Omega 29 (2001) 457–471

www.elsevier.com/locate/dsw

An analysis of environmental management, organizational

context and performance of Spanish hotels
M.J. Alvarez Gila; ∗, J. Burgos Jimenezb, J.J. Cespedes Lorentec

aDepartamento de Econom(cid:14)a de la Empresa, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, C=Madrid, 126 28903 Getafe, Madrid, Spain

bDepartamento de Direccion y Gestion de Empresas, University of Almer(cid:14)a, Crtra. de Sacramento s=n,

04120 La Ca˜nada de San Urbano, Almer(cid:14)a, Spain

cDepartment of Management, University of Almer(cid:14)a, Crtra. de Sacramento s=n, 04120 La Ca˜nada de San Urbano, Almer(cid:14)a, Spain

Received 21 January 2000; accepted 15 May 2001

Abstract

This paper addresses the factors that determine the deployment of environmental management practices and its e2ects on
3rms’ 3nancial performance. Empirical evidence supporting this investigation is gathered from the Spanish hotel industry.
Our results 3nd support for the notion that age of facilities, size, chain a6liation, stakeholder environmental pressures, and
their use of operations management techniques exert a lasting in9uence on the degree of implementation of environmental
management practices by hotel 3rms. Moreover, our 3ndings show a positive relationship between environmental management
practices and 3rms’ 3nancial performance. ? 2001 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Environmental management; Financial performance; Hotels; Spain

1. Introduction

The degradation of the environment constitutes a main
concern of modern society, and this in turn a2ects 3rms’
strategy. Industries a2ect the environment di2erently and,
arguably, each sector may have deployed di2erent strategies
to tackle environmental issues [1]. Investigations address-
ing the responses of 3rms to environmental concerns have
overwhelmingly focused on the manufacturing industry [2].
Surprisingly, however, service 3rms, “the silent destroyers
of the environment” [3] have attracted much less research
attention. As a service industry, the tourist sector is particu-
larly interesting as the focus of an investigation on environ-
mental management practices for two main reasons. First,
this sector has an increasing economic importance [4,5].
Second, the tourist industry shows an increasingly higher

∗ Tel.: +34-9162-49643; fax: +34-91624-9708.
E-mail addresses: catinaag@eco.uc3m.es (M.J. Alvarez Gil),
(J.J.

jcespede@ual.es

(J. Burgos

Jimenez),

jburgos@ual.es
Cespedes Lorente).

environmental concern [4]. Such distinctive characteristics
of the tourist industry are especially dominant in Spain,
where this industry generates 11.1% of the Gross National
Product [5]. The tourist industry involves two main activ-
ities, namely: accommodation and transportation. In this
study, we focus on the accommodation sub-sector for both
its outstanding role in the o2er of tourist services and for its
impact on the environment.

This paper studies the driving factors for hotels to deploy
environmental management practices. Our review of the ex-
tant literature on environmental management determinants
lead us to identify a number of factors that have exerted
a considerable impact on such practices: age of facilities,
size, chain a6liation, stakeholder environmental pressure,
and the use of operations management techniques [6,7]. Ad-
ditionally, we have found a number of factors pertinent to
the hotel industry that a2ects environmental management
practices, including hotels’ legal category and type of dom-
inant tourism among hotels’ clientele. In addition to ex-
ploring such driving factors of environmental management
practices, we study the extent to which the deployment of

0305-0483/01/$ - see front matter ? 2001 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
PII: S 0 3 0 5 - 0 4 8 3 ( 0 1 ) 0 0 0 3 3 - 0


458

M.J.

Alvarez Gil et al. / Omega 29 (2001) 457–471

such practices exerts a positive impact on 3rms’ 3nancial
performance.

Our study is structured as follows. First, we review the
extant literature on environmental management, focusing on
those investigations addressing the hotel industry. We then
outline the factors that may in9uence corporate environmen-
tal management and the eventual relationship between such
practices and 3rms’ 3nancial performance. Such discussion
leads us to a number of hypotheses. Our empirical investi-
gation is shown in due course and addresses the extent to
which our 3ndings show support for our hypotheses. Lastly,
the results are discussed and some suggestions for future
research are posed.

2. Corporate environmental management and strategy

Corporate environmental management embraces both
technical and organizational activities aimed at reducing the
environmental negative impact caused by 3rms’ operations
[8]. Environmental management activities may be classi3ed
as “technical or hardware” and “organizational or soft-
ware” [6,8,9]. The former aim at the straight reduction of
3rms’ pollution output (e.g., modi3cations in the physical
characteristics of the product, or changes in the machinery
used to reduce the 3rms’ environmental impact). Though
the latter activities are relevant for the implementation of
technical measures, they do not exert a direct impact on
the environment, but they do a2ect the 3rms’ formal sys-
tems (e.g., environmental training, planning and control of
environmental objectives, environmental reporting, or top
management support). Admittedly, environmental organi-
zational activities are similar across industries, whereas
technical measures are industry-driven.

Another well-accepted classi3cation of environmental
management activities distinguishes between “pollution
control” and “pollution prevention” [6,10–12]. The former
refers to activities aiming to keep pollution within speci3-
cations (e.g., to comply with the enacted legal norms). This
approach is based on techniques of waste removal, treatment
and disposal and usually entails the use of speci3c facilities
that treat the waste or pollution once this has been generated
(end-of-pipe approach). Conversely, pollution prevention
is based on “source reduction”, that is, stopping waste be-
fore generation. Pollution prevention comprises practices
that reduce or eliminate the creation of pollutants through
increased e6ciency in the use of raw materials, energy, or
water to protect natural resources through conservation.

The long term planning of environmental management
activities determines the environmental strategy of a 3rm.
This strategy may di2er depending on the industry, the
characteristics of each organization and its impact on the
environment.

A large part of environmental management literature has
analyzed how the “greening” of 3rms is brought about,
through the outlining of environmental strategy typologies.

There are various classi3cations, whose aim is to fully en-
compass di2ering strategies 3rms may adopt to deal with
environmental protection. Some of these have focused on
proposing a conceptual classi3cation (e.g. [13]); others have
simply placed a set of companies (normally manufactur-
ing 3rms) within these categories already proposed by other
authors (e.g. [14]). Finally, other studies have elaborated
their own criteria for developing typologies and=or their own
classi3cations, and have validated them empirically using a
sample of 3rms (e.g. [15]). However, in spite of the exist-
ing di2erences in criteria and=or methods employed to de-
3ne these, as well as in the number of categories proposed,
all are based on a continuum of evolution of the most re-
active to the most proactive strategies with di2erent inter-
mediate strategies in between. Table 1 presents a number
of these classi3cations, as well as their character: concep-
tual, applied, or both. By applied character, we mean that
the classi3cation is empirically validated.

Some of these typologies attempt to place whole indus-
trial sectors rather than individual 3rms (e.g. [15,19]). More-
over, most of extant taxonomies on environmental strategies
either focus on the manufacturing sector (e.g. [6,15]) or
make comprehensive approaches that encompass both man-
ufacturing and service industries (e.g. [20,22]). In this in-
vestigation, we focus on hotel 3rms because it is a widely
neglected industry and because it is suggested that studies
on 3rms’ environmental management practices may well
bene3t from focusing on a single industry [1]. Admittedly,
it is di6cult to ascertain the environmental strategy of ser-
vice sector 3rms because (i) environmental legislation has a
lesser importance, and (ii) environmental issues are nearly
neglected in such industry [3]. Under these conditions, ser-
vice 3rms that have a proactive environmental strategy are
those that apply environmental practices to a greater extent,
both technical and organizational. Arguably, the develop-
ment of such strategies can be captured through quantitative
indicators. In the particular case of hotel 3rms, environmen-
tal management consists of a large number of small oper-
ations that cover aspects such as consumption of energy,
water and other resources. However, it is widely admitted
that such activities add a small amount of pollution to the
environment by way of smoke, smell, noise and chemical
pollutants [23, p. 3]. We contend that hotel 3rms’ environ-
mental management may be measured through the extent to
which such organizations deploy certain practices to reduce
their negative impact on the natural environment. Further,
both the lack of an environmental management tradition in
the hotel industry and the existence of “feedback loops”
that deteriorate progress in environmental practices make
sensible not to measure the environmental strategy of 3rms
through the amount of time that the practices are in opera-
tions.

In this investigation, we analyze hotels’ environmental
management determinants and consequences. Among the
driving elements of environmental management, the ex-
tant literature suggests external factors such as stakeholder


M.J.

Alvarez Gil et al. / Omega 29 (2001) 457–471

459

Table 1
Classi3cations of corporate environmental strategies

Author(s)

Hunt and Auster [13]
Roome [16]

Winsemius and Guntram [17]
Sadgrove [18]
Steger [19]
Aragon-Correa [20]
Schaefer and Harvey [14]

Vastag et al. [15]
Steger [21]
Henriques and Sadorsky [22]

Klassen and Whybark [6]

Typologies

Beginner, 3ghter, worried citizen, pragmatic, proactive
Non-compliance, compliance, compliance plus, commercial
and environmental excellence, leading edge
Reactive, receptive, constructive, proactive
Penalized, delayed, conformist, leader
Indi2erent, defensive, o2ensive, innovative
Uses the typology proposed by Roome (1992)
Uses the typologies of Hunt and Auster (1990) and those
of Roome (1992), reworked into another 3ve groups
Reactive, crisis preventive, strategic, proactive
Neutral, reactive, o2ensive, proactive
Adapt Roome (1992) typology with that of the corporate
social responsibility literature: reactive, defensive, accom-
modative, proactive
Compliance, opportunistic, leadership

Character

Conceptual
Conceptual

Conceptual
Conceptual
Conceptual
Applied
Applied

Conceptual=applied
Conceptual=applied
Conceptual=applied

Conceptual=applied

in9uence [22] and environmental regulation [24], whereas
internal
factors comprise aspects such as a proactive
business strategy [20] and the resources and capabilities
of 3rms [11,25]. Organizational performance, it is argued,
may be a2ected by environmental management practices
[26,27]. This relationship has generally been analyzed
assuming that environmental practices enhance organiza-
tional performance. However, the relationship can also be
two-way: successful 3rms invest their slack resources in
improving their environmental practices and this in turn
bene3ts their organizational performance.

3. Hotel environmental management

As noted above, the absence of environmental regulation
addressing the hotel industry lead us to focus on other ex-
ternal mechanisms, such as pressures from stakeholders, as
the driving factors of environmental management practices
[22,28,29]. Furthermore, these practices may be a2ected by
variables such as operations management techniques and
methods [30,31] and the age of hotels’ facilities [32]. We
also study the e2ect of 3rms’ size on our dependent vari-
able as long as size may strengthen stakeholders’ pressures
as well as ease the access to resources. In this investigation,
we also examine the impact of chain a6liation on environ-
mental practices as long as such idiosyncratic characteris-
tic of hotel 3rms exerts a lasting in9uence on their overall
strategy [33].

3.1. Facility age

It is suggested that the age of facilities in9uences 3rms’
environmental performance [32,34]. The relationship be-

tween facility age and environmental performance is ex-
plained clearly by the use of new technologies. Renewing
the facilities allows more e6cient machinery to be intro-
duced, which leads to savings in energy, water and materi-
als, as well as to lesser levels of pollution. In short, mod-
ern facilities imply less environmental impact and, thus, an
improvement in environmental performance. However, the
relationship between facility age and environmental man-
agement should be based on the social values present at
the time of creating the facilities or carrying out the major
renovation work. In this sense, questions referring to envi-
ronmental protection are relatively new and are related to
modernity [35]. These new social values will be more ap-
parent in the norms, practices and rules of newly created
organizations as well as in those that have been completely
renovated [36]. For example, new facilities can be designed
so as to aid in the carrying-out of certain environmental pro-
tection activities (e.g., separating garbage out for recycling)
or to make better use of the existing resources (e.g., by sav-
ing energy and water). Thus,

H1: Hotels with modern facilities deploy more exten-
sive environmental management practices than their
counterparts with older facilities.

3.2. Size

Most studies on corporate environmental management
focus on large corporations [20,22,28], assuming a rela-
tionship between size and environmental management. It is
argued that large 3rms have a greater impact on the envi-
ronment. Further, large 3rms are exposed to considerable
environmental pressures from stakeholders because (a) their
environmental impact is more visible [29, p. 385]; (b) it is


460

M.J.

Alvarez Gil et al. / Omega 29 (2001) 457–471

easier to control centralized sources of pollution than dis-
perse ones [37, p. 5]; (c) large 3rms are regarded as indus-
try’s leaders and, thus, constitute models to imitate [38, p.
14]. Another stream of research contends that large 3rms de-
velop more advanced environmental management because
(1) they have slack resources to be invested in environmental
protection [25]; (2) large 3rms usually adopt a more formal
management and this in turn implies a more formal envi-
ronmental management [39]; (3) they may have economies
of scale for the re-use, recycling or valuation of waste [40].
All these factors can in9uence the hotel industry in the same
way. Therefore,

H2: Large-size hotels deploy more extensive environ-
mental management practices than their smaller size
counterparts.

3.3. Chain a9liation

Hotel chains use to standardize their activities. This en-
hances the chain’s reputation and bene3ts from economies
of scale, which helps increase e6ciency [41]. Some of the
functions carried out by hotel chains are: use of a more
e6cient marketing system (e.g., central reservations o6ce,
wide-reaching advertising campaigns, better conditions
with tour-operators), personnel and management training,
centralized bulk purchasing at special prices, management
of hotel’s brand image, centralized advice and consultancy
(e.g., design and 3tting-out of facilities, commercial agree-
ments, quality control), and up-to-date information on new
events and trends in the industry [33].

The functions carried out by hotel chains that refer to
transfer of knowledge are extremely important for environ-
mental protection-related matters. The novelty of environ-
mental matters in the lodging sector makes it di6cult for
individual hotels to know which environmental protection
activities to develop and how to implement them e6ciently
[42]. Conversely, chains may easily obtain this information
and make additional searches from conventional sources
(government, specialist journals or business associations).
Moreover, hotels’ chains take advantage of the successful
practices of individual units and distribute it among mem-
bers of the chain [43]. Thus, the chains carry out a series
of functions that help their components to know how a ho-
tel can protect the environment. Hotels’ chains may support
individual units by: (1) providing them with training on en-
vironmental protection techniques, methods and=or activi-
ties; (2) facilitating their inclusion in programs or activities
already functioning or that are known to be useful; (3) pro-
viding technical advice to hotels that start up such activities;
(4) easing their access to more ecological markets.

Interestingly for our purposes, Ingram and Baum [33]
point out that chain’s membership may also constitute a po-
tential source of strategic constraints that may foster envi-
ronmental management in hotels joining a chain. Hence, to
take advantage of a uni3ed environmental image, the chain

may impose certain minimum or common norms for envi-
ronmental protection on its component parts.

Finally, some of the factors previously mentioned for
hotel size—greater visibility,
resource availability and
economies of scale in waste treatment—might also fa-
vor the adoption of environmental protection activities by
chain-a6liated hotels. This leads us to hypothesize

H3: Hotels a6liated to a hotel chain deploy more ex-
tensive environmental management practices than their
non-a6liated counterparts.

3.4. Stakeholder environmental pressure

Social pressure may constitute a driving force for corpo-
rate environmental response [22]. According to the stake-
holder theory, organizations carry out activities to satisfy
their main stakeholders. By doing this, organizations garner
support and resources to survive in the long term [44,45].
Accordingly, examination of stakeholders’ environmental
demands reveals the extent to which 3rms receive pres-
sures to deploy environmental protection activities [8,22,28].
Stakeholders’ claims, though, are not all equally relevant for
3rms. Firms, thus, weigh up the legitimacy and urgency of
pressures from powerful constituents [46].

First, as long as the environment is a “common good”
for all stakeholders, we assume that all stakeholders have a
minimum degree of legitimacy to make environmental de-
mands [47]. Second, a stakeholder may consider that each
demand has a di2ering degree of urgency, and this in turn
is the outcome of the importance and celerity of each in-
dividual demand [46]. Through the stakeholders’ in9uence
strategies on environmental claims, the 3rm perceives both
the importance they place on their environmental demands
and the swiftness with which it is required to act. Thus, the
3rm can perceive the urgency of the stakeholders’ environ-
mental demands when they use in9uence strategies such as
o2ering rewards or providing technical support on these is-
sues. Lastly, stakeholder theory deems power as a distinctive
element to assess which are the relevant 3rms’ stakehold-
ers [44–46]. Moreover, organizations should satisfy multi-
ple, con9icting shareholders’ interests and, thus, strategies
of partial conformity to comply with pressures from stake-
holders may be well expected [48]. Findings of the resource
dependence theory point out that 3rms’ resistance to exter-
nal pressures will largely depend on the source of such [49].
In short, 3rms may pay more attention to pressures arising
from powerful constituents (primary) and lessen such inter-
est for demands made by non-powerful stakeholders [50],
and this in turn depend on the stakeholders’ in9uence strate-
gies over the 3rm [51].

Our study of the driving elements of environmental
management practices in the hotel industry, thus, requires
the identi3cation of di2erent categories of stakeholders.
The hotel
industry, we contend, combine idiosyncratic
with across-the-board stakeholders. The former refers to


M.J.

Alvarez Gil et al. / Omega 29 (2001) 457–471

461

constituents such as travel agencies, tour operators, and ho-
tel chains, whereas the latter concerns stakeholders such a
government, customers, and ecologist groups. Hotels’ stake-
holders may deploy di2erent in9uence strategies and levels
of pressure. For example, the Spanish government enacted
a program to promote environmental protection in the hotel
industry according to the EMAS 2000 regulation. Further,
other stakeholders grant environmental awards such as the
World Travel and Tourism Council “Green Globe Achieve-
ment Awards”, or the International Hotel and Restaurant
Association “Green Hotelier of the Year” awards. Lastly,
some tour-operators (e.g., TUI) regularly demand informa-
tion about hotels’ environmental management practices.

This leads us to the following hypothesis:

H4: Hotels perceiving strong pressures from stakehold-
ers on environmental issues deploy more extensive
environmental management practices than their coun-
terparts which do not perceive such demands.

3.5. Operations management

Operations management techniques like time and motion
studies, quality circles, product and process standardization,
cause–e2ects diagrams and Pareto charts may help improve
hotels’ e6ciency, service and quality [52,53]. The hotel’s
use of these operations management techniques and proce-
dures constitutes a strategic capability that may provide a
sustainable competitive advantage by reducing cost or dif-
ferentiating the hotel’s product [31]. Developing this capa-
bility usually takes a long time, since it is based on the hotel
employees’ acquisition of certain abilities, such as knowl-
edge, experience, co-ordination and skills with respect to
both operations management techniques, and the hotel op-
erations and delivery system.

Although the use of operations management techniques
might be considered to have no connection with environ-
mental management, the reduction of environmental impact
by means of pollution prevention is, in practice, intrinsically
linked to the productive activities of the 3rm [10]. Fur-
thermore, some operations management
techniques and
methods are relatively similar
to others belonging to
environmental management. For example, work–study has
a similar methodology to environmental auditing, though
they use di2erent magnitudes (time, in the case of a work–
study, and pollution in environmental auditing). Thus, on
tidying up these activities with the aid of operations man-
agement techniques, environmental management may also
be improved. In this sense, the pursuit of e6ciency—one
of the operations competitive priorities—implies carrying
out the productive activity with a minimum consumption of
resources, which contributes to environmental protection in
what is known as eco-e6ciency [35,54]. Something similar
occurs with quality competitive priority, when the con-
cept of defects is widened to include waste and pollution
[55,56].

In the case of hotels, the tasks that can be evaluated and
improved using operations management techniques encom-
pass a wide range of activities (1) purchasing and supply of
inputs such as energy, water, food and cleaning products; (2)
technology in use (e.g., laundry, or air-conditioning equip-
ment); (3) design and control of activities and processes
(e.g. separation of solid wastes in each work site, or water
management); (4) product design (e.g., green rooms, green
menus, elimination of sub-products, re-use and re-cycle of
waste). Lastly, some aspects of environmental protection be-
come increasingly important for operations management, be-
ing perceived as a core component of the operations strategy
[30,57]. Therefore, hotels’ operations a2ect services them-
selves in terms of cost, quality and time delivery as well
as emissions and the 9ow of hazardous materials [30]. This
leads us to the following hypothesis:

H5: Hotels with greater use of operations management
techniques deploy more extensive environmental man-
agement practices than their counterparts with less use.

3.6. Control variables

Other idiosyncratic characteristics of the hotel industry
may a2ect environmental management practices of 3rms
such as the legal category of hotels and the predominant
tourism among the hotel’s clientele. Hotels’ legal category
constitutes a strategic aspect of di6cult modi3cation (e.g.,
rooms’ dimensions and services vary within a narrow range).
In general, high category hotels have greater volumes of as-
sets and employees per room [58]. Thus, the superior per-
sonnel’s skills of such high category hotels ease them to
satisfy the needs and tastes of their customers, including the
protection of the natural environment. Interestingly for our
purposes, customers of higher category hotels seek luxury,
comfort and even a certain kind of adulation, which imply
a high level of resource consumption and which come into
con9ict with environmental protection [59].

The predominant type of tourism amongst a hotel’s clien-
tele constitutes a strategic factor, linked basically to the
hotel’s location [60,61]. It may a2ect environmental man-
agement in a number of ways. First, customers may a2ect
the environment depending on the time spent and type of
the activities carried at the hotel’s. Second, the length of
customers’ stays arguably a2ects their environmental con-
cerns and, thus, the longer is the stay of customers the higher
will be their environmental concerns. Lastly, natural tourist
attractions will likely deploy a wide range of environmental
protection activities.

4. Corporate environmental strategy and (cid:28)rms’
performance

Implementation of corporate environmental strategies
tightens organizational boundaries. Restrictions to 3rms’


462

M.J.

Alvarez Gil et al. / Omega 29 (2001) 457–471

behavior may arise from the enactment of internal proce-
dures as well as from conformity with extant regulation.
Further, compliance with internal and external procedures
posits considerable restrictions to opportunistic behavior
of 3rms as well as increase operational costs, and this in
turn has a negative impact on 3rms’ 3nancial performance
[26,62].

On the other hand, environmental protection activities
are embedded in business operations and, thus, may also
bring about some bene3ts for 3rms (e.g., improvement in
organizational reputation [63]). Such interrelationship of
environmental management with operational activities of
3rms imprints the development of organizational functions
such as marketing (e.g., access to new markets, distribu-
tion channels, product di2erentiation, publicity and promo-
tion policy), operations (e.g., redesigning of the product, of
the process, of the technology or of the work content, ca-
pacity needs), 3nance (e.g., access to subsidies or 3nancing
channels, new resource needs), personnel (e.g., motivation
and satisfaction, training), supply (e.g., selection criteria for
suppliers, frequency and size of deliveries) and management
information systems (e.g., processing of new information).
In short, extant literature attributes a number of bene3ts to
the integration of environmental issues in corporate strategy
[24,34,64,65]: (1) cost savings and improvements in 3rms’
e6ciency, (2) product quality improvements, (3) increases
in market share, (4) getting ahead of competitors and leg-
islation, (5) access to new markets, (6) enhance employee
motivation and satisfaction, (7) improvements in public re-
lations, (8) access to 3nancial aid.

Extant evidence on the relationship between environ-
mental management and 3rms’ 3nancial performance
is contradictory. Whereas some studies suggest a pos-
itive relationship between 3nancial performance and
proactive environmental strategies [11,27,31], other in-
vestigations have found a negative relationship [26,66].
Accordingly, more research is needed on this issue. In
our study, we attempt
to which
3rms’ 3nancial performance evolves with the deployment
of more extensive corporate environmental protection
activities.

to explore the extent

H6a: Hotels which deploy more extensive environmen-
tal management practices have better 3nancial perfor-
mance than their counterparts that do not.

H6b: Hotels which deploy more extensive environmen-
tal management practices have lower 3nancial perfor-
mance than their counterparts that do not.

to which several

To sum up, our examination of the literature leads
us to a number of hypotheses that attempt (1) to as-
sess the extent
internal and external
variables predict environmental management practices in
the hotel
industry, (2) to examine the relationship be-
tween environmental management and 3rms’ 3nancial
performance.

5. Methods

5.1. Sample

A 3rst survey was conducted in November 1998. It tar-
geted the entire population of Spanish 3-, 4- and 5-star
hotels. The closing date for replies was February 15, 1999.
At that time, we received 168 questionnaires and proceeded
with a second survey to establishments, which either did
not complete the questionnaire or did not identify them-
selves. The closing date for reception of the questionnaires
was April 8, 1999 and that made a total number of 304
replies. No signi3cant di2erences were found with regard to
size, legal category and geographical distribution between
either the population and the group of hotels that completed
the survey or between the hotels that returned the question-
naire in each of the deadlines. Of the 304 replies, eight had
not properly completed the section on environmental man-
agement and, thus, were removed from our sample. The
remaining 296 responses amount to 12% of the total popu-
lation of Spanish establishments of 3-, 4-, and 5-star hotels.
Admittedly, 24 hotels did not fully complete other parts of
the questionnaire, especially sections concerning organiza-
tional performance and, thus, our 3nal sample consisted of
262 observations.

5.2. Measurement

5.2.1. Environmental management

Our review of the literature did not produce any insight
on issues and measurement scales for hotels environmental
management practices. Therefore, we drew on general con-
tributions addressing corporate environmental management
[13,20,22] and, to a lesser extent, on the sparse number of
contributions addressing hotel management [23,42,67]. We
included seven items to capture hotel environmental man-
agement: quanti3cation of environmental costs and savings,
environmental
training programs, deployment of green
purchasing policies, use of green arguments in marketing
campaigns, demands for customer cooperation in envi-
ronmental protection programs (e.g., voluntary change of
towels), adoption of energy- and water-saving actions, and
selective collection of paper, oil, glass, and other materials.
These items attempted to produce a comprehensive indica-
tor of the balanced combination of the various components
of environmental management. We included technical (e.g.,
energy- and water-saving activities) and organizational
practices (e.g., environmental
training). The sparse en-
vironmental legislation on the hotel industry advised the
inclusion of most practices under the heading of “pollution
prevention”,
though some questions targeted “pollution
control” issues (e.g., selective collection of materials).
Each item should be evaluated by the hotel manager on a
scale of 0–10 as a function of the establishment’s degree
of involvement in each practice.


M.J.

Alvarez Gil et al. / Omega 29 (2001) 457–471

463

Table 2
Factor analysis results for multi-item subjective scales

Scale and item

Environmental management

The hotel quanti3es in its budget its environmental savings and costs
The hotel gives the employees training on environmental issues
The hotel gives priority to purchasing ecological products (biodegradable, reusable, recyclable, etc.)
The hotel uses ecological arguments in its marketing campaigns
The hotel facilitates customer collaboration in environmental protection (voluntary changing of towels, etc.)
The hotel applies energy and water saving practices
The hotel makes a selective collection of paper, oil, glass, etc.

Operations management techniques

The hotel makes a systematic analysis of the best way to carry out certain tasks (especially those that are
frequently repeated)
The hotel de3nes and controls the time it takes to carry out these tasks
The hotel classi3es and codes the activities
The hotel studies the standardization of its services
The hotel studies the standardization of its outside supplies
The hotel uses an instructions manual (or similar)
The hotel analyzes and plans its maintenance policy
The hotel controls the frequency of errors occurring when a certain service is being conducted and analyzes
the causes (via graphs, tables, etc.)
The hotel uses quality circles and implements improvement proposals from personnel, clientele, etc.

Exercise of power or in9uence strategies

The stakeholders threaten to sanction the hotel if it does not protect the environment
The stakeholders promise rewards if the hotel improves its environmental behavior
The stakeholders remind the hotel of its moral obligation to protect the environment
The stakeholders exchange impressions on how to deal with environmental problems
The stakeholders encourage a greater identi3cation of the hotel with environmental protection

Eigenvalue
Percentage of variance explained
Alpha

Factor loading

1

2

3

0.28
0.30
0.20
0.15
0.14
0.24
0.17

0.81

0.81
0.82
0.87
0.81
0.76
0.75
0.71

0.73

0.05
0.11
0.09
0.15
0.10

5.96
28.38
0.93

0.54
0.63
0.73
0.62
0.62
0.63
0.67

0.21
0.34
0.09
0.38
0.09
0.02
0.11

0.19

0.04

0.18
0.14
0.13
0.14
0.20
0.29
0.33

0.31
−0:03
0.09
0.18
0.29
0.41

3.60
17.15
0.82

0.04
0.11
0.13
0.11
0.16
0.10
0.06

0.15

0.68
0.75
0.84
0.72
0.73

3.22
15.34
0.85

All items were grouped together in a single factor (see
Table 2). The Cronbach alpha value (0.82) is well above
the limit of 0.70 established by Nunnally [68] to ensure
constructs’ internal consistency. Additionally, a comple-
mentary measurement has been used to ensure the con-
vergent validity of this factor. We relied on studies that
used the drawing up of an environmental plan as a proxy
for environmental management, both for the 3rm (e.g.
[29]), and for hotel establishments (e.g. [23,69]). Accord-
ingly, we asked hotels whether they had formally outlined
their environmental plans and=or objectives. Our results
show that
the environmental management measurement
corresponding to the 123 hotels that had formally set up
environmental plans and=or objectives was signi3cantly
higher than data produced by the remaining establishments
(F = 195:82; p = 0:000).

5.2.2. Facility age

We included a question referring to hotel’s age or time
when facilities underwent
last full renovation. Though
these data are shown in the Gu(cid:14)a O<cial de Hoteles

(O6cial Spanish Hotels Guide),
updated.

it

is not always well

5.2.3. Size

Size was measured by the number of guest-rooms [61].
Motivation for this comes from: (1) hotels’ readiness to pro-
vide such data, and (2) letting us testing such data with those
provided by the Gu(cid:14)a O<cial de Hoteles. In order to evaluate
the quality and veracity of the data provided by the hotels,
we compared it with that of the Gu(cid:14)a O<cial de Hoteles.
Our testing revealed no signi3cant di2erences between the
sources of data since small variations were mainly due to
the time gap between last hotels’ enlargements and the date
of publication of the Gu(cid:14)a. Further, we calculated the base-e
logarithm of the number of guest-rooms to avoid 9uctua-
tions in the non-transformed variable (with values ranging
from 6 and 1126).

5.2.4. Chain a9liation

Hotels may be classi3ed into those belonging to a
hotel chain and those that do not (independent). The


464

M.J.

Alvarez Gil et al. / Omega 29 (2001) 457–471

though, may be a2ected by di2erent

former,
types of
contract: referral, management contract, franchising, joint
venture and chain ownership [61]. As noted above, we are
interested in determining the extent to which membership
to hotels’ chains a2ects the behavior of establishment.
Among the various forms of chain membership, ownership
encompasses the greater capacity of in9uence, whereas the
others may cover a number of hotel services (e.g., reser-
vations, information, and customer treatment). We assume
that chain a6liation a2ects the environmental management
strategy of hotels as long as the establishment is owned by
the chain. Therefore, we measured chain ownership as a
dichotomous variable, which takes the value of 1 when the
hotel is owned by a chain and 0 otherwise.

5.2.5. Environmental pressures from stakeholders

Drawing on the stakeholders literature [28,44,45] and on
the interviews with 11 hotel general managers, we identi-
3ed hotels most relevant environmental stakeholders: share-
holders, government, travel agencies and tour operators,
chain or hotel association, customers, competitors, employ-
ees, non-governmental organizations (NGOs, neighborhood
associations, ecology groups) and suppliers. These stake-
holders depict the speci3cs of the hotel industry, character-
ized by the importance of some stakeholders (e.g., a6liation
to a hotel chain, travel agencies and tour operators), whilst
other stakeholders play a subordinate role in environmental
issues (e.g., media). Hotels were accordingly asked to as-
sess on a 0–10 scale the importance of each stakeholder and
to determine their power on the 3rm. Raven and Kruglanski
[70] identi3ed di2erent forms of exerting power on a person
or organization: coercion, reward, experience, legitimacy,
reference and information. To account for this, we included
3ve items to ask hotels for the extent to which their main
stakeholders deployed di2erent strategies of in9uence over
the establishment, measured on a 0–10 scale. Hotels were
asked to indicate the degree to which its main stakeholders
exercised in9uence strategies over them by mean of items
such as “they promise rewards if the hotel improves its envi-
ronmental behavior”, and [stakeholders] “exchange impres-
sions on how to deal with environmental problems”. An ex-
ploratory factorial analysis (see Table 2) clearly groups the
3ve items together on a single factor, suggesting that it is
a unidimensional construct. The Cronbach alpha coe6cient
was 0.85, which may be considered as satisfactory for an
exploratory study.

5.2.6. Operations management

Although operations management goes beyond the mere
implementation of certain techniques and methods, their use
should be regarded as a proxy measure, in concordance with
the procedure used by Witt and Clark [71] for tourist 3rms.
As noted above, we conducted a preliminary interview se-
ries to 11 hotel managing directors and asked them for the
state-of-the-art operations management procedures and ter-

minology in use in the hotel industry. Therefore, we reduced
the 26 items questionnaire of Witt and Clark [71] to nine
items and made an additional e2ort to write them down in an
understandable language. Issues under consideration com-
prised items about work–study, quality control, standardiza-
tion, or preventive maintenance planning. As in the rest of
the questionnaire, questions should be assessed on a 0–10
scale. The alpha coe6cient for these items was 0.93, which
guarantees their internal consistency.

5.2.7. Financial performance

We measured 3nancial performance through the follow-
ing indicators: current-year pro3tability, pro3tability over
the last 3 years, and average occupancy rate of present year.
Current-year pro<tability. In the interviews’ phase, ho-
tel managers were reluctant to provide us with details of
their hotel’s 3nancial performance. Accordingly, we asked
managers for an assessment of their hotel pro3tability.
Such measurement was used in previous studies [72]. Hotel
managers were asked to assess this year’s hotel pro3tability
with respect to the yield average of the industry, on a scale
0–10. 1

Pro<tability over the last 3 years. Similar to current-year

pro3tability.

Occupancy rate. The occupancy rate is an index of the
hotel’s level of activity. This magnitude has the advantage
of being widely used among hotels [58]. Furthermore, it is
regarded as a performance indicator in the hotel industry
[73,74].

The correlation between the two pro3t variables was high
(0.88). However, their relationship with the occupancy rate
was rather lower (e.g., correlation between current-year
pro3t and occupancy rate was 0.42, whereas it was 0.40 for
the relationship between the 3-year pro3t average and the
occupancy rate).

5.2.8. Control variables

Two control variables were included in our study.
Hotel clientele. Two main hotel categories were es-
tablished: business or leisure [61]. The second group
encompasses a large number of sun-and-sand holiday es-
tablishments. Certain characteristics of their clientele, such
as a greater contact with nature, and length of the stay,
usually in9uence the way in which these establishments
are managed. We distinguished between sun-and-sand ho-
tels and the rest of the establishments and, thus, included

1 It was decided to include the comparison of the results of the
3scal year with the average results of the sector for the same year
due to the habitual 9uctuations in the tourism market, where, in
particular, 1998 was a year of very good results for the 3rms in
this sector.


M.J.

Alvarez Gil et al. / Omega 29 (2001) 457–471

465

a dummy variable that took 1 if a hotel’s clientele was made
up of sun-and-sand customers and 0 otherwise.

Legal category. Hotels were asked to indicate their cat-
egory within the values of 3-, 4- and 5-stars enforced by
law. This information was checked with the Gu(cid:14)a O<cial
de Hoteles. Given that the number of 5-star hotels in the
sample is very low and that they are very similar to 4-star
hotels, we included a dichotomous variable, which took 1
in case of 3-star hotels and 0 otherwise.

5.3. Data analysis

An exploratory factor analysis was conducted to test the
extent to which the a priori multi-item scales held together.
Such analysis comprised items of the multi-item scales that
measured environmental management, stakeholders exercise
of power, and the deployment of operations management
procedures. Results of the principal component analysis with
“varimax” rotation are shown in Table 2 and suggest that
the scales held together quite well. Table 2 also shows the
estimates of the alpha reliability coe6cient for the scales.

We used a multiple regression analysis to simultaneously
examine environmental management predictors. Further, the
use of hierarchical regression enabled us to enter the vari-
ables into the models in consecutive steps and, by doing
so, to assess the incremental explanatory power of each
variable. We enter the control variables into the models
3rst, whereas the predictors were included in subsequent
blocks.

Hypotheses 6a and 6b refer to the relationship between
environmental strategy and 3nancial performance. Identi3-
cation of hotel groups that conducted environmental man-
agement within the sample was made through a cluster anal-
ysis (K-means). Such groups were compared with one an-
other for di2erences in performance means by a one-way
ANOVA F-statistic.

6. Results

Table 3 shows means, standard deviations, and correla-
tions for all variables. As noted above, hierarchical multiple
regression analysis models used environmental manage-
ment as the dependent variable. Such models tested for the
e2ects of facility age (Hypothesis 1), size (Hypothesis 2),
chain a6liation (Hypothesis 3), environmental pressures
from stakeholders (Hypothesis 4), and operations man-
agement (Hypothesis 5) on environmental management
practices. Our control variables encompassed hotel legal
category and hotel clientele (sun and sand). Table 4 depicts
the results of our regression models. Standardized partial
regression coe6cients and the change in R2 are listed for
each step.

In the 3rst step, the legal category and sun-and-sand vari-
ables account for about 6 percent of the variance of en-
vironmental management practices. High category hotels

and those dominated by the sun-and-sand tourism make ex-
tensive use of environmental management practices. The
second step reveals that facility age has a signi3cant, neg-
ative e2ect on the dependent variable, that is, environmen-
tal management. Therefore, hotels with old facilities adopt
fewer environmental protection measures than their coun-
terparts with more recent premises, and this provides sup-
port for Hypothesis 1. In step 3, the size variable coe6cient
is positive and signi3cant, while the control variables are
not signi3cant. This, in addition to providing support for
Hypothesis 2, shows that the 3rms’ size information em-
braces the e2ect of the control variables. In fact, the de-
scriptive data of our sample reveal that the sun-and-sand
and the high category hotels are more likely to have a larger
size, measured in number of guest-rooms, than their coun-
terparts with other dominant clientele or low hotel category.
Step 4 shows that chain a6liation has a signi3cant, posi-
tive e2ect on the extensive use of environmental practices,
as predicted in Hypothesis 3. Finally, the e2ects on the de-
pendent variable of stakeholder in9uence strategies and the
greater use of operations management tools are also signif-
icant, as shown in steps 5 and 6. The highest increases in
R2 occur upon the inclusion of these variables. These re-
sults support Hypotheses 4 and 5. All variables account for
about 46 percent of the dependent variable’s variance. Inter-
estingly, the operations management variable seemingly in-
corporates a large part of the e2ect of facility age and chain
a6liation.

Cluster analysis was conducted using the seven environ-
mental management variables. Using K-means clustering,
this analysis considered from three to 3ve clusters, according
to the di2erent typologies identi3ed in Table 1. Di2erent cri-
teria were used to select the best number of groups. A num-
ber of these criteria (pseudo-F test, Calinski and Harabasz
criterion and C-index, see Everitt [75], Milligan and Cooper
[76]) coincide in stating that the best number is 3. To study
the stability of the results, the analysis was repeated after
eliminating potential outliers (based on distance to the near-
est centroid), and after considering as initial centroids in the
K-means procedure those obtained following a hierarchical
cluster analysis (Ward method). In both cases, this had lit-
tle e2ect on the cluster centroids for the seven variables or
on group membership.

Group 1 is designated as reactive. It reports the low-
est values in the application of each of the environmen-
tal protection practices. Group 2 is situated in an inter-
mediate position. Group 3, which we designate as proac-
tive, has the highest values for each environmental man-
agement activity. As Table 5 reports, each of the environ-
mental strategies depicts a di2erent level of environmental
management development. Financial performance averages
of the 3rst and second groups are signi3cantly lower than
those corresponding to the third group. These results pro-
vide some support for Hypothesis 6a. In other words, envi-
ronmentally proactive hotels have higher level of 3nancial
performance.


466

M.J.

Alvarez Gil et al. / Omega 29 (2001) 457–471

Table 3
Descriptive statistics and correlations for all variablesa

Variable

Mean

1. Environmental management
2. Legal category
3. Sun and sand
4. Facility age
5. Size
6. Chain a6liation
7. Exercise of power
8. Operation management

5.21
0.62
0.42
6.13
4.57
0.49
3.31
5.66
aN = 296; ∗p ¡ 0:05; ∗∗p ¡ 0:01.

s.d.

2.08
0.49
0.49
6.04
0.95
0.50
2.21
2.16

Table 4
Hierarchical regression analysisa

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

−0:19**
0.19**
−0:24**
0.33**
0.30**
0.51**
0.54**

−0:07
0.11
−0:39**
−0:26**
−0:10
−0:21**

−0:05
0.43**
0.05
0.23
0.13*

−0:14*
−0:11
−0:13*
−0:24**

0.27 **
0.23 **
0.26**

0.18 **
0.30**

0.31**

Step 1

(cid:10)

0.17**
−0:17**

Step 2

(cid:10)

0.16**
−0:15**
−0:21**

Step 3

(cid:10)

0.06
−0:06
−0:19**

0.25**

Step 4

(cid:10)

0.08
−0:02
−0:18**

0.21**

0.22**

Step 5

(cid:10)

0.02
−0:03
−0:14**

0.16**

0.16**

0.42**

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Step 4

Step 5

Step 6

Sun and sand
Category

Facility age

Size

Chain a6liation

Exercise of power

Operations management

R2 at each step
VR2 at each step

0.15**
0.04**
aNote: (cid:10)’s are standardized coe6cients; ∗∗∗p ¡ 0:10; ∗p ¡ 0:05; ∗∗p ¡ 0:01.

0.06**
0.06**

0.11**
0.05**

0.19**
0.04**

0.35**
0.16**

Table 5
Financial performance variables by groupa

Environmental management
Occupancy
Pro3ts last year
Pro3ts last 3 years
N

Environmental management groups

Overall

5.37
69.55
6.25
5.83

262

Group 1
Reactive

2.81 (2,3)**
62.47 (2)*(3)**
5.87 (3)**
5.46 (3)**
71

Group 2
Intermediate

5.29 (1,3)**
69.11 (1)*(3)**
6.20 (3)***
5.75 (3)*

112

Group 3
Proactive

7.77 (1,2)**
76.53 (1,2)**
6.67 (1)** (2)***
6.27 (1)** (2)*
79

Step 6

(cid:10)

0.00
0.00
−0:08***

0.13*

0.09***

0.34**

0.36**

0.46**
0.11**

F-value

671.54**
16.15**
5.40**
6.97**

aNote: Values in parentheses indicate the group numbers from which this group was signi3cantly di2erent using the Tamhane pairwise

comparison procedure; ∗∗∗p ¡ 0:10; ∗p ¡ 0:05; ∗∗p ¡ 0:01:

7. Discussion and conclusions

7.1. Discussion of the results

The results support our hypotheses on the determinants
of hotel environmental management. Further, we have also

found signi3cant di2erences between the 3nancial perfor-
mance of active environmental management hotels and their
counterparts with a low pro3le in environmental manage-
ment practices.

Our 3ndings suggest that the age of hotels’ facilities
negatively in9uence the deployment of environmental


M.J.

Alvarez Gil et al. / Omega 29 (2001) 457–471

467

management practices, that is, hotels with old facilities put
in place less extensive programs of environmental manage-
ment than their counterparts with more recent premises.
Organizational and technical reasons may help explain
these 3ndings. Arguably, some environmental protection
practices are associated with hotels’ facilities, that is, im-
plementation of such techniques requires state-of-art equip-
ment. Further, hotels that do not renovate their facilities
may also face some sort of organizational inertia which
may a2ect their willingness to modify their extant routines.
However, the e2ect of the facility age falls when the oper-
ations management variable is introduced. This can be due
to the fact that renovating the facilities favors the intro-
duction of operations management techniques and methods
(e.g. maintenance planning, or work study), meaning that
this last variable re9ects part of the 3rst variable’s e2ect on
environmental management practices.

We found support for the notion that hotel size is as-
sociated to the deployment of environmental management
techniques, in concordance with results found by the ex-
tant environmental management literature [6,20,39]. These
results may be explained through the concomitant e2ect of
economies of scale and the existence of slack resources. The
latter aspect reveals that 3rms need a minimum quantity
of 3nancial and human resources to deploy environmental
management practices, especially because returns on envi-
ronmental protection activities can only be achieved in the
medium or long term [77]. Further, economies of scale are
regarded to play a signi3cant role in environmental man-
agement practices because such activities comprise actions
aiming at both reducing the physical impact on the envi-
ronment (technical measures) and attaining organizational
aspects (e.g., training, public relation campaigns). Lastly,
size in the hotel industry is associated to the establishments’
legal category and clientele. Therefore, high category (4- or
5-star) and sun-and-sand tourism establishments are gener-
ally larger than their counterparts of lower category or dom-
inated by other type of clientele.

Chain a6liation enables hotels access to information on
environmental protection measures as well as sharing re-
sources and taking advantage of economies of scale. This
has a positive e2ect on the level of environmental practices
development. Our results suggest three additional consid-
erations. First, chains themselves constitute a stakeholder
group that may in9uence the deployment of environmen-
tal protection activities and, by doing this, be encompassed
under the “stakeholder environmental pressure” variable.
Second, chains may propel the deployment of operations
management techniques that comprise environmental pro-
tection practices (e.g., by publishing an operations manage-
ment manual that includes environmental management is-
sues). Third, some hotel chains are well concerned about
environmental topics and lead the industry in this matter,
whereas other hotel chains are unaware of this issue. Our re-
sults support the 3rst two factors. Interestingly, the beta co-
e6cient of the hotel chain a6liation variable dropped upon

the inclusion of the stakeholder environmental pressure and
the operations management variables in the hierarchical re-
gression (steps 5 and 6). As far as the third factor is con-
cerned, our 3ndings reveal that some chains impose on a6l-
iates a minimum set of environmental protection activities
(e.g. Sol-Melia, RIU Hotels and Hoteles Playa). The ratio-
nale for this practice, we contend, stems for the perceived
public relations gain that derives from the accomplishment
of a minimum of environmental management. Therefore,
we cannot dismiss the notion that membership to a hotel
chain imposes strategic restrictions on a hotel’s environmen-
tal protection policy [33].

Our results reveal that stakeholder environmental pres-
sures help explain environmental management develop-
ment, and this concurs with the 3ndings of the extant
literature [6,22,29]. Thus, a hotel’s attributed importance to
each stakeholder’s demand is related to the proactivity of
its environmental protection practices. Our results indicate
that the use of di2erent in9uence strategies (both in terms of
coercion and information exchange) by the most powerful
stakeholders a2ects the degree of environmental practice
development. Admittedly, our data gathering di2ers from
that made in the previous literature. However, the high beta
coe6cient of the stakeholder environmental pressure vari-
able and the sharp increase in R2 con3rm the instrumental
role of both external and internal stakeholders in promoting
environmental management.

Our results show support for the notion that operations
management is related to a 3rm’s environmental manage-
ment. This result is novel, given the lack of research to
this respect, although certain studies have mentioned that
environmental improvement is only possible through an
improvement in the operations sub-system [78,79]. Studies
relating operations management and the 3rm’s environmen-
tal strategy have mainly concentrated on the more highly
regulated manufacturing sectors (e.g. chemical industry,
furniture industry). In this context, it has been pointed out
that, historically, 3rms have preferred to keep environ-
mental protection separate from the operations function,
so that these questions do not interfere with production
planning [32]. Currently, it has been suggested that the
more proactive 3rms emphasize pollution prevention, in
spite of the fact that the empirical evidence is not con-
clusive [6]. Our investigation on the lodging sector, we
believe, may enhance understanding on this crucial aspect.
In this respect, the use of operations management tech-
niques and methods is being done by only a small minority
of hotels, which are ahead of the rest in their management
techniques [71,53]. Implementation of operations man-
agement techniques and methods may be regarded as a
sign of proactivity. Proactive 3rms attempt to deploy ad-
vanced methods of environmental management [20]. On
the other hand, and in line with our arguments, it is likely
that
techniques and
procedures may favor activities that protect the environ-
ment. From this viewpoint, operations management may be

the use of operations management


468

M.J.

Alvarez Gil et al. / Omega 29 (2001) 457–471

understood as a complementary resource to environmental
management [79].

Our results suggest a slight relationship between en-
vironmental management practice and 3rms’ 3nancial
performance. Our three indicators suggest this interpreta-
tion. Admittedly, however, this 3nding is stronger for the
proactive group of proactive hotels than for its counterparts
designated as restrictive and intermediate. The rational for
this 3nding stems from the fact that environmental protec-
tion management is regarded as a complementary rather
than as a compulsory activity. As noted above, our 3ndings
do not imply that environmental management and 3nancial
performance is a one-way causal relationship.

Our results indicate that environmental management
exerts a positive in9uence on short-term 3nancial perfor-
mance. Prior studies, however, provide contradictory empir-
ical evidence. Whereas some investigations 3nd a positive
relationship [27,31] others report a negative relationship
(e.g. [26,66]). Our examination of the environmental man-
agement literature suggests that such di2erences may be
explained for the contingent nature of 3nancial performance
upon the particular environmental protection policy de-
ployed by 3rms. For example, Klassen and Whybark [12]
found that pollution prevention activities have a positive
impact on 3nancial performance. In contrast, they found
that pollution control activities have a negative in9uence
on 3rms’ 3nancial performance. Such results may be well
explained in the context of manufacturing 3rms, whose
conformity with environmental protection legislation brings
about the deployment of activities that increase their costs
and, thus, decrease their 3nancial performance. Hotel or-
ganizations, conversely, lack comprehensive environmental
legislation and, thus, their activities in this matter may well
address prevention, inexpensive matters.

7.2. Limitations

Our study bears some limitations that may encourage
future work. First, our results on the relationship between
environmental management practices and 3rms’ 3nancial
performance may be tested in view of additional factors
that arguably a2ect hotels’ 3nancial performance (e.g.,
customers’ loyalty, innovativeness). Further, the e2ects of
environmental management on 3nancial performance may
in9uence both short and the long-term results. Admittedly,
our database reported on the short-term e2ects and, thus,
investigation on the long-term e2ects of environmental
management on 3nancial performance may constitute a
potential strand of research in this area. Lastly, the rela-
tionship between environmental management and 3nancial
performance is widely regarded as environmental issues
driving 3nancial performance. However, it might be ar-
gued that 3rms need a performance threshold to engage in
environmental protection activities.

Second, the variables are constructed using questions put
to a single source within each organization and are based on

the perceptions of the hotel manager. Although part of the
data have been compared using secondary sources, without
there being any apparent bias, it has not been possible to
validate all the variables. However, the factorial analysis
provides an initial sign that the di2erent measurement scales
group together items belonging to the same construct.

Third, our study is made up of a single-industry and
single-geographical scope 3rms. Though control variables
attempted to capture this situation, future research will re-
veal the generalizability of our 3ndings. In the hotel industry
there have recently been, both on a national and international
level, di2erent initiatives to try and promote hotels’ com-
mitments to the environment (e.g. International Hotels En-
vironment Initiative, Green Globe Program of Word Travel
& Tourism Council, and Ecotour). These initiatives gener-
ally show the preoccupation in improving the environmental
commitment and lowering costs. This global concern may
be considered as a 3rst sign that our results can be extended
to hotels from other geographic regions, since the condition-
ing factors analyzed are similar. In extending our investi-
gation to other industries, it may be interesting to note that
(1) the lodging sector’s concern over environmental mat-
ters is relatively recent, and this might imply that environ-
mental strategies are less diverse than those implemented in
industries with a longer tradition in environmental manage-
ment (e.g., the steel sector); (2) environmental regulation
is largely industry-speci3c and, thus, it may pose additional
constraints on the generalizability of our 3ndings across in-
dustries; and (3) some idiosyncratic characteristics of the
hotel industry (e.g., hotels’ chains [33]) may pose addi-
tional problems on the generalizability of our results across
industries.

Finally, some of our measurement scales are not validated
by previous work or are industry speci3c. For example, to
examine the stakeholders’ strategies of in9uence, we have
grouped the stakeholders that are deemed to be the most im-
portant for hotels. Admittedly, though, such important stake-
holders may di2er among them in their approach to 3rms’
environmental issues, and this is an aspect that may encour-
age future work on this area. Lastly, our operations manage-
ment scale would not be of any use to manufacturing-sector
3rms. In that case, it would be more appropriate to use scales
dealing with advanced manufacturing technologies [12].

7.3. Implications

This investigation suggests that a number of determinants
may in9uence the environmental management strategy of
3rms operating in industries which are not a2ected by envi-
ronmental regulations. Our study focuses on a loosely regu-
lated industry, the lodging sector. In this context, pressures
from stakeholders, deployed through di2erent strategies of
in9uence, may help explain the deployment of environmen-
tal management practices in 3rms. In a similar vein, opera-
tions management techniques may also play an instrumental
role in environmental management. Lastly, we have found


M.J.

Alvarez Gil et al. / Omega 29 (2001) 457–471

469

a slight relationship between 3rms’ 3nancial performance
and environmental management practices. These results may
suggest some implications for the present practice.

First, 3rms face a sort of contradictory pressures. Whereas
hotel organizations are asked to improve quality and reduce
costs, they are also requested to increase their environmen-
tal commitment. Our study indicates that both demands are
attainable through the deployment of a set of operations
management techniques and, thus, we concur with studies
which reveal that operations management and environmental
management may share similar purposes and methodology
[21,55]. For example, actions aiming at total quality manage-
ment may help identify ine6ciencies and resource wastage,
and this brings about improvements in eco-e6ciency as well
as in cost improvement.

Second, our results support the notion that a positive rela-
tionship exists between 3rm’s extensive use of environmen-
tal management practices and 3nancial performance. This
argument, we believe, may be used by agents such as the
public administration, regulatory bodies and stakeholders at
large to enhance 3rms’ commitment to environmental issues.

Acknowledgements

We wish to thank Salvador Carmona and the three
anonymous reviewers for the substantial improvements in
our manuscript resulting from their suggestions. This re-
search was partially funded through DGES aids (references
PB97-1358, PB97-0089 and PR95-583).

References

[1] Hand3eld RB, Walton SV, Seegers LK, Melnyk SA. “Green”
value chain practices in the furniture industry. Journal of
Operations Management 1997;15(3):293–315.

[2] Foster ST, Sampson SE, Dunn SC. The

impact of
initiatives for service
customer contact on environmental
3rms. International Journal of Operations and Production
Management 2000;20(2):187–203.

[3] Hutchinson C. Integrating environmental policy with business

strategy. Long Range Planning 1996;29(1):11–23.

[4] Hunter C. Sustainable tourism as an adaptive paradigm.

Annals of Tourism Research 1997;24(4):850–67.

[5] De Rato y Figaredo R. La incidencia del

turismo en la

economXa nacional. Estudios TurXsticos 1999;141:3–7.

[6] Klassen RD, Whybark DC. Environmental management
in operations: the selection of environmental technologies.
Decisions Sciences 1999;30(3):601–31.

[7] Bansal P, Roth K. Why companies go green: a model of
ecological responsiveness. Academy of Management Journal
2000;43(4):717–36.

[8] Cramer J. Environmental management: From “3t” to “stretch”.

Business Strategy and the Environment 1998;7(3):162–72.

[9] Peattie K, Ringler A. Management and the environment in
the United Kingdom and Germany: a comparison. European
Management Journal 1994;12(2):216–25.

[10] Hart SL. A natural-resource-based view of the 3rm. Academy

of Management Review 1995;20(4):986–1014.

[11] Russo MV, Fouts PA. A resource based perspective
on corporate environmental performance and pro3tability.
Academy of Management Journal 1997;40(3):534–59.

[12] Klassen RD, Whybark DC. The impact of environmental
technologies on manufacturing performance. Academy of
Management Journal 1999;42(6):599–615.

[13] Hunt CB, Auster ER. Proactive environmental management
trap. Sloan Management Review

toxic

avoiding the
1990;31(2):7–18.

[14] Schaefer A, Harvey B. Stage models of corporate “greening”:
a critical evaluation. Business Strategy and the Environment
1998;7(3):109–23.

[15] Vastag G, Kerekes S, Rondinelli DA. Evaluation of corporate
environmental management approaches: a framework and
application. International Journal of Production Economics
1996;43(2,3):193–211.

[16] Roome N. Developing environmental management strategies.

Business Strategy and the Environment 1992;1(1):11–24.

[17] Winsemius P, Guntram U. Responding to the environmental

challenge. Business Horizons, 1992;March=April:12–20.

[18] Sadgrove K. The green’s manager handbook. Aldershot:

Gower, 1993.

[19] Steger U. The greening of the board room: how german
companies are dealing with environmental
In:
Fischer K, Schot J, editors. Environmental strategies for
industry:
international perspectives on research needs and
policy implications. Washington, DC: Island Press, 1993. p.
147–66.

issues.

[20] Aragon Correa JA. Strategic proactivity and 3rm approach
to the natural environment. Academy of Management Journal
1998;41(5):556–67.

[21] Steger U. The strategic dimensions of environmental
management. Sustaining the corporation during the age of
ecological discovery. Houndmills: MacMillan Press, 1998.

[22] Henriques

I, Sadorsky P. The

between
environmental commitment and managerial perceptions of
stakeholders importance. Academy of Management Journal
1999;42(1):87–99.

relationship

[23] Kirk D. Environmental management in hotels. International
Contemporary Hospitality Management

of

Journal
1995;7(6):3–8.

[24] Porter ME, van der Linde C. Green an competitive: ending
the stalemate. Harvard Business Review 1995;73(5):120–34.
[25] Sharma S, Vredenburg H. Proactive environmental strategy
and the development of competitively valuable organizational
capabilities. Strategic Management
Journal 1998;19(8):
729–53.

[26] Cordeiro JJ, Sarkis J. Environmental proactivism and 3rm
performance: evidence from security analyist earning forecast.
Business Strategy and the Environment 1997;6(2):104–14.

[27] Judge WQ, Douglas TJ. Performance implications of
incorporating natural environmental issues into the strategic
planning process: an empirical assessment.
Journal of
Management Studies 1998;35(2):241–62.

[28] Fineman S, Clarke K. Green

industry
interpretations and response. Journal of Management Studies
1996;33(6):715–30.

stakeholders:

[29] Henriques

environmental

I, Sadorsky P. The

an
responsive 3rm: an empirical approach.

determinants

of


470

M.J.

Alvarez Gil et al. / Omega 29 (2001) 457–471

Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
1996;30(3):381–95.

[30] Gupta MC,

Sharma K.

operations
management: an opportunity for improvement. Production and
Inventory Management Journal 1996;37(3):40–6.

Environmental

[31] Klassen RD, McLaughlin CP. The impact of environmental
management on 3rm performance. Management Science
1996;42(8):1199–214.

for

and

practices

performance.

[32] Theyel G. Management

environmental
innovation
of
Operations and Production Management 2000;20(2):249–66.
[33] Ingram P, Baum JAC. Chain a6liation and the failure
of Manhattan hotels, 1898–1980. Administrative Science
Quarterly 1997;42(March):68–102.

International

Journal

[34] Shrivastava P. Environmental technologies and competitive
advantage. Strategic Management Journal 1995;16(special
issue-summer):183–200.

[35] Welford RJ. Corporate

environmental management,
technology
postmodern
perspective and the need for a critical research agenda.
Business Strategy and the Environment 1998;7(1):1–12.

development,

sustainable

and

[36] Dacin MT.

Isomorphism in context: The power and
prescription of institutional norms. Academy of Management
Journal 1997;40(1):46–81.

[37] Dobers P. Strategies for environmental control: a comparison
between regulation and centralized control in Germany and
reforms leading to decentralized control in Sweden. Business
Strategy and the Environment 1997;6(1):34–45.

[38] Ghobadian A, Viney H, Liu J, James P. Extending linear
approaches to mapping corporate environmental behavior.
Business Strategy and the Environment 1998;7(1):13–23.

[39] Merritt Q. EM into SME won’t go? Attitudes, awareness
and practices in the London borough of Croydon. Business
Strategy and the Environment 1998;7(2):90–100.

[40] Andersen O.

Industrial ecology and some implications
for rural SMEs. Business Strategy and the Environment
1997;6(3):146–52.

[41] Brown JR, Dew CS. Looking beyond RevPAR: productivity
consequences of hotel strategies. Cornell Hotel & Restaurant
Administration Quarterly 1999;40(2):23–33.

[42] Zurburg R, Ru2 D, Ninemier J. Environmental action in the
United States lodging industry. Hospitality & Tourist Educator
1995;7(2):45–9.

acquisition,
[43] Darr ED, Argote L, Epple D. The
knowledge
in
service
franchises. Management

depreciation
productivity

transfer
and
organizations:
Science 1995;41:1750–62.

of
in

[44] Freeman RE. Strategic management: A stakeholder approach.

Boston: Pitman, 1984.

[45] Donaldson T, Preston LE. The stakeholder theory of the
corporation: concepts, evidence, and implications. Academy
of Management Review 1995;20(1):65–91.

[46] Mitchell RK, Agle BR, Wood DJ. Toward a theory of
stakeholder identi3cation and salience: de3ning the principles
of who and what really counts. Academy of Management
Review 1997;22(4):853–86.

[47] Argando˜na A. The stakeholder theory and the common good.

Journal of Business Ethics 1998;17(9–10):1093–102.

[49] Pfe2er J, Salancik GR. The external control of organizations: a
resource dependence perspective. New York: Harper & Row,
1978.

[50] Clarkson MBE. A stakeholder

framework for analyzing
and evaluating corporate social performance. Academy of
Management Review 1995;20(1):92–117.

[51] Frooman J. Stakeholder in9uence strategies. Academy of

Management Review 1999;24(2):191–205.

[52] Lee-Ross D, Ingold T. Increasing productivity in small hotels:
are academic proposals realistic?. International Journal of
Hospitality Management 1994;13(3):201–7.

[53] McMahon F. Productivity in the hotel industry. In: Seaton AV,
Jenkins CL, Wood RC, Pieke PUC, Bennet MM, McLellan
LR, Smith R, editors. Tourism: the state of the art. West
Sussex: JW, 1994. p. 616–25.

[54] Schmidheiny S. Changing course:

a global business
perspective on development and the environment. Cambridge:
MIT Press, 1992.

[55] Klassen RD, McLaughlin CP. TQM and environmental
excelence in manufacturing. Industrial Management & Data
Systems 1993;93(6):14–22.

[56] Hanna MD, Newman WR. Operations and environment: an
expanded focus for TQM. International Journal of Quality &
Reliability Management 1995;12(5):38–53.
Integrating

environmental
issues into the mainstream: an agenda for
research in
operations management. Journal of Operations Management
1999;17(5):575–98.

[57] Angell LC, Klassen RD.

[58] FEH—Federacion Espa˜nola de Hoteles. El sector hotelero en

Espa˜na. Madrid: FEH, 1999.

[59] Gustin ME, Weaber PA. Are hotels prepared for

the
consumer? Hospitality Research Journal

environmental
1996;20(2):1–14.

[60] ICHE—Instituto para la Calidad Hotelera Espa˜nola. Normas
de calidad para hoteles y apartamentos turXsticos. Madrid:
ICHE, 1998.

[61] GarcXa-Falcon JM, Medina-Mu˜noz D. The relationship
between hotel companies and travel agencies: an empirical
assessment of the United States market. The Service Industries
Journal 1999;19(4):102–22.

[62] Walley N, Whitehead B. It’s not easy being green. Harvard

Business Review 1994;72(3):46–52.

[63] Welford R. Environmental

sustainable
development: the corporate challenge for the 21st century.
London: Routledge, 1995.

strategy

and

[64] Beaumont JR, Pedersen LM, Whitaker BD. Managing the
Environment: business opportunity and responsibility. Oxford:
Butterworth-Heinemann, 1993.

[65] Guimaraes T, Liska K. Exploring the business bene3ts
of environmental stewardship. Business Strategy and the
Environment 1995;4(1):9–22.

[66] Worrell D, Gilley KM, Davidson III WD, El-Jely A. When
green turns to red: stock market reaction to announced
greening activities Paper presented at
the Academy of
Management Meeting, Vancouver, 1995.

[67] IHEI—International

Initiative.
Environmental management for hotels. Oxford: Butterworth-
Heinemann, 1993.

Environment

Hotels

[48] Oliver C. Strategic response to institutional processes.

[68] Nunnally JC. Psycometric theory, 2nd ed. New York:

Academy of Management Review 1991;16(1):145–79.

McGraw-Hill, 1978.


M.J.

Alvarez Gil et al. / Omega 29 (2001) 457–471

471

[69] Brown M. Environmental strategy in the hotel sector: “green”
strategy or stratagem? International Journal of Contemporary
Hospitality Management 1996;8(3):18–23.

[70] Raven BH, Kruglanski AW. Con9ict and power. In: Swingle
P, editor. The structure of con9ict. New York: Academic
Press, p. 69–109.

[71] Witt CA, Clark BR. Tourism:

the use of production
techniques. The Services Industries Journal

management
1990;10(2):306–19.

[72] Miller CC, Cardinal LB. Strategic planning and 3rm
than two decades
research. Academy of Management Journal 1994;37:

synthesis of more

a

performance:
of
1649–65.

[73] Damonte TL, Rompf PD, Bahl R, Domke DJ. Brand
a6liation and property size:
e2ects on measures of
performance in lodging properties. Hospitality Research
Journal 1997;20(3):1–16.

[74] Johns N, Howcroft B, Drake L. The use of data envelopment
analysis to monitor hotel productivity. Progress in Tourism
and Hospitality Research 1997;3(2):119–27.

[75] Everitt BS. Cluster analysis. London: Arnold, 1993.
[76] Milligan GW, Cooper MC. An examination of procedures
for determining the number of clusters in a data set.
Psychometrika 1985;50:159–79.

[77] Bringer RP, Benforado DM. Pollution prevention and total
quality environmental management. In: Kolluru R, editor.
Environmental strategies handbook: a guide to e2ective
policies and practices. New York: McGraw-Hill, p. 165–88.
[78] Azzone G, Bertele U. Exploiting green strategies for com-
petitive advantage. Long Range Planning 1994;27(6):69–81.
into
open
systems.
Journal 1993;

[79] Klassen RD.
manufacturing:
interactive
Production and Inventory Management
34(1):82–8.

Integration of environmental

toward

issues

an

