Transformational leadership or the iron cage: which
predicts trust, commitment and team efficacy?

Kara A. Arnold
PhD Candidate, Queen's School of Business, Queen's University, Kingston,
Ontario, Canada
Julian Barling
Associate Dean, Queen's School of Business, Queen's University, Kingston,
Ontario, Canada
E. Kevin Kelloway
Department of Management, Saint Mary's University Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada

Keywords
Leadership, Corporate culture,
Commitment, Trust, Teamwork

Abstract
This paper investigates the
differential effects of
transformational leadership and
the ``iron cage'' on trust,
commitment and team efficacy at
the team level. Transformational
leadership has been shown to have
positive effects on trust,
commitment and team efficacy.
However, it could be argued that
these results are not due to the
leadership but to the idea that the
team has developed strong norms
that constrain their behavior and
``force'' them to perform. The rival
hypothesis that the iron cage
results in trust, commitment and
team efficacy is tested using
hierarchical regression analysis.
We find that transformational
leadership in teams predicts trust,
commitment and team efficacy
over and beyond the perceptions of
the iron cage. The iron cage adds
to the prediction of commitment
only. Results suggest that while
encouraging strong values and
norms within a team will lead to
increased commitment, focusing
on transformational leadership in
teams is a more effective way to
encourage the development of
trust, commitment and team
efficacy.

Submitted: May 2001
Accepted: June 2001
All three authors would like
to acknowledge funding
support provided by The
Social Sciences and
Humanities Research
Council of Canada.

Leadership & Organization
Development Journal
22/7 [2001] 315±320
# MCB University Press
[ISSN 0143-7739]

Many organizations are experimenting with
new ways to design work to enable them to be
more productive, flexible, and to meet the
demands of a fast paced and changing
environment. The competitive challenges of
the last two decades have seen an increase in
the number of organizations using self-
managed teams as a new work design and
this topic has been receiving increased
attention in the literature (Banker et al., 1996;
Cohen and Ledford, 1994; Manz, 1992). One
estimate is that more than half of major US
corporations are exploring some type of team
based work design (Osterman, 1994). Manz
and Sims (1993, p. ix) state that ``almost every
major US corporation is seriously
considering work teams''. Parker and Wall
(1998, p. 24) assert that ``autonomous
workgroups, in all their forms and sizes, are
increasingly popular''.

Team structure can lead to increased
organizational productivity, higher job
satisfaction and more effective response to
competitive pressures (Cohen et al., 1996;
Parker and Wall, 1998). It has been suggested
that team structure increases employee
empowerment (Galbraith and Lawler, 1993)
and employee commitment (Barker, 1993).
There is also a potential ``down'' side of team
structure. Wasted time, frustration,
destructive conflict, poor decisions and the
reinforcing of norms of poor performance are
some common problems with this design
(Hackman, 1987). Other authors have argued
that empowerment is a ``myth'' (Harley, 1999)
and that teams are as controlling of
employees as hierarchical management ever
was (Barker, 1993). Strong positive norms can
develop concertive control systems that exert
powerful control over team members
(Barker, 1993). Barker (1993) referred to this
concertive control system as the ``iron cage''.

Like the iron cage described by Weber, it
controls behavior but in a different way.

What are the differential effects of

transformational leadership in teams versus
the perception of the iron cage? Do teams that
develop such strong group norms as to
develop this concertive control experience as
high trust, commitment, and team efficacy as
teams that have high transformational
leadership? The objective of this research
was to test the rival hypothesis that trust,
commitment and team efficacy could be as
effectively achieved by concertive control
within the team, or the ``iron cage'', as they
could be by transformational leadership.

Transformational leadership, trust

and commitment

Transformational leadership is composed of
inspirational motivation, idealized influence,
individualized consideration and intellectual
stimulation (Bass, 1985, 1998). This type of
leadership encourages followers to put in
extra effort and to go beyond what they
thought possible. A large amount of
empirical research on transformational
leadership has shown its positive effects
(Bass, 1985, 1998). Strong leadership
positively affects satisfaction and
performance of individuals, teams and
organizations (e.g. Barling et al., 1996).
Transformational leadership has also been
found to lead to higher levels of
organizational commitment and is associated
with business unit performance (Barling et
al., 1996). At an individual level,
transformational leadership has positive
effects on subordinates' satisfaction with
(Hater and Bass, 1988) and trust in leadership
(Barling et al., 2000; Podsakoff et al., 1996).

The research register for this journal is available at
http://www.mcbup.com/research_registers

The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
http://www.emerald-library.com/ft

[ 315 ]


Kara A. Arnold, Julian Barling
and E. Kevin Kelloway
Transformational leadership or
the iron cage: which predicts
trust, commitment and team
efficacy?
Leadership & Organization
Development Journal
22/7 [2001] 315±320

[ 316 ]

Transformational leadership and

team efficacy

A group that shares a belief that they can be
successful at a particular task has much
greater possibility of actually succeeding
because of this efficacious belief. Collective
efficacy is defined as ``a group's shared belief
in its conjoint capabilities to organize and
execute courses of action required to produce
given levels of attainment'' (Bandura, 1997,
p. 477). This concept is as important at the
group level as self-efficacy is at the individual
level (Durham et al., 1997). Self-efficacy and
collective efficacy differ in the level of agency
(Feltz and Lirgg, 1998). While many researchers
view them as similar in that they are both
task specific (Durham et al., 1997), some use it
in a more general way, for example Parker's
(1998) role-breadth self-efficacy. Some
researchers have named this concept team
efficacy and we will follow that labelling. The
concept of team efficacy is the same as
collective efficacy only applied more
specifically to a team versus a collective.

Both self and team efficacy ``have similar
sources, serve similar functions and operate
through similar processes'' (Bandura, 1997,
p. 178). Extending evidence on individual
level variables suggests that team efficacy is
a potential mediator of the relationship
between transformational leadership in
teams and team performance. On an
individual level, self-leadership has been
shown to positively influence self-efficacy
(Prussia et al., 1998). Transformational
leadership has also been found to have
positive impacts on subordinates' self
efficacy beliefs (Kirkpatrick and Locke, 1996).
At the group level, Sosik et al. (1997) found
that transformational leadership affected
group potency (which is closely related to
collective efficacy) more strongly than
transactional leadership. Group potency
beliefs in turn affected group performance
positively.

The iron cage

What of the rival hypothesis that trust,
commitment and team efficacy could also be
as effectively achieved by the development of
strong group norms and values? Barker (1993,
p. 408) depicts a team structure that evolved
over time to ``draw the iron cage tighter and
to constrain the organization's members
more powerfully [than the former
bureaucratic and hierarchical structure]''.
This finding seemed contrary to what we
would expect with a team structure. Instead
of the freeing of the organization's members

from Weber's iron cage of rational control, a
system of value-based normative rules
developed that controlled the members'
actions much more than previously. The
concertive structure resulted in a ``form of
control more powerful, less apparent, and
more difficult to resist than that of the former
bureaucracy'' (Barker, 1993, p. 408).

In reviewing the self-managing team
literature it could be argued that a self-
managing team structure will increase
``employee motivation, productivity and
commitment'' (Barker, 1993, p. 414). It is for
this reason that many companies adopt this
organizational form. The teams that Barker
(1993) studied created a value-based system of
control and then became strongly identified
with these values. This value-based system
evolved over time to strong norms and then
to a rule-based system. The abstract values of
the vision statement were brought into
concrete terms by this process. These values
were responsibility, quality, member
contribution, and commitment to the team
and the company (Barker, 1993, p. 421). There
was high commitment of the team members
to the values of the team. There is nothing in
this description of the development of
concertive control that would indicate that
there was a lack of trust or distrust in team
members. In fact in the first phase an
employee describes the members of the team
as being like family members (Barker, 1993).
We could also infer from the description that
these teams had high levels of team efficacy.
They tackled problems and took on the
authority that was vested in them gladly and
effectively. They exhibited a ``can do''
attitude. On the basis of these observations it
appears that the perceptions of an ``iron cage''
in fact could elicit great commitment. There
is no evidence to suggest that trust and team
efficacy would not also be high in such an
environment.

Which will exert a stronger influence ±

transformational leadership or perceptions
of the ``iron cage''? Are the effects additive?
After controlling for the effects of
transformational leadership, does the iron
cage perception add to the prediction of trust,
team efficacy, or commitment? And when we
control for iron cage perceptions, does
transformational leadership still exert any
influence? It appears from the literature that
teams that have strong transformational
leadership or strong value-based norms and
rules will perform more effectively than
those that have neither. The process by
which this performance is reached would
appear to depend on trust, commitment, and
team efficacy. The evidence to date suggests
that transformational leadership will be a


Kara A. Arnold, Julian Barling
and E. Kevin Kelloway
Transformational leadership or
the iron cage: which predicts
trust, commitment and team
efficacy?
Leadership & Organization
Development Journal
22/7 [2001] 315±320

stronger influence. The only outcome that we
would expect to be influenced by the
perception of the iron cage would be
commitment. This is the only outcome that
Barker (1993) found to be an integral part of
the concertive system of control that
developed. On the basis of the discussion to
this point we hypothesize that:

H1. The effects of transformational

leadership will be significant over and
above the effects of the perception of
the iron cage in predicting trust,
commitment and team efficacy.

H2. The iron cage will add to the

prediction of commitment over and
above transformational leadership but
not to trust or team efficacy.

Method

Sample
The sample consisted of teams formed for an
Executive MBA program at a leading
Canadian business school. Teams in this
program are self-managing in that they have
control over when tasks will be done and how
the work will be accomplished. They are
intact for the duration of the program (20
months). They do not have control over who
is assigned to their group or what specific
academic assignments must be completed,
but some mechanisms exist for expulsion
from a team under extreme circumstances. A
cover letter explaining the study and the
actual survey were sent via e-mail addressed
to each individual registered in the program
in 1999. Participants filled out the survey
online and e-mailed it back to the Executive
MBA Centre at the school where the
responses were printed out and then input
into an SPSS file. The survey was sent to
approximately 400 people. We received 177
back for a response rate of 44.25 per cent.
Once responses were aggregated to the team
level, data for 42 teams were obtained. The
average number of respondents per team was
3.8 with a range of 2 to 7. The group
composition with respect to sex was similar
across teams with 22.01 percent female
members on average.

Scale development
There were no scales available in the
literature to measure team efficacy with
respect to academic achievement. Items were
generated for team efficacy by thinking of the
various competencies that a team would
require to excel in an academic environment.
Sixteen original items were devised. Six
expert judges (i.e. graduate students in
organizational behaviour and psychology)

rated these 16 items on two dimensions. They
were given the definition of team efficacy.
They were asked to indicate whether they
thought that the item measured team
efficacy. They also rated how certain they
were of their decision (on a scale of 1 = not
certain at all to 10 = absolutely certain). Items
for the final scale were selected based on two
criteria. First, the majority of judges had to
agree that the item was measuring team
efficacy. Second, where there was high
agreement, there also had to be high
certainty that on a scale from 1-10 the item
measured team efficacy. Using these criteria,
11 items for the team efficacy scale were
chosen.

There were also no scales available to

measure perceptions of the iron cage. Items
were developed for this scale based on
Barker's (1993, p. 434) discussion of the
manifest and latent consequences of
concertive control. Seven items representing
the iron cage perception were developed.
These were then revised and refined for a
total of seven final items that were different
from the original seven.

Questionnaire measures
The final questionnaire consisted of a
summary sheet and three main sections. The
summary sheet asked for data on team
membership, months the team had been
together, number of members in the team,
program they were in, age, sex, and year of
study. The first section measured team
efficacy. The second measured
transformational leadership. The third
measured trust, commitment, and the iron
cage perceptions.

The first section of the questionnaire

measured team efficacy using 11 items. Items
were reflective of the teams' perceived
academic ability. Respondents were asked to
rate on a five-point Likert scale (1 = not at all
confident to 5 = extremely confident) the
extent to which they felt confident that their
team could successfully complete various
tasks, actions and processes that contribute
to successful academic performance. For
example, ``My team can contribute
substantially to group discussions''. This
format was similar to the scale Parker (1998)
used to measure role breadth self-efficacy. As
Parker (1998) and others (Prussia et.al., 1998)
point out, this method differs from Bandura's
original method of asking people to indicate
``yes or no'' whether they can perform at
certain levels (magnitude) and asking how
confident they are in that endorsement
(strength). Recent studies examining self-
efficacy use strength measures only (Prussia
et al., 1998) and Bandura (1977) indicated that

[ 317 ]


Kara A. Arnold, Julian Barling
and E. Kevin Kelloway
Transformational leadership or
the iron cage: which predicts
trust, commitment and team
efficacy?
Leadership & Organization
Development Journal
22/7 [2001] 315±320

[ 318 ]

the strength score was most relevant. We
therefore used only an assessment of
strength of team efficacy.

Four aspects of transformational

leadership were measured using the
Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire for
Teams (MLQT) (Bass and Avolio, 1996). These
include: idealized influence, inspirational
motivation, intellectual stimulation, and
individualized consideration. This scale has
been used in previous research and has
acceptable psychometric properties. Subjects
were asked to evaluate each statement in
terms of their team's overall leadership
behavior. They were to judge how frequently
on average their team displayed the behavior
described on a five point Likert scale from
0 = not at all to 4 = frequently, if not always.
Examples of items include ``Members of my
team avoid controversial issues that would
produce conflict'' and ``Members of my team
go beyond their self interests for the good of
the team''. The reliability for the four
dimensions of transformational leadership
was an alpha of 0.96.

Team commitment was measured using
items adapted from Ellemers et al. (1998).
There were seven items in the final scale.
Respondents were asked to indicate the
number that corresponded to the extent to
which they agreed with the statements with
respect to their team. They were to indicate
their agreement on a scale from 1 = strongly
disagree to 7 = strongly agree. Examples of
items are ``I am prepared to do additional
chores when this benefits my team'' and ``I
try to invest effort into a good atmosphere in
my team''. Reliability for this scale was an
alpha of 0.84.

Five items measured trust. The

instructions and rating scale were the same
as for the commitment scale. Trust in team
members was assessed using items adapted
from Jarvenpaa et al. (2000). Items in this
scale included ``The members of my team are
trustworthy'' and ``I find it necessary to be
cautious with members of my team (R)''.
Reliability was alpha 0.86.

The iron cage perceptions were measured
with seven items constructed from Barker's
(1993) description of this concertive control
system. Again, the instructions and rating
scale were the same as the commitment and
trust sections of the questionnaire. Examples
of items include `` The behavioural norms we
have developed enable us to work effectively
together'' and ``We enforce rules through peer
pressure''. Reliability for the scale was an
alpha of 0.78.

Results

Descriptive statistics and inter-correlations for
all study variables are presented in Table I.

To assess the relative contribution of

transformational leadership and iron cage
perceptions to the prediction of the outcomes
of interest we conducted a series of
hierarchical regression analyses. In the first
set of analyses, we entered transformational
leadership on step one and iron cage
perceptions on step two and assessed the
change in R2 associated with each step. In the
second set of analyses we reversed the
procedure, entering iron cage perceptions on
the first step and transformational
leadership on the second step. Thus, these
analyses assess whether iron cage
perceptions contribute to the prediction of
study outcomes over and beyond the
prediction attributable to transformational
leadership (first set of analyses) and whether
iron cage perceptions contribute to the
prediction after controlling for
transformational leadership (second set of
analyses).

Results of these analyses are presented in
Table II. In the first set of regressions, after
accounting for the effects of transformational
leadership, iron cage perceptions did not
make a significant contribution to the
prediction of team efficacy or trust. Iron cage
perceptions did add to the prediction of
commitment.

In the second set of analyses, perceptions of

transformational leadership significantly
added to the prediction of all criteria after
accounting for the effects of iron cage
perceptions.

Discussion

Our results suggest strong support for both of
the hypotheses regarding the differential
effects of transformational leadership and the
iron cage on trust, commitment and team
efficacy. Transformational leadership
increases trust, commitment and team
efficacy over and above the levels that a team
achieves through perceptions of the iron
cage. Strong values and norms within a team
are still important in that they have an effect
on the commitment that is felt within the
team.

These results suggest that organizations
implementing teams should concentrate on
encouraging and training their team
members in how to be effective
transformational leaders. A culture of
transformational leadership within the team
should be promoted. This would seem to be a


Kara A. Arnold, Julian Barling
and E. Kevin Kelloway
Transformational leadership or
the iron cage: which predicts
trust, commitment and team
efficacy?
Leadership & Organization
Development Journal
22/7 [2001] 315±320

Table I
Descriptive statistics and intercorrelations for all study variables (n = 42)

Variable

1 Transformational leadership
2 Iron cage perceptions
3 Team efficacy
4 Trust
5 Commitment

Notes: R > 0.20, p < 0.05

Mean

3.02
5.09
4.03
5.84
5.94

SD

0.38
0.52
0.31
0.71
0.45

1

2

3

4

0.50
0.64
0.72
0.60

0.24
0.46
0.57

0.62
0.47

0.70

Table II
Hierarchical regression results (R2 change)

Step 1
Transformational leadership
Step 2
Iron cage perceptions
Step 1
Iron cage perceptions
Step 2
Transformational leadership

Notes: * = p < 0.05

Efficacy

0.41*

0.01

0.06

0.36*

Trust

0.52*

0.01

0.21*

0.32*

Commitment

0.36*

0.09*

0.32*

0.13*

more effective way to engender trust,
commitment and team efficacy than the
encouragement of strong values and norms.
These strong values and norms can easily
lead to rules that govern behavior of team
members and constrain their behavior as
powerfully as the hierarchical structure
associated with bureaucracy had in the past.
While the stronger perceptions of the iron
cage did lead to increased commitment over
and above what strong transformational
leadership did, there may also be some
negative consequences such as increased
stress on team members (Barker, 1993).

This study does have some limitations.
First, the data are cross-sectional and we
cannot make any statements as to causation.
It could be that strong transformational
leadership arises due to team efficacy. Or
perhaps within a team environment where
members feel trust and commitment they feel
freer to enforce value-based norms and rules.
While the evidence to date would suggest that
causation occurs in the direction we have
posited this has not been tested in a
longitudinal study. Second, the scales for
team efficacy and the iron cage are new and
have not been subjected to extensive
validation. We did have acceptable reliability
for all the scales but there is a chance that
given further use they may not stand up as
valid. Finally, the use of student samples may
limit the generalizability of our findings. The
use of Executive MBAs does mitigate this
concern to some extent, as these are students

who are also executives in the corporate
world.

Despite these limitations, this study is still

the first test to date of the rival hypothesis
that teams could experience high trust,
commitment and team efficacy as a result of
their development of strong concertive
control systems as easily and effectively as
they could through transformational
leadership. As such it is important evidence
of what organizations would best concentrate
their team development efforts on.
Organizations that have a team structure
may find that teams will benefit most from a
focus on transformational leadership. Let the
strong group values and norms take care of
themselves.

References
Bandura, A. (1977), Social Learning Theory,

Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Bandura, A. (1997), Self-efficacy: The Exercise of
Control, W.H. Freeman and Company, New
York, NY.

Banker,R.D., Field J.M., Schroeder R.G. and

Sinha, K.K. (1996), ``The impact of work teams
on manufacturing performance: a
longitudinal field study'', Academy of
Management Journal, Vol. 39 No. 4, pp. 867-90.

Barker, J.R. (1993), ``Tightening the iron cage:

concertive control in self-managing teams'',
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 38,
pp. 408-37.

Barling, J., Moutinho, S. and Kelloway, E.K.
(2000), ``Transformational leadership and
group performance: the mediating role of
affective commitment'', manuscript under

[ 319 ]


Kara A. Arnold, Julian Barling
and E. Kevin Kelloway
Transformational leadership or
the iron cage: which predicts
trust, commitment and team
efficacy?
Leadership & Organization
Development Journal
22/7 [2001] 315±320

review, Queen's School of Business, Queen's
University, Kingston, Ontario.

Barling, J., Weber, T. and Kelloway, E.K. (1996),

transformational and transactional
leadership'', Journal of Applied Psychology,
Vol. 73, pp. 695-702.

``Effects of transformational leadership
training on attitudinal and fiscal outcomes: a
field experiment'', Journal of Applied
Psychology, Vol. 81, pp. 827-32.

Bass, B.M. (1985), Leadership and Performance

Beyond Expectations, Free Press, NY.

Bass, B.M. (1998), Transformational Leadership,

Erlbaum, NJ.

Bass, B.M. and Avolio, B. (1996), Multifactor

Leadership Questionnaire for Teams, Mind
Garden, Redwood City, CA.

Cohen, S.G. and Ledford, G.E. Jr (1994), ``The

effectiveness of self-managing teams: a
quasi-experiment'', Human Relations, Vol. 47
No. 1, pp. 13-43.

Cohen, S.G., Ledford, G.E. Jr and Spreitzer, G.M.

(1996), ``A predictive model of self-managing
work team effectiveness'', Human Relations,
Vol. 49 No. 5, pp. 643-76.

Durham, C.C., Knight D. and Locke, E.A. (1997),

Jarvenpaa, S.L., Tractinsky, N. and Vitale, M.

(2000), ``Consumer trust in an Internet store'',
Information Technology and Management,
Vol. 1 No. 1, pp. 45-71.

Kirkpatrick, S.A. and Locke, E.A. (1996), ``Direct
and indirect effects of three core charismatic
leadership components on performance and
attitudes'', Journal of Applied Psychology,
Vol. 81, pp. 36-51.

Manz, C.C. (1992), ``Self-leading work teams:

moving beyond self-management myths'',
Human Relations, Vol. 45 No. 11, pp. 1119-40.

Manz, C.C. and Sims, H.P. Jr (1993), Business

Without Bosses: How Self-managing Teams
Are Building High-performing Companies,
John Wiley & Sons, Toronto.

Osterman, P. (1994), ``How common is workplace

transformation and who adopts it?'',
Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
Vol. 47, pp. 173-88.

``Effects of leader role, team-set goal difficulty,
efficacy, and tactics on team effectiveness'',
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, Vol. 72 No. 2, pp. 203-31.

Parker, S. and Wall, T. (1998), Job and Work

Design: Organizing Work to Promote Well-
Being and Effectiveness, Sage Publications,
London.

Ellemers N., de Gilder, D. and van den Heuvel, H.
(1998), ``Career-oriented versus team oriented
commitment and behavior at work'', Journal
of Applied Psychology, Vol. 83 No. 5, pp. 717-30.
Feltz, D.L. and Lirgg, C.D. (1998), ``Perceived team

and player efficacy in hockey'', Journal of
Applied Psychology, Vol. 83 No. 4, pp. 557-64.

Galbraith, J.R. and Lawler, E.E. III (1993),

Organizing for the Future: The New Logic for
Managing Complex Organizations, Jossey-
Bass, San Francisco, CA.

Hackman, R.J. (1987), ``The design of work teams'',

in Lorsch, J. (Ed.), Handbook of
Organizational Behaviour, Prentice-Hall,
New York, NY, pp. 315-42.

Harley, B. (1999), ``The myth of empowerment:

work organization, hierarchy and employee
autonomy in contemporary Australian
workplaces'', Work, Employment and Society,
Vol. 13 No. 1, pp. 41-66.

Hater, J.J. and Bass, B.M. (1988), ``Supervisors'

evaluations and subordinates' perceptions of

Parker, S.K. (1998), ``Enhancing role-breadth

self-efficacy: the role of job enrichment and
other organizational interventions'', Journal
of Applied Psychology, Vol. 83 No. 6, pp. 835-52.

Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S.B. and

Bommer, W.H. (1996), ``Transformational
leader behaviors and substitutes for
leadership as determinants of employee
satisfaction, commitment, trust and
organizational citizenship behaviors'',
Journal of Management, Vol. 22, pp. 259-98.

Prussia, G.E., Anderson, J.S. and Manz, C.C.
(1998), ``Self-leadership and performance
outcomes: the mediating influence of
self-efficacy'', Journal of Organizational
Behavior, Vol. 19, pp. 523-38.

Sosik, J.J., Avolio, B.J. and Kahai, S.S. (1997),

``Effects of leadership style and anonymity on
group potency and effectiveness in a group
decision support system environment'',
Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 82 No. 1,
pp. 89-103.

[ 320 ]

The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.
The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.

