 
 
An Empirical Examination of the Relationship between Corporate Social Responsibility and
Profitability
Author(s): Kenneth E. Aupperle, Archie B. Carroll and  John D. Hatfield
Source: The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 28, No. 2 (Jun., 1985), pp. 446-463
Published by: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/256210
Accessed: 26-02-2017 20:49 UTC
 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/256210?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted

digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about

JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

http://about.jstor.org/terms

Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The
Academy of Management Journal

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Sun, 26 Feb 2017 20:49:05 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 ? Academy of Management Journal
 1985, Vol. 28, No. 2, 446-463

 AN EMPIRICAL EXAMINATION

 OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CORPORATE
 SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND PROFITABILITY

 KENNETH E. AUPPERLE

 Kent State University
 ARCHIE B. CARROLL
 JOHN D. HATFIELD
 University of Georgia

 Although there has been considerable research into the relationship
 between corporate social responsibility and profitability, it has frequently
 reflected either an ideological bias or limited methodological procedures.
 Research has also been impeded by the difficulty of adequately measur-
 ing corporate social responsibility. This study, using an elaborate, forced-
 choice instrument administered to corporate CEOs, did not find any
 relationship between social responsibility and profitability. Specifically,
 varying levels of social orientation were not found to correlate with
 performance differences.

 Although an enormous body of literature has emerged concerning corpo-
 rate social responsibility, actual empirical research designed to test the multi-
 tude of definitions, propositions, concepts, and theories that have been
 advanced has been scarce. In addition, much of the research done in the area
 has been incomplete and simplistic in methodology. Abbott and Monsen
 have observed that "the empirical study of corporate social involvement is
 in an undeveloped state" (1979: 501).

 Many of the methodological quagmires in studying corporate social
 responsibility stem from the nature of the subject, a relatively new field of
 study whose concepts are value laden and susceptible to particular ideologi-
 cal and emotional interpretations. Perhaps the overriding research constraint
 has been the difficulty of developing valid measures. Arlow and Gannon, in
 their recent review (1982) of the relationship between profitability and corpo-
 rate social responsibility, observed that all the various studies relied upon
 questionable indexes of social responsibility. Assessing profitability is a
 relatively clear-cut process, but assessing social responsibility is not.

 The problem in assessing levels of corporate social responsibility is objec-

 tively determining appropriate criteria and standards of corporate perfor-
 mance, a kind of difficulty typical of the labyrinthian problems confronting
 social audits. For instance, Parket and Eilbirt observe that:

 To be sure, the scope of endeavor categorized by the term social
 responsibility cannot be analyzed on the order of a balance sheet
 or profit and loss statement. There are, as yet, no accounting
 techniques, analytical tools, or statistical methods which will

 446

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Sun, 26 Feb 2017 20:49:05 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1985

 Aupperle, Carroll, and Hatfield

 447

 objectively differentiate companies that are socially responsible
 from those that are not. To measure degrees of social responsibil-
 ity would be an even more ethereal task (1975: 6).

 The whole process of the corporate social audit is so vague that Robert

 Jensen, a leading researcher in the social accounting area, has commented
 that "in most instances we are still groping in the dark concerning what to
 disclose, how to disclose it, and how to compare and evaluate business
 enterprises" (1976: 2). Jensen also observed that:

 Social accounting, and especially corporate social accounting, is
 in some instances an attempt to conjure up an image or represen-
 tation of the institution constituting the "real object." The image
 created may range from hideous to angelic depending on who is
 conjuring up the image. Social accounting is like a kaleidoscope
 in that the same pieces turned a little differently form a whole
 new pattern (1976: 1).

 Compounding difficulties in studying corporate social responsibility

 has been the lack of an effort to empirically test definitions, propositions,
 and concepts; researchers have tended to create their own measures rather
 than to use one of the many preexisting definitions in the literature. Not only
 has this hindered interstudy comparisons and analyses; it has limited
 development of a research base in the social issues area.

 The initial purpose of this study was to develop an instrument to mea-
 sure degree of orientation to social responsibility based upon a model defin-
 ing corporate social responsibility that has appeared in the literature. Carroll
 (1979) developed the definition used in this study for instrument develop-
 ment. Although no single defining construct has universal acceptance,
 Carroll's conceptualization has multiple components that lend themselves
 to measurement and testing. Another, related purpose was to use the instru-
 ment to assess how CEOs viewed their firm's social responsibilities. Our
 ultimate purpose was to investigate the relationship between orientation
 toward corporate social responsibility, as measured through the instrument,
 and profitability.

 THE LITERATURE ON CORPORATE

 SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND PROFITABILITY

 The first issue of Business and Society Review gave us the initial impe-

 tus for examining the relationship between corporate social responsibility
 and profitability. In that issue, Editor Milton Moskowitz suggested that
 socially responsible firms were good investment risks even though "there is
 at this point no real evidence that capital markets will be materially affected
 by social performance" (1972: 71). While Moskowitz made no explicit claim
 that such firms were good investment risks, he clearly implied it, and, in
 addition recommended 14 firms as potential investments because of their
 social performance: ". . . the securities are being suggested here on the basis
 of corporate behavior that can be considered socially responsive" (1972: 72).
 However, he never revealed what criteria he used in selecting these 14 firms.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Sun, 26 Feb 2017 20:49:05 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 448

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 The next issue of Business and Society Review observed that the 14

 socially responsible firms identified by Moskowitz had registered a stock
 price increase of 7.28 percent over the previous six months, in contrast to a
 4.4 percent rise for the Dow-Jones, a 5.1 percent increase for the New York
 Stock Exchange, and a 6.4 percent gain for Standard and Poors Industrials
 during that period. This finding was used to support the notion that socially
 responsible firms were good investment risks.

 Stanley Vance challenged the findings and claims of Moskowitz and
 Business and Society Review in a 1975 Management Review article. Vance
 examined the market performance of the 14 Moskowitz-recommended firms
 from 1972 to 1975 and found that stock in all of the firms had declined in
 price and had performed far below the Dow-Jones, the New York Stock
 Exchange Index, and the Standard and Poors Industrials (1975: 19).

 To support his tentative conclusion that socially responsible firms are
 not good investment risks, Vance extended his analysis to looking at the
 performance of firms identified as having high and low levels of corporate
 social responsibility in surveys reported by Business and Society Review. He
 compared the financial performance of the firms rated highest in corporate social
 responsibility with that of those rated lowest and found that the latter
 outperformed the former. Although he performed no statistical test to deter-
 mine whether differences were significant, Vance did correlate corporate
 social responsibility and financial performance, and, finding a negative
 relationship, concluded that socially responsible firms were not good invest-
 ments (1975: 24).

 There are similar methodological problems with the exploratory work of
 both Moskowitz (1972) and Vance (1975). The initial 14-firm sample used
 by each was small and subjectively selected. In addition, both studies relied
 upon a performance criterion that considered only capital gains or losses.
 There was also no adjustment for risk; not all stocks reflect the same degree
 of risk. In addition, the performance time period was short in the Moskowitz
 study. The Vance study used reputational surveys that reflected a response
 rate of 11 percent, with the typical responder rating only 20 of 45 firms
 considered.

 Table 1 provides a chronological review of the major research efforts in

 this area; some of the more important of these research efforts will be briefly
 examined. Alexander and Buchholz (1978) did an important study that fol-
 lowed up on the efforts of Moskowitz and Vance. The major methodological
 difference between the Vance study and that of Alexander and Buchholz lies
 in the area of risk adjustment for the firms identified in the reputational
 survey. The latter study utilized the betas1 of each firm to adjust performance.
 When examining the issue of risk, Alexander and Buchholz were able to
 conclude that "there seems to be no significant relationship between stock

 1Beta is a measure of sensitivity of a firm's stock price in context of overall fluctuations in

 the New York Stock Exchange composite average.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Sun, 26 Feb 2017 20:49:05 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 TABLE 1

 Studies Examining the Relationship between Corporate

 Social Responsibility (CSR) and Profitability

 Study Methodology Criteria Implications Limitations

 Performance Findings

 Moskowitz (1972)

 Simplistic comparison of
 stock price increases in
 Moskowitz' 14 firms with
 "perceived" high CSR with
 the average increase in
 the Dow-Jones Index.

 Stock price
 increases
 over time
 (six months)

 High CSR firms outper-

 form the Dow-Jones
 Industrials.

 Bragdon &

 Martin (1972)

 Bowman & Haire

 (1975)

 Seventeen firms in the

 Return on

 The better the

 equity (ROE)

 pollution index,
 the higher the
 ROE.

 paper and pulp industry
 were rated on a pollution
 index developed by the
 Council of Economic
 Priorities. Each firm's
 index was compared to its
 ROE.

 Five-year

 return on
 equity

 Eighty-two food processing
 firms classified into low,
 medium, and high CSR cate-
 gories based on the number
 of lines devoted to the
 topic of CSR in corporate
 annual reports. The CSR
 categories are compared
 on the basis of their ROE.

 Existence of a U-

 shaped performance
 curve; the highest
 performing firms
 being those found
 in the middle range
 of CSR.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Sun, 26 Feb 2017 20:49:05 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Study Methodology Criteria Implications Limitations

 TABLE 1 (continued)

 Performance Findings

 Parket &

 Eilbirt (1975)

 96 firms that responded

 Absolute net

 On all four mea-

 to the researchers' previous
 CSR survey were assumed
 to be CSR firms. The
 profitability of 80 of these
 firms compared to the
 Fortune 500.

 income, pro-
 fit margin
 ROE, and EPS

 sures, the 80 CSR
 firms proved to
 be more profitable.

 Vance (1975)

 Two-fold:

 Stock price
 increases
 over time

 1. Replicating Moskowitz
 2. Correlating CSR firms
 derived from two Busi-
 ness and Society Review
 Surveys with stock price
 changes over time.

 Heinz (1976)

 Sturdivant &

 Ginter (1977)

 Correlating CSR ratings of

 29 firms from a Business
 and Society Review survey
 with ROE.

 Several mea-
 sures such
 as ROA, ROE,
 and profit
 margins

 10 year EPS

 growth

 A population of 67 high CSR
 firms as identified by Mos-
 kowitz in the Business and
 Society Review are used in
 a CSR survey. Twenty-three
 firms returned 130 question-
 naires. The 67 firm popu-
 lation is also reduced down
 to 28 firms and reclassified

 CSR firms are

 determined not to
 be good invest-
 ments; negative
 correlation bet-
 ween CSR and stock
 price increases.

 A significantly

 positive corre-
 lation between
 CSR and ROE.

 High CSR firms

 (Best and Honorable
 Mention) outperform
 low CSR firms.
 Honorable mention
 CSR firms have the
 best performance
 and supports find-
 ings of Bowman and

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Sun, 26 Feb 2017 20:49:05 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 TABLE 1 (continued)

 Study Methodology Criteria Implications Limitations

 Performance Findings

 Sturdivant & into four industrial group- Haire and to some performance measure is question-
 Ginter (1977) ings. CSR and the 10-year extent that of able; failure to identify curvilinear
 (continued) growth in EPS is examined. Bragdon and Martin. relationship revealed in data

 Alexander & Replicating efforts of Stock price CSR has no effect Reliance on a questionable sample;

 Buchholz (1978) Vance by using reputa- increases on stock market performance measure is inadequate.

 tional ratings derived over 2 years performance;
 from Business and Society and 5 years repudiates both
 Review surveys. CSR ratings Moskowitz and Vance.
 are correlated with stock
 price increases over time
 and adjusted for risk.

 Abbott & Development of a Social 10 year CSR has no effect No adjustment for risk; the SID

 Monsen (1979) Involvement Disclosure yield on the total return may not reflect the true level of
 (SID) scale from a content to investors. CSR; the content analysis used
 analysis of Fortune 500 is superior to that of Bowman and
 firms. The SID is used to Haire but is still questionable;
 determine CSR firms, which performance measure is inadequate.
 are then compared on the
 basis of their investment
 yield.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Sun, 26 Feb 2017 20:49:05 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 452

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 risk levels and degree of social responsibility. These findings suggest that the
 interpretations of both Moskowitz and Vance are invalid" (1978: 485).

 Since the data were derived from both 3-year and 5-year assessment

 periods and were adjusted for risk, this study was a considerable improve-
 ment over its predecessors. However, as with the Vance study, the nature of
 the sample of firms remains a potential problem in that it relies upon the
 reputational studies and ratings provided by the Business and Society Review.
 In addition, the use of stock prices as the criterion for performance is undesir-
 able given their inability necessarily to reflect on a firm's profitability.

 Bowman and Haire (1975) conducted a study that used a different

 approach in investigating the issue of the relationship between corporate
 social responsibility and profitability. The researchers, in identifying firms
 as low or high in social responsibility on the basis of the number of lines
 devoted to the topic of social responsibility in their annual reports, point out
 that:

 In searching for a readily available surrogate measure for actual
 activities in the area of corporate citizenship, we chose to mea-
 sure the proportion of lines of prose in the annual report devoted
 to social responsibility. The annual report is a kind of projective
 test that allows a firm to express its goals and motives in much
 the same way that a Rorschach or TAT does for an individ-
 ual .... A critic could immediately scoff at this measure. It is at
 least a popular belief that "everybody that talks about heaven
 ain't going there," that talk is cheap, and that talk about socially
 desirable behavior is not necessarily a predictor of such behavior
 (1975: 49-50).

 To validate this line-count method, the researchers cross-validated it by

 applying the method to Moskowitz's 14 firms having high levels of social
 responsiblity and found them to have much more line space devoted to the
 topic of social responsibility than the 14 other randomly chosen firms (1975:
 51). Using this line-count procedure, the authors classified 82 firms into
 high, medium, and low social-responsibility categories, and then evaluated
 each category on the basis of 5-year return on equity (ROE). The researchers
 found that the firms with medium ratings for degree of corporate social
 responsibility performed the best and the firms with low ratings performed
 the worst, indicating a U-shaped relationship between corporate social respon-
 sibility and firms' financial performance (1975: 51-53).

 Bowman and Haire's (1975) study exhibits numerous methodological
 problems. First, what is or is not a sentence or comment on corporate social
 responsibility can be difficult to ascertain, as the researchers themselves
 implicitly demonstrate (1975: 50). Second, the issue of validity also arises
 when assessment of corporate social responsibility is based on simple line
 count and cross-validated by 14 other firms whose level of social responsi-
 bility is also indeterminant, as we earlier observed. Third, the study included
 more (51) firms having low social responsibility than firms with moderate
 (18) or high (13) levels of social responsibility. Fourth, reliance on ROE as a
 measure of firm performance could be misleading since that return is a
 function not only of profitability, but also of a firm's financial leverage.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Sun, 26 Feb 2017 20:49:05 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1985

 Aupperle, Carroll, and Hatfield

 453

 Finally, the researchers performed no significance tests, nor did they adjust
 performance for risk.

 A subsequent study by Abbott and Monsen (1979) employed a similar

 but more sophisticated methodology. The researchers used a content analy-
 sis of Fortune 500 annual reports performed annually by the accounting firm
 of Ernst and Ernst. This content analysis involves 28 items monitored in the
 annual reports; the content analysis is then used to construct a Social Involve-
 ment Disclosure (SID) scale that Abbott and Monsen used as a surrogate
 for corporate social responsibility. They divided 450 firms from the Fortune
 500 into high and low groups on the basis of this scale and then examined
 each group for profitability. They discovered little difference in investment
 yield between firms in the two groups, even when controlling for size. They
 concluded that: "Being socially involved does not appear to increase investor's
 total rate of return. Nor does it appear that being socially involved is dysfunc-
 tional for the investor" (1979: 514-515).

 Some methodological problems exist with this study, as well. The annual
 report method used to assess corporate social responsibility may be superior
 to that used by Bowman and Haire, but it is still subject to validity problems.
 In addition, there was no adjustment for risk, and the performance criterion
 of investor's yield is not necessarily an adequate surrogate for profitability:
 yield is a function of both capital gains and dividends, neither of which need
 be tied directly to profitability.

 Parket and Eilbirt (1975) conducted a study that took still another
 approach. In a previous study of corporate social responsibility the research-
 ers had been able to get 96 firms from the Forbes 1971 Annual Directory to
 respond; they concluded that, since these firms had responded, they were
 clearly more oriented toward social responsibility than were nonrespondents.
 Parket and Eilbert point out that:

 The fact that all ninety-six of the replying forms identified them-
 selves as engaged in endeavors associated with social responsi-
 bility suggests that firms not actively undertaking such work are
 more heavily represented among our nonrespondents (1975: 6).

 They then compared 80 alleged socially responsible firms to the Fortune 500
 firms (minus these 80 firms) on the performance criteria of dollar net income,
 profit margin, ROE, and earnings per share (EPS). The researchers conclude:
 "By all four measures, the 80 respondents who were considered to be the
 most socially active show up as more profitable" (1975: 8).

 However, no significance test was performed, and it appears that the
 differences in both ROE and EPS are insignificant between the firms identi-
 fied as socially responsible and other firms. Other methodological limitations
 exist. One problem was the assumption that the 80 firms in the sample had
 demonstrated a socially responsible orientation because they responded to a
 previous survey. Also, the data analysis methods were incomplete; there was
 no risk adjustment, and the profitability measures employed are not definitive
 and cover only one year.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Sun, 26 Feb 2017 20:49:05 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 454

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 Another major research effort in this area was based on the judgment of

 Moskowitz, who had classified 67 firms over time as essentially high,
 moderate, and low in corporate responsibility (Sturdivant & Ginter, 1977).
 The researchers note that:

 The study was based on the sixty-seven corporations that had
 been cited by business journalist Milton Moskowitz as exhibit-
 ing exceptional social responsiveness or lack thereof. While no
 claim can be made about the accuracy of these ratings, they had
 the advantage of consistency in that they came from a single
 source (1977: 30).

 Sturdivant and Ginter used this sample to derive yet a smaller 28 firm
 sample that they subdivided into four industrial groupings. They compared
 firms showing high, moderate, and low social responsibility in each group-
 ing on the basis of 10-year EPS growth, and then normalized each firm by
 dividing growth by the industry average. They found that firms from the high
 and moderate groups outperformed those from the low group (1977: 38).
 However, Sturdivant and Ginter did not really mention the fact that firms in
 the moderate group were the best performers, a result similar to what Bow-
 man and Haire had discovered earlier.

 A number of methodological problems exist in this study, the first of

 which was sample selection: Sturdivant and Ginter derived their sample
 from a single source whose judgment was used in classifying the various
 firms in terms of orientation to corporate social responsibility. No criteria
 were offered for this classification. Moreover, the four industrial groupings
 reflect inconsistencies: for instance, Weyerhaeuser was grouped with U.S.
 Steel, Giant Food with S. S. Kresge Company, and Ralston Purina with
 Campbell Soup. In addition, the final sample, having been reduced to 28
 firms, was small; there was no adjustment for risk; and the performance
 measure of growth in earnings per share is not definitive.

 These studies reflect both varying methodologies and different degrees

 of rigor. Although reputational surveys and content analysis of annual reports
 do provide useful beginning points, other exploratory methods also exist.
 Also, it is surprising that so much research has been based on the value
 orientations of a single business critic, and that none of the studies used a
 financial performance measure, like return on assets, that is less susceptible
 to corporate manipulation. Only one study realized the critical importance
 of adjusting performance on the basis of risk. The two studies employing the
 most rigor (Abbott & Monsen, 1979; Alexander & Buchholz,1978) found no
 relationship between corporate social responsibility and financial perfor-
 mance. However, two studies employing different methodologies (Bowman
 & Haire, 1975; Sturdivant & Ginter, 1977) found a curvilinear relationship
 between corporate social responsibility and financial performance, with mod-
 erately socially responsible firms being the best performers.

 RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

 In order to avoid some of the methodological problems of previous

 studies, we chose to develop a survey instrument capable of clearly assessing,

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Sun, 26 Feb 2017 20:49:05 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1985

 Aupperle, Carroll, and Hatfield

 455

 on a relative basis, a corporate respondent's social-responsibility orientation.
 The design and validation of the survey instrument was an important and
 indispensable part of this study; the basic approach used in constructing the
 instrument drew on Carroll's (1979) corporate social responsibility construct.
 Carroll's Construct

 The attractive feature of Carroll's (1979) construct was its definition of
 corporate social responsibility through four components; we saw this com-
 prehensive quality as particularly conducive to the construction of a research
 instrument, and judged each of the components to be suitable for the kind of
 survey data we deemed desirable. The four components of the defining
 model are: economic, legal, ethical, and discretionary (or philanthropic)
 concerns. Carroll defines them as follows: (1) Economic responsibilities of
 business reflect the belief that businss has an obligation to be productive and
 profitable and meet the consumer needs of society. (2) Legal responsibilities
 of business indicate a concern that economic responsibilities are approached
 within the confines of written law. (3) Ethical responsibilities of business
 reflect unwritten codes, norms, and values implicitly derived from society;
 ethical responsibilities go beyond mere legal frameworks and can be both
 strenuously undertaken and nebulously and ambiguously stated. (4) Discre-
 tionary responsibilities of business are volitional or philanthropic in nature,
 and, as such, also difficult to ascertain and evaluate.

 With Carroll's (1979) construct, we could assess orientations toward

 social responsibility of corporate executives. In addition, use of the con-
 struct permitted inquiry into whether or not four separate components of
 corporate social responsibility exist, and, if they do, whether they exist in
 the weighted proportions implied by Carroll. His graphic representation of
 the four-part construct (1979: 499) suggested a weighting of 4-3-2-1, respec-
 tively, for the economic, legal, ethical, and discretionary components.

 A Forced-Choice Survey Instrument

 We used a forced-choice methodology to minimize the social desirabil-

 ity of responses. Respondents were asked to allocate up to 10 points to each
 of 20 sets of statements measuring corporate social responsibility. Each set
 contained four statements, each of which corresponded to one of Carroll's
 four components. Though all statements were unique, we asked respondents
 to respond repetitiously to slightly varying situations referring to corporate
 social responsibility. In other words, each set sought the same basic
 information.

 Item Selection and Content Validity

 Our first concern was content validity. To ensure the statements on
 corporate social responsibility were representative, an exhaustive list of state-
 ments representing the three non-economic components was derived from
 five studies - Eilbirt and Parket (1973), Corson and Steiner (1974), Paluszek

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Sun, 26 Feb 2017 20:49:05 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 456

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 (1976), Holmes (1977), and Ostlund (1977). We took only items or statements
 rated as important by respondents in the former studies, and omitted industry-
 specific items in order to facilitate meaningful ratings from respondents
 regardless of industry association. Items selected to represent the economic
 performance component were drawn from performance measures typically
 found in corporate scoreboard sections of Business Week and Forbes and
 commonly referred to in well-established managerial finance texts. Altogether,
 we developed an inventory of 117 statements; each of the four components
 had its own pool of statements in this inventory. The 117 statements assess-
 ing corporate social responsibility were screened through a panel of six
 independent judges to ensure that statements in the instrument for each set
 actually represented Carroll's four components. The judges' task was to place
 each of the statements into one of the four categories, and to differentiate
 economic statements from non-economic statements. Consensus for a given
 statement was considered to exist when at least five judges concurred. This
 process produced enough statements to construct a 20-set, 80-item instrument.
 Since the ethical and discretionary statements produced less consensus, in a
 few instances high consensus statements from those two pools were used in
 more than one set. As statements were assigned to the various sets, three
 panel members reviewed the composition of each set to ensure the state-
 ments had relatively equal levels of social desirability. Statements were also
 randomly ordered to reduce response bias.

 Reliability

 We tested reliability by administering the instrument to 158 business

 policy students in four different classes at a large business school. Cronbach
 alphas calculated for each of the four categories of corporate social respon-
 sibility produced the following results: economic, .93; legal, .84; ethical,
 .84; and discretionary, .87.

 The final questionnaire included additional questions in a Likert format

 including two questions that asked whether or not the respondents' organiza-
 tion engaged in social forecasting or had a corporate social responsibility
 committee on its corporate board.2

 Instrument Mailing

 We sent the final instrument, containing the 20 items assessing corpo-

 rate social responsibility and other questions pertaining to both corporate
 social responsibility and to strategic management to the 818 chief executive
 officers (CEOs) listed in Forbes 1981 Annual Directory. A first mailing and
 two follow-up mailings generated 241 (30%) usable responses. Eight other
 responses were unusable, and 42 respondents indicated that they did not
 wish to participate in the survey.

 2A copy of the main instrument can be obtained from the first author.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Sun, 26 Feb 2017 20:49:05 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1985

 Aupperle, Carroll, and Hatfield

 457

 Factor Analysis

 RESULTS

 A factor analysis of the 80 item instrument was performed to determine

 whether the 4-part construct defining corporate social responsibility offered
 by Carroll could be supported. We used an N-factor, principal components
 factor analysis with a varimax rotation; it produced 22 factors with eigen-
 values greater than 1.0. Further parsimony was required, particularly since
 the factor loadings for the 22 factors were low. Also, the eigenvalues and
 explained variances declined rapidly following the extraction of the first
 factor.

 In order to identify the relevant number of factors inherent in the
 construct, we performed a scree test, which suggested that either three or
 four factors existed. We therefore performed both 3-factor and 4-factor princi-
 pal component factor analyses.3

 We judged the 3-factor solution to be the one that produced the more
 practical results because in it, 59 of the statements assessing corporate social
 responsibility had dominant loadings, considerably more than we found
 with the 4-factor solution.

 One factor contained both highly negative economic loadings and highly

 positive ethical loadings. This pattern supported the validity of the four-part
 corporate social-responsibility construct, but also produced an unanticipated
 revelation: a clear inverse relationship between the economic and ethical
 dimensions, implying that an emphasis on one of these two components was
 primarily at the expense of the other. Apparently, the more concerned a
 corporation was with its economic responsibilities, the less interested it was
 in its ethical responsibilities. Considering the amount of support given in
 recent years by both business leaders and social critics to the topic of ethical
 behavior, we found this result somewhat surprising.

 Table 2 presents zero-order correlations among the four component scores;
 Cronbach alpha coefficients are in the diagonal cells. As would be expected
 from the factor structure, the strongest correlation (r = - .71, p = .001) was
 between the economic and ethical components. In fact, the economic factor
 correlated negatively with all three of its non-economic counterparts.
 Generally, our analysis supported the existence of four distinct, but related,
 components. In addition, the relative values or weights of each of the compo-
 nents, as implicitly depicted by Carroll, approximated the relative degree of
 importance the 241 executives placed on the four components. The mean
 scores for each component were: economic = 3.50, legal = 2.54, ethical
 2.22, discretionary = 1.30.

 Partitioning the Four Components

 For purposes of later analysis, we rearranged the four components as-
 sessing corporate social responsibility into two categories. The first category,

 3The results of these factor analyses can be obtained from the first author.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Sun, 26 Feb 2017 20:49:05 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 458

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 TABLE 2

 Intercorrelations Among the Four Components

 of Corporate Social Responsibilitya

 1 2 3 4

 1. Economic .ob
 2. Legal -.48*** .86
 3. Ethical -.71*** .13* .87
 4. Discretionary -.47 ** .04 .25** .84
 aN = 241
 bValues on diagonal are Cronbach alphas.

 *p < .05
 **p < .01
 * **p < .001

 denoted as "a concern for society," consisted of the three non-economic
 components (legal, ethical, and discretionary). We labeled the remaining,
 economic component a "concern for economic performance." This dicho-
 tomy is not uncommon, for social responsibility is often seen as combining
 the legal, the ethical, and the philanthropic. The social orientation of an
 organization can be appropriately assessed through the importance it places
 on the three non-economic components compared to the economic. For in-
 stance, we considered high concern-for-society scores for an organization to
 indicate a strong orientation toward social responsibility.

 Corporate Performance Criteria

 To ascertain the relationship between corporate social responsibility
 and profitability, it was necessary to correlate a firm's concern for society
 score with its profitability. The profitability indicator used was return on
 assets (ROA); we employed both short-term (one year) and long-term ROA
 (five year). However, in order to rely on this indicator as our performance
 criterion, we had to adjust it for risk propensities typical of various firms and
 industries. We took our adjustments from Value Line, which publishes
 betas and safety measures for most large corporations. Although these mea-
 sures pertain directly to risk in regard to a firm's stock, they also reflect the
 firm's general risk characteristics. Value Line's safety index is perhaps the
 most comprehensive among measures of total risk confronting a firm, since it
 incorporates the beta and many other factors as well. Value Line observes
 that the safety index is:

 a measure of potential risk associated with individual common
 stocks rather than large diversified portfolios (for which the Beta
 is a good risk measurement). Safety is based on the Stability of
 price (which includes sensitivity to the market - i.e., Beta - as
 well as the stock's inherent volatility) adjusted for trend and
 other factors - including company size, the penetration of its
 markets, product market volatility, the degree of financial
 leverage, the earnings quality, and the overall condition of the

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Sun, 26 Feb 2017 20:49:05 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1985

 Aupperle, Carroll, and Hatfield

 459

 balance sheet. Safety Ranks range from 1 (Highest) to 5 (Lowest).
 (1981, part IV: 7)

 To standardize a firm's return on assets, we first averaged its safety
 index figures for five years. We then divided this measure by three, the
 Value Line average safety index, and divided this result into the ROA. For
 instance, if a firm's safety index figure over five years were 3,4,3,4, and 3, the
 average would be 3.4. Because 3.4 would be slightly above the risk norm,
 and since greater levels of risk require greater compensating payouts, we
 would adjust such a firm's ROA of (say) 20 percent downward by dividing it
 by 1.1 (3.4 + 3), bringing the risk-adjusted ROA of that firm down to 19
 percent. An average safety index of 1 would also need to be divided by 3,
 yielding an adjustment factor of .333, to be divided into an ROA of (say) 7
 percent. Adjusting ROA for risk, the second firm would have higher perfor-
 mance: a 21 percent versus a 19 percent risk-adjusted ROA. This method,
 though uncommon, serves the purpose of standardizing the ROA so that firms
 can be compared with one another.

 Analyses of Performance

 Table 3 shows that no statistically significant relationships were found

 between a strong orientation toward social responsibility, or concern for
 society, and financial performance. It did not matter whether short-term or
 long-term ROA were used, nor did it matter if that indicator were adjusted or
 unadjusted for risk. We concluded that it was not possible to support the
 notion of a positive or negative relationship between profitability and an
 orientation toward corporate social responsibility, results that are basically
 consistent with Arlow and Gannon's (1982) conclusion that research studies
 hae not provided strong support for a positive association between profitabil-
 ity and corporate social responsibility. The present study also suggests that it
 is neither beneficial nor harmful for a firm to be socially motivated to fulfill
 its social contract.

 The results displayed in Table 3 parallel other empirical findings derived

 with our research instrument. For instance, the instrument examined two
 issues related to the social orientation of an organization. One question

 TABLE 3

 Relationship of Concern for Society
 with Financial Performance and Risk

 Predictors N r p

 Long-term return on assets 174 .00 .99
 Risk-adjusted, long-term return on assets 166 .11 .16
 Short-term return on assets 228 .10 .15
 Risk-adjusted, short-term return on assets 192 .13 .08
 Five-year total risk 189 -.17 .02
 Long-term beta 189 -.08 .25

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Sun, 26 Feb 2017 20:49:05 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 460

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 regarding organizational policy involved determining whether social fore-
 casting was employed. Another question addressed whether there was a
 corporate social responsibility committee on the board of directors.

 The results shown in Table 4 clearly suggest that firms that employ
 social forecasting are not different from firms that do not in regard to long-
 term profitability, with or without an adjustment for risk. The same results
 also appear to be true for the related category concerning corporate social
 responsibility committees on boards of directors. The results shown in Table
 5 reveal no statistically significant differences in regard to adjusted or unad-
 justed profitability. We concluded that firms with a corporate social responsi-
 bility committee on their boards did not differ in profitability from other
 firms.

 DISCUSSION

 The review of the literature on the relationship between corporate social

 responsibility and profitability showed that the studies produced varying
 results. Although many studies concluded that a relationship existed, those
 studies that appeared to be most methodologically sound did not reach that

 TABLE 4

 Relationship between Employing Social
 Forecasting and Profitability of Firms

 Firms N Mean t p

 Firms employing social forecasting 69 10.83a -.59 .550
 Remaining firms 111 11.27a
 Firms employing social forecasting 68 15.56b 1.16 .250
 Remaining firms 103 13.40b
 aLong-term return on assets.
 bRisk-adjusted, long-term return on assets.

 TABLE 5

 Relationship between Presence of Corporate
 Social Responsibility Committee on Board

 and Profitability of Firms

 Firms N Mean t p

 Firms with CSR committees 53 10.43a 1.18 .24
 Remaining firms 127 11.39a
 Firms with CSR committees 53 14.60b -.02 .98
 Remaining firms 118 14.63b
 aLong-term return on assets.
 bRisk-adjusted, long-term return on assets.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Sun, 26 Feb 2017 20:49:05 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1985

 Aupperle, Carroll, and Hatfield

 461

 conclusion. The current study is also unable to support the notion that such
 a relationship exists.

 This study has made an attempt to avoid some of the problems that
 existed in earlier studies. Rather than relying upon methodologically weak
 mechanisms by which to determine the social orientation of an organization,
 we used an elaborate forced-choice instrument to examine the relationship
 between an orientation toward corporate social responsibility and profit-
 ability. The structure of the survey instrument not only minimized the degree
 of response bias, but facilitated our observing how much relative importance
 an organization placed on both the non-economic and the economic. We
 found it interesting that many executives wrote on their questionnaires that
 it was unfair that they had to make unpleasant choices. For instance, respon-
 dents commonly noted that all categories were attractive or important to
 them. They clearly indicated a dislike for the forced-choice procedure, which,
 they felt, constrained their responses - in actuality, it limited their bias.

 Since the instrument itself was embedded in Carroll's (1979) four-part
 model defining corporate social responsibility, it was imperative that this
 construct's validity be examined as well. The results of the content validity
 studies appear to support both model and instrument. First, the studies
 indicated that "experts" were capable of distinguishing among the four com-
 ponents when sorting written statements reflecting each component. Second,
 we concluded, from our factor analyses, that there are four empirically
 interrelated, but conceptually independent, components of corporate social
 responsibility. Third, a test of discriminant validity for an instrument devel-
 oped to represent those components clearly identified the components for 59
 of the 80 statements used in the study, and in addition, two separate studies
 verified the internal consistency of each component as a reflection of aspects
 of corporate social responsibility.

 Our results also give tentative support to the relative weightings Carroll
 (1979) assigned to each of the four components. Although the mean scores
 used to determine these weightings were rather crude indicators, their rela-
 tive magnitude and order confirmed that, at least for 241 active CEOs or their
 designated associates, Carroll's weightings were close approximations. We
 were interested in seeing that, although respondents clearly placed more
 emphasis on the economic component, the non-economic component means
 taken together (6.06) were of much greater weight than the mean for the
 economic component (3.50). Perhaps this suggests the corporate community
 is more responsive to social issues than has been suspected.

 The research inquiry also produced an unanticipated finding. Apparently,

 there is a strong inverse relationship between the economic and ethical
 components, as the factor analysis made clear, with the economic compo-
 nent loading negatively on one factor and the ethical component loading
 positively on the same factor. In addition, strong negative correlations between
 the economic and each of the three non-economic components suggest that
 the more economically oriented a firm is, the less emphasis it places on
 ethical, legal, and discretionary issues, a particularly interesting finding,

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Sun, 26 Feb 2017 20:49:05 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 462

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 given the fact that the three non-economic components had modest or insig-
 nificant correlations among themselves. The correlations among these com-
 ponents showed few substantive relationships from the emphasis respon-
 dents placed on them. Consequently, the results indicate that CEOs make
 fairly unambiguous negative associations between economic and non-
 economic components taken together, but make few associations among the
 non-economic components themselves.

 In addition to using a more objective social orientation measurement
 technique than former studies, we employed more representative profitability
 criteria. Many of the earlier studies relied upon profitability measures of less
 definitive value than ours when performing inter-company comparisons. We
 used return on assets in this study because we thought, as a standard means
 of assessing profitability on a relative basis, it was more universally accept-
 able and less likely to produce misleading results than other measures. We
 used both short-term (one year) and long-term (five year) return on assets,
 adjusted for risk.

 When correlating orientation toward social responsibility, a "concern
 for society," with profitability, we observed no statisitically significant
 relationships. Much the same was also discovered when surrogate measures
 for this orientation were used. The profitability of firms that did social fore-
 casting was not found to be statistically different from that of firms that did
 no forecasting. In addition, the profitability of firms having a corporate social
 responsibility committee on their corporate boards did not significantly dif-
 fer from that of other firms. It seems that there is insufficient evidence to
 support the claim that socially responsible firms are more profitable than
 other firms.

 There are many other methods available to assess the relationship between
 corporate social responsibility and profitability. Some studies have chosen
 to measure managers' behavior, commitment, or reputations in regard to
 their orientation toward social responsibility; this study assessed CEOs'
 orientations. Consequently, the findings of this study are limited, in part, to
 the perceptions on corporate social responsibility of CEOs or their delegated
 representatives. It is possible that CEOs are not representative of their
 organizations and that the research instrument should instead be adminis-
 tered to several employees of each organization surveyed.

 Still, this study has not been able to corroborate the claims of either

 advocates or critics as to the value social responsibility may have for indus-
 trial organizations. Perhaps its merits simply do not show up on the "bottom
 line;" perhaps superior methodologies or new qualitative approaches are
 required. It could very well be that the intangible benefits of corporate social
 responsibility tend to evade scientific inquiry. Perhaps this issue, whether or
 not corporate social responsibility is related to profitability, will never be
 completely resolved.

 REFERENCES

 Abbott, W. F., & Monsen, J. R. 1979. On the measurement of corporate social responsibility.

 Academy of Management Journal, 22: 501-515.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Sun, 26 Feb 2017 20:49:05 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1985 Aupperle, Carroll, and Hatfield 463

 Alexander, G. J., & Buchholz, R. A. 1978. Corporate social responsibility and stock market

 performance. Academy of Management Journal, 21: 479-486.

 Arlow, P., & Gannon, M. J. 1982. Social responsiveness, corporate structure, and economic

 performance. Academy of Management Review, 7: 235-241.

 Bowman, E. H., & Haire, M. 1975. A strategic posture toward corporate social responsibility.

 California Management Review, 18 (2):49-58.

 Bragdon, J. H., & Marlin, J. T. 1972. Is pollution profitable? Risk Management, 19 (4): 9-18.
 Business and Society Review, 1972. So far so good, (2): 88.
 Carroll, A. B. 1979. A three dimensional conceptual model of corporate social performance.

 Academy of Management Review, 4: 497-505.

 Corson, J. J., & Steiner, G. A. 1974. Measuring business' social performance: The corporate

 social audit. New York: Committee for Economic Development.

 Eilbirt, H., & Parket, R. I. 1973. The practice of business: The current status of corporate social

 responsibility. Business Horizons, 16 (4): 5-14.

 Heinz, D. C. 1976. Financial correlates of a social measure. Akron Business and Economic

 Review, 7 (1): 48-51.

 Holmes, S. L. 1977. Corporate social performance: Past and present areas of commitment.

 Academy of Management Journal, 20: 433-538.

 Jensen, R. E. 1976. Phantasmagoric accounting: Research and analysis of economic, social,
 and environmental impact of corporate business. Sarasota, Fla.: American Accounting
 Association.

 Moskowitz, M. 1972. Choosing socially responsible stocks. Business and Society Review,

 (1): 71-75.

 Ostlund, L. E. 1977. Attitudes of managers toward corporate social policy. California Manage-

 ment Review, 19 (4): 35-49.

 Paluszek, J. L. 1976. Business and society: 1976-2000, an AMA report. New York: AMACOM.
 Parket, R., & Eilbirt, H. 1975. Social responsibility: The underlying factors. Business Horizons,

 18 (4): 5-10.

 Sturdivant, F. D., & Ginter, J. L. 1977. Corporate social responsiveness. California Manage-

 ment Review, 19 (3): 30-39.

 Value Line Investment Survey, 1981. Part IV, Glossary, 37 (1): 1-8.
 Vance, S. C. 1975. Are socially responsible corporations good investment risks? Management

 Review, 64 (8): 19-24.

 Kenneth E. Aupperle earned his Ph.D. degree at the University of Georgia; he is Assis-
 tant Professor of Management in Policy and Strategy at Kent State University, Kent,
 Ohio. His current research interests are in strategy implementation and corporate
 performance evaluation.
 Archie B. Carroll earned his Ph. D. at Florida State University; he is Professor of
 Management at the College of Business Administration, University of Georgia in Athens.
 Professor Carroll is a former chairperson of the Social Issues in Management Division
 of the Academy of Management. His current research interests are in corporate social
 performance and business ethics.
 John D. Hatfield earned his Ph. D. at Purdue University; he is Associate Professor of
 Management at the College of Business Administration, University of Georgia in Athens.
 Professor Hatfield is a former chairperson of the Organizational Communication Divi-
 sion of the Academy of Management. His current research interests are in organi-
 zational communications and employee productivity.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Sun, 26 Feb 2017 20:49:05 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

