The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/0143-7739.htm

Using positivity, transformational
leadership and empowerment to

combat employee negativity

College of Business and Economics, Central Washington University, Ellensburg,

James B. Avey

Washington, USA
Larry W. Hughes

College of Business and Technology, University of Nebraska at Kearney,

Kearney, Nebraska, USA

Steven M. Norman

Mesa State College, Grand Junction, Colorado, USA, and

Kyle W. Luthans

College of Business and Technology, University of Nebraska at Kearney,

Kearney, Nebraska, USA

Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this study is to hypothesize and test a conceptual model linking concepts
of leadership and positive organizational behavior to a reduction in employee negativity, with
empowerment as an important mediator in the causal relationships.
Design/methodology/approach – A heterogeneous sample of 341 working adults completed
survey measures as two separate points in time. Conﬁrmatory factor analysis was used to validate
psychometric properties of instruments, and path analysis using structural equation modeling
software was used to test hypotheses.
Findings – As hypothesized, both transformational leadership (b¼ 0.27) and positive psychological
capital (hope, efﬁcacy, resilience and optimism) (b¼ 0.61) were signiﬁcantly related to feelings of
empowerment. Empowerment was signiﬁcantly related to intentions to quit (b¼ 2 0.38) but not
employee cynicism. Empowerment also fully mediated the relationship between the independent
variables and intentions to quit.
Research limitations/implications – A convenience sampling method limited the generalizability
of results. Causal and longitudinal research designs would extend ﬁndings discussed here.
Implications for management are signiﬁcant in terms of countering employee negativity using
leadership processes, employee selection and development.
Originality/value – This study offers the ﬁrst conceptual model integrating emerging concepts
from positive organizational behavior, in the form of positive psychological capacities, with validated
leadership models (transformational leadership). Both were suggested to inﬂuence negative outcomes,
with empowerment as an effective mediator of these relationships. Findings generally support the
hypotheses advanced herein.

Keywords Organizational behaviour, Transformational leadership, Empowerment, Employee attitudes

Paper type Research paper

The popular press has given much attention to the dramatic rise of employees’ working
hours and stress levels. Such is a result of the escalating competitive pressures from

LODJ
29,2

110

Received February 2007
Revised June 2007
Accepted July 2007

Leadership & Organization
Development Journal
Vol. 29 No. 2, 2008
pp. 110-126
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
0143-7739
DOI 10.1108/01437730810852470

