PSYCHOLOGICAL CAPITAL: 

A POSITIVE RESOURCE FOR 

COMBATING EMPLOYEE STRESS 

AND TURNOVER

F

O

O

J A M E S   B .   A V E Y,   F R E D   L U T H A N S ,   A N D   S U S A N   M . 
J E N S E N

R

Workplace stress is a growing concern for human resource managers. Although 
considerable scholarly and practical attention has been devoted to stress man-
agement over the years, the time has come for new perspectives and research. 
Drawing  from  the  emerging  ﬁ eld  of  positive  organizational  behavior,  this 
study  offers  research  ﬁ ndings  with  implications  for  combating  occupational 
stress. Speciﬁ cally, data from a large sample of working adults across a vari-
ety of industries suggest that psychological capital (the positive resources of 
efﬁ cacy, hope, optimism, and resilience) may be key to better understanding 
the  variation  in  perceived  symptoms  of  stress,  as  well  as  intentions  to  quit 
and job search behaviors. The article concludes with practical strategies aimed 
at leveraging and developing employees’ psychological capital to help them 
better cope with workplace stress. © 2009 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

D   P

T

E

Keywords: positive psychological capital, stress, turnover intentions

C

E

R

R

O

C

N

 T he World Health Organization has 

declared  occupational  stress  to  be 
a  worldwide  epidemic.  Certainly 
the impact of an increasingly pres-
sured  work  environment  is  evi-
dent  throughout  American  industry.  One 
recent  analysis  noted  that  20%  of  payroll 
of  a  typical  company  goes  toward  dealing 
with  stress-related  problems  (Riga,  2006), 
and  Americans  identify  work  as  their  most 
significant source of stress because of heavy 
workloads,  uncertain  job  expectations,  and 

U

long  hours  (American  Psychological  Asso-
ciation,  2007).  Extensive  research  over  the 
years  has  focused  on  identifying  stressors 
(e.g.,  Colligan  &  Higgins,  2006),  coping 
mechanisms  (e.g.,  Nelson  &  Sutton,  1990), 
and  ways  that  both  individual  employees 
and  organizations  can  effectively  manage 
stress (e.g., Kram & Hall, 1989). Yet, despite 
this  attention,  remedies  to  combat  occupa-
tional stress remain elusive.

Taking a new approach, this study draws 
from  both  positive  psychology  and  the 

Correspondence to: James B. Avey, Department of Management, College of Business, Central Washington 
University, 400 E. University Way, Ellensburg, WA 98926-7485, Phone: (509) 963-3381, Fax: 509-963-2875, 
E-mail: aveyj@cwu.edu

Human Resource Management, September–October 2009, Vol. 48, No. 5, Pp. 677– 693

© 2009 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.  

Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). 

DOI: 10.1002/hrm.20294

20294.indd   677

8/13/2009   1:52:13 PM


678 

HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT, SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2009

emerging  study  of  positive  organizational 
behavior to investigate whether the recently 
identified  core  construct  of  psychological 
capital  (Luthans,  Avolio,  Avey,  &  Norman, 
2007; Luthans, Youssef, & Avolio, 2007) may 
be  a  key  factor  in  better  understanding  not 
only  how  employees  perceive  stress  symp-
toms, but also the impact of stress on inten-
tions  to  quit  and  job  search  behaviors. 
Specifically, we propose that human resource 
development  (HRD)  strategies  aimed  at 
enhancing  the  components  of  employees’ 
overall  psychological  capital  or  PsyCap 
(efficacy,  optimism,  hope,  and  resilience) 
may  reduce  their  perceptions  of  the  symp-
toms  of  stress,  as  well  as  limit  subsequent 
turnover.

First,  we  will  review  the  background  of 
positive  organizational  behavior,  specifically 
the  theoretical  underpinnings  of  the  core 
construct of psychological capital, and briefly 
summarize  workplace  stress  with  particular 
focus  on  stress-associated  intentions  to  quit 
and  job  search  behaviors.  Our  study  specifi-
cally focuses on physiological, cognitive, and 
emotive  stress  symptoms  rather  than  exclu-
sively  cognitive  appraisals  of  job  demands 
themselves  being  stressful.  After  presenting 
the  methodology  and  results  in  testing  the 
study  hypotheses,  we  conclude  with  some 
practical implications of the findings, paying 
particular  attention  to  HRD  guidelines  to 
help  build  and  support  employees’  PsyCap, 
which  will  help  combat  their  stress  and  re-
duce turnover.

E

R

R

C

T

The Emerging Positive Approach

U

As organizations seek ways to help employees 
navigate the ever-challenging work environ-
ment,  they  increasingly  are  recognizing  the 
importance  of  positivity  and  concentrating 
on  developing  employee  strengths,  rather 
than dwelling on the negative and trying to 
fix employee vulnerabilities and weaknesses. 
This approach does not claim to discover the 
value of positivity but, rather, calls for a more 
positive  approach  than  the  dominant  nega-
tive perspective regarding occupational stress. 
For example, a recent survey of the articles in 
the  occupational  health  literature  found 

O

C

N

R

about a 1 (positive) to 15 (negative) ratio (of 
positively  to  negatively  focused  articles) 
(Schaufeli  &  Salanova,  2007).  Drawing  from 
positive  psychology  (e.g.,  Seligman  &  Csik-
szentmihalyi,  2000;  Snyder  &  Lopez,  2002), 
the  emerging  positive  organizational  behav-
ior approach (introduced by Luthans, 2002a, 
2002b; for a recent review article see Luthans 
& Youssef, 2007, and also see Nelson & Coo-
per,  2007;  Wright,  2003)  provides  such  a 
positive perspective and serves as the founda-
tion for this study. Specifically, positive orga-
nizational  behavior  (POB)  is  “the  study  and 
application of positively oriented human re-
source strengths and psychological capacities 
that  can  be  measured,  developed,  and  effec-
tively  managed  for  performance  improve-
ment” (Luthans, 2002b, p. 59).

F

O

O

D   P

E

Although there are an increasing number 
of  approaches  associated  with  POB  (e.g., 
Luthans  &  Youssef,  2007;  Nelson  &  Cooper, 
2007)  and  positive  organizational  scholar-
ship (Cameron, Dutton, & Quinn, 2003), this 
study  uses  the  core  construct  of  positive 
psychological  capital  (see  Luthans,  Avolio, 
et  al.,  2007;  Luthans,  Youssef,  et  al.,  2007). 
This PsyCap has been defined as “an individ-
ual’s positive psychological state of develop-
ment  and  is  characterized  by:  (1)  having 
confidence (self-efficacy) to take on and put 
in the necessary effort to succeed at challeng-
ing  tasks;  (2)  making  a  positive  attribution 
(optimism) about succeeding now and in the 
future;  (3)  persevering  toward  goals  and, 
when  necessary,  redirecting  paths  to  goals 
(hope)  in  order  to  succeed;  and  (4)  when 
beset  by  problems  and  adversity,  sustaining 
and  bouncing  back  and  even  beyond  (resil-
ience)  to  attain  success”  (Luthans,  Youssef, 
et al., 2007, p. 3).

This  operational  definition  differentiates 
the  core  construct  of  PsyCap  (efficacy,  opti-
mism, hope, and resilience) from the widely 
recognized  aspects  of  human  capital  (what 
you know in terms of knowledge, skills, abili-
ties, and experience) and social capital (whom 
you  know,  including  your  network  of  rela-
tionships).  Recent  research  has  empirically 
supported PsyCap as a higher-order core fac-
tor (Luthans, Avolio, et al., 2007) that is open 
to  development  (Luthans,  Avey,  Avolio, 

Human Resource Management DOI: 10.1002/hrm

AQ2

AQ3

20294.indd   678

8/13/2009   1:52:20 PM


 

PSYCHOLOGICAL CAPITAL 

679

AQ12

Norman,  &  Combs,  2006;  Luthans,  Avey,  & 
Patera,  2008)  and  is  associated  with  higher 
performance  (Luthans,  Avolio,  et  al.,  2007). 
As  more  fully  outlined  in  the  development 
of  the  study  hypotheses,  overall  PsyCap 
also  may  affect  employee  stress  levels  and 
intentions to quit. Before deriving these hy-
potheses  and  testing  them,  however,  a  brief 
overview  of  the  nature  of  today’s  workplace 
stress is provided.

Workplace Stress Relevant to 
Psychological Capital

A number of factors contribute to workplace 
stress,  ranging  from  technological  change 
and  global  competitive  pressures  to  toxic 
work  environments  and  managerial  bully-
ing  (Colligan  &  Higgins,  2006).  Heavier 
workloads and increased business travel also 
affect stress levels as more than one-fifth of 
U.S.  managers  and  professionals  work  at 
least 60 hours a week and many are on call 
around the clock for clients across the globe 
(Hymowitz,  2007).  Downsizing; 
rapid 
changes  in  competitive  pressures,  technol-
ogy, and work procedures; heightened levels 
of  job  insecurity;  and  ever-demanding  cus-
tomers  make  today’s  workplace  arguably 
even  more  stress-laden  than  it  was  just  a 
decade ago. A large-scale survey at Princeton 
(1997)  indicated  that  the  majority  of 
employees  at  all  levels  feel  “quite  a  bit  or 
extremely  stressed”  at  work.  A  2007  study 
by  the  American  Psychological  Association 
(APA)  noted  that  50%  of  Americans  say 
their stress has significantly increased in the 
past five years, and that work is the biggest 
stressor for 74% of Americans, up from 59% 
in 2006.

E

O

N

C

R

R

C

The classic definition of stress offered by 
Lazarus  (1966)  is  that  it  “occurs  when  an 
individual perceives that the demands of an 
external situation are beyond his or her per-
ceived ability to cope with them.” Although 
such  stress  affects  employees  today,  it  is 
important to note that not only does it re-
sult  in  negative  outcomes,  but  it  also  can 
have  positive  outcomes,  such  as  increased 
creativity (Le Fevre, Matheny, & Kolt, 2003) 
and enhanced performance (Marino, 1997). 

U

Heavier workloads 

and increased 

business travel 

also affect stress 

levels as more 

than one-fifth of 

U.S. managers and 

professionals work 

at least 60 hours 

a week and many 

are on call around 

the clock for clients 

across the globe 

(Hymowitz, 2007).

D   P

Despite  such  possible  benefits,  however, 
there is no question that stress can result in 
health  problems,  increased  accidents,  and 
burnout  (Bernard  &  Krupat,  1994).  A  sub-
stantial  body  of  research  clearly  demon-
strates  the  costly  connection  between 
workplace  stress  and  illness.  For  example, 
studies  show  workplace  stress  to  be  a  con-
tributing  factor  in  the  leading 
causes  of  death  in  the  United 
States  and  health-care  expendi-
tures  are  nearly  50%  greater  for 
workers  who  report  high  levels 
of  stress  (Goetzel  et  al.,  1998). 
Research  has  shown  that  job-
related stress is linked with soar-
ing  organizational  (and  societal) 
health-care  costs  (e.g.,  Colligan 
& Higgins, 2006; Manning, Jack-
son, & Fusilier, 1996).

F

O

O

R

E

T

Beyond  its  significant  impact 
on  health  care,  workplace  stress 
is  a  key  human  resource  man-
agement  issue  because  of  the 
apparent  connections  among 
perceived stress, employee perfor-
mance (e.g., Motowildo, Packard, 
&  Manning,  1986),  and  undesir-
able  organizational  outcomes, 
such  as  job  dissatisfaction,  burn-
out,  and  organiza-tional  with-
drawal  (e.g.,  Bhagat,  McQuaid, 
Lindholm,  &  Segovis,  1985;  Bo-
swell, Olson-Buchanan, & LePine, 
2004). Too often, the result of these dysfunc-
tions  is  voluntary  turnover.  For  example, 
the 2007 study by the American Psychologi-
cal Association found that 52% of employees 
had  searched  for  a  new  job  or  left  a  job 
on  the  basis  of  their  perceived  workplace 
stress.  Reducing  this  detrimental  impact 
and  cost  of  workplace  stress  has  become  a 
major  concern  for  both  organizations  and 
national economies (Le Fevre & Kolt, 2006). 
We  propose  that  when  combined  into  the 
core  construct  of  PsyCap,  the  positive  re-
sources  of  efficacy,  optimism,  hope,  and 
resilience  may  provide  a  better  understand-
ing  of,  as  well  as  practical  guidelines  for 
managing,  the  stress  epidemic  plaguing 
today’s organizations.

Human Resource Management DOI: 10.1002/hrm

20294.indd   679

8/13/2009   1:52:20 PM


680 

HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT, SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2009

Psychological Capital: A Positive 
Strength for Combating Stress

PsyCap may turn 

out to be one of the 

critical resources 

that Lazarus and 

Folkman (1984) said 

were needed for 

employees to cope 

with stressful events 

or conditions at 

work.

In  their  widely  recognized  work,  Stress, 
Appraisal,  and  Coping,  Lazarus  and  Folkman 
(1984) argued that people suffer stress when 
they  believe  they  lack  the  resources  to  deal 
with  difficult  events.  They  also  noted  the 
complex  interaction  between  individuals 
and their surroundings and emphasized the 
role  of  cognitive  processes  and  intervening 
variables (such as appraisal and coping) that 
may  appear  as  “hidden  factors,”  but  that 
greatly affect the outcome of po-
tentially  stressful  events.  Other 
researchers have recognized addi-
tional  factors  that  may  affect 
stress, such as personality dimen-
sions (Costa & McCrae, 1990).

C

R

R

E

PsyCap  may  turn  out  to  be 
one  of  the  critical  resources  that 
Lazarus  and  Folkman  (1984)  said 
were  needed  for  employees  to 
cope with stressful events or con-
ditions at work, thus minimizing 
symptoms  of  stress;  however, 
Lazarus  (2003,  p.  94)  also  cau-
tioned researchers against making 
a false distinction between “posi-
tive” and “negative” human char-
acteristics. For example, he argued 
that “you can’t separate them and 
make good sense” (Lazarus, 2003, p. 94). In 
his  critique  of  positive  psychology,  Lazarus 
(2003)  asserts  that  stress  and  loss  are  inevi-
table aspects of life that often play a key role 
in  developing  the  individual  strengths 
needed  not  only  to  survive,  but  to  flourish. 
He  argues  that  considerable  value  can  be 
gained by more fully understanding how in-
dividuals might transcend some of the harsh 
realities of life and that to ignore negatively 
oriented  stress  and  coping  in  favor  of  more 
“positive”  human  aspects  would  be  short-
sighted. Yet Lazarus (2003) specifically iden-
tifies efficacy, optimism, hope, and resilience 
as  relevant  avenues  of  exploration  for  en-
hanced understanding of how humans adapt 
to stress.

O

U

N

C

Although  Lazarus  (2003)  has  expressed 
initial  reservations  regarding  an  overzealous 

T

D   P

positive  approach,  our  study  of  positive 
PsyCap addresses the same cognitive capaci-
ties  he  advocates  as  instrumental  in  better 
coping with stress and, thus, reducing related 
symptoms.  Also,  all  of  the  components  of 
PsyCap  are  open  to  development  (e.g.,  see 
Bandura,  1997;  Masten  &  Reed,  2002; 
Seligman,  1998;  Snyder,  2000),  and  recent 
studies show that overall PsyCap also can be 
developed  in  short  training  interventions 
with employees (Luthans, Avey, et al., 2006; 
Luthans,  Avey,  &  Patera,  2008).  By  fostering 
psychological capital, HR managers may pro-
vide a new human resource development ap-
proach  to  help  employees  build  the  critical 
resources needed in today’s stress-filled work-
place.  Each  component  of  the  potentially 
critical  resource  of  psychological  capital  is 
first briefly described to help derive the study 
hypotheses.

F

O

O

R

E

Efficacy  is  based  on  Bandura’s  (1997) 
social cognitive theory. Applied to the work-
place, it is defined as “an individual’s convic-
tion  about  his  or  her  abilities  to  mobilize 
the  motivation,  cognitive  resources,  and 
courses  of  action  necessary  to  successfully 
execute  a  specific  task  within  a  given  con-
text”  (Stajkovic  &  Luthans,  1998b,  p.  66). 
Efficacy  beliefs  affect  how  individuals  per-
ceive  and  interpret  events.  Those  with  low 
efficacy  are  easily  convinced  that  efforts  to 
address  difficult  challenges  are  futile  so  are 
more  likely  to  experience  negative  stress 
symptoms, while those with higher levels of 
efficacy are more likely to perceive challenges 
as  surmountable  given  sufficient  competen-
cies and effort (Bandura, 2007).

Efficacy  has  been  strongly  linked  with 
work-related  performance  outcomes  (e.g., 
Bandura & Locke, 2003; Stajkovic & Luthans, 
1998a).  Moreover,  several  approaches  have 
been found successful in developing efficacy, 
including  mastery  experiences,  modeling, 
social  persuasion,  and  physiological/psycho-
logical arousal (Bandura, 1997). Consistently 
with  Lazarus  (2003),  Bandura  (2007)  argues 
that most human stress is governed by beliefs 
about coping efficacy. For example, research 
by Matsui and Onglatco (1992) found percep-
tions of work overload to be affected by per-
ceived  self-efficacy,  with  female  employees 

Human Resource Management DOI: 10.1002/hrm

20294.indd   680

8/13/2009   1:52:21 PM


 

PSYCHOLOGICAL CAPITAL 

681

AQ4

who  had  a  lower  sense  of  efficacy  more 
stressed by heavy work demands and respon-
sibilities than those with higher self-efficacy. 
Links  between  efficacy  and  workplace  stress 
also have been demonstrated in recent stud-
ies  of  workers  in  Hong  Kong  and  Beijing 
(Siu, Spector, & Cooper, 2005) and of nurses 
providing  cancer  care  (Fillion  et  al.,  2007). 
Efficacy also has been shown to be related to 
the  socialization  and  retention  of  new 
employees (Bauer, Bodner, Erdogan, Truxillo, 
& Tucker, 2007) and the organizational com-
mitment and turnover intentions of existing 
staff (Harris & Cameron, 2005).

Optimism, as included in PsyCap, is both 
realistic  and  flexible  (e.g.,  see  Luthans, 
Youssef, et al., 2007; Schneider, 2001). Selig-
man  (1998)  defines  an  optimistic  explana-
tory  style  as  one  that  attributes  positive 
events to personal, permanent, and pervasive 
causes, and negative events to external, tem-
porary, and situation-specific ones. Optimism 
as a facet of PsyCap is associated with a posi-
tive outlook but is not an unchecked process 
without realistic evaluation (Luthans, Youssef, 
et al., 2007).

R

R

C

O

E

As  with  efficacy,  optimism  has  been 
shown  to  be  amenable  to  development 
through such methods as Schneider’s (2001) 
three-step  process,  which  includes  leniency 
for the past, appreciation for the present, and 
opportunity seeing for the future. For exam-
ple,  as  employees  deal  with  stressors  on 
the  job,  they  need  to  be  sensitive  in  distin-
guishing  facts  from  perception  and  allow 
themselves the benefit of the doubt for mis-
fortunes that were conceivably beyond their 
control.  Schneider  (2001)  demonstrates  that 
employees must carefully assess the utility of 
holding  on  to  feelings  of  guilt  or  shame,  as 
those negative feelings could limit their abil-
ity to appreciate and learn from the positives 
of a situation and even hinder future risk tak-
ing.  In  their  analysis  of  “portfolio  workers” 
(self-employed  individuals  who  work  for 
multiple clients), Totterdell, Wood, and Wall 
(2006) found optimism to be a key moderat-
ing  factor  in  the  relationship  between  job 
characteristics and job strain. Those portfolio 
workers with higher levels of optimism were 
considered  by  Totterdell  et  al.  (2006)  to  “be 

U

N

C

endowed with added protection” (p. 80) and 
less likely to experience symptoms of stress in 
the workplace.

D   P

Hope is commonly used in everyday lan-
guage,  but  within  the  context  of  positive 
psychology  has  a  specific  meaning  with 
substantial  theoretical  support  (see  Snyder, 
2000).  Hope  is  defined  as  a  “positive  moti-
vational  state  that  is  based  on  an  interac-
tively derived sense of successful (1) agency 
(goal-directed  energy)  and  (2)  pathways 
(planning to meet goals)” (Snyder, Irving, & 
Anderson,  1991,  p.  287).  In  other  words, 
hope  consists  of  both  willpower  (individu-
als’  agency,  or  determination  to  achieve 
their goals) and “waypower” thinking (being 
able to devise alternative pathways and con-
tingency plans to achieve a goal in the face 
of obstacles).

F

O

O

R

E

T

Research  suggests  that  managers  with 
higher levels of hope have correspondingly 
higher  rates  of  work  unit  performance  as 
well  as  increased  retention  rates  and  more 
satisfied  employees  (Peterson  &  Luthans, 
2003).  There  also  appears  to  be  a  connec-
tion between hope and job satisfaction and 
organizational  commitment  (Luthans  & 
Jensen, 2002; Youssef & Luthans, 2007). To 
date,  however,  the  relationship  between 
hope  and  workplace  stress  has  received  lit-
tle,  if  any,  research  attention.  Yet  there  is 
compelling evidence from hope research in 
other contexts (e.g., clinical psychology and 
athletics) suggesting that hope may provide 
individuals  a  positive  resource  for  stressful 
work  situations.  For  example,  Snyder  and 
colleagues (1991) have shown that hope has 
a significant negative correlation with anxi-
ety, and studies demonstrate an individual’s 
hope  level  protects  against  perceptions 
of  vulnerability,  uncontrollability,  and 
unpredictability (Snyder, 2000). In addition, 
training interventions have proven success-
ful  in  supporting  and  building  individuals’ 
hope (Snyder, 2000).

Workplace  hope  training  efforts  are  just 
beginning  to  emerge  (e.g.,  see  Luthans,  Avey, 
et  al.,  2006;  Luthans  et  al.,  2008;  Luthans, 
Youssef,  et  al.,  2007).  The  initial  results  from 
these efforts focusing on goal design, pathways 
generation,  and  overcoming  obstacles  are 

Human Resource Management DOI: 10.1002/hrm

20294.indd   681

8/13/2009   1:52:21 PM


682 

HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT, SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2009

encouraging  and  could  help  HR  managers 
influence employees’ perceptions of challenges 
versus  hindrances  in  stress  management 
(Luthans,  Avey,  et  al.,  2006;  Luthans  et  al., 
2008).

AQ5

There is 

considerable 

evidence that 

resilience, once 

believed to be a rare 

dispositional trait, is 

statelike and open to 

development.

T

Resilience,  the  “developable  capacity  to 
rebound  or  bounce  back  from  adversity, 
conflict,  failure,  or  even  positive  events, 
progress,  and  increased  responsibility”  (Lu-
thans,  2002a,  p.  702)  is  arguably  the  most 
important positive resource to navigating a 
turbulent  and  stressful  workplace.  Accord-
ing  to  a  recent  KPMG  poll,  more  than 
25,000 mergers, acquisitions, and organiza-
tional restructurings were completed during 
2007,  as  companies  strove  for  enhanced 
competitive  positioning  and  greater  access 
to world markets. Job redesign, downsizing, 
and layoffs are increasingly com-
monplace  as  organizations  shift 
focus  and  form.  Career  consul-
tants  urge  individuals  to  be  pre-
pared  for  “wrenches  in  one’s 
career  plan”  and  develop  the 
ability  to  adjust,  bounce  back, 
and  make  transitions  (Trunk, 
2007).  The  “survivor”  literature 
also  offers  compelling  evidence 
of  how  organizational  downsiz-
ing  and  restructuring  can  create 
considerable  stress  and  negative 
consequences for remaining em-
ployees (Makawatsakul & Kleiner, 
2003).    More  than  ever,  the  de-
velopment  of  resilience  is  needed  to  help 
individuals  recover  from  adversity  or  per-
sonal  setbacks—not  if  they  happen,  but 
when they happen.

E

O

R

R

C

C

There is considerable evidence that resil-
ience, once believed to be a rare dispositional 
trait,  is  statelike  and  open  to  development 
(e.g., Bonanno, 2004; Coutu, 2002; Masten & 
Reed,  2002;  Youssef  &  Luthans,  2005). 
Various  methods  have  proven  successful  in 
building  resilience,  including  using  positive 
emotions  (Tugade  &  Fredrickson,  2004), 
altering the perceived level of risk or personal 
assets  (Masten,  2001),  and  generally  foster-
ing  self-enhancement  and  development 
(Luthans, Vogelgesang, & Lester, 2006). Resil-
ient  people  are  characterized  by  a  staunch 

U

N

sense of reality (Coutu, 2002), and resiliency 
development  efforts  are  similarly  grounded 
in  the  realistic  assessments  and  creation  of 
coping strategies when a setback occurs.

F

Research indicates that resilient individu-
als are better equipped to deal with the stress-
ors  in  a  constantly  changing  workplace 
environment, as they are open to new experi-
ences, are flexible to changing demands, and 
show  more  emotional  stability  when  faced 
with adversity (Tugade & Fredrickson, 2004). 
Recent research also demonstrates a positive 
link between resilience and employee perfor-
mance  (Luthans,  Avolio,  et  al.  2007),  job 
satisfaction (Youssef & Luthans, 2007), orga-
nizational  commitment  (Youssef  &  Luthans, 
2007),  work  happiness  (Youssef  &  Luthans, 
2007),  and  the  ability  to  deal  with  massive 
corporate downsizing (Maddi, 1987). As stress 
is  increasingly  understood  to  contribute  to 
employee  turnover  (e.g.,  Coomber  &  Barrib-
all, 2007), it appears that resilience may be a 
key  factor  in  determining  how  individuals 
respond in stressful environments.

D   P

O

O

R

E

Psychological Capital: Core 
Construct and Study Hypotheses

Each  of  the  PsyCap  components  described 
has been shown to be conceptually indepen-
dent  (Bandura,  1997;  Luthans  &  Jensen, 
2002;  Luthans,  Youssef,  &  Avolio,  2007; 
Snyder,  2000,  2002)  and  empirically  valid 
(Bryant & Cvengros, 2004; Carifio & Rhodes, 
2002; Luthans, Avolio, et al., 2007; Magaletta 
&  Oliver,  1999;  Youssef  &  Luthans,  2007). 
This  research  also  indicates,  however,  that 
the  four  factors  have  a  common  under-
lying  link  representing  a  core  second-order 
positive resource called psychological capital 
(Luthans, Avolio, et al., 2007).

Hobfoll  (2002)  provides  conceptual  sup-
port for this finding of PsyCap as a core con-
struct.  Psychological  resources  theory  posits 
that  some  psychological  constructs  are  best 
understood  as  representing  a  core,  underly-
ing construct. For example, such a theoretical 
view  is  also  evident  in  other  multidimen-
sional  organizational  behavior  construct 
models,  such  as  Judge  and  Bono’s  (2001) 
core  self-evaluations  or  Spreitzer’s  (1995) 

Human Resource Management DOI: 10.1002/hrm

20294.indd   682

8/13/2009   1:52:21 PM


 

PSYCHOLOGICAL CAPITAL 

683

multifactor  empowerment  construct.  Law, 
Wong, and Mobley (1998) also have described 
such  multidimensional  constructs  as  we 
propose  that  fit  the  description  of  positive 
PsyCap. For example, Bandura (2007) asserts 
that our daily realities are fraught with diffi-
culties  (that  is,  stressors),  and  an  optimistic, 
hopeful,  and  resilient  sense  of  efficacy  is 
needed for well-being. PsyCap as a core con-
struct  composed  of  the  shared  variance  of 
each of the four components empirically has 
been  found  to  predict  performance  and 
satisfaction better than any of the individual 
components  (Luthans,  Avolio,  et  al.,  2005, 
2007).

On the basis of the existing related theory 
and research summarized, we derive the first 
study hypothesis as follows:

Hypothesis  1:  Employees’  PsyCap  will  have  a 
negative  relationship  with  their  symptoms  of 
stress.

C

R

R

E

In addition to the relationship with stress 
symptoms,  the  role  that  PsyCap  may  play  in 
both intentions to quit and job search behav-
iors is examined. Although both may be con-
sidered  proxies  for  actual  turnover,  they  each 
reflect unique cognitive and behavioral mani-
festations.  For  example,  following  Ajzen’s 
(1991) theory of planned behavior, intentions 
to  quit  reflect  an  attitude  about  leaving  the 
organization  (behavioral  intentions),  whereas 
job  search  behaviors  reflect  actual  behaviors 
contributing toward turnover. Given the weak 
relation  often  found  between  behavioral  in-
tentions  and  actual  behavior,  both  outcomes 
were deemed unique and appropriate.  Draw-
ing  from  related  research  findings  for  each 
component of PsyCap, as well as studies that 
suggest  individuals  in  stressful  occupations 
who have higher levels of psychological capital 
may be more likely to stick it out rather than 
quit (e.g., Luthans & Jensen, 2005), this study 
explored  the  link  between  PsyCap  and  both 
intentions to quit and job search behaviors.

O

U

N

C

Over  the  years,  work  attitudes  and  per-
ceived  available  opportunities  have  been 
shown  to  affect  turnover  intentions  (Bretz, 
Boudreau, & Judge, 1994).  Moreover, various 
links  among  workplace  stress,  job  satisfac-

Human Resource Management DOI: 10.1002/hrm

Research indicates 

that resilient 

individuals are 

better equipped 

to deal with 

the stressors 

in a constantly 

changing workplace 

environment, as they 

are open to new 

experiences, are 

flexible to changing 

demands, and show 

more emotional 

stability when faced 

with adversity.

F

tion, and intentions to quit have been dem-
onstrated  in  a  number  of  studies  (e.g., 
Coomber & Barriball, 2007), and the connec-
tion between job search behaviors and volun-
tary  turnover  also  appears  well  supported 
(e.g., Blau, 1994). As a self-regulatory process, 
the intensity of job search behav-
ior  can  be  expected  to  change 
because  of  feedback  from  the 
environment  (Kanfer,  Wanberg, 
& Kantrowitz, 2001).

O

R

O

E

T

D   P

In  addition  to  a  direct  effect 
between  employee  PsyCap  and 
both intentions to quit and actual 
job search behaviors, a relationship 
between  job  stress  and  these  out-
comes  is  expected.  In  high-stress 
environments,  employees  are  not 
experiencing homeostasis in terms 
of  normal  levels  of  experienced 
stress.  When  symptoms  are  stron-
gest, employees would be expected 
to  attempt  to  relieve  the  discon-
nect between current levels of stress 
and  desired  levels  of  stress.  There-
fore,  removal  from  the  job  and, 
hence, the source of the job stress 
might  follow.  This  conclusion  is 
grounded in the literature discussed 
previously  and  is  supported  by 
empirical  evidence.  For  example, 
Saks  and  Ashforth  (1997)  found  a 
strong  relationship  between  stress 
symptoms  and 
to 
quit, as well as actual turnover, in 
a  10-month  longitudinal  study. 
Thus,  it  is  expected  that  the  effects  of 
PsyCap  on  intentions  to  quit  and  job  search 
behaviors  will  be  partially  mediated  by  stress 
symptoms.

intentions 

On  the  basis  of  this  related  theoretical 
and empirical literature, the remaining study 
hypotheses are:

Hypothesis  2a:  Employees’  PsyCap  will  have  a 
negative  relationship  with  their  reported  inten-
tions to quit.

Hypothesis 2b: Employees’ stress symptoms par-
tially mediate the relationship between their Psy-
Cap and intentions to quit.

20294.indd   683

8/13/2009   1:52:21 PM


684 

HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT, SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2009

Hypothesis  3a:  Employees’  PsyCap  will  have 
a  negative  relationship  with  their  reported  job 
search behaviors.

Hypothesis 3b: Employees’ stress symptoms par-
tially mediate the relationship between their Psy-
Cap and job search behaviors.

Methods and Measures

T

A heterogeneous 

sample of 416 

working adults from 

a wide variety of 

jobs and industries 

responded.

C

Under the auspices of a large midwestern uni-
versity  research  study,  we  solicited  volunteers 
for a research study on motivation in the work-
place. A heterogeneous sample of 416 working 
adults from a wide variety of jobs and indus-
tries responded. They completed an online in-
formed  consent  form  and  Survey  1,  which 
measured  their  level  of  PsyCap  and  collected 
demographic  information.  The  demographic 
profile  included  203  males  and  204  females 
and 9 others who did not list gen-
der.  The  participants  had  1  to  35 
(SD,  7.5)  years  of  tenure  in  their 
current  organization.  A  week  to 
two  weeks  later,  they  were  con-
tacted  via  e-mail  to  complete 
Survey 2, which included the out-
come variables of stress symptoms, 
intentions  to  quit,  and  job  search 
behaviors.  This  temporal  separa-
tion  between  collecting  the  data 
for  the  independent  and  depen-
dent study variables follows the recommenda-
tions of Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Lee, and  Pod-
sakoff  (2003)  to  reduce  potential  problems 
with common method variance. As they noted, 
“The  advantage  of  this  procedure  is  that  it 
makes  it  impossible  for  the  mind-set  of  the 
source  or  rater  to  bias  the  observed  relation-
ship between the predictor and criterion vari-
able, thus eliminating the effects of consistency 
motifs, implicit theories, social desirability ten-
dencies,  dispositional  and  transient  mood 
states,  and  any  tendencies  on  the  part  of  the 
rater  to  acquiesce  or  respond  in  a  lenient 
manner” (p. 887). Of the 416 participants who 
initially  completed  Survey  1,  360  (86.5%) 
also  completed  Survey  2.  This  represented  a 
total of 360 data points for hypotheses testing. 
Survey 1 and Survey 2 data were aligned using 
the participants’ e-mail addresses.

E

O

U

N

C

R

R

AQ6

R

O

O

F

All measures used in this study have been 
psychometrically  validated  in  previous  re-
search  and  demonstrated  adequate  internal 
reliability  in  this  study.  The  anchors  for  all 
measures were from 1 to 6, with 6 being the 
highest  (most  frequently  or  strongly  agree). 
Specifically,  PsyCap  was  measured  with  the 
24-item Psychological Capital Questionnaire 
(PCQ;  see  Luthans,  Youssef,  et  al.,  2007,  for   
the  complete  questionnaire).  Containing  six 
items for each of the four components (effi-
cacy,  hope,  resilience,  optimism),  the  PCQ 
demonstrated  adequate  confirmatory  factor 
analytic  structure  across  multiple  samples 
(e.g.,  Luthans,  Avolio,  et  al.,  2007)  and  had 
strong  internal  reliability  in  this  study  (♡ =  
.92). As indicated earlier, there is considerable 
conceptual  and  empirical  support  for  exam-
ining  PsyCap  at  the  core  construct  level 
rather  than  according  to  each  component 
(Luthans, Youssef, et al., 2007; Luthans, Avo-
lio, et al., 2007; Luthans, Norman, Avolio, & 
Avey, 2008). Specifically, confirmatory factor 
analytic comparisons have demonstrated that 
the optimal fitting measurement model across 
multiple  samples  includes  analysis  with  the 
core  construct  of  PsyCap.  This  suggests  that 
although the components have distinct prop-
erties, they have more in common than not 
(Luthans, Avolio, et al., 2007). Sample items 
on the PCQ address efficacy (“I am confident 
helping to set targets/goals in my work area”), 
hope (“I can think of many ways to reach my 
current  work  goals”),  resilience  (“I  usually 
take  stressful  things  at  work  in  stride”),  and 
optimism  (“When  things  are  uncertain  for 
me at work I usually expect the best”).

D   P

E

The  measure  for  intentions  to  quit  and 
job search behaviors was used by Crossley and 
colleagues  (in  press)  and  demonstrated  ade-
quate internal alphas in this study (♡ = .92 and 
.94, respectively). An example of an intention 
to quit scale item is “I will quit this organiza-
tion as soon as possible” and was set on an-
chors from 1 (strongly disagree) to 6 (strongly 
agree).  The  job  search  behaviors  instrument 
developed  by  Crossley  and  colleagues  (in 
press) asks participants to rate the frequency 
with which they have engaged in each of 13 
behaviors. This instrument also demonstrated 
adequate  internal  reliability  in  this  study 

AQ10

AQ10

Human Resource Management DOI: 10.1002/hrm

20294.indd   684

8/13/2009   1:52:22 PM


 

PSYCHOLOGICAL CAPITAL 

685

(♡ = .94).  Sample  items  include  “Prepared/re-
vised  your  resume,”  “Spoke  with  previous 
employers  or  business  acquaintances  about 
their  knowing  of  potential  job  leads,”  and 
“Used the Worldwide Web or other computer 
services  to  locate  job  openings.”  This  instru-
ment  was  set  on  anchors  from  1  (almost 
never, if ever) to 6 (frequently, if not always).
Finally,  stress  symptoms  were  measured 
with  7  stress  items  from  the  Depression, 
Anxiety,  Stress  Scale  (DASS;  Lovibond  & 
Lovibond,  1995).  This  instrument,  which 
describes  several  symptoms  of  stress,  asks 
participants to rate the frequency with which 
they experience these sensations at work and 
was  set  on  anchors  from  1  (almost  never,  if 
ever) to 6 (frequently, if not always). It dem-
onstrated adequate internal reliability in this 
study  (♡ = .86).  A  sample  item  is  “I  found  it 
difficult to relax.”

In  addition  to  bivariate  correlations,  we 
conducted path analyses using regression for 
all hypotheses tests. The means, standard de-
viations,  and  results  of  the  bivariate  correla-
tions can be seen in Table I. All study variables 
demonstrated  skewness  and  kurtosis  values 
that were well within the normal ranges, sug-
gesting the data had a normal distribution.

Results of Hypotheses Tests

R

O

The  results  of  the  hypotheses  tests  can  be 
seen  in  Figure  1.  Hypothesis  1  predicted  a 
negative 
relationship  between  positive 
PsyCap  and  stress  symptoms.  There  was  full 
support  for  this  hypothesis,  as  PsyCap  was 
positively related to stress symptoms (♢ = –.35; 
p < .01). Next, Hypothesis 2a and Hypothesis 
3a predicted a negative relationship between 
PsyCap and intentions to quit and job search 
behaviors,  respectively.  As  seen  in  Figure  1, 

N

C

U

E

R

there  was  support  for  both  as  PsyCap  was 
significantly  and  negatively  related  to  em-
ployee  intentions  to  quit  (♢ = –.24;  p  <  .01) 
and job search behaviors (♢ = –.16; p < .01).

R

O

O

F

D   P

Hypothesis  2b  and  Hypothesis  3b  pre-
dicted  symptoms  of  stress  would  partially 
mediate  the  relationship  between  PsyCap 
and  both  intentions  to  quit  and  job  search 
behaviors. According to guidelines by Baron 
and  Kenny  (1986),  partial  mediation  is  said 
to exist when several conditions are satisfied. 
First, the independent variable (PsyCap) must 
be related to the dependent variables (inten-
tions  to  quit  and  job  search  behaviors).  Evi-
dence of meeting this condition can be seen 
in Table I, as PsyCap is significantly related to 
both  outcome  variables.  Next,  the  indepen-
dent variable (PsyCap) must be related to the 
mediating  variable  (stress  symptoms).  This 
condition was met, as seen in Table I and in 
the testing of Hypothesis 1. The third condi-
tion  of  partial  mediation  as  prescribed  by 
Baron  and  Kenny  (1986)  is  that  the  mediat-
ing  variable  (stress  symptoms)  must  be  re-
lated to the dependent variable(s) (intentions 
to quit and job search behaviors). This condi-
tion was met, as seen in Table I and Figure 1. 
Finally,  for  partial  mediation  to  exist,  the 
strength  of  the  relationship  between  the  in-
dependent  variable  and 
the  outcome 
variable(s) should be reduced when the medi-
ating  variable  is  in  the  model.  In  this  case, 
when adding stress symptoms to the model, 
the  strength  of  the  relationship  between 
PsyCap  and  intentions  to  quit  diminished 
from  ♢ = –.29  (p  <  .01)  to  ♢ = –.24  (p  <  .01). 
Likewise,  when  the  variable  of  stress  symp-
toms  was  included  in  the  path  model,  the 
strength of the relationship between PsyCap 
and  job  search  behaviors  decreased  from 
♢ = –.20  (p  <  .01)  to  ♢ = –.16  (p  <  .01).  Thus, 

T

E

C

T A B L E   I   Means, Standard Deviations, and Bivariate Correlations of Study Variables

1. Psychological Capital

2. Intentions to Quit

3. Stress Symptoms

4. Job Search Behaviors

* p < .001; n = 416.

Mean

4.77

2.59

2.17

1.91

SD

.57

1.22

.86

.78

1

1.00

9.29*

9.35*

9.20*

2

3

4

1.00

.22*

.52*

1.00

.22*

1.00

Human Resource Management DOI: 10.1002/hrm

20294.indd   685

8/13/2009   1:52:22 PM


686 

HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT, SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2009

-.24**

Intentions to 

Quit

Positive

Psychological

Capital

-.35**

Stress

Symptoms 

-.16**

.13*

.17**

Job Search 
Behaviors

FIGURE 1. Theoretical Model of PsyCap and Stress

     

*p < .05 
**p < .01

having met all the conditions for partial me-
diation, we found support for both Hypoth-
esis 2b and Hypothesis 3b.

Discussion and Implications

T

C

R

E

As  hypothesized,  this  study  found  a  signifi-
cant negative relationship between the newly 
recognized  PsyCap  of  employees  and  their 
perceived  symptoms  of  job  stress.  This  find-
ing  contributes  to  the  understanding  that 
today’s employees need to draw from hereto-
fore unrecognized and largely untapped posi-
tive  resources,  such  as  psychological  capital, 
to  help  them  combat  the  dysfunctional  ef-
fects  of  stress,  such  as  turnover.  Supporting 
this  impact  on  turnover,  the  study  findings 
also  indicate  that  employees’  PsyCap  has  a 
significant  negative  relationship  with  both 
their intentions to quit and job search behav-
iors,  both  indicators  of  voluntary  turnover. 
Armed  with  the  implications  of  this  empiri-
cal  evidence,  we  propose  that  HR  training 
and  development  efforts  that  recognize  and 
enhance  the  underemphasized  positive  re-
sources of efficacy, hope, optimism, and resil-
ience and the core construct of psychological 
capital  may  help  employees  combat  stress 
and, in turn, reduce voluntary turnover.

O

U

N

C

R

Workplace  stress  management  programs 
often  focus  on  working  conditions,  such  as 
providing  flexible  work  schedules,  creating 
employee  assistance  and  wellness  programs, 
and redesigning jobs. Organizational policies 
that  encourage  social  support  from  supervi-

F

O

O

R

E

sors  and  coworkers  also  are  offered  to  help 
buffer employees from stress. Participation in 
recreational sports is still another avenue that 
allows  employees  to  release  stress  and  inter-
act  with  one  another  in  positive  ways,  and 
recent studies suggest that organization-spon-
sored  play  can  have  a  positive  impact  on 
employee stress levels (Nel & Spies, 2007).

D   P

Although  stress  management  programs 
that focus on the organizational context can 
be effective, Nelson and Sutton’s (1990) longi-
tudinal  study  indicates  the  importance  of 
recognizing dispositional as well as situational 
effects  on  work  stress.  Their  findings  suggest 
personal characteristics may predispose a per-
son  to  stress,  thereby  limiting  the  effective-
ness  of  such  environmental  interventions  as 
job  redesign  and  company  programs.  Re-
search  has  shown  that  certain  personality 
variables do relate to the appraisal and effects 
of  stressful  events,  negative  affectivity  (Brief, 
Burke,  George,  Robinson,  &  Webster,  1988), 
neuroticism  (McRae,  1990),  and  conscien-
tiousness (O’Brien & DeLongis, 1996).  Type A 
and  Type  B  personality  differences  also  have 
been correlated to work stress, with the impa-
tient and overly aggressive Type A personality 
particularly susceptible to dissatisfaction and 
stress  (Mathews,  1982).  This  research  has 
prompted  personality  testing  to  become  a 
common (albeit somewhat controversial) HR 
selection tool. Although the use of personal-
ity testing for selection must have predictive 
validity for performance on the job, it could 
also potentially be used to help ensure a bet-

Human Resource Management DOI: 10.1002/hrm

20294.indd   686

8/13/2009   1:52:23 PM


 

PSYCHOLOGICAL CAPITAL 

687

ter fit between the employee and the demands 
of a job and, thus, may subsequently help re-
duce stress.

The results of the present study on the role 
of  positive  resources  in  combating  stress  go 
beyond the use of personality traits. Although 
personality dimensions may influence an em-
ployee’s  ability  to  cope  with  stress  (Costa  & 
McRae, 1990), these traits (for example, nega-
tive affectivity) are recognized to be relatively 
fixed  and  stable  over  time  (Watson,  Clark,  & 
Tellegen,  1988).  This  dispositional,  stable 
nature of personality traits makes them useful 
for  employee  selection,  but  not  for  employee 
development. On the other hand, positive re-
sources, such as those represented by PsyCap, 
are  defined  and  empirically  determined  (Lu-
thans et al., 2008; Luthans, Avolio, et al., 2007) 
to be statelike (rather than relatively fixed trait-
like  personality  dimensions)  and,  thus,  are 
open  to  development  and  HR  management. 
Meta-analyses  indicate  that  cognitive-behav-
ioral  approaches,  which  seek  to  change 
employee  cognitions  and  reinforce  active 
coping  skills,  may  be  the  most  effective  in 
reducing  anxiety  symptoms,  enhancing  cop-
ing  strategies,  and  improving  the  perceived 
quality  of  work  life  (Van  der  Hek  &  Plomp, 
1997;  Van  der  Klink,  Blonk,  Schene,  &  van 
Dijk, 2001). This related research suggests that 
HR  managers  who  recognize  positive  PsyCap 
as an important individual difference that can 
be  developed  (through  the  cognitive-behav-
ioral  approaches  used  in  PsyCap  training 
interventions  discussed  later)  may  use  this 
development for stress management.

E

R

R

C

O

N

U

PsyCap  short  training 

interventions 
(which typically last one to three hours, de-
pending  on  the  number  of  participants)  in-
clude  activities  designed  to  enhance  the 
components of efficacy, optimism, hope, and 
resilience, as well as overall PsyCap (Luthans, 
Avey,  et  al.,  2006;  Luthans  et  al.,  2008; 
Luthans,  Youssef,  et  al.,  2007).  For  example, 
in the hope component of the PsyCap train-
ing  module  (see  the  graphic  model  and  ver-
bal summary in Luthans, Youssef, et al., 2007, 
pp. 214–215), participants begin by delineat-
ing  key  goals  they  will  use  throughout  the 
session.  The  facilitator  then  explains  the 
need  for  (1)  concrete  end  points  to  measure 

C

AQ8

AQ9

D   P

success,  (2)  an  approach  (rather  than  avoid-
ance)  framework  that  allows  participants  to 
work  toward  goal  accomplishment  as  op-
posed to away from desired goals (for exam-
ple, move toward a quality target, rather than 
avoiding product rejects), and (3) using what 
Snyder  (2000)  calls  a  “stepping”  method  of 
identifying subgoals as a way to reap the ben-
efits  of  even  modest  achievements.  Then 
participants are instructed to generate multi-
ple proactive pathways to the goal and reflect 
on  and  discuss  the  realistic  (and  unrealistic) 
options identified. This is consistent with the 
stress  coping  approach  described 
by Taylor, Pham, Rivkin, & Armor 
(1998), who describe mental sim-
ulation  as  providing  a  “window 
on the future” by enabling people 
to  envision  possibilities  and  craft 
plans for realizing those possibili-
ties.

F

O

O

R

E

T

At  the  completion  of  this  di-
mension  of  the  PsyCap  training 
intervention,  participants  have 
taken  ownership  of  a  personally 
valuable and realistically challeng-
ing  goal,  are  prepared  for  obsta-
cles,  and  are  ready  to  implement 
multiple contingency plans—that 
is,  alternate  paths  to  attain  their 
goals.  The  facilitator  and  other 
participants  serve  as  role  models 
for  the  realistic  optimism  and  ef-
ficacy-building  processes 
that 
elicit  these  positive  states  and 
build  employees’  confidence  to 
generate and implement plans to 
attain  goals.  As  participants  fore-
cast  “bad  events”  by  anticipating 
potential obstacles (and then cre-
ate  alternative  paths  to  minimize 
their  impact),  pessimists  lose  more  options 
for expecting bad things to happen. The pro-
cess of counteracting pessimism supports the 
development  of  realistic  and  optimistic  ex-
pectations. Participants also have the oppor-
tunity to experience and model success, and 
social  persuasion,  arousal,  and  positive  self-
talks are used to support the development of 
efficacy and optimism further. Through visu-
alization,  participants  gain  “imaginal”  task 

PsyCap short 

training 

interventions 

(which typically 

last one to three 

hours, depending 

on the number of 

participants) include 

activities designed 

to enhance the 

components of 

efficacy, optimism, 

hope, and resilience, 

as well as overall 

PsyCap.

Human Resource Management DOI: 10.1002/hrm

20294.indd   687

8/13/2009   1:52:24 PM


688 

HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT, SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2009

mastery  experience  to  enhance  their  effi-
cacy.

In particular, the 

findings suggest 

the need to focus 

future research and 

practice on how 

PsyCap training may 

be a valuable part of 

organizational stress 

management.

Finally, the PsyCap training intervention 
helps build resilience by having participants 
identify recent personal setbacks within their 
work  domain,  which  might  include  major 
setbacks  (such  as  pending  layoffs)  or  minor 
ones  (such  as  a  missed  project  deadline). 
After  participants  identify  their  immediate 
reactions  to  the  setbacks,  the  fa-
cilitator  elaborates  on  a  staunch 
view  of  reality  and  an  ideal  resil-
ient process for framing a setback, 
consistently with the broaden and 
build  positivity  approach  advo-
cated  by  Fredrickson  (2001).  The 
participants then assess the realis-
tic impact of the setbacks, includ-
ing  what  is  in  (and  out  of)  their 
control, and options for taking ac-
tion. Participants practice learned 
cognitive  processes  that  perpetu-
ate the development of both resil-
iency  and  realistic  optimism  by 
anticipating  and  addressing  addi-
tional  setbacks.  Overall,  this 
PsyCap  training  appears  to  have 
the  potential  to  provide  participants  with 
that “added protection” suggested by Totter-
dell  et  al.  (2006)  needed  to  help  shield  one 
from negative stress symptoms.

E

C

C

O

The overall objective of the PsyCap train-
ing  intervention  includes  an  integrated  de-
velopmental  strategy  for  all  four  Psy-Cap 
statelike  capacities.  Although  each  compo-
nent is affected by the design of the interven-
tion, research to date indicates that PsyCap is 
synergistic  and  that  the  participants  experi-
ence  an  overall  result  greater  than  the  sum 
of  the  four  components  of  the  training 
(Luthans,  Avey,  et  al.,  2006;  Luthans  et  al., 
2008).  Future  research  is  needed  to  investi-
gate how well PsyCap training interventions 
reduce stress and lower turnover.

U

N

R

R

T

Limitations and Conclusion

Although  it  was  exploratory  rather  than 
causal  experimental  in  nature,  this  study 
did  find  significant  inverse  relationships 
between employees’ PsyCap, their symptoms 

AQ7

O

F

of  job  stress,  and  measures  of  intentions  of 
voluntary  turnover.  As  in  any  study,  how-
ever,  there  are  research  design  limitations 
that  need  to  be  noted.  First,  self-reported 
levels of stress have been found to be differ-
entially related (positively and negatively) to 
attitudinal  and  behavioral  work  outcomes, 
depending  on  the  stressor  being  evaluated 
(Podsokoff, LePine, & LePine, 2007). As indi-
cated in the foundational discussion for this 
study, challenge stressors (those that people 
appraise  as  potentially  promoting  their  per-
sonal  growth  and  achievement,  such  as 
workload or time urgency) are negatively re-
lated  to  job  search  behaviors.  Alternatively, 
hindrance stressors (those that are viewed as 
constraining a person’s work-related accom-
plishment,  such  as  inadequate  resources  or 
role overload) are positively related to turn-
over  intentions  and  withdrawal  behavior. 
Such findings indicate that stressors are not 
created  equal,  and  future  research  needs  to 
investigate  whether  the  use  of  scales  that 
treat  stress  as  a  single,  unidimensional  con-
struct  may  mask  important  effects.  Further 
research also is needed to analyze more fully 
how  PsyCap  training  interventions  may  af-
fect both individuals’ appraisal of events and 
the actual workplace stress symptoms experi-
enced by participants.

D   P

E

O

R

Besides  the  stress  measurement  limita-
tion  of  the  present  study,  there  is  also 
the  potential  for  inflated  relationships 
because of common-method bias. In the data 
collection  for  this  study,  participants  re-
sponded  to  questionnaire  instruments  that 
had been validated in previous research. This 
common method generates a concern of ar-
tificially  increased  relationships.  We  did 
try  to  minimize  this  potential  problem  by 
following  Podsakoff  et  al.’s  (2003)  recom-
mendation  of  temporally  separating  data 
gathering  on  independent  and  dependent 
variables.  Another  limitation,  however,  was 
that this study was cross-sectional and, thus, 
cannot  account  for  alternative  explanations 
in terms of the order of variables. For exam-
ple,  it  is  possible  that  those  who  engage  in 
more  job  search  behaviors  could  identify 
ideal employment opportunities, which may 
lead  to  intentions  to  quit,  rather  than  vice 

Human Resource Management DOI: 10.1002/hrm

20294.indd   688

8/13/2009   1:52:24 PM


 

PSYCHOLOGICAL CAPITAL 

689

versa.  This  is  unlikely,  however,  given  the 
fact that a certain threshold of intentions to 
quit  generates  job  search  behaviors  in  the 
first place. Nonetheless, causal ordering can-
not  be  concluded  from  the  research  design 
used.

Despite  these  limitations,  the  results 
from  the  study  can  still  initially  support 
the concept that the newly recognized core 
positive  resource  of  psychological  capital 
relates  to  both  the  perception  and  poten-

tial  outcomes  of  workplace  stress.  In  par-
ticular,  the  findings  suggest  the  need  to 
focus  future  research  and  practice  on  how 
PsyCap  training  may  be  a  valuable  part  of 
organizational  stress  management.  Com-
pletely  eliminating  workplace  stress  is  not 
a realistic, nor even desired, organizational 
outcome.  Helping  employees  effectively 
manage  stress,  however,  is  (and  will  con-
tinue to be) a critical objective for effective 
HRM.

F

O

D   P

JAMES B. AVEY is an assistant professor of management at Central Washington Univer-
sity. Before attaining his Ph.D.; he was a human resource manager at The Boeing Com-
pany in Seattle, Washington. Since obtaining his Ph.D. at the University of Nebraska, Dr. 
Avey has consulted with companies such as Kelloggs, ANZ Financial Group, The Boeing 
Company,  and  Lincoln  Plating.    His  consulting  and  research  interests  include  positive 
psychological capital, psychological ownership, and ethical leadership.

R

O

FRED LUTHANS is University and George Holmes Distinguished Professor of Manage-
ment  at  the  University  of  Nebraska. The  former  President  of  the Academy  of  Manage-
ment, he received the   Academy’s  Distinguished Educator Award and is currently editor 
of Journal of World Business, Organizational Dynamics, and Journal of Leadership and 
Organization Studies. He is the author of several well-known books and numerous re-
search articles. His textbook Organizational Behavior is now in its 12th edition and his 
latest  book  is  Psychological  Capital  (Oxford  University  Press).    His  research  in  recent 
years has been focused on the theory building, measurement, and performance impact 
of this positive approach.

T

E

C

SUSAN  M.  JENSEN  is  an  assistant  professor  of  management  at  the  University  of 
Nebraska-Kearney.  She  holds  a  bachelor’s  degree  in  business  administration  from  the 
University of Kansas, an MBA from Washington University in St. Louis, and a Ph.D. in 
organizational behavior from the University of Nebraska. She has published and contin-
ues  to  do  research  on  psychological  capital,  leadership,  and  the  link  between  positive 
organizational behavior and corporate performance.

R

E

R

O

C

References

N

U

Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. 

Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes, 50(2), 179–211.

Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efﬁ cacy: The exercise of con-

trol. New York: Freeman.

Bandura, A. (2007). An agentic perspective on positive 

psychology. In S. J. Lopez (Ed.), The science of 
human ﬂ ourishing. New York: Praeger.

Bandura, A., & Locke, E. A. (2003). Negative self-
efﬁ cacy and goal effects revisited. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 88(1), 87–99.

Human Resource Management DOI: 10.1002/hrm

Baron, R. A., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator-

mediator variable distinction in social psychologi-
cal research: Conceptual, strategic and statistical 
considerations. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 51(6), 1173–1182.

Bauer, T. N., Bodner, T., Erdogan, B., Truxillo, D. M., & 
Tucker, J. S. (2007). Newcomer adjustment during 
organizational socialization: A meta-analytic review 
of antecedents, outcomes, and methods. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 92(3), 707–721.

Bernard, L. C., & Krupat, E. (1994). Health psychology: 
Biopsychosocial factors in health and illness. New 
York: Harcourt Brace College Publishers.

20294.indd   689

8/13/2009   1:52:24 PM


690 

HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT, SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2009

Bethune, S., & Panlener, J. (2007, October 24).  Stress 

Crossley, C. D., Bennett, R. J., Jex, S. M., & Burnﬁ eld, 

a major health problem in the U.S., warns APA. 
New York: American Psychological Association.

Bhagat, R. S., McQuaid, S. J., Lindholm, H., & 

Segovis, J. (1985). Total life stress: A multimethod 
validation of the construct and its effects on 
organizational valued outcomes and withdrawal 
behaviors. Journal of Applied Psychology, 70(1), 
203–214.

Blau, G. (1994). Testing a two-dimensional measure of 

job search behavior. Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes, 59(2), 288–312.

Bonanno, G. A. (2004). Loss, trauma and human 

resilience: Have we underestimated the human 
capacity to thrive after extremely adverse events? 
American Psychologist, 59(1), 20–28.

Boswell, W. R., Olson-Buchanan, J. B., & LePine, 

M. A. (2004). The relationship between work-related 
stress and work outcomes: The role of felt-chal-
lenge and psychological strain. Journal of Voca-
tional Behavior, 64(1), 165–181.

Bretz, R. D., Boudreau, J. W., & Judge, T. A. (1994). Job 
search behavior of employed managers. Personnel 
Psychology, 47(2), 275–301.

Brief, A. P., Burke, M. J., George, J. M., Robinson, 
B. S., & Webster, J. M. (1988). Should negative 
affectivity remain an unmeasured variable in the 
study of job stress? Journal of Applied Psychology, 
73(2), 193–198.

T

Bryant, F. B., & Cvengros, J. A. (2004). Distinguishing 
hope and optimism. Journal of Social and Clinical 
Psychology, 23(2), 273–302.

Cameron, K. S., Dutton, J. E., & Quinn, R. E. (Eds.). 
(2003). Positive organizational scholarship. San 
Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.

R

R

Cariﬁ o, J., & Rhodes, L. (2002). Construct validities 

and the empirical relationships between optimism, 
hope, self-efﬁ cacy, and locus of control. Work, 
19(2), 125–136.

O

C

Colligan, T.  W., & Higgins, E. M. (2006). Workplace 

stress etiology and consequences. Journal of 
Workplace Behavioral Health, 21(2), 89–97.

Coomber, B., & Barriball, K. L. (2007). Impact of job 

satisfaction components on intent to leave and 
turnover for hospital-based nurses: A review of the 
research literature. International Journal of Nursing 
Studies, 44(2), 297–314.

Costa, P.  T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1990). Personality: 

Another “hidden factor” in stress research. Psycho-
logical Inquiry, 1(1), 22–24.

N

U

C

E

J. L. (in press). Development of a global measure of 
job embeddedness and integration into a tradition-
al model of voluntary turnover. Journal of Applied 
Psychology.

Fillion, L., Tremblay, I., Manon, T., Cote, D., Struthers, 

AQ10

C. W., & Dupuis, R. (2007). Job satisfaction and 
emotional distress among nurses providing 
palliative care: Empirical evidence for an integra-
tive occupational stress-model. International 
Journal of Stress Management, 14(1), 1–25.

F

O

Fredrickson, B. L. (2001). The role of positive emotions 

in positive psychology: The broaden-and-build 
theory of positive emotions. American Psycholo-
gist, 56(3), 218–226.

Goetzel, R. Z., Anderson, D. R., Whitmer, R. W., 

Ozminkowski, R. J., Dunn, R. L., & Wasserman, J. 
(1998). The relationship between modiﬁ able health 
risks and health care expenditures: An analysis of 
the multi-employer HERO health risk and cost data-
base. Journal of Occupational and Environmental 
Medicine, 40(10), 843–854.

R

O

Harris, G. E., & Cameron, J. E. (2005). Multiple dimen-

E

sions of organizational identiﬁ cation and com-
mitment as predictors of turnover intentions and 
psychological well-being. Canadian Journal of 
Behavioural Science, 37(3), 159–169.

D   P

Hobfoll, S. (2002). Social and psychological resources 

and adaptation. Review of General Psychology, 
6(4), 307–324.

Hymowitz, C. (2007, April 20). Executive’s motto for 
reducing job stress: Work hard, be nice. The Wall 
Street Journal Online. Retrieved April 28, 2008, 
from ABI/Inform Global database.

Judge, T. A., & Bono, J. E. (2001). Relationship of core 

self-evaluations traits—self-esteem, generalized 
self-efﬁ cacy, locus of control, and emotional 
stability—with job satisfaction and job perform-
ance: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 86(1), 80–92.

Kanfer, R., Wanberg, C. R., & Kantrowitz, T. M. (2001). 

Job search and employment: A personality-motiva-
tional analysis and meta-analytic review. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 86(5), 837–855.

Kram, K. E., & Hall, D. T. (1989). Mentoring as an 

antidote to stress during corporate trauma. Human 
Resource Management, 28(1), 493–510.

Law, K. S., Wong, C., & Mobley, W. H. (1998). 
Toward a taxonomy of multidimensional 
constructs. Academy of Management Review, 
23(4), 741–755.

Coutu, D. L. (2002). How resilience works. Harvard 

Lazarus, R. S. (1966). Psychological stress and the 

Business Review, 80(5), 46–55.

coping process. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Human Resource Management DOI: 10.1002/hrm

20294.indd   690

8/13/2009   1:52:24 PM


 

PSYCHOLOGICAL CAPITAL 

691

Lazarus, R. S. (2003). Does the positive psychology 

movement have legs? Psychological Inquiry, 14(2), 
93–109.

Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, 

and coping. New York: Springer.

Le Fevre, M., & Kolt, G. S. (2006). Eustress, distress 

and their interpretation in primary and secondary 
occupational stress management interventions: 
Which way ﬁ rst? Journal of Managerial Psychol-
ogy, 21(6), 547–565.

Le Fevre, M., Matheny, J., & Kolt, G. S. (2003). Eus-

tress, distress, and interpretation in occupational 
stress. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 18(7), 
726–744.

Lee, T. W., & Mitchell, T. R. (1994). An alternative 
approach: The unfolding model of voluntary 
employee turnover. Academy of Management 
Review, 19(1), 51–89.

Lovibond, P. F., & Lovibond, S. H. (1995). The structure 

of negative emotional stress: Comparison of the 
Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS) with the 
Beck depression and anxiety inventories. Behav-
iour, Research and Therapy, 33(3), 335–343.

Luthans, F. (2002a). The need for and meaning of posi-

tive organizational behavior. Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior, 23(6), 695–706.

Luthans, F. (2002b). Positive organizational behavior: 

Developing and managing psychological strengths. 
Academy of Management Executive, 16(1), 57–72.

Luthans, F. (2002c).  The impact of hope in the entre-

preneurial process:  Exploratory research ﬁ ndings.  
Decision Sciences Institute Conference Proceed-
ings, San Diego, CA.

R

Luthans, F., Avey, J. B., Avolio, B. J., Norman, S. M., & 

Combs, G. M. (2006). Psychological capital devel-
opment: Toward a micro-intervention. Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, 27(3), 387–393.

R

O

Luthans, F., Avey, J. B., & Patera, J. L. (2008). Experi-

mental analysis of a Web-based intervention to 
develop positive psychological capital. Academy 
of Management Learning and Education, 7(2), 
209–221.

N

C

Luthans, F., Avolio, B., Avey, J. B., & Norman, S. M. 
(2007). Psychological capital: Measurement and 
relationship with performance and job satisfaction. 
Personnel Psychology, 60(3), 541–572.

U

C

E

Human Resource Development Review, 1(3), 
304–322.

Luthans, F., & Jensen, S. M. (2005). The linkage be-

tween psychological capital and commitment to 
organizational mission: A study of nurses. Journal 
of Nursing Administration, 35(6), 304–310.

AQ11

Luthans, F., Norman, S. M., Avolio, B. J., & Avey, J. B. 

(2008). Supportive climate and organizational 
success: The mediating role of psychological 
capital. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 29(2), 
219–238.

F

O

O

Luthans, F., Vogelgesang, G. R., & Lester, P. B. (2006). 
Developing the psychological capital of resiliency. 
Human Resource Development Review, 5(1), 
25–44.

R

Luthans, F., & Youssef, C. M. (2007). Emerging positive 

organizational behavior. Journal of Management, 
33(5), 321–349.

D   P

Luthans, F., Youssef, C. M., & Avolio, B. J. (2007). 

Psychological capital: Developing the human com-
petitive edge. New York: Oxford University Press.

E

T

Maddi, S. R. (1987). Hardiness training at Illinois Bell 

Telephone. In P. Opatz (Ed.), Health promotion 
evaluation (pp. 101–115). Stevens Point, WI: 
National Wellness Institute.

Magaletta, P. R., & Oliver, J. M. (1999). The hope 
construct, will and ways: Their relations with 
self-efﬁ cacy, optimism, and well being. Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 55(5), 539–551.

Makawatsakul, N., & Kleiner, B. H. (2003). The effect of 

downsizing on morale and attrition. Management 
Research News, 26(23–24), 52–62.

Maki, N., Moore, S., Grunberg, L., & Greenburg, E. 

(2005). The responses of male and female manag-
ers to workplace stress and downsizing. North 
American Journal of Psychology, 7(2), 295–312.

Manning, M. R., Jackson, C., & Fusilier, M. R. (1996). 
Occupational stress, social support, and the costs 
of health care. Academy of Management Journal, 
33(3), 738–750.

Marino, S. (1997). The stress epidemic. Industry Week, 

246(7), 14.

Masten, A. S. (2001). Ordinary magic: Resilience 

processes in development. American Psychologist, 
56(3), 227–238.

Luthans, F., Avolio, B. J., Walumbwa, F. O., & Li, W. 

(2005). The psychological capital of Chinese workers: 
Exploring the relationship with performance. 
Management and Organization Review, 1(2), 
249–271.

Masten, A. S., & Reed, M. G. J. (2002). Resilience in 
development. In C. R. Snyder & S. Lopez (Eds.), 
Handbook of positive psychology (pp. 74–88). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Mathews, K. A. (1982). Psychological perspectives on 

 Luthans, F., & Jensen, S. M. (2002). Hope: A new posi-

tive strength for human resource development. 

the Type A behavior pattern. Psychological Bulletin, 
91(2), 293–323.

Human Resource Management DOI: 10.1002/hrm

20294.indd   691

8/13/2009   1:52:25 PM


692 

HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT, SEPTEMBER–OCTOBER 2009

Matsui, T., & Onglatco, M. L. (1992). Career self-efﬁ cacy 

of the relation between occupational stress and 
strain. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 41(1), 79–88.

McRae, R. R. (1990). Controlling neuroticism in the 

measurement of stress. Stress Medicine, 6(3), 
237–241.

D. D. Steiner, & D. P. Skarlicki (Eds.), Research 
in social issues in management: Vol. 5. Managing 
social and ethical issues in organizations 
(pp. 135–177). Greenwich, CT: Information Age.

Schneider, S. L. (2001). In search of realistic optimism. 

American Psychologist, 56(3), 250–263.

Motowildo, S. J., Packard, J. S., & Manning, M. R. 

Seligman, M. E. P. (1998). Learned optimism. 

Peterson, S., & Luthans, F. (2003). The positive impact 

Spielberger, C., & Vagg, P. (1991).  Professional manual 

(1986). Occupational stress: Its causes and conse-
quences for job performance. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 71(4), 618–629.

Neil, D., & Spies, G. M. (2007). The use of play therapy 

mediums in a stress management program with 
corporate employees. Journal of Workplace Behav-
ioral Health, 22(1), 33–51.

Nelson, D., & Cooper, C. L. (Eds.). (2007). Positive 

organizational behavior: Accentuating the positive 
at work. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Nelson, D. R., & Sutton, C. (1990). Chronic work stress 

and coping: A longitudinal study and suggested 
new directions. Academy of Management Journal, 
33(4), 859–869.

O’Brien, T. B., & DeLongis, A. (1996). The interactional 

context of problem-, emotion-, and relationship-
focused coping: The role of the big ﬁ ve personality 
factors. Journal of Personality, 64(4), 775–813.

C

E

and development of hopeful leaders. Leadership and 
Organization Development Journal, 24(1), 26–31.

R

O

Podsakoff, N. P., LePine, J. A., & LePine, M. A. (2007). 
Differential challenge stressor-hindrance stressor 
relationships with job attitudes, turnover inten-
tions, turnover, and withdrawal behavior: A meta-
analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92(2), 
438–454.

R

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. C., Lee, J., & Podsakoff, 

N. P. (2003). Common method biases in behavioral 
research: A critical review of the literature and 
recommended remedies. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 88(5), 879–903.

Princeton Survey Research Associates. (1997). Labor 

Day survey: State of workers. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton Survey Research.

C

Riga, A. (2006, February 27). Business awakes to cost 

of stress.  The Gazette.  Retrieved May 1, 2008, from 
ABI/Inform Global database

N

U

Saks, A. M., & Ashforth, B. E. (1997). A longitudinal 

investigation of the relationship between job 
information sources, applicants’ perceptions of ﬁ t 
and work outcomes. Personnel Psychology, 50(2), 
395–426.

E

T

New York: Pocket Books.

Seligman, M. E. P., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000). 

Positive psychology. American Psychologist, 55(1), 
5–14.

Siu, O., Spector, P. E., & Cooper, C. J. (2005). Work 

stress, self-efﬁ cacy, Chinese work values, and work 
well-being in Hong Kong and Beijing. International 
Journal of Stress Management, 12(3), 274–288.

Snyder, C. R. (2000). Handbook of hope. San Diego: 

O

F

Academic Press.

Snyder, C. R. (2002). Hope theory: Rainbows in the 

mind. Psychological Inquiry, 13(4), 249–276.

Snyder, C. R., Irving, L. M., & Anderson, J. R. (1991). 
Hope and health. In C. R. Snyder (Ed.), Handbook 
of social and clinical psychology (pp. 295–305). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

D   P

Snyder, C. R., & Lopez, S. (2002). Handbook of positive 

psychology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

O

R

for the job stress survey. Tampa, FL: Center for 
Research in Behavioral Medicine & Health Psychol-
ogy, University of Southern Florida.

Spreitzer, G. M. (1995). Psychological empowerment 
in the workplace: Dimensions, measurement, and 
validation. Academy of Management Journal, 
38(5), 1442–1465.

Stajkovic, A. D., & Luthans, F. (1998a). Self-efﬁ cacy 

and work-related performance: A meta-analysis. 
Psychological Bulletin, 124(2), 240–261.

Stajkovic, A. D., & Luthans, F. (1998b). Social cognitive 

theory and self efﬁ cacy: Going beyond traditional 
motivational and behavioral approaches. Organiza-
tional Dynamics, 26(4), 62–74.

Taylor, S. E., Pham, L. B., Rivkin, I. D., & Armor, D. A. 

(1998). Harnessing the imagination: Mental 
simulation, self-regulation, and coping. American 
Psychologist, 53(4), 429–439.

Totterdell, P., Wood, S., & Wall, T. (2006). An intra-indi-
vidual test of the demands-control model. Journal 
of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 
79(12), 63–85.

Trunk, P. (2007). Brazen careerist: The new rules for 

success. New York: Warner Business Books.

Schaufeli, W. B., & Salanova, M. (2007). Work engage-
ment: An emerging psychological concept and its 
implications for organizations. In S. W. Gilliland, 

Tugade, M. M., & Fredrickson, B. L. (2004). Resilient 

individuals use positive emotions to bounce back 
from negative emotional experiences. Journal of 

Human Resource Management DOI: 10.1002/hrm

20294.indd   692

8/13/2009   1:52:25 PM


 

PSYCHOLOGICAL CAPITAL 

693

Personality and Social Psychology, 86(2), 
320–333.

Van der Hek, H., & Plomp, H. N. (1997). Occupational 

stress management programmes: A practical 
overview of published effect studies. Occupational 
Medicine, 47(3), 133–141.

Van der Klink, J., Blonk, R., Schene, A., & van Dijk, F. 

(2001). The beneﬁ ts of interventions for work-
related stress. American Journal of Public Health, 
91(2), 270–276.

Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Develop-

ment and validation of brief measures of positive 
and negative affect. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 54(6), 1063–1070.

Wright, T. A. (2003). Positive organizational behavior: 

An idea whose time has truly come. Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, 24(4), 437–442.

Youssef, C. M., & Luthans, F. (2007). Positive organi-
zational behavior in the workplace: The impact of 
hope, optimism, and resilience. Journal of Manage-
ment, 33(5), 774–800.

Youssef, C. M., & Luthans, F. (2005). Resiliency devel-
opment of organizations, leaders and employees: 
Multi-level theory building for sustained perform-
ance. In W. Gardner, B. J. Avolio, & F .O. Walumbwa 
(Eds.), Authentic leadership theory and practice: 
Origins, effects, and development (pp. 303–343). 
Oxford: Elsevier.

F

O

O

R

D   P

E

T

C

E

R

R

O

C

N

U

Human Resource Management DOI: 10.1002/hrm

20294.indd   693

8/13/2009   1:52:25 PM

