An Empirical Assessment of Organizational Commitment and Organizational
Effectiveness

Harold L. Angle; James L. Perry

Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 26, No. 1. (Mar., 1981), pp. 1-14.

Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28198103%2926%3A1%3C1%3AAEAOOC%3E2.0.CO%3B2-A

Administrative Science Quarterly is currently published by Johnson Graduate School of Management, Cornell University.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.

Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/cjohn.html.

Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.

The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive is supported by libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

http://www.jstor.org
Wed Oct 3 14:43:23 2007


An Empirical Assess- 
merit of Organizational 
Commitment and Or-
ganizational Effective- 
ness 

Harold L. Angle and 
James L. Perry 

@ 1981 by Cornell University. 
0001-8392/81/2601-0001$00.75 

Support for this research was provlded by 
the U.S. Department ofTransportation. Of-
fice of University Research, the Graduate 
School of Management, and the Institute 
of Transportatlon Studies. University of 
Californla. I ~ l n e .  The authors are indebted 
toa number of their colleagues, particularly 
Robert Dubin and Lyman Porter, for t h e ~ r  
helpful comments on an earlier verslon of 
this paper. 

Thestudy attempts to relate the organizational commitment 
of lower-level employees to organizational effectiveness in 
organizations offering bus services. Organizational com- 
mitment was found to be associated with organizational 
adaptability, turnover, and tardiness rate, but not with 
operating costs or absenteeism. Two subscales were con- 
structed to measure value commitment and commitment to 
stay in the organization. Few significant differences were 
found between the subscales, as they relate to various 
indicators of organizational effectiveness, and the overall 
pattern suggested the need to avoid simplisticassumptions 
about the impact of commitment on organizationally rele- 
vant behavior: 

In a widely accepted paradigm in organization theory, organiza- 
tions and their members are seen in an exchange relationship. 
Each party makes certain demands on the other while providing 
something in return. March and Simon (1958) characterized 
such an exchange in terms of organizational inducements and 
individual contributions. They pointed out that employees' 
contributions to the organization take two general forms -
they described some impor- 
production and participation -and 
tant differences in the antecedents of an employee's decision 
to produce in contrast to the decision to participate. 
Students of organizational behavior have attempted to estab- 
lish reliable linkages between employee attitudes and organiza- 
tionally relevant behaviors, though with mixed results (Vroom, 
1964). Substantial attention has been directed recently toward 
organizational commitment as the attitudinal component of this 
relationship (Hrebiniakand Alutto, 1972; Buchanan, 1974; 
Porter et al., 1974; Porter, Crampon and Smith, 1976; Steers, 
1977a; Stevens, Beyer and Trice,  1978). Some have proposed 
that the concept of commitment may disclose reliable linkages 
between attitudes and behavior, because commitment is pre- 
sumed to be a relatively stable employeeattribute (Porter et al., 
1974; Koch and Steers, 1978). 
Commitment has been studied from so many different theoret- 
ical perspectives, however, that Hall (1 977) remarked that we 
might better abanaon the term altogether and deal instead with 
a set of concepts, each focused on one or another aspect of 
commitment. The term "commitment"  has been used, for 
example, to describe such diverse phenomena as the willing- 
ness of social actors to give their energy and loyalty to social 
systems (Kanter, 1968), an awareness of the impossibility of 
choosing a different social identity or of rejecting a particular 
expectation, under force of penalty (Stebbins, 1970a), the 
binding of an individual to behavioral acts (Kiesler, 1971 ; 
Salancik, 1977), or an affective attachment to an organization 
apart from the purely instrumental worth of the relationship 
(Buchanan, 1974). Some commitmentlike concepts, such as 
organizational identification or organizational involvement, have 
also appeared in the literature (Patchen, 1970; Hall and 
Schneider, 1972). 
The commitment framework adopted in the present research 
has been called the "organizational behavior approach"  (Staw, 
1977). This treatment of commitment has perhaps its most 
frequently cited origins in the work of Porter and his associates 

March 1981, volume 26 

1/Administrative Science Quarterly 


(Porter and Smith, 1970; Porter et al., 1974; Porter, Crampon 
and Smith, 1976; Steers,  1977a; Mowday, Steers and Porter, 
1979) and a similar concept is found in other research by Hall, 
Schneider and Nygren (1 970), Hall and Schneider (1972) and 
Buchanan (I974). 
Organizational commitment as defined by Porter et al. (1 974) 
has three major components: (1) a strong belief in and accep- 
tance of the organization's goals, (2) a willingness to exert 
considerable effort on behalf of the organization, and (3)a 
definite desire to maintain organizational membership. Re- 
search conducted within this framework has indicated that 
commitment is not only a predictor of employee retention 
(Porter et al., 1974; Koch and Steers,  1978), but may also be a 
predictor of employee effort and performance (Mowday, Por- 
ter, and Dubin, 1974; Mowday, Steers, and Porter, 1979). 
Organizational Commitment and Organizational 
Effectiveness 
Organizational theorists seem to agree that organizational ef- 
fectiveness is multidimensional (Campbell et al., 1974; Steers, 
1977b), and there is also reason to believe that the determi- 
nants of organizational effectiveness vary (Steers, 1977a; Ste- 
vens, Beyer, and Trice, 1978). Although general organizational 
theory  holds that the structural features of an organization 
should fit the demands of environment and technology (Burns 
and Stalker, 1961 ; Woodward, 1965; Lawrence and Lorsch, 
1967), organizational design, alone, will not ensure organiza- 
tional effectiveness. Even where the structural prerequisites 
have been met, there remains a crucial requirement-that 
the 
members of the organization behave in a manner supportive of 
organizational goals. 
Katz (1 964) suggested three types of member behaviors, 
reminiscent of March and Simon's (1 958) participation and 
production framework, essential for a functioning organization. 
Not only must the organization induce members to join and 
remain (i.e., participate), but it must also motivate two kinds of 
production: dependable role behavior, as prescribed by the 
organization, and spontaneous and innovative behaviors which 
go beyond explicit behavioral prescriptions. 
Some parallels can be drawn between the elements of organi- 
zational commitment according to the organizational behavior 
school (Porter et al., 1974) and the motivational taxonomies of 
March and Simon (1 958) and Katz (1 964). A committed 
member's definite desire to maintain organizational member- 
ship would have a clear relationship to the motivation to 
participate. Willingness to exert considerable effort on behalf of 
the organization and the belief in and acceptance of the 
organization's goals, in combination,  have implications for the 
member's motivation to produce for the organization -in 
accordance with explicit organizational mandates, as well as in 
terms of Katz's (1 964) spontaneous and innovative behaviors. 
Expected Relationships 
In the present research, it had been anticipated that several 
measures of organizational effectiveness would be sensitive to 
differences in the levels of commitment of the members of the 
organizations studied. Thus, it was hypothesized that organiza- 
tions whose members were strongly committed would have 


Organizational Commitment and Effectiveness 

both high participation and high production. Such organizations 
were therefore expected to show relatively low levels of 
absenteeism, tardiness, and voluntary turnover, and high levels 
of operating efficiency. In addition, in keeping with the view 
that committed employees will engage in spontaneous, innova- 
tive behaviors on behalf of the organization, it was anticipated 
that, within limits, organizational commitment among the 
members would facilitate the ability of an organization to adapt 
to contingencies. The adaptability-commitment relationship 
would not actually be expected to be monotonic over all 
possible levels of commitment. Extreme commitment would 
probably lead to fanatical behavior, suspension of individual 
judgment and the like, i.e., the syndrome that Schein (1968) 
termed "failures of socialization." However, the relationship 
was presumed to be positive and monotonic over the range of 
values actually encountered. While these outcomes are not 
exhaustive, they are typical of the measures of effectiveness 
that have appeared in the literature based on the goal model of 
organizations (Campbell et al., 1974; Steers,  197713). 
It was anticipated that the relative strength of the relationship 
between organizational commitment and organizational effec- 
tiveness mig htvary depending upon the behaviors to which the 
employees were committed. Harris and Eoyang (1 977), building 
upon Steers' (1 977a) notion of "active"  and "passive"  com-
mitment, offered a fourfold typology of commitment as a 
construct having two bipolar dimensions: (1) commitment, or 
lack of commitment, to remain with the organization, and (2) 
commitment, or lack thereof, to work in support of organiza- 
tional objectives. Within such a framework, turnover measures 
should be most sensitive to the extent to which employees 
were committed to remaining in the organization. Conversely, 
those measures that more nearly reflected a decision by 
organizational members to produce (March and Simon,  1958) 
should be more clearly related to their commitment to exert 
effort on behalf of the organization. The latter category of 
indicators includes not only such performance dimensions as 
service efficiency and adaptability,  but absenteeism and tardi- 
ness, as well. Although the term "participation"  in common 
usage includes employee behaviors opposite to absenteeism, 
as well as to turnover,  March and Simon (1 958) defined the 
term solely with respect to turnover. 

METHOD 
Sample and Research Sites 
A total of 24 organizations, which operated fixed-route bus 
services in western United States, participated in the study. 
Archival and transit manager questionnaire and interview data 
were collected at all participating organizations, and employee 
questionnaires were administered to members of the bus 
drivers' bargaining unit. Consequently, a majority (91 percent) of 
the respondents were bus drivers;  however, at a few of the 
participating organizations, mechanics andlor clerical personnel 
were included in the drivers' bargaining unit and so were 
sampled along with the drivers. The total employee sample was 
1244, while the transit manager sample was 96. 
The nature of the bus driver's job was expected to provide a 
particularly sensitive test of the relationship between the 
commitment of rank-and-file employees and several indicators 


of the effectiveness of their employing organizations. Driving a 
bus is one of the more controlled yet one of the more 
autonomous blue-collar occupations. On the one hand, drivers 
must adhere rigorously to minute-by-minute schedules keyed 
to a fixed route that must be followed exactly, and deviance 
from these schedules has a high probability of discovery. On 
the other hand, within the constraints of time and route, the 
bus driver is like a ruler of a minor kingdom. Whether intended 
by the organization or not, a great deal of the driver's behavior, 
with respect to passenger relations, is discretionary. 
For the passengers, the driver is the organization. The network 
of drivers that the organization puts out on the road constitutes 
the organization's public face. Ultimately, public attitudes 
toward the organization, and public utilization and support of the 
transit operation, may come to depend in large part on how well 
the drivers represent the organization to the public. Thus, as a 
true boundary-role person (Adams, 1976), the bus driver may be 
in a unique position to influence organizational outcomes, by her 
or his job-relevant behaviors. If these behaviors are, in any way, 
a function of organizational commitment, then organizational 
commitment and organizational performance might be related. 

Measures 
Organizational commitment. Employee commitment was 
measured by the 15-item Organizational Commitment Ques- 
tionnaire (OCQ) (Porter et al., 1974), which has demonstrated 
good psychometric properties and has been used with a wide 
range of job categories (Mowday, Steers, and Porter, 1979). In 
the present study, Cronbach's alpha was .90. Two subscales 
were also created, based on the results of a factor analysis: 
value commitment (alpha=.89) and commitment to stay (al- 
pha=.72), which appear to differentiate between the respon- 
dents' commitment to support thegoals of the organization and 
their commitment to retain their organizational membership. 
Table 1 indicates the factor loadings and shows which items 
were included in each of the subscales. As Table 1 indicates, 
there was also a third factor extracted under the conventional 
rule that eigenvalues equal or exceed a value of one (Nunnally, 
1978); however, only one item had its highest loading on that 
factor. Because single-item scales are notoriously unreliable, 
only the two subscales mentioned were used. 
In order to assess the stability of the factor structure obtained, 
cross validation was achieved by randomly dividing the sample 
and conducting a new pair of factor analyses. The factor-loading 
patterns for these analyses were virtually identical with those 
for the overall sample; thus, the factor structure appears quite 
stable. 
The observation that the items loading on factor 2 were all 
reverse-scored, while none of the reverse-scored items were 
loaded on factor 1, gave rise, initially, to the concern that the 
structure obtained might have resulted from an artifact of 
measurement. Although it is likely that such an artifact might 
have contributed to the separation of factors, the two clusters 
of questionnaire items appear to be conceptually distinct. 
The value commitment scale includes items connoting pride in 
association with the organization (i.e., identification), willing- 


Organizational Commitment and Effectiveness 

Table 1 

Rotated Factor Loadings from Factor Analysis for the Organizational Commitment Questionnaire* 

I am willing to put in a great deal of effort beyond that normally 

expected in order to help thls organization be successful. 

I talk up this organization to my frlends as a great organlzation 

to work for. 

I feel very little loyalty to this organlzation (reversed). 

I would accept almost any type of job assignment in order to keep 

working for thls organization. 

I find that my values and the organization's values are very simllar 

I am proud to tell others that I am part of this organization. 

I could just as well be working for a different organization as 

long as the type of work were similar (reversed). 

This organization really inspires the best in m e  in the way of 

job performance. 

It would take very little change in my present circumstances to 

cause m e  to leave this organization (reversed). 

I am extremely glad I  chose this organization to work for over 

others I was considering at the time I joined. 

There's not much to be gained by sticklng with this organization 

~ndefin~tely

Often, I find it difficult to agree with this organization's 

policies on important matters relating to its employees (reversed). 

I  really care about the fate of this organization. 

For me, this is the best of all organizations for which to work. 

Deciding to work for this organization was a definite mistake 

on my part (reversed). 


(reversed). 


Eigenvalues 
*  Only factor loadings above .30 are shown. 
** 	 Factor 1 -value  commitment; Factor 2 -commitment to stay. 
*  Items included in commitment to stay subscale. 
t  Items included in value commitment subscale. 

ness to perform for the organization, concern for the fate of the 
organization, and congruence of personal values with those of 
the organization. Although three of the nine items relate to 
attitudes toward organizational membership, their wording 
tends to imply that attachment is based on the member's 
positive regard for the organization. In the aggregate, these 
items indicate a form of organizational involvement, which 
Etzioni (1 975) termed "moral"  and which is clearlyanalogous to 
Stebbins' (1970b) notion of value commitment. 
The commitment to stay scale includes a cluster of question- 
naire items that pertain to membership in itself. Unlike the 
membership-related items that load on factor 1, these items do 
not connote an affective bond to the organization. On the 
contrary, the wording of this set of items conveys a general 
impression of Etzioni's (1 975) "calculative  involvement." 
Organizational effectiveness. Several aspects of overall or- 
ganizational effectiveness were tapped by the use of selected 
performance indicators. The rationale for the selection of the 
specific indicators is discussed in an earlier paper (Perry and 
Angle, 1980b). 
Employee turnover (separation rate) was measured by compila- 
tion of statistics on voluntary termination during the preceding 
fiscal year. A second turnover measure was obtained by self- 
report of employees' intent to quit (Appendix), a measure which 


has received substantial research support, as documented in a 
recent review by Muchinsky and Tuttle (1979). 
Employee tardiness was computed as the ratio of recorded 
tardiness incidents to the mean number of employees during 
the preceding fiscal year. Unfortunately, adequate tardiness 
records had been maintained by only 14 of the 24 organizations 
for which other performance data were available. 
Absenteeism was obtained by self-report (Appendix). Like 
tardiness, reliable absence statistics had not been maintained 
by several of the participating organizations, but the alternative 
measure was available through the employee questionnaire. 
Operating expense was another measure of effectiveness. A 
general notion of efficiency seems to be common in most 
taxonomies of the dimensions of organizational effectiveness. 
The broad concept of efficiency involves the computation of 
ratios of inputs to outputs, or of costs to benefits. In public mass 
transit, efficiency may be defined in terms of the extent to 
which the organization is able to minimize operating costs, 
relative both to the amount of transit service provided and to the 
overall scope of the operation. Two performance indicators 
were, therefore, selected for this purpose: operating expense 
per revenue vehicle-hour, computed by dividing total operating 
expenses for the preceding fiscal year by the total number of 
operating hours for the revenue vehicles, and operating ex- 
pense per employee, using the total number of employees as 
the measure of input. 
Organizational adaptability was measured by self-report, using a 
modified version of Mott's (1 972) questionnaire. A four-item 
scale was constructed and incorporated in both the employee 
questionnaire and the transit manager questionnaire (Appen- 
dix). The adaptability of each organization was thus measured 
two ways, i.e., by averaging the responses to the adaptability 
scale separately for transit managers and for other employees. 
Procedures for Data Collection 
Archival data and questionnaires. Archival data were col- 
lected and questionnaires administered during two-day site 
visits. Employees had been made aware of the survey in 
advance of each visit throug h the internal communication 
systems of the organizations. All questionnaires were pre- 
sented directly to participating employees by a member of the 
research team. In most cases, completed questionnaires, 
which were filled out anonymously, were returned directly to 
one of the researchers before the conclusion of the sitevisit. In 
a few cases, respondents were unable to complete question- 
naires in time, and so were furnished with preaddressed, 
postpaid envelopes for direct mail return to the university. In no 
case did persons in the chain of authority in the organization 
become involved in administering questionnaires. The re- 
sponse rate for the primary method of administration (i.e., 
on-site return) was 71 percent; however, the overall response 
rate dropped to 64 percent when persons who were provided 
mail-return envelopes were included in the computation. The 
response rate from mail returns alone was 32 percent. 
Sampling goals were established separately for each site, in 
inverse proportion to organization size. At the smallest organiza- 
tions, less than 30 eligible employees, for instance, the target 


Organizational Commitment and Effectiveness 

was 100 percent. At organizations  having more than 1,000 
eligible employees, the target was only 10 percent. In most 
cases, the targeted sampling objectives were achieved, the 
exceptions tending to be in those organizations for which the 
target was 100 percent sampling. 
Since participation was voluntary, true random sampling was 
not possible. Researchers attempted judgmentally,  however, 
to distribute questionnaires across categories of race and sex, 
and across the apparent range of age and tenure. Analysis of 
questionnaire returns, however, disclosed some discrepancies 
in proportional representation of certain groups. Blacks were 
underrepresented (14 percent in sample, 31 percent in popula- 
tion); as were employees having more than five years' tenure in 
the organization (30 percent in sample, 38 percent in popula- 
tion); women were overrepresented (18 percent in sample, 6 
percent in population). Other groups matched sampling targets 
reasonably well. Retrospectively, it appeared that the devia- 
tions from ideal proportional representation may have resulted, 
at least in part, from population differences during the work 
shifts in which most of the sampling effort had been concen- 
trated. 

RESULTS 
Organizational Commitment: Subgroup Differences 
Personal factors accounted for several subgroup differences. 
Commitment was positively correlated with age (r=.17, 
p <.001),  but negatively related to educational level (p<.0001). 
The results for educational level were striking, showing a 
steady decline in commitment across eight ascending educa- 
tional level categories. No significant differences were found, 
however, across racial-ethnic subgroups or between em- 
ployees whose income was or was not the primary source of 
family support. 
The relationships of age and of educational level with commit- 
ment were generally consistent with findings from related 
research (Sheldon, 1971 ; Hrebiniak and Alutto,  1972; Steers. 
1977a; Stevens, Beyer, and Trice, 1978). The argument often 
used to explain these relationships is that increasing age and 
decreasing levels of education tend to reduce the feasibility of 
obtaining desirable alternative education and therefore tend to 
restrict the individual to the present organization. 
Females were more strongly committed to their organizations 
than males (p<.001). While this finding was consistent with 
research that has treated commitment as an instrumental 
attachment to organizational membership (Hrebiniak and 
Alutto,  1972), it had not been expected in the present study, 
since the OCQ appears to tap a form of commitment that is 
conceptually very close to work involvement (Dubin, Cham- 
poux, and Porter, 1975) and, historically, women have been less 
involved than men in their work (Department of Health, Educa- 
tion, and Welfare, 1973; Taveggia and Ziemba,  1978). The 
rationale usually presented for such findings is that females 
enjoy less interorganizational mobility than males and, there- 
fore, tend to become restricted to their present organizations. In 
the present research, demographic differences alone would 
have predicted higher commitment for males. Male employees 


were older and had longer organizational tenure than females. 
There were no significant sex differences in educational levels. 
Measures of Organizational Effectiveness 
Correlational analysis was the principal method used to assess 
organizational-level relationships. Pearson correlation coeffi- 
cients were computed where marginal distributions were 
symmetrical and unimodal; however, forvariables with skewed 
distributions, nonparametric correlations were substituted for 
Pearson correlations. lntercorrelations among the effective- 
ness indicators are provided in Table 2 . All variables in Table 2 
were measured at the organizational level; thus, the self-report 
measures consisted of the arithmetic mean of responses to 
questionnaires within each participating organization. 

Table 2 

lntercorrelations among Indicators of Organizational Effectiveness 

Indicators* 

1 	 Manager-perceived adaptability 
2. 	 Employee-perceived adaptability 
3.  Absenteeism 
4. 	 Intent to quit 
5. 	 Separation rate 
6.  Tardiness 
7. 	 Operating expenselrevenue 

vehicle hour 

8. 	 Operating expenselemployee 

*Pearson  correlation coefficients are underlined;  all others are Spearman rho. 
*p<.05;  **p<.01;  ***p<.001. 

- ~ -

Two aspects of the intercorrelations shown in Table 2 seem 
noteworthy. First, the correlation between managers' and 
employees' organizational adaptability ratings was rather low 
(r=.23); thus, these two member groups appeared to percelve 
the same organization somewhat differently. Second, the two 
measures of turnover (separation rate, intent to quit) were 
negatively correlated with absenteeism, although neither coef- 
ficient was statistically significant. This is in keeping with March 
and Simon's (1 958)view of participation, that is, that there is no 
consistent relationship between absenteeism and voluntary 
turnover. 
Employee Commitment and Organizational Effectiveness 
Employees' organizational commitment scores, both for overall 
commitment and the two commitment subscales, were aggre- 
gated in the same way as the performance indicators. Table 3 
shows the correlations between the effectiveness indicators 
and overall commitment, value commitment, and commitment 
to stay. Table 3 also shows the absolute differences between 
the correlations with value commitment and commitment to 
stay, for each performance indicator. The statistical signifi- 
cance of the difference between correlations was computed 
using a technique recommended by Steiger (1 980) for testing 
the equality of two correlations having one index in common. 
This procedure, which utilizes the Fisherr-to-z transformation, 
is superior to Hotelling's t test, where sample sizes are small. 
Three of the effectiveness indicators (employee-perceived 


Organizational Commitment and Effectiveness 

Table 3 

Correlations between Commitment Variables and Indicators of Organizational Effectiveness* 

Indicator 

Organizational 
commitment 

N 

Value 
commitment 

Total difference between 
correlations for value 

Commitment  commitment and commitment 
to stay 

to stay? 

Manager-perceived 
adaptability 

24  -.I 6 

-. I 5   -.I7 

02 

. I 5  

.2 6 
-.28 
-.44* 
--.46*  --.35 
-.34 
-.06 

.27 
24 
-.36* 
24 
-  -  - 
24 
-.48* 
14  --.48* 
-.28 
22 

Absenteeism 
Intent to quit 
Separation rate 
Tardiness rate 
Operating expense1 
revenue vehlcle 
hour 
Operating expense1 
employee 
* 	 Pearson correlation coefflclents are underlined;  others are Spearman rho. 
t 	 Statistical significance is indicated for the difference between correlations between value commitment and 

. I  1 
,320 
.20 
. I  1 
,280 

-.60e** 
-.  64** 

.40° 

-.35 

-.21 

.05 

20 

commitment to stay. All significance tests are one-tailed. 

* ~ < . 0 5 ;  * * ~ < . 0 1 ;  ***~<.001. 

adaptability, absenteeism, and intent to quit) were derived from 
the same employee questionnaires as the commitment mea- 
sures. In order to avoid the inherent single-source bias, an 
alternative technique was used for the correlations between 
these three indicators and the commitment measures. The 
sample of respondents was randomly divided so that, for each 
organization, the measures of employee-perceived adaptability, 
absenteeism, and intent to quit were obtained from half of the 
employees, while organizational levels of overall commitment, 
value commitment, and commitment to stay were obtained by 
taking the arithmetic means for t.he remaining half of the 
employees. Since the other performance measures were free 
of single-source bias, they were all correlated with commit- 
ment scores that were based on the entire employee sample. 
Organizational commitment was significantly  related to organi- 
zational adaptability, based on employee questionnaire data, but 
was not significantly related based on manager questionnaires. 
This disparity was consistent with the low correlation between 
the two adaptability measures (Table 2). 
Turnover, that is, separation rate and intent to quit, was 
significantly  related to organizational commitment, as was the 
archival measure of tardiness rate. However, neither absen- 
teeism nor the two operating-expense ratios showed a statisti- 
cally significant association with commitment. 
When the two commitment subscales, value commitment and 
commitment to stay, were substituted for the 15-item measure 
of organizational commitment, turnover appeared to be more 
strongly associated with commitment to stay than with value 
commitment. This difference was statistically significant for 
the intent-to-quit measure (p<.05). The archival separation rate 
indicator showed a similar directional pattern;  however, the 
difference fell short of the traditional level of statistical signifi- 


cance (p<.07). Tardiness rate was negatively correlated with 
value commitment, as had been the case with organizational 
commitment, but was not significantly correlated with com- 
mitment to stay;  however, the difference between the two 
correlation coefficients was not statistically significant (p >.20). 
Other indicators tended to show stronger associations with 
value commitment than with commitment to stay, among them 
the two operating expense ratios. However, even though the 
difference between the correlations for both ratios was statisti- 
cally significant, the correlations fell short of traditional levels of 
significance (p<.08,  for both  correlation^).^  Neither organiza- 
tional adaptability nor absenteeism showed a differential 
strength of association with the two commitment subscales. In 
summary, although the overall pattern in Table 3 tends to 
suggest that the two subscales relate differentially to turnover 
and to such other types of measuresas operating expense, the 
absence in some instances of statistically significant findings 
dictates caution in drawing conclusions. 

DISCUSSION 
This research was designed to find systematic relationships 
between members' commitment to their work organizations 
and several indices of organizational effectiveness. The results 
were rather mixed. The pattern of relations hips s hown in Table 
3 for the two commitment subscales perhaps provides one clue 
as to why the overall commitment-effectiveness relationships 
were not as strong as had been anticipated. Although none of 
the relationships was statistically significant, the two operating 
expense ratios showed a tendency toward a stronger associa- 
tion with value commitment than with commitment to stay, 
whereas the turnover measures were more clearly related to 
commitment to stay. This pattern suggests that any impact of 
employee commitment on the organization may indeed depend 
on the specific kinds of behaviors to which the employees are 
committed and, of course, the effects of such behaviors on 
organizational outcomes. 
In keeping with earlier research (Porter et al., 1974; Steers, 
1977a; Koch and Steers, 1978), the clearest evidence provided 
by the present study is that there is an inverse relationship 
between organizational commitment and employee turnover. 
As Steers (1 977a) pointed out, such a finding is not surprising, 
considering Porter's definition of commitment (Porter et al., 
1974). However, a strong desire to remain a member of one's 
organization does not automatically imply that there is also an 
intention to be a dependable and hardworking employee. In 
terms of Harris and Eoyang's (1 977) typology, organizational 
outcomes would probably vary, depending on which quadrant 
includes the preponderance of employees whoare in a position 
to influence the performance of the organization. For instance, 
if most such employees had a strong intention to remain but 
low motivation to contribute their best efforts toward the 
mission (i.e., passive commitment), there would be no reason 
to expect a simple, linear relationship between organizational 
commitment and overall organizational effectiveness-particu- 
larly in cases where turnover appears to have little direct impact 
on other aspects of organizational performance. As Table 2 
indicates, the turnover measures appeared virtually unrelated to 

1 
It is acknowledged that the significance of 
the difference between two correlation 
coefficients, neither of which is statistically 
significant, is difficult to interpret. How- 
ever, the fact that a correlation could have 
occurred by chance does not mean that the 
correlation equals zero. In this instance, the 
larger of each pair of correlations related to 
operating expense is nearly significant 
(p<.081. Furthermore, the test forthe 
equallty of two dependent correlations 
takes intoaccount, simultaneously, the size 
of each correlation and the degrees of 
freedom. Accordingly, there appears to be 
some justtfication  for reporting statistical 
significance, when found. On the other 
hand, the issue is controversial, and the 
data are offered with due caution. 


Organizational Commitment and Effectiveness 

operating costs, and the probable reasons for this have been 
discussed in an earlier paper (Perry and Angle, 1980a). 
The overall pattern in Table 3 seems consistent with Harris and 
Eoyang's (1977) notion that commitment to stay and commit- 
ment to work are Independent constructs and, in combination, 
have complex implications for organlzatlons. However, the 
table shows fewer statistically significant relationships than 
might be desired, and there are some anomalies. For instance, 
although there is no significant difference between the correla- 
tions for employee-perceived adaptability and the two com- 
mitment subscales, the trend IS in a counterintuitive direction. 
Indeed, the largest correlation in Table 3 is between 
employee-perceived adaptability and commitment to stay. 
It would seem unlikely that a linear relationship should exist 
betweenany form of commitment and organizational adaptabil- 
ity. At the extreme, commitment would appear to milltate 
against the individual's (and therefore the organization's) ability 
to adapt to change (Salancik, 1977). It is more likely that, with 
respect to adaptability, there is some optimal level of commit- 
ment -sufficient to evoke needed employee behaviors be- 
yond expliclt role stipulations, but not so strong as to incur the 
suspension of individual judgment In favor of organizational 
precepts 
As an additional note on the number of nonsignificant relation- 
ships in Table 3, it should be recognized that this study 
represents an attempt to find systematic relationships in a 
"noisy  system." As is often the case with field research, there 
are a number of uncontrolled variables. In particular, such 
performance measures as operating expense ratios are subject 
to many influences besides the motivation of lower-level 
employees. Management competence, structural and 
technological variables, and various contextual factors combine 
to place limits on any potential effort-performance relationship. 
Two cautions are required. The first is about the cross-sectional 
nature of the research. To the extent that Table 3 does show 
relationships between commitment and indicators of organiza- 
tional effectiveness, the directionality of the causal arrow has 
still not been established. For example, however logical a case 
might be made that some optimal level of employee commit- 
ment might foster organizational adaptability, there is the 
possibility that organizations that are adaptable either induce 
commitment in their members or tend to attract and retain a 
disproportionate share of committed types of employees. 
The second caution is about occupational specificity. As Salan- 
cik (1 977) pointed out, the impact of employee commitment on 
an organization depends, not only on what the employees are 
committed to do, but also on what the potential is for those 
specific behaviors to influence organizational outcomes. In the 
present research, for example, commitment to stay was shown 
to have a more clear-cut relationship to voluntary turnover than 
to such indicators as operating costs. This may reflect the ready 
availability of a replacement labor pool and relatively modest 
training costs in the transit industry. In an industry where 
labor-pool and technological considerations would combine to 
make turnover particularly expensive, commitment to stay 
might exert a more powerful impact on operating costs, though 
indirectly. 


CONCLUSION 
The present research offered an opportunity to uncover a 
commitment-performance relationship, if such a relationship 
exists, through cross-organizational comparison of commit- 
ment levels relative to performance measures within a single 
type of service organization. Furthermore, there were reasons 
to expect that the role of bus operator was such that a 
behavior-performance link might, indeed, exist. 
What the research most clearly accomplished was a construc- 
tive replication of a relatively large body of earlier work, showing 
a definite negative relationship between organizational com- 
mitment and voluntary turnover. Beyond that issue, the results 
were rather mixed. The statistics that could most nearly be 
considered bottom-line indicators fort he organizations that 
participated in the research were the two operating expense 
ratios, yet these aspects of organizational performance were 
not significantly associated with organizational commitment. 
Although employee-perceived organizational adaptability was 
associated with commitment, manager-perceived adaptability 
was not. The relationship between tardiness and commitment 
was significant;  however, employee tardiness rate was not 
significantly associated with organizational operating costs. 
The overall pattern of relationships between various perform- 
ance indicators and the two commitment subscales, though 
inconclusive, suggests follow-up research. The relationship 
between commitment and behavior very likely depends on the 
form that commitment takes. Ratherthan assuming a simplistic 
relationship between commitment and positive performance 
outcomes, organizational researchers will have to begin to deal 
with more complex factors. 

REFERENCES 

Adams, J. Stacy 
1976  "The structureand dynamlcs of  and Welfare 

Department of Health, Education, 

behavior in organizational 
boundary roles." In Marvin D. 
Dunnette (ed.), Handbook of 
lndustrlal and Organizational 
Psychology:  1 175-1  199. 
Chlcago: Rand McNally. 

Buchanan, Bruce ll 
1974  "Build~ng organlzatlonal com- 
mitment: The socialization of 
managers in work organiza- 
tions."  Administrative Science 
Quarterly. 19: 533-546. 

Burns,Tom,and  Graham M. Stalker 
1961  The Management of Innova- 

tlon. London: Tavistock. 

1973  Work In America. Cambridge, 

MA. MIT Press. 

Dubin, Robert, Joseph E. Cham- 
poux, and Lyman W. Porter 
1975  "Central  life interests and or- 
ganizational commitment of 
blue-collar and clerical work- 
ers." Adm~nistratlve Science 
Quarterly, 20: 41 1-421. 

Etzioni, Amitai 
1975  A Comparative Evaluation of 
Complex Organizations: On 
Power, Involvement and Their 
Correlates, rev. ed. New York. 
Free Press 
Hall, Douglas T. 

Campbell, John P.,  David A. Bow- 
nas,  Norman G. Peterson, and Mar-  1977  "Conflict  and congruence 
vin D. Dunnette 
1974  The Measurement of Organiza- 
tional Effectiveness: A Revlew 
of Relevant Research and Opin- 
ion. NPRDC TR  75-1,  Navy 
Personnel Research and De- 
velopment Center, San Diego, 
CA. 

among multiple career com- 
mitments as the career un- 
folds."  Paper presented at an- 
nual meeting of Academy of 
Management, Orlando, Florida, 
August. 

Hall, DouglasT., and Benjamin 
Schneider 
1972  "Correlates  of organizational 
Identification as a function of 
career pattern and organiza- 
tional type."  Administrative 
Science Quarterly, 17: 340- 
350. 

Hall, Douglas T.,  Benjamin 
Schneider, and Harold T. Nygren 
1970  "Personal factors In organlza- 
tional ident~fication " Admlnis-
trative Science Quarterly, 15: 
176-1 90. 

Harris, Rueben T., and Carson K. 
Eoyang 
1977  "A typology of organlzatlonal 

commitment."  Working paper, 
Massachusetts lnst~tute of 
Technology, Sloan School of 
Management, Paper No  957- 
77, October. 


Organizational Commitment and Effectiveness 

Hrebiniak, Lawrence G.,  and Joseph 
Alutto 
1972  "Personal and role-related fac- 
tors in the development of or- 
ganizatlonal commitment  " 
Administrative Sclence Quar- 
terly, 17: 555-572. 
Kanter, Rosabeth Moss 
1968  "Commitment and social or- 
ganlzation. Astudy of com- 
mltment mechanisms in 
pian communities."  American 
Sociological Review, 33' 499- 
517. 

Katz, Daniel 
1964  "The  motivational basis of or- 
ganizational behavior." Behav- 
ioral Science, 9: 131 -146. 

Kiesler,  Charles A. 
1971  The Psychology of Commit- 
ment. Experiments Linking 
Behav~orto Belief  New York: 
Academic Press. 

Koch, James L.,  and Richard M. 
Steers 
1978  "Job attachment, satisfaction, 
and turnover among public sec- 
tor employees." Journal of Vo- 
cational Behavior, 12: 1 19- 
128. 

Lawrence, Paul R.,  and Jay W. 
Lorsch 
1967  Organization and Environment: 

Managing Differentiation and 
Integration. Boston: Haward 
Univers~ty Press. 

March, James G.,  and Herbert A. 
Simon 
1958  Organizations. New York. 

Wiley. 
Mott, Paul E. 
1972  The Character~stics of Effec- 
tive Organizations. New York 
Harper & Row. 

Mowday, Richard T., Lyman W. 
Porter, and Robert Dubin 
1974  "Unit  performance, s~tuational 
factors and employee attitudes 
in spatially separated work 
units."  Organizational Behavior 
and Human Performance. 12. 
231 -248. 

Mowday, Richard T., Richard M. 
Steers, and Lyman W. Porter 
1979  "The  measurement of organl- 
zational commitment." Journal 
of Vocational Behavior, 14. 
224-247. 

Muchinsky, Paul M., and Mark L. 
Tuttle 
1979  "Employee  turnover: An empir- 

ical and methodological as- 
sessment."  Journal of Voca- 
tlonal Behavior, 14  43-77. 

Nunnally, Jum C. 
1978  Psychometric Theory, 2d ed. 

New York: McGraw-Hill. 

Patchen, ,,,lartin 
1970  Participation, Achlevement, 
and Involvement on the Job. 
Englewood Cliffs. NJ: 
Prentice-Hall. 

Perry, James L., and Harold L. Angle 
1g80a  The 

of Labor-

Management Relations on 
Productivity and Efficiency ~n 
Urban Mass Transit:  Em- 
ployee Attitudes, Withdrawal 
Behavior, and Bargaining Unit 
Structure  Washington' De- 
partment of Transportat~on, 
March. 

1980b  Labor-Management Relations 

and Public 
ness: AStudy of Urban Mass 
Transit. New York: Pergamon 
Press. 

Effective-

Porter, Lyman W., William J. Cram- 
pon, and Frank J. Smith 
1976  "Organizational commitment 

and managerial turnover: A Ion- 
gltudinal study." Organizational 
Behavior and Human Perform- 
ance, 15: 87-98. 

Porter, Lyman W., and Frank J. 
Smith 
1970  "The  etiology of organizational 

commitment." Unpublished
paper. University of California, 
Iwlne. 

Porter, Lyman W,,  Richard M, 

Steers, Richard T. Mowday, and 

Paul V.  Boulian 

1974  "Organizational commitment, 

job satisfaction, and turnover 

among psychiatric techni- 

cians." Journal of Applled 

Psychology, 59: 603-609. 


Salancik'  GeraldR' 
1977  "Commitment and the control 
of organizational behavior." In 
Barry M. Staw and Gerald R. 
Salancik (eds.), New Directions 
in Organizational Behavior: 
1-54.  Chicago: St. Clalr. 

Schein, Edgar H. 
1968  "Organizational socialization 
and the profession of man- 
agement."  Industrial Manage- 
ment Review, 9 .  1-1  5. 

sheidon, 
1971  "Investments  and involve- 

E, 

ments as mechanisms produc- 
ing commitment to the organi- 
zation."  Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 16. 142-1 50. 

Staw, Barry M. 
1977  "Two sides of commitment." 

Paper presented at annual 
meeting of Academy of Man- 
agement, Orlando, Florida, Au- 
gust 

Stebbins, Robert A. 
1970a  Commitment to Deviance 

Westport, CT: Greenwood. 
1970b  "On  misunderstand~ng the 
concept of commitment: A 
theoretical clarification."  So- 
cial Forces, 48: 526-529. 

steers, 
1977a  "Antecedents  and outcomes 

M, 

of organizational commlt- 
ment." Administrative Sci- 
ence Quarterly, 22  46-56. 

197713  Organizational Effectiveness: 

A Behav~oral Vlew. Santa 
Monica. CA: Goodyear. 

Steiger,  James H, 
1980  8 r ~ e s t sfor comparing elements 

of a correlation matrix." Psy- 
chological Bulletin, 87: 245- 
251 

Stevens, John M., Janice M. Beyer, 
and Harrison M. Trice 
1978  "Assessing personal. role, and 

organizational predictors of 
managerial commitment." 
Academy of Management 
Journal, 21 :  380-396. 

Taveggia, Thomas C.,  and Thomas 
Ziemba 
1978  ,,A study of the 

life 
interests' and 'work attach- 
ments' of male and female 
workers." Journal of Vocat~onal 
Behavior, 12. 305-320. 

vroom,victorH, 
1964 	 Work and Motlvatlon,New 


York: W~ley. 


Woodward, Joan 
1965  Industrial Organization: Theory 

and Practice. London: Oxford 
University Press. 


APPENDIX: Self-Report Performance Indicators 

Indicator 
Intent to quit  What are your plans for staying wlth this organization? 


Wording of item 


1. 	 I  intend to stay until I  retire. 
2. 	 1  will leave only if an exceptional opportunity turns up. 
3. 	
4.  1  intend to leave as soon as possible. 

1  will leave if something better turns up. 

Absenteeism  How many workdays were you absent from work in the last year (do not count v a c a t l o n ) ? d a y s .  
A scale was constructed from the following four questions (Alpha=.80). Responses were obtalned on a 
Adaptability 
7-point summated rating scale with anchor words ranging from "strongly  disagree"  (1) to "strongly 
agree"  (7): 
1.  People In this organization do a good job anticipating  problems. 
2. 	 People in this organization doa good job in keeping up wlth changes in new equipment and new ways 

of doing things. 

3.  When changes are made in routlnes and equipment, people adjust to these changes qulckly. 
4. 	 People in this organization do a good job coping with emergency situations brought on by accidents. 

equipment and labor problems, or other factors that might cause temporary work overloads. 


http://www.jstor.org

LINKED CITATIONS

- Page 1 of 3 -

You have printed the following article:

An Empirical Assessment of Organizational Commitment and Organizational Effectiveness
Harold L. Angle; James L. Perry
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 26, No. 1. (Mar., 1981), pp. 1-14.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28198103%2926%3A1%3C1%3AAEAOOC%3E2.0.CO%3B2-A

This article references the following linked citations. If you are trying to access articles from an
off-campus location, you may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR. Please
visit your library's website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR.

References

Review: [Untitled]
Reviewed Work(s):

Prediction of Organizational Behavior by Norman Frederiksen; Ollie Jensen; Albert E. Beaton;
Bruce Bloxom
Paul C. Buchanan
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 19, No. 2. (Jun., 1974), pp. 287-289.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28197406%2919%3A2%3C287%3APOOB%3E2.0.CO%3B2-0

Central Life Interests and Organizational Commitment of Blue-Collar and Clerical Workers
Robert Dubin; Joseph E. Champoux; Lyman W. Porter
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 20, No. 3. (Sep., 1975), pp. 411-421.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28197509%2920%3A3%3C411%3ACLIAOC%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Q

Correlates of Organizational Identification as a Function of Career Pattern and
Organizational Type
Douglas T. Hall; Benjamin Schneider
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 17, No. 3. (Sep., 1972), pp. 340-350.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28197209%2917%3A3%3C340%3ACOOIAA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-5


http://www.jstor.org

LINKED CITATIONS

- Page 2 of 3 -

Personal Factors in Organizational Identification
Douglas T. Hall; Benjamin Schneider; Harold T. Nygren
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 15, No. 2. (Jun., 1970), pp. 176-190.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28197006%2915%3A2%3C176%3APFIOI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-E

Personal and Role-Related Factors in the Development of Organizational Commitment
Lawrence G. Hrebiniak; Joseph A. Alutto
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 17, No. 4. (Dec., 1972), pp. 555-573.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28197212%2917%3A4%3C555%3APARFIT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-L

Commitment and Social Organization: A Study of Commitment Mechanisms in Utopian
Communities
Rosabeth Moss Kanter
American Sociological Review, Vol. 33, No. 4. (Aug., 1968), pp. 499-517.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-1224%28196808%2933%3A4%3C499%3ACASOAS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-1

Investments and Involvements as Mechanisms Producing Commitment to the Organization
Mary E. Sheldon
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 16, No. 2. (Jun., 1971), pp. 143-150.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28197106%2916%3A2%3C143%3AIAIAMP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-R

On Misunderstanding the Concept of Commitment: A Theoretical Clarification
Robert A. Stebbins
Social Forces, Vol. 48, No. 4. (Jun., 1970), pp. 526-529.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0037-7732%28197006%2948%3A4%3C526%3AOMTCOC%3E2.0.CO%3B2-R

Antecedents and Outcomes of Organizational Commitment
Richard M. Steers
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 22, No. 1. (Mar., 1977), pp. 46-56.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28197703%2922%3A1%3C46%3AAAOOOC%3E2.0.CO%3B2-M


http://www.jstor.org

LINKED CITATIONS

- Page 3 of 3 -

Assessing Personal, Role, and Organizational Predictors of Managerial Commitment
John M. Stevens; Janice M. Beyer; Harrison M. Trice
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 21, No. 3. (Sep., 1978), pp. 380-396.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28197809%2921%3A3%3C380%3AAPRAOP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-V

