Long Range Planning 40 (2007) 357e381

http://www.elsevier.com/locate/lrp

Proactive Corporate
Environmental Strategies:
Myths and Misunderstandings

Juan Alberto Arago´ n-Correa and Enrique A. Rubio-Lo´ pez

Proactive environmental strategies have been proposed as urgent, profitable and
sustainable ways for firms to deal with the natural environment. This voluntary approach
is said to pay off in terms of social reputation, customer preferences and generation of
organisational capabilities. However, many managers and stakeholders are now finding
that some proactive approaches may perpetuate or even increase environmental
problems, while others have no clear payoffs. We propose a strategic framework
identifying six categories of ‘myths’ - commonly accepted misunderstandings in the
analysis, selection/implementation and control of proactive environmental strategies.
These categories and specific problems are analysed in detail, and evidence presented in
support of our arguments. We focus on the food industry, using secondary data of
well-known (mostly American) multinational companies and a sample of 140 food
factories in France and the United Kingdom. We conclude by suggesting that firms take
a contingent view and generate a dynamic capability for a proactive environmental
approach, rather than relying on universalistic implementation based on unreliable
myths. We also make more explicit some general points about the relationships between
business and society and the urgency of developing ‘real’ eco-sustainability measure-
ments and strategies.
Ó 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

‘Why are we facing such problems if we’re doing everything ‘right’ in

environmental management?’

0024-6301/$ - see front matter Ó 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.lrp.2007.02.008


Introduction: Delimitation and importance of the problem
This article deals with the identiﬁcation and analysis of problems that ﬁrms may encounter when
trying to implement advanced environmental strategies. The following offers a useful general
description of a typical paradoxical situation facing a (ﬁctional) executive and company, in which
advances and problems go hand in hand: most practitioners, scholars and environmental activists
will probably know similar stories:

Tom Smith is a top executive of Great Company Ltd., where he has been championing an
environmental program for three years. Legal pressure, avoiding criticism and being labelled as
‘bad guys’ in the firm’s sector, participating in an emergent area, reducing costs and improving
financial performance were some of the reasons the company took on these environmental challenges.
High Street Consulting Ltd has coached Great Company employees on the necessary changes,
offering a report each month showing ‘clear advances’
in environmental management. High
Street Consulting even managed the process of obtaining an ISO 14001 certification for Great
Company two years ago.
However, Tom Smith now wonders if his company has made any real improvement. Financial
performance has not changed significantly, the marketing department reports that no significant
advantage has been obtained from the company’s ‘eco-labels’, and environmental activists have
targeted the company many times during these years. Tom Smith wonders ‘Why are we facing
such problems if we are doing everything that is supposed to be ‘right’ in environmental management?’

Since the 1990s consultants and scholars have repeatedly shown that proactive environmental
strategies are both urgent for the planet and good for corporate reputation and ﬁnancial perfor-
mance.1 Proactive environmental strategies have been delimited as systematic patterns of voluntary
practices that go beyond regulatory requirements, for instance in terms of waste reduction and pre-
vention of pollution at source. Multiple typologies and taxonomies have proposed different levels of
proactivity of environmental strategy, ranging from slightly exceeding legal requirements to environ-
mental excellence or leadership. It is also widely accepted that the degree of a ﬁrm’s environmental
strategic proactivity is correlated with its general level of strategic proactivity.2 Many managers have
tried to implement at least some proactive environmental practices in recent years, as the enormous
expansion of corporate environmental standards attests: the International Organization for Stan-
dardization has reported that more ﬁrms than ever before gained its ISO 14001 certiﬁcation in 2003.
But, after making progress on accepted environmental management practices, many ﬁrms now
ﬁnd that neither their environmental nor their ﬁnancial improvement are as good as they expected.
So, while some ﬁrms are taking solid steps in environmental matters, many others are still looking
for guidance as to appropriate corporate environmental approaches.3

Such problems are not exclusive to small or marginal ﬁrms, as our article illustrates with evidence
from well-known multinational ﬁrms (PepsiCo, Del Monte and Bureau Veritas), large organisations
(a sample of 140 big food factories in France and the U.K.), and major industries (organic foods and
packaging). It is unrealistic to ﬁnd a single company or sample of ﬁrms illustrating all the potential
problems we highlight (fortunately, ‘nobody is that miserable’). However, the following sections
illustrate our arguments with evidence from different cases and data. We have focused our analysed
evidence mainly on a single industry, rather than choosing ad hoc examples from outliers in different
activities, to show that all the problems that concern us can be found in a single sector.

our ‘myths’ are commonly accepted understandings about

environmental strategies, which turn out on closer inspection to be

unreliable

358

Proactive Corporate Environmental Strategies


We do not mean that proactive environmental processes are always unsuccessful, or that no en-
vironmentally proactive ﬁrms are making progress. However, we want to deﬁne and discuss differ-
ent common problems which limit the potential of such strategies. A newly emerging wave of
researchers is beginning to identify how the actuality of environmental management is producing
paradoxes for organizations, although they mostly discuss general principles.4 In contrast, we have
developed a framework (see Table 1) which includes six broad categories of ‘myths’ e that is, com-
monly accepted understandings about proactive environmental strategies, which turn out on closer
inspection to be unreliable - in order to address speciﬁc problems which have very direct implica-
tions for the strategy process.

While, of necessity, the selection of problems addressed here is limited, and cannot be offered as
a comprehensive list, they represent the kind of ‘well-known truths’ that our researches lead us to
believe are too often simply accepted unquestioned and untested. Problems have been chosen from
our previous research and consulting experience in the area, our review of the literature and our
analysis of data for this article. We have used an inductive process, ﬁrst identifying the problems
and later showing evidence. The problems chosen for analysis were selected because they all have
the potential to serve as strategic, generalizable and useful examples. First, we have chosen problems
that arise at various stages of the strategic process, thus following Ansoff and McDonnell’s sugges-
tion that researchers address the whole strategic process in seeking to understand strategic position-
ing, as well as answering scholars’ calls to pay more attention to the implementation of corporate
environmental strategies.5 Second, although we pay special attention in this article to evidence from
a single industry (the food industry), with minor adaptations all of the problems analysed here
might easily apply to many industrial activities. Third, we have sought to choose problems that
were well deﬁned for academics but also relevant for practitioners.

While these problems offer different levels of novelty, this article integrates them into a new
framework, offering detailed discussion and strategic analysis with evidence drawn from real-world
environmental management. While some may appear to be relatively simple, our evidence shows
that they are relevant and important even for well-known multinationals seeking reputations for
environmental excellence, as is illustrated by our review of the literature, examples and results.

The food industry was selected for our analysis because of its high visibility, the importance of its
relationship with the natural environment, and its signiﬁcant contribution to gross domestic prod-
ucts all round the world (food and drink is still the largest manufacturing sector in both Europe and
the United States, accounting for 13.6 and 12.6 percent respectively of total EU-15 and U.S.
manufacturing).6 We simultaneously analyse data from secondary sources on the problems in gen-
eral, from well-known industry ﬁrms, and from our sample of 140 food factories operating in
France and the U.K. (see the Appendix for details about this sample).

environmental management is necessary, urgent and can often be

profitable

We believe that environmental management is necessary, urgent and can often be proﬁtable for ﬁrms.
This article contributes to the literature ﬁrst by proposing a strategic framework of three steps -
examining general and business environments; selecting and implementing appropriate strategies,
and controlling them and measuring their performance consequences - to identify and describe
some of the most common problems of so-called ‘good’ environmental management practice. Second,
the article discusses the implications of six problems and provides speciﬁc prescriptions for avoiding
them in the future. Third, the article contributes to research on corporate environmental management
by suggesting a contingent analysis, and by proposing the importance of ﬁrms’ generating a dynamic
proactive environmental strategy capability. The article represents a strategic view, proposing

Long Range Planning, vol 40

2007

359


3
6
0

P
r
o
a
c
t
i
v
e
C
o
r
p
o
r
a
t
e
E
n
v
i
r
o
n
m
e
n
t
a
l

S
t
r
a
t
e
g
i
e
s

Table 1. Abstract of the analyzed problems and evidence

The myths:

The facts:

Sampled Evidence:

General and business analysis:
1. Corporate Stakeholders are
Increasingly Sensitive to Firms’
Statements of Environmental
Progress

2. Environmental Industries and
Investments are Growing Rapidly

Selection and implementation:
3. Certiﬁcation of Environmental
Management Standards (such as
ISO 14001) produces
Differentiation

- Answers may show social bias.
- Even when interest is sincere, interest does not always mean action.
- Citizens are not equally interested in every aspect of preservation.
- Stakeholders do not trust companies’ environmental statements.

- Environmental sector is integrated by a combination of multiple and

heterogeneous activities; different analyses have to begin with decisions
about exactly which activities are being included.

- Environmental investments are often internalized in other regular

activities of ﬁrms and institutions.

- The treatment of environmental investments, expenditures, and reparation

costs is often undifferentiated.

- The important percentage of increase in the environmental areas does

not always mean an important increase.

- Environmental activities may imply environmental damage.

- Standards only guarantee that ﬁrms are using a process of environmental

management, but not environmental records.

- ISO 14001 only provides public information on corporate general

principles included in the environmental policy.

- Self-certiﬁcation and certiﬁcation through non-accredited veriﬁers are

possible.

- Many accredited veriﬁers have simultaneous interests in environmental

consulting.

- Markets may be not familiar with a certiﬁcation.

- Findings from public’s attitudes on national

polls (data from several U.S. National Polls on
the environment, and the Eurobarometer 58.0:
Poll on ‘‘The Attitudes of Europeans towards
the Environment’’).

- Short case analysis of PepsiCo International.
- Evolution of the U.S. environmental industry

(data from U.S. Census Bureau data).

- Analysis of organic food industry in the U.S.

(data from Datamonitor Inc. and the U.S.
Department of Commerce)

-Short case analysis of Del Monte Fresh Produce
and Bureau Veritas.
-Analysis of a sample of 140 food factories in
UK and France.


4. Eco-efﬁcient Activities are
a Consistent
Way of Obtaining Cost
Advantages

Control and performance consequences
5. Waste-recycling rates are Control
Indicators of Corporate Environmental
Progresses

6. Proactive Environmental Strategies
Imply
Financial Improvement

- Polluting companies may be more efﬁcient than

environmentally sensitive ﬁrms if social (not internalized)
costs are taken into account.

- The non-sustainability of consumption of nonrenewable

resources is not properly reﬂected in most systems of prices.

- It is not possible to compare heterogeneous activities

using ecoefﬁcient ratios.

- Ecoefﬁcient practices might indirectly prevent the

generation of organizational capabilities positively related
to performance.

- Increases in recycling may be in part because waste is

now generated in much higher quantities nowadays.
- Processes of recycling are not always environmentally

friendly, effective, or viable (technically or economically).
- The role of a company as a generator of recycled wastes
is often not linked with a responsible role as a buyer of
recycled materials.

- Some ﬁrms may improve ﬁnancial performance by

progressing in environmental management; meanwhile
others are strong because they keep environmental
management to the legal minimum.

- Environmental/ethical reasons may/should be more
relevant for the urgency of sustainable actions than
proﬁtability.

-Comparative illustration of prices on a list of
packaging in the industry.

- Comparative analysis of recycled versus

generated (and non-recycled) waste in the U.K.

- Analysis of a sample of 140 food factories

in UK and France.

L
o
n
g
R
a
n
g
e

P
l
a
n
n
n
g
,

i

v
o

l

4
0

2
0
0
7

3
6
1


environmental management based on deep analysis rather than on universalistic prescriptions. By
shedding light on day-to-day environmental management problems, it aims to relieve the frustration
with corporate environmental management often felt by both managers and society at large, as well as
offering implications for scholars, practitioners and public policy makers.

General and Business Analysis

Myth 1: Corporate Stakeholders are Increasingly Sensitive to Firms’
Environmental Progress Statements
Many surveys indicate stakeholders’ growing interest in the natural environment, and provide clear
evidence of popular environmental demands on business ﬁrms. The Yale University National Poll
on the Environment showed that 84 percent of Americans believed that the United States should
enact stricter emissions and pollution standards for business and industry, and national surveys
conducted by Gallup and the LCV Education Fund have delivered very similar results.7 Such
high levels of environmental interest may be one of the main reasons behind the growth of myths
about the environmental sensitivity of stakeholders. Table 2 calls attention to some incorrect gen-
eral assumptions about stakeholders’ environmental interests as found in previous research.

The food industry illustrates well the complexity of recent well-publicized environmental prob-
lems (e.g., mad cow disease, genetically modiﬁed crops, pesticide abuse, avian inﬂuenza). Avoiding
mutual misunderstandings in such areas demands that ﬁrms treat relationships with their stake-
holders carefully. We propose that ﬁrms’ leaders consider three points carefully before trying to
translate surveys into advice about corporate behaviour: the meanings and implications of stake-
holders’ responses to surveys, the heterogeneity of peoples’ interests in environmental matters,
and the difﬁculty of developing credible corporate statements.

First, it is important to note that when consumers, managers or employees declare an interest in
the natural environment in a survey, their answers could reﬂect social bias. People may think it is
politically correct to say, ‘Of course I am interested in food manufacturing preserving the natural
environment!’ More precisely deﬁning questions could help avoid this social bias. ‘Do you think
that food manufacturing that preserves the natural environment is important?’ and ‘Would you
pay 20 percent more for an ‘environmentally friendly’ cheese because the natural environment is
important?’ are different questions with very different implications, but unfortunately surveys
more often ask the ﬁrst type.

The situation behind the second formulation highlights a deeper question about whether we
should consider our markets are working correctly while environmentally friend products are
more expensive than products that generate damage. This situation exists because cheap, damaging
products do not yet internalize the costs generated to the society: the speciﬁc aspect of the equilib-
rium between prices and costs is developed further in our investigation of myth 4, below.

even sincere societal interest does not always imply a willingness to act

if increased difficulty or expense are involved.

Second, even when societal interest is sincere, social behaviour theory has shown that interest does
not always imply a willingness to act, especially if increased difﬁculty or expense are involved.8 In this
context, not everyone is equally interested in all aspects of preserving the environment, and some may
be more inclined to act in certain areas than in others. People often pay more attention to topics re-
lated to their own welfare or community, or simply to those they understand better. For example,
a survey carried out just after an accident in a Toulouse chemical factory in Sept 2001, which was
widely reported in the French press, found that 51 percent of French people were ‘very worried’ about
the ‘chemical risks’ posed by industry, but only 29 percent of Germans were similarly anxious.9

362

Proactive Corporate Environmental Strategies


L
o
n
g
R
a
n
g
e

P
l
a
n
n
n
g
,

i

v
o

l

4
0

2
0
0
7

3
6
3

Table 2. Research background note: Some works finding problems in the stakeholders’ management of environmental issues

Citation

Data sources

Assumptions from literature or
management to be avoided

Findings

S. Sharma and I. Henriques, Stakeholder
inﬂuences on sustainability practices in
the Canadian forest products industry,
Strategic Management Journal, 26, pp.
159-180 (2005).

K. Buysse and A. Verbeke, Proactive
environmental strategies: A stakeholder
management perspective, Strategic
Management Journal, 24, pp. 453-470
(2003).

I. Henriques and P. Sadorsky, The
relationship between environmental
commitment and managerial perceptions
of stakeholder importance, Academy of M
anagement Journal, 42, pp. 87-99 (1999).

38 ﬁrms in the Canadian
forest industry

‘Stakeholders considered secondary by managers
in the past (.) have become more salient in
assessing the social and ecological impacts
of business’

They show how different
types of stakeholder pressure affect
individual sustainability practices in
different steps of proactivity.

197 ﬁrms operating in
Belgium

‘All stakeholders are equally important for
corporations when crafting environmental
strategies’.
‘Multinational afﬁliates often deviates from
domestic practices’

400 large ﬁrms in Canada

‘The question of how they [companies] can manage
the vast amount of environmental information
and pressures, however, requires further study’.

Only the linkage between environmental
strategy and internal, primary stakeholder
management appears rather strong

Results indicate that managers of
environmentally proactive ﬁrms
perceive all stakeholders as important
except the media. The reactive proﬁle
is the opposite: no stakeholder was
perceived as important except the
media.

C. L. Hartman and E. R. Stafford, Green
alliances: Building new business with
environmental groups, Long Range
Planning, 30, pp. 184-196 (1997).

Case analysis of different green
alliances (specially including
U.S. ﬁrms)

‘Environmentalist’ alignment with government,
however, has thrust them in an adversarial
relationship with industry,
given businesses’ traditional view of government
policies as threats’

Partnerships between businesses and
environmental groups can be effective
strategies for integrating corporate
environmental responsibilities with
market goals.


Third, sincerely interested people with the ability to act in speciﬁc areas of environmental con-
cern are often sceptical about (or cannot understand) ﬁrms’ environmental claims. The complexity
of environmental problems and solutions demands extraordinary efforts of clarity on the part of
corporate communication. Perhaps more important, as far as the natural environment is con-
cerned, people trust environmental protection associations and scientists much more than they
trust business.10 Environmental disasters caused by industrial activities and associated communica-
tion ‘mistakes’ have contributed to this lack of trust (e.g. the Nestle problems with baby milk).

The case of PepsiCo (see Table 3) illustrates some of these problems well. The company’s efforts
to assert its environmental commitment have failed to persuade the wide spectrum of the popula-
tion worried about genetically modiﬁed products (GMPs). The company has used its expertise to
illustrate some important environmental progress it has made; but more environmentally sensitive
stakeholders look sceptically at the ﬁrm’s claims about such progress, knowing that the company is
‘hiding’ its use of GMPs.

It is not easy for ﬁrms to manage stakeholder communication given the complexity of environ-
mental problems. The best way to achieve trust would be to offer clear, precise and well-referenced
information on the environmental advantages of a ﬁrm’s products or processes. The so-called ‘eco-
labels’ were originally devoted to this aim - however, the abundance, geographical fragmentation
and different meanings of eco-labelling nowadays has undermined their proper working. Externally
validated objective information is also supposed to be a tool for achieving clearer and more trusting
relationships between companies and stakeholders. For instance, the EU has recently implemented
the European Pollutant Emission Register (EPER), which includes data on ﬁfty pollutants from
around 10,000 large and medium-sized industrial facilities, justifying its utility as follows: ‘Citizens
can ﬁnd about the emissions from industrial facilities in their neighbourhood and compare (.). This
empowers people to ask serious questions, and engage in discussions, about reducing these emissions.’

Myth 2: Environmental Industries and Investments Are Growing Rapidly
Environmental industries have been deﬁned as those involved with the protection and preservation
of the natural environment. Their activities include: protection of ambient air and climate; waste
and wastewater management; protection and recovery of soil and ground and surface water; noise
and vibration abatement; protection against radiation and selling environmentally friendly con-
sumer products.11 The U.S. Census Bureau estimated expenditures of US$6,111 million for pollu-
tion abatement and control in 1999; but unfortunately changes in deﬁnitions and methods mean
this data cannot be compared to earlier years (when, for instance, the Bureau reported the 1994
expenditure ﬁgure as US$14,778 million).12

Many reports have expressed positive expectations for business activities related to preservation
of the natural environment, and Russo has proposed a simple framework that uses natural capital
site speciﬁcity and institutional environment to predict which sustainable industries would enjoy
growth in coming decades.13 According to Porter’s well-known arguments, the analysis of economic
growth is one of the most important steps in the ‘scan phase’ of the strategic process.

The food industry includes one of the most visible examples of an environmental product: or-
ganic food. The organic food industry proﬁle in the United States in 2003 from Datamonitor, a lead-
ing business information company specializing in industry analysis, is one of the most ambitious
and detailed reports available on the topic. It reports the organic food market as growing by
19.6 percent in 2002 to reach a value of US$11,350 million. Such data is generally viewed as highly
positive and as indicating an optimistic future for environmental activities.

However, we highlight three points of caution. First, the ‘environmental sector’ consists of multiple
heterogeneous activities related in some way to the natural environment, which are often integrated
into different ofﬁcial categories (such as services to business, chemicals, forestry, and so on). Analysis
should begin by deﬁning which activities are being included, and estimates of environmental sector
beneﬁts might then vary for different studies and methodologies (e.g. the effect of methodological
changes on the U.S. Census Bureau estimates as noted above). Unlike other analyses, Datamonitor
notes that its estimation of the organic market does not include ‘green food’ (food produced with

364

Proactive Corporate Environmental Strategies


Table 3. Case analysis: PepsiCo, environment and relationships with stakeholders

Firm Proﬁle:

Firm efforts:

Firm problems:

PepsiCo is among the world’s largest food and beverage companies. Its businesses
include popular ﬁrms such as Frito-Lay (snack chips), Pepsi-Cola (beverage company),
Tropicana (producer of branded juice), Gatorade (the world’s leading sports drink) and
Quaker (manufactures and marketer of grain-based products).
The corporate webpage (www.pepsi.com) offers a long report about the environmental
commitment and programs of the different companies. Among others, they mention its policy
regarding agro-materials: ‘application of environmentally sound agricultural practices with its
suppliers of agro-materials’. The company also reports PepsiCo’s Community Affairs as
devoting speciﬁc attention to encouraging and supporting employees in their efforts to
volunteer with community projects.
PR Watch (www.prwatch.org) is a quarterly publication of the Center for Media
& Democracy dedicated to investigative reporting on the public relations industry. PR
Watch reported in September 2002 that PepsiCo is one of the companies integrating
a coalition to defeat a November ballot initiative in Oregon requiring labels for genetically
modiﬁed foods in that state. This coalition planned to spend $6 million and has already
raised at least $4.6 million from coalition companies. The citizens’ movement pushing for
labelling of genetically modiﬁed foods included PepsiCo as one of the companies most
active in ﬁghting against its environmental views.

Source: Our own selection from www.pepsi.com and www.prwatch.org

few chemicals), but only ‘organic food’ (products ‘independently certiﬁed to have been grown free of
chemicals’): however, the report does not deﬁne exactly what ‘independently certiﬁed’ means.

environmental ‘progress’ can easily be overstated. large percentage

increases can often mean only moderate absolute growth.

Second, it is often argued that increased environmental investment by regions and organisations
is a very positive indicator of environmental activities’ evolution all round the world. It is important
here to clarify that environmental investments are sometimes mixed up with environmental expen-
ditures, although the two have different objectives. It is also important to remember that environ-
mental ‘progress’ can easily be overstated; particularly when initial ﬁgures were very low, apparently
large percentage increases may often mean only a moderate growth in absolute terms. Table 4
illustrates this point. While organic food sales grew by a massive 56.75% over the two years
1999-2001, as opposed to the whole food industry growth ﬁgure of 5.96%, the absolute increase
in the organic sector only amounted to US$3,437 million, still only a small share of the total
food sector growth of US$25,386 million. Thus in each of the two years, despite rapid growth in
organic food, the absolute difference between the two results continued to grow relentlessly.

Third, it is important to keep in mind that the processes involved in producing environmental sec-
tor products and services may not themselves contribute towards eco-sustainability. Thus the
manufacturing of ﬁlters to clean air in pipes is well accepted as an environmental activity; however
manufacturers and buyers of such ﬁlters may d or may not d actually exhibit good environmental
management at their facilities. And large-scale organic food production may not only involve signif-
icant transport or waste emissions, but may also risk marginalizing smaller established producers.

processes involved in producing environmental sector products and

services may not themselves contribute towards eco-sustainability.

Long Range Planning, vol 40

2007

365


Table 4. Food and Organic Food Markets in the United States: Relative and Absolute Increases

Total (millions $US dollars)

Percentage increase

Absolute increase (millions $US dollars)

Food industry Organic food Food industry Organic Food Food industry Organic Food Difference

1999 426,000
2000 435,230
2001 451,386

6,056
7,761
9,493

2.17
3.71

28.15
22.32

9,230
16,156

1,705
1,732

7,525
14,424

Sources: U.S. Department of Commerce-Bureau of the Census (2004) for the food industry. Datamonitor (2003) for the organic
data

To sum up, the environmental sector is an important emergent business area involving many
ﬁrms. Progress in this sector may ease environmental management for many other ﬁrms and in-
crease interest in environmental matters. However, data from the environmental business sector
has to be interpreted cautiously, especially because continued effort is still needed to make it
both reliable and internationally comparable. In addition, it is important to distinguish between
environmental investments and expenditures, and between rates of growth and absolute growth.

Selection and Implementation

Myth 3: Environmental Management Standards Certification (e.g. ISO 14001)
is a Reliable Basis for Differentiation
Several researchers have suggested that ﬁrms should use environmental certiﬁcation to develop pro-
active environmental strategies and thereby gain differentiation.14 Environmental standards have
been designed by both governmental and nongovernmental actors to create patterns of voluntary
environmental practices to facilitate systematic environmental management. Examples include
the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), the CERES or Valdez Principles, the FSC Forest Product Cer-
tiﬁcation, the Eco-management and Audit Scheme (EMAS), and ISO 14001. The number of envi-
ronmental standards has grown enormously in recent years - in the United States, for instance,
there are 100 separate federal environmental statutes, as well as many other environmental laws
at state level and an undetermined number of professional and private standards.15

ISO 14001 and EMAS are probably among the best-known certiﬁcation schemes, and we focus this
section mainly on four problems with them, as most other regimes face similar problems.16 We begin
with a brief description of each standard. In September 1996 the International Organisation for
Standardisation introduced ISO 14001, probably the world’s most widely implemented environmen-
tal standard, as a guide to implementing environmental management systems. The number of ﬁrms
receiving ISO 14001 certiﬁcates in 2003 was the largest recorded so far, with over 66,070 certiﬁcates
being issued in 113 countries, representing a 34 percent increase over 2002.17 EMAS has been available
for participation by companies since 1995, and while originally restricted to industrial sites, has been
open to all economic sectors and public or private organizations since 2001. Although managed by the
European Commission, participation in the scheme is voluntary and extends to organisations oper-
ating in the EU, countries preparing for accession and the European Economic Area. In 2005 EMAS
certiﬁcates were issued to 4,275 sites involving 3,174 organizations.18

Academic research has begun to show evidence of some problematic implications of environ-
mental certiﬁcation. Tenbrunsel et al. report that adhering to the letter of a standard matters
more to managers than achieving the ends behind the standard.19 We illustrate our own discussion
of operational problems with a short case analysis of Del Monte Fresh Produce (see Table 5), one of
the food industry’s biggest multinational corporations. We also note evidence of a non-signiﬁcant
relationship between emissions and EMAS-certiﬁed environmental management systems.

366

Proactive Corporate Environmental Strategies


Table 5. Case Analysis: Del Monte and the ISO 14001 environmental management system

Firm proﬁle:

Firm efforts:

Firm problems:

Del Monte Fresh Produce is one of the world’s leading vertically integrated producers
and marketers of fresh and fresh-cut produce, with more than 25,000 employees
and a presence in more than 50 countries. The company is one of the biggest
multinationals in the food industry, and one of three (with Chiquita and Dole)
dominating the world trade in bananas and pineapples.
Tropical plantations have a bad image for environmental dangers, accidents
and violence. According to a report in Ethical Consumer (www.ethicalconsumer.org),
half of all work-related accidents in Costa Rica during 1997 occurred on banana
plantations, mostly due to pesticide poisoning. Del Monte Fresh has tried to show
commitment to solving these problems, and has achieved environmental certiﬁcation
for several of its operations (www.freshdelmonte.com). According to the Del Monte web
page Costa Rican Fresh Pineapple Operations was the ﬁrst pineapple operation in the world
to be awarded an ISO 14001 certiﬁcation, while Guatemalan Fresh Banana Operations is
that country’s only ISO 14001 certiﬁed company. The United Registrar for ISO certiﬁcation
is Bureau Veritas Quality International (BVQI), an ISO third party auditing in more
than 60 countries.
Several popular activist web pages (e.g. www.corpwatch.org) are sceptical of the
company’s new ISO 14001 certiﬁcates, pointing out that during the 1990’s Del
Monte have been linked to violence against banana workers, and that these workers
are often affected by chemicals in packing plants and in the ﬁeld. They have no conﬁdence
in ISO 14001, because of the company’s lack of transparency about its real environmental
performance. Michael Jessen (AlterNet, 2001) accuses the companies in the industry of
a ‘‘greenwashing corporate crime’’, while Marilyn B. Snell (Sierra Club Magazine, 2002,
March) heavily criticizes the ﬁrm’s operation in Costa Rica, stating that ISO 14001 has
not addressed fundamental environmental issues.

Source: Del Monte Fresh Produce (www.freshdelmonte.com), CorpWatch (e.g. www.corpwatch.org), and Sierra Club Magazine
(2002, March)

First, while Del Monte Fresh e in common with other producers - has tried to show commit-
ment and achieve differentiation by gaining environmental certiﬁcation, it is important to note
that ISO 14001 does not guarantee any speciﬁc environmental performance record. In reality,
the standard only guarantees that ﬁrms are using a consistent environmental management process
(i.e. means proposals), without requiring any speciﬁc environmental outputs (i.e. ends proposals).
Thus ﬁrms with ISO 14001 certiﬁcation may still have environmental performance that is below
average for their sector. Indeed, as ISO 14001 certiﬁcation demands serious commitment to meeting
legal requirements, but does not require that ﬁrms actually do so, ﬁrms may be certiﬁcated while
still not even conforming to local environmental laws.

firms may be ISO 14001 certificated while having environmental

performance below average for their sector, and without even

conforming to local environmental laws.

Even certiﬁcation with a more stringent standard (such as EMAS) that does demand meeting
legal requirements does not necessarily indicate good environmental performance. For instance,
our sample of the full list of the 140 food factories in the UK and France which are included in
the EPER database because of their potential for environmental impact includes only one with

Long Range Planning, vol 40

2007

367


EMAS certiﬁcation. This is surprising, as we might have expected that bigger Europe food ﬁrms
would be more interested in gaining environmental certiﬁcation. Our analysis also shows no statis-
tically signiﬁcant difference for ‘Total Organic Carbon’ emissions between the certiﬁed ﬁrm and
those without certiﬁcation, underlining how even a certiﬁed process may not have the automatic
relationship with real environmental impact one might expect.

From a second aspect, environmental activist groups have often criticized ISO 14001 for its lack
of transparency, which makes it difﬁcult for an external agent to know whether a certiﬁed ﬁrm is
actually improving its environmental impact. ISO 14001 does not demand public information as to
environmental performance, but only on the general principles of a ﬁrm’s environmental policy.
Corporate watchers of Del Monte, which is proud of its ISO certiﬁcation, are especially critical
of the ﬁrm’s lack of transparency about its real environmental performance. In contrast (to
some extent) while EMAS certiﬁcation also involves commitment rather than results, the standard
does demand certiﬁed ﬁrms make full and open reports of their environmental situation.

Third, there has been criticism about the transparency of the process of obtaining ISO 14001.
While most serious companies displaying ISO 14001 certiﬁcates use accredited veriﬁers, certiﬁca-
tion through non-accredited veriﬁers e and even self-certiﬁcation - are possible. In addition,
many accredited veriﬁers also have simultaneous interests in consulting on the environmental cer-
tiﬁcation process. For instance, Bureau Veritas Quality International (BVQI), an accredited veriﬁer
(working, among others, for Del Monte) is the independent certiﬁcation body of Bureau Veritas, an
international company which delivers technical consulting services in the quality, safety, environ-
mental and information systems ﬁelds. Such institutional closeness of the consulting and certifying
processes is both common and valid in the ISO world, but we would argue that it can also imply
some ethical and credibility problems. And, of course, the highly competitive market implies the
possibility that some veriﬁers might feel encouraged to ‘ease the way’ towards certiﬁcation for po-
tential customers.

Finally, both ISO 14001 and EMAS are voluntary standards, and all markets may not be equally
familiar with the certiﬁcation involved. This can lead to an uncomfortable ‘no-win’ situation: the
paradox that people unfamiliar with such certiﬁcation probably won’t regard it as very important,
while on the other hand, those more environmentally sensitive customers who are familiar with the
standards concerned are becoming ever-more conscious of the criticisms they are attracting, and
thus becoming more, rather than less, mistrustful of both the certiﬁed companies and the certiﬁ-
cation process itself.

To sum up, we do not agree with rejecting environmental standards altogether, as even imprecise
standards may be better than none at all. However, ﬁrms seriously committed to environmental
improvement need to be able to appeal to exigent standards which are clear and well publicized.
The possibility of a ﬁrm using accreditation to a standard as a source of differentiation depends
on the interest and conﬁdence of stakeholders (especially customers) in the particular certiﬁcation.
Sadly, our opinion has to be that standards of sufﬁcient credibility are scarce (if any), and that their
abundance generates difﬁculties in distinguishing the serious efforts.

Myth 4: Ecoefficient Activities are a Consistent Way of Gaining Cost Advantage
Early analyses of corporate environmental progress often argued that it implied high costs for
ﬁrms.20 Nowadays, analysts more often highlight the ‘win-win’ possibility of simultaneously
advancing environmentally while reducing costs (for instance, of water, energy or raw materials):
simply reducing consumption of natural resources is characterised as an ‘ecoefﬁcient’ activity
that affects both the natural environment and ﬁnancial performance positively.21

The OECD, U.S. government, European Environment Agency and World Business Council
for Sustainable Development (WBCSD) have all announced explicit support for the ecoefﬁ-
ciency approach.22 Outputs over inputs, the traditional ratio measuring a ﬁrm’s efﬁciency,
has gained importance as a good proxy for corporate environmental performance, which is as-
sumed to be better when a speciﬁc output level is obtained with reduced inputs. However,
management based on ecoefﬁciency ratios can face several problems: four of the most relevant,

368

Proactive Corporate Environmental Strategies


in terms of their apparently paradoxical results for research or for managerial practice, are out-
lined below.

First, polluting companies may not be able to curtail their adverse environmental impacts with-
out losing efﬁciency. If their current operation involves producing negative externalities, internal-
ising these costs will risk harming their proﬁtability. Such externalities occur when economic
decisions impose costs or offer beneﬁts to people other than the economic decision makers.
Thus a ﬁrm contaminating a river generates a negative externality when the costs of recuperation
of the river, its ﬁsh, scenic amenity etc., as well as of any health problems associated with drinking
or swimming in the water, are fully not covered by the ﬁrm, but fall to the local citizens (via their
regional government). Even when such a ﬁrm pays penalties, they will often be less than the total
damage. A situation where a factory in one country outputs polluting smoke which then affects cit-
izens in other countries offers a more extreme example e those adversely affected would be ex-
tremely unlikely to receive recompense from the polluting ﬁrm, either via negotiation or
through penalties.

citizens affected by polluting smoke from a factory in another country

are extremely unlikely to receive recompense

Efﬁciency improvements might only provide a ﬁnancial payoff when market or legal restrictions
exist to provide that such external costs of their operations are fully internalised into ﬁrms’ bud-
gets.23 As noted above (see Myth 1), this will involve a serious collective effort towards designing
markets to be fully responsive to the eco-efﬁciency context. A further major step would be required
to ensure that those ﬁrms that improve the environment for society are also able to obtain cost ad-
vantages over those generating environmental damage.

The second point complements the ﬁrst. As suppliers do not always assume their own social
costs, few prices properly reﬂect the non-sustainability of the consumption of non-renewable re-
sources. For instance, using plastic for food packaging has more environmental impact than using
recycled plastic or recycled paper - yet the prices of all these types of packaging to food companies
are often similar.

Table 6 illustrates products and prices from two leading U.K. packaging ﬁrms, and reveals com-
plete pricing inconsistency. In the current state of the market, popular wisdom might expect that,
while recycled goods should be cheaper, actually non-recycled goods are. However, this simple logic
is confounded by these ﬁgures, which show that while non-recycled plastic bags are cheaper than
recycled plastic bags, non-recycled paper bags are more expensive than eco-friendly recycled paper
bags. Nor is there any logic in the sense of either supplier being cheaper all round. The table reveals
a chaotic market - or perhaps more accurately one in state of ﬂux - where products substantially less
favourable to the environment can still be offered in the market at lower prices (maybe because
customers don’t care enough about the environmental arguments), but where, as the recycled paper
bag prices show, breaking the expected logic is also possible, implying that some customers do care,
and perhaps some businesses are beginning to respond.

In more general terms, where market prices do not include environmental aspects, ﬁrms using
non-renewable and renewable materials may have similar efﬁciency ratings, even though their en-
vironmental impacts are very different: this is clearly nonsensical. Charging for the social costs of
environmentally dangerous supplies is a prerequisite of accurate ecoefﬁciency indicators, of the
kind that might serve integrated efforts towards sustainability policies, and earn the trust of eco-
commentators.

Third, it is important to note that it is not possible to use ecoefﬁciency ratios to compare
heterogeneous activities, as different activities offer different ranges of efﬁciency opportunities.
For example, in general terms, a service organisation is more efﬁcient than a manufacturing

Long Range Planning, vol 40

2007

369


Table 6. Environmental impacts and prices of packaging

Supplier

Size (cm.)

Environmental
characteristics

Unit price (£)

Plastic Carrier Bags
Recycled Vest Plastic
Carrier Bags
Vest Plastic Carrier Bags

Paper Carrier Bags:
White Kraft Paper Bags

Rose Packaging

28*41*51

AC Packaging

28*41*51

Made from a recycled
ﬁlm.
Unknown

Rose Packaging

18*18

0.0169e0.0199

0.0069

0.0069

0.0083

Made from a recycled
white Kraft paper. 50p
from each product pur-
chase to be donated to
TreeAid to help plant
trees in Africa (box of 50
or box of 500).
Unknown

White Paper Bags

AC Packaging

18*18

Sources: http://www.rosepackaging.co.uk and http://www.acpackaging.co.uk/. 2006-01-23

ﬁrm; however the ecoefﬁciency comparatives are only relevant for companies developing similar or
substitutable products or services.

Fourth, from a resource-based view, implementation of ecoefﬁcient practices may not be always
positively related to performance. Hart has argued in his ‘natural resourceebased view of the ﬁrm’ that
ﬁrms with proactive environmental strategies generate valuable organisational capabilities that may
contribute to competitive advantage.24 Ecoefﬁcient practices are usually deﬁned as any legal practices
that simultaneously save costs and improve the natural environment. But to limit the deﬁnition thus
may indirectly prevent the generation of organisational capabilities positively related to perfor-
mance, for instance by deterring innovation in the search for new solutions. Viewed from a
resource-based perspective, a broader deﬁnition of what such practices might include would help
differentiate between a capability that is speciﬁc to a particular function and time, and a dynamic
capability that can be a means to systematically integrate the demands of the ﬁrm and environment.
Therefore, a more global and systematic approach to ecoefﬁciency might yield more dynamic
effects on performance than the simple types of ecoefﬁcient practices usually implemented. Limited
ecoefﬁciency behaviours are more likely to occur in many ﬁrms that develop isolated environmental
measures.

Control and Performance Outcomes

Myth 5: Waste-Recycling Rates are Good Indexes of Corporate Environmental Progress
The implementation of any strategy demands developing consistent, accurate and visible indexes if
ﬁrms are to be able to guarantee real progress. Those monitoring environmental management im-
plementation often pay special attention to the amount of waste a ﬁrm recycles, with increases usu-
ally being interpreted as advances in environmental performance.25 However a proactive
environmental strategy may have little to do with this index for three reasons.

while recycling rates have significantly increased, absolute amounts of

non-recycled waste paper and cardboard continue to rise.

370

Proactive Corporate Environmental Strategies


First, it is important to note that recycling may increase simply because more waste is being
generated, and thus there is more material available to recycle. Even if the percentage of waste
that is recycled grows, the bigger recycled percentage may still disguise the fact that, if the total
amount of waste increases, so may the absolute amount that goes without being recycled. Table 7
illustrates this apparent paradox. The food industry is a heavy consumer of packaging, and the
paper and cardboard widely used have been successfully integrated into recycling programs. How-
ever, while recycling rates have signiﬁcantly increased, the U.K. has seen absolute amounts of
non-recycled waste paper and cardboard continue to rise. Population growth exacerbates the
problem, and can even cancel out the real progress that has been made in reduction of waste
per person.

Second, recycling processes are not always environmentally friendly, effective or either technically
or economically viable. Recycling certain compounds (especially plastics and derivatives) involves
heavy consumption of water and energy, and the process itself often generates polluting smokes and
efﬂuents. Selectively collecting waste, which is often deﬁned as ‘recycling,’ does not always imply
complete ‘real’ recycling of the materials involved. Again, consuming less and reusing more are
more environmentally friendly alternatives, and the onus for making important eco-choices is
not so much with customers’ decisions as to how to dispose of packaging, but with retailers deci-
sions as to how much packaging is used in the ﬁrst place.

How many offices are equipped with baskets for used paper to be

recycled, but without recycled paper available for use?

A third point links with this last: environmental analysis usually focuses on progress in recycling
and manufacturing, but all too often a company may have a positive stance as a generator of re-
cycled wastes while paying too little attention to having an equally responsible stance about buying
in the ﬁrst place. Jones has shown that half of the food in the United States goes to waste, involving
total losses of up to $100 billion per year, $20 billion occurring in the farm and processing sectors,
$30e40 billion in the retail sector and $40 billion in U.S. households. A proportion of this waste
might be ‘inevitable,’ but a large part of it could be avoided. (Paradoxically, as we have seen above,
much of this generated waste is probably selectively collected, increasing the statistics of the abso-
lute amount of recycled waste: again a situation where apparently positive measurements can be
disguising negative practices).

If recycling is not going to solve the ever-growing problem of societal waste, what strategy is
needed? The message is clear: more responsible consumption (i.e., less consumption and/or more
reutilization) may be signiﬁcantly more environmentally benign than increased recycling. Real
environmental progress will depend on ﬁrms as well as citizens using less raw and more recycled
materials in the ﬁrst place, concentrating more on cutting down their inputs than on recycling their
outputs. (How many readers, for instance, are working in ofﬁces equipped with baskets for used
paper to be recycled, but without recycled paper available for them to use in the ﬁrst place?)

Table 7. Waste and Recycling Rates in the U.K. for paper and cardboard

Paper waste
(kg per habitant)

Paper-recycling
rate (%)

Non-recycled waste
(kg per habitant)

Population
(million habitants)

Total Non-recycled
waste (million kg)

1990
1995
2000

136.30
181.30
207.20

33
35
41

91.32
117.85
122.25

57.24
58.02
58.89

5,227.16
6,837.66
7,199.30

Source: OECD Environmental Data (Compendium 2002) for paper waste and paper-recycling rate

Long Range Planning, vol 40

2007

371


Food companies have promoted important and highly publicized programs to encourage con-
sumers to recycle food packaging; but it would be more useful if they were themselves both buying
in recycled products for their packaging requirements, as well as using less packaging in overall
terms. To sum up, the evolution and checking of responsible guidelines for buying and consump-
tion may be more important than recycling rates in assessing environmental progress.

Myth 6: A Proactive Environmental Strategy improves a Company’s Financial Performance
We have noted that the introduction of environmental management into ﬁrms was made more dif-
ﬁcult because published work initially cautioned that broad implementation of proactive environ-
mental
strategies might be endanger corporations’ ﬁnancial performance. Porter’s works
popularised a completely different view, strongly proposing that stringent approaches to environ-
mental management could contribute to competitive advantage in multiple ways.26

Since Porter, most publications have conﬁrmed direct and positive links between proactive en-
vironmental strategy and ﬁnancial performance, often explained by the generation of organisational
capabilities through environmental practices (such as continuous innovation or stakeholder man-
agement) and social reputation and legitimisation.27 More recently, however, many works have
shown null or negative relationships between corporate environmental progress and performance,
as reviewed in Table 8. As these works (which are less numerous than those showing a positive re-
lationship) have yet not been completely analyzed, the reasons for those results remain unclear.

We believe that the very over-simplistic ‘one-size-ﬁts-all’ universality of the encouragements in
favour of developing (or not developing) a proactive environmental approach with a view to in-
creased ﬁnancial returns have both increased the confusion around this topic, and perhaps led
some ﬁrms towards disappointments which make them less inclined to reactivate their interest
in achieving a successful strategy. From our viewpoint, some ﬁrms may improve their ﬁnancial per-
formance thanks to progress in environmental management; but others may get better performance
by keeping their environmental activities to the legal minimum. Managers (or consultants) need to
perform in-depth SWOT analyses for each organisation before being able to make realistic prescrip-
tions for appropriate environmental management in terms of ﬁnancial proﬁtability.

We illustrate these comments with our own analysis of data from 140 factories of the French and
U.K. food industries. We have used two control variables of size (sales and employees), two perfor-
mance variables (ROI and ROE), and one environmental variable related to the most common pol-
lutant in the industry (organic carbon), and analysed the absolute and relative values of the
environmental variables. Table 9 shows that environmental progress is not related to ﬁnancial per-
formance for the sampled ﬁrms (more of the methodology is discussed in the Appendix). Case anal-
ysis would be necessary to show speciﬁc situations, as positive and negative inﬂuences each depend
on different sets of internal situations and external circumstances.28

For example, ﬁrms lacking environmentally qualiﬁed personnel will have difﬁculty reaching high
environmental performance standards. Lack of expertise will probably lead to wasted time and in-
efﬁciencies, tending to limit any major potential ﬁnancial returns from environmental progress, and
paying for external expertise will limit them further. Some organisations may ﬁnd more disadvan-
tages than advantages in trying to obtain excellence in the absence of productive, ﬁnancial or ex-
pertise resources.29 Even a well prepared organisation operating in a business environment that
is not sensitive to environmental progress, will ﬁnd its returns will be lower than they would be
if customers, suppliers and regulators actively supported environmental advances.

But the opposite situation is also possible. Wide segments of the business environment are
increasingly sensitivity to environmental issues, and employees and managers are now more tech-
nically qualiﬁed in these areas. In this context, ﬁrms introducing proactive environmental strategies
have the opportunity to secure competitive advantages through environmental progress.

We therefore propose a ‘contingent approach to corporate environmental management’, with
managers analysing their ﬁrm’s speciﬁc situation and socioeconomic environment in depth before
deciding the level of environmental progress they should aim at (while, obviously, always adhering
at least to minimum legal levels).30 While environmental progress will be ﬁnancially favourable for

372

Proactive Corporate Environmental Strategies


L
o
n
g
R
a
n
g
e

P
l
a
n
n
n
g
,

i

v
o

l

4
0

2
0
0
7

3
7
3

Table 8. Research background note: Some works finding a negative or null relationship between environmental and financial progresses

Citation

Data sources

Findings

Methodology:

Bansal, P. (2005): Evolving sustainability:
A longitudinal study of corporate sustainable
development’’, Strategic Management Journal,
26, pp. 197e218.
Wagner, M. & Schaltegger, S. (2004): ‘‘The
effect of corporate environmental strategy
choice and environmental performance on
competitiveness and economic performance:
An empirical study of EU manufacturing’’,
European Management Journal, 22, pp. 557e572.
Thornton, D., Kagan, R.A., Gunningham, N.
(2003): ‘‘Sources of corporate environmental
performance’’, California Management Review,
46, 1, pp. 127e141.
Wagner, M., Van Phu, N., Azomahou, T.,
Whermeyer, W. (2002): ‘‘The relationship
between the environmental and economic
performance of ﬁrms: An empirical analysis
of the European paper industry’’, Corporate
Social-Responsibility and Environmental
Management, 9, pp. 133e146.
Gilley, K., Worell, D., El-Jelly, A. (2000):
Corporate environmental initiatives and
anticipated ﬁrm performance’’, Journal
of Management, 26, pp. 1199e1216.

45 forestry, mining, oil and
gas ﬁrms in Canada

Negative link between ﬁnancial performance
as control variable and sustainable corporate
development

Time series cross-sectional
data analysis techniques

Industrial sector including 135 ﬁrms
in U.K. and 166 in Germany

The degree of shareholder value-oriented
strategies in the ﬁrm inﬂuences the potential
for positive, negative or neutral relationship

Regression analysis based
on a survey

14 ﬁrms in the paper industry in
Canada, Australia, New Zealand
and USA

Differences in ﬁrms’ environmental performance
were not consistently correlated with proﬁtability
or sales of the parent corporation.

Case analyses

37 ﬁrms in the paper industry in
German, Italy, UK and the
Netherlands

Evidence of a trade-off between return on capital
employed and environmental performance.

Simultaneous equation
framework based on a survey

71 corporate environmental
initiative announcements

No overall effect of announced environmental
initiatives on stock returns.

Event study methodology.


Table 9. Descriptive statistics and correlations

1. No. of
employees

2. Sales (Vk) 3. ROI

4. ROE

5. TOC 6. TOC/

Employees

7. TOC/
Sales

Means
Standard
Deviations
N
Correlations

1326
2819.630

287420.80
424118.5

5.434
10.722

22.450
118.07

378.03
713.610

4.959
19.840

0.147
0.621

140
1

87

140

.879(**)

.088

140
 .019

86

86
 .086  .115

41
 .176

1. No. of
employees

3. ROI

4. ROE

2. Sales (Vk)

P
Correlations
.879(**)
P
.000
Correlations
.088
P
.301
Correlations  .019
P
.822
Correlations  .086
.430
P
6. TOC/EmployeesCorrelations  .115
P
.292
Correlations  .176
.270
P

7. TOC/Sales

5. TOC

.000

1

.307(**)
.004
.181
.093
.081
.616
 .235
.139
 .188
.240

.301
.307(**)
.004

1

.194(*)
.022
.032
.767
.139
.202
.255
.108

.822
.181
.093
.194(*)
.022
1

 .046
.671
 .006
.955
.000
1.000

.430
.292
.081  .235
.139
.616
.139
.032
.767
.202
 .046  .006
.955
.671
.229(*)
.034

1

.229(*) 1
.034
.045
.780

.936(**) 1
.000

.270
 .188
.240
.255
.108
.000
1.000
.045
.780
.936(**)
.000

(*)p<0,05; (**)p<0,01*TOC (Total Organic Carbon): the most common pollutant in the sampled factories, the organic
(carbon-containing) substances in natural waters

many ﬁrms, including some not yet obtaining its advantages, others may have no ﬁnancial incen-
tives to progress beyond the legal standard.

While environmental progress will be financially favourable for many

firms, others may have no financial incentives to progress beyond legal

standards.

However, despite our recommendation that ﬁrms’ environmental management ambitions should
be realistic to their management capabilities and operating environments, we are also of the view
that there are over-riding arguments concerning the responsibility of both ﬁrms and individuals for
promoting the continued health of the world environment. Thus meeting its ethical and social re-
sponsibility should be a ‘plus’ of environmental sensitivity for any ﬁrm, even if such progress is not
related to immediate or direct improvements in ﬁnancial performance.

Conclusions and the Future:

How Dynamic Capability can make Proactive Environmental Strategies effective
Environmental problems are real and urgent for our planet. The ﬁnancial, managerial and compet-
itive implications of a sustainable view must be analysed because ﬁrms have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence
on those problems.31 Three factors are forceful in pushing corporate environmental progress: pres-
sures from society (especially legal pressures); the sense of social responsibility in ﬁrms and of

374

Proactive Corporate Environmental Strategies


ethical responsibility amongst executives; and business opportunities emerging from proactive en-
vironmental strategies. Business opportunities have been identiﬁed both inside ﬁrms (generating
useful organisational capabilities such as continuous innovation, employee motivation and stake-
holder management) and beyond (obtaining a good reputation with customers, suppliers or
authorities).

These factors are acting together to push managers towards considerably extending environmen-
tal developments. However, the speed of the process, the technical and scientiﬁc complexity of the
variables involved, and the variety of interest groups advocating their own environmental concerns
have often generated misunderstandings about trying to delimit and implement proactive environ-
mental strategies. The resultant oversimpliﬁcations and the strengths of interested views mean prac-
tices have expanded, but sometimes with doubtful implications for real improvements, in either
environmental or ﬁnancial terms. This situation has generated some degree of frustration about
corporate environmental management both among managers and in society at large.

Implications from the study: Issues for researchers
This article contributes to reinforce the natural resource-based view, suggesting that an integrated
way of dealing with the natural environment will in the end generate a dynamic capability of pro-
active environmental strategy that ‘although idiosyncratic to ﬁrms in their details and path dependent
in their emergence, has signiﬁcant commonality in the form of best practices across ﬁrms.’32 A proactive
strategy to manage the business/natural environment interface must have dynamic capability char-
acteristics to enable the organisation to align itself with changes in its general business environment.
We strongly advise avoiding the temptation to apply general prescriptions to the analysis of
environmental strategies, and recommend using a contingent lens instead. Improving corporate
environmental performance is urgent for a sustainable world, but environmental management de-
mands a speciﬁc analysis of each ﬁrm and its business and general context. From a strategic point of
view, it is important to highlight the parallelism between a ﬁrm’s environmental strategy process
and its general business strategy process. Figure 1 summarises some of the main proposals in
this article using an integrated strategic framework.

For the future, it will be important to analyse how different dimensions of the general and busi-
ness environment - especially legal, social and commercial dimensions - can provide guidelines and
sustainable development. Research should also analyse whether an
rewards

for ﬁrms’

The strategic process:

GENERAL

and

BUSINESS ANALYSIS 

The facts:

The myths (risks):

SELECTION

and

IMPLEMENTATION

The facts:

CONTROL and
 PERFORMANCE

 CONSEQU

M1:

Corporate

stakeholders are

increasingly

sensitive to firms’
progress in the

field

M2:

Environmental
industries and
investments
are growing

rapidly

M3:

Environmental
certification is a
coherent way to
get differentiation

M4:

Ecoefficiency is a
consistent way to

get cost
advantage

M5:

Waste-

recycling rates

are good

indicators of
environmental
progresses

M6:

Proactive

environmental

strategies improve

financial

performance

Our proposals:

P1: Corporate environmental
strategy must be based on
contingent situations of the

general and business

environment

P2: There are several

environmental approaches
available for any firm (from

proactive to reactive).

P3: The corporate environmental

strategy must be based on

internal resources and capabilities

P4: A effective environmntal

strategy must reduce

environmentalimpacts of the firm
and may positively affect financial

performance (or not)

Figure 1. The strategic process of the corporate environmental management: Risks and propositions for
scholars

Long Range Planning, vol 40

2007

375


environmentally proactive strategy is desirable in order to allow managers to meet their own ethical
responsibilities and fulﬁl their ﬁrm’s corporate social responsibility, even if no direct ﬁnancial im-
provements are involved.

Implications from the study: Issues for managers
A key implication of this article for practitioners is that a rigorous analysis of a ﬁrm’s general en-
vironment is an important ﬁrst step for gaining a better understanding of stakeholder interests and
views. We suggest that managers must be aware that there are no ‘off-the-shelf’ answers, and pay
very special attention to both external context and internal situation before making individualized
decisions about environmental approach. They will also need to be realistic in assessing the re-
sources and abilities at their disposal.

managers must be aware there are no ‘off-the-shelf’ answers [and

should make] individualized decisions according to their external

context and internal situation.

Accounting of environmental costs and investments needs to be thorough, with the efﬁciency
aim of using the latter to reduce the former. Generation and selection of environmental strategies
should begin with avoiding the simplistic analysis of ISO 14001 certiﬁcation and efﬁciency indica-
tors. While such tools can indicate a ﬁrm’s environmental approach and simultaneously shape its
environmental reputation, they also have serious limitations if applied alone. A successful and pro-
active environmental strategy requires a systemic integration of environmental dimensions into
a ﬁrm’s functional departments: the development of organisational capabilities based on environ-
mental proactivity are signiﬁcantly more important than external signals of progress.

1. There are no single environmental answers suitable for every firm. Your firm needs an 

individualized approach

2. Check your internal resources (if any) for implementing a proactive environmental

strategy. If you have (or can develop) appropriate abilities, almost everything is possible. 

3. Try to get a consistent picture of your stakeholders’ interests in your environmental 

improvement process 

4. Pay close attention to the proper delimitation (and accounting) of environmental costs 
and environmental investments. Your aim should be to eliminate environmental costs 
using efficient environmental investments.

5. Environmental certification (e.g. ISO 14001) may be an environmental tool, but its 

usefulness can be problem if certification becomes the objective in itself. Adhering to
environmental standards should benefit your firm in terms of process implementation,
and not just as marketing label.

6. Environmental proactivity requires a fully controlled approach covering different 

dimensions, including short and long-term performance consequences. 

7. Proactive strategies may definitely pay. However, being green is an ethic choice even

if you do not make money with it. 

Figure 2. Seven basic principles for implementing environmental strategies: Implications for managers

376

Proactive Corporate Environmental Strategies


It may seem that reacting to basic legal environmental requirements may be the only options for
ﬁrms with a limited range of organisational compatibilities, or those facing external pressures to
avoid paying attention to the natural environment. Managers may feel that, in their speciﬁc oper-
ating or market contexts, such strategies are unlikely to pay ﬁnancial dividends. But managers are
also citizens, and should be aware that moves towards eco-sustainability may still make sense in the
global and ethical perspective. Figure 2 summarizes seven basic implications of our article for
managers.

Conclusions and Implications for the Future.
This article has contributed to the debate about the potential contribution of business towards
planetary sustainability by identifying and describing how common practices and ideas generate
myths and misunderstandings in the analysis and implementation of proactive environmental strat-
egies. We have proposed a framework which includes these diverse problems in a simpliﬁed model
of three categories related to different aspects of the strategic process: general and business analysis,
selection and implementation of environmental strategies, and control and consequences for per-
formance. This analysis provides speciﬁc guidelines for avoiding these problems in the future, as
well as advancing research through its emphases on the importance of generating a dynamic capa-
bility of proactive environmental strategy, and on the contingent analysis of corporate environmen-
tal management.

Our society needs to do more to preserve its planet from destruction. The challenge for man-
agers is to measure ‘real’ outputs by generating precise indexes of progress that are more devel-
opmental than traditional simplistic recycled waste rates. All these circumstances suggest that
sincere approaches to corporate environmental progress will be more sustainable in the long
term (even in ﬁnancial terms), will lead to a greater understanding of what constitutes ‘worth-
while’ progress and will be more likely to increase levels of trust between business and society,
than those focused on short-term visibility. While recognizing that some ﬁrms (in Ansoff and
McDonnell’s terminology) will be only able to be ‘reactive’ or ‘stable’
in their corporate
environmental progresses, if ‘real’ environmental progress is to be made, we will need ﬁrms
they describe as ‘anticipatory’,
‘entrepreneurial’ and ‘creative’ to anticipate requirements, and
especially to lead the process of change.

if ‘real’ progress is to be made, we need ‘entrepreneurial’ and ‘creative’

firms to anticipate requirements and lead the process of change.

Finally, on a broader public level, we point in a more explicit manner to some elements of our
paper as being fundamental indicators of a stance business, markets and society must begin to
adopt if our future is not going to become impossible to contemplate:
 The overarching need to take the ethical responsibility for saving the planet seriously;
 the need to rein in destructive levels of over-consumption;
 the need to make sure we don’t celebrate small ‘rate’ victories while losing the war as far as
 the need for clear and well-publicized environmental standards which measure actual output
progress, rather than asserted process intentions, so that they may command respect from all
parties, and for stakeholders to convince business that adherence to such standards is important
as part of a ﬁrm’s ethical rather than its marketing stance;
 the need to internalise environmental costs so that markets make some sense - damaging prod-

absolute ﬁgures are concerned;

ucts and processes must be more expensive, not less;

Long Range Planning, vol 40

2007

377


directing business policies and strategies;

in their calculations, rather than leaving the responsibility to their customers;

 the need to allow the ‘ought’ argument to challenge the traditional ‘proﬁt’ stance in terms of
 the need for ﬁrms to lead in rebuilding business/society trust by including the ethical dimension
 the need to establish patterns of responsible buying as well as responsible disposal;
 and, above all e indeed this might stand as a one-line abstract for our whole paper - the need for
both business and society to begin to measure real progress, rather than just adhering to mythical
indices.

business and society must begin to measure real progress, rather than

adhering to mythical indices.

Acknowledgement
We should like to thank our three anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments on earlier
drafts of this article. We are particularly indebted to the editor, Charles Baden-Fuller, for his
encouragement and for his detailed, perceptive and constructive criticism which has proved espe-
cially useful in helping us improve on our original submission. The authors thank BBVA Founda-
tion, Erasmus Research Institute of Management (ERIM), and the Spanish Ministry of Industry
(project SEC 2003-07755) for providing partial funding for this research.

Appendix.

Analysis Methodology
Our analyses of the 140 food factories in France and U.K. uses data from the Amadeus Database
(including the ﬁnancial data of main ﬁrms in Europe) and data on objective emissions from the
European Pollutant Emission Register database. The EPER contains data on the main pollutant
emissions to air and water (covering ﬁfty pollutants) reported by around 10,000 large and me-
dium-sized industrial facilities in the 15 EU Member States, Hungary and Norway.

Our sampled ﬁrms include all those ﬁrms in the EPER database with facilities in category 6.4
(slaughterhouses (>50t/d), plants for the production of milk (>200t/d), other animal raw materials
(>75t/d) or vegetable raw materials (>300t/d)) in France and the U. K. Not all industrial plants are
considered for EPER reporting e only those activities listed in the EPER Decision are included (i.e.
those which are supposed to be more polluting in general terms) - and each facility must include
data for each speciﬁc pollutant where threshold values are exceeded. The threshold values have been
chosen in order to include about 90% of the emissions of the industrial facilities. The quality of the
EPER emissions data has been checked at local, regional and national level before the data were in-
cluded in the register.

We focused our attention in the registered emissions of ‘Total Organic Carbon’ (TOC), the most
common pollutant in the sampled factories. TOC includes the organic (carbon-containing) sub-
stances in waters. For each facility, we also ﬁnd the data regarding proﬁtability and sales of the
parent company from the Amadeus DataBase. We used the ratio TOC/Sales and TOC/employees
for comparisons of emissions controlling the effect of the ﬁrm’s size. Finally, we also checked if
the company was EMAS registered by the European Commission in the EU-environment web
page. As noted above, the lack of relationship between certiﬁcation and superior environmental
performance underlines our fundamental conclusions about the difference between apparent and
real progress in this area.

378

Proactive Corporate Environmental Strategies


References
1. See, for example, P. Christmann, Effects of ‘‘best practices’’ of environmental management on cost
advantage: The role of complementary assets, Academy of Management Journal 43, 663e680 (2000);
R. D. Klassen and D. C. Whybark, The impact of environmental technologies on manufacturing perfor-
mance, Academy of Management Journal 42, 599e615 (1999); A. A. Marcus and D. Geffen, The dialectics
of competency acquisition: Pollution prevention in electric generation, Strategic Management Journal 19,
1145e1168 (1998); S. Sharma and H. Vredenburg, Proactive corporate environmental strategy and the
development of competitively valuable organizational capabilities, Strategic Management Journal 19,
729e753 (1998).

2. Although different works have proposed multiple names and typologies of corporate environmental strat-
egies, the vast majority of them are based on the use of a continuum ranging from the most proactive to
the least proactive (reactive) environmental strategy of the company. For instance, Buysse and Verbeke
review a wide sample of these works (K. Buysse and A. Verbeke, Proactive environmental strategies:
A stakeholder management perspective, Strategic Management Journal 24, 453e470 (2003)). Other
work (such as by J. A. Arago´ n-Correa, Strategic proactivity and ﬁrm approach to the natural environ-
ment, Academy of Management Journal 41, 556e567 (1998)) have speciﬁcally shown the positive associ-
ation between proactivity in corporate environmental strategy and proactivity in the general strategic
posture.Finally, Worthington and Patton describe the different patterns and implications in a sample
of SMEs’ ﬁrms (I. Worthington and D. Patton, Strategic Intent in the Management of the Green Envi-
ronment within SMEs: An Analysis of the UK Screen-printing Sector, Long Range Planning 38, 197e212
(2005)).

3. Different works have recently argued the necessity of looking for new ways to better understand stake-
holders’ expectations and knowledge about corporate environmental management. For example, see
S. L. Hart and S. Sharma, Engaging fringe stakeholders for competitive imagination, Academy of Manage-
ment Executive 18, 7e18 (2004); B. W. Husted, Governance choices for corporate social responsibility: To
contribute, collaborate or internalize? Long Range Planning 36, 481e498 (2003); M. J. Epstein and
M. J. Roy, Sustainability in Action: Identifying and Measuring the Key Performance Drivers, Long Range
Planning 34, 585e604 (2001).

4. Some examples of these critics’ academic papers are following: Banerjee explores the contradictions in the
concept of sustainable development (S. B. Banerjee, Who sustains whose development? Sustainable Devel-
opment and the Reinvention of Nature, Organization Studies 24, 143e180, (2003)); Newton and Newton
and Harte provide a severe critique of works on the ‘‘greening’’ of organizations based on ecocentric
arguments (T. J. Newton, Creating the new ecological order? Academy of Management Review 27,
523e540 (2002); T. Newton and G. Harte, Green business: Technicist kitsch, Journal of Management Stud-
ies 34, 75e98 (1997); Finally, Crane proposes that there is a tendency in corporations for greening to be
accompanied by a process of amoralization (A. Crane, Corporate greening as amoralization, Organization
Studies 21, 673e696 (2000)).

5. H. I. Ansoff and E. McDonnell, Implanting strategic management (2nd edition), Prentice-Hall, London
(1990); H. Mintzberg, The design school: Reconsidering the basic premises of strategic management, Stra-
tegic Management Journal 11, 171e195 (1990); M. Starik and A. Marcus, Introduction to the special
research forum on the management of organizations in the natural environment, Academy of Management
Journal 43, 539e546 (2000).

6. L. Partos, European food industry 2002: the facts and ﬁgures, Product & Supplier News (15/04/2005
(2005)); Bureau of Economic Analysis, Value Added by Industry in Current Dollars as a Percentage of Gross
Domestic Product 1947e2004, U.S. Department of Commerce (2005).

7. The data is from the Yale University National Poll on the Environment, conducted by the Global Strategy
Group from 26 April to 3 May 2004 (overall margin of error of 3.1% at the 95% conﬁdence level). The
LCV Education Fund commissioned a national poll, which was conducted 6e13 February 2000, showing
89% of respondents believing that business that pollute should pay higher fees for permits to help pay for
environmental law enforcement (margin of error 3%). The Gallup national poll (conducted 3e6 March
2003 margin of error 5%), showed that 80% of Americans generally favour setting higher emissions and
pollution standards for business and industry.

8. For more details see for instance, L. Derksen and J. Gartrell, The social context of recycling, American

Sociological Review 58, 43e49 (1993 June).

9. European Commission, The attitudes of Europeans towards the environment, Eurobarometer 58.0,

Directorate-General Environment, Brussels (2002).

Long Range Planning, vol 40

2007

379


10. See also note 5.
11. An example of early delimitation of environmental sector is R. V. Kolluru and M. E. Silverstein, Environ-
mental business: Markets and prospects, in R. V. Kolluru (ed.), Environmental strategies handbook,
McGraw Hill, New York, 681e780 (1994); The listed categories in the text are included in the Classiﬁca-
tion of Environmental Protection Activities (CEPA) and accepted by UNECE, Eurostat, and the United
Nations Expert Group of International Economic and Social Classiﬁcations.

12. In the United States, data on pollution abatement and control expenditures have been collected since 1972
by the Bureau of Economic Analysis and published in the Survey of Current Business. These efforts were
suspended in 1995 because of budget cuts. A new survey covering 1999 data was published in November
2002, including changes in the design of the collection of data. See US Census Bureau, Pollution abatement
costs and expenditures: 1999 (2002). See also for different countries, OECD, Pollution abatement and control
expenditure in OECD countries: 2002, Working group on Environmental information and outlooks (2003).
13. See for example the special issue on ‘‘Global Markets’’ of the Environmental Business Journal, (vol. 15,
11/12, 2003) or the different environmental markets report of Environmental Business International,
Inc (http://www.ebiusa.com); M. V. Russo, The emergence of sustainable industries: Building on natural
capital, Strategic Management Journal 24, 317e331 (2003).

14. Just for illustration, see for example, F. Bellesi, D. Lehrer and A. Tal, Comparative Advantage: The Impact
of ISO 14001 Environmental Certiﬁcation on Exports, Environmental Science & Technology 39(7),
1943e1953, (2005) or L. P. Tan, Implementing ISO 14001: is it beneﬁcial for ﬁrms in newly industrialized
Malaysia?, Journal of Cleaner Production 13(4), 397e404 (2005).

15. For details, see for example, P. Christmann and G. Taylor, Globalization and the environment: Strategies
for international voluntary environmental initiatives, Academy of Management Executive 16, 121e135
(2002); A. E. Tenbrunsel, K. A. Wade-Benzoni, D. M. Messick and M. H. Bazerman, Understanding
the inﬂuence of environmental standards on judgments and choices, Academy of Management Journal
43, 854e866 (2000).

16. See for details P. Bansal and W. C. Bogner, Deciding on ISO 14001: Economics, institutions, and context,

Long Range Planning 35, 269e290 (2002).

17. International Organisation for Standardization, The ISO Survey of ISO 9001: 2000 and ISO 14001 Certif-

icates e 2003, ISO, Geneva (2004).

18. Data from EMAS Helpdesk, European Commission (webpage), 2006-02e02.
19. A. E. Tenbrunsel, K. A. Wade, D. M. Messick and M. H. Bazerman, Understanding the inﬂuence of
environmental standards on judgement and choices, Academy of Management Journal 43, 854e866 (2000).
20. For example, N. Walley and B. Whitehead, It’s not easy being green, Harvard Business Review 72, 46e52
(1994); S. L. Hart and G. Ahuja, Does it pay to be green? An empirical examination of the relationship be-
tween emission reduction and ﬁrm performance, Business Strategy and the Environment 5, 30e37 (1996).
21. For details, see Schmidheiny was one of the pioneers in delimiting this concept and he developed it from
his managerial position and simultaneously working in an UN environmental working group. S. Schmid-
heiny, Changing course: A global business perspective on development and the environment, MIT Press,
London (1992).

22. See for example, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Eco-efﬁciency, OECDE, Paris
(1998); S. Moll and D. Gee, Making sustainability accountable: Eco-efﬁciency, resource, productivity and
innovation, European Environment Agency, Luxembourg (1999); M. Lehni, Eco-efﬁciency: Creating
more value with less impact, World Business Center for Sustainable Development, Geneva (2000).

23. See note 22.
24. Some pioneers were, J. B. Barney, Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage, Journal of
Management 17, 99e120 (1991); R. Rumelt, Toward a strategic theory of the ﬁrm, in Competitive strategic
in R. Lamb (ed.), Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 556e570 (1984); B. Wernerfelt,
management,
A resource-based view of the ﬁrm, Strategic Management Journal 5, 171e180 (1984); S. L. Hart,
A natural-resource-based view of the ﬁrm, Academy of Management Review 20, 874e907 (1995).

25. See, for example M. Lehni, Eco-efﬁciency: Creating more value with less impact, World Business Center for

Sustainable Development, Geneva (2000).

26. M. E. Porter and C. Van der Linde, Green and competitive, Harvard Business Review 73, 120e134 (1995);

M. E. Porter, America’s green strategy, Scientiﬁc American, (1991), April, p. 168.

27. See note 1.
28. A good example in O Boiral, Global warming: Should companies adopt a proactive strategy?, Long Range

Planning 39, 315e330 (2006)

380

Proactive Corporate Environmental Strategies


29. See illustration in J. A. Arago´ n-Correa, F. Matı´as-Reche and M. E. Senise-Barrio, Managerial discretion
and corporate commitment to the natural environment, Journal of Business Research 57(9), 964e975
(2004).

30. J. A. Arago´ n-Correa and S. Sharma, A contingent resource-based view of proactive corporate environmen-

tal strategy, Academy of Management Review 28, 71e88 (2003).

31. V. Chiesa, R. Manzini and G. Noci, Towards a sustainable view of the competitive system, Long Range

Planning 32, 519e530 (1999).

32. K. M. Eisenhardt and J. A. Martin, Dynamic capabilities: What are they? Strategic Management Journal 21,

1105e1121 (2000).

Biographies
J. Alberto Arago´ n-Correa is Professor of Strategic Management and Chair of the Department of Management at
the University of Granada, and visiting professor of the Rotterdam-Erasmus University. He received his doctorate
from the University of Seville. His research is primarily in the area of corporate environmental strategies and
innovation, and he has been published in various books, and in the Academy of Management Journal, the Academy
of Management Review, the Journal of Business Research, Sustainable Development, and the Industrial Marketing
Management. School of Economics and Business, University of Granada, Campus Cartuja, s.n., 18071 Granada. Spain.
Tel.: + 34 958 24 61 58, Fax: + 34 958 24 62 22, Email: jaragon@ugr.es
Enrique Rubio is an associate Professor of Management at the University of Granada. He received his doctorate
from the University of Granada. He has been CEO of several consulting ﬁrms, and his research is primarily in
the area of international business and cooperation. School of Economics and Business, University of Granada, Tel: +
34 958 24 37 05, Fax: + 34 958 24 62 22, Email: erubio@ugr.es

Long Range Planning, vol 40

2007

381

