Can Positive Employees Help Positive
Organizational Change?
Impact of Psychological Capital and Emotions on
Relevant Attitudes and Behaviors

James B. Avey
Central Washington University
Tara S. Wernsing
Fred Luthans
University of Nebraska–Lincoln

Although  much  attention  has  been  devoted  to  understanding  employee  resistance  to
change, relatively little research examines the impact that positive employees can have
on  organizational  change.  To  help  fill  this  need, the  authors  investigate  whether  a
process  of  employees’ positivity  will  have  an  impact  on  relevant  attitudes  and
behaviors. Specifically, this study surveyed 132 employees from a broad cross-section
of  organizations  and  jobs  and  found: (a)  Their  psychological  capital  (a  core  factor
consisting  of  hope, efficacy, optimism, and  resilience)  was  related  to  their  positive
emotions  that  in  turn  were  related  to  their  attitudes  (engagement  and  cynicism)  and
behaviors (organizational citizenship and deviance) relevant to organizational change;
(b)  mindfulness  (i.e., heightened  awareness)  interacted  with  psychological  capital  in
predicting  positive  emotions;  and  (c)  positive  emotions  generally  mediated  the
relationship  between  psychological  capital  and  the  attitudes  and  behaviors.  The
implications these findings have for positive organizational change conclude the article.

Keywords: psychological capital; positive emotions; mindfulness; cognitive mediation

theory; positive organizational change

Both scholars and practitioners would agree that employee resistance to change is

a  primary  obstacle  for  effective  organizational  change  processes  and  programs
(Armenakis & Bedeian, 1999; O’Toole, 1995; Strebel, 1996), whether incremental

THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE, Vol. 44 No. 1, March 2008 48-70
DOI: 10.1177/0021886307311470
© 2008 NTL Institute

48


Avey et al. / POSITIVE EMPLOYEES AND CHANGE

49

or discontinuous change (Tushman & O’Reilly, 1996). In particular, resistance man-
ifested through employee dysfunctional attitudes (e.g., disengagement or cynicism)
and behaviors (e.g., deviance) can be devastating to effective organizational change
(Abrahamson, 2000; Reichers, Wanous, & Austin, 1997; Stanley, Meyer, & Topolntsky,
2005). While much attention has been given to such perspectives and how to over-
come  resistance  to  change, the  role  that  positive  employees  may  play  in  positive
organizational change has been largely ignored. Although the importance of positive
constructs  has  been  recognized  from  the  beginning  of  organizational  behavior
research  and  the  study  of  organization  development  and  change  (e.g., the  happy
worker productive worker thesis; for the history of positivity in the workplace see
Quick & Quick, 2004; Wright & Cropanzano, 2004), only recently has a positive
approach received focused research attention as is found in this special issue of The
Journal of Applied Behavioral Science.

Although there are numerous conceptions and definitions, the perspective taken
by this study is that organizational change initiates from a mismatch with the envi-
ronment (Porras & Silvers, 1994) and is motivated by gaps between the organiza-
tion’s  goals  and  current  results.  This  organization  change  is  both  critical  for
managers in terms of effective implementation and for employees in terms of accep-
tance and engagement. More than a decade ago, Strebel (1996) argued that vision
and leadership drive successful organizational change but that few leaders recognize
the importance of the employees’ commitment to changing. Employees within the
organizational  system  are  responsible  for  adapting  and  behaving  in  ways  aligned
with  change  strategies  and  programs  initiated  by  management, often  with  fewer
resources than before (Mishra, Spreitzer, & Mishra, 1998). With the change, they
must  learn  to  forge  new  paths  and  strategies  to  attain  redefined  goals. They  must
have  the  confidence  (efficacy)  to  adapt  to  organizational  change  as  well  as  the
resilience to bounce back from setbacks that are bound to occur during the change
process. Moreover, it follows that to be successful, employees undergoing change
would need to have the motivation and alternate pathways determined (i.e., hope)
when obstacles are encountered and make optimistic attributions of when things go
wrong and have a positive outlook for the future. Gittell, Cameron, Lim, and Rivas
(2006) explain that positive relationships can be one source for developing some of
these ways, such as resilience when faced with change, and we add to this research
by highlighting the positive processes that may be available to support employees
who are facing organizational change.

Based on positive psychology (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2000), we propose
the newly emerging fields of positive organizational scholarship (Cameron & Caza,
2004; Cameron, Dutton, & Quinn, 2003; Roberts, 2006) and positive organizational
behavior (Luthans, 2002a, 2002b; Nelson & Cooper, 2007; Wright, 2003) may offer

James  B.  Avey  is  an  assistant  professor  of  management  in  the  Department  of  Management, Central
Washington University.
Tara S. Wernsing is a doctoral candidate in the Department of Management, Gallup Leadership Institute,
University of Nebraska–Lincoln.
Fred Luthans is the George Holmes Distinguished Professor of Management, Department of Management,
Gallup Leadership Institute, University of Nebraska–Lincoln.


50

THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE

March 2008

insights  into  effective  organizational  change.  In  particular, this  study  investigates
whether employees’ psychological resources, such as hope, optimism, efficacy, and
resilience (i.e., what has been termed their positive psychological capital, PsyCap
for short; see Luthans, Avolio, Avey, & Norman, 2007; Luthans & Youssef, 2004;
Luthans, Youssef, & Avolio, 2007), and  positive  emotions  (e.g., see  Fredrickson,
1998; Lord, Klimoski, & Kanfer, 2002; Staw, Sutton, & Pelled, 1994) are examples
of positive individual-level factors that may facilitate organizational change. In other
words, positive employees, defined here as those with positive psychological capital
and positive emotions, may exhibit attitudes and behaviors that in turn may lead to
more effective and positive organizational change.

For this study, positive organizational change is any change that does more good
than harm in and for an organization, considering aspects of employees’ psycho-
logical resources, behavior, and performance that may be affected by the change.
An  important  consideration  in  positive  change  is  the  corresponding  effects  on
employees  as  well  as  organizational  outcomes.  For  example, downsizing  is  a
change  intended  to  be  positive  by  increasing  organizational  efficiency  but  often
fails to be positive because of its disastrous effects on employees (Cascio, 2002). It
follows  from  this  perspective  that  one  of  the  most  important  aspects  of  positive
organizational change is how the employees respond in terms of their attitudes and
behaviors.

To explicate the relationship between positive employees and their attitudes and
behaviors  that  have  implications  for  positive  organizational  change, we  can  draw
from a stream of research in positive psychology. Specifically, Fredrickson’s (1998,
2001, 2003b)  broaden  and  build  theory  examining  the  role  that  positive  emotions
play in generating broader ways of thinking and behaving seems especially relevant
to  explaining  the  role  that  positive  employees  can  play  in  positive  organizational
change. Research on positive emotions shows that a ratio of about 3:1 positive to
negative  emotions  leads  to  flourishing  (i.e., high  levels  of  functioning  and  well-
being;  Keyes, 2002)  due  to  increased  “momentary  thought-action  repertoires”
(Fredrickson, 2001, p.  219)  that  come  from  experiencing  positive  emotions
(Fredrickson & Losada, 2005). Additional empirical evidence demonstrates that pos-
itive emotions can engender better decision making (Chuang, 2007) and are posi-
tively related to various measures of success and well-being (Lyubomirsky, King, &
Diener, 2005).  In  other  words, positive  emotions  may  help  employees  cope  with
organizational change by broadening the options they perceive, maintaining an open
approach to problem solving, and supplying energy for adjusting their behaviors to
new work conditions (Baumeister, Gailliot, DeWall, & Oaten, 2006).

For this study, the proposed process and empirical relationship between positive
employees  and  positive  organizational  change  is  as  follows: Employees’ positive
PsyCap, through positive emotions, relates to their relevant attitudes and behaviors
that can facilitate (or inhibit) positive organizational change. More specifically, cyn-
ical attitudes and deviant behaviors may inhibit positive change, but their attitudes
of engagement and organizational citizenship behaviors may enhance positive orga-
nizational change. We now turn to the background leading up to the specific study
hypotheses for this proposed process shown in Figure 1.


Avey et al. / POSITIVE EMPLOYEES AND CHANGE

51

Psychological

Capital

Positive 
Emotions

Mindfulness

Employee Attitudes:
-Engagement
-Cynicism

Employee Behaviors:
-Organizational Citizenship
-Deviance

FIGURE  1: Model  for  Impact  of  Psychological  Capital  (PsyCap), Mindfulness, and  Positive
Emotions on Attitudes and Behaviors Relevant to Positive Organizational Change

THE ROLE OF EMOTIONS, ATTITUDES, AND BEHAVIORS IN

ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE

In this study we investigate the impact that positive employees, represented by
their levels of psychological capital (covered next) and positive emotions, and their
relevant attitudes and behaviors may have on positive organizational change. Based
on  Fredrickson’s  (1998, 2001, 2003b)  work, we  propose  positive  emotions  will
result in higher levels of engagement attitudes and organizational citizenship behav-
iors that would facilitate positive change. By the same token, those employees who
are low in PsyCap will experience lower levels of positive emotions and in turn are
more  likely  to  experience  cynical  attitudes  and  deviant  behaviors  that  would  be
indicative of resistance to change and detract from positive organizational change.
Relevant prior research by Staw and colleagues (Staw & Barsade, 1993; Staw
et  al., 1994; Wright  &  Staw, 1999)  has  found  that  employees  who  report  more
frequent  levels  of  positive  emotions  tended  to  be  more  socially  integrated  in  the
organization, thus  likely  leading  to  higher  engagement  and  citizenship  than  those
who  reported  fewer  positive  emotions.  In  terms  of  work  attitudes, Fredrickson’s
(2001) broaden and build theory of positive emotions predicts that positive emotions
“broaden people’s momentary thought-action repertoires, widening the array of the
thoughts and actions that come to mind” (p. 220). She further notes “the personal
resources accrued during states of positive emotions are conceptualized as durable”
(p. 220). It would follow that these psychological resources generated by employees
experiencing positive emotions may lead to employee attitudes such as emotional
engagement. This employee engagement would not only affect individual employ-
ees but may also impact other team members’ motivation and emotions, which in
turn can be a positive influence on organizational change (Bakker, van Emmerik, &
Euwema, 2006).


52

THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE

March 2008

Fredrickson  and  colleagues’ (Fredrickson, 1998, 2001;  Fredrickson, Mancuso,
Branigan, & Tugade, 2000) work also provides insight into the role positive emo-
tions may play in influencing negative attitudes such as cynicism toward organiza-
tional change. For example, she notes the undoing hypothesis of positive emotions:
Positive emotions “undo” the dysfunctional effects of negative emotions (Fredrickson
& Levenson, 1998). Because organizational cynicism is an individual attitude (Dean,
Brandes, &  Dharwadkar, 1998)  associated  with  negative  emotions  (Andersson  &
Bateman, 1997), it follows from Fredrickson’s “undoing hypothesis” that employees
high in positive emotions will be expected to have fewer cynical attitudes regarding
organizational  change.  Because  cynicism  is  a  result  of  negative  experiences  and
emotions (Pugh, Skarlicki, & Passell, 2003), Fredrickson’s research would suggest
that  such  cynical  attitudes  toward  organizational  change  would  be  undone  or
decreased by positive emotions.

Furthermore, because Fredrickson’s broaden and build theory argues that positive
emotions broaden both thought and action repertoires, we also propose that positive
emotions  will  affect  employees’ behaviors  with  regard  to  organizational  change.
Specifically, Fredrickson (2003a) argues that while the absence of positive emotions
limits  thought-action  repertoires  to  instinctual  human  functioning  (e.g., fight  or
flight) leading to more short-term thinking and undesirable organizational outcomes,
the presence of positive emotions broadens thought-action repertoires to consider a
wider array of positive behavioral manifestations toward organizational change. In
other  words, those  experiencing  positive  emotions  may  engage  in  fewer  deviant
behaviors  and  more  positive  citizenship  behaviors  in  regard  to  organizational
change. Given the aforementioned proposed relationships of positive emotions with
both employee attitudinal and behavioral outcomes, the following study hypotheses
are derived:

Hypothesis 1: Positive emotions will be positively related to employee attitudes of engagement

and negatively to organizational cynicism.

Hypothesis 2: Positive emotions will be positively related to employee behaviors of organizational

citizenship and negatively to workplace deviance.

PSYCHOLOGICAL CAPITAL

Besides the roles of emotions, attitudes, and behaviors, central to our proposed
model of the relationship of positive employees in positive organizational change is
psychological capital. This PsyCap is based on the emerging field of positive orga-
nizational behavior (for a recent review article, see Luthans & Youssef, 2007). Like
psychology, positive  organizational  behavior  makes  no  claim  to  discovering  the
importance of positivity in the workplace but rather is simply calling for a focus on
relatively unique positive, state-like constructs that have performance impact (see
Luthans, 2002a, 2002b). To differentiate from the positively oriented popular per-
sonal development literature (e.g., the power of positive thinking or the seven habits
of  highly  successful  people)  or  the  relatively  fixed, trait-like  positively  oriented
organizational  behavior  literature  (e.g., Big  Five  personality  dimensions  or  core


Avey et al. / POSITIVE EMPLOYEES AND CHANGE

53

self-evaluations), the  following  definition  of  positive  organizational  behavior  has
been  offered: “the  study  and  application  of  positively  oriented  human  resource
strengths and psychological capacities that can be measured, developed, and effec-
tively  managed  for  performance  improvement” (Luthans, 2002b, p.  59;  also  see
Luthans & Youssef, 2007; Nelson & Cooper, 2007; Wright, 2003).

Although  a  number  of  positive  constructs  have  been  researched  (e.g., see
Cameron et al., 2003; Nelson & Cooper, 2007), so far the four that have been iden-
tified to best meet the criteria of the definition of positive organization behavior are
hope, efficacy, optimism, and resilience (Luthans, 2002a; Luthans, Youssef, et al.,
2007).  When  combined, these  four  have  been  conceptually  (Luthans  & Youssef,
2004; Luthans, Youssef, et al., 2007) and empirically (Luthans, Avolio, et al., 2007)
demonstrated to represent a second-order, core factor called psychological capital.
After a brief overview of the four components and their relevancy to positive orga-
nizational change, the precise meaning of PsyCap is provided as it is a major pre-
dictor variable in the proposed process shown in Figure 1.

Conceptually, Snyder, Irving, and Anderson  (1991)  define  hope  as  a  “positive
motivational state that is based on an interactively derived sense of successful (1)
agency (goal-directed energy) and (2) pathways (planning to meet goals)” (p. 287).
People who are high in hope possess the uncanny ability to generate multiple path-
ways to accomplishing their goals. This psychological resource continuously pro-
vides hope that the goal will be accomplished. Furthermore, those with high hope
frame tasks in such a way that keeps them highly motivated to attain success in the
task at hand. Snyder (2002) notes that agency thinking in hope “takes on special sig-
nificance when people encounter impediments. During such instances of blockage,
agency helps the person to apply the requisite motivation to the best alternative path-
way” (p.  258).  Therefore, both  agency  and  pathways  thinking  are  necessary  and
complementary  components  of  hope.  Sustaining  hope  during  times  of  crises  and
change seems imperative for the well-being of employees and a necessary ingredi-
ent of positive organizational change. In particular, the capacity for generating new
pathways  seems  essential  to  navigating  discontinuous  and  unpredictable  change
processes (Weick & Quinn, 1999).

A second capacity of PsyCap is efficacy. Drawn from the theory and research of
Bandura (1997), applied to the workplace, efficacy can be defined as “the employee’s
conviction or confidence about his or her abilities to mobilize the motivation, cogni-
tive  resources, or  courses  of  action  needed  to  successfully  execute  a  specific  task
within a given context” (Stajkovic & Luthans, 1998b, p. 66). In relationship to hope,
efficacy can be interpreted as the conviction and belief in one’s ability to (a) gener-
ate multiple pathways, (b) take actions toward the goal, and (c) ultimately be suc-
cessful  in  goal  attainment.  Efficacy  has  shown  very  strong  relationships  with
performance (e.g., meta-analysis by Stajkovic & Luthans, 1998a) and is generated
from four generally recognized sources that are all relevant to positive organizational
change.

First, Bandura  (1997)  has  conceptually  and  empirically  demonstrated  that  task
mastery, or successfully accomplishing a task, is a primary source of efficacy. When
employees successfully accomplish a task or cope with change, they are more likely


54

THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE

March 2008

to  believe  they  can  do  it  again.  Other  major  sources  of  efficacy  include  watching
someone considered similar to oneself successfully accomplish a task or cope with
change  (vicarious  learning  or  modeling), being  assured  by  a  respected  role  model
(e.g., a coach or mentor) that one will be successful in a new task or in the change
process (social persuasion), and being emotionally and physically motivated to com-
plete the task or cope with the change (arousal). Employees that are highly efficacious
are characterized by tenacious pursuit and persistent efforts toward accomplishment
and are driven by beliefs in their own successes. In other words, efficacy seems vitally
important  to  effective  organizational  change  efforts  because  employees  are  often
required to take on new responsibilities and skills. Simply focusing time on early task
mastery experiences, role modeling, and greater social support can move employees
toward higher levels of efficacy in the changing workplace.

A  third  criteria-meeting  positive  resource  of  PsyCap  is  optimism.  Carver  and
Scheier (2002) note quite simply that “optimists are people who expect good things
to happen to them; pessimists are people who expect bad things to happen to them”
(p. 231). This statement represents the expectancy framework used to understand the
influential role of optimism in one’s success in undergoing organizational change.
Under  this  perspective, those  high  in  optimism  characteristically  expect  success
when faced with change. It is important to note that optimistic expectations in this
case are an individual-level attribution. It is not likely that optimists expect organi-
zational change efforts to be successful because of their optimism. Rather, optimists
tend to maintain positive expectations about what will happen to them personally
throughout the change process.

This  optimism  is  in  contrast  with  efficacious  people  who  believe  positive  out-
comes  will  occur  given  their  belief  that  their  personal  ability  will  lead  to  success
through  making  a  change.  Optimistic  people  expect  positive  outcomes  for  them-
selves regardless of personal ability. In addition to this positive future expectation,
Seligman (1998) proposes a complementary optimistic framework based in attribu-
tions or what he calls explanatory style. Optimists tend to make internal, stable, and
global attributions for successes and external, unstable, and specific attributions for
failures. Thus, should a negative outcome occur during the process of change, opti-
mists would tend to remain motivated toward success because they conclude the fail-
ure was not due to something inherent in them (external) but was instead something
unique in that situation (specific) and a second attempt will likely not result in fail-
ure again (unstable). Therefore, the optimistic employee can continue to move for-
ward with positive expectations regardless of past problems or setbacks.

The fourth positive capacity making up PsyCap is resilience. Given the turbulent
socioeconomic  and  “downsizing” types  of  adverse  change  facing  most  of  today’s
organizations  and  employees, Luthans  (2002a)  defines  resilience  as  a  “positive
psychological capacity to rebound, to ‘bounce back’ from adversity, uncertainty,
conflict, failure, or even positive change, progress and increased responsibility”
(p. 702). At the core of this capacity is the bouncing back (and beyond) from set-
backs and positively coping and adapting to significant changes. Masten and Reed
(2002) assert resilience is “a class of phenomena characterized by patterns of posi-
tive adaptation in the context of significant adversity or risk” (p. 74). Thus, resilient


Avey et al. / POSITIVE EMPLOYEES AND CHANGE

55

employees are those who have the ability to positively adapt and thrive in very chal-
lenging circumstances such as involved in most organizational change.

The aforementioned indicates that employees high in the four components making
up PsyCap could have a variety of positive psychological resources to draw from to
cope with the challenges of organizational change. This combined effect of PsyCap
has been defined as

an individual’s positive psychological state of development that is characterized by: (1) having
confidence (self efficacy) to take on and put in the necessary effort to succeed at challenging tasks;
(2) making a positive expectation (optimism) about succeeding now and in the future; (3) perse-
vering toward goals and, when necessary, redirecting paths to goals (hope) in order to succeed;
and (4) when beset by problems and adversity, sustaining and bouncing back and even beyond
(resilience) to attain success. (Luthans, Youssef, et al., 2007, p. 3)

As a higher-order core capacity, PsyCap has an underlying common thread and
shared characteristics running through each of the psychological resource capacities
(i.e., efficacy, optimism, hope, and resiliency) of positive agentic (intentional) striv-
ing  toward  flourishing  and  success, no  matter  what  changes  and  challenges  arise.
This PsyCap core construct has been found to be validly measurable and related to
several key workplace outcomes, including employee performance, job satisfaction,
and  absenteeism  (Avey, Patera, &  West, 2006;  Luthans, Avolio, et  al., 2007).
Research has also shown that the overall core construct of PsyCap better relates to
these outcomes than the individual constructs that make it up (Luthans, Avolio, et al.,
2007; Luthans, Avolio, Walumbwa, & Li, 2005). Finally, there is beginning evidence
that  PsyCap  is  open  to  development  in  short  training  interventions  (see  Luthans,
Avey, Avolio, Norman, & Combs, 2006; Luthans, Avey, & Patera, in press).

THE MEDIATING ROLE OF POSITIVE EMOTIONS

As shown in Figure 1, PsyCap is related to positive emotions, and positive emo-
tions  in  turn  are  related  to  employee  attitudes  and  behaviors  relevant  to  positive
organizational change. Thus, we are proposing that positive emotions mediate the
relationship between PsyCap and attitudes and behaviors. Although the powerful
effects of positive emotions have been empirically demonstrated in the workplace
(for a review, see Brief & Weiss, 2002; Lord et al., 2002; Payne & Cooper, 2001),
there is still debate on whether cognition precedes emotion or vice versa (e.g., see
Izard, 1993; Lazarus, 2006). In any case, there seems to be a closely linked and rec-
iprocal  relationship  between  cognition  and  emotion.  There  is  evidence  that
thoughts  cause  emotional  responses  (Frijda, 1986;  Lazarus  &  Folkman, 1984;
Ortony, Clore, & Collins, 1988), cognition creates labels used to identify physio-
logical feelings as discrete emotions (Schachter & Singer, 1962), and emotions in
turn are a source for information processing and decision making (Albarracin &
Kumkale, 2003; Schwarz & Clore, 1983). We propose that Lazarus’s (1991, 1993,
2006) cognitive mediation theory that views appraisals and evaluations as the basis
for emotional response elicitation is the most relevant framework for the workplace,


56

THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE

March 2008

as  demonstrated  by  affective  events  theory  developed  by  Weiss  and  Cropanzano
(1996). Affective events theory explains that an event elicits an initial evaluation “for
relevance to well-being in simple positive or negative terms. This initial evaluation
also contains an important evaluation which influences the intensity of the emotional
reaction” (Weiss  &  Cropanzano, 1996, p.  31)  and  leads  to  a  secondary  appraisal
associated with discrete emotions. These initial and secondary appraisals can occur
automatically, below the threshold of conscious awareness (Bargh, 1994). Therefore,
multiple appraisals occur from events experienced at work that generate emotions.
For  example, research  shows  that  the  same  event  can  occur  to  two  different
people and cause stressful emotions in one of them but not in the other (Lazarus &
Folkman, 1984).  Thus, employees  may  automatically  interpret  organizational
change events in ways that cause them to experience dysfunctional attitudes such as
cynicism and exhibit deviant behaviors, perhaps even without conscious awareness
of  the  connection  between  their  thoughts  and  emotions.  On  the  other  hand, those
employees who interpret events in a positive way, namely, with hope, optimism, effi-
cacy, and resilience (i.e., PsyCap), may be more likely to experience positive emo-
tions at work even during potentially stressful events associated with organizational
change. Therefore, as shown in Figure 1, PsyCap is proposed as a source of positive
emotions.

We suggest that overall PsyCap will contribute to individual positive emotions.
For example, first, if employees are optimistic and efficacious, they generally pos-
sess positive expectations for goal achievement and successfully coping with change
and thus experience positive feelings of confidence. Positive emotions are in turn
likely  to  broaden  or  multiply  the  pathways  that  are  generated  in  goal  pursuit
(Fredrickson, 2001). If a setback or challenge occurs during a process of change,
they are likely to attribute the setback to external, one-time circumstances and imme-
diately  consider  alternative  pathways  to  goal  success, demonstrating  hope  and
resilience. Tugade and Fredrickson (2004) also support the position that cognitive
states  and  abilities  such  as  resilience  precede  positive  emotions  and  found  that
“high-resilient individuals tend to experience positive emotions even amidst stress”
(p.  331). As  organizational  transitions  are  associated  with  higher  levels  of  stress
(Ashford, 1988), PsyCap  may  help  maintain  a  more  positive  climate  during  such
periods of change.

Martin, Jones, and Callan (2005) have recently extended Lazarus and Folkman’s
(1984) research on stress and coping to show that employee perceptions of organi-
zational  climate  affect  their  appraisals  and  emotions, which  affect  their  organiza-
tional commitment, job satisfaction, and absenteeism. In addition, related research
in  positive  psychology  also  suggests  the  mediating  role  of  positive  emotions.  For
example, Tugade, Fredrickson, and  Barrett  (2004)  found  that  those  individuals
higher in resilience used positive emotions to cope during and after stressful events.
Similar results were found by Fredrickson, Tugade, Waugh, and Larkin (2003) when
studying the role of resilience in responding to the 9/11 attacks in New York.

In sum, we posit a mediating role of positive emotions in the relationship between
PsyCap and employee attitudes and behaviors relevant to organizational change. In
particular, given  (a)  the  explanatory  framework  of  the  cognitive  mediation  theory


Avey et al. / POSITIVE EMPLOYEES AND CHANGE

57

that proposes cognitions precede emotions; (b) previous research such as by Tugade,
Fredrickson, and colleagues (2004) that support the mediating role of positive emo-
tions; (c) the hypothesized relationship between PsyCap and positive emotions; and
(d) the hypothesized relationship between positive emotions and employee attitudes
and  behaviors, we  expect  that  positive  emotions  will  mediate  the  relationship
between PsyCap and the attitudes and behaviors relevant to organizational change.
Specifically, we derive the following study hypotheses:

Hypothesis 3: PsyCap will be positively related to positive emotions.
Hypothesis 4: Positive emotions will mediate the relationship between PsyCap and the attitudes

of engagement and cynicism and the behaviors of organizational citizenship and deviance.

THE INTERACTIVE ROLE OF MINDFULNESS

Figure 1 shows that psychological capital predicts positive emotions, and now we
examine whether heightened awareness can affect this relationship. Specifically, can
greater mindfulness result in higher levels of positive psychological capital and emo-
tions?  Perhaps  the  more  mindful  awareness  employees  have  of  their  PsyCap  and
positive emotions, or lack thereof, the more it can facilitate positive attitudes and
behaviors relevant to organizational changes. To investigate this question, we tested
whether  mindfulness, through  an  interaction  with  PsyCap, may  provide  further
insight into this process.

Mindfulness is defined as “enhanced attention to and awareness of current expe-
riences or present reality” (Brown & Ryan, 2003, p. 823). To date, this concept has
been  tied  to  positive  psychological  and  physiological  well-being  (Baer, 2003;
Carlson, Speca, Patel, &  Goodey, 2004;  Kabat-Zinn, 2003;  Wallace  &  Shapiro,
2006)  through  providing  greater  nonjudgmental  awareness  of  one’s  internal  and
external  environment  (Germer, Siegel, &  Fulton, 2005;  Langer, 1997;  Sternberg,
2000; Teasdale, Segal, & Williams, 1995).

Mindfulness has been applied to organizational settings requiring high reliability
(Weick & Sutcliffe, 2001). Weick, Sutcliffe, and Obstfeld (1999) define mindfulness
as  enhanced  awareness  of  discriminatory  detail  of  organizational  processes.
Specifically, “mindful  organizing” in  high-reliability  contexts  consists  of  greater
attention  to  detecting  failure, reluctance  to  simplify  interpretations, more  time
observing  operations, and  more  time  developing  resilience  to  unexpected  events
(Weick  &  Sutcliffe, 2006).  Based  on  this  latter  point, mindfulness  as  a  form  of
heightened attention and awareness seems likely to be related to resilience and other
psychological capital components as well.

Given  that  mindfulness  can  help  in  “disengaging  individuals  from  unhealthy
thoughts, habits and unhealthy behavior patterns” (Brown & Ryan, 2003, p. 823), it
follows that becoming more mindful of one’s thoughts and emotional response pat-
terns can be a source for altering them and therefore be important to supporting pos-
itive organizational change. For example, if an employee becomes more aware of a
pessimistic thinking pattern regarding changes at work, potentially through practicing


58

THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE

March 2008

greater mindfulness, this employee can use self-monitoring to identify unproductive
thinking  habits  and  choose  more  positive  interpretations, thus  reducing  negative
emotions  over  time. This  reduction  happens  as  mindfulness  moves  the  individual
from being embedded in their thinking to being able to step outside and observe it.
As Bandura (1991) points out: “People cannot influence their own motivation and
actions very well if they do not pay adequate attention to their own performances”
(p.  250).  Thus, mindfulness  seems  to  be  an  important  factor  that  interacts  with
PsyCap to influence positive emotions that support positive organizational change,
which leads us to the final study hypothesis:

Hypothesis 5: Mindfulness will moderate the positive relationship between PsyCap and positive
emotions such that when PsyCap is low, mindfulness will have a stronger relationship with
positive emotions.

Sample

METHOD

The heterogeneous sample for this study was comprised of 132 working adults
from a wide cross-section of U.S. organizations who volunteered to participate in a
large Midwestern university–sponsored research project on motivation and leadership.
Participants were targeted through contacts of management faculty and students at
the  university. Those  who  agreed  to  participate  were  provided  a  link  to  an  online
secure server, where they read and approved the informed consent form and regis-
tered their e-mail address. At this point they were assigned a randomly generated
seven-digit code for tracking, and 132 fully participated and completed all of the
survey measures described in the following section.

Participant ages ranged from 18 to 65 with a mean age of 30.4 years. They had a
mean  of  10.8  years  of  experience  and  6  years  at  their  existing  organization.  The
majority of the sample was white (90.2%), with 5.3% Asian, 1% black, 1% Native
American, and the rest (< 2%) not reporting ethnicity. There were 68 men and 64
women, and 32% reported working virtually from their manager 50% or more of the
time. Nonmanagerial employees comprised about two thirds of the sample. Among
the 35% of the sample in some supervisory role, 8.5% were in a first-level supervi-
sory role, 13.2% were in a division or department leadership role, 8.5% were exec-
utives, and 4.7% were business owners. Finally, 3.8% reported completion of high
school only, whereas 52.3% reported completion of high school and some college or
vocational training. Another 34.8% of participants reported a bachelor’s degree, with
7.6% reporting a master’s degree and 1.5% reporting a PhD or equivalent.

Study Procedures

The  independent  and  dependent  variable  survey  measures  (covered  next)  were
separated by time to reduce common method bias as recommended by Podsakoff,
MacKenzie, Lee, and Podsakoff (2003) who note this temporal separation procedure
“makes it impossible for the mindset of the source or rater to bias the observed


Avey et al. / POSITIVE EMPLOYEES AND CHANGE

59

Descriptive Statistics, Correlations, and Scale Reliabilities

TABLE 1

M

SD

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

1. Psychological capital (PsyCap)
2. Mindfulness
3. Positive emotions
4. Engagement
5. Cynicism
6. Deviance
7. Organizational 

citizenship behaviors

4.56
4.07
4.51
4.57
2.95
1.83
4.04

0.63
0.76
0.66
0.99
1.00
0.65
1.00

.95
.27
.70
.50
–.42
–.52
.44

.91
.43
.26
–.24
–.37
.27

.95
.59
–.39
–.55
.42

NOTE: All relationships significant at p < .01. Reliabilities in bold.

.80
–.29
–.48
.52

.95
.34
–.30

.92
–.33

.90

relationship between the predictor and criterion variable, thus eliminating the effects
of consistency motifs, implicit theories, social desirability tendencies” (p. 887) and
other individual attributes that may influence/bias the responses. First, the partici-
pants completed the PsyCap, mindfulness, and positive emotions instruments. After
a week of separation the participants logged on and completed the dependent vari-
able  instruments  for  cynicism, employee  engagement, organizational  citizenship,
and deviance.

Measures

Psychological capital was measured by the 24-item PsyCap questionnaire or
PCQ (Luthans, Avolio, et al., 2007; Luthans, Youssef, et al., 2007). This instru-
ment  includes  6  items  for  each  of  the  four  components  of  hope, efficacy,
resilience, and optimism measured on a 6-point Likert-type scale. Sample items
are as follows: efficacy—“I feel confident helping to set targets/goals in my work
area;” hope—“If  I  should  find  myself  in  a  jam  at  work, I  could  think  of  many
ways  to  get  out  of  it;” resilience—“I  usually  take  stressful  things  at  work  in
stride;” and optimism—“When things are uncertain for me at work, I usually expect
the best.” Reliability coefficients for all the components were greater than .70, as was
the overall PsyCap instrument, which was .95 (see Table 1 for the reliabilities of all
study measures). A confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) was also conducted on the
PsyCap  instrument  using  maximum  likelihood  techniques.  Previous  research  has
shown strong factor-analytic fit for the PsyCap questionnaire across multiple sam-
ples (e.g., Avey et al., 2006; Luthans, Avolio, et al., 2007). Similar to these findings,
in our study the PCQ yielded adequate fit in terms of indices (Comparative Fit Index
[CFI] = .93, root mean square error of approximation [RMSEA] = .07) with all items
loading greater than .70 and no cross-loading items.

Mindfulness was measured using the instrument developed by Brown and Ryan
(2003), where ratings for 15 items were set on a 6-point scale ranging from strongly
disagree to strongly agree. A sample item from this scale is: “I find myself doing
things  without  paying  attention.” The  reliability  coefficient  for  the  mindfulness
instrument was also acceptable (.91).


60

THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE

March 2008

Finally, consistent  with  research  by Tugade  and  Frederickson  (2004), we  used
Watson, Clark  and  Tellegen’s  (1988)  Positive  and  Negative  Affect  Schedule
(PANAS) scale to measure positive emotions. For these analyses, given the explicit
focus on positive emotions (PA), we only used the positive emotions listed in the
scale, which included interested, excited, strong, enthusiastic, proud, alert, inspired,
determined, attentive, and active. Participants rated the frequency they experienced
each particular emotion over the last week. This represents a sample of the individ-
ual’s  emotions  that  is  relatively  recent, not  fixed  (e.g., the  last  year), and  not  so
immediate that a one-time event or day would extremely skew the data (e.g., the last
day). The reliability coefficient for positive emotions as measured by the PA scale
was acceptable at .95.

The dependent variables measured at Time 2 in this study included both attitudi-
nal (emotional engagement and cynicism) and behavioral (individual organizational
citizenship and workplace deviance) scales. Emotional engagement was measured
with the scale developed by May and colleagues (May, Gilson, & Harter, 2004). This
scale demonstrated adequate reliability (.80), and a sample item is: “I really put my
heart into my job.” Cynicism was measured by a 12-item instrument developed by
Wanous, Reichers, and Austin (2000). This scale demonstrated adequate reliability
(.95), and a sample item from this scale is: “Most of the programs that are supposed
to solve problems around here won’t do much good.”

Individual  organizational  citizenship  behaviors  (OCBI)  were  measured  by  Lee
and Allen’s (2002) eight-item OCBI scale, which demonstrated adequate reliability
in this study (.90). A sample item is: “I go out of my way to make new employees
feel welcome in the work group.” Finally, deviance behaviors were measured by Fox
and  Spector’s  (1999)  counterproductive  work  behaviors  scale.  This  scale  asks
respondents  to  rate  the  extent  to  which  the  individual  has  engaged  in  deviant
behaviors (α = .92).  We  used  the  minor  organizational  and  the  minor  personal
dimensions of this scale. A sample item from the minor personal scale is “withheld
work related information from a co-worker,” and a sample item from the minor orga-
nizational scale is “purposely wasted company materials/supplies.”

RESULTS

Means, standard deviations, and item correlations for study variables are shown
in Table  1.  Hypothesis  1  was  that  employees’ positive  emotions  would  be  posi-
tively related to their emotional engagement and negatively related to their cyni-
cism. For these analyses we used hierarchical regression where the covariates of
age, gender, tenure, job level, and education were entered into Step 1 and positive
emotions were entered into Step 2. The purpose was to see the independent effects
of positive emotions on both attitudes. As seen in Table 2, when entering positive
emotions  into  the  regression  model, it  predicted  significant  variance  beyond  the
covariates. In each case, the model in Step 2 shows positive emotions related pos-
itively  with  engagement  and  negativity  with  cynicism. Therefore, there  was  full
support for Hypothesis 1.


Avey et al. / POSITIVE EMPLOYEES AND CHANGE

61

TABLE 2

Effect of Positive Emotions on Attitudes and Behaviors

Relevant to Positive Organizational Change 

Engagement

Cynicism

Citizenship

Deviance

Step 1

β

Step 2

β

Step 1

β

Step 2

β

Step 1

β

Step 2

β

Step 1

β

Step 2

β

.001
–.045
.045
.089
.033
.097
.107
.193
.274** .150

–.419*
–.096
.364*
.035
–.277**

.531**
.256**

–.221
.254**
.292
–.020
.242*

–.449*
–.067
.405*
.064
–.198*
–.342**
.106**

–.059
–.232*
–.054
–.025
–.206*

–.186
.221*
.244
–.054
.150
.394**
.141**

–.104
–.189*
.010
.018
–.086
–.519**
.245**

Age
Gender
Tenure
Job level
Education
Positive emotions
∆R2
*p < .05. **p < .01.

Hypothesis  2  predicted  a  positive  relationship  between  positive  emotions  and
organizational  citizenship  behaviors  and  a  negative  relationship  with  workplace
deviance behaviors. Similar to the test of Hypothesis 1, hierarchical regression was
used with the covariates of age, gender, tenure, job level, and education in Step 1,
followed  by  positive  emotions  in  Step  2.  As  hypothesized, positive  emotions
accounted  for  significant  incremental  variance  in  each  model  and  were  positively
related to citizenship behaviors and negatively related to workplace deviance behav-
iors as shown in Table 2. Thus, full support was found for Hypothesis 2.

Hypothesis 3 predicted a positive relationship between PsyCap and positive emo-
tions. As evident in Table 4, PsyCap predicted positive emotions above and beyond
the control variables used in the study. Thus, we found full support for Hypothesis 3.

Hypothesis 4 indicated positive emotions acted as a mediator between PsyCap
and the employee attitudes and behaviors. Baron and Kenny (1986) posit that medi-
ation is supported if each of the following is demonstrated: (a) The first regression
equation shows that the independent variable relates to the dependent variable, (b)
the  second  equation  shows  that  the  independent  variable  relates  to  the  mediating
variable, and (c) the third regression shows that the mediating variable relates to the
dependent variable and the relationship of the independent variable with the depen-
dent variable is significantly lower in magnitude in the third equation than in the sec-
ond. Support for full mediation can be argued when the independent variable does
not  relate  to  the  dependent  variable  when  the  mediating  variable  is  added  to  the
equation.

Support  for  the  second  condition, that  the  independent  variable  of  PsyCap  is
related  to  positive  emotions, was  found  in  testing  Hypothesis  3  (see  Table  4).
Therefore, we performed regression analyses to determine the extent to which the
independent variable PsyCap was related to the attitudes and behaviors and in Step
2 of the regression model, the extent to which positive emotions negated or mini-
mized that relationship.


62

THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE

March 2008

Mediating Effect of Positive Emotions on Attitudes and Behaviors

Relevant to Positive Organizational Change

TABLE 3

Engagement

Cynicism

Citizenship

Deviance

Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 1

β

β

β

β

Step 2

β

Step 3 Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 1

β

β

β

β

β

Step 2

β

Step 3

β

Education
Gender
Age
Job level
Tenure
Psychological 

capital (PsyCap)
Positive emotions

*p < .05. **p < .01.

.001
–.045 –.021
.032
.017
.089
.023
.026
.097
.103
.153
.111
.274* .189* .145
.429* .118

–.028
.430*
.074

–.419* –.442* –.448* –.221
–.033
.254*
–.096
.431*
.364
.292
–.020
.077
.035
–.277* –.198* –.185*
.242*
–.401** –.306*

–.200 –.187 –.059
–.084
.190* .199* –.232* –.155
.023
.229
.227 –.054
–.057 –.062 –.025
.019
.168
.142 –.206* –.116
.379** .199

–.103
–.167*
.026
.026
–.078
–.461**–.192

.452*

–.138

.262*

–.391**

As shown in Table 3, the results of the analyses for Hypothesis 4 were mixed.
When entered into Step 3 of the regression model, positive emotions were related to
engagement and negated the previously significant relationship between PsyCap and
engagement. Therefore, positive emotions were found to fully mediate the relation-
ship between PsyCap and engagement. In contrast, positive emotions did not negate
the significant negative relationship between PsyCap and cynicism, and neither were
positive  emotions  significantly  negatively  related  to  cynicism  with  PsyCap  in  the
regression model. Thus, PsyCap was shown to have an independent effect on cyni-
cism apart from positive emotions. Given that cynicism is an attitude that is recog-
nized to be made up of both cognitive and affective components (Dean et al., 1998),
the  empirical  evidence  suggests  that  the  cognitive  component  of  this  attitude  pri-
marily drives the negative relationship between PsyCap and cynicism.

For the final two outcomes in the study, citizenship and deviance behaviors, pos-
itive emotions were found to fully mediate their relationship with PsyCap. In each
case, Step 2 shows PsyCap to be a significant predictor, then in Step 3 positive emo-
tions were found to negate that relationship and emerge as the stronger and signifi-
cant predictor of both citizenship and deviance behaviors.

Hypothesis  5  was  that  mindfulness  would  moderate  the  relationship  between
PsyCap and positive emotions. Thus, we calculated an interaction term (using cen-
tered terms) and included it in the hierarchical analyses. In addition, we included
education, gender, age, job level, and tenure as covariates in our analyses. As evident
by the results shown in Table 4, we found full support for Hypothesis 5; however,
the interaction effect was different than we expected.

The  graph  in  Figure  2  plots  high  and  low  levels  of  mindfulness  and  PsyCap
according  to  procedures  in  Aiken  and  West  (1991).  Specifically, the  interaction
effects were examined using standard deviations above and below the mean and by
selecting values for high and low levels of each variable (i.e., 2 for low and 6 for high);
the latter results are presented in Figure 2. As depicted by this graph, mindfulness


Avey et al. / POSITIVE EMPLOYEES AND CHANGE

63

TABLE 4

Interactive Effect of Mindfulness on Psychological

Capital (PsyCap) and Positive Emotions

Positive Emotions

Age
Gender
Tenure
Job level
Education
PsyCap
Mindfulness
PsyCap × Mindfulness
∆R2

*p < .05. **p < .01.

Step 1

β

–.097
–.092
.123
.099
.227*

Step 2

β

–.065
–.047
–.020
.058
.055
.640**
.250**

.473**

Step 3

β

–.056
–.047
–.016
.059
.058
.690**
.226*
–.152*
.020*

significantly (β = –.15; p < .05) interacts with PsyCap to predict positive emotions
such  that  the  relationship  between  mindfulness  and  positive  emotions  is  stronger
when PsyCap is lower. However, when PsyCap is high, mindfulness does not have a
significant effect on positive emotions. Therefore, the compensatory effect of mind-
fulness on positive emotions occurs only when PsyCap is low. A test of the simple
slopes confirms that the relationship between PsyCap and positive emotions is sig-
nificantly different than zero at the levels of mindfulness examined (t tests signifi-
cant at p < .001).

Post Hoc Analyses

Subsequent to all hypotheses tests, we conducted two post hoc analyses to better
determine both psychometric properties and inference for directionality of the tested
model.  Specifically, despite  the  theoretical  and  empirically  validated  distinction
between positive emotions and PsyCap, given the high correlation between PsyCap
and positive emotions in this study, we conducted a confirmatory factor analysis to
better distinguish these two constructs in terms of measurement. Each item was fit
to  its  latent  variable  using  maximum  likelihood  techniques  in  structural  equation
modeling (using Mplus 3.1). Fit indices for the CFA were generally acceptable
(CFI = .93, RMSEA = .06, standardized root mean square residual [SRMR] = .05),
suggesting that despite a strong correlation, measurement of the constructs was gen-
erally discriminatory and provides further construct validity support.

A second post hoc analysis was also conducted to test competing theoretical mod-
els. First, although we leveraged Lazarus’s cognitive mediation theory to describe
the relationship between PsyCap and positive emotions, other researchers have sug-
gested  that  perhaps  emotions  precede  cognitions  (e.g., Goleman, Boyatzis, &
McKee, 2002). Given that the research design applied in this study was not experi-
mental and thus cannot account for ordering effects of phenomena, we utilized path
analysis in structural equation modeling to compare the two models.


64

THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE

March 2008

FIGURE 2:
NOTE: Interaction is significant at p < .05.

Interaction of Psychological Capital (PsyCap) and Mindfulness on Positive Emotions

First, we modeled the data as the theoretical model as shown in Figure 1. This
model yielded significant paths consistent with the regression models and generally
acceptable model fit indices (CFI = .95, RMSEA = .08, SRMR = .08). Next, we fit
the data to a model beginning with positive emotions leading to PsyCap (with the
mindfulness  interaction)  and  PsyCap  leading  to  the  attitudes  and  behaviors.  This
model produced a slightly less optimal fit than the hypothesized model (CFI = .90,
RMSEA = .15, SRMR = .10). The two models were compared using a chi-square
difference  significance  test, which  indicated  that  the  hypothesized  model  with
PsyCap leading to positive emotions was a significantly better fit to the data than a
model beginning with positive emotions and leading to PsyCap (∆χ2 = 17.5, p < .01).
Although this model comparison does not demonstrate that PsyCap “caused” posi-
tive emotions, it does demonstrate that the optimal fit of the data in this case was a
model with PsyCap leading to positive emotions and positive emotions leading to the
attitudinal and behavioral variables.

DISCUSSION

Employee resistance is commonly recognized as one of the biggest obstacles and
threats to organizations attempting to change to keep up or ahead of evolving inter-
nal  and  external  conditions. The  results  of  this  study  suggest  employees’ positive
psychological capital and positive emotions may be important in countering poten-
tial  dysfunctional  attitudes  and  behaviors  relevant  for  organizational  change.
Specifically, the positive resources of employees (i.e., PsyCap and emotions) may
combat  the  negative  reactions  (i.e., cynicism  and  deviance)  often  associated  with
organizational change. Taking a positive approach, this study also found that employees’
positive resources are associated with desired attitudes (emotional engagement) and


Avey et al. / POSITIVE EMPLOYEES AND CHANGE

65

behaviors (organizational citizenship) that previous research has shown to directly
and indirectly facilitate and enhance positive organizational change. In other words,
in answering the question posed in the title of the article, positive employees’ psy-
chological capital and emotions may indeed be an important contribution to positive
organizational change.

In addition, employees’ awareness of their thoughts and feelings, namely, mind-
fulness, was  found  to  interact  with  PsyCap  to  predict  positive  emotions.  In  the
observed interaction, when PsyCap is low, high mindfulness seems to compensate
for this and individuals may still experience more positive emotions. It is important
to note that this effect is stronger at low levels of PsyCap, suggesting that mindful
employees have greater opportunity to become aware of thinking patterns that chal-
lenge their ability to be hopeful, efficacious, optimistic, and resilient at work, espe-
cially during times of organizational change. Such awareness may lead employees to
intentionally  choose  more  hopeful, efficacious, optimistic, and  resilient  ways  of
dealing with stress and resistance to change.

Besides the impact that employee positivity through PsyCap and emotions has on
attitudes and behaviors relevant to positive organizational change and the moderat-
ing role of mindfulness, another major finding from the study is the mediating role
positive emotions seems to play in the relationship between PsyCap and the attitudes
and behaviors. Given that research to date has mainly considered the direct effects
of PsyCap on employee work outcomes (e.g., Luthans, Avolio, et al., 2007; Luthans
et al., 2005), mediating mechanisms are just starting to be explored to better under-
stand how PsyCap may affect outcomes in the workplace. Results from this study
suggest that positive emotions may mediate the relationship between PsyCap and at
least the attitudes of cynicism and engagement and the behaviors of citizenship and
deviance. In other words, employees who are higher in PsyCap are likely to have
more positive emotions and subsequently be more engaged and less cynical and also
exhibit more organizational citizenship and less deviant behaviors. In addition, the
results also seem to indicate that PsyCap has a stronger direct and independent effect
on employee cynicism than the indirect effect of PsyCap through positive emotions.
Future research could replicate and extend these findings by examining this medita-
tional  model  over  time  during  specific  organizational  discontinuous  events  and
incremental change processes (Tushman & O’Reilly, 1996).

Finally, the study’s findings build more evidence supporting a cognitive media-
tion  theory  (see  Lazarus, 1993, for  overview;  Weiss  &  Cropanzano, 1996)  of
employee  emotions  in  the  workplace.  That  is, employees’ psychological  beliefs,
expectancies, and appraisals (i.e., hope, efficacy, optimism, resilience, or PsyCap)
may be a good potential source of positive emotions and subsequent employee atti-
tudes and behaviors related to positive organizational change.

Study Limitations

As with any empirical study, there are methodological limitations that need to be
recognized. First, no causal conclusions can be drawn. Specifically, neither experi-
mental  manipulation  nor  random  assignment  was  part  of  the  study  design.  Thus,
causal effects between PsyCap and positive emotions and between positive emotions


66

THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE

March 2008

and the identified attitudes and behaviors cannot be determined. For example, one
alternative  explanation  from  this  study’s  findings  could  be  that  employees  highly
engaged in their work leads them to have more positive emotions.

In addition to the direction of causality limitation is that the same source was used
to  gather  data  on  both  independent  and  dependent  variables.  Podsakoff  and  col-
leagues (2003) note that this common source bias can lead to inflated relationships.
Thus, this study followed their recommendations to separate data collection of vari-
ables over time. This procedure can help minimize but obviously does not eliminate
this limitation. However, recently some organizational research methodologists have
argued that the threat of common method variance may not be as big a problem as
once assumed (see Spector, 2006).

Future Research and Practical Implications

Future research needs to continue to explore the nomological network of psycho-
logical capital, mindfulness, emotions, and other related positive constructs in the
context  of  organizational  change.  The  integration  of  positive  psychology  into  the
field of organizational behavior has provided ample opportunities for researchers to
learn how to leverage individual-level positive constructs for improved organization-
level outcomes (e.g., see Cameron, 2003; Youssef & Luthans, 2005). Furthermore,
future research should consider the role of additional mediators and moderators as
well as the role of differing organizational-level and cultural contextual factors that
influence employee psychological capital and positive emotions and how they man-
ifest and impact performance and macro-level organizational change.

Future research should also focus on experimental studies to establish the causal,
directional  impact  of  psychological  capital  and  positive  emotions.  Tugade  and
Fredrickson (2004) emphasize that positive emotions enhance resilience, and so it is
likely that emotions, once manifested, may in turn influence one’s subsequent thinking/
cognition (Albarracin & Kumkale, 2003; Frijda, Manstead, & Bem, 2006). However,
we  agree  with  Lazarus’s  (1991, 1993)  and  Fredrickson’s  (2001)  conclusions  that
cognition (i.e., perceptions, interpretations, appraisals, beliefs) is a starting point and
initiator  for  emotions.  Research  on  initial  event  categorization  and  stereotyping
helps explain why people are often not aware of the automatic cognitive appraisals
that precede their emotions (e.g., see Bargh, 1994, for a review).

Finally, examining the long-term interactive effects and developmental opportu-
nities for psychological capital, positive emotions, and mindfulness provides practi-
cal  implications  for  developing  more  positive  workplaces.  For  example, there  is
beginning  evidence  that  PsyCap  can  be  developed  in  short  training  interventions
(e.g., see Luthans et al., 2006; Luthans et al., in press). The results of the current
study would indicate that such training may be effective to facilitate positive organi-
zational changes. In addition, based on the nature of the interaction of PsyCap and
mindfulness, it  seems  that  developing  mindfulness  at  work, namely, heightened
awareness  of  current  thoughts  and  feelings, can  also  facilitate  positive  emotions.
Thus, mindfulness may contribute to understanding the process by which the core
construct  of  PsyCap  affects  employee  attitudes  and  behaviors  relevant  to  positive
organizational change and how PsyCap can be developed. Although this study only


Avey et al. / POSITIVE EMPLOYEES AND CHANGE

67

tested  the  relationships  between  two  measurable  positive  constructs  on  relevant
attitudes and behaviors, the findings provide beginning support that positive employees
may indeed be a very important ingredient in positive organizational change.

REFERENCES

Abrahamson, E. (2000). Change without pain. Harvard Business Review, 78(4), 75-79.
Aiken, L. S., & West, S. G. (1991). Multiple regression: Testing and interpreting interactions. Newbury

Park, CA: Sage.

Albarracin, D., & Kumkale, G. T. (2003). Affect as information in persuasion: A model of affect identifi-

cation and discounting. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 453-469.

Andersson, L. M., & Bateman, T. S. (1997). Cynicism in the workplace: Some causes and effects. Journal

of Organizational Behavior, 18, 449-460.

Armenakis, A. A., & Bedeian, A. G. (1999). Organizational change: A review of theory and research in

the 1990s. Journal of Management, 25, 293-315.

Ashford, S. J. (1988). Individual strategies for coping with stress during organizational transitions. The

Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 24, 19-36.

Avey, J. B., Patera, J. L., & West, B. J. (2006). Positive psychological capital: A new approach for under-

standing absenteeism. Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies, 13, 42-60.

Baer, R. A. (2003). Mindfulness training as a clinical intervention: A conceptual and empirical review.

Clinical Psychology: Science & Practice, 10, 125-143.

Bakker, A. B., van Emmerik, H., & Euwema, M. C. (2006). Crossover of burnout and engagement in work

teams. Work and Occupations, 33, 464-489.

Bandura, A.  (1991).  Social  cognitive  theory  and  self-regulation.  Organizational  Behavior  and  Human

Decision Processes, 50, 248-287.

Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: Freeman.
Bargh, J. A. (1994). The four horsemen of automaticity. In R. S. Wyer & T. K. Srull (Eds.), Handbook of

social cognition (pp. 1-40). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psychologi-
cal research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 51, 1173-1182.

Baumeister, R. F., Gailliot, M. T., DeWall, C. N., & Oaten, M. (2006). Self-regulation and personality:
How interventions increase regulatory success, and how depletion moderates the effects of traits on
behavior. Journal of Personality, 74, 1773-1801.

Brief, A. P., & Weiss, H. M. (2002). Organizational behavior: Affect in the workplace. Annual Review of

Psychology, 53, 279-307.

Brown, K. W., & Ryan, R. M. (2003). The benefits of being present: Mindfulness and its role in psycho-

logical well-being. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 822-848.

Cameron, K. S. (2003). Organizational virtuousness and performance. In K. S. Cameron, J. E. Dutton, &
R. E. Quinn (Eds.), Positive organizational scholarship (pp. 48-65). San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.
Cameron, K. S., & Caza, A. (2004). Contributions to the discipline of positive organizational scholarship.

American Behavioral Scientist, 47, 731-739.

Cameron, K. S., Dutton, J. E., & Quinn, R. E. (Eds.). (2003). Positive organizational scholarship. San

Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.

Carlson, L. E., Speca, M., Patel, K. D., & Goodey, E. (2004). Mindfulness-based stress reduction in rela-
tion to quality of life, mood, symptoms of stress and levels of cortisol, dehydroepiandrosterone sul-
fate (DHEAS) and melatonin in breast and prostate cancer outpatients. Psychoneuroendocrinology,
29, 448-471.

Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. S. (2002). Optimism. In C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), Handbook of pos-

itive psychology (pp. 231-243). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Cascio, W. F. (2002). Strategies for responsible restructuring. Academy of Management Executive, 16(3),

80-91.


68

THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE

March 2008

Chuang, S.  C.  (2007).  Sadder  but  wiser  or  happier  and  smarter? A  demonstration  of  judgment  and

decision-making. Journal of Psychology, 141, 63-76.

Dean, J. W., Brandes, P., & Dharwadkar, R. (1998). Organizational cynicism. Academy of Management

Review, 23, 341-352.

Fox, S., &  Spector, P.  E.  (1999). A  model  of  work  frustration-aggression.  Journal  of  Organizational

Behavior, 20, 915-931.

Fredrickson, B. L. (1998). What good are positive emotions? Review of General Psychology, 2, 300-319.
Fredrickson, B. L. (2001). The role of positive emotions in positive psychology: The broaden-and-build

theory of positive emotions. American Psychologist, 56, 218-226.

Fredrickson, B. L. (2003a). Positive emotions and upward spirals in organizations. In K. S. Cameron,
J. E. Dutton, & R. E. Quinn (Eds.), Positive organizational scholarship (pp. 241-261). San Francisco:
Berrett-Koehler.

Fredrickson, B. L. (2003b). The value of positive emotions. American Scientist, 91, 330-335.
Fredrickson, B. L., & Levenson, R. W. (1998). Positive emotions speed recovery from the cardiovascular

sequelae of negative emotions. Cognition and Emotion, 12, 191-220.

Fredrickson, B. L., & Losada, M. F. (2005). Positive affect and the complex dynamics of human flour-

ishing. American Psychologist, 60, 678-686.

Fredrickson, B. L., Mancuso, R. A., Branigan, C., & Tugade, M. M. (2000). The undoing effect of posi-

tive emotions. Motivation and Emotion, 24, 237-258.

Fredrickson, B. L., Tugade, M. M., Waugh, C. E., & Larkin, G. R. (2003). What good are positive emo-
tions in a crisis? A prospective study of resilience and emotions following the terrorist attacks on the
United States on September 11th (2001). Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 365-376.

Frijda, N. H. (1986). The emotions. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Frijda, N. H., Manstead, A. S. R., & Bem, S. (2006). Emotions and beliefs. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge

University Press.

Germer, C. K., Siegel, R. D., & Fulton, P. R. (2005). Mindfulness and psychotherapy. New York: Guilford.
Gittell, J.  H., Cameron, K., Lim, S., &  Rivas, V.  (2006).  Relationships, layoffs, and  organizational
resilience: Airline industry responses to September 11. The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science,
42, 300-329.

Goleman, D., Boyatzis, R., & McKee, A. (2002). Primal leadership: Realizing the power of emotional

intelligence. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.

Izard, C.  E.  (1993).  Four  systems  for  emotion  activation: Cognitive  and  noncognitive  processes.

Psychological Review, 100, 68-90.

Kabat-Zinn, J.  (2003).  Mindfulness-based  interventions  in  context: Past, present, and  future.  Clinical

Psychology: Science & Practice, 10, 144-156.

Keyes, C. L. M. (2002). The mental health continuum: From languishing to flourishing in life. Journal of

Health and Social Behavior, 43, 207-222.

Langer, E. J. (1997). The power of mindful learning. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Lazarus, R. S. (1991). Emotion and adaptation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lazarus, R. S. (1993). From psychological stress to the emotions: A history of changing outlooks. Annual

Review of Psychology, 44, 1-21.

Lazarus, R. S. (2006). Emotions and interpersonal relationships: Toward a person-centered conceptual-

ization of emotions and coping. Journal of Personality, 74, 9-46.

Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, and coping. New York: Springer.
Lee, K., & Allen, N. J. (2002). Organizational citizenship behavior and workplace deviance: The role of

affect and cognitions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 131-142.

Lord, R. G., Klimoski, R. J., & Kanfer, R. (2002). Emotions in the workplace: Understanding the struc-

ture and role of emotions in organizational behavior. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Luthans, F.  (2002a).  The  need  for  and  meaning  of  positive  organizational  behavior.  Journal  of

Organizational Behavior, 23, 695-706.

Luthans, F. (2002b). Positive organizational behavior: Developing and managing psychological strengths.

Academy of Management Executive, 16, 57-72.

Luthans, F., Avey, J. B., Avolio, B. J., Norman, S. M., & Combs, G. M. (2006). Psychological capital

development: Toward a micro-intervention. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 27, 387-393.


Avey et al. / POSITIVE EMPLOYEES AND CHANGE

69

Luthans, F., Avey, J. B., & Patera, J. L. (in press). Experimental analysis of a Web-based intervention to

develop positive psychological capital. Academy of Management Learning and Education.

Luthans, F., Avolio, B., Avey, J. B., & Norman, S. M. (2007). Psychological capital: Measurement and

relationship with performance and job satisfaction. Personnel Psychology, 60, 541-572.

Luthans, F., Avolio, B., Walumbwa, F., & Li, W. (2005). The psychological capital of Chinese workers:

Exploring the relationship with performance. Management and Organization Review, 1, 247-269.

Luthans, F., & Youssef, C. M. (2004). Human, social, and now positive psychological capital manage-

ment. Organizational Dynamics, 33, 143-160.

Luthans, F., &  Youssef, C.  M.  (2007).  Emerging  positive  organizational  behavior.  Journal  of

Management, 33, 321-349.

Luthans, F., Youssef, C. M., & Avolio, B. J. (2007). Psychological capital: Developing the human com-

petitive edge. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Lyubomirsky, S., King, L., & Diener, E. (2005). The benefits of frequent positive affect: Does happiness

lead to success. Psychological Bulletin, 131, 803-855.

Martin, A.  J., Jones, E.  S., &  Callan, V.  J.  (2005).  The  role  of  psychological  climate  in  facilitating
adjustment during organizational change. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology,
14, 263-289.

Masten, A. S., & Reed, M. G. J. (2002). Resilience in development. In C. R. Snyder & S. Lopez (Eds.),

Handbook of positive psychology (pp. 74-88). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

May, D. R., Gilson, R. L., & Harter, L. M. (2004). The psychological conditions of meaningfulness, safety
and  availability  and  the  engagement  of  the  human  spirit  at  work.  Journal  of  Occupational  &
Organizational Psychology, 77, 11-37.

Mishra, K. E., Spreitzer, G. M., & Mishra, A. K. (1998). Preserving employee morale during downsizing.

MIT Sloan Management Review, 39(2), 83-95.

Nelson, D., & Cooper, C. (Eds.). (2007). Positive organizational behavior: Accentuating the positive at

work. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Ortony, A., Clore, G.  L., &  Collins, A.  (1988).  The  cognitive  structure  of  emotions.  Cambridge, UK:

Cambridge University Press.

O’Toole, J. (1995). Leading change: Overcoming the ideology of comfort and the tyranny of custom. San

Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Payne, R. L., & Cooper, C. L. (2001). Emotions at work: Theory, research and applications in manage-

ment. New York: John Wiley.

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. C., Lee, J., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2003). Common method biases in behav-
ioral  research: A  critical  review  of  the  literature  and  recommended  remedies.  Journal  of  Applied
Psychology, 88, 879-903.

Porras, J. I., & Silvers, R. C. (1994). Organizational development and transformation. In W. L. French,
C.  H.  Bell, &  R. A.  Zawacki  (Eds.), Organizational  development  and  transformation: Managing
effective change (pp. 82-110). New York: Irwin McGraw-Hill.

Pugh, S. D., Skarlicki, D. P., & Passell, B. S. (2003). After the fall: Layoff victims’ trust and cynicism in

re-employment. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 76, 201-212.

Quick, J. C., & Quick, J. D. (2004). Healthy, happy, productive work. Organizational Dynamics, 33,

329-337.

Reichers, A. E., Wanous, J. P., & Austin, J. T. (1997). Understanding and managing cynicism about orga-

nizational change. Academy of Management Executive, 11(1), 48-59.

Roberts, L. M. (2006). Shifting the lens on organizational life: The added value of positive scholarship.

Academy of Management Review, 31, 292-305.

Schachter, S., & Singer, J. (1962). Cognitive, social, and physiological determinants of emotional state.

Psychological Review, 69, 379-399.

Schwarz, N., & Clore, G. L. (1983). Mood, misattribution, and judgments of well-being: Informative and

directive functions of affective states. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 513-523.

Seligman, M. E. P. (1998). Learned optimism. New York: Pocket Books.
Seligman, M. E. P., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000). Positive psychology. American Psychologist, 55, 5-14.
Snyder, C. R. (2002). Hope theory: Rainbows in the mind. Psychological Inquiry, 13, 249-276.


70

THE JOURNAL OF APPLIED BEHAVIORAL SCIENCE

March 2008

Snyder, C. R., Irving, L. M., & Anderson, J. R. (1991). Hope and health. In C. R. Snyder (Ed.), Handbook

of social and clinical psychology (pp. 285-305). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Spector, P. E. (2006). Method variance in organizational research: Truth or urban legend? Organizational

Research Methods, 9, 221-232.

Stajkovic, A. S. & Luthans, F. (1998a). Self-self efficacy and work-related performance: A meta-analysis.

Psychological Bulletin, 124, 240-261.

Stajkovic, A. S. & Luthans, F. (1998b). Social cognitive theory and self-efficacy: Going beyond tradi-

tional motivational and behavioral approaches. Organizational Dynamics, 26, 62-74.

Stanley, D. J., Meyer, J. P., & Topolntsky, L. (2005). Employee cynicism and resistance to organizational

change. Journal of Business and Psychology, 19, 429-459.

Staw, B. M., & Barsade, S. G. (1993). Affect and managerial performance: A test of the sadder-but-wiser

vs. happier-and-smarter hypotheses. Administrative Science Quarterly, 38, 304-331.

Staw, B. M., Sutton, R. I., & Pelled, L. H. (1994). Employee positive emotion and favorable outcomes at

the workplace. Organization Science, 5, 51-71.

Sternberg, R. J. (2000). Images of mindfulness. Journal of Social Issues, 56, 11-26.
Strebel, P. (1996). Why do employees resist change? Harvard Business Review, 74(3), 86-92.
Teasdale, J. D., Segal, Z., & Williams, J. M. G. (1995). How does cognitive therapy prevent depressive
relapse  and  why  should  attentional  control  (mindfulness)  training  help?  Behavior  Research  and
Therapy, 33, 25-39.

Tugade, M. M., & Fredrickson, B. L. (2004). Resilient individuals use positive emotions to bounce back

from negative emotional experiences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86, 320-333.

Tugade, M. M., Fredrickson, B. L., & Barrett, L. (2004). Psychological resilience and positive emotional

granularity. Journal of Personality, 72, 1161-1190.

Tushman, M. L., & O’Reilly, C. A. (1996). Ambidextrous organizations: Managing evolutionary and

revolutionary change. California Management Review, 38(4), 8-30.

Wallace, B. A., & Shapiro, S. L. (2006). Mental balance and well-being. American Psychologist, 61,

690-701.

Wanous, J.  P., Reichers, A.  E., &  Austin, J.  T.  (2000).  Cynicism  about  organizational  change:

Measurement, antecedents, and correlates. Group and Organization Management, 25, 132-153.

Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of
positive and negative affect: The PANAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54,
1063-1070.

Weick, K.  E., &  Quinn, R.  E.  (1999).  Organizational  change  and  development.  Annual  Review  of

Psychology, 50, 361-386.

Weick, K. E., & Sutcliffe, K. M. (2001). Managing the unexpected: Assuring high performance in an age

of complexity. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Weick, K.  E., &  Sutcliffe, K.  M.  (2006).  Mindfulness  and  the  quality  of  organizational  attention.

Organization Science, 17, 514-524.

Weick, K. E., Sutcliffe, K. M., & Obstfeld, D. (1999). Organizing for high reliability: Processes of
collective mindfulness. In B. M. Staw & R. Sutton (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior
(pp. 81-123). Greenwich, CT: JAI.

Weiss, H. M., & Cropanzano, R. (1996). Affective events theory. In B. Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.),

Research in organizational behavior (pp. 1-74). Greenwich, CT: JAI.

Wright, T. A. (2003). Positive organizational behavior: An idea whose time has truly come. Journal of

Organizational Behavior, 24, 437-442.

Wright, T.  A., &  Cropanzano, R.  (2004).  The  role  of  psychological  well-being  in  job  performance.

Organizational Dynamics, 33, 338-351.

Wright, T. A., & Staw, B. M. (1999). Affect and favorable work outcomes: Two longitudinal tests of the

happy-productive worker thesis. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 20, 1-23.

Youssef, C. M., & Luthans, F. (2005). Resiliency development of organizations, leaders and employees:
Multi-level theory building for sustained performance. In W. Gardner, B. J. Avolio, & F. O. Walumbwa
(Eds.), Authentic  leadership  theory  and  practice.  Origins, effects, and  development (pp.  303-343).
Oxford, UK: Elsevier.

