Human Performance, 25:1–25, 2012
Copyright © Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 0895-9285 print/1532-7043 online
DOI: 10.1080/08959285.2011.631648

Transformational Leadership, Innovative Behavior,

and Task Performance: Test of Mediation and

Moderation Processes

Samuel Aryee
Aston University

Fred O. Walumbwa
Arizona State University

Qin Zhou

ISCTE-Instituto Universitario de Lisboa

Chad A. Hartnell

Arizona State University

We use the self-concept based theory of leadership and social exchange theory to hypothesize
processes linking transformational leadership to follower performance outcomes. Speciﬁcally, we
hypothesize that (a) transformational leadership relates to followers’ work engagement both directly
and indirectly through their psychological states, (b) work engagement relates to innovative behav-
ior, (c) innovative behavior relates to task performance, and (d) the work engagement–innovative
behavior relationship is moderated by leader–member exchange. Results from a test of these relation-
ships in a sample of employees of a large telecommunication company in China largely support our
hypothesized model.

Transformational leadership has garnered a plethora of attention since its inception more than
three decades ago. The pervasive focus on transformational leadership appears to be well founded
due to its positive documented effects on employees’ attitudes and behaviors (Judge & Piccolo,
2004; Lowe, Kroeck, & Sivasubramaniam, 1996) and across cultures (Kirkman, Chen, Farh,
Chen, & Lowe, 2009; Walumbwa, Lawler, & Avolio, 2007). Given these well-established links,
the need to illuminate the boundary conditions and mechanisms through which transformational
leaders foster positive employee work outcomes has gained an increased focus in the leadership
literature (Avolio, Walumbwa, & Weber, 2009). For example, researchers have focused on expli-
cating the boundary conditions and motivational mechanisms through which transformational

Correspondence should be sent to Samuel Aryee, Aston University, Aston Business School, Birmingham, B4 7ET,

United Kingdom. E-mail: s.aryee@aston.ac.uk


2

ARYEE, WALUMBWA, ZHOU, HARTNELL

leaders enhance employee performance (e.g., Bono & Judge, 2003; Dvir, Eden, Avolio, & Shamir,
2002; Piccolo & Colquitt, 2006; Schaubroeck, Lam, & Cha, 2007; Walumbwa, Avolio, & Zhu,
2008; Walumbwa & Hartnell, 2011).

Although researchers have made signiﬁcant progress in elucidating mechanisms through
which transformational leadership impacts followers, more work is still needed to uncover the
psychological linkages through which followers are motivated to perform beyond expectations.
As Avolio and colleagues (2009) recently stated, “Generally speaking, few have paid any atten-
tion to the underlying psychological processes, mechanisms, and conditions through which
charismatic and transformational leaders motivate followers to higher levels of motivation and
performance” (p. 429). These scholars called for further research that explores the mediators
and moderators of the relationships between transformational leadership and beneﬁcial work
behaviors. This is because there may be “a variety of different inﬂuence processes through which
transformational leaders inﬂuence followers” (Yukl, 1998, p. 328).

In tandem with research on transformational leadership is a surge in research on understand-
ing what motivates or enables individuals to innovate and the consequences of such innovative
behavior. This surge has been spurred by a realization that innovative behavior is critical for an
organization’s long-term survival and effectiveness (George & Zhou, 2002; Scott & Bruce, 1994).
At the microlevel, several researchers have identiﬁed leadership, particularly transformational
leadership (e.g., Gong, Huang, & Farh, 2009; Oke, Munshi, & Walumbwa, 2009; Pieterse, van
Knippenberg, Schippers, & Stam, 2010; Shin & Zhou, 2003) and leader–member exchange
(LMX; e.g., Scott & Bruce, 1994; Tierney, Farmer, & Graen, 1999), as an important currency
in innovative behavior. However, it has been noted that the results linking transformational lead-
ership to employee innovative behavior have been inconsistent (Gong et al., 2009; Pieterse et al.,
2010). Gong and colleagues (2009), for example, speculated several reasons for these inconsistent
ﬁndings, including the need to delve more into the mechanisms through which transformational
leadership affects innovative behavior (p. 766).

We believe there is another important theoretical explanation. Speciﬁcally, in addition to iden-
tifying more proximal mediators that link transformational leadership to innovative behavior, it
may also be theoretically important to identify potential moderators of such mediating variables
to further provide a better understanding of not only what motivates individuals to innovate but
also the conditions necessary for such effects. This investigation is particularly important because
prior research suggests that context has a substantial impact on innovative behavior (George &
Zhou, 2002; Scott & Bruce, 1994; Tierney et al., 1999).

Accordingly, we propose a different set of processes to further illuminate the underlying psy-
chological mechanisms that sequentially mediate the link between transformational leadership
and employee task performance. Speciﬁcally, we tested the model shown in Figure 1, whereby
transformational leaders affect employee work engagement as well as followers’ psychological
states of experienced meaningfulness of work and experienced responsibility for work outcomes.
Work engagement refers to the extent to which an employee is cognitively, emotionally, phys-
ically, and psychologically connected during the performance of his or her work roles (Harter,
Schmidt, & Hayes, 2002; Schaufeli & Bakker, 2004). Experienced meaningfulness refers to the
degree to which an employee experiences the work as inherently meaningful, judged in relation to
an individual’s own ideals or standards, whereas experienced responsibility is the degree to which
an employee feels personally accountable and responsible for the results of the work he or she
does (Hackman & Oldham, 1975). Similarly, and as shown in Figure 1, we further contend that


TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP AND PERFORMANCE

3

Leader-Member

Exchange

Meaningfulness

Transformational

Leadership

Work

Engagement

Innovative
Behavior

Task

Performance

Responsibility

FIGURE 1 The hypothesized model.

followers’ psychological states of experienced meaningfulness of work and experienced responsi-
bility for work outcomes predict their work engagement, which in turn fosters innovative behavior
and consequently task performance. Finally, we posited that employee work engagement more
strongly leads to innovative behavior when accompanied by a high LMX relationship.

We focus on employees’ experienced meaningfulness of work and experienced responsibility
for work outcomes as immediate outcomes of transformational leadership based on self-concept
theory of leadership (e.g., Shamir, House, & Arthur, 1993) and transformational leadership the-
ory, in general (Bass, 1985). According to self-concept theory, the inﬂuences of transformational
leaders are based on their success in connecting or engaging followers’ self-concept in the mis-
sion articulated by the leader (Bass, 1985; Shamir et al., 1993). Thus, the theory suggests that
transformational leaders inﬂuence their followers’ behavior by ﬁrst changing how they feel about
themselves (i.e., their psychological states). Further supporting this argument, in a meta-analytic
study, Judge and Piccolo (2004) reported that transformational leadership was more strongly
related to employee attitudes than their behaviors. However, to our knowledge, only a few stud-
ies (e.g., Bono & Judge, 2003; Walumbwa et al., 2008) have explored these potential aspects of
self-concept based theory to explain the motivational effects of transformational leadership on
followers’ performance.

By testing our model shown in Figure 1, we aimed to contribute to the leadership literature
in four important respects. First, by integrating insights from the self-concept based theory of
leadership (e.g., Shamir et al., 1993) and social exchange perspective (Blau, 1964), we further
illuminate the psychological processes and conditions through which transformational leaders
augment employee performance. Second, although transformational leadership behavior has been
identiﬁed as an important predictor of employee work engagement (Zhu, Avolio, & Walumbwa,
2009), research has yet to examine the potential underlying mechanisms through which this
relationship occurs. Therefore, in addition to examining the extent to which transformational
leadership contributes to employee work engagement, the present study contributes to the liter-
ature by applying aspects of self-concept-based theory (e.g., how employees come to feel about
themselves) to probe the psychological mechanisms by which this contribution occurs. Third,
with only a few exceptions (e.g., Gong et al., 2009; Shin & Zhou, 2003), researchers have paid


4

ARYEE, WALUMBWA, ZHOU, HARTNELL

less attention to psychological mechanisms that facilitate innovative behaviors. As Gong and
colleagues (2009) stated, “By examining potential mediators, we may better understand why
expected inﬂuences on creativity [innovative behavior] have been observed in some studies but
not in others” (p. 766). Thus, we extend previous innovation/creativity research by examining
additional potential mediators that have not been previously investigated yet are theoretically rel-
evant to fostering innovative behavior. In so doing, our contribution is not only to illuminate an
understanding of the complex relationship between transformational leadership and innovative
behavior but also to provide managers with guidance on enhancing innovative behaviors in their
organizations.

Last, we extend previous research on work engagement by showing how the leader-employee
relationship (LMX) may inﬂuence the relationship between employee work engagement and
innovative behavior. Although many authors have suggested leadership as an important situational
factor that could affect innovative behavior (e.g., Oke et al., 2009; Scott & Bruce, 1994; Tierney
et al., 1999), little research has been devoted to understanding how the leader–follower rela-
tionship can facilitate or inhibit individual innovative behavior and, consequently, performance.
Indeed, Scott and Bruce (1994) encouraged researchers to take an interactionist perspective
to help illuminate the processes underlying the antecedents of innovative behavior. Thus, our
examination of LMX as a potential moderator addresses this limitation in the literature.

TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP AND EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT

Kahn (1990) deﬁned personal engagement as “the simultaneous employment and expression of
a person’s ‘preferred self’ in task behaviors that promote connections to work and to others, per-
sonal presence (physical, cognitive, and emotional), and active, full role performances” (p. 700).
Harter and colleagues (2002) suggested that employee engagement refers to “one’s involve-
ment, satisfaction with, and enthusiasm for work” (p. 295). Although differences exist among
the various deﬁnitions, they all view engagement as being composed of purpose, involvement,
commitment, focused effort, and enthusiasm (Macey & Schneider, 2008). In the present study,
we chose to adopt Schaufeli and Bakker’s (2004) deﬁnition of employee engagement as a psycho-
logical state because we are interested in how employees come to feel about themselves at work.
According to their conceptualization, engagement consists of three dimensions: vigor (exhibited
by high levels of energy, mental resilience, and persistence), dedication (depicted by enthusiasm,
inspiration, pride, and challenge at work), and absorption (evidenced by concentration, focus,
intensity, and being deeply engrossed in work; Schaufeli & Bakker, 2004). These characteristics
are consistent with Kahn’s (1990) perspective that engagement involves an individual’s physical,
cognitive, and emotional effort.

Transformational leadership theory identiﬁes four dimensions that describe leader behavior
(Bass, 1985). Idealized inﬂuence is the charismatic behavior that inspires followers to trust and
identify with their leader and their mission. Inspirational motivation is the ability to articulate
shared goals and a clear, compelling vision that arouses followers and promotes positive expecta-
tions. Intellectual stimulation is the capacity to challenge followers to question assumptions, take
risks, think critically, and identify and solve problems proactively. Individualized consideration
is the extent to which leaders identify, understand, and address followers’ developmental needs
and treat them uniquely.


TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP AND PERFORMANCE

5

Shamir and colleagues’ (1993) self-concept based theory asserts that followers’ commitment
to the work unit’s mission, vision, and goals is a core element of transformational leadership’s
motivational process. They referred to commitment as the “motivational disposition to continue
a relationship, a role or course of action and to invest efforts regardless of the balance of exter-
nal costs and beneﬁts and their immediate gratifying properties” (Shamir et al., 1993, p. 583).
Transformational leaders develop followers’ commitment by linking their behavior and goals
to the work unit’s values and mission (Shamir et al., 1993). Consequently, followers express
greater enthusiasm, intensity, and resilience toward achieving the unit’s objectives. By connect-
ing the follower’s self-concept to the unit’s vision and mission, transformational leaders foster
employees’ work engagement. In essence, transformational leaders positively inﬂuence employee
work engagement by raising followers to higher levels of potential, developing their skills, and
expressing conﬁdence in their followers’ ability to perform beyond expectations. In line with
this expectation, research has detected a positive relationship between transformational leader-
ship and work engagement (see Zhu et al., 2009). In addition, results of Kahn’s (1990) extensive
two qualitative studies, designed to explore the conditions at work in which people personally
engage or disengage, revealed that leadership inﬂuenced the degree to which individuals were
engaged. Speciﬁcally, Kahn found that in environments where people felt supported and allowed
to take risks, as we would expect with transformational leaders (Bass, 1985), work engagement
increased. Therefore, we expect transformational leadership to positively inﬂuence employee
work engagement.

H1: Transformational leadership is positively related to employee work engagement.

TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP AND PSYCHOLOGICAL STATES

According to the self-concept based theory of leadership, transformational leaders motivate fol-
lowers through articulating a vision and mission in terms of the values they represent (Shamir
et al., 1993). Visionary and inspirational messages are instrumental inﬂuence mechanisms
because they structure attention and manage meaning (Smircich & Morgan, 1982). Smircich
and Morgan (1982) aptly noted that “the actions and utterances of leaders frame and shape the
context of action in such a way that the members of that context are able to use the meaning
thus created as a point of reference for their own action and understanding of the situation”
(p. 261). Hence, followers’ work is permeated with a sense of meaningfulness because lead-
ers explicitly associate it with a larger, moral purpose and with commitment to the collective’s
objective (Shamir et al., 1993). That is, followers perceive that their work matters because they
know how it upholds the unit’s values and contributes toward its objectives. In support, empirical
evidence indicates that transformational leadership is positively associated with perceptions of
work enjoyment, the degree to which work is fulﬁlling and rewarding (Arnold, Turner, Barling,
Kelloway, & McKee, 2007), and core job characteristics such as task identity and task signiﬁ-
cance (Piccolo & Colquitt, 2006)—important determinants of work meaningfulness (Hackman &
Oldham, 1975).

Self-concept-based theory of leadership also suggests that transformational leaders increase
the intrinsic value followers’ attribute to effort (Shamir et al., 1993). One way such leaders may
increase followers’ intrinsic value is through framing followers’ behavior as an expression of


6

ARYEE, WALUMBWA, ZHOU, HARTNELL

collective identity. Connecting followers’ self-concept with a larger collective infuses meaning
into tasks because followers want to meet and exceed their unit members’, leader’s, and their own
expectations. Consequently, followers frequently identify with their role and/or unit and associate
their tasks with a larger purpose (Kark, Shamir, & Chen, 2003; Walumbwa & Hartnell, 2011),
thereby making their work more meaningful. In other words, followers are motivated to attain
the unit’s overall objective because they perceive that their tasks are instrumental to the unit’s
overall goal. Therefore, we expect a positive relationship between transformational leadership
and experienced meaningfulness of work.

H2: Transformational

leadership

is

positively

related

to

followers’

experienced

meaningfulness of work.

To our knowledge, the link between transformational leadership and followers’ experienced
responsibility for work outcomes has not yet been explicitly tested. Transformational leader-
ship theory lends theoretical support, however, for the proposed relationship. Transformational
leaders do not exhibit excessive direction and control. Instead, they assess their followers’ devel-
opmental needs, listen to their concerns, and actively coach and mentor their followers. They
ask questions, solicit feedback, and reframe the problem to assist followers in the performance
of their work role. In essence, transformational leaders are a source of information from which
followers formulate and execute a novel plan based on their own competence and expertise (Bass,
1985). Transformational leaders thus coordinate, orchestrate, and engage followers by dissemi-
nating goals, delegating authority, and expressing conﬁdence in their ability to perform beyond
the expectations speciﬁed in the implicit or explicit exchange agreement and for the collective
good (Dvir et al., 2002). They also encourage followers to take risks by approaching old issues in
a novel way and admonishing them to question assumptions and think critically (Bass, 1985).
Furthermore, transformational leaders focus on coaching and mentoring followers to assume
greater levels of responsibility (Bass, 1985).

(2009) assertions

These arguments are consistent with Zhu and colleagues’

that
transformational leaders pay closer attention to their followers’ needs for achievement and growth
by encouraging them to take additional responsibilities, thereby developing their full potential.
Similarly, Dvir and colleagues (2002) noted, “Transformational leaders evaluate the potential
of all followers in terms of their ability to fulﬁll current commitments, while also envisioning
expansion of their future responsibilities” (p. 736). In addition, the transformational leadership
behaviors have been shown to enhance followers’ psychological empowerment (Kark et al., 2003;
Pieterse et al., 2010). This shared power enhances followers’ sense of control, which leads to
experienced responsibility for work outcomes. Providing indirect empirical support, Renn and
Vandenberg (1995) reported that followers who perceived greater autonomy were more likely
to assume greater responsibility for work outcomes. We contend that followers are more apt to
take responsibility for work outcomes when working with a transformational leader, because
such leaders encourage them to take more responsibilities to develop their full potential by pay-
ing closer attention to their needs for achievement and growth and also by fostering a sense of
control through shared power. Thus, we hypothesized:

H3: Transformational leadership is positively related to followers’ experienced responsibility

for work outcomes.


TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP AND PERFORMANCE

7

PSYCHOLOGICAL STATES AND EMPLOYEE WORK ENGAGEMENT

Kahn (1990) identiﬁed three psychological conditions that inﬂuence the degree to which peo-
ple engage in their tasks. These include meaningfulness (How meaningful is it for me to invest
myself into performing the task?), safety (How safe is it for me to do so?), and availability (How
available am I to do so?). Similarly, Hackman and Oldham (1975) theorized that three critical
psychological states (i.e., experienced meaningfulness of the work, experienced responsibility
for work outcomes, and knowledge of the results) are instrumental to ameliorating employees’
intrinsic motivation. May, Gilson, and Harter (2004) conducted a path analysis to ascertain the
extent to which these three psychological conditions are determinants of employee work engage-
ment. They reported that all three conditions were positively related with work engagement, but
meaningfulness exhibited the strongest association.

Drawing upon self-concept based theory of leadership (Shamir et al., 1993), Hackman and
Oldham’s (1975) work on employee psychological states, ﬁndings from Kahn (1990), and May
and colleagues’ (2004) ﬁnding that work meaningfulness (and by extension responsibility) is the
psychological condition with the strongest effect on employee work engagement, we contend
that followers’ experienced meaningfulness of work and experienced responsibility for work out-
comes are two of the most salient psychological resources through which transformational leaders
augment followers’ work engagement. That is, employees who view their work as personally
impactful and making a difference to the unit’s performance are more likely to be resilient, per-
sistent, devoted, and enthusiastic toward their work. Similarly, employees who feel that they are
responsible and accountable for their work and its outcomes are more likely to invest themselves
in their work, thus augmenting their level of work engagement.

Although these predictions have received little empirical support in the literature (for an
exception, see May et al., 2004, who examined the link between meaningfulness and work
engagement; however, the association between experienced responsibility for work outcomes
and work engagement has not been examined heretofore), prior work suggests that job resources
increase employees’ motivation (Schaufeli & Bakker, 2004). More speciﬁcally, Salanova, Agut,
and Peiro (2005) reported that positive organizational resources such as autonomy are pos-
itively associated with employees’ work engagement. This ﬁnding is consistent with Bono
and Judge (2003), who argued and found that followers of transformational leaders ﬁnd
their work more meaningful because such leaders are able to change their (followers’) self-
concept. In further support, Zhu and colleagues (2009) also argued that followers working
with transformational leaders experience high levels of work engagement because they are
developed to take greater responsibility. Thus, we expect experienced meaningfulness of work
and experienced responsibility for work outcomes to stimulate and augment employees’ work
engagement.

Note that our study focuses on followers’ experience of these psychological states and there-
fore how they feel about themselves, which translates into their work engagement. As we did not
consider other mechanisms through which transformational leadership might relate to employee
work engagement, such as job characteristics (e.g., skill variety, task identity, and task signiﬁ-
cance), we expect followers’ experienced meaningfulness of work and experienced responsibility
for work outcomes to only partially mediate the relationship between transformational leadership
and employee work engagement. For example, Grant (2008) reported that the positive association


8

ARYEE, WALUMBWA, ZHOU, HARTNELL

between task signiﬁcance and employee behavior was mediated by perceptions of social impact
and social worth. We propose the following:

H4: Experienced meaningfulness of work is positively related to work engagement.
H5: Experienced responsibility for work outcomes is positively related to work engagement.
H6: Experienced meaningfulness of work and experienced responsibility for work outcomes
will partially mediate the positive inﬂuence of transformational leadership on work
engagement.

EMPLOYEE WORK ENGAGEMENT AND INNOVATIVE BEHAVIOR

Innovative behavior refers to “the production or adoption of useful ideas and idea implementation,
and begins with problem recognition and the generation of ideas or solutions” (Scott & Bruce,
1994, p. 581). Because engaged individuals are characterized by vigor, dedication, and absorption
(Schaufeli & Bakker, 2004), they are likely to be innovative. More speciﬁcally, engaged individ-
uals exhibit high levels of energy, enthusiasm, focus, inspiration, intensity, mental resilience, and
persistence. These characteristics enable them to be innovative in their work. Indeed, Luthans,
Avolio, Avey, and Norman (2007), among others, have argued that behaviors such as resiliency
are likely to allow individuals to persist even in the face of adversity to attain success, thereby
enhancing innovative behavior. This argument is predicated on the notion that employees who
exhibit positive psychological resources view work obstacles as challenges to overcome, and
thus make their jobs more enriched. As such, they approach work with creativity and ingenu-
ity to learn and achieve. Parker and Axtell (2001) found that individuals with enriched jobs are
more likely to develop a “big picture” understanding of how the whole department works, thereby
enhancing innovative behavior.

The literature on motivation, particularly intrinsic motivation, provides further theoretic and
empirical grounds to expect work engagement to be related to innovative behavior. As a conceptu-
ally similar construct to work engagement (Rich, LePine, & Crawford, 2010), intrinsic motivation
has been shown to be related to creativity (Shalley, Zhou, & Oldham, 2004), which we treat as
being synonymous with innovative behavior. Rich and colleagues (2010) noted that job (work)
engagement is a much broader construct than intrinsic motivation because it entails investments
of cognitive, emotional, and physical energies into a work role. To the extent that work engage-
ment reﬂects greater connectedness to one’s work role, it will engender a perception of one’s
work role as including a wider array of behaviors including innovative behavior. In support of
our arguments, Hakanen, Perhoniemi, and Toppinen-Tanner (2008) found a positive relationship
between work engagement and personal initiative, which in turn positively inﬂuenced work-unit
innovativeness. Thus, we expect a positive relationship between work engagement and individual
innovative behavior.

H7: Work engagement is positively related to innovative behavior.

INNOVATIVE BEHAVIOR AND TASK PERFORMANCE

Innovative employees gather and consider a broad range of information to generate new ideas
and to improve existing processes (Tesluk, Farr, & Klein, 1997). As such, they are more likely


TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP AND PERFORMANCE

9

to be willing to learn to discover and develop new ideas to solve problems at hand, thereby
enhancing task performance (Amabile, 1996). Indeed, employee willingness to learn has been
recognized as critical to job performance (Walumbwa, Cropanzano, & Hartnell, 2009), because
learning motivates employees to acquire new skills needed to perform the tasks (Argote, 1999;
McGrath, 2001). Of interest, this perspective is akin to the challenge-stressor framework in which
meta-analytic evidence indicated that challenge stressors increase employees’ motivation and,
subsequently, their performance (LePine, Podsakoff, & LePine, 2005).

In sum, although research linking employee innovative behavior to task performance is sparse,
a few studies have found a positive relationship between innovative behavior and job performance
(Gong et al., 2009; see also Gilson, Mathieu, Shalley, & Ruddy, 2005, at the team level). In keep-
ing with these ﬁndings, we also expect a positive relationship between employees’ innovative
behavior and their task performance.

H8: Innovative behavior is positively related to task performance.

WORK ENGAGEMENT AND INNOVATIVE BEHAVIOR: LMX AS A MODERATOR

Despite calls for the integration of leadership perspectives (Gerstner & Day, 1997; Howell & Hall-
Merenda, 1999), only limited research has responded to these calls (Howell & Hall-Merenda,
1999; Wang, Law, Hackett, Wang, & Chen, 2005). Relating to the leadership perspectives of
transformational leadership and LMX, Howell and Hall-Merenda (1999) argued that the inﬂuence
of transformational leadership behaviors on follower outcomes is contingent upon LMX quality.
Of the three types of relationships that Hirschhorn (1991) suggested leaders should have with a
group, two underscore the need to integrate transformational leadership and LMX. These are (a)
relationships to each group member as individuals, and (b) relationship to the group as a whole.
As a form of average leadership style (Dansereau, Alutto, & Yammarino, 1984), transformational
leadership may be perceived as a group-focused leadership in that it creates the motivating condi-
tions that facilitate the group’s work engagement. However, as a differentiated individual-focused
leadership, LMX suggests that leaders vary their behavior based on the quality of the relation-
ship they have with individual employees. Consequently, an employee’s behavioral reactions
to the motivational state of engagement will be contingent on the nature of the quality of the
LMX an employee has with his or her leader. In this study, we responded to this call for integra-
tion by examining the moderating role of LMX in the relationship between the transformational
leadership-engendered motivational state of work engagement and follower innovative behavior.
Although LMX has been linked to innovative behavior in past research (e.g., Scott & Bruce,
1994; Tierney et al., 1999), we argue that LMX may also moderate the relationship between
employee work engagement and innovative behavior. This moderating inﬂuence can be illustrated
more clearly from the lens of LMX perspective itself, which draws from social exchange theory
(Blau, 1964; see Cropanzano & Mitchell, 2005, for a recent review). A key argument of LMX the-
ory is that leaders form high-quality social exchanges that are based on liking, respect, and trust
with some employees, resulting in high levels of shared identity with the leader, loyalty, emo-
tional connections, and mutual support. With other employees, they form lower quality, economic
exchanges that are transactional in nature, emphasizing short-term interactions and quid pro quo
exchanges where obligations are circumscribed to a particular exchange (Erdogan, Liden, &


10

ARYEE, WALUMBWA, ZHOU, HARTNELL

Kraimer, 2006; Maslyn & Uhl-Bien, 2001; Walumbwa, Cropanzano, & Goldman, 2011). These
two types of relationships suggest that LMX functions as an “anchor and context” (Lind, 2001,
p. 73). That is, LMX carries implicit cues that direct employees’ attention to what leaders say
and whether the leader supports, values, and shares their aspirations. Thus, LMX is an important
contextual variable that can enhance or inhibit the positive impact of employee engagement on
innovative behavior.

For those in a high-quality LMX relationship, we expect the relationship between work
engagement and innovative behavior to be further enhanced because employees are likely to
perceive that they operate in a context that is supportive of innovative behavior. Speciﬁcally,
within the security, trust, and mutual support of high LMX relationships, employees who are
engaged in their work may feel at liberty to approach tasks innovatively, without fear of being
reprimanded. In effect, failed innovative approaches may be viewed, in the context of high LMX
relationships, as learning opportunities for innovative behavior. Consequently, engaged employ-
ees may be more likely to express innovative behavior when they have high LMX relationships
with their supervisors. Conversely, a low-quality LMX relationship may be interpreted as an indi-
cation that the supervisor has not afﬁrmed ones’ aspirations and values, and thus may weaken the
positive engagement–innovative behavior relationship. In addition, because employees’ engage-
ment is contingent on the work environment (Harter et al., 2002; Schaufeli & Bakker 2004; Zhu
et al., 2009), the leader–follower relationship is likely to play a signiﬁcant role in enhancing or
inhibiting the inﬂuence of work engagement on innovative behavior. Thus, a high-quality LMX
suggests a psychologically safe context in which the motivational state of work engagement will
promote the risk-taking behavior of innovation.

To our knowledge, no study has examined the employee work engagement–LMX interaction
to predict innovative behavior, but there is evidence supporting this expected interaction. Tierney
et al. (1999) proposed and examined an interactionist model of creativity to identify the role of
leadership in creativity. They found that employees characterized by an adaptive cognitive style
engaged in higher levels of creativity when they were in a high LMX relationship with their
supervisors. Similarly, Van Dyne, Jehn, and Cummings (2002) examined the moderating effect
of LMX in the relationship between two types of strain (work strain and home strain) and two
forms of work performance (quantity of individual sales performance and creativity). Relevant
to the present study, their results demonstrated that the negative effect of both strain types on
creativity was mitigated among high-quality LMX employees but not among low-quality LMX
employees. Thus, we expect LMX will moderate the effects of employee work engagement on
innovative behavior. Accordingly, we hypothesized:

H9: LMX moderates the relationship between work engagement and innovative behavior such

that the relationship is more positive in high rather than low LMX relationships.

METHOD

Respondents were employees of a large telecommunication company located in a northeastern
province in the People’s Republic of China. One of the authors was invited by the human resource
manager of the company to a 3-day training session for supervisors where this author explained
the objectives of the survey and compiled a list of the names and departments of supervisors who


TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP AND PERFORMANCE

11

agreed to participate in the survey. Subsequently, a survey coordinator in the human resource
department was requested to randomly select three subordinates of each of the supervisors on
the list one of whom was invited to participate in the survey. Supervisor surveys were distributed
during the 1st day of the training session and the completed survey for the focal subordinate for
each supervisor was collected at the end of that day’s training session. Subordinates, on the other
hand, were invited in batches to a large meeting room where the survey coordinator distributed
the surveys. They (subordinates) returned their completed surveys directly to one of the authors
before leaving the meeting room. Attached to each questionnaire was a cover letter that explained
the objective of the survey, assured respondents that their responses are conﬁdential, and noted
that participation in the survey is voluntary.

Of the 300 surveys distributed, 200 completed were returned. Seven were discarded because
of unmatched subordinate–supervisor responses, thereby representing an effective response rate
of 66%. Fifty-two percent of respondents (subordinates) were male and reported an average age
of 28.37 years (SD = 6.24). With regard to education, respondents reported an average of 13.52
(SD = 4.07) years of education and an average organizational tenure of 3.89 years (SD = 4.41).
Respondents worked an average of 43.51 hr per week. Among the supervisors, 58% were male,
with an average age of 35.84 years (SD = 7.67), an average of 14.30 (SD = 3.98) years of
education, and an average organizational tenure of 9.55 (SD = 7.94) years.

Measures

Questionnaires were administered in Chinese but originally constructed in English. We used the
back-translation procedures recommended by Brislin (1980) to translate the English language
version into Chinese and then back into English. The Chinese version was pilot tested using a
sample of 30 employees drawn from the participating organization but who were not included in
the ﬁnal sample. Based on the pilot test, a few items were reworded to ensure clarity. With the
exception of the performance data, which were obtained from immediate supervisors, data on the
other variables were obtained from respondents.

Transformational Leadership

We used the 20-item Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire to measure transformational
leadership (α = .93; Rater Form 5X; Bass & Avolio, 2004).1 The Multifactor Leadership
Questionnaire measures the dimensions of idealized inﬂuence comprising attributed and behavior
(e.g., “Talks about his /her most important values”), individualized consideration (e.g., “Treats
me as an individual rather than just as a member of a group”), intellectual stimulation (e.g.,
“Suggests new ways of looking at how to complete an assignment”), and inspirational motiva-
tion (e.g., “Talks enthusiastically about what needs to be accomplished”). The response anchors
ranged from 1 (not at all) to 5 (frequently, if not always). Following prior research (e.g., Bono &
Judge, 2003; Piccolo & Colquitt, 2006; Walumbwa et al., 2008), we averaged the 20 items to
form a single measure of transformational leadership.

1The Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire, Form 5X is copyrighted in 1995 by Bernard Bass and Bruce Avolio

(http://www.mindgarden.com/products/mlq.htm).


12

ARYEE, WALUMBWA, ZHOU, HARTNELL

Work Engagement

A 15-item version of the 17-item scale (Salanova et al., 2005) was used to measure work
engagement (α = .92). One item (“I ﬁnd the work that I do full of meaning and purpose”) was
deleted because of its similarity to the experienced meaningfulness of work measure, and the
second item (“I am proud of the work I do”) was omitted because of clerical error. Response
options ranged from 1 (never) to 5 (very often). Sample items are “At work, I feel full of energy”
and “I am immersed in my work.” These items tapped the three dimensions of the construct
(vigor, dedication, and absorption) and are consistent with prior research (Salanova et al., 2005).

Experienced Meaningfulness of Work

A six-item scale, with four items drawn from Hackman and Oldham (1975) and the remaining
two developed for this study, was used to measure employees’ experienced meaningfulness of
work (α = .80). Response options ranged from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). Sample
items are “The work I do on this job is very meaningful to me” and “Most of the things I have to
do on this job seem useless or trivial” (reverse scored).

Experienced Responsibility for Work Outcomes

A ﬁve-item version of the six-item scale by Hackman and Oldham (1975) was used to measure
employees’ experienced responsibility for work outcomes (α = .74). Response options ranged
from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). Sample items are “I feel a very high degree of
personal responsibility for the work I do on this job” and “Whether or not this job gets done right
is clearly my responsibility.”

Innovative Behavior
A six-item scale by Scott and Bruce (1994) was used to measure innovative behavior (α = .85).
Response options ranged from 1 (not at all) to 5 (to an exceptional degree). Sample items are
“This employee . . . searches out new technologies, processes, techniques, and/or product ideas”
and “. . . promotes and champions ideas to others.”

Task Performance

We used a seven-item scale by Williams and Anderson (1991) to measure task performance
(α = .79). Response options ranged from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). Sample
items include “This employee adequately completes assigned duties” and “. . . meets formal
performance requirements of the job.”

LMX
We used Scandura and Graen’s (1984) LMX-7 scale to measure LMX (α = .82). Response
options ranged from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). Sample items are “My immediate


TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP AND PERFORMANCE

13

supervisor understands my problems and needs” and “My immediate supervisor would be
personally inclined to use his/her power to help me solve problems in my work.”

Control Variables

We controlled for gender, age, education, and tenure because they have been shown to inﬂu-
ence subordinate innovative behavior and task performance (Scott & Bruce, 1994; Pieterse et al.,
2010). In addition, we controlled for hours worked per week on the reasoning that employees who
worked more hours were more likely to demonstrate high levels of the performance outcomes we
examined relative to those who worked less hours.

Data Analytic Strategy

We used structural equation modeling (SEM) to test direct and indirect hypotheses (H1–8).
Researchers (e.g., MacKinnon, Lockwood, Hoffman, West, & Sheets, 2002) have suggested that
a simultaneous test of the signiﬁcance of both the path from an initial variable to a mediator and
the path from the mediator to an outcome (as implied in SEM and consistent with our direct
and indirect predictions) provides the best balance of Type I error rates and statistical power.
Further, we used SEM because each supervisor rated the performance of only one subordinate so
there was no concern about the nonindependence of supervisor ratings. To test the hypothesized
moderating role of LMX (H9), we used hierarchical multiple regression.

Validity Issues

RESULTS

Given the relatively small sample size in relation to the measurement items, we employed item
parceling procedures to achieve an adequate sample-size-to-parameter ratio. Speciﬁcally, for
the multidimensional constructs (i.e., transformational leadership and work engagement), we
averaged items into dimensions and treated the different dimensions as indicators of their corre-
sponding constructs. For the unidimensional constructs (i.e., LMX, experienced meaningfulness,
experienced responsibility, innovative behavior, and task performance), we formed parcels by
randomly assigning items from their respective scales. Table 1 displays indicators of the measure-
ments, standardized loadings, and variance-extracted estimates for all study variables. As shown
in Table 1, the variance-extracted estimate for each construct is above .62, higher than the
suggested limit of .50 (Bagozzi & Yi, 1988).

Next, we conducted a conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) using AMOS 17.0 to compare
our hypothesized seven-factor model (transformational leadership, experienced meaningfulness,
experienced responsibility, work engagement, LMX, innovative behavior, and task performance
as seven independent factors) to a series of intuitively plausible alternative nested models: (a) a
six-factor model A (combining innovative behavior and task performance), (b) a six-factor
model B (combining experienced meaningfulness and experienced responsibility), (c) a six-factor


14

ARYEE, WALUMBWA, ZHOU, HARTNELL

TABLE 1

Measurements and Indicators

Construct

Transformational leadership

Indicator 1
Indicator 2
Indicator 3
Indicator 4

Leader-member exchange

Indicator 1
Indicator 2
Indicator 3

Work engagement

Indicator 1
Indicator 2
Indicator 3

Meaningfulness

Indicator 1
Indicator 2
Indicator 3
Responsibility
Indicator 1
Indicator 2

Innovative behavior

Indicator 1
Indicator 2
Indicator 3

Task performance

Indicator 1
Indicator 2
Indicator 3

Standardized

Loadings

Variance-Extracted

Estimate

.73

.62

.72

.63

.71

.64

.71

.88
.89
.86
.78

.81
.74
.81

.81
.90
.82

.86
.87
.61

.81
.87

.74
.83
.83

.81
.92
.80

model C (combining transformational leadership and LMX), (d) a ﬁve-factor model (combining
experienced meaningfulness, experienced responsibility, and work engagement), (e) a two-factor
model (combining transformational leadership, LMX, experienced meaningfulness, experienced
responsibility and work engagement into one factor and combining innovative behavior and task
performance into another factor), and (f) a one-factor model (combining all variables). We used
the comparative ﬁt index (CFI), the Tucker-Lewis index (TLI), and the root mean square error of
approximation (RMSEA) to examine model ﬁt. In addition, we used chi-square difference test to
determine the best ﬁtting model.
Results of the CFA suggest that our hypothesized seven-factor model had a good ﬁt to the
data, χ 2(168) = 301.39, χ 2/df = 1.79 (CFI = .95, TLI = .94, RMSEA = .06). Furthermore, the
hypothesized model showed a signiﬁcantly better ﬁt than the six-factor model A (χ 2 = 160.58,
df = 6, p < .01), the six-factor model B (χ 2 = 40.82, df = 6, p < .01), the six-factor
model C (χ 2 = 100.12, df = 6, p < .01), the ﬁve-factor model (χ 2 = 111.60, df = 11,
p < .01), the two-factor model (χ 2 = 562.04, df = 20, p < .01), and the one-factor model


TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP AND PERFORMANCE

15

Means, Standard Deviations, Correlations Among Study Variables

TABLE 2

M

SD

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

1. Transformational leadership
2. Work meaningfulness
3. Felt responsibility for the job
4. Work engagement
5. Leader-member exchange
6. Innovative behavior
7. Task performance
Note. n = 193.
∗∗
Correlations are signiﬁcant at the .01 level (two-tailed).

3.51
3.69
3.76
3.71
3.46
3.34
4.05

.64
.66
.64
.62
.58
.68
.64

.93
.57
.52
.67
.65
.47
.31

∗∗
∗∗
∗∗
∗∗
∗∗
∗∗

.80
.65
.68
.50
.34
.37

∗∗
∗∗
∗∗
∗∗
∗∗

.74
.48
.40
.66
.42

∗∗
∗∗
∗∗
∗∗

.92
.63
.47
.37

∗∗
∗∗
∗∗

.82
.37
.26

∗∗
∗∗

.85
.50

∗∗

.79

(χ 2 = 839.95, df = 21, p < .01). These CFA results provide support for the distinctiveness
of the variables used in this study.

Hypothesis Tests

Table 2 presents the descriptive statistics, reliability coefﬁcients, and correlations among study
variables. Although the CFA results revealed our variables to be distinct, the zero-order correla-
tions show them to be correlated. McCormack (1956) argued that constructs can be very highly
correlated while still maintaining distinct patterns of associations with other variables.

Direct Effect Hypotheses

H1 to H3 suggested that transformational leadership would be positively related to employee
work engagement, experienced meaningfulness of work, and experienced responsibility for
work outcomes, respectively. H4 to H5 posited that experienced meaningfulness of work and
experienced responsibility for work outcomes would be positively related to employee work
engagement, respectively. Figure 2a presents the SEM results, and the model demonstrated a
good ﬁt to the data, χ 2(127) = 247.23, χ 2/df = 1.95 (TLI = .94, CFI = .95, RMSEA = .07).
As shown in Figure 2a, the paths from transformational leadership to work engagement (β = .36,
p < .01), experienced meaningfulness of work (β = .64, p < .01), and experienced responsibility
for work outcomes (β = .62, p < .01) are all positive and signiﬁcant. Thus H1 to H3 received
support. Similarly, Figure 2a shows that the path from experienced meaningfulness of work to
work engagement (β = .36, p < .01) and from experienced responsibility for work outcomes
to work engagement (β = .27, p < .05) are both positive and signiﬁcant, providing support for
H4 and H5.

H7 predicted that employee work engagement would be positively related to innovative
behavior, whereas H8 suggested that innovative behavior would be positively related to task
performance. As shown in Figure 2a, the path from work engagement to innovative behavior
(β = .52, p < .01) as well as the path from innovative behavior to task performance (β = .62,
p < .01) are both positive and signiﬁcant. Therefore, H7 and H8 received support. Taken together,
results from Figure 2a suggest some evidence of a mediated relationship. What is not clear,


16

(a)

(b)

ARYEE, WALUMBWA, ZHOU, HARTNELL

Meaningfulness

.64**

.36**

Transformational

Leadership

.36**

Work

Engagement

Innovative
Behavior

.62**

Task

Performance

.56**

.62**

Responsibility

.27*

Meaningfulness

(R2 = .41)

.64**

.36**

Transformational

Leadership

.36**

Work

Engagement
(R2 = .77)

.53**

Innovative
Behavior
(R2 = .29)

.48**

Task

Performance
(R2 = .39)

.62**

Responsibility

(R2 = .39)

.27**

.21*

FIGURE 2 Structural equation modeling results.

Note. The effect of control variables are not shown; Values represent standardized estimates.
∗
p < .05;

p < .01 (two-tailed tests).

∗∗

however, is the degree to which there might be full or partial mediation among the variables
of interest as suggested in H6, and perhaps H7 and H8. In an effort to address these questions, we
turn our attention to the mediation analyses.

Mediation Analyses

H6 posited that experienced meaningfulness of work and experienced responsibility for work
outcomes would partially mediate the positive inﬂuence of transformational leadership on work
engagement. To test this hypothesis, we compared the ﬁt of the model shown in Figure 2a with
an alternative model, with no direct path from transformational leadership to work engagement.
The alternative model was a fully mediated model. This model exhibited a moderately poor ﬁt
to the data, χ 2(128) = 272.27, χ 2/df = 2.13 (TLI = .94, CFI = .95, RMSEA = .08), and
the difference in ﬁt was statistically signiﬁcant, χ 2(1) = 25.04, p < .001. This indicates that
the additional path for partial mediation (transformational leadership → work engagement) did
add signiﬁcantly to the model. Therefore, H6, which posited that experienced meaningfulness
of work and experienced responsibility for work outcomes partially mediate the relationship
between transformational leadership and employee work engagement, received support from
our data.


TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP AND PERFORMANCE

17

In addition, we compared the ﬁt of the model shown in Figure 2a to an alternative model
(Figure 2b) where we added a direct path from work engagement to task performance. This
alternative model (Figure 2b), ﬁt the data well, χ 2 = 240.98, χ 2 = 126 (TLI = .94, CFI = .95,
RMSEA = .06) and exhibited a slight improvement over the model shown in Figure 2a, and that
difference in ﬁt was statistically signiﬁcant, χ 2(1) = 6.25, p < .05. Based on this ﬁnding, we
concluded that innovative behavior partially mediated the positive inﬂuence of employee work
engagement on task performance. (Note: We tested additional alternative models, and none of
these showed any signiﬁcant improvement to the model ﬁt over Figure 2a. These results are
available from the authors upon request.)

We used bootstrap to cross-validate the SEM results. Following procedures suggested by
Shrout and Bolger (2002), we created 5,000 bootstrap samples and estimated the indirect effects
of transformational leadership on work engagement with the bias-corrected percentile method
(Efron & Tibshirami, 1993). The results from the bootstrap samples showed that the indirect
effect of transformational leadership on work engagement via felt responsibility was .14 with
a bootstrapped 95% conﬁdence interval (CI) ranging from .03 to .24; the indirect effect of
transformational leadership on work engagement via meaningfulness was .19 with a bootstrapped
99% CI ranging from .04 to .34. Using the same procedures, we also found that the indirect effect
of work engagement on task performance via innovative behavior was .28 with a bootstrapped
99% CI ranging from .06 to .51. These results cross-validate the SEM results.

Moderation Hypothesis

H9 suggested that LMX would moderate the relationship between work engagement and inno-
vative behavior. Table 3 presents the results. As shown in Table 3, we found LMX signiﬁcantly
moderated the inﬂuence of work engagement on innovative behavior (β = .21, p < .01). We plot-
ted the results graphically using values of 1 SD below the mean and 1 SD above the mean on
LMX to explore the form and nature of the signiﬁcant interaction (Aiken & West, 1991). Figure 3
depicts the plot of the signiﬁcant interaction term. As shown, the relationship between work
engagement and innovative behavior was stronger for individuals high rather than low in LMX.
In addition, we also performed a simple slope analysis and results of the simple slope test revealed
that when LMX was high (1 SD above the mean), the work engagement-innovative behavior slope
was stronger (simple slope = .61, SE = .105, t = 5.854, p < .01) than when LMX was low (1 SD
below the mean; simple slope = .26, SE = .107, t = 2.443, p < .05). Taken together, these results
provide support for H9. Finally, although we did not hypothesize an interaction, we also explored
the possible moderating role of LMX in the innovative behavior-task performance relationship.
As shown in Table 3, no signiﬁcant interaction effect was detected in our data (β = −.06, ns).

DISCUSSION

Based on self-concept based theory and social exchange theory, we formulated and tested a model
to explain how and when transformational leaders positively affect employees’ task performance.
Results provided support for our postulation that psychological processes and employees’
innovative behavior mediate the link between transformational leadership and employee task
performance. Furthermore, LMX moderated the positive relationship between employee work


18

ARYEE, WALUMBWA, ZHOU, HARTNELL

The Moderating Inﬂuence of Leader–Member Exchange

TABLE 3

Task

Performance

(β)

.10
−.12
.06
.26
.12
.10
3.96

∗∗

∗∗

∗∗

Innovative
Behavior

(β)

−.09
.04
.04
.00
.05
.02
.66

∗∗
.40
∗
.17
.24
27.72

∗∗

Step 1
Sex
Age
Years of formal education
Organizational tenure
No. hours worked per week
R2
F
Step 2

Work engagement
Leader–member exchange
R2
F
Step 3
Work engagement × leader–member exchange
R2
F
Note. n = 193. The results of the moderated regression did not change with or without the
∗

controls. However, we elected to retain the controls.

.29
.04
.19
10.78
−.06
.19
.70

.21
.28
10.28

∗∗

∗∗

∗∗

∗∗

p < .05.

p < .01 (two-tailed tests).

 
r
o
i
v
a
h
e
b
 
e
v
i
t
a
v
o
n
n
I

4

3.8

3.6

3.4

3.2

3

2.8

Low work engagement

High work engagement

Low LMX

High LMX

FIGURE 3 The moderating inﬂuence of leader-member exchange (LMX) on the work engagement–innovative
behavior relationship.


TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP AND PERFORMANCE

19

engagement and innovative behavior. These ﬁndings extend our understanding of the psycholog-
ical mechanisms and conditions through which transformational leadership impacts followers’
beneﬁcial work behaviors (Avolio et al., 2009). More important, the study’s results shed light
on the positive psychological states that result from transformational leaders transforming their
followers’ self-concepts. These psychological states, in turn, motivate followers to perform
beyond expectations.

Theoretical Implications

The ﬁndings of this study suggest four theoretical implications. First, the job design literature
(job characteristics model) posits objective job conditions as antecedents to the psychological
states of experienced meaningfulness of work, experienced responsibility for work outcomes and
knowledge of results (Hackman & Oldham, 1975). Our ﬁnding that transformational leadership
related to experienced meaningfulness of work and experienced responsibility for work outcomes
suggests a need to expand the job characteristics model to incorporate a role for leaders particu-
larly of the transformational variety. This ﬁnding and its implication extends the work of Piccolo
and Colquitt (2006), who reported transformational leadership to relate to job characteristics.
Second, in addition to ﬁnding a direct link between transformational leadership and employee
work engagement, the study’s ﬁndings indicate that employees’ experienced meaningfulness of
work and experienced responsibility for work outcomes partially mediated the aforementioned
relationship. These results lend empirical support for the self-concept based argument that trans-
forming followers’ self-concepts and linking them with the unit’s mission and vision produces
positive psychological states that are valued resources from which employees draw to engage in
their work (Bono & Judge, 2003; Shamir et al., 1993). Although experienced meaningfulness of
work has already been empirically linked to employee engagement (e.g., Kahn, 1990; May et al.,
2004), to our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study to demonstrate a positive relationship between
employees’ experienced responsibility for work outcomes and employee work engagement.
In sum, the results suggest that experienced meaningfulness of work and experienced respon-
sibility for work outcomes are two psychological mechanisms through which transformational
leaders augment employee work engagement. Thus, the present study compliments and extends
Zhu and colleagues’ (2009) research by identifying potential psychological processes that might
link transformational leadership to employee work engagement.

Third, the relationship between transformational leadership and the psychological states is also
important because employee work engagement was positively associated with employees’ inno-
vative behavior. These ﬁndings shed light on the equivocal relationship between transformational
leadership and employee innovative behavior (Gong et al., 2009). In particular, employee work
engagement may be a proximal psychological resource through which transformational leader-
ship augments innovative behavior. That is, vigor, dedication, and absorption may be critical
elements through which followers are motivated to develop and explore unconventional options
to ﬁnd novel solutions (Schaufeli & Bakker, 2004). This possibility is consistent with the ﬁnding
that teams’ engagement in creative processes was positively associated with creativity (Gilson
et al., 2005).

Last, the results of the moderated relationship lend additional clarity to the equivocal relation-
ship between transformational leadership and employee innovative behavior by eliciting LMX as
a moderator of the employee work engagement–innovative behavior link. This ﬁnding suggests


20

ARYEE, WALUMBWA, ZHOU, HARTNELL

that a relationship based on social exchange (one that exhibits trust, openness, and communica-
tion) may provide engaged employees a safe environment that encourages them to take risks,
explore unique options, and champion new ideas. In contrast, transactional or an economic
exchange-based relationship may have a stiﬂing effect on employee creativity because employees
are incentivized to perform to the job’s explicit speciﬁcations (Pieterse et al., 2010). This rationale
is in line with research that indicates that controlling supervisory behavior is negatively related
to employee creativity (George & Zhou, 2002). Therefore, LMX is an important boundary con-
dition that can augment or mitigate employee work engagement’s effect on employee behavior.
Moreover, investigating LMX as a moderator of the work engagement–innovative behavior rela-
tionship further contributes to the transformational leadership literature by examining when and
how transformational leadership has a more potent effect on employee outcomes. Consequently,
we extend previous research by responding to calls for a more concerted effort to understand
both the moderating and mediating mechanisms that link transformational leadership to follower
behaviors (Walumbwa et al., 2008).

Practical Implications

The results of the present study have important practical or managerial implications. First, objec-
tive job characteristics have been shown to engender the psychological states we examined
leading to intrinsic motivation (Hackman & Oldham, 1975). However, our ﬁndings suggest that
the transformational leadership behaviors perform a role akin to objective job characteristics
in terms of engendering the psychological states of experienced meaningfulness of work and
experienced responsibility for work. The implication is that managers should learn how to artic-
ulate a compelling mission and vision in order to link their followers’ self-concept to the overall
work unit or organizational goals. In addition, managers could use the transformational leadership
behaviors to foster these psychological states in employees whose jobs are low on the enriched
job characteristics as speciﬁed in the JCM. Second, the demonstrated inﬂuence of work engage-
ment on innovative behavior and task performance highlights the importance of interventions
to enhance levels of employee work engagement. Therefore, managers should monitor employ-
ees’ work engagement through, for example, organizational climate surveys. Managers may also
encourage employees to view their role from a broader perspective aligned to the organization’s
mission and goals instead of from a narrow role-oriented or this is my job description point
of view. Finally, our ﬁnding that LMX moderated the employee engagement–innovative behavior
relationship suggests that organizations should focus their attention on identifying both individual
and organizational factors that enhance supervisor–subordinate relationships. Leadership training
programs that focus on building high-quality supervisor–subordinate relationships may thus be
important in engendering followers’ organizationally relevant behaviors.

Potential Limitations

As is the case with any research, the present study has some limitations. First, the data are
cross-sectional. Although the hypothesized relationships imply causality, alternative relationships
may exist. For instance, high-performing employees may exhibit the task mastery needed to
explore new options and engage in innovative behavior. Employees’ innovative behavior may


TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP AND PERFORMANCE

21

thus result in increased levels of work engagement leading to experienced meaningfulness of
work and experienced responsibility for work outcomes. In addition, employees high in these
psychological states may be more likely to rate their supervisors as transformational (Lord,
Foti, & DeVader, 1984). Although we cannot rule out the possibility of reverse causality, our
model is consistent with extant theory and complementary empirical research. Second, some
of the relationships in the hypothesized model are subject to common-source, common-method
bias. Consequently, the magnitude of the effects may be inﬂated. Spector (2006), however, sug-
gested that common method bias is rarely serious enough to threaten the validity of the results.
Moreover, although transformational leadership, experienced meaningfulness of work, experi-
enced responsibility for work outcomes, work engagement, and LMX were rated by followers,
employee innovative behavior and task performance were rated by supervisors. The current study
thus incorporated data from multiple sources. Furthermore, given the fact that we tested a very
complex model and the fact that we found an interaction effect suggest that common method bias
may not fully account for the signiﬁcant relationships obtained in the present study. Finally, the
study’s respondents were from the same organization. Consequently, the mechanisms through
which transformational leadership is associated with employee task performance may not gener-
alize beyond the current setting. Obviously, future research should replicate the current ﬁndings
by sampling employees across organizations and industries to ascertain the generalizabitlity of
our ﬁndings.

Directions for Future Research

Experienced meaningfulness of work and responsibility for work outcomes only partially medi-
ated the link between transformational leadership and employee work engagement. Hence,
other mechanisms exist through which transformational leaders augment the extent to which
employees are engaged in their work. Future research should consider the role that additional
variables such as core job characteristics and identiﬁcation foci may play in collectively mediat-
ing the transformational leadership–work engagement relationship (Kark et al., 2003; Piccolo &
Colquitt, 2006; Walumbwa & Hartnell, 2011). Although we did not formally hypothesize a
mediating role for innovative behavior in the work engagement–task performance relationship,
our results indicated that employees’ innovative behavior partially mediated the relationship
between work engagement and task performance. This ﬁnding suggests that in addition to
the demonstrated emotional and cognitive resources that mediate the work engagement–task
performance relationship (Rich et al., 2010), future research may need to identify other medi-
ators of this relationship. For example, research may consider including such variables as the
extent to which employees expend more effort in their jobs or creative self-efﬁcacy to fur-
ther illuminate the underlying processes linking employee work engagement to important work
behaviors.

Other researchers have also recently linked prosocial behaviors to job performance. For
example, Podsakoff, Whiting, Podsakoff, and Blume (2009) reported in their meta-analysis
that employees’ organizational citizenship behaviors were associated with rated job perfor-
mance. Similarly, Walumbwa and colleagues (2009) reported that voluntary learning behav-
ior exhibited a positive relationship with employee job performance. Consequently, future
research may also investigate the extent
to which positive, proactive behavior, such as
organizational citizenship behavior and voluntary learning behaviors, further mediate the


22

ARYEE, WALUMBWA, ZHOU, HARTNELL

employee engagement–performance link. Finally, additional work is needed to further understand
the boundary conditions concerning when transformational leadership is related with employee
work engagement. Task characteristics, such as task complexity and nonroutine tasks, may be
enabling conditions such that transformational leaders may have an increased opportunity to
augment followers’ work engagement through directing their effort and expressing conﬁdence
in their ability to succeed. Conversely, transformational leadership behavior may not meaning-
fully affect employee work engagement if the tasks are simple and routine. For this reason, it
would be interesting to explore the extent to which contextual factors such as employees’ intrau-
nit justice climate (i.e., the extent to which employees in a work group treats one another)
is a substitute for the impact transformational leaders have on employee engagement (Li &
Cropanzano, 2009).

CONCLUSION

We proposed and tested a model of the processes through which transformational leader-
ship inﬂuences employee performance. Our results highlight
three central ﬁndings. First,
transformational leadership directly and indirectly (through the psychological states of experi-
enced meaningfulness of work and experienced responsibility for work outcomes) relates to work
engagement. Second, work engagement directly and indirectly (through innovative behavior)
inﬂuences task performance. Last, LMX moderates the work engagement–innovative behavior
relationship such that the relationship is stronger for high rather than for low quality LMX subor-
dinates. Given the paradigmatic status of transformational leadership in leadership research, we
hope that these ﬁndings will motivate additional research to further uncover additional mediators
and moderators of the performance effects of this genre of leadership.

REFERENCES

Aiken, L. S., & West, S. G. (1991). Multiple regression: Testing and interpreting interactions. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Amabile, T. M. (1996). Creativity in context: Affect and creativity at work. Administrative Science Quarterly, 50,

367–403.

Argote, L. (1999). Organizational learning: Creating, retaining, and transferring knowledge. Norwall, MA: Kluwer

Academic.

Arnold, K. A., Turner, N. Barling, J., Kelloway, E. K., & McKee, M. C. (2007). Transformational leadership and psy-
chological well-being: The mediating role of meaningful work. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 12,
193–203.

Avolio, B. J., Walumbwa, F. O., & Weber, T. (2009). Leadership: Current theories, research and future directions. Annual

Review of Psychology, 60, 421–449.

Bagozzi, R. P., & Yi, Y. (1988). On the evaluation of structural equation models. Journal of the Academy of Marketing

Science, 16, 74–94.

Bass, B. M. (1985). Leadership and performance beyond expectations. New York: Academic Press.
Bass, B. M., & Avolio, B. J. (2004). Multifactor leadership questionnaire: Manual leader form, rater, and scoring key for

MLQ (Form 5x-Short). Redwood City, CA: Mind Garden.

Blau, P. M. (1964). Exchange and power in social life. New York: Academic Press.
Bono, J. E., & Judge, T. A. (2003). Self-concordance at work: Toward understanding the motivational effects of

transformational leaders. Academy of Management Journal, 46, 554–571.


TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP AND PERFORMANCE

23

Brislin, R. W. (1980). Translation and content analysis of oral and written materials. In H. C. Triandis & J. W. Berry

(Eds.), Handbook of cross-cultural psychology (pp. 389–444). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Cropanzano, R., & Mitchell, M. S. (2005). Social exchange theory: An interdisciplinary review. Journal of Management,

31, 874–900.

Dansereau, F., Alutto, J., & Yammarino, F. (1984). Theory testing in organizational behavior: The variant approach.

Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Dvir, T., Eden, D., Avolio, B. J., & Shamir, B. (2002). Impact of transformational leadership on follower development

and performance: A ﬁeld experiment. Academy of Management Journal, 45, 735–744.

Efron, B., & Tibshirami, R. J. (1993). An introduction to the bootstrap. New York: Chapman & Hall.
Erdogan, B., Liden, R. C., & Kraimer, M. L. (2006). Justice and leader-member exchange: The moderating role of

organizational culture. Academy of Management Journal, 49, 395–406.

George, J. M., & Zhou, J. (2002). Understanding when bad moods foster creativity and good ones don’t: The role of

context and clarity of feelings. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 687–697.

Gerstner, C. R., & Day, D. V. (1997). Meta-analysis review of leader-member exchange theory: Correlation and construct

issues. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82, 427–444.

Gilson, L. L., Mathieu, J. E., Shalley, C. E., & Ruddy, T. M. (2005). Creativity and standardization: complementary or

conﬂicting drivers of team effectiveness? Academy of Management Journal, 48, 521–531.

Gong, Y., Huang, J., & Farh, J. (2009). Employee learning orientation, transformational leadership, and employee

creativity: The mediating role of employee creative self-efﬁcacy. Academy of Management Journal, 52, 765–778.

Grant, A. M. (2008). The signiﬁcance of task signiﬁcance: Job performance effects, relational mechanisms, and boundary

conditions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 93, 108–124.

Hackman, J. R., & Oldham, G. R. (1975). Development of the Job Diagnostic Survey. Journal of Applied Psychology, 60,

159–170.

Hakanen, J. J., Perhoniemi, R., & Toppinen-Tanner, S. (2008). Positive gain spirals at work: From job resources to work

engagement, personal initiative and work–unit innovativeness. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 73, 78–91.

Harter, J. K., Schmidt, F. L., & Hayes, T. L. (2002). Business-unit-level relationship between employee satisfaction,

employee engagement, and business outcomes: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 268–279.

Hirschhorn, L. (1991). Managing in the new group environment: Skills, tools, and methods. Lincoln, NE: Authors Choice

Press.

Howell, J. M., & Hall-Merenda, K. E. (1999). The ties that bind: The impact of leader-member exchange, transformational
leadership, and transactional leadership, and distance on predicting follower performance. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 84, 680–694.

Judge, T. A., & Piccolo, R. F. (2004). Transformational and transactional leadership: A meta-analytic test of their relative

validity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89, 755–768.

Kahn, W. A. (1990). Psychological conditions of personal engagement and disengagement at work. Academy of

Management Journal, 33, 692–724.

Kark, R., Shamir, B., & Chen, G. (2003). The two faces of transformational leadership: Empowerment and dependency.

Journal of Applied Psychology, 88, 246–255.

Kirkman, B. L., Chen, G., Farh, J. L., Chen, Z. X., & Lowe, K. B. (2009). Individual power distance orientation and
follower reactions to transformational leaders: A cross-level, cross-cultural examination. Academy of Management
Journal, 52, 744–764.

LePine, J. A., Podsakoff, N. P., & LePine, M. A. (2005). A meta-analytic test of the challenge stressor – hindrance stressor
framework: An explanation for inconsistent relationships among stressors and performance. Academy of Management
Journal, 48, 764–775.

Li, A., & Cropanzano, R. (2009). Fairness at the group level: Justice climate and intraunit justice climate. Journal of

Management, 35, 564–599.

Lind, E. A. (2001). Fairness heuristic theory: Justice judgments as pivotal cognitions in organizational relations. In G.
Greenberg & R. Cropanzano (Eds.), Advances in organizational justice (pp. 56–88). Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.

Lord, R. G., Foti, R. J., & DeVader, C. L. (1984). A test of leadership categorization theory: internal structure, information

processing, and leadership perceptions. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 34, 343–378.

Lowe, K. B., Kroeck, K. G., & Sivasubramaniam, N. (1996). Effectiveness correlates of transformational and transactional

leadership: A meta-analytical review of the literature. Leadership Quarterly, 7, 385–425.


24

ARYEE, WALUMBWA, ZHOU, HARTNELL

Luthans, F., Avolio, B., Avey, J., & Norman, S. (2007). Psychological capital: Measurement and relationship with

performance and satisfaction. Personnel Psychology, 60, 541–572.

Macey, W. H., & Schneider, B. (2008). The meaning of employee engagement. Industrial and Organizational Psychology,

1, 3–30.

MacKinnon, D. P., Lockwood, C. M., Hoffman, J. M., West, S. G., & Sheets, V. (2002). A comparison of methods to test

mediation and other intervening variables effects. Psychological Methods, 7, 83–104.

Maslyn, J. M., & Uhl-Bien, M. (2001). Leader-member exchange and its dimensions: Effects of self-effort and other’s

effort on relationship quality. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 697–708.

May, D. R., Gilson, R. L., & Harter, L. M. (2004). The psychological conditions of meaningfulness, safety and availability
and the engagement of the human spirit at work. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 77, 11–37.
McCormack, R.L. (1956). A criticism of studies comparing item-weighting methods. Journal of Applied Psychology, 40,

343–344.

McGrath, R. G. (2001). Exploratory learning, innovative capacity, and managerial oversight. Academy of Management

Journal, 44, 118–131.

Oke, A., Munshi, N., & Walumbwa, F. O. (2009). The inﬂuence of leadership on innovation processes and activities.

Organizational Dynamics, 38, 64–72.

Parker, S. K., & Axtell, C. M. (2001). Seeing another view point: Antecedents and outcomes of employee perspective-

taking. Academy of Management Journal, 44, 1085–1100.

Piccolo, R. F., & Colquitt, J. A. (2006). Transformational leadership and job behaviors: The mediating role of core job

characteristics. Academy of Management Journal, 49, 327–340.

Pieterse, A. N., van Knippenberg, D., Schippers, M., & Stam, D. (2010). Transformational and transactional leadership
and innovative behavior: The moderating role of psychological empowerment. Journal of Organizational Behavior,
31, 609–623.

Podsakoff, N. P., Whiting, S. W., Podsakoff, P. M., & Blume, B. D. (2009). Individual and organizational-level
consequences of organizational citizenship behaviors: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 94, 122–141.
Renn, R. W., & Vandenberg, R. J. (1995). The critical psychological states: An underrepresented component in job

characteristics model research. Journal of Management, 21, 279–303.

Rich, B. L., LePine, J. A. & Crawford, E. R. (2010). Job enlargement: Antecedents and effects on job performance.

Academy of Management Journal, 53, 617–635.

Salanova, M., Agut, S., & Peiro, J. M. (2005). Linking organizational resources and work engagement to employee
performance and customer loyalty: The mediation of service climate. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90, 1217–1227.
Scandura, T. A., & Graen, G. B. (1984). Moderating effects of initial leader-member exchange status on the effects of a

leadership intervention. Journal of Applied Psychology, 69, 428–436.

Schaubroeck, J., Lam, S. S. K., & Cha, S. E. (2007). Embracing transformational leadership: Team values and the

relationship between leader behavior and team performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92, 1020–1030.

Schaufeli, W. B., & Bakker, A. B. (2004). Job demands, job resources, and their relationship with burnout and

engagement: A multi-sample study. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 25, 293–315.

Scott, S. G., & Bruce, R. A. (1994). Determinants of innovative behavior: A path model of individual innovation in the

workplace. Academy of Management Journal, 37, 580–607.

Shalley, C. E., Zhou, J. & Oldham, G. R. (2004). The effects of personal and contextual characteristics on creativity:

Where do we go from here? Journal of Management, 6, 933–958.

Shamir, B., House, R. J., & Arthur, M. B. (1993). The motivational effects of charismatic leadership: A self-concept

based theory. Organization Science, 4, 577–594.

Shin, S. J., & Zhou, J. (2003). Transformational leadership, conservation, and creativity: Evidence from Korea. Academy

of Management Journal, 46, 703–714.

Shrout, P. E., & Bolger, N. (2002). Mediation in experimental and nonexperimental studies: New procedures and

recommendations. Psychological Methods, 7, 422–445.

Smircich, L., & Morgan, G. (1982). Leadership: The management of meaning. Journal of Applied Behavioral Science,

18, 257–273.

Spector, P. E. (2006). Method variance in organizational research: Truth or urban legend? Organizational Research

Methods, 9, 221–232.

Tesluk, P. E., Farr, J. L., & Klein, S. R. (1997). Inﬂuences of organizational culture and climate on individual creativity.

Journal of Creative Behavior, 31, 27–41.


TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP AND PERFORMANCE

25

Tierney, P., Farmer, S. M., & Graen, G. B. (1999). An examination of leadership and employee creativity: The relevance

of traits and relations. Personnel Psychology, 52, 591–620.

Van Dyne, L., Jehn, K. A., & Cummings, A. (2002). Differential effects of strain on two forms of work performance:

Individual employee sales and creativity. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 23, 57–74.

Walumbwa, F. O., Avolio, B. J., & Zhu, W. (2008). How transformational leadership weaves its inﬂuence on individual

job performance. Personnel Psychology, 61, 793–825.

Walumbwa, F. O., Cropanzano, R., & Goldman, B. M. (2011). How leader-member exchange inﬂuences effective work

behaviors: Social exchange and internal-external efﬁcacy perspectives. Personnel Psychology, 64, 739–770.

Walumbwa, F. O., Cropanzano, R., & Hartnell, C. A. (2009). Organizational justice, voluntary learning behavior, and job
performance: A test of the mediating effects of identiﬁcation and leader-member exchange. Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 30, 1103–1126.

Walumbwa, F. O., & Hartnell, C. A. (2011). Understanding transformational leadership–employee performance links:
The role of relational identiﬁcation and self-efﬁcacy. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 84,
153–172.

Walumbwa, F. O., Lawler, J. J., & Avolio, B. J. (2007). Leadership, individual differences and work attitudes: A cross-

culture investigation. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 56, 212–230.

Wang, H., Law, K. S., Hackett, R. D., Wang, D. & Chen, Z. X. (2005). Leader-member exchange as a mediator of the
relationship between transformational leadership and followers’ performance and organizational citizenship behavior.
Academy of Management Journal, 48, 420–432.

Williams, L. J., & Anderson, S. E. (1991). Job satisfaction and organizational commitment as predictors of organizational

citizenship and in-role behaviors. Journal of Management, 17, 601–617.

Yukl, G. (1998). Leadership in organizations. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Zhu, W., Avolio, B. J., & Walumbwa, F. O. (2009). Moderating role of follower characteristics with transformational

leadership and follower engagement. Group & Organization Management, 34, 590–619.


Copyright of Human Performance is the property of Taylor & Francis Ltd and its content may not be copied or
emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.
However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

