International Journal of Business and Society, Vol. 15 No. 1, 2014, 151 - 170

REVERSE LOGISTICS: PRESSURE FOR ADOPTION AND 

THE IMPACT ON FIRM’S PERFORMANCE

Nik Ab Halim Nik Abdullah♣

Universiti Utara Malaysia 

Sabariah Yaakub

Universiti Utara Malaysia 

ABSTRACT

One of the new challenges faced by Malaysian firms that want to go global is the fact that 
many  countries  have  introduced  legislation  or  directives  to  ensure  effective  disposal  of 
manufactured products and its waste. Furthermore, the increase in awareness on environmental 
issues, sustainable development, corporate citizenship and the benefit of recycling had also 
placed more pressure on firms to adopt sustainable business initiatives such as a better reverse 
logistics strategy. Manufacturing firms however often focused on forward logistics and as a 
result, they tend to overlook at the importance of reverse logistics activities and its potential 
of improving the firm’s performance. The objective of this study is to look at the current level 
of reverse logistics adoption among manufacturers in Malaysia and to identify the influence 
of  customer/stakeholder  pressure,  regulatory  pressure,  financial  and  competitive  pressure, 
and corporate citizenship pressure on the level of reverse logistics adoption. In addition, this 
study also aims to determine the relationship between reverse logistics adoption level and 
firm’s performance. Data was collected through survey questionnaire, and the respondents 
consist of managers at manufacturing firms located in the Northern State of Malaysia and the 
Klang Valley. 101 samples were collected and data analysis was conducted using the Partial 
Least Square (PLS) regression analysis, through SmartPLS 2.0 software. Findings indicate 
that the level of reverse logistics adoption among Malaysia manufacturers is considerably 
low. Out of four independent variables, only the regulatory pressure has a significantly strong 
influence on the level of reverse logistics adoption, while customer and stakeholder pressure 
has a significant but moderate influence. No significant relationship was observed between the 
level of reverse logistics adoption and firm’s performance. 
Keywords: Logistics; Reverse Logistics; Supply Chain; Environmental Awareness; Corporate 
Social Responsibility.

♣	 Corresponding  Author:  School  of  International  Studies,  Universiti  Utara  Malaysia,  06010  Sintok,  Kedah,  Malaysia.  

Tel: +604-9286474, Fax: +604-9284205. Email: abhalim@uum.edu.my


152

Reverse Logistics: Pressure For Adoption And The Impact On Firm’s Performance

1.   INTRODUCTION

Reverse logistics has been defined as the movement of product or materials in the opposite 
direction of the supply chain for the purpose of creating or recapturing value, or for proper 
disposal.  It  includes  processing  returned  merchandise  due  to  damage,  seasonal  inventory, 
restock, salvage recalls and excess inventory, as well as packaging and shipping materials from 
the end user or reseller. It also includes recycling programs, hazardous material programs, 
obsolete equipment disposition, and asset recovery (Rogers & Tibben-Lembke, 2001).
Manufacturing firms these days often focused on forward logistics and as a result, they tend 
to  overlook  at  the  importance  of  reverse  logistics  activities.  Management  usually  was  so 
concerned with the inbound movement of material and product to ensure that they can deliver 
it efficiently within the required time frame and at the right cost, through their supply chain. As 
a result, firms did not acknowledge the importance of having a centralized return centres (CRC) 
to process return product and there is also a temptation to redirect reverse logistics personnel 
to the forward logistics function when the facility is experiencing high demand (Rogers & 
Tibben-Lembke,  1998).  In  addition,  reverse  logistics  should  be  properly  managed  just  as 
forward logistics because it is also a cost centre to the company. Minahan (1998) estimated that 
reverse logistics activities constitute between 3 to 4% of a company’s total logistics cost. On 
the other hand, some forward thinking companies in industries such as electronic equipment, 
household appliances, automotive parts, pharmaceuticals and chemicals view reverse logistics 
as a significant source of untapped profitability (Anderson, 2009; Jayaraman & Luo, 2007). 
Company such as Estee Lauder for example has, after a very successful reverse logistics project 
created $250 million product line from its return goods flow. Similarly, Caterpillar investment 
in remanufacturing plant in Mississippi that disassembles and rebuilds diesel engines pays off 
when the division has become their fastest growing unit with annual revenue tops $1 billion 
and is estimated to grow 20% a year (Jayaraman & Luo, 2007). These examples indicate that 
proper reverse logistics activities may help firm’s improve the performance.
One of the new challenges faced by Malaysian firms that want to go global is the fact that many 
countries have introduced legislation or directives to ensure effective disposal of manufactured 
products and its waste. Furthermore, the increase in awareness on environmental issues and the 
benefit of recycling had also placed more pressure on firms to create a better reverse logistics 
strategy. As an example, this is evident in Europe where a new regulation with the objective 
to reduce the amount of waste dumped in landfills results in all manufacturers, wholesalers 
and retailers all came under the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) Directive 
in January 2007. Under the terms of the regulations, manufacturers had to join a WEEE 
compliance scheme by March 2007, and as of July 2007 had full financial responsibility for 
recycling household equipment. As a result, the ability to manage the reverse logistics process 
efficiently will definitely become one of the critical factors for manufacturers and retailers 
who currently doing business or those who are thinking of going into Europe during the next 
couple of years (Scott, 2008). Firms that comply with regulations and stress on environmental 
protection will have a good goodwill or corporate citizenship among their customers. 
Another  activity  involved  in  firm’s  reverse  logistics  system  besides  managing  product 
disposal is the management of after-sales service, which is also a part of customer relationship 


 

Nik Ab Halim Nik Abdullah and Sabariah Yaakub

153

management (CRM). A product is returned by a customer maybe because it is defective, did 
not work as advertised, in wrong size or perhaps because the customer suddenly changed 
minds and decided that they did not need the thing after all (Blanchard, 2007). Proper after-
sales service may help to enhance customer’s loyalty and at the same time might improve 
firm’s  competitive  advantage. According  to  Gentry  (1999),  overall  customers  returns  are 
estimated at 6% of sales and may run as high as 15% for mass merchandisers and up to 35% 
for catalogue and e-commerce retailers. However, most of the business organizations are not 
aware about the after-sales service factors and its impact towards the customer satisfaction. 
Failing to realize the importance of the factors can lead to a disastrous and threatening business 
relationship. Dissatisfied customers will turn to competitors who can offer better after-sales 
services (Shaharudin, Yusof, Elias & Mansor, 2009). 
Besides regulation and customer, other stakeholders and even competitors are expected to also 
put more pressure on firms to improve the level of reverse logistics adoption as rivalry between 
firms in the global market these days put more pressure on companies to reduce costs.  Getting 
ahead  of  the  competitors  in  customer  service  will  definitely  improve  the  manufacturer’s 
financial proficiency, through improves profits and higher recovery rates (Stock, 1992). Based 
on the above issues, it is obvious that Malaysian manufacturers these days faced pressures to 
implement reverse logistics adoption. Therefore, this study is conducted in order to determine 
which pressure has the most influence on the level of reverse logistics adoption. In addition, 
the other objective of this study is also to identify the current level of reverse logistics adoption 
among Malaysian manufacturers and most importantly, to study whether reverse logistics 
based on the manufacturers point of view has an influence on firm’s performance or not.

2.   REVERSE LOGISTICS ACTIVITIES

Reverse  logistics  activities  offers  benefits  to  the  customers,  companies  and  even  the 
environment. There are various business activities that are part of reverse logistics programme. 
Each activities serve different purposes such as to remove defective and environmentally 
hazardous products from the hands of customers and this practice subsequently leads to benefits 
to the environment (Jayaraman, Patterson, & Rolland, 2003). At the same time, companies 
can become more environmentally efficient through activities such as recycling, reusing, and 
reducing the amount of materials used (Carter & Ellram, 1998; Aghazadeh, 2008). By reusing 
the end-of-life products, the environment is benefited and the company’ goodwill among the 
consumer might increase. Reverse logistics might also lead to production of green products 
through recycling, remanufacturing or reconditioning that appeal the consumer, as present day 
consumers are ready to pay more for green products (Vandermerwe & Oliff, 1990). Jayaraman 
and Luo (2007) stresses that high quality reverse logistics activities can also promote long-
term relationships where customers are more likely to repurchase from firms who do a good 
job at handling returns. Table 1 describes some of the major the activities involved in reverse 
logistics program.


154

Reverse Logistics: Pressure For Adoption And The Impact On Firm’s Performance

Table 1: Reverse Logistics Activities and Its Description

Activities

Description

Products for which a customer wants a refund because it either fails 
to meet his needs, the standard, or fails to perform.
How a product is disposed. Either sold at an outlet, sold to broker, 
sent to landfill etc.

Returns 
 
Disposition 
 
Green manufacturing  Attempts to minimize the ecological impact of manufacturing  
 
Reconditioning/ 
Refurbishing 
Recycle 
Remanufacturing 
 
Salvage 
 
Landfill 

activities.
When a product is cleaned and repaired to return it to
 “like new” state.
When a product is reduced to its basics elements, which are reused.
Similar to refurbishing but require more extensive work; often 
requires completely disassembling the product.
When a product is sold to a broker or some other low-revenue 
customer (Outlet/discount store).
A controlled environment for burying solid waste

 

Reverse logistics activities offers benefits to both the customers, companies and even the 
environment.  For  example,  reverse  logistics  activities  involve  the  removal  of  defective 
and  environmentally  hazardous  products  from  the  hands  of  customers  and  this  practice 
subsequently leads to benefits to the environment (Jayaraman, Patterson, & Rolland, 2003). 
For companies that continually strive for achieving cost savings in their production processes, 
reverse logistics program is a good option as it would lead to cost reduction (Fassoula, 2005; 
Gentry, 1999; "Competitive advantage through," 2004). At the same time, companies can 
become more environmentally efficient through recycling, reusing, and reducing the amount of 
materials used (Carter & Ellram, 1998; Aghazadeh, 2008). By reusing the end-of-life products 
the environment is benefited and the company’ goodwill among the consumer might increase. 
Reverse logistics might also lead to production of green products that appeal the consumer 
as present day consumers are ready to pay more for green products (Casadesus-Masanell et 
al., 2009; Vandermerwe & Oliff, 1990). Jayaraman and Luo (2007) stresses that high quality 
reverse logistics can also promote long-term relationships where customers are more likely to 
repurchase from firms who do a good job at handling returns.


 

Nik Ab Halim Nik Abdullah and Sabariah Yaakub

155

3.   THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK AND HYPOTHESES DEVELOPMENT

Figure 1 presents the theoretical framework of the study. It is developed based on previous 
study related to reverse logistics adoption. The model consists of four independent variables 
namely financial and competitive pressure, customer/stakeholder pressure, regulatory pressure 
and corporate citizenship pressure. These four proposed factors are expected to directly impact 
the dependent variable, which is the level of reverse logistics adoption.  

Figure 1: Theoretical Framework of the Study

Financial & 

competitive pressure

Demanding 

customer’s pressure

Regulatory pressure

Corporate 

citizenship pressure

Reverse Logistics 
Adoption Level

Firm’s 

Performance

3.1.  Financial and Competitive Pressure
In order to be competitive, firms these days need to innovate and discover the best competitive 
opportunities and improve the quality of its products and methods in order to progress. At 
the same time, firms who want to sustain their competitive advantage must earn the trust of 
customers and this could be gained by having a good return policy. A good return policy needs 
good reverse logistics programme. The reality is that a good reverse logistics programme 
can be a differentiator and provides a means of gaining market and competitive advantage 
(Jayaraman & Luo, 2007). Rivalry between firms in the global market these days put more 
pressure  on  companies  to  reduce  costs.  Implementation  of  reverse  logistics  activities  can 
help firms in becoming more proficient at handling returned goods. It will not only improve 
relationships along the supply chain, but also reduces costs. Thus, this proficiency improves 
profits and higher recovery rates are reached (Stock, 1992). Previous studies found out that 
there is a tendency that the intensity with which firms compete with their competitors in the 
market  positively  affects  their  strategic  business  policies,  such  as  it  influence  manager’s 
investment decisions (Grenadier, 2002), or in their innovation effort (Aghion et al., 2005), or 
in creating firm’s marketing strategy (Porter, 1979). Therefore, it is hypothesises that: 
 
H1: Financial and competitive pressure is positively related to the level of reverse 
logistics adoption.


156

Reverse Logistics: Pressure For Adoption And The Impact On Firm’s Performance

3.2.  Demanding customer/Stakeholders Pressure
In  the  present  scenario  where  there  is  a  growing  concern  for  environmental  protection 
among consumers and stakeholders such as the shareholders, government, non-governmental 
Organisations (NGOs) or other pressure groups; firms are expected to be under enormous 
pressure  to  implement  reverse  logistics.  Customers  even  are  ready  to  pay  more  for 
environmental-friendly  products  (Casadesus-Masanell  et  al.,  2009; Vandermerwe  &  Oliff, 
1990), so there are not many options left for companies but to go for reverse logistics practices. 
This requires proper disposal of end-of-life products which otherwise have a negative impact 
on the environment. This public concern for environment should not be taken as a problem, 
but must be considered as opportunities for companies to gain more profit by marketing their 
green products. Implementation of reverse logistics also requires a liberal return policy where 
customers are often allowed to return products for any reason. This coupled with the need to 
accommodate damaged or defective merchandise, product recalls, maintenance and repairs, 
means logistics professionals must place a higher priority on effectively managing returns 
(Autry, Daugherty, & Richey, 2001). Efficient after-sales services will definitely increase the 
consumers’ satisfaction (Shaharudin et al., 2009). Based on the above argumentation, it is 
hypothesises that:

H2: Demanding customer/stakeholders pressure is positively related to the level of
  

reverse logistics adoption.

3.3.  Regulatory Pressure
Sustainable development and environmental protection concerns are among the significant 
issues faced by businesses these days. Introduction of new or improved regulations that relates 
to product and waste disposal may make it mandatory for the companies to recover used 
products produced by them or accept them back at the end of the useful life of the product. 
Regulations are generally credited as having the greatest influence on a firm's reverse logistics 
activities (Carter & Ellram, 1998) and therefore, companies are expected to focus on reverse 
logistics  operations  because  of  environmental  reasons  (Rogers  &  Tibben-Lembke,  1998). 
European Waste electrical and electronic Equipment (WEEE) Directive introduced in January 
2007 for example requires electrical and electronic manufacturers to comply with this scheme 
in order to trade in Europe (Scott, 2008). The German packaging ordinance of 1991 resulted in 
the companies working closely with their competitors to put tough environmental policies into 
practice (Cairncross, 1992). Packaging therefore was returned mainly because it is reusable or 
sometimes legal regulations required that it should be disposed of in a proper and acceptable 
manner (Rogers & Tibben-Lembke, 2001). Previous studies reveal that most firms who are 
practicing environmentally-friendly programs are doing so only because they are trying to 
avoid violating environmental-related regulations (Luken & Van Rompaey, 2008; Hokey & 
William 2001). As a result, the third hypothesis of this study is:

H3:  Regulatory  pressure  is  positively  related  to  the  level  of  reverse  logistics
  

adoption.


 

Nik Ab Halim Nik Abdullah and Sabariah Yaakub

157

3.4.  Corporate Citizenship Pressure
Firms these days are also under huge pressure to behave in a socially responsible manner, or 
usually known as corporate citizenship pressure. Corporate citizenship is the extent to which 
businesses are socially responsible for meeting legal, ethical and economic responsibilities 
placed  on  them  by  shareholders. The  aim  is  for  businesses  to  create  higher  standards  of 
living and quality of life in the communities in which they operate, while still preserving 
profitability  for  stakeholders. As  demand  for  socially  responsible  corporations’  increases, 
investors, consumers and employees are now more willing to use their individual power to 
punish companies that do not share their values. For example, investors who find out about 
a company's negative corporate citizenship practices could boycott its products or services, 
refuse to invest in its stock or speak out against that company among family and friends 
(Investopedia, 2012). Corporate citizenship is likely to be acknowledged by businesses as 
a worthwhile investment if its activities clearly trigger consumers’ active support. Inasmuch 
as corporate citizenship may be desirable for society as a whole, it is unlikely to be widely 
embraced by organizations unless it yields concrete business benefits (Isabelle & Ferrell, 2001). 
Implementation of reverse logistics activities is a way to portray good corporate citizenship. 
Therefore, it is hypothesises that manufacturers will implement or increase the current level of 
reverse logistics adoption due the corporate citizenship pressure. Thus, the fourth hypothesis 
of this study is:

H4:  Corporate citizenship pressure is positively related to the level of reverse  
 

logistics adoption.
3.5.  Firm’s Performance
In measuring the firm’s performance, it is essential to recognize the multidimensional nature of 
the performance construct (Cameron, 1978; Chakravarthy, 1986). Previous research testing the 
relationship between firm’s strategy and performance suggested that it should include multiple 
performance measures. Such measures could include traditional accounting measures such as 
sales growth, market share, and profitability. Other non-financial considerations may also be 
used such as reputation, public image and goodwill, and the commitment and satisfaction of 
customers (Lumpkin & Dess, 1996).
Many benefits can be associated directly with effective reverse logistics management. These 
include,  among  others,  improved  customer  satisfaction  and  reduction  in  inventory  and 
warehousing cost. The benefits of effective reverse logistics management can also be considered 
as some of the key performance measures of reverse logistics program and these could include 
environmental  regulatory  compliance,  improved  customers  relations,  recovery  of  assets 
(products), cost containment, improved profitability and reduced inventory investment (Autry, 
et al., 2001). An effective reverse logistics system could potentially increase profitability via 
reduced material requirements and an improved market share via an environmental image. 
Indirect benefits of a reverse logistics programme such as better corporate image and increased 
levels of customer satisfaction may also add value (Jayaraman & Luo, 2007). Based on these 
arguments, the final hypothesis of this study is:

H5:  The level of reverse logistics adoption has a positive impact on firm’s   
 

performance.

 


158

Reverse Logistics: Pressure For Adoption And The Impact On Firm’s Performance

4.   METHODOLOGY

This study is explanatory in nature as it tries to explain the causal relationship between four 
factors (financial and competitive pressure, customer and stakeholder pressure, regulatory 
pressure,  and  corporate  citizenship  pressure)  with  the  level  of  reverse  logistics  adoption 
among manufacturers in Malaysia. It also tries to find out whether the level of reverse logistics 
implementation has a significant effect on firm’s performance or not.  In order to achieve the 
objective of the study, quantitative research approach was adopted where primary data were 
collected using survey questionnaires. Survey questionnaire was developed based on measures 
used in previous related studies to gain information on the level of pressure faced by the 
manufacturers, the current level of reverse logistics adoption and the level of performance. 
The population of this study consists of all manufacturing companies located at the three 
northern state of Malaysia, which are Penang, Kedah and Perlis, together with companies 
located in the Klang Valley, namely Kuala Lumpur and Selangor. Manufacturers were selected 
as respondents of this study because manufacturing sector is a major contributor to Malaysian 
economy. It accounts for 20.6% of Malaysia’s gross domestic product (GDP) and is expected 
to be an important economic growth driver during the Tenth Malaysia Plan period which 
takes 2011 to 2015. The sector is expected to grow at 5.7% annually until 2015, raising its 
contribution to GDP to 26.3% by the end of the Plan period (Ministry of Finance Malaysia, 
2012). The increase in manufacturing activities however brings a serious impact on Malaysian 
environmental  quality.  The  Malaysia  Environmental  Quality  Report  (2011)  indicates  that 
manufacturing industries and are among the major sources of water and air pollution in this 
country. One possible solution in reducing the environmental pollution from manufacturing 
activities is through reverse logistics and thereby justifies the selection of manufacturers as the 
respondent for this study. 
The  sampling  frame  used  for  this  study  is  the  Federation  of  Malaysian  Manufacturers 
(FMM) Directory for the year 2010. Manual count of the directory shows that there are 1356 
manufacturers located in the above mentioned states from various industries but most numbers 
of manufacturers are from the electrical and electronics, automotive, chemicals and petroleum, 
food and beverage, and also machinery and fabricated metal industry. Manufacturers from 
various different industries were randomly selected to allow generalisation of the findings 
towards every manufacturing sector in Malaysia. Based on the sample size table developed by 
Cavana, Delahaye and Sekaran (2001), the number of sample needed for this study is 300. A 
simple random sampling method was adopted in selecting the respondent.
The survey questionnaire for this study have five different sections where the first section 
looks at the company’s demographic information while second section obtain the reverse 
logistics activities and the level of reverse logistics implementation at the company. Third 
section consists of questions for all four independent variables of the study (reverse logistics 
pressures). Both the independent and dependent variables of this study was measured using 
five points Likert scale. Survey questionnaire was developed based on the instruments used 
in previous studies related to reverse logistics, firm’s performance or other relevant topics. 
Before the actual distribution of questionnaires, a pilot study was conducted to determine the 
readers understanding of the items and to confirm the internal reliability.  It is pertinent in 


 

Nik Ab Halim Nik Abdullah and Sabariah Yaakub

159

order to further improve the questionnaires and avoid any confusion on the part of respondents 
before the actual questionnaire distribution took place. In addition, pilot study is relevant as 
the feedback given by the respondents help improve the reliability of the research. First draft 
of the questionnaire, which combined the previous measures used in related research was 
pilot tested to confirm its internal reliability. A total of 30 companies were selected based on 
convenience basis for this pilot study. Data from pilot study were analyzed using SPSS and 
the reliability of each variable was checked using their Cronbach’s Alpha value. Table 3.8 
shows the result of pilot study data analysis where all variables of the study have a Cronbach’s 
Alpha value of more than 0.6, which is the cut-off value or the acceptable reliability level. It 
also proofs that there is good internal consistency of the survey items in the scale. Several 
questions were also identified by respondents as being vague and quite confusing. The pilot 
study helped to identify this problem and thus been improved to ensure better understanding 
of the questions asked. All the necessary changes and amendments to the questionnaire based 
on the pilot study were conducted before the actual data collection activity was carried out.
In total, 500 survey questionnaires were distributed either via self-administered, regular mail 
or through email. Some questionnaires were also sent by faxes as per respondent’s request. For 
mail survey, a mailed package that included a cover letter explaining the research objectives 
and instructions on how to complete the questionnaire, together with a postage-paid reply 
envelope, was sent to respondents in order to encourage the return of the questionnaire. All the 
necessary action was taken to ensure that those who filled in the survey via self-administered 
and through email were omitted from the mailing list. The questionnaire was sent to the key 
informant within the companies, namely the officer in-charge of supply chain and logistics 
operation or the top management of the company itself. A telephone follow up was made two 
weeks after the questionnaire was posted to remind the respondents about the questionnaire. 
Respondents were also promised anonymity for themselves and their company, in addition to 
a guarantee of the confidentiality of data they provided.

Table 2: Cronbach Alpha Value for Each Variable

Variables

Cronbach’s Alpha

Financial/Competitors pressure 
Customer and stakeholder pressure 
Regulatory pressure 
Corporate citizenship pressure 
Reverse logistics level 
Performance 

0.689
0.719
0.866
0.848
0.817
0.849

Even with the above data collection efforts conducted to acquire more returned questionnaires, 
only 104 of the 500 surveys distributed to selected companies were completed and returned, 
which  makes  the  return  rate  20.8%.  Upon  preliminary  screening  of  all  the  returned 
questionnaires, only 101 questionnaires are considered as usable for further data analysis. Three 
questionnaires were rejected because of too many missing value. Data analysis was conducted 


160

Reverse Logistics: Pressure For Adoption And The Impact On Firm’s Performance

using two statistical softwares, which were SPSS for descriptive statistics and SmartPLS 2.0 in 
order to test the relationship between the independent and dependent variables. The structural 
equation modelling technique using the Partial Least Square (PLS) regression approach was 
used to validate the measurement instrument and research model of this study because it 
examine the causal relationship between pressures that influence the level of reverse logistics 
adoption, followed by how the level of adoption impact firm’s performance. At the same time, 
PLS also has the ability to model latent constructs under conditions of non-normality and small 
to medium sample sizes as it places minimal restrictions on measurement scales and residual 
distribution (Chin, Marcolin, & Newsted, 2003). PLS analysis involves two stages. The first 
one is the assessment of reliability and validity of the measurement model established. The 
objective is to make sure that the construct measures are valid and reliable before attempting 
to draw the conclusions (Hulland, 1999; Barclay, Higgins, & Thompson, 1995). During this 
stage, the convergent and discriminant validity of the research instrument was tested based on 
indicator’s factor loading, and the average variance extracted (AVE) value. The second stage 
is the assessment of the structural model itself and a bootstrap re-sampling procedure with 
500 samples was used to calculate the significance of path coefficients in the research model.  
The bootstrap approach treats the collected research sample as a population from which a 
large number of samples are drawn with continuous replacement such that the probability of 
selection for any given case remains equal over every random draw (Mallinckrodt, Abraham, 
Wei & Russell, 2006).

5.   RESULTS

 Descriptive analysis

5.1. 
Preliminary analysis of the returned questionnaires shows that majority of the respondents 
are from the electrical and electronics industry (64%), automotive industry (27%), food and 
beverage (5%) and others (4%). Out of 101 manufacturers that return the survey questionnaires, 
43 companies are fully owned by a foreign company or 42.6%, while 33 firms or 32.7% are a 
local company with no foreign shares at all. Another 10 (9.9%) and 12 (11.9%) have foreign 
ownership of 1 to 50% and 52 to 99% respectively. 31 companies have been in operation for 
more than 25 years or 30.7%. Second is in between 6 to 10 years with 28 (27.7%) companies 
and third is 16 to 20 years with 24 (23.8%) companies. Majority of respondents have more 
than 301 employees, as a total of 64 manufacturers are in this category while 42 of them 
employ more than 500 employees. 37 manufacturers in total have less than 300 employees 
and 23 employs less than 100 people. In terms of annual turnover, more than half earn more 
than RM20 million annually or over 62% of the respondents. Even 55 of them earned more 
than RM40 million a year. Another 37 manufacturers earned less than RM20 million where 4 
earned less than a million in revenue. 
In order to measure the level of reverse logistics adoption, four measures were used, namely the 
financial investment, resource allocation, management commitment and overall involvement 
towards reverse logistics activities. Three out of these four indicators as depicted in table 
2 scores a mean value of less than 3.0 (average), which is financial investment, resource 
allocation and overall involvement. Only mean scores for management commitment is more 
than the average, which is 3.12. Overall mean for reverse logistics level is 2.67.


 

Nik Ab Halim Nik Abdullah and Sabariah Yaakub

161

Table 3: Level of Reverse Logistics Adoption

Financial investment in RL 
Resources allocated for RL 
Mgmt Commitment in RL 
Overall involvement in RL 

N
100 
100 
100 
101 

Mean
2.36 
2.35 
3.12 
2.74 

Std. Deviation

1.168
1.104
1.249
1.180

5.2.  Measurement Model
The  assessment  of  the  measurement  model  is  done  by  examining  the  content  validity, 
convergent validity and discriminant validity. For content validity, all scales used in this study 
were derived from previous studies related to reverse logistics and business performance. A 
first draft of the questionnaire was discussed with a few lecturers before it was pilot tested 
at 30 manufacturing companies. The Cronbach Alpha for each variable is above the cut-off 
level 0f 0.6. Therefore, content validity is assumed to be fulfilled in this study. According 
to  Fornell  and  Larcker  (1981),  convergent  validity  is  demonstrated  when  indicators  load 
highly (loading> 0.50) on their associated factors. Table 4 shows the items loading for every 
variables of the study. There are three items that have loading scores less than 0.5, which 
are CorpCitz2, CustSH6 and Fincom1. These items therefore are removed and will not be 
used in the assessment of the structural model analysis. Besides looking at items loading, 
convergent validity is also consider as adequate when each constructs (variables) have an 
Average Variance Extracted (AVE) score of at least 0.5 (Fornell & Larcker, 1981). Table 4 
also shows that all constructs have an AVE value of more than 0.5 and therefore, it can be 
concluded that the model has an adequate convergent validity. 
Discriminant validity describes the degree to which the operationalisation is not similar to 
other operationalisations that it theoretically should not be similar to. Campbell and Fiske 
(1959) introduced the concept of discriminant validity within their discussion on evaluating 
test validity. A successful evaluation of discriminant validity shows that a test of a concept is 
not highly correlated with other tests designed to measure theoretically different concepts. The 
AVE statistics are then again used to determine the discriminant validity of the model. The 
square root of the average variance extracted (AVE) statistics were calculated using Microsoft 
Excel and compared with the correlations among the latent variables using the latent variable 
correlation matrix output of PLS (Chin, et al., 2003). The latent variable correlation matrix 
and the square root of the AVE are indicated in Table 5.Correlations between constructs is 
displayed in the lower left off-diagonal elements in the matrix. 
Average variance shared between the construct and its measures should be greater than the 
variance shared between the construct and other constructs in the model (Fornell & Larcker, 
1981). Table 5 shows that the diagonal elements in bold (square root of AVE) are greater 
than the off-diagonal elements at both corresponding rows and columns. For example, the 
square root of AVE for CorpCitz (0.778) is higher than the correlation of CustomerSH and 
CorpCitz (0.196). It is also higher than corporate citizenship’s correlation with other constructs 


162

Reverse Logistics: Pressure For Adoption And The Impact On Firm’s Performance

(FinCom = 0.343, performance = 0.154, RL_Level = 0.121, RegPres = 0.331). Therefore, it 
can be concluded that the findings of the PLS measurement model analysis show evidence of 
discriminant validity, where all constructs are statistically discriminated from the others.
5.3.  Structural Model
The second step after the assessment of the measurement model is the assessment of the 
structural model itself by looking at the sign and magnitude of path coefficients. It is then 
followed by the test of whether the paths are statistically significant. The bootstrap procedure 
with 500 re-samples as recommended by Chin, Marcolin and Newsted (2003) was used to 
calculate  the  significance  of  the  path  coefficients  (t-value).  The  bootstrapping  procedure 
generates random samples of observations from the original data set by using a sampling 
through replacement technique. The path coefficients were then re-estimated using each one of 
these random samples of observations. Previous studies using PLS have typically considered 
path coefficient of above 0.20 as having a strong relationship, path coefficients of between 0.10 
to 0.20 as moderate, and path coefficients below 0.10 as weak (Johnson, 1997). Meanwhile, the 
degree to which the PLS model accomplishes its objectives of minimising errors or to maximise 
the variance explained, can be determined by examining the R2 values (Lertwongsatien, 2000).  
R2 is a measure of the proportion of the total of the dependent variables, which is explained by 
independent variables. Falk (2005)suggests that the R2 value should be more than 0.1, as any 
value lower than that informs very little even though it is statistically significant. The entire 
specified path and their coefficient, together with the R2 value is shown in figure 2.

Indicators

Corporate Citizenship 
CorpCitz1 
CorpCitz2 
CorpCitz3 
CorpCitz4 
CorpCitz5 
CorpCitz6 
Regulatory Pressure 
RegPres1 
RegPres2 
RegPres3 
RegPres4 
RegPres5 
RegPres6 

Loadings

Table 4: Survey Items Loadings
Composite 
Reliability
0.882894 

 

0.679568 
0.253059 
0.939790 
0.687659 
0.788954 
0.732401 
0.566921 
0.701919 
0.640475 
0.880858 
0.745940 
0.737827 

 

0.863320 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Average Variance 
Extracted (AVE)

0.604626

0.517393


 

Nik Ab Halim Nik Abdullah and Sabariah Yaakub

163

Indicators

Loadings

Table 4: Survey Items Loadings (cont)
Composite 
Reliability
0.792424 

 

 

Customer/Stakeholder Pressure 
CustSH1 
CustSH2 
CustSH3 
CustSH4 
CustH5 
CustSH6 
Reverse logistics Level 
RLlevel_Fin 
RLlevel_Invnt 
RLlevel_Mgmt 
RLlevel_Res 
Financial and Competitive Pressure 
FinCom1 
FinCom2 
FinCom3 
FinCom4 
FinCom5 
FinCom6 
Firm’s Performance 
Performance1 
Performance2 
Performance3 
Performance4 
Performance5 
Performance6 
Performance7 

0.740709 
0.855973 
0.556716 
0.514983 
0.500000 
-0.075948 
0.853587 
0.903515 
0.744255 
0.903126 
0.397222 
0.554491 
0.678030 
0.730651 
0.720458 
0.620325 
0.785211 
0.594126 
0.573672 
0.823094 
0.755454 
0.677491 
0.755143 

 

 

0.914318 

0.796689 

0.878022 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Average Variance 
Extracted (AVE)

0.542479

0.728479

0.542880

0.510881

RL_Level

RegPres

CorpCitz 
CustSH 
FinCom 
Performance 
RL_Level 
RegPres 

CorpCitz
0.778 
0.196 
0.343 
0.154 
0.121 
0.331 

Table 5: Latent Variable Correlation Matrix
Performance

CustomerSH

FinCom

 

0.737 
0.343 
0.110 
0.240 
0.215 

 
 

0.737 
0.216 
0.246 
0.324 

 
 
 

0.715 
0.191 
0.109 

 
 
 
 

0.853 
0.293 

0.720


164

Reverse Logistics: Pressure For Adoption And The Impact On Firm’s Performance

Figure 2: Structural Model Result of the Analysis

FinCom
CustSH
RegPres
CorpCitz

0.13
0.15*
0.23*
0.03

Note: Significant at p < 0.05.

RL Level
R2 = 0.132

Performance
R2 = 0.037

Table 6 then summarise the outcome of PLS model analysis using Bootstrapping Procedure 
and it details out the path coefficients, their t-values and the level of significance for each of 
them. The T-distribution table were referred in order to obtain the P value (Degree of freedom, 
df = 100). The result shows that out of 5 relationships tested, only 2 shows a significant 
relationship, which are between customer and stakeholder pressure (CustomerSH) with the 
level of reverse logistics adoption (RL_Level) and between corporate citizenship (CorpCitz) 
and the level of reverse logistics adoption (RL_Level). Even the relationship between the level 
of reverse logistics adoption and firm’s performance did not show a significant relationship. 
Path coefficient for regulatory pressure is 0.23, indicating a strong relationship with level 
of  reverse  logistics  adoption  while  Customer/stakeholder  pressure  only  have  a  moderate 
relationship with adoption, which is 0.15.The variance explained values (R2) for level of reverse 
logistics adoption is 0.132. It means that the model explains 13.2% of the variance in the level 
of reverse logistics adoption among manufacturers in Malaysia. For performance, the variance 
explained values is only 0.037 or 3.7%. This is very low and it justify why the bootstrap 
analysis before shows that the relationship between level of reverse logistics adoption and 
firm’s performance is not significant.

 Table 6: Outcome of Structural Model Analysis

FinCom➔RL_Level 
CustSH➔RL_Level 
RegPres➔RL_Level 
CorpCitz➔RL_Level 
RL_Level➔ Performance 
Note: Significant, p< 0.05 

Sign
+ 
+ 
+ 
- 
+ 

Path
0.13 
0.15 
0.23 
0.03 
0.19 

T-Value
0.924 
1.682 
1.760 
0.138 
1.401 

P-Value
0.1789 
0.0478 
0.0407 
0.4453 
0.0822 

Sig
No
Yes
Yes
No
No

6.    DISCUSSIONSAND CONCLUSIONS

The  first  objective  of  this  study  were  to  empirically  study  the  level  of  reverse  logistics 
adoption  and  the  impact  of  financial  and  competitive  pressure,  customer  and  stakeholder 
pressure, regulatory pressure and corporate citizenship pressure on reverse logistics adoption 


 

Nik Ab Halim Nik Abdullah and Sabariah Yaakub

165

level among manufacturing firms in Malaysia. Another objective is to study the manager’s 
perception on whether reverse logistics have influence on firm’s performance or not. The 
analysis of data has led to some major findings. First, the level of reverse logistics adoption 
among Malaysian manufacturers is considerably low with a mean score of 2.67. An item by 
item analysis shows that the level of investment, resources and overall commitment towards 
reverse logistics are less than average. It shows that firms are not really ready to commit 
themselves towards investing and allocating extra resources for reverse logistics adoption. 
Even the score for commitment by the management shows just a slightly higher than average 
score. It seems that manufacturers are not ready to invest and allocate resources even though 
the management of the company is aware of the benefit of adopting reverse logistics. 
Second, only two out of four studied variables have a significant relationship with reverse 
logistics adoption level, namely regulatory pressure and, customer and stakeholder pressure. 
It is interesting to note that the reverse logistics adoption based on this study is affected 
strongly by rules and regulation, while demanding customer and stakeholder have a moderate 
influence. The results demonstrated that the government, consumer and pressure groups such 
as NGOs have a strong influence on firm’s decision and their voice would lead to an increase in 
the likelihood of adopting reverse logistics or increasing the current level of reverse logistics 
activities among manufacturing firms in Malaysia. Financial and competitive pressure and 
corporate  citizenship  pressure  have  no  significant  impact  on  reverse  logistics  adoption. 
Financial and competitive pressure might not have a significant effect as firm’s competitors 
might also do not heavily involve in reverse logistics activities. Therefore, there is no urgency 
for the respondent’s to increase their involvement in reverse logistics activities. 
Corporate citizenship meanwhile is important to manufacturers that produce consumer goods 
such as food and beverages, cosmetics, cars, but not for producers of industrial product, materials 
or components. Possibly, most respondents of this study did not manufactured consumer goods 
and that is why corporate citizenship does not significantly pressure firms to increase the level 
of their reverse logistics activities. Some authors do argue that reverse logistics performance 
could be poor due to the fact that more than one company may get involved in the reverse 
logistics process, and thus a holistic approach is required. Another reason behind this is that 
reverse logistics is still in its infancy and manufacturing organizations have not assumed a pro-
active role to consider reverse logistics activities in the design phase (Carter & Ellram, 1998). 
Additionally, an efficient reverse logistics system is much more valuable to a company selling 
high-volume, high value product with a short life-cycle than to a retailer selling low-value 
products (Jayaraman & Luo, 2007).
Third, the results also indirectly indicate that the level of environmental awareness among 
consumers and stakeholders in Malaysia have improve significantly, that it influences firms 
decision in adopting the environmental friendly logistics practices such as reverse logistics. 
This is evidence when one of the item in the survey questionnaire which is “Our customer and 
shareholder are concern about environmental protection and sustainable development” scores 
a mean of 4.07. It shows that managers involved in this study are generally agreed to the fact 
that the environmental awareness among the customer and stakeholder these days has increase. 
This phenomenon also put managers under a greater pressure to undertake reverse logistics 
not only as a consequence of their ethical principles but also because they feel that it is a good 


166

Reverse Logistics: Pressure For Adoption And The Impact On Firm’s Performance

way of satisfying their customers and stakeholders. Finally, this study examines the impact of 
reverse logistics adoption level on firms’ performance, as perceived by the respondents. The 
output of data analysis stage shows that there is no significant relationship between the level 
of reverse logistics adoption and performance. This finding indicates that reverse logistics 
programs according to the managers of manufacturing firms in Malaysia did not contributes 
towards the improvement in firm’s performance. Even the whole model of this study according 
to the PLS analysis explains only 3.7% of the variance in firms’ performance, which is very 
low. It means that there are many other factors that determine the level of performance in the 
opinion of Malaysian manufacturers besides the adoption of reverse logistics. 
The possible explanation for this finding may be related back to the previous discussions 
where regulatory pressure, together with consumer and stakeholder pressure have a significant 
influence on reverse logistics adoption level. The fact that reverse logistics adoption level have 
no influence on performance is observed possibly because there is lack of ‘true’ commitment 
by these manufacturers in implementing reverse logistics. They implement it not as part of 
their business strategy in order to improve the level of customer service, to improve quality, 
to increase their revenue, to provide environmental protection or to reduce costs but merely 
in response to the external pressures. Furthermore, just like many other logistics and supply 
chain strategy such as information technology adoption or any other management technique 
implementation, performance outcomes related to reverse logistics programs may remain sub-
par without appropriate resource commitment (Skinner, Bryant, & Richey, 2008). Reverse 
logistics activities such as recycling, refurbishing, remanufacturing and repackaging require 
a significant resources commitment if the company want to reclaim the value from product 
returns. The level of resources allocated for reverse logistics activities by these manufacturers 
are also less than average, where the mean score for this item as shown in table 2 before, is only 
2.35. Therefore, it is assumed to be among the reason why reverse logistics according to this 
study did not contribute much towards the performance of the company. Although previously 
highlighted literatures do state that reverse logistics helps improve firm’s performance, there is 
also a similar study that shows disagree with result and similar to this study. A survey conducted 
by Eyefortransport (2012) for example reveals that high-tech manufacturing companies were 
split between seeing their reverse logistics as just cost centers to support product sales and 
as competitive differentiators. Only about 5% out of 200 companies involved in the study 
were able to apply these services in their profit centers, suggesting that only some high-tech 
manufacturing companies are able to generate revenue through reverse logistics. This finding 
indicates that majority of the respondents did not see reverse logistics as a source of revenue 
that consequently will improve firm’s performance.

7.   CONTRIBUTIONS, LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH

There are a number of significant contributions of this study to both the academia and business 
practitioners.  Reverse  logistics  despite  all  the  practical  uses  by  many  manufacturers  in 
developed countries are still not a popular practice among Malaysian manufacturers. The main 
factors that results in adoption of reverse logistics and barriers that create this low adoption 
level are seldom explored within the available literature. Therefore, the results of this study 
fulfil this gap in the literature by answering the research questions of which factors increase the 
level of adoption and which barriers contributes to totally non or minimum level of adoption of 


 

Nik Ab Halim Nik Abdullah and Sabariah Yaakub

167

reverse logistics activities only. Regulatory pressure, together with customer and stakeholder 
pressure are found to have a significant relationship with the level of reverse logistics adoption. 
Issues such as lack of awareness and knowledge of reverse logistics, implementation cost 
is high, lack of resources and no management commitment is among the top barriers that 
inhibit an effective reverse logistics activities implementation among the manufacturers. At 
the same time, this study also contributes to the literature by providing some insights on the 
impact of reverse logistics adoption on firm’s performance. Even though the finding is not as 
hypothesized, it shed lights on Malaysian manufacturers view on the factors that determine 
their business performance. The fact that reverse logistics is not considered as a contributors 
towards firm’s performance means that Malaysian manufacturers are still behind if compared 
to manufacturers in developed countries who treats reverse logistics as anew source of core 
competency. According  to  Rogers,  Lembke  and  Benardino  (2013),  managers  should  now 
broadened their perspective as the difference between a product’s success (and profitability) 
and failure in today’s competitive environment depends on how the end of life is managed. 
Finally, this study contributes to the literature on reverse logistics adoption specifically within 
the context of developing countries like Malaysia. Most studies on reverse logistics adoption to 
date have been conducted in developed countries such as the United States, United Kingdom, 
Australia and Europe. 
For the practitioners, findings of this study could provide the management of a company 
especially a manufacturer with a better understanding on reverse logistics adoption, especially 
the factors that influence the adoption. Those who never know on the activities related to reverse 
logistics will have a better understanding about the concept. Manufacturing firms in particular, 
would be able to address their main concerns by looking at the findings of this study before 
they decide to proceed with the adoption of reverse logistics programmes.  Findings and the 
discussions of this study could also serve as a guide for business managers or policy makers in 
Malaysia when creating policies related to reverse logistics, sustainable development or even 
environmental protection. This study clearly shows that strict regulation and strong pressure 
from customer and the stakeholders can increase the environmental awareness of managers 
and the tendency to implement reverse logistics among the manufacturers. This study also 
found out that managers involved did not view reverse logistics as a mean to improve their 
business performance, as there is no significant relationship evidence. Product returns and 
reverse logistics activities always been viewed as a cost centre by manufacturers and not as a 
source of competitive advantage. Therefore, less attention and resource allocation is given on 
reverse logistics activities. In contrast, manufacturers in developed countries as discussed in 
the literature review before have already reap the advantage of implementing reverse logistics 
such as reduction in logistics costs, increase profit, better environmental regulation compliance 
and improve in goodwill. Therefore, more efforts should be taken by the relevant government 
agencies, training centres and educational institutions to enlighten Malaysian manufacturing 
firm’s managers on the potential of adopting comprehensive reverse logistics activities.
There are a few issues that arise from this study which could provide an opportunity for further 
research. First, data collected for this study is small due to cost and time constraint. The sample 
size of this survey is only 101 manufacturers. Another research with a greater sample size to 
replicate this survey using a different sample of companies in the other sectors such as service 


168

Reverse Logistics: Pressure For Adoption And The Impact On Firm’s Performance

sector may be conducted to validate these findings. Moreover, this study did not categorized 
the sample based on their level of adoption such as high reverse logistics adoption level, low 
level adopters and also non-adopters to refine and test the model. This will probably contributes 
to the variation of reverse logistics adoption in various industries. Finally, this study includes 
all manufacturing industries from all sizes and industry. The replication of the study where the 
analysis is conducted based on specific industry or sizes of the company would provide new 
insights into the reverse logistics adoption factors. It would also be interesting to replicate the 
study for the analysis of small and medium enterprises (SMEs) as the influential factors could 
be different from big enterprises and multinational companies.

REFERENCES

Aghazadeh, S. M. (2008). The success of reverse logistics in supporting the environment: the 
case of the computer industry. International Journal of Environment and Sustainable 
Development, 7(4), 452-464. 

Aghion, P., Blundell, R., Grith, R., Howitt, P., & Prantl, S. (2005). The effects of entry on 
incumbent  innovation  and  productivity.  Review  of  Economics  and  Statistics,  91(1),  
20-32.

Anderson, P. (2009). How to succeed in reverse logistics. Material Handling Management, 

64(8), 41-42. 

Autry, C. W., Daugherty, P., & Richey, R. G. (2001). The challenge of reverse logistics in catalog 
retailing.  International  Journal  of  Physical  Distribution  &  Logistics  Management, 
31(1), 26. 

Barclay, D. W., Higgins, C., & Thompson, R. (1995). The partial least squares (PLS) approach 
to causal modeling: personal computer adoption and use as an illustration. Technology 
Studies, 2, 285-309. 

Blanchard, D. (2007). Supply chains also work in reverse. Industry Week/IW, 256(5), 48-48. 
Cairncross, F. (1992). How Europe's companies position to recycle. Harvard Business Review, 

70, 35-45. 

Cameron, K. (1978). Measuring organizational effectiveness in institutions of higher education. 

Administrative Science Quarterly, 23, 604-632. 

Campbell,  D.  T.,  &  Fiske,  D.  W.  (1959).  Convergent  and  discriminant  validation  by  the 

multitrait-multimethod matrix. Psychological Bulletin, 56, 81-105. 

Carter,  C.  R.,  &  Ellram,  L.  M.  (1998).  Reverse  logistics:  a  review  of  the  literature  and 
framework for future investigation. Journal of Business Logistics, 19(1), 85 -102. 
Casadesus-Masanell,  R.,  Crooke,  M.  Reinhardt,  F.,  &  Vasisth,  V.  (2009).  Households’ 
willingness to pay for ’Green’ goods. Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 
18 (1), 203-233.

Cavana, R. Y., Delahaye, B. L., & Sekaran, U. (2001). Applied business research: Qualitative 

and quantitative method. Queensland: John wiley & Sons Australia Ltd.


 

Nik Ab Halim Nik Abdullah and Sabariah Yaakub

169

Chakravarthy, B. (1986). Measuring strategic performance. Strategic Management Journal, 

6, 437-458. 

Chin, W. W., Marcolin, B. L., & Newsted, P. R. (2003). A partial least squares latent variable 
modelling  approach  for  measuring  interaction  effects:  Results  from  a  Monte  Carlo 
simulation study and voice mail emotion/adoption study. Information Systems Research, 
14(2), 189-217. 

Eyefortransport. (2012). High-tech companies and service providers differ on reverse logistics. 

Material Handling & Logistics, 67(5), 14-15.

Falk, M. (2005). ICT-linked firm re-organisation and productivity gains. Technovation, 25(11), 

1229-1250. 

Fassoula, E. D. (2005).  Reverse logistics as a means to reduce the cost of quality.  Total 

Quality Management and Business Excellence, 16(5), 631–643.

Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. F. (1981). Evaluating structural equation models with unobservable 
variables and measurement error. Journal of Marketing Research (JMR), 18(1), 39-50. 

Gentry, C. R. (1999). Reducing the cost of returns. Chain Store Age, 75(10), 124-125. 
Grenadier, S. R. (2002). Option exercise games: An application to the equilibrium investment 

strategies of firms. The Review of Financial Studies, 15(3), 691-721.

Hokey, M., & William, P. G. (2001). Green purchasing practices of US firms. International 

Journal of Operations & Production Management, 21(9), 1222-1238. 

Hulland, J. (1999). Use of partial least squares (PLS) in strategic management research: A 

review of four recent. Strategic Management Journal, 20(2), 195. 

Investopedia.  (2012).  Corporate  Citizenship.  Retrieved  March  2,  2012,  from  http://www.

investopedia.com/terms/c/corporatecitizenship.asp#ixzz1pd1BUe2h

Isabelle,  M.,  &  Ferrell,  O.  C.  (2001).  Corporate  citizenship  as  a  marketing  instrument  - 
Concepts,  evidence  and  research  directions.  European  Journal  of  Marketing,  35(3), 
457-484. 

Jayaraman, V.,  &  Luo, Y.  (2007).  Creating  Competitive Advantages Through  New Value 
Creation:  A  Reverse  Logistics  Perspective.  Academy  of  Management  Perspectives, 
21(2), 56-73. 

Jayaraman, V., Patterson, R. A., & Rolland, E. (2003). The design of reverse distribution 
networks: Models and solution procedures. European Journal of Operational Research, 
150(1), 128-129. 

Johnson,  J.  P.  (1997).  Strategic  decision  making,  commitment  and  organizational  justice: 
Implications for the control and performance of international joint venture. PhD thesis, 
University of South Carolina.   


170

Reverse Logistics: Pressure For Adoption And The Impact On Firm’s Performance

Lertwongsatien,  C.  (2000).  An  Impirical  Investigation  of  The  Strategic  Implications  of 
Information  System  Resources  and  Capabilities.  PhD  thesis,  Rensselaer  Polytechnic 
Institute, Troy, New York.   

Luken, R., & Van Rompaey, F. (2008). Drivers for and barriers to environmentally sound 
technology adoption by manufacturing plants in nine developing countries. Journal of 
Cleaner Production, 16, 67-77.

Lumpkin, G. T., & Dess, G. G. (1996). Clarifying the entrepreneurial orientation construct and 

linking it to performance. Academy of Management Review, 21(1), 135-172. 

Ministry of Finance Malaysia. (2012). Economic Report 2011 - 2012. Kuala Lumpur.
Mallinckrodt, B., Abraham, W. T., Wei, M. F., & Russell, D. W. (2006). Advances in testing the 
statistical significance of mediation effects. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 53(3), 
372-378. 

Minahan, T. (1998). Manufacturers take aim at end of the supply chain. Purchasing, 124(6), 

111-112. 

Porter, M. E. (1979). How competitive forces shape strategy. Harvard Business Review, 57(2), 

137 - 145.

Rogers, D. S., & Tibben-Lembke, R. S. (1998). Going backwards: Reverse logistics trends and 

practices. University of Nevada, Reno: Reverse Logistics Executive Council.

Rogers, D. S., & Tibben-Lembke, R. S. (2001). An examination of reverse logistics practices. 

Journal of Business Logistics, 22(2), 129-148. 

Rogers, D. S., Lembke, R., & Benardino, J. (2013). Reverse logistics: A new core competency. 

Supply Chain Management Review, 17(3), 40-47.

Scott, A. (2008). Taking it back: Why reverse logistics will at last be taken seriously. Logistics 

& Transport Focus, 10(6), 34-35. 

Shaharudin, M. R., Md. Yusof, K. M., Elias, S. J., & Wan Mansor, S. (2009). Factors affecting 
customer satisfaction in after-sales service of Malaysian electronic business market. 
Canadian Social Science, 5(6), 10-18. 

Skinner, L. R., Bryant, P. T., & Richey, R. G. (2008). Examining the impact of reverse logistics 
disposition  strategies.  International  Journal  of  Physical  Distribution  &  Logistics 
Management, 38(7), 518-539. 

Stock, J. R. (Ed.). (1992). Reverse Logistics. Oak Brook, IL: Council of Logistics Management.
The Malaysia Environmental Quality Report. (2011). Petaling Jaya, Malaysia: Department of 

Environment, Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment Malaysia.

Vandermerwe, S., & Oliff, M. D. (1990). Customers drive corporations green. Long Range 

Planning, 23(6), 10-16. 

