INFORMATION TO USERS

This manuscript has been reproduced from the microfilm master.  UMI 
films the text directly from the original or copy submitted.  Thus, some 
thesis and dissertation copies are in typewriter face, while others may 
be from any type of computer printer.

Hie quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the 
copy submitted.  Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality 
illustrations and photographs, prim bleedthrough, substandard margins, 
and improper alignment can adversely afreet reproduction.

In the unlikely event that the author did not send UMI a complete 
manuscript and there are missing pages, these will be noted.  Also, if 
unauthorized copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate 
the deletion.

Oversize materials (e.g_, maps, drawings, charts) are reproduced by 
sectioning the original, beginning at the upper left-hand comer and 
continuing from left to right in equal sections with small overlaps.  Each 
original  is also photographed in one exposure and is  included in 
reduced form at the back of die book.

Photographs included in the original manuscript have been reproduced 
xerographically in this copy.  Higher quality 6" x 9” black and white 
photographic prints are available for any photographs or illustrations 
appearing in this copy for an additional charge.  Contact UMI directly 
to order.

A Pell & Howell Information Company 

300 North ZeeD Road. Ann Arbor. Ml 48106-1346 USA 

313/761-4700  800/521-0600

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


HUMAN RESOURCE PRACTICES,  ORGANIZATIONAL CLIMATE,  WORK 

ATTITUDES AND ORGANIZATIONAL PERFORMANCE

BY

WILLIAM KEVIN BARKSDALE

A Disseration Submitted in Partial Fulfillment 

of the Requirements for the Degree

Doctor of Philosophy 

College of Business Administration

Georgia State University

of
in the

of

GEORGIA STATE UNIVERSITY 

COLLEGE OF BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION 

1994

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


UMI Number:  9526885

BARKSDALE, WILLIAM KEVIN 

Copyright 1994 by 
All rights reserved.

Copyright 1995,  by UMI Company.  All rights reserved.

UMI Microform 9526885 

This microform edition  is protected against unauthorized 

copying under Title 17,  United States Code.

UMI

300 North Zeeb Road 
Ann Arbor,  MI  48103

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Copyright by 

William Kevin Barksdale 

1994

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


ACCEPTANCE

This dissertation was prepared under the direction of the 
candidate's Dissertation Committee.  It has been approved 
and accepted by all members of that committee,  and it has 
been accepted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for 
the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in Business 
Administration in the College of Business Administration of 
Georgia State University.

e

D
7  
College of Business

a

n

istration

Dissertation Committee:

Ch3±r

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The author wishes to acknowledge the patience,  support,  and 
sacrifices of his wife Lisa.  The faculty of the W.T.  Beebe 
Institute of Personnel and Employment Relations proved 
invaluable during the author's training at Georgia State 
University.  Special credit is due to Lynn Shore,  without 
whom this work would not have been possible.  In addition, 
the author wishes to acknowledge his parents,  who taught him 
to believe in his dreams,  the value of hard work,  and the 
meaning of charity.

iv

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


ABSTRACT

HUMAN RESOURCE PRACTICES,  ORGANIZATIONAL CLIMATE,  WORK 

ATTITUDES AND ORGANIZATIONAL PERFORMANCE

BY

WILLIAM KEVIN BARKSDALE 

JULY 11,  1994 

Committee Chair:  Dr.  Lynn McFarlane Shore 
Major Department: Management

While many organizational theories and conceptualizations 

link organizational practices and policies with the 
organizational climate and employee attitudes,  very little 
empirical research has addressed these relationships 
comprehensively at both the individual and organizational 
levels.  In addition,  there is a critical gap in the 
literature addressing cross-level effects of the impact of 
the organizational context on individuals.  This research 
presents and tests a general organizational model which 
outlines relationships among a firm's human resource 
practices,  organizational climate,  and employees'  work 
attitudes at the individual,  organizational,  and cross­
levels of analysis.

Results of correlate and regression analysis suggest the 
particular importance of labor force strategy to aggregate 
perceptions of the organizational climate.  Aggregate 
employee perceptions of the organizational climate were 
strongly linked with aggregate employee work attitudes. 
Human resource practices,  organizational climate and work

v

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


attitudes were also related to several indicators of 
organizational performance.  No support was found for the 
contextual effects of aggregate organizational climate and 
human resource practices on individual level work attitudes.

Important support for the model by Kopelman at al.,

(1990)  was found.  Organizational climate mediated the 
relationship between human resource practices and aggregate 
work attitudes.  In addition,  work attitudes completely 
mediated the relationship between organizational climate and 
organizational turnover.

vi

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
Chapter 
1
I.  Introduction  .................................... 
3
A.  P u r p o s e ...............................  
 
4
B.  Human Resource Practices  ...................... 
7
C.  Organizational Climate  ........................ 
9
D.  Work Attitudes................................  
12
E.  Organizational Outcomes  ...................... 
15
II.  O v e r v i e w ........................................ 
A.  A General Framework.......................... 
16
20
B.  Human Resource Practices  ...................... 
20
1.  Organizational Downsizing  ...................  
22
2.  Innovative Human Resource Practices  ........  
3.  Human Resource Practices and Organizational 
27
Performance.................................... 
28
C.  Translating Organizational Practices  .........  
28
D.  Organizational Climate  ........................ 
30
1.  Dimensionality of Organizational Climate . . .  
2.  Organizational Climate As a Contextual 
...................................... 32
Phenomenon 
3.  Organizational Climate and Human Resource 
Practices.......................................... 34
4.  Organizational Climate and Organizational 
Performance........................................ 35
36
37
1.  Job Satisfaction and Job Behaviors............. 38
2.  Performance Behaviors  .......................   41
3.  Withdrawal Behaviors  .........................   42
45
1.  Attitudinal Commitment  .......................   46
2.  Commitment Typologies  .......................   47
3.  Commitment and Job Behaviors................... 49
4.  Performance Behaviors  .......................   49
5.  Withdrawal Behaviors............................50
52
H.  Organizational Climate and Work Attitudes . . .  
53
I.  Job Satisfaction and Organizational Commitment  . 
54
J.  Work Attitudes As Aggregate Variables  ........  
K.  Aggregate Organizational Climate and Aggregate Work
56
Attitudes.......................................... 
L.  Work Attitudes and Organizational Outcomes . . .  
57
59
M.  Comprehensive Model Evaluation  ................. 
III.  M e t h o d s ........................................ 
61
61
A.  Sample........................................  
61
1.  Organization Sample  .........................  
2.  Employee Sample.............................  
62
3.  Representativeness of Sample  ............... 
63
B.  Measures......................................  
64
1.  Work Force Stra t e g y ...................  
64

E.  Work Attitudes as Individual Level Variables .  . 
F.  Job Satisfaction 
.............................  

G.  Organizational Commitment  .....................  

vii

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


IV. Results..........................................  
A.  Organizational Practices  ...................... 
B.  Organizational Climate  ....................... 
C.  Work Attitudes................................  

2.  Human Resource Practices  ...................  
3.  Work Attitudes and Organizational Climate  .  . 
C.  Financial Data 
................................ 
 
D.  Pr o c e d u r e .............................. 
E.  Sample......................................... 
F.  Psychometric Analyses... ....................... 
G.  Nature of Aggregation........................ 
H.  Classification of Human Resource Practices  .  . 

65
65
67
69
70
70
77
85
88
88
96
102
D.  Comprehensive Model Evaluation  ................ 
112
V.  Disccssion.......................................... 115
116
117
118
120
122
122
125
126
128
129
129
129
130
131
.............................................138
Appendix A
Appendix B
.............................................141
References.............................................160
V i t a .................................................... 188

A.  Hypothesis  l a ................................  
B.  Hypothesis  l b ................................  
D.  Hypothesis  2 a ................................  
E.  Hypothesis  2 b ................................  
................................  
F.  Hypothesis  3
G.  Hypothesis 4
..................................  
H.  Hypothesis  5
................................  
I.  Hypothesis  6 a ................................  
J.  Hypothesis 6 b ..................................  
K.  Hypothesis  7 a ................................  
L.  Hypothesis 7 b ..................................  
M.  Hypothesis  7 c ................................  
N.  Limitations.................................... 
0.  Conclusions and Implications  ..................  

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


LIST OF TABLES

Page

Table 1 Factor analytic results of the organizational 
climate and work attitude i t e m s ..................... 72
Table 2 Confirmatory factor analysis results for the 32 
organizational climate and work attitude items  . . . .   75
Table 3 MANOVA results for testing assumptions of
aggregation.............................................84
Table 4 ANOVA results for testing assumptions of 
aggregation.............................................85
Table 5 Results of expert judgements in classifying human 
resource practices  ....................................  87
Table 6 Intercorrelations among the human resource 
pr a c t i c e s ...............................................89
Table 7 Correlations among career enhancement practices, 
labor force strategy,  and organizational profitability 
measures............................................  
91
Table 8 Regression results of return on assets on human 
resource practices and labor force strategy  .........  93
Table 9 Regression results of return on equity on human 
resource practices and labor force strategy  .........  94
Table 10 Regression results of average A.M.  Best's ratings 
on human resource practices and labor force strategy  .  95
Table 11 Correlations of human resource practices,  labor 
force strategy with aggregate organizational climate
variables............................................  
96
Table 12 Regression results using organizational strategy 
variables and human resource practices to predict aggregate 
dimensions of organizational climate  .................   98
Table 13 Correlations of organizational profitability and 
turnover with aggregate organizational climate perceptions 
....................................................... 
99
Table 14 Regression results of return on assets on the 
organizational climate ................................  100
Table 15 Regression results of return on equity on the 
organizational climate ................................  101

ix

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Table 16 Regression results of average A.M.  Best's ratings 
on the organizational climate  .......................   102
Table 17 Intercorrelations among the individual level 
organizational climate variables and the individual level 
work attitude variables  .............................   103
Table 18 Regression results of individual climate 
perceptions predicting individual work attitudes.  .  .  104
Table 19 Intercorrelations among aggregate organizational 
climate and aggregate work attitude variables  . . . .   104
Table 20 Regression results using aggregate climate 
variables to predict aggregate work attitudes  . . . .   105
Table 21 Correlations of labor force strategy variables, 
human resource practices,  and aggregate perceptions of the 
organizational climate with individual level work attitudes 
 
106
Table 22 Regression results of individual climate 
perceptions,  labor force strategy,  human resource practices, 
and aggregate climate perceptions predicting individual 
level work attitudes................................... 108
Table 23 Correlations of organizational profitability 
measures with aggregate level work attitudes  ........   109
Table 24 Regression results of  average return on assets on
aggregate job satisfaction and aggregate organizational 
commitment........................................  
109
Table 25 Regression results of  average return on equity on
aggregate job satisfaction and aggregate organizational 
commitment........................................  
110
Table 26 Regression results of  average A.M.  Best's ratings
on aggregate job satisfaction and aggregate organizational 
commitment........................................  
Ill
Table 27 Correlations of employee turnover with aggregate 
job satisfaction and aggregate organizational commitment 
......................................................... Ill

LIST OF FIGURES

FIGURE 1 ............................................  
FIGURE 1 ............................................  

4
6

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Chapter I 
INTRODUCTION 

Much research in applied psychology focuses on 

relationships between the work context,  employee attitudes 
and subsequent behaviors at the individual level of analysis 
(i.e.,  j ob performance,  turnover,  absence,  tardiness, 
sabotage)  and has led to years of empirical research  (see 
reviews by Brayfield & Crockett,  1955;  Carsten & Spector, 
1987;  Iffaldano & Muchinsky,  1985; Locke 1976; Mathieu & 
Zajac,  1991; Vroom,  1964).  However,  the context is almost 
always assessed by measuring individual perceptions in spite 
of conceptual work which suggests that the context is 
something that exists apart from individual perceptions 
(e.g.,  Schneider,  1987).  A great deal of criticism was 
recently directed at this predominant focus on the 
individual level of analysis when studying organizational 
behavior  (Mowday & Sutton,  1993;  O'Reilly,  1991).  Mowday 
and Sutton called for a greater emphasis on putting 
organizations back into organizational behavior by re­
framing research questions to include or account for the 
context in which attitudes and behaviors occur.

Organizational theorists  (Argyris,  1964;  Campbell, 

Dunnette,  Lawler & Weick,  1970;  Etzioni,  1975;  Likert,  1967) 
have long held that organizations create an organizational 
climate through their human resource management practices 
which have a predictable impact across individuals within a

1

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


particular context or organization.  As a result,  such 
differences in organizations ought to be related to measures 
of organizational performance and effectiveness  (Kopelman, 
Brief,  & Guzzo,  1990).  Thus,  Mowday and Sutton  (1993)  have 
identified a major empirical gap in the organizational 
behavior literature whereby studies of employee attitudes 
need to account for the impact of the work context by 
focusing on how organizations are different,  and how those 
differences affect employee attitudes and subsequently,  firm 
performance.

In order to depict comprehensive relationships within 

organizations  (i.e.,  to study the organizational context), 
a broad conceptual framework is required.  Recently,
Kopelman,  et al.,  (1990)  drew on a wide range of theory and 
empirical research from individual,  group,  and 
organizational levels to propose an organizational model 
that depicted a relationship between human resource 
practices,  organizational climate,  work attitudes,  and 
organizational outcomes.  This model is based on the view 
that organizations,  through their human resource policies 
and practices,  can create an environment  (climate)  that will 
lead to worker motivation,  positive work attitudes,  worker 
commitment,  and productivity.  As yet,  there is no 
comprehensive empirical evaluation of this model.

While many organizational theories and conceptualizations

Purpose

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


3

link organizational practices and policies with the 
organizational climate and employee attitudes  (e.g.,
Argyris,  1964;  Etzioni,  1975;  Kopelman,  et al.,  1990;
Likert,  1967),  very little empirical research has addressed 
these relationships comprehensively at both the individual 
and organizational levels.  In addition,  there is a critical 
gap in the literature addressing cross-level effects of the 
impact of the organizational context on individuals.  The 
purpose of this study is to present and test a general 
organizational model,  based on a model by Kopelman et al., 
(1990)  which outlines relationships among a firm's human 
resource practices,  organizational climate,  and employees' 
work attitudes at the individual,  organizational,  and cross­
levels of analysis.  Kopelman et al.'s,  model  (presented in 
Figure 1)  directs research toward evaluation of the impact 
of the organizational context as represented by 
organizational level human resource practices and 
organizational climate on employee work attitudes.  The 
present study reviews existing theory and research focusing 
on relationships between individual level attitudes,  climate 
perceptions,  and employee behaviors and integrates it with 
emerging organizational level conceptualizations  (Hansen, 
1987;  Ostroff,  1992;  Schneider,  1975,1987)  focusing on 
organizational practices,  aggregate climate perceptions, 
aggregate attitudes and organizational outcomes.

This research utilizes an  (insurance)  industry specific

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


R
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
e
d

 

wi
h

t

 

i

p
e
r
m
s
s
o
n

i

 

Societal  Culture

Organizational

Culture

MR

Practices

Hir ing
PIac i ng
Rewarding
Promoting
Monitoring
Developing
Promoting

1

of

 

t

h
e 

c
o
p
y
r
i
g
h

t
 

o
w
n
e
r
.
 

F
u
r
t

h
e
r
 

r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i

o
n

 

i

p
r
o
h
b
i
t
e
d
 

w

i
t
h
o
u
t
 

p
e
r
m
s
s

i

i

o
n
.

\
1

V/

1
V

Figure 1

Cognitive  and 
Affective  States

Work  Motivation 
Job  Satisfaction

S a 1 i ent 

Organ izat i ona1 

Behaviors

Attachment 
Citi zenship 
Performance

Organi zational 

Productivity

Physical  Output 
Total  Labor  Costs

Organizational

Climate

Goal  Emphasis 
Means  Emphasis 

Reward 

Orientation 
Task  Support 
Socioemot iona1 

Support


5

archival data set composed of survey data from 92 
organizations  (4802 employees)  that allows for an empirical 
evaluation of the relationships within and across levels of 
analysis within organizations.  Figure 2 depicts the model 
tested in this study.  Below is a brief review of literature 
relevant to each variable in the model.
Human Resource Practices

Kopelman et al.,  (1990)  view the firm's human resource 
practices as setting the tone for the work environment or 
context.  Human resource practices reviewed by Kopelman et 
al.,  included innovative work practices such as the use of 
flexible work hours,  financial incentives,  systematic 
employee selection,  employee training and development,  and 
participation in decision making.  The field of human 
resources has contributed to our understanding through the 
examination of relationships between managerial practices 
and policies and organizational outcomes such as turnover 
(Brown & Medoff,  1978;  Cotton & Tuttle,  1986; McEvoy & 
Cascio,  1985),  productivity  (Brown & Medoff,  1978;  Cutcher- 
Gershenfeld,  1991;  Huselid,  1993; Katz,  Kochan & Keefe,
1987),  employee performance  (Becker & Huselid,  1992),  and 
firm profitability  (Huselid,  1993;  Ichniowski,  1990).  The 
context within which human resource management occurs has 
also been addressed  (see review by Jackson & Schuler,  in 
press).  However,  organizational level human resource 
practices have not been treated as contextual variables at

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


R
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
e
d

 

wi
h

t

 

i

p
e
r
m
s
s
o
n

i

 

Organizational

Practices

Figure 2

of

 

t

h
e 

c
o
p
y
r
i
g
h

t
 

o
w
n
e
r
.
 

F
u
r
t

h
e
r
 

r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i

o
n

 

i

p
r
o
h
b
i
t
e
d
 

w

i
t
h
o
u
t
 

p
e
r
m
s
s

i

i

o
n
.

Employment Strategy
Plans to  increase or 
decrease employee 
population
Past  increase or decrease 
employee population

HR Practices

Flex Time 
Job Sharing 
Telecommuting 
Extended Leaves 
Part-time Tracks 
Job Rotation 
Special Projects 
On-Site Child Care 
Child Care Referral 
Sick Child Care 
Elder Care Referral 
Paternity Leave 
Mentors
Dual Career Tracks 
Remedial Training

Organizational

Climate

Task Emphasis
Reward
Orientation

^   Means Emphasis
Goal EmphasiB
Socio-Emotional
Support

Work Attitudes

,  Job
\ Satisfaction
^ Organizational 
Commitment

Organizational

Outcomes

Profitability
Turnover
A.M.  Best's 
Ratings


the organizational level of analysis  (Ichniowski,  1990),  nor 
have studies included employee climate perceptions and work 
attitudes as intervening variables between those practices 
and firm performance.

Two issues which are among the most important current 

topics with regard to human resource practices and policies 
are:  (1)  work force downsizing to retain  (or regain) 
competitive advantage  (Atcheson,  1991);  and  (2)  innovative 
human resource practices to motivate and accommodate an 
increasingly diverse employee population  (Atcheson,  1991). 
The chief focus of micro- level research has been to examine 
the effects of the perceived fairness of these policies and 
practices on employees7  attitudes toward the policies,  and 
subsequent job attitudes and behaviors  (Atcheson,  1991; 
Grover,  1991).  Macro- level research has predominately 
examined the effects of these policies and trends on firm 
performance,  or the costs to employers  (Cascio,  1993; 
Huselid,  1993;  Ichniwoski,  1990).

Some research supports the relationship among work force 
population changes and human resource practices  (Atcheson, 
1991;  Ichniowski,  1990).  For example,  firms that initiate 
work force downsizing may also practice job sharing to 
reduce the total number of employees displaced or laid off.
A general issue to be addressed in this study is whether 
these practices seems to be used in any particular 
combination within organizations  (i.e.,  defineable clusters

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


8
of practices).  Finally,  since human resource practices have 
been found to have a direct impact on organizational 
performance,  this study provides further examination of this 
direct relationship.
Organizational Climate

Organizational climate refers to the discovery of how the 

organization becomes psychologically meaningful to the 
individual member  (Payne & Pugh,  1976).  Kopelman et al., 
(1990)  conceptualized climate as "meaningful  interpretations 
of a work environment by the people in it"  (p.290)  which is 
perceived at the individual level.  However,  they noted that 
the environmental conditions  (e.g.,  HR practices)  used as a 
basis for interpretation are common across employees within 
a given organization.  Schneider  (1975)  also argued for the 
value of both individual level and aggregated climate 
perceptions.  However,  with a few notable exceptions  (i.e., 
Hansen,  1987;  Jones & James,  1979)  much of the research on 
organizational climate has focused on individual and group 
perceptions of the organizational climate.

As noted above,  the organizational climate serves as the 
perceptual filter through which employees interpret their 
work environment,  which according to Kopelman et al.,  (1990) 
is comprised of human resource practices.  Organizational 
climate is said to exist at the individual and 
organizational levels of analysis  (Payne & Pugh,  197 6).
This study reviews the conceptual foundations of

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


9
organizational climate and includes analyses of the climate 
at both the individual and organizational levels of 
analysis.  Another important research question is whether 
the present trends in firm-level human resource practices 
have a predictable impact on the aggregate organizational 
climate.

Although Kopelman et al.,  (1990)  do not propose a direct 

linkage between the organizational climate and firm 
performance,  some research supports such a relationship 
(Hansen,  1987; Jones & James,  1979).  Hansen  (1987)  argued 
that because of its relationship to worker motivation, 
positive perceptions of the organizational climate should be 
related to organizational effectiveness.  He regressed 5 
year average ROA values  (defined as a ratio of net income 
plus interest expense to total average assets employed)  on 
aggregated climate measures from 40 organizations  (from a 
variety of industries)  and found several dimensions of 
climate  (effective communications,  employee's sense of 
involvement,  and participation in decision making),  as well 
as an overall climate score accounted for a significant 
proportion of the variance in ROA.  Thus,  in addition to the 
human resource practices to organizational climate linkage, 
this study examines the direct relationship between 
aggregated organizational climate and indicators of 
organizational performance.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


10

Work Attitudes

Job satisfaction has been defined as resulting from the 
attainment of values which are compatible with one's needs 
(Locke,  1976).  Likewise,  organizational commitment has been 
defined as "(1)  a strong belief in and acceptance of the 
organization's goals;  (2)  a willingness to exert 
considerable effort on behalf of the organization;  and  (3)  a 
strong desire to maintain organizational membership"
(Mowday,  Porter,  & Steers,  1982,  p=43).  Historically,  these 
two work attitudes have been treated as individual level 
variables.  It was this individual level focus that drew 
criticism from Mowday and Sutton  (1993).  Schneider and 
Schmitt  (1986)  noted that higher performing organizations 
would probably have higher levels of morale  (aggregated job 
satisfaction)  than lower performing organizations.
Likewise,  Kopelman et al.,  (1990)  proposed that work 
attitudes should be direct determinants of organizational 
effectiveness.  However,  their literature review of work 
attitudes emphasized the individual level of analysis, 
making the relationship between work attitudes and 
organizational performance somewhat unclear.

In light of tenuous results relating attitudes to 

performance at the individual level,  Ostroff  (1992)  called 
for research that is directed toward studying the effects of 
attitudes aggregated to the organizational level of 
analysis.  Drawing on conceptual work by several authors

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


(i.e.,  Argyris,  1964;  Emery & Trist,  1960;  Likert,  1961; 
Mayo,  1933; McGregor,  1960;  Schneider & Schmitt,  1986), 
Ostroff's research showed that positive work attitudes in 
the aggregate were an important part of effective 
organizations,  thus providing evidence that comparing morale 
across organizations is an important contribution to the 
literature.  Conceptual definitions of aggregate work 
attitudes are important in drawing parallels between these 
attitudes and organizational morale as described by 
Schneider and Schmitt  (1986).  Thus,  more extensive 
conceptual development of the meaning of aggregated work 
attitudes is also needed.

Organizational climate is conceptualized as the 

psychological process that mediates the relationship between 
organizational practices and employee attitudes  (Kopelman et 
al.,  1990).  Research is also needed that addresses this 
linkage.  Since researchers have argued that organizational 
climate and work attitudes may be meaningfully assessed at 
the organizational level of analysis,  an important issue is 
to determine the extent to which aggregate measures of the 
organizational climate and aggregate measures of work 
attitudes are related to each other.  In other words, 
another purpose of this study is to examine whether 
the relationship between organizational climate and work 
attitudes holds at both the individual and organizational 
levels of analysis.  In addition,  if climate exists at the

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


12
organizational level of analysis as a contextual variable, 
an important question is whether this context affects 
individual level work attitudes  (cross-level effects).

Arguments presented above suggest work attitudes may also 
reflect an organizational level phenomenon.  Ostroff  (1992) 
aggregated work attitudes  (job satisfaction,  organizational 
commitment,  and job stress)  of over 14,000 individual 
teachers to the organizational level from 298 schools and 
used those aggregate scores to predict measures of 
organizational effectiveness.  After accounting for 
organizational factors  (i.e.,  size,  age of building,  % 
white,  and economic status),  levels of those attitudes 
significantly predicted several school effectiveness 
measures.  Correlations between job satisfaction and school 
performance were somewhat higher  (average r=.28)  than for 
commitment  (average r=.22).  In regression analyses, 
commitment predicted student satisfaction with teachers and 
student attendance,  while both job satisfaction and 
commitment predicted overall student satisfaction and 
teacher turnover.  Likewise,  job satisfaction was a stronger 
predictor of student academic achievement than was 
organizational commitment.

Ostroff's  (1992)  research has not been replicated in for- 

profit institutions.  Thus,  another important gap in 
research addressed by this study is to test the relationship 
of aggregate work attitudes with indicators of

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


13

organizational effectiveness using a sample of for-profit 
organizations.
Organizational Outcomes

Campbell  (1977)  outlined in detail the difficulties 

associated with defining organizational effectiveness.  In 
particular,  there is a debate over whether effectiveness is 
a uni-dimensional or multi-dimensional concept.  Campbell 
concluded that in order to measure organizational 
effectiveness,  multiple indicators of organizational 
performance must be studied.

Four measures of organizational effectiveness are 

included in this study:  (1)  three year average return on 
assets  (defined as the ratio of net income plus interest 
expense to total average assets employed);  (2)  three year 
average return on equity  (defined as the ratio of net income 
after taxes to average equity);  (3)  three year average A.M. 
Best's ratings  (defined as the firm's ability to meet it's 
long term obligations to policyholders)  of life and health 
insurance firms;  and  (4)  firm-level employee turnover.

In sum,  Figure 2 portrays a model linking HR practices, 
organizational climate,  work attitudes,  and organizational 
effectiveness.  This model is based on Kopelman et al.'s 
(1990)  conceptual model,  includes multiple levels of 
analysis and represents a comprehensive evaluation of the 
organizational context composed of human resource practices, 
organizational climate and work attitudes.  It is a direct

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


attempt to address the criticisms raised by Mowday and 
Sutton  (1993)  by treating human resource practices and 
aggregate measures of organizational climate as contextual 
organizational variables affecting individual work 
attitudes.  This study builds on Hansen's  (1987)  and 
Ostroff's  (1992)  work and uses existing theory focusing on 
individual level attitudes,  climate perceptions,  and 
employee behaviors as well as organizational level 
conceptualizations  (Argyris,  1964;  Etzioni,  1975;  Hansen, 
1987;  Likert,  1976;  Pfeffer,  1983;  Ostroff,  1992;  Schneider, 
1975,1987)  to propose and test relationships between and 
among organizational practices,  aggregate climate 
perceptions,  aggregate work attitudes and organizational 
outcomes.

Chapter II contains the expanded literature review and 

hypotheses for this study.  Chapter III presents the methods 
for the study and chapter IV contains the results of the 
hypothesis testing.  Finally,  chapter V is a discussion of 
the results,  implications for future research,  and 
limitations of the study.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Chapter II 
OVERVIEW

The introduction in Chapter I identified critical gaps in 

organizational research,  particularly with regard to the 
organizational context.  As noted,  while there are many 
theories and conceptualizations of organizations that 
attempt to describe the effects of the organizational 
context on individuals  (Argyris,  1964;  Etzioni,  1975; 
Forehand & Gilmer,  1964;  Likert,  1961,  1967;  Litwin & 
Stringer,  1968;  Salancik & Pfeffer,  1978),  there are 
relatively few attempts to empirically bridge the gap 
between the macro orientation of organizational theory and 
the micro orientation of work attitudes.  Roberts,  Hulin and 
Rousseau  (1978)  theorized that in order to examine data at 
multiple levels of analysis,  theories which span or cross 
the levels of analysis in question must exist or be 
developed.  Thus,  in order to build an understanding of the 
complex issues associated with this study,  a thorough 
examination of individual level theory and organizational 
level theory is necessary.  In addition,  conceptual 
relationships crossing the pertinent levels of analysis must 
be established.  First,  a brief review of organizational 
theory which supports the importance of the organizational 
context is presented.  Following that review,  the literature 
review of the model presented in Chapter I is expanded and 
research hypotheses are presented.

15

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


16

A General Framework

Many organizational theories and conceptual frameworks 
have focused on the importance of organizational structure 
and managerial behaviors for determining broad sets of 
outcomes including employee attitudes and behaviors 
(Argyris,  1964;  Etzioni,  1975;  Likert,  1967).  Argyris 
(1964)  focused on the distribution of power in organizations 
as an important contextual factor in employee satisfaction, 
behavior,  and organizational outcomes.  He contended that 
satisfaction and employee commitment should be associated 
with a distribution of power that is less arbitrary and 
provides lower level members with greater discretion.

Likert  (1967)  proposed four basic organizational systems 

on a continuum of managerial behaviors ranging from 
authoritative to participative.  Authoritative systems 
represent the left side of a continuum resulting in hostile 
attitudes,  low sense of felt responsibility,  low 
satisfaction with co-workers and supervision,  no 
discretionary influence for lower level participants,  and 
emphasis on downward communications.  Participative systems, 
representing the far right of the continuum,  result in 
positive attitudes,  high sense of responsibility among 
employees,  high co-worker and supervisor satisfaction,  open 
communications,  and a great deal of discretionary influence 
for employees.  Likert noted the manner in which employees 
are led should focus on developing a supportive environment

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


17

where employees feel valuable and important.

Etzioni  (1975)  proposed a typology of organizations based 

on a central theme of member compliance.  According to 
Etzioni,  organizations can be described by the manner in 
which they use power to extract member compliance.  Etzioni 
proposed three basic types of power - coercive,  remunerative 
and normative;  three types of organizations - coercive, 
utilitarian,  and normative;  leading to three types of member 
involvement or attachment  (compliance)  - alienative, 
calculative and moral.  Etzioni argued workers are 
predominately controlled by one type of power resulting in 
certain types of attachment.  Remunerative power or the 
manipulation of wages,  commissions,  fringe benefits and 
working conditions results in calculative attachment whereas 
normative power or the manipulation of symbolic rewards, 
allocation of esteem,  and prestige symbols results in moral 
attachment.

Tsui,  Porter,  Pearce and Tripoli  (1993)  drew on Barnard's 
(1938)  inducement-contribution theory to develop a framework 
of employee-organization relationship strategies linking 
inducement strategies and mechanisms developed at the 
organizational level to contributions at the individual 
level.  Organizations may have either a job-focused strategy 
or an organization-focused strategy,  resulting in certain 
types of psychological contracts between the individual and 
the organization.  A job-focused strategy encourages a high

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


18

level of employee task performance and focuses on the 
immediate job of the employee.  It is expected to result in 
flexibility for the organization,  and little or no employee 
commitment to the organization.  The psychological contract 
the employee forms in this strategy is one in which the 
employee exchanges explicit performance on a job or set of 
tasks for explicit rewards from the organization.  An 
organization-focused strategy places more emphasis on 
broader behaviors and long term commitment to it's 
employees.  The psychological contract formed by the 
employee in this strategy is one in which the employee 
exchanges loyalty and willingness to commit to the 
organization's strategy,  goals,  and values in return for 
employment security,  and employer support of the individual.

Thus,  a number of organizational theories and 

conceptualizations support the notion of generalized 
organizational effects on employees  (Payne & Pugh,  1976). 
Etzioni's  (1975)  and Tsui et al.'s  (1993)  work implies the 
strategy the organization takes with regard to the type of 
employment relationship desired will be reflected in 
organizational practices and will affect employee attitudes 
and behaviors.

If organizational practices define the context,  then 
organizations should be distinguishable on the basis of 
those practices,  and in particular,  their effects on the 
organizational climate and work attitudes.  As Kopelman et

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


al.  (1990)  noted,  these practices should lead to similar 
reactions across employees within the same organization. 
Aggregate climate perceptions should reflect employee 
reactions to the actual work environment.  There should be 
consistency in employee interpretations of the work context 
which are reflected in fairly homogeneous climate 
perceptions within a given organization.  Likewise, 
aggregate work attitudes could reflect the reactions of 
employees taken as an average response to the manner in 
which power,  influence,  and work motivation is enacted 
within an organization.  Similarly,  one could argue that 
aggregate climate perceptions and aggregate work attitudes 
predict organizational performance because they are the 
result of managerial and work practices that act to direct 
behavior within the organization.  However,  the intervening 
role employee climate perceptions and work attitudes play in 
linking organizational practices and organizational 
effectiveness needs to be tested empirically.  The following 
sections reflect a presentation of the model discussed in 
Chapter I  (Figure 2).

Human Resource Practices 

Human resource practices have been studied as direct 

predictors of firm performance in the human resource 
literature  (Huselid,  1993;  Ichniowski,  1990).  Likewise, 
they have been studied extensively as contextual variables 
at the individual level of analysis  (i.e.,  Atcheson,  1991;

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Cascio,  1993;  Grover,  1991; Riley & Wrench,  1985).  This 
section reviews literature outlining the effects of certain 
organizational practices  (organizational growth/downsizing 
and innovative human resource practices)  on individuals 
within organizations,  and how these practices may be linked 
to other activities at the organizational level. 
Organizational Downsizing

Cascio  (1993)  defined downsizing as the planned 
elimination of jobs via reducing work,  eliminating 
functions,  voluntary severance,  or early retirement.  Prior 
to the 1980's much of the downsizing in U.S.  organizations 
occurred in the blue-collar sector of the labor market. 
However,  Cascio noted that between 1989 and 1991,  white 
collar workers accounted for 17% of all dismissals,  and for 
36% of the newly unemployed in 1992.  A restructuring 
through layoffs and downsizing in organizations in the 
United States is fast becoming a way of life  (Cascio,  1993). 
A literature search of the most widely read applied 
psychology journals and books  (Psychlit)  conducted by the 
author found only 12  studies published from 1976 to 1992 
whereas a search of a business-oriented data base  (ABI- 
INFORM)  identified over 205 practitioner articles  (1989- 
1993)  referring to downsizing and employee layoffs.  Thus, 
there is a tremendous need for more scientific approaches to 
studying this important topic.

Research on downsizing has taken two distinct directions.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


21

The first is on the benefits/costs for organizations,  and 
the second is on the effects of downsizing on employees 
(casualties and survivors).  The anticipated benefits of 
organizational downsizing are lower overhead,  less 
bureaucracy,  faster decision making,  better communications, 
greater innovation,  and an increase in productivity  (Cascio, 
1993)-

Initial research has shown that the work environment 
after a layoff is hostile and unfriendly  (Cascio,  1993). 
Fewer managers supervise more people and work loads are re­
distributed to fewer people,  meaning more work and longer 
hours for the survivors.  Survivors tend to develop what 
Brockner  (1988)  described as survivor's syndrome  where they 
become narrow-minded,  self-absorbed,  and risk-averse.
Markham and McKee  (1991)  found that absence among survivors 
in firms having layoffs was moderated by unemployment rates. 
When an organizational decrease in size coincided with 
higher unemployment rates,  absenteeism rates fell. 
Furthermore,  Brockner,  Grover,  Reed and DeWitt  (1992)  found 
that survivors who felt they could control the negative 
effects of a layoff  (i.e.,  they felt they could find another 
job)  and had only moderate job insecurity put forth higher 
work effort than survivors who had very high job insecurity 
and little control.  Overall,  organizational morale and 
employee trust of management declines,  and productivity 
drops  (Cascio,  1993).

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


22

This study includes two measures of organizational 

practices relating to employee population changes:  (1)  what 
the organization's strategy was in the past two years with 
regard to employee population changes  (decrease,  remain 
same,  increase);  and  (2)  what the organization's strategy 
will be in the next two years with regard to employee 
population changes  (decrease,  remain same,  or increase). 
Innovative Human Resource Practices

The American work force has become increasingly diverse. 

Between 1990 and 2000,  85% of all additions to the labor 
force will be composed of females and non-white males 
(Atcheson,  1991).  The work force has also become older on 
average due to the "baby boom" generation and deletion of 
mandatory  retirement age for most workers.  The U.S. 
Department of Commerce and Department of Labor Statistics 
predicts the bulk of labor force growth between 1986 and 
2000 will be from workers between the ages of 35 and 54.

Atcheson  (1991)  noted the changing demographic 

composition of the labor force and the increased practice of 
organizational downsizing calls for changes in the way 
organizations manage their employees.  The increasing age of 
the labor force,  coupled with organizational downsizing 
means fewer opportunities for experienced employees.  The 
career plateau,  defined as the point in a person's career 
"when there is no longer any opportunity to progress in the 
organizational hierarchy"  (p.28,  Leibowitz et al.,  1990)  is

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


23

more prevalent as a result of these forces.  In addition, 
with more women in the labor force,  child care issues are 
becoming increasingly important  (Gummer,  1991).

Thus,  the role of innovative human resource practices in 

assisting employees is extremely important.  A number of 
innovative work practices are included in this study:  (1) 
flexible work hours;  (2)  job sharing;  (3)  telecommuting;  (4) 
extended leave policies;  (5)  part-time work opportunities;
(6)  job rotation;  (7)  dual career tracks;  (8)  special 
assignments such as opportunities to participate on task 
forces;  (9)  mentoring programs for women and minorities;
(10)  remedial training programs;  (11)  on-site child care;
(12)  child care referral services;  (13)  sick child care 
provisions;  (14)  elder care referral services;  and  (15) 
paternity leave.

Flexible work hours provide employees with the 

opportunity to set their own work hours,  within some 
specified range  (Gummer,  1991; Rosenberg,  1993 Ruhl,  1990) . 
Job sharing is the practice of allowing two  (or more) 
workers to share job duties so neither employee works a full 
work week and is practiced as an alternative to layoffs 
(Bulger & Gessner,  1991;  Jacoby,  1985).  Part-time workers 
comprise a larger number of employees than ever before 
(Robinson,  1993)  and are used to fill in during peak 
business hours,  or allow workers who would otherwise be laid 
off an opportunity to continue working,  albeit at a reduced

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


24

salary.

Telecommuting is a relatively new work practice allowing 
workers to conduct their work activities from their home via
computer,  fax,  and telephone  (Half,  1992;  Hotch,  1993).  It
allows new mothers to return to work more quickly after 
having a baby,  and can cut office overhead costs for 
organizations.  Extended leave policies allow women to stay 
home with newborn babies longer than otherwise or give 
employees the opportunity to enter training programs or 
return to school to re-tool or upgrade out-dated job skills 
(Losey,  1992) .

Job rotation is the practice of moving employees from one 

job to another  (at the same job level),  usually in some 
planned progression and can provide opportunities to learn 
more about an array of jobs within a work unit,  as well as 
prevent boredom and stagnation  (King,  1991;  Pulich,  1989; 
Ryan,  1991;  Sambrook,  1992).  Job rotation is a common 
practice in many organizations where downsizing or layoffs 
are prevalent  (Challenger,  1993).  Dual career tracks allow 
employees the opportunity to pursue more than one career at 
the same time  (Challenger,  1993).  Special assignments allow 
employees to temporarily leave their regular job and work on 
special projects  (Pulich,  1989).

Mentoring fills two basic career functions - career 

enhancing and psycho-social functions  (Kram,  1983). 
enhancing functions include information sharing,  career

Career 

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


25

strategizing,  and job-related feedback.  Psycho-social 
functions include emotional support and friendship.  Noe 
(1988)  noted the importance of mentoring programs in the 
career development of women in organizations.  Women with 
mentors,  and employees in general report greater job 
success,  job satisfaction,  career mobility,  opportunities 
for recognition and higher promotion rates  (Fagenson,  1989). 
Special programs to provide mentors are important since 
female and minority access to mentors is limited  (Alexander 
& Brisbon,  1993;  Cox & Nkomo,  1991).

A majority of the research on work-family assistance 

takes the form of child care assistance and parental leave 
policies  (Goff,  Mount & Jamison,  1990; Grover,  1991;  Kossek, 
1990;  Kossek & Nichol,  1992).  Goff et al.,  (1990)  found 
supportive supervision and employee satisfaction with child 
care arrangements led to less work-family conflict.  Kossek 
and Nichol  (1992)  noted that employee attitudes toward 
balancing work and family responsibilities correlated 
positively with manager's performance ratings of the 
employee and child care related absence correlated 
negatively with performance ratings.  Grover  (1991)  found 
people who benefited directly from or were similar to those 
who would benefit from parental leave policies were more 
likely to perceive leave policies as being fair than 
employees who were less likely to take advantage of the 
policies.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


This review of the literature suggests that separate 

bodies of research have developed on various human resource 
practices.  However,  Ichniowski  (1990)  argued that while 
many studies have assessed individual organizational 
practices,  these practices are inter-related.  In addition, 
many researchers are now arguing that different human 
resource practices fit together into meaningful clusters 
(Kerr & Slocum,  1987; Osterman,  1987;  Sonnenfield & Peiperl, 
1988; Wright & McMahan,  1992).  This is consistent with my 
view that the human resource practices reviewed above may be 
grouped into two general categories.  For instance,  job 
rotation,  dual career tracks and remedial training 
opportunities are easily seen as career development 
practices engaged in by the organization.  Likewise,  child­
care assistance policies  (i.e.,  child care referral 
services)  can be seen as work-family assistance practices 
engaged in by the organization.  However,  some of the 
practices  (i.e.,  extended leave)  could be seen as either 
work-family assistance or career development practices. 
Therefore,  the following hypothesis regarding organizational 
practices is offered.

Hla:  The human resource practices will be inter­
correlated;  however,  correlations among the practices 
within the career enhancement category,  and separately 
within the work-family assistance category will be 
higher than correlations of human resource practices

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


27

between categories.

Human Resource Practices and Organizational Performance

In concluding this section on human resource practices,  a 

final hypothesis is drawn from the review in Chapter II 
where HR practices were identified as predictors of 
organizational performance  (Huselid,  1993;  Ichniowski,
1990).  It is expected that the presence of these human 
resource practices would be related to better firm 
performance:

Hlb:  There will be a positive relationship between 
greater use of innovative human resource practices 
(career enhancement and work-family assistance 
practices),  organizational growth,  and organizational 
performance.

Translating Organizational Practices 

The previous review identifies a number of organizational 

practices and policies.  The organizational theory and 
conceptualizations reviewed predicts that these actions 
would have predictable effects on employees.  How the 
individual perceives these practices and policies is an 
important key to understanding their effects on employees. 
Perceptual context is embodied in the organizational climate 
literature.

Organizational Climate 

In contrast to organizational structure,  which refers to 

objective characteristics of the organization,

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


28

organizational climate refers to the discovery of how the 
organization becomes or is psychologically meaningful to the 
individual member  (Payne & Pugh,  1976).  Climate is 
important in describing the organizational setting in which 
behavior and attitudes occur  (Campbell & Beatty,  1971). 
Context,  structure,  managerial style,  policies and practices 
within an organization are important determinants of the 
organizational climate  (Payne & Pugh,  1976).

In this study,  Pritchard and Karasick's  (1973)  definition 

of climate will be used:  "a relatively enduring quality of 
an organization's internal environment distinguishing it 
from other organizations;  (a)  which results from the 
behavior and policies of members of the organization, 
especially top management;  (b)  which is perceived by members 
of the organization;  (c)  which serves as a basis for 
interpreting the situation;  and  (d)  acts as a source of 
pressure for directing activity”  (p.127).

Climate differentiates one organization from another 

(Schneider,  1975).  Organizational culture or story 
(Kopelman et al.,  1990);  size  (Forehand,  1968;  James &
Jones,  1976; Payne,  Pheysey & Pugh,  1971;  Prien & Ronan,
1971);  structure  (George & Bishop,  1971;  Lawler,  Hall & 
Oldham,  1974;  Litwin & Stringer,  1968;  Payne & Pheysey, 
1971);  technology  (Hage & Aiken,  1969;  Litwin & Stringer, 
1968; Payne et al.,  1971);  centralization  (James & Jones, 
1976; Prien & Ronan,  1971;  Tagiuri,  1968);  configuration

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


29
(Lawler et al.,  1974; Prien & Ronan,  1971; Tagiuri,  1968); 
formalization  (James & Jones,  1976; Payne et al.,  1971; 
Tagiuri,  1968);  standardization  (James & Jones,  1976;  Payne 
et al.,  1971; Prien & Ronan,  1971); human resource policies 
and practices  (Kopelman,  et al.,  1990); managerial behavior 
(Greiner,  Leitch & Barnes,  1968;  Lawler et al.,  1974; 
Schneider,  1975);  leadership patterns  (James & Jones,  1974; 
Tagiuri,  1968)  and rewards/controls  (James & Jones,  1976; 
Payne & Pugh,  1976;  Shortell,  1977)  are internal 
organizational influences that are important determinants of 
climate.
Dimensionality of Organizational Climate

Organizational climate is a multi-dimensional concept 

(Campbell,  Dunnette,  Lawler & Weick,  1970;  Hemphill,  1956; 
House  & Rizzo,  1972;  Litwin & Stringer,  1968;  Newman,  1977; 
Pritchard & Karasick,  1973;  Schneider & Bartlett,  1975). 
Kopelman et al.,  (1990)  suggested five core dimensions that 
are used in this study:  "(1)  goal emphasis - the extent to
which management makes known the types of outcomes and 
standards that employees are expected to accomplish;  (2) 
means emphasis - the extent to which management makes known 
the methods and procedures that employees are expected to 
use in performing their jobs;  (3)  reward orientation - the 
extent to which various organizational rewards are perceived 
to be allocated on the basis of job performance;  (4)  task 
support - the extent to which employees perceive that they

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


30
are being supplied with the materials.,  equipment,  services 
and resources necessary to perform their jobs;  (5)  socio- 
emotional support - the extent to which employees perceive 
that their personal welfare is protected by a kind, 
considerate and generally humane management"  (p.  296).

The first four dimensions of climate described above have 

an important relationship with motivational theories that 
link environmental predictability and control with employee 
behaviors  (Shore & Tetrick,  in press).  Task emphasis 
relates to the employees7  beliefs that they have the 
training needed to successfully complete the job.
Kopelman et al.,  (1990)  noted the importance of self 
efficacy  (Bandura,  1986)  in employees7  beliefs that they are 
equipped to perform and hence,  the acceptance of goals. 
Reward orientation reflects the belief that successful 
effort will be rewarded with desired outcomes 
(predictability).  The dimension of goal emphasis has 
demonstrated importance in employee motivation via the goal 
setting literature  (Locke,  Shaw,  Saari,  & Latham,  1981). 
Likewise,  Latham  (1988)  noted that key role of 
organizational goal setting in serving as a central theme to 
unite employees in working toward the organizational 
mission.  Means emphasis reflects a clarity of how those 
goals are to be accomplished.

Socio-emotional support focuses on the organization7s 

philosophy toward employees and is similar to the concept of

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


31
perceived organizational support developed by Eisenberger, 
Huntington,  Hutchison & Sowa  (1986).  Perceived 
organizational support has been linked with organizational 
commitment  (Eisenberger et al.,  1990;  Shore & Tet.rick,  1991) 
and with organizational citizenship behaviors  (Shore &
Wayne,  1993).  In summary,  the task support,  reward 
orientation,  means emphasis,  and goal emphasis dimensions of 
the organizational climate act together to create a 
motivating climate or environment,  whereas socio-emotional 
support emphasizes the humane treatment of employees. 
Organizational Climate As a Contextual Phenomenon

Climate seems to function at three levels - 

organizational  (Drexler,  1977; Hansen,  1987; Offenberg & 
Cernius,  1978;  Pritchard & Karasick,  1973;  LaFollette &
Sims,  1975);  group  (Astin,  1963;  Curtis,  1975;  Payne & 
Mansfield,  1973; Pritchard & Karasick,  1973; Waters,  et al., 
1974;  Schneider,  1975);  and individual  (George & Bishop, 
1971;  Schneider & Hall,  1972;  Tagiuri,  1968).  Perceptions 
are formed at the individual level,  where climate is 
referred to as the psychological climate  (James,  1982; 
Schneider,  1975).  Psychological climate has been found to 
contribute substantially to individual work attitudes and 
behaviors  (James & James,  1991; Jones & James,  1979) . 
However,  the individual level still does not fully account 
for the complexities of the organizational environment.

The climate differentiates one organization from another

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


32

(Schneider,  1975)  and is a relatively enduring or stable 
phenomenon that represents the experiences or perceptions of 
organizational members.  It is an individual perception that 
should be widely shared among organizational members 
subjected to the same policies and procedures,  and can be 
aggregated to the organizational or unit/group level 
(Schneider,  1975; Kopelman et al.,  1990).

Schneider's  (1987)  Attraction-Selection-Attrition model 
(ASA)  poses that organizations are functions of the kinds of
people they contain.  Processes  of attraction to an
organization,  selection to the organization,  and attrition 
from the organization yield particular kinds of persons in 
an organization.  The ASA process produces a homogeneous 
work force such that people in the same setting will have 
similar climate perceptions and work attitudes because "they 
are similar people experiencing  similar conditions"
(Schneider,  1975,  p.449).  When  the individual experiences a
situation incongruent with his or her needs and values,  they 
will tend to leave  (attrition),  thus,  further restricting 
the range of people remaining.

In sum,  organizational climate literature supports the 

aggregation from the individual to the organizational level 
of analysis on the basis of greater accuracy and on the 
basis of supporting psychological theory  (Schneider,  1975). 
Aggregate climate perceptions are meaningful because 
employees encounter similar policies and practices,  and

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


33

because organizations attract and retain similar types of 
people who in turn have similar perceptions.
Organizational Climate and Human Resource Practices

Each of the climate dimensions included should reflect 
perceptions of the psychological meaning ascribed by the 
employee to the organizational practices in this study.  The 
review on downsizing suggests if the reductions in the 
employee population are made without attention to fairness 
or assistance to displaced or surviving employees,  the 
effect on the climate could be to create a more negative 
climate.  Organizations that have increased their employee 
population,  or intend to in the future,  are more likely to 
be viewed by employees as viable,  increasing employee 
perceptions of career opportunities and other positive 
rewards and hence should be associated with a more positive 
climate.  In addition,  the presence of career enhancement 
and work-family assistance practices should have a positive 
impact on the organizational climate.  For example, 
organizations employing work-family assistance practices 
should be perceived by employees as having a very supportive 
(socio-emotional support)  climate.
Thus,  the following hypothesis is offered.

H2a:  Human resource practices and work force strategy 
will be related with aggregate measures of the task-, 
goal-,  reward-,  means- and socio-emotional support 
dimensions of the organizational climate.  Presence of

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


34

HR practices will have a positive impact,  whereas past 
downsizing or projected future downsizing will have a 
negative impact on the organizational climate. 

Organizational Climate and Organizational Performance 
Organizational climate frameworks posit a positive 

organizational climate would create a motivating environment 
for employees  (Kopelman et al.,  1990;  Litwin & Stringer, 
1968) ,  which should lead to organizational effectiveness. 
Likewise,  if firms are differentiated by their climate, 
there should be a relationship between the climate and firm 
performance.  Jones and James  (1979)  examined the 
relationship of climate to attitudes and organizational 
performance.  Perceptions of climate aggregated to the 
divisional level were significantly related to  (1) 
organizational structure  (e.g.,  size,  specialization,  span 
of control);  (2)  organizational context  (e.g.,  technology, 
quality of personnel);  and  (3)  personnel  (e.g., 
intelligence,  education,  tenure).  Aggregate perceptions of 
the divisional climate predicted measures of division 
performance.  Enriched,  friendly,  and supportive climates 
correlated positively  (from r=.34 to r-.56)  with division 
performance scores.  In Hansen's  (1987)  study several 
aggregated dimensions of climate  (effective communications, 
employee's sense of involvement,  participation in decision 
making,  well organized tasks,  aggressive pursuit of goals, 
and an overall climate score)  accounted for significant

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


35

amounts of variance ranging from .16  (R2=.l6;  overall 
climate)  to  .35  (R2=.35;  sense of involvement)  in ROA.
Following Jones and James  (1979)  and Hansen  (1987), 

positive perceptions of the organizational climate should 
have a positive impact on firm profitability and 
productivity.  Likewise,  turnover should be lower in 
organizations with a positive climate.

H2b:  The organizational climate will be positively 
related to measures of firm profitability,  and 
negatively related to employee turnover.

Work Attitudes As Individual Level Variables 

Whereas the organizational climate reflects employee 

perceptions of the work environment,  work attitudes reflect 
employee reactions to that environment.  Accordingly,  the 
organizational climate should mediate the relationship 
between organizational practices and employee work 
attitudes.  The two work attitudes  (job satisfaction and 
organizational commitment)  in Figure 2 have received a great 
deal of attention in the literature.  These two work 
attitudes are conceptualized predominately at the individual 
level of analysis.  Although the focus of this study is 
chiefly on organizational level outcomes,  individual level 
outcomes of job satisfaction and organizational commitment 
are reviewed in order to provide a foundation for the 
relationship between these work attitudes and organizational 
level outcomes.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


36

Job Satisfaction

Job satisfaction is arguably the most heavily researched 

construct in industrial-organizational psychology,  social 
psychology,  organizational behavior,  personnel and human 
resource management,  and organizational management  (Cranny, 
Smith & Stone,  1991).  Roethlisberger and Dickson's 
Management and the Worker and Hoppock's monograph on job 
satisfaction in the 1930's represent the earliest research 
in this field.  Research efforts increased rapidly as shown 
in Locke's  (1969,  1976)  reviews of the literature in which 
there were over 2000 studies and papers on the subject.

There are several popular definitions of job satisfaction 
(i.e.,  Adams,  1963;  Locke,  1969,  1976; Porter,  1962).  While 
each of these differ in substantive ways,  all three efforts 
represent job satisfaction as an individual's affective 
reaction to the work role,  and also involve a comparison 
between what an individual desires or deems important and 
what they receive.  Adams's contribution via Equity theory 
was to express the relationship between an individual 
employee and an organization as an exchange relationship, 
with the degree of job satisfaction resulting from the 
individual's evaluation of their inputs and outcomes 
relative to the inputs and outcomes of a comparison other. 
Porter suggested job satisfaction is composed of the 
importance of a psychological need in comparison to the 
extent to which the job fulfills that need.  Locke believed

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


37

job values rather than psychological needs represent the 
desires of the individual.  Others  (Dawes,  Lofquist & Weiss, 
1968;  Smith,  Kendall & Hulin,  1969; Vroom,  1964) 
characterized job satisfaction as the individual's 
expression of the match between his or her needs,  values and 
goals and the work environment  (Scarpello & Campbell,  1983).
For the purposes of this study,  job satisfaction will be 
defined as the fulfillment of important job values that are 
related to one's personal needs  (Locke,  1976).  This view 
recognizes that job satisfaction includes fulfillment of 
both needs and values of the individual.

Job Satisfaction and Job Behaviors 

Satisfaction and Performance

The fascination of researchers with employee job 

satisfaction lies in the fundamental belief that satisfied 
workers will be more productive  (Brayfield & Crockett,  1955; 
Fisher,  1980;  Iffaldano & Muchinsky,  1985;  Likert,  1961; 
Argyris,  1964; Ostroff,  1992; Vroom,  1964)  although it is 
not altogether clear where the assumption originated.  The 
human relations movement is often credited with this 
theoretical proposition.  The early human relations studies 
were focused on increasing productivity by meeting the needs 
of employees  (Vroom,  1964).  Roethlisberger  (1941)  was 
careful to point out that factors causing satisfaction and 
high morale among employees were not necessarily related to 
the factors which led to efficient organizational operations

t

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


38

and high job performance  (Schwab & Cummings,  1967).
Likewise,  Schneider and Schmitt  (1986)  suggested:  "the
assumption of a relationship between satisfaction and 
productivity was derived from the observations of 
researchers and managers that in organizations which were 
efficient and effective,  morale of the workers  (the sum of 
job satisfaction scores from all workers)  seemed to be 
higher than in ineffective and inefficient organizations"
(p.137-138).  Thus,  Schneider and Schmitt concluded that 
high performing organizations would also tend to be 
organizations with more satisfied employees.

Schwab and Cummings  (1967)  credited Herzberg,  Mausner, 

Peterson and Capwell  (1957)  with providing the best research 
formulated around the idea that satisfaction leads to 
performance.  Herzberg et al.,  argued that motivator 
variables such as challenging assignments,  recognition,  and 
opportunity for growth contributed to work satisfaction and 
were the principal factors associated with work performance. 
Hygiene factors such as pay,  benefits and working conditions 
were not seen as being related to performance.  Subsequent 
efforts to replicate the Herzberg et al.  findings by other 
researchers have not met with much success  (Miner,  1979; 
Schwab & Heneman,  1970; Wofford,  1971).

Lawler and Porter  (1967)  drew on Vroom's  (1964) 

interpretation of path-goal theory  (that job satisfaction is 
closely affected by the amount of rewards people receive

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


39
from their jobs),  and stated that "good performance may lead 
to rewards, which in turn lead to satisfaction"  (p.23).
Thus,  they suggested the relationship between performance 
and rewards is moderated by what rewards the individual 
expects.  Empirical evidence only provided weak support for 
their model.  Specifically,  they found significant 
correlations ranging from .18 to  .30 between needs 
satisfaction and performance rankings by superiors  (Lawler & 
Porter,  1967).

Other moderators have been identified.  Building on 
Triandis's  (1959)  work,  Bhagat  (1982)  identified two 
moderators - organizational pressure for performance and 
experienced time pressures.  Higher order need strength 
(Abdel-Halim,  1980) ;  level of stimulation provided by the 
job  (Baird,  1976);  intrinsic vs.  extrinsic satisfaction 
(Wanous,  1974);  size of work force,  city size,  wage rate, 
unionization,  and percentage of males  (Katzell,  Barrett,  and 
Parker,  1961);  self esteem  (Siegel & Bowen,  1971);  and job 
complexity and career stage  (Gould,  1979)  have also been 
studied as moderators of the job satisfaction-job 
performance relationship.
Performance Behaviors

Various indicators of performance have appeared in 

studies linking job satisfaction and employee performance.
Of these,  the most common according to Brayfield and 
Crockett  (1955)  and Iffaldano and Muchinsky  (1985)  were:  (1)

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


40
accidents;  (2)  performance ratings by immediate supervisors; 
(3)  training program success;  (4)  proficiency ratings;  (5) 
quality of production;  and  (6)  quantity of production.
Thus,  a wide range of individual level performance data have 
been employed in search of a relationship between job 
satisfaction and performance.  By far,  however,  ratings by 
supervisors appeared to be the most common criterion.
Several reviews of the satisfaction-performance 

relationship have been conducted  (Brayfield & Crockett,
1955;  Herzberg,  Mausner,  Peterson & Capwell,  1957;  Iffaldano 
& Muchinsky,  1985;  Podsakoff & Williams,  1986; Vroom,  1964). 
The similarities in findings are striking.  The average 
correlation between job satisfaction and various measures of 
job performance has been consistently positive and small. 
Both Brayfield and Crockett  (1955)  and Vroom  (1964)  found 
the average correlation to be around  .14,  while Iffaldano 
and Muchinsky  (1985)  found it to somewhat larger  (r=.l7) 
through meta-analysis methodology.  Only the Herzberg et 
al.,  (1957)  study concluded more optimistically,  although 
their findings have often been criticized because their 
results have never been successfully replicated  (Miner,
1979) .  A meta-analysis by Podsakoff and Williams  (1986) 
identified particularly strong moderator effects for the 
extent to which rewards were linked to performance.  When 
the reward-performance link was present,  they found a 
correlation of  .27 between satisfaction and performance

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


41
whereas when the link was absent,  the correlation  (.17)  was 
identical to the findings of Iffaldano and Muchinsky  (1985). 
The type of study  (laboratory experiment or field study)  did 
not moderate the relationship between satisfaction and 
performance.
Withdrawal Behaviors

The expression of the relationship between job 

satisfaction and withdrawal is not altogether different from 
theory relating satisfaction to performance.  Vroom  (1964) 
assumed that measures of job satisfaction reflect the 
importance  (valence)  of the job to the person and "it 
follows from our model that job satisfaction shoi’ld be 
related to the strength of force on the person to remain in 
his job"  (p.175).  Likewise,  Lawler and Porter  (1968)  noted 
that "high satisfaction will lead to low turnover and 
absenteeism because the satisfied individual is motivated to 
go to work where his important needs are satisfied"  (p.22). 
The two most widely studied withdrawal behaviors in relation 
to job satisfaction are absenteeism and turnover.

Absenteeism.  Hackett and Guion's  (1985)  meta-analysis 

computed average correlations which identified the strongest 
average correlation between overall job satisfaction and an 
attitudinal index  (defined as the number of 1 day absences 
accumulated over a specified period of time)  to be -.23.  No 
significant moderator variables were present in their study 
and as they note,  most of the variation in the relationship

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


42

between satisfaction and absence can be accounted for by 
statistical artifacts  (variation in sample size and 
unreliability in measurement of both satisfaction and 
absence).  In summary,  Hackett and Guion  (1985)  suggested 
future research efforts studying employee absence be 
directed toward explaining employee values systems rather 
than attitudes.  In essence,  absence is best cast as a 
decision between working and not working as being guided by 
both habit and personal values rather than by job 
satisfaction.

Turnover.  By the time of Locke's  (1976)  review of job 

satisfaction,  many empirical studies linking job 
satisfaction with turnover had been conducted  (see reviews 
by Muchinsky & Tuttle,  1979; Price,  1977).  Locke  (1976)  and 
Mobley,  Griffeth,  Hand,  & Meglino  (1979)  argued job 
satisfaction had become the most widely studied correlate of 
turnover,  yet alone,  it accounted for less that 16%  (average 
correlation of  .32)  of the variance in turnover.

Mobley et al.,  (1979)  concluded that the theoretical and 
empirical methods for examining this relationship were too 
simplistic and developed a model that incorporates not only 
satisfaction with the current job,  but expected future 
satisfaction and an evaluation of alternatives.  A more 
recent model is one where intentions to leave and 
evaluations of alternatives represent a cognitive 
intermediary between job satisfaction and turnover  (Horn,

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


43
Carnikas-Walker,  Prussia & Griffeth,  1992).  Turnover also 
appears to be moderated by unemployment rates  (Carsten & 
Spector,  1987).  When there was low unemployment,  the 
correlation between satisfaction and turnover was higher 
than when unemployment was high.  The unemployment rate also 
had the same effect on measures of turnover intentions.
In summary,  research on the job satisfaction - job 
behavior relationship has resulted in mixed findings. 
Multiple empirical reviews  (Brayfield & Crockett,  1955; 
Carsten & Spector,  1987; Herzberg,  Mausner,  Peterson & 
Capwell,  1957;  Iffaldano & Muchinsky,  1985;  Podsakoff & 
Williams,  1986; Vroom,  1964)  with one exception -  (Herzberg 
et al.,  1957)  found generally weak relationships between 
satisfaction and performance,  with the range of correlations 
being from -.39 to +.52.  Research findings have thus far 
identified a consistent,  albeit small proportion of 
variation in turnover that can be explained by job 
satisfaction  (Mobley et al.,  1979).  Furthermore,  the 
relationship between satisfaction and absence is 
questionable  (Hackett & Guion,  1985).

Organizational Commitment

While job satisfaction is an attitude directed toward the 
job and aspects of the job,  organizational commitment is a 
general attitude toward the organization.  Many definitions, 
typologies and theories of organizational commitment exist. 
Mowday et al.,  (1982)  presented 10 definitions in their

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


comprehensive review of the literature,  reviewed three 
typologies and two broad theories - attitudinal and 
behavioral commitment.  Research on commitment has now 
spanned over 30 years and has passed through three stages - 
(1)  organizational commitment as a multi-faceted attitude 
toward the organization  (Etzioni,  1961; Kanter,  1968;
Kelman,  1958;  (2)  organizational commitment as a uni­
dimensional affective attitude  (Mowday et al.,  1982;  Porter, 
Crampon & Smith,  1972);  (3)  and finally a return to multi­
faceted approaches  (Allen & Meyer,  1990; Meyer & Allen,
1991;  and O'Reilly & Chatman,  1986).

Historically,  there are two different theoretical 
foundations of organizational commitment - behavioral 
commitment  (from social psychology)  and attitudinal 
commitment  (from organizational behavior)  (Mowday et al., 
1982) .  Behavioral commitment is defined as an individual's 
commitment to an organization resulting from the 
accumulation of investments  (e.g.,  firm specific training, 
non-transferable pension fund,  reputation)  which act to bind 
the individual to a particular line of behavior  (Becker, 
1960) .  There are many definitions of attitudinal 
commitment,  the most pervasive of which states that 
organizational commitment represents "(1)  a strong belief in 
and acceptance of the organization's goals;  (2)  a 
willingness to exert considerable effort on behalf of the 
organization;  and  (3)  a strong desire to maintain

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


organizational membership"  (Mowday et al.,  1982,  p.43).
The most persistent problem with the behavioral commitment 
theory is a lack of consensus on the antecedents or causes 
of such commitment  (Meyer & Allen,  1991).  Likewise,  there 
is a problem with adequate measurement of this construct 
(Meyer,  Allen & Geilatly,  1990; Barksdale & Shore,  1993).
In summary,  even though the concept of behavioral commitment 
is intuitively appealing,  the evidence in support of this 
concept has yielded inconsistent results.
Attitudinal Commitment

The attitudinal approach to organizational commitment has 

roots  in organizational behavior theory.  Seminal work 
originated from the interest of organizational researchers 
and practitioners to explain withdrawal behaviors  (turnover 
and absenteeism)  (Porter,  Steers,  Mowday & Bou^ian,  1974).
It is thought to develop as a result of an employee's 
evaluation of the implicit and explicit exchanges with the 
organization  (Mowday et al.,  1982).  As they suggest 
"Individuals come to organizations with certain needs, 
desires,  skills and so forth,  and expect to find a work 
environment where they can use their abilities and satisfy 
many of their basic needs.  When an organization provides 
such a vehicle,  the likelihood of increasing commitment is 
apparently increased"  (p.27).  Thus,  the formation of 
commitment when viewed as an attitude represents a "two-way 
street" between the individual and the organization.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


46

Commitment Typologies

Criticisms of the attitudinal commitment literature are 
often leveled at the problems associated with identifying 
its true antecedents,  as opposed to a wide range of 
correlates  (Mowday et al.,  1982).  Additionally,  the Mowday 
et al.,  (1982)  definition  is criticized.  In particular:
(1)  that it's definition is tautological with regard to 
employee intentions to remain,  (2)  that a proliferation of a 
variety of measures makes drawing conclusions difficult,  and 
3)  that such singular definitions of organizational 
commitment confound its antecedents and outcomes with the 
level of commitment in general  (Morrow,  1983,  O'Reilly & 
Chatman,  1986;  Reichers,  1985).

In response to those criticisms,  a resurgence of interest 
in multi-faceted models of commitment has occurred.  Two new 
multi-faceted typologies have been developed and/or 
explicated since the review of the commitment literature by 
Mowday et al.,  (1982).  Meyer and Allen  (1990)  proposed 
affective,  continuance and normative commitment as a three 
facet model.  Similarly,  O'Reilly and Chatman  (1986) 
expanded on Kelman's  (1958)  theory to develop a three facet 
model of employee attachment composed of internalization, 
identification and compliance.  Both models predict each 
form of commitment ought to be differentially related to 
employee behaviors.  Initial research looks promising with 
regard to the theoretical contribution of the multi-faceted

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


47

models of organizational commitment  (Allen & Meyer,  1990; 
Caldwell,  Chatman & O'Reilly,  1990; Meyer & Allen,  1984; 
Meyer,  Paunonen,  Gellatly,  Goffin & Jackson,  1989;  O'Reilly 
& Chatman,  1986;  Shore & Barksdale,  1991).  However,  at the 
present time,  there is a great deal of controversy over the 
measurement of these two models of commitment.  Both Allen 
and Meyer  (1990)  and O'Reilly and Chatman  (1986)  developed 
measures of their conceptualizations of commitment but the 
construct validity for the two sets of measures is 
questionable  (Barksdale & Shore,  1993; Vandenberg & Self, 
1993;  Vandenberg,  Self & Seo,  1994).

In summary,  although much has been gained from the multi­

faceted view of organizational commitment as well as the 
behavioral explanation of commitment,  the uni-dimensional 
concept of attitudinal commitment continues to hold wide 
acceptance as the predominant view.  Thus,  the focus of this 
study is on attitudinal commitment as defined by Mowday et 
al.,  (1982).
Commitment and Job Behaviors

The relationship between organizational commitment and 
job performance does not have a long history like that of 
satisfaction and performance.  Mowday et al.,  (1982)  argued 
that while commitment per se may not be related directly to 
employee performance,  it should be related to work effort 
and subsequently to performance.  Thus,  an employee who is 
highly committed should be more likely to expend extra

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


48

effort in the organization's behalf.  Likewise,  Meyer,  et 
al.,(1989)  proposed employees who value and want to maintain 
organizational membership should also be willing to spend 
considerable effort on behalf of the organization. 
Performance Behaviors

Research on the relationship between commitment and 
performance has been very mixed  (Mowday et al.,  1982). 
Mathieu and Zajac  (1990)  found 16 studies published between 
1967 and 1986 that assessed the relationship between 
commitment and performance.  They reported an average 
correlation of  .135 with supervisory performance ratings and 
of  .054 with output based performance measures.  Subsequent 
research by Meyer et al.,  (1989)  found a significant 
positive relationship between attitudinal commitment and 
performance,  as well as with a promotability index.
Likewise,  Shore and Martin  (1989)  identified a relationship 
between organizational commitment and error rates,  but not 
with supervisory ratings.  Randall,  et al.,  (1990)  reported 
a significant correlation between commitment and quality of 
work.  In a longitudinal study,  Shore and Barksdale  (1991) 
found that managerial assessment of employee potential and 
performance were significant predictors of continuance 
commitment and suggested that an individual's level of 
commitment to an organization might well be affected by the 
performance assessments made by managers.  In summary,  the 
empirical evidence supports a moderate to low relationship

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


49

between organizational commitment and job performance. 
Withdrawal Behaviors

Organizational commitment is expected to have the 
greatest effects in relation to employee withdrawal 
behaviors.  A committed employee is expected to expend more 
effort to attend,  to be on time,  and to be less likely to 
leave the organization.  Empirical findings generally 
support this expectation.  Steers  (1977)  and Mowday et al., 
(1979)  found commitment to correlate significantly 
(negatively)  with absence.  Likewise,  Angle and Perry  (1981) 
found a strong negative relationship between commitment and 
tardiness.  By far the most significant relationship has 
been between commitment and turnover or turnover intentions 
where a consistently strong  negative relationship has been 
found  (Angle & Perry,  1981;  Decotiis & Summer,  1988;  Horn, 
Katerburg & Hulin,  1979; Koch & Steers,  1978; Mowday et al., 
1979;  Porter et al.,  1974;  Porter et al.,  1976;  and Steers, 
1977).  Mathieu and Zajac's meta-analysis  (1990)  found a 
strong negative relationship between commitment and 
intentions to seek alternatives  (-.599),  intentions to leave 
one's job  (-.464)  and turnover  (-.277).

The use of commitment to predict turnover and job 

withdrawal has drawn criticism.  Hulin  (1991)  suggested when 
turnover is seen as a general rejection of the organization, 
then organizational commitment can be an appropriate 
predictor.  However,  when the interest is simply in

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


50
predicting turnover,  a behavioral intentions model following 
Fishbein and Ajzen  (1975)  is much more effective.

In summary,  organizational commitment has been found to 

have a weak relationship with employee performance behaviors 
and absenteeism, whereas,  it is strongly linked with 
employee turnover,  particularly when turnover is a general 
rejection of the organization.

Organizational Climate and Work Attitudes 

Organizational climate is viewed as antecedent to work 

attitudes,  motivation,  and behaviors  (Field & Abelson,  1982; 
At the 
Kopelman et al.,  1990;  Payne & Pugh,  1976). 
individual level of analysis,  it is expected that all 
dimensions of the climate would be positively correlated 
with job satisfaction and organizational commitment.  In 
effect,  positive perceptions of the organizational climate 
should lead to positive employee reactions  (work attitudes). 
The relationship between organizational climate and work 
attitudes is documented in a long history of research and as 
such,  the work environment has been found to be positively 
related to both job satisfaction and organizational 
commitment  (Cranny,  Smith & Stone,  1991;  James & James,
1991;  Payne & Pugh,  1976;  Schneider & Hall,  1972).

Consistent with Eisenberger et al.,  (1986)  there should 

be a relationship between socio-emotional support and 
organizational commitment since perceived organizational 
support creates feelings of obligation which result in

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


higher levels of organizational commitment.  Eisenberger et 
al.  presented evidence that commitment is seen as a social 
exchange process such that an organization can increase 
employee commitment by acting in ways that show it is 
concerned for the welfare of an employee  (perceived 
organizational support).  As stated previously,  the 
remaining four dimensions of climate reflect employee 
perceptions that the organization communicates clearly what 
is expected and rewarded,  leading to perceptions of 
predictability and control.  Given employee needs for 
predictability  (Bandura,  1986;  Latham,  1988;  Shore &
Tetrick,  in press),  this should lead to greater 
organizational commitment.  It is also expected that a 
supportive and predictable environment would lead to more 
positive affective reactions,  as reflected in greater levels 
of job satisfaction among employees  (Eisenberger et al., 
1990;  Shore & Tetrick,  1991).

H3:  Employee perceptions of the organizational climate 
will be positively related to job satisfaction and 
organi z at iona1 commitment.

Job Satisfaction and Organizational Commitment

There is a long standing debate in the organizational 

literature referring to the relationship between individual 
level job satisfaction and individual level organizational 
commitment  (Vandenberg & Lance,  1992).  Unquestionably, 
these two constructs are correlated.  The debate stems from

Reproduced with permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


the directionality of the relationship between these two 
constructs.  Some authors  (Mowday et al.,  1982)  suggest that 
job satisfaction is less stable than organizational 
commitment and that job satisfaction should represent a 
causal antecedent of organizational commitment.  Several 
authors support this perspective  (Bluedorn,  1982;  Williams & 
Hazer,  1986).  Likewise,  a number of studies note the 
potential for the reverse situation  (commitment causes 
satisfaction)  (Bateman & Strasser,  1984).  Finally,  several 
researchers note the possibility of a reciprocal 
relationship  (Farkas £ Tetrick,  1989;  Lance,  1991).  In the 
present study,  these causal relationships between job 
satisfaction and organizational commitment are not assessed 
since the main purpose was to determine whether attitudes 
serve as intervening variables between organizational 
climate and organizational effectiveness.

Work Attitudes As Aggregate Variables 

Whereas the relationship between work attitudes and job 

performance is tenuous at the individual level,  the findings 
of Ostroff  (1992)  provide encouraging results with regard to 
the attitude-performance relationship at the organizational 
level of analysis.  Ostroff supported the aggregation 
argument by providing empirical data that suggested little 
within organization variance for the attitudes of interest. 
While Schneider and Schmitt  (1986)  labeled aggregated 
satisfaction as organizational morale,  Ostroff took the

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


position that aggregated attitudes  (as one determinant of 
organizational performance)  represent effective social 
interaction in organizations  (i.e.,  Emery & Trist,  1960) 
resulting in an array of positive organizational behaviors. 
That is,  when employees in general are satisfied, 
organizational performance may be facilitated by 
cooperation,  collaboration,  trust,  and communications 
(Ostroff,  1992) .  However,  greater conceptual development is 
needed for explaining the underlying meaning of aggregate 
measures of work attitudes such as job satisfaction and 
organizational commitment.

Ostroff  (1992)  developed two justifications for the 
potential causes of aggregate attitudes.  First,  that 
genetic influences  (i.e.,  Staw & Ross,  1985)  imply 
satisfaction is a stable attitude due to its relationship to 
dispositional influences.  In other words,  some people are 
more likely to be satisfied with their job than others, 
simply on the basis of their personalities.  However,  the 
preponderance of evidence in support of this view relies on 
genetic studies of identical and fraternal twins,  a reality 
rarely if ever characteristic of most organizations.  In 
addition,  the stability of attitudes caused by genetic 
influences does not offer adequate justification for 
similarity of attitudes across individuals within the same 
organization.

The second explanation offered by Ostroff  (1992)  focuses

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


on the importance of situational influences and the 
organizational climate.  Pfeffer  (1991)  argued that in 
contrast to the typical psychological explanations of job 
satisfaction,  we may need to consider the environment, 
social structure and the "possibility of social contagion as 
a source of affective reactions to the work environment"
(p.793-794).  Drawing on empirical evidence supporting 
Salancik and Pfeffer's  (1978)  Social Information Processing 
theory  (SIP),  Pfeffer suggested that through social 
interactions,  group and organizational similarity in 
attitudes should develop.

If organizational climate represents employees'  shared 

perceptions of the work environment then aggregate job 
satisfaction and organizational commitment may represent a 
type of morale as suggested by Schneider and Schmitt  (1986). 
This is consistent with Etzioni's view that power and 
purpose leads to certain types of predominant employee 
attitudes.  If climate is reflective of employees'  shared 
perceptions of how an organization achieves compliance,  then 
aggregate attitudes could reflect reactions to that climate 
or the compliance processes.  Similarly,  Schneider  (1975) 
argued that restrictive climates lead to a sense of 
alienation and low organizational identification,  moderate 
performance and higher turnover and that non-restrictive 
climates lead to higher job satisfaction,  higher 
organizational identification,  lower turnover and higher

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


55

performance by rewarding individual performance.

Recent work by George  (1990)  also lends strength to the 
utility of examining aggregated work attitudes.  Although 
her study focused on the work group level,  she drew on 
Schneider's ASA model to argue that individuals of certain 
personality types would be attracted to work groups with 
similar orientations.  The group develops a characteristic 
(affective tone)  defined as consistent or homogeneous 
affective reactions to the work group environment  (George, 
1990).  This phenomenon is also strengthened by the 
socialization processes which act to encourage newcomers to 
adopt characteristics and attitudes similar to those they 
are working with  (Van Mannen & Schein,  1979).  A person who 
cannot or does not adapt will be more likely to withdraw 
from the situation.

Thus,  aggregation of individual level data to the 

organizational level has been justified by both conceptual 
(Etzioni,  1975;  Pfeffer,  1983;  Salancik & Pfeffer,  1978; 
Schneider,  1975,  1987)  and empirical work  (George,  1990; 
Ostroff,  1992).  It could be argued that aggregated 
attitudes should be defined in the same manner as their 
individual-level counterparts  (James,  1982).  James  (1982) 
argued that when empirically justified,  aggregation from one 
level of analysis to another implies no change in 
definition.  However,  in my view,  these constructs are 
distinct because aggregation represents the combined views

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


of the group.  This distinction between individual work 
attitudes and aggregate work attitudes is important because 
(a)  it does not suggest that one level of analysis is more 
important than another;  and  (b)  it does not rule out the 
possibility that one may influence the other.  For example, 
Buchanan  (1974)  found that attitudes of co-workers toward 
the organization had a significant effect on an individual's 
level of organizational commitment.  Specifically,  when co­
workers expressed positive feelings toward the organization, 
the individual was more committed than when co-workers 
expressed negative feelings toward the organization. 
Likewise,  Schneider  (1987)  has argued the individual and the 
context work interactively to affect organizations,  and 
there is some empirical evidence to support this view 
(Cleveland & Shore,  1992).
Aggregate Organizational Climate and Aggregate Work 
Attitudes

The hypotheses for organizational level relationships are 

drawn in parallel to those at the individual level.  The 
difference is that with these hypotheses,  aggregate 
variables are being considered.

H4: Aggregated employee perceptions of the 
organizational climate will be positively related to 
aggregated job satisfaction and organizational 
commitment.
It is quite possible that aggregate climate  (representing

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


57

shared perceptions of the situation)  contributes to 
individual attitudes,  over and above individual perceptions 
of the climate.  For example,  imagine an individual has a 
certain perception of the organization's climate.  Likewise, 
there is a shared perception of the climate pervading the 
environment or "atmosphere"  in the organization.  It seems 
unlikely the individual will be able to perceptually filter 
the shared climate from their own,  in responding to 
evaluative items  (satisfaction and commitment)  of the job 
and organization  (i.e.,  Pfeffer's notion of social 
contagion,  1991).  Examination of these cross-level effects 
leads to the following hypothesis:

H5:  Work force strategy,  career enhancement practices, 
work-family assistance practices,  and shared 
perceptions of climate  (aggregate)  will explain 
additional variance in individual work attitudes over 
and above individual level climate perceptions.

Work Attitudes and Organizational Outcomes 

Throughout this study,  it is argued that predictable 

differences among organizations with respect to work 
attitudes ought to exist.  Tests of aggregation presented in 
subsequent chapters serve as one test of this argument.  A 
second and more important test of this argument refers to 
the relationship between aggregate work attitudes and 
indicators of organizational performance.  Ostroff  (1992) 
found that aggregate measures of job satisfaction and

t

Reproduced with permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


58
organizational commitment were correlated with indicators of 
school performance,  including teacher turnover.  Thus,  it is 
expected that both job satisfaction and organizational 
commitment would be positively correlated with indicators of 
financial performance.

H6a:  High levels of aggregate work attitudes will be 
positively related to indicators of firm financial 
perf ormance.
Unquestionably,  the most widely researched outcome 

variable in the Kopelman et al.,  (1990)  model,  and in Figure
2,  is the relationship between climate,  attitudes,  and 
employee turnover.  Ostroff found that aggregate measures of 
both satisfaction and commitment were related to 
organizational turnover,  with commitment representing the 
strongest effect.  Her results appear to be consistent with 
Hulin  (1991),  who argued that commitment is a better 
predictor of turnover when such turnover is viewed as a 
general rejection of the organization.  If aggregate 
attitudes represent a general affective environment,  one 
could argue that prediction of turnover is a general 
rejection of the organization and thus,  commitment should 
represent a stronger relationship than satisfaction to 
turnover.

H6b:  High levels of aggregate work attitudes will 
relate to lower turnover.  However,  aggregate levels of 
organizational commitment will represent a stronger

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


59

relationship than will job satisfaction to turnover.

Comprehensive Model Evaluation

Surprisingly,  there have been few comprehensive attempts 

to address the relationship between human resource 
practices,  organizational climate,  work attitudes,  and 
organizational outcomes  (Jones & James,  1979; Hansen,  1987). 
Kopelman et al.,  (1990)  argued that the organizational 
climate would mediate the relationship between 
organizational practices and organizational outcomes such as 
work attitudes,  work force attachment,  and productivity.
In light of Hansen's  (1987)  and Ostroff's  (1992)  findings,  a 
general hypothesis is that both climate and work attitudes 
should be directly related with indicators of organizational 
profitability and employee turnover.  Likewise,  Ichniowski 
(1990)  and Huselid  (1993)  found HR practices predicted 
organizational productivity.  Therefore,  an important 
question to address is whether human resource practices and 
organizational climate are directly related to 
organizational outcomes,  or whether work attitudes mediate 
these effects.  Likewise,  the Kopelman et al.,  (1990)  model 
proposes that organizational climate mediates the 
relationship between human resource practices and work 
attitudes,  and this mediation needs testing.

A final set of hypotheses are derived from the Kopelman 

et al.,  (1990)  model which implies several mediating 
relationships.  First,  organizational climate is proposed to

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


60

mediate the effects of human resource practices on work 
attitudes.  Second,  organizational climate and work 
attitudes are proposed to mediate the influence of human 
resource practices on organizational outcomes.  Third,  work 
attitudes are proposed to mediate the effects of 
organizational climate on organizational outcomes.  The 
hypotheses are:

H7a:  Organizational climate will mediate the effects of 
human resource practices on job satisfaction and 
organizational commitment.
H7b:  Organizational climate and work attitudes will 
mediate the effects of human resource practices on 
organizational outcomes.
H7c:  Job satisfaction and organizational commitment 
will mediate the effects of organizational climate on 
organizational outcomes.

Reproduced with permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Chapter III 

METHODS

The data for this study came from two separate sources. 
Human resource practices,  work force strategy,  turnover, 
organizational climate,  and work attitude data were drawn 
from an archival database collected between January and July 
of 1991 by the Life Office Management Association  (LOMA). 
LOMA is an association of life and health insurance 
organizations that provides training,  organizational 
assessment and development,  human resources selection 
assistance,  and other assistance to member organizations.
The survey for this study is conducted every three years and 
is used for developing attitude/climate norms for 
participating organizations and clients of LOMA.  Human 
resource practices,  work force strategy,  and turnover data 
were provided by one top human resource manager from each of 
the 92 organizations in the database.  The organizational 
climate and work attitude data were provided by 4,802 home 
office employees representing the 92  life and health 
insurance organizations located within the United States and 
Canada.  Financial performance indicators came from A.M. 
Best's ratings of life and health insurance organizations. 
Sample

Organization sample.  Forty-two percent of the companies 
in the survey were located in the Midwest,  twenty percent in 
the West,  sixteen percent in the Southeast,  eleven percent

61

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


in the Northeast,  and eleven percent in Canada.  Thirty-four 
percent of the organizations in the sample had less than 200 
home office employees,  twenty-four percent had between 200 
and 499,  twenty percent had between 500 and 999,  and twenty- 
one percent had greater than 1000 home office employees. 
Seventeen percent of the companies had less than $100 
million in assets,  forty percent had between $100 and $400 
million,  thirteen percent had between $500 million and $1.5 
billion,  twelve percent had between $1.5 billion and $4.9 
billion,  fifteen percent had between $5 billion and $14.9 
billion,  and two percent had greater than $14.9 billion in 
assets.  Forty-nine percent of the companies were stock 
companies,  thirty-four percent were mutuals,  seven percent 
were fraternal,  and ten percent were classified as other.

Employee sample.  The employees in the sample came from a 

variety of job classifications.  Six percent of the 
employees were executives,  eleven percent were managers or 
directors,  ten percent were supervisors,  thirty-one percent 
were technical and professional employees,  forty-one percent 
were clerical employees,  and one percent were 
maintenance/security employees.  Tenure among the employees 
ranged from less than 1 year to greater than 10 years with 
nine percent of the sample having less than one year of 
tenure,  thirteen percent between one and two years,  twenty- 
seven percent between two and five years,  twenty-one percent 
between five and ten years,  and thirty-one percent having

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


over 10 years of service.  The median age group was 31 to 40 
years of age,  representing thirty-two percent of the total 
sample.  Seventy percent of the employees in the sample were 
female.  The sample was eighty-one percent white 
respondents,  seven percent African-American,  four percent 
Asian,  four percent Hispanic and four percent other race.
One percent of the employees had less than a high school 
degree,  twenty-four percent had high school degrees,  twenty- 
nine percent had some college,  twelve percent had an 
associate degree,  twenty-eight percent had a bachelor's 
degree,  and six percent had advanced degrees.  The 
respondents came from 12 different departments in their 
organizations  (claims,  administration,  actuarial, 
accounting,  underwriting,  policyowner services,  executives, 
marketing,  investments and legal services,  information 
systems,  and human resources).

Representativeness of sample.  Some 500 organizations were 

originally solicited for participation in the study.  The 
median age group was 31-40 vaars of age which is consistent 
with the Bureau of Labor Statistics median age of 36.  The 
sample was 70% female,  which is above the 45-50% labor force 
participation rate,  but commensurate with the insurance 
industry which attracts more women than average.  Sixteen 
percent of the sample was non-white,  as compared with the 
13% to 15% national average.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


64

Measures

Work Force Strategy.  Organizational actions with regard 

to employee population were measured with two questions.
The first was a multi-response item which asked for past 
changes  (in the last 2 years)  in employee population across 
four groups of employees:  (1)  executives;
(2)  managers/directors;  (3)  technical/professional;  (4) 
clerical/administrative.  The response anchor for this item 
was l=increased,  2=decreased,  3=remained same.  This item 
was recoded to be  (l=decreased,  2=remained same,
3=increased).  Responses for each group were summed together 
to obtain a measure of the general past strategic action 
with regard to employee population changes.  The second was 
a multi-response item which asked for planned future changes 
(in the next 2 years)  in employee population across four 
groups of employees:  (1)  executives;  (2)  managers/directors;
(3)  technical/professional;  (4)  clerical/administrative.
The response anchor for this item was  (l=increase, 
2=decrease,  3=remain same).  This item was recoded to be 
(l=decrease,  2=remain same,  3=increase).  Responses for each 
group were summed together to obtain a measure of the 
general future strategic plan with regard to employee 
population changes.  Thus,  the minimum score for each of 
these variables was 4  (maximum downsizing)  and the maximum 
score was 12  (maximum growth).

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


H u m a n   Resource Practices.  This dimension of 

organizational practices was measured with sixteen 
dichotomous  items  (l=yes)  (0=no).  Responses were provided 
by one top HR manager from each firm.  The practices 
included were:  (1) flexible work hours;  (2)  job sharing;  (3)
telecommuting;  (4) extended leave  (from  1 to 3 months);  (5)
extended leave  (more than 3 months);  (6) part-time work
opportunities;  (7) job rotation;  (8)  dual career tracks;  (9)
special assignments such as opportunities to participate on 
task forces;  (10)  mentoring programs for females and 
minorities;  (11)  remedial training programs for entry level 
workers;  (12)  on-site child care;  (13)  child care referral 
services;  (14)  sick child care assistance;  (15)  elder care 
referral services;  and  (16)  paternity leave.  The items are 
presented in Appendix A.
Work Attitudes and Organizational Climate

Each of the following work attitude and organizational 

climate items was responded to by the 4802 employees in the 
sample.  The items used in this study are presented in 
Appendix A.  The response anchors for all items were 
answered with a 4 point scale where 1 = strongly agree and 4 
= strongly disagree.  Each item was recoded so that 1 = 
strongly disagree and 4 = strongly agree.

Job Satisfaction.  Job satisfaction was measured with 5 
items developed by LOMA addressing the extent to which the 
employee views the job as challenging,  rewarding,  and

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


66

matches skills and interests.  This measure of job 
satisfaction focused on the cognitive aspect of job 
satisfaction using the statement "Generally,  I think my job 
is challenging;  rewarding,  etc.".  While this measure does 
not address the affective component of job satisfaction,  it 
is consistent with Locke's  (1976)  definition implying a 
belief that a person's important job values have been met. 
The internal consistency  (a)  for this measure was  .89.

Organizational Commitment.  Organizational commitment was 

measured with 5 items  (a=.87)  modified from the 
Organizational Commitment Questionnaire developed by Porter 
et al.,  (1972).

Task Support.  This scale consisted of 7  items  (a=.89) 

measuring the extent to which employees perceive they have 
received adequate training to do their job.

Goal Emphasis.  This scale consisted of 4  items  (a=.74) 
measuring the extent to which the employee perceives the 
organizational goals are clearly communicated.

Means Emphasis.  This scale consisted of 4  items  (a=.67) 
measuring the extent to which the employee understands how 
to achieve organizational goals.

Socio-Emotiona1 Support.  This scale consisted of 4  items 
(a=.87)  measuring the extent to which the employee believes 
the organization cares about the employee,  treats them as an 
investment,  and values their efforts.  This measure is very 
similar to the Survey of Perceived Organizational Support

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


67
developed by Eisenberger et al.f  (1986)  reflecting employee 
perceptions of caring and employer commitment.

Reward Orientation.  This scale consisted of 3  items 

(a=.78)  measuring the employees' perceptions that hard work 
would be rewarded.
Turnover

Turnover was reported by participating organizations 

through their top HR manager's response to a survey 
administered separately from employee surveys.  Several 
measures of turnover were included - total organizational 
turnover,  total voluntary turnover,  turnover by job level, 
and voluntary turnover by job level.  Due to problems with 
sample size for most of the voluntary turnover measures, 
both total turnover and voluntary turnover were used in this 
study.
Organizational Characteristics

In addition to turnover data,  the top HR managers were 

asked to identify the size of the organizational home office 
(as a categorical variable)  where l=less than 200 employees; 
5=5000 or more employees.  The type of organization was 
measured by an item where l=mutual;  2=stock;  3=fraternal; 
4=other.
Financial Data

The ROA,  ROE,  and A.M.  Best ratings were drawn from the 
A.M.  Best's financial reports on life and health insurance 
firms.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


68
ROA.  Return on assets is typically defined as the ratio 
of net income plus interest expense to total average assets 
employed.  However,  for insurance firms ROA is computed 
using the return on invested assets.  Three years of data 
were collected  (1990,  1991,  & 1992)  reflecting financial 
performance one year before the survey,  the year of the 
survey and one year after the survey.  Data was not yet 
available for 1993.  An average of these three years was 
computed and used in all subsequent analyses.  The purpose 
of taking an average of financial results is so that the 
likelihood of one particularly good or bad year affecting 
the analysis is reduced  (Nayyar,  1993) .

ROE.  Return on equity is defined as the ratio of net 

income after taxes to average equity.  Three years of data 
were collected  (1991 to 1993),  and an average of these three 
years was used in all subsequent analyses.

Best's Ratings.  A.M.  Best  (Best's rating)  reflects the 

organization's ability to meet its long term obligations to 
policyholders.  There are nine ratings ranging from A++ 
(best)  to F  (in liquidation).  The ratings were converted to 
numeric values where A++ =9;  and F =1.  Three years of data 
were collected  (1991 to 1993),  and an average of these three 
years was used in all subsequent analyses.

Product Line Variables.  While all organizations in the 

sample operate within the insurance industry,  there are 
important distinctions to make within the industry with

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


regard to the make-up of the firm business.  One important 
distinction to be made is the percentage of income generated 
from individual life insurance policies.  The individual 
life market is more stable than other insurance markets such 
as the group accident and health market.  Organizations that 
generate a large share of their overall revenue from 
individual life insurance can be expected to obtain higher 
profits due to their ability to maintain a relatively long 
term financial investments portfolio,  yielding higher rates 
than available in a short term investments portfolio.  Thus, 
it is important to account for the percentage of business 
generated from individual life insurance.

Data pertaining to the percentage of business generated 
from individual life insurance was obtained from the A.M. 
Best's financial reports on life and health insurance firms. 
Procedure

Companies participated in this survey on a voluntary 

basis.  Their participation was solicited by LOMA. 
Participating organizations assigned a central coordinator 
who was provided with a coordinator's manual with 
instructions on how to develop the sample of employees, 
administer the survey and return data to LOMA for 
processing.  The central coordinator was in most cases,  a 
member of the human resources department.  One high level 
human resources manager was asked to complete a survey on 
company background and other information.  Each HR manager

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


70
also provided turnover data  (for the prior year)  for their 
respective organization,  in total and by job category. 
Sampling

The coordinator was asked to first determine the number 
of required participants.  In general,  ten percent of each 
organization was sampled.  Thus,  for organizations of 1000 
employees or more,  100 employees were sampled,  and for 
organizations between 350 and 999 employees,  10% of the 
staff was sampled.  For organizations of less than 350 
employees,  a minimum of 3 5 employees were sampled.  Random 
sampling was conducted by asking the coordinator to divide 
the total number of employees in the organization by the 
required sample size.  The resulting number was used to 
randomly select employees from a list  (usually payroll).
For example,  a company of 1000 employees would sample 100 
employees,  thus every 10th employee  (1000/100)  would be 
selected from the payroll list for inclusion in the study.

The randomly selected participants were notified and 

introduced to the project and asked for their participation. 
The surveys were then administered in groups to ensure 
clarity of instruction and administration.  All responses of 
employees were anonymous and only aggregate scores were 
reported by LOMA to participating organizations.

Psychometric Analyses

In addition to the reliability statistics reported above, 

the 32  items composing the organizational climate and work

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


71
attitude constructs were analyzed with principal components 
factor analysis and with maximum likelihood factor analysis. 
These two analyses were conducted in order to confirm the 
existence of seven dimensions  (five climate dimensions and 
two work attitude dimensions).  Since the seven constructs 
were expected to be correlated all analyses included oblique 
(non-orthoganal)  rotations.  First,  the items were analyzed 
with an exploratory principal components analysis and 
Harris-Kaiser  (oblique)  rotation.  The results of this 
analysis are presented in Table 1.  Seven interpretable 
factors  (corresponding with the five organizational climate 
constructs and two work attitude constructs)  accounting for 
65% of the variance were extracted in the factor analysis. 
With the exception of one item from the means emphasis 
scale,  the items associated with each scale loaded most 
highly on the same factor.  The means emphasis item  (V96) 
loaded on both the means factor and the rewards factor.
Prior to making a judgment about the inclusion of this 
item,  a maximum likelihood factor analysis using LISREL VII 
(Joreskog & Sorbom,  1989)  was conducted to determine the 
goodness of fit of an a priori factor structure on the 
items.

Maximum likelihood factor analysis was conducted on the 
32 items with the measurement model equations from LISREL 
VII  (Joreskog & Sorbom,  1989).  Maximum likelihood factor 
analysis with LISREL allows the researcher to impose a

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


R
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
e
d

 

wi
h

t

 

i

p
e
r
m
s
s
o
n

i

 

of

 

t

h
e 

c
o
p
y
r
i
g
h

t
 

o
w
n
e
r
.
 

F
u
r
t

h
e
r
 

r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i

o
n

 

i

p
r
o
h
b
i
t
e
d
 

w

i
t
h
o
u
t
 

p
e
r
m
s
s

i

i

o
n
.

Table 1 Factor analytic results of the organizational climate and work attitude variables.

T U l i  A U W X W M  •

Means
Emphasis

Goals
Emphasis

Task
Support

Socio-
ernotional
support

Reward
Orientation

Job
Satisfaction

Organizational
Commitment

Item

41.  I understand the  boundaries of my authority

39.  I understand this company's  lines of authority

94.  I know what is expected of me on the job.

99.  I understand how the work I do contributes to the organization achieving  its 
goals.

101.  Employees o f this company work toward  a common goal.

98.  Company goals and objectives are clearly specified.

100.  I am committed  to the company’s goals.

133.  I received  sufficient training to do my job.

139.  I am satisfied with the number of training and  development programa available 
to  me.

137.  I have had  sufficient/adequate job-related training.

134.  Overall,  I am satisfied with my training opportunities.

140.  I am satisfied with  the  quality of training and development programs available 
to  me.

138.  If I  felt that  I needed  more job-related  training, the company would  provide  it.

136.  Education and training  is an integral part o f this company's  future.

105.  Generally  I  feel this company values employees who have worked here a  long 
time.

.850

■758

■336

.115

-.164

-.058

.006

.083

-.064

.105

.000

-.056

.008

-.082

.085

-.043

-.072

.284

.832

.768

.763

.657

-.065

.042

-.064

-.051

.034

-.021

.195

-.070

.020

-.020

.057

-.064

.046

.046

-.072

.835

.833

.828

.822

.795

.792

.628

-.058

.021

.177

-.243

-.114

.113

.036

-.028

-.105

.039

-.105

-.046

.060

.101

.063

.967

105.  Generally,  I  feel  this company values employee  loyalty.

.070

.009

-.007

.836

-.028

-.118

.208

-.028

-.037

.073

-.106

.012

-.024

-.015

.026

-.035

-.013

-.038

-.017

.006

-.053

.036

-.028

.076

-.072

-.110

.135

-.010

-.004

-.003

.110

-.007

-.007

-.081

-.002

.008

.018

.018

-.037

-.088

.002

-.077

.249

-.006

-.038

.005

.003

-.030

.024

.077

-.101

-.037

to


R
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
e
d

 

wi
h

t

 

i

p
e
r
m
s
s
o
n

i

 

of

 

t

h
e 

c
o
p
y
r
i
g
h

t
 

o
w
n
e
r
.
 

F
u
r
t

h
e
r
 

r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i

o
n

 

i

p
r
o
h
b
i
t
e
d
 

w

i
t
h
o
u
t
 

p
e
r
m
s
s

i

i

o
n
.

Table 1 continued.

Item Stem

Means
Emphasis

Goals
Emphasis

Task
Support

Socio-
emotional
support

Reward
Orientation

Job
Satisfaction

Organizational
Commitment

104.Generally,  I feel this company cares about  its employees -  not just profits and 
losses.

110.  Generally,  1 feel this company treats employees as an investment  -  key to  its 
future  success.

-.020

-.070

.024

.131

.017

.760

-.018

.081

.666

102. There  is a strong  link between how well  I perform my job  and the  likelihood 
of receiving a  raise  in pay/salary.

-.079

-.008

-.036

-.022

103. There  is a  strong  link between how well  I perform my job  and the  likelihood 
of receiving high performance  appraisal  ratings.

-.016

-.057

-.004

.003

96.  I understand how  my job performance  is  measured.

95.  Generally,  I  feel this company  rewards employees who make  an extra effort.

61.  Generally,  I think my job  is a good  match  for  my  skills and abilities.

59.  Generally,  1 think my job  is challenging.

62.  Generally,  I think my job  is a good  match  for my career interests.

60.  Generally,  I think  my job  is important.

63.  Generally,  1 think my job  is rewarding in ways other than money.

4 7 .1 would  have  little  or no regrets about  leaving this company.

46.  I  feel  a high  level of loyally to this company.

49.  I am proud  to be an employee of this company.

48.  If  asked,  I would he  willing to make an extra  effort to help this company.

45.  If 1 had  it  to do over again,  I would  still  go to work  for this company.

Eigenvalue
%  Variance  explained

.262

.065

-.023

-.028

-.059

.162

-.048

-.009

.013

.051

.081

.024

10.37

32%

.105

.051

.004

.016

-.055

.085

o©

-.090

.004

.046

.080

-.078

2.92

9%

.060

.047

.016

-.020

.061

-.072

.020

.030

-.012

-.024

-.081

.078

2.24

7%

-.076

.287

.008

-.006

.001

-.013

.030

.072

.011

.052

-.081

.014

1.70

5%

Note. The  number associated  with each  item stem corresponds with the  item number in the  appendix.

.040

■924

.897

.545

.468

-.004

-.040

.012

-.069

.068

.051

-.021

-.030

-.026

.054

1.52

5%

.003

.008

-.018

.010

.051

.000

.916

.895

.868

.725

.719

-.015

.002

-.050

.016

.01

1.18

4%

.135

.063

.026

-.001

-.097

.061

-.065

.051

.015

-.014

.155

.889

.866

.850

.759

.746

1.01

3%

>0
OJ


particular structure on the data being analyzed,  so that 
statistical inferences can be drawn as to the 
appropriateness of the model specified.  In this case,  a 
seven-factor model was estimated with each of the five 
climate constructs and two work attitude constructs 
representing unique,  but correlated factors.  The model was 
assessed by inspecting the significance of the factor 
loadings and factor correlations,  as well as the chi-square 
(x2)  goodness of fit test provided by the LISREL program.
The x2 test associated with LISREL VII  is affected by sample 
size  (Bollen,  1989) .  Particularly,  as the sample size 
grows,  the  x2 test becomes highly sensitive to even 
moderate departures from the proposed model.  Thus,  a number 
of incremental and comparative fit indices were calculated 
in order to further assess the reasonableness of the 
solution imposed by the model.  The Tucker-Lewis index  (TLI; 
Tucker & Lewis,  1973),  the Normed Fit index  (NFI;  Bentler & 
Bonnett,  1980)  and the Parsimonious Fit index  (PFI; Mulaik, 
James,  Van Alstine,  Bennet,  Lind & Stilwell,  1989)  are 
included due to their lessened sensitivity to sample size 
(Bollen,  1991).  They are calculated by comparing the fit of 
the proposed model against the fit of a null model of 
independence in which the 32 items are restricted to 
represent 32 unique uncorrelated constructs.  The NFI 
measures the proportionate reduction in the x2 value in the 
proposed model relative to the null model of independence.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


75

It is important because it reflects the incremental 
improvement in fit,  relative to the null model.  The TLI is 
similar to the NFI,  but has a lessened sensitivity to the 
sample size  (Bollen,  1989).  Typically,  values ranging above 
.900 for both the TLI and NFI reflect a reasonable model fit 
(Bollen,  1989).  The PFI reflects the degree to which the 
model is parsimonious,  relative to the null model.
Typically,  a PFI greater than  .600 is thought to reflect a 
model more parsimonious than the null model  (Bollen,  1989).
The covariance matrix for this analysis was generated by 

PRELIS,  the preprocessor program for LISREL VII.  The 
mainframe version of LISREL VII was used for the analysis. 
Table 2 presents the results of this analysis.  The seven 
factor model fit the data quite well  (x2=456.97[56];
GFI=.977;  rmsr=.011; NFI=.977; TLI=.967;  PFI=.601),  although
Table 2  Confirmatory factor analysis results for the 32 oraanizational
climate and work attitude items.

p-
value
.000
.000

X*
22,179.87
496.97

Model

df 

GFI

RMSR

NFI
--
.977
--
.903

TLI
--
.967
--
.909

PFI
--
.601
--
.556

91 
56 

91 
56 

.158
.011

.333
.977

1233.03
120.84

Null*
7 Factor 
model*
Nullb
7  Factor 
Modelb
Note.  * denotes model estimated at the  individual  level of analysis.  b 
denotes model estimated at the organizational level of analysis, 
the resulting chi-square  (x2)  statistical test suggested 
that the imposed covariance matrix  (2)  produced by the

.214
.844

.021
.002

.000
.000

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


76
LISREL program was significantly different from the sample 
covariance matrix  (pc.OOl).  T-tests indicated that all 
factor loadings were significantly different  (pc.OOl)  from 
zero  (0).  As expected the factor correlations were also 
positive and significant  (p<.001),  suggesting positive 
relationships among the measures of organizational climate 
and work attitudes.  Given the results of the confirmatory 
factor analysis,  all 32 items were retained for all 
remaining analyses.  In summary,  the results from both 
factor analyses provided strong evidence that the items 
designed to measure the five organizational climate 
dimensions and two work attitude dimensions loaded on the 
appropriate factors.

The final step in the psychometric analyses was to impose 

the 7 factor solution on the aggregate measures of 
organizational climate and work attitudes.  This step was 
taken after general tests of aggregation were completed. 
After establishing the appropriateness of aggregation, 
confirmatory factor analysis was conducted on the aggregate 
measures of the organizational climate and work attitudes. 
The results of this analysis are in Table 2.  The model fit 
the data quite well  (x2=120.84  [56]; GFI=.844;  rmsr=.002; 
NFI=.903;  TLI=.909;  PFI=.556).  All factor loadings and 
factor intercorrelations were significant  (p<.0l).  It is 
interesting to note that the individual level model 
possessed better overall fit indices than the organizational

Reproduced with permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


77

level model although the x2 value for the organizational 
level model is smaller.  The most likely explanation for 
this phenomenon is the dependency of the x2 on sample size 
since the organizational level model was computed on a 
sample of 92 whereas the individual level model was computed 
with 4800 employees.

Nature of Aggregation 

General empirical tests of aggregation must be completed 
in order to proceed with the main hypotheses of the study. 
The criteria for aggregation set forth by Jones and James 
(1979)  are:  (1)  low within-organization variance;  (2)  high 
across-organization variance;  (3)  homogeneity within the 
situation;  and  (4)  when there are meaningful relationships 
between the aggregate variables and other organizational, 
sub-unit,  or individual level criteria.  There are strong 
parallels between this process and the process of construct 
validity in psychological measurement.  In construct 
validity studies,  we rely on multiple sets of evidence that 
lead to the conclusion that a measurement device does indeed 
represent the defined construct.  We generally look at item 
analysis and factor analysis for first assessing the 
homogeneity of the items of interest.  We empirically test 
the question:  do these items correlate highly with one 
another?  Likewise,  in studies of aggregation,  we test for 
whether the items in question have been answered similarly 
at the level we wish to aggregate.  The question we ask is:

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


78
do the subjects within each aggregate respond to the items 
similarly?  In construct validity,  after assessing 
homogeneity of our measure,  we construct a nomological 
network around that variable,  proposing and testing its 
relationship with other variables.  In aggregation studies, 
we assess whether or not our aggregate variables relate to 
other aggregate variables.

In light of the criteria set forth by Jones and James 

(1979),  similarity is seen as fundamental to the process of 
aggregation.  Blalock  (1982)  has noted that we aggregate 
because we are willing to assume a certain level of 
homogeneity among the variables and people in question.  In 
this study,  the focus is on aggregation across units of 
analysis  (from the individual to the organizational level). 
Hence,  the issue of similarity in this study pertains to the 
similarity of subjects within each organization with respect 
to the climate and work attitudes.

After choosing the basis for aggregation  (from the 

individual to the organizational level),  we must test the 
first two of Jones and James's  (1979)  criteria - low within 
organization variance and high across organization variance. 
That is,  are a given set of data within an organization 
similar enough to be aggregated?

Several authors have addressed this problem in a variety 

of ways  (James,  1982;  James,  et al.,  1984;  Jones & James, 
1979;  Ostroff,  1992;  Shrout & Fleiss,  1979).  The most

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


common methods relate to analysis of variance  (ANOVA)  and 
the calculation of intra-class correlations  (ICC).  More 
recent methods employ variations of inter-rater reliability 
estimation methods  (i.e.,^;  James,  et al.,  1984), 
hierarchical linear modeling  (HLM;  Bryk & Raudenbush,  1993), 
or Within and Between Analysis  (WABA;  Dansereau,  Alutto,  & 
Yammarino,  1984).  Since the appropriateness of WABA and HLM 
is still in question the more traditional ANOVA approach 
will be used in this study  (George & James,  1993; personal 
communication with Larry James,  1993).

There are a number of ANOVA and ICC techniques applicable 

to assessing the aggregation of data  (Shrout and Fleiss 
1979).  For this study,  the design is a random effects,  one­
way nested design ANOVA in which each of the K  (K=l  ...K) 
organizations represent the treatment and nk individuals who 
provide information on the climate variable  (X)  are nested 
within the treatment  (organization). 
The ANOVA provides a 
between organization mean square  (BMS)  and a within 
organization mean square  (WMS).  The mean squares furnished 
by the ANOVA can then be used to calculate a variety of ICC 
coefficients which represent the extent of within- 
organization agreement and between- organization effects.
Two ICC coefficients are most relevant in this study.  The 
first,  often referred to as ICC(l)  represents interrater 
reliability  (Winer,  1971).  This is calculated by the 
following formula:

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


80

ICC(1)=  BMS-WMS/BMS+(k-1)WMS 

where k equals the number of targets or climate variables 
rated by subjects.

A second ICC coefficient that is calculated is the 

ICC(2).  It is defined as the reliability of the mean X 
scores for K organizations.  It is obtained by applying the 
Spearman-Brown prophecy formula to the ICC(l)  coefficient 
and may be seen in the following formula:

ICC(2)  = nk  [ICC(l) ]/[l+(nk-l)ICC(l) ] .

The ICC(2)  implies that if another sample of nk individuals 
were randomly sampled from the same K organizations,  then 
the correlation between the first and second samples of 
means on X would be approximately equal to ICC(2).  Simply 
put,  ICC(2)  reflects how accurate the scores are in 
representing each organization's mean.  If the F value in 
the ANOVA is significant,  the ICC(2)  may also be interpreted 
as reflecting that K organizations can reliably be 
differentiated on the climate variable X.

ICC(1)  estimates have some drawbacks that cannot be 
overcome.  Because of the manner in which variance is 
partitioned,  the residual term is equal to the inseparable 
effects of the rater,  the rater by variable or target 
interaction,  and random error.  Likewise,  there is not a 
sufficient standard of what constitutes an ICC(l)  value 
suggesting aggregation is appropriate.  James  (1982) 
reported that the range in many studies is from  .00 to  .50

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


81

with a median of  .12  (with higher values representing 
greater homogeneity).  Ostroff  (1992)  found ICC(l)  values 
ranging from .10 to  .26 in her study while Hansen  (1987)  did 
not report ICC values.

The ICC(1)  statistic can yield artificially low estimates 

of rater agreement  (James et al.,  1986).  In particular, 
James et al.,  noted that it is strongly affected by 
restriction of range.  The ICC statistic will be large 
(reflecting homogeneity)  only when the BMS is substantially 
larger than WMS.  It is "insensitive to degrees of 
agreement,  that is,  it treats agreement as an all or none 
phenomenon,  with no room for partial or incomplete agreement 
(Mitchell,  1979,  p.377).  James et al.  (1986)  provided an 
example in which  (on a scale of 1 to 7)  one subject's 
response of 4  is treated as being in total disagreement with 
another judge's response of 5 on the same target.

Another potential criticism of the ANOVA technique for 
assessing the variance between and within organizations is 
that it is typically calculated on the summed scale of the 
construct in question.  Thus,  information associated with 
individual items is lost when the scale is created.
Schneider  (1975)  suggested that when the research is 
oriented toward understanding organizational climate,  only 
items on which organizational members have high agreement 
(low within organization variance)  should be retained.  An 
alternative to using the traditional ANOVA method is to use

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


With MANOVA, 

multivariate analysis of variance  (MANOVA). 
each proposed item of a scale can be entered into the MANOVA 
model,  still nested within organizations.  The results 
provide an assessment of the variance of each item within 
and between organizations,  as well as an omnibus F-test of 
the overall MANOVA model which controls for experimental 
error.  Thus,  the use of MANOVA allows the researcher to see 
which items may be potentially less appropriate to 
aggregate,  while controlling for multiple comparisons across 
items and organizations.

In summary,  three methods for assessing the 

appropriateness of data aggregation are presented.  Both the 
ICC(1)  and ICC(2)  statistics are based on ANOVA results.
The MANOVA approach presents an alternative in which the 
researcher may account for variation within and across 
organizations at the item level within a given construct.
The method for computing ICC statistics consisted of a 

two-step procedure.  First,  the items composing each of the 
five climate scales  (task,  goals,  means,  rewards and socio- 
emotional support)  and the two work attitude scales were 
subjected to a multivariate analysis of variance  (MANOVA). 
Second,  ANOVA was conducted on each of the seven scales in 
the fashion described above.  Thus,  7 MANOVA models and 7 
ANOVA models were computed.  Once aggregation was found to 
be appropriate,  the aggregate level variables were assigned 
values  (the organizational mean)  for each variable in the

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


83
study.  The grand mean becomes the average of organizational 
means,  and the standard deviation becomes the deviation of 
each organizational mean from the grand mean.

The MANOVA results are presented in Table 3.  The results 

suggest that each of the 32 items reflect more variance 
across organizations than within.  The univariate statistics 
for each item were significant,  as was the omnibus F-test 
from the MANOVA.  The scale level ANOVA results and ICC 
statistics are reported in Table 4.  The socio-emotional 
support climate dimension had the largest ICC(l)  statistic 
(.653)  and job satisfaction had the smallest  (.185).  All 
seven constructs reflected ICC  (1)  statistics which were as 
high or higher than those found in Ostroff's  (1992)  study 
and all were higher than the median value  (.12)  reported by 
James  (1982).  The F-value for each construct was also 
significant,  suggesting that the organizations could be 
reliably differentiated on the basis of these variables.
The Spearman-Brown estimates calculated via the ICC(2) 
formula suggested that each of the ICC(l)  estimates are very 
reliable.  The values were all greater than  .95,  suggesting 
that if another sample of employees were drawn from this 
same set of organizations,  their responses would be highly 
similar to the employees in the present sample.

In summary,  the five organizational climate dimensions 
(task,  goals,  rewards,  means and socio-emotional support) 
and the two work attitudes  (job satisfaction and

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Wilk's 
Lambda
.699
.793
.811

organizational commitment)  appear to represent 7 distinct, 
but correlated factors.  The general aggregation tests and 
confirmatory factor analysis with aggregate variables
Table 3 MANOVA results  for testing assumptions of aggregation.

Scale

F-Value

Ndf/Ddf

PROB > F

.709
.777

.845
.864

.0001
.0001

.0001
.0001

4.086
2.30

2.09
1.422

.0001
.0001
.0001

2.245
2.733
3.503

364/16579
455/20171

364/17806
455/21759

637/27283
364/16671
273/13254

Task Support
Goal Emphasis
Reward
Orientation
Means Emphasis
Socio-Emotional
Support
Job Satisfaction
Organizational
Commitment
provides preliminary evidence that relationships proposed 
between these constructs holds at both the individual and 
organizational levels of analysis.  In addition,  these 
results provide further justification for investigation of 
organizational level effects relating to data aggregated 
from the individual level of analysis.  After testing the 
first three criteria for data aggregation,  the fourth 
criterion has to do with the hypotheses for this study - do 
the aggregated variables correlate with other organizational 
level variables?  Once again the parallel with construct 
validity is made by considering the nomological network of 
variables that should be related to the constructs of 
interest.  This criterion is evaluated thoroughly with the 
hypotheses.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


85

Table 4 ANOVA results for testing assumptions of  aggregation.

Scale
Task Support
Goal Emphasis
Reward
Orientation
Means Emphasis
Socio-Emotional
Support
Job Satisfaction
Organizational
Commitment

BMS
1.62
1.15
2.19

.447
3.36

.868
1.70

WMS
.308
.234
.475

.209
.394

.407
.355

F-VALUE
5.25
4.91
4.60

PROB > F
.0001
.0001
.0001

ICC(l)
.378
.495
.550

ICC(2)
.99
.99
.99

2.16
8.53

2.12
4.78

.0001
.0001

.0001
.0001

.222
.653

.185
.431

.99
.99

.99
.99

Classification of Human Resource Practices 

In chapter II,  it was argued the human resource practices 

in this study could be categorized as either career 
enhancement or work-family assistance practices.  Twenty- 
five business school faculty and Ph.D.  students acting as 
subject matter experts were asked to categorize the human 
resource practices as either a career enhancement practice 
or a work-family assistance practice.  Career enhancement 
was defined as:  "those HR practices which are designed to 
assist the employee with:  (1)  developing work experience;
(2)  promotional opportunities;  and  (3)  motivation/work 
opportunities in the shrinking organization."  Work-family 
assistance was defined as:  "those HR practices which are 
designed to assist the employee in coping with the stress 
associated with the conflict between work and family 
responsibilities."  The tabulation of results is presented 
in Table 5.  The experts identified five practices as being

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


86
most strongly associated with career enhancement practices 
(mentor programs,  job rotation,  dual career tracks,  special 
projects,  and remedial training for entry level workers. 
Eleven practices were identified as being most closely 
associated with work-family assistance practices  (flextime, 
job sharing,  telecommuting,  extended leaves,  part-time work 
opportunities,  child care referral services,  on-site child 
care,  sick child care services,  paternity leave,  and elder 
care referral services).  Categorization of all items had an 
inter-rater agreement of at least 80% or higher suggesting 
the value of this grouping of human resource practices.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Table 5 Results of exoert iudaments  in classifvina human resource
practices.

87

Practice

Mentor program
Job rotation
Dual careers
Special assignments
Remedial training
Flex-Time
Job Sharing
Telecommuting
Extended leave  (<3 
months)
Extended leave  (>3 
months)
Part-Time workers
Child Referrals
On-site child care
Sick child care
Paternity leave
Elder care referral

Career
Enhancement
25
25
20
22
25
4
3
2
0

Work-Family
Assistance
0
0
5
0
0
21
20
23
25

0

0
0
0
0
0
0

25

24
25
25
25
25
25

Percent
Agreement
100%
100%
80%
88%
100%
84%
80%
92%
100%

100%

96%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Chapter IV 
RESULTS

Due to the n um be r   of variables in the study,  the means, 

standard deviations,  and full correlation matrix of all 
aggregate variables included in this study are presented in 
Appendix B.  However,  excerpts from this table are 
interspersed throughout this chapter to provide information 
pertaining to specific hypotheses.

Organizational Practices 

Hypothesis la predicted that the human resource practices 
would be inter-correlated,  but that correlations among the 
practices within the career enhancement category and 
separately,  within the work-family assistance category would 
be higher than correlations of human resource practices 
between categories.  Two practices were dropped from all 
analyses  (special projects and on-site child care)  due to 
their low frequencies.  In order to examine relationships 
between the categories,  the correlations presented in Table 
6 were converted to Fisher z scores and averaged.  In 
support of hypothesis la,  the pattern of correlations 
suggested that those items identified as career enhancement 
practices correlated most strongly with the career 
enhancement practices composite while those identified as 
work-family assistance practices correlated most strongly 
with the work-family assistance practices composite.  The 
average correlation of the career enhancement practices with

88

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Table 6 Intercorrelations among the human resource practices.

89

7

3

2

7

3

1

6

5

4

42

13

45

14

30

. . .

.19

.17

.07

.18

.04

.14

.12

.11

.11

.10

.09

.13

.10

. 11

.02

.06

.06

---

----

----

----

----

.21*

.21*

.20*

.30*

.35*

.29*

.25*

.46*

-.07

-.12

-.05

-.03

-.07

-.08

----
.07

Freq
9
19

Variable
1.  Mentor
2.  Job 
rotation
3.  Dual
career
track
4.  Special 
projects
5.  Remedial 
training
5.  Flex­
time
7.  Job 
sharing
8.  Tele­
commuting
9.  Extended 
leave  (1-3 
months)
10.
Extended 
leave  (>3 
months)
11.  Part- 
time work
12.  Child
care
referral
13.  On-site 
child care
14.  Sick 
child care
15.
Paternity
leave
16.  Elder
care
referral
*p<.05.
their composite was  .59 while their average correlation with 
the work family assistance practices composite was  .15

-.27*

-.10

-.01

-.05

-.13

-.08

-.05

-.09

-.09

-.13

-.04

-.11

-.02

-.05

.23*

.28*

.43*

.27*

.31*

.32*

.33*

.39*

.31*

.47*

.26*

.43*

.31*

.01

.11

.11

.16

.06

.06

.16

.19

.15

.19

.12

.02

.18

.03

.17

.09

.08

.17

.19

.17

.19

.17

.17

.17

24

20

25

25

14

18

0

1

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Table  6 continued.

90

15

13

14

9

8

— —  —

-------

12

11

10

.15

.19

.06

.17

.10

“ ” "

.35*

.31*

.30*

.30*

.44*

.32*

-.05

-.03

-.09

-.06

Variable
8.  Tele­
commuting
9.
Extended 
Leave  (1- 
3 months)
10.
Extended 
Leave  (>3 
months)
11.
Parttime 
work
12.  Child 
care
referrals
13.
Onsite
child
care
14.  Sick
child
care
15.
Paternity
leave
16.  Elder 
care
referral
*E<-05.
(t=22.19, pc.05).  Furthermore,  the average correlation of 
the work-family assistance practices with their composite 
was  .57,  whereas their average correlation with the career 
enhancement practices composite was  .25  (t=37.20,  p<.05). 
In addition,  the average intercorrelation among all 
practices was  .14.

-.05

-.04

-.06

.23*

.22*

.21*

.22*

.37*

.21*

.31*

.22*

.42*

.27*

.36*

.27*

.14

.14

.19

.06

.17

.12

"

Hypothesis lb predicted there would be a positive 
relationship between greater use of innovative human

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


91

resource practices  (career enhancement and work-family 
assistance practices),  organizational growth,  and 
organizational performance.  The correlations of the work 
force strategy variables and human resource practices with 
organizational profitability measures are presented in Table 
7.  Both career enhancement practices and work-family 
assistance practices were significantly correlated with 
average A.M.  Best's ratings.
Table 7 Correlations of human resource practices,  work force strategy, 
with turnover,  and organizational profitability measures.

Average 
Return on 
Invested 
Assets
.01

.12

.05

.03

Average 
Return on 
Equity

-.20

-.12

.02

.12

A.M.
Best's
Average
Ratings
.16

.07

.29*

.32*

Total
Turnover

Voluntary
Turnover

.01

-.22

. 03

.11

-.06

-.40*

.05

.05

Variable

Past: Work
Force
Strategy
Future Work
Force
Strategy
Career
Enhancement
Practices
Work-Family
Assistance
Practices
* E < . O S .

Prior to conducting regression analysis on the financial 
data,  two issues had to be addressed.  First,  ROA and ROE 
suffered from non-normality  (especially kurtosis),  thus 
transformations were necessary.  This was accomplished by 
transforming these two variables into their natural 
logarithmic form.  Second,  it was essential to control for

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


known variation in the financial indicators.  Keppel and 
Zedeck  (1989)  noted that "even if there is a slight 
possibility that a hypothesized covariate will have an 
effect on the dependent variable,  controlling for it will 
result in a more sensitive test of the treatment condition" 
(p.456).  The covariate chosen for this study was the 
percentage of business derived from individual life 
insurance  (product line),  given its known relationship to 
insurance firm profitability  (personal communication with 
Martin Grace,  April,1994).  The multiple regression method 
for conducting analysis of covariance  (ANCOVA)  was used to 
control for the product line.  Regression weights reported 
for the control variable are derived at their point of entry 
into the regression equation.  In order to treat the product 
line variable as a covariate,  it was necessary to examine 
the homogeneity of regression assumption for ANCOVA by 
examining the effects of the multiplicative interaction term 
(product line by the independent variable)  on each of the 
dependent variables.  No significant interactions were 
found,  so that it was appropriate to treat product line as a 
covariate.

The natural logarithm of average ROA was regressed on 

each of the human resource practice and strategy variables 
after controlling for the percentage of business derived 
from the individual life insurance market  (product line). 
Hierarchical regression was employed for these regressions.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


93

The product line was entered into the regression first, 
followed by each of the HR practices variables,  one at a 
time.  Thus,  four regression analyses are reported for the 
dependent variable average return on assets.  The results of 
these regressions are presented in Table 8.  None of the HR 
practice or strategy variables accounted for a significant 
amount of variance in ROA suggesting hypothesis lb was not 
supported.
Table 8 Regression results of return on assets on human resource
practices and work force strategy.

Average Return on Assets

p 

AR:

p 

a r: 

p

a r:

P
.23*

.14

a r:

.05*

.02

.20 

.36 

.04

.04

.26* 

.07*

-.02 

.00

.26*

.01

.07*

.00

R:

.05*

.08

.04

.09

.07*

.07

.07*

.07

Independent
Variable
Product
line
Past Work
Force
Strategy
Product
line
Future Work
Force
Strategy
Product
line
Career
Enhancement
Practices
Product
line
Work-Family
Assistance
Practices
*p<.05.

The natural logarithm of average ROE was regressed on 
each of the human resource practice and strategy variables

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


94

after controlling for the product line.  As before, 
hierarchical regression was employed.  The results of these 
regressions are presented in Table 9.  None of the human 
resource practices variables accounted for any significant 
amounts of variance in average return on equity also showing 
no support for hypothesis lb.
Table 9 Regression results of average return on equity on human 
resource practices  and work force strategy.

Average Return on Equity

(3 

Ar 2 

p 

Ar 2 

p 

Ar2

P

Ar2

-.19
-.21 

.04
.01

-.19 
-.18 

.03
.03

-.16 
.06 

.03
.01

-.16
.17

.03
.03

R2

.04
.05

.03
.06

.03
.04

.03
.06

Independent 
Variable
Product  line 
Past Work 
Force Strategy
Product  line
Future Work 
Force Strategy
Product  line
Career
Enhancement
Practices
Product  line
Work-Family
Assistance
Practices
*p<.05.

The average A.M. Best's ratings were regressed on each of

the human resource practice and strategy variables after 
controlling for the product line.  Hierarchical regression 
was employed as with average ROA and ROE.  The results of 
these regressions are presented in Table 10 and show mixed 
support for hypothesis lb.  Past work force strategy was

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


95

positively related to Best's ratings  (@=.25,  e<.05)  and 
accounted for a significant proportion of the variance 
(R2=.06,}.  This suggests past work force increases 
coincided with higher ratings of long term firm  financial 
health.  Career enhancement practices were positively 
related to Best's ratings  (£=.27)  and accounted
Table 10 Regression results of average A.M.  Best's ratings on human 
resource practices  and work force strategy.

Average A.M. Best's Ratings

p

p 

Ar 2

p 

Ar2

AR2

a r2 

.05

.01

.05

.09 

.20 

.06*

.25*

P
.22

Independent
Variable
Product
line
Past Work
Force
Strategy
Product
line
Future Work
Force
Strategy
Product
line
Career
Enhancement
Practices
Product
line
Work-Family
Assistance
Practices
*p<.05.
for a significant proportion of the variance  (R2=.07,
P<.05).  Likewise,  work-family assistance practices were 
positively related to Best's ratings  (£=.32)  and accounted

.28* 

.27* 

.08*

.07*

.08*

.10*

.28*

.32*

R2

.05

.11*

.05

.06*

.08*

.15*

.08*

.18*

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


96

for a significant proportion of the variance  (R2=.10,
P<.01).

Organizational Climate 

Hypothesis 2a predicted that human resource practices and 

work force strategy would be related to the task-,  goal-, 
reward-,  means- and socio-emotional support dimensions of 
the organizational climate.  Table 11 contains the 
correlations among these variables.  Overall,  the results 
produced mixed support for this hypothesis.  Five of 20 
correlations between the climate and practice variables were 
statistically significant  (p<.05).  The most consistent 
correlations were between the organizational climate 
variables and future work force strategy,  suggesting planned 
organizational growth is associated with positive aggregate 
perceptions of the organizational climate.
Table 11  Correlations of human resource practices,  and work force 
strategy with aggregate organizational climate variables.

Past Work
Force
Strategy
.04

.03

.02

.19

.20

Variable

Task
Support
Means
Emphasis
Goal
Emphasis
Rewards
Orientation
Socio-
Emotional
Support
*p<.05.

Future Work 
Force Strategy

.29*

.12

.22*

.33*

.43*

Career
Enhancement
Practices
.12

Work-Family
Assistance
Practices
.20

.08

-.02

.01

.01

.08

.09

.28*

.17

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


97

The literature review suggested that the size of an 

organization,  as well as the type  (i.e.,  public or private 
ownership)  would affect the organizational climate  (Payne & 
Pugh,  1976).  Thus,  each of the five organizational climate 
variables was regressed on the human resource practice and 
work force strategy variables after controlling for size and 
type of organization.  The hierarchical regression method 
for ANCOVA was used.  Size and type were controlled by 
entering them into the regression equation first,  and then 
entering the practice and strategy variables into the 
equation.  Table 12 contains the results of those 
regressions.  The results supported the correlate analysis 
in that the most consistent predictor of the organizational 
climate was the future work force strategy variable.  Four 
of the five regressions were significant.  Only means 
emphasis was not significantly predicted by any of the 
practice or strategy variables.  Consistent with the 
correlate analysis,  only future work force strategy was a 
consistently significant predictor of the organizational 
climate measures.  Thus,  the results provided some support 
for this hypothesis by showing that planned organizational 
growth contributes substantially to aggregate perceptions of 
the organizational climate.

Organizational climate was expected to be positively 

related to measures of firm profitability and negatively 
related to employee turnover  (Hypothesis 2b).  Table 13

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


98
contains the correlations of the organizational climate with
Table 12 Regression results using work force strategy variables  and
human resource practices to predict aggregate perceptions of the
organizational  climate.

.45’

P
.14
.28’
-.20

Independent
Variable
Type
Size
Past Work
Force
Strategy
Future Work
Force
Strategy
Career
Enhancement
Practices
Work-Family
Assistance
Practices
*p< • 05.
Table 12  Continued.

-.02

.10

Task Support

Ar2

R2

.09’

.09’

Reward
Orientation
AR2

R2

.12’

.12’

P
.04
.34’
-.03

.36*

-.11

Goal Emphasis

Ar 2

R2

.16“

.16’

P
.32'
.25’
-.16

.35"

-.02

.14'

.24’

.08

.14’

.26’

.01

.07"

.25’

Means Emphasis

Socio-Emotional
Support

r2

R2

Ar 2 

.06

.06

AR2

.05 

P
.13
.18

P
.17
.19
-.06

Independent Variable
Type
Size
Past Work Force 
Strategy
Future Work Force 
Strategy
Career Enhancement 
Practices
Work-Family 
Assistance Practices
’£<.05.
average ROA,  average ROE,  average A.M.  Best's ratings and

.22’ 

-.01

-.03

.27’

.51*

.06

.20

.05

.07

.09

.01

•o

1

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


turnover.  Six of the correlations are significant, 
providing partial support for this hypothesis.
T a b l e   13 Correlations of organizational profitability and turnover with
aggregate organizational climate perceptions.

Variable

Task
Support

Goal
Emphasis

Reward
Orientation

Average ROA
Average ROE
A.M.  Best's 
Average Ratings
Turnover
Voluntary
Turnover
* E < . 05.

-.08
.14
.32*

-.27*
-.25

.06
.20
.16

-.21
.05

-.16
.13
.28*

-.23*
-.18

Socio-
Emotional
Support
-.09
.11
.21

-.37*
-.20

Means
Emphasis

-.17
.28*
.12

-.04
-.18

Average ROA and ROE were transformed via their natural 
logarithm,  and hierarchical regression was used to control 
for the product line.  The results of these regressions are 
presented in Table 14.  None of the climate variables 
accounted for a significant amount of variance in ROA 
showing hypothesis 2b was not supported.

The natural logarithm of average return on equity was 
regressed on each of the organizational climate variables 
using hierarchical regression as with return on assets 
above.  The results of these regressions are presented in 
Table 15.  Only the means emphasis climate was positively 
related to ROE  (0=.28, p<-05)  and accounted for a 
significant amount of the variance  (R2=.08).  This 
relationship suggests that organizations with employees

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


perceiving a clear understanding of how to perform their 
jobs also have a higher return on equity.

100

climate.

Independent
Variable
Product  line
Task Support
Product  line
Goal Emphasis
Product line
Reward Orientation
*p<.05.

Table 14 Continued.

Independent
Variable

Product  line
Means Emphasis
Product  line
Socio-Emotional
Support
*p<.05.

Average Return on Assets

P 

Ar 2

P

AR:

P

AR2

.26*  .07*
-.08 
.01

.26*
.01

.07*
.00

.26*
-.13

.07*
.01

R2

.07*
.07
.07*
.07
.07*
.08*

Average Return on Assets

P

.26*
-.15

Ar 2
.07*
.02

P

.26*
-.09

Ar 2

.07*
.00

R2
.07*
.09*
.07*
.07

The average A.M.  Best's ratings were regressed on each of 
the organizational climate variables after controlling for 
the product line.  The results of these regressions are 
presented in Table 16.  The task support climate was 
positively related to Best's ratings  (/£?=. 29, p.<.05)  and 
accounted for a significant proportion of the variance 
(R2=.08).  Likewise,  the reward orientation climate was

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


positively related to Best's ratings  (/3=.28,  p<.05)  and 
accounted for a significant proportion of the variance 
Table 15 Regression results of return on equity on the organizational
climate.

101

p 

.16 
.08 

Ar 2

.03
.01

Independent
Variable
Product  line
Task Support
Product  line
Goal Emphasis
Product  line
Reward
Orientation
*g<.05.
Table 15  Continued.

Average Return on Equity

P

Ar 2 

0

Ar2

-.16
.10

.03
.01

-.16
.17

.03
.03

R2

.03
.04
.03
.04
.03
.06

Average Return on Equity

0 

R2

AR2

Ar2

.03
.00

.03
.08*

-.16 
.03 

.03
.11*
.03
.03

P
-.16
.28*

Independent
Variable
Product  line
Means Emphasis
Product  line
Socio-Emotional
Support
*£<•05.
(R2=.08).  Thus,  partial support for hypothesis 2b was 
found.  These results suggest that organizations with a 
strong task support climate,  or with an emphasis on rewards 
are also rated by A.M.  Best's as having greater long term 
financial health than firms with a weak task climate or 
reward orientation.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Table 16 Regression results of average A.M. Best's ratings on the
organizational climate.

P

.28*
.29*

Ar 2 

.08*
.08*

A.M.  Best's Average Ratings

p

a r 2 

p

Ar 2

.28*
.13

.08*
.02

.28*
.28*

.08*
.08*

Independent
Variable
Product  line
Task Support
Product  line
Goal Emphasis
Product  line
Reward
Orientation
*£<•05.

102

R2

.08*
.16*
.08*
.10*
.08*
.16*

Table 16 Continued.

Independent
Variable
Product  line
Means Emphasis
Product  line
Socio-Eraotional
Support
*£<.05.

P

.28*
.14

A.  M.  Best's Average Ratings

p

AR2

Ar 2 

.08*

O

CNI

•

.28*
.17

.08*
.03

R2

.08*
.10*
.08*
.11*

Work Attitudes 

Hypothesis 3 predicted that employee perceptions of the 

organizational climate would be positively related with work 
attitudes.  Table 17 contains the correlations among 
the organizational climate and work attitude variables at 
the individual level of analysis.  The results strongly 
supported this hypothesis.  The five dimensions of

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


organizational climate were all significantly and positively 
correlated with job satisfaction and organizational 
commitment.
Table 17  Intercorrelations  among individual  level organizational  climate 
variables and -the individual  level work attitude variables.

Variable
Task Support 
Means Emphasis
Goal Emphasis
Reward
Orientation
Socio-emotional
Support
Job Satisfaction
Organizational
Commitment
*p<.05.

1

2

3

4 

5 

6

.46*
.38*
.37*

.44*

.27*
.38*

. . .
.56*
.47*

.45*

.34*
.44*

----
.39*

.49*

.32*
.45*

----

.53*  ---

.27*  .30*  ---
.41*  .55*  .48*

Organizational commitment and job satisfaction were also 

regressed on the five climate variables.  The results of 
this regression are presented in Table 18.  All five climate 
variables significantly predicted job satisfaction.  Socio- 
emotional support  (£=.07, p<.05),  means emphasis  (£=.14,
E<. 05) ,  task support  (£=.08, p<.05),  goal emphasis climate 
(£=. 12,  pc.05)  and reward orientation  (£=.13,  p<.05) 
accounted for 17 percent of the total amount of variance in 
job satisfaction  (R2=.17, p<.05).  Likewise,  socio-emotional 
support  (£=.35,  p<.05),  means emphasis  (£=.09,  p<.05),  task 
support  (£=.08, p<.05),  goal emphasis climate  (£=.13,  p<.05) 
and reward orientation  (£=.13,  p<.05)  accounted for 39 
percent of the total amount of variance in organizational

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


104
Table  18 Regression results of individual climate perceptions predicting 
individual work attitudes.

Job
Satisfaction

Organizational
Commitment
R2

R2

P
.35*
.09*
.08*
.13*
.13*

P 
.07*
.14*
.08*
.12*
.13 

Independent Variable
Socio-Emotional Support
Means Emphasis
Task Support
Goal Emphasis
Reward Orientation
*p<.05.
commitment  (R2=.39,  p<.05) •  Thus,  significant amounts of 
variance in job satisfaction and organizational commitment 
were explained by the organizational climate variables.  A 
strong climate coincides with high levels of work attitudes.

.17*

.39*

Hypothesis 4 predicted that aggregated employee 
perceptions of the organizational climate would be 
positively related to aggregate job satisfaction and 
aggregate organizational commitment.  Table 19 contains the
Table  19  Intercorrelations among aggregate organizational climate 
variables  and aggregate work attitude variables.

Variable
Task Support 
Means Emphasis
Goal Emphasis
Reward
Orientation
Socio-emotional
Support
Job Satisfaction
Organizat ional 
Commitment
*p<.05.

1

2

3

4 

5 

6

.53*
.48*
.48*

.60*

.38*
.69*

. . .
.59*
.55*

.43*

.34*
.50*

-----
.47*

.60*

.47*
.70*

-----

.64*  ---

.38*  .40*  ---
.61*  .82*  .62*

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


105

intercorrelations among the aggregate measures of the 
organizational climate and work attitudes providing support 
for hypothesis 4.

Organizational commitment and job satisfaction were also 

regressed on the five climate variables.  The results of 
this regression are presented in Table 20 and provide fairly 
strong support for hypothesis 4.  The only significant 
predictor of job satisfaction was goal emphasis climate 
(0=. 33,  p<. 05)  accounting for 27 percent of the total amount 
of variance  (R2=.27).  Organizational commitment was 
predicted by socio-emotional support  (0=.46,  p<.05),  task 
support  (/3=.27,  p<.05) ,  and goal emphasis  (jS=.28,  p<.05) 
accounting for 79 percent of the total amount of variance 
(R2=.79) .
Table 20 Regression results using aggregate climate variables to predict 
aggregate work attitudes.

Independent Variable

Socio-Emotional  Support
Means Emphasis
Task Support
Goal Emphasis
Reward Orientation
*p<.05.

Job
Satisfaction
0

R2

.03
-.02
.14
.33*
.15

.27*

Organizational
Commitment
jS 
R2
.46*
-.06
.27*
.28*
.08 

.79*

The fifth hypothesis predicted that work force strategy, 

career enhancement practices,  work-family assistance 
practices,  and shared perceptions of climate  (aggregate)

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


106

would explain additional variance in individual work 
attitudes over and above individual level climate 
perceptions.  Table 21 contains the correlations of 
strategy,  practices,  individual climate,  aggregate climate 
with individual level work attitudes.
Table 21 Correlations of work force strategy variables,  human resource 
practices,  and aggregate perceptions of the organizational  climate with 
individual  level work attitudes.

Variable

Past Work Force Strategy
Future Work Force Strategy
Career Enhancement Practices
Work-Family Assistance Practices
Task Support  (Individual)
Goal Emphasis  (Individual)
Reward Orientation  (Individual)
Means Emphasis  (Individual)
Socio-Emotional Support 
(Individual)
Task Support  (Aggregate)
Goal Emphasis  (Aggregate)
Reward Orientation  (Aggregate)
Means Emphasis  (Aggregate)
Socio-Emotional  Support 
(Aggregate)
*p<.05.

Job
Satisfaction
-.04*
-.01
-.02
-.004
.27*
.32*
.27*
.34*
.30*

Organizational
Commitment
.04*
.09*
.05*
.07*
.38*
.46*
.41*
.44*
.55*

.07*
.09*
.06*
.06*
.06*

.21*
.20*
.17*
.15*
.24*

Job satisfaction and organizational commitment were 

regressed on the individual and aggregate level variables 
using hierarchical regression analysis.  The results are in 
Table 22.  The aggregate measures of the organizational 
climate and human resource practice variables were entered

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


107

in two steps after first entering the individual level 
climate variables.  The aggregate measures of the 
organizational climate did not add any appreciable increase 
in explained variance in job satisfaction,  over and above 
that already explained by the individual level climate 
variables.  Likewise,  although past work force strategy was 
significantly related to individual job satisfaction(£=-. 05, 
E<.05),  the increase in explained variance was small 
(R2=.005).  Similarly,  while the aggregate measure of task 
support was related to individual organizational commitment 
(£=.04,  p<.05),  the increase in explained variance was small 
(R2=.003).  None of the human resource practice variables or 
work force strategy variables added any increase in 
explanation after individual and aggregate measures of the 
organizational climate were entered into the regression for 
organizational commitment,  suggesting hypothesis 5 was not 
supported.

Hypothesis 6a predicted that high levels of aggregate 

work attitudes would be positively related to indicators of 
firm financial performance.  Table 23 contains the 
correlations of the two work attitudes with the financial 
indicators.  The results provided limited support for this 
hypothesis.

As with previous analyses regarding financial 

performance,  average ROA and average ROE were transformed by 
their natural logarithm prior to testing this hypothesis

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Table 22 Regression results of  individual  climate perceptions.  work 
force strategy.  human resource practices,  and aggregate climate
perceptions predicting  individual  level work attitudes.

108

Job Satisfaction
R:

AR:

P

Organizational Commitment

P 

Ar :

R:

.35*

.09*

.08*

.13*

Independent
Variable
Step 1
Socio-Emotional
Support
(Individual)
Means Emphasis 
(Individual)
Task Support 
(Individual)
Goal Emphasis 
(Individual)
Reward Orientation 
(Individual)
Step 2
Socio-Emotional 
Support  (Aggregate)
Means Emphasis 
(Aggregate)
Task Support 
(Aggregate)
Goal Emphasis 
(Aggregate)
Reward Orientation 
(Aggregate)
Step 3
Past Work 
Force Strategy
Future Work 
Force Strategy
Career
Enhancement
Practices
Work-Family
Assistance
Practices
*p<.05.

.09*

.14*

.08*

.11*

.14

-.02

-.03

-.001

.03

-.01

-.05*

-.02

-.03

.17*

.17*

.13* 

.39*

.39*

.001*

.17*

.01

-.01

.04*

.02

.01 

-.01

-.00

.01

.003*

.39*

-.01

.005*

.18*

.01 

.001

.39*

t

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Table 23 Correlations of organizational profitabi 1 itv measures with 
aggregate level work attitudes.

109

Variable

Job
Satisfaction
-.18
.08
.08

Organizational
Commitment
-.11
.14
.26*

Average ROA
Average ROE
A.M.  Best's Average Ratings
*p<.05.
with regression analysis.  Hierarchical regression analysis
was used in order to control for the product line.  The
results of these regressions are presented in Table 24.
Only job satisfaction  (jS=-.26, pc.05)  accounted for a
significant amount of variance in ROA  (R2=.06)  suggesting
mixed support for hypothysis 6a.  The negative beta weight
implies that contrary to the hypothesis,  high aggregate
Table 24 Regression results of average return on assets on 
aggregate -job satisfaction and aggregate organizational commitment.

Average Return on Assets

R:

Ar2

P

P

Ar:

.07*
.06*

.26*
-.26

Independent
Variable
Product line
Job Satisfaction
Product line
Organizational
Commitment
*p<.05.
levels of job satisfaction are negatively associated with 
ROA.  That is,  organizational profitability as measured by 
return on assets is lower in organizations where job 
satisfaction is high.

.07*
.13*
.07*
.10*

.26*
-.16

.07*
.03

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


110

The natural logarithm of average ROE was regressed on 

each of the work attitude variables using hierarchical 
regression as before with ROA.  The results of these 
regressions are presented in Table 25.  Neither of the two 
work attitudes predicted unique amounts of variance in ROE 
showing no support for hypothesis 6a.

satisfaction and aaareaate oraanizational commitment.

0
-.16
-.06

Independent
Variable
Product  line
Job Satisfaction
Product  line
Organizat ional 
Commitment
*p<.05.

Average Return on Equity
AR2
.03
.00

a r 2

0 

-.16 
-.01 

.03 
.00

R2
.03
.03
.03
.03

Average A.M.  Best's ratings were regressed on each of the 
work attitude variables with hierarchical regression.  These 
regressions are presented in Table 26.  Neither job 
satisfaction,  nor organizational commitment accounted for 
variance in the ratings,  showing no support for hypothesis 
6a.

Hypothesis 6b predicted that higher levels of aggregate 

work attitudes would relate to lower turnover,  however 
aggregate levels of organizational commitment would 
represent a stronger relationship than would aggregate job 
satisfaction to turnover.  Table 27 contains the

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Ill
Table 26 Regression results of average A.M.  Best's ratings on aggregate 
job satisfaction and aggregate organizational commitment.

0
.28*
.04

Independent
Variable
Product  line
Job Satisfaction
Product  line
Organizational
Commitment
*p<.05.

A.  M.  Best's Average Ratings
AR2

AR2

0

*0

0o

•

.00

.28*
.19

.08*
.04

R2
.08*
.08*
.08*
.12*

Table 27  Correlations of employee turnover with aggregate  -job 
satisfaction and aggregate organizational commitment.

Type of Turnover

Job
Satisfaction
-.13
.24
-.12
-.12

Organizational
Commitment
-.41*
.22
-.17
-.17

-.19
-.25
-.26

-.24
-.09
-.16

Total turnover  (n=73)
Total executive turnover  (n=31)
Total manager turnover  (n=31)
Total professional turnover 
(n=32)
Total  clerical turnover  (n=32)
Total voluntary turnover  (n=52)
Voluntary executive turnover 
(n=50)
Voluntary manager turnover 
(n=22)
Voluntary orofessional turnover 
(n=21)
Voluntary clerical turnover 
(n=23)
*p<.05.
correlations of total turnover,  total turnover by job type, 
voluntary turnover,  and voluntary turnover by job type with 
job satisfaction and organizational commitment.  Partial

-.43*

-.10

-.03

-.20

.33

.33

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


112
support was found for this hypothesis since organizational 
commitment was significantly correlated with total turnover 
(r=-.41, pc.001).  However,  job satisfaction was not 
correlated with overall turnover.  Turnover was regressed on 
job satisfaction and organizational commitment with 
hierarchical regression.  Consistent with the correlate 
analysis,  organizational commitment was the only significant 
predictor of total turnover  (£=-.54,  pc.05),  explaining 20 
percent of the variance  (R2=.20,),  showing support for 
hypothesis 6b.

Comprehensive Model Evaluation 

Hypothesis 7a proposed that organizational climate would 

mediate the effects of human resource practices on job 
satisfaction and organizational commitment.  Following 
Schmitt and Klimoski  (1989),  two hierarchical regressions 
(one for job satisfaction and one for organizational 
commitment)  were employed to test this hypothesis.  The 
organizational climate dimensions were entered first into 
the regression equation,  followed by the human resource 
practices.  In the first regression,  job satisfaction was 
regressed first on organizational climate,  followed by human 
resource practices.  Once organizational climate was entered 
into the regression  (R2=.27,  p<.05),  human resource 
practices  (AR2=.09,  p<.06)  did not account for a significant 
portion of variance in job satisfaction.  In the second 
regression,  organizational commitment was regressed first on

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


113

organizational climate,  followed by human resource 
practices.  Once organizational climate was entered into the 
regression  (R2=.79,  E<.05),  human resource practices 
(AR2=.00,  p>.05)  did not account for a significant portion 
of variance in organizational commitment.  Thus,  these 
results supported the Kopelman et al.,  (1990)  model.

Hypothesis 7b predicted that organizational climate and 
work attitudes would mediate the relationship between human 
resource practices and organizational outcomes.  The only 
organizational outcome that was related to HR practices was 
A.M.  Best's ratings.  Two regressions were computed.  First, 
organizational climate was regressed on Best's ratings, 
followed by career enhancement practices.  Second, 
organizational climate was regressed on Best's ratings, 
followed by work-family assistance practices.  After 
organizational climate was entered into the regression 
(R2=.19, p<.05),  career enhancement practices  (AR2=.05,
P <  .05)  accounted for a significant amount of variance in 
total organizational turnover.  Likewise,  once 
organizational climate was entered into the regression 
(R2=.19,  p<.05),  work-family assistance practices  (AR2=.05, 
P<.05)  also accounted for a significant amount of variance 
in total organizational turnover.  In sum,  these results did 
not support hypothesis 7b since organizational climate only 
partially mediates the relationship between human resource 
practices and organizational performance.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Hypothesis 7c predicted that work attitudes would mediate 

the relationship between organizational climate and 
organizational outcomes.  The one organizational outcome 
making this hypothesis testable was total turnover because 
turnover was the only outcome variable related to work 
attitudes.  Thus,  total turnover was regressed first on work 
attitudes,  followed by the organizational climate.  Once the 
work attitudes were entered into the regression  (R2=.20,
P<.05),  organizational climate  (£R2=.05,  p>.05)  did not 
account for a significant amount of variance in total 
organizational turnover.  Again,  this result supported the 
model by Kopelman et al.,  (1990).

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Chapter V 
DISCUSSION

The purpose of the present study was to test hypotheses 
about the relationships between human resource practices, 
organizational climate,  work attitudes,  and organizational 
performance.  Of particular interest was the notion that 
human resource practices would influence organizational 
climate which in turn would represent important contextual 
effects on employee work attitudes.  Overall,  substantial 
support was found for relationships among human resource 
practices,  organizational climate,  and work attitudes at the 
organizational level of analysis.  In addition,  aggregate 
organizational climate did affect aggregate organizational 
commitment and job satisfaction to a much lesser extent, 
suggesting the value of organizational climate as a 
contextual variable at the organizational level of analysis. 
However,  neither HR practices nor aggregate climate affected 
individual work attitudes,  once the effects of individual 
level perceptions of the climate were accounted for.  Thus, 
the cross-level effects of context were not supported, 
suggesting perhaps a more complex process than that 
reflected in my model  (Figure 2).  In addition,  there was 
limited support for the relationship of human resource 
practices,  organizational climate and work attitudes with 
organizational performance variables.  Thus,  there was mixed 
support for the Kopelman et al.,  (1990)  model,  suggesting

115

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


116

that modifications may be needed,  particularly for cross­
level effects and organizational effectiveness indicators. 
The remainder of this chapter is a discussion of each 
hypothesis presented in Chapter II,  followed by the 
limitations and contributions of this research.
Hypothesis 1(a)

Consistent with Ichniowski's  (1990)  expectation,  the 

human resource practices reported in this study were 
correlated with one another.  Although only 39 correlations 
(of the 240 potential)  were statistically significant,  the 
categorization method of grouping the practices according to 
the distinction between the career enhancement or work- 
family assistance categories resulted in a fairly consistent 
pattern of correlations.

This categorization methodology serves as an excellent 

starting point for organizing a wide variety of "best human 
resource practices"  into a useful framework.  One important 
result of using this categorization is that in a multi­
organization study,  the grouping of multiple practices into 
a smaller n um be r   of categories allows for the development of 
parsimonious research questions of their relationships with 
other organizational variables.  In this study,  this was a 
particular advantage because the sample size for 
organizational level analyses was only composed of 92  firms. 
Without a parsimonious method for grouping these 16 human 
resource practices,  the power of many of the statistical

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


117

tests regarding these variables would have been 
prohibitively low.
Hypothesis 1(b)

Although not significant in the correlate analysis,  past 

work force growth was positively associated with average 
A.M.  Best's ratings after controlling for the product 
market,  suggesting the more viable firms are those most 
likely to increase rather than decrease the total number of 
employees.  This is consistent with Cascio  (1993)  who noted 
most organizations that downsize do so under adverse 
financial conditions.  In contrast to predictions,  there 
were no significant relationships found between human 
resource practices,  work force strategy,  and ROA,  or ROE. 
However,  the use of career enhancement and work-family 
assistance practices was positively related to A.M.  Best's 
ratings of financial health.

The relationship between human resource practices and 

A.M.  Best's ratings supports previous work by Huselid  (1993) 
with regard to the contribution of the sophistication of 
human resource practices to organizational productivity. 
However,  this study expanded on Huselid's findings by 
investigating the effects of two sets of human resource 
practices  (career enhancement and work-family assistance 
practices)  on other indicators of financial performance.

One way of interpreting these results is to say that the 

very best organizations in the insurance industry  (as

[

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


118
determined by A.M.  Best's ratings)  also utilize innovative 
human resource practices.  The pattern of relationships 
between career enhancement,  work-family assistance 
practices,  and A.M.  Best's ratings might be explained by 
institutional theory  (Scott,  1987)  suggesting organizations 
may incorporate innovative human resource practices in order 
to maintain a positive image within its industry.  Future 
research should include longitudinal performance data to 
further determine whether human resource practices result 
from financial success,  or cause it.

These results also support Atcheson  (1991)  who suggested 

organizations need to take into account the needs of the 
changing work force,  and try to accommodate them through 
career enhancement and work-family assistance practices.
This study provided some evidence that organizations relying 
on innovative human resource practices are financially 
stronger than organizations not using those practices. 
Hypothesis 2(a)

Unlike Jones and James  (1979),  this research supports the 
conceptualization of organizational climate as existing at 
both the individual and organizational levels of analysis. 
Four of the five dimensions of the organizational climate 
reflected acceptable psychometric properties.  The one 
exception - means emphasis,  had a relatively low internal 
consistency estimate  (.68).  Future research should examine 
alternative measures of this dimension of the climate.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


119

However,  all five climate variables exhibited predictable 
differences across organizations.

The results linking work force strategy and human 
resource practices to the organizational climate have 
several potential interpretations.  The first is that the 
particular human resource practices included in this study 
do not contribute substantially to aggregate perceptions of 
the organizational climate.  Nonetheless,  it is apparent 
that firms viewed as being the best in the industry by A.M. 
Best engage in innovative human resource practices,  and have 
supportive task and rewards orientation climates. 
Alternatively,  the sample size of this study could have 
precluded the existence of a significant relationship 
between HR practices and the organizational climate.  A 
larger sample with more variability may have shown different 
results.

The second interpretation is that while innovative human 

resource practices,  per se,  do not contribute to the 
organizational climate,  a substantial portion of the 
variance in the climate is attributable to a contextual 
factor  (organizational work force strategy).  Future 
research should include antecedents such as leadership 
patterns,  technology,  centralization,  and structure  (James & 
Jones,  1976;  Payne & Pugh,  1976)  to more fully explain 
aggregate perceptions of the organizational climate.
Another possibility is that HR practices are not

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


120

meaningful predictors of aggregate organizational climate 
because individuals have different needs,  and also because 
organizations do not administer all practices to all 
individuals.  It may be discretionary administration of HR 
practices at the individual level that affects the 
psychological climate.  For example,  the child-care 
literature shows that an individual who does not have 
children is not affected by the presence of child care 
services  (Grover,  1991).

Alternatively,  top management acknowledgement of the 

presence of these practices may not always coincide with the 
availability of these practices to all employees.  In many 
instances,  the availability of these practices is dependent 
on the active participation by managers who administer human 
resource policies to employees.  It may be necessary to 
evaluate the managers who administer these policies and 
their attitudes toward those policies.  In addition, 
employee perceptions of the availability of these practices 
could have a significant impact on organizational climate. 
Hypothesis 2 (b)

The task support and reward orientation dimensions of 
organizational climate were correlated with A.M.  Best's 
ratings of long term financial health of insurance 
companies.  This suggests that employees in financially 
healthy organizations perceive substantial support via 
training and development,  and they also perceive direct

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


121

linkages between hard work and rewards.  Thus,  linkages 
between the organizational climate and organizational 
performance were supported.  These findings are consistent 
with Hansen's  (1987)  research,  and extend it to include 
industrial indicators of financial performance  (Best's 
ratings).  These results taken in conjunction with the 
relationship between future work force strategy and the 
organizational climate imply that growing organizations have 
a positive climate and are financially healthy.  Conversely, 
downsizing organizations have a negative climate,  and are 
less financially successful.

Similar to human resource practices,  none of the climate 
variables were related to ROA.  However,  the means emphasis 
climate was related to ROE,  both in the correlate and 
regression analyses.  This finding is interesting in several 
ways.  Means emphasis was the least reliable of all the 
climate measures.  Thus,  one potential explanation is that 
this relationship between means emphasis and ROE is 
spurious.  However,  it explains 8% of the variance in ROE. 
Another potential explanation is that by definition,  means 
emphasis suggests that employees know what is expected of 
them.  Thus,  organizations with a strong means emphasis 
climate achieve a higher return on equity in part because 
their employees know what to do.  This is not altogether 
different from Hansen's  (1987)  findings that effective 
communications and well-organized tasks relate to a higher

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


122

ROA.
Hypothesis 3

The analysis relating individual level work attitudes and 
individual level perceptions of the organizational climate 
support previous findings that the psychological climate in 
organizations is related to individual work attitudes  (James 
& James,  1991).  Employees with positive individual 
perceptions of the organizational climate are more satisfied 
with their job and committed to their organization.  In 
particular,  positive perceptions of the climate coincide 
with organizational commitment.

With the exception of socio-emotional support,  the 
relationship of the climate with both satisfaction and 
organizational commitment were very similar.  The strength 
of the relationship between socio-emotional support and 
organizational commitment supports the parallels drawn in 
this study between socio-emotional support and perceived 
organizational support  (POS;  Eisenberger et al.,  1986) 
whereby POS is highly correlated with organizational 
commitment  (Eisenberger et al.,  1990;  Shore & Tetrick,  1991; 
Shore & Wayne,  1993).
Hypothesis 4

The aggregation of job satisfaction and organizational 
commitment was supported.  In addition,  empirical tests 
depicted consistent and strong relationships between 
organizational climate and work attitudes at the

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


123

organizational level of analysis.

The correlations among the five dimensions of the 

organizational climate and work attitudes at the 
organizational  level of analysis reflect relations similar 
to those found at the individual level of analysis.  The 
main difference is that the organizational level 
correlations were somewhat stronger,  a characteristic 
consistent with data aggregation  (Ostroff,  1993).  An 
interesting result was the extremely large correlation 
between socio-emotional support and organizational 
commitment  (r=.82,  p<.05)  in addition to the large 
proportion of variance accounted for in organizational 
commitment  (79 percent)  relative to job satisfaction  (27 
percent).  This suggests that the POS to organizational 
commitment relationship occurs at both the individual and 
organizational  level,  such that supportive organizations 
have committed employees.

The relationship between socio-emotional support and 

organizational commitment appears substantially stronger at 
the organizational level of analysis.  One interpretation of 
this finding is methodological in nature.  Ostroff  (1993) 
noted if identical processes operate across levels of 
analysis,  the individual and organizational level 
correlations should be identical,  after correcting the 
individual correlations for attenuation due to 
unreliability.  In other words,  the stronger aggregate

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


124

relationship is due to error at the individual level of 
analysis  (individual deviations about the mean),  which is 
discarded when the data are aggregated.  Correcting the 
correlation between socio-emotional support and 
organizational commitment for attenuation produced an 
expected correlation of  .63 which is still substantially 
smaller than the organizational level sample correlation of 
.82.  Thus,  it appears that the relationship between socio- 
emotional support and organizational commitment at the 
individual and organizational levels of analysis may be due 
in part to different processes.  It could be that social 
contagion  (Pfeffer,  1992)  is stronger due to the 
organizational orientation of both socio-emotional support 
and organizational commitment.  That is,  people may be more 
influenced by their peers with regard to aspects of the 
organization than with regard to aspects of the job.

Interestingly,  the only significant predictor of job 
satisfaction at the organizational level of analysis was 
goal emphasis.  The importance of goals to individual job 
satisfaction has been discussed in detail by Locke  (1976), 
however,  this finding transfers that linkage to the 
organizational level of analysis.  The significance of the 
relationship between goal emphasis and job satisfaction 
strongly supports arguments forwarded by Latham  (1988) 
regarding the psychological make-up of workers for 1990 and 
beyond.  Latham argued that in the future,  employees will

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


125

not accept orders from authority figures  (i.e.,  managers) 
unless they can see how their work relates to the 
organizational goals,  as well as how those goals translate 
into personal opportunity.  Subsequently,  Latham noted the 
importance of linking organizational and individual goals, 
in order to gain the synergies necessary for organizational 
success.  The present results suggest that morale,  as 
measured by aggregate job satisfaction,  is also determined 
by the goal orientation of the organization.
Hypothesis 5

The cross-level analyses depicting individual work 

attitudes as being dependent on firm level human resource 
practices and organizational climate provided weak support 
for the effect of the organizational context on the 
individual within this study.  Although the aggregate 
climate variables and human resource practices were 
correlated with individual work attitudes,  the incremental 
variance accounted for by these contextual variables was 
quite small.

The lack of substantial cross-level effects of the 

aggregate organizational climate on individual level work 
attitudes leaves an important question unanswered - 
particularly,  what are the contextual causes of the 
phenomenon of individual work attitudes?  Perhaps the broad 
contextual level  (organizational)  addressed in this study is 
too distal in relation to the individual to have a

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


126

significant impact on individual work attitudes.  A more 
fruitful  avenue of research might draw from the work of 
George  (1991)  to investigate the effects of group, 
departmental,  or occupational contextual effects on 
individual work attitudes.
Hypothesis 6(a)

In general,  the relationship between work attitudes and 

financial performance were in direct contrast to those found 
by Ostroff  (1992).  In Ostroff's study,  job satisfaction 
related significantly and positively to organizational 
outcomes while in the present study,  job satisfaction 
exhibited a negative relationship with average return on 
assets.  Other than this finding,  the hypothesis linking work 
attitudes with organizational performance was not supported. 
Neither aggregate job satisfaction nor aggregate 
organizational commitment contributed significantly to ROE 
or A.M.  Best's ratings.  One explanation for this finding 
may be associated with the size of the organizations in this 
sample.  Aggregate effects of work attitudes on 
organizational outcomes in Ostroff's study may have been 
stronger than in this study simply because there were fewer 
employees within each of the schools in her study  (an 
average of 46 teachers per school)  as opposed to the wide 
range of size of the organizations in this study.  That is, 
attitudes in smaller organizations may more directly impact 
organizational effectiveness.  In addition,  two of the

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


outcomes in her study were subjective ratings provided by 
school administrators whereas in this study,  all 
organizational outcomes were objective performance 
indicators.  Likewise,  the difference between Ostroff's 
measure of job satisfaction  (affective;  "I  feel...")  and the 
measure included in this study  (cognitive;  "I think...") 
could also account for the differential findings.

A potential explanation for the negative relationship 
between job satisfaction and ROA is that organizations 
emphasizing higher profits may pay less attention to the 
intrinsic aspects of jobs held by their employees.  Such an 
emphasis might create higher levels of stress and less 
opportunities for growth or use of individual talents and 
abilities.  This interpretation is similar to Ostroff's 
(1992)  research which found high levels of job stress among 
teachers led to higher student dropout rates,  lower student 
satisfaction with teachers,  and greater turnover intentions 
among teachers.

Given the strength of the relationship between goal 
emphasis and job satisfaction,  future research might 
investigate potential moderating effects of goals on the job 
satisfaction-organizational performance relationship.
Future research could also benefit from the inclusion of a 
measure of job stress.

It is interesting to note that In Ostroff's  (1992)  study, 

aggregate satisfaction was positively related to student

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


128
satisfaction.  An extension of this would include outcomes 
such as customer satisfaction in future studies of aggregate 
work attitudes.
Hypothes i s 6(b)

Consistent with expectations,  total turnover was lower in 

organizations with committed employees.  As such,  this 
result is consistent with Hulin's  (1991)  position that 
commitment is a general rejection of the organization.  This 
result is also consistent with Ostroff's  (1992)  findings 
that organizational commitment had the strongest 
relationship with total organizational turnover.
In general,  the amount of variance in turnover accounted for 
by organizational commitment roughly matched the individual 
level correlations in previous research  (i.e.,  Mobley et 
al.,  1979).  Although it was hypothesized that aggregate 
organizational commitment would be a stronger correlate of 
turnover than job satisfaction,  the absence of a significant 
relationship between job satisfaction and turnover was not 
expected  (Horn et al.,  1993).  One explanation is that 
aggregate organizational commitment simply has a stronger 
relationship with organizational level turnover.  In other 
words,  job satisfaction may be important in explaining the 
individual decision to quit,  not turnover on average for the 
organization.  A potential methodological explanation for 
the findings is that organizational commitment has the 
stronger organizational level effect,  thereby "drowning out"

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


129
the effects of job satisfaction on organizational turnover. 
Hypothesis 7(a)

The last hypothesis tested relationships proposed by the 
Kopelman et al.,  (1990)  model.  The results provided partial 
support for the present application of the Kopelman et al., 
(1990)  model.  Organizational climate completely mediated 
the effects of human resource practices on aggregate work 
attitudes.  This suggests that HR practices do not directly 
affect work attitudes.  This finding suggests the climate 
serves as a perceptual filter which affects work attitudes, 
particularly commitment to the organization.
Hypothesis 7(b)

The relationship between human resource practices and 

Best's ratings was partially mediated by the organizational 
climate.  Thus,  only partial support for the Kopelman at 
al.,  (1990)  model was found.  Future research should attempt 
to identify other variables that may impact the relationship 
between HR practices and firm performance.  For example, 
organizational size  (e.g.,  number of employees),  or 
geographic location  (e.g.,  in a heavily unionized area) 
could have an important influence on this relationship. 
Hypothesis 7(c)

The effects of organizational climate on organizational 

turnover were completely mediated by work attitudes,  in 
particular,  by organizational commitment.  Thus,  this 
research supported the primary linkages between human

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


130

resource practices,  organizational climate and work 
attitudes proposed by Kopelman et al.,  (1990).  The fact 
that the organizations in this sample all came from the 
insurance industry could have restricted the range of 
variation in the financial performance data,  thereby 
limiting some of the conclusions regarding them.  Thus, 
future studies should test the Kopelman et al.,  (1990)  model 
in other industries.

Limitations

Given the cross-sectional nature of the survey data 

collected for this study,  it is difficult to ascertain the 
causal ordering of the variables in the conceptual model 
presented in Chapter I.  In addition,  mono-method bias could 
have affected the individual level analyses.  In addition, 
these findings,  while representative of the insurance 
industry,  may have limitations in their generalizability to 
other industries.  Data collection procedures were conducted 
by an organization other than the principal investigator of 
this study,  thus,  it is difficult to rule out data encoding 
errors,  or survey administration problems.  However,  a 
thorough review of survey procedures indicates every effort 
was made to maintain the integrity of the data.  Likewise, 
data for organizational effectiveness indicators came from 
secondary data sources,  which may not be completely 
accurate.  Thus,  while this study represented a unique 
opportunity to test a number of important questions,  there

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


131

are limitations in working with secondary source data. 
Finally,  the sampling procedure for selection of employees 
from each organization may be a limitation with regard to 
organizational representation,  although the sponsor 
organization  (LOMA)  has compared the demographic profile of 
the sample to the industry and found it to be fairly 
representative of numerous demographic indicators.

Another limitation of this study relates to what was not 

included in the model.  Several authors  (Field & Abelson, 
1980; Kopelman et al.,  1990)  have identified external 
influences such as social culture,  organizational culture, 
and political influence that impact the exogenous variables 
in Figure 1.  While factors such as the size and type of 
organization were included in this study,  the broader social 
and political context was not studied directly.  This 
omission creates limiting factors in this study's ability to 
fully test a model of organizational context.

The sample size of this study precluded the testing of a 
comprehensive model including all study variables.  While 
the results provided initial evidence of important linkages 
across organizational variables,  it was impossible to 
completely examine all relationships concurrently.

Conclusions and Implications 

In addition to the limitations noted above,  this study 
had a number of strengths.  In particular,  data for this 
study came from multiple sources.  It drew on a large data

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


132
base containing objective and subjective data from employees 
and managers from the organizations under study.  Product 
market variations and financial performance data were drawn 
from independent data.  Thus,  this research offers unique 
insights into how the internal and external environment work 
together to explain organizational phenomena.

This research resulted in a number of important 

contributions to both researchers and practitioners.  First, 
organizations are clearly differentiable according to their 
human resource practices,  organizational climate and work 
attitudes.  These differences translate into variability in 
organizational performance although the effects are not 
consistently strong.  Organizations that had better 
performance  (according to A.M.  Best)  relied on both career 
enhancement and work-family assistance practices.  They also 
had a positive task support,  reward orientation,  and means 
emphasis climate.  Furthermore,  very profitable 
organizations may have lower morale  (lower aggregate job 
satisfaction).  The integration of these findings also lends 
support to organizational theorists  (Argyris,  1964;  Likert, 
1967; Tsui et al.,  1993)  who argued that predictable 
differences exist across organizations in terms of 
practices,  climate,  and work attitudes.

Second,  socio-emotional support represented a 

particularly strong organizational level variable.  Fourteen 
percent of the variance in the aggregate socio-emotional

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


support variable was attributable to the organization 
effect.  The strength of this variable at the organizational 
level of analysis coupled with the parallel between it and 
perceived organizational support  (Eisenberger et al.,  1986) 
has important implications for future research.  Perceived 
organizational support has been linked with employee 
citizenship behavior  (Shore & Wayne,  1993)  as well as with 
organizational commitment and work satisfaction  (Shore & 
Tetrick,  1991).  In this study,  socio-emotional support 
represented the strongest predictor of organizational 
commitment.  The strength of the relationship between 
organizational commitment and socio-emotional support 
provides greater support for the work of Eisenberger et al., 
(1986),  who noted that treating employees well is a 
significant factor in developing employee commitment.
Future research should focus on a more complete explanation 
of the processes contributing to this concept.  One area for 
future research might be the study of procedural and 
distributive justice in the administration of organizational 
practices and their impact on employee perceptions of 
support.

Third,  the relationship between future work force 

strategy and the organizational climate,  as well as the 
climate to Best's ratings relationship has important 
implications for organizations.  Consistent with the 
downsizing literature  (Cascio,  1993),  these results suggest

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


134

that organizations planning to grow have a very positive 
organizational climate.  Conversely,  the organizational 
climate in organizations planning to downsize is 
substantially negative.  These results support previous 
findings that outlined the importance of the process of 
layoffs and downsizing  (Brockner et al.,  1989;  Cascio,
1993).  Future research should investigate potential 
moderating effects of organizational actions to minimize the 
effects of employee population changes on the organizational 
climate.  Potential moderators might include employee 
perceptions of procedural and distributive justice,  in 
addition to measures of organizational attempts to minimize 
the impact of downsizing  (e.g.,  outplacement services,  early 
retirement offerings) .

Fourth,  as Ichniowski  (1990)  noted,  it appears that 

meaningful comparisons across organizations are possible 
when evaluating human resource practices holistically,  as 
opposed to individually.  Categorization methods such as the 
one used in this study are necessary in order to conduct 
parsimonious research of organizations.  This study 
represents a positive step toward developing a useful 
categorization method of HR practices.  Future research 
should incorporate a broader range of HR practices and 
policies.  In particular,  compensation practices should be 
included in future research.  Given the importance of the 
reward orientation climate,  and its conceptual foundation in

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


135

motivational theory  (Vroom,  1964),  important linkages 
between compensation practices and this concept are likely.

Finally,  the negative relationship between job 

satisfaction and return on assets provides important 
information for organizations.  Literature reviewed in 
Chapter 1  (Atcheson,  1991;  Cascio,  1993)  noted that 
organizations are asking fewer employees to do more with 
less.  The negative relationship between morale and 
profitability may be a direct result of this trend.  While 
in the short term such a philosophy may pay dividends, 
organizations may need to consider the long term effects on 
employees and ultimately on the bottom line of performance.

This study resulted in several findings that have 

important implications for the organizational literature. 
First,  although aggregate climate and human resource 
practices did not have substantial effects on individual 
work attitudes,  this research suggests that important 
aggregate effects do exist.  Group,  occupational,  or 
departmental level contextual effects may have a more 
important influence on the individual.  This is not 
inconsistent with a social information processing 
perspective  (Salancik & Pfeffer,  1978)  although it does 
suggest that individuals may seek information from the 
environment in closest proximity to them.  This could be 
particularly true in larger organizations,  where departments 
and/or work groups take on special meaning to the

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


136

individual.

Second,  growing organizations within this sample appeared 
to be following the suggested trends in the human resource 
practice literature  (Atcheson,  1991)  by accommodating the 
changing needs of their work force through innovative HR 
practices.  Organizations that fail to do so may also be 
unable to take advantage of diverse talent available in the 
labor market.  In the future,  it will be important to 
observe how these practices impact the flow of talent into 
and out of organizations.

Third,  more supportive organizations  (i.e.,  socio- 

emotional support climate)  have more committed employees. 
This is extremely important in understanding the impact of 
organizational actions on employees and a parallel may be 
drawn to social exchange theory  (Blau,  1964).  When 
employees on the whole  (aggregate)  feel strong support from 
their organization,  they in turn feel obligated to be 
committed to the organization.  This commitment,  however, 
results primarily in lower turnover,  as opposed to higher 
profits.

Finally,  this study provided valuable information about 
the Kopelman et al.,  (1990)  model and the linkages between 
human resource practices,  organizational climate,  work 
attitudes and organizational performance.  Evidence was 
provided that organizational climate with its foundation in 
motivational theory may have a stronger relationship than

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


work attitudes with organizational performance.  This 
suggests that organizations could benefit from a greater 
understanding of the antecedents of organizational climate.

137

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Appendix A 

Items from the LOMA 100 Survey 

Employee Survey Items 

Item numbers correspond with number on original  survey.
Job satisfaction
Generally,  I think my job is —
59.  challenging.
60.  important.
61.  a good match for my skills and abilities.
62.  a good match for my career interests.
63.  rewarding in ways other than money.
Organizational commitment
45.  If I  had it to do over again,  I would still go to work for this 
company.
46.  I  feel a high  level  of loyalty to this company.
47.  I would have little or no regrets about  leaving  this company.
48.  If asked,  I would be willing to make an extra effort  to help this
company.
49.  I  am proud to be an employee of this company.
Task support
134.  Overall,  I  am satisfied with my training opportunities.
135.  I received sufficient training to do my job.
136.  Education and training is an intergal part of this company's 
future.
137.  I have had sufficient/adequate job-related training.
138.  If I  felt that I  needed more job-related training,  the company 
would provide it.
139.  I  am satisfied with the number of training and development programs 
available to me.
140.  I am satisfied with the quality of training and development 
programs available to me.

138

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


139

Socio-emotional  support 
Generally I  feel this company...
104.  cares about  its employees - not just about profits and losses.
105.  values employees who have worked here a long time.
106.  values employee loyalty.
110.  treats employees as an investment  - key to its  future success. 
Reward orientation
95.  Generally,  I  feel this company rewards employees who make an extra 
effort.
There is a strong link between how well  I perform my job and the 
likelihood of receiving  ..
102.  a raise  in pay/salary.
103.  high performance appraisal ratings.
Means Emphasis
39.  I  understand this company’s  lines of authority.
41.  I  understand the boundaries of my authority.
94.  I  know what  is expected of me on my  job.
96.  I  understand how my job performance  is measured.
Goals Emphasis
98.  Company goals and objectives  are  clearly communicated  to employees.
99.  I understand how the  work I do contributes 
to the company  achieving
its goals.
100.  I  am committed to the company's goals.
101.  Employees of this company work toward a common goal.

Human Resource Practice  Items

17.  Does your company have formal programs  (e.g.,  mentoring)  focused on 
advancement opportunities  for women and minorities.
18.  To help employees balance work and family/home responsibilities, 
which of these options  are offered?  (Please check all that apply.)
    flextime
    job sharing

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


140

    -telecommuting
    extended leaves  (1-3 months)
    extended leavs  (more than 3 months)
    part-time tracks
    child care/referral
    on-site child care
    sick child care,  sick days  for sick children
    paternity leave
    elder care referral

19.  What kinds of  initiatives does your company have to reward or 
challenge employees in areas where limited advancement opportunities 
exist?  (Please check all that apply.)
    job rotation
    dual-career tracks
    special  job assignments/task forces

20.  Do you offer remedial training for entry level employees?

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Appendix B

j._—

Table containing means,  standard deviations,  and correlations among all
oraanizational  level variables •
N
Variable

1

2

3

4

5

141

M
(SD)
2.72
(.18)
2.89
(.16)
3.06
(.10)
2.64
(.22)
2.71
(.26)
3.09
(.14)
3.12
(.19)
1.92
(.90)
2.11
(1.17)
1.97
(.66)
2.16
(.75)
2.33
(.76)
2.17
(.85)
2.00
(.47)
2.11
(.56)
2.33
(.67)

1.  Task Support

2.  Goals Emphasis

3.  Means Emphasis

4.  Reward 
Orientation
5.  Socio-Emotional 
Support
6.  Job Satisfaction

7.  Organizational 
Commitment
8.  Type

9.  Size

10.  Executive 
Population  (past)
11.  Manager 
Popu1at ion  (past)
12.  Technical 
Population  (past)
13.  Clerical 
Population  (past)
14.  Executive 
Population  (future)
15.  Manager 
Population  (future)
16.  Technical 
Popu1at ion  (Future)
*E<.05

92

92

92

92

92

92

92

90

76

75

75

74

74

76

75

75

.89

.48*

.53*

.48*

.59*

.38*

.69*

.13

.27*

.01

-.01

.15

-.07

.20

.25*

.25*

.74

.59*

.47*

.60*

.47*

.69

.32*

.24*

.01

-.13

.09

-.01

.11

.22*

.17

.64

.55*

.42*

.34*

.50*

.17

.18

.03

-.02

.00

.03

.12

.17

.02

.78

.64*

.38*

• 61*

.03*

.33*

.26*

.10

.18

.01

.25*

.36*

.22*

.87

.40*

.82*

.13

.17

.17

.12

.25*

.05

.33*

.35*

.36*

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


142

1

2

3

4

5

.27*

.22

.04

.30*

.12

.20*

.08

.04

.23*

.24

-.07

.09

.24*

.15

.05

.10

.07

.12

.11

.02

.22*

-.02

.09

-.12

.09

.14

.09

.03

-.01

.01

.07

.07

.09

-.04

.05

.02

.11

.03

.12

.08

.08

.15

-.02

.12

.21*

-.03

.10

.11

.12

.04

-.01

-.13

.07

.03

.29*

.41*

.19

.33*

.01

.28*

.07

.13

.24*

.24*

.04

.11

.22*

.25*

-.03

.11

.09

.23*

.04

.20

.43*

.01

.18

-.09

.02

.11

.18

.01

.07

.13

.18

.06

.08

.03

.27*

.05

Variable

17.  Clerical 
Population 
(Future)
18.  Past Strategy-

19 .  Future 
Strategy
20.  Career 
Enhancement
21.  Work-Family 
Assistance
22.  Mentor

23.  Flex-time

24.  Job sharing

25.  Tele-commuting

26.  Extended Leave 
(1-3 months)
27.  Extended Leave 
(>3months)
28.  Part-time work 
opportunities
29.  Child care 
referral service
30.  On-site child 
care
31.  Sick child 
care
32.  Paternity 
leave
33.  Elder care

34.  Job rotation

*p<.05.

M
(SD)
2.31
(.74)

8.58
(2.42)
8.75
(2.05)
2.14
(1.39)
2.54
(2.37)
.12
(.33)
.49
(.50)
.14
(.35)
.07
(.27)
.45
(.50)
.21
(.41)
.26
(.44)
.27
(.45)
.01
(.10)
.27
(.45)
.19
(.40)
.15
(.36)
.21
(.41)

N

74

74

74

92

92

73

92

92

92

92

92

92

92

92

92

92

92

92

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


143

Variable

35.  Special 
projects
36.  Dual career 
track
37.  Remedial 
training for entry 
level
38.  ROA90

39.  ROA91

40.  ROA92

41.  ROE90

42.  ROE91

43.  ROE92

44.  BEST90

45.  BEST91

46.  BEST92

47.  Average ROA

48.  Average ROE

49.  Average A.M. 
Best's
50.  Total turnover

51.  Total 
executive 
turnover
52.  Total manager 
turnover
*p<.05.

M
(SD)
.03
(.18)
.37
(.53)
.26
(.13)

9.08
(.95)
9.26
(2.5)
8.25
(1.0)
16.2
(23.6)
13.8
(18.6)
12.5
(14.3)
8.38
(.99)
8.25
(1.03)
8.05
(.98)
8.86
(1.01)
14.08
(14.4)
8.18
(.98)
17.02
(9.2)
2.51
(3.47)

4.67
(4.81)

N

92

92

75

72

73

73

71

74

74

66

68

71

73

74

71

73

31

32

1

-.09

.16

-.14

.09

-.17

.09

.08

.02

.23*

.27*

.30*

.36*

-.08

.14

.32*

2

.06

.06

.11

.09

.02

.06

.17

.11

.16

.12

.21

.21

.06

.20

.16

3

.01

-.01

4

5

.01

.03

.01

.10

.24*

-.07

-.15

.09

-.17

-.17

.04

-.21

.02

.27*

-.01

.20

.15

.03

.17

.21

.05

.29*

.18

.30*

.34*

.13

-.22*

.18

-.01

-.01

.29*

.10

.22

.30

-.17

-.16

-.09

.28*

.12

.13

.28*

.11

.21

-.27*

-.21

-.04

-.23*

-.37*

.14

.36*

.21

-.16

-.13

-.03

.18

.05

.18

-.05

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Variable

53.  Total
professional
turnover
54.  Total clerical 
turnover
55.  Total voluntary 
turnover
56.  Voluntary 
executive turnover
57.  Voluntary 
manager turnover
58.  Voluntary
professional
turnover
59.  Voluntary 
clerical turnover
*p<.05.

M
(SD)
4.67
(4.81)

8.02
(6.75)
16.15
(10.9)
15.14
(9.55)
1.56
(4.35)
3.47
(4.65)

5.88
(6.89)

N

32

32

37

50

22

21

23

144

1

2

3

4

5

-.16

-.13

-.03

.05

-.05

-.23

-.18

-.29*

-.02

-.01

-.11

-.27

-.07

.23

-.12

-.13

-.15

.02

.19

-.02

-.00

-.19

-.24

-.20

.14

-.16

-.27

-.24

.15

.18

-.21

-.16

-.22

-.08

-.12

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


6

7

8

9

10

11

12

145

.89

.62*

.20
-.08
-.14

.87

.21
.24*
.11

-.26*

-.10

.14

-.05

.23*

-.12

-.19

.01

.00

-.03
-.24*

-.08

-.04

.05

.11

.29*

-.10

.16

-.05

.08

-.01

.00

.01

.50*

.29*

.48*

.22*

.55*

.58*

.39*

.60*

.26*

.45*

.45*

.36*

-.06

.28*

-.13

-.11

.33*

.39*

.29*

.07

.32*

-.05

-.11

.33*

.21

-.21
.01*

-.13

-.02

-.27*
-.03
.04
.11

.05
.34*

.01

.14

-.01
-.01
.18
.22*

-.06
-.06

-.22*

-.31*

-.07
-.19
-.03
-.16

.03
-.07

.67*
.40*

.79*
.41*

.34*

.50*

.03
.31*
.43*
.2

.14

.19

.22
.17
.07
.09

-.04

.13

.16
-.01
.05
.13

.30*

.80*
.36*

.12

.17

.11
.12
-.05
.06

Variable
6.  Job
Satisfaction
7.  Organizational 
Commitment
8.  Type
9.  Size
10.  Executive 
Population  (past)
11.  Manager 
Population  (past)
12.  Technical 
Population  (past)
13.  Clerical 
Population  (past)
14.  Executive
Population
(future)
15.  Manager 
Population 
(future)
16.  Technical 
Population 
(Future)
17.  Clerical 
Population 
(Future)
18.  Past Strategy
19.  Future 
Strategy
20.  Career 
Enhancement
21.  Work-Family 
Assistance
22.  Mentor
23.  Flex-time
24.  Job sharing
25.  Telecommuting
*p<.05.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Variable
26.  Ex-tended 
Leave  (1-3 
months)
27.  Extended 
Leave  (>3 
months)
28.  Part-time 
work
opportunities
29.  Child care 
referral  service
30.  On-site 
child care
31.  Sick child 
care
32.  Paternity 
leave
33.  Elder care
34.  Job rotation
35.  Special 
projects
36.  Dual  career 
track
37.  Remedial 
training  for 
entry level 
worker
38.  ROA90
39.  ROA91
40.  ROA92
41.  ROE90
42.  ROE91
43.  ROE92
44.  BEST90
45.  BEST91
46.  BEST92
*p<.05.

6
-.05

.07

-.05

-.09

.04

.15

-.06

-.18
-.07
.10

-.02

-.14

-.19
-.13
-.01
-.01
.05
.13
.04
.12
.08

7

.01

.12

.12

.08

.12

.02

-.01

.14
.11
-.03

.16

-.12

-.02
-.16
.11
.01
.07
.25*
.13
.26*
.32*

146

9

.14

10
.25

11
.12

12
.07

8
-.19

-.19

-.17

.22*

.16

.20

.20

-.06

-.03

-.25*

.43*

.03

-.07

.01

-.11

-.14

-.30*
-.05
-.12

-.10

.12

-.09
.01
-.09
.01
.11
.10
-.19
-.22
-.25*

.19

.19

.26*

.24*
.17
-.08

.32*

.22*

.01
.02
.04
.21
.19
.30*
.39*
.52*
.49*

-.17

-.10

.12

.33*
.16
-.20

.11

-.02

.08
-.03
.07
-.07
-.19
.01
.21
.25*
.31*

.18

.04

.09

.26*
.08
-.13

-.11

-.09

.21
-.18
.10
-.06
-.22
-.13
.10
.01
.04

.10

.16

.10

.10

-.01

.08

.19
.08
.18

.12

-.12

.02
.03
-.17
-.03
-.30*
-.15
.11
.14
.12

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


6
-.18
.08
.08

-.13

.24

7
-.11
.14
.26*

-.41*

.22

-.12

-.17

-.12

-.17

8
-.05
.09
-.22

-.16

.50*

.13

.13

-.24

-.19

-.02

.26

.26

.33

-.27

.04

.08

-.09

-.16

.33

-.11

-.03

-.08

-.01

-.43*

-.20

-.39*

.13

9

.03
.29*
.46*

-.18

.26

-.06

-.06

.08

.07

.01

.03

147

10
.02
-.11
.26*

-.14

-.21

.31

.31

.23

11
-.05
-.18
.05

.02

-.15

.01

.01

12
-.01
-.20
.10

-.05

-.26

.04

.04

-.02

-.11

-.45*

-.27

-.10

-.26

-.01

.03

-.08

.35

.31

-.09

-.05

-. 15 _

.28

-.07

-.04

Variable
47.  Average ROA
48.  Average ROE
49.  Average A.M. 
Best's Ratings
50.  Total 
turnover
51.  Total 
executive 
turnover
52.  Total
manager
turnover
53.  Total
pofessional
turnover
54.  Total
clerical
turnover
55.  Total 
voluntary 
turnover
56.  Voluntary
executive
turnover
57.  Voluntary 
manager turnover
58.  Voluntary
professional
turnover
59.  Voluntary
clerical
turnover
*£<.05.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


13

14

15

16

17

18

19

148

.39*

.46*

.41*

.38*

.85*

.48*

-.05

.08

.08
-.01
-.01
.11
.06

.17

-.04

-.11

-.16

.13
-.04
.23
-.01

.62*

.44*

.44*

.45*

.77*
.03

.22*

.18
.12
.16
.21
.17

.14

.06

.12

.63*

.61*

.58*

.84*

-.06

.35*

.17
.11
.18
.21
.27*

.23*

.19

.17

.81*

.46*

.39*

.89*
.89*
 •1 -.10
.13
.19

0
0

0

.01
.06
.11
.07
.10

.14

.16

.02

-.03
.06
.11
.08
.02

.10

.09

.01

-.25*

-.23*

-.24*

-.21

•or

.01 I
.07
.22*
.01

o .05
.14
.11
.46*
.22*
.17
-.06

.03
.15
.12
.05

.55*

.01

.20

.18
.07
.03
.13
.18

.21

.03

-.01

-.12

.05
.08
.32
.05

-.07

.26*

.08
.10
.16
.16
.16

.18

.15

.08

-.27*

.02
.14
.29*
.05

Variable
13.  Clerical 
Population  (past)
14.  Executive 
Population  (future)
15.  Manager 
Population  (future)
16.  Technical 
Population  (Future)
17.  clerical 
Population  (Future)
18.  Past Strategy

19.  Future Strategy

20.  Career 
Enhancement
21.  Work-Family 
Assistance
22.  Mentor
23.  Flex-time
24.  Job sharing
25.  Tele-commuting
26.  Extended Leave 
(1-3 months)
27.  Extended Leave 
(>3months)
28.  Part-time work 
opportunities
29.  Child care 
referral service
30.  On-site child 
care
31.  Sick child care
32.  Paternity leave
33.  Elder care
34.  Job rotation
*p<.05

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Variable
35.  Special 
projects
36.  Dual  career 
track
37.  Remedial 
training for entry 
level worker
38.  ROA90
39.  ROA91
40.  ROA92
41.  ROE90
42.  ROE91
43.  ROE92
44.  BEST90
45.  BEST91
46.  BEST92
47.  Average ROA
48.  Average ROE
49.  Average A.M. 
Best's Ratings
50.  Total  turnover
51.  Total 
executive 
turnover
52.  Total manager 
turnover
53.  Total
professional
turnover
54.  Total  clerical 
turnover
*p<.05.

13
-.04

-.11

-.03

-.08
.08
-.11
.05
-.24*
-.22
.15
.14
.07
.07
-.15
.11

.14
-.26

.18

.18

.01

14
.01

.01

-.07

.18
.04
.18
-.12
-.14
-.10
-.06
-.07
-.10
.14
-.15
-.03

-.08
-.11

-.07

-.07

-.10

15
-.04

-.12

-.16

.15
-.01
.16
-.01
-.10
-.05
.03
-.03
.05
-.09
-.06
.06

-.17
-.26

-.16

-.16

16
-.21

.02

-.24*

.31*
-.02
.32
.03
-.17
.02
.22
.06
.10
.17
-.05
.13

-.16
-.33

-.28

-.28

17
-.18

-.05

-.14

.16
-.10
.17
-.03
-.31*
.01
.10
-.01
.01
.01
-.15
.04

-.32*
-.19

-.31

-.31

-.26

-.27

-.39*

18
-.05

-.03

-.09

.13
-.02
-.04
-.03
-.30*
-.16
.18
.16
.16
.01
-.20
.16

.01
-.26

.16

.16

.03

149

19
-.14

-.04

-.19

.24*
-.04
.25*
-.03
-.23
-.02
.11
-.01
.03
.12
-.12
.07

-.22
-.27

-.26

-.26

-.32

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


150

13
-.15

14
-.24

15
-.40*

16
-.42*

17
-.38*

18
-.28

19
-.43*

.02

-.19

-.32*

-.26*

-.46*

-.05

-.40*

-.06

.14

.07

-.19

-.42*

-.01

.11

-.08

-.09

-.03

-.05

-.18

-.32

-.31

-.37

-.10

.21

.04

-.09

-.08

-.35

Variable
55.  Total
voluntary
turnover
56.  Voluntary 
executive turnover

57.  Voluntary 
manager turnover
58.  Voluntary
professional
turnover
59.  Voluntary 
clerical turnover
*p<.05

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


20

21

22

23

24

25

26

151

.45*

.52*
.46*
.21*
.15
.27*

.21*

.28*

.38*

.22*

.04
.25*
.20
.59*
.25*

.70*

.50*

.12
.64*
.62*
.45*
.54*

.66*

.57*

.63*

.02

.47*
.59*
.50*
.14
.06

.30*

.02

-.08
.01
.19
-.06
-.04

.01
-.03
.17
.09
.04

-.12
.17
.19
-.09

.17

.19

.17

.29*
.13
.28*

.27*

.31*

.43*

.35*
.19

.47*

.40*

.17

.07

.44*

.30*

.19

.31*

.10

.32*

.31*

-.10

-.04

-.03

-.10

-.27*
.09
.17
.07
-.08

.21

.21

-.03
-.10
-.15
-.11
-.04

.23*
.34*
.19
.25*
.19

.30*

.11

.01
.10
.15
-.07
-.01

.17
.43*
.26*
.10
-.07

.07

.09

.02
-.08
.08
.06
.16

.19
.06
.22*
.06
-.05

.11

-.03

.03
-.02
.08
.08
.17

.22*
.21*
.22*
.12
.20*

.14

-.13

.09
-.01
.17
.16
.05

Variable
20.  Career 
Enhancement
21.  Work-Family 
Assistance
22.  Mentor
23.  Flex-time
24.  Job sharing
25.  Tele-commuting
26.  Extended Leave 
(1-3 months)
27.  Extended Leave 
(>3months)
28.  Part-time work 
opportunit ies
29.  Child care 
referral service
30.  On-site child 
care
31.  Sick child care
32.  Paternity leave
33.  Elder care
34.  Job rotation
35.  Special 
projects
36.  Dual career 
track
37.  Remedial 
training for entry 
level worker
38.  ROA90
39.  ROA91
40.  ROA92
41.  ROE90
42.  ROE91
*p<.05.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Variable
43.  ROE92
44.  BEST90
45.  BEST91
46.  BEST92
47.  Average ROA
48.  Average ROE
49.  Average A.M. 
Best's Ratings
50.  Total 
turnover
51.  Total 
executive 
turnover
52.  Total manager 
turnover
53.  Total
professional
turnover
54.  Total 
clerical turnover
55.  Total 
voluntary 
turnover
56.  Voluntary
executive
turnover
57.  Voluntary 
manager turnover
58.  Voluntary
professional
turnover
59.  Voluntary 
clerical turnover
*p<.05.

24
.19
.09
.13
.09
-.05
.18
.09

-.04

.14

-.12

-.12

-.15

-.15

20
.14
.21
.27*
.33*
.05
.02
.30*

.03

21
.10
.32*
.35*
.35*
.03
.12
.34*

.11

22
-.03
-.14
-.15
-.09
-.14
-.09
-.13

23
.14
.29*
.35*
.32*
.13
.02
.33*

.04

.05

-.28

-.19

-.16

-.05

-.11

-.11

.07

-.01

.04

.04

.13

.16

.25

.01

-.15

-.10

-.12

-.17

-.09

.03

-.17

.12

.12

.15

.28

.14

.18

.06

.39

-.13

-.13

-.09

.31

.04

.05

-.04

-.06

152

26
-.05
.08
.06
.11
.08
.09
.10

.23*

25
.11
.04
.08
.09
.02
.16
.08

-.02

.15

-.25

0
G
 •1
O
-.08

-.01

.16

-.10

.17

-.04

I

•o

-.06

-.10

.16

.06

.21

-.01

.21

.11

-.14

-.04

-.15

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


27

28

29

30

31

32

33

153

.35*

.15

-.05

.27*

.27*

.36*
-.01
-.10

.18

.11

-.19
-.14
-.13
.09
.04
.01
.13
.16
.13
-.21
.07
.13

.30*

-.06

.14

.14

.23*
.12
.03

.19

-.08

.03
.16
.07
-.02
.08
.08
.25*
.26*
.24*
.15
.07
.27*

.17

.12

.38*

.42*
.11
.16

.31*

.01

.14
-.01
.24*
.12
.04
.20
.17
.20
.27*
.11
.15
.22*

-.06

.21

-.04
-.05
-.02

.32

.06

-.37
-.15
-.25*
.02
.09
.08
-.05
.09
.11
-.32*
.08
.06

.31*

-.05
-.13
-.11

-.06

.07

-.02
-.10
.08
.06
-.11
-.14
.32*
.26*
.17
-.06
-.06
.22

.17
.15
-.09

.17

.02

-.01
-.06
.09
-.05
-.09
.05
.18
.15
.14
-.01
-.04
.13

.01*
.09

.16

-.05

.08
-.03
.13
.09
-.04
-.01
.20
.21
.27*
.05
.03
.25*

Variable
27.  Extended 
Leave  (>3months)
28.  Part-time 
work
opportunit ies
29.  Child care 
referral  service
30.  On-site child 
care
31.  Sick child 
care
32.  Paternity 
leave
33.  Elder care
34.  Job rotation
35.  Special 
projects
36.  Dual career 
track
37.  Remedial 
training for 
entry  level 
worker
38.  ROA90
39.  ROA91
40.  ROA92
41.  ROE90
42.  ROE91
43.  ROE92
44.  BEST90
45.  BEST91
46.  BEST92
47.  Average ROA
48.  Average ROE
49.  Average A.M. 
Best's Ratings
*p<.05.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


154

Variable
50.  Total turnover
51.  Total executive 
turnover
52.  Total manager 
turnover
53.  Total
professional
turnover
54.  Total  clerical 
turnover
55.  Total voluntary 
turnover
56.  Voluntary 
executive turnover
57.  Voluntary 
manager turnover
58.  Voluntary
professional
turnover
59.  Voluntary 
clerical turnover
*p<.05.

27
-.07
-.15

-.23

-.23

28
.06
-.15

.10

.10

29
.10

H
•1

-.07

-.07

30
-.03
-.08

-.10

-.10

-.20

-.03

-.06

-.16

.24

-.08

.44*

-.26

-.29

.08

-.07

-.04

.36

.02

.32*

.15

-.04

-.01

.01

.45*

.53*

.00

.00

.00

31
.23
-.11

.05

.05

.13

.50*

.01

0
0

0
 •1
-.01

32
.01
-.15

-.23

-.23

-.13

.31

.09

-.17

-.20

.05

-.01

33
-.01
-.22

.02

.02

.01

-.12

-.05

-.04

.06

.06

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


34

35

36

37

38

39

40

155

.06

.46*

.02

.18
-.01
.25*
-.01
.02
.23*
.20
.21
.31*
.13

.10

.11

.13
.02
.15
-.04
-.12
-.02
.02
.04
.07
.11

.04

-.11
.02
.10
-.09
.03
.28*
.24*
.29*
.33*
.01

-.08
.05
.03
-.11
-.15
-.19
.05
.07
.12
.03

.08 1
.26*

D
•oC

.05

.07 I
.31*

D
•MC

.10

-.19
-.02

oo

-.07
.26
• -.09
• .11

.47* oo

-.04
.33

-.05

.47* oo

•

• -.04

HH

.24

-.30

-.25

.41*

oo

.33

• .04
.38*
.00
• .17
.29*
.63*

.50*

.22

.00

C
o
O

.04
.49*
.09
-.07
.01
.18
.14
.15
.51*

HO

•1

-.06
.12
-.18
.01
-.01
-.05

.84*
.02 0
 •1
.01
.14

.01
.21

-.02

-.02

.16

-.45*

-.40*

.23

.26*
.09

.11

.11

.31

-.13

.01

.01

-.26*
-.12
.24*
.22
.15
.24*
.46*

1

O

v
D

.27*

-.13
.21

.20

.20

.37

-.14

-.26

.07

Variable
34.  Job rotation
35.  Special 
projects
36.  Dual career 
track
37.  Remedial 
training for entry 
level worker
38.  ROA90
39.  ROA91
40.  ROA92
41.  ROE90
42.  ROE91
43.  ROE92
44.  BEST90
45.  BEST91
46.  BEST92
47.  Average ROA

48.  Average ROE
49.  Average A.M. 
Best's Ratings
50.  Total turnover
51.  Total executive 
turnover
52.  Total manager 
turnover
53.  Total
professional
turnover
54.  Total clerical 
turnover
55.  Total voluntary 
turnover
56.  Voluntary 
executive turnover
57.  Voluntary 
manager turnover
*p<.05.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


156

34 
.50* 

35
.00

36
-.01

37
-.25

38
-.03

39
.07

40
.23

.37 

.00

.16

.31

.22

.23

.44*

Variable
58.  Voluntary
professional
turnover
59.  Voluntary 
clerical turnover
*p<.05.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


41

42

43

44

45

46

47

157

.42
.05
.11
.16
.00
-.10
.77
-.03

.32*
.07

-.34

-.34

-.30

-.09

.07

.29

Variable
41.  ROE90
42.  ROE91
43.  ROE92
44.  BEST90
45.  BEST91
46.  BEST92
47.  Average ROA
48.  Average ROE
49.  Average A.M. 
Best's Ratings
50.  Total turnover
51.  Total executive 
turnover
52.  Total manager 
turnover
53.  Total
professional
turnover
54.  Total clerical 
turnover
55.  Total voluntary 
turnover
56.  Voluntary 
executive turnover
57.  Voluntary 
manager turnover
58.  Voluntary
professional
turnover
59.  Voluntary 
clerical turnover
*p<.05.

.51*
-.16
-.09
-.08
.03
.84*
-.12

.17
-.04

-.20

-.20

-.17
-.10
.02
-.08
.63*
-.08

-.22
-.12

-.35

-.35

-.29

-.52*

.01

.17

.08

-.11

-.09

-.04

-.22

-.14

-.15

-.35

-.37

-.48*

.93*
.85*
.13
-.08
.95*

-.18
-.09

.27

.27

.19

.21

.92*
.07
.01
.98*

-.25
-.04

.29

.29

.15

.19

.07
-.02
.96*

-.30*
.10

.20

.20

.08

.06

-.27*

-.14

-.11

.08

.46

.20

.11

.49*

.23

.25

.51*

.17

-.06
.13

.19
.20

.12

.12

.35

-.29

-.24

.11

.14

.41

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


48

49

50

51

52

53

54

158

-.09

.19
-.03

-.31

-.31

-.39*

-.06

.09

.13

-.18

-.26*
.03

-.30*

.31

.31

.19

.19

-.13

.15

.15

.40*

.49

.79

.18

.53*

-.21

-.12

-.44*

.24

.37

.21

.21

.38*

.02

-.12

.62*

.09

.36

.80

.73*

.05

-.01

.02

.87

.73

.73

.05

-.01

.02

.87*

.21

.13

.04

.45

.73*

.96*

Variable
48.  Average ROE
49.  Average A.M. 
Best's Ratings
50.  Total turnover
51.  Total 
executive 
turnover
52.  Total manager 
turnover
53.  Total
professional
turnover
54.  Total  clerical 
turnover
55.  Total 
voluntary 
turnover
56.  Voluntary 
executive turnover
57.  Voluntary 
manager turnover
58.  Voluntary
professional
turnover
59.  Voluntary 
clerical turnover
*p<.05.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Variable
55.  Total voluntary 
turnover
56.  Voluntary 
executive turnover
57.  Voluntary 
manager turnover
58.  Voluntary
professional
turnover
59.  Voluntary 
clerical turnover
*£<•05.

55

56

57 

58

.68*

.37*

-.29

1oM -.16

.01

.24

.27

-.01 

.54*

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


160

REFERENCES

Abdel-Halim,  A.A.  (1980)  Effects of higher order need strength on the 

job performance-job satisfaction relationship,  Personnel  Psychology. 
33,  335-347.

Adams,  J.S.  (1963)  Toward an understanding of  inequity.  Journal of 

Abnormal and Social Psychology,  422-436.

Ajzen,  I.,  & Fishbein,  M.  (1977)  Attitude-behavior relations:  A 

theoretical analysis and review of empirical literature.
Psychological Bulletin.  84.  888-918.

Alexander,  R.  & Brisbon,  D.  (1993)  Diversity in hospital management - A 

diagnosis and prescription.  Trustee.  46,7,16-17.

Allport,  G.  (1954)  Theories of perception and the concept of structure. 

New York:  Wiley.

Alutto,  J.A.,  Hrebiniak,  L.G.,  & Alonso,  R.C.  (1973)  On operationalizing 

the  concept of  commitment.  Social Forces.  51.  448-454.

Allen,  N.J.,  & Meyer,J.P.  (1990)  The measurement and antecedents of 

affective,  continuance,  and normative commitment.  Journal of 
Occupational Psychology.  63.  1-18.

Anastasi,  A.  (1988)  Psychological testing.  New York:  McMillan.
Angle,H.L.,  & Perry,  J.L.  (1981)  Dual commitment and  labor-management 

relationship climates,  Academy of Management Journal,  29.,  31-50.

Argyris,  C.  (1964)  Integrating the individual  and the organization.  New 

York:  Wiley.

Arnold,  H.  J.  (1982)  Moderator variables:  A clarification of  conceptual, 
analytic,  and psychometric  issues.  Organizational Behavior  and Human 
Decision Processes.  29.  143-174.

Arnold,  H.J.  (1984)  Testing moderator variable hypotheses:  A reply to 
Stone and Hollenbeck.  Organizational behavior and human Decision 
Processes,  34.  214-224.

Arvey,  R.D.,  Bouchard,  T.J.,  Segal,  N.,  & Abraham,  L.  (1989)  Job 
satisfaction:  environmental  and genetic components.  Journal of

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


161

Applied Psychology.  187-192.

Astin,  A.W.  (1963)  Further validation of the environment assessment 

technique.  Journal of Educational Psychology.  54,  217-226.

Atcheson,  T.J.  (1991)  The employment relationship:  Untied or retied?

Academy of Management Executive.  5.,  52-62.

Baird,  L.S.  (1976)  Relationship of performance to satisfaction in

stimulating and non-stimulating jobs,  Journal of Applied Psychology. 
61,  721-727.

Barksdale.  K.,  & Shore,  L-M.  (1993)  A comparison of the Meyer and Allen 

and the O'Reiily and Chatman Models of Organizational Commitment. 
Unpublished manuscript.

Barnard,  C.  (1938)  The functions of the executive.  Cambridge,  MA:

Harvard University Press.

Bartko,  J.J.  (1976)  On various  intraclass correlation reliability 

coefficients.  Psychological Bulletin,  83.  762-765.

Bartkowiak,  J.  (1993)  Trends toward part-time employment:  Ethical 

issues.  Journal  of Business Ethics.  12.,  811-815.

Bateman,  T.S.,  & Organ,  D.W.  (1983)  Job satisfaction and the good

soldier:  The relationship between affect and employee citizenship. 
Academy of Management Journal.  26.,  587-595.

Bateman,  T.  S.  £ Strasser,  S.  (1984)  A longitudinal  analysis of the 
antecedents of organizational commitment.  Academy of Management 
Journal.  27.  95-112.

Becker,  G.S.  (1975)  Human capital.  New York:  National Bureau of Economic 

Research.

Becker,  H.S.  1960.  Notes on the concept of commitment.  American Journal 

of Sociology.  66,  32-42.

Becker,  B.  £ Huselid,  M.  (1992)  Direct estimates of SDy and the

implications  for utility analysis.  Journal of Applied Psychology.
77,  227-233.

Beer,  M.,  Spector,  B.,  Lawrence,  P.R.,  Mills,  D.Q.  and Walton,R.E.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


(1984)  Human resource management.:  A general manager's perspective.
New York:  Free Press.

Begin,  James P.  (1991)  Strategic employment policy:  An organizational 

systems perspective.

Bentler,  P.M.  & Bonett,  D.G.  1980.  Significance tests and goodness of 

fit  in the analysis of  covariance structures.  Psychological Bulletin, 
88.  588-606.

Bhagat,  R.S.  (1982)  Conditions under which stronger job performance-job 

satisfaction relationships may be observed:  A closer look at two 
contingencies.  Academy of Management Journal.  25.  772-789.

Blalock,  H.  (1982)  Conceptualization and measurement  in the social 

sciences.  California:  Sage Publications.

Blau,  P.M.  (1960)  Structural effects.  American Sociological Review,  25, 

178-193.

Blau,  P.M.  (1964).  Social  exchange:  Exchange and power in  social  life. 

New York:  Wiley.

Blau,  G.J.  (1987)  Using a person-environment  fit model to predict  job 

involvement and organizational commitment,  Journal of Vocational 
Behavior.  30.  240-257.

Bluedorn,  A.C.  (1982)  A unified model of turnover from organizations. 

Human Relations.  35,  135-153.

Bollen,  K.  1989.  Structural eouations with latent variables.  New York: 

John Wiley and Sons.

Bourgeis,  L.J.  (1985)  Strategic goals,  perceived uncertainty,  and

economic performance in volatile environments.  Academy of Management 
Journal.  28.  548-573.

Brayfield,  A..H.  & Crockett,  W.H.  (1955)  Employee attitudes and employee 

performance,  Psychological Bulletin.  52.  396-424.

Bretz,  R.D.,  Ash,  R.A.,  & Dreher,  G.F.  (1989)  Do people make the place? 

An examination of the attraction-selection-attrition hypothesis. 
Personnel Psychology,  42.  561-581.

Reproduced with permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


163
Brian,  J.  (1993)  Motivating when times are slow.  S u p e r v i s o r y   Management, 

38,3.

Brief,  A.P.,  & Motowidlo,  S.J.  (1986)  Prosocial organizational 

behaviors.  Academy of Management Review.  11.  710-725.

Brief,  A.P.,  Aldag,  R.,  & Wallden,  R.A.  (1976)  Correlates of  supervisory 

style among policemen.  Criminal Justice and Behavior.  3.,  263-271.

Brockner,  J.  (1988)  The effects of work layoffs on survivors:  Research, 
theory and practice.  In B.M.  Staw and L.L.  Cummings  (eds.)  Research 
in organizational behavior.  10.  Greenwich,  CT:  JAI  Press.

Brockner,  J.,  Grover,  S.,  Reed,  T.  & DeWitt,  R.  (1992)  Layoffs,  job 

insecurity,  and  survivors'  work efforts:  Evidence of  an inverted-U 
relationship.  Academy of Management Journal.  35.  413-425.

Brown,  C.  & Medoff,  J.  (1978)  Trade unions in the production process. 

Journal of Political Economy.  86.355-378.

Bryk,  A.S.  & Raudenbush,  S.W.  (1993)  Hierarchical  linear models: 

applications and data analysis methods.  Newberry Park,  CA:  Sage 
Press.

Buchanan,  B.  (1974)  Building organizational commitment:  The

socialization of managers  in work organizations.  Administrative 
Science Quarterly.  533-546.

Bulger,  B.  & Gessner,  C.  (1991)  Sign of the times:  Implementing

reductions  in force.  Employee Relations Law Journal.  17.  3_,  431-448.

Burke,  R.J.,  & Deszca,  E.  (1982)  Preferred organizational climates of 

type A individuals.  Journal of Vocational  Behavior.  21.  50-59.

Caldwell,D.F.,  Chatman,  J.,  & O'Reilly,  C.  (1990)  Building

organizational commitment:  A multifirm study.  Journal of Occupational 
Psychology.  63.  245-261.

Campbell,  J.P.  (1977)  On the nature of organizational  effectiveness.  In 

P.S.  Goodman & J.M.  Pennings  (Eds.)  New perspectives  on 
organizational effectiveness.  San Francisco:  Josey-Bass.

Campbell,  J.P.  & Beatty,  E.E.  (1971)  Organizational  climate:  It's

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


164

measurement  and relationship to workgroup performance.  Paper 
presented at the American Psychological Association,  Washington,  D.C.
Campbell,  J.P.,  Dunnette,  M.,  Lawler,  E.E.  & Weick,  K.  (1970)  Managerial
behavior,  performance,  and effectiveness.  New York:  McGraw-Hill.
Campion,  M.  & McLelland,  C.  (1991)  Interdisciplinary examination of the 
costs  and benefits of enlarged jobs:  A job design quasi-experiment. 
Journal of Applied Psychology.  76,  186-198.

Cascio,  W.  (1993)  Downsizing:  What do we know?  What have we 

learned? Academy of Management Executive.  7_,  95-104.

Cappelli,  P.,  & Sherer,  P.D.  (1991)  The missing role of  context in 03: 

The need for a meso-level approach.  Research in organizational 
behavior.  13.  55-110.

Carsten,  J.  & Spector,  P.  (1987)  Unemployment,  job satisfaction,  and 

employee turnover:  A meta-analytic  test of the Muchinsky model.
Journal of Applied Psychology.  72.  374-381.

Challenger,  J.  (1993)  Two or more for  one - A new trend in the

workplace.  Manage,  44,  4,  26-27.

Chatman,  J.  (1991)  Matching people and organizations:  Selection and 
socialization in public accounting firms.  Administrative Science 
Quarterly.  36.  459-484.

Cleveland,  J.  & Shore,  L.M.  (1992)  Self- and  supervisory perspectives on 

age and work attitudes and performance.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology.  77.  469-484.

Cohen,  A.R.  (1964)  Attitude Change and Social  Influence.  New York:

Basic Books.

Cotton,  J.  & Tuttle,  J.  (1986)  Employee turnover:  A meta-analysis and 

review with implications  for research.  Academy of Management Review. 
11,  55-70.

Cox,  T.  & Nkomo,  S.  (1991)  A race and gender-group analysis of the early 

experience of MBAs.  Work and Occupations.  18.  4,  431-446.

Cranny,  C.J.,  Smith.  P.C.,  & Stone,  E.F.  (1991)  Job satisfaction:  How

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


165

people feel about their  jobs and how it affects their perfc.rroance.
New York:  Lexington.

Curtis,  B.  (1975)  Boundary conditions for relationships  among components 
of job perception and attitudes.  Unpublished doctoral dissertation, 
Texas Christian University.

Cutcher-Gershenfeld,  J.  (1991)  The impact of economic performance of a 

transformation in industrial relations.  Industrial  and Labor 
Relations Review.  44,  241-260.

Dansereau,  F.,  Alutto,  J.A.,  Si Yamraarino,  F.  (1984)  Theory testing in 

organizational behavior:  The varient approach.  Engelwood Cliffs,  New 
Jersey:  Prentice-Hall.

Dalton,  D.R.,  & Krackhardt,  D.M.,  & Porter,  L.  (1981)  Functional

turnover:  An empirical assessment.  Journal of Applied Psychology.
66,  716-721.

Davis,  J.A.,  Spaeth,  J.L.  Si Hudson,  C.  (1961)  A technique for analyzing 
the effects of group composition.  American Sociological Review.  26. 
215-225.

Dawes,  R.V.,  Lofquist,  L.H.,  Si Weiss,  D.J.  (1968)  A theory of work

adjustment.  Minnesota Studies in Vocational Rehabilitation,  Bulletin 
23.

Decotiis,  T.A.,  Si Summers,  T.P.  (1987)  A path analysis of a model of the 

antecedents and outcomes of organizational  commitment.  Human 
Relations.  40.  445-470.

Denton,  D.  (1993)  Using flextime to create a competitive workplace. 

Industrial Management.  35.  JL,  29-31.

Doob,  L.W.  (1947)  The behavior of attitudes.  Psychological Review.  54. 

135-156.

Drexler,  J.A.  (1977)  Organizational climate:  It's homogeneity within 

organizations.  Journal of Applied Psychology.  62.,  38-42.

Dunbar,  D.  (1990)  Desparately seeking mentors.  Black Enterprise.  20.  8, 

53-56.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


166
Dunnette,  M.D.  (1973)  Performance equals ability and what?  Unpublished 

manuscript,  University of Minnesota,  Department of Psychology, 
Technical Report No.  4009.

Eisenberger,  R.,  Fasolo,  P.  & Davis-LeMastro,  V.  (1990)  Perceived 
organizational support and employee diligence,  commitment and 
turnover.  Journal of Applied Psychology.  75.  51-59.

Eisenberger,  R.,  Huntington,  R.,  Hutchinson,  S.  & Sowa,  D.  (1986)

Perceived organizational  support.  Journal of Applied Psychology.  71. 
500-507.

Emery,  R.E.,  & Trist,  E.L.  (1960)  Socio-technical systems.  In C.W. 

Churchman & M.  Verhuslt  (Eds.)  Management science models and 
technicrues.  (Vol.  2,  pp.83-97),  Elmsford,  NY:  Pergamon Press.

Etzioni,  A.  (1961)  A comparative analysis of complex organizations.  New 

York:  Free Press.

Etzioni,  A.  (1975)  A comparative analysis of complex organizations.  2nd 

edition,  New York:  Free Press.

Fagenson,  E.A.  (1989)  The mentor advantage:  Perceived career/job 

experiences of proteges  versus non-proteges.  Journal of 
Organizational Behavior.  10.  309-320.

Farkas,  A.J.,  & Tetrick,  L.  (1989)  A three-wave longitudinal analysis of 

the causal order of satisfaction and commitment on turnover 
decisions.  Journal of Applied Psychology.  74.  855-868.

Feldman,  S.P.  (1985)  Culture and conformity:  An essay on individual

adaptation in centralized bureaucracy.  Human Relations.  38.  341-356.

Ferris,  G.R.,  Youngblood,  S.A.,  & Yates,  V.L.  (1985)  Personality,

training,  performance and withdrawal:  A test of the person-group fit 
hypothesis for organizational newcomers.  Journal of Vocational 
Behavior.  27.  377-388.

Field,  G.,  & Abelson,  M.  (1982)  Climate:  A reconceptualization and 

proposed model.  Human Relations.  35.  181-201.

Finkelstein,  S.  & Hambrick,  D.C.  (1990)  Top management team tenure and

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


167

organizational outcomes:  The moderating role of managerial 
discretion.  Administrative Science Quarterly.  35.  484-503.

Fishbein,  M.  (1967)  Attitude and the prediction of behavior.  In

M.Fishbein  (Ed.),  Readings  in Attitude and Measurement,  New York: 
Wiley.

Fishbein,  M.  & Ajzen  (1975)  Beliefs,  attitudes,  intentions,  and 

behaviors.  Reading,  MA:  Addison-Wesley.

Fisher,  C.D.  (1980)  On the dubious wisdom of expecting job satisfaction 
to correlate with performance.  Academy of Management Review.  5,,  607- 
612.

Fitzgerald,  M.  (1993)  Promoting diversity.  Editor and Publisher,  126,

1,  38.

Forehand,  G.A.  (1968)  On the interactions of persons and organizations. 
In R.Taguiri and G.Litwin  (Eds.)  Organizational climate:  Explorations 
of a concept.  Boston:  Harvard University Press.

Forehand,  G.A.  & Gilmer,  B.  (1964)  Environmental variation in studies of 

organizational behavior.  Psychological Bulletin.  62.  361-382.

Forrest,  A.  (1989)  Women in a man's world.  Journal of Management 

Development.  8,  6.,  61-68.

Froiland,  P.,  Gordon,  J.  Picard,  M.,  & Zemke,  R.  (1993) Tough sledding

for new graduates.  Training.  30.  9.,  12-13.

Froiland,  P.,  Geber,  B.,  Gordon,  J.  & Picard,  M.  (1993) Fear and

trembling after the downsizing.  Training.  30.  8,  13-14.

Furnham,  A.,  & Schaeffer,  R.  (1984)  Person-environment  fit,  job

satisfaction,  and mental health.  Journal of Occupational Psychology, 
57.  295-307.

Galen,  M.  (1993)  Work and Family.  Business Week.  33,25.,  80-88.
Gaudet,  F.J.  (1963)  Solving the problems of employee absence.  New York: 

American Management Association.

George,  J.  M.  (1990)  Personality,  affect,  and behavior  in groups.

Journal of Applied Psychology.  75.,  107-116.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


168

George,  J.  & James,  L.  <1993)  Personality,  affect,  and behavior in

groups  revisited:  A comment on aggregation of attitudes  and a recent 
application of within and between analysis.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology.  78,  798-8G4.

George,  J.R.,  & Bishop,  L.K.  (1971)  Relationship of organizational

structure and teacher personality characteristics to organizational 
climate.  Administrative Science Quarterly.  16.  467-475.

Gerhart,  B.  (1987)  How important are dispositional  factors as

determinants of  job satisfaction?  Implications for job design and 
other personnel programs.  Journal of Applied Psychology.  72.  366- 
373.

Goff,  S.,  Mount,  M.  & Jamison,  R.  (1990)  Employer supported childcare, 

work-family conflict,  and absenteeism:  A field study.  Personnel 
Psychology.  43.,  793-809.

Goldman,  D.  (1993)  Broken trust.  Adweek.  34,27,  20.
Gould,  S.  (1979)  An equity-exchange model of organizational  involvement. 

Academy of Management Review.  4,  53-62.

Graham,  J.W.  (1986)  Organizational  citizenship  informed by political 
theory.  Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Academy of 
Management,  Chicago,  IL.

Greiner,  L.E.,  Leitch,  D.P.  & Barnes,  L.B.  (1968)  The simple complexity 
of organizational  climate in a governmental  agency.  In R.Taguiri and 
G.Litwin  (Eds.)  Organizational  climate:  Explorations of a concept. 
Boston:  Harvard University Press.

Gross,  A.L.,  Faggen-Steckler,  J.,  & McCarthy,  K.  (1974)  Statistical 

procedures  for evaluating the practical utility of a moderator 
approach to prediction.  Journal of Applied Psychology.  59.,  578-582.
Grover,  S.  (1991)  Predicting the perceived fairness of parental  leave 

policies.  Journal of Applied Psychology.  76.  247-255.

Gummer,  B.  (1991)  The management of careers of men and women:  Mommy 
tracks,  Daddy Tracks,  and  'new age'  leadership.  Administration in

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


169

Social Work.  15.  4,  111-128.

Hackett,  R.D.,  Bycio,P.,  & Hausdorf,P.  1992.  Further assessments of a 

three-component model of organizational commitment.  Best paper 
proceedings of the Academy of Management.  Las Vegas,  Nevada.

Hackett,  R.D.  & Guion,  R.  (1985)  A reevaluation of the absenteeism-job 

satisfaction relationship.  Organizational  Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes.  35.  340-381.

Hackman,  J.R.,  & Oldham,  G.  (1976)  Motivation through the design of 

work:  Test of a theory.  Organizationa1 Behavior and Human 
Performance.  16.  250-279.

Hage,  J.  & Aiken,  M.  (1969)  Routine technology,  social  structure,  and 

organizational goals.  Administrative Science Quarterly.  14,  366-376.

Half,  R.  (1992)  Mananging your career:  How can I balance my job with 

family.  Management Accounting.  74.  4,  10.

Hambrick,  D.C.  Si Mason,  P.A.  \1984)  Upper echelons:  The organization as 
a reflection of  its top managers.  Academy of Management Review.  9, 
193-206.

Handy,  C.  (1993)  Felxing,  chunking and changing.  Director.  46.  1_>

20.

Hannan,  M.T.  (1971)  Problems of aggregation.  In H.  Blalock  (Ed.)  Causal 

Models  in the Social Sciences.  Chicago:  Aldine Publishing Company.

Hansen,  G.S.  (1987)  Determinants of  firm performance:  An integration of 

economic and organizational  factors.  An unpublished doctoral 
dissertation,  The University of Michigan.

Hellriegel,  D.  Si Slocum J.  (1974)  Organizational climate;  Measures,

research,  and contingencies.  Academy of Management Journal.  17.  255- 
280.

Hemphill,  J.K.  (1956)  Group Dimensions:  A Manual For Their Measurement. 

Columbus:  Ohio State University Press.

Herzberg,  F.,  Mausner,  B.,  Peterson,  R.O.,  Si Capwell,  D.F.  (1957)  Job 

Attitudes:  Review of Research and Opinion.  Pittsburg,  PA.,

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


170

Psychological Service of Pittsburg.

Hill,  J.M.  & Trist,  E.L.  (1953)  A consideration of  industrial accidents 

as a means of withdrawal  from the work situation.  Human Relations.
6,  357-380.

Holland,  J.L.  (1973)  The psychology of vocational choice.  Waltham,  MA.: 

Blaisdell.

Horn,  P.,  Katerburg,  R.,  & Hulin,  C.  (1979)  Comparative examination of 
three approaches to the prediction of turnover.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology.  64,  280-290.

Horn,  P.,  Carnikas-Walker,  F.,  Prussia,  G.E.,  & Griffeth,  R.  (1993)  A 

meta-analytical structural equation analysis of a model of employee 
turnover.  Journal of Applied Psychology.  77.  890-909.

Hoppock,  R.  (1935)  Job satisfaction.  New York:  Harper.
Hotch,  R.  (1993)  All the comforts of a home office.  Nation's Business. 

81,  2,  26-28.

House,  R.J.,  & Rizzo,  J.R.  (1972)  Toward the measurement of

organizational practices:  Scale development and validation.  Journal 
of Applied Psychology.  56.  388-396.

Hulin,  c.  (1991)  Adaptation,  persistence,  and commitment  in

organizations.  In M.D.  Dunnette and L.M.  Hough  (Eds.)  Handbook of 
Industrial  and Organizational Psychology,  Vol 2,  Palo Alto,  CA.: 
Consulting Psychologists Press.

Huselid,  M.  (1993)  Human resource management practices  and firm 

performance.  Manuscript under review.

Ichniowski,  c.  (1990)  Human resource management systems and the

performance of U.S.  manufacturing businesses.  NBSR Working Paper 
Series #3449.  National Bureau of Economic Research:  Cambridge,  MA.

Iffaldano,  M.T.  & Muchinsky,  P.M.  (1985)  Job satisfaction and job

performance:  A meta-analysis,  Psychological Bulletin.  97.  251-273.

Jackson,  S.,  Brett,  J.,  Sessa,  V.,  Cooper,  D.,  Julin,  J.,  & Peyronin,  K. 

(1991)  Some differences make a difference:  Individual dissimilarity

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


171
and group heterogeneity as correlates of recruitment,  promotions,  and 
turnover.  Journal of Applied Psychology.  76.  675-689.

Jackson,  S.  & Schuler,  R.  (1995)  Understanding human resource management 

in the context of organizations and their environments.  Manuscript 
under preparation for the Annual Review of Psychology.

Jacoby,  S.  (1985)  Employing bureaucracy.  New York:  Columbia University 

Press.

James,  L.  (1982)  Aggregation bias in estimates of perceptual agreement. 

Journal of Applied Psychology.  67.  219-229.

James,  L.,  Demaree,  R.G.,  & Wolfe,  G.  (1984)  Estimating within-group 
interrater reliability with and without response bias.  Journal of 
Applied Psychology.  69,  85-98.

James,  L.,  Demaree,  R.G.,  & Mulaik,  S.  (1986)  A note on validity

generalization procedures.  Journal of Applied Psychology.  71.  440- 
450.

James,  L.  & Jones,  A.P.  (1974)  Organizational climate:  A review of 

theory and research.  Psychological Bulletin.  81.  1096-1112.

James,  L.  & Jones,  A.P.  (1976)  Organizational structure:  A review of 

structural dimensions and their conceptual relationships with 
attitudes and behavior.  Organizational Behavior and Human 
Performance.  16.  74-113.

James,  L.  & James,  L.  (1991)  Psychological climate and affect.  In

Cranny,  Smith & Stone  (eds.)  Job satisfaction:  How people feel  about 
their jobs  and how it affects their performance.  New York:
Lexington.

Johannesson,  R.E.,  (1973)  Some problems in the assessment of 
organizational climate.  Organizational Behavior and Human 
Performance.  10.  118-144.

Jones,  A.P.  & James,  L.  (1979)  Psychological climate:  Dimensions and 

relationships of  individual and aggregated work environment 
perceptions.  Organizational Behavior and Human Performance.  23.  201-

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


172

250.

Joreskog,Karl  & Sorbom,  Dag 1989.  Lisrel  7.:  A guide to the program and 

applications.  2nd edition,  SPSS,  Inc.

Joyce,  W.F.,  & Slocum,  J.W.  (1984)  Collective climate:  Agreement as a 
basis  for defining aggregate climates  in organizations.  Academy of 
Management Journal.  27.  721-742.

Judge,  T.A.,  &  Bretz,  R.D.  (1992)  Effects of work values on job choice 

decisions.  Journal of Applied Psychology.  77.  261-271.

Ranter,  P.M.  (1968)  Commitment  and social organizations:  A study of 

commitment mechanisms  in utopian communities.  American Sociological 
Review.  33.  499-517.

Ranter,  R.M.  (1977)  Men and women of the corporation.  New York:  Basic 

Books.

Ratz,  D.  & Rahn,  R.L.  (1952)  Some recent  findings  in human relations 

research.  In G.E.  Swanson,  T.E.  Newcomb,  & E.L.  Hartley  (Eds.) 
Readings  in Social Psychology,  New York:  Holt.

Ratzell,  R.A.,  Barrett,  R.S.,  & Parker,  T.C.  (1961)  Job satisfaction, 
job performance,  and situational characteristics.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology.  45.  65-72.

Ratzell,  R.A.,  Thomas,  D.E.,  & Guzzo,  R.A.  (1991)  How job satisfaction 

and  job performance are not  linked.  In C.J.  Cranny,  P.C.  Smith  &
E.F.  Stone  (Eds.)  Job Satisfaction:  How people feel about their jobs 
and how it affects their performance.  195-217.  New York:  Lexington.
Reiman H.C.  1958.  Compliance,  identification,  and internalization:  Three
processes of  change.  Conflict Resolution.  2.(1),  51-60.
Reon,  T.L.,  Latack,  J.C.,  & Wanous,  J.P.  (1982)  Image congruence and the
treatment of  difference scores  in organizational choice research.  Human
Relations.  35.  155-166.
Reppel,  G.  & Zedeck,  S.  (1989)  Data analysis  for research design.  New 

York:  Freeman Press.

Rerr,  W.A.  (1952)  Summary of validity studies on the tear ballot.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


173

Personnel Psychology.  5.,  105-113.

Kerr,  W.  & Slocum  (1987)  Linking reward systems and corporate cultures. 

Academy of Management Executive.  1.,  99-108.

Kets de Vries,  M.F.,  & Miller,  D.  (1986)  Personality,  culture,  and 

organization.  Academy of Management Review.  11.  266-279.

Kiesler,  C.A.  (1971)  The Psychology of commitment;  Experiments  linking 

behavior to belief.  New York:  Academic Press.

King,  J.  (1991)  How to rekindle motivational  fires.  Computerworld.  25. 

40,  121.

Koch,  J.T.,  & Steers,  R.M.  (1978)  Job attachment,  satisfaction and 

turnover among public  sector employees.  Journal of Vocational 
Behavior.  12,  119-128.

Kopelman,  R.E.,  Brief.  A.P.,  & Guzzo,  R.A.  (1990)  The role of climate 

and culture in productivity.  In B Schneider  (Ed.)  Organizational

culture and climate.  San Francisco:  Josey-Bass.
Kornhauser,  A.  & Sharp,  A.  (1932)  Employee attitudes:  Suggestions from a 

study on a factory.  Personnel Journal,  10,  393-401.

Koelowski,  M.  (1990)  Staff/line distinctions  in job and organizational 

commitment,  Journal of Occupational Psychology.  63,  167-173.

Kossek,  E.  (1990)  Diversity in childcare assistance needs:  Employee 

problems,  preferences,  and work-related outcomes.  Personnel 
Psychology.  43,  769-791.

Kossek,  E.  & Nichol,  V.  (1992)  The effects of on-site childcare on 

employee attitudes.  Personnel Psychology.  45.  485-510.

Kram,  K.  (1985)  Mentoring at work:  Developmental relationships  in 

organizational  life.  Glenview,  IL:  Scott-Foresman.

Kram,  K.E.,  & Isabella,  L.A.  (1985)  Mentoring alternatives:  The role of 

peer relationships  in career development.  Academy of Management 
Journal.  28.  110-132.

Kroeger,  L.  & Overholt,  M.  (1993)  Retaining the survivors of downsizing. 

Human Resources Professional.  5,, 3., 42-43.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


174
Kruger,  P.  (1993)  What women think of women bosses.  Working Woman,  18, 

6,  40-43.

LaFollette,  W.R.  & Sims,  H.P.  (1975)  Is satisfaction redundant with 

organizational climate?  Organizational Behavior and Human 
Performance.  11,  139-155.

Lance,  C.  (1991)  Evaluation of a structural model relating  job

satisfaction,  organizational commitment,  and precursors to voluntary 
turnover.  Multivariate Behavioral Research,  2£,  137-162.
LaPlante,  A.  (1992)  Part-time arrangements are a tough sell. 

Computerworld.  26.  £,103.

Latham,  G.  (1988) In G.  Hage  (ed.)  Futures of  organizations.

Lexington,  MA: Lexington Books.

Lawler,  E.E.  (1973)  Motivation in work organizations.  Monterey,  CA.: 

Brooks/Cole.

Lawler,  E.E.,  & Porter,  L.W.,  (1967)  The effect of  job performance on 

job satisfaction,  Industrial Relations.  7,  20-28.

Lawler,  E.E.,  Hall,  D.T.,  & Oldham,  G.  (1974)  Organizational  climate: 
Relationship to organizational structure,  process  and performance. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance.  11.  139-155.

Leibowitz,Z.,  Kaye,  B.,  & Farren,  C.  (1990)  What to do about career 

gridlock.  Training and Development Journal.  44,  4,  28-35.

Likert,  R.  (1961) New patterns of management. 
Likert,  R.  (1967) The human organization.  New  York:  McGraw-Hill.
Litwin,  G.  & Stringer,  R.  (1968)  Motivation and organizational climate. 

New York:  McGraw-Hill.

Boston University:  Harvard Press.

Locke,  E.A.  (1969)  What  is  job satisfaction? Organizational  Behavior and 

Human Performance.  4,  309-336.

Locke,  E.A.  (1976)  The nature and causes of  job satisfaction,  in 
Dunnette,  M.D.  (sd.)  Handbook of  Industrial and Organizational 
Psychology,  Palo Alto,  CA:  Rand-McNally.

Locke,  E.A.,  Shaw,  K.,  Saari,  L.  & Latham,  G.  (1981)  Goal  setting  and

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


175
task performance from 1969-1980.  Psychological Bulletin.  90.  125-152.
Locke E.A.  (1984)  Job satisfaction.  Social Psychology and Organizational 

Behavior  (edited by M.  Gruneberg and T.  Wall),  93-117.

Locke,  E.A.,  & Fisher,  C.D.  (1991)  The new look in job satisfaction 

research and theory.  In C.J.  Cranny,  P.C.  Smith & E.F.  Stone  (Eds.) 
Job satisfaction:  How people feel about their -jobs and how it affects 
their performance.  165-194.  New York:  Lexington.

Long,  R.  (1987)  Relationship of aggregate positive behavior measure with 

job satisfaction.  Unpublished raw data.

Losey,  M.  (1992)  Workplace policies  should be family-friendly.  Modern 

Office Technology.  37.  5.,  84-85.

Markham,  S.  & McKee,  G.  (1991)  Declining organizational  size and

increasing unemployment rates:  Predicting employee absenteeism from a 
within and between plant perspective.  Academy of Management Journal, 
31,  952-965.

Marsh,  R.M.  & Mannari,  H.  (1977)  Organizational commitment and turnover: 

A predictive study.  Administrative Science Quarterly.  22,  57-57.

Martinez,  M.  (1993)  Family support makes business sense.  HRMAoazine.

38,  1,  38-43.

Mathieu,  J.  & Kohler,  S.S.  (1990)  A cross level examination of group 

absence influence on individual absence.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology.  75,  217-220.

Mathieu,  J.  & Zajac,  D.  (1990)  A Review and meta-Analysis of the 

antecedents,  correlates and consequences of organizational 
commitment.  Psychological Bulletin,  108.  171-194.

Mayo,  E.  (1933)  The human problems of  industrial organizations.  New 

York:  Viking Press.

Mayo,  E.  (1945)  The social problems of an industrial  civilization. 

Cambridge Graduate School of Business Adminstration:  Harvard 
University Press.

McEvoy,  G.  & Cascio,  W.  (1985)  Strategies  for reducing employee

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


176

turnover:  A meta-analysis.  Journal of Applied Psychology.  70.  342- 
353.

McGregor,  D.  (1960)  The human side of enterprise.  New York: McGraw-Hill.
McKeen,  C.  & Burke,  R.  (1989)  Mentor relationships  in organizations: 
Issues,  strategies  and prospects for women.  Journal  of Management 
Development.  8,  6,  33-42.

Meglino,  B.M.,  Ravlin,  E.  & Adkins,  C.  (1989)  A work values approach to 
corporate culture:  A field test of the value congruence process  and 
its relationship to individual outcomes.  Journal  of Applied 
Psychology.  74,  424-432.

Meyer J.P.  & Allen,  N.J.  1984.  Testing the side-bet theory of

organizational commitment:  Some methodological considerations.
Journal  of Applied Psychology.  69.  372-378.

Meyer,J.P.  & Allen,N.J.  1991.  A three-component conceptualization of 

organizational  commitment.  Human Resource Management Review.  1,,  61- 
89.

Meyer,J.P.,  Allen,N.J.,  & Gellatly,I.R.  (1990)  Affective and continuance 

commitment to the organization:  Evaluation of measures and analysis 
of concurrent and time-lagged relations.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology.  75.  710-720.

Meyer,  J.P.,  Bobocel D.R.,  & Allen.,  N.J.  (1991)  Development of

organizational  commitment during the first year of employment:  A 
longitudinal study of pre- and post-entry influences.  Journal of 
Management.  17.  717-733.

Meyer,J.P.,  Paunonen,S.V.,  Gellatly,I.R.,  Goffin,R.D.,  & Jackson,D.N. 

(1989)  Organizational commitment and performance:  It's the nature of 
commitment that counts.  Journal of Applied Psychology.  74,  152-156.
Miles R.  & Snow,  c.  (1984)  Designing strategic human resource systems. 

The Strategic Human Resource Handbook  (Baird,  L.,  Schneir,  C.,  & 
Beatty,  R.  Eds.)  Amherst,  MA:  Human Resource Development Press.

Miner,  J.B.  (1979)  Theories of organizational behavior.  Hinsdale,  IL:

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


177

Dryden Press.

Mintzberg,  H.  (1983)  Structure  in  fives;  Designing effective 

organizations.  Englewood Cliffs,  NJ:  Prentice Hall.

Mitchell,  S.  (1979)  Interobserver agreement,  reliability,  and 

generalizability of data collected in observational  studies. 
Psychological Bulletin.  86,  376-390.

Mobley,  W.H.,  Griffeth,R.W.,  Hand,H.H.,  & Meglino,B.M.  (1979)  Review and 
conceptual analysis of the employee turnover process.  Psychological 
Bulletin.  86.  493—522.

Morris,  J.H,  & Steers,  R.M.  (1980)  Structural  influences on

organizational commitment.  Journal of Vocational Behavior.  17,  50-57.
Morrow,  P.c.  (1983)  Concept redundancy in organizational research:  The 
case of worker commitment.  Academy of Management Review.  8,  486-500.

Mowday.  R.T.,  & Sutton,  C.  (1993)  Organizational behavior:  Linking

individuals and groups to organizational  concepts.  In Annual Review 
of Psychology.  44.  195-229.

Mowday,R.T.,  Porter,L.W.,  and Steers,R.M.  (1982)  Emolovee-organization 

linkages:  The psychology of commitment.  turnover and absenteeism.  New 
York:  Academic Press,Inc.

Muchinsky.  P.M.  & Tuttle,  M.L.  (1979)  Employee turnover:  an empirical 
and methodological assessment.  Journal of Vocational Behavior.  14. 
43-77.

Mulaik,  S.A.,  James,  L.R.,  Van Alstine,  J.,  Bennett,  N.,  Lind,  S.  & 
Stilwell,  C.D.  (1989)  Evaluation of goodness of  fit  indices  for 
structural equation models.  Psychological Bulletin.  105.  430-445.

Murray,  A.I.  (1989)  Top management group heterogeneity and firm 

performance.  Strategic Management Journal,  10,  125-142.

Nayyar,  P.R.  (1993)  Performance effects of information asymmetry and 

economies of  scope in diversified service firms.  Academy of 
Management Journal.  36.,  28-57.

Newman,  J.E.  (1977)  Development of a measure of perceived work

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


178

environment.  Academy of Management Journal.  20.  520-534.

Nichols,  D.  (1989)  Motivating part-timers.  Incentive.  163.  2,  45-50. 
Nicholson,  N.  & Johns,  G.  (1985)  The  absence culture and  the

psychological contract—  who's  in  control of absence?  Academy of
Management Review.  10.  397-407.

Noe,  R.  (1988)  Women and mentoring:  A review and research agenda.

Academy of Management Review.  13.  65-68.

Offenberg,  R.M.  & Cernius,  V.  (1978)  Assessment of  ideographic

organizational climate.  Journal of Applied Behavioral Science.  14. 
79-86.

O'Reilly,  C.  (1991)  Organizational behavior:  Where we've been and where 

we're going.  Annual Review of Psychology.  42.  427-458.

O'Reilly,  C.,  & Chatman,  J.  1986.  Organizational commitment  and

psychological  attachment:  The effects of  compliance,  identification 
and internalization on pro-social behaviors.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology.  71.  492-499.

Organ,  D.  (1977)  A reappraisal  and re-interpretation of the satisfaction 

causes performance hypothesis.  Academy of Management Review.  2,  46- 
53.

Organ,  D.  (1988)  Organizational  citizenship:  The good soldier syndrome.

Lexington,  MA:  Lexington Books.

Ornstein,  S.  & Isabella,  L.  (1993)  Making sense of careers:  A review 

1989-1992.  Journal of Management.  19.  243-267.

Osterman,  P.  (1987)  Choice of employments systems  in internal  labor 

markets.  Industrial Relations.  26.  46-67.

Osterman,  P.  (1988)  The transformation of industrial organizations.

Belmont,  CA:  Wadsworth.

Ostroff,  C.  (1992)  The relationship between satisfaction,  attitudes,  and 

performance:  An organizational  level analysis.  Journal  of Applied 
Psychology.  77.  963-974.

Ostroff,  C.  (1993)  Comparing correlations based on individual-  level and

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


179

aggregated data.  Journal of Applied Psychology.

Panepinto,  J.  (1993)  Layoff survivors.  Computerworld.  27.  41.  93.
Payne,  R.L.  & Mansfield,  R.  (1973)  Relationships of perceptions of 
organization climate to organizational structure,  context,  and 
hierarchical position.  Administrative Science Quarterly,  18,  515- 
526.

Payne,  R.L.  & Pheysey,  D.C.  (1971)  G.G.  Stern's organizational climate 

index:  A reconceptualization and application to business 
organizations.  Organizational Behavior and Human Performance.  6,  77- 
98.

Payne,  R.L.  & Pugh,  D.S.  (1976)  Organizational  structure and climate.  In 

M.D.  Dunnette  (Ed.)  Handbook of  industrial and organizational

psychology.  Chicago:  Rand-McNally.
Payne,  R.,  Pheysey,  R.,  & Pugh,  D.  (1971)  Organizational structure,

organizational  climate,  and group structure:  An exploratory study of 
their relationships  in two British manufacturing companies. 
Occupational  Psychology.  45.  45-56.

Petty,  M.M.,  Mcgee,  G.W.,  & Callendar,  J.W.  (1984)  A meta-analysis of 
the relationship between individual  job satisfaction and individual 
performance,  Academy of Management Review.  9.,  712-721.

Pfeffer,  J.  (1983)  Organizational demography.  In L.  Staw and L.  Cummings 

(eds.)  Research  in organizational behavior.  5.,  299-357.

Pfeffer,  J.  (1991)  Organizational theory and structural perspectives on 

management.  Journal of Management.  17,  789-803.

Podsakoff,  P.M.,  & Williams,  L.  J.  (1986)  The relationship between job 

performance and  job satisfaction.  Gruneberg and E.A.  Locke  (Eds.)

Generalizing from laboratory to field settings.
Poffenberger,  A.  T.  (1928)  The effects of continuous work upon output 

and feelings.  Journal of Applied Psychology.  12.,  459-467.

Porter,  L.W.  (1962)  Job attitudes in management:  Perceived deficiencies 

in need fulfillment as a function of  job level.  Journal of Applied

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


180

Psychology.  46.  375-384.

Porter,  L.,  Crampon,  W.,  & Smith,  F.  (1972)  Organizational  commitment 

and managerial turnover:  A longitudinal study.  Organizational 
Behavior and Human Performance.  15.  87-98.

Porter,  L.  & Lawler,  E.E.  (1965)  Properties of organizational  structure 

in relation to job attitudes and job behavior.  Psychological 
Bulletin.  64.  23-51.

Porter,  L.W.,  & Steers,  R.M.  (1983)  Motivation and work behavior.  New 

York:  McGraw-Hill.

Porter,  L.W.,  steers,  R.M.,  Mowday,  R.T.  & Boulian,  P.V.  1974. 

Organizational  commitment,  job satisfaction and turnover among 
psychiatric technicians.  Journal of Applied Psychology.  59.  603-609.
Pozner,  B.Z.  (1992)  Person-organization values congruence:  No support 

for individual differences as a moderating influence.  Human 
Relations.  45.  351-361.

Price,  J.L.  (1977)  The study of turnover  in organizations.  Ames,  IA:

Iowa University Press.

Priem,  R.L.  (1990)  Top management team group factors,  consensus,  and 

firm performance.  Strategic Management Journal.  11.  469-478.

Prien E.P.  & Ronan,  W.W.  (1971)  An analysis of organizational

characteristics.  Organizational Behavior and Human Performance.  6, 
215-234.

Pritchard,  R.D.  & Karasick,  B.W.  (1973)  The effect of organizational 

climate on managerial  job performance and job satisfaction. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance.  9_,  126-146.

Puffer,  S.M.  (1987)  Prosocial behavior,  noncompliant behavior,  and work 

performance among commission salespeople.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology.  72.  615-621.

Pulich,  M.  (1989)  Revitalizing an employee's  job  interest.  Supervisory 

Management.  34,  3^  3-10.

Ragins,  B.  & Cotton,  J.  (1993)  Wanted:  mentors  for women.  Personnel

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


181

Journal,  72,  4,  20.

Ragins,  B.  & Cotton,  J.  (1993)  Gender and willingness to mentor in 

organizations.  Journal of Management.  19,  97-111.

Randall,  D.M.,  Fedor,  D.B.,  & Longnecker,  C.O.,  1990.  The behavioral 

expression of organizational commitment.  Journal  of Vocational 
Behavior.  36.  210-224.

Reingold,  J.  (1993)  Prudential  Insurance.  Financial World.  162,  19,  60. 

Reichers,A.E.  1985.  A review and reconceptualization of 
organizational commitment.  Academy of Management Review.  10,  465-476.
Ritzer,  G.  & Trice,  R.M.,  (1971)  An empirical  study of Howard Becker's 

side bet theory.  Social Forces.  47,  475-470.

Roberts,  K.H.,  Hulin,  C.  & Rousseau,  D.  (1978)  Developing an

interdisciplinary  science of organizations.  San Francisco:  Josey- 
Bass.

Roethlisberger,  F.J.  & Dickson,  W.  (1939)  Management  and the worker. 

Cambridge:Harvard Univerisity Press.

Roethlisberger,  F.J.  (1941)  Management and morale.  Cambridge:  Harvard 

University Press.

Rosenberg,  R.  (1993)  Human resources challenges  in bank downsizing and 

mergers.  World of Banking.  12,  5.,  11-14.

Rosenberg,  R.  (1993)  More work for some,  less work for others:  Working 

hours  in the USA.  Futures.  25.  5.,  551-560.

Roznowski,  M.,  & Hulin,  C.  (1991)  The scientific merit  of valid measures 
of general  constructs with special  reference to job satisfaction and 
job withdrawal.  In C.J.  Cranny,  P.C.  Smith & E.F.  Stone  (Eds.)  Job 
satisfaction:  How people feel about their jobs and how  it affects 
their performance.  124-163.  New York:  Lexington Books.

Rudolph,  P.  & Kleiner,  B.  (1989)  The art of motivating employees.

Journal of Managerial Philosophy.  4,  5.,  1-5.

Ruhl,  J.  (1990)  Part-time jobs  are catching on.  ComputerworId.  24.  21, 

111.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


182

Ryan,  A.  (1991)  Job rotations grease long-term IS wheels.

Computerworld.  25.  24.  76.

Sabatino,  F.  (1993)  One hospital mentor's insight on the labor issue. 

Hospitals.  67,  10.  25.

Salancik,  G.R.  (1977)  Commitment and the control of organizational 
behavior and belief.  In B.M.  Staw & G.R.  Salancik  (Eds.)  New 
directions  in organizational behavior,  (pp.  1-54),  Chicago:  St.Clair 
Press.

Salancik,  G.  & Pfeffer,  J.  (1978)  A social  information processing 

approach to job attitudes and job design.  Administrative Science 
Quarterly.  23,  224-253.

Sambrook,  C.  (1991)  How to hold on to the best.  Marketing.  Sept,  26-27.
Scarpello,  V.  Si Campbell,  J.P.  (1983)  Job satisfaction and the fit 
between individual needs  and organizational rewards.  Journal of 
Occupational Psychology.  56.  315-328.

Schmitt,  N.  Si Klimoski,  R.  (1989)  Research methods  in human resource 

management.  Cincinnati,  OH:  Southwestern.

Schneider,  B.  (1975)  Organizational climates:  An essay.  Personnel 

Psychology.  28.  447-479.

Schneider,  B.  (1987)  The people make the place.  Personnel Psychology. 

40,  473-453.

Schneider,  B.,  Si Bartlett,  C.J.  (1975)  Some relationships between job 

satisfaction and organizational climate.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology.  60.  318-328.

Schneider,  B.  Si Hall,  D.T.  (1972)  Toward specifying the concept of work 

climate:  A study of Roman Catholic diocesan priests.  Journal of 
Applied Psychology.  56.  447-455.

Schneider,  B.,  & Schmitt,  N.  (1986)  Staffing organizations.  Gelnview,

IL:  Scott,Foresman.

Schwab,  D.P.,  Si Cummings,  L.L.  (1970)  Theories of performance and 

satisfaction:  A review.  Industrial Relations.  9,  408-430.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


183

Schwab,  D .P.  & Heneman,  H.G.  (1970)  Aggregate and individual 

predictability of the two-factor theory of job satisfaction.
Personnel Psychology.  23.  55-66.

Scott,  w.  (1987)  The adolescense of institutional theory.

Administrative Science Quarterly.  32.  493-511.

Shore,L.M.,& Barksdale,K.  (1991)  A longitudinal assessment of the

antecedents of affective and continuance commitment.  Presented at 
the Academy of Management Meetings.  Miami,  FL.

Shore,  L.M.  & Martin,  H.  (1989)  Job satisfaction and organizational 

commitment  in relation to work performance and turnover intentions. 
Human Relations.  42_,  625-638.

Shore,  L.  M.,  & Tetrick,  L.  (1991).  A construct validity study of the 

Survey of Perceived Organizational Support.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology.  76.  637-643.

Shore,  L.  M.,  & Wayne,  S.  J.  (1993).  Commitment and employee behavior: 
A comparison of affective commitment and continuance commitment with 
perceived organizational  support.  Journal of Applied Psychology.  78. 
774-780.

Shortell,  S.M.  (1977)  The role of envirnoment  in a configurational 

theory of organizations.  Human Relations.  30.  275-302.

Shrout.  P.E.,  & Fleiss,  J.L.  (1979)  Intraclass correlations:  Uses  in 
assessing rater reliability.  Psychological Bulletin.  86.  420-428.
Siegel,  J.P.  & Bowen,' D.  (1971)  Satisfaction and performance:  Causal 

relationships and moderating effects.  Journal of Vocational Behavior. 
1,  263-269.

Smith,  F.  J.  (1977)  Work attitudes as predictors of  specific day 

attendance.  Journal of Applied Psychology.  62.  16-19.

Smith,  P.,  Kendall,  L.,  & Hulin,  C.  (1969)  The measurement of 
satisfaction  in work and retirement.  Chicago:  Rand-McNally.

Smith,  C.A.,  Organ,  D.,  & Near,  J.P.  (1983)  Organizational citizenship 

behaviors:  it's nature and antecedents.  Journal  of Applied

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


184

Psychology.  68.  453-463.

Sonnenfield,  & Peiperl  (1988)  staffing policy as a strategic response:  A 

typology of career systems.  Academy of Management Review.  13.  588- 
600.

Sorohan,  E.  (1993)  Wanted  (Wo)mentors.  Training and Development.  47,  9, 

10.

Spangler,  E.,  Gordon,  M.,  & Pipkin,  R.  (1978)  Token women:  An empirical 
test of Ranter's hypothesis.  American Journal of Sociology.  85.  160- 
170.

Spragins,  E.  (1993)  Managing diversity.  Inc..  15.  1,  33.
Staehle,  C.M.  (1985)  Job dissatisfaction and action alternatives:  A 

study of the relationship between dissatisfaction and behaviors  in 
work organizations.  Unpublished honors thesis,  College of Business 
and Management,  University of Maryland.

Staw,  B.M.  (1977)  Motivation in organizations:  Toward synthesis and 
redirection,  In B.M.  Staw & G.R.  Salancik  (Eds.)  New Directions in

Organizational Behavior,  (pp.55-95)  Chicago;  St.Clair.
Staw,  B.M.,  Bell,  N.E.,  & Clausen,  J.A.  (1986)  The dispositional

approach to job attitudes:  A lifetime longitudinal test.  American 
Science Quarterly.  31.  56-77.

Staw,  B.M.  & Ross,  J.  (1985)  Stability in the midst of  change:  A 

dispositional approach to  job attitudes.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology.  70.  469-480.

Steers,  R.M.  (1977)  Antecedents and outcomes of organizational 

commitment,  Administrative Science Quarterly.  22.  46-56.

Stevens,  J.M.,  Beyer,  J.,  & Trice,  H.M.  (1978)  Assessing personal,  role 

and organizational predictors of managerial commitment.  Academy of 
Management Journal,  21_,  380-396.

Stone,  E.  & Hollenbeck,  J.  (1984)  Some issues associated with the use of 
moderated regression.  Organizational Behavior and Human Performance. 
34,  195-213.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


185
Strauss,  G.  (1968)  Human relations —  1968  style.  Industrial Relations. 

VII.

Stumpf,  S.A.  & Hartman,  K.  (1984)  Individual exploration to

organizational commitment or withdrawal,  Academy of Management 
Journal.  27.  308-329.

Tagiuri,  R.  (1968)  The concept of organizational climate.  In R.Taguiri & 

G.  Litwin  (Eds.)  Organizational climate:  Exploration of a concept. 
Boston:  Harvard University Press.

Thomas,  D.  (1990)  The impact of race on managers'  experiences of

developmental relationships:  An intra-organizational study.  Journal 
of Organizational Behavior.  11.  479-492.

Thorndike,  L.L.  (1917)  Early interests:  Their permanence and relation to 

abilities.  Schools and Sociology.  5.,  178-179.

Thurstone,  L.L.  (1931)  The measurement of  social attitudes.  Journal of 

Abnormal  and Social Psychology.  26.  249-269.

Tilly,  C.  (1991)  Reasons  for the continuing growth of part-time 

employment.  Monthly Labor Review.  114.  3,  10-18.

Triandis,  H.C.  (1959)  A critique and experimental design for the study 

of the relationship between productivity and job satisfaction. 
Psychological Bulletin.  56.  309-312.

Tsui,  A.S.,  Porter,  L.W.,  Pearce,  J.L.,  Tripoli,  A.M.  (1993) 

Reconceptualizing the employee-organization relationship:  An 
inducement-contribution approach.  Unpublished Manuscript,  University 
of California,  Irvine.

Tsui,  A.S.,  Hartwick,  J.,  & Sheppard,  B.H.  (1985)  Satisfaction- 

performance revisited:  Are happy workers better workers?  Paper 
presented to the 93rd annual meeting of the American Psychological 
Association,  Washington,  D.C.

Tsui,  A.,  Egan,  T.,  & O'Reilly,  C.  (1992)  Being different:  Relational 

demography and organizational attachment.  Administrative Science 
Quarterly.  37.  549-579.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


186
Tucker,  L.R.,  Si Lewis,  C.A.  1973.  A reliability coefficient  for maximum 

likelihood factor analysis.  Psvchometrika.  38.  1-10.

Vancouver,  J.B.,  Si Schmitt,  N.  (1991)  An exploratory examination of 

person-organization fit:  Organizational goal congruence.  Personnel 
Psychology.  44,  333-352.

Vandenberg,  R.  & Lance,  C.  (1992)  Examining the causal order of  job 

satisfaction and organizational  commitment.  Journal of Management. 
18,  153-167.

Vandenberg,  R.  & Self,  R.  (1993)  On assessing newcomer's  changing

commitments to the organization during the entry period.  Journal of 
Applied Psychology.  78,  557-568.

Vandenberg,  R.J.,  Self,  R.M.,  & Seo,  J.H.  (1994)  A critical examination 

of the internalization,  identification and compliance  commitment 
measures  in press.  Journal of Management.  20.  123-140.

Van Mannen,  J.  & Schein,  E.  (1979)  Toward a theory of organzational

socialization.  In B.M.  Staw  (Ed.)  Research in Organizational Behavior 
(Vol.  1,  209-266).  Greenwich,  CT:  JAI  Press.

Vanzelst,  R.H.,  & Kerr,  W.A.  (1953)  Worker's attitudes towards merit 

ratings.  Personnel Psychology.  6,  159-172.

Viteles,  M.S.  (1953)  Motivation and Morale in Industry.  New York: 

Norton.

Vroom,  V.  (1964)  Work and Motivation,  Wiley,  New York.
Wanous,  J.P.  (1974)  A causal-correlational analysis of the job 
satisfaction-job performance relatioship.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology.  59.  139-144.

Waters,  L.K.,  Roach,  D.,  & Batlis,  N.  (1974)  Organizational  climate

dimensions and job-related attitudes.  Personnel -Psychology.  27.  465- 
476.

Weiner,  Y.  & Vardi,  Y.  (1980)  Relationships between job,  organizational 

and career commitments and work outcomes- an integrative approach. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance.  26.81-96.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


187
Wicker,  A.W.  (1969)  Attitudes vs.  actions:  The relationship of verbal 

and overt behavioral responses to attitude objects.  Journal of 
Social  Issues.  25.  41-78.

Wickert,  F.R.  (1951)  Turnover and employee feelings of ego involvement 

in day to day operations of a company.  Personnel Psychology.  4,  185- 
197.

Wietz,  J.  & Nuckols,  R.C.  (1953)  The validity of direct and indirect 
questions  in measuring  job satisfaction.  Personnel  Psychology.  5., 
487-494.

Wiggins,  J.D.,  Lederer,  D.A.,  Salkowe,  A.,  & Rys,  G.S.  (1983)  Job 
satisfactiuon related to tested congruence and differentiation. 
Journal of Vocational Behavior.  23.  112-121.

Williams,  L.J.  & Anderson,  S.E.  1991.  Job satisfaction and

organizational  commitment as predictors of organizational citizenship 
and in-role behaviors.  Journal of Management.  17.  601-618.

Williams,  L.  Sc Hazer,  B.  (1986)  Antecedents and consequences of

satisfaction and commitment  in turnover models:  A re-analysis with 
latent variable structural equation models.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology.  71.  219-231.

Wofford,  J.C.  (1971)  The motivational bases of  job satisfaction and  job 

performance.  Personnel  Psychology.  24,  501-518.

Winer,  B.J.  (1971)  Statistical principles  in experimental design.  (2nd 

ed.)  New York:  McGraw-Hill.

Wright,  R.  & Werther,  W.  (1991)  Mentors at work.  Journal of Management 

Development.  .10,3,  25-32.

Wright,  P.  & McMahan,  G.  (1992)  Theoretical perspectives  for  strategic 

human resource management.  Journal of Management.  18,  295-320.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


VITA

188

William Kevin Barksdale was born in Birmingham,  Alabama 

on March 28th,  1961.  He received his high school diploma at 
W.A.  Berry High School in Birmingham.  He graduated Magna 
Cum Laude with a Bachelor's degree in Business 
Administration with a major in management from Georgia State 
University in Atlanta in 1989.  Dr.  Barksdale earned his 
doctorate from the College of Business Administration at 
Georgia State with a major in Personnel and Employment 
Relations.  He has worked in a variety of occupations 
including one year of service with the Hoover Police 
Department in Birmingham,  Alabama,  and eight years of 
service in the natural gas pipeline construction industry in 
the Atlanta area.  He has written papers on work commitment, 
the psychological contract,  employee performance,  and 
research methods.  Dr.  Barksdale has also consulted with 
several large organizations in Atlanta,  including Delta 
Airlines.  He is presently on faculty at the University of 
Memphis in Memphis,  Tennessee and may be contacted by mail 
at the Department of Management,  Fogelman College of 
Business and Economics,  University of Memphis,  Memphis,  TN, 
38152.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

