INFORMATION TO USERS

This  manuscript has  been  reproduced from  the  microfilm  m aster  UMI  films the 
text  directly  from  the  original  or  copy  submitted.  Thus,  some  thesis  and 
dissertation  copies are  in  typewriter face,  while others  may  be  from  any type  of 
computer printer.

The quality of this  reproduction is  dependent upon  the quality of the copy 
subm itted.  Broken  or  indistinct  print,  colored  or  poor  quality  illustrations  and 
photographs,  print  bleedthrough,  substandard  margins,  and  improper alignment 
can adversely affect reproduction.

In the unlikely event that the author did not send  UMI a complete  manuscript and 
there  are  missing  pages,  these  will  be  noted.  Also,  if  unauthorized  copyright 
material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.

Oversize  materials  (e.g.,  maps,  drawings,  charts)  are  reproduced  by  sectioning 
the  original,  beginning  at  the  upper  left-hand  comer and  continuing  from  left to 
right in equal sections with small overlaps.  Each original  is also photographed in 
one exposure and is included in reduced form at the back of the book.

in 

included 

Photographs 
the  original  manuscript  have  been  reproduced 
xerographically in this copy.  Higher quality 6” x 9”  black and white  photographic 
prints are available for any photographs or illustrations appearing  in this copy for 
an additional charge.  Contact UMI directly to order.

Bell & Howell Information and Learning 

300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, Ml  48106-1346 USA 

800-521-0600

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


CUSTOMER INVOLVEMENT IN NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT 

CUSTOMER INTERACTION INTENSITY AND 

CUSTOMER NETWORK ISSUES

A THESIS

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL 

OF THE UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA 

BY

JOSEPH MICHAEL BONNER

IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE REQUIRMENTS 

FOR THE DEGREE OF 

DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY

Orville C. Walker, Jr, Advisor

JUNE 1999

Reproduced with permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


UMI Number:  9934936

Copyright 1999 by 
Bonner,  Joseph Michael

All rights reserved.

UMI Microform 9934936 

Copyright 1999,  by UMI Company. All rights reserved.

This microform edition is protected against unauthorized 

copying under Title 17, United States Code.

UMI

300 North Zeeb Road 
Ann Arbor, MI 48103

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA

This is to certify that I have examined this bound copy o f a doctoral thesis by

Joseph Michael Bonner

and have found that it is complete and satisfactory in all respects, 

and that any and all revisions required by the final 

examining committee have been made.

Orville C. Walker, Jr. Ph.D.
Name of Faculty Advisor

Signature of Faculty Advisor

Date

GRADUATE SCHOOL

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

There were so many people who contributed to my completing the doctoral 

program, and deserve many thanks. First, Orv was a terrific advisor, and truly prepared 

me for this career. For example, I learned from Orv how to concisely articulate an 

argument which is a skill I can use the rest of my life. In addition, I am extremely grateful 

to him for helping me acquire financial support for my research. Also, I would like to 

thank my committee members who all contributed to the quality of my dissertation, and 

to my education.

Second, I feel very fortunate to have developed wonderful friendships with my 

fellow doctoral students in the marketing department. They provided invaluable 

intellectual and motivational support. Whether it was unwinding at the local brew pub or 

providing me with encouragement after a presentation, their support clearly allowed me 

to endure the stresses and strains of the program. These friendships will never be 

forgotten.

My wife, Pat, proved again how special she is. She sacrificed tremendously as I 

was unable, at times, to provide her with close companionship. Lastly, I am forever 

thankful to my parents who provided me with the support to enter into higher education, 

and who instilled a great deal of confidence in myself to make changes in my life.

i

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


TABLE OF CONTENTS

SECTION 

CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION 

CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE AND BACKGROUND 

CHAPTER 3: THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 

CHAPTER 4: METHODOLOGY 

CHAPTER 5: RESULTS 

CHAPTER 6: DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 

APPENDIX A: STUDY QUESTIONNAIRE 

APPENDIX B: FUNC MANAGER QUESTIONNAIRE 

PAGE

1

10

22

50

72

94

124

135

APPENDIX C: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS AND CORRELATIONS 

13 8 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

139

ii

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


FIGURES 

PAGE

LIST OF FIGURES

3
25
32
97
99

99

100

107
108

108

109

111

111

112

1-1  Customer Involvement in New Product Development 
3-1  Continuum of Customer Interaction Intensity 
3-2  Customer Involvement Framework 
6-1 
6-2  The Effects of Product Newness on the Relationship Between 

Summary of Customer Interaction Intensity Findings 

Customer Interaction Intensity and Customer Information Quality

6-3  The Effects of Product Newness on the Relationship Between 

Customer Interaction Intensity and Product Performance

6-4  The Effects of Product Embeddedness on the Relationship Between 

Customer Interaction Intensity and Customer Information Quality

Summary of Customer Network Findings 

6-5 
6-6  The Effects o f Market Heterogeneity on the Relationship Between 

Customer Non-redundancy and Customer Information Quality

6-7  The Effects o f Market Heterogeneity on the Relationship Between 

Customer Non-redundancy and Schedule Adherence

6-8  The Effects of Product Newness on the Relationship Between 

Customer Non-redundancy and Product Performance

6-9  The Effects of Product Newness on the Relationship Between the 

Maintenance o f Weak Ties and Product Performance

6-10  The Effects of Product Newness on the Relationship Between the 

Maintenance o f Weak Ties and Market Performance

6-11  The Effects of Market Heterogeneity on the Relationship Between 

the Maintenance of Weak Ties and Schedule Adherence

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


TABLES 

LIST OF TABLES

2-1 

4-1 

Customer Involvement inNPD Phases 

Distribution of Sample by Industry 

4-2  Multi-item Measure Reliability Estimates 

4-3  Measure Validation: Correlation Between Project Manager and 

Functional Manager Reports

5-1 

5-2 

5-3 

5-4 

5-5 

Regression Models for Predicting Project Outcomes and Mediating 
Variables

Customer Information Quality: Estimate of Simple Slope Coefficients at 
Different Moderator Levels o f Product Newness

75

Product Performance: Estimate of Simple Slope Coefficients at Different  76
Levels of Product Newness

Customer Information Quality: Estimate o f Simple Slope Coefficients at 
Different Levels of Product Embeddedness

Team Satisfaction: Estimate of Simple Slope Coefficients at Different 
Levels o f Product Embeddedness

5-6 

Successful Customer Interaction Intensity Hypothesis Tests Summary 

5-7  Market Performance: Estimate of Simple Slope Coefficients at Different 

Levels of Product Newness

5-8 

5-9 

Customer Information Quality: Estimate o f Simple Slope Coefficients at 
Different Levels o f Market Heterogeneity

Schedule Adherence: Estimate of Simple Slope Coefficients at Different 
Levels o f Market Heterogeneity

5-10  Successful Customer Network Hypothesis Tests Summary 

5-11  Regression Models for Relationships Between Mediating Variables and 

Project Outcomes

5-12  Regressions for Early and Late Customer Interactions 

iv

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

PAGE

15

51

59

59

74

77

78

79

80

84

84

86

89

91


CHAPTER 1:  INTRODUCTION

“Customer involvement has been shown to improve the effectiveness of the 

product concept... However, it is not clear exactly how or when suppliers and 

customers are appropriately involved in the development process, and the 

evidence is not unanimous.”  (Brown and Eisenhardt,  1995; pp. 371-372)

NPD managers have many decisions to make in developing a strategy for 

involving customers in new product development. This thesis examines three important 

decisions facing NPD managers: (1) what mechanisms should be used to involve 

customers in NPD activities, (2) what types o f customers should be involved, and (3) 

does it matter whether customer involvement is early or late in the project? This 

dissertation will provide some insight into these decisions that will help NPD 

organizations develop more successful products.

How NPD Organizations Become Market-Oriented

Customer involvement can be viewed as being related to the broader concept of 

market orientation. Market orientation has been defined by Kohli and Jaworski (1990) as 

the organization-wide acquisition, dissemination of, and response to market intelligence 

concerning customers and competitors. Customer involvement can be viewed as one 

means to become more market oriented, but applying the market orientation concept at 

the project level in NPD raises three issues which are covered in turn.

1

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


First, the market orientation literature provides little guidance on the appropriate 

form of customer interaction. In the Journal o f Marketing Research’s Special Issue on 

Innovation and New Products, Wind and Mahajan (1997) stressed that marketing 

researchers should focus on NPD research methods that involve customers to a higher 

degree than the more traditional, passive methods:

“Researchers should redefine marketing research and modeling [in product 

development] beyond the traditional scope of qualitative methods (such as, focus 

groups), consumer surveys, and experiments to encompass all approaches to the 

acquisition of knowledge about customers and the other key stakeholders. Figure 

1-1  illustrates the range of approaches that can be used to involve potential 

customers throughout the NPD process and reduce the traditional reliance on 

qualitative focus group interviews and survey research. It is critical that the new 

definition o f marketing research incorporate knowledge gained from all these 

sources.”  (Wind and Mahajan,  1997, pp. 9-10)

2

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Figure 1-1 

Customer Involvement in New Product Development

High

C/D
c/ d

Conjoint

analysis-based

studies

Concept tests: 
Focus Group 
Interviews

Low 

R&D  Concept tests: 
knows  Quantitative 
best 
No 

Methods
Passive 

Knowledge-base

marketing
research

Co-specification

and

development

Beta
Testing

Consumer
labs

Consumer 
site visits

User
group
feedback

Trade
Shows

Some

Limited

Extreme

LEVEL OF CUSTOMER INVOLVEMENT 

(Wind and Mahajan,  1997)

This call for increasing levels of customer involvement is driven in part by reports 

o f the success or promise of new techniques, such as lead user analysis (von Hippel, 

1986), information acceleration (Urban, et. al.,  1997), and rapid prototyping, which 

involve customers to a high degree. Such techniques address the difficulty that customers 

and NPD teams have in exchanging information about future products in highly 

ambiguous situations.

This dissertation identifies the general underlying dimensions that are inherent in 

NPD market research techniques and customer interaction processes, and ties them to 

project outcomes. Dimensions, such as the degree o f participation, frequency of 

interaction, and the degree of joint problem solving, are conceptualized. For example, this 

research distinguishes between projects doing a one-time survey of potential customers

3

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


from projects including customers as participating members o f the project team. A project 

using a one-time survey would be rated low on intensity of interaction due to its low 

frequency of occurrence, low participation level by customers in the activity, and low 

degree of joint problem solving. On the other hand, a project using customers as on-going 

team participants in co-development would be rated high on intensity of interaction 

because of its interactive, participatory, and joint problem solving nature.

Second, a key issue for market-oriented firms is how to target the right sources of 

customer information. The impact of the diversity o f the customers contacted on project 

outcomes is considered. It might be expected that there is a limit to the diversity of 

customers with whom a product development team should interact, and that certain 

customers may be better sources of information than others.

In this dissertation, the structure o f the network of customers is viewed as an 

important determinant o f the usefulness of sources of customer information. This view 

follows the social networks framework which theorizes that sources o f information that 

are not closely tied to each other or are weakly tied to a recipient o f the information will 

generally provide greater diversity of information (Burt,  1992, Granovetter,  1973).

Third, market orientation research suggests that the process of acquiring market 

information is continuous and stable over time. However, project teams that continually 

scan and respond to market information have been found to be unable to finalize product 

specifications and implement the product in a timely fashion (Ancona and Caldwell,

1992). This leads to an interesting issue concerning whether intense customer

4

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


involvement at early versus later stages in the project may differentially influence project 

outcomes.

Contingencies Influencing Customer Interaction Effectiveness

This dissertation investigates three conditions that moderate the relationship 

between customer involvement and project performance: market heterogeneity, product 

newness and product embeddedness. It examines the proposition that a high degree of 

customer involvement is not always advantageous to project outcomes. For instance, it is 

hypothesized that when the customer needs to be satisfied by the product are 

homogeneous, interacting with a diverse set o f customers is inefficient. Also, when the 

product being developed is an enhancement to an existing product, highly intensive 

interactions with customer are unwarranted.

The effects of product embeddedness are investigated as well. It is defined as the 

degree to which the product being developed is embedded in customer systems and 

processes. In other words, do customers have to create a new system or change an 

existing system in order to use the product. In this study, a high degree o f embeddedness 

is hypothesized to be linked to the need for more interactive, and participative customer 

interactions. This variable places emphasis on understanding the customer’s process in 

using the product. This is a novel addition to the new products research.

5

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Multiple Outcomes from Customer Involvement

The proposed research will address the processes mediating the relationship 

between customer involvement and project performance. Existing research leads one to 

conclude that more customer involvement is generally better than less involvement. 

However, as relationships with customers develop through increased involvement in 

project activities, customer influence over the NPD project becomes an issue. Customer 

expectations rise, and demands for specific product features increase. This can become a 

problem if the idiosyncratic requirements of a single influential customer or a closely tied 

network o f customers are not suitable for the broader marketplace. Several researchers 

have emphasized these and other concerns about getting “too close” to customers 

(MacDonald,  1995; Bower and Christensen, 1995; Uzzi,  1997).

The influence of customer involvement on information quality, on customer 

influence on decision making during the project, and on the project’s ultimate 

performance outcomes are examined. The examination o f all of these outcomes may 

reveal a “double edge sword” nature of customer involvement - involvement may provide 

informational benefits along with some loss of control.

6

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Research Questions:

In summary, the research objectives being addressed in this dissertation are:

(1)  Conceptualize and develop a measure of customer involvement in new product 

development projects,

(2) Determine how the characteristics of the product, specifically product newness, and 

product embeddedness, influence the relationship between customer interaction 

intensity and project outcomes,

(3)  Determine how product newness, and market heterogeneity influences the 

relationships between the network of customers or potential customers interacted with 

during a NPD project and project outcomes,

(4) Determine how the timing of customer interaction during the project has an influence 

on project outcomes.

Theory Foundations

Following organizational communications and information processing theories 

(Daft and Lengel,  1984,  1986), hypotheses are developed in Chapter 3 which stress the 

conditions under which intensive customer interactions are advantageous, and conditions 

where they may be detrimental to project outcomes. This theoretical foundation posits 

that for communication channels to be effective the information richness o f the channel 

must be matched to the uncertainty and ambiguity in the environment. Rich channels, 

such as face-to-face interactions, are suitable in highly ambiguous situations, while less

7

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


rich channels, such as formal, numerical documents, and surveys, are suitable in 

unambiguous situations.

Intensive customer interactions are viewed in the dissertation as a richer form of 

interaction between customers and the NPD project team. In addition, characteristics of 

the product being developed are posited to be related to the degree o f ambiguity in the 

project. Therefore, this framework fits nicely into the NPD context, and allows for 

hypotheses to be made relating customer interactions to project outcomes.

This dissertation also contributes to the emerging network view of new product 

development. Hakansson (1989) has articulated a view of NPD which emphasizes the 

facilitating and limiting influences of the network of relationships and resources. This 

dissertation utilizes social network theories. The social network literature provides the 

perspectives that (1) new information is acquired by a focal organization from a source 

which is either a weak tie contact (i.e. participates in different social circles from the focal 

organization) (Granovetter,  1973), or which is not tied to other contacts of the focal 

organization (i.e. non-redundant) (Burt,  1992), and (2) a focal organization acquires 

influence over non-redundant contacts by being the bridge between non-redundant 

contacts (i.e. spans a structural hole) (Burt, 1992).

This framework is used to develop hypotheses on the relationships between the 

network structure o f customers involved in new product development activities, and the 

quality o f information available to the project team, the degree o f influence customers 

have over the project, and the final performance of the product in the market.

8

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Contribution of the Dissertation Research

From a theoretical standpoint, the academic literature touts the importance of 

involving customers in new product development efforts. However, this literature 

provides little understanding concerning what types of customers should be involved, or 

how and when they should be involved. Also, this dissertation provides conceptual clarity 

to the customer involvement construct, and provide a better understanding of the 

moderating and mediating factors influencing the relationship between customer 

involvement, and project performance.

From a managerial standpoint, the results of this dissertation assist NPD managers 

in developing a strategy for infusing effective kinds and amounts o f customer 

involvement in a given NPD project. This dissertation provides specific guidance on the 

kinds of situations suitable for intense customer interactions. The study places emphasis 

on understanding the social structure of the network of customers. Examination of the 

customer network reveals that NPD teams may become too focused on sim ilar types of 

customers or customers with whom they have had past experiences resulting in less 

innovative, and less competitive products.

Organization o f the Dissertation Report

The remainder of the dissertation is organized as follows. Chapter 2 reviews the 

literature. Chapter 3 develops and discusses the conceptual framework and hypotheses. 

Chapter 4 describes the methodology used in the study. Chapter 5 describes the results, 

and Chapter 6 contains the discussion and conclusions.

9

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


CHAPTER 2:  LITERATURE AND BACKGROUND

This chapter reviews the literature that is relevant to the research questions 

addressed in this dissertation and provides background on the nature o f customer 

involvement in the new product development process. It is organized into the following 

sections:

1)  New Product Development Literature

2)  Market Research Techniques Literature

3)  Networks in New Product Development Literature

4)  Background on Customer Involvement in the NPD

NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT

The new product development literature is a group of studies which relates a 

broad range o f NPD product and process variables to project performance. An extensive 

review o f this literature uncovered only one study that directly addressed the relationship 

between customer involvement and project performance. Karagozoglu and Brown (1993) 

found that customer involvement, together with the use o f multifunctional teams, were 

the most often used methods to shorten project throughput time. However, what 

constituted customer involvement was not clearly defined. Therefore, their study can only

10

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


be considered exploratory, but the results encourage further research as addressed in this 

dissertation.

Other studies have addressed customer involvement in some fashion. Cooper and 

Kleinschmidt (1987), found that a strong market orientation and proficiency at upfront, 

predevelopment activities was positively related to product profitability and timeliness to 

market. Zirger and Maidique (1990) found support for the relationship between product 

value and financial performance, and argued that close contact between the development 

team and the end user was important in order to understand the value of particular 

features of the product. Gupta and Wilemon (1990) found the top inhibitor to new 

product success to be the poor definition of product requirements which led to frequent 

changes in plans and significant rework over the course o f the project. They suggested 

that integrating the NPD project team and the customer early in the NPD process is 

necessary for developing clear product requirements early in the project.

These studies provide some evidence for the positive impact o f early customer 

involvement on project performance. However, these studies have two limitations. First, 

they do not address the effects of possible moderating conditions on the impact of 

customer involvement on project performance. For instance, it is conceivable that 

customer involvement may be less crucial, and have less positive impact on outcomes, 

when NPD projects are less innovative, or customer’s needs are relatively invariant. 

Similarly, the existing literature has nothing to say about the possible moderating 

influence of market heterogeneity on the relationship between the diversity of customers 

involved and project outcomes.

11

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Second, these studies do not isolate the effects of customer involvement from 

other variables within the NPD process. For example, customer involvement was 

considered part of the “quality of execution of marketing activities” construct in the 

Cooper and Kleinschmidt (1994) study, and the “product value” construct in the Zirger 

and Maidique (1990) study along with many other non-customer involvement aspects. 

Therefore, it’s difficult to isolate the effects of involvement on project performance. 

Consequently, this dissertation study (1) addresses the moderating effects of project 

innovativeness and market heterogeneity, and (2) distinguishes customer involvement 

from other NPD variables.

MARKET RESEARCH TECHNIQUES

There have been numerous research studies on specific NPD techniques which 

involve customers, such as lead user analysis for generating product ideas (von Hippel, 

1986), quality functional deployment for developing product specifications (Hauser and 

Clausing, 1988), information acceleration (i.e. computer multi-media simulation) for 

testing product concepts (Urban, et. al.,  1996), and customer visit programs (McQuarrie 

and McIntyre,  1990).

The purpose o f this study is to investigate the differential effects of the nature and 

level of customer involvement which varies across the above research techniques. For 

instance, two NPD projects may both use lead user analysis, but they may each involve 

lead users to a different extent, and in a different way. One project may conduct one lead

12

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

a


user meeting early in the project with lead users providing information on their needs. 

Another project may involve lead users more extensively by conducting on-going, weekly 

meetings with them, and in more ways by using lead users to design new product 

concepts in addition to providing needs information. By separating the underlying 

dimension of customer involvement from the specific research technique, our ability to 

link managerial actions to project outcomes will improve.

NETWORKS IN NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT

This stream of research takes the view that the network of sources of information 

and technology are the key determinants o f successful product development (Hakansson, 

1989). Clearly, this dissertation builds on this area of research.

Gemunden, et. al. (1996) studied the pattern of interactions between high 

technology companies and their network o f customers, suppliers, universities, and 

consultants for different types o f products. They found that, for incremental product 

improvements, firms which interacted proportionally more heavily with suppliers 

outperformed those firms that interacted proportionally less with suppliers. For new 

products, they found that those firms which interacted proportionally more heavily with 

customers and universities outperformed those that interacted proportionally less with 

customers and universities.

The Gemunden, et al (1996) study lends support to the notion that the type of 

product moderates the relationship between the pattern of interaction and project

13

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


outcomes. This dissertation research investigates this same moderator, but for 

relationships in customer-only networks. The focus here is on the diversity of customer 

sources o f information instead of different types of sources (i.e. customers, suppliers, 

universities, and consultants) as in the Gemunden, et. al. (1996) study. This dissertation 

also argues that it is the form of customer interaction, not that it just exists. It will 

consider dimensions of frequency, participativeness, bidirectionality, and joint problem 

solving.

BACKGROUND ON CUSTOMER INVOLVEMENT IN NPD

This section outlines the phases o f the NPD process, and discusses customer 

interaction activities in each phase. A key construct in this study is the intensity of 

customer interaction which is the degree to which these customer involvement activities 

entail the direct participation of customers in frequent, interactive communications. This 

section provides an understanding of these activities, and how they may vary in terms of 

interaction intensity.

Typically the new product development process is modeled as a linear sequence 

of stages. One o f the most widely used models is the five stage model developed by 

Urban and Hauser (1993), and will serve as a basis here. The five phases are Opportunity 

Identification, Product Design, Testing, Commercialization, and Lifecycle Management. 

The last phase, the Lifecycle Management phase, is not considered this dissertation 

because it addresses the management o f the product after it has been introduced.

14

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Table 2-1  shows the four NPD phases in the first column. In the table, for each 

phase, the major tasks are listed in the second column, and examples o f techniques used 

in accomplishing the tasks are shown in the third column. In the last column are examples 

of customer involvement activities which are part o f the tasks and techniques used in 

NPD.

Table 2-1 

Customer Involvement in NPD Phases

NPD Phase
1.  Opportunity 
Identification

Major Tasks
Generate ideas 
and concepts for 
products

Example Techniques Customer Involvement
In-depth interviews, 
focus groups, lead 
user analysis, 
creative group 
discussions

Issue discussions 
Discovery of product 
ideas
Evaluation of product 
ideas

2. Product Design

3. Testing

User needs 
analysis, concept 
tests, product 
specification, and 
business analysis

Product testing, 
marketing 
program testing

Surveys, customer 
visits, focus groups, 
quality functional 
deployment, 
simulation, 
prototype testing

Prototype testing, 
lab testing, beta 
testing, test 
marketing

Issue discussions 
Articulation of needs 
Evaluation of product 
concepts and 
prototypes

Product training 
discussions
Product use discussions 
Evaluation of products 
and marketing program

4.
Commercialization

Introduce the 
product to the 
market

Press releases, 
product tours, 
introduction events, 
promotion 
campaigns, success 
stories

Issue discussions 
Joint promotion 
activities 
Evaluation of 
marketing materials

15

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Opportunity Identification Phase

The purpose of the opportunity identification phase is to generate product 

ideas/concepts. New product ideas can come from many sources including, customers, 

competitors, the firm’s managers and employees, research organizations, and distribution 

channel members.

The methods used for generating ideas can vary widely from as simple as setting 

up information channels that are sensitive to idea sources or as sophisticated as using 

creative group methods and market research. The goal of idea generation is to create a 

large number of different ideas. The more ideas generated in this step, the more likely one 

or two will ultimately be a success in the market.

The nature of the research in this phase is exploratory. Interactions with customers 

often require significant two-way communication in order to develop solution alternatives 

and to adequately evaluate product ideas in such an early stage of conception. A widely 

used method of gaining knowledge from customers is through focused group discussions 

or what are termed “focus groups”. Customers in the group voice their opinions about the 

likes and dislikes of a product idea. Interaction among group members is encouraged to 

generate more insight from the discussion, and to expose latent feelings about the product 

issues. In addition, one-on-one in-depth interviews are often, used in order to probe deeply 

into understanding customer ideas, and needs driving their ideas.

NPD organizations have been found to seek out “lead users” of a product (von 

Hippel,  1986). Lead users face needs ahead of the general marketplace, and often have 

devised enhancements to current products that serve as an excellent source o f product

16

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


ideas, von Hippel (1986) outlines a lead user analysis process which consists of 

identifying lead users, generating product concepts in interactive group discussions, and 

testing lead user concepts with the general marketplace. Other types of creative group 

sessions with customers are used by NPD organizations. One such technique is called 

consumer idealized design (Ciccantelli and Magidson,  1993) where consumers design 

ideal products in an interactive group setting.

The intensity of customer interactions can vary significantly from project to 

project. A high degree o f customer interaction intensity in this phase consists of regular, 

interactive discussions on discovering, discussing and evaluating new products ideas. A 

low degree of customer interaction intensity consists of little customer interaction or 

simple feedback from customer surveys. For instance, a customer satisfaction survey may 

provide a NPD team with a product idea, but the interaction intensity would be 

considered to be at a low level.

The advantage o f higher intensity interactions in this stage is that product 

concepts can be developed more creatively, and interaction can result in a  better 

understanding of the product idea and the needs being addressed by the product.

However, the advantage of lower intensity interactions is that the exchange o f 

information is quick and without any potential for increasing commitment to the 

customer.

17

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Product Design/Specification Phase

The main purpose of the design phase is to take product ideas, and develop the 

product specification for the product to be developed. Three broad issues are considered 

in this phase. This includes developing a prioritized list o f customer needs for the 

product, developing the product or design specifications, and completing a business 

analysis.

A wide range of techniques are used in this phase. Quantitative techniques, such 

as surveys, are used to acquire information on needs, preferences and attitudes from a 

large number of potential customers. These techniques are focused on testing specific 

ideas, product capabilities and customer needs. Qualitative techniques, such as, customer 

visits, focus groups and in-depth interviews, are more open-ended techniques which 

allow for exploring into issues, and, possibly, for revealing underlying wants/needs. 

However, these techniques are not as generalizable to a large set of customers as are 

quantitative techniques.

Research methods used in this phase vary considerably in the degree of interaction 

intensity. For instance, the use o f secondary information such as, industry reports 

includes no customer involvement. The use of broad-based surveys, represent a lower 

level o f customer involvement as compared to customer interviews and group discussions 

with customers. Rapid prototyping o f products which entails receiving continual feedback 

from customers is a more intensive form of customer interaction than is the traditional 

“design it once” method of product development (Eisenhardt and Tabrizi,  1995). 

Computer simulation techniques which place customers in animated shopping situations

18

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


are able to involve customers to a higher degree than more traditional product concept 

evaluation methods (Urban, et. al.,  1997).

Once again, the advantage of higher intensity interactions is that the NPD 

organization can acquire a deeper understanding of customer needs by being able to probe 

deeply into issues. Also, customers are more able to understand the product capabilities 

through face-to-face discussions. The advantage of low intensity interactions is that 

customer input occurs quickly, and through broad-based survey techniques can be more 

easily generalized to the broader market.

Testing

The purpose of the testing phase is to test the product in usage situations, and to 

test the marketing program prior to launching the product into the marketplace. As a first 

step, this phase often consists of internal lab testing to flush out problems with the 

product prior to releasing the product to customers to test. Next, in business-to-business 

markets, beta testing is often used. It consists of releasing an early version of the product 

to business customers to be used in real situations. Customers provide feedback to the 

NPD organization on the quality of the product. Test marketing is often used for 

consumer packaged goods. This includes testing the product in actual use in limited 

markets along with the other elements of the marketing program.

The intensity of customer interaction can vary in at least two ways during this 

stage. First, NPD organizations can choose the level of customer interaction during 

product training for customers. On-site training seminars for customers represents a

19

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


higher degree of customer interaction than providing only product documentation to 

customers. Interacting with customers in seminars provides an opportunity to gather 

information about the customer’s environment, and requirements for support and training 

for the product.

Second, NPD organizations can choose the level of customer interaction during 

the testing o f the product in the field. For instance, a NPD organization may receive bi­

weekly written reports from customers who are using the products. Another NPD 

organization review product testing with customers in regular, group discussions. The 

former case would be less intensive than the later case.

The advantage o f intensive customer interactions during the testing phase is that 

the NPD organization can explore issues with customers concerning the use and support 

of the product. Also, intensive interactions encourage customers to ask more questions 

about using the product. Often, customers can inappropriately use new products, and the 

test results suffer. The advantage of less intensive interactions is that it can take less time 

and coordination effort.

Commercialization

The purpose of this phase is to introduce the product into the market. This phase 

consists of a wide range o f introduction activities from the planning of the marketing 

introduction program to the execution o f the program. It includes activities such as, press 

conferences/tours, initiating promotional campaigns, and executing other introduction 

events.

20

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Customer interactions with the NPD team can be extensive in product 

introduction activities. For instance, customers are often involved in promotional 

activities to lend more credibility to the introduction. Customers can attest to the value 

provided by the new product to other customers, and channel members. Also, customers 

can be used to evaluate product introduction materials. For instance, customers can 

provide feedback on advertisements and product literature.

A high degree of customer interaction in this stage would be indicated by 

customer involvement in joint promotion activities, evaluating the marketing materials 

used for the product introduction, and discussing issues about the product introduction. A 

low degree of customer interaction would be indicated by little customer involvement in 

these activities.

In summary, this chapter reviewed some of the relevant literature, and provided 

some background on customer involvement NPD. Chapter 3 describes the framework 

used in the study, and the hypotheses.

21

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


CHAPTER 3:  THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

The key constructs employed in the dissertation are defined and related to the new 

product development environment. These constructs are largely adapted from the 

organizational communications, social networks, and new products literatures. This section 

is  then followed by a section discussing the framework and hypotheses for the study.

KEY CONSTRUCTS

Interaction Intensity

NPD organizations can choose the level of intensity o f procedures they use to acquire 

information from customers. An organization may choose to interact with customers in a 

direct, interactive fashion, such as face-to-face discussions with lead users in a group setting. 

Alternatively, it may interact in a more passive, distant form, such as broad-based surveys. 

The former is considered to have a higher degree of intensity o f interaction than the later.

The conceptualization of interaction intensity employed here is an aggregation of 

multiple dimensions. The organizational communications literature has argued that 

communications between organizational entities can vary on at least four dimensions: 

frequency, modality, direction, and content (Krone, Jablin, and Putnam, 1987; Mohr and 

Nevin,  1990). In this study, the construct of interaction intensity is built upon these four 

dimensions, as defined below.

22

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Frequency refers to how often, on average, communication occurred between 

members of the NPD team and its customers throughout the project. A project with a high 

frequency of communication with customers would indicate a more interactive form of 

interaction with customers. For instance, a project which uses rapid, successive versions of 

prototypes for evaluation by customers would interact frequently with customers. A project 

which only performs a one-time survey o f customer needs would indicate a low frequency o f 

interaction with customers.

Modality is the method used to transmit information. One way in which this has been 

conceptualized is the degree to which the method transmits rich information (i.e. variety of 

cues, feedback, and personalization) (Daft and Lengel, 1984). In this dissertation, this notion 

of rich information exchange is evaluated by measuring the degree o f participativeness by 

customers in new product development activities. Participativeness is defined as the degree 

to which customers actively and directly participate in NPD activities. It includes customer 

participation in face-to-face interactions, group discussions, and meetings. For instance, a 

NPD project that includes customers on the team that generates new product ideas would be 

considered to have a higher degree of participativeness than a project which acquires 

information on product ideas from written survey questionnaire responses.

In the organizational communications literature, the direction dimension 

characterizes the flow of information between partners as either one-way or bidirectional 

(Mohr and Nevin, 1990). This dissertation uses a bidirectionality dimension to examine the 

degree to which the flow of information between a new product development organization 

and its customers is bidirectional. Interactions that are primarily one-way from the customer

23

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


to the NPD organization are more likely to represent simple responses concerning customer 

needs or preferences. Two-way interaction represents an interactive exchange where 

problems are analyzed, solutions are proposed, and feedback is provided. For instance, the 

use of lead users in developing product concepts, or the use of focus groups in evaluating a 

product concept, tends to result in two-way interaction.

The content o f the interaction is also considered a component of interaction intensity. 

The content of interest in this study is the degree of joint problem solving between 

customers and NPD team related to the product and its use. For instance, the interaction 

between a NPD team and customers might contain significant probing into issues such as 

how a customer might use the new product, who will be involved in its use, what impact the 

product might have on the customer’s organization, and so on. In this case, the degree o f 

joint problem solving would be high. At the other extreme, customers may provide direct 

statements of what they want with little additional probing or interaction. For example,  “I 

want a 500 Mhz processor computer”.

These four attributes of customer interaction intensity - frequency, participativeness, 

bidirectionality, and joint problem solving - are joined together to represent an overall 

strategy for involving customers in NPD. A continuum o f customer interaction intensity is 

diagrammed in Figure 3-1.

24

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Figure 3-1

Continuum of Customer Interaction Intensity

Low Intensity

Frequency

Participativeness

Low

Low

<

<

>

<--------

----------- >

High Intensity

High

High

Direction

Unidirectional

<------------------------------>

Bidirectional

Joint Problem
Solving

Simple

<

>

Complex

Organizations that pursue a low intensity strategy towards involving customers in 

new product development interact with customers infrequently, and use methods of 

acquiring customer information where customers do not participate in directly. The flow of 

information is unidirectional, going from the customer to the NPD team. The content of the 

information consists of simple feedback from direct questions.

At the other end of the continuum, NPD organizations follow a highly intensive 

customer interaction strategy. Here customer interaction is frequent throughout the phases of 

the NPD process. Customers participate directly in interactive market research, and other 

NPD activities as described in Chapter 2. These activities include extensive discussions 

about customer needs and preferences for solutions. The content of the information consists

25

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


o f rich, elaborate descriptions of the customer environment, the problems faced, the value 

placed on products and feedback on alternative solutions.

In summary, the interaction intensity dimension captures the depth of customer 

involvement in new product development. Such questions as, how interactive are encounters 

with customers, what is the depth of discussion of the issues, and do customers participate in 

project activities, are addressed with this construct.

Customer Network

This dissertation examines not only the customer interaction process, but also  the 

characteristics of the sources of customer information. An unexplored issue in NPD is how 

the makeup of the network o f customers who interact with the NPD project team might 

influence the NPD project. It’s important to note, however, that this study only considers 

networks of business customers (i.e. business organizations) in a business marketing context, 

and not customers in a consumer marketing context.

This dissertation focuses on the customer network from a social influence 

perspective. According to the social networks literature, focal organizations have access to 

more diverse and potentially new information either through weak tie contacts (Granovetter, 

1973) or the bridging of non-redundant network contacts (i.e. structural holes) (Burt,  1992).

Zaheer and Zaheer (1997) developed an organization-level construct called 

maintenance of weak ties which captures the overall pattern of weak ties maintained by a 

focal organization. Following from their work, the maintenance of weak ties construct refers

26

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


to the extent to which a new product development project team interacts with customers or 

potential customers who have been only weakly tied to the NPD organization in the past.

A weak customer tie can be thought of as a relationship between a customer and the 

NPD division that is characterized by infrequent past interactions relevant to the division’s 

business. A strong customer tie, on the other hand, is characterized by a customer who has 

been frequently and deeply involved with the NPD organization in the past. This dissertation 

operationalizes the strength of a customer tie as a combination of  (a) the customer’s 

involvement in the NPD organization’s development and marketing activities on past 

projects, (b) the customer’s providing of resources on past projects, (c) the exchange of key 

personnel between the customer’s organization and the NPD organization, and (d) the 

significance o f the customer’s share of the NPD organization’s sales. Therefore, a very 

strong customer tie would exist with a customer who accounts for a significant portion of the 

division’s sales, who was involved in past development and marketing activities, who has 

exchanged key personnel, and who has provided resources to the NPD organization. The 

construct captures the “closeness” of the relationship between the NPD organization and a 

customer which has formed from past experiences.

McEvily and Zaheer (1997) developed an organization-level construct called non­

redundancy which is derived from Burt’s notion o f bridging non-redundant contacts. They 

defined it as the extent to which the contacts in a focal actor’s advice network are not linked 

to one another. Consequently, customer non-redundancy is defined in this study as the 

degree to which customers in a NPD organization’s customer network are operationally 

independent and are not linked to one another. The types of links between network customer

27

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


pairs used to operationally define and measure their degree of non-redundancy include the 

extent to which the two customers (a) have different technical competencies, (b) address 

different markets, (c) attend different industry events, such as conferences, training 

seminars, and users group meetings, and (d) pursue different competitive strategies.

Product Newness

The degree of newness o f the product being developed is used as a moderator of the 

relationship between customer interaction intensity and project outcomes. Similar to other 

new product research definitions o f product newness (Olson, et. al.  1995), product newness 

is defined as the degree of newness of the product to the firm and to the customer. This 

follows from a Booz, Allen and Hamilton (1982) typology of new products. They defined 

four types of projects:

1)  New-to-the-world products:  True innovations to the firm, creating entirely new markets.

2)  Me-too products:  A product new for the company developing the product, but not new 

to customers in the target market due to the existence of one or more competing similar 

products.

3)  Line extensions:  New products which are extensions of existing products. These 

extensions are often targeted at new customer segments. In general, this type of product 

is not significantly new to the company developing the product, but may be new to 

customers in a newly targeted segment.

28

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


4)  Product modifications: Improvements or revisions o f existing products. These products 

are not significantly new to either the company developing the product or the customer 

being targeted.

Product Embeddedness

Product embeddedness is defined as the degree to which the product being developed 

will be integrated into the customer’s organizational environment. The elements of the 

customer’s environment which can be significantly impacted by a new product include 

people, processes and information systems. A product which is tightly integrated into a 

customer’s environment can not be removed easily and involves high switching costs. For 

example, a computer-aided design software product is generally highly embedded in a 

customer’s environment. It is tightly integrated into the customer’s process for designing 

and manufacturing products. This product is closely linked into company information 

systems, influences how employees perform their jobs, and is a fundamental part of 

important internal processes. On the other hand, a laser printer product is not as embedded 

into the customer’s environment. A laser printer generally has less influence over how 

people perform their jobs, and is generally not an integral part of a critical organizational 

process.

Market Heterogeneity (MktHeter)

Market heterogeneity is the degree to which customer needs for the product are 

highly diverse and customer preferences vary.

29

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Perceived Customer Information Quality

The perceived customer information quality variable is the degree to which customer 

information was perceived to be accurate, relevant, and consistent, and provided clear 

signals and important details.

Customer Information Use

The customer information use variable is the degree to which customer information 

improved implementation, improved the team’s understanding o f the market, led to concrete 

actions, and shaped strategy.

Customer Decision Influence

Customer decision influence is the degree to which customers had an influence over 

key NPD decisions. These decisions include (1) which product ideas to investigate, (2) 

which product concept(s) to develop, (3) what product specifications/features to include in 

the product, (4) what the project schedule should be, (5) what changes should be made to the 

schedule and product during the project, (6) when to introduce the product, and (7) what the 

price should be for the product. The customer influence over NPD decisions can be much 

greater than simply providing information. For instance, customers may exert power over 

the NPD effort by demanding commitments for product features, or delivery of the product.

30

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Therefore, the customer decision influence variable is considered independent from the 

customer information use variable.

Performance Measures

Four dimensions of project performance were measured to cover a range of 

efficiency and effectiveness outcomes — Product Performance, Adherence to Schedule, 

Market Performance, and Team Satisfaction.

Product Performance (ProdPerf).  This is the degree to which the resulting new product’s 

quality, technical performance, features, and ability to meet customer needs was ahead, was 

on par, or behind the competition at the time of product introduction.

Adherence to Schedule (Sched).  This is the degree to which the project met, beat, or fell 

behind the schedule set for the project.

Market Performance (MktPerf).  This is the degree to which the new product’s sales, 

profitability and market share met, exceeded, or fell below project objectives.

Team Satisfaction (TSatis).  This is the degree to which the team was satisfied with the 

project. It consists of items concerning the team’s satisfaction with their contribution, the 

joint contribution o f the functional departments, and the team’s spirit.

31

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


FRAMEWORK AND HYPOTHESES

The customer involvement framework is depicted in Figure 3-2. The perspective 

taken in the theoretical framework is that customer interaction intensity, and the customer 

network influence NPD project outcomes. These relationships are moderated by either the 

product characteristics, product newness and product embeddedness, or market 

heterogeneity. In addition, customer interaction intensity and the customer network have an 

influence on variables which mediate the relationship between interaction intensity and the 

customer network, and project outcomes. These mediating variables are perceived customer 

information quality, information use and decision influence. The hypotheses from this 

framework are covered next.

Figure 3-2 

Customer Involvement Framework

Product Characteristics 
-Newness 
- Embeddedness

Interaction intensity
- Frequency
- Participativeness
- Bidirectionality
- Joint problem solving

Customer network
- Maintenance o f weak ties!
- Customer nonredundancy

Perceived customer 
information quality

Customer information use

Customer decision 
influence

Market Heterogeneity

32

Project Outcomes
-Product

performance

- Schedule 
adherence

-Market

performance

- Team satisfaction

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


The Relationships Between Customer Interaction Intensity and Project Outcomes

Interaction intensity.  The relationships between the intensity of interactions with 

customers and the perceived quality of information and project outcomes are proposed to be 

contingent upon the (1) the newness of the product being developed, and (2) the product’s 

degree of embeddedness in customer’s process. Each moderator will be addressed, in turn.

A product which is new to the NPD organization, and to customers is likely to entail 

a great deal of uncertainty about the product technology, product features, and customer 

requirements. It’s reasonable to expect that firms are likely to search externally for 

information to reduce this uncertainty. Outside sources, such as customers, suppliers, 

research institutions, competitors and so on provide information necessary for the NPD 

organization to learn about the market. Lead users can provide vital information to NPD 

organizations, and may at times even provide product solutions (von Hippel,  1986). 

Although a new product may be heavily technology-driven, the NPD organization must still 

understand how customers might apply the technology, and how they will value the product. 

These issues require customer information to resolve.

Given that all NPD projects should incorporate some customer information, why 

should the intensity o f the customer interaction be considered especially important for 

innovative projects? Do really new products require a different information acquisition 

process than simple product modifications?

When the product is new to the firm, and to customers, there is a general lack of 

understanding about the product and its application. The organizational information

33

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


processing literature has referred to this as ambiguity in the sense that knowledge o f cause- 

effect relationships becomes problematic (Daft and Macintosh,  1981). For really new 

products, customers often have difficulty providing accurate feedback, and the NPD 

organization may have difficulty understanding how the new product will be used in the 

customer’s environment.

Daft and Lengel (1984) theorized that an organization’s success is based on its ability 

to process information of appropriate richness. Daft and Lengel (1986) developed a model 

where information processing effectiveness is determined by the fit between the information 

processing requirements o f the environment, and the amount and richness of the 

communications media. When the environment is uncertain and equivocal, rich media are 

called for.

Daft and Lengel (1986) theorized that rich, face-to-face communication channels are 

effective when information is highly ambiguous because they allow both parties to develop 

new interpretations. As defined earlier, high intensity interaction mechanisms incorporate 

such rich, face-to-face communications channels. Therefore, such high intensity mechanisms 

facilitate the learning process between customers and the NPD organization by reducing 

ambiguity associated with how really new products will be used and valued. This, in turn, 

should result in a higher quality product. Some support for this contention is provided by 

case studies which suggest that the learning process for really new products is an iterative 

process consisting o f “probe and learn” forms o f information acquisition (Iansiti,  1991;

Lynn, et. al.,  1996). Lead user processes have been shown to be highly interactive as well 

(von Hippel,  1986; Herstatt and von Hippel, 1992).

34

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


On the other hand, Daft and Lengel (1986) also theorized that when knowledge about 

cause-effect relationships was high (i.e. low ambiguity), surveys are most effective. This 

situation fits the case when existing products are being modified. The NPD organization has 

a general understanding of the usage environment, and customers are readily able to provide 

accurate information to the NPD organization concerning their needs. In such situations, 

high intensity interaction mechanisms may not only be unnecessary, they may even lead to 

dysfunctional complexity and confusion. For instance, relying on face-to-face discussions 

for acquiring product modification information may encourage discussions of extraneous 

issues that lead the NPD organization astray. This may result in a reduction in the quality o f 

the information collected. For product modifications, then, it seems likely that a project team 

can acquire information more effectively and efficiently using more passive forms of 

interaction (eg. surveys, customer reports). Therefore:

H I: (a) For highly new products, customer interaction intensity is positively related to 

perceived customer information quality, (b) for simple products modifications, interaction 

intensity is negatively related to perceived customer information quality.

The fit between the interaction intensity and the newness o f the product is also 

posited to directly influence project outcomes. A  good fit should result in acquiring 

appropriate kinds and amounts of information, leading to higher product quality and market 

performance. An appropriate fit should also result in projects that require little rework and 

are therefore completed on-time or ahead o f schedule. Finally, project team members should

35

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


be more satisfied with their contributions when the appropriate customer information 

acquisition process was used during the project. Thus:

H2: The greater the newness o f the product, the greater the positive relationship between 

customer interaction intensity and (a) product performance, (b) adherence to schedule, (c) 

market performance, and (d) team satisfaction.

When a new product will be highly embedded in a customer’s organizational 

environment, a higher degree of interdependence results between the customer and the NPD 

organization. This interdependence results because changes in the product are likely to 

require changes in the customer’s environment, and visa versa. In highly embedded 

situations, multiple people from each organization may need to be involved in the NPD 

process, including users, managers, business planners, marketing and R&D people, and so 

on. Therefore, both parties are motivated to work closely together in developing and testing 

new product specifications.

Some support for the above contention is provided by von Hippel (1992) who 

asserted that joint user (customer) and NPD organization problem-solving is more likely to 

be involved when a change to a product or service also requires a change to the system in 

which it will be embedded. He found some evidence, in a study of 38 innovations in 2 

companies, that customers are more likely to be the source of an innovation when it requires 

changes to a larger system. He went on to describe a highly interactive procedure for “joint 

system-level problem solving”.

36

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


In addition to interdependence driving the need for intensive interactions, it is argued 

that highly embedded new products also involve high levels of decision-making ambiguity. 

As stated earlier, the organizational communication literature suggests that rich information 

channels are appropriate for revolving such ambiguity.

On the other hand, in cases where a product will not be embedded into a customer 

system, there is less reason to involve the customer in its development. When a product is 

not highly embedded in a larger system, the product may only impact one or a few of the 

customer’s employees or internal processes. Information about such impacts can often be 

efficiently obtained via more focused, passive methods, such as a questionnaire. Also, 

consistent with the previous argument for HI, the use of highly rich channels for acquiring 

information that could easily be transferred to the project team using more passive methods 

may lead to confusion over multiple interpretations of the information, and subsequently to 

lower quality information. Therefore:

H3: (a) For products which are highly embedded into the customer environment, customer 

interaction intensity is positively related to perceived customer information quality,  (b) for 

products which are not embedded in the customer environment, interaction intensity is 

negatively related to perceived customer information quality.

Similar to the argument for H2, the appropriate fit between product embeddedness 

and customer interaction intensity is also posited to directly influence project outcomes. The 

following hypothesis is made:

37

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


H4: The greater the embeddedness of the product in the customer environment, the greater 

the positive relationship between customer interaction intensity and (a) product performance, 

(b) adherence to schedule, (c) market performance, and (d) team satisfaction.

The intensity of interactions is hypothesized to affect the degree o f influence that 

customers have over NPD decisions. In situations where interaction intensity is high, much 

time and effort is put into NPD activities by customers. Much of the information exchanged 

is customer confidential information. This situation raises customer expectations that the 

NPD team will meet their demands for specific product features. These increased 

expectations can motivate customers to attempt to exert more influence over NPD decisions. 

These customers are motivated to justify their investments in such NPD activities by 

exerting influence over the outcomes.

In addition, from the NPD organization’s perspective, the additional time and effort 

devoted to intensive interactions with customers results in more detailed and insightful 

information which is more likely to be attended to and utilized in the making o f major 

decisions. Therefore:

H5:  The intensity of interactions is positively related to customer influence over NPD 

decisions.

38

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


The Relationships Between the Customer Network and Project Outcomes

Both the degree of product newness and the degree of market heterogeneity are 

posited to moderate the relationship between the customer network characteristics and the 

perceived customer information quality. Hypotheses are developed for the maintenance of 

weak ties, and non-redundancy of customers.

Maintenance of Weak Ties.  In his “strength o f weak ties” theory, Granovetter (1973) 

argued that the best source of new and diverse information is from contacts which are 

infrequently interacted with (i.e. weak customer ties). When a product being developed by a 

NPD organization is highly new, it is particularly likely to benefit from information drawn 

from new and diverse sources. Following the weak ties logic, new information should be 

more readily available from customers with whom the NPD organization has weak ties.  By 

contacting weak customer ties more alternatives are considered, more different kinds of 

expertise are drawn upon, and, subsequently, a higher quality product may be developed. 

Therefore, when developing a highly new product, weak tie contacts should be 

advantageous.

For simple product modifications, a NPD organization is more likely to obtain the 

best information from those customers who have had the most experience using the existing 

product. Experienced customers can provide in-depth descriptions about how they use the 

product, any shortcomings they have experienced, and perhaps ideas for specific product 

enhancements.

39

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


In addition to having an influence on information quality, it is posited that interaction 

with weak tie customers directly influences project outcomes. For highly new products, 

projects which rely heavily on weak tie customers should be in the best position to develop 

higher performing products due to the increased availability of diverse and potentially 

innovative information. However, with product modifications, NPD teams can more readily 

acquire the information necessary to build superior products from strong tie customers. In 

addition, projects that use the appropriate fit between tie strength and product newness are 

likely to require less rework during a project, and, as a result, should more often complete 

their work on-time or ahead o f schedule. Also, a good fit should lead to products which sell 

more successfully. Finally, project team members should be more satisfied about their 

contribution if the appropriate sources for customer information are used during a project. 

Therefore:

H6:  For highly new products, the maintenance of weak customer ties is positively related to 

(a) perceived information quality, (b) product performance, (c) adherence to schedule, (d) 

market performance, and (e) team satisfaction.

H7:  For simple product modifications, the maintenance of weak customer ties is negatively 

related to (a) perceived information quality, (b) product performance, (c) adherence to 

schedule, (d) market performance, and (e) team satisfaction.

40

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


When the product being developed by a NPD organization is targeted at a market 

characterized by very heterogeneous customer needs and preferences, the NPD organization 

is likely to benefit from information drawn from diverse sources. Such information is more 

likely to be perceived as high quality and can lead to better products, better market 

performance, better adherence to schedules and higher team satisfaction. For a product being 

developed for a more homogeneous market, on the other hand, the best source of 

information is from a close knit group of representative customers. In such cases, the NPD 

organization is more likely to benefit from interacting with strong tie customers who can 

provide in-depth information about a homogeneous set of needs. Therefore:

H8:  For heterogeneous markets, the maintenance of weak customer ties is positively related 

to (a) perceived information quality, (b) product performance, (c) adherence to schedule, (d) 

market performance, and (e) team satisfaction.

H9:  For homogeneous markets, the maintenance of weak customer ties is negatively related 

to (a) perceived information quality, (b) product performance, (c) adherence to schedule, (d) 

market performance, and (e) team satisfaction.

The amount of interaction with weak tie customers is hypothesized to be related to 

the degree o f influence that customers have over NPD decisions. Strong tie customers 

represent the NPD organization’s biggest and most important customers. Therefore, NPD 

projects which predominantly interact with strong customer ties will be influenced

41

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


significantly by these customers. On the other hand, a NPD organization which relies 

heavily on weak tie customers will be better informed, but will have more diverse 

information to interpret and integrate. Therefore, its decisions may not be as directly or 

strongly influenced by specific customers. Thus:

H10:  The maintenance of weak customer ties is negatively related to the degree of customer 

influence over NPD decisions.

Customer Non-redundancy.  In his structural holes theory, Burt (1992) theorized that 

the best source of new information is from contacts which are non-redundant or, in other 

words, are not linked either directly or indirectly to each other. A NPD organization which 

bridges many structural holes in its network of potential customers has access to diverse 

information from different clusters of customers. When a product being developed by a NPD 

organization is highly new, it is even more likely to benefit from new, innovative 

information from multiple diverse sources. Such information should help ensure that more 

alternatives are considered, more different kinds of expertise are drawn upon, and, 

subsequently, a higher quality product is developed.

For simple product modifications, however, the focus should be on acquiring in- 

depth information from customers who have had experience in using the product. Such in- 

depth customer information is most likely to come from redundant customers. Therefore:

42

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


HI 1:  For highly new products, customer non-redundancy is positively related to (a) 

perceived information quality, (b) product performance, (c) adherence to schedule, (d) 

market performance, and (e) team satisfaction.

H I2:  For simple product modifications, customer non-redundancy is negatively related to 

(a) perceived information quality, (b) product performance, (c) adherence to schedule, (d) 

market performance, and (e) team satisfaction.

When a product being developed by a NPD organization is targeted at a market with 

very heterogeneous customer needs or preferences, it is likely to benefit from using diverse 

sources of information. In such cases, NPD organizations which have many non-redundant 

contacts will have access to more diverse sources o f information than organizations with 

mostly redundant contacts. As a result, reliance on non-redundant contacts should facilitate 

the development of a higher quality product with a greater likelihood of success in the 

market.

For a product being developed for a more homogeneous market, it’s likely that the 

best source o f information is from a single cluster o f experienced customers. In this case, it’s 

plausible that the NPD organization which relies heavily on redundant contacts will enjoy 

superior performance. Therefore:

43

Reproduced with permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


H13:  For heterogeneous markets, customer non-redundancy is positively related to (a) 

perceived information quality, (b) product performance, (c) adherence to schedule, (d) 

market performance, and (e) team satisfaction.

H I4:  For homogeneous markets, customer non-redundancy is negatively related to (a) 

perceived information quality, (b) product performance, (c) adherence to schedule, (d) 

market performance, and (e) team satisfaction.

The degree of customer non-redundancy is also hypothesized to be related to the 

degree of customer decision influence. In his structural holes theory, Burt (1992) argued that 

when a focal organization’s network is rich in structural holes (i.e. many non-redundant 

contacts), the focal organization receives information and control benefits. According to 

Burt, a focal organization can control two non-redundant contacts because it can choose 

between the demands o f the two contacts. If these contacts are redundant, then the contacts 

may easily join together to influence the focal organization. Therefore:

HI 5:  Customer non-redundancy is negatively related to the degree of customer influence 

over NPD decisions.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Relationship Between Information Quality and Information Use

Information Quality.  There is both conceptual and empirical support for the notion 

that perceived information quality is positively related to information use in many contexts; 

including marketing research (Menon and Varadarajan,  1992; Deshpande and Zaltman, 

1982), marketing planning (John and Martin,  1984), and marketing-R&D manager 

communications (Maltz and Kohli,  1996). Therefore, the following is hypothesized:

HI 6:  The quality of customer information is positively related to the use of customer 

information.

Relationships Between Information Use and Decision Influence and Project Outcomes

The relationships between customer information use and project outcomes are 

hypothesized to be contingent on the level of market heterogeneity. This hypothesis follows 

directly from Gatignon and Xuereb (1997) who found that in markets that are highly 

uncertain in terms o f customer demand, a customer orientation has a positive influence on 

product performance. As demand uncertainty decreased, they found that a high customer 

orientation can hinder performance. Therefore:

45

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


HI 7: The greater the market heterogeneity, the greater the positive relationship between 

customer information use and (a) product performance, (b) adherence to schedule, (c) market 

performance and (d) team satisfaction.

The relationship between the degree of customer influence over NPD decisions and 

project outcomes is hypothesized to be contingent on the degree of market heterogeneity. A 

high degree of customer influence likely results from either a few large, influential 

customers, or several closely connected customers who band together with common 

requirements for the NPD organization. In either case, this influence will likely limit the 

breadth of the search for customer information.

In a heterogeneous market, a broadening of the search for customer information is 

called for. Therefore, high customer influence will likely lead to lower performance in such 

markets. In a homogeneous market, the search for customer information can be focused on 

fewer customers, and the NPD project may even benefit from having close ties to these 

influential customers. Such customers will be interested in providing in-depth information 

aimed at satisfying their own needs, and in speeding up NPD decisions. Therefore:

HI 8:  For heterogeneous markets, customer influence over NPD decisions is negatively 

related to (a) product performance, (b) schedule adherence, (c) market performance and (d) 

team satisfaction.

46

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


H I9:  For homogeneous markets, customer influence over NPD decisions is positively 

related to (a) product performance, (b) schedule adherence, (c) market performance and (d) 

team satisfaction.

Early and Late Customer Involvement in the NPD Process

Another objective of this dissertation is to gain a better understanding of how 

patterns of customer involvement in the early and late stages of the NPD process affect 

project performance. The early stage is defined to encompass opportunity identification and 

the product design/specification activities. The late stage incorporates product testing and 

product launch activities.

Products can be new to the firm, new to the customers, or both, and may have 

different implications for NPD organizations. This dissertation examines how the type o f 

product newness might dictate when intensive interactions with customers are desired. 

Therefore, four concepts are introduced: product newness to the firm, product newness to 

customers, early interaction intensity, and late interaction intensity.

Product newness to the firm and product newness to customers are self explanatory. 

Early interaction intensity and late interaction intensity are the customer interaction 

intensity, as defined by the interaction intensity construct described earlier, during the early 

and late phases o f the NPD project, respectively. Two hypotheses can be developed for early 

and late interaction intensity when products are either new to the firm or new to customers.

47

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Product Newness to the Firm.  If the product is new to the NPD organization, the 

need for rich information channels to uncover customer needs and help translate them into 

product specifications is very high. Acquiring such information early in the project is 

especially important so that the project team has time to incorporate it into the product 

(Cooper and Kleinschmidt, 1987). On the other hand, intense interactions with customers in 

the later project stage seems less important because any new information acquired at that 

point would be difficult to incorporate into the product. Therefore, it is hypothesized that 

when the product is new to the NPD organization, early interaction intensity is especially 

beneficial. When the product is familiar to the NPD organization, there is less need for 

intensive interactions with customers early in the project. NPD organizations can formulate 

questions and interpret feedback from customers relatively easily. Thus:

H20: The degree o f product newness to the firm has a more positive moderating influence on 

the relationship between early interaction intensity and (a) perceived information quality, (b) 

product performance, (c) adherence to schedule, (d) market performance, and (e) team 

satisfaction than on the relationship between late interaction intensity and these project 

outcomes.

Product Newness to the Customer.  In the late stages of NPD projects, one critical 

activity is often the testing of product prototypes in actual customer usage situations. If the 

product is new to customers, the need for rich information channels to communicate how to 

use the product, and to interpret testing results from its use, is very high. Also, customers

48

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


may be unable to effectively communicate with the project team in the early phase of the 

project when product prototypes are less likely to be available. Therefore, when the product 

is new to customers, late interaction intensity is especially beneficial. When the product is 

relatively familiar to the customer, there is less of a need for intensive interactions late in the 

project. Customers know how to use the product, and can communicate testing results 

relatively easily. In this case, less intensive interaction mechanisms, such as testing feedback 

reports, are more efficient. Therefore:

H21:  The degree of product newness to the customer has a more positive moderating 

influence on the relationship between late interaction intensity and (a) perceived information 

quality, (b) product performance, (c) adherence to schedule, (d) market performance, and (e) 

team satisfaction than on the relationship between early interaction intensity and these 

project outcomes.

This completes the chapter on the framework used in the study. Chapter 4 now 

addresses the methodology used to test these hypotheses.

49

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


CHAPTER 4:  METHODOLOGY

This chapter describes the research methodology used in the study along with the 

rationale for its use. The chapter is organized into three main sections: data collection, 

measures, and statistical methods.

DATA COLLECTION

A field survey of new product development projects was employed to acquire 

information on the model variables, and to test the hypotheses. The characteristics of the 

sample and the survey  procedure are described next.

Sample

An initial sample of 642 potential respondents was selected from the American 

Marketing Association’s (AMA) membership list (602), and member lists from the 

Institute for the Study o f Business Markets (ISBM) (14), and the Juran Center for Quality 

Management (26). This initial sample was subsequently reduced by removing people who 

(a) no longer worked at the company (97), (b) were not involved in new product 

development (61), or (c) were not appropriate respondents for the study (185), resulting 

in 299 eligible respondents. Of the eligible sample, 134 respondents provided useable 

survey responses for a 45% response rate. This is a reasonable response rate for this type 

of study.

50

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


No systematic differences were found between the half o f respondents who 

responded earliest and the later respondents on any o f the independent variables in the 

study:  product newness (p=.661), product embeddedness (p=.83), market heterogeneity 

(p=.514), maintenance o f weak ties (.699), customer non-redundancy (p=.628), 

information quality (p=.97), customer decision influence (p=.29), interaction intensity 

(p= 82), customer percentage (p=.84), and company sales(p=.34). Thus, there is no 

indication of apparent non-response bias.

The organizations included in the sample all sell products in business-to-business 

markets (i.e. a firm selling to another firm, and not to a consumer). These organizations 

represented a variety of industries (see Table 4-1).

Table 4-1: 

Distribution of Sample by Industry

Industry
Computers
Telecommunications Equipment
Medical Products
Manufacturing Equipment
Instrument Products
Office Products
Miscellaneous Technical Products
Miscellaneous Non-technical Products

Percent of Sample

28%
15%
13%
9%
9%
5%
13%
8%
100%

51

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


The study targeted projects which resulted in: (1) a tangible product, and not 

solely a service (ie. a mix of service/product was acceptable), (2) a product which was 

available to multiple customers (ie. proprietary projects were not included), (3) a product 

which was sold into a competitive market (ie. no governmental projects), and (4) a 

product which was introduced to the market within the past 3 years, and had been on the 

market for at least 6 months. Projects involving the development o f new services were 

avoided because firms which sell intangible services have been shown to utilize different, 

more ad hoc product development procedures than firms that sell tangible products, and 

thus were not in the target sample (Griffin,  1997). Very small businesses (i.e. those with 

less than $50 million in annual sales) were also avoided in order to reduce the potential 

influence owners/top managers might have over the conduct o f the NPD project. Also, 

small, startup companies often do not have formal NPD process that can be easily and 

accurately reported. Finally, only projects which used cross functional NPD teams were 

included in the study. Such teams are the predominant form o f NPD project organization 

(Page,  1993; Griffin,  1997), and teams have identifiable members with specialized roles 

which facilitates accurate reporting of information on customer and project member 

interactions.

Procedure

The primary data collection mechanism was a survey questionnaire. Wherever 

possible, existing measures of the constructs in this study were used or adapted in order 

to construct the initial questionnaire. The sources of the specific measures are discussed

52

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


in a later section. Where no measures existed for a construct, then a new one was 

developed for this study. For new measures, items were generated from discussions with 

industry and academic experts in the new product development area in order to tap into 

the full range of the construct.

The survey questionnaire was pre-tested with a sample of 14 NPD projects. The 

objectives of the pre-test were (1) to estimate the reliability and the validity o f the 

measures, (2) to identify unclear or difficult aspects of the questionnaire, (3) to evaluate 

the acceptability o f the mean and standard deviation of measures, (4) to evaluate whether 

survey information should be collected directly from customers, as well as from 

project/product managers, and (5) to gain a deeper understanding of the theory through 

follow-up discussions with the respondents. Each project manager/product manager who 

participated in the pretest was given a study questionnaire and was asked to fill it out. 

They were then asked to report on the difficulty/clarity o f the questionnaire and its 

individual items by filling out an additional form. After receiving the form, each 

respondent was contacted over the phone for further discussion of problems and concerns.

The pretest revealed that (1) the questionnaire took a long time to complete (45 

minutes on average), (2) the matrix used for acquiring customer-to-customer tie 

information was difficult to understand, and (3) some o f the items used to measure the 

strength of a customer tie were misinterpreted. In response to these issues, items were 

removed from the questionnaire to reduce the time to complete the survey to around 30 

minutes, the customer-to-customer ties table was redesigned and retested, and the 

phrasing of some individual items was clarified. The questionnaire is in Appendix A.

53

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


In addition, the pretest subjects indicated that any attempt to acquire information 

directly from customers concerning their interactions with other customers would present 

serious problems. First, many reported that they would have to go to great lengths to 

acquire top management approval to contact their customers. In addition, concern was 

voiced about providing information to a customer about the identity of the firm’s other 

influential customers. This was particularly problematic when the customers were 

competitors. As a result of this feedback, it was decided that information about the 

redundancy of customer networks would be collected from the NPD project/product 

managers rather than from the customers themselves.

Once the questionnaire was ready, the sample was selected from the AMA 

member list. The key informant for the study was the person who was most closely 

involved in customer interactions during a  NPD project. This person was most often a 

project manager or product manager, but sometimes had another title. Members were 

selected from the list if it they had interests in business markets, had a title o f product 

manager, project manager, product marketing manager, marketing manager, product 

development manager, or similar promising titles, and worked for a company that 

developed tangible products.

These target informants were mailed a questionnaire with a  cover letter, and 

questionnaire instructions. Within two weeks a second m ailing  was sent which consisted 

o f a reminder letter. Starting at this time and continuing for over the next three months, 

phone contact was attempted with each potential respondent on the list. Phone contact 

was used to screen respondents, to encourage participation, and to gain commitments

54

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


from the respondents. Often, the initial member was not the appropriate person to report 

on the study information, and names of other potential study participants were often 

provided. These contacts were then contacted by phone.

The study informants were asked to report on a recently completed NPD project 

in which they were closely involved. The project must have been completed within the 

past 3 years, and had to have been on the market for at least 6 months. The final sample 

consisted o f projects which had introduced a new product during the past 6-8 months 

(38%), 9-12 months (31%), and 13-36 months (31%).

Survey respondents were also acquired from ISBM and Juran Center-afiliated 

companies, but the procedure for initiating contact with these people was somewhat 

different from the procedure for contacting the AMA respondents. First, ISBM and Juran 

Center administrators provided the names of company representatives who had access to 

product development projects within their respective companies. Companies were chosen 

because o f their fit with the study’s requirements (e.g. they develop tangible products in 

business markets). The company representatives were contacted and informed about the 

study and the desired characteristics of the projects sought. In some cases, more than one 

project was provided for inclusion in the study. The company reps provided the name(s) 

of a contact within the product development organization who was then mailed the study 

questionnaire, cover letter, and instructions.

It’s important to note the similarity that exists between the projects in the study 

that were from the AMA, ISBM and Juran Center-initiated contacts. All but two of the 

ISBM and Juran affiliated companies who provided project information were also

55

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


sampled from the AMA list. Thus, in large part, the ISBM/Juran companies were being 

sampled from the AMA list as well although from different project areas. Also, there 

were no significant differences between the  111 projects reported by respondents from 

the AMA list and the 23 projects from the ISBM/Juran-affiliated companies concerning 

the mean scores for product newness (p=.57), product embeddedness (p=.80), market 

heterogeneity (p=.57), maintenance of weak ties (p=.48), customer non-redundancy 

(p=.79), interaction intensity (p=.33), or company sales (p=.27). Therefore, it seems 

reasonable to combine  projects from all three sampling sources.

After a study respondent returned a questionnaire, he/she was mailed/faxed/e- 

mailed a second single-page questionnaire to give to a functional manager to fill out (see 

Appendix B for functional manager questionnaire). This functional manager was a higher 

level manager responsible for the project’s outcomes, but who may not have been 

involved in the day-to-day project team activities.  This second questionnaire repeated the 

project outcome items o f the main questionnaire, and served as a validation of the 

product/project manager’s project outcome scores.

56

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


MEASURES

The measures in this study were largely multiple-item scales, and utilized existing 

measures where possible. The procedure for developing the measures is now discussed.

Measure Development Procedure

The overall measurement development procedure was as follows.  Preliminary 

interviews were held with several project and product managers to uncover ideas for 

appropriate measurement items. Also, academics were consulted who had experience in 

studying new product development. A preliminary questionnaire was developed and 

pretested on a sample of 14 NPD product/project managers. Based on this pretest, 

measures were refined, and the final questionnaire was developed.

Each multi-item measure was checked for reliability and unidimensionality in the 

final sample. Table 4-2 reports the coefficient alphas for these measures. These measures 

were above the traditional coefficient a  cutoff o f .70 indicating acceptable inter-item 

consistency. These measures underwent a unidimensionality test using exploratory factor 

analysis. Each measure, with the exception o f the product newness measure, factored into 

a single factor (eigenvalue > 1). It was no surprise that the product newness measure 

evidenced two separate factors: (1) newness to the firm, and (2) newness to the customer. 

The product newness measure was kept in the analysis, and product newness scores were 

calculated by taking the average of the newness to the firm items and average o f the 

newness to the customer items, and then averaging those two averages.

57

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Validation o f the project outcomes reported by the project/product manager 

informant was accomplished by using a follow-up questionnaire for functional managers, 

and comparing the responses of the two informants. A total of 134 questionnaires were 

sent to functional managers, and 71 questionnaires were returned resulting in a 53% 

response rate. Table 4-3  reports the correlation coefficient and significance level for the 

correlation between the functional manager’s and the product/project manager’s reports 

for the product performance, market performance, and adherence to schedule project 

outcome variables. For all project outcome measures, the correlation was significantly 

positive (p < .01). This indicates that the three project outcome measures have an 

acceptable level of validity in measuring these constructs.

The descriptive statistics and correlation matrix are shown in Appendix C.

58

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Table 4-2: 

Multi-item Measure Reliability Estimates

Measure

Items

Coeff. a

Customer Interaction Intensity

Customer Information Quality

Customer Information Use

Product Newness

Product Embeddedness

Market Heterogeneity

Product Performance

Market Performance

Team Satisfaction

4

7

7

5

6

4

4

3

->

.90

.88

.87

.86

.76

.71

.80

.85

.88

Table 4-3: 

Measure Validation: Correlation Between Project Manager and Functional
Manager Reports

Measure

Product Performance

Market Performance

Adherence to Schedule

**  p < .01,  n=71

Correlation
Coefficient

.11**

.84**

.54**

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Measure Descriptions

The measures of the theoretical constructs are described in this section.

Customer Interaction Intensity (Interact).  As explained in chapter 3, customer 

interaction intensity is the degree to which interactions between potential customers and 

project team members are frequent, participative, bidirectional, and involve joint problem 

solving. The intensity of interaction measure is an aggregation of these four dimensions. 

Each dimension was measured for both the early and later phases of the NPD project. The 

early phase was defined to include activities concerned with concept generation, concept 

development, market/product requirements development and product specification. The 

later phase encompassed product testing and product launch activities.

The frequency of interaction refers to how often project team members interacted 

with a typical customer who was influential on the project. The frequency of interaction 

for each project phase was measured using a 5-point scale consisting of less than 1 

time/month,  1-3 times/month, 1-3 times/week, 4-5 times/week, and daily. This coding 

scheme follows Maltz and Kohli (1996) who studied communication between marketing 

managers and R&D managers.

The degree of participativeness by customers in NPD activities refers to the 

degree to which customers actively and directly participated in NPD activities. It is 

measured with a 4-item measure which includes items on the degree of customer 

participation in face-to-face interactions, group discussions, working meetings, and 

review meetings.

60

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Bidirectionality refers to the degree to which two-way communications occured in 

performing NPD activities. It was measured with a 3-item measure examining the degree 

of feedback sent and received between customers and the project team (Anderson, Lodish 

and Weitz,  1987), and the degree to which two-way communications occurred.

The degree of joint problem solving was measured with a 3-item scale. The items 

assessed the degree to which customers and project members worked together on 

problems, the degree to which issues were critically discussed between customers and 

project members, and the degree to which solutions were jointly developed.

Maintenance of Weak Ties (WeakTies). 

The maintenance of weak ties refers to the 

degree to which the NPD project team interacted with customers or potential customers 

who had had only infrequent contact with the NPD organization in the past. This measure 

was adapted from one employed in a study of a banking network by Zaheer and Zaheer 

(1997). This measure asked respondents to report the historical presence or absence of 

five types of ties between the NPD organization and a given customer involved in the 

project. These ties included whether the customer 1) had been involved in past NPD 

activities, 2) had been involved in past marketing activities, 3) had exchanged key 

personnel with the NPD organization, 4) had provided resources to the NPD organization 

and 5) had been — or was currently — one o f the top 25% of customers of the NPD 

organization. The greater the number o f these ties reported to exist, the stronger the tie

61

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


between the customer and the NPD organization. The range of tie strength with an 

individual customer was 0-5.

Respondents were asked to complete the information above for each of the five 

most influential customers or potential customers involved in the project. In order to 

arrive at a single summary measure for the customer network, the maintenance of weak 

ties measure was operationalized as a multiplicative effect o f two factors:  (1) the 

difference between the maximum tie strength with a single customer (i.e. =5) and the 

average tie strength across the five most influential customers, and (2) the concentration 

index o f ties across the five most influential customers. More specifically, the 

concentration index o f ties was calculated as the sum of squares of the customer tie shares 

of each influential customer, i, or S; (s,- / Zj Sj)2 where S; is the number of ties with 

customer i (i.e. analogous to a Herfindahl Index of industry concentration which sums the 

squares o f firms’ market shares in an industry). Therefore, a high value o f the 

maintenance of weak ties measure would indicate that a NPD project has a low average 

tie strength across the five most influential customers, and m aintains a high number o f 

weak ties among the  five most influential customers (i.e. a high concentration index 

indicates a high concentration o f ties with only a few (strong tie) customers leaving more 

weak tie customers). The range o f the maintenance of weak ties measure is 0-5.

,  A  key concern is whether the “five most influential customers” can provide an 

accurate representation of the customer network involved in a NPD project. Although 

examinations of only a portion o f the full network under study can be found in numerous

62

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


contexts (e.g. McEvily’s (1997) study of CEO advisor networks, and McCallister and 

Fischer’s (1982) and Minor’s (1982) studies of personal social networks), there is the risk 

that collecting data on only a portion of the customer network might limit the 

generalizability of study results. On the other hand, limiting the number o f network 

members examined has the advantage of allowing more detailed accounts o f the 

relationships with and between customer contacts, and it facilitates the study of a large 

sample of customer networks cross many industries.

This concern about the representativeness o f a small sample of customers may be 

less relevant in this study because it focused on NPD projects where the customer 

network is likely to be relatively small. For instance, only business markets were studied. 

Generally, the number of business customers for a product is much smaller than the 

number of potential customers for a consumer product. However, this does not entirely 

defuse the issue because some business markets do consist of large numbers of potential 

customers and NPD teams may interact with a large portion of them during a project. 

Consequently, each project informant was asked to estimate what percentage of total 

communications with customers or potential customers during the project was accounted 

for by interactions with the five most influential customers. One hundred five of the  134 

projects reported that 50 percent or more of the total communications with customers was 

accounted for by the top five customers. This high percentage of projects having a 

majority of communications with the top five customers provides some assurance that the 

measures of network characteristics employed in study are representative.

63

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Customer Non-redundancy (NonRedund).  Customer non-redundancy is the degree to 

which customers in a NPD organization’s customer network are not linked to each other. 

This measure is adapted from McEvily (1997) - a study of CEO advisor networks. In this 

study, the redundancy between each pair of the “five most influential customers” was 

measured. Four types of ties were considered between each pair: whether the customers 

1) have similar technical competencies, 2) address similar markets, 3) attend common 

industry events, and 4) have similar competitive strategies. The greater the number of 

these ties, the higher the redundancy score between a customer pair. The range of the 

redundancy score between two customers was 0-4.

In order to arrive at a single summary measure for the customer network, a similar 

calculation was made for customer non-redundancy as with the maintenance of weak ties. 

However, the customer non-redundancy calculation used the number of ties between 

customer pairs, and the maintenance of weak ties calculation used the number of ties 

between each customer and the NPD organization.

The customer non-redundancy measure was operationalized as a multiplicative 

effect of two factors:  (1) the difference between the maximum number of ties between a 

customer pair  (i.e. =4) and the average number of ties between customer pairs, and (2) 

the concentration index o f ties between customer pairs. More specifically, the 

concentration index of ties between customers was calculated as the sum of squares of the 

ties between customers shares for each customer pair, i, or 

(r,- / Ej ij)2 where r; is the 

number of ties between customer pair, i. Therefore, a high value o f the customer non-

64

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


redundancy measure would indicate that a NPD project interacts with a set of customers 

which has a low average number of ties between customer pairs, and that many of the 

customer pairs have a low number of ties (i.e. a high concentration index indicates a high 

concentration of ties with only a few pairs of customers leaving more pairs with a low 

number of ties). The range of the customer non-redundancy measure is 0-4.

Perceived Customer Information Quality (InfoQual).  The perceived customer 

information quality variable was measured with a 7-item scale adapted from Maltz and 

Kohli (1996). It contains items which assess the degree to which customer information 

was perceived to be perceived to be accurate, relevant, and consistent, and provided clear 

signals and important details.

Customer Decision Influence (Custlnfl).  The customer decision influence was measured 

with a newly developed 7-item formative measure which assessed the degree of influence 

customers had over seven key NPD decisions. These decisions include which product 

ideas to investigate, which product concept to develop, what specifications to adopt for 

the product, what schedule to follow, what changes should be made to 

schedule/features/quality levels during the project, when to release the product, and what 

price should be charged.

Customer Information Use (InfoUse).  The customer information use variable was 

measured with a 7-item scale adapted from Maltz and Kohli (1996). The items assess the

65

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


degree to which customer information improved implementation, improved the team’s 

understanding o f the market, led to concrete actions, and shaped strategy.

Product Newness (ProdNew).  The product newness variable was measured using a 5- 

item measure adapted from Olson, et al (1995). Three of those items assess the degree o f 

newness to the firm from a manufacturing, research and development, and marketing 

perspective. The other two items assess the newness to the customer (ie. what percentage 

of the market has purchased an earlier version of this type product, and  how extensive is 

the marketplace’s knowledge of this type of product). In order to test hypotheses on the 

differential effects o f newness to the firm and newness to customers, two disaggregated 

measures - NewToFirm (3  items) and NewToCust (2 items) - were also formed.

Product Embeddedness (ProdEmb).  The product embeddedness variable was measured 

with a newly developed 6-item measure. It assesses the degree to which the product 

impacts how customers perform important functions, influences a significant customer 

process, requires effort in learning the product, creates dependencies for the product, and 

influences customers’ policies and procedures.

Market Heterogeneity (MktHeter).  Market heterogeneity was assessed with a 4-item 

measure derived from Achrol and Stem’s (1988) measure o f environmental diversity. 

Items include the degree to which customer needs for the product are highly diverse and 

customer preferences vary.

66

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Performance Measures

Four dimensions of project performance were measured to cover a range of 

efficiency and effectiveness outcomes — Product Performance, Adherence to Schedule, 

Market Performance, and Team Satisfaction.

Product Performance (ProdPerf).  This is a 4-item measure which assesses the degree to 

which the resulting new product’s quality, technical performance, features, and ability to 

meet customer needs was ahead, was on par, or behind the competition at the time of 

product introduction.

Adherence to Schedule (SchedAd).  This is a single-item measure which assesses the 

degree to which the project met, beat, or fell behind the schedule set for the project.

Market Performance (MktPerf).  This is a 3-item measure which assesses the degree to 

which the new product’s sales, profitability and market share met, exceeded, or fell below 

project objectives.

Team Satisfaction (TSatis).  This is a 3-item scale adapted from Olson, et al (1994) which 

assesses the degree to which the team was satisfied with the project. It consists o f items 

concerning the team’s satisfaction with their contribution, the joint contribution o f the 

functional departments, and the team’s spirit.

67

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Measures of Control Variables

Customer Percentage (CustPer).  It is conceivable that information collected by an NPD 

team from external sources other than customers -  such as suppliers, channel members, 

or consultants — may be an effective substitute for customer information. For example, a 

NPD team may be able to develop an adequate understanding of customer needs based on 

information supplied channel members who deal with these customers. Alternatively, 

information obtained from non-customer sources may compliment customer information 

and increase its positive impact on project outcomes. In addition, extensive information 

from non-customer sources may reduce the importance o f maintaining weak ties and non­

redundancy in the customer network because it will provide the NPD team with a greater 

variety of information from diverse perspectives. Consequently, it is important to control 

for the effects of extensive non-customer information use on project outcomes and on the 

degree o f customer decision influence. Therefore, this control variable was included in 

the study. It measures the percentage of all interactions with external information sources 

that was accounted for by interactions with customers or potential customers.

Firm Size (FirmSize).  The size of the firm may have an influence on the strength of 

customer ties, and the degree o f customer non-redundancy. For instance, larger firms may 

be more likely to develop a more diverse set of customer ties than smaller firms due to 

having more product lines and being able to explore different markets. Also, larger firms 

may have higher quality customer information available than smaller firms due to their

68

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


higher investments in information technology, and specialized sales/marketing positions 

(e.g. account management). This suggests a positive correlation between firm size and 

both maintenance of weak ties and customer non-redundancy, and a positive correlation 

with the quality of customer information.

In addition, customers may be more interested in interacting at a higher intensity 

level with larger firms than with smaller firms due to larger firms being better known, and 

perhaps being more able to deliver on their product development efforts. The size of the 

firm may also be negatively correlated with the degree of customer decision influence. 

Therefore, it is important to control for the effects o f firm size on both customer 

interaction intensity and customer decision influence.

STATISTICAL METHODS

In order to test the hypotheses in the study, a series of linear regression models 

were estimated. Each regression equation is shown below. Since several hypotheses 

posited relationships at high or low values of a moderator variable, the method outlined 

by Aiken and West (1991) for continuous moderator variables was used. This method 

examines the slope o f the relationship between an independent and dependent variable at 

three different levels of the moderator variable: the mean, one standard deviation below 

the mean and one standard deviation above mean. T-tests were performed at the high and 

low levels o f the moderator. A p=.10 level o f statistical significance was used as the 

criteria for accepting each hypothesis test.

69

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


InfoQual = 

p0+  p,  ProdNew +  P2 ProdEmb + P3 MktHeter + P4 Interact + P5 WeakTies 

+ p6 NonRedund + p7 Interact * ProdNew + P8 Interact * ProdEmb 
+ p9 WeakTies * ProdNew + pi0 NonRedund * ProdNew + pn WeakTies * 
MktHeter + pi2 NonRedund * MktHeter +  P13 CustPer +  pi4 FirmSize 
+   8

ProdPerf = 

P0 +  P,  ProdNew +  p2 ProdEmb + p3 MktHeter + p4 Interact + ps WeakTies 

+ p6 NonRedund + p7 Interact * ProdNew + P8 Interact * ProdEmb 
+ P9 WeakTies * ProdNew + p ,0 NonRedund * ProdNew + p u WeakTies * 
MktHeter + p i2 NonRedund * MktHeter + P13 CustPer +  PI4 FirmSize
■+*  8

SchedAd =

p0+  p,  ProdNew +  P2 ProdEmb + P3 MktHeter + P4 Interact + ps WeakTies 

+ p6 NonRedund + p7 Interact * ProdNew +  p8 Interact * ProdEmb 
+ p9 WeakTies * ProdNew + p ,0 NonRedund * ProdNew + p n WeakTies * 
MktHeter + P,2 NonRedund * MktHeter + P, 3 CustPer +  P,4 FirmSize 
+   8

MktPerf  =

P0 +  P(  ProdNew +  P2 ProdEmb + P3 MktHeter + P4 Interact + ps WeakTies 

+ P6 NonRedund + P7 Interact * ProdNew +  P8 Interact * ProdEmb 
+ P9 WeakTies * ProdNew + pi0 NonRedund * ProdNew + pn WeakTies * 
MktHeter + p i2 NonRedund * MktHeter +  P13 CustPer  +  p , 4 FirmSize 
+  8

TSatis =

P0 +  p[  ProdNew +  p, ProdEmb + P3 MktHeter + P4 Interact +  p5 WeakTies 

+ P6 NonRedimd + p7 Interact * ProdNew +  pg Interact * ProdEmb 
+ P9 WeakTies * ProdNew + p i0 NonRedund * ProdNew +  pu WeakTies * 
MktHeter + p 12 NonRedund * MktHeter +  p i3 CustPer  +  p i4 FirmSize 
+  8

Custlnfl = p 

o +  P, Interact + P2 WeakTies + P3 NonRedimd + P4 CustPer + ps FirmSize 

+  8

InfoUse = P, 

3 +  P, InfoQual + + P2 CustPer  +  P3 FirmSize + s

ProdPerf  = 

Po +  P, InfoUse + p2 Custlnfl + p3 MktHeter +  p4 InfoUse * MktHeter 

+ p5CustInfl * MktHeter + P6 CustPer  +  p7 FirmSize + e

SchedAd = (

50 +  Pj InfoUse + p2 Custlnfl + P3 MktHeter +  P4 InfoUse * MktHeter 

+ P5 Custlnfl * MktHeter + p6 CustPer  +  p7 FirmSize + s

70

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


MktPerf  = 

p0 +  P, InfoUse + P2 Custlnfl + p3 MktHeter + p4 InfoUse * MktHeter 

-i- P5 Custlnfl * MktHeter + P6 CustPer  +  p7 FirmSize + s

TSatis = 

(3
o +  Pi InfoUse + p2 Custlnfl + p3 MktHeter + p4 InfoUse * MktHeter 

+ P5 Custlnfl * MktHeter + P6 CustPer  +  p7 FirmSize + e

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


CHAPTER 5:  RESULTS

The results of the statistical tests of the hypotheses are reported in this chapter. 

The twenty-one hypotheses are categorized into 4 categories: (1) the impact of customer 

interation intensity, (2) the impact of the customer network, (3) the impact of customer 

information use and customer influence, and (4) the impact o f early and late customer 

interaction.

THE IMPACT OF CUSTOMER INTERACTION INTENSITY

Overall, the results were significant for the models which included the customer 

interaction and customer network variables, shown in Table 5-1, for predicting: (a) 

perceived customer information quality (R-squared = .29, F(I4  M9) = 3.49, p = .000), (b) 

product performance (R-squared = .28, F(14  1I9)= 3.302, p = .000), (c) adherence to 

schedule (R-squared = .19, F(14  I]9) = 1.99, p = .024), (d) market performance (R-squared 

= .21, F(14  u6) = 3.49, p = .009), (e) team satisfaction (R-squared = .29, F(14  1I9) = 3.396, p 

= .000), and (f) customer decision influence (R-squared = .29, F(512g) = 10.44, p = .000).

HI posits that the sign of the relationship between customer interaction intensity 

and information quality will be in opposite directions depending on the newness o f the 

product being developed. The results in Table 5-1  show that there is a positive, and 

significant interaction effect of customer interaction intensity and product newness on the 

quality of customer information (b=.15, t=1.82, p<.10). This indicates that for highly new

72

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


products, a more positive relationship exists between customer interaction intensity and 

information quality than for simple, product modifications.

73

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Table 5-1: Regression Models for Predicting Project Outcomes and Mediating 

Variables

Dependent Variables
Sched
Adhere

Market
Perf
-.29**
- .1 0

Info
Quality
-.18*
-.08

-.0 1

.16!

- .1 0

.0 1

.15!

Prod
Perf
- . 1 0
-.07

.08

.2 0 *

-.30**

- .0 1

.2 0 *

.2 0 *

.09

.04

.08

-.15

.17!

.2 2 *

- . 1 0

.0 2
-.2 1 *

.0 1

.17!

-.04

- .0 1

-.08

.09

-.14

.0 1

-.2 1 *

.28**

.15

.28**

.26**
.15!

.2 2 *
- .1 1

.15!
.1 0

.29**
134

.28**
134

.19*
134

Independent
Variables
Product Newness
Product
Embeddedness
Market
Heterogeneity
Customer
Interaction
Intensity
Maintenance of 
Weak Ties
Customer Non- 
redundancy
Newness x
Customer
Interaction
Embeddedness x
Customer
Interaction
Newness x 
Weak ties
Newness x 
Non-redundancy
Market
Heterogeneity x 
Weak ties
Market
Heterogeneity x 
Non-redundancy
Customer Percent
Company Sales

R-squared =
N =
! 
p< . 1 0  
*  p < .05 
**  p < .0 1

-.11

.19!

-.33**

.2 0 !

.04

.05

.2 0 !

.04

-.04

.07

.1 1
-.14

.2 1 **
131

Cust
Influ

.42**

-.08

-.18*

Team
Satis
-.06
-.19*

.0 2

.16!

- .1 0

-.05

.0 1

.2 0 *

.1 2

-.03

-.13

.0 2

.19*
.34**

.15!
.07

.29**
134

.32**
134

Note: Independent variables are mean centered, and standardized 

coefficient estimates are shown.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


However, these results do not indicate whether the sign of the relationship is 

positive or negative in the range o f the product newness moderator. Therefore, estimates 

of the simple slopes between customer interaction intensity and information quality are 

made, following Aiken and West’s (1991) procedure1, at one standard deviation above 

and below the mean of the moderator, and at the mean of the moderator.

As indicated in Table 5-2, at one standard deviation above the mean — where 

product newness is relatively high — the estimate of the slope coefficient between 

customer interaction intensity and information quality is significantly positive (b=.30, 

t=2.59, p<.05) supporting H i (a). However, at one standard deviation below the mean -  

where product newness is low — the estimate is not significant, and H l(b) is not 

supported.

Table 5-2:  Customer Information Quality: Estimate of Simple Slope Coefficients 

at Different Moderator Levels of Product Newness

Dependent Variable:  Customer Information Quality

Product Newness Moderator Level

Independent Variable
Interaction Intensity
!  p < . 1 0
*  p < .05
**p < . 0 1
Note: Low level—One standard deviation below the mean of the moderator 

Moderate

Low
.02

.16!

Moderate level — Mean of the moderator
High level — One standard deviation above the mean of the moderator

High
.30*

1 The procedure was the same as Aiken and West’s procedure by estimating coefficients at the low (1 
standard deviation below the mean), moderate (mean), and high ( 1  std deviation above the mean) levels of 
the focal moderator (i.e. product newness in Table 5-2), but differed from their procedure due to multiple 
moderators in the regression equation. The study procedure estimated the coefficients at the mean level of 
the other non-focal moderator(s) (i.e. product embeddedness) in the equation.

75

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


H2 predicts that customer interaction intensity will be more positively related to 

product performance, adherence to schedule, market performance and team satisfaction 

the greater the newness of the product. The results in Table 5-1  indicate a significant 

positive interaction effect between interaction intensity and product newness on product 

performance (b=.20, t=2.40, p<.10). Also, shown in Table 5-3, there exists support for a 

significant positive simple slope coefficient between interaction intensity and product 

performance at a high level o f product newness (b=.38, t=3.24, p<.01), and non 

significant coefficient at a low level o f product newness, which supports H2(a). However, 

there are no significant interaction effects on adherence to schedule, market performance, 

or team satisifaction which fails to support H2(b), (c), and (d).

Table 5-3:  Product Performance: Estimate o f Simple Slope Coefficients at 

Different Levels of Product Newness

Dependent Variable:  Product Performance

Independent Variables
Interaction Intensity
Maintenance o f WeakTies
Customer Non-redundancy

Low
. 0 1

-.44**
-.23

Product Newness Moderator Level

Moderate

.2 0 *
-.30**
- . 0 1

High
.38**
-.16
.2 1 !

H3 posits that the sign of the relationship between customer interaction intensity 

and customer information quality will be in opposite directions depending on the 

embeddedness o f the product in the customer’s environment. The results in Table 5-1 

show that there is a significant positive interaction effect of customer interaction intensity

76

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


and product embeddedness on the quality o f customer information (b=.20, t=2.37, p<.05). 

This indicates that for highly embedded products, a more positive relationship exists 

between customer interaction intensity and information quality than for simple, product 

modifications. As indicated in Table 5-4, the estimate of the simple slope between 

customer interaction intensity and information quality at a high level of product 

embeddedness was found to significantly positive (b=.35, t=2.97, p<-01) supporting 

H3(a), but was not significantly negative at low levels of product embeddedness which 

failed to support H3(b).

Table 5-4:  Customer Information Quality: Estimate of Simple Slope Coefficients 

at Different Levels of Product Embeddedness

Dependent Variable:  Customer Information Quality

Independent Variable
Interaction Intensity

Product Embeddedness Moderator Level

Low
-.03

Moderate

.16!

High
.35**

H4 predicts that customer interaction intensity will be more positively related to 

product performance, adherence to schedule, market performance and team satisfaction 

the greater the embeddedness of the product. The results shown in Table 5-1 indicate a 

significant positive interaction effect between interaction intensity and product 

embeddedness on team satisfaction (b=.20, t=2.36, p<.05). Also, shown in Table 5-5, 

there exists support for a significant positive simple slope between interaction intensity 

and team satisfaction at a high level of product embeddedness (b=.35, t=2.96, p<.01), but 

not at a low level product embeddedness, which supports H4(d). However, there are no

77

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


significant interaction effects for product performance, adherence to schedule, or market 

performance which fails to support H4(a), (b), and (c).

Table 5-5:  Team Satisfaction: Estimate of Simple Slope Coefficients at Different 

Levels of Product Embeddedness

Dependent Variable:  Team Satisfaction

Independent Variable
Interaction Intensity

Low
-.03

Product Embeddedness Moderator Level

Moderate

.16!

High
.35**

H5 predicts that the intensity of interactions is positively related to the influence 

that customers have over project decisions which is supported by the results shown in 

Table 5-1  (b=42, t=5.41, p<.01).

Table 5-6 summarizes the successful tests o f the customer interaction hypotheses. 

It was found that for either highly new products or highly embedded products, a higher 

level o f customer interaction intensity leads to higher customer information quality. Also, 

the newer the product being developed, the more positive the relationship between 

interaction intensity and product performance. The higher the embeddedness of the 

product, the more positive the relationship between interaction intensity and team 

satisfaction. No significant moderating relationships were found in predicting market 

performance or schedule adherence. Lastly, the degree of customer interaction was found 

to be positively related to the influence that customers had over project decisions.

78

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Table 5-6: 

Successful Customer Interaction Intensity Hypothesis Tests Summary

HI (a)

H2(a)

H3(a)

H4(d)

H5

Independent
Variable
Interaction
Intensity
Interaction
Intensity
Interaction
Intensity
Interaction
Intensity
Interaction
Intensity

Moderator or 
Moderator level
Highly New 
Product
Product
Newness
High Product 
Embeddedness
Product
Embeddedness

—

Predicted
Relationship^

(+)

(+)

(+)

(+)

(+)

Dependent
Variable
Information
Quality
Product
Performance
Information
Quality
Team
Satisfaction
Customer
Influence

Conclusion

Supported
(p<.05)
Supported
(p<-05)
Supported
(P<-01)
Supported
(p<.0 1 )
Supported
(P<-01)

THE IMPACT OF THE CUSTOMER NETWORK

Hypotheses H6-H15 deal with the effect of the customer network variables - 

maintenance of weak ties and customer non-redundancy - on information quality, project 

outcomes, and customer influence. Together, H6  and H7 predict that the sign o f the 

relationship between the maintenance of weak ties, and information quality, product 

performance, adherence to schedule, market performance and team satisfaction will be in 

opposite directions depending on the newness of the product being developed. H 6  makes 

predictions for highly new products, and H7 makes predictions for product modifications.

2 HI  and H3 predict the direction of the relationship between interaction intensity and the dependent 
variable at the specified level of the moderator. H2 and H4 predict the direction of the moderator’s 
influence on the relationship between customer interaction intensity and the specified dependent variable. 
Therefore, the signs have different meanings for the two types o f hypotheses. H5 predicts a direct 
relationship with no moderator involvement.

79

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


The results in Table 5-1  show that there are significant positive interaction effects 

o f the maintenance of weak ties and product newness on product performance (b=.17, 

t=1.70, p<.10), and market performance (b=.20, t=1.89, p<.10). This indicates that for 

highly new products, more positive relationships exist between the maintenance of weak 

ties and both product performance and market performance than for simple, product 

modifications. However, at a high level of product newness, the simple slopes are not 

significant either for the relationship between the maintenance of weak ties and product 

performance, as shown in Table 5-3, or between the maintenance o f weak ties and market 

performance, as shown in Table 5-7. In addition, no significant interaction effects were 

found between the maintenance of weak ties and product newness for customer 

information quality, adherence to schedule and team satisfaction. These results fail to 

support H6 .

Table 5-7:  Market Performance: Estimate o f Simple Slope Coefficients at 

Different Levels of Product Newness

Dependent Variable:  Market Performance

Independent Variable
Maintenance of WeakTies

Low
-.49**

Product Newness Moderator Level

Moderate
-.33**

High
-.17

H7 predicts that negative relationships will exist between the maintenance of 

weak ties and the various project outcomes for simple product modifications. Significant 

negative simple slope estimates between the maintenance of weak ties and product 

performance (b=-.44, t=-3.3, p<.01), shown in Table 5-3, and the maintenance o f weak

80

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


ties and market performance (b=-.49, t=-3.51, p<.01), shown in Table 5-7, at a low level 

of product newness, provides support for H7(b), and (d). This result along with H6  (b) 

and (d) indicates that the use of weak ties has no significant positive effect on product or 

market performance even when products are highly new, and that the use o f weak ties can 

have a dramatic negative effect on product and market performance when the product is a 

simple modification. The lack of significance for the interaction effects of product 

newness and the maintenance of weak ties on information quality, schedule adherence 

and team satisfaction provides no support for H7(a), (c) and (e).

H8 and H9 predict that the sign o f the relationships between the maintenance of 

weak ties, and the various project outcomes will be in opposite directions depending on 

the heterogeneity o f the market. H8 is the prediction for heterogeneous markets, and H9 

is the prediction for homogeneous markets.

Surprisingly, the results in Table 5-1 show that there is a significant negative 

interaction effect o f the maintenance of weak ties and market heterogeneity on adherence 

to schedule (b=-.21, t=-1.98, p=.05). Contrary to hypotheses H8 (c) and H9(c), this 

indicates that the maintenance of weak ties is more likely to lead to delays in the project 

for more heterogeneous markets than for more homogeneous markets. However, further 

analysis shows that the simple slopes between weak ties and schedule adherence are not 

significant for either heterogeneous markets (b=-.24, t=-1.58, p=.12), or for homogeneous 

markets (b=.15, t=1.14, p=.26), as shown in Table 5-9. No significant interaction effects 

exist for the maintenance of weak ties and market heterogeneity on information quality,

81

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


product performance, market performance, and team satisifaction. Therefore, the results 

do not support H8  and H9.

H10 predicts that the maintenance of weak ties is negatively related to the degree 

of influence that customers have over project decisions. The results in Table 5-1  indicate 

a non-significant effect which does not support H 1 0 .

The hypothesis tests which include the customer non-redundancy variable are now 

reported on. Together, HI 1  and H12 predict that the sign o f the relationship between 

customer non-redundancy and information quality, product performance, adherence to 

schedule, market performance and team satisfaction will be in opposite directions 

depending on the newness of the product being developed. HI 1 makes predictions for 

highly new products, and HI 2 makes predictions for product modifications.

The results in Table 5-1 show that there are significant positive interaction effects 

of customer non-redundancy and product newness on product performance (b=.2 2 , 

t=2.32, p<05). This indicates that for highly new products, a more positive relationship 

exists between customer non-redundancy and product performance than for simple 

product modifications. As shown in Table 5-3, examination o f the simple slope indicates 

for highly new products a  significant positive relationship between customer non­

redundancy and product performance (b=.21, t=1.77, p<.10) providing support for 

HI 1(b). The simple slope estimate for simple product modifications, although in the 

hypothesized direction, is not at a sufficiently strong confidence level to support H I 2 (b) 

(b=-.23, t=-1.52, p=.13). It is noted, however, that at two standard deviations below the

82

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


mean of the product newness moderator, the slope estimate is positive and significant 

with p= 057 indicating support for HI 2(b) at very low levels o f product newness.

The lack o f significance for the interaction effects of customer non-redundancy 

and product newness on information quality, adherence to schedule, market performance 

and team satisfaction indicates no support for HI 1(a), (c), (d) and (e) and HI2(a), (c), (d) 

and (e).

H i 3 and H14 predict that the sign o f the relationships between customer non­

redundancy and the various project outcomes will be in opposite directions depending on 

the heterogeneity o f the market needs. H I 3 posits a positive relationship for heterogenous 

markets, and H I4 posits a negative relationship for homogeneous markets.

The results shown in Table 5-1  indicate a significant positive interaction effect 

between customer non-redundancy and market heterogeneity on customer information 

quality (b=.28, t=2.83, p<.01) and adherence to schedule (b=.28,1=2.68, p<.01). This 

suggests that when the market for a product is more heterogeneous, projects which 

interact with customers that are less redundant are more likely to attain higher quality 

customer information, and to release products on-schedule relative to projects which 

interact with more redundant customers. Examination of the simple slope coefficients, 

shown in Table 5-8, reveals significant coefficients for the relationship between customer 

non-redundancy and information quality at both high (b=.26, t=2.11, p<.05) and low (b=- 

.24, t=-1.75, p<.10) levels of the market heterogeneity moderator in the opposite and 

predicted directions showing support for HI3(a) and H14(a).

83

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Table 5-8:  Customer Information Quality: Estimate of Simple Slope Coefficients at 

Different Levels of Market Heterogeneity

Dependent Variable:  Customer Information Quality

Independent Variable
Customer Non-redundancy

Low
-.24!

Moderate

.01

High
.26*

Market Heterogeneity Moderator Level

Examination o f the simple slope coefficients, shown in Table 5-9, indicates 

significant coefficients for the relationship between customer non-redundancy and 

schedule adherence at both high (b=.24, t=1.81, p<-10) and low (b=-.27, t=-1.81, p<-10) 

levels of the market heterogeneity moderator in the opposite and predicted directions 

showing support for H13(c) and H14(c).

Table 5-9:  Schedule Adherence: Estimate o f Simple Slope Coefficients at Different 

Market Heterogeneity

Dependent Variable:  Schedule Adherence

Independent Variable
Customer Non-redundancy
Maintenance of Weak Ties

Low
-.27!
.15

Moderate

- . 0 1
-.04

High
.24!
-.24

Market Heterogeneity Moderator Level

The lack o f significance for the interaction effects of customer non-redundancy 

and market heterogeneity on product performance, market performance and team 

satisfaction indicates no support for HI 1(b), (d), and (e) and H12(b), (d), and (e).

H I5 predicts that customer non-redundancy is negatively related to the degree of 

influence that customers have over project decisions. The results in Table 5-1 indicate a 

significant negative effect which supports HI 5 (b=-.18, t=-2.12, p<.05).

84

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Table 5-10 summarizes the successful tests of the customer network hypotheses. 

Support was found for a negative relationship between the use o f weak ties, and product 

performance and market performance when developing simple product modifications. No 

positive relationship between the use of weak ties, and any of the project performance 

variables was found. For highly new products, the use o f non-redundant customers was 

found to be positively related to product performance. For products targeted at 

heterogeneous markets, the use o f non-redundant customers was found to be positively 

related to the quality of customer information and adherence to the project schedule. For 

homogeneous markets, the use o f non-redundant customers was found to be negatively 

related to information quality and schedule adherence. No significant moderating 

relationships were found in predicting team satisfaction from the customer network 

variables. Lastly, the use of non-redundant customers was negatively related to the degree 

of influence that customers had over project decisions.

85

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Table 5-10:

Successful Customer Network Hypothesis Tests Summary

Moderator Level Predicted

Relationship^

H7(b)

H7(d)

HI 1(b)

HI 3(a)

H13(c)

HI 4(a)

HI 4(c)

H15

Independent
Variable
Maintenance of 
Weak Ties
Maintenance of 
Weak Ties
Customer Non­
redundancy
Customer Non- 
redundancy
Customer Non­
redundancy
Customer Non­
redundancy
Customer Non­
redundancy
Customer Non­
redundancy

Product
Modification
Product
Modification
Highly New 
Product
Heterogeneous
Market
Heterogeneous
Market
Homogeneous
Market
Homogeneous
Market

“

\ )

C /

(+)

(+)

(4-)

(-)

v  /

Dependent
Variable
Product
Performance
Market
Performance
Product
Performance
Information
Quality
Schedule
Adherence
Information
Quality
Schedule
Adherence
Customer
Influence

Conclusion

Supported
(P<-01)
Supported
(P<-01)
Supported
(P<-10)
Supported
(P<05)
Supported
OxiO)
Supported
0X10)
Supported
0X10)
Supported
0X05)

3 H7-H14 predict the direct of the relationship between the independent variable and the dependent variable 
at the specified level of the moderator. H15 predicts a direct relationship with no moderator involvement.

Reproduced with permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


THE IMPACT OF CUSTOMER INFORMATION USE AND INFLUENCE

The use o f customer information and the degree of influence that customers have 

over project decisions are two variables which are included in the study model as 

mediators of the relationship between the customer interaction and the customer network 

variables, and project outcomes. Hypothesis tests including these variables are reported 

here.

As specified in H I6 , support was found for a positive relationship between 

customer information quality and customer information use (b=.67, t=10.41, p<.01). 

Overall, the results were significant for the models which included the customer 

information usage and customer influence variables (shown in Table 5-11) for predicting 

product performance (R-squared = .20, F(7  126) = 4.37, p = .000), adherence to schedule 

(R-squared = .10, F(7 126) = 1.98, p = .06), market performance (R-squared = .16, F(7  123) = 

3.33, p = .003), and team satisfaction (R-squared = .22, F(7  126) = 5.15, p =  .000).

HI 7 posits that the relationship between customer information use and the various 

project outcomes will be more positive for products sold into heterogeneous markets than 

for those sold into homogeneous markets. The results in Table 5-11 indicate a non­

significant interaction effect of market heterogeneity and customer information use on all 

the project outcomes. Therefore, HI 7 is not supported. However, the results indicate 

strong, positive direct effects of customer information use on adherence to schedule 

(b=.20, t=1.76, p=.077), market performance (b=.37, t=3.40, p=.001), and team 

satisfaction (b=.27, t=2.58, p=.01) which were not hypothesized.

87

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


H I 8 and H I9 predict that the relationship between customer decision influence 

and the various project outcomes will depend on the degree of market heterogeneity. HI 8  

predict that the relationships are negative for heterogeneous markets, and H I9 predicts 

that the relationships are positive for homogeneous markets.

The results in Table 5-11  indicate non-significant interaction effects of market 

heterogeneity and customer decision influence on product performance, market 

performance, and team satisfaction. Therefore, H I 8 (a), (c), (d), and H I9 (a), (c), (d) are 

not supported. However, there is support for a negative interaction effect o f market 

heterogeneity on the relationship between customer decision influence and adherence to 

schedule (b=-.24, t=-l .8 8 , p=.06). Examination of the simple slope coefficient reveals - at 

a high level of market heterogeneity - a negative and significant relationship between 

customer influence and schedule adherence (b=-.31, t=-1.84, p=.068) providing support 

for HI 8  (b). At a low level of market heterogeneity, the simple slope estimate is not 

significantly positive (b=.12, t=.79, p=.43). Therefore, H I9 (b) is not supported. In 

addition, a positive and direct effect was found between customer decision influence and 

product performance, although it was not included in the hypotheses (b=33, t=3.16,

p=.0 0 2 ).

In summary, the hypothesized relationships between either mediating variable - 

information use and customer decision influence - and project outcomes were not 

supported by the data except for one case. Support was found for a negative relationship 

between customer decision influence and schedule adherence for heterogeneous markets.

88

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Table 5-11:  Regression Models for Relationships Between Mediating Variables

and Project Outcomes

Dependent Variables

Mkt Perf

3 7 **
.06

Sched Adhere

.2 0 !
- . 1 0

Team Satis

.27*
.05

-.09
.06

- . 1 0

- . 0 2

- . 1 2

.16**
131

. 0 1
.08

-.24!

.15
.04

. 1 0 !
134

- . 0 2

. 0 0

- . 0 2

. 1 0
.24**

.2 2 **
134

Prod Perf

. 1 2
.33**

.07
.07

-.08

.08
- . 1 0

.2 0 **
134

Independent Variables
Information Use
Customer Decision 
Influence
Market Heterogeneity
Mkt Heterogeneity x 
Info Use
Mkt Heterogeneity x 
Cust Decision Influ
Cust Percent
Comp Sales

R-squared =
N =

! 
p < . 1 0
*  p < .05
**  p < . 0 1

Note: Independent variables are mean centered. Standardized coefficient estimates are 
shown.

THE IMPACT OF EARLY AND LATE CUSTOMER INTERACTION

The results of the regression models for testing the effect of early and late 

customer interaction on project outcomes are shown in Table 5-12. Overall, the models 

for predicting customer information quality (R-squared=.24, F(1 0,23) =3.86, p=.000), 

product performance (R-squared=.17, F{10  123) =2.60, p=.007), market performance (R- 

squared=.13, F(10120) =1.72, p=.08), and team satisfaction (R-squared=.23, F(10123) =3.59,

89

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


p=.000) are significant. However, the model for predicting adherence to schedule was not 

significant (R-squared=. 11, F(10123) =1.50, p=.15).

Hypothesis H20 deals with newness to the firm, and early and late customer 

interactions, and H21 deals with newness to customers, and early and late customer 

interactions. To test H20 and H21, a t-test of the difference between the coefficients of 

the interaction terms in the models was performed for each project outcome4.

H20 posits that newness to the firm has a more positive moderating influence on 

the relationship between early customer interaction and project outcomes than on the 

relationship between late customer interaction and project outcomes.

The results indicate that a positive significant difference exists between the 

interaction coefficients for early and late customer interaction by newness to the firm for 

customer information quality (t=2.57, p<.05). This supports H20(a). In addition, the 

estimate for the slope coefficient for early customer interaction (b=.57, p<.01) is 

significantly larger than the coefficient estimate for late customer interaction (b=-.45, 

p<.05) at one standard deviation above the mean o f newness to the firm. Therefore, when 

the product is new to the firm, early customer interaction is more advantageous to the 

quality of customer information than is late customer interaction. However, the difference 

between the interaction coefficients were not significantly different from zero for the 

other project outcome variables. Consequently, H20(b), (c), (d), and (e) are not supported.

4 The t-statistic was calculated by taking the difference between the estimated coefficients (e.g. for the 
information quality model, the difference is 0.33- (-.34>=.67, see Table 5-12, for testing H20 which 
considers the newness to the firm interactions) divided by an estimate of the standard deviation of the

90

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Table 5-12:  Regression Models for Relationships Between Early and Late Customer

Interaction and Project Outcomes

Independent Variables

Newness to Firm
Newness to Cust
Interact Early
Interact Late
Newness to Firm x 
Interact Early
Newness to Firm x Interact 
Late
Newness to Cust x 
Interact Early
Newness to Cust x 
Interact Late
Cust Percent
Comp Sales

R-squared =
N =

! 
p < . 1 0
*  p < .05
**  p < . 0 1

Info
Quality
-.23*
.03
.25*
-.09
.33*

-.34*

-.13

.35*

.23**
.1 2

.24**
134

Prod Perf
-.27**

.1 2
.25*
.0 2
.15

0

0©r

-.15

.30*

.1 0
- .1 0

.17**
134

Mkt Perf

-.17
-.11
.04
.16
-.27!

.17

.04

.07

.0 0
-.07

.13!
131

Sched
Adhere

.1 1
-.13
.05
.05
.08

.09

-.03

-.25

.16!
.09

.1 1
134

Team
Satis
.06
-.15
.2 1 !
- . 0 2
-.17

.2 1

-.14

.0 2

.13
29**

.23**
134

Note: Independent variables are mean centered. Standardized coefficient estimates are 
shown.

H21 posits that newness to the customer has a more positive moderating influence 

on the relationship between late customer interaction and project outcomes than on the 

relationship between early customer interaction and project outcomes. H21 was tested 

following the same procedure as for H20 except that newness to the customer was used. 

The results indicate that a positive significant difference exists between the interaction

difference. The variance of the difference of the coefficients was calculated by summing the variance of 
each coefficient estimate, and subtracting twice the covariance of the estimates.

91

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


coefficients for late and early customer interaction by newness to the customer for 

customer information quality (t=1.96, p<.05), and for product performance (t=1.77, 

p<.10). Therefore, H21(a) and H21  (b) are supported.

In addition, further analysis of the slope coefficients was performed at high and 

low levels of the newness to the customer moderator for both information quality and 

product performance. At one standard deviation above the mean, the estimate for the 

slope coefficient for the impact of late customer interaction on information quality 

(b=.21, p=-27) is larger, although at a non-significant level, than the coefficient for early 

customer interaction (b=.13, p=.48). At one standard deviation below the mean, the 

estimate of this coefficient is much higher for early interaction (b=.39, p<.05) than for 

late interaction (b=-.43, p<.01).

The estimate for the slope coefficient for the impact of late customer interaction 

on product performance (b=.28, p=.16) is larger than the coefficient for early customer 

interaction (b=.l 1, p=.56) at one standard deviation above the mean o f newness to the 

customer, although neither are at a significant level. At one standard deviation below the 

mean of newness to the customer, the estimate of this coefficient is much higher for early 

interaction (b=.41, p<.05) than for late interaction (b=-.27, p=.10). Therefore, when the 

product is highly familiar to the customer, early interaction is more advantageous to the 

quality of information and product performance than is late customer interaction.

The differences between the interaction coefficients were not significantly 

different from zero for the other project outcome variables which does not support 

H21(c), (d), and (e).

92

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


To summarize the early versus late customer interaction hypotheses, the findings 

indicate that, when the product is new to the firm, early intensive interaction with 

customers has a more positive influence on the quality of customer information than does 

late intensive interactions. Also, when the product is familiar to customers, early 

intensive interaction with customers has a more positive influence on project outcomes 

than does late customer interaction.

This concludes the chapter on the study results. The next chapter discusses the 

results in more depth, and provides conclusions about the studies contributions.

93

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


CHAPTER 6 :  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

This chapter discusses the key results of the study, its contributions to the theory 

and practice o f marketing, the shortcomings of the study, and some possible fixture 

research directions. There were four objectives of this research: (1) conceptualize and 

develop a measure(s) o f customer involvement in new product development, (2 ) 

determine how customer interaction intensity influences project outcomes, (3) determine 

how the use o f weak and non-redundant customer ties influences project outcomes, and 

(4) determine whether the timing o f customer interaction during the project has an 

influence on project outcomes. Each is addressed in turn.

THE CUSTOMER INVOLVEMENT CONCEPT

The first contribution of this study is to provide a more in-depth description of 

customer involvement in NPD. Although other researchers have looked at specific 

techniques, such as lead user analysis (von Hippel, 1986), quality functional deployment 

(Hauser and Clausing,  1988), and voice of the customer (Griffin and Hauser,  1993), it 

was argued in this research that more general underlying characteristics of the customer 

interaction process are important in determining project outcomes. Utilizing theories 

about information richness (Daft and Lengel, 1984), this research proposed and found 

support for the concept that the intensity of customer interactions is a critical aspect of 

customer involvement in new product development It was found that the degree o f

94

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


customer interaction intensity had significant direct positive effects on all five project 

outcome variables, and had moderated effects — through product newness and 

embeddedness — on three out of the five project outcome variables examined in the study. 

This result should help managers infuse the appropriate level of interaction intensity into 

whatever specific customer interaction mechanisms they choose to employ.

The market orientation and market information processing literature focuses on 

the amount of customer interaction and monitoring of competitors (Kohli and Jaworski, 

1990) and the degree to which information acquisition processes exist in organizations 

(Moorman, 1995). This dissertation examined these information acquisition processes in 

more detail by studying the underlying characteristics o f the customer interaction process. 

The degree of customer participation, frequency of contact, bidirectionality of 

interactions, and the degree of joint problem solving were found to be important 

characteristics of customer interaction which distinguish successful NPD projects from 

unsuccessful projects. In light of the lack of significance found in Moorman’s (1995) 

research for the relationship between the existence o f a generic information acquisition 

process at the division level and new product performance, these results are particularly 

significant in placing a focus on the characteristics o f customer information acquisition 

processes actually used during a NPD project.

This research also addressed the question o f what types of customers are most 

appropriate for a NPD team to interact with during the course of a project. The view of 

this research was that a product development organization’s position in the network of 

customers determines the usefulness of information received, the degree of influence

95

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


customer’s have over project decisions and the degree of success in product development 

projects along several dimensions. More specifically, it was found that the maintenance 

of weak customer ties or the degree o f non-redundancy in the customer network had 

significant moderated effects — through product newness and market heterogeneity — on 

four out of the five project outcome variables examined in the study. Also, the customer 

network was found to both constrain and facilitate new product development projects 

depending on the level of the moderators. This network view provides a different 

perspective from the traditional information processing view in NPD. It is useful in 

identifying sources of diverse, potentially innovative information, and sources of 

influence on NPD decisions.

These results build on the fledgling research on organizational networks and 

extends that research into new product development by examining the characteristics of 

the ties with and between customers, by providing a more in-depth investigation of the 

customer network, and by invoking social networks theory to explain a product 

organization’s access to new and diverse information. This builds on research by 

Hakansson (1989), Anderson, Hakansson and Johanson (1994) and Gemunden, Georg, 

Ritter, and Heydebreck (1996) in the marketing literature by considering the 

characteristics o f the links between network contacts, and explicitly considering the 

customer network.

96

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


THE IMPACT OF CUSTOMER INTERACTION  INTENSITY

To aid the discussion, a summary of the findings for the relationships between 

customer interaction intensity and project outcomes is provided in Figure 6-1.

Figure 6-1: 

Summary o f Customer Interaction Intensity Findings

Product Embeddedness

Product Newness

Customer Interaction 
Intensity

Information Quality

+

Information Use

Product performance

Team Satisfaction

Market Performance

Schedule Adherence

Customer decision 
influence

Market Heterogeneity

Product Newness Moderator Effects

The most significant finding in this study relating to the customer information 

acquisition process is the strong influence of customer interaction intensity on product 

performance, and perceived customer information quality. More specifically, this study 

found support for a positive moderating effect o f product newness on the relationship 

between customer interaction intensity and customer information quality, and on the

97

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


relationship between interaction intensity and product performance. Therefore, projects 

that developed highly new products benefited, in terms of information quality and 

product performance, from more intense customer interactions than did projects that 

developed simple product modifications.

These relationships can be shown more clearly by plotting the partial derivatives 

(simple slope estimates) of information quality and product performance with respect to 

customer interaction intensity using the coefficient estimates from the regression analysis 

(note that non-centered and non-standardized data were used to aid interpretation of the 

range o f the moderators)1. Figure 6-2 shows that as product newness increases the 

relationship between interaction intensity and information quality becomes more positive. 

As shown in Figure 6-3, as product newness increases the relationship between 

interaction intensity, and product performance becomes more positive.

1 The partial derivatives were evaluated at the mean of the non-focal moderator. For example,
InfoQual =  6.7 - .55 Pnew - .75 Pembed - .06 Mheter + .21  Weaktie -.87 Nonredun - .96 CInterac + .123 
Pnew*CInterac + .24 Pembed*CInterac + .02 Pnew*Weaktie + .05 Pnew*Nonredun - .10 Mheter*Weaktie 
+ .22 Mheter*Nonredun + .01 CustPer + .11 CompSales

SInfoQual 
SCInterac

= (-.96 + .24(3.28)) + .123 Pnew = -.18 + .123 Pnew,  where mean of Pembed =3.28

98

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Figure 6-2 

The Effects of Product Newness on the Relationship Between
Customer Interaction Intensity and Customer Information. Quality

5 InfoQual 
8 CInteract

+1

+ .5 0 ------

- . 5 0 ------

8 InfoQual 
8 CInteract

=  -.18 + .123 Product Newness

Product Newness

Figure 6-3 

The Effects of Product Newness on the Relationship Between
Customer Interaction Intensity and Product Performance

8 ProdPerf 
8 CInteract

+1

+ .5 0 ------

-.50

8 ProdPerf 
8 CInteract

=   -.23 +  .147 Product N ew ness

Product N ew ness

99

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Product Embeddedness Moderator Effects

The study found strong support for positive moderating effects of product 

embeddedness on the relationship between customer interaction intensity and customer 

information quality. Therefore, projects which developed products which were highly 

embedded in a customer’s environment benefited, in terms o f the quality o f customer 

information, from more intensive customer interactions than did projects which 

developed products which were not embedded in the customer’s environment. Figure 6-4 

shows this relationship graphically.

Figure 6-4 

The Effects o f Product Embeddedness on the Relationship Between 
Customer Interaction Intensity and Customer Information Quality

5 InfoQual 
5 CInteract

+.50

-.50

S InfoQual 
5 CInteract

=   -.63 +  .24 Product Embeddednesss

Product
Embeddedness

100

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


The results also supported a significant positive moderating effect of product 

embeddedness on the relationship between customer interaction intensity and team 

satisfaction. Surprisingly, there was no support for product newness as a moderator of 

this relationship which raises the question about why the inconsistency.

One possible explanation is that there is a greater need for participation from 

multiple functional areas when a product is highly embedded than when a product is 

highly new. A product that is embedded into the customer environment has a significant 

influence on the customer’s business leading to issues of support, training, compatibility, 

and bottom-line business benefit, and, subsequently, requires more diverse expertise from 

the NPD team. Therefore, if the project team is developing a highly embedded product 

and interacts extensively with customers, the team may be more likely to develop strong 

team spirit or, conversely, if no interaction occurs then team conflict is more likely to 

occur. However, if the team is developing a highly new product, the process may be 

largely technology-driven and there may be less of a need to involve multiple functional 

areas. Therefore, team spirit may not develop to the same degree. Other explanations may 

exist, but this result clearly encourages further research on how the influence of product 

embeddedness might differ from product newness on NPD projects.

The Mediating Effect of Information Use and Customer Decision Influence

Another significant finding that is related to the customer information acquisition 

process was the significance o f the relationships with the mediating variables. In 

particular, the results indicate the existence of a positive relationship between information

101

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


quality and information use, and a positive direct relationship between information use 

and market performance, schedule adherence, and team satisfaction. Therefore, it’s not 

just that customer information is o f high quality, but that it is also actually used, which 

determines project outcomes. This result is consistent with previous findings of a strong 

direct effect between information use and project outcomes (Moorman, 1995; Ottum and 

Moore,  1997).

Customer interaction intensity was also positively related to customer decision 

influence, the other mediating variable in the study. Customer decision influence was 

found to be positively related to product performance as well. This suggests that intensive 

face-to-face interactions lead to higher customer involvement in project decisions. This 

increased involvement was found to have a positive influence on the product 

performance.

To test for mediation effects between the interaction of product newness and 

customer interaction intensity, and product perfomance more directly, two regressions 

were run -  one with the mediating variables, and one without the mediating variables. A 

significant drop in the coefficient estimate for the interaction term was found. This 

provides some evidence that the relationship between the interaction of product newness 

and customer interaction intensity, and product performance is mediated by information 

quality, information use and customer decision influence.

Interestingly, support was found for the proposition that, in heterogeneous 

markets, increased customer influence over decisions leads to delays in the release of 

NPD projects. This suggests that project teams may have difficulty in balancing the

102

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


demands o f large influential customers with the needs of the broader market. In order to 

meet the demands of influential customers, the project team may either limit their search 

for information and opportunities in the market or take longer to release products. 

Another possible explanation, however, is that project teams may have difficulty in 

balancing the demands of influential customers who have highly diverse needs. In either 

case, handling these demands may lead to delays in the project. In homogeneous markets, 

input from influential customers is more narrowly defined, and more consistent with the 

total market being targeted. Similar moderator effects also existed with product 

performance and market performance, but were not at a statistically significant level.

Contribution to Market Information Processing Theory in NPD

Unlike Moorman’s research (1995) which focused on the existence of acquisition 

processes at the division level, these findings reveal that the intensity o f actual 

information acquisition at the project level has direct ramifications for project outcomes. 

Even though acquisition processes may exist in a division, there is no assurance that a 

project team actually utilizes these processes. These results indicate that product 

development project teams benefit from engaging in active learning. Also, Moorman’s 

research only considered financial performance outcomes. The findings o f this research 

reveal relationships with other important project outcomes, such as information quality 

and product performance.

The findings lend support to Daft and Lengel’s (1986) information richness 

theory. In more ambiguous situations, as a result of products being new or embedded,

103

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


project teams should seek rich information channels as a means to acquire customer 

information. These rich channels allow the NPD project team to learn about the 

technologies, customer needs, benefits sought, and value provided by the product.

To gain a more complete understanding o f the causal mechanisms underlying the 

moderating effects of product newness and embeddedness, the relationships between 

those two variables and perceived task ambiguity were examined. A positive and 

significant correlation was found between product newness and task ambiguity (r=.23, 

p=.009). However, a positive but insignificant correlation was found between product 

embeddedness and task ambiguity (r=.l 1, p=.22).

A possible explanation for the lack of significance for the product embeddedness 

relationship is that information which is tightly integrated into a customer’s organization 

might be more confidential, and reside with multiple people and in multiple forms. The 

task o f acquiring such information may not necessarily be more ambiguous, but may 

nevertheless be more effective when using  more intensive interactions. For instance, 

confidential information may be less likely to be offered to a vendor in a survey, as 

compared to a more collaborative and intensive form o f interaction where some degree of 

trust, and some ability for the customer to control the information (e.g. confidential non­

disclosure agreements), exists. Also, the need to acquire information from multiple 

sources might render a survey instrument less effective. A more intensive form, such as 

customer visits, would allow for multiple people from the customer’ organization to meet 

together and formulate their needs in a  more coherent and consistent fashion. This issue 

of trust in highly embedded situations would be an interesting area of follow-on research.

104

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Interestingly, no significant negative relationship between customer interaction 

intensity and customer information quality was found when developing products at a low 

level o f newness (i.e. one standard deviation below the mean for product newness in the 

sample, see Figure 6-2). This does not support Daft and Lengel’s (1986) line of reasoning 

that when uncertainty is low, rich information channels can lead to negative outcomes 

due to extraneous cues, distracting comments, and conflict over issues.

One possible explanation for this finding might be that there exists at least a 

moderate level of uncertainty in all product development projects, or at least all projects 

included in this sample. Another possibility is that NPD professionals, who are generally 

well trained and experienced, are able to ignore extraneous information, and resolve 

conflicts without compromising information quality.

Managerial Implications for Customer Interaction Processes

In terms o f managerial implications, the results of the study indicate that the form 

of the customer interaction process is an important determinant of project outcomes either 

directly or through mediating processes. In addition, the effectiveness o f the customer 

interaction process is dependent on the fit between the process and the type of new 

product being pursued by the product development organization. An organization that 

pursues highly new products or products which are embedded in customers’ systems 

would be advised to use relatively rich, intensive forms of customer interaction. 

Adherence to these guidelines seems particularly important for increasing the quality of 

the customer information used in the project, increasing the degree of influence that

105

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


customer input has over NPD decisions, increasing  the performance of the new product 

relative to competitor’s products, and increasing team satisfaction.

However, for projects which are developing simple product modifications or 

products which are not embedded in the customer environment, no strong relationship 

was found between the use of rich information channels and project outcomes. In these 

cases, it might be prudent to incorporate less rich forms o f customer interaction, such as 

surveys or market reports.

THE IMPACT OF THE CUSTOMER. NETWORK

The second set o f relationships tested in this study related to the customer 

network. The focus o f these hypotheses was on whether customer networks which 

contained a high proportion o f weak ties and/or many non-redundant customers were 

more likely to provide NPD project teams with more diverse, new and potentially 

innovative sources o f information. This type of information could then be used to develop 

superior products when project teams are developing highly new products or when 

markets are heterogeneous, but may lead to detrimental effects when developing simple 

product modifications or marketing a product into a homogeneous market. The influence 

of customer non-redundancy will be addressed first, followed by the maintenance of weak 

ties. To assist in the discussion, a summary diagram with the significant customer 

network relationships is shown in Figure 6-5.

106

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Figure 6-5

Summary o f Customer Network Findings

Market Heterogeneity

Product Newness

Maintenance o f 
Weak. Ties

Customer Non- 
redundancy

Information Quality

Information Use

Customer decision 
influence

Product performance

Team Satisfaction

Market Performance

Schedule Adherence

Market Heterogeneity

Non-Redundancy in Customer Networks

The most significant findings relating to the customer network were associated 

with the customer non-redundancy variable. Support was found for a strong positive 

relationship between the degree o f non-redundancy in the project team’s customer 

network and information quality for projects aimed at heterogeneous markets, and a 

negative relationship between the degree of customer non-redundancy and information 

quality for projects directed at homogeneous markets. Also, support was found for a 

strong positive relationship between the degree o f customer non-redundancy and schedule 

adherence for highly heterogeneous markets, and a negative relationship between the 

degree of customer non-redundancy and schedule adherence for homogeneous markets. 

These relationships are shown graphically by plotting the partial derivatives in Figures 6- 

6 and 6-7.

107

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Figure 6-6 

The Effects of Market Heterogeneity on the Relationship Between 
Customer Non-redundancy and Customer Information Quality

8 InfoQuality 
8 CustNon-redund

+  1

+ .5 0 ------

-.50

8 InfoQuality 
8 CustNon-redund

=   -.72 +- 22 Mkt Heterogeneity 

M kt
Heterogeneity

Figure 6-7 

The Effects of Market Heterogeneity on the Relationship Between 
Customer Non-redundancy and Schedule Adherence

8 SchedAdhere 
8 CustNon-redund

+1

+.50

-.50

8 SchedAdhere 
8 CustNon-redund

=   -.92 + .27 M kt Heterogeneity 

Mkt
Heterogeneity

108

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


In addition, support was found for a strong positive relationship between customer 

non-redundancy and product performance for highly new products. This relationship was 

found to be negative for simple product modifications, although the estimated coefficient 

was not statistically significant at one standard deviation below the mean of product 

newness. This relationship is shown in Figure 6-8.

Figure 6-8 

The Effects of Product Newness on the Relationship Between 
Customer Non-redundancy and Product Performance

S ProdPerf 
5 CustNon-redund

5 ProdPerf 
5 CustNon-redund

=   -.35+  .13 Product Newness

+.50

-.50

Product
Newness

109

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Customer Tie Strength in NPD

The effects of the maintenance of weak ties on project outcomes were not as 

pronounced as the effects of customer non-redundancy. The most significant findings 

were support for the positive moderating effects o f product newness on the relationships 

between the maintenance of weak ties, and both product performance and market 

performance. As expected, for simple product modifications, the use of strong customer 

ties is beneficial to product and market performance. The finding suggests that strong tie 

customers are more likely to have experience with the product, to have ideas for 

incremental improvements to the product, and to be motivated to assist a NPD 

organization than are weak tie customers.

However, at a high level o f product newness, the findings did not support a 

positive relationship between the use o f weak ties, and product and market performance. 

As shown in Figures 6-9 and 6-10, a positive relationship did not exist over the range o f 

the product newness moderator. Therefore, these results suggest that weak ties never lead 

to higher product performance or market performance regardless of product newness.

Counter to the hypothesis, the higher the degree of market heterogeneity, the more 

negative the relationship between the maintenance of weak ties and adherence to the 

project schedule (shown graphically in Figure 6-11). Therefore, this does not support the 

argument that weak ties provide better information in more heterogeneous markets for 

speeding product development than do strong ties.

110

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Figure 6-9 

The Effects of Product Newness on the Relationship Between 
The Maintenance o f Weak Ties and Product Performance

8 ProdPerf 
8 WeakTies

+ .5 0 -----

8 ProdPerf 
8 WeakTies

=   -.33 + .07 Product Newness

Product
Newness

Figure 6-10  The Effects of Product Newness on the Relationship Between 

The Maintenance o f Weak Ties and Market Performance

8 M ktPerf 
8 WeakTies

+ .5 0 ------

-.50

8 M ktPerf 
8 WeakTies

-   -.52 +  .11  Product Newness

Product
Newness

111

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Figure 6-11 

The Effects of Market Heterogeneity on the Relationship Between 
The Maintenance of Weak Ties and Schedule Adherence

5 SchedAd 
5  WeakTies

+1

+.50

-.50

5 SchedAd
8 WeakTies

=   .52 - .165 Market Heterogeneity

Market
Heterogeneity

Unfortunately, the study failed to find significant moderated relationships 

between the maintenance of weak ties and team satisfaction. Future research may need to 

investigate other possible moderators of the relationship between weak ties and team 

satisfaction.

Contribution to Network Theory in NPD

Looking at the customer non-redundancy results, support was found for Burt’s 

(1992) theory o f bridging structural holes. Those projects that used a high degree o f non- 

redundant customers likely had access to new and diverse information which resulted in 

developing superior performing products when those products were new or their markets

112

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


were diverse. This superior information may then result in less rework during the project, 

and result in products which are released on schedule.

However, the results suggest that non-redundant customer networks can be 

detrimental to project performance when new and diverse information is not required. It’s 

likely that interacting with a wide diversity o f customers requires more time, makes it 

more difficult to assimilate customer information into product requirements, and may be 

more distracting to project teams than interacting with redundant customers. At low 

levels o f the moderators, as shown in Figures 6-6, 6-7 and 6-8, the findings indicate 

negative relationships between customer non-redundancy and information quality, 

product performance, and schedule adherence, although the effect was not statistically 

significant at one standard deviation below the mean of product newness for product 

performance, as shown in Figure 6-8.

These findings provide support for the notion that redundant customers, or those 

who are part o f a closely linked network, provide a good source o f experience to utilize in 

homogeneous markets, and in making enhancements to existing products. In such 

situations, redundant customers are likely a good source o f in-depth and highly specific 

information which can speed products to market at high quality levels.

These findings also lend support to those network researchers who have found 

that embedded networks provide better information due to trust, fine-grained information 

transfer, and joint problem solving arrangements (Uzzi, 1997; Achrol,  1997). This study 

suggests that highly embedded or redundant networks are suitable for more routine 

product development situations, but may limit the opportunities that NPD teams consider

113

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


when developing more innovative products in more diverse markets. This notion is 

consistent with Uzzi’s (1997) research on the “paradox of embeddedness”. He states, “the 

optimal network structure is a mix of arm’s length and embedded ties, because each type 

o f tie performs different functions: Embedded ties enrich the network, while arm’s length 

ties prevent the complete insulation of the network from market demands and new 

possibilities” (Uzzi,  1997; p. 59)

Looking at the maintenance of weak ties results, they do not support 

Grano vetter’s strength o f weak ties theory for customer networks in the NPD context. 

There was no evidence that weak customer ties provide better access to new, diverse 

information as compared with strong ties. The results were more supportive of the benefit 

o f using strong customer ties particularly when modifying an existing product. This 

finding makes some sense when you consider the arguments of those network researchers 

who stress the benefit, or the “strength” o f strong ties (Krackhardt, 1992). Krackhardt 

stated that “strong ties constitute a base o f trust that reduce resistance and provide 

comfort in the face of uncertainty” (Krackhardt,  1992; p. 218). Even Granovetter (1982) 

noted that “Weak ties provide people with access to information beyond those available 

in their own social circles; but strong ties have greater motivation to be o f assistance and 

are typically more easily available” (Grannovetter,  1982; p. 113).

The increased availability, motivation to cooperate, and higher product knowledge 

o f strong ties may explain why their participation leads to better product performance 

when modifying existing products. In addition, the strong ties argument may explain why 

strong ties are sometimes more beneficial than weak ties even when developing highly

114

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


new products. It suggests that when trust and reciprocity are critical when generating new 

ideas, the diversity of information sources becomes a secondary issue to actually gaining 

cooperation and access to information; a strength of strong ties.

To test the tradeoff between strong ties and weak ties, further analysis was 

performed using the product embeddedness moderator. One could argue that the more 

embedded a product is in customer procedures and policies, the higher the need for trust 

and reciprocity in a relationship. The analysis revealed negative, but generally weak, 

coefficient estimates for the interaction effects of product embeddedness and the 

maintenance of weak ties on information quality (b=-15, p=.21),  product performance 

(b=-.18, p=.12), schedule adherence (b=-.19, p=.12), market performance (b=-.13, p=.26), 

and team satisfaction (b=-.32, p=.005). The simple slope coefficient estimate between the 

maintenance of weak ties and team satisfaction was significantly negative (b=-.33, p=.03) 

at high levels of product newness, and product embeddedness, and was significantly 

positive (b=.31, p=.04) at a high level of product newness and a low level of product 

embeddedness. Therefore, these results lend some support to the argument that in high 

trust situations, the need for innovative information through weak ties may be outweighed 

by the need for more cooperative relationships through strong ties. This is clearly an area 

ripe for more research.

In summary of the network theory contributions, the existing network literature 

had not addressed how characteristics o f the customer network might influence NPD 

outcomes. Moreover, it had not dealt with issues concerning the strength o f ties with 

customers, and between customers. This study’s findings lend support to the argument

115

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


that non-redundant networks are sources of diverse and potentially new information, and 

that redundant networks and strong tie customers are sources of in-depth, highly 

accessible information. Also, the findings challenge the argument that weak ties offer 

benefits over strong ties for gaining access to new, diverse information.

Managerial Implications for Customer Networks

In terms o f managerial implications, the results o f the study indicate that the 

characteristics of the customer network influence project outcomes. The effectiveness of 

the customer network is dependent on the fit between the degree of customer non­

redundancy in the network, and the type o f product being developed or market being 

pursued. An organization that develops a highly new product, or pursues a highly 

heterogeneous market, would be advised to choose customers who are not closely linked 

to each other which, in turn, offers more diverse sources o f information to use in product 

development. An organization that engages in a project which develops a modification to 

an existing product, or which targets a homogeneous market, would be advised to utilize 

customers who are closely linked to each other, and to utilize customers with whom the 

NPD organization has had previous ties. Adherence to these guidelines seems particularly 

important for increasing the quality o f the customer information used in the project, 

increasing the degree of influence that customer input has over NPD decisions, increasing 

the performance of the new product relative to competitor’s products, and releasing 

products to the market in a timely manner.

116

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


THE IMPACT OF EARLY AND LATE CUSTOMER INTERACTION

The last topic addressed in this study is how customer interactions early and late 

in the NPD project might differentially influence project outcomes. A significant finding 

from this study shows that early and late customer interactions have a differential effect 

on the quality o f customer information, and product performance. This relationship is 

moderated by whether the product is new to the firm and/or whether it’s new to 

customers. The evidence suggests that if the product is new to the firm, early interaction 

with customers is more advantageous to the quality of customer information than is late 

customer interaction. This indicates that NPD organizations should take a proactive 

approach to understanding customer needs when they have limited experience with a 

product. This includes being involved with customers early, and incorporating customer 

inputs into the project plans. It may be too late to incorporate customer input into the 

project if interaction occurs late in the project.

When the product is familiar to customers then customers should be incorporated 

into early new product development activities.  Once again, in such cases, the NPD 

organization should proactively involve customers in early planning. Although not at a 

high level o f significance, when the product is new to customers, late intensive 

interactions seem to have some beneficial effect on product performance and customer 

information quality. This result indicates that NPD organizations should place emphasis 

on using intensive testing procedures for the product, and on involving customers in 

introduction activities when the product is new to the customer.

117

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


The study also sheds light on the debate over whether the NPD process should be 

more planning oriented (Cooper and Kleinschmidt,  1987) or more experientially oriented 

(Eisenhardt and Tabrizi,  1995). Eisenhardt and Tabrizi (1995) concluded that “extensive 

planning simply wastes time”, especially in dynamic markets where plans are subject to 

change. They concluded that fast NPD processes are more improvisational, incorporating 

many design iterations and much testing. However, the researchers did not consider that 

improvisation may be occurring during the planning process early in the project, and that 

late improvisation may have detrimental effects.

The results from this study suggest that emphasis should be placed on an 

intensive, more interactive, more experiential form o f acquiring information early in the 

project if it’s new to the NPD organization, or if the product is familiar to customers. 

Also, more experiential forms should be considered later in the project but only if it’s 

new to customers, and not to the firm. Therefore, this research provides more insight into 

the timing of improvisational processes, and more resolution to the type o f moderating 

conditions driving the effectiveness of these processes.

118

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


FUTURE RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES

Looking first at the customer interaction process, further research could assess 

other forms o f customer interaction. In line with Daft and Lengel’s (1986) theory, this 

study viewed more collaborative, face-to-face modes of interaction as being richer than 

less collaborative, more unidirectional, and more passive forms of interaction. Another 

means o f acquiring rich information is through observation. It would be useful to 

hypothesize how observation may be incorporated into the dimensions o f customer 

interaction intensity used in this study. Such aspects as the frequency or duration of 

observation, or the intensity of the task being observed, seem to fit with the dimensions of 

customer interaction intensity developed in this study, but may have different 

implications for product outcomes. Also, computer simulations are becoming quite 

advanced providing customers with a variety of scenarios in seemingly realistic situations 

for evaluating future products. Problem solving and bidirectionality of the feedback are 

clearly important attributes o f effective computer simulations in marketing. Research into 

how the dimensions of a computer simulated environment might be integrated into the 

dimensions of customer involvement seems potentially interesting.

A logical extension o f the research would be to examine how structural 

dimensions of NPD might influence the customer interaction process. For instance, the 

number and type of functional areas involved in customer interactions may have 

interesting effects. Some projects may use a hub-and-spoke form o f distributing customer 

information with a product manager serving as the hub while other organizations might

119

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


involve many project members from multiple functional areas. In business markets, the 

structural dimensions of the customer’s organization  might provide useful insights into 

effective customer interaction processes as well.

Several areas for further research on customer networks in NPD are apparent from 

this study. The tension between the strength of strong ties which provides one the ability 

to implement change, and the strength o f weak ties which provides more diverse 

information about new ideas and opportunities, seems to highlight the need to better 

understand the consequences of introducing a highly new product. An interesting future 

research topic would be to examine possible conditions that influence the degree of trust 

required between customers and the NPD organization. It could be hypothesized that high 

trust situations would favor strong ties, and low trust situations would favor weak ties.

It would be interesting to see how customer networks change over the course o f a 

project. It could be hypothesized that successful projects transition from using weak 

customer ties early in the project where ideas for new products are important to stronger 

ties later in the project where fine-tuning of the product requirements and implementation 

of the product occurs.

Other types o f mediating variables are important to understand as well. Along the 

lines of the strength o f strong ties argument, it would be interesting to examine if trust or 

the development o f relational norms mediates the relationship between the customer 

network and project outcomes. For instance, it could be hypothesized that highly 

redundant networks foster relationship development more than non-redundant networks.

120

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Examining other dimensions o f information quality would be useful as well. 

Understanding how the customer network may lead to better creative/conceptual 

information versus better instrumental information seems particularly interesting 

(Moorman,  1995). It might be hypothesized that customer networks with many strong ties 

or highly redundant customer networks would lead to more instrumental use of 

information, while weak ties, and non-redundant networks m ight lead to more conceptual 

use of information. Also, more tacit forms of information may be more easily acquired 

from weak ties or non-redundant networks, and more explicit forms of information may 

be more easily acquired from strong ties or redundant networks. Analyzing these different 

forms of information might reveal more about the advantages and disadvantages of 

customer networks.

THE LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY

There are some limitations o f the study that need to be mentioned. The study 

focused more on high tech industries than on low tech industries. One might speculate 

that in high tech industries some new “revolutionary” products may utilize very little 

customer interaction due to the inability o f customers to provide useful information. 

However, the sample did not include what would be considered highly revolutionary 

products, such as a new pharmaceutical drug. The intent was to target projects that had 

the potential to benefit from customer interactions. Therefore, there is no obvious reason 

why this study’s results should not be generalizable to low-tech industries.

121

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


The study focused on business markets, and not consumer markets. Clearly a 

future research effort should be made to test the current model in a consumer 

environment- The study also focused on products, and not services. Although there is no 

obvious reason why the results would not apply to services as well, it might be speculated 

that services are on the average more customer intensive than product development. As a 

result, differentiating successful projects from unsuccessful projects based on interaction 

intensity or network ties may be more difficult with services. Lastly, the study sample 

consisted of product development organizations that sell products to markets with a 

limited number o f customers. As a reminder, 105 out o f the total 134 projects in the 

sample reported that greater than 50% of their total communications with customers was 

with five customers during the project. One could speculate that highly intensive 

interaction procedures become very expensive and time consuming in very large markets, 

and may lead to lower project efficiencies.

Another concern about the study was the possibility for common method bias due 

to the use of perceptual measures for the study variables, and the use of a single 

informant. In order to reduce this concern, project outcome information was collected 

from a second informant; a designated functional manager who was involved in the 

project. As reported in the methodology section, functional manager informant reports 

were highly related to project/product manager reports.

Lastly, one must be cautious about inferring causal mechanisms since the study 

utilizes cross-sectional data. This is particularly a concern for the hypothesized mediating 

relationship between customer interaction intensity and customer decision influence,

122

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


where both occur throughout the project. It could be argued that causation runs in either 

direction.

CONCLUSION

In conclusion, the study examined two aspects of customer involvement — the 

process of acquiring information, and the sources of customer information. Drawing on 

literature from organizational information processing, the focus placed on the richness of 

information channels enhances our understanding of how firms should tailor techniques 

for acquiring market information. The network view introduced a new dimension on how 

firms become more market-oriented. This view is particularly instructive in illuminating 

the tradeoff between acquiring innovative information, and acquiring information for 

achieving operational efficiencies. Non-redundant networks seem better at the former, 

and redundant networks seem better at the later.

123

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


APPENDIX A

NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT SURVEY QUESTIONNAIRE 

(Product/Project Manager)

124

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Product Development Questionnaire

I.  Your Project and Product

1.1  Please provide information on the project and the product that you selected.

How long ago was this product or product modification introduced to the market?  Months:

What was the approximate duration of time between:

a) 

the initial product idea and the start of product development 

b) 

the start of product development and product introduction 

Months:

Months:

Approximately, what was the maximum number of people assigned to the project at any one time?

This product is targeted at (check one):  _____OEMs 

______   non-OEMs 

_____   Both

Prior to the development o f this product, how much experience did your firm, division or business unit 
have in (circle one response per part):

a)  selling and promoting this type of product? 

b)  manufacturing this type of product? 

c)  engineering and designing this type of product? 

None 
1 

1 

1 

2 

2 

2 

3 

3 

3 

4 

4 

4 

Extensive
5

5

5

At the time this product was initially offered for sale, what percentage of the market had previously 
purchased either an earlier version of this product, or a similar product from a competitor?

0%  1-25%  26-50% 
1

3 

2

 

51-75%  76-100%

4 

5

At the time this product was initially offered for sale, how extensive was the marketplace’s knowledge (e.g. 
through advertising, sales contacts, news articles, word-of-mouth, or direct contact with similar 
products) about this product and the general functions it performs?

No extent 
1 
2 

3 

4 

Extensive

5

1.2  Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with each statement (circle one response per 
statement).

This product impacts how customers perform a very important  1 
function.

This product requires the customer to use many other 
complementary products.

This product requires customers to expend a significant 
amount of effort in learning how to use the product

This product results in customers becoming highly dependent 
on how the product performs its functions.

1 

1 

1 

125

Strongly 
Disagree 

Strongly
Agree

2 

2 

2 

2 

3 

3 

3 

3 

4 

4 

4 

4 

5

5

5

5

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


This product influences the nature of the job responsibilities 
in the customer’s organization.

1

2

 

3 

4

This product influences how customers perform a 
significant process

Policies and procedures in the customer’s organization 
are shaped by the use of this product

1

1

2

2

 

 

3 

3 

4 

4 

5

5

1.3  Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with each statement as it pertains to your 
customers.

Customer needs for this product are highly diverse.

Some customers receive different benefits from this 
product than others.

Customer preferences for price/quality vary significantly.

Customer preferences for product features vary significantly.

Customer preferences change quite a bit over time.

It is very difficult to forecast customer needs over 
the next few years.

Strongly
Disagree

2

2

2

2

2

2

3

3

3

3

Strongly
Agree
5

5

5

5

5

4

4

4

4

4

4

1.4  Which of the following statements best describes this product? (Please checkjust one).

(  )  At the time this product was introduced, neither this firm nor any other firm has developed anything 
quite like this product.

(  )  This product is a new product to our firm (or division) but at least one competitor had something 
comparable to it on the market when it was introduced.

(  )  This product is an extension to an existing line of products produced by our firm.

(  )  This product is an improvement to, or alteration of an existing product our firm already manufactures.

II.  Your Project Interactions with Customers

II.  1  Estimate the frequency o f interaction (verbal,  written or electronic exchanges) between project 
members and a single, typical customer who was influential in the project. Project members refer to those 
people from multiple functionalareas (e.g. R&D, engineering, product marketing manufacturing support) 
who were assigned to the project. Estimate this frequency for the following phases o f the project.

0 
times 
a month  a month  a month

1-3
times

<1 
time 

a)  Initial product idea generation phase.

b)  Market requirements/product design/

2

2

126

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

1-3
times
a week  Daily

4

4

5

5


specification phase.

c)  Product testing phase. 

d)  Product launch phase. 

1 

1 

2 

2 

3 

3 

4 

4 

5

5

II.2  Allocate a total o f 100 points among customer, supplier,  R&D, channel, and industry consultant 
organizations which are external to your company. Allocate these points to represent the approximate 
percentage oftime project members spent, as a whole, communicating with each type o f organization over 
the course o f the project out o f the total communications with all jive types oforganizations.

 

 

 

points.  Customer organizations 

points.  Supplier organizations 

points.  External R&D organizations.

 

 

points.  Channel organizations

points.  Industry consultants

127

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


II.3  Specify in the table below the extent to which you agree with statements in the lefthand column about 
interactions between project members and your customers. Specify your level ofagreement for interactions 
which occurred in the earlyfmiddle column) and later(righthand column) phases o f the project.  Project 
members refer to those people from multiple functional areas (e.g. R&D, engineering, product marketing, 
manufacturing, support) who were assigned to the project.

Early Phase of Project 
Consists of initial product 
idea generation, 
determination of market 
requirements, and product 
specification/design.

Later Phase of Project 
Consists of product 
testing, and product 
launch.

Strongly 
Disagree 
1

2

1

2

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

2

2

2 .

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

128

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

Strongly 
Agree
5

4

Strongly 
Disagree 
I 

2

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

Strongly 
Agree
5
4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

Customers and project members had 
frequent face-to-face interactions during 
this phase.
Customers interacted with project members 
often in group discussions during this 
phase.
Customers often participated in working 
meetings with project members.
Customers frequently engaged in 
interactive dialog with project members.
Customers were often involved in project 
activities.
Much feedback was provided to customers 
during this phase.
Much feedback was received from 
customers during this phase.
Communication between customers and 
project members flowed frequently in both 
directions.
Customers and project members worked 
together on  problems during this phase.
Issues were critically discussed between 
customers and project members.
Solutions to problems were jointly 
developed between customers and project 
members.
Information was exchanged openly 
between customers and project members.
Information from customer surveys was 
heavily relied upon during this phase.
Formal reports (e.g. market and customer 
reports) were often used during this phase.
Customer visits were heavily utilized in 
this phase.
It was difficult to know whether the process 
used to acquire information from customers 
during this phase was effective.
It was often difficult to predict in advance 
the outcome of customer interactions.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Difficult problems often arose during 
interactions with customers for which there 
were no immediate or apparent solutions.
Overall, the task of collecting customer 
information was very challenging during 
this phase.

1 

2 

1 2  

3 

3 

4 

4 

5

5

1 

1 

2 

2 

3 

3 

4 

4 

5

5

III.  Your Organization’s Relationships with Influential Customers

Please specify the initials o f the five “most influential” customers during the project in the far lefthand 
column o f the table below.  These  “most influential” customers had the most significant impact on the 
product which was developed. Please specify  five customers eventhough more customers may have had as 
much influence as the top five. Respond to the five statements in each column concerning the relationship 
between each customer and your product division (or business unit). If the relationship existed, circle  “Y" 
for yes. I f it did not exist, do not circle  “Y".

Statement 5: 
This customer 
provided 
resources (i.e. 
financial, 
personnel, 
facilities, or 
equipment) to 
support our 
division’s 
activities in the 
2  years prior to 
the start of the 
project

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

5 Most 
Influen 
tial 
Custo 
mers 
Initials 

1

1. ___

2 . ___

3 .___

4 .___

5.___

Statement 1: 
This
customer 
was one of 
the top 25% 
of customers 
for our 
division at 
the start of 
the project.

Statement 2:
This customer 
had been 
involved in 
product 
development 
activities with 
our division in 
the 2  years prior 
to the start o f the 
project.

Statement 3: 
This customer 
had been 
involved in 
marketing and 
sales activities 
with our division 
in the 2  years 
prior to the start 
of the project.

Statement 4:
One or more key 
people have 
switched jobs 
between our 
division and this 
customer’s 
organization in 
the 2  years prior 
to the start of the 
project

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

129

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


IV.  Customer-to-Customer Relationships

IV.  I  Place the initials ofthe same five  “most influential” customers, as specified above,  in the five spaces 
provided in the table below. For each o f the four statements in the lefthand column ofthe table, specify 
whether the statement is true for each pair o f customers as indicated in the column heading ofeach 
column. If the statement is true, then circle  “Y” for yes for the corresponding customer pair. For example, 
if customer I and customer 2 have similar technical competencies,  then the  “Y" in the upper leftmost 
position of the table immediately under the column marked "1&2 ", should be circled

I.
1&2 1&3

4-  5 Most Influential Customer’s Initials  4-
2-

4-

3-

1&4

1&5

Customer Pairs
2&4

2&3

2&5

3&4

3&5

5-

These two customers have similar technical 
competencies.
These two customers serve similar markets.

People from these two customer 
organizations attend common industry events.
These two customers follow similar strategies 
in competing in their markets (e.g. low cost 
supplier, technology leader, industry 
follower).

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

4 
&
5
Y

Y

Y

Y

IV2   Approximately, how many customers (i.e. existing or potential customer organizations) did 
members of your project (i.e. people assigned to the project from multiple functional areas, e.g. R&D, 
product marketing, manufacturing, support) directly interact with during the project in accomplishing their 
project activities?__________

Approximately, what percentage of total customer interaction during the project was:

a)  with the five most influential customers?  _______ %

b)  with the ten most influential customers?  _______ %

V.  Your Assessment o f Customer Information and Decision Influences

V.  1  Assess the customer information that was available to members o f the project by indicating the extent 
to which you agree or disagree with each statement.

Information on our customers: 

Strongly 
Disagree 

Strongly
Agree

a)  lacked objectivity.

b)  was accurate.

c)  was highly consistent

d)  included important details about their 

needs.

e)  was relevant.

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

2

3

3

3

3

3

4

4

4

4

4

130

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


0   made sense.

g)  provided clear signals about what had 

to be done.

h)  helped shape our strategy.

i)  improved the implementation of 

our product.

j)  improved our team’s productivity.

k)  improved our team’s understanding of 

the market.

1)  improved our estimate of the size of the 

business opportunity.

m)  was rarely used.

g)  led to concrete actions.

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

3

3

V.2  Please indicate the extent to which the final decisions in the following areas were influenced by input 
from customers during  the project.

Not at all influenced 
by customer input 

1

2

Greatly influenced 
by customer input
4

5

a)  Decision on which product ideas to investigate.

b)  Decision on which product concept(s) to develop. 

1

d)  Decision on the project schedule.

c)  Decision on the product specifications and features.  1
1
1

e)  Decisions on changes to the schedule, features, 

and quality levels during the project.

f)  Decision to release/introduce the product to 

the market

g)  Decision on the pricing of the product.

1 

2

2

2

2

2

3

3
J

3

3

4

4

4

4

5

5

5

5

h) 

Indicate the extent to which project decisions were 
influenced by only a few or many customers.

1 

Influence was from a 
broad set of customers

Influence was from 
only a few customers

131

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


VT.  Your Assessment of Project Performance and Outcomes

VI. I  Please indicate the extent to which the project  fell below, met or exceeded the objectives set for the 
project along the following dimensions:

Far below 
objectives 

Met project 
objectives 

Far above
objectives

a)  Product sales

b)  Market share

c)  Profitability

d)  Product quality

e)  Technical product performance

f)  Product innovativeness

1

2

2

2

2

2

2

3

3

3

3

3

3

4

4

4

4

4

4

0

5

5

5

5

5

Development costs were 
far above our initial budget

Development costs were far 
below our initial budget

g)  Meeting budget and costs

1

The project took much 
more time to complete 
than was scheduled
1

h)  Meeting schedule

The project took much 
less time to complete 
than was scheduled

VI. 2  At the time the product was introduced to the market, how would you rate this product in comparison 
with similar products offered by your competition on the following dimensions:

Well below 
the competition

Well above 
the competition

a)  Product quality

b)  Product features

c)  Product innovativeness

d)  Technical product performance

e)  Meeting customer needs

2

2

2

2

2

3

3

3

3

3

4

4

4

4

4

5

5

5

5

5

VI. 3  Assess team outcomes from  the project.

a)  At the time this product was introduced, 

how satisfied were project members with their

Completely
Unsatisfied

1

132

Completely
Satisfied

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


contribution to the project?

b)  Overall, how satisfied were project team members in the 
joint contribution of the functional departments involved 
in the project?

1 

c)  At the time this product was introduced, what level 

of team spirit existed among project members?

d)  Rate the degree of consensus achieved among project 

team members for the following new product areas:

(1)  Product features

(2)  Product design

(3)  Product quality level

(4)  Target market(s) chosen

(5)  Promotional content

Low
Team Spirit

1

Low Team 
Consensus

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

2

2

2

2

2

High
Team Spirit

High Team 
Consensus

3

3

3

3

3

4

4

4

4

4

5

5

5

5

5

VII.  Classification Questions and Contact Information 

1.  Please circle your response to the following statements.

Sales for your company last year 
were:

Less than 
$50 Million- 
$50 Million  $500 Million 

$501  Million-  $1.1 Billion-  More than
$1 Billion
$ 10 Billion

$ 10 Billion 

1 

2

Sales for your division/SBU last year 
were: 

1 

2

3 

4 

5

Less than 
$25 Million- 
$25 Million  $100 Million 

$101  Million-  $501 Million-  More than 
$500 Million  $1 Billion 
$1 Billion

How long has your division/SBU been in existence?  _______

_  years.

2. 

In order to increase the robustness of the data base, input from a second source is sought. Please 
provide the name of one person in your organization who is knowledgeable about your project’s 
customer relationships (e.g. product manager, sales development manager), and whom I can ask to fill- 
out Sections HI-IV (page 4) on customer relationships. Also, please provide the name of a functional 
manager in your organization to fill out Section VI (pages 6-7) on project outcomes.

Customer Relationships Contact: 

Functional Manager Contact: 

Name:

Name: 

_______

133

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Title:

Address: 

Title:

Address:

Phone:  _________________________________  

Phone:_________________

Note:  If contact information can not be provided, please return your questionnaire without this 
information.

3. 

Information on yourself:

Name: 

___  

_____________________________________

Job Title:  ___________________________________________________________________

Project Name:  _______________________________________________________________

Project Responsibility:  ________________________________________________________

Length of time in current position:  ___________   years

Would you be willing to provide more information on your project through a phone interview?

Your phone number:  _________________  

E-mail:________________________________

If you would you like a copy of a summary of the study, please check here___________ , and include
your business card in the return envelope.  Thank you very much for participating in the study. Return your 
completed questionnaire via the enclosed addressed envelope, or to Joseph Bonner, Department of 
Marketing, University o f Minnesota, 3-140 Carlson School of Management, 321-19* Avenue South, 
Minneapolis, MN  55455-0413.  If you want to return it via fax, my fax number is (612) 624-8804. If you 
need to contact me, (612) 626-9740 or jbonner@csom.umn.edu.

134

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


APPENDIX B

NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT OUTCOMES QUESTIONNAIRE

(Functional Manager)

135

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Product Development Questionnaire - Functional Manager

Instructions: This questionnaire asks about the outcomes of a completed project in which you were
involved. This project name is__________________________________________ .  Refer to this project
only in your questionnaire responses.

I)  Circle the appropriate number to indicate the extent to which the project fell below, met or exceeded 

the objectives set for the project along the following dimensions:

Far below 
objectives 

Met project 
objectives 

Far above
objectives

a)  Product sales 

b)  Market share 

c)  Profitability 

d)  Product quality 

e)  Technical product performance 

0   Product innovativeness 

1

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

2

 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

5

5

5

5

5

5

Development costs were 
far above our initial budget

Development costs were far 

below our initial budget

g)  Meeting budget and costs

1

The project took much 
more time to complete 
than was scheduled

The project took much 
less time to complete 
than was scheduled

h)  Meeting schedule

1 

2

2)  At the time the product was introduced to the market,  how would you rate this product in comparison 
with similar products offered by your competition on the following dimensions:

2

2

2

2

2

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

Well above 

the competition 

5

5

5

5

5

Well below 
the competition
1 

a)  Product quality 

b)  Product features 

c)  Product innovativeness 

d)  Technical product performance 

e)  Meeting customer needs 

1 

1 

1 

1 

136

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


3)  At the time this product was introduced, what level 

of team spirit existed among project members?

1 

Low 
Team Spirit 

2 

3 

4 

High

Team Spirit

5

Thank you very much for participating in the study. Return your completed questionnaire:
US Mail: 
Joseph Bonner
Department of Marketing, 3-140 Carlson School of Management 
University of Minnesota 
321-1911* Avenue South 
Minneapolis, MN  55455-0413

Fax:  (612) 624-8804 

E-Mail:  jbonner@csom.umn.edu

137

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


APPENDIX C

DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS -  ZERO ORDER CORRELATIONS

I. Prod 
Newness
2. Prod Embed
3. Mkt Hetero
4. Cust Interact
5. Weak Ties
6. Cust 
NonRedun
7. Info Qual
8. Info Use
9. Cust Influ
10. Cust Per
11. Firm Size
12. Prod Perf
13. SchedAd
14. Mkt Perf
15. Team Satis

I. Prod 
Newness
2. Prod Embed
3. Mkt Hetero
4. Cust Interact
5. Weak Ties
6. Cust 
NonRedun
7. Info Qual
8. Info Use
9. Cust Influ
10. Cust Per
11. Firm Size
12. Prod Perf
13. Sched Ad
14. Mkt Perf
15. Team Satis

Mean
2.68

3.28
334
2.82
1.44
1.21

3.76
3.75
339
37.02
3.94
3.95
2.47
3.04
3.82

SD
1.07

.74
.81
.82
139
1.08

.77
.77
.82
23.8
1.10
.69
.95
.95
.87

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

.10
-.12
.14
20
20

-.15
-.08
-22
-.09
-.10
-.09
-.01
-24
-.10

.06
39
.11
.08

-.04 j
.15
.13
.08
20
-.01
-.19
-.09
-.09

.02
-.02
.15

.02
.08
.07
-.11
-.04
.09
.02
-.04
-.01

-.06
-.09

.23
.42
.49
24
22
25
.13
.12
22

.44

-.05
-.10
-.17
.15
-.18
-.15
-.07
-20
-.16

-.05
-20
-21
-.10
.02
-.07
-.06
.01
-.15

.71
.43
29
22
35
.14
29
39

.62
2 8
23
3 2
21
3 1
3 9

26
.18
.41
.11
.26
29

.09
.17
.17
.09
2 2

11

12

13

14

.00
.11
-.01
33

.11
.55
34

28
39

31

p<.05 atr>|.16[ 
p < . 0 1  at r > j-2 2 |

138

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


BIBLIOGRAPHY

Achrol, Ravi S. and Louis W. Stem (1988). Environmental determinants of decision 
making uncertainty in marketing channels, Journal of Marketing Research, 25 
(Feb), 36-50.

Anderson, Erin, Leonard Lodish, and Barton Weitz (1987).  Resource allocation behavior 

in conventional channels, Journal of Marketing Research, 24 (Feb), 85-97.

Anderson, James C., Hakan Hakansson and Jan Johanson (1994). Dyadic business 

relationships within a business context, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 58, No. 4,
1-15.

Aiken, Leona S. And Stephen G. West (1991). Multiple Regression: Testing and 

Interpreting Interactions. Sage: Newbury Park.

Ancona and Caldwell (1992). Bridging the boundary: External activity and performance 

in organizational teams. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37: 634-665.

Booz, Allen & Hamilton, Inc. (1982). New Product Management for the 1980’s. New 

York: Booz; Allen & Hamilton, Inc.

Bower, Joseph L, and Clayton M. Christensen (1995). Disruptive technologies: Catching 

the wave. Harvard Business Review, (Jan-Feb), 43-53.

Brown, Shona L. and Kathleen M. Eisenhardt (1995). Product development: Past 
research, present findings, and future directions. Academy of Management 
Review, Vol. 20, No. 2: 343-378.

Burt, Ronald S. (1992). Structural holes: The social structure o f competition. Harvard 

University Press, Cambridge MA.

Ciccantelli, Susan and Jason Magidson (1993). Consumer idealized design: Involving 
consumers in the product development process, Journal of Product Innovation 
Management,  10:341-347.

Cooper, Robert G. and Elmo J. Kleinschmidt (1987). New product: What separates 

winners from losers?, Journal o f Product Innovation Management, 4:169-184.

Cooper, Robert G. and Elmo J. Kleinschmidt (1994). Determinants of timeliness in

product development, Journal of Product Innovation Management, 11:381-396.

Daft, Richard L. and Robert H. Lengel (1984). Information richness: A new approach to 

managerial behavior and organization design. In Research in Organizational 
Behavior, Vol. 6:191-233.

139

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Daft, Richard L. and Robert H. Lengel (1986).  Organizational information requirements, 

media richness and structural design.  Management Science, Vol. 32, No.
5,(May), 554-571.

Daft, Richard L. and Macintosh (1981). A tentative exploration into amount and 

equivocality o f information processing in organizational work units. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 26:207-224.

Deshpande, Rohit and Gerald Zaltman (1982). Factors affecting the use o f market 
research information: A path analysis, Journal of Marketing Research,  14,
Feb: 14-31.

Eisenhardt, Kathleen M. and BenhamN. Tabrizi (1995). Accelerating adaptive processes: 

Product innovation in the global computer industry, Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 40: 84-110.

Gatignon, Hubert and Jean-Marc Xuereb (1997). Strategic orientation of the firm and 

new product performance, Journal of Marketing Research, 34, Feb:77-90.

Gemunden, Hans Georg, Thomas Ritter, and Peter Heydebreck (1996). Network

configuration and innovation success: An empirical analysis in German high-tech 
industries, International Journal of Research in Marketing, 13, pp. 449-462.

Granovetter, Mark S. (1973). The strength o f weak ties. American Journal of Sociology, 

78:1360-1380.

Granovetter, Mark S. (1982). The strength o f weak ties: A network theory revisited. In

P.V. Marsden and Nan Lin, eds. Social Structure and Network Analysis. Beverly 
Hills: Sage.

Griffin, Abbie (1997). The effect of project and process characteristics on product 

development cycle time. Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 34, Feb:24-35.

Griffin, Abbie and John Hauser (1993).  The voice of the customer.  Marketing Science, 

Vol.  12, No.  1, Winter.

Gupta, Ashok K., and David L. Wilemon (1990). Accelerating the development of

technology-based new products. California Management Review, Winter:24-44.

Hakansson, Hakan (1989). Corporate Technological Behaviour: Co-operation and 

Networks, Routledge, London.

Hauser,  John R. and Don P. Clausing (1988). The house of quality. Harvard Business 

Review, 66,3, May-June.

140

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Herstatt, Cornelius and Eric von Hippel (1993).  From experience: Developing new 
product concepts via the lead user method: A case study in a "low-tech" field. 
Journal of Product Innovation Management, Vol. 9, pp 213-221.

Iansiti, Marco (1995). Shooting the rapids: Managing product development in turbulent 

environments. California Management Review, Vol. 38,  1, (Fall), 37-58.

John, George and John Martin (1984). Effects of organizational structure o f marketing 

planning on credibility and utilization of plan output. Journal o f Marketing 
Research, 21  (May),  170-83.

Karagozoglu, Necmi and Warren B. Brown (1993). Time-based management o f the new 
product development process, Journal of Product Innovation Management, Vol. 
10: 204-215.

Kohli, Ajay K. and Bernard J. Jaworski (1990).  Market orientation: The construct,

research propositions, and managerial implications. Journal o f Marketing, Vol. 
54, (April),  1-18.

Krackhardt, David (1992). The strength of strong ties: The importance of philos in 

organizations. In N. Nohria and R. Eccles, eds. Networks and Organizations: 
Structure, Form and Action. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.

Krone, Kathleen, Frederic Jablin and Linda Putnam (1987). Communication theory 
and organizational communication: Multiple perspectives, in Handbook of 
Organizational Communication: An Interdisciplinary Perspective, F.
Jablin et al, eds, Newbury Park, CA: Sage,  11-17.

Lynn, Gary S., Joseph G. Morone, and Albert S. Paulson (1996). Marketing and

discontinuous innovation: The probe and learn process. California Management 
Review, Vol. 38, 3, (Spring),8-35.

MacDonald, Stuart (1995).  Too close for comfort?: The strategic implications of getting 

close to the customer.  California Management Review, Vol. 37, No. 4, 
(Summer), 8-27.

Maltz, Elliot and Ajay K. Kohli (1996). Market intelligence dissemination across

functional boundaries. Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 32, (Feb), 47-61.

McCallister, Lynne and Claude S. Fischer (1983). A procedure for surveying personal 
networks. In Applied Network Analysis, Eds. Ronald Burt and Michael Minor, 
Sage Publications, Beverly Hills, pp. 75-88.

141

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


McEvily, William (1997). Bridging the industrial divide: Small firm innovativeness and 
regional institutions in geographical clusters. University of Minnesota Doctoral 
Dissertation.

McEvily, William and Akbar Zaheer (1997). Bridging ties: A source of firm

heterogeneity in competitive capabilities. Working paper, University o f 
Minnesota.

McQuarrie, Edward F. and Shelby H. McIntyre (1990). Implementing the marketing 

concept through a program o f customer visits, Marketing Science Institute 
Working Paper, Report No. 90-107, (March).

Menon and Varadarajan (1992). A model o f marketing knowledge use within firms. 

Journal of Marketing, Vol. 56, (Oct), 53-71.

Minor, Michael J. (1983). Panel data on ego networks: A longitudinal study o f former 

heroin addicts, In Applied Network Analysis, Eds. Ronald Burt and Michael 
Minor, Sage Publications, Beverly Hills, pp. 89-99.

Mohr, Jakki and John R. Nevin (1990). Communication strategies in marketing channels 

A  theoretical perspective, Journal of Marketing, (Oct), 36-51.

Moorman, Christine (1995). Organizational market information processes:

Cultural antecedents and new product outcomes. Journal of Marketing 
Research, Vol. 32, (Aug), 318-335.

Olson, Eric M., Orville C. Walker and Robert W. Ruekert (1995). Organizing for

effective new product development: Moderating role o f product innovativeness. 
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 59: 49-62.

Ottum, Brian D. and William L. Moore (1997). The role o f market information in new 

product success and failure. Journal of Product Innovation Management,  14: 
258-273.

Page, Albert L. (1993). Assessing new product development practices and performance: 
Establishing crucial norms. Journal o f Product Innovation Management, 10:273- 
290.

Urban, Glen L., and John R. Hauser (1993). Design and marketing of new products. 

Prentice-Hall.

Urban, Glen L., John R. Hauser, William J. Qualls, Bruce D. Weinberg, Jonathan D. 

Bohlman, and Roberta A. Chicos (1997). Information acceleration: Validation, 
and lessons from the field. Journal o f Marketing Research, Vol. 34, Feb: 143-153.

142

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Urban, Glen L., Bruce D. Weinberg, and John L. Hauser (1996). Premarket forecasting of 

really-new products, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 60, No.  1, pp. 47-60.

Uzzi, Brian (1997).  Social structure and competition in interfirm networks: The paradox 

of embeddedness. Administrative Science Quarterly, March, pp. 35-67.

von Hippel, Eric (1986). Lead users: A source o f novel product concepts. Management 

Science, Vol. 32, No. 7:791-805.

von Hippel, Eric(1992). Adapting market research to the rapid evolution of needs for 
new products and services. MIT Sloan School of Management Working Paper, 
WP# 3374-92-BPS.

Wind, Jerry and Vijay Mahajan (1997). Issues and opportunities in new product

development: An introduction to the special issue. Journal o f Marketing Research, 
Vol. 34, Feb, pp.  1-13.

Zaheer, Akbar and Srilata Zaheer (1997). Catching the wave: Alertness, responsiveness, 
and market influence in global electronic networks. Management Science, Vol. 43 
No.  11, November.

Zirger, Billie Jo and Modesto A. Maidigue (1990). A model of new product development: 

An empirical test. Management Science, Vol. 36, 7:867-883.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


IMAGE  EVALUATION

TEST  TARGET  (Q A -3 )

1.0

l.l

2.8

3.2 sa

1 * 0

1.25

1.4

m
2.2

2.0

1.8

1.6

150m m

IM /IG E  . I n c
1653 East Main Street 
Rochester, NY 14609  USA 
Phone: 716/482-0300 
Fax: 716/288-5989

O ‘993. Applied Image, Inc., All Rights Reserved

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

