 
 
 
 

 

 

 

Acceptance and job control 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

1

 

 

 

 

The role of acceptance and job control in mental health, job satisfaction, and work performance 

Frank W. Bond and David Bunce 

Goldsmiths College, University of London  

 

Bond, F.W. & Bunce, D. (2003). The role of acceptance and job control in mental health, job  

satisfaction, and work performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88, 1057-1067. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
Correspondence: F.Bond@gold.ac.uk

Acceptance and job control 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

2


 
 
 
 

 

Acceptance and job control 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

3

Abstract 

Acceptance, the willingness to experience thoughts, feelings, and physiological sensations without 

having to control them, or let them determine one’s actions, is a major individual determinant of mental 

health and behavioral effectiveness, in a more recent theory of psychopathology. This two-wave panel 

study examined the ability of acceptance also to explain mental health, job satisfaction and 

performance, in the work domain. We hypothesized that acceptance would predict these three 

outcomes, one year on, in a sample of customer service center workers in the United Kingdom 

(N=412). Results indicated that acceptance predicted mental health and an objective measure of 

performance, over and above job control, negative affectivity, and locus of control. Furthermore, these 

beneficial effects of having more job control were enhanced when people had higher levels of 

acceptance. Discussion notes the theoretical and practical relevance of this individual characteristic to 

occupational health and performance. 


 
 
 

Acceptance and job control 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

4

 

Most work psychologists maintain that both the design of work (e.g., having job control) and 

individual characteristics (e.g., negative affectivity) contribute to people’s mental health and work 

performance (e.g., Cooper & Marshall, 1976; Hurrell & Murphy, 1992; Katz & Kahn, 1978; Quick, 

Quick, Nelson, & Hurrell, 1997). They are not alone. Psychopathologists also posit and test theories of 

how mental health and effective behavior is promoted, protected, and improved. Psychological 

acceptance (also referred to as acceptance) is a major individual determinant of mental health and 

behavioral effectiveness, as hypothesized by one of the more recent, empirically-based theories of 

psychopathology (e.g., Hayes, 1987; Hayes, Strosahl, & Wilson, 1999). It refers to a willingness to 

experience thoughts, feelings, and physiological sensations, especially those which are negatively 

evaluated (e.g., fear), without having to avoid them, or let them determine one’s actions. We 

hypothesize that acceptance, developed to explain mental health and performance in a way that is most 

relevant to clinical psychology, can also help us to understand these outcomes, in a context that can 

inform organizational behavior. 

To investigate this possibility, the present two-wave panel study used structural equation 

models to test the extent to which acceptance predicts mental health, job satisfaction, and work 

performance, one year on. As the way that work is designed, or organized, also affects these outcomes 

(e.g., Quick et al., 1997), we wished to examine the predictive effects of acceptance, whilst accounting 

for those of job control: research consistently shows that this work organization variable is associated 

with occupational health and productivity (e.g., Terry & Jimmieson, 1999). We were not, however, 

merely interested in accounting for job control; rather, we hypothesized that acceptance interacts with 

this work design variable, to predict the three outcomes that we were examining, and we tested this 

theoretically-based prediction (Bond & Hayes, 2002) in the present study.  


 
 
 

Another goal of this research was to determine whether or not mental health, job satisfaction, 

Acceptance and job control 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

5

and work performance also predict levels of acceptance and job control, one year on. Such “reciprocal” 

relationships run contrary to relevant theories (e.g., Hayes, 1987; Karasek & Theorell, 1990), but, by 

testing for them, we can examine these unidirectional hypotheses. From all of these analyses, we 

assessed the extent to which a more recent psychopathology-based theory of mental health and 

behavioral effectiveness may explain occupational health and performance. 

 

Psychological acceptance at work 

Acceptance is a two part process that involves, firstly, a willingness to experience all 

psychological events (i.e., thoughts, feelings, and sensations), without changing, avoiding, or otherwise 

controlling them (Hayes, 1987; Hayes, Wilson, Gifford, Follette, & Strosahl, 1996). By accepting these 

internal events, people can, secondly, more effectively use their energies, formerly given over to 

resignation, avoidance, or control of these events, to act in a way that is congruent with their values and 

goals (Hayes et al., 1996). In other words, acceptance involves the transfer of scarce, attentional 

resources from controlling internal events to observing one’s environment and deciding on, and 

completing, the right course of action for goal attainment (e.g., paying more attention to task 

requirements). In order to enact this transfer, people need to be willing to experience even unwanted 

internal events (e.g., fear), so that they do not use their attentional resources to change or control them; 

but, instead, to make and enact overt behavioral choices on the basis of what will lead to their own 

valued goals (e.g., performing well at work), and not on the basis of what emotions or thoughts they 

may be experiencing. 

In psychotherapy, the concept of acceptance is operationalized in Acceptance and Commitment 

Therapy (ACT; Hayes, 1987; Hayes et al., 1999). ACT promotes acceptance by training people to be 

aware of their thoughts and feelings, but to base their actions upon their values and goals: not upon the 


 
 
 
vagaries of their internal events. Thus, ACT clients are encouraged to feel good (i.e., do a good job of 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

Acceptance and job control 

6

feeling fully what is there to be felt), as opposed to feeling good (i.e., changing one’s goal-directed 

actions, in order to experience feelings that are evaluated as “good”) (Hayes et al., 1996). In this way, 

clients can more effectively take control of their overt behavior, so as better to realize their own unique 

goals, or values. Hayes et al. (1999) maintain that these two components of acceptance (i.e., (1) not 

controlling internal behavior so that (2) one can better control overt actions) promote mental health by, 

respectively, lessening the impact that negative, private events have on people, and by helping 

individuals to define and accomplish goals that are meaningful to them. Bond and Hayes (2002) 

hypothesize that these “willingness-action” components of acceptance also help people receive more 

satisfaction from their jobs, as well as perform more effectively at work (if they value, and have the 

goal of, performing well at work). 

Consistent with this conceptualization of psychological acceptance, there is a great deal of 

research that implicates this individual characteristic in a wide range of psychological problems, from 

substance abuse to depression and suicide (see Hayes et al. (1996) for a review). There is also a large 

literature that shows an association between acceptance and positive outcome in psychotherapy (see 

Hayes et al., 1996; Linehan, 1993). It may not be surprising, therefore, that acceptance-based 

treatments are now used in relation to many types of psychological problems (see Hayes, Jacobson, 

Follette & Dougher, 1994). Despite its growing popularity in theories of psychopathology, the concept 

of acceptance has yet to inform models of occupational health and performance. Recent research, 

however, shows potential benefits for applying acceptance to the work context.  

For example, a randomized, controlled experiment by Bond and Bunce (2000) evaluated the 

effectiveness of an acceptance-based worksite stress management intervention (SMI) in a large media 

organization. Bond and Hayes (2002) developed this SMI for use in the work environment, from the 

strategies and techniques found in the psychotherapy version of ACT (i.e., Hayes, et al., 1999). Results 


 
 
 
indicated that the ACT SMI improved employees’ general mental health (General Health 

Acceptance and job control 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

7

Questionnaire), depression (Beck Depression Inventory), and innovation potential (Propensity to 

Innovate), relative to a control group. According to Cohen’s (1977) criteria for the effect size index of 

eta-squared (η2), these improvements ranged from a medium (depression, η2 = .21) to large (general 

mental health, η2 = .25; propensity to innovate, η2 = .43) magnitude of effect. Moreover, results showed 

that ACT produced these improvements, because it increased people’s acceptance levels. That is, 

acceptance was the mechanism, or mediator, by which ACT affected levels of general mental health, 

depression, and propensity to innovate. This suggests that psychological acceptance is very much 

associated with not only mental health-related variables (e.g., depression), but a performance-related 

variable (propensity to innovate) as well. This hypothesis is examined in the present study. 

 

Job control and acceptance 

 

Job control is defined, herein, as a perceived ability to exert some influence over one’s work 

environment, in order to make it more rewarding and less threatening (Ganster, 1989). Theories of 

occupational health and performance have hypothesized that providing people control over their work 

serves to improve mental health, job satisfaction, and performance (e.g., the job characteristics model 

(Hackman & Lawler, 1971), the sociotechnical systems approach (e.g., Emery & Trist, 1960), action 

theory (Frese & Zapf, 1994; Hacker, Skell, & Straub, 1968), and the demands-control model (Karasek, 

1979)). In line with these theories of work control and employee health, Terry and Jimmieson (1999) 

noted, in their review of this research literature, that there appears to be “consistent evidence” that high 

levels of worker control are associated with low levels of stress-related outcomes, including anxiety, 

psychological distress, burnout, irritability, psychosomatic health complaints, and alcohol consumption 

(p. 131). In addition, Bosma, Marmot, Hemingway, Nicholson, Brunner, and Stansfeld (1997) showed 

that low levels of job control longitudinally predict new reports of coronary heart disease, amongst 


 
 
 
London-based civil servants. Furthermore, Bond and Bunce (2001) showed, using a longitudinal, quasi-

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

Acceptance and job control 

8

experimental design, that a work reorganization intervention could improve people’s mental health, 

absenteeism levels, and self-rated performance, by increasing their job control. 

 

We believe that psychological acceptance can moderate this well-established relationship 

between job control and occupational health and productivity. As noted above, people who do not try to 

avoid or control internal events have more attentional resources and engage in less avoidant behavior 

(Bond & Hayes, 2002). They are, therefore, better able to notice the degree to which they have control 

in a given situation; and, since they are not very avoidant, they may, through trial and error, learn how 

they can most effectively use this control, in order to act in a way that is consistent with their values 

and goals (e.g., maximizing their work performance, mental health, and job satisfaction). Clearly, this 

explanation for an interactive effect of acceptance and job control needs to be empirically examined. 

Research does suggest, however, that if people can learn to focus on the task at hand (e.g., by learning 

acceptance), then they are better able to notice and respond effectively to even subtle changes in 

contingencies of reinforcement (e.g., situations in which they have, and can use, control) (e.g., Catania, 

Shimoff, & Matthews, 1989; Hayes et al., 1989). The present study tests whether or not job control and 

acceptance actually interact, in this manner, to affect these three outcomes.  

 

Furthermore, it examines whether or not these outcomes also predict acceptance, job control, 

and their interaction, one year on. Both theories of acceptance and occupational health (e.g., Bond & 

Hayes, 2002 and Hackman & Oldham, 1975, respectively) do not suggest such reciprocal relationships; 

and, consistent with these latter theories, a two-wave panel study by de Jonge, Dormann, Janssen, 

Dollard, Landeweerd, and Nijhuis (2001) found no longitudinal effects of job satisfaction, job 

motivation, or emotional exhaustion on job control. To our knowledge, no study has yet investigated 

the hypothesis that the impacts of acceptance on mental health, job satisfaction, and performance are 

unidirectional. 


 
 
 
 

Acceptance and job control 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

9

Treating negative affectivity and locus of control as potential confounds 

 

The term, negative affectivity, describes an aversive (e.g., angry, scornful, fearful, depressive) 

emotional style, or trait, that can exist even in the absence of objective stressors (Watson & 

Pennebaker, 1989). Locus of control describes the extent to which people believe that they influence 

events in their lives. Those with an internal locus of control perceive that they can manage situations 

with their decisions and behaviors, whilst those with an external locus of control believe that what 

happens to them is beyond their influence: a result of luck or fate (Rotter, 1966). People with the latter 

orientation are thought to be most at risk for experiencing mental ill-health and poor productivity 

(Spector, 1988).  

 

Research has shown that negative affectivity and locus of control have the potential to bias, or 

distort, people’s self-reports on a wide range of variables, from work characteristics (e.g., job control) 

to well-being (e.g., mental health, job satisfaction) and coping behaviors (e.g., problem- or emotion-

focused coping) (e.g., Parkes, 1991; Siu, Spector, Cooper, Lu, Yu, 2002; Spector, 1986). Such 

widespread (or “common”) biases are problematic, in that they may produce correlations amongst 

measures (e.g., between those of acceptance and mental health), when the constructs that they represent 

are not actually associated (e.g., Spector, Fox, & Van Katwyk, 1999). We believe that this confounding 

potential for negative affectivity and locus of control may appear when testing for associations between 

acceptance, on the one hand, and mental health and job satisfaction, on the other. Specifically, people 

with higher levels of negative affectivity, who perhaps already feel depressed or anxious, may discount 

the extent to which they do accept their unwanted thoughts and feelings. Likewise, people with an 

external locus of control may underestimate the degree to which they are able to take action (or manage 

situations), especially in the face of unpleasant internal events. Such cognitive distortions that center 

around people “minimizing” their abilities, and which result from unhelpful personality characteristics, 


 
 
 
have long been documented in the psychopathology literature (e.g., Beck, Rush, Shaw & Emery, 1979; 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

Acceptance and job control 

10

Beck & Freeman, 1990)). As a result of their potential biases, we wish to control for negative 

affectivity and locus of control, when testing the longitudinal relationships that we are examining in the 

present study.   

Quite apart from any potential biasing effect, we believe that it is important to control for 

negative affectivity and locus of control, because these are amongst the most heavily researched 

individual characteristics examined in studies of mental health and job performance (Jex, 1998). 

Therefore, it is not possible to gauge the incremental validity of the acceptance construct to 

organizational behavior and occupational health psychology, unless we know the degree to which it can 

predict mental health, job satisfaction, and job performance, over and above these two individual 

characteristics. 

 

The present study 

Based upon Hayes et al. (1999), Bond and Bunce (2000), and Bond and Hayes (2002), our first 

hypothesis was that higher levels of acceptance at Time 1 will predict, one year on at Time 2, better 

mental health, job satisfaction, and performance, even when accounting for job control, negative 

affectivity, and locus of control. Consistent with Hackman and Oldham (1975) and Karasek (1979), our 

second hypothesis was that greater job control at Time 1 will predict better mental health, performance, 

and job satisfaction at Time 2, after controlling for the other predictor variables. We, thirdly, 

hypothesized that, at Time 1, acceptance will moderate the relationship between job control and the 

three Time 2 outcomes, such that the benefits of job control will be greater when acceptance is higher 

than when it is lower. Based upon Hayes (1987) and Karasek & Theorell (1990), our fourth hypothesis 

was that there is a unidirectional, not a reciprocal, longitudinal relationship from the five predictor 

variables to the three outcomes. In other words, we predicted that mental health, performance, and job 


 
 
 
satisfaction at Time 1 will not predict acceptance, job control, or the interaction between the two, at 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

Acceptance and job control 

11

Time 2. Whilst we control for negative affectivity and locus of control in all our analyses, described 

below, we do not make any predictions concerning these two potentially confounding variables. 

 

Method 

Design and participants 

 

This study constituted a two-wave, autoregressive, cross-lagged panel design in which the same 

set of participant data was obtained on two occasions, one year apart. These data were taken from a 

sample of English and Scottish employees who worked in the customer service centers (also referred to 

as call-centers) of a United Kingdom (UK) financial institution. In order to participate in this study, 

employees had to have worked for the organization for at least two years. Furthermore, they had to 

input customer data into a computer, as a primary part of their job. (As noted below, the accuracy of 

these data entries constituted the performance outcome measure for the study.) Due to constraints on 

our resources, we were only able to include 800 of the 1,634 non-managerial employees who satisfied 

these two inclusion criteria. To select these 800, we used the systematic sampling procedures specified 

by Pedhazur and Schmelkin (1992). That is, following a random start on the list of 1,634 employees 

who met the inclusion criteria, we selected every second person (i.e., 1,634/800 ≈ 2) for inclusion, until 

we had a sample of 800 workers, to whom we sent questionnaires.  

The number of people who completed the first set of questionnaires at Time 1 was 647, or 81% 

of the initial sample of 800. At the second wave (i.e., Time 2), one year on, 412 people, or 52% of 

respondents also returned the second, final set. (This percentage does not include 10 people who had 

returned their final set of questionnaires yet had been promoted to managerial levels between Times 1 

and 2. This small group was excluded from the analyses, as they were no longer inputting customer 

data at Time 2.) The 52% response rate for people who completed both waves is consistent with that of 


 
 
 
other, similar, panel studies (e.g., Hagenaars, 1990). Of the final sample of 412, on which the following 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

Acceptance and job control 

12

analyses were based, 68% were women, the mean age was 30.87 (SD = 9.58) years, 66% worked part-

time, and they had worked for the organization for a mean of 5.23 (SD = 1.97) years. As inputting 

customer data is an “entry-level” position, none of this sample had previously had a non-data entering 

job at the organization. 

 

Chi-square and ANOVA analyses revealed no significant Time 1 differences on any variable 

reported below, between participants who dropped-out after Time 1 and those who completed both 

waves of questionnaires. Furthermore, path analyses (through LISREL 8.30, Jöreskog & Sörbom, 

1996) indicated that the causal relationships, at Time 1, were statistically similar between those who 

dropped out after the first wave and those who participated in both waves. It is unlikely, therefore, that 

the relationships, amongst the variables under consideration, differ systematically between survivors 

and dropouts.  

 

Measures 

 

  

Predictor variables 

Acceptance and Action Questionnaire (AAQ; Hayes et al., submitted). The 16 items that 

comprise this scale are shown in Table 1. They assess people’s willingness to accept their undesirable 

thoughts and feelings, whilst acting in a way that is congruent with their values and goals. A seven-

point Likert scale labeled “Never true” (scored 1) to “Always true” (scored 7) is used for responses. 

Higher scores indicate greater psychological acceptance. In this study, Time 1 and 2 alpha coefficients 

for this measure were .79 and .72, respectively.  

Although the AAQ is a relatively new measure, research thus far indicates that it has good 

psychometric properties (see Hayes et al., submitted). For example, regarding convergent validity, 

Hayes et al. (submitted) found that, in two studies, the AAQ was significantly, and negatively, 


 
 
 
associated with the White Bear Suppression Inventory (WBSI; Wegner & Zanakos, 1994). The WBSI 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

Acceptance and job control 

13

measures people’s tendency to suppress (i.e., not accept) unwanted thoughts, which is part of what the 

AAQ assesses. In addition, two studies (Roemer & Salters, in press; Tull & Roemer, in press) showed 

that less psychological acceptance was significantly associated with greater “fear of emotions”, as 

measured by the Affective Control Scale (Williams, Chambless, & Ahrens, 1997). Such a relationship 

would be expected, as people who do not want to experience, or whose actions are ruled by, unwanted 

emotions (e.g., anxiety or depression), probably fear these affective experiences. Furthermore, 

Donaldson and Bond (in press) found that the AAQ was significantly, and positively, associated with 

the Clarity scale of the Trait Meta-Mood Scale (TMMS; Salovey, Mayer, Goldman, Turvey and Palfai, 

1995). This TMMS scale assesses the degree to which people allow themselves to experience, and 

hence not avoid, both desirable and undesirable feelings (a concept that is similar to the willingness 

scale of the AAQ). The criterion-related validity of the AAQ has been demonstrated in respect to 

Generalized Anxiety Disorder and Post-Traumatic Stress (Roemer & Salters, in press; Tull & Roemer, 

in press), as well as depression, general mental health and job performance (Bond & Bunce, 2000). 

Finally, regarding construct validity, the AAQ exhibits no evidence of response bias, when considered 

in relation to social desirability (Hayes et al., submitted). 

We conducted a confirmatory factor analysis on the AAQ, using the current data set, in order to 

investigate further the construct validity of this measure. Consistent with the dual component 

conceptualization of acceptance (i.e., willingness and overt action) (Hayes et al., 1999), we found that a 

two factor solution was a good fit to these data: χ2(d.f. = 101) = 233, p = .020, comparative fit index 

(CFI) = .97; root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) = .05. Specifically, “willingness to 

experience internal events” and “ability to take action, even in the face of unwanted internal events” 

constituted the two factors. Table 1 shows the standardized path coefficients, or estimates, for the factor 

indicators. As the two factors were highly correlated (r = .71), a second-order factor (e.g., acceptance) 


 
 
 
is strongly indicated but cannot be estimated for reasons of statistical identification (e.g., Kline, 1998). 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

Acceptance and job control 

14

In summary, whilst more psychometric research is required on the AAQ, we believe that extant 

findings indicate that the construct and criterion-related validities of this measure are sufficient for its 

use in this study.  

 

Job control (Ganster, 1989). This 22-item scale assesses a range of areas over which people can 

have control at work: variety of tasks performed, the order of task performance, pacing, scheduling of 

rest breaks, procedures and policies in the workplace, and arrangement of the physical environment. 

Each item (e.g., “How much control do you have personally over the quality of your work?”) is rated 

on a five-point Likert scale that is labeled “Very little” (scored 1) to “Very much” (scored 7). Higher 

scores indicate greater levels of control. Psychometric properties of this scale appear good and reveal a 

single factor of control (Ganster, 1989), and, in the present study, alpha coefficients for this scale were 

.88 and .90 for Times 1 and 2, respectively. 

 

 

Predictor variables that are included as controls 

Negative affect schedule (Negative affectivity; Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988). This scale 

lists ten adjectives that describe negative moods (i.e., distressed, upset, guilty, scared, hostile, irritable, 

ashamed, nervous, jittery, and afraid). Participants indicate the extent to which they “generally” feel 

each mood, on a scale that is scored from “Very slightly or not at all” (scored 1) to “Extremely” (scored 

5). Higher scores indicate greater levels of negative affectivity. Watson et al. (1988) show that this 

measure demonstrates good psychometric properties, and, in the present study, Time 1 and Time 2 

alpha coefficients were .87 and .89, respectively. 

 

Work locus of control scale (Locus of control; Spector, 1988). This sixteen-item measure 

assesses the extent to which people expect that rewards, reinforcements, and other outcomes in the 

work domain, are controlled either by one’s own actions or by others. Responses to each item (e.g., 

“Promotions are usually a matter of good fortune”) are scored on a scale that ranges from “Disagree 


 
 
 
very much” (scored 1) to “Agree very much” (scored 6). Higher scores indicate a greater external locus 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

Acceptance and job control 

15

of control. Research indicates that this measure predicts work outcomes (e.g., job satisfaction) better 

than Rotter’s (1966) general locus of control scale (Spector, 1988). Alpha coefficients at Time 1 and 

Time 2 were .73 and .77, respectively. 

 

Outcome variables 

Computer input errors. The financial organization keeps records on the number of computer 

input errors that call-center personnel make, and do not immediately correct, when working on client 

accounts. As the organization maintains that any error has the potential to affect monetary movements, 

and account balances, all errors are recorded, whether they are “small” (e.g., ending a sentence with a 

comma rather than a period) or “large” (e.g., mismatching a client name and account number). In order 

to conform to UK law and industry best practice, there are a number of procedures set up to identify 

input errors. The main ones are: computer programs, employees involved in “clearing” (or monitoring 

and processing) account transactions, internal auditors, external auditors, and customers. Company, and 

government, policy mandates that every input error be traced back to the employee who made it, which, 

due to strict audit trails, is not difficult to do. For the purposes of this study, the ratio of “number of 

errors per year” to “number of hours worked” was established for each participant, in order to control 

for full-time and part-time working. As this ratio is considered confidential by the host organization, we 

standardized this value for the purposes of data analyses, below.  

General Health Questionnaire-12 (GHQ; Goldberg, 1978). This is a 12-item scale, typically 

used as a measure of general mental health (McDowell & Newell, 1996). Here the Likert method of 

scoring was employed (see Banks, Clegg, Jackson, Kemp, Stafford, & Wall, 1980), where each item 

(e.g.,  “Have you recently….” “Lost much sleep over worry”) was scored 0 (“Not at all”) to 3 (“Much 

more than usual”). Higher scores indicate greater mental ill-health. Alpha coefficients were .84 and .85 

at Time 1 and Time 2, respectively. 


 
 
 
 

General Job Satisfaction (Hackman & Oldham, 1975). This 5-item scale (e.g., “People on this 

Acceptance and job control 

 
                                                                                 

16

                                          
 

job often think of quitting” (reversed format)) measures the degree to which people are satisfied and 

happy with their job. Responses are recorded on a Likert scale labeled “Disagree strongly” to “Agree 

strongly”, scored 1 to 7  respectively. Higher scores indicate greater job satisfaction. Psychometric 

properties for this scale are good (Hackman & Oldham, 1975), and we found that alpha coefficients at 

Time 1 and Time 2 were .79 and .78, respectively. 

 

Procedure 

 

Each of the 800 people selected to participate at Time 1 received an envelope that contained a 

cover letter that explained the study, and it asked them to print their name, sign, and date the letter in 

the appropriate places, if they wished to participate. This letter was attached to the questionnaires, and 

we included a “freepost” envelope that allowed participants to send their questionnaire pack, which 

included their signed consent, directly to us, free of charge to themselves. The letter explained that the 

purpose of the study was to “understand how people’s attitudes, and the way their work is managed, 

affect well-being and performance levels at work”.  The letter made clear that they did not have to 

participate in this study, and that no one within their company would know whether or not they did so. 

The letter also noted that, by signing the form, and thus consenting to participate in the study, 

their computer input error rates for the past year would be obtained by the research team. Pay bonuses 

were based, in part, upon these rates, and employees understood that financial law and practice meant 

that these rates were very important and seen by many people within and outside the organization. For 

these reasons, we believe that our access to such data was not seen as very controversial. The letter 

emphasized that their error rates, and their responses to the questionnaires, would be treated as 

confidential, and no one within their organization would see how any individual responded to the 

questionnaires. The letter also noted that any report to the organization, or anyone else, would only 


 
 
 
present summary data. Furthermore, the letter provided contact details for the first author, in the event 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

Acceptance and job control 

17

that they wanted their data removed from the database, if they later decided that they did not wish to 

participate in the study. Finally, the Time 1 letter stated that they would be invited to complete the 

same questionnaires, and allow us to obtain their error rates again, in one year’s time. At Time 2, each 

participant had to sign a second consent form, in order to continue their participation in the study. The 

covering letters, and consent procedures, were consistent with the United Kingdom’s Data Protection 

Act, and they were approved by the organization’s human resource department and trades unions. 

 

Data analysis 

 

We tested our hypotheses by fitting, and comparing, three nested path analysis models (with 

LISREL 8.30), all of which can be seen in Figure 1. Following recommendations by Bollen (1989), 

Jöreskog (1979), Rogosa (1979), and Kline (1998), the first model that we specified was a baseline one, 

in which all of the Time 2 variables were predicted only by their Time 1 scores (i.e., their 

autoregressions). This model constitutes the most parsimonious explanation for Time 2 scores; thus, a 

more complex account (or model) of what predicts mental health, job satisfaction, and performance at 

Time 2 must provide a better fit to our data, in order for us to accept it (e.g., Kline, 1998). Regarding 

this baseline model, we allowed the disturbances (or residual errors) of the endogenous variables, found 

at Time 2, to correlate. We also allowed the exogenous variables, located at Time 1, to correlate 

(Jöreskog, 1979). 

Our hypotheses, of course, required us to add further paths, or associations, to the baseline 

model (or Model 1). In particular, our first three hypotheses were, respectively, that acceptance, job 

control, and their cross-product interaction term, each predicts all of the Time 2 outcomes: mental 

health, performance, and job satisfaction. To test these hypotheses, we added, to Model 1, cross-lagged 

structural paths from each of the five Time 1 predictors to each of the three Time 2 outcomes, which 


 
 
 
resulted in Model 2 (see Figure 1). If the goodness of fit of this latter model was better than that of 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

Acceptance and job control 

18

Model 1, we could then conclude that it better represented our data. We would then have the statistical 

justification to examine the significance levels of the path coefficients from each of the Time 1 

predictors to each of the Time 2 outcome variables. (We should note, here, that the “acceptance x job 

control” interaction term, seen in Figure 1, is used to test the hypothesis that acceptance interacts with 

job control to predict each of the three Time 2 outcomes. This interaction term can only serve to test 

such a moderator hypothesis, if acceptance and job control are also included in the model, in order to 

partial their main effects from their product (see Kline, 1998). 

Our fourth hypothesis was that there is a unidirectional, not a reciprocal, longitudinal 

relationship from the five predictor variables to the three outcomes. To test this prediction, we created 

Model 3, in which added to Model 2, paths from each of the Time 1 outcomes to each of the five 

predictor variables at Time 2 (see Figure 1). If the fit of this latter, reciprocal, model was worse than 

that of the former, we could conclude that there was no evidence for a reciprocal relationship between 

the predictors and outcomes. Likewise, if the fit of  Models 2 and 3 were equal, parsimony would lead 

us to the same conclusion, as there would be no statistical benefit of having reciprocal paths in a model 

(e.g., Kline, 1998). 

As can be seen in Table 2, there were no significant correlations between the demographic 

variables that we assessed (i.e., age, gender, and organizational tenure), on the one hand, and any of the 

predictor and outcome variables, on the other. We did not control, therefore, for these demographic 

variables, in the three models that were just described.   

 

  

 

Results 

Bivariate within-time, and test-retest, correlations are displayed in Table 2, and these are 

consistent with the relevant theories, research, and hypotheses, noted above. Means and standard 


 
 
 
deviations are also shown in Table 2. Standardized path coefficients are presented in Table 4, and an 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

Acceptance and job control 

19

interpretation of their magnitudes, discussed presently, are based upon the recommendations of Cohen 

(1988). In particular, coefficients of .10, .30, and .50 represent small, medium, and large effects, 

respectively. 

 

Model comparisons 

Covariance matrices were used to analyze the following structural equation models, and full 

information maximum likelihood (FIML) estimation was used to assess their fit. Table 3 shows the 

three, nested models, noted above, that we evaluated, and the comparisons that we made between 

Models 1 and 2 and Models 2 and 3. The difference in chi-squares, and degrees of freedom, between 

any two models that are compared can be used to test the statistical significance of the difference 

between the fit of the two models (Jöreskog & Sörbom, 1996). It is this chi-square difference test that 

we used in our model comparison analyses. 

To examine our first three hypotheses, we began by comparing the relative fit of Models 1 and 

2. Model 1 was the baseline one in which we specified autoregressions, only; and, we formed Model 2 

by adding cross-lags from the five Time 1 predictors to the three Time 2 outcomes. As can be seen in 

Table 3, the chi-square difference test between these two models indicated a significantly lower chi-

square, or better fit to the data, for Model 2. Indeed, the chi-square to degrees of freedom ratio, which 

is 28.54/25 = 1.14, suggests a very good fit for Model 2 (Bollen, 1989), which is a conclusion 

supported when considering other important fit indices that account for sample size (i.e., CFI = .99) and 

number of specified parameters, or model complexity (i.e., RMSEA = .04) (Hu & Bentler, 1998; 

Schumacker & Lomax, 1996).  

The significantly lower chi-square for Model 2 than for Model 1 provides us with statistical 

justification to examine the significance of the standardized paths that run from the Time 1 predictors 


 
 
 
to the Time 2 outcomes. These partial regression coefficients are presented in Table 4; and, consistent 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

Acceptance and job control 

20

with the first hypothesis, they indicated that greater psychological acceptance at Time 1 predicted better 

mental health and performance at Time 2. The magnitude of these significant effects were, respectively, 

medium and moderately small (i.e., at .18, approximately half way between small and medium). 

Contrary to the first hypothesis, however, acceptance at Time 1 was not associated with job satisfaction 

at Time 2. As predicted in the second hypothesis, higher levels of job control at Time 1 predicted 

greater levels of mental health, performance, and job satisfaction at Time 2. The sizes of these job 

control effects were, respectively, moderately small, small, and medium. When comparing the relative, 

standardized effects of acceptance and job control, acceptance was a significantly better predictor of 

mental health (z = 1.99, p < .05) but not of job performance. 

Hypothesis three proposed an interaction between acceptance and job control, such that the 

benefits of job control will be greater when acceptance is higher than when it is lower. Following 

Cohen and Cohen (1983), acceptance and job control scores were standardized, and the main effects for 

these variables were partialled from their product to create the interaction term. As a result, this 

interaction term can be directly interpreted (Cohen & Cohen). As can be seen in Table 4, the 

Acceptance x Job Control path coefficient is, as predicted, significant and positive for both mental ill-

health and input errors. This indicates that the beneficial effects of having more job control, in terms of 

better mental health and performance, are enhanced when people have higher levels of acceptance. The 

magnitude of the interaction effect, is medium for mental health and moderately small for performance. 

Contrary to hypothesis three, the path coefficient from the Acceptance x Job Control interaction to job 

satisfaction was not significant. 

When comparing the relative, standardized effects of the Acceptance x Job Control interaction 

with the other two predictor variables, results indicate that the interaction is a better predictor of mental 

health than is acceptance (z = 1.97, p < .05) and job control (z = 2.60, p < .05). Similarly, this 


 
 
 
interaction is a better predictor of job performance than is job control (z = 2.03, p < .05), but it is 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

Acceptance and job control 

21

statistically just as good as acceptance.  

The fourth hypothesis was that there is a unidirectional, not a reciprocal, longitudinal 

relationship from the five predictor variables to the three outcomes; thus, mental health, computer input 

errors, and job satisfaction at Time 1 should not predict acceptance, job control, the interaction between 

the two, at Time 2. To test this hypothesis, we compared Model 2 (with autocorrelations and cross-lags 

from the Time 1 predictors to the Time 2 outcomes) with Model 3 (which is the same as Model 2, with 

the exception of additional paths from each of the Time 1 outcomes to each of the five predictors at 

Time 2). As can be seen in Table 3, the chi-square for Model 3 is not significantly different from that of 

Model 2. This indicates, as hypothesized, that the effects of the predictors on the outcomes is 

unidirectional, not reciprocal (Kline, 1998). (This finding is, in fact, consistent with results that show 

no significant paths from any of the outcomes at Time 1 to any of the predictors at Time 2 (See Table 

4).) 

Finally, negative affectivity and locus of control functioned as control variables in this study; 

and, the impacts of them can be seen in Table 4. Specifically, higher levels of negative affectivity at 

Time 1 significantly predicted greater mental ill-health, computer input errors, and job dissatisfaction at 

Time 2; and, a greater external locus of control at Time 1 predicted higher levels of mental ill-health at 

Time 2. Importantly though, the results in relation to Hypotheses 1 to 4 were obtained having 

statistically controlled for these two variables. 

 

 

This two-wave panel study examined the longitudinal effects of psychological acceptance on 

Discussion 

mental health, job satisfaction, and work performance, amongst customer service center employees in a 


 
 
 
financial organization. In assessing the impact of this variable, we accounted for job control, and two 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

Acceptance and job control 

22

potential confounds: negative affectivity and locus of control. 

 

Acceptance and its interaction with job control 

As predicted by Hayes’ (1987; Bond & Hayes, 2002) theory, results indicated that higher 

acceptance levels predict better mental health and performance, one year on. Interestingly though, and 

as hypothesized, results also showed that acceptance interacts with job control to affect these two 

outcomes. This work organization characteristic is one of the most important ones that is identified by 

occupational health and performance theories (e.g., Emery & Trist, 1960; Frese & Zapf, 1994; 

Hackman & Lawler, 1971; Karasek, 1979), and the research that investigates them (see Terry and 

Jimmieson, 1999 for a review). Findings from this study suggested that higher levels of acceptance at 

Time 1 serve to increase the association between higher levels of job control at Time 1 and better 

mental health and performance at Time 2. 

 

This strengthening effect is consistent with the theory of acceptance (see Hayes et al., 1999), 

described above. It states that people who do not try to avoid or control psychological events have more 

attentional resources and engage in less avoidant behavior (Bond & Hayes, 2002). In the work 

environment, these people are better able to notice the degree to which they have control in a given 

situation; and, since they are not very avoidant, they may, through trial and error, learn how they can 

most effectively use the control that they have, in order to promote their mental health. Through this 

same “trial and error” mechanism, they can also maximize their work performance, if they value, and 

have the goal of, performing well at work. We believe that most of the present sample shared the goal 

of performing well at work, as we defined it in this study (i.e., number of computer input errors). 

Specifically, people who wanted to keep their job had to meet a number of strenuously enforced 

performance targets, one of which included the number of computer input errors they made. As the 


 
 
 
mean tenure of this sample of employees was over five years, we believe that it is reasonable to assume 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

Acceptance and job control 

23

that, by their very survival at the company, they accepted the organizationally-specified goal of 

minimizing computer input errors.  

 

  The results for acceptance in this study reflect the findings from a randomized controlled 

outcome study by Bond and Bunce (2000), noted above. It showed that a training program improved 

people’s mental health, and their propensity to be innovative in their job, because it increased their 

acceptance levels. In other words, acceptance mediated the changes in mental health and propensity to 

innovate, in that study. This finding is consistent with results from the present study that demonstrated 

that acceptance can predict, one year on, mental health and another work performance indicator, 

computer input errors.  

Finally, consistent with acceptance theory (e.g., Hayes, 1987; Hayes et al., 1999), results 

indicated that the longitudinal effects of acceptance on mental health and performance that were seen 

are unidirectional. In that, mental health, input errors, nor job satisfaction at Time 1 was associated 

with acceptance at Time 2. We are not aware of any previous study that has tested this unidirectional 

hypothesis.  

 

Job control 

In addition to its interaction with acceptance, job control also produced several main effects. 

Specifically, higher job control levels at Time 1 predicted better mental health, job satisfaction, and 

performance at Time 2. These main effects for job control are consistent with models of occupational 

health and performance (e.g., Hackman & Lawler, 1971; Karasek, 1979). There is also a large literature 

that shows positive relationships between job control and outcomes centering around occupational 

health and productivity (see Terry and Jimmieson (1999) for a review. 


 
 
 

Consistent with theories of occupational health and performance (e.g., Hackman & Lawler, 

Acceptance and job control 

 
                                                                                 

24

                                          
 

1971; Karasek, 1979), our results indicated that the longitudinal effects of job control on mental health, 

performance, and job satisfaction are unidirectional. In that, consistent with the findings of de Jonge et 

al. (2001), noted above, we found that none of these three outcomes at Time 1 predicted job control at 

Time 2. 

 

Job satisfaction 

 

Results indicated a significant, positive, bivariate correlation between acceptance and job 

satisfaction at both Time 1 (r=.26) and Time 2 (r=.23). Contrary to our hypotheses, however, we did 

not find that acceptance longitudinally predicted job satisfaction, either directly, or indirectly through 

an interaction with job control. To understand this discrepancy, it is helpful to consider the path 

analytic model that we used to test for this association (see Figure 1). Its specification meant that the 

relationship between acceptance at Time 1 and job satisfaction at Time 2 was calculated, after 

controlling for relationships that the other predictors have with these two variables (see Kline, 1998). 

One notable association that would have been accounted for is the fairly large bivariate correlation 

between job control and job satisfaction (i.e., r=.54 at Time 1 and r=.53 at Time 2). Given this strong 

relationship, it is possible that Time 1 acceptance could not account for a significant amount of residual 

variance in job satisfaction, after job control was partialled.  

In other words, acceptance may well be associated with job satisfaction, but this relationship 

becomes non-significant once job control, a more important predictor of job satisfaction, is accounted 

for. Such an explanation would also be consistent with the finding that acceptance did not moderate the 

significant relationship between job control at Time 1 and job satisfaction at Time 2. That is, since job 

control is substantially more important than acceptance in predicting job satisfaction, the effect of this 

latter predictor will not impact the effect of the former one, in its association with job satisfaction.  


 
 
 
 

Acceptance and job control 

 
                                                                                 

25

                                          
 

Negative affectivity and locus of control as potential confounds 

  We treated negative affectivity and locus of control as possible confounds in this study, and 

thus controlled them. In the event, bivariate correlations, and path analysis, results both indicated that 

these two individual characteristics were associated with acceptance, and other predictors and 

outcomes. Thus, including them in the study allowed us to control for any spurious associations that 

they may have caused between our variables of interest. We should note, though, that the degree to 

which personality variables, and negative affectivity in particular, function as substantive variables that 

should not be controlled, or as biases that should be controlled, has received growing attention recently 

(e.g., Spector, Fox, & van Katwyk, 1999). We chose to take the latter, more conservative, approach in 

this study, so that we could understand the role of acceptance in predicting the outcomes, over and 

above the contribution of negative affectivity and locus of control. In so doing, we appeared to 

demonstrate incremental validity of acceptance, in terms of its ability to predict mental health and job 

performance, both directly and when interacting with job control. As a result, it appears that the 

predictive effects of acceptance are independent of those that stem from negative affectivity and locus 

of control.   

Although we treated negative affectivity and locus of control only as confounding variables in 

this study, it is useful to note that they did show expected relationships with the outcomes that we 

examined. Specifically, higher negative affectivity at Time 1 predicted greater levels of mental ill-

health, job dissatisfaction and performance at Time 2. These findings for the first two outcomes are 

consistent with those from previous research (e.g. Brief & Roberson, 1989; DeNeve & Cooper, 1998; 

Munz, Huelsman, Konold, & McKinney, 1996; Watson and Slack, 1993). We are not aware, however, 

of another study that has examined negative affectivity as a longitudinal predictor of an objective, work 

performance index. Also, consistent with prior research (e.g., Jex, 1998; Parkes, 1991; Spector, 1982) 


 
 
 
we found that people with a greater external locus of control at Time 1 experienced lower levels of job 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

Acceptance and job control 

26

satisfaction at Time 1, and worse mental health at Time 2. 

 

Limitations and conclusions 

One potential limitation of our study concerns the extent to which our findings generalize to 

other populations. Our sample was fairly homogenous, in that it comprised only non-managerial 

customer service center personnel, who worked for one financial services organization. This single 

occupation and organization sample, constituted by people who were all in a very narrow grade (and 

pay) range, minimized potential confounds to our data (e.g., socio-economic status). It also, 

importantly, permitted us to obtain a very objective performance rating for each participant (i.e.,  

computer input errors). Despite these desirable advantages, such homogeneity, inevitably, has its 

downsides. For example, it does not allow us to comment upon the generalizability of our findings to 

other industries, other financial services organizations, or even to managers within the organization in 

which our study was conducted. As a result, future studies that examine the impact of acceptance on 

workplace variables may wish to use a population that complements the one that we studied.  

Subsequent studies examining acceptance in the workplace would also do well to control for 

other, potentially confounding, dispositional variables that may influence the mind set of questionnaire 

respondents. As indicated above, we believe that negative affectivity and locus of control are two such 

variables, and indeed results support this contention, but there are certainly others (e.g., self-efficacy). 

Due to constraints on workers’ time, no study can examine every potential confound, so it is important 

for future ones to investigate additional possibilities. 

In conclusion, there are three primary implications of these findings to work psychology and 

organizational behavior. First, it would seem that acceptance is an important longitudinal predictor of 

both mental health and performance, even when accounting for job control, negative affectivity, and 


 
 
 
work locus of control. This suggests that Hayes’ (1987) theory of psychological acceptance, which 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

Acceptance and job control 

27

attempts to explain mental health and performance in a way that is most relevant to clinical psychology, 

can also help us to understand these outcomes, in a context that is directly pertinent to organizational 

behavior (e.g., when examining its interaction with job control to predict job performance). Second, as 

the beneficial effects of having more job control were enhanced when people had higher levels of 

acceptance, it would appear that any work reorganization program that attempts to increase employee 

control may also wish to increase their acceptance levels.  

Relatedly, and finally, it may be helpful to assess and enhance acceptance, when trying to find 

ways to improve mental health and productivity at work. Indeed, this implication is consistent with the 

findings of Bond and Bunce (2000) who showed that acceptance was the mechanism by which an SMI 

improved mental health and propensity to innovate, in a media organization. Thus, there is now both a 

longitudinal panel study and a longitudinal, experimental outcome study that indicate the importance of 

psychological acceptance to mental health and performance in different organizations, within different 

industries. If further research yields similar findings for acceptance, we may find it theoretically and 

practically useful to integrate this individual characteristic into models of occupational stress and 

productivity. 


 
 
 

Acceptance and job control 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

28

References 

Banks, M.H., Clegg, C.W., Jackson, P.R., Kemp, N.J., Stafford, E.M. & Wall, T.D.  (1980).  The use of the 

general health questionnaire as an indicator of mental health in occupational studies.  Journal of 

Occupational Psychology, 53, 187 - 194. 

Beck, A.T. & Freeman, A.M. (1990). Cognitive therapy of personality disorders. New York: Guilford Press. 

Beck, A.T., Rush, J., Shaw, B. & Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive therapy of depression. New York:  

Guilford Press. 

Bollen, K.A. (1989). Structural equations with latent variables. New York: Wiley. 

Bond, F.W. & Bunce, D. (2000). Outcomes and mediators of change in emotion-focused and problem-focused 

worksite stress management interventions. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology,5(1), 156 – 163. 

Bond, F.W., & Bunce, D.  (2001).  Job control mediates change in a work reorganization intervention for stress 

reduction. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 6, 290 – 302. 

Bond, F.W. &  Hayes, S.C.  (2002).  ACT at work. In F.W. Bond & W. Dryden (Eds.), Handbook of brief cognitive 

behaviour therapy. Chichester:  John Wiley & Sons. 

Brief, A.P. & Roberson, L. (1989). Job attitude organization: An exploratory study. Journal of Applied Social 

Psychology, 19, 717 – 727. 

Bosma, H., Marmot, M.G., Hemingway, H., Nicholson, A.C., Brunner, E., & Stansfeld, S.A. (1997). Low job 

control and risk of coronary heart disease in the Whitehall II (prospective cohort) study. British Medical 

Journal, 314, 558 – 564.  

Catania, A.C., Shimoff, E., & Matthews, B.A. (1989). An experimental analysis of rule-governed behavior. In 

S.C. Hayes (Ed.), Rule-governed behavior: Cognition, contingencies, and instructional control (pp. 119 – 

150). New York: Plenum.  

Cohen, J. (1977).  Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences.  San Diego, CA:  Academic Press. 

Cohen, J.  (1988).  Statistical power analysis (2nd ed.).  Hillsdale, NJ:  Erlbaum. 


 
 
 

Acceptance and job control 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

29

Cohen, J. & Cohen, P. (1983). Applied multiple regression/correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd 

ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum  Associates. 

Cooper, C.L. & Marshall, J. (1976). Occupational sources of stress: A review of the literature relating to coronary 

heart disease and mental ill health. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 49, 11 – 28.  

De Jonge, J., Dormann, C., Jannssen, P.P.M., Dollard, M.F., Landerweerd, J.A., & Nijhuis, F.J.N. (2001). Testing 

reciprocal relationshiops between job characteristics and psychological well-being. Journal of 

Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 71, 29 – 46. 

DeNeve, K.M. & Cooper, H. (1998). The happy personality: A meta-analysis of 137 personality traits and 

subjective well-being. Psychological Bulletin, 124(2), 197-229. 

Donaldson, E. & Bond, F.W. (in press). Psychological acceptance and emotional intelligence in relation to 

workplace well-being. British Journal of Guidance and Counselling.  

Emery, F.E., & Trist, E.L.  (1960).  Socio-technical systems.  In C.H. Churchman & M. Verhulst (Eds.), 

Management science, models and techniques (Vol. 2,  pp. 83 – 97).  New York:  Pergamon. 

Frese, M. & Zapf, D. (1994). Action as the core of work psychology: A German approach. In H.C. Triandis, M.D. 

Dunnette & J.M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology. Palo alto, CA: 

Consulting Psychologists. 

Ganster, D.C. (1989). Measurement of worker control. Final report to the National Institute of Occupational 

Safety and Health, Contract No. 88 – 79187. 

Goldberg, D. (1978). Manual of the general health questionnaire. Windsor:  National Foundation for Educational 

Research.  

Hacker, W., Skell, W. & Straub, W. (1968). Arbeitspychologie und wissenschaftlich-technische revolution. 

Berlin:  Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften. 

Hackman, J.R. & Lawler, E.E. (1971). Employee reactions to job characteristics.  Journal of Applied Psychology, 

55, 259 – 286. 


 
 
 

Acceptance and job control 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

30

Hackman, J.R, & Oldham, G.R.  (1975).  Development of the Job Diagnositic Survey.  Journal of Applied 

Psychology, 60, 159 – 170. 

Hagenaars, J.A. (1990). Categorical longitudinal data: Log-linear panel, trend, and cohort analysis. Newbury 

Park, CA: Sage. 

Hayes, S.C. (1987). A contextual approach to therapeutic change. In N. Jacobson (Ed.), Psychotherapists in 

clinical practice. New York:  Guilford Press. 

Hayes, S.C., Bissett, R.T., Batten, S.V., Bergen, J., Bond, F.W., Dykstra, T.A., et al. (submitted). Psychometric 

properties of the acceptance and action questionnaire. 

Hayes, S.C., Jacobson, N.S., Follette, V.M., & Dougher, M.J. (1994). Acceptance and Change:  Content and 

context in psychotherapy. Reno, NV:  Context Press. 

Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance and Commitment Therapy: An experiential 

approach to behavior change. New York: Guilford Press. 

Hayes, S.C., Wilson, K.G., Gifford, E.V., Follette, V.M., & Strosahl, K. (1996). Experiential avoidance and 

behavioral disorders:  A functional dimensional approach to diagnosis and treatment. Journal of 

Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64, 1152 - 1168. 

Hayes, S.C., Zettle, R.D., & Rosenfarb, I. (1989). Rule following. In S.C. Hayes (Ed.), Rule-governed behavior: 

Cognition, contingencies, and instructional control (pp. 191 – 220). New York: Plenum.   

Hu, L.T., & Bentler, P.M. (1998). Fit indices in covariance structure modeling: Sensitivity to underparameterized 

model misspecification. Psychological methods,3, 424 – 453. 

Hurrell, J.J. & Murphy, L.R. (1992). An overview of occupational stress and health. In W.M. Rom (Ed.), 

Environment and occupational medicine (2nd ed., pp. 675 – 684). Boston: Little, Brown. 

Jex, S.M. (1998). Stress and job performance. London:  Sage. 


 
 
 

Acceptance and job control 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

31

Jöreskog, K.G. (1979). Statistical estimation of structural models in longitudinal-developmental investigations. In 

J.R. Nesselroade & P.B. Baltes (Eds.), Longitudinal research in the study of behavior and development 

(pp. 303 – 352). New York: Academic Press. 

Jöreskog, K. & Sörbom, D. (1996). LISREL 8: User’s reference guide. Chicago Ill: Scientific Software 

International. 

Karasek, R.A.  (1979).  Job demands, job decision latitude, and mental strain:  Implications for job redesign.  

Administrative Science Quarterly, 24, 285 – 308. 

Karasek, R. & Theorell, T.  (1990).  Healthy work:  Stress, productivity, and the reconstruction of working life.  

New York:  Basic Books. 

Katz, D. & Kahn, R.L. (1978). The social psychology of organizations (2nd ed.). New York: John Wiley. 

Kline, R.B. (1998). Principles and practice of structural equation modeling. New York: Guilford. 

Linehan, M.M. (1993). Cognitive behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder.  New York:  

Guilford Press. 

McDowell, I., Newell, C.  (1996).  Measuring health.  Oxford:  Oxford University Press. 

Munz, D.C., Huelsman, T.J., Konold, T.R., & McKinney, J.J. (1996). Are there methodological and 

substantive roles for affectivity in Job Diagnostic Survey relationships? Journal of Applied 

Psychology, 81, 795 – 805.  

Parkes, K.R. (1991). Locus of control as moderator: An explanation for additive versus interactive findings 

in the demand-discretion model of work stress? British Journal of Psychology, 82, 291 – 312. 

Pedhazur, E.J., & Schmelkin, L.P. (1991).  Measurement, design and analysis:  An integrated approach.  

Hillsdale, N.J:  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

Quick, J.C., Quick, J.D., Nelson, D.L., & Hurrell, J.J. (1997). Preventive stress management in organizations. 

Washington DC:  American Psychological Association. 

Roemer, L. & Salters, K. (in press). Fear and avoidance of internal experiences in GAD:  


 
 
 
Preliminary tests of a conceptual model. Cognitive Therapy and Research. 

Acceptance and job control 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

32

Rogosa, D. (1979). Causal models in longitudinal research: Rationale, formulation, and interpretation. In J.R. 

Nesselroade & P.B. Baltes (Eds.), Longitudinal research in the study of behavior and development (pp. 

303 – 352). New York: Academic Press. 

Rotter, J.B. (1966). Generalized expectancies for internal versus external control of reinforcement. Psychological 

Monographs, 80, Whole no. 609.  

Salovey, P., Mayer, J.D., Goldman, S.L., Turvey, C. & Palfai, T.P. (1995).  Emotional attention, clarity and 

repair: Exploring Emotional Intelligence using the Trait Meta-Mood Scale.  In J.W. Pennebaker (Ed.) 

Emotional disclosure and health (pp 125- 154). Washington DC: American Psychological Association. 

Schumacker, R.E., & Lomax, R.G. (1996). A beginner’s guide to structural equation modeling. Mahwah, NJ: 

Erlbaum. 

Siu, O, Spector, P.E., Cooper, C.L., Lu, L, & Yu, S (2002). Managerial stress in greater China: The direct and 

moderator effects of coping strategies and work locus of control. Applied Psychology: An International 

Review, 51(4), 608-632. 

Spector, P.E. (1982). Behavior in organizations as a function of employee locus of control. Psychological 

Bulletin, 91, 482 – 497. 

Spector, P.E. (1986). Perceived control by employees: a meta-analysis of studies concerning autonomy and 

participation at work. Human Relations, 39(11), 1005-1016. 

Spector, P.E. (1988). Development of the work locus of control scale. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 61, 

335 – 340. 

Spector, P.E., Chen, P.Y., O’Connell, B.J. (1999). The role of negative affectivity in employee reactions to job 

characteristics: bias effect or substantive effect? Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 

72(2), 205-218. 


 
 
 

Acceptance and job control 

 
                                                                                 

                                          
 

33

Terry, D.J. & Jimmieson, N.L. (1999). Work control and employee well-being: A decade review. In C.L. Cooper 

& I.T. Robertson (Eds.), International review of industrial and organizational psychology. Chichester:  

John Wiley & Sons. 

Tull, M.T. & Roemer, L. (in press). Alternative explanations of emotional numbing of posttraumatic stress 

disorder: An examination of hyperarousal and experiential avoidance. Journal of Psychopathology and 

Behavioral Assessment. 

Watson, D., Clark, L.A. & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of positive and 

negative affect: the PANAS Scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 1063 – 1074. 

Watson, D. & Pennebaker, J.W. (1989). Health complaints, stress, and distress: Exploring the central role of 

negative affectivity. Psychological Review, 96, 234 – 254. 

Watson, D. & Slack, A.K. (1993). General factors of affective temperament and their relation to job satisfaction 

over time. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 54, 181 – 202.  

Williams, K. E., Chambless, D. L., & Ahrens, A. (1997).  Are emotions frightening? An extension of the 

fear of fear construct.  Behaviour Research and Therapy, 35, 239-248. 

Wegner, D. M., & Zanakos, S. (1994). Chronic thought suppression. Journal of Personality, 62, 615-640. 


                                   
34

 
Table 1.  
Factorial structure of the Acceptance and Action Questionnaire (AAQ)  
AAQ items 

Factor 

Acceptance and job control 

Standardized  
path coefficients 
.73 

.67 

.69 

.61 

.58 

.42 

.29 

.54 

(cid:197)Action 

(cid:197)Willingness 

(cid:197)Willingness 

(cid:197)Willingness 

(cid:197)Willingness 

(cid:197)Willingness 

(cid:197)Willingness 

(cid:197)Willingness 

I try to suppress thoughts and feelings that  
I don’t like by just not thinking about them.* 
 
It’s OK to feel depressed or anxious. 
 
I try hard to avoid feeling depressed or anxious.* 
 
If I could magically remove all the painful  
experiences I’ve had in my life, I would do so.* 
 
I rarely worry about getting my anxieties,  
worries, and feelings under control. 
 
Anxiety is bad.* 
 
I’m not afraid of my feelings. 
 
I am in control of my life. 
 
In order for me to do something important,  
I have to have all my doubts worked out.* 
 
If I get bored of a task, I can still complete it. 
 
Worries can get in the way of my success.* 
 
I should act according to my feelings at the time.* 
 
I am able to take action on a problem even  
if I am uncertain what is the right thing to do. 
 
If I promised to do something,  
I’ll do it, even if I later don’t feel like it. 
 
When I feel depressed or anxious,  
I am unable to take care of my responsibilities.* 
 
Despite doubts, I feel as though I can  
set a course in my life and then stick to it. 
 
Note. Willingness = Willingness to experience unwanted events; Action= Ability to take action, even in 
the face of unwanted internal events; *= items reversed for scoring purposes; all coefficients are 
significant at the p < .01 level.

(cid:197)Action 

(cid:197)Action 

(cid:197)Action 

(cid:197)Action 

(cid:197)Action 

(cid:197)Action 

(cid:197)Action 

(cid:197)Action 

.77 

.51 

.72 

.61 

.38 

.62 

.55 

.69 


 

Acceptance and job control 

                                   
35

Figure caption 
Figure 1.Three nested path analysis models 

Note. As we are model building, each model retains the paths specified in the previous one(s). 

The models specify correlations amongst the Time 1 variables, and correlations amongst the 

disturbances. 


Acceptance and job control 

 

Time 1

                                                                              
 

                                                                                 

Time 2

36

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

Model 1

 

Outcomes 

Mental ill-health 

Performance 
Job satisfaction 

Predictors 
Acceptance 
Job control 

Acceptance x Job control

Negative affectivity 

Locus of control

Model 1

Model 3

Model 2

Model 1

 

Outcomes 

Mental ill-health 

Performance 
Job satisfaction 

Model 1

Predictors 
Acceptance 
Job control 

Acceptance x Job control

Negative affectivity 

Locus of control


 
 

Acceptance and job control 

 

                                                                              
 

                                                                                 

37

Table 2 
Means, standard deviations, and bivariate correlations (N=412) 
 
Variable 
1. Mental ill-health 
2. Job satisfaction 
3. Computer input errors 
4. Acceptance 
5. Negative affectivity 
6. Locus of control 
7. Job control 
8. Age 
9. Gender 
10. Tenure in organization  5.23 (1.97) 
 
Note. Coefficients above the diagonal represent intercorrelations at Time 1, those below Time 2, and those on the diagonal are intercorrelations 
between a variable at Time 1 and 2. T1 = Time 1; T2 = Time 2; values in parentheses are standard deviations. Computer input errors were 
standardized. Higher scores relate to greater external locus of control. For the gender variable, females were coded 1 and males 2. 
* p < .05.  **  p < .01.  

Means (T1)  Means (T2) 
15.9 (4.13) 
14.7 (4.26) 
4.64 (1.28) 
4.51 (1.06) 
0 (1) 
0 (1) 
58.61 (12.65)  58.14 (11.18) 
18.85 (5.82) 
18.66 (5.07) 
38.05 (9.02) 
38.17 (8.96) 
2.95 (3.70) 
2.98 (3.85) 
31.87 (9.58) 
30.87 (9.58) 
 
 
6.23 (1.97) 

2 
1 
.56** 
-.35** 
-.34** .56** 
.31** 
-.26** 
-.57** .23** 
-.24** 
.48** 
.33** 
-.16* 
-.25** .54** 
 
 
 

8 
7 
.08 
-.28** 
-.02 
.53** 
-.18* 
.05 
  .21** -.11 
-.09 
-.09 
-.12 
-.12 
.59** 
-.02 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
-.61** 
 .26** 
-.30** 
.72** 
-.34** 
-.48** 
.26** 
 
 
 

5 
.44** 
-.28** 
.24** 
-.36** 
.76** 
.19** 
-.13 
 
 
 

6 
.39** 
-.21** 
.11 
-.44** 
.23** 
.57** 
-.14* 
 
 
 

3 
.35** 
-.21** 
.66** 
-.34** 
.20** 
.08 
-.17* 
 
 
 

9 
.09 
.12 
.05 
.14 
-.12 
-.05 
.12 
.24** 
 
 

 
 
 

10 
-.04 
.10 
.07 
-.10 
-.03 
.03 
.10 
.41**
.17**
 


 

 

 

 

 

 

The role of acceptance 

38

Table 3 
Fit statistics and chi-square difference tests 
 
Model 
1. Stability, no cross-lags 
2. Cross-lagged: 
     T1 Predictors → T2 Outcomes 
3. Reversed cross lagged:  
T1 Predictors → T2 Outcomes      
T1 outcomes → T2 Predictors 
 
Note. N = 412;  CFI = Comparative fit index; RMESA = Root mean square error of approximation; T1 = Time 1; T2 = Time 2 
***  p < .001 for two-tailed tests.   

RMSEA  Comparison 
.08 
.04 

 
Model 1 vs. 2  69.31***   15 

χ2 
97.85*** 
28.54 

Model 2 vs. 3  3.14 

CFI 
.95 
.99 

d.f. 
40 
25 

∆d.f. 
 

∆χ2 
 

31.68*** 

.99 

.05 

15 

10 


 

Table 4 

The role of acceptance 

39

Standardized path coefficients for Model 2 

 
   Outcome variables 
Mental ill-health  Computer input errors 

 
 
Predictor variables 
Acceptance 
Job control 
Acceptance x Job control 
.10* 
Negative affectivity 
Locus of control 
.00 
Note. Higher scores relate to greater external locus of control  
* p < .05.  **  p < .01. 
 
 
 

-.32** 
-.21** 
.41** 
.27** 
.07* 

-.18* 
-.11* 
    .22** 

 
Job satisfaction 

.02 
.35** 
.04 
-.09* 
-.05 

