LINKS BETWEEN BUSINESS STRATEGY AND HUMAN RESOURCE 

MANAGEMENT STRATEGY IN U.S.-BASED JAPANESE 

SUBSIDIARIES: AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 

California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo 

Allan Bird* 

Schon Beechler** 
Columbia University 

Abstract. This study examines linkages between business strategy 
and human resource management (HRM) strategy in Japanese 
subsidiaries in the U.S. It investigates whether or not fit between a 
subsidiary's business strategy and its HRM strategy is associated 
with higher performance. The data show that subsidiaries with 
matched strategies performed better than unmatched ones in terms 
of HRM-related performance measures such as rates of promotion 
and turnover. Japanese subsidiaries with a business strategy/HRM 
strategy match were also more likely to experience better business 
performance versus competitors than were unmatched ones. 

INTRODUCTION 

Japanese management practices have received considerable attention and notoriety 
over the past fifteen years as Westerners have searched for the key to Japan's 
meteoric economic success. This attention has shifted in the last few years from 
what the Japanese are doing at home to what they are doing overseas. This atten- 
tion is due, in part, to the increased level of overseas investment by Japanese firms. 
Japanese transnational corporations (TNCs) have aggressively moved into a global 
business  arena once  dominated by  European and American TNCs.  Japanese 

*Allan Bird is Associate Professor of Management and International Business at 
California Polytechnic State University. He received his Ph.D. in Organizational 
Studies from the University of Oregon. His research focuses on HRM activities in 
Japanese overseas subsidiaries, Japanese top management teams, and issues related to 
expatriate assignments. 
**Schon Beechler is Associate Professor of Management and International Business at 
Columbia University. She received her Ph.D. in Sociology from the University of 
Michigan. Her research focuses on management issues in transnational corporations, par- 
ticularly the management of Japanese affiliates overseas. 
We gratefully acknowledge the cooperation and support of May Mukuda and KPMG Peat Marwick in the col- 
lection  of  the data, as  well  as  Sumita Raghuram and Jim Kennelly in  coding  and analyzing it. We thank 
Kiyohiko Ito, Jeremiah Sullivan, Mary Sully Taylor, and Eleanor Westney for their helpful comments on earlier 
versions of this paper. We also thank this journal's reviewers for the insightful comments and criticisms. Earlier 
versions of this paper were presented at the 1992 Association of Japanese Business Studies Meetings and the 
1993 Academy of Intemational Business Meetings. 

Received: August 1993; Revised: February & May 1994; Accepted: May 1994. 

23 

Palgrave Macmillan Journals
is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve, and extend access to
Journal of International Business Studies

®
www.jstor.org


24 

JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS STUDIES, FIRST QUARTER 1995 

foreign direct investment [FDI] grew phenomenally after the Plaza Accord of 
1986 which caused an abrupt and steep drop in the value of the dollar against the 
yen. Today, Japanese TNCs represent a formidable international presence around 
the world. Between  1988  and 1989 alone, total direct foreign investment by 
Japanese firms increased from $47.02 billion to $67.54 billion, more than a five- 
fold increase over the  1985 investment level  [JEI 1990]. By  the end of March, 
1990,  cases  of  Japanese FDI had reached 57,400,  totaling $254  billion  [JEI 
1990]. Japanese investment in the U.S. between FY 1951 and FY 1990 accounted 
for 42% of all Japanese FDI, making the U.S.  the largest recipient of Japanese 
FDI during the postwar period. In comparison, the U.K.,  the second highest 
recipient of Japanese FDI during the same period, accounted for only 7.3% of 
total Japanese FDI worldwide. New Japanese investment in the U.S.  increased 
dramatically in the mid- 1980s and peaked in fiscal year 1989 at an annual total of 
$32.54  billion  including  2,668  new  cases  of  investment.  Although  annual 
Japanese investment in the United States declined 19.7% from the 1989 figure, 
2,269 new cases, amounting to $26.1 billion in new Japanese investment flowed 
into the United States in 1990. 
Although the rapid and visible increase in Japanese foreign direct investment has 
spawned a closer look at Japanese overseas operations, this attention is also due, 
in no small part, to the perceived successes a number of visible Japanese firms 
have had in management and production in their foreign operations. For example, 
NUMMI, the Toyota-GM joint venture, has been the focus of attention for both 
journalists and academicians (cf., Duerr [1991]). 
Although most American managers, the business press, and the general public 
believe that Japanese transnational corporations are well managed and that they 
share common management characteristics because they are Japanese, there is 
little empirical evidence to support these conclusions [DeNero 1990]. Relatively 
little is known about the management of the foreign operations of Japanese TNCs 
and much of what is known comes from the popular press and is primarily anec- 
dotal in nature. With few exceptions, the empirical studies that do exist [Beechler 
& Bird 1994; Kenney & Florida 1993; Pucik, Hanada & Fifield, 1989; Shibagaki, 
Trevor & Abo  1989] are generally descriptive in nature with the result that little 
progress has been made toward developing and applying discipline-based theo- 
retical paradigms to Japanese TNCs. 
One consequence of this empirical deficiency has been an assumption by some 
researchers that Japanese management is culturally deterministic: Japanese com- 
panies have instituted specific types of policies and practices both at home and 
abroad simply because they are Japanese. Such an assumption overlooks the 
potential influence of  distinctive competencies, industry effects, or other vari- 
ables which  have been  shown to  be  elemental in determining organizational 
structures and processes in research on American firms, both domestic and inter- 
national (cf., Chandler [1962]; Bartlett & Ghoshal [1989]). 
In this paper we focus on the relationship between business strategy and human 
resource management [HRM] strategy and the impact that this relationship has on 
performance in U.S.-based Japanese subsidiaries. We first describe a theoretical 


LINKS BETWEEN BUSINESS & HRM STRATEGY 

25 

framework that incorporates recent thinking in strategy and international human 
resource management and explicitly attempts to explain the relationships between 
business-level  strategies and human resource management strategies and out- 
comes. We then test this model in a study of business strategy-HRM linkages in 
sixty-four U.S.-based Japanese subsidiaries. 
This research serves several valuable functions. First, it provides an expanded 
empirical platform for analyzing the actions of Japanese firms in the U.S.  The 
behaviors of Japanese subsidiaries have a dynamic impact on the U.S. economy 
and on how U.S. firms are managed. Numerous books and articles (cf., Lincoln 
&  Kalleberg [1990];  Ouchi  [1981];  Pascale  & Athos  [1981];  Sethi,  Namiki 
& Swanson  [1984];  Sullivan  [1992])  have detailed how Japanese managerial 
practices -  many specifically related to human resources -  may or may not be 
effective in the U.S.  While most of these posit a relationship between strategy 
and HRM policies,  many are unclear as to the specific relationships and offer 
little systematic data to support their contentions. This paper explicitly examines 
the relationship between subsidiary business unit strategy and HRM strategy and 
the link to HRM outcomes and firm performance. 
A  second beneficial function served by this study is  the insight it provides re- 
garding organizational activity in environments of  heightened uncertainty. The 
prevailing theoretical assumptions underlying conceptual and empirical work on 
the connections between HRM practices and business strategy are ones of contin- 
gency [Baird & Meshoulam 1988; Lengnick-Hall & Lengnick-Hall 1988]. These 
assumptions are twofold. First, it is assumed that the selection and mix of human 
resource practices are determined by the specific strategy a firm adopts, which is 
itself influenced by environmental constraints. Second, it is  assumed that firms 
achieving a tighter fit between environmental constraints, strategy requirements, 
and HRM actions will  perform better than those that do not. Achieving  a fit 
between environment, strategy and HRM is  difficult for most business units 
under normal circumstances. Under conditions of  increased diversity and un- 
certainty, a situation encountered by TNCs, the challenge is even greater. Regu- 
latory differences between home and host country, cultural differences between 
the headquarters personnel and the host country labor force, and geographical 
distance  from the parent company all  imbue the activities  of  environmental 
scanning, strategy formulation, and policy implementation with substantial ambi- 
guity. Achieving fit under such conditions is  likely to be simultaneously more 
important and more difficult to accomplish. 
In the next section we develop a theoretical framework of the linkages between 
business strategy and HRM strategy. This framework is used to generate hypo- 
theses that we then test with data from U.S.-based Japanese subsidiaries. 

THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 

A  general model is  employed to conceptualize linkages between environment, 
business  strategy, HRM strategy and performance. Business  strategy can be 
thought of as a set of decisions about the direction of a firm. Firms select busi- 
ness  strategies in accordance with evaluations they make about their distinctive 


26 

JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS STUDIES, FIRST QUARTER 1995 

competencies and the environment in which they wish to compete [Mintzberg 
1990]. Implementation of a business strategy necessitates breaking it down into 
smaller, manageable components. This process of decomposition occurs as the 
various functional or divisional units within the organization develop responses 
specific  to  their activities.  Functional units within an organization establish 
underlying strategies which provide a foundation that helps to guide them in the 
development and implementation of policy [Beechler, Bird & Raghuram 1993]. 
Although the model recognizes relationships between organization-level business 
strategy and various functional strategies, the focus of this study is solely on the 
human resource management function. In short, the interest is specifically in the 
relationship between business strategy, HRM strategy, and performance. 
While each firm tailors its particular business strategy to fit its unique distinctive 
competencies, needs, and circumstances, it is useful to apply a simplifying frame- 
work when developing theoretical constructs [Daft 1984; Dubin 1978]. Consistent 
with previous studies in this area [Miles & Snow  1984; Olian & Rynes  1984; 
Sonnenfeld & Peiperl 1988],  we  adopt Miles  and Snow's  [1984]  typology  of 
Prospector, Defender and Analyzer strategies. We do so for two reasons. First, 
extensive use of  this classificatory scheme in prior empirical efforts [Gupta & 
Govindarajan  1986;  Hambrick  & Mason  1984;  Miles  & Snow  1978]  has 
demonstrated its utility is explaining general strategic orientations at the business 
level. Second, the typology appears to fit well with the strategic orientations of 
subsidiaries. Foreign direct investment occurs for a variety of  reasons, but, in 
general, three of the most commonly identified rationales are: 1) to develop new 
markets; 2) to solidify current market positions; and 3) to simultaneously maintain 
current market position, while expanding into new markets. These orientations 
toward foreign direct investment are consistent with the Miles and Snow typology, 
where the Prospector pursues market expansion and innovation, the Defender 
strives to maintain market position, and the Analyzer seeks some combination of 
market expansion/innovation while endeavoring to preserve stability in existing 
markets. 
Although they do not discuss HRM in detail, Miles and Snow [1984] identify 
three pure types  of  strategies  and their key  human resource  implications. 
Defenders create a secure market share with moderate, steady growth. To support 
their strategy, Defenders rely heavily on internally developed human resources: 
employees  are carefully  selected,  placed  and trained. In addition,  they are 
expected to be with the company for much, if not all, of their careers. 
The second strategy is the Prospector. Firms employing this type of strategy are 
characterized by rapid growth and continual resource deployment/redeployment, 
particularly of  management and technical personnel. To support this strategy, 
human resource units perform an entrepreneurial role, helping to identify and 
quickly develop crucial human resources through the rapid movement and altera- 
tion of assignments. Key human resources are brought in from outside as well as 
developed internally. 
The  third strategic  type  identified  by  Miles  and Snow  is  the Analyzer.  In 
Analyzers, management believes that the firm can compete not only in the early 


LINKS BETWEEN BUSINESS & HRM STRATEGY 

27 

phase of product development when the emphasis in on uniqueness, but later on 
as well,  when efficient mass production becomes necessary to be competitive. 
For mature products and production processes, the human resource unit plays the 
training and maintenance role appropriate to the Defender strategy by using ac- 
curate placement and appraisal devices. For innovative developments, the human 
resource unit plays  a more developmental role by designing  flexible  and en- 
riching team structures and processes. 
Drawing on the work of Miles and Snow, the model predicts that when a firm's 
strategy is congruent with the external environment, firm performance will be 
higher than when the business strategy is not. Consistency between a business 
strategy and the external environment is only a first step, however. Consistency at 
this interface does not directly influence firm performance. The second half of 
the process of aligning a firm with the environment occurs in the implementation 
of the strategy. It is the enactment of a business strategy, through the development 
and application of  functional strategies within the various divisions  or units, 
which also  determines firm performance [Hrebiniak & Joyce  1984].  In other 
words, external fit is achieved, in part, as a consequence of internal fit. 
Although the linkages in the model could be applied to any and all of the func- 
tional areas within a firm, this study focuses solely on the HRM function. While 
many classificatory schemes exist for typing HRM, we use one that reflects the 
philosophical approach taken to manage human resources [Carroll 1991; Cascio 
1991; Dyer  1984; Schuler 1988; Schuler & Jackson 1987b]. This approach is 
consistent with previous theoretical and empirical writings regarding Japanese 
and American business  practices [Hatvany & Pucik  1981; Kagono, Nonaka, 
Sakakibara & Okumura 1985] and defines three kinds of HRM strategy [Carroll 
1991; Cascio 1991; Schuler 1988]. A  Utilizer strategy is predicated on minimal 
commitment and high skill utilization. It seeks to deploy the human resources of 
a firm as efficiently as possible through: 1) acquiring and dismissing personnel 
based on  short-term needs; and 2)  matching employee  skills  to  specific  task 
requirements. An Accumulator strategy is based on maximum involvement and 
skilled execution. It attempts to build up the human resources of the firm through: 
1) the acquisition of  personnel with large, latent potential; and 2) the develop- 
ment of that latent potential over time in a manner consistent with the needs of 
the organization. Finally, a Facilitator strategy is  founded on generating new 
knowledge and new knowledge creation. It seeks to develop the human resources 
of the firm as effectively as possible through: 1) the acquisition of self-motivated 
personnel; and 2)  the encouragement and support of  personnel to develop, on 
their own,  the  skills  and knowledge  which  they, the employees,  believe  are 
important. 
To clarify the match of business strategy to HRM strategy, it is useful to consider 
the organizational requirements that a selected business strategy may impose and 
the proposed policy implications that a given HRM strategy might suggest. These 
are presented in Table 1. 
In the following  sections  we  consider the relationship between specific  com- 
binations of business strategy and HRM strategy. We show how particular ideal 


28 

JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS STUDIES, FIRST QUARTER 1995 

TABLE 1 

Relationship  between  Business  Strategy, 

Organizational  Requirements,  and  HRM Strategy. 

Business  Strategy 

Organizational Requirements  Human Resources  Strategy 

Defender  Strategy 

Accumulator  Strategy 

-  Narrow product  markets  Maintenance  of stability 

-  Efficiency orientation 

Limited environmental 

Internal focus 

monitoring 

Centralized control systems 
Standardized  operating 

procedures 

Strategy based  on building maximum 

involvement and skilled execution. 

- Acquisition of employees  with large 

latent potential 

- Development  over time of employee 

abilities, skills & knowledge 

Analyzer  Strategy 

Facilitator  Strategy 

- Pursue  new  markets 

Flexibility 

Strategy based  on new  knowledge  and 

Administrative differentiation  new  knowledge  creation. 

-  Maintain presence 
in existing  markets 

Intensive & comprehensive 

planning 

Offer unique products 

at low cost 

- Acquisition of self-motivated  personnel 

- Encourage  & support  self-development 

of abilities, skills & knowledge 

- Coordinate  between  accurate  place- 

ment and flexible team  structures 

Utilizer Strategy 

Prospector  Strategy 

- Continuous  search  for 

new  markets 

-  External orientation 

- Product/Market 

innovators 

Constant  state  of change 
Extensive  monitoring 

of environment 

Decentralized  control systems 
Low degree  of structural 

formalization 

Rapid resource  deployment 

Strategy based  on minimal commitment 

and high skill utilization. 

- Employ ready-to-use  talent 

- Move employee  to  match abilities, 
skills & knowledge  to specific  tasks 

combinations derive from the fit between organizational requirements imposed 
by a given strategy and the ability of  a given HRM strategy to address those 
requirements. 

Defender Business Strategy/Accumulator HRM Strategy 
Firms with a Defender strategy limit their search for new opportunities and, 
instead, focus attention internally on ways to enhance organizational effective- 
ness  [Miles  & Snow  1978].  Given  a narrow product market domain and an 
orientation toward efficiency, organizational requirements gravitate in favor of 
maintaining stability and focusing on internal operations. As a consequence, there 
is  likely to be  limited environmental monitoring. Finally, central control, high 
degrees of formalization, and elaborate control systems are hypothesized to pro- 
mote organizational effectiveness [Miles & Snow 1978]. 
An Accumulator  HRM strategy, based  on  building  maximum involvement 
and achieving skilled execution, serves Defender needs because it focuses  on 


LINKS BETWEEN BUSINESS & HRM STRATEGY 

29 

providing skill development in an evolutionary fashion in accordance with the 
firm's slowly evolving human resource needs. Its concern is on the acquisition of 
employees  perceived to possess  large latent potential. Once latent potential is 
acquired, the attention then shifts to developing ability, skill and knowledge in 
ways that will serve company purposes. 
The internal development of human resources over time requires the firm to exer- 
cise  care in the selection of  new employees. The firm searches for both human 
potential and personal fit and the relationship between employer and employee is 
expected to be longterm. The result is an emphasis on job-security and the appli- 
cation of  compensation and promotion policies  containing a  strong seniority 
component. These, in turn, call for extensive training to develop potential which, 
because it is directed at internal fit, is biased toward on-the-job training and the 
development of a skill set that is firm-specific. 

Analyzer Business Strategy/Facilitator HRM Strategy 
Analyzers represent organizations that operate in relatively stable as well  as 
changing product-market domains [Miles & Snow  1978]. Consequently, these 
firms must identify and pursue new product-market opportunities while simulta- 
neously maintaining a presence in existing domains. The pursuit of effectiveness 
in both areas necessitates an ability to be efficient yet flexible in production tech- 
nologies.  Accommodation of  both stable and dynamic areas of  operations re- 
quires similar differentiation with regard to human resources. 
A  Facilitator strategy fits  the organizational requirements of  Analyzer firms 
because  it  accommodates the management of  dual pressures imposed by  an 
Analyzer strategy. The pursuit of new markets requires an infusion of new skills 
and talents into the firm, encouraging hiring from the external labor market. 
Maintenance of existing product lines, by contrast, necessitates the internal devel- 
opment of employees and encourages the development of an internal labor mar- 
ket. Consequently, staffing policies will likely be a mix of both internal and exter- 
nal selection. Firms with a Facilitator strategy may seek to offset the potential 
schizophrenic  outcomes  of  a mixed  staffing  policy  by  carefully  recruiting 
employees  with a desire for self-development. By  encouraging and supporting 
self-development, a firm can focus its activities more fully on the accurate place- 
ment of personnel and the design of flexible teams. 

Prospector Business Strategy/Utilizer HRM Strategy 
Prospector firms compete in broad product-market domains characterized by con- 
tinual states of  flux. Constant product-market innovation reflects a response to 
this dynamic domain, requiring the capacity to closely  monitor external events 
[Miles & Snow 1978]. Additionally, the ability to develop new products and enter 
new markets requires creativity and idea generation. Decentralized control sys- 
tems and rapid deployment of  resources further characterize firms employing 
Prospector strategies. 
Given the  volatility  of  their environments, Prospector firms are expected  to 
employ a Utilizer HRM strategy geared towards providing appropriate, readily 


30 

JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS STUDIES, FIRST QUARTER 1995 

available skills consistent with the companies' constantly changing needs. Such 
an approach places minimal emphasis on employee commitment while trying to 
achieve  high  skill  utilization. As  a consequence,  selection  policies  focus  on 
closely  matching skills to immediate task requirements. The need for rapid de- 
ployment of  resources in response to market development and innovation also 
reduces emphasis on training. The view of employees as another resource of the 
firm and the emphasis on resource utilization and deployment encourage the de- 
velopment of appraisal and reward systems based on results [Kagono et al. 1985]. 
Additionally, compensation is likely to be referenced to the external market. 
In terms of  the impact of  specific combinations of business strategy and HRM 
strategy on organizational performance, Table 1 presents suggestions regarding 
the appropriate match between each business strategy and HRM strategy type. 
Miles and Snow [1978] have argued that their typology does not imply one best 
business  strategy, any of  the three strategy types  can lead to high  firm per- 
formance. Consequently, no distinction is made as to whether or not one particu- 
lar ideal  match will  outperform another, rather it is  proposed that firms with 
appropriate matches will outperform firms with mismatches. 

Proposition 1: Firms with ideal matches between business strategy and 

HRM strategy (i.e., Prospector- Utilizer, Defender- 
Accumulator; and Analyzer-Facilitator) will perform 
better than firms with mismatches. 

HYPOTHESES 

The  business  strategy/HRM  strategy match may  influence  subsidiary  per- 
formance on several dimensions. Below  we  identify two aspects of  subsidiary 
performance and propose specific hypotheses. 

HRM-Related Outcome Measures 
The contingency  model  indicates that business  strategy is  translated by each 
functional unit into a local strategy that influences performance in that functional 
area. While performance in each functional area, in turn, affects performance at 
the firm level, it constitutes only one of several factors contributing to firm per- 
formance. Consequently, in the case of this study, we anticipate that the strongest 
effects  of  a business strategy/HRM strategy match will  be on outcomes most 
closely tied to HRM activities. 
In the context  of  subsidiary operations, four HRM-related outcomes  appear 
important. These four include employee morale, tenure, promotion, and turnover. 
Each is considered below. 
Employee morale constitutes one outcome that is  likely to be influenced by the 
business strategy/HRM strategy match. Previous research (cf., Tung [1981]) on 
foreign subsidiary HRM activities has noted that cultural differences between 
parent and subsidiary countries, the presence of parent-company managers, and 
perceptions by host country employees of  a lack of control and autonomy fre- 
quently contribute to a low level of  morale. A  proper combination of business 


LINKS BETWEEN BUSINESS & HRM STRATEGY 

31 

strategy and HRM strategy should increase morale by helping to create in the 
minds of subsidiary employees a sense of coherency and rationality in what the 
subsidiary is trying to accomplish and how it is trying to accomplish it. Indeed, 
Pucik et al.  [1989] note that one of  the most frequently cited sources of  local 
national employee dissatisfaction within U.S.-based Japanese subsidiaries is not 
knowing why things are done or how they fit into a bigger picture. 

Hypothesis 1: Japanese subsidiaries with ideal matches between business 
strategy and HRM strategy will experience higher levels of 
employee morale than subsidiaries with mismatches. 

One indication that a firm has effective HRM functions is its ability to retain and 
promote employees. Firms that are able to match business strategy and HRM 
strategies will be more likely to select people appropriate to the strategy they are 
pursuing. Better selection and retention suggests higher levels of employee tenure 
and lower levels of turnover. Moreover, selection of employees who match sub- 
sidiary needs should also lead to an increased likelihood of promotion for such 
employees. 

Hypothesis 2: Japanese subsidiaries with ideal matches between business 

strategy and HRM strategy will have higher levels of average 
employee tenure than subsidiaries with mismatches. 

Hypothesis 3: Japanese subsidiaries with ideal matches between business 
strategy and HRM strategy will have higher rates of employ- 
ee promotion than subsidiaries with mismatches. 

Hypothesis 4: Japanese subsidiaries with ideal matches between business 

strategy and HRM strategy will experience lower rates of 
employee turnover than subsidiaries with mismatches. 

Firm Performance Measures 
The business strategy-HRM strategy match may affect different aspects of perfor- 
mance at the firm level. As  we previously noted, however, firm performance is 
influenced by a broad array of  factors. It is  also probable that some aspects of 
firm performance may be more strongly affected by specific factors. By decom- 
posing firm performance into several variables we should be better able to get at 
the issue of which performance factors may be most influenced by the business 
strategy-HRM strategy match. 
Subsidiary profit and sales growth are two financial measures frequently used in 
evaluating  company performance. Companies,  including  foreign  subsidiary 
operations, with business strategy/HRM strategy matches should manage their 
resources more efficiently and effectively, thereby reducing their operating costs. 
Moreover, firms with ideal matches should be more effective in aligning human 
resources to their overall strategic thrusts, thereby responding more appropriately 
to environmental constraints and opportunities. Fit between business strategy and 
HRM strategy is  therefore predicted to lead to increased subsidiary sales and 
greater profits. 


32 

JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS STUDIES, FIRST QUARTER 1995 

Hypothesis 5: Japanese subsidiaries with ideal matches between business 
strategy and HRM strategy will achieve higher profits than 
subsidiaries with mismatches. 

Hypothesis 6: Japanese subsidiaries with ideal matches between business 

strategy and HRM strategy will experience higher sales 
growth than subsidiaries with mismatches. 

It should also be recognized, however, that subsidiaries do not always act with 
complete autonomy. Sometimes they pursue goals mandated by the parent or- 
ganization that are not directly related to financial objectives. For example, a parent 
firm may establish goals for its subsidiary, such as developing new products or 
improving product quality, which do not lead to enhanced profit or sales for that 
subsidiary in the short term, but which benefit the larger organization. Parent com- 
pany objectives for the subsidiary should enhance the strategic focus of managers 
in the subsidiary and, to the extent that subsidiary managers in turn align the sub- 
sidiary's HRM strategy with these objectives, the subsidiary should do better in 
reaching them. 

Hypothesis 7: Japanese subsidiaries with ideal matches between business 
strategy and HRM strategy will experience higher levels of 
performance on parent-prescribed objectives than sub- 
sidiaries with mismatches. 

A second way of looking at firm performance is in more general terms. Because 
its activities are directed at people throughout an organization, HRM is purported 
to have wide-ranging effects within the organization. Rather than thinking of per- 
formance in terms of specific outcomes, it may be useful to think of it as having 
overarching impact. If HRM activities do have wide-ranging effects, then firms 
with a good  match between strategy and HRM ought to do better overall than 
mismatched firms. 

Hypothesis 8: Japanese subsidiaries with ideal matches between business 
strategy and HRM strategy will achieve higher overall per- 
formance than subsidiaries with mismatches. 

A  second generalized approach to conceptualizing subsidiary performance is to 
evaluate how an organization is  doing relative to its competitors. While firms 
with matches may not outperform their rivals when those rivals also have ideal 
matches, we  would expect firms with mismatched strategies to perform more 
poorly than their competitors. 

Hypothesis 9: Japanese subsidiaries with ideal matches between business 

strategy and HRM strategy will perform better relative to 
their competitors than will subsidiaries with mismatches. 

METHODOLOGY 

Sample 
A  questionnaire survey of non-randomly selected senior personnel managers in 
U.S. subsidiaries of Japanese firms was carried out between November 1990 and 


LINKS BETWEEN BUSINESS & HRM STRATEGY 

33 

February  1991.  Questionnaires  were  mailed  to  219  of  approximately  400 
Japanese-owned companies in the United States that had expressed interest in 
HRM issues in an earlier KPMG Peat Marwick study of labor practices. Roughly 
equal numbers of manufacturing and service firms with 100 employees or more 
were selected for inclusion in our study. After partitioning, the sample was divided 
along two strata: 1) manufacturing and non-manufacturing firms; 2)  geographic 
distribution across the United States, with equal numbers of manufacturing and 
non-manufacturing firms drawn from the East Coast, West Coast, and Midwest 
regions of the U.S. 
The expressed interest of these firms in HRM-related issues raises the question of 
whether or not they are representative of the larger population of Japanese sub- 
sidiaries in the U.S.  To the extent that an expressed emphasis on HRM issues 
may predispose firms to align their business and HRM strategies, the differences 
between matched and unmatched firms in this sample would be lessened, making 
our test of hypotheses a conservative one. 
Sixty-four of  the 219 firms returned usable surveys, for a response rate of 29%. 
This return rate is  roughly comparable to other studies with similar objectives 
[Hitt, Ireland & Palia 1982; Dean & Snell  1991]. An analysis of  basic charac- 
teristics of respondent and non-respondent firms in terms of type [manufacturing 
vs.  non-manufacturing], geographic location,  and company size  revealed no 
significant differences. The 64  firms included 33  manufacturing and 31  non- 
manufacturing firms. A profile of basic firm characteristics is presented in Table 2. 

Profile  of  Basic  Characteristics  of Japanese  Subsidiaries 

TABLE 2 

in the  Sample 

Manufacturing/Service* 

Parent Company  Sales  Worldwide in 1989 

Subsidiary  Sales  in 1990 

Mode  of  Entry (% of total)t 

Number of Years Parent Company  has  Operated  in US 

Age  of Subsidiary 

% Japanese  Ownership  in 1990 

Number of Employees  in Subsidiary 

*indicates the  number of firms in each  category 
tindicates  the  percentage  of firms in each  category 

Manufacturing 
Service 

Greenfield 
Merger 
Takeover 

Mean 

(Std Dev.) 

31 
33 
$5,648  million 
($1,524  million) 
$1,287  million 
($214  million) 
73.1 
15.4 
11.5 
14.2 
(9.4) 
10.8 
(6.6) 
98.2 
(6.7) 
660.1 
(1243.6) 

Our original objective was to obtain two questionnaires from each firm -  one 
from a Japanese manager and one from an American HR manager. However, for 
forty-one  companies  we  received  a completed  questionnaire  from only  the 


34 

JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS STUDIES, FIRST QUARTER 1995 

American manager. For the remaining twenty-three, we received responses from 
both the Japanese and American managers. To test for possible  differences in 
responses due to nationality for these twenty-three firms we conducted an analy- 
sis to test for interrater agreement using the procedure followed by Shortell and 
Zajac [1990] and by Kotha, Dunbar and Bird [forthcoming]. As  82% [228/276] 
of the responses on self-report items were either identical or within one interval 
of  one another, we  concluded that a satisfactory degree of  interrater reliability 
existed. In the interest of  consistency across observations, only the American 
responses were retained. 

Strategy Measures 
Business Strategy. A modified version of Miles and Snow's [Hrebiniak & Joyce 
1984]  typology  including Prospectors, Defenders and Analyzers was used to 
measure respondents' business strategy and classify  them into nominal cate- 
gories. HRM managers read brief descriptions of strategy types and were asked 
to identify the one that most closely resembled their firm's strategy. Self-typing 
using nominal scales for the measurement of Miles  and Snow strategic arche- 
types is both a common and accepted methodology [McDaniel & Kolari 1987; 
McKee, Varadarajan & Pride 1989; Segev 1987a, 1987b; Shortell & Zajac 1990; 
Snow & Hrebiniak 1980]. 
HRM Strategy. Respondents' HRM strategies were identified in a fashion similar 
to that used to  measure business strategy. After reading general descriptions of 
HRM strategy types  [Schuler  1988],  respondents indicated which  one  most 
closely  resembled the HRM strategy employed at their firm. The result was a 
nominal variable with three categories. 

HRM Outcome Measures 
In the case  of  outcomes directly related to HRM practices, it was possible to 
obtain objective,  quantitative data on  all but one  of  the variables. Employee 
Morale, the extent to which employees, in the firm as a whole, exhibit a positive 
affect toward their work, was measured using a five-point scale ranging from 
" very low" to "very high." 
Although evaluation of employee morale may be considered an inherently sub- 
jective task, the respondents-human resource managers-are charged with making 
such assessments as a function of their job and are experienced at doing so. In 
this respect, though a subjective evaluation, the measurement of employee morale 
used in this study is made by individuals who may be considered experts at doing 
so. Having only a single measure of employee morale is problematic and would 
be a critical issue if our concern was with the level of  employee morale. How- 
ever, our interest is  in the difference in level between matched and unmatched 
firms. Because there is no obvious reason for HRM managers in matched firms to 
assess employee morale more highly than HRM managers in unmatched firms it 
was felt that a single-item measure was acceptable. 
Average length of tenure is a measure of the effectiveness of HRM policies be- 
cause it reflects a subsidiary's ability to attract and retain appropriate employees. 


LINKS BETWEEN BUSINESS & HRM STRATEGY 

35 

This variable was calculated by taking the average length of tenure of all manage- 
rial-class U.S. employees in the subsidiary. 
A  third outcome  of  effective  HRM activities  is  increased  opportunities for 
individual growth and career advancement. Annual rates of promotion for  top 
managers  and promotion for  all  other  managers  were  used  to  provide two 
measures of this variable. Promotions were measured as the average percentage 
of managers receiving promotions annually. 
A  final measure of  an effective  business  strategy/HRM-strategy match is  the 
extent to which firms can avoid unnecessary quits or layoffs. While it is true that 
employee exits can constitute a positive outcome for both an organization and an 
employee under some circumstances, in a more general sense turnover represents 
at the very least the presence of  inadequacies in  selection  practices or HRM 
planning. As with promotions, turnover was measured for both top managers and 
all other managerial class employees, and was calculated as the average annual 
turnover rate for each group. 

Subsidiary Performance Measures 
Because Japanese companies are quite sensitive about publicly reporting finan- 
cial data, we  were compelled to use  less  intrusive self-reported measures. This 
approach was also necessary because a majority of the firms sampled are wholly- 
owned subsidiaries and, consequently, are not required to divulge such informa- 
tion to regulatory agencies or make it public in other ways. While self-report data 
may be  subject to  response bias  in  some  circumstances, Dess  and Robinson 
[1984] suggest that, in the absence of objective data, self-report measures consti- 
tute an acceptable substitute and are often equally reliable. 
On a five-point scale ranging from "very low level of performance" to "very high 
level of  performance," managers were asked to indicate the level of  their sub- 
sidiary's performance with regard to specific outcomes. These included subsidiary 
profit and subsidiary sales volume. Additionally, each manager identified the parent 
organization's most important criterion for evaluating the success  of  the sub- 
sidiary's operations-parent-prescribed objective-and,  using the same scale  as 
above, rated their firm's performance on that criterion for 1989. 
In addition to these outcome-specific measures, respondents also rated their sub- 
sidiary's overall performance and its performance relative to major competitors 
in the U.S. These ratings were also measured on a five-point Likert-type scale. 
The means, standard deviations, and correlations for the HRM and subsidiary 
performance variables are presented in Table 3. 
Analysis 
The analytical methods used  in this study were chi-square and t-tests of  dif- 
ferences between  means. These  are appropriate techniques, given the size  of 
the  sample and the nature of  the hypotheses  to  be  tested. Analyses  focused 
on identifying and testing for the presence of  fit between business strategy and 
HRM strategy, followed by an investigation into the relationship between busi- 
ness strategylHRM strategy match and performance. 


36 

JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS STUDIES, FIRST QUARTER 1995 

0 c 

00 

Q co 

8 

to2 

C 

0 
OOC\J 

CM N 

000 

a 

0) 

LO 

n  n  M  0 

o 

o 

T 

0  m  cLO 

L0N0Nf-CO.JCO 

LO 

COQD 
Ov- 

0.~D  C  1- 'JCt~ 

0 

) tJ 

0 

0 

o 

co 

.0 
oo 

0. 

0 
0 

L) 

0 
o  N- 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

'  C' LO  c 

CD-J0)0  C'  0- 

f 

N 

C'  C'  C% 

tt 

0) 

m 0 2,, 

o N,mf- 
X~~  ~~~  C'  C' 

C: f~- m 
Co 

0- 

.10 

- 

> 

0~~~~~~ 
00)-E 
0 
00 
~N C- 
0~~~~ 
en~~~~~~~~: 

-E 

0: 

c0 

o 

1-  (Ol$)E 
U) og-- Co 
Q 

I 
-- 

c  c-~ 

Ot 

v 

0 

0 

0 

0 
: zr 

c 

a>  co 
C 
C1 

e0o 
c6*J) 

C'JLc'C'JU]-CO(D(DCOE 

?  -- 

0~~~~~00U 
0  ~~~0CDC 
0 
0  ~~~~i,C 
..oo 
." 
0 
_~~~ 

-co2  (OC 

c  a  E 

E 

CLa  C 
. 
. 

. 

. 

E2 
. 

2>d 

. 

-. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

.  vL~ 

. 


LINKS BETWEEN BUSINESS & HRM STRATEGY 

37 

RESULTS 

The initial analysis investigated whether or not Japanese subsidiary business 
strategies matched up with HRM strategies in the combinations predicted in 
Table 1, i.e.,  Prospector-Utilizer, Defender-Accumulator, Analyzer-Facilitator. 
Table 4 reveals that only ten of the sixty-four firms employed a Prospector busi- 
ness  strategy. The remaining fifty-four subsidiaries adopted either Analyzer or 
Defender business strategies, suggesting a generally conservative approach to 
product and market innovations among the Japanese subsidiaries in our sample. 

Chi-Square  Test  of  Business  Strategy/HRM  Strategy  Match 

TABLE 4 

Prospector 
Business  Defender 
Strategy  Analyzer 

Column Total 

Utilizer 

1* 
2 
7 

10 

HRM Strategy 

Accumulator 

5 
14 
7 

26 

Facilitator 

Row Total 

4 
9 
15 

28 

10 
25 
29 

64 

Chi-square  = 7.090,  4  df, p  <.1312 
*Boldfaced  numbers  denote  predicted  matches. 

In terms of managing their human resources, ten firms used a Utilizer strategy. 
The remaining fifty-four employed either an Accumulator or Facilitator strategy, 
indicating an orientation toward long-term investment in human resources. 
Results of the chi-square test of the business strategy/HRM strategy matches are 
also  shown in Table 4.  Overall, thirty of  the sixty-four subsidiaries had com- 
binations hypothesized as ideal. In summary, the findings indicate that thirty of 
sixty-four firms, or 47%, have business strategy/HRM strategy matches, which 
we  have proposed will  lead to higher performance. Moreover, Japanese sub- 
sidiaries in the U.S. appear to rely on conservative business strategies and HRM 
strategies emphasizing a long-term orientation toward human resources. These 
findings are consistent with those of  prior empirical investigations into the be- 
havior of Japanese firms domestically within Japan [Kagono et al. 1985]. 
In the second phase of the analysis, firms were divided into two sets, those with 
matched strategies and those with unmatched ones. Differences in means tests 
were then conducted on  the  six  HRM-related performance measures. These 
results are presented in Table 5. 
Among the HRM-related outcome measures, the findings are mixed, although 
generally supportive of  the hypotheses. The results, shown in Table 5,  support 
Hypothesis 1: matched firms experienced significantly higher levels of employee 
morale than did unmatched firms. Also,  the prediction that subsidiaries with 
hypothesized matches will experience significantly longer employee tenure than 
unmatched firms (Hypothesis 2), is strongly supported. Employees in subsidiaries 
that conformed to proposed ideal matches between business strategy and HRM 
strategy experienced significantly longer tenures than employees in firms that 
were unmatched. Results pertaining to our third hypothesis, that managers in 


38 

JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS STUDIES, FIRST QUARTER 1995 

matched firms would experience higher levels  of  promotion, were in the pre- 
dicted direction but not statistically significant. Finally, strong support was found 
for Hypothesis 4: subsidiaries with matched strategies experienced substantially 
lower rates of turnover than their unmatched counterparts. 

Means, Standard Deviations and t-Statistics  for Matched and Unmatched 

Firms on HRM Outcome Measures and Firm Performance Measures 

TABLE 5 

Variables 

HRM Performance 

Employee  Morale 

Average  Length of Tenure 

Promotion of Top Managers 

Promotion of Other Managers 

Turnover of Top Managers 

Turnover of Other Managers 

Firm Performance 

Subsidiary  Profit 

Subsidiary  Sales 

Performance  on  Parent-prescribed  Objectives 

Overall Firm Performance 

Performance  versus  Rivals 

*p < .10; ***p < .01 
tMatched:  N=30; Unmatched:  N=34 

Matchedt 

Unmatched 

Mean 
(s. d.) 

3.285 
(1.271) 
5.158 
(8.636) 
11.85 
(16.449) 
22.638 
(25.947) 
6.429 
(1 3.522) 
3.050 
(5.539) 

2.375 
(1.204) 
3.353 
(1.320) 
3.312 
(1.250) 
3.208 
(1.211) 
3.222 
(.807) 

Mean 
(s. d.) 

3.111 
(.832) 
3.167 
(1.248) 
9.333 
(1 7.634) 
19.750 
(23.481) 
5.222 
(.546) 

14.89 
(24.1 08) 

2.676 
(1.510) 
3.216 
(1.084 
3.212 
(1.386) 
3.084 
(.909) 
3.059 
(1.045) 

t-test  of 
Means 

Differences 

2.33* 

18.94*** 

1.15 

.669 

2.01* 

18.94*** 

1.57 

1.48 

1.23 

1.52 

1.68* 

Hypotheses 5 through 9 dealt with the relationship between subsidiary perfor- 
mance and the business strategy/HRM strategy match. Table 5 also presents the 
results for the t-tests of differences between means for matched and unmatched 
firms on firm performance. Hypothesis 5 was not supported by the findings. In 
fact, unmatched subsidiaries report slightly better performance on profit than 
matched ones. 
Results for Hypotheses 6 through 8 are in the predicted direction, but not statisti- 
cally  significant. The one  subsidiary performance measure where firms with 
matched strategies did outperform unmatched ones at a significant level was in 
performance versus rivals. Thus, the results of the analysis support Hypothesis 9. 
In the case of  Hypothesis 6,  which stated that matched firms would experience 
higher sales growth than unmatched firms, there arose a question as to whether 
the  weak findings  might not reflect  the possibility  that growth was  directly 


LINKS BETWEEN BUSINESS & HRM STRATEGY 

39 

influenced by the business strategy, the logic being that Prospectors might possi- 
bly experience higher levels of growth than Analyzers or Defenders. This is a dis- 
tinct possibility. However, adoption of a Defender strategy does not necessarily 
mean that a firm will not pursue growth. One way of maintaining market posi- 
tion is by keeping up with or outpacing the growth of one's competitors. The dis- 
tinctive differences between Prospectors and Defenders, while perhaps involving 
some  variance with  regard to  an emphasis  on growth, revolve  more around 
product and market innovation. Defenders seek growth through defense of posi- 
tion within an existing product domain, whereas Prospectors seek growth through 
the development of new products or new product domains. 
One way to test for the possible confounding effects of comparing matched ver- 
sus unmatched firms across different strategy types would be to conduct a within- 
type analysis. Unfortunately, the small sample size,  particularly in the case of 
Prospectors, negated the possibility of doing this effectively. However, post hoc 
within-type comparative assessments appeared to confirm our findings from the 
pooled analysis. 
The  absence  of,  or weak  support for, the  hypotheses  linking  HRM strategy 
match with subsidiary performance may be attributable to the contributing in- 
fluence of other factors outside the HRM function. We therefore examined other 
characteristics of  matched and unmatched firms to  determine if  moderating 
factors influencing performance were present. Though not shown here, tests of 
the influence of parent and subsidiary size, subsidiary age, level of capitalization, 
initial mode of entry, and type of  industry were carried out. Neither size of the 
parent nor subsidiary, nor age of the parent or subsidiary, nor type of industry - 
manufacturing or service -  were found to differ significantly between matched 
and unmatched firms. 
We also explored the possibility that some of  the findings might be due to the 
influence of  either business strategy or HRM strategy alone as opposed to the 
match between the two. To do this we  recalibrated the two  strategy variables 
using ordinal measures in place of the original categorical measures to generate 
Spearman rank correlations with the performance outcome measures. In the case 
of business strategy, the Miles and Snow archetypes were rank ordered in terms 
of  the  degree  to  which  they  favor  product/market  innovativeness,  with 
Prospectors being  greatest, then Analyzers,  and Defenders being  least.  This 
characterization is consistent with Miles and Snow's [1978] original presentation 
of the typology and with its subsequent interpretation and use [Hambrick 1983]. 
Similar treatment was applied to the Schuler typology of  HRM strategies. The 
primary dimension  along  which  the  three types  can be  differentiated is  the 
emphasis on,  and investment in,  training and development [Beechler & Bird 
1994]  with Accumulators investing  and emphasizing training the most,  then 
Facilitators, and Utilizers emphasizing and investing the least. The results of the 
Spearman rank correlation analysis of  business strategy, HRM strategy and the 
performance outcome measures is reported in Table 6. 
Hypothesis 3 held that subsidiaries with an ideal match would have higher rates 
of  employee  promotion. It is  conceivable  that business  strategy alone might 


40 

JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS STUDIES, FIRST QUARTER 1995 

explain differences between matched and unmatched firms in terms of  rates of 
promotion, with the expectation being that promotions might be more prevalent 
in Prospectors as opposed to Defenders. However, a consideration of the results 
in Table 6 reveals that the relationship between the two variables is statistically 
insignificant. In a similar vein, because the Utilizer HRM strategy focuses on the 
efficient  deployment of  personnel, there was  some concern that the findings 
favoring Hypothesis 4 might derive from a direct influence between turnover and 
HRM strategy. Table 6 indicates that this is not the case. Indeed, neither business 
strategy nor HRM strategy had a statistically significant relationship to the HRM 
or firm performance variables. This post hoc  analysis further strengthens the 
argument that it is the match between the two strategies that is important. 

Spearman  Rank Order Correlations  for  Business  Strategy, 

HRM Strategy  and  the  Performance  Measures 

TABLE 6 

Business Strategy 

HRM Strategy 

1. Performance on Parent Objectives 
2. Subsidiary Profit 
3. Subsidiary Sales 
4.  Employee Morale 
5. Average Tenure 
6. Top Management Turnover (annual %) 
7. Management Turnover (annual %) 
8. Top Management Promotion (annual %) 
9. Management Promotion (annual %) 
10. Overall Subsidiary Performance 
11. Performance vs. Competitors 

.14 
-.10 
.22 
-.03 
.03 
-.19 
.01 
-.08 
.00 
.07 
.20 

.00 
.17 
-.01 
.00 
-.13 
-.17 
.01 
-.19 
-.07 
.04 
.03 

DISCUSSION 

Employing a contingency approach, we  have argued that performance will  be 
higher among Japanese subsidiaries that are able to match their business strategy 
to an appropriate HRM strategy. The findings offer firm, but guarded support for 
this proposition. Subsidiaries with matched combinations did outperform their 
unmatched counterparts, particularly with regard to  HRM-related outcomes. 
Matching business strategy to HRM strategy is  associated with superior HRM 
outcomes. However, there appears to be less  impact on organization-level sub- 
sidiary performance. Consequently, the extent to which the business strategy- 
HRM strategy linkage  matters to  organizational-level  performance requires 
further investigation. 
Beyond findings of  statistical significance and support for several hypotheses, 
this study raises a number of other points that warrant discussion. Of particular 
interest are the findings regarding the prevalence of particular business strategies 
and HRM strategies among our sample firms. In terms of business strategy, fifty- 
four of the sixty-four firms were either Defenders or Analyzers. This distribution 
seems consistent with previous empirical work on Japanese firms that suggests 
they are more inclined  to  respond in  an incremental and reactive fashion to 
changes in their external environment [Kagono, Nonaka, Sakakibara & Okumura 
1985]. 


LINKS BETWEEN BUSINESS & HRM STRATEGY 

41 

This conservative tendency may be heightened in U.S.-based subsidiaries as a 
consequence  of  Japanese MNCs'  inexperience  in managing operations in  a 
foreign context. The average subsidiary in the sample was only ten years old, 
suggesting that many are still at the steep end of the learning curve. Follow-up 
interviews by the authors with a number of HRM managers in the participating 
companies confirmed this interpretation. Several managers noted that not only 
was the subsidiary young, but that it also represented the parent company's first 
major operation outside of Japan. As  a result, the parent firm was moving for- 
ward conservatively and making changes very slowly. One manager noted that 
his firm spent four years preparing for the opening of  its U.S.  manufacturing 
facility. This was in addition to three years spent in considering whether or not to 
establish a U.S. operation. 
Firms were  also  bunched in terms of  HRM strategies,  with  fifty-four  firms 
adopting either Accumulator or Facilitator strategies. Interviews with HRM man- 
agers suggest that this bifurcation was largely the result of the HRM manager's 
personal orientation. Firms more frequently adopted Accumulator strategies when 
they hired managers sympathetic to a Japanese management approach and en- 
couraged those managers to apply parent company values. 
The influence of  the HRM manager was not the only, or necessarily the most, 
important factor in determining HRM strategy. Differences  in HRM strategy 
appear to reflect underlying company orientations to adaptation. Firms pursuing 
an Accumulator approach relied heavily on a more traditional Japanese approach 
to managing subsidiary employees, attempting to transplant many of the practices 
that they used in Japan. For example, one subsidiary went so far as to translate 
the parent company's employee  handbook into English and then modified it 
where necessary to comply with U.S. labor laws. 
In contrast, firms employing a Facilitator strategy sought adaptation through the 
interpretation of basic parent company norms and values provided by a U.S. man- 
ager familiar with the local environment. Facilitators sought the middle ground 
between traditional Japanese and traditional American approaches to managing 
the HRM function.  Nevertheless,  the underlying foundation appeared to  be 
strongly tilted toward that of the parent company's HRM strategy. 
Although in our sample there were only a small number of  Utilizers, an HRM 
strategy most frequently associated with American firms, these companies dis- 
played several distinctive characteristics. Subsidiaries with Utilizer strategies 
hired experienced  U.S.  human resources  managers and granted them near- 
autonomy. They sought adaptation through the absorption of  local norms and 
practices into the organization. Human resource managers we  interviewed in 
Utilizers saw their role as one of educating the parent company. 
One particularly striking aspect of the distribution of HRM strategies is the rela- 
tively  large number of  firms opting for a Facilitator approach. Japanese firms 
have often been portrayed as resource accumulators [Kagono et al. 1985], partic- 
ularly with regard to HRM activities. Researchers have characterized them as 
focused  on acquiring employees  possessing  large reserves of  latent potential 
which can be developed and tailored to organization needs over time. While some 


42 

JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS STUDIES, FIRST QUARTER 1995 

writers [Abegglen 1956; Clark 1979; Dore  1973; Rohlen 1974] point out that 
Japanese organizations are effective in achieving congruence between individual 
interests and organizational goals, the tendency has been to characterize this fit in 
terms of  how employee skills and abilities are shaped to match organizational 
needs. References to Japanese practices aimed at developing human resource 
potential that take into consideration individual preferences and aspirations are 
rare. For Japanese subsidiaries in the U.S.,  it may be that the mix of  Japanese 
organizational values and U.S. sociocultural orientations encourages a more indi- 
vidual-centered approach in the selection of a HRM strategy. The result may be 
the adoption of a Facilitator approach that allows for greater individual participa- 
tion in the determination of what and how human resources are to be developed. 
Considered in the larger context of theories regarding foreign subsidiary perfor- 
mance, the findings of  this study point to a number of  important implications. 
First, though much of  the work on subsidiary performance has focused on the 
need to align the firm with environmental constraints, the importance of internal 
fit deserves much more attention. Having found that internal fit with regard to the 
business strategy-HRM strategy match affects performance, there is every reason 
to assume that similar influences are exerted by matches between business strate- 
gy and other functional areas of the subsidiary. To our knowledge this is a line of 
inquiry that has remained largely unexplored. 
This would also seem to suggest that our theories need to be more holistic. The 
rather lackluster results regarding the impact of  the business-HRM strategy 
match on firm performance point to a need to consider the subsidiary's internal 
fit as a whole.  Given a strong presumption that HRM activities have a deep 
impact on how a firm performs, the approach taken in this study may be some- 
what simplistic. Rather than assuming that the business-HRM strategy match 
influences only HRM performance and firm performance, it is more reasonable 
to assume that this match also influences performance in other functional areas. 
Indeed, mismatches between business strategy and HRM strategy may lead to 
lowered firm performance indirectly through lowered performance in production, 
sales and R&D. 
The findings of  this investigation also have implications for practitioners. Our 
interviews with HRM managers participating in this study suggest that, at least in 
the case of Japanese subsidiaries in the U.S., little thought has been given to the 
need to align business strategy and HRM strategy. In essence, managers at the 
firms in our sample had not yet developed a view of HRM as a strategic activity 
and, consequently, did not see a need to align their HRM strategy with the sub- 
sidiary's business strategy. Yet it is clear that doing so yields benefits in terms of 
lower turnover rates, longer employee tenure, as well  as higher levels  of  em- 
ployee morale. The costs associated with turnover and new employee selection 
and training ought to encourage HRM managers to focus more attention on the 
business-HRM strategy match. 
Several limitations of this study should be noted. One limitation of this study is 
that the companies  were  not  chosen  randomly from the total population of 
Japanese subsidiaries operating in the United States, but instead represent a large 


LINKS BETWEEN BUSINESS & HRM STRATEGY 

43 

subset of  companies that had previously identified themselves as being particu- 
larly interested in HRM issues. Therefore, generalization of this study's findings 
cannot be made to the total population of Japanese firms operating in the U.S. 
Despite significant findings for four of  the nine hypotheses, the failure to find 
stronger support for the impact of  the business strategy/HRM strategy linkage 
appears to be the result of the weak effect of this variable on organization-level 
performance measures. Though an argument can be made that the power of the 
statistical analyses was low, ultimately the issue is one of effect size. Given the 
other factors that affect organization-level performance, the limited strength of 
the linkage relationship may not be too surprising. Nevertheless, a relationship 
does appear to exist. 
Future research should move forward in several directions. First, the findings of 
this  study  demonstrate  the  influence  of  internal  fit  on  firm  performance. 
However, little is known about how easy it may be to achieve internal fit, particu- 
larly with regard to HRM practices. Beechler, Bird and Raghuram [1993] note 
that the importance of  internal fit may be moderated by  several key considera- 
tions. The particular strategic orientation of  the parent firm and the nature of 
international competition in which it is involved place differing levels of pressure 
on  a TNC to  maintain policies  that are consistent  across countries and sub- 
sidiaries. They note, for example, that TNCs with a strategic orientation centered 
on cost leadership in industries characterized by global competition will face sub- 
stantially greater pressure to maintain consistency between parent and subsidiary 
policies than will TNCs with a strategic orientation based on product differentia- 
tion in  industries where competition is  multidomestic. This suggests  that the 
ability and need to achieve internal fit may be moderated by the parent's strategic 
orientation in combination. In other words, some foreign subsidiaries may find it 
more  difficult  than  others  to  match  business  strategy  and  HRM  strategy. 
Additionally, the costs  involved in failing to achieve a business strategy-HRM 
strategy match may be larger for some foreign subsidiaries than others. This is an 
area where further theoretical and empirical work is sorely needed. 
A  second  line  of  inquiry should focus  on the process  by  which  subsidiaries 
achieve internal fit between business strategy and HRM strategy. There is  an 
absence of descriptive evidence regarding how foreign subsidiaries develop HRM 
strategy or align an existing one with business strategy. Calling for a matching up 
of  HRM and business strategies without an understanding of  how to go  about 
doing so  would be  imprudent. For this reason we  strongly suggest that future 
investigations focus on how foreign subsidiaries go about aligning business and 
HRM strategies. 

CONCLUSION 

This study examined linkages between business strategy and HRM practices in 
Japanese subsidiaries in the U.S. It specifically investigated whether or not fit be- 
tween a subsidiary's business strategy and its HRM strategy were associated with 
higher performance. Subsidiaries with matched strategies did perform better on 
HRM-related outcome measures than those that were unmatched. The relationship 


44 

JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS STUDIES, FIRST QUARTER 1995 

between HRM outcomes and firm performance, however, was less clear. Having 
established a relationship between business strategy/HRM strategy match and 
some aspects of performance, future research should explore the mechanisms by 
which this match affects HRM policy formulation and implementation in over- 
seas subsidiaries. 

REFERENCES 

Abegglen, James C. 1956. The Japanese factory. Glencoe, Ill.: Irwin. 
Baird, Lloyd & Ilan Meshoulam. 1988. Managing two fits of  strategic human resource manage- 

ment. Academy of Management Review, 13:116-28. 

Bartlett, Christopher & Sumantra Ghoshal. 1989. Managing across  borders: The transnational 

solution. Boston, Mass.: Harvard Business School. 

Beechler, Schon & Allan Bird. 1994. The best of  both worlds? An exploratory study of  human 
resource management practices in U.S.-based Japanese affiliates. In Nigel Campbell, editor, The 
global kaisha. London: Blackwell. 

____ 

__ 

& Sumita Raghuram. 1993. Linking business strategy and transnational human resource 

management practices. Advances in International and Comparative Management, 8:199-215. 

Bird, Allan. 1993. Career advancement in Japanese top management teams: Who gets to the top? 

Kodo Kagaku Kenkyu Behavioral Science Research. 

Broderick, R.F. 1986. Pay policy  and business strategy: Toward a  measure of fit.  Unpublished 

doctoral dissertation, Cornell University. 

Carroll, Stephen. 1991. New  HRM roles, responsibilities, and structures. In Randall S.  Schuler, 

editor, Managing HR in the information age. Washington, D.C.: SHRM. 

Cascio, Wayne. 1991 (third edition). Costing human resources: The financial impact of behavior in 

organizations. Boston: PWS-Kent. 

Chandler, Alfred D.  1962. Strategy and structure: Chapters in the history of American industrial 

enterprise. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 

Clark, Rodney. 1979. The Japanese company. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press. 
Daft, Richard L. 1984. Antecedents of significant and not-so significant organizational research. In 
T. S. Bateman & G. R. Ferris, editors, Methods and analysis in organizational research . Reston, 
Va.: Reston Publishing. 

Dean, James W., Jr. & Scott A.  Snell. 1991. Integrated manufacturing and job design. Academy of 

Management Journal, 34:776-804. 

DeNero, H. 1990. Creating the 'hyphenated' corporation. McKinsey Quarterly, 4:153-74. 
Dess, Gregory G. & Richard B. Robinson, Jr. 1984. Measuring organizational performance in the 
absence of  objective measures: The case of  privately held firms and conglomerate business 
units. Strategic Management Journal, 5:265-73. 

Dillman, D. 1978. Mail and telephone surveys: The total design method. New York: Wiley. 
Dore, Ronald. 1973. British factory-Japanese factory. Berkeley, Calif.: University of  California 

Press. 

Dubin, Robert. 1978. Theory building. New York: The Free Press. 
Duerr, Mitsuko.  1991.  NUMMI  at mid-life:  Lessons  learned by  the American and Japanese 
partners. Paper presented at the Association of  Japanese Business  Studies Annual Meetings. 
Honolulu, Hawaii, January. 

Dyer, Lee. 1984. Studying human resources management and planning. Research in Personnel and 

Human Resources Management, 3:1-30. 


LINKS BETWEEN BUSINESS & HRM STRATEGY 

45 

Gupta, Anil K. & Vijay Govindarajan. 1986. Business unit strategy, managerial characteristics, and 
business  unit effectiveness  at strategy implementation. Academy of Management Journal, 
27:25-41. 

Hambrick, Donald C.  1983. Some tests of the effectiveness and functional attributes of Miles and 

Snow's strategic types. Academy of Management Journal, 26:5-26. 

& Phyllis  A.  Mason.  1984.  Upper echelons:  The organization as  a reflection  of  its  top 

managers. Academy of Management Review, 9:193-206. 

Hansen, G.S. & B. Wemerfelt. 1989. Determinants of firm performance: The relative importance of 

economic and organizational factors. Strategic Management Journal, 10: 399-411. 

Hatvany, Nina  & Vladimir Pucik.  1981. An integrated management system: Lessons  from the 

Japanese experience. Academy of Management Review, 6:469-80. 

Hitt, Michael  S.,  R.  Duane Ireland & K.A.  Palia.  1982.  Industrial firm's  grand strategy and 
functional  importance:  Moderating  effects  of  technology  and uncertainty.  Academy  of 
Management Journal, 25:265-298. 

Hrebiniak, Lawrence G. & W.F. Joyce. 1984. Implementing strategy. New York: Macmillan. 
Japan Economic Institute. 1990. JEI report. Washington, D.C.: Japan Economic Institute. 
Jobber, D.  & J. Saunders. 1988. An experimental investigation into cross-national mail survey 

response rates. Journal of International Business Studies, 19:483-89. 

Kagono, Tadao, Ikujiro Nonaka, Kiyoshi Sakakibara & Akihiro Okumura. 1985. Strategic vs. evolu- 
tionary management: A  U.S.-Japan comparison of strategy and organization. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier. 

Kenney, Martin & Richard Florida. 1993. Beyond mass production. New York: Oxford University 

Press. 

Kotha, Suresh, Roger Dunbar & Allan Bird. Forthcoming. Strategic action generation: A compari- 
son  of  emphasis  placed  on  generic  competitive  methods  by  US  and Japanese managers. 
Strategic Management Journal. 

Lengnick-Hall, Cynthia & Michael Lengnick-Hall. 1988. Strategic human resources management: 
A review of the literature and a proposed typology. Academy of Management Review, 13:454-70. 
Lincoln,  James R. & Arne L.  Kalleberg.  1990.  Culture, control, and commitment. New York: 

Cambridge University Press. 

McDaniel, S.W. & J.W. Kolari. 1987. Marketing strategy implications of Miles and Snow strategic 

typology. Journal of Marketing, 51:19-30. 

McKee, D.O., P. Rajan Varadarajan & W.M. Pride. 1989. Strategic adaptability and firm perfor- 

mance: A market-contingent perspective. Journal of Marketing, 53:21-35. 

Miles,  Raymond E.  & Charles C.  Snow.  1984.  Designing  strategic human resource systems. 

Organization Dynamics, 13:36-52. 

.  1978. Organizational strategy, structure and process. New York: McGraw Hill. 

Mintzberg, Henry. 1990. The design school: Reconsidering the basic premises of strategic manage- 

ment. Strategic Management Journal, 11: 171-96. 

Olian,  J.D.  &  S.L.  Rynes.  1984.  Organizational staffing:  Integrating practice with  strategy. 

Industrial Relations, 23:171-83. 

Ouchi, William. 1981. Theory Z. New York: Addison-Wesley. 
Pascale, Richard T. & Anthony G. Athos.  1981.  The art of Japanese management. New York: 

Simon & Schuster. 

Pucik, Vladimir, Mitsuyo Hanada & George Fifield. 1989. Management culture and the effectiveness 

of local executives in Japanese-owned U.S. corporations. Tokyo: Egon Zehnder International. 


46 

JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS STUDIES, FIRST QUARTER 1995 

Rohlen, Thomas. 1974. For harmony and strength. Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press. 
Schuler, Randall S.  1988. Systematic human resources management. Working paper. New York, 

University. 
I & Susan E. Jackson. 1987a. Linking competitive strategies with human resources manage- 
ment practices. Academy of Management Executive, 1:207-19. 

.  1987b. Organizational strategy and organization level as determinants of  human resource 

management practice. Human Resource Planning, 10:441-55. 

Segev,  E.  1987a.  Strategy, strategy-making,  and performance in  a business  game.  Strategic 

Management Journal, 8:565-77. 

:. 

1987b. A  systematic comparative analysis and synthesis of  two business-level  strategic 

typologies. Strategic Management Journal, 10:487-505. 

Sethi, S. Prakash, Nobuaki Namiki & Carl L. Swanson. 1984. The false  promise of the Japanese 

miracle. Boston: Pitman. 

Shibagaki, K., Malcolm Trevor & Tetsuo Abo. 1989. Japanese and European management. Tokyo: 

University of Tokyo Press. 

Shortell, S.M. & Edward J. Zajac. 1990. Perceptual and archival measures of Miles and Snow's 
strategic types: A comprehensive assessment of reliability and validity. Academy of Management 
Journal, 33:817-32. 

Snow, Charles C. & Lawrence Hrebiniak. 1980. Strategy, distinctive competence, and performance. 

Administrative Science Quarterly, 25:317-36. 

Sonnenfeld, Jeffrey A. & Maury A. Peiperl. 1988. Staffing policy as a strategic response: A typology 

of career systems. Academy of Management Review, 13:588-600. 

Sullivan, Jeremiah. 1992. Invasion of the salarymen: The Japanese business presence in America. 

New York: Praeger. 

Tung, Rosalie I.  1981. Selection and training procedures of  U.S., European, and Japanese trans- 

nationals. California Management Review, 25:51-71. 

The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.
The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.

