The European Accounting  Review  2000, 9:1, 31-52

Environmental  management
accounting in Europe: current
practice and future  potential

Matteo  Bartolomeo
Fondazione ENI  Enrico Mattei,  Milan,  Italy
Martin  Bennett
Cheltenham  and Gloucester College of  Higher
Education,  UK
Jan Jaap  Bouma
Erasmus  University,  Rotterdam,  The  Netherlands
Peter  Heydkamp
IBM  Germany,  Stuttgart,  Germany
Peter  James
University  of Bradford,  UK
Teun  Wolters
EIM  Small  Business Research  and  Consultancy,
Zoetermeer,  The  Netherlands

ABSTRACT

This paper  reports and  analyses the results of a trans-European  project  to inves-
tigate the present and potential future links between the environmental management
and management accounting functions  of a company or business. A taxonomy of
four  broad but distinct approaches to environmental accounting is identified  from
the literature: external financial reporting; social accountability  reporting; energy
and materials accounting; and environmental management accounting. This project
focuses  on  the  latter -  the  generation,  analysis  and  use  of financial and  related
non-financial  information,  in order to support management within a company or
business, in integrating corporate environmental and economic policies and build-
ing sustainable  business. The research  involved  interviews with accountants'  and

Address for correspondence
Dr J. J. Bouma, Erasmus University, Erasmus Centre for Environmental Studies, P.O.
Box 1738, 3000 Rotterdam, The Netherlands. E-mail:  bouma(gfsw.eur.nl

Copyright  ©  2000 European  Accounting  Association
ISSN 0963-8180 print/ISSN  1468-4497 online
Published  by Routledge Journals, Taylor & Francis Ltd  on behalf of the EAA


32  The European Accounting  Review

environmental managers at eighty-four companies in Germany, Italy, The Nether-
lands  and  the  UK,  and  detailed  case  studies  of fifteen companies  in  those  four
countries. The paper summarizes the findings of the research and their implications
for four core hypotheses, goes on to discuss international differences, and concludes
by reviewing the implications of the results for likely future developments.

1.  APPROACHES  TO  BUSINESS-LEVEL
ENVIRONMENTAL  ACCOUNTING

The academic and practitioner literature on environmental accounting at the
level of the individual company or business spans several different approaches,
and  the term  'environmental  accounting'  is itself  used  loosely  and  ambigu-
ously. In order to position  a specific project within the literature, and  define
at  least  broad  boundaries  within  which  empirical  work  can  be carried  out,
some taxonomy is needed.

The  different  approaches  to  environmental  accounting  are  most  directly
distinguished in terms of their differing  emphases on, first, the content of the
activity -  the balance between financial and non-financial  data; and, second,
the primary purpose, in particular the well-established accounting distinction
between primary target audiences -  how far the principal objective is internal
decision support for management, or external reporting.

The need for such a structure to be defined  at the outset to guide research
is  indicated  by  the  lack  of  consensus  in  the  literature  on  terminology  and
definitions -  for  example,  on  what  should  be encompassed  within  the  defi-
nition of'management  accounting'. The official  definition  of the UK's Char-
tered  Institute  of  Management  Accountants,  for  example,  claims  that,  as
well  as  reporting  internally  to  management  within  an  entity,  'management
accounting also comprises the preparation  of financial reports for  non-man-
agement groups such as shareholders...'  (CIMA,  1996) whereas some stan-
dard  texts (Drury,  1996) restrict  its scope to  providing  information  only  to
'people within  the organisation'.  The CIMA definition  also  refers  to  'infor-
mation  used  by  management  to  plan,  evaluate  and  control  ...  and  assure
appropriate use of and accountability  for its resources' -  implicitly including
non-financial as well as strictly financial measures and performance indicators.
Few would deny that an organization's financial performance  is likely to be
dependent  on  its performance  in operational  and  strategic areas which can
best  be  measured  by  non-financial  indicators,  but  some  non-accountants
would  challenge  a  definition  which  can  sometimes  be  perceived  as  an
attempted assertion of professional ownership. This is particularly relevant in
environmental accounting and performance measurement, where much of the
process of data capture and information  generation  is, in practice, managed
by graduates  of  natural  science disciplines  which  would  themselves claim a
long pedigree of measurement expertise.


Environmental management accounting in Europe  33

FINANC

.lAL DATA

ENVIRONMENTAL
MANAGEMENT
ACCOUNTING

FINANCIAL
REPORTING

INTERNAL
DECISION
SUPPORT

EXTERNAL

•  REPORTING

ENERGY AND
MATERIALS
ACCOUNTING

SOCIAL

ACCOUNTABILITY

REPORTING

FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL DATA

Figure 1 Four approaches to environmental accounting at the level of the  firm

Boundaries between subsets of environmental accounting are definable only
broadly, and it would be counter-productive to attempt to apply these rigidly.
The structure reflected in Figure 1  was adopted by the members ofthe  project
to  be  used  as  a  pragmatic  framework  to  guide  the  empirical  research  and
regular  frequent  debates  between  members  as  the  project  proceeded,  over
which  business  activities  could  most  usefully  be  classified  as  elements  of
environmental  management accounting, were a continuing demonstration of
the need  to see it as such.  Figure  1 distinguishes  four  broad  approaches  to
environmental accounting at the level ofthe individual company or business  -
external  financial  reporting;  social  accountability  reporting;  energy  and
materials accounting; and environmental management accounting.

External finaneial  reporting
The environment-related  aspect  of  this  is concerned  with  assessing  the fin-
ancial  effects  (returns and  risks) of environmental  factors  on companies, in
order to inform investors, lenders and other financial stakeholders, as distinct
from reporting on environmental performance for its own sake. Environment-
driven financial risks can be considerable -  for example, liabilities associated
with a need to clean-up contaminated  land. It has been estimated that Amer-
ican  industry  may be under-provided  for  'Superfund'-related  clean-up liab-
ilities by  up  to  a  trillion  dollars  (Schoemaker  and  Schoemaker,  1995). The
scale of environment-driven  liabilities is less in the UK and  other  European
countries  because  of  differing  legislative  and  regulatory  regimes,  but  can


34  The European Accounting  Review

be  significant  for  some  individual  companies  and  may  become  more  so  as
environmental  legislation  becomes more  rigorous.

Financial  regulators  such as the  Securities and  Exchange  Commission  and
the accountancy profession on both sides of the Atlantic have been concerned
to ensure that current financial reporting standards are adequate  to capture
the  full  scale  of  potential  environmental  liabilities  (FEE,  1996), though  an
argument has been made that the current standards themselves are adequate
provided  that  they  are  properly  followed  and  enforced  (ICAEW,  1996).
Research into the attitudes of the financial auditing profession reports similar
findings:  that although there is a high level of awareness of the importance of
environmental  issues, at  least  amongst  larger  audit firms, there is a general
lack of support for regulation and mandatory professional guidance (Collison,
1996; Collison et al,  1996; Collison and Gray, 1997).

Social accountability reporting

Much of the interest shown by academia, particularly in the UK, can be seen
as an extension of the social accounting movement which flourished briefly in
the 1970s. This aimed to broaden the scope of accounting from its traditional  -
and  legally-defined -  concentration  on financial stakeholders,  to  a  broader
accountability  to  external  stakeholders  generally  and  to  society  as  a whole
(Gray et al.,  1993, 1996, 1997). Although those initiatives failed to persist, the
social  accounting  approach  has  influenced  debate  and  practice  in  environ-
mental  reporting  externally.  In  the  UK,  for  example,  its  proponents  have
been  central  to  the  development  of  the  Association  of  Chartered  Certified
Accountants' Environmental  Reporting Awards Scheme (Owen et al., 1997).
Anecdotal evidence based on feedback from environmental managers suggests
that this is highly regarded in industry and is a valuable support for them in
convincing sceptical senior managements of the value of external disclosure,
and  that  it  has  been  instrumental  in  encouraging  improvements  and  inno-
vations  in  the  stand-alone  voluntary  published  corporate  environmental
reports which  are  the  most  visible  indicator  of corporate  accountability  to
external stakeholders (Owen, 1992).

Gray  et al. (1993) and  others  have pointed  out  that  accountants  and  the
accounting  profession  have much  to  contribute  in  this  respect;  specifically,
their experience could  be valuable in the generation, collection  and  analysis
of data  on resources consumed  and  other  aspects of performance,  much of
which will be held within accounting records and systems; verification  of data
collection  and  analysis  methods;  and  the  reporting  and  communication  of
quantitative data.

Energy and materials accounting

Many environmental impacts are related to flows of physical substances (fuels,
materials, water, gases, etc.). Hence, this is the basic data used for  life-cycle


Environmental  management  accounting  in Europe  35

assessment  (LCA).  Some  experts  therefore  advocate  that,  if  management
accounting is to take environment seriously, the tracking and analysis of this
non-financial  information  should  become  as important  as the  tracking  and
analysing of financial information  (Birkin,  1997a-f). This can also be seen as
a  logical  response  to  the  arguments  for  greater  use  of  non-financial  infor-
mation  in decision-making  and  performance  measurement  which  have been
made  by  Kaplan  and  Norton  (1996), though  this can  again  raise  potential
questions over the most appropriate professional  ownership of  non-financial
performance  measurement indicators.

One particular  activity  in  this area  with  clear  relevance  for  management
accounting is eco-balancing, since both offer a framework in which an holistic
overview ofa  business as a whole can be broken down into sufficient  detail to
be  managed  and  controlled  operationally  (Becksmann,  1996; Jasch,  1999;
Rauberger and Wagner,  1999). Mueller-Wenk, a Swiss engineer, is generally
recognized  as  the  originator  of  eco-balancing  in  the  1970s  (Mueller-Wenk,
1978), and it has subsequently been widely implemented as an integral part of
corporate environmental management in Germany, Austria and Switzerland.
However, it is usually perceived as an engineering management process, organ-
izationally located within production functions,  rather than as an accounting
process,  perhaps  reflecting  deeper  differences  between  Germanic  and  other
(particularly Anglo-Saxon) management cultures.

Environmental management accounting
As environmental management in business has evolved, interest has grown in
developing a better understanding of environment-related financial costs and
benefits as an input to conventional management accounting. The main stimu-
lus  is  growing  evidence  of  the  effect  that  environmental  factors  can  have
on  the  profitability  and financial position  ofa  business  (Cairncross,  1995;
Schmidheiny  and  Zorraquin,  1996; DeSimone  and  PopofT,  1997),  and  the
probability that these effects will increase in future through both public policy
and  market  forces.  Some manifestations  of this include: high and  increasing
levels of capital  and  operating  expenses for  pollution  control  equipment  as
legislated  standards  are  increased;  additional  costs  incurred  as  a  result  of
public concern over environmental issues, for example Shell's disposal of the
Brent Spar oil storage platform at a much higher cost than had been originally
anticipated; and the introduction  in a number of countries of'eco-taxes'  and
other incentive-based  forms of regulation.

Several company initiatives have demonstrated  the extent of environment-
related costs, and opportunities to control and minimize these through appro-
priate  management  action.  Baxter  International's  1996 corporate  environ-
mental financial statement demonstrated that, even when costs were matched
against  only  those  benefits  realized  in  the  current  year,  its  environmental
programmes almost broke even ($23.4 million of benefits compared  to S27.6


36  The European Accounting  Review

million of costs); whilst there were a further  $51.2 million of benefits realized
in  1996 from  costs avoided as a result of previous years' initiatives (Bennett
and James, 1998c). The 'Green Ledgers' study by the World Resources Insti-
tute also found that, by their definition, environmental costs comprised almost
22%  of  non-feedstock  operating  costs  at  Amoco's  Yorktown  refinery  and
19%  of the manufacturing  costs of a Du Pont agricultural  pesticide (Ditz et
al., 1995). Similar findings have been reported in several European  projects,
particularly in the Netherlands (Dieleman et al.,  1991;  Wolters and Bouman,
1995) and the UK (Johnston, 1994).

In  the  USA,  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency's  Environmental
Accounting  Project  has  collaborated  with  organizations  such  as  the  Tellus
Institute to summarize definitions; to develop a model for considering environ-
ment in investment decisions ('total cost assessment', or TCA);  and to develop
research into trends and practices in industry in both specific industry sectors
such  as  chemicals  and  electroplating,  and  in  individual  companies  such  as
AT&T  and  Ontario  Hydro  (McLaughlin  and  Elwood,  1996;  Bennett  and
James, 1998b). This is supported by academic and applied research such as a
survey  of  practice  by  Epstein  (1996),  supported  by  the  USA  Institute  of
Management  Accountants;  the  work  of  Bailey  and  Soyka  (1996);  and  the
Green Ledgers study (Ditz et al.,  1995). Tuppen (1996) has also analysed the
USA  situation  from  a European  perspective,  as part  of  a  study  to  identify
possible environmental management accounting initiatives which British and
other European companies could consider adopting.

Although empirical work in Europe would appear to be less developed than
in the US, there is a growing literature. Schaltegger et  al.  (1996) have provided
an  overview  of  the  field  from  a  European  perspective,  and  much  of  the
practical work in Europe has been in the Netherlands, driven by that country's
advanced environmental policies and its move towards incentive-based  regu-
lation  (Braakhuis  et al.,  1995; Wolters  and  Bouman,  1995; Bouma,  1998).
There  has  also  been  work  on  the  development  of  typologies  of  costs  and
benefits as an outcome of a number of waste minimization schemes in the UK
(Johnston,  1994;  Business  in  the  Environment  and  Environment  Agency,
1996). Finally, Bennett and James (1998b, 1999) have collected articles reflect-
ing the current state of the art from  both Europe and the USA.

2.  THE 'ECOMAC'2 RESEARCH  PROJECT
In  1996 the present authors commenced  a European Union-funded  research
project on links in European companies, and the potential to develop  further
links, between management accounting and environmental management. The
objectives were to generate empirical data on the current status and to analyse
these in order to identify  opportunities for further  development.

The  design  adopted  a  conscious  and  deliberate  managerialist  stance.


Environmental  management  accounting  in Europe  37

reflected  in  its  definition  of  environmental  management  accounting  for  the
purposes  of the  project:

the generation, analysis and use of financial  and related non-financial  information
in  order  to  integrate  corporate  environmental  and  economic  policies,  and  build
sustainable business.

Although  there  are  other  approaches  which  are  reflected  in  the  literature,
these  were  decided  to  be  outside  the  scope  of  the  project,  which  focused
on  the  potential  to  develop  links  between  environmental  management  and
management  accounting  which  could  be  mutually  beneficial  even  in  con-
ventional  business  terms.  The  project  therefore  focused  on  the  north-west
quadrant  of  Figure  1,  i.e.  environmental  management  accounting,  and
adopted  a  narrow  definition  of  data -  that  which  is either  already  expressed
in monetary units, or of direct relevance to financial analysis -  and an  internal
audience/decision  support  perspective.

The research work was undertaken  by four  academic partners:  Fondazione
ENI  Enrico  Mattei  (FEEM)  in  Italy,  TNO  and  Erasmus  University  in  the
Netherlands,  and  the  UK  Centre  for  Environment  and  Economic  Devel-
opment  (CEED). The  project  also had  an  industrial  partner,  IBM  Germany,
and  undertook  demonstration  projects  in  three  Dutch-based  companies  or
facilities,  Auping,  Hercules and  Xerox.

The project's  four  main  hypotheses  were  that:

1  Logical  relationships  between  management  accounting  and  environ-
mental management  can be established  through existing production  pro-
cesses and  products.

2  The  linking  of  management  accounting  to  environmental  management
will help to demonstrate  the  financial  superiority  of pollution  prevention
measures relative to end-of-pipe  measures.

3  Internal  costs  to a business  resulting  from  emissions  to  the  environment
are often  not  identified  within  conventional  management  practices. As a
result, cost savings relating to environmental pressures frequently  remain
hidden.

4  Activity-based  costing  (ABC)  is  a  promising  approach  to  remedy  the
'black  box'  nature  of  overheads.  It  can  be  applied  so  as  to  quantify
systematically  the cost-saving effects  of environmental  measures.

These were tested  through  a questionnaire  survey, administered  by interview,
of  eighty-four  companies  in  Germany,  Italy,  the  Netherlands  and  the  UK;
and  fifteen  detailed  case  studies.  The  survey  sample  was  stratified  by  size,
divided  equally  in each  country  between  larger companies  and  small  to  med-
ium-sized  enterprises.  It  was also focused  on  industries  where environment  is
a  significant  strategic  issue  such  as  chemicals,  pharmaceuticals,  energy  and
printing.  For  nearly  all  companies,  both  an  environmental  specialist  and  a


38  The  European Accounting Review

financial specialist  were  interviewed.  The  survey findings are  described  in
detail in Bouma and Wolters (1998).

Some of  the questions  replicated  those  in a similar American  exercise by
the Tellus  Institute  on  behalf  of  the  US Environmental  Protection  Agency
(White  and  Savage,  1995).  However,  the  comparative  results  need  to  be
interpreted  with caution  as the samples were different.  In comparison  to the
Ecomac project, the USA exercise was based on a larger number of firms and
respondents,  had  less  control  over  the  identity  of  respondents,  and  had a
greater  proportion  of responses from  medium-sized  and  large companies.

The case studies for the research were of the German  subsidiaries of IBM,
Philips and Sony; AGIP, Cartiera Favini, Italiana Petroli and SGS-Thomson
in Italy; Auping, Hercules,  Meerssen  Papier  and  Xerox  in the Netherlands;
and Baxter, Xerox, Zeneca and an anonymous company (referred to as 'XYZ
pic') in the UK and Ireland. They covered a variety of themes, including 'costs
of  non-environment',  product  costing,  waste  minimization,  environmental
costs in product development, and end-of-life  disposal costs. They also pro-
vided  a mix  of both  'problems',  where  the  research  objective  was to  reveal
problems  and  demonstrate  a  range  of  alternative  possible  solutions,  and
'solutions' where companies had already taken successful  action.

3.  RESULTS OF THE  RESEARCH
The main themes which emerged from  the research are summarized in Figure
2.  The following  subsections  discuss  these themes and  consider  their  impli-
cations for the project's initial hypotheses.

Cross-functional  goals and procedures

A small majority of companies in the survey had formal environmental policy
goals which  were integrated  into  their  business policy goals (53%). A large

in  environmental  management

•  Cross-functional goals and procedures
•  Emphasis on pollution prevention
•  Moderate  but  growing 
interest 

accounting

•  Diverse sources of information
•  Limited allocation of environmental costs
•  Equivalence of environmental  investments
•  Short-term decision-making  perspectives
•  Limited use of externalities data
•  Problems of data reliability
•  Importance of organizational structure
•  Importance of organizational processes

Figure 2  Themes emerging  from  the Ecomac  project


Environmental  management  accounting  in Europe  39

majority  also  either  already  had  an  environmental  management  system  in
operation (56%) or were in the process of introducing one (24%). Over half
of all companies (58%) had formal  procedures to ensure that  environmental
staff were involved in capital budgeting processes.

Emphasis on pollution  prevention

Most  companies  had  recognized  the  superiority  in  principle  of  pollution
prevention at source over 'end-of-pipe' solutions, and were seeking to prevent
pollution  by  integrating  environmental  management  into  their  normal
decision-making.  However,  this was  not  evenly  distributed  across  business
functions: implementation was highest in production (74%) and R&D (61 %),
but there is still room  for  further  improvement  in, for example, the product
design, distribution, use/consumption or disposal stages of the life cycle, where
less than 50% of companies had adopted this approach.

Moderate  but growing  interest  in environmental  management
accounting

The case studies suggested that the financial benefits of introducing environ-
mental management accounting do not usually justify  major changes and are
therefore  better  achieved  by  integrating  environment  into  existing  change
programmes, such as the introduction into a business of activity-based costing.
Realistically,  therefore,  for  most  companies,  environmental  management
accounting  will  be  an  intermittent  process  in  which  periods  of  low-level,
low-profile,  activity  are punctuated  by bursts  of considerable  attention  and
innovation. These will often  be triggered by changes such as the introduction
of new internal accounting systems.

However,  most  survey  respondents  did  expect  their  environmental  man-
agement  accounting  activities  to  increase  in  the future.  There  was also sig-
nificant activity in a few companies and considerable general interest in some
specific  applications,  particularly  amongst  environmental  specialists.  These
were  asked  to  assess  the  usefulness,  both  currently  and  in  the  future,  of
seven areas or activities -  the bookkeeping system, budget-setting, budgetary
control, capital  budgeting, product  costing, financial performance  measure-
ment, and non-financial performance measurement. The area which was high-
est  ranked  overall  was capital  budgeting,  which  48%  saw  as  having  either
considerable or crucial importance to environmental  management currently,
and which 61 % expected to be of either considerable or crucial importance in
the  future.  The  two  aspects  of  operational  budgeting -  budget-setting  and
budgetary control -  were also highly ranked, with 33-34% considering them
to be either considerably or crucially important now, and 53-56% expecting
that this would be the case in the future. Interestingly -  in view of the topic's
prominence  to date in the subject  literature -  the lowest ranked  of the seven


40  The European Accounting  Review

was product costing, with only 24% of environmental specialists ofthe opinion
that  this was of considerable  or  crucial  importance  to  environmental  man-
agement currently, and only 39% for the future.

Diverse sources of information

This is one of  the few  areas  of  significant  difference  between  the  USA  and
Europe which emerged from  the Ecomac survey. In the USA, 51% of com-
panies stated  that  their financial and  management  accounting  systems were
their main  source of data  on environmental  costs. This compares with only
19% of European companies, a far larger proportion of whom stated that the
main source was operational management systems. In particular, operational
data  such  as  manufacturing  process  records  emerged  as  being  extremely
important  for  most  companies -  often  more  so  than  data  from  accounting
systems.

Limited allocation of environmental costs

Only 50% ofthe European companies were explicitly tracking any of a number
of named environmental  costs, compared  to  83% in the US. The  difference
was especially marked at plant level, where only 18% of European companies
were  tracking  environmental  costs  compared  to  64%  in  the  USA,  with  a
slightly higher proportion of German companies allocating costs to processes
and products than in the three other European countries. However, the differ-
ence between  the USA and  Europe was less significant  than it may  appear,
since even the American companies were tracking only a small proportion of
the costs which  might  potentially  be classified  under  this  heading.  In  both
countries, most companies were tracking  obvious environment-related  costs
such as energy and waste disposal (although not always identifying  them as
environment-related),  but  paying  little  attention  to  others  such  as environ-
mental fines or penalties, or insurance costs. The residual differences  between
the USA and Europe are probably explained by the higher levels of liabilities
and penalties in the former.

Given that many environmental  costs are allocated  to overheads, the  for-
mulae which  then  assign these into  individual  cost  objects  are of  some sig-
nificance. On both sides ofthe Atlantic the main basis for allocation is labour
hours (55% of USA companies and  33% of European), closely followed  by
production volume (53% in the USA and 24% in Europe). Several ofthe case
studies-for  example,  those  on  Cartiera  Favini  and  Philips -  demonstrate
how  this  can  result  in  environmental  costs  being  allocated  to  processes  or
products which do not in fact generate them and which are therefore  effectively
being required to cross-subsidize other, dirtier, products and processes.


Environmental  management  accounting  in Europe  41

Equivalence  of environmental  investments
The  Ecomac  survey  showed  that,  whilst  some  urgent  compliance  projects
might  avoid  conventional  investment  appraisal  procedures,  environmental
investments  are  generally  not  treated  differently  to  other  proposed  invest-
ments. In Europe, 83% of companies have a common capital budgeting pool
for  both  environmental  and  non-environmental  investments -  a very similar
figure  to the 86% of companies which do so in the USA. However, a quarter
of all firms -  and  in some sectors a much higher proportion -  used  different
assessment techniques for environmental  projects.

Short-term  decision-making  perspectives
Most business decisions involve the commitment  of resources; if  significant,
this will usually be subject to financial evaluation. The time-horizon adopted,
and the selection of investment appraisal method, is therefore of great import-
ance since the benefits  of environmental  investments are often  of long-term
impact.  For  these,  the payback  method  can  be particularly  distorting  both
since it ignores the time dimension of cash fiows and also because, in practice
in some companies, it is often  based on very short payback periods (less than
a  year,  for  several  of  the  companies  interviewed).  Conversely,  discounted
cash fiow methods  do  take  account  of  longer-term  returns,  although  their
significance depends upon the discount rate applied and the time-horizon over
which costs and benefits are recognized.

In practice, most of the European firms surveyed used the payback method
as one of their assessment techniques and  35% used it as their primary one,
making it the most popular assessment technique. This contrasts with the US
study, which found  return on investment (ROI) to be the most common main
investment  technique.  It  does,  however,  correspond  to  other  research  on
management accounting practice generally (Drury et al., 1993). Although the
European companies in the sample who were using the payback method were,
on average, basing their decisions on longer threshold periods than were their
American  peers,  it  is  none  the  less  notable  that  it  is  so  prevalent.  This  is
particularly true of companies in Italy and the UK, which placed even greater
emphasis on this method than did their Dutch and German equivalents.

Limited use of externalities data
Conventional  management  accounting -  like  conventional financial report-
ing-aims  to  report  and  analyse  only  costs  incurred  internally  within  the
business, though there have been several recent calls for a more strategic and
externally-oriented  perspective (Simmonds,  1991; Wilson, 1997). The parallel
to  this  in environmental  accounting  is the  argument  that  the  scope  should
include not only the internal environmental costs, but also the external costs


42  The European Accounting  Review

imposed on society and the environment outside the boundaries of the organ-
ization  itself.  This -  it  has  been  argued -  is  not  only  a  recognition  of  the
company's responsibility for the full range of its impacts, but can also provide
an approximate  leading indicator  of future  internal  costs, as environmental
legislation  becomes  more  stringent,  particularly  if  this  is  through  market-
based  public  policy  instruments  such  as  eco-taxes  and  tradable  emissions
permits.

However, the survey and cases found  only a small number  of companies
with any interest in externalities data, though the XYZ pic case study  found
that calculation  of externalities can be, at the very least, a useful  marketing
tool for new products and services which reduce environmental impacts such
as road transport requirements. This might be further  increased if more data
were  available -  there  is currently  a  lack  in  respect  of  several  key  environ-
mental parameters, such as the use of alternative types of raw materials, or
many forms of toxic emission.

One reason  for  this relative lack of interest is doubts about  the credibility
of long-term  projections  of environmental  cost. Although  many  companies
expect  these  to  increase,  few  attempt  to  quantify  them-for  example,  by
considering current levels of externalities and how these might be internalized
in future -  in a way which can be used in decision-making models. More work
is therefore  necessary  both  to  generate  additional  data,  and  to  study  cost-
effective  and feasible ways of signalling such trends to business.

Data reliability

Some of the project's survey interviews and case studies revealed considerable
doubts about the reliability of much environmental and  environment-related
cost data within companies. One reason is that direct measurement  of many
environmental  parameters  is often  impossible  or  unduly  expensive,  so  that
data  have to be derived  from  other  parameters;  for  example, by measuring
inputs and outputs to estimate losses, or by applying a conversion formula  to
estimate the carbon dioxide emissions of fuels. The margins of error are often
considerable and can sometimes outweigh any trend variations. Variations in
definition can also create difficulties.  The problems of ensuring reliability are
particularly pressing in large organizations, which are often collecting data at
different  levels -  for  example,  at  the  levels  of  the  corporate  centre,  of  the
division,  and  of  an  individual  business  unit  or  site -  as  well  as  at  multiple
locations in different  countries.

These  problems  are  partly  attributable  to  a  lack  of  standardization  of
terms and techniques, which is hampering development. Although the maxim
'different  costs  for  different  purposes'  is equally  relevant  in  environmental
accounting  in supporting  objectives  and  programmes which may be unique
to the particular  organization,  a higher degree of standardization  would  be


Environmental  management  accounting  in Europe  43

valuable for other purposes such as in benchmarking exercises, and to support
the preparation of national statistics.

Relevance  of organizational  structure
The most  fundamental  aspect  of  structure  is the degree  of  decentralization
within  the  organization.  In  highly  decentralized  organizations  the  fun-
damental decision-making centres will be business units below the level of the
corporation as a whole, and large sites also may enjoy considerable autonomy.
The  Ecomac  project's  cases  and  survey  found  several  examples  where  this
autonomy translates into the operation of different  accounting systems which
produce problems of data compatibility between business units.

Decentralization does offer  an opportunity for local initiatives to be intro-
duced  on a small-scale basis, for  example in response to particular  environ-
mental circumstances. If successful, these can then be extended across the rest
of the organization. However, a high degree of decentralization can also make
it difficult  to  take any action  which  requires co-operation  between  different
business  units.  Often  too,  these  units  have  a  less  well-developed  strategic
perspective  than  does  the corporate  centre,  and  may  therefore  be less per-
suaded  by  arguments  about  long-term  pressures  such  as  the  likely  future
internalization  of  costs  which  at  present  are  external.  On  the  other  hand,
centralization  can  encourage  a  'convoy'  approach  to  environmental  man-
agement  and  a  stifling  of  local  initiative.  Several  corporate  environmental
managers in the survey noted the importance of these factors and the practical
difficulties  which  they  created  for  both  environmental  management  and
environmental management accounting.

These  issues  are  particularly  pronounced  for  local  subsidiaries  of  trans-
national  enterprises,  where  the  extent  of  decentralization  can  range  from
very  limited  to  almost  complete  autonomy.  In  particular,  ownership  by an
American parent can be an important  driver of environmental  management
accounting, as corporate initiatives developed in the high environmental cost
context  of  America  are  made  either  mandatory  for,  or  available  to,  local
subsidiaries.  This  was  the  case  with  Baxter's  development  of  a  site-level
environmental  financial  statement  for  its  Irish  Manufacturing  Operations
plant,  for  example. The global perspective and  management  of many trans-
national  organizations  can  also  create  another  use  of  eco-management
accounting, which is to analyse the costs and benefits of national  regulations
and compare these with those of other countries.

Another aspect of structure is the extent to which the organization is based
on strong  and  independent  functional  departments.  Generally, a  functional
structure is more common in German companies -  many American and Brit-
ish  companies  have  in  recent  years  been  using  a  variety  of  mechanisms  to
break these down and focus instead on process-based management. This has
major implications for culture and processes (see below) and also determines


44  The European Accounting  Review

the  role  and  objectives  of  the  accounting  and  environmental  management
function  (Becksmann,  1996; James et al.,  1997).

The  Zeneca  case  provides  an  example  of  the  influence  of  structure  on
environmental management accounting. The waste minimization initiative at
the Huddersfield  site was initially driven by the environmental department of
one of the company's autonomous business units, and subsequently  adopted
by site staff.  However, the case identified  one significant  factor  in its success
as  the  presence  on  the  site  of  a  corporate  service  function,  Zeneca  Manu-
facturing's  Process  Development  department,  which  facilitated  the  rec-
ognition  of  the  opportunities  which  could  be  generated  through  a  'cost  of
waste' analysis.

Relevance of organizational processes

The case studies suggested  that  effective  and  enduring cross-functional  pro-
cesses  are  vital  for  successful  environmental  management  accounting,  for
three reasons. First, many actions require collaboration and concerted action
by different  functions, such as financial management and environmental man-
agement. Second, some important  opportunities -  such as the ability to cap-
ture new kinds of data  or to reclassify  existing data categories as a result of
the introduction of activity-based costing -  arise only at irregular intervals. If
good  relationships  and  understanding  between  functions  are not  already in
existence,  it  can  be  difficult  for  such  opportunities  to  be  identified  and
implemented.  Finally,  an  important  underpinning  of  environmental  man-
agement accounting is mutual understanding and awareness: financial literacy
amongst  environmental  managers,  and  environmental  awareness  amongst
accounting staff. An important  means to achieve this is regular contact  and
good  personal  relationships  between  individuals  from  these  different  func-
tional areas.

The project found  only two companies which had generated new processes
which brought together accounting and environmental  staff to meet environ-
mental objectives. Akzo had created a position of environmental bookkeeper'
to co-ordinate accounting, environmental management and operational data,
and  Xerox  UK's  quality  improvement  team  brought  together  accounting,
environmental, logistics, packaging and other staff to focus on opportunities
for  packaging  reduction.  However,  even  in  this  case  the  original  principal
objective had been cost reduction rather than environmental  improvement.

Several case studies and survey interviews also demonstrated the suboptimal
situations which can arise from  the absence of such processes. At XYZ pic,
for  example,  the  case  study  involved  the  setting-up  of  an  environmental
workshop  which  brought  together  both  the  internal  players  involved  with
the  product  development  process,  and  important  external  players  such  as
disassembly  companies.  This  was  the  first  time  that  such  a  meeting  had
occurred,  and participants subsequently  reported  that  they had  been helped


Environmental  management  accounting  in Europe  45

in developing an improved understanding of the role of environmental issues
in determining the long-term feasibility  and profitability  of the projeet.

The findings and the projeet hypotheses
The  first  projeet  hypothesis  was  that  'logical  relationships  between  man-
agement  accounting  and  environmental  management  ean  be  established
through existing produetion  processes and products'. Contrary to the expee-
tation  of  the  researchers,  this  hypothesis was  not  supported  by  the results,
since there was no apparent correlation across the companies studied between
their  methods  of  production  and  types  of  product,  and  their  approaches
to  environmental  management  aecounting.  The  survey  found  considerable
variations in practice. This may be partially explained by the finding that the
aecounting  function  was  not  central  to  many  environmental  management
accounting activities -  more frequently these aetivities were driven by environ-
mental  and  operational  managers.  This  was  related  to  the  importance  of
operational  data,  such  as job  and  process  records,  to  cost  reduction  and
other  initiatives.  In  theory  these  may  be  within  the  remit  of  management
aecountants,  but  in  practice -  as  with  Zeneca -  this  was  frequently  not  the
case.  Where  links  were  established  between  management  aecounting  and
environmental  management,  they almost invariably  took  the form  of modi-
fication  of some existing accounting processes, in particular of capital invest-
ment appraisal processes.

The second hypothesis was that 'the linking of management accounting to
environmental management will help to demonstrate the financial superiority
of  pollution  prevention  measures  relative  to  end-of-pipe  measures'.  This
hypothesis was partially  supported.  Several  of the case studies showed  that
when  hidden  costs  were  revealed  they  did  indeed  strengthen  the  case  for
waste minimization and similar initiatives, and this was also supported by the
responses of a majority  of survey respondents.

However,  the  research  also  revealed  that  the mere identification  of costs
alone is not  necessarily  sufficient  to make pollution  prevention  a  financially
attractive  aetivity.  If  costs  are  not  allocated  to  appropriate  cost  objects  or
budgets, they will not necessarily infiuence behaviour. And, if excessively high
discount  rates  are  used  in  investment  appraisal  techniques,  then  any  long-
term  benefits  and  costs which  are identified  will be discounted  to  negligible
amounts.

The third  hypothesis was that  'internal  costs to a business  resulting  from
emissions  to  the  environment  are  often  not  identified  within  conventional
management  practices.  As  a  result,  cost  savings  relating  to  environmental
pressures  frequently  remain  hidden'.  This hypothesis  was supported  by the
research.  Only  half  of  the  companies  surveyed  were  first  identifying  and
then  allocating  key  environmental  costs  to  processes  or  products,  A  large
proportion  of  both  accountants  and  environmental  managers  also  believed


46  The European Accounting  Review

that  more could  be done  to  identify  and  allocate  environmental  costs,  which
was  supported  by  the  results  of  the  pilot  exercises  at  Auping  and  Hercules.
Moreover,  the  cases  where  environmental  costs  had  been  identified,  such  as
Zeneca and Xerox, are widely acknowledged  as exceptional, not least  because
of  the  effort  expended  in  revealing  hidden  costs,  and  therefore  not  gen-
eralizable to normal practice in the majority  of companies. Several cases, such
as that  of Zeneca,  also demonstrated  that  the costs of  inefficiency  could  be
the most difficult  element of environmental  cost to identify,  but could  also be
the most  significant.

The final  hypothesis  was that  'activity-based  costing  (ABC) is a  promising
approach  to  remedy  the  "black  box"  nature  of  overheads.  It  can  be  applied
so as to quantify  systematically  the cost-saving effects  of environmental  mea-
sures'.  The  case  of  Meerssen  Papier-where  the  introduction  of  ABC  did
reveal unexpected environmental costs -  supported  this hypothesis.  However,
activity-based  costing  was being  implemented  in  only  18% of  the  companies
which  were  surveyed  (though  it  was  being  considered  by  a  further  6%).
Moreover, only a small proportion of interviewees considered that the  benefits
of  introducing  environmental  management  accounting  were  sufficiently  high
in themselves to compensate for the high costs of changing accounting systems.
Hence,  ABC  is  likely  to  be  only  one  of  the  means  by  which  environmental
management  accounting  is  introduced  into  business.  In  addition,  little  evi-
dence was found  to indicate that ABC initiatives automatically reveal environ-
ment-driven costs. Substantial  inputs by environmental managers and  experts
will almost  certainly  be necessary  to ensure that  this occurs.

4.  INTERNATIONAL  DIFFERENCES

Some specific variations between European countries have already been noted.
The research also suggests that  there are some more fundamental  differences,
both  between  Europe  and  the  USA, and  between  individual  European  coun-
tries.  For  example,  the  argument  that  financial  'bottom-line'  considerations
will  be  major  drivers  of  environmental  improvement  in  European  business
can  sometimes  be  exaggerated.  In  general,  the  fact  that  Europe  does  not
have a US-style liability  and  environmental  penalty  regime means  that  direct
environmental  cost drivers are not as intense as in America. The Dutch  cases,
for  example,  found  that — even  in  a  country  with  one  of  the  most  stringent
environmental  regimes in Europe -  direct environmental  costs  (so far  as  they
can  be  accurately  measured)  still  accounted  for  only  around  2%  of  sales
revenue of the chemical companies researched. On the other hand,  European-
based  companies  tend  to  face  higher  resource  costs,  particularly  for  energy,
than  do  American  companies,  so  that  their  'costs  of  inefficiency'  -  the  costs
of buying and processing resources which ultimately become waste -  will  often
exceed direct environmental  costs. It could be argued  that improvements  here
should not be considered as primarily attributable to environmental  initiatives


Environmental  management  accounting  in Europe  47

since  there  is  a  clear  profit  motive,  and  that  well-managed  profit-seeking
companies should be able to optimize their production processes even in the
absence  of  any  specifically  environmental  programme.  However,  the  con-
tinuing reports of effieiency  gains, previously unrecognized, which are ident-
ified  through  environment-driven  audits  and  reviews,  demonstrate  the
continuing potential for such initiatives,

A  broad,  if  crude,  distinction  can  also  be  drawn  between  companies  in
terms of their basic ethos and philosophy: crudely, between primarily 'finance-
driven' and  'stakeholder'  organizations, 'Finance-driven'  organizations have
a primary focus on shareholder value and the bottom  line, whereas a 'stake-
holder'  organization  would  see finaneial performance  as only  one factor  in
meeting the needs of a variety of stakeholders, which includes employees and
local communities as well as shareholders. At the risk of stereotyping, a broad
correlation  has been  observed  with national  differences,  with  finance-driven
corporate cultures being more prevalent in the strong-capital-market contexts
of the Anglo-Saxon economies of the UK and USA, and a broader stakeholder
culture being more prevalent in Germany (James et al., 1997) as well as other
continental  European  countries  and  Japan,  The differences  have  important
consequences for accountants and finaneial managers, who are usually central
figures  in the decision-making of Anglo-Saxon companies (to the point where
finaneial training  and  experienee  is  a  frequent  background  for  those  who
become company ehief executives and chairmen) but are generally relatively
less prominent  at  senior levels of continental  European  and  Japanese enter-
prises.

These cultural differences  are reflected  in differences  in the development of
environmental management accounting. In British and Ameriean companies
(and,  usually,  in  their  overseas  subsidiaries  also)  the emphasis  has been on
'finance-driven'  initiatives such as waste minimization which offer  immediate
pay-offs.  Although  accountants  have  not  usually  been  prominent  in  these,
conventional  accounting  and  financial  techniques -  such  as  the  use  of  the
payback method -  have been frequently  used. In Germany, by contrast, there
has been  more emphasis on eco-balancing, an activity  largely conducted  by
engineers and  scientists and  focused  as much on  holistic understanding  and
long-term benefits as on short-term returns. This point was also eonfirmed by
a US case study of the electroplating industry, which found that organizations
with strongly finance-driven cultures tended to be more supportive of environ-
mental management accounting (Environmental Protection Agency, 1997).

However, this broad stereotype is becoming less valid. Economic difficulties
are leading many eontinental European and Japanese companies to put greater
weight on finaneial considerations, whilst eonversely there have always been
several British and American companies who can fairly claim to have adopted
a broad stakeholder philosophy. This is currently a topical issue in the UK in
partieular (RSA,  1994), with declared government policy clearly in favour of
encouraging a broad stakeholder responsibility by companies as a correction


48  The European Accounting  Review

to  what  is perceived  by some  to have  been  the  excessively  finance-driven
climate of the  f980s.

5.  C O N C L U S I O NS

The  Ecomac  project  frequently  found  that,  although  many  companies  claim
some  environmental  management  accounting  activity,  this  often  represents
only  a  few  isolated  experimental  projects  rather  than  a  systematic  and  com-
prehensive  implementation.  One  example  of  this  patchy  response  was  cited
by the environmental manager of a major American corporation who reported
that his corporation was well aware of the need to carry out thorough  environ-
mental  checks  as  part  of  their  'due  diligence'  processes  when  mergers  or
acquisitions  were  contemplated,  and  invested  substantial  resources  in  this
(including much  of his own  time). However,  this same enlightened  awareness
was not equally found  in other, more internal, processes such as new  product
development,  although  (in  his  opinion)  these  offered  much  greater  oppor-
tunities  to generate  long-term  improvements  in environmental  performance.
The  project  results  suggest  that  opportunities  exist  for  many  companies,
for  both  business  and  environmental  reasons,  to  become  more  active  and
adventurous in environmental management accounting, and that the pressures
on  them  to do  so will increase. However,  any  actions need  to be realistic  and
cost-effective  and  are  more  likely  to  involve  incremental  changes  to  existing
activities  rather  than  the  introduction  of  compfetefy  new  processes.  Seven
areas, which are summarized  in Figure  3, are likely to be the focus  of this.

The first  two  reflect  a pragmatic  recognition  that  it is likely  to  be easier  to
identify  and  implement  potential  improvements  whose  value  can  be  dem-
onstrated  in  short-term  business  terms  as well  as  in  environmental  perform-
ance, and  that  a demonstration  of  the early  harvesting  of some  'low-hanging
fruit'  might encourage subsequent receptiveness to more ambitious  proposals.
The  other  areas  are  more  fundamental,  with  a  longer-term  significance,  rep-
resenting  both  occasional  point  decisions  which  can  influence  performance

•  Understanding  and  managing  environmental  costs
•  Introducing waste  minimization  schemes
•  Integrating  environment  into decisions with  long-term  implications on

capital  expenditure  and  product  development
•  Understanding  and  managing  life-cycle  costs
•  Involving  accountants  in a strategic  approach  to environmental  man-

agement  accounting  and  performance  evaluation

•  Encouraging  cross-fertilization  of knowledge and  ideas, through  train-
ing  and  organizational  processes,  between  environmental  man-
agement  and  management  accounting  functions
•  Linking data  beld  by different  business  functions

Figure 3  Environmental management accounting opportunities in business


Environmental  management  accounting  in Europe  49

over several subsequent years, and an opportunity  to influence  the evolution
of organizational cultures. The final point -  better integration  of the data of
different  business functions -  was an issue for several companies, particularly
since in practice much environmental management accounting is initiated and
carried out by people from outside the accounting function who do not always
have  easy  access  to  accounting  data,  or  are  even  aware  of  what  may  be
available.  Zeneca's  cost-of-waste  exercise,  for  example,  was carried  out  by
technical production specialists, largely on the basis of data that were available
from manufacturing process records; however, it became apparent during the
collection of material for the case study that the exercise could have benefited
from  access  to  standard  accounting  data  also. Non-accountants  frequently
recognized  the potential  attractions  of using accounting data -  not  only  the
economies in being able to re-use data which had originally been collected for
another  purpose,  but  also the  perceived  integrity  of data  collected  through
accounting systems with well-established internal checks and controls that are
frequently  absent from  other information  systems.

A more ambitious initiative, but one which is less likely in the immediate
future,  is the use of external costs and benefits in business planning. This can
be  used  as  an  indicator  of  environmental  impacts  and  possibly  also  as  a
predictor of future  internal costs, if environmental  legislation becomes more
stringent. The XYZ pic case study demonstrated a possible, if limited, role in
certain circumstances, and several interviewees were interested in the concept
and prepared to consider it. However, it was not clear how this concept could
be adopted and used in practice in a way that would be credible, which awaits
the development of suitable management techniques and tools.

Fortunately,  environmental  management  accounting  is  often  comp-
lementary to other current trends in business and accounting; as Bennett and
James  (1998b)  have  observed,  in  several  ways it  represents  the  application
of  many  current  developments  in  advanced  management  accounting  to  a
particular  area  of  business  management.  For  example,  environmental  cost
accounting  (as  a  subset  of  environmental  management  accounting)  can  be
seen  in part  as a specific  application  of  activity-based  costing (ABC) which
focuses  on  the  environment  as  a  key  cost  driver;  and  environmental  man-
agement accounting's emphasis on end-of-life costs, and on other costs which
are either downstream  or upstream  from  the organization  itself,  reflects  the
growing emphasis on product-life  costing in management accounting  gener-
ally. In  companies  where environmental  performance  is identified  as  a sig-
nificant  strategic variable, it can form  one of the perspectives in a 'balanced
scorecard' approach (Kaplan and Norton, 1996). Finally, environmental man-
agement accounting's emphasis on  future  threats and  opportunities  mirrors
the wider argument in management accounting that it should aim to become
more strategic and less focused on short-term controlling and reporting (John-
son and Kaplan,  1987); notwithstanding the widely recognized limitations of
conventional  investment  appraisal  techniques  in  dealing  with  uncertainty.


50  The European Accounting Review

long-term  strategic benefits  and  the evaluation  of investments  in  intangible
assets,  which  are  also  very  relevant  for  many  potential  investments  which
offer  to improve a company's environmental  performance.

However,  environmental  management  accounting  can  also involve going
beyond the conventional aims of management accounting. A central objective
is to  be a  significant  driver  of  action  through  demonstrating  the  long-term
financial  implications of sustainability and creating a vision of how this can
be achieved. In this respect, it has what McAuley et al.  (1997) have termed a
'narrative'  role  of  making  sense  of  a  complex  world,  as  well  as  a  'logico-
scientific' role of developing an accurate representation of reality.

NOTES

1  The  term  'accountant'  is  used  throughout  this  paper  for  simplicity;  however,  this
should  not  be taken  to indicate  that  this was necessarily  a  term  in interviewees' job
titles (alternatives such as 'financial  controller' were frequently  encountered)  or  that
they necessarily  held  formal  professional  accountacy  qualifications.

2  The name  'Ecomac' was originally adopted  as an  abbreviation  of  'eco-management
accounting',  the  term  initially  used  within  the  team  to  refer  to  the  area  of  study,
now  replaced  by  'environmental  management  accounting'.  The  full  results  of  the
project  are contained  in Bartolomeo  et al. (1999).

REFERENCES

Bailey, P. and  Soyka, P. (1996) 'Environmental  accounting -  making  it work  for  your

company'.  Total  Quality  Environmental  Management,  Summer:  13-30.

Bartolomeo,  M.,  Bennett, M.,  Bouma, J.,  Heydkamp,  P., James, P., de Walle, F.  and
Wolters, T. (1999) Eco-Management  Accounting.  Dordrecht,  Netherlands:  Kluwer.
Becksmann, T. (1996) The  Use of Environmental  Accounting  in German Industry  and its
Integration  into Existing  Management  Accounting  Systems.  Rotterdam, Netherlands:
Centre for  Environmental  Studies, Erasmus  University.

Bennett,  M.  and  James,  P.  (1997)  'Environmental  management  accounting:  current
practice and future  trends'. Greener Management  International,  Spring: 32-52. (Also
included  in Bennett  and  James  (eds.),  1998b.)

Bennett,  M.  and  James, P. (1998a) Environment  under the Spotlight:  Current  Practice
and Euture  Trends  in Environment-Related  Performance  Measurement  in  Business.
London:  Association  of Chartered  Certified  Accountants  (ACCA).

Bennett, M. and  James, P. (eds) (1998b)  The Green Bottom  Eine:  Current  Practice and

Euture  Trends in Environmental  Management  Accounting.  Sheffield:  Greenleaf

Bennett, M. and James, P. (1998c) 'Making environmental  management count:  Baxter
International's  environmental  financial  statement',  in  Bennett,  M.  and  James,  P.
(eds)  The Green Bottom  Line:  Current  Practice  and Euture  Trends in  Environmental
Management  Accounting.  Sheffield:  Greenleaf.

Bennett,  M.  and  James,  P. with  Klinkers,  L.  (eds) (1999)  Sustainable  Measures:  Eva-
luating and Reporting on Environmental  and Social Performance.  Sheffield:  Greenleaf.
Birkin, F. and Woodward,  D. (1997a-f)  Management  Accounting  (UK).  Series: Man-

agement  Accounting  for  Sustainable  Development:


Environmental  management  accounting 

in Europe 

51

(a)  December:  40-2.  'A  zero-base  approach  to  accounting  for  sustainable  devel-

opment'.

(b)  November:  52-4.  'Accounting  for  sustainable  development'.
(c)  October:  50-2. 'The eco-balance  account'.
(d)  September:  58-60. 'Stakeholder  analysis'.
(e)  July/August:  42-5. 'From  economic to ecological  efficiency'.
(f)  June: 24-6.  'Introduction'.

Bouma,  J.  (1998)  'Some  developments  of  environmental  management  accounting  in
the Netherlands', in Bennett, M. and James, P. (eds) The Green Bottom  Eine: Current
Practice  and  Euture  Trends  in  Environmental  Management  Accounting.  Sheffield:
Greenleaf

Bouma,  J.  and  Wolters,  T.  (1998)  Management  Accounting  and Environmental  Man-
agement:  A  Survey  among 84 European  Companies.  Zoetermeer,  Netherlands:  EIM
and  Erasmus  University.

Braakhuis, F., Gijtenbeek,  M. and Hafkamp, W. (1995) Milieumanagement:  van kosten

naar baten.  Alphen  aan  de Rijn,  Netherlands:  Samsom  H. D. Tjeenk  Willink.

Business in the Environment and  Environment Agency (1996) Profiting from  Pollution

Prevention:  The 3Es Methodology.  Leeds: Environment  Agency.

Cairncross,  F.  (1995)  Green Inc.:  A  Guide to Business  and  the  Environment.  London:

Earthscan.

CIMA  (1996)  Official  Terminology.  London:  Chartered  Institute  of  Management

Accountants.

Collison, D. (1996) 'The response of statutory  financial  auditors in the UK  to environ-
mental  issues: a descriptive  and  exploratory  case study', British  Accounting  Review,
28(4) December:  325-49.

Collison,  D.  and  Gray,  R.  (1997)  'Auditors'  responses  to  emerging  issues:  a  UK
perspective  on  the  statutory  financial  auditor  and  the  environment'.  International
Journal  of Auditing,  1(2) March:  135-49.

Collison, D., Gray,  R. and  Innes, J. (1996) The Einancial Auditor  and the  Environment.

London:  Institute  of Chartered  Accountants  in  England  and  Wales  (ICAEW).

DeSimone, D. and Popoff,  F. (1997) Eco-Efficiency  -  The Business Route  to Sustainable

Development.  Cambridge,  MA: MIT  Press.

Dieleman,  H., van  Berkel,  S.,  Brezet,  H.,  Cramer,  J.  and  Schot,  J.  (1991) Kiezen  voor
Preventie  is  Winnen: Naar  een Peventief  Milieubeleid  van Bedrijf  en  Overheid.  Den
Haag, Netherlands:  SDU.

Ditz,  D.,  Ranganathan,  J.  and  Banks,  D. (eds) (1995) Green Ledgers:  Case Studies  in
Corporate Environmental  Accounting.  Washington,  DC: World  Resources  Institute.
Drury,  C.  (1996)  Management  and  Cost  Accounting,  4th  edn.  London:  International

Thomson  Business Press.

Drury,  C,  Braund,  S.,  Osborne,  P.  and  Tayles,  M.  (1993)  A  Survey  of  Management
Accounting  Practice in UK Manufacturing  Companies. London: Association of Char-
tered  Certified  Accountants  (ACCA).

Environmental  Protection Agency (USA) (1997) Applying  Environmental Accounting  to
Electroplating  Operations:  An  In-Depth  Analysis.  Washington,  DC:  Environmental
Protection  Agency  (EPA  742-R-97-003).

Epstein,  M.  (1996)  Measuring  Corporate  Environmental  Performance,  Chicago,  IL:

Irwin.

Federation  des  Experts  Comptables  Europeens  (FEE)  (1996)  Expert  Statements  on
Environmental  Reports,  Research  Paper.  Brussels, Belgium: Federation  des  Experts
Comptables  Europeens.

Gray,  R., with  Bebbington, J. and  Walters, D. (1993) Accounting for  the  Environment.
London:  Paul  Chapman  and  Association  of  Chartered  Certified  Accountants
(ACCA).


52  The  European  Accounting  Review

Gray,  R.,  Owen,  D.  and  Adams,  C.  (1996)  Accounting  and Accountability  -  Changes
and Challenges in Corporate Social and Environmental  Reporting.  Hemel  Hempstead:
Prentice-Hall.

Gray,  R.,  Dey,  C,  Owen,  D.,  Evans,  R.  and  Zadek,  S.  (1997)  'Struggling  with  the
praxis  of  social  accounting:  stakeholders,  accountability,  audits  and  procedures'.
Accounting,  Auditing  and Accountability  Journal,  10(3): 325-64.

Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  in  England  and  Wales  (ICAEW)  (1996)  Environ-

mental  Issues in Einancial Reporting.  London:  ICAEW.

James,  P.,  Prehn,  M.  and  Steger,  U.  (1997)  Corporate  Environmental  Management  in

Britain  and Germany.  London:  Anglo-German  Foundation.

Jasch,  C. (1999) Eco-Balancing  in Austria:  Its  Use in SMEs  and for  Benchmarking,  in
Bennett, M. and  James, P. with Klinkers, L. (eds) Sustainable  Measures:  Evaluating
and Reporting  on Environmental  and Social Performance.  Sheffield:  Greenleaf.

Johnson,  H. and  Kaplan,  R.  (1987) Relevance  Lost:  The Rise and Eall of  Management

Accounting.  Boston,  MA: Harvard  Business School  Press.

Johnston,  N.  (1994)  Waste  Minimisation:  A  Route  to  Profit  and  Cleaner  Production.

London: Centre  for  Exploitation  of Science and  Technology.

Kaplan,  R.  and  Norton,  D.  (1996)  The  Balanced  Scorecard.  Boston,  MA:  Harvard

Business School  Press.

McAuley,  L.,  Russell,  G.  and  Sims,  J.  (1997)  'How  do  financial  directors  make

decisions?'. Management  Accounting,  November:  32-4.

McLaughlin,  S. and  Elwood,  H.  (1996) 'Environmental  accounting  and  EMSs',  Pol-

lution Prevention Review,  Spring:  13-21.

Mueller-Wenk,  R. (1978) Die Okologische  Buchhaltung.  Frankfurt  am  Main:  Campus

Verlag.

Owen, D. (ed.) (1992) Green Reporting:  Accountancy  and the Challenge of the  Nineties.

London:  Chapman  & Hall.

Owen,  D.,  Gray,  R.  and  Adams,  R.  (1997)  Corporate  Environmental  Disclosure:
Encouraging  Trends.  London:  Association  of  Chartered  Certified  Accountants
(ACCA).

Rauberger,  R.  and  Wagner,  B. (1999)  Eco-Balance  Analysis  as a  Managerial  Tool at
Kunert  AG,  in  Bennett,  M.  and  James,  P. with  Klinkers,  L.  (eds) Sustainable  Mea-
sures: Evaluating and Reporting  on Environmental  and Social Performance.  Sheffield:
Greenleaf.

Royal  Society  of Arts  (RSA) (1994)  Tomorrow's  Company.  London:  RSA.
Rubenstein,  D.  (1994)  Environmental  Accounting  for  ihe  Sustainable  Corporation:

Strategies  and  Techniques. Westport,  CT: Quorum  Books.

Schaltegger,  S. with  MuUer,  K.  and  Hindrichsen,  H.  (1996)  Corporate  Environmental

Accounting.  Chichester: John  Wiley.

Schmidheiny,  S.  and  Zorraquin,  F.  (1996)  Financing  Change:  The  Financial  Com-
munity,  Eco-Efficiency  and  Sustainable  Development.  Cambridge,  MA:  MIT  Press
with  the World  Business Council  for  Sustainable  Development.

Schoemaker,  P. and  Schoemaker,  J.  (1995) 'Estimating  environmental  hability:  quan-

tifying  the unknown',  California Management  Review,  37(3) Spring:  29-61.

Simmonds,  K.  (1991)  'Strategic  management  accounting'.  Management  Accounting

(UK),  April:  26-9.

Tuppen,  C.  (ed.)  (1996)  Environmental  Accounting  in  Industry:  A  Practical  Review.

London:  British  Telecom.

White,  A.  and  Savage,  D.  (1995)  'Budgeting  for  environmental  projects:  a  survey'.

Management  Accounting  (USA),  October:  48-54.

Wilson,  R.  (ed.) (1997) Strategic  Cost Management.  Aldershot:  Ashgate.
Wolters,  T.  and  Bouman,  M.  (eds)  (1995)  Milieu-investeringen  in  Bedrijfseconomisch

Perspectief.  Alphen  aan  de Rijn,  Netherlands:  Sansom  Bedrijsinformatie.


The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.
The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.

