Cornell University ILR School
DigitalCommons@ILR

ILR Collection

Articles and Chapters

5-2011

An Employment Systems Approach to Turnover:
HR Practices, Quits, Dismissals, and Performance
Rosemary Batt
Cornell University, rb41@comell.edu

Alexander Colvin
Cornell University ILR School, ajc22@cornell.edu

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/articles

Part of the Labor Relations Commons, and the Performance Management Commons

Thank you for downloading an article from DigitalCommons@ILR.
Support this valuable resource today!

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the ILR Collection at DigitalCommons@ILR. It has been accepted for inclusion in Articles
and Chapters by an authorized administrator of DigitalCommons@ILR. For more information, please contact hlmdigital@cornell.edu.


An Employment Systems Approach to Turnover: HR Practices, Quits,
Dismissals, and Performance

Abstract
This study examines the relationship between alternative approaches to employment systems and quits,
dismissals and customer service, based on cross-sectional and longitudinal data from nationally representative
surveys of call center establishments. Contrary to prior literature, the antecedents and consequences of quits
and dismissals are quite similar. Comparing three dimensions of employment systems, we find that high
involvement work organization and long-term investments and inducements are associated with significantly lower
quit and dismissal rates, while short term performance-enhancing expectations are related to significantly higher
quit and dismissal rates. Establishments with higher quit and dismissal rates have significantly lower customer
service, as reported by managers.

Keywords
employment systems, turnover, human resources, performance, call center

Disciplines
Human Resources Management | Labor Relations | Performance Management

Comments
Suggested Citation
Ball, R. & Colvin, A. J. S. (2011). An employment systems approach to turnover: HR practices, quits, dismissals,
and performance [Electronic version]. Retrieved [insert date], from Cornell University, ILR School site:
http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/articles/576

Required Publisher Statement
© Academy of Management. Final version published as: Ball, R. & Colvin, A. J. S. (2011). An employment
systems approach to turnover: Human resources practices, quits, dismissals, and performance. Academy of
Management Journal, 54(4), 695-717. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved.

This article is available at DigitalCommons@ILR: http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/articles/576


An Employment Systems Approach to Turnover: 

HR Practices, Quits, Dismissals, and Performance 

May 2011 

ROSEMARY BATT 

rb41@cornell.edu 

and 

ALEXANDER J. S. COLVIN 

ajc22@cornell.edu* 

*The authors are listed alphabetically to reflect  equal contribution to authorship. Rosemary Batt is 
the Alice H. Cook Professor  of Women and Work, and Alexander J.S. Colvin is associate professor,  both 
at Cornell University. The research is based on a multi-year study of call center operations conducted in 
collaboration with Harry C. Katz and Jeffrey  Keefe and generously funded by the Alfred P. Sloan 
Foundation. 

Copies of the computer programs used to generate the results in the paper may be obtained from the 

authors at the Industrial and Labor Relations School at Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853-3901, 607-
254-8206 (ph),  ajc22@cornell.edu. 


1 

AN EMPLOYMENT SYSTEMS APPROACH TO TURNOVER: 
HR PRACTICES, QUITS, DISMISSALS, AND PERFORMANCE 

Abstract 

This study examines the relationship between alternative approaches to employment 

systems and quits, dismissals and customer service, based on cross-sectional and longitudinal 

data from nationally representative surveys of call center establishments. Contrary to prior 

literature, the antecedents and consequences of quits and dismissals are quite similar. Comparing 

three dimensions of employment systems, we find that high involvement work organization and 

long-term investments and inducements are associated with significantly  lower quit and dismissal 

rates, while short term performance-enhancing  expectations are related to significantly  higher 

quit and dismissal rates. Establishments with higher quit and dismissal rates have  significantly 

lower customer service, as reported by managers. 


2 

INTRODUCTION 

Turnover is among the most important employment relations outcomes for both 

employees and organizations. Employees face the uncertainties of job search and potential 

unemployment. Organizations confront  uncertain costs and benefits: The costs of operational 

disruption and replacement of human capital versus the benefits of lower-cost labor, or  fresh 

skills to compete on innovation. These uncertainties raise the question of which  management 

practices increase turnover; how much turnover is harmful  or beneficial, and under what 

conditions and why? These questions have spawned a small, but growing set of organization 

level studies of the antecedents and consequences of turnover.  This research complements the 

large micro-organizational literature on how and why individuals choose to quit their jobs 

(Griffeth,  Hom, & Gaertner, 2000; Hom & Griffeth, 1995; Maertz & Campion 2004). 

However, research has largely focused on the issue of voluntary turnover, or total turnover 

more generally, neglecting involuntary turnover in the form of dismissals. Here, we define 

dismissals as employer decisions to fire individual employees, rather than decisions to cut costs 

through mass layoffs, downsizing, early retirement buyouts, or organizational restructuring.  The 

few existing studies of dismissals have conceptualized them as distinct from quits, with  different 

antecedents and consequences (Dalton & Todor 1979; Donaghue & Castle, 2006; Knight & 

Latreille, 2000; Shaw et al. 1998). While dismissals are viewed as the result of hiring errors, 

which employers may correct by terminating poor performers, quits are seen as a relatively 

rational process in which employees weigh their current job against alternative prospects. The 

literature often assumes that quits undermine performance because better performers are more 

likely to quit than poor performers, but theory and evidence are equivocal (McEvoy & Cascio, 

1987; Osterman, 1987; Trevor, Gerhart, & Boudreau, 1997). 


3 

This paper draws on an alternative perspective, internal labor market theory (Doeringer  & 

Piore 1971; Osterman, 1987), which focuses on how employers establish sets of internal 

administrative rules (e.g., HR practices or employment systems) to advance their goals.  Here, 

quits and dismissals are viewed as related phenomena with similar antecedents deriving from the 

type of employment system that employers choose. Employers may manage turnover levels via 

their choice of HR practices; and the optimal turnover level may vary by market, industry 

conditions (Abelson & Baysinger, 1984), business strategy, or values (Baron, Burton, & Hannan, 

1996). Cost-focused  firms, for example, may use high turnover to minimize labor costs.  Jack 

Welch at GE, by contrast, built a ‘performance culture’ through an explicit policy of dismissing 

10 percent of employees each year (Welch, 2005: 37-52). 

To investigate these alternative theories, we examine the relationship between quits and 

dismissals and three dimensions of the employment system: work organization, commitment-

inducing long term incentives, and performance-enhancing  short-term incentives. We also 

explore their relationship to customer satisfaction, an increasingly important outcome for  firm 

competitiveness (Fornell, Van Amburg, Morgeson, & Bryant, 2005; Lovelock & Wirtz, 2005). 

We draw on a 2003 national survey of US call centers, as well as longitudinal data for a subset of 

these establishments. Call centers are an appropriate context for this study because high rates of 

turnover are a major source of high costs and poor service quality. Despite off-shoring  trends, 

they also employ over 4 million workers in interactive voice services (3 percent of the US 

workforce), compared to less than 400,000 comparable employees in India and the Philippines 

(Batt, Holman, & Holtgrewe, 2009: 465). 


4 

THEORY AND HYPOTHESES 

The theory that quits and dismissals have distinct antecedents draws on the early work of 

Dalton and others, who distinguished between ‘functional’ turnover (where poor  performers 

leave) and ‘dysfunctional’ turnover (where high performers leave) (Dalton, Krackhardt, & Porter 

1981; Abelson & Baysinger, 1984). Dismissals are equated with functional turnover while quits 

are equated with dysfunctional turnover (Jacofsky, 1984; Sturman, Trevor, Boudreau, & Gerhart, 

2003). McElroy and colleagues, for example, argued that, “Dismissals are a function of poor 

individual performance or of insubordination….” (2001:1294). Shaw and colleagues noted that, 

“In an organization with high quit rates, for various reasons employees find it more attractive to 

leave than to stay. In an organization with high discharge rates, however, presumably incorrect 

hiring decisions are remedied through termination” (1998:512).  Of course, poor  performance 

also may be due to other factors than hiring errors – new production systems may render 

employee skills obsolete, employee motivation or commitment may change. 

The assumption that quits and dismissals have distinct antecedents is theoretically 

plausible, but has not been systematically tested, and existing studies show mixed results. 

Wanous, Stumpf, and Bedrosian (1979) found that job attitudes and performance  were 

significant  predictors of both types of turnover, but job attitudes explained more variance for 

quits, and performance  more variance for dismissals.  Organizational factors (job training and 

pay) accounted for the most variance for both types of turnover. Stumpf and Dawley (1981) 

found that absenteeism and job performance  significantly explained the incidence of both quits 

and dismissals, but absenteeism explained a higher proportion of variance in dismissals. 

Recent organization-level research also provides mixed results based on  industry-specific 

studies of trucking (Shaw et al. 1998) and nursing homes (Donaghue & Castle, 2006). Donaghue 


5 

and Castle (2006) found several differences  between quits and dismissals, but noted that “…most 

of the organizational characteristics held similar associations to voluntary and involuntary 

turnover….” (2006:467). Shaw and colleagues (1998) argued that  commitment-enhancing 

investments and inducements (higher pay, benefits, job stability, training) should lower quit 

rates, while performance-enhancing  HR practices (electronic monitoring, longer work hours) that 

raise the expectations of employee effort  and accountability should increase quits. By contrast, a 

third HR practice -- the staffing  system (selection procedures, performance appraisals) -- should 

only affect  dismissals.  While some of their predictions were confirmed,  the paper raised other 

questions.  Why should performance-enhancing  practices only affect  quit rates, when these 

practices should uncover weaknesses in poor performers, leading to their dismissal? Similarly, 

why should better selection procedures only affect  dismissals, when quit rates depend on getting 

the right ‘fit’ between the individual and the organization? 

Existing research, therefore, leaves many questions unanswered and suggests that other 

theories may help explain these relationships. Osterman, for example, argued that employers 

view turnover “…as a strategic variable – part of a larger set of personnel policies that the firm 

manipulates to achieve its ends…. In some models, the firm … explicitly considers and chooses 

the level of turnover along with other characteristics of the employment system” (1987: 289-90). 

Firms that choose to compete on service quality or customer loyalty may seek to keep turnover 

low, as research suggests that quality is higher where turnover is lower – due to employee 

motivation (Schlesinger & Heskitt, 1991) or to the firm-specific  skills and knowledge of 

customers that experienced workers have (Batt, 2002).  By contrast, a high turnover model may 

be acceptable or even desirable for cost-focused  firms if lower operational costs outweigh higher 

turnover costs.  In his classic defense of the production-line approach to services, Levitt (1972) 


6 

argued that efficiency  and profitability would be higher if service industries adopted more 

standardized work processes – processes that also create more monotonous, high turnover jobs 

(Schlesinger and Heskitt, 1991). Of course, not all firms think strategically about turnover; and 

many, particularly those facing weak competitive markets, may use ‘bad’ or unproductive 

management practices (Bloom & Van Reenen, 2007), which are likely to result in high turnover. 

In the sections below, we examine specific HR practices, and their theoretical relationship 

to quits, dismissals, and operational performance.  Theory is more well-developed for quits than 

for dismissals (Griffeth,  Hom, & Gaertner, 2000; Hom & Griffeth,  1995; Maertz & Campion 

2004).  Employees quit when they are dissatisfied  with HR practices and working conditions; 

and their quitting raises labor costs and disrupts operations. Employees are dismissed, by 

contrast, when HR policies allow employers to identify weak performers  or lead employees to 

perform badly, ultimately leading to their dismissal.  This may occur in two ways.  Some HR 

practices, such as performance  monitoring, provide information  that allows poor performers to 

be more accurately identified  and dismissed.  Other HR practices create more demanding or 

onerous work, leaving the less-able more exposed to discipline, and ultimately dismissal. 

We analyze three sets of HR practices, rather than HR practices taken as a coherent bundle, 

because prior research suggests that they have potentially different  effects  (Appelbaum, Bailey, 

Berg & Kalleberg, 2000; Batt et al., 2002; Shaw et al., 1998, 2009). Building on the work of 

Shaw and colleagues (1998, 2009), we examine investments and inducements (practices that 

invest in employees’ human capital and induce commitment), and  performance-enhancing 

expectations (practices that enhance performance expectations). We also examine the role of 

work organization because considerable research has demonstrated its substantial relationship to 

turnover and performance (Appelbaum et al., 2000; Batt, 2002; Wood et al., 2006). 


7 

Work Organization 

Variation in work organization has grown in recent decades as employers have used 

different  approaches to compete on price, quality, innovation, or time-to-market. Some 

organizations rely on Taylorized work design (individually-defined  jobs with low discretion), 

characteristic of mass production systems, while others have promoted employee involvement 

and group problem-solving and learning. The large job characteristics literature provides 

persuasive evidence that Taylorized jobs demotivate workers and lead to higher turnover (Dalton 

& Todor, 1979); while higher discretion jobs are more intrinsically meaningful (Hackman & 

Oldham, 1980), leading to higher satisfaction, commitment, and lower quits (Wood et al., 2006). 

Approaches to work design that combine employee discretion with group problem-

solving are often defined as ‘high involvement work organization’. Drawing on concepts from 

total quality management (TQM) (Deming, 1982) and socio-technical systems (STS) (Trist, 

1981), this approach assumes that employees need discretion at work in order to utilize their tacit 

knowledge to diagnose and solve operational problems. These literatures also assume that 

problem-solving is best achieved through group collaboration: Under TQM, quality circles that 

discuss problems ‘off-line’ (away from work stations); and under STS, work organized into ‘on 

line’ teams, with considerable operational autonomy. 

Although some argue that team-based systems are potentially onerous because peer 

monitoring and enforcement  of group norms may dominate individual discretion (Barker, 1999), 

even in Barker’s classic ethnography of self-managed  teams, employees preferred teams over the 

prior system of Taylorized work. In settings such as call centers, where work tasks are 

individualized and scripted, opportunities for greater discretion and group interaction have been 


8 

found to relieve boredom, stress, and social isolation, leading to lower absenteeism and turnover 

and better sales performance (Batt, 1999, 2002; Deery, Iverson, & Walsh, 2002). 

While theory and evidence provide reasonable support that high involvement work design 

reduces quit rates (Arthur, 1994; Batt, 2002; Huselid, 1995), the predictions for dismissals are 

less clear.  Dismissals may be higher than in Taylorized operations if those employees who have 

fewer skills or abilities are given more discretion, and they stand out as unable to perform; or if 

peer-monitoring exposes free-riders, leading to their discipline or dismissal (Barker, 1999). 

However, we believe that dismissals are likely to be higher in Taylorized systems because 

individual performance  may be more accurately monitored and poor performers cannot free ride 

in their workgroups.  In addition, high involvement systems provide a structure of  cooperation 

and mutual learning in which employees who run into problems can obtain help from co-

workers. In sum, high involvement work organization may ‘raise all boats’ and lower dismissals. 

A less generous argument yields a similar hypothesis. Where workers have greater control 

over the work process, as in high involvement work systems, they can sanction managers who 

engage in what they view as unjustified  disciplinary action (Klaas, Brown & Heneman, 1998) – 

yielding lower dismissal rates.  In sum, the existing literature yields the following  hypothesis: 

Hypothesis 1: Work organization practices that enhance employee discretion and group 

collaboration will be associated with lower quit rates and lower dismissal rates. 

Long-term Incentives: Investment and Inducement  Strategies 

The concept of investments and inducements draws on internal labor market theory which 

posits that higher relative pay, benefits, internal promotion opportunities, and procedures for 

employment security provide long-term incentives that lead employees to stay with the 

organization (Doeringer & Piore, 1971). Employers may seek low voluntary turnover to compete 


9 

on the basis of firm-specific  skills or a unique human resource base. The empirical evidence of a 

negative relationship between investments and inducements and voluntary turnover is growing, 

including organizational studies that measure bundles of high involvement work and 

commitment-enhancing practices (Arthur 1994; Huselid 1995), as well as those with separate 

measures of inducements and investments (Batt et al., 2002; Shaw et al., 1998). 

However, the theoretical relationship between these long-term incentives and dismissals is 

undeveloped. Dismissals may be higher in these systems if employers are unwilling to make 

costly investments in employees whom they perceive as less able to perform or to learn new 

tasks.  However, we believe that these incentives are more likely to motivate employees to avoid 

the types of behaviors that lead to dismissal. According to efficiency-wage  theory, employees of 

firms paying above market wages should engage in less shirking, thereby reducing disciplinary 

problems that lead to dismissal (Cappelli & Chauvin, 1991; Klaas, Brown & Heneman, 1998). 

Generous benefit  packages and internal career ladders should similarly engender this  effect. 

Firms that invest more in the workforce may be reluctant to dismiss workers with this 

accumulated human capital (Klaas, Brown & Heneman, 1998), unless the employee misbehavior 

is egregious. The unfolding  model of turnover also suggests that employee development  plays 

the role of maintaining skills and reducing the likelihood of precipitating events that lead to an 

employee’s leaving a job (Lee & Mitchell, 1994). Finally, employers who attempt to compete by 

building a culture of trust and the synergies of social capital (Leana & Van Buren III, 1999) may 

try to limit overall turnover as much as possible because it disrupts the social fabric of work. 

Empirical support for these arguments is mixed. Shaw and colleagues (2009) found that 

HRM inducements were negatively related to the quits of both ‘good’ and ‘poor’ performing 

employees, significant  for the former  in study 1 and the latter in study 2. Knight and Latrielle 


10 

(2000) argued that high commitment practices should be associated with lower dismissal rates, 

but they only found a negative relationship between dismissals and profit-sharing. In sum, the 

bulk of existing theory and evidence suggest that inducements and incentives should have the 

same relationship to quits and dismissals: 

Hypothesis 2: Employment practices emphasizing inducements and investments will be 

associated with lower quit rates and lower dismissal rates. 

Short-term Incentives: Performance-enhancing  Expectations 

The concept of performance-enhancing  expectations (Shaw et al., 1998; Tsui et al., 1997) 

has advanced the literature by identifying  distinct parts of the HR system that may  differentially 

affect  employee performance. Performance-enhancing  practices are short-term incentives 

designed to respond to immediate competitive pressures to improve performance. They may 

include behavior-oriented measures (electronic monitoring, performance appraisals) and 

outcome-oriented measures, such as pay linked to employee performance.  While theory suggests 

that they are often substitutes (outcome measures used for hard-to-monitor jobs), in fact, 

employers often view them as complementary.  Where good service is viewed as an antecedent 

to sales (Schlesinger & Heskitt, 1991), as in service and sales settings, electronic systems 

monitor the quality of service interactions while commission pay provides incentives for sales. 

In theory, more extensive use of performance  monitoring creates higher expectations and 

more onerous working conditions, leading to higher quit rates.  Employees typically view on 

going electronic monitoring as an invasion of privacy and an indication of lack of trust, leading 

even ‘good performers’ to be dissatisfied  and quit.  Empirical studies show that electronic 

monitoring is significantly  linked to higher job-related stress (Carayon, 1993; Deery et al., 2002; 

Holman, Chissick, & Totterdell, 2002), an antecedent to voluntary turnover (de Croon, Sluiter, 


11 

Blonk, Broersen & Frings-Dresen 2004), and higher quit rates (Batt et al., 2002; Shaw et al. 

1998; Wilson & Peel, 1991).  It also should lead to higher dismissals because it provides accurate 

information about performance, assuaging employer uncertainty about whether claims of poor 

performance are accurate (Klaas, Brown & Henemann, 1998). However, the only study of these 

relationships found a positive relationship between performance appraisals and dismissals, but 

none between monitoring and dismissals (Shaw et al., 1998). 

Performance-based  pay, by contrast, provides an outcome measure that sorts employees 

according to their ability to meet objective standards (Gerhart & Rynes 2003).  The predictions 

for the relationship between performance-based  pay and dismissals are consistent with our 

arguments regarding electronic monitoring.  Pay-for-performance  (in this case, commission-

based pay) provides clear, objective measures that allow employers to more accurately  identify 

poor performers and dismiss them. 

The predictions for overall quit rates are less straightforward.  They depend on the net 

effect  of four factors.  First, employees who perform poorly under these pay plans are likely to 

quit more, either because they find them onerous or because they anticipate being fired.  Second, 

employees who perform well under these plans are likely to quit less than they otherwise would 

because they earn more (Harrison, Virick, & William, 1996; Lazear, 1999).  One department 

store study found higher earnings for workers who received a base salary plus commission, 

rather than either a base salary alone or a commission alone (Patterson, 1992).  Third, employees 

who perform well under these plans may nonetheless quit because they experience greater job-

related stress – pressure to sell and to be ‘on’ all day in order to make their commissions. 

A fourth factor that affects  quit rates is the level of pay that is at risk and the level of risk 

aversion of the workforce.  Most research on pay-for-performance  has focused on pay that is not 


12 

at-risk (individual bonuses, merit pay, gain-sharing, profit-sharing  over and above an employees’ 

normal pay) (Gerhart & Rynes, 2003). Commission pay is pay-at-risk, making weekly wages 

variable and uncertain.  In addition, factors beyond workers’ control affect  their  commission 

levels: changing economic conditions, the product’s competitiveness, and variation in the 

customers that employees are assigned to serve.  While companies may try to adjust  the payout 

formula to improve the pay-for-performance  link, research shows that this is quite difficult  to do; 

and in uncertain market conditions when workers are more likely to be dissatisfied  with payouts, 

employers whose profit margins are uncertain may be reluctant to increase the generosity of 

commission pay formulas.  Thus, the impact of commission pay on quit rates is likely to depend 

on how risk averse workers are.  Risk aversion varies among individual workers, but research 

has documented two general patterns.  First, women have higher risk aversion than men (Byrnes, 

Miller, & Schaefer, 1999).  Second, workers with lower skill levels and wages have higher risk 

aversion (Caroli & García-Peñalosa, 2002).  Nadler and Wiswall (2009), for example, found that 

teacher support for a policy shift  from scheduled, fixed-pay increases to merit pay was higher in 

school districts that offered  higher base salaries and had a higher proportion of teachers with 

masters’ degrees (as opposed to bachelors’ degrees).  Even here, however, the teachers would 

only support merit pay if their current base salary was guaranteed – that is, no pay-at-risk. 

The workforce in the current study is predominantly female (on average 70 percent), does 

not have a college degree, and receives a relatively low wage – considerably lower than teachers. 

Assuming that a large proportion of these employees are risk averse, many are likely to prefer 

the certainty of a stable weekly income over a variable one, even if the variable pay plan offers a 

somewhat higher annual pay.  In this context, therefore, we believe that the net effect  of these 

four factors will yield a positive relationship between the use of commission pay and quit rates. 


13 

Hypothesis 3: Performance-enhancing  practices will be positively related to both quit rates 

and dismissal rates. 

HR Practices, Quits, Dismissals, and Performance 

Theory and evidence on the relationship between HR practices and organizational 

performance has expanded considerably in the last two decades, although questions remain 

unanswered. An exhaustive review of empirical studies concluded that, on average, high 

involvement work systems are associated with significantly higher operational  performance 

(Combs, Liu, Hall, & Ketchen, 2006); and some recent studies have linked HR practices 

specifically to better customer satisfaction (Liao & Chuang, 2004). While studies differ  in their 

approach to measurement, they typically include two dimensions examined here: high 

involvement work organization and commitment-enhancing  investments and inducements. In 

theory, organizations that make greater use of high involvement work organization should have 

higher performance because they provide employees with the discretion and opportunity to 

collaborate to solve problems effectively.  Commitment-enhancing  incentives motivate 

employees to use their skills and discretionary effort  to advance the interests of the organization. 

The concept of performance-enhancing  expectations has not been part of the high 

involvement literature. However, organizations that make more intensive use of these practices 

should, in theory, experience better performance  because these practices are designed to induce 

employees to meet immediate performance goals. 

Hypothesis 4a: High involvement work organization, investment and inducement practices, 

and performance-enhancing  expectations will each individually be associated with higher 

levels of operational performance. 


14 

Theory also predicts that the synergies from these three types of HR practices should be 

multiplicative, but some studies have found evidence of interactions (Huselid, 1995; Shaw et al., 

2009), while others have not (e.g. Cappelli and Neumark 2004). These mixed findings suggest 

that it is worthwhile to further  explore the synergies of these practices. 

Hypothesis 4b: The interactions of high involvement work, investment and inducement 

practices, and performance-enhancing  expectations will be associated with higher levels of 

operational performance than the simple additive effect  of these HR practices. 

Turnover and Performance 

The theory linking turnover and organizational performance  is more equivocal (Bluedorn 

1982; Osterman, 1987). The link depends in part on which workers leave, and who they are 

replaced by. While the literature has assumed that more able employees quit more often, those 

with valuable firm-specific  skills may stay, in part because their skills are less valuable 

externally. Studies finding that ‘better’ performers are more likely to quit (Wells & Muchinsky, 

1985; Tang & Frost, 1999) stack up against those that find the opposite (Martin, Price, & 

Mueller, 1981), while McEvoy and Cascio (1987) found a negative relationship between 

performance and both quits and dismissals, and Trevor and colleagues (1997) showed that high 

and low performers quit more than do average employees. The phenomenon also may be context 

specific. For example, Shaw and colleagues (2009) found that quits among good and poor 

performers in trucking were correlated at .58, but not at all in supermarkets. 

Similarly, while theory would argue that dismissing less able employees should improve 

performance, the only organizational study that differentiates  quits and dismissals found the 

opposite: Higher dismissal rates in bank branches negatively affected  customer satisfaction and 

cost per loan (McElroy, Morrow, & Rude, 2001). 


15 

Beyond this classic discussion about who quits or is dismissed, another line of argument 

focuses on the extent to which overall turnover – whatever its source – is dysfunctional  because 

it contributes to higher costs and operational disruption (Hausknecht, Trevor, and Howard, 2009; 

Watrous, Huffman,  & Pritchard, 2006). Regardless of whether an employee quits or is fired, 

recruitment and training costs are the same. Short-term productivity may be lower until the new 

employee becomes fully proficient  (Batt, 2002) and longer term performance depends on 

whether the new recruit is more able than the dismissed employee, which is not certain if the 

organization’s labor pool and selection procedures are unchanged (Hausknecht et al., 2009). 

High overall turnover may raise transactions costs by: Requiring higher  management-to-worker 

ratios; undermining workplace rules that form the basis of organizational control (Price, 1977); 

shifting resources and experienced workers away from daily work to train and socialize novices 

(Staw, 1980); disrupting the social fabric and bonds of trust and social capital that have been 

shown to positively affect  performance (Shaw, Duffy,  Johnson, & Lockhart, 2005); or lowering 

flexibility for internal redeployment or rotation across different  jobs or skill sets. 

In sum, the relationship between turnover and performance  is likely to be the complex 

result of multiple contingencies -- depending on the institutional, organizational, and market 

context of firms and on how performance  is measured. Despite theoretical ambiguities, however, 

the preponderance of evidence is that total turnover and voluntary turnover are both negatively 

related to operational performance, and specifically to service quality and customer  satisfaction 

(Kacmar, Andrews, Van Rooy, Steilberg, & Cerrone, 2006; McElroy et al., 2001). These 

arguments suggest the following  hypothesis: 

Hypothesis 5a: Quit and dismissal rates will be negatively related to operational  performance: 


16 

These theoretical  arguments  also suggest  that  whether  turnover  mediates  the  relationship 

between  HR  practices  and  performance  may  depend  upon  the  contingencies  discussed  above. 

Studies  finding  partial  mediation  for  voluntary  turnover  include  those  by  Huselid  (1995), Batt 

(2002), and  Way (2002). However,  if  indeed  quit  rates have  a  negative  effect  on  performance 

and dismissals have a positive effect,  as some have argued (Koys, 2001:111), then the mediating 

effect  may be insignificant. The literature, then, suggests the following  hypothesis: 

Hypothesis 5b: The HR – performance  relationship will be mediated by the additive effect  of 

quit rates and dismissal rates. 

METHODS 

Sample 

The data for this study come from a 1998 stratified  nationally-random survey of call 

centers in the telecommunications industry, based on the Dun and Bradstreet listing of 

establishments, and a 2003 nationally-random survey of call centers across all industries. 

Limiting the sample to organizations providing the same types of services enhances 

comparability and reduces extraneous sources of variation and measurement error (Becker & 

Gerhart, 1996: 792; Osterman, 1994). The longitudinal dataset includes telecommunications 

industry establishments surveyed in both 1998 and 2003; but due in part to the dot.com bust in 

the intervening period, only 40 percent of the 1998 sample was able to be identified  in 2003. A 

response rate of 68 percent for the matched cases yielded a longitudinal sample of 97 centers. 

Identifying  the 2003 population of call centers across industries was difficult  because there 

is no official data on call centers, and many are located within larger organizations. By contrast, 

as a large proportion of establishments in telecommunications are call centers, they could be 

easily identified  via initial screening. As a result, for 2003, we used the Call Center Magazine 


17 

subscription list, with over 60,000 subscribers. We pulled a random sample of subscribers who 

were listed as the general directors or managers of their centers, stratified  by the industry they 

served. After exclusions for missing data on the variables of interest, the 2003 sample is 339 

establishments (including those in the longitudinal sample), while the longitudinal sample is 93. 

Both the 1998 and 2003 telephone surveys were administered by a university-based  survey 

research institute to the senior manager at each center. It took 52 minutes on average in 1998 and 

45 minutes in 2003. Questions focused on call center agents, defined as the “core” workforce 

(Osterman, 1994). Given our large, nationally representative sample, it was not feasible to survey 

multiple respondents at each site. However, Gerhart, Wright, McMahan, and Snell (2000) note 

that establishment surveys are generally more reliable than corporate-level surveys as the 

workforce is much smaller, and the managers are generally knowledgeable about the HR 

practices they are responsible for implementing. The average size of the core workforce was 107 

in 1998 and 167 in 2003; the median size was 24 in 1998 and 73 in 2003. 

The 1998 and 2003 samples differed  in minor ways, reflecting the changes in the overall 

economy as well as differences  in the industries covered in the two periods. Mean quit rates were 

10.5 percent in the 1998 sample and 14.9 percent in the 2003 sample, while local unemployment 

rates averaged 4.6 and 5.4 percent respectively. Years of formal education averaged 13.6 years 

for the typical employee in 1998 and 13.4 years in 2003. Workforce size increased over time, 

reflecting the consolidation of operations into larger centers. Workforce size was also smaller in 

the longitudinal sample. More generally, it is important to recognize that there is an inherent 

selection bias in the longitudinal data in favor of establishments that continued to operate over 

this five-year  period, likely selecting out poorer performing  establishments. 


18 

Measures1 

Dependent variables. The four dependent variables provide indicators of quits, dismissals, 

total turnover, and customer satisfaction. The quit rate is the percentage of workers who quit 

voluntarily in the past year, while the dismissal rate is the percentage of workers who were 

dismissed. Total turnover is the percentage of workers who either quit or were dismissed in the 

past year. These measures exclude promotions, retirements, buy-outs, and lay-offs. Customer 

satisfaction is constructed from the mean of two standardized items (alpha= 0.59): the average 

level of customer satisfaction (1-5 scale); and the center’s customer satisfaction  level compared 

to other competitors (1-5 scale, with anchors “much lower” and “much higher”). This provides a 

measure of operational performance, rather than cost-adjusted  or financial performance. While 

this is a subjective measure, it is an important and widely discussed metric in this industry. 

Independent variables. We measured high involvement work organization by three 

variables: The extent of employee discretion; use of problem-solving groups; and use of self-

directed teams (see Batt, 2002). The discretion scale (MacDuffie,  1995; Batt, 2002) is the 

average of the extent to which employees have discretion (from none (1) to complete (5)) over 

operational issues, such as: daily tasks or assignments; tools or procedures; the pace or speed of 

work; setting daily lunch and break schedules; settling customer complaints without a supervisor 

(alpha = .77). Problem-solving groups is the percentage of workers involved in off-line  groups 

with supervisors to discuss work-related issues. Self-directed teams is the percentage of workers 

organized into on-line semi-autonomous teams. The high involvement work index is the mean of 

the standardized values of discretion, problem-solving groups, and self-directed teams. 

Detailed definitions of all variables are found in Appendix 1. 


19 

All three of our HR indexes (high involvement  work organization, investment and 

inducement practices, and performance enhancing practices) are additive -- conceptualized as 

composed of substitutable elements, which provide alternative means of achieving the same 

objective. We treat them as additive indices rather than as items in a scale representing an 

underlying latent variable – an approach well-established in the HR-Performance  literature 

(Appelbaum et al. 2000; Batt 2002; Shaw et al. 2009). 

Investment and inducement practices are a slightly modified version of Shaw et al.’s 

measure (1998; 2009), which captures the use of internal labor market practices (internal 

mobility opportunities, relative pay, pensions, and employment security). Internal mobility 

opportunities are measured by the percentage of the core workforce promoted to higher positions 

or transferred  within the larger organization. Transfers allow employees to move to jobs that 

provide experience for subsequent promotions or offer  preferable working conditions or 

locations. Relative pay is the average annual pay (in dollars) of the typical (median) core worker, 

relative to the median wage of customer service employees in the metropolitan area or county in 

which the establishment is located (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2001). This definition of pay 

measures the relative attractiveness of the current job compared to local alternatives, which is 

likely to influence turnover decisions. The pension variable is a dichotomous variable, which 

equals 1 if employees are covered by a defined  benefit  pension plan, a type of long-term deferred 

compensation benefit  used to tie employees to the firm. 

Employment security is the proportion of the workforce that is full-time and permanent, as 

opposed to contingent (part-time or temporary). While some argue that contingent workers may 

serve as a buffer  to protect full time workers, research shows that they are often used for  cost-

cutting (Houseman, 2001); and quit rates among core workers are higher in establishments 


20 

making greater use of contingent workers (Batt et al., 2002).  In these cases, firms send a signal 

to core employees that their jobs are insecure because future cost-cutting may lead to converting 

more core jobs to contingent positions. In addition, the availability of contingent workers as 

substitutes for core employees puts downward pressure on the wages of incumbent  employees 

(Katz and Krueger, 1999; Houseman, 2001), thereby unintentionally inducing higher quit rates 

among these employees. Combining these four measures, we constructed a standardized additive 

index of investments and inducements. The first three measures are also used in the Shaw et al. 

(2009) investments and inducements index. We add the fourth measure, internal mobility 

opportunities to capture the internal labor market theory based arguments that this is a key 

practice indicating long-term investments in and inducements for the workforce. 

Performance enhancing practices are measured by two commonly used practices in call 

centers: Monitoring intensity and individual commission pay. Monitoring intensity is the average 

of three questions: How often core employees receive statistics on performance; how often their 

calls are listened to by supervisors; and how often they get feedback on phone technique 

(frequency  scale of 1-8, where 1 = never and 8 = daily) (Alpha = .66). Commission pay is the 

percentage of annual earnings of the typical core worker that comes from  individual 

commissions (at risk pay). In this sample, 57.8 percent of establishments made no use of 

commission pay.  Of the remaining 42.2 percent of establishments that made some use of it, the 

mean percentage of total pay that was commission pay was 27.1%.  Overall, 11.2 percent of 

establishments had 1-9 percent of pay at risk; 15.6 percent had 10-25 percent at risk; 5.6 percent 

had 26-50 percent at risk; and 5.9 percent had >50-100% at risk. 

We standardized the monitoring and commission pay variables and constructed a 

standardized additive performance-enhancing practices index. Our approach is similar to that of 


21 

Shaw et al. (2009), who also used monitoring and performance-based  pay in their expectations-

enhancing practices index. 

Control variables. We included several variables to control for market, organizational, and 

workforce characteristics. The local unemployment rate controls for variation in labor market 

conditions: Higher unemployment rates or alternative job opportunities are negatively correlated 

with turnover (e.g., Carsten & Spector 1987; Gerhart 1990). We control for  industry 

(telecommunications versus others) as telecommunications is over-represented in the sample. 

Union coverage is a dichotomous variable (1=yes, 0=no), as a core workforce is legally defined 

as one bargaining unit, with complete union coverage or none at all. Controls for  ownership 

include whether the center is in-house (owned by a primary firm, 1 = yes) or outsourced (owned 

by a subcontractor). A series of dummy variables captures the primary segment served by the 

center: large business, small business, residential clients, or all segments (the omitted category). 

We control for workforce size, (of the core workforce), as larger establishments may have more 

turnover due to a more standardized work environment. We also control for the age of the 

establishment, as older establishments may have more stable employment systems; and whether 

it had recent layoffs (in the last year), as research has shown that downsizing may undermine 

employee commitment, leading to higher quit rates (Trevor & Nyberg, 2008). 

To control for the human capital and demographic characteristics that may influence 

employees’ relative ease of movement, we include: The percentage of the workforce that is 

female (percent  female); the average number of years of education of the typical worker at the 

site (average education) (Bretz, Boudreau, & Judge, 1994; Trevor 2001); and the number of 

weeks of initial training and on-the-job experience for workers to become fully qualified (initial 

training). These human capital controls are important to our argument because they help us to 


22 

identify the degree to which employment systems, rather just a higher quality workforce,  affect 

quits, dismissals, and performance. Two particularly important control variables capture 

selection practices, as selectivity is a major competing explanation for variation in quits and 

dismissals. We measure the selection ratio as the percentage of applicants hired by the 

establishment and systematic selection procedures as the proportion of the core workforce that 

has been selected using systematic selection tests (psychometric tests or aptitude tests). 

RESULTS 

Table 1 presents the means, standard deviations, and bi-variate correlations for the 

variables. The average annual quit rate in this sample is 14.9 percent, the dismissal rate is 9.8 

percent, and average total turnover is 24.7 percent (with a range of close to zero to over 100 

percent).  Note that the dismissal rate is much higher than prior studies of banking (5%, McEloy 

et al. 2001) or truckers (5.9%, Shaw et al. 1998), which may be partly due to the effectiveness of 

electronic monitoring in calling centers for identifying  poor performers. Table 2 presents the 

estimation equations for the first three dependent variables (quits, dismissals, and total turnover), 

using the cross-sectional sample. Table 3 replicates these equations, using the longitudinal 

sample, with lagged HR index variables from 1998 to estimate turnover outcomes in 2003. Table 

4 presents the equations for customer satisfaction, using the cross sectional sample. 

- Table 1 about here -

Beginning with the simple bi-variate correlations, we find a striking degree of similarity in 

the predicted HR factors for both quits and dismissals. The high involvement work index is 

associated with lower quits (r=-0.28*)2 and lower dismissals (r=-0.18*). The results are similar 

for the individual practices in this index, including worker discretion (r=-0.25* for quits and r=-

0.20* for dismissals), problem-solving groups (r=-0.23* for quits and r=-0.14* for dismissals) 


23 

and self-directed  teams (r=-0.12* for quits and r=-0.04 for dismissals). Similarly, the investments 

and inducements index is significantly associated with both lower quits (r=-0.33*) and lower 

dismissals (r=-0.25*). Individual practices comprising this index also have parallel results, as 

seen for internal promotion (r=-0.20* for quits and r=-0.22* for dismissals), relative pay (r=-

0.22* for quits and r=-0.09 for dismissals), pensions (r=-0.10 for quits and r=-0.20* for 

dismissals), and full-time and permanent workforce (r=-0.27* for quits and r=-0.11* for 

dismissals). The performance-enhancing  practices index is positively correlated with both quits 

(r=0.24*) and dismissals (r=0.22*), with parallel associations for the components of this index --

monitoring intensity (r=0.27* for quits and r=0.20* for dismissals) and commission pay (r=0.08 

for quits and r=0.11* for dismissals). Thus, for all of the HR indexes and individual practices, we 

find initial support for the hypotheses 1, 2, and 3, suggesting similar antecedents for quits and 

dismissals. To further  investigate these relationships, we now turn to our multivariate models. 

Multivariate Analyses 

- Table 2 about here – 

Estimation of multivariate models for our dependent variables requires accounting for the 

functional form of these variables, which are measured as rates, and therefore have a lower 

bound of zero (negative values are impossible). This produces a censored distribution, where 

only part of the normal distribution is observed. Ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates for 

censored distributions produce biased estimates. To produce consistent estimates of the 

parameters, it is necessary to use a Tobit model for the estimation (Long 1997: 187-9). 

We begin by estimating base models consisting of market, organizational, and  workforce 

controls as predictors of quits, dismissals, and total turnover (models 1a, 1b, and 1c in table 2). 

* Indicates significance at the p<.05 level. 


24 

Next we add the set of three HR indexes (models 2a, 2b, and 2c in table 2). Finally, we examine 

the interaction terms for the three HR indexes (model 3a, 3b, and 3c in table 2). 

Use of Tobit models in the estimation complicates the interpretation of effect  sizes: The 

Tobit coefficients  represent changes in the latent variable y*, rather than the censored variable y. 

For interpretation of effect  sizes, the Tobit coefficients  need to be multiplied by the appropriate 

conversion factors to produce the change in the observed censored variable y (Long 1997).3 For 

ease of interpretation, all effect  sizes for variables in our Tobit models are reported in the text 

and tables as marginal effects  in terms of percentage point changes in the observed dismissal, 

quit, and total turnover rates, calculated at the means of the variables. 

In the analyses, we found strong support for hypothesis 1: Organizations that make greater 

use of high-involvement work practices have significantly lower quit rates (p<.001, model 2a, 

table 2), lower dismissal rates (p<.05, model 2b, table 2), and lower total turnover (p<.001, 

model 2c, table 2). A one standard deviation increase (0.67) in the high-involvement index is 

associated with a 3.4 percentage point lower quit rate (0.67*-5.04), a 1.4 percentage point lower 

dismissal rate, and a 4.5 percentage point decrease in total turnover. 

We also found strong support for hypothesis 2: The investments and inducements index is 

significantly associated with lower quits (p<.05, model 2a, table 2), dismissals (p<.05, model 2b, 

table 2), and total turnover (p<.01, model 2c, table 2). A one standard deviation increase (0.63) in 

the investments and inducements index yields a 1.9 percentage point lower quit rate, a  1.5 

percentage point lower dismissal rate, and a 3.5 percentage point decrease in total turnover. 

3 For a tobit model with a lower limit, the formula for the total change in the observed variable y is F(z)ß, where ß is 
the unadjusted  tobit coefficient  and F(z) is the cumulative density function  for the probability of the observation 
being uncensored (Long 1997: 209). 


25 

Similarly, the performance-enhancing  incentives index has the same (positive) relationship 

with quits and dismissals (Table 2). Organizations that make greater use of  performance 

incentives have significantly higher quit rates (p<.001, model 2a), higher dismissal rates (p<.001, 

model 2b), and higher total turnover (p<.001, model 2c). A one standard deviation (0.65) 

increase in the performance-enhancing  index is associated with a 3.3 percentage point higher quit 

rate, a 2.0 percentage point higher dismissal rate, and a 5.2 percentage point increase in total 

turnover. 

In sum, for all three HR indexes, the relationships between the index and both quits 

and dismissals are highly significantly and in the same direction. 

We investigated the possibility of interactions between the different  HR indexes, which 

might indicate either complementarities or incompatibilities between these different  approaches 

to HR management. Among the two-way interactions, the only significant  result was for the 

interaction between the high involvement index and the performance-enhancing  index and quits 

(p<.05, model 2a, table 2).  The same interaction term for total turnover was marginally 

significant  (p<.10, model 2c, table 2). These results indicate that the combination of higher 

scores on both of these indexes were associated with higher quits and higher total turnover. A 

three-way interaction term was tested as well (in analysis not shown), but was not  significant. 

In addition to the findings for the employment systems variables, our results also indicate 

some interesting relationships between our control variables and both types of turnover. Notably, 

union representation is associated with significantly lower quit rates (p<.001, models 1a, table 2), 

dismissal rates (p<.05, model 1b, table 2), and total turnover (p<.001, model 1c, table 2). 

Compared to nonunion workplaces, the average union workplace has a 9 percentage point lower 

quit rate, a 4 percentage point lower dismissal rate, and a 13 percentage point lower total 

turnover rate. The association between union representation and lower quit rates supports 


26 

predictions from exit-voice theory that the union collective voice mechanism will reduce the use 

of the exit option of quitting in response to dissatisfaction  (Freeman, 1980). This theory may also 

explain the negative association between union representation and dismissals as the voice 

mechanism may allow employees to correct poor performance  before it leads to dismissal. 

Alternatively, it can be explained by just cause protections and effective  union grievance 

procedures, which reduce the ability of management to dismiss employees (Colvin 2003). 

Also of interest is that establishments in labor markets with higher unemployment  have 

significantly higher dismissal rates (p<.001, model 1b, table 2). Managers in these contexts may 

feel more latitude to dismiss under-performing  or marginal employees as the local labor market 

provides a ready supply of potential replacements. Among other controls, establishments that 

employ a higher educated workforce have significantly lower dismissal rates (p<.001, model 1a, 

table 2), perhaps reflecting better job performance by employees with higher education or 

managerial assumptions that more educated workers are more trainable. Also, as anticipated, 

selection practices are significant: Organizations with higher selection ratios (lower selectivity in 

hiring) have significantly  higher quits (p<.05, model 1a, table 2), higher dismissals (p<.01, 

model 1b, table 2), and higher total turnover (p<.01, model 1c, table 2). 

In a series of additional analyses (not shown) we explored the effects of other control 

variables.  These included measures of differences  in the types of services and sales that a center 

offers, as well as the level of competitiveness of the product market, which Bloom and Van 

Reenan (2006) show to be a powerful predictor of the adoption of good management practices. 

(Our competitiveness measure was whether the market was local/regional, national, or 

international in scope).  These controls were not significant  and did not change our findings. We 

also included a dummy variable in the longitudinal analyses for those establishments that had 


27 

switched to commission pay between the two time periods (11 percent of the sample).  We found 

no significant  effect  and the findings did not change, suggesting that quits are not entirely driven 

by lower performing employees who quit because of the introduction of a new system. 

- Table 3 about here – 

We now turn to the analysis of our longitudinal data, which enables us to examine whether 

the use of HR practices in one time period has an effect  on subsequent turnover. Turnover rates 

from our 2003 sample are regressed on lagged HR practice indexes from our 1998 sample. The 

five year lag period between the surveys in our study is longer than some other longitudinal 

studies. This has the disadvantage that if effects attenuate over time, it will be less likely that we 

will find significant  effects of our 1998 predictors on our 2003 outcomes. At the same time, the 

relatively longer lag period makes for a more conservative test of our hypotheses, increasing our 

confidence that any significant  effects we find are causal in nature. 

The results of the longitudinal analysis mirror those found in Table 2, but as expected, the 

significance  levels are lower given the much smaller sample size of 93 establishments. The 

lagged high involvement work index is associated with significantly  lower quits (p<.05, table 3), 

lower dismissals (though not significantly), and significantly  lower total turnover (p<.10, table 

3). The lagged performance-enhancing  index is associated with significantly  higher quits 

(p<.001, table 3), higher dismissals (p<.05, table 3), and higher total turnover (p<.001, table 3). 

The associations for the lagged investments and inducements index are negative, but not 

significant. Thus, the longitudinal analysis supports the results of the cross-sectional analysis for 

the effect  of performance-enhancing  practices, and partially supports the effect  of high 

involvement work practices. It is noteworthy that the longitudinal results provide some 


28 

consistent findings, given that we used a relatively conservative test involving a relatively long 

(five year) lag period and a considerably smaller sample size. 

- Table 4 about here – 

In Table 4, we present the results of our analysis of HR practices, turnover, and customer 

satisfaction. As in the analyses for turnover, we begin with a base model that includes only the 

control variables (model 1), then add the three HR indexes (model 2), and finally the interactions 

among the HR indexes (model 3). Our results show only partial support for hypothesis 4a: The 

high involvement index has a significant  positive association with customer satisfaction  (p<.01, 

model 2, table 4), but the other two indexes are not significant. A one standard deviation increase 

in the high-involvement  index is associated with a 0.20 standard deviation increase in customer 

satisfaction (model 2, table 4). Also, there are no significant  effects on customer satisfaction  for 

two-way interactions between the HR indexes (model 3, table 4) or for a three-way interaction 

(analysis not shown), so hypothesis 4b was not supported. 

In the next three sets of models in Table 4, we examine the relationship between customer 

satisfaction and quit rates (model 4), dismissal rates (model 5), and total turnover (model 6). We 

find that organizations with higher quit rates have significantly lower customer satisfaction  rates 

(p<.05); those with higher total turnover (quits and dismissals combined) have significantly 

lower customer satisfaction (p<.05).  The relationship between dismissals alone and customer 

satisfaction  is negative, but not significant. In terms of effect  sizes, a one standard deviation 

increase in total turnover (i.e. an increase of 24.2 percentage points in the rate of quits plus 

dismissals) is associated with a 0.12 standard deviation decrease in customer satisfaction.  These 

findings are consistent with hypothesis 5a, (which predicted that organizations with higher 

dismissals would have lower customer satisfaction). Model 6 also examines whether total 


29 

turnover mediates the relationship between the HR practices and customer satisfaction.  Recall 

that all three HR indices are significantly related to total turnover (Table 2), and only the high 

involvement work index is significantly related to customer satisfaction (Table 4, model 2). 

We find that total turnover partially mediates the relationship between high involvement 

work organization and customer satisfaction. Following the standard mediation test procedures 

(Baron & Kenny, 1986; Muller, Judd & Yzerbyt, 2005), the high involvement index was a 

significant  predictor of customer satisfaction  (step 1 of the mediation test, model 2, table 4) and a 

significant  predictor of total turnover (step 2, model 2c, table 2). When both the high 

involvement index and total turnover are included in the model, total turnover is a  significant 

predictor of customer satisfaction  (step3, model 6, table 4). When total turnover is included as a 

control (step 4), the coefficient  of the high involvement index on customer satisfaction  is smaller 

in absolute value (26.3=>23.8, models 2 and 6, table 4). Therefore, hypothesis 5b is supported 

for the high involvement work index, but not for the other HR indexes, which were not 

significantly related to customer  satisfaction. 

Additional Analyses 

Although we focus our analysis on our three employment systems indexes, as a check on 

the robustness of our findings we also estimated models using the individual practices that make 

up these indexes. These results are shown in Appendix 2 and provide additional confirmation of 

our general findings. The relationships for almost all of the individual practices are in the same 

direction as for the indexes (with the exception of relative pay) and a large number of them are 

significant, albeit given that practices in the same index are capturing similar effects it is 

unsurprising that there is loss of significance  for some variables in the full model. One notable 

finding is that both electronic monitoring and commission pay have significant  positive  effects 


30 

on quits, dismissals, and total turnover, which corresponds to our hypotheses and findings for the 

performance-enhancing  practice index. This provides some additional support for our argument 

that these two practices have similar effects and can be linked together. 

In separate analyses (not shown), we further  examined our assumption that the commission 

pay variable has a linear relationship to the outcomes of interest by creating a series of dummies 

for different  levels of pay at risk (none; 1-9%;  10-25%; 26-50%; 51-100%).  It could be, for 

example, that people who are less risk averse would self-select  into jobs with high levels of 

commission pay (over 50%) and quit less because they are rewarded with higher pay.  This was 

not the case.  Relative to no pay at risk (the largest group), each of the 3 groups representing the 

highest levels of pay at risk (10-25%; 26-50%; 51-100%) had significantly  higher quits, 

dismissals, and total turnover and the magnitude of the coefficients  for the groups increased as 

the level of pay at risk increased.  Even the first group representing the smallest amount of pay at 

risk (1-9%), which was not significant  for quits, did have significantly higher dismissals.  Thus 

our results suggest that commission pay does have a linear relationship with quits, dismissals, 

and total turnover. 

We also explored whether the turnover-performance  relationship takes on different  forms. 

Some researchers have called for analyses to provide a full empirical record of alternative 

possibilities, even when the theoretical arguments are ambiguous (Glebbeek and Bax (2004) 

argued that a curvilinear relationship should always be tested). The research record is mixed on 

whether the turnover-performance  relationship is linear, curvilinear, or contingent on other 

factors (Alexander et al., 1994; Kacmar et al., 2006; Shaw, Gupta, & Delery, 2005; Siebert & 

Zubanov, 2009). In analyses not shown, we added a squared term for turnover to the turnover-

performance equation and found no evidence of a curvilinear relationship. This is consistent with 


31 

a recent study by Siebert and Zubanov (2009), who found a negative linear relationship between 

turnover and performance  for core workers, but a curvilinear one for part-time workers who were 

a secondary workforce. As our study is of ‘core workers’, our findings of a negative linear 

relationship are consistent with this recent study. 

Some also have argued that turnover should moderate the HR-performance  relationship 

because turnover should be more costly for organizations that have invested more in the 

workforce. Again, the research record is mixed on this point (Arthur, 1994; Shaw et al., 2005b; 

Ton & Huckman, 2008). In analyses not shown, we included interaction terms between total 

turnover and each of the three HR indices. Among the three interaction terms, one reached a 

modest level of significance (p<.10): the interaction of turnover and the high involvement index 

was negatively related to customer satisfaction. This would suggest that the lower the total 

turnover rate, the stronger the effect  of the high-involvement work index on customer 

satisfaction. Put differently,  high turnover would appear to weaken the performance  enhancing 

effect  of the high-involvement system. At a relatively low total turnover rate of 12.6 percent (a 

one-half  standard deviation lower than the mean), an increase of one standard deviation in the 

high-involvement  index produces a 0.30 standard deviation increase in customer  satisfaction. 

Meanwhile, at a relatively high total turnover rate of 36.8 percent (corresponding to one-half 

standard deviation greater than the mean rate), the same increase of one standard deviation in the 

work organization index produces only a 0.13 standard deviation increase in customer 

satisfaction. Given the modest level of significance  for the interaction term, however, these 

findings should be interpreted with caution. 

DISCUSSION 


32 

In this study we took an employment systems approach to understanding how human 

resource practices affect  turnover and performance. We found that quits and dismissals have 

similar antecedents in HR practices.  First, employers that made greater use of high involvement 

work organization had significantly  lower quits, dismissals, and total turnover. Second, those that 

invested more in the workforce and offered  long term incentives (internal promotion 

opportunities, high relative pay, pensions, and full-time jobs) had significantly  lower quits, 

dismissals, and total turnover. Third, those workplaces featuring higher short-term  performance 

pressures (intensive performance monitoring and commission-based pay) had  significantly 

higher rates of quits, dismissals, and total turnover. Analyses using longitudinal data with lagged 

HR variables from time 1 predicting quits, dismissals, and total turnover at time 2 provided 

consistent evidence for these relationships. Since effects tend to attenuate over time, the use of a 

relatively long five year lag period provided a conservative test of our hypotheses and enhances 

the likelihood that the relationships we did find are causal in nature. Finally, employers who 

made greater use of high involvement work organization had significantly  higher customer 

satisfaction rates, while those with higher quits and higher total turnover had significantly  lower 

satisfaction rates. 

Whereas past research has generally theorized, and sometimes found, that quits and 

dismissals have distinct antecedents, we found the opposite to be true. The explanation we 

proposed is that employers view the level of turnover as a strategic variable that contributes to 

operational performance and they may achieve different  turnover levels via the use of HR 

practices. We argued that high involvement work organization may, in effect, raise all boats: 

Employees quit less because their involvement in operational decisions and problem-solving 

creates more engaging and satisfying  jobs; novices and poor performers benefit  from the 


33 

structure of learning and motivation created through team-based forms of work.  Similarly, 

drawing on logic of internal labor market theory, as well as efficiency  wage theory, we argued 

that high relative pay and long-term incentives motivate all employees to avoid shirking – the 

less proficient  as well as the more proficient  -- because their current job is far more desirable 

than the external alternatives. Finally, HR practices that enhance performance  expectations 

produce higher quits, as others have argued and found (Shaw et al., 1998), as well as higher 

dismissals, as the enhanced criteria expose employees who can’t keep up. 

Notably, our analyses controlled for alternative explanations related to the human capital 

level of the workforce and the selectivity of hiring practices. In particular, although we found 

that having a highly educated workforce and hiring a relatively small proportion of applicants are 

both associated with better performance, high involvement work practices were associated with 

higher levels of customer satisfaction even when we took into account these human capital 

related factors. 

Similarly, the turnover-performance  literature generally has theorized that quits and 

dismissals should have opposite effects on performance, but the slim empirical evidence that 

exists does not support this theory.  Our study contributes positive evidence that the combined 

level of quits and dismissals is significantly  negatively related to customer satisfaction. This 

finding is consistent with the argument we made that quits and dismissals both contribute to 

operational disruption, which incurs the costs of replacing lost employees and undermines stable 

social relationships that provide the basis for workplace trust and collaboration, or social capital 

(Leana & Van Buren III, 1999). 

To make sense of our findings, it may also be useful to put them in the context of the call 

center sector, as we have argued that we believe the dynamics of turnover are highly  influenced 


34 

by the context in which organizations operate. While call centers have a widespread reputation of 

being ‘electronic sweatshops’, employing low-skilled workers with little attachment to the labor 

force, in fact we observed a considerable range of variation in business and HR strategies and 

turnover in the centers we visited.  This variation is evident in the descriptive statistics in this 

study.  The average call center in 2003 offered  annual wages of $33,794, with a standard 

deviation of $17,292. The telecommunications and banking industries, which are lead users of 

call centers and represent a large proportion of establishments in this study, have deep legacies of 

internal labor market practices that have not been entirely eroded.  Call centers in the 

telecommunications sector continue to have high unionization rates (33 percent among call 

center workers), with particularly low quits, dismissals, and overall turnover. 

While we cannot empirically link our analysis to the business strategies of companies, our 

analysis may be picking up differentiation  in employment systems and turnover related to 

differences  in the competitive choices that establishments are making. Centers competing on 

customer loyalty may emphasize low turnover in order to provide high quality, stable, on-going 

services to customers. They are likely to invest in high involvement work organization and long-

term incentives and downplay monitoring and commission pay because the value proposition is 

based on long-term customer relationships, not on the quick sell. Other call centers compete on 

high volume, low-cost interactions, leading them to emphasize a Taylorized approach to work 

design in which the estimated costs of turnover are low because low-skilled labor is viewed as 

replaceable.  In our study, high total turnover was associated with lower customer satisfaction  – 

but this outcome may not be as important to those centers that compete primarily on low costs. 

To the extent that these establishments compete on short-term sales, the intensification of short-

term performance expectations may be particularly  beneficial. 


35 

This explanation dovetails with the findings of a recent study of retail, a similar context to 

call centers, by Sierbert and Zubanov (2009). They differentiated  between high commitment and 

secondary work systems within the same organization and showed that turnover in the secondary 

system was positive for performance at low levels, but eventually turned negative. Similarly, our 

findings may be driven by two types of systems operating in different  establishments – a high 

commitment system with low overall turnover, focused on quality and customer loyalty, and a 

secondary system with high turnover in centers competing primarily on costs. 

There are several limitations to this study. The findings from the call center sector may not 

generalize to industries with different  product and labor market conditions, technologies, skill 

requirements and work organization.  Future research could valuably extend the current analysis 

to other industries and occupational groups. This study took an organization-level approach, but 

future research would benefit  from multi-level analyses linking the individual and the workplace. 

A multi-level approach would also help sort out issues of causality, which we could only 

address to a limited degree through our lagged model for the longitudinal data. We used a 

relatively long five-year  lag period, which increases the likelihood that effects are not due to 

simple correlations of variables over short periods of time, but increases the problem that the 

actual causal effects  will become attenuated with time and hence less observable. This raises a 

larger question, which has not been adequately theorized in the literature, regarding what should 

be the appropriate time lag for testing a causal model of the relationship between HR practices 

and outcomes; and of course, this question will also depend on which HR practices and what 

types of outcomes.  For studies of turnover, how long does it take for an employee to become 

dissatisfied  with an employment system and quit?  An ideal research design would track 

individual employees over time and conduct periodic surveys of stayers and leavers, which could 


36 

be aggregated to the organizational level. This approach would also go beyond an analysis of 

aggregate separation rates to include a more fine-grained  study of how quits and dismissals  affect 

the overall capacity of the organization to function  and why. Another area for future research is 

to examine whether there is variation in the types of workers quitting or being dismissed under 

different  types of employment systems. Future research, particularly if it combined 

organizational and individual level data, could examine the characteristics of the workers 

involved in turnover and see how this affects organizational outcomes. 

Finally, a general limitation of this study is that the data are based on reports from  the 

general manager at each establishment, so we are unable to check for inter-rater reliability. 

However, the typical establishment in this study was small, and our measures are mostly based 

on objective information within the ready knowledge of respondents, which was investigated in 

fieldwork  prior to the survey. Also, for this nationally-representative sample of establishments, 

we could not gather objective performance data, rendering our performance models only 

suggestive. However, our approach compares favorably to the other studies of voluntary and 

involuntary turnover that have been published to date – which rely on cross-sectional data and 

single establishment respondents (Donaghue and Castle, 2006; Shaw et al., 2005b, study 1). 

CONCLUSION 

Our study advances the past literature in two main areas. First, contrary to past research in 

this area, we found strong similarities in the antecedents of both quits and dismissals, suggesting 

that they are influenced  by common processes relating to the type of employment system that 

exists in each workplace. Second, we found that quits and dismissals combined are  significantly 

negatively related to customer  satisfaction. 


37 

We want to emphasize that we are not challenging the notion that the dynamics of quits and 

dismissals may be different  when we examine individual-level behavior or other industry 

contexts. And clearly, the dismissal of individual employees for poor performance may improve 

organizational performance  if they are replaced by more capable individuals. Rather we are 

arguing that at the organizational level, the dynamics of quits and dismissals, and their 

antecedents and consequences, are contingent on many factors. This study presents a plausible 

theory and suggestive evidence that the relationship between HR practices, quits, and dismissals 

may function  in similar ways in some circumstances. An employment systems lens shifts the unit 

of analysis to the organization and considers the ways in which employers may view overall 

turnover as part of the HR system – a set of tools to manage not only performance but headcount 

levels. The idea that employers search for ‘the optimal level of turnover’ (Siebert & Zubanov 

2009) is an emerging idea, worthy of further  investigation. Thus, we believe that the  different 

results that we have found provide the basis for future research that may examine these 

relationships with more precision and rigor and with other industries, occupations, and 

organizational contexts. 


38 

REFERENCES 

Abelson, M. & Baysinger, B. 1984. Optimal and dysfunctional  turnover: Toward an 
organizational level model. Academy of Management Review, 9(2): 331-341. 

Alexander, J. A., Bloom, J. R., & Nuchols, B. A. 1994. Nursing turnover and hospital  efficiency: 
An organization-level analysis. Industrial Relations, 33: 505-520. 

Appelbaum, E., Bailey, T., Berg, P., & Kalleberg, A. 2000. Manufacturing advantage. Ithaca, 
NY: ILR Press, an imprint of Cornell University Press. 

Arthur, J. 1994. Effects of human resource systems on manufacturing  performance and turnover. 
Academy of Management Journal, 37(3): 670–87. 

Barker, J. R. 1999. The discipline of teamwork: Participation and concertive control. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Baron, J. N. & Burton, M. D. & Hannan, M. T. 1996. The road taken: The origins and evolution 
of employment systems in high-tech firms. Industrial and Corporate Change, 5(2): 239-75. 

Baron, R. & Kenney, D. 1986. The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psychology 
research. J. Personality Soc. Psych., 51: 1173-1182. 

Batt, R. 1999. Work organization, technology, and performance in customer service and sales. 
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 52(4):539-564. 

Batt, R. 2002. Managing customer services: Human resource practices, quit rates, and sales 
growth, Academy of Management Journal, 45(3): 587-97. 

Batt, R., Colvin, A. J. S., & Keefe, J. 2002. Employee voice, human resource practices, and quit 
rates: Evidence from the telecommunications industry. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 
55(4): 573-94. 

Batt, R., Holman, D., & Holtgrewe, U. 2009.  The globalization of service work: Comparative 
institutional perspectives on call centers.  Introduction to a Special Issue of Industrial and Labor 
Relations Review 62(4):453-88. 

Becker, B., & Gerhart, B. 1996. Special research forum: Human resource management and 
organizational performance. Academy of Management Journal, 39(4): 777-985. 

Bloom, N., & Van Reenen, J.  2007.  Measuring and explaining management practices across 
firms and countries. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4):1351-1408. 

Bluedorn, A. 1982. The theories of turnover: Causes, effects, meanings. In S. Bacharach, (Ed.), 
Research in the Sociology of Organizations. (pp. 75-128). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press. 


39 

Bretz, R. D., Boudreau, J. W., & Judge, T. A. 1994. Job search behavior of employed managers. 
Personnel Psychology, 47(2): 275-301. 

Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). 2001. Occupational Employment Statistics  Survey. 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Labor. http:/stat.bls.gov/oes/home.htm. Accessed on 
10/3/2009. 

Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). 2003. Local Area Unemployment Statistics. Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Department of Labor. http://stats.bls.gov/lau/. Accessed on 10/3/2009. 

Byrnes, J. P., Miller, D. C., & Schaefer, W. D. 1999. Gender differences  in risk taking: A meta-
analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 125: 367-383. 

Cappelli, P., and Chauvin, K. 1991. An interplant test of the efficiency  wage hypothesis. 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106: 769-94. 

Cappelli, P. & Neumark, D. 2004. External churning and internal flexibility: Evidence on the 
functional flexibility and core-periphery hypotheses. Industrial Relations, 43(1): 148:82. 

Carayon, P. 1993. Effect  of electronic performance  monitoring on job design and worker stress -
review of the literature and conceptual-model, Human Factors, 35(3):385-95. 

Caroli, E. & García-Peñalosa, C.  2002.  Risk aversion and rising wage inequality. Economics 
Letters, 77(1): 21-26. 

Carsten, J. M., & Spector, P. E. 1987. Unemployment, job satisfaction and employee turnover: A 
metanalytic test of the Muchinsky model. Journal of Applied Psychology, 72(3): 75-80. 

Colvin, A. J. S. 2003. The dual transformation of workplace dispute resolution. Industrial 
Relations, 42(4): 712-735. 

Combs, J., Liu, Y., Hall, A., & Ketchen, D. 2006. How much do high-performance  work 
practices matter? A meta analysis of their effects on organizational performance. Personnel 
Psychology, 59(3): 501-28. 

de Croon, E. M., Sluiter, J. K., Blonk, R. W. B., Broersen, J. P. J. & Frings-Dresen, M. H. W. 
2004. Stressful work, psychological job strain, and turnover: A 2-year prospective cohort study 
of truck drivers. Journal of Applied Psychology 89(3): 442-34. 

Dalton, D. R., Krackhardt, D. M., & Porter, L. W. 1981. Functional turnover: An empirical 
assessment. Journal of Applied Psychology, 66(6): 716-721. 

Dalton, D. R., & Todor, W. D. 1979. Turnover turned over: An expanded and positive 
perspective. Academy of Management Review, 4: 225-35. 


40 

Deery, S., Iverson, R. D., & Walsh, J. 2002. Work relationships in telephone call centers: 
Understanding emotional exhaustion and employee withdrawal, Journal of Management 
Studies, 39(4): 471-97. 

Deming, W. E. 1982. Out of the crisis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

Donaghue, C., and Castle, N. G. 2006. Voluntary and involuntary nursing home staff  turnover. 
Research on Aging, 28:454-72. 

Doeringer, P., & Piore, M. 1971. Internal labor markets and manpower analysis. Lexington, 
Mass.: Heath and Co. 

Freeman, R. 1980. The Exit-Voice Tradeoff  in the Labor Market: Unionism, Job Tenure, Quits, 
and Separations. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 94(3):643- 73. 

Fornell, C., Van Amburg, D., Morgeson, F. & Bryant, B. 2005.  The American customer 
satisfaction index at ten years, ACSI 1994-2004 : A summary of findings: implications for the 
economy, stock returns and management.  Ann Arbor, MI: National Quality Research Center, 
Ross School of Business, U. of Michigan. 

Gerhart, B. A. 1990. Voluntary turnover and alternative job opportunities. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 75(5): 467-476. 

Gerhart, B. A., & Rynes, S. 2003. Compensation: Theory, evidence and strategic  implications. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Gerhart, B., Wright, P. M., McMahan, G. C., & Snell, S. A. 2000. Measurement error in research 
on the human resources and firm performance relationship: How much error is there and how 
does it influence effect  size estimates? Personnel Psychology, 53(4): 803-34. 

Glebbeek, A. C., & Bax, E. H. 2004. Is high employee turnover really harmful? An empirical test 
using company records. Academy of Management Journal, 47: 277-286. 

Griffeth,  R. W., Hom, P. W., & Gaertner, S. 2000. A meta-analysis of antecedents and 
consequences of employee turnover: Update, moderator tests, and research implications for the 
next millennium. Journal of Management, 26: 463-88. 

Hackman, J. R. & Oldham, G. R. 1980. Work Redesign. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 

Harrison, D. A., Virick, M., & William, S. 1996. Working without a net: Time, performance, and 
turnover under maximally contingent rewards. Journal of Applied Psychology 81(4): 331-45. 

Hausknecht, J. P., Trevor, C. O., & Howard, M. J. 2009. Unit-level voluntary turnover rates and 
customer service quality: Implications of group cohesiveness, newcomer concentration, and size. 
Journal of Applied Psychology:  1-8. 


41 

Holman, D., Chissick, C., & Totterdell, P. 2002. The effects of performance  monitoring on 
emotional labour and well-being in call centres. Motivation and Emotion, 26(1): 57-81. 

Hom, P. W., & Griffeth, R. W. 1995. Employee turnover. Cincinnati: South-Western College 
Publishing. 

Houseman, S. 2001. Why Employers Use Flexible Staffing  Arrangements: Evidence from an 
Establishment Survey.  Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 55(1): 149–70. 

Huselid, M. A. 1995. The impact of human resource management practices on turnover, 
productivity, and corporate financial performance. Academy of Management Journal, 38: 635-
72. 

Jacofsky, E. F. 1984. Turnover and job performance: An integrated process model. Academy of 
Management Review, 9: 74-83. 

Kacmar, K. M., Andrews, M. C., Van Rooy, D. L., Steilberg, R. C., & Cerrone, S. (2006). Sure, 
everyone can be replaced…but at what cost? Turnover as a predictor of unit-level performance. 
Academy of Management Journal, 49: 133-44. 

Klaas, B. S., Brown, M., & Heneman III, H. G. 1998. The determinants of organizations’ usage 
of employee dismissal: Evidence from Australia. Journal of Labor Research 19(1): 149-64. 

Knight, K. G., & Latreille, P. L. 2000. Discipline, dismissals and complaints to employment 
tribunals. British Journal of Industrial Relations, 38(4): 533-55. 

Koys, D. J. 2001. The effects of employee satisfaction, organizational citizenship behavior, and 
turnover on organizational effectiveness: A unit-level, longitudinal study. Personnel  Psychology, 
54, 101-114. 

Lazear, E. P.  1999.  Personnel economics: Past lessons and future directions.  Journal of Labor 
Economics, 17: 199-236. 

Leana, C. R. & Van Buren III, H.J. 1999. Organizational social capital and employment 
practices. Academy of Management Review, 24(3): 538-555. 

Lee, T. W. & Mitchell, T. R. 1994. An alternative approach: The unfolding model of voluntary 
employee turnover. Academy of Management Review, 19(1):51-89. 

Levitt, T.  1972.  “Production line approach to services.”  Harvard Business Review.  50(5):41-
50. 

Liao, H., & Chuang, A. 2004.  A multilevel investigation of factors influencing employee service 
performance and customer outcomes. Academy of Management Journal, 47: 41–58. 


42 

Long, J. 1997. Regression models for categorical and limited dependent variables. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Lovelock, C. & Wirtz, J.  2005.  Services Marketing: People, Technology, and Strategy, 5th 
edition.  Upper Saddle River, NJ.  Pearson Prentice Hall. 

MacDuffie, J. P. 1995. Human resource bundles and manufacturing  performance: Organizational 
logic and flexible production systems in the world auto industry. Industrial and Labor Relations 
Review, 48(2): 197-221. 

Maertz, C. P., and Campion, M. A. 2004. Profiles in quitting: Integrating process and content 
turnover theory. Academy of Management Journal, 47: 566-82. 

Martin, T. N., Price, J. L., Mueller, C. W. 1981. Job performance and turnover. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 66(1): 116-19. 

McElroy, J. C., Morrow, P. C., & Rude, S. N. 2001. Turnover and organizational performance: A 
comparative analysis of the effect  of voluntary, involuntary and reduction-in-force  turnover. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(6): 1294-99. 

McEvoy, G. M. & Cascio, W. F. 1987. Do good or poor performers leave? A meta-analysis of 
the relationship between performance and turnover. Academy of Management Journal, 30(4): 
744-62. 

Muller, D., Judd, C. M., & Yzerbyt, V. Y. 2005. When moderation is mediated and mediation is 
moderated. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89(6): 852-863. 

Nadler, C., & M. Wiswall.  2009.  Risk aversion and Support for merit pay: Theory and 
evidence from Minnesota’s Q Comp Program. NYU Institute for Education and Social Policy, 
Working Paper #09-05.  http://steinhardt.nyu.edu/iesp/featured/6 

Osterman, P. 1987. Turnover, employment security, and the performance of the firm. In M.M. 
Kleiner et al. (Eds.), Human resources and the performance of the firm. Madison, WI: 
Industrial Relations Research Association, pp. 275-316. 

Osterman P. 1994. How common is workplace transformation and who adopts it? Industrial and 
Labor Relations Review, 47: 173-88. 

Price, J. L. 1977. The study of turnover. Ames: Iowa State University Press. 

Schlesinger, L., & Heskett, J. 1991.  Breaking the cycle of failure in services. Sloan 
Management Review 32(Spring):17-28 

Shaw, J., Delery, J., Jenkins, G. D., Jr., & Gupta, N. 1998. An organization-level analysis of 
voluntary and involuntary turnover. Academy of Management Journal, 39(5): 1-15. 


43 

Shaw, J. D., Duffy,  M. K., Johnson, J. L., & Lockhart, D. E. 2005a. Turnover, social capital 
losses, and performance. Academy of Management Journal, 48: 594-606. 

Shaw, J. D., Gupta, N., & Delery, J. E. 2005b. Alternative conceptualizations of the relationship 
between voluntary turnover and organizational performance. Academy of Management Journal, 
48: 50-68. 

Shaw, J. D., Dineen, B. R., Fang, R., & Vellella, R. 2009. Employee-organization exchange 
relationships, HRM practices, and quit rates of good and poor performers. Academy of 
Management Journal. Forthcoming. 

Siebert, W. S., & Zubanov, N. 2009. Searching for the optimal level of employee turnover: A 
study of a large U.K. retail organization. Academy of Management Journal, 52(2): 294–313. 

Staw, B. M. 1980. The consequences of turnover. Journal of Occupational Behavior, 1: 253-
273. 

Sturman, M. C., Trevor, C. O., Boudreau, J., & Gerhart, B.  2003. Is it worth it to win the talent 
war? Using turnover research to evaluate the utility of performance-based  pay. Personnel 
Psychology, 56: 997-1035. 

Tang, T. L. & Frost, A. G. 1999. Employee turnover revisited: Differences  among involuntary 
turnover, voluntary turnover, and current employees. Journal of Compensation and Benefits, 1: 
41-46. 

Ton, Z. & Huckman, R. S. 2008. Managing the impact of employee turnover on performance: 
The role of process conformance. Organization Science, 19(1): 56-68 

Trevor, C. O. 2001. Interactions among actual ease-of-movement  determinants and job 
satisfaction  in the prediction of voluntary turnover. Academy of Management  Journal¸44(4): 
621-638. 

Trevor, C. O., Gerhart, B., & Boudreau, J. 1997. Voluntary turnover and job performance: 
Curvilinearity and the moderating influences of salary growth and promotions. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 82: 44-61. 

Trevor, C. O., & Nyberg, A. J. 2008. “Keeping your headcount when all about you are losing 
theirs: Downsizing, voluntary turnover rates, and the moderating role of HR practices. Academy 
of Management Journal, 51(2):259–276. 

Trist, E. 1981. The sociotechnical perspective: The evolution of sociotechnical systems as a 
conceptual framework  and as an action research program. In Perspectives on Organization 
Design and Behavior, Van de Ven, A. & Joyce, W., eds., 19-75. New York: Wiley. 


44 

Tsui, A. S., Pearce, J. L., Porter, L.W., & Tripoli, A. M. 1997. Alternative approaches to the 
employee-organization relationship: Does investment in employees pay off? Academy of 
Management Journal, 40: 1089-121. 

Wanous, J. P., Stumpf, S. A., & Bedrosian, H. 1979. Job survival of new employees. Personnel 
Psychology, 32(4): 651-662. 

Watrous, K. M., Huffman,  A. H., & Pritchard, R. D. 2006. When coworkers and managers quit: 
The effects  of turnover and shared values on performance. Journal of Business and  Psychology, 
21(1): 103-126. 

Way, S. 2002. High performance work systems and intermediate indicators of firm  performance 
within the U.S. small business sector. Journal of Management, 28:765-85. 

Welch, J., with Welch, S. 2005. Winning: The ultimate business how to book. N.Y., N.Y: 
HarperCollins Publishers. 

Wells, D. L., & Muchnisky, P. M. 1985. Performance antecedents of voluntary and involuntary 
managerial turnover. Journal of Applied Psychology, 70(2): 329-336. 

Wilson, N., & Peel, M. J. 1991. The impact on absenteeism and quits of profit-sharing  and other 
forms of employee participation. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 44(3): 454–68. 

Wood, S., Holman, D., & Stride, C.  2006. Human resource management and performance  in UK 
call centres. British Journal of Industrial Relations, 44: 99–124. 


45 

Table 1: Means, Standard Deviations and Bivariate Correlations for Variables 

Variable 

Quit rate 
Dismissal rate 
Total turnover 
Customer  satisfaction 
High involvement work index 
Worker discretion 
Problem-solving groups 
Self-directed  teams 
Investments and inducements index 
Internal mobility opportunities 
Relative pay 
Pensions 
Full-time and permanent 
Performance-enhancing  practices index 
Monitoring intensity 
Commission pay 
Unemployment rate 
Telecommunications industry 
Union represented 
In-house center 
Large business clients 
Small business clients 
Residential clients 
Non-segmented  clients 
Workforce  size 
Female  workforce 
Average education 
Initial training 
Selection ratio 
Systematic selection procedures 
Age of establishment 
Recent  layoffs 

Mean 
14.88 
9.81 
24.69 
-0.02 
-0.11 
2.87 
33.80 
16.02 
-0.21 
0.21 
0.33 
0.48 
0.75 
0.15 
0.04 
0.11 
5.36 
0.42 
0.08 
0.86 
0.24 
0.10 
0.35 
0.32 
1.67 
0.66 
13.37 
0.35 
0.27 
0.39 
14.18 
0.21 

S.D. 
16.88 
12.04 
24.18 
0.89 
0.67 
0.74 
37.07 
33.12 
0.63 
0.29 
0.16 
0.50 
0.35 
0.65 
0.66 
0.22 
1.35 
0.49 
0.28 
0.35 
0.43 
0.30 
0.48 
0.47 
3.77 
0.24 
1.56 
0.40 
0.23 
0.46 
13.95 
0.41 

1 
1 
0.38 
0.89 
-0.14 
-0.28 
-0.25 
-0.23 
-0.12 
-0.33 
-0.20 
-0.22 
-0.10 
-0.27 
0.24 
0.27 
0.08 
-0.07 
-0.15 
-0.16 
-0.12 
-0.10 
-0.12 
0.10 
0.07 
0.12 
0.12 
-0.20 
-0.16 
0.19 
0.03 
-0.05 
-0.05 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 

Values greater than or equal to 0.11 are significant at p<.05. 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

1 
0.76 
-0.12 
-0.18 
-0.20 
-0.14 
-0.04 
-0.25 
-0.22 
-0.09 
-0.20 
-0.11 
0.22 
0.20 
0.11 
0.19 
0.00 
-0.13 
-0.13 
0.02 
-0.13 
0.05 
0.02 
0.06 
-0.04 
-0.16 
-0.15 
0.20 
0.01 
-0.23 
0.13 

1 
-0.16 
-0.29 
-0.28 
-0.23 
-0.10 
-0.35 
-0.25 
-0.20 
-0.17 
-0.25 
0.28 
0.29 
0.11 
0.04 
-0.11 
-0.18 
-0.15 
-0.06 
-0.15 
0.09 
0.06 
0.11 
0.06 
-0.22 
-0.19 
0.23 
0.03 
-0.15 
0.03 

1 
0.16 
0.13 
0.11 
0.10 
0.05 
0.04 
0.06 
0.03 
-0.03 
0.01 
0.00 
0.00 
-0.07 
0.00 
0.01 
-0.01 
-0.02 
0.02 
-0.05 
0.06 
0.03 
0.03 
0.10 
0.07 
-0.10 
0.06 
0.02 
-0.06 

1 
0.71 
0.70 
0.72 
0.38 
0.19 
0.38 
0.02 
0.33 
-0.16 
-0.41 
0.12 
-0.02 
0.21 
-0.12 
0.18 
0.20 
0.02 
-0.17 
-0.02 
-0.18 
-0.27 
0.35 
0.07 
-0.23 
-0.16 
0.11 
0.09 

1 
0.22 
0.29 
0.36 
0.12 
0.43 
0.05 
0.29 
-0.07 
-0.38 
0.20 
-0.06 
0.25 
-0.05 
0.18 
0.17 
0.06 
-0.18 
-0.01 
-0.09 
-0.30 
0.39 
0.13 
-0.15 
-0.15 
0.02 
0.05 

1 
0.26 
0.29 
0.22 
0.21 
0.06 
0.21 
-0.19 
-0.27 
-0.04 
-0.04 
0.12 
-0.09 
0.15 
0.18 
-0.06 
-0.12 
0.00 
-0.19 
-0.13 
0.21 
0.03 
-0.19 
-0.11 
0.13 
0.10 

1 
0.16 
0.08 
0.18 
-0.07 
0.19 
-0.07 
-0.22 
0.09 
0.06 
0.08 
-0.11 
0.05 
0.09 
0.03 
-0.06 
-0.04 
-0.12 
-0.14 
0.15 
-0.01 
-0.15 
-0.08 
0.10 
0.03 

1 
0.57 
0.64 
0.52 
0.68 
-0.16 
-0.36 
0.09 
-0.01 
0.23 
0.17 
0.31 
0.22 
0.06 
-0.19 
-0.05 
-0.08 
-0.27 
0.38 
0.18 
-0.29 
-0.04 
0.14 
0.06 

1 
0.14 
0.11 
0.19 
-0.15 
-0.16 
-0.06 
-0.02 
0.04 
0.12 
0.15 
0.01 
0.04 
-0.09 
0.06 
0.02 
-0.12 
0.12 
0.10 
-0.05 
-0.04 
0.05 
0.01 

1 
0.14 
0.29 
0.01 
-0.45 
0.34 
0.05 
0.16 
0.07 
0.17 
0.43 
0.07 
-0.24 
-0.19 
-0.13 
-0.45 
0.52 
0.15 
-0.20 
-0.07 
0.03 
0.18 

1 
0.03 
-0.10 
-0.04 
-0.10 
-0.09 
-0.03 
0.24 
0.11 
0.06 
-0.10 
0.02 
-0.01 
-0.02 
0.02 
0.08 
0.06 
-0.14 
0.10 
0.07 
-0.02 

1 
-0.13 
-0.25 
0.04 
0.03 
0.36 
0.02 
0.28 
0.06 
0.13 
-0.16 
0.02 
-0.06 
-0.12 
0.21 
0.11 
-0.27 
-0.08 
0.16 
-0.01 

1 
0.54 
0.78 
0.02 
0.02 
-0.08 
-0.13 
-0.04 
0.07 
0.06 
-0.08 
0.10 
-0.11 
-0.06 
0.01 
0.14 
0.17 
-0.16 
-0.04 

1 
-0.12 
0.06 
-0.20 
-0.04 
-0.24 
-0.18 
-0.07 
0.19 
0.02 
0.20 
0.22 
-0.33 
-0.20 
0.21 
0.25 
-0.19 
-0.12 

1 
-0.01 
0.18 
-0.06 
0.02 
0.10 
0.13 
-0.06 
-0.11 
-0.03 
-0.30 
0.18 
0.15 
0.00 
0.03 
-0.06 
0.05 

1 
-0.08 
0.00 
-0.07 
0.07 
0.08 
-0.04 
-0.08 
0.15 
-0.08 
0.06 
0.00 
0.01 
0.04 
-0.07 
0.11 

45 


Table 1 (Continued) 

Variable 

18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 

Telecommunications industry 
Union represented 
In-house center 
Large business clients 
Small business clients 
Residential clients 
Non-segmented  clients 
Workforce  size 
Female  workforce 
Average education 
Initial training 
Selection ratio 
Systematic selection procedures 
Age of establishment 
Recent  layoffs 

18 

1 
0.09 
0.26 
-0.15 
-0.04 
-0.12 
0.28 
-0.01 
-0.02 
-0.01 
0.07 
-0.14 
-0.05 
0.06 
-0.02 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 

32 

1 
0.09 
-0.04 
0.01 
0.01 
0.02 
-0.04 
0.16 
-0.08 
0.17 
0.02 
0.11 
0.08 
-0.05 

1 
-0.09 
0.10 
-0.04 
0.06 
-0.09 
-0.08 
0.13 
0.15 
-0.23 
-0.13 
0.08 
-0.13 

1 
-0.18 
-0.41 
-0.38 
-0.11 
-0.28 
0.28 
-0.02 
-0.09 
-0.03 
-0.07 
0.16 

1 
-0.24 
-0.22 
-0.07 
-0.06 
0.09 
0.16 
-0.05 
-0.01 
0.04 
-0.04 

1 
-0.50 
0.13 
0.17 
-0.13 
-0.09 
0.07 
-0.03 
-0.12 
-0.08 

1 
0.01 
0.12 
-0.18 
0.02 
0.04 
0.07 
0.16 
-0.04 

1 
0.08 
-0.11 
-0.04 
0.17 
0.08 
-0.03 
-0.03 

1 
-0.45 
0.02 
0.05 
0.04 
0.18 
-0.16 

1 
0.10 
-0.16 
-0.13 
-0.08 
0.12 

1 
-0.03 
0.03 
0.17 
-0.02 

1 
0.05 
-0.18 
-0.03 

1 
-0.04 
-0.02 

1 
-0.10 

1 

Values greater than or equal to 0.11 are significant at p < .05. 

46 

46 


Quits and Dismissals as Functions of High Involvement Work Organization, 

Investments and Inducements, and Performance-enhancing Practices (Tobit Models) 

TABLE 2 

47 

High involvement work 
organization (A) 

Investments and 
inducements (B) 

Performance-enhancing 
practices (C) 

A*B 

B*C 

A*C 

Control Variables: 
Unemployment rate 

Telecommunications 

Union represented 

In-house center 

Large business clients 

Small business clients 

Residential clients 

Workforce size 

Model 1a 

Quits 
Model 2a 

Model 3a 

Model 1b 

Model 2b 

Model 3b 

Dismissals 

-5.04 

(1.35) 

-3.06 

(1.47) 

5.12 
(1.19) 

** 

*** 

* 

-0.80 
(0.57) 
-4.91 
(1.62) 
-9.05 
(2.07) 
0.04 
(2.34) 
-2.92 
(2.16) 
-5.32 
(2.48) 
-0.62 
(1.91) 
0.30 

-0.86 
(0.55) 
-3.67  * 
(1.64) 
-8.59  *** 
(2.09) 
2.66 
(2.15) 
-1.52 
(2.17) 
-6.25  ** 
(2.30) 
-1.44 
(1.83) 
0.19 

-16.16  ** 

(5.81) 

-0.88 

(6.20) 

-0.10 
(4.48) 
1.12 
(1.98) 
-2.03 
(2.22) 

4.35  * 

(1.92) 

*** 

-0.82 
(0.55) 
-3.54  * 
(1.64) 
-8.47 
(2.10) 
2.67 
(2.16) 
-1.45 
(2.17) 
-6.17  ** 
(2.31) 
-1.01 
(1.84) 
0.21 

-2.14  * 

(0.93) 

-2.32  * 

(1.05) 

3.11 
(0.84) 

*** 

*** 

1.37 
(0.40) 
0.69 
(1.17) 
-4.01  * 
(1.63) 
-0.88 
(1.66) 
0.42 
(1.59) 
-2.49 
(1.79) 
0.37 
(1.34) 
0.02 

*** 

1.36 
(0.39) 
1.40 
(1.19) 
-3.47  * 
(1.70) 
0.80 
(1.56) 
1.44 
(1.63) 
-2.93  + 
(1.71) 
-0.07 
(1.30) 
-0.03 

-3.26 

(4.04) 

-5.13 

(4.39) 

-0.80 
(3.16) 
-0.16 
(1.42) 
1.43 
(1.56) 
0.69 
(1.32) 

1.36 
(0.39) 
1.29 
(1.20) 
-3.37 
(1.72) 
0.62 
(1.58) 
1.34 
(1.63) 
-3.08 
(1.70) 
-0.09 
(1.31) 
-0.03 

Total Turnover (Quits+Dismissals) 
Model 1c 

Model 2c 

Model 3c 

-6.67 

*** 

-20.30  * 

(1.90) 

-5.56 

** 

(2.12) 

8.03 
(1.71) 

*** 

0.67 
(0.83) 
-3.24 
(2.40) 
-12.97  *** 
(3.26) 
-0.77 
(3.45) 
-2.45 
(3.23) 
-7.76  * 
(3.69) 
-0.72 
(2.79) 
0.25 

0.64 
(0.80) 
-1.38 
(2.40) 
-12.03 
(3.32) 
3.55 
(3.20) 
-0.15 
(3.20) 
-9.44 
(3.43) 
-1.95 
(2.66) 
0.09 

*** 

** 

(8.27) 

-7.72 

(8.91) 

0.88 
(6.46) 
2.33 
(2.83) 
-1.12 
(3.16) 
4.51 
(2.72) 

0.71 
(0.79) 
-1.25 
(2.41) 
-11.65 
(3.36) 
3.62 
(3.22) 
-0.24 
(3.20) 
-9.25 
(3.46) 
-1.52 
(2.68) 
0.11 

47 

+ 

*** 

** 


Percent female 

Average education 

Initial training 

Selection ratio 

Systematic selection 

Age of establishment 

Layoffs 

Constant 

* 

+ 

+ 

(0.20) 
4.21 
(3.81) 
-1.09 
(0.56) 
-4.07 
(2.16) 
8.04 
(3.60) 
0.97 
(1.67) 
-0.04 
(0.06) 
-0.60 
(1.91) 
38.35  ** 

Likelihood Ratio Chi2 
-2*Log Likelihood 

(12.65) 
66.90 
2541.83 

*** 

(0.20) 
4.04 
(3.79) 
-0.12 
(0.57) 
-3.67  + 
(2.02) 
4.54 
(3.50) 
-0.48 
(1.63) 
0.02 
(0.06) 
0.25 
(1.87) 
16.34 
(12.57) 
111.20  *** 

2497.52 

(0.20) 
4.46 
(3.83) 
-0.20 
(0.57) 
-4.10  * 
(2.02) 
4.48 
(3.49) 
-0.33 
(1.63) 
0.01 
(0.06) 
0.48 
(1.87) 
-0.42 
(20.77) 
116.50 
2492.23 

*** 

(0.14) 
-3.21 
(2.68) 
-1.72 
(0.41) 
-1.82 
(1.47) 
6.94 
(2.47) 
0.53 
(1.16) 
-0.16 
(0.04) 
1.93 
(1.41) 
33.78 
(9.55) 
83.57 
2257.50 

*** 

** 

*** 

*** 

*** 

** 

* 

(0.14) 
-2.85 
(2.69) 
-1.14 
(0.42) 
-1.56 
(1.40) 
5.01 
(2.42) 
-0.28 
(1.15) 
-0.13 
(0.04) 
2.49 
(1.40) 
19.19  * 
(9.62) 
115.09 
2227.98 

** 

+ 

*** 

* 

(0.14) 
-2.93 
(2.73) 
-1.17  ** 
(0.42) 
-1.54 
(1.42) 
5.10 
(2.42) 
-0.38 
(1.15) 
-0.13 
(0.04) 
2.60 
(1.40) 
9.53 
(15.61) 
117.18  *** 

** 

+ 

+ 

(0.30) 
0.90 
(5.49) 
-2.59  ** 
(0.83) 
-5.88 
(3.07) 
14.93  ** 
(5.19) 
0.96 
(2.43) 
-0.19  * 
(0.09) 
1.84 
(2.84) 
64.87  *** 

(17.00) 
124.65  *** 

2225.89 

2069.47 

Marginal effects reported; N = 339; + = p < .10, * = p < .05, ** = p < .01, *** = p < .001 

48 

(0.29) 
1.30 
(5.47) 
-1.23 
(0.83) 
-5.71  * 
(2.87) 

9.91  * 

(4.99) 
-1.26 
(2.36) 
-0.11 
(0.08) 
3.59 
(2.75) 
6.91 
(27.55) 
71.13 
2863.28 

*** 

(0.29) 
0.62 
(5.41) 
-1.15 
(0.82) 
-5.33 
(2.87) 

+ 

9.90  * 

(4.99) 
-1.32 
(2.36) 
-0.09 
(0.08) 
3.28 
(2.75) 
33.43  * 

(16.69) 
124.75 
2809.67 

*** 

48 


TABLE 3 

Longitudinal Analysis of Lagged HR Indexes on 

Quits, Dismissals, and Total Turnover (Tobit Models) 

Quits 

Dismissals 

Total 

Turnover 

High involvement work 
organization (Lagged) 

Investments and 
inducements (Lagged) 

Performance-enhancing 
practices (Lagged) 

Control Variables: 
Unemployment rate 

Union represented 

Large business clients 

Small business clients 

Residential clients 

Workforce  size 

Percent  female 

Average education 

Initial training 

Constant 

-6.31  * 
(2.89) 

*** 

** 

-1.18 
(2.96) 

8.33 
(2.07) 

-0.71 
(1.22) 
-4.19 
(4.87) 
-2.79 
(4.54) 
-8.85 
(3.27) 
-3.45 
(3.55) 
0.48 
(0.37) 
7.27 
(6.54) 
2.01 
(1.38) 
-0.89 
(2.79) 
-40.10 
(38.70) 

Likelihood Ratio Chi2 (F) 
-2*Log Likelihood (R-sq) 

25.42  * 
567.32 

-2.09 
(1.87) 

-2.18 
(1.86) 

3.02  * 

(1.29) 

* 

1.66 
(0.77) 
2.12 
(3.88) 
-3.49 
(2.49) 
-6.27  ** 
(1.86) 
-3.01 
(2.16) 
0.21 
(0.23) 
-10.81  * 
(4.14) 
-1.89  * 
(0.90) 
0.94 
(1.71) 
47.20  * 

(23.70) 
29.59 
497.10 

** 

+ 

-7.59 
(4.17) 

-3.14 
(4.26) 

10.57  *** 
(2.94) 

* 

+ 

1.00 
(1.73) 
1.68 
(8.32) 
-5.96 
(6.37) 
-12.64 
(6.05) 
-9.10 
(5.03) 
0.63 
(0.55) 
-3.76 
(9.16) 
0.50 
(1.99) 
-1.69 
(4.00) 
9.03 
(44.34) 

21.51  * 
704.78 

Marginal effects reported; N = 93; + = p < .10, * = p < .05, ** = p < .01, *** = p < .001 

49 

49 


Customer Satisfaction as a Function of Work Organization, 

Investments & Inducements, Performance-enhancing Practices, and Turnover (OLS Models) 

Model 1 

Model 3 

Model 4 

Model 5 

Model 6 

TABLE 4 

High involvement work 
(A) 

organization 

Investments and inducements (B) 

Performance-enhancing practices (C) 

A*B 

B*C 

A*C 

Quits 

Dismissals 

Total Turnover 

Control Variables: 
Unemployment rate 

Telecommunications 

Union represented 

In-house center 

Large business clients 

Small business clients 

Residential clients 

Model 2 

0.263 
(0.085) 
-0.045 
(0.097) 
0.052 
(0.079) 

-0.050 
(0.037) 
-0.039 
(0.106) 
0.010 
(0.181) 
-0.167 
(0.152) 
-0.176 
(0.145) 
-0.084 
(0.183) 
-0.161 

-0.050 
(0.036) 
-0.107 
(0.109) 
0.105 
(0.186) 
-0.174 
(0.154) 
-0.216 
(0.145) 
-0.087 
(0.182) 
-0.164 

-0.082 
(0.371) 
-0.115 
(0.405) 
0.271 
(0.293) 
0.177 
(0.127) 
-0.130 
(0.142) 
0.005 
(0.122) 

-0.049 
(0.036) 
-0.084 
(0.110) 
0.113 
(0.187) 
-0.135 
(0.156) 
-0.203 
(0.146) 
-0.053 
(0.184) 
-0.148 

0.236 
(0.085) 
-0.071 
(0.097) 
0.088 
(0.080) 

-0.007 
(0.003) 

-0.056 
(0.036) 
-0.132 
(0.109) 
0.049 
(0.186) 
-0.157 
(0.153) 
-0.234 
(0.145) 
-0.139 
(0.183) 
-0.179 

0.257  ** 

(0.085) 
-0.054 
(0.097) 
0.062 
(0.080) 

0.238 
(0.086) 
-0.073 
(0.097) 
0.088 
(0.080) 

-0.004 
(0.005) 

-0.044 
(0.037) 
-0.099 
(0.110) 
0.091 
(0.187) 
-0.172 
(0.154) 
-0.212 
(0.146) 
-0.104 
(0.184) 
-0.166 

-0.005 
(0.002) 

-0.046 
(0.036) 
-0.113 
(0.109) 
0.051 
(0.187) 
-0.159 
(0.153) 
-0.223 
(0.145) 
-0.142 
(0.184) 
-0.176 

50 

50 


Workforce size 

Percent female 

Average education 

Initial training 

Selection ratio 

Systematic selection 

Age of establishment 

Layoffs 

Constant 

F 
R-sq 

(0.123) 
0.014 
(0.013) 
0.276 
(0.237) 

0.092  * 

* 

(0.036) 
0.139 
(0.128) 
-0.450 
(0.227) 
0.124 
(0.107) 
-0.002 
(0.004) 
-0.134 
(0.123) 
-0.839 
(0.626) 

1.25 
0.05 

(0.123) 
0.018 
(0.013) 
0.365 
(0.241) 

0.073  + 

(0.038) 
0.128 
(0.127) 
-0.409  + 
(0.229) 
0.141 
(0.108) 
-0.003 
(0.004) 
-0.143 
(0.122) 
-0.608 
(0.647) 

(0.124) 
0.018 
(0.013) 

0.433  + 

(0.245) 

0.075  * 

(0.038) 
0.125 
(0.128) 
-0.419  + 
(0.229) 
0.152 
(0.109) 
-0.003 
(0.004) 
-0.146 
(0.122) 
-0.973 
(1.070) 

(0.122) 
0.020 
(0.013) 
0.386 
(0.240) 

0.071  + 

(0.037) 
0.100 
(0.127) 
-0.375 
(0.228) 
0.134 
(0.107) 
-0.003 
(0.004) 
-0.143 
(0.121) 
-0.462 
(0.647) 

+ 

(0.123) 
0.018 
(0.013) 
0.353 
(0.242) 
0.070 
(0.038) 
0.121 
(0.127) 
-0.390  + 
(0.230) 
0.137 
(0.108) 
-0.003 
(0.004) 
-0.131 
(0.123) 
-0.553 
(0.651) 

(0.122) 
0.019 
(0.013) 
0.363 
(0.240) 

0.067  + 

(0.038) 
0.101 
(0.127) 
-0.363 
(0.229) 
0.131 
(0.108) 
-0.003 
(0.004) 
-0.128 
(0.122) 
-0.445 
(0.649) 

1.61  + 
0.08 

1.52  + 
0.09 

* 

1.79 
0.10 

+ 

1.55 
0.08 

* 

1.74 
0.00 

N = 339; + = p < .10, * = p < .05, ** = p < .01, *** = p < .001 

51 

51 


52 

Appendix 1: Variable Definitions 

Dependent variables 
Quits 

Dismissals 

Total turnover 

Customer  satisfaction 

The percentage of workers who quit voluntarily in the past year, 
The percentage of workers dismissed in the past year, not including workers who were laid-off, promoted, or 
retired or quit voluntarily. 
The quit rate plus the dismissal rate. 
The mean of the responses to two standardized items (alpha = 0.59): 
• 
•  How the call center’s level of customer satisfaction  compares to other call centers it competes with (on a 

The average level of customer satisfaction  (on a 1 -5 scale); 

1 to 5 scale, with anchors “much lower” and “much higher”). 

Independent variables 
Work organization and performance  management 

High involvement 
Work organization 

An index based on 3 items, standardized and averaged: 
•  Discretion: an 8-item index of discretion over tasks, tools, pace of work, breaks, work methods, what to 
say to customers, handling additional customer requests, handling customer complaints (each item was 
measured with a 1  to 5 Likert-scale type question with anchors “none” and “complete”; the mean response 
for the 8 questions was 2.87) (alpha = 0.77) 

Investments and 
Inducements 

• 

•  Problem-solving  groups: the average percent of workers in off-line  problem-solving. 
•  Self-directed teams: the average percent of workers in on-line self-directed work groups. 
An index based on 4 items, standardized and averaged: 
• 

Internal mobility opportunities: the percentage of the core workforce  promoted to higher positions at the 
worksite or promoted or transferred  within the larger organization. 
Relative pay: ratio of the average annual pay (in $100,000’s) of the typical (median) core worker 
compared to the median wage of customer service employees (Occupation code 43-4051, OES survey) 
in the metropolitan area or county in which the establishment is located (BLS 2001). 
Pensions: whether employees are covered by a defined benefit pension plan (1) or not (0). 
Employment  security: Proportion  of the workforce  that is full-time  and permanent. 

• 
• 
An index based on 2 items, standardized and averaged: 
•  Monitoring intensity. An index based on 5 items, standardized and averaged (response anchors for 

Performance-enhancing 
expectations 

Likert-type  scale questions are in parentheses after the item): How often  core employees receive 
feedback  on their performance  (never-continously); how often their calls are listened to by supervisors 
(rarely-every day); how often  calls are monitored without their knowledge (never-always); how  often 
they get feedback  and coaching on phone technique (rarely-every day); and to what extent  information 
from performance  monitoring is used to support disciplinary actions  (not at all-a very great extent) 
(Alpha = .70). 
Commission pay: The proportion of annual pay based on individual commission. 

• 

Control Variables 
Human capital, workforce quality and demographic characteristics 
Female  workforce 
Education level 

Initial training 

Selection ratio 
Systematic selection 
procedures 
Market, Institutional, and organizational characteristics 
Unemployment rate 
Sector: Telecom 
Union coverage 

The proportion of core employees who are women. 
Years of education of the typical core employee at the worksite. 
Number of weeks it takes for a full-time core employee to become fully competent on the job (E.g. able to 
train someone else). 
Proportion of applicants hired. 
Proportion of core workforce hired using systematic selection procedures (such as psychometric tests or 
aptitude tests). 

Local unemployment rate. 
In-house center serving telecommunications (1= Telecommunications, else 0). 
Whether the call center is covered by collective bargaining for core employees. 
A series of indicators for the primary customer segment served: Large business, small business, residential, or 
all (omitted category) 
Whether the call center is an in-house operation providing services to clients of one company or is a sub 
contractor providing services to other companies. (1 = In-house; sub-contractor = 0). 
Number of call center agents in the establishment (in 100’s). 

Customer segment: 

Ownership: In-house 

Size 

Age of establishment 

Number of years since establishment opened. 

52 


Quits, Dismissals, and Customer Satisfaction as Functions of High Involvement 

Work Organization, Investments and Inducements, and Performance-enhancing Practices 

[Models Using Individual Practices instead of Indices] 

Appendix 2 

High involvement work 
organization: 
Discretion 

Problem-solving groups 

Self-directed teams 

Investments and 
inducements: 
Internal mobility 

Relative pay 

Pensions 

Proportion full-time 

Performance-enhancing 
practices: 
Monitoring intensity 

Commission pay 

Total turnover 

Control Variables: 
Unemployment rate 

Quits 
[Tobit] 

Dismissals 
[Tobit] 

Total 
Turnover 
[Tobit] 

Customer 
Satisfaction 
[OLS] 

Customer 
Satisfaction 

[OLS] 

** 

** 

-3.31 
(1.27) 
-0.07 
(0.02) 
-0.01 
(0.02) 

-5.35 
(3.92) 
4.10 
(7.20) 
-1.40 
(1.62) 
-4.68  + 
(2.51) 

* 

*** 

2.88 
(1.44) 
13.65 
(3.97) 

** 

* 

-2.74 
(0.86) 
-0.03 
(0.02) 
0.02 
(0.02) 

** 

-8.21 
(2.70) 
3.16 
(5.05) 
-2.22  * 
(1.11) 
1.24 
(1.72) 

* 

* 

2.02 
(1.01) 
6.76 
(2.66) 

** 

* 

-5.98 
(1.80) 
-0.08 
(0.03) 
0.00 
(0.04) 

-14.30  * 
(5.57) 
8.24 
(10.29) 

-3.83  + 
(2.32) 
-3.54 
(3.63) 

* 

* 

0.185 
(0.081) 
0.003 
(0.002) 
0.002 
(0.002) 

-0.108 
(0.252) 
0.514 
(0.469) 
-0.063 
(0.107) 
-0.374  * 
(0.168) 

* 

*** 

4.76 
(2.07) 
20.72 
(5.57) 

0.123 
(0.095) 
-0.177 
(0.258) 

-0.89 
(0.57) 

** 

1.04 
(0.40) 

0.26 
(0.83) 

-0.035 
(0.038) 

0.159  + 

* 

(0.082) 
0.003 
(0.002) 
0.002 
(0.002) 

-0.177 
(0.254) 
0.545 
(0.468) 
-0.079 
(0.107) 
-0.395  * 
(0.167) 

0.142 
(0.095) 
-0.084 
(0.262) 

-0.004  + 
(0.002) 

-0.033 
(0.038) 

53 

53 


Telecommunications 

Union represented 

In-house center 

Large business clients 

Small business clients 

Residential clients 

Workforce size 

Percent female 

Average education 

Initial training 

Selection ratio 

Systematic selection 

Age of establishment 

Layoffs 

Constant 

-4.06  * 
(1.87) 
-8.77  ** 
(2.18) 
2.77 
(2.25) 
-2.80 
(2.36) 
-6.64  ** 
(2.35) 
-1.79 
(1.94) 
0.17 
(0.20) 
5.91 
(3.97) 
-0.45 
(0.61) 
-5.45 
(2.36) 
5.16 
(3.61) 
-0.65 
(1.72) 
0.04 
(0.06) 
0.73 
(1.98) 
42.34 
(12.92) 

* 

** 

Chi2 [F] 
-2* Log Likelihood [R-sq] 
Obs 

123.7  *** 

2337.0 
321 

0.92 
(1.33) 
-2.37 
(1.87) 
1.15 
(1.59) 
1.07 
(1.75) 
-3.56 
(1.66) 
0.03 
(1.36) 
-0.00 
(0.14) 
-3.16 
(2.77) 
-1.22 
(0.44) 
-1.51 
(1.59) 
5.05 
(2.46) 
-0.19 
(1.18) 
-0.15 
(0.04) 

* 

** 

* 

*** 

2.87  * 

(1.45) 
35.81 
(9.64) 

127.6 
2052.0 
316 

*** 

*** 

** 

** 

-2.12 
(2.72) 
-11.18 
(3.56) 
4.02 
(3.35) 
-1.69 
(3.48) 
-10.48 
(3.45) 
-2.35 
(2.82) 
0.11 
(0.30) 
2.45 
(5.66) 
-1.52  + 
(0.88) 
-6.79 
(3.27) 
10.81  * 
(5.17) 
-1.17 
(2.48) 
-0.09 
(0.09) 
3.81 
(2.89) 
70.03 
(17.03) 

* 

*** 

-0.029 
(0.124) 
0.133 
(0.196) 
-0.146 
(0.163) 
-0.239 
(0.160) 
-0.060 
(0.188) 
-0.193 
(0.131) 
0.018 
(0.014) 
0.421 
(0.253) 

+ 

0.079  * 

(0.040) 
0.125 
(0.143) 
-0.399  + 
(0.239) 
0.129 
(0.114) 
-0.003 
(0.004) 
-0.220 
(0.129) 
-1.318 
(0.673) 

+ 

+ 

-0.037 
(0.124) 
0.083 
(0.197) 
-0.130 
(0.163) 
-0.252 
(0.160) 
-0.118 
(0.190) 
-0.205 
(0.131) 
0.019 
(0.014) 
0.425 
(0.252) 
0.072 
(0.040) 
0.095 
(0.144) 
-0.350 
(0.239) 
0.119 
(0.114) 
-0.004 
(0.004) 
-0.204 
(0.129) 
-1.019 
(0.690) 

+ 

+ 

*** 

131.3 
2602.0 
316 

[1.63]  * 
[0.12] 
316 

* 

[1.71] 
[0.13] 
316 

Marginal effects reported for tobit models; + = p < .10, * = p < .05, ** = p < .01, *** = p < .001 

54 

54 


Author Bios 

Rosemary Batt (rb41@cornell.edu) is the Alice Hanson Cook Professor of Women and Work at the ILR School, Cornell University. 
She received her Ph.D. from the Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.  Her research focuses on 
strategic HR management, employment relations, and organizational outcomes for firms and employees, particularly  in service 
industries and cross-nationally. 

Alexander J.S. Colvin (ajc22@cornell.edu)  is Associate Professor of Labor Relations and Conflict  Resolution at the ILR School, 
Cornell University. He received his Ph.D. from Cornell University. His research focuses on employment relations, dispute resolution, 
and the impact of the legal environment on organizations. 

55 

55 

