The International Journal of Human Resource
Management

ISSN: 0958-5192 (Print) 1466-4399 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rijh20

Human resource strategy and firm performance in
Pacific Rim countries

Johngseok Bae , Shyh-jer Chen , Tai Wai David Wan , John J. Lawler & Fred
Ochieng Walumbwa

To cite this article: Johngseok Bae , Shyh-jer Chen , Tai Wai David Wan , John J. Lawler &
Fred Ochieng Walumbwa (2003) Human resource strategy and firm performance in Pacific Rim
countries, The International Journal of Human Resource Management, 14:8, 1308-1332, DOI:
10.1080/0958519032000145774
To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0958519032000145774

Published online: 17 Feb 2007.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 710

View related articles 

Citing articles: 76 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rijh20

Download by: [University of North Carolina Charlotte]

Date: 13 February 2017, At: 11:17


Int. J. of Human Resource Management 14:8 December 2003 1308 – 1332

Human resource strategy and ﬁrm
performance in Paciﬁc Rim countries

Johngseok Bae, Shyh-jer Chen, Tai Wai David Wan, John J. Lawler
and Fred Ochieng Walumbwa

Abstract This paper examines the impact of high-performance work system (HPWS)
techniques on organizational performance in four East and Southeast Asian economies that
have been at the forefront of Asia’s rapid development. All now face considerable
competitive pressures from newer emerging markets (e.g. China, India, Vietnam, Eastern
Europe) and thus experience many of the same sources of uncertainty from globalization
as more economically developed countries, especially in the period following the 1997
Asian ﬁnancial crisis. Many companies in Korea, Taiwan, Singapore and Thailand
are experimenting with features of American-style high-performance work systems.
We collected data from nearly 700 companies in the region, both subsidiaries of MNCs
(American, Japanese and European) and locally owned ﬁrms. Statistical techniques were
used to measure the effects of HPWS techniques on perceived ﬁnancial performance.
In general, the results indicated HPWSs worked effectively, even under tremendously
variable conditions. Most interesting is the ﬁnding that use of HPWS techniques in locally
owned ﬁrms apparently has at least a marginally greater impact on ﬁrm performance than
when used in MNC subsidiaries.

Keywords HR strategy; high performance; work system; ﬁrm performance; Asian
countries; multinational corporations; globalization.

The past decade has seen extensive research centring on the role ‘high-involvement’
or
‘high-performance’ work systems may play in inﬂuencing organizational
effectiveness. The high-performance work system (HPWS) is typically characterized
by signiﬁcant delegation of authority to lower-level employees (‘empowerment’),
extensive training and development of these employees, reliance on pay-for-performance
(signiﬁcant contingent or ‘at risk’ pay), broadly deﬁned job responsibilities and employee
participation in non-work aspects of organizational decision making. Firms may vary
with regard to the degree to which these approaches are utilized and the level
of HPWS penetration (i.e. the proportion of employees working under such systems),
but the empirical evidence indicates increasing adoption of HPWS techniques by
American ﬁrms (Lawler et al., 1998). Extensive empirical work also suggests HPWS
effectiveness in inﬂuencing ﬁrm performance.

Johngseok Bae, Korea University Business School, Seoul, Korea (e-mail: johngbae@korea.ac.kr).
Shyh-jer Chen, National Sun Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan
(e-mail:
schen@cm.nsysu.edu.tw); Tai Wai David Wan, National University of Singapore, Singapore
(e-mail: bizwantw@nus.edu.sg); John J. Lawler, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Champaign, IL, USA (e-mail:
j-lawler@uiuc.edu); Fred Ochieng Walumbwa, University of
Nebraska (e-mail: fwalumbwa@unlnotes.unl.edu).

The International Journal of Human Resource Management

ISSN 0958-5192 print/ISSN 1466-4399 online q 2003 Taylor & Francis Ltd

http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals

DOI: 10.1080/0958519032000145774


Bae et al.: HR strategy and performance in Paciﬁc Rim countries

1309

Most of the empirical work assessing the relationship between HPWS utilization
and ﬁrm performance has taken place in ﬁrms operating in the US. Although rooted
in management approaches developed in such diverse locations as Japan and
Scandinavia, HPWS types that have evolved in the US seemingly reﬂect
the
organizational and cultural imperatives of American society (Appelbaum and Batt, 1993).
This paper explores the transferability of the US-style HPWS to other cultural settings,
speciﬁcally East and Southeast Asia. The speciﬁc countries studied here are Korea,
Taiwan, Thailand and Singapore.

We believe our line of research is timely and important for several reasons. There
has been limited research on HPWS impact in Asia. However, American ﬁrms have
invested extensively in the region. These companies have transferred some HPWS
practices to Asian operations; European and Japanese multinational corporations
(MNCs), as well as indigenous ﬁrms, have also adopted HPWS practices within Asia
(Bae et al., 1998). So there is a need to assess the effectiveness of these techniques.
Moreover, Asian cultures often differ in many fundamental ways from American
culture, so it is not at all apparent that HPWS approaches will have the desired
impact
regarding the HPWS impact on ﬁrm
effectiveness have implications not only for management, but also for governments
and economic planners in the region, as the human resource (HR) strategies pursued
by local and foreign companies operating in these companies may have
important
to the best of our
knowledge there have been no previous multi-country comparative studies of HPWS
effects. By applying similar methods across several different countries, we are in a
position to assess cross-national differences, if any, in the responsiveness of ﬁrm
performance to HR strategy.

implications for economic development. Finally,

in Asian countries. Findings

This paper represents an analysis of the HR strategy – organizational effectiveness
relationship using the four countries in our dataset. Of particular concern is
HPWS use among lower-level (i.e. non-managerial and non-professional) workers,
where the HR practices linked to the HPWS diverge most prominently from those
of traditional HR systems. Our work focuses on the following principal research
questions:

. Given potential cultural incompatibilities, to what extent do HPWS practices in East

and Southeast Asian economies improve organizational performance?

. Do similarities or differences in the HPWS impact on ﬁrm performance vary between

the case of indigenous ﬁrms and the case of subsidiaries of MNCs?

High performance work systems and ﬁrm performance: prior research

HPWS research, mostly contained within the strategic human resource management
(SHRM) literature,
is extensively reviewed in many places (e.g. Arthur, 1994;
Bamberger and Meshoulam, 2000; Delery and Doty, 1996; Huselid, 1995). Given space
limitations and the general familiarity most readers will have with this literature,
we provide only a general overview.

One major issue in the SHRM ﬁeld concerns whether HR practices independently
affect organizational outcomes or, alternatively, need to be embedded in a broader
and internally consistent conﬁguration of such practices (Delery and Doty, 1996).
Research by several authors seems to demonstrate that ‘internal ﬁt’ or consistency
among HR practices is necessary to achieve the optimal impact of such practices


1310 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

on organizational outcomes such as ﬁrm performance (Arthur, 1992; Huselid, 1995;
Ichniowski et al., 1997; MacDufﬁe, 1995). Although not all studies ﬁnd support for
the conﬁgurational or
the
preponderance of evidence seems to favour this position.

‘bundles’ perspective (e.g. Delery and Doty, 1996),

A second major issue concerns whether HPWS practices are universally superior to
more traditional, bureaucratic practices or if, rather, the employment system should be
contingent upon organizational strategy or other contextual conditions. The universalist
perspective takes a ‘best practices’ perspective (Huselid, 1995), the central argument
being that the contemporary environment confronting most organizations is turbulent
and uncertain, a consequence of factors such as a highly competitive, globalized
marketplace and rapidly changing technologies that make the contributions of motivated
and empowered employees at all levels of the ﬁrm critical to its ability to cope with
environmental hostility. Much empirical evidence has been assembled in support of this
viewpoint, demonstrating that ﬁrms that utilize HPWS approaches have higher levels of
organizational effectiveness than those that do not (Arthur, 1994; Delaney and Huselid,
1996; Huselid, 1995; MacDufﬁe, 1995).

In contrast, the contingency perspective argues that it is important that there be an
appropriate ﬁt between HR strategy and the external environment
in which the
organization operates. The absence of external ﬁt would lead, in the contingency
perspective, to sub-optimal performance. Thus the HPWS is typically seen as more
compatible with organizational strategies that emphasize quality and product
differentiation, while more traditional HR strategies based on centralized control are
seen to be as or more compatible with organizational strategies that emphasize cost
control and competition based primarily on price (Youndt et al., 1996). Youndt et al.
(1996) provide empirical support for the contingency perspective. However, several
other studies have not found empirical support for such a relationship (e.g. Delery
and Doty, 1996). Wright and Snell (1998) have proposed a theoretical argument
suggesting that these two points of view are not necessarily contradictory and that ﬁrms
can design systems that promote ﬂexibility and simultaneously attain some level of
HR strategy – organizational strategy ﬁt.

Although most of

the research concerning the HR strategy – organizational
effectiveness relationship has taken place in the US, there is a growing body of literature
examining this relationship in other parts of the world. Lahteenmaki et al. (1998) study the
strategy – performance link in a large sample of companies in Finland. They come down on
the side of the contingency perspective, arguing that ﬁt between HR strategy and economic
conditions are critical in determining organizational effectiveness. As we describe
below, there are several potential cultural barriers to HPWS implementation in many
Asian countries. Yet at least some research indicates that American-style HPWS
employment practices can, in fact, be quite effective in ﬁrms operating in Korea (Bae and
Lawler, 2000; Lee and Johnson, 1998), India (Sivasubramaniam and Venkata Ratnam,
1998), Japan (Morishima, 1998), and Taiwan (Uen, 1997). Our purpose is to extend this
work on Asia through a multi-country study.

Strategic human resource management in the Asian context

The four Asian countries included in this study have enjoyed substantial economic
growth over much of the past twenty or more years. Korea, Taiwan and Singapore are
all categorized as ‘newly industrialized economies’
(NIEs), with levels of
economic development approaching or equalling many Western European countries.
Thailand, which began its economic take-off more recently, enjoyed one of the highest


Bae et al.: HR strategy and performance in Paciﬁc Rim countries

1311

economic growth rates in the world in the early 1990s, though suffered signiﬁcantly
(along with Korea) during the 1997 Asian ﬁnancial crisis.

Environmental conditions

stability, openness

reasonable political

The economies we study all shared certain common characteristics at the point of
economic take-off. Each had a literate and disciplined labour force, relatively low
wages,
to foreign investment and a
government that vigorously pursued export-oriented economic policies. While such
conditions may have been the formula for success initially, the long term was another
matter. The pressures of globalization have impacted on each, just as in the case of
Japan and the industrialized countries of Europe and North America. The competitive
pressures engendered by globalization promote turbulence and uncertainty and newly
emerging economies offer lower wages and present signiﬁcant and rapidly changing
competitive challenges. There is a need to increase productivity and enter into newer,
generally more sophisticated and technologically advanced markets, as competing in
the product markets that brought initial success is no longer viable. In particular, all
four countries in this study now experience signiﬁcant competitive pressures from
China, which has evolved into the dominant economy in the region in terms of its
ability to attract foreign investment, as well as emerging regional economies such as
Vietnam.

Prior to the 1997 Asian ﬁnancial crisis, much of the thinking in Asia revolved around
the role ‘Asian values’ could play in sustaining continual economic growth and the
avoidance of recession and the vacillations of the business cycle (much as proponents of
the ‘new economy’ thought high technology had similarly altered the American
economy). Asian values embody the predominant characteristics of collectivist cultures
(Triandis, 1995), including the subordination of self-interest to the interests of the group,
pervasive reliance on social networks, harmonious relationships, respect for authority
and the avoidance of dishonourable behaviour or incompetent action leading to
humiliation and loss of face. These values, of course, are rooted in Confucianism, which
has been a pervasive force in the region. The governments of Korea, Taiwan and
Singapore all promote Confucianism as a national philosophy and Confucian principles
permeate their educational systems. Thailand is ofﬁcially Buddhist and the majority of
Thais are not ethnically Chinese. Thus Confucianism is not per se an element of its
national philosophy. However, Thai values closely parallel those of Confucian societies.
Moreover, most major Thai companies are owned or controlled by Thai-Chinese families
(as is the case throughout Southeast Asia), so Confucian values nonetheless inﬂuence
business practices in Thailand.

The view, then, frequently espoused by Asian business and political leaders was that
an unremitting pursuit of self-interest at the expense of the group and broader society,
seen to be characteristic of Western cultures, created distrust and instability in business
relationships and the economy. In contrast, Asian organizations, hierarchical but
paternalistic and interlinked through networks of reciprocal obligations and personal
loyalties (guanxi in Chinese) (Hamilton, 1996), could sustain high levels of economic
performance over very long periods.

This perspective was shaken, however, by the events that began to unfold in the
summer of 1997. The Thai economy was devastated through a rapid devaluation of its
currency after central bankers, working feverishly to forestall speculative attacks on the
Thai baht, nearly exhausted the country’s foreign exchange reserves. Much of this was
brought on by numerous poorly conceived investment projects, excessive foreign debt,


1312 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

the rapid exodus of foreign capital and the outright theft of funds from banks and
ﬁnancial institutions by ofﬁcers and inﬂuential investors. Korea also experienced a
severe downturn and, like Thailand, required IMF loans. Taiwan and Singapore, with
much less external debt and large foreign exchange reserves, were impacted upon, but
not so severely, by the 1997 crisis.

The 1997 events generated reproach from many Western critics of Asian business
practices and the behaviours associated with ‘Asian values’
(Krugman, 1994).
The ‘bamboo network’ of interlinked business interests came to be disparaged as
‘crony capitalism’ and guanxi as just another form of bribery and extortion. The ﬁnancial
crisis was viewed as an inevitable day of reckoning. That the ﬁnancial crisis did not
lead to a full ‘meltdown’ of the Asian economy was attributed primarily to the strength
of the American economy, ﬁrmly and wisely guided under the watchful eye of Alan
Greenspan.

Although there are certainly elements of truth here, the critics of the Asian values
perspective are seemingly as extreme and, in the end, largely as wrong-headed as its most
strident proponents. Although most of the region recovered much more rapidly than
anticipated from the 1997 ﬁnancial crisis, the recovery was viewed with caution in much
of Asia, where there was considerable fear of a ‘second shock’. Indeed, that occurred in
2001 with the weakening global economy, particularly after the September 11 bombings.
But there are structural, as well as cyclical, factors inﬂuencing long-term economic
performance in these Paciﬁc Rim countries, most notably the emergence of China as a
dominant economic force in the region. Much of the export business and foreign
investment that once went to Korea, Taiwan, Singapore and the emerging Southeast
Asian economies now ﬂows to China. In the long term,
these economies must
devise new sources of competitive advantage, as they will not be able to compete with
emerging economies on the basis of labour costs. More innovative ﬁrms marketing
higher value-added products and services will be critical
to long-term economic
success in the region. Thus, traditional business practices and management systems
need to change in the face of
these new competitive challenges confronting
the Paciﬁc Rim countries. One area in which this will be especially signiﬁcant will
be HRM.

Organizational characteristics

Many of the changes under way in Asia involve restructuring national political and
economic systems. At the more micro-level, the process of management is also under
scrutiny and considerable change appears to be taking place, at least in some quarters.
Long before 1997, there had been considerable movement towards professionalization of
management throughout Asia, including the HRM ﬁeld. The increased presence of
MNCs, particularly Western-based companies, has promoted the diffusion of Western
management techniques, including HRM practices, to indigenous ﬁrm. The threats
to national competitiveness brought about by globalization have further led to a
realization that conventional Asian management techniques are no longer fully adequate,
especially in ﬁrms heavily involved in international trade. The 1997 ﬁnancial crisis
only exacerbated such concerns within the region. Aside from Japanese approaches,
Asian management systems are traditionally based on limited delegation of decision
making, so that organizations often tend to lack the ﬂexibility to respond rapidly to
unforeseen environmental change. It is in this way, of course, that HPWS techniques are
potentially useful in Asia.


Bae et al.: HR strategy and performance in Paciﬁc Rim countries

1313

Unfortunately, there are also signiﬁcant potential cultural conﬂicts between the
American-style HPWS and traditional Asian values. As an example, Kirkman
and Shapiro (1997) discussed cultural factors that might impact on the effectiveness of
self-managed teams, often a central HPWS feature. Applying Kirkman and Shapiro’s
framework,
the collectivist nature of Asian cultures would certainly increase
the receptivity of workers in the region to the team aspect of the HPWS. However, the
self-management aspect is another issue. The hierarchical nature of Asian cultures, in
which those of lower status often tend naturally to defer to those of higher status, and
in which higher-status individuals expect such deference, would seem to militate against
the effectiveness of these types of systems. Managers are apt to be disinclined to share
power and subordinates may be disinclined to accept it.

Harmonious relationships are another cornerstone of East and Southeast Asian
culture. But the American-style HPWS requires a readiness for innovation and change,
factors that might well promote signiﬁcant degrees of short-term conﬂict at least.
Thus workers might be quite uncomfortable with systems that require team members to
raise questions about the wisdom of each other’s proposals for solving a problem, which
creates the possibility of loss of face for someone. Although group problem solving has
long been a part of Japanese employment systems, Morishima (1998) notes important
differences between Japanese participative systems, which he argues are best suited to
creating ‘incremental knowledge’, and the American-style HPWSs, which he argues
are designed to promote ‘innovative knowledge’. In addition, reaching consensus,
fundamental in the Japanese system, is not central to the American-style HPWS.

Finally, Kirkman and Shapiro (1997) argue that those from cultures with a strong
sense of external versus internal control will have greater difﬁculty in accepting and
working within a self-management system. External control implies the belief that one’s
actions have little impact on the environment, that nature controls man, not the other way
around. Traditional Asian societies are often highly fatalistic, as reﬂected in the
signiﬁcant role played in everyday life by practices such as fortune telling, astrology,
face reading,1 fung-shui,2 numerology and related techniques in these cultures. This then
provides another reason we might doubt, on theoretical grounds at any rate, the viability
of the American-style HPWS in Asia.

Country contexts

Before we can develop hypotheses about the workability of the American-style HPWS
across these four economies, we need to examine, in each case, current market forces,
typical HRM practices and changes in management style that may be under way.
In addition, we need to recognize the general statements regarding Asian culture made
above ignore within-country cultural variability. Thus, as Cavusgil and Das (1997) point
out, societies are not monolithic: an understanding of national culture requires an
appreciation of sources of cultural diversity within the country, especially here as these
might affect openness or resistance to HPWS implementation. We shall therefore
also discuss sources of cultural diversity as relevant to this issue for each of these
societies.

Korea The dominant form of business organization in Korea is the chaebol, generally
a family-controlled conglomerate of interlinked ﬁrms often held together through a
trading company (Chen, 1995). Even before the 1997 Asian ﬁnancial crisis, the Korean
government, worried about waning national competitiveness in the face of globalization,
began pressing for industrial reorganization and reform in the chaebols, as well as for


1314 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

a means of enhancing the competitiveness of small and medium-sized enterprises
(SMEs). In fact, segyewha, the Korean word for globalization, came to be used to
designate the government’s reform policies (Ungson et al., 1997). The 1997 ﬁnancial
crisis devastated the economy. GDP growth rates fell, respectively, from 8.9 per cent, 6.8
per cent and 5 per cent during 1995 – 7 to 2 6.7 per cent in 1998. Real wage increase rates
during the same period fell respectively from 6.4 per cent, 6.6 per cent and 2.5 per cent to
2 9.3 per cent. Unemployment rates, which had remained under 3 per cent from 1990 to
1997, jumped to 6.8 per cent in 1998. Given these economic conditions, the government
took even bolder steps to restructure the chaebols by forcing divestiture of unproductive
operations and moving these companies in the direction of more streamlined, efﬁcient
and ﬂexible organizations. Various labour law reforms were also introduced, allowing
ﬁrms greater latitude in lay-offs for economic reasons. The changes have not always been
appreciated by labour unions, generating numerous, sometimes violent, confrontations.
The economy has improved in recent years, though there is continuing concern and
uncertainty regarding Korea’s competitiveness in the global economy. Hence, despite
resistance in many quarters, the government continues to press for reforms in corporate
management and governance.

Chaebols have typically been managed in a paternal fashion and centrally controlled
by the founder or his heirs. In contrast to Japanese keiretsu, chaebols have tended to be
quite bureaucratic and heavily rooted in the traditions of Korea’s strongly Confucian
culture (Bae, 1997); the more participative management style typical in Japanese
companies is generally lacking. Chaebols also have traditionally employed extensive and
sophisticated recruitment and screening techniques in the case of white-collar workers,
but often use only personal referrals to recruit blue-collar workers (Koch et al., 1995).
Training is strongly emphasized and compensation has normally been linked primarily to
seniority. Though lay-offs and terminations occurred, ﬁrms often sought to avoid these,
as least for male employees of prime age.

While the traditional bureaucratic management and employment systems of the
chaebols promoted Korean competitiveness initially, it was apparent even before the 1997
crisis that globalization necessitated more ﬂexible and responsive organizations.
Complementing these societal and organization-wide changes were shifts in internal
employment practices by many companies to encourage higher levels of employee
performance and employment ﬂexibility. Therefore, two radically changed, fundamental
dimensions of Korean HRM systems are: 1) evaluation and remuneration, which have
moved from seniority-based to performance and competence-based; and 2) employment
ﬂexibility, which has changed from long-term attachment and high job security towards
numerical ﬂexibility (Bae and Rowley, 2001). What Koreans call the ‘new human
resource management’ (NHRM) approaches involve greater reliance on teams, employee
empowerment, linking stafﬁng decisions more directly to an employee’s ability and
potential (rather than personal connections) and performance-based evaluation and pay,
and stafﬁng (Bae, 1997), thus incorporating many features of HPWSs.

Korea is ethnically the most homogeneous of the four countries studied here, with
over 99 per cent of the population being ethnic Koreans. There is considerable diversity
with regard to religion, with the country roughly split between Buddhists and Christians,
though Christianity is dominant in urban areas and among the more educated. However,
religion does not seem to be a divisive force within Korean society, as Confucian
principles, promoted by through governmental policies, have been a dominant inﬂuence
on values regardless of religion. Of the four countries studied, Korea would have the
lowest proportion of women in the labour force, so gender diversity in the workplace
is also relatively limited. There would, however, seem to be a growing generation gap.


Bae et al.: HR strategy and performance in Paciﬁc Rim countries

1315

As the Korean economy has advanced, elements of
individualism increasingly
intermingle with traditional Confucian values, especially among younger workers
(Bae, 1997). However, this change would tend to favour many of the elements integral to
the HPWS. Another diversity issue, with perhaps the opposite impact, is linked to class.
Korea has one of the strongest, and certainly most militant, labour movements in Asia.
As noted above,
the unions have often vigorously opposed changes associated
with NHRM and related managerial initiatives and changes in Korean law that allowed
lay-offs for economic reasons resulted in heated confrontation.

Taiwan In contrast to Korea, Taiwanese companies tend to be SMEs, as is very typical
of privately owned Chinese ﬁrms throughout the region (Chen, 1995). Taiwan was
affected by the 1997 ﬁnancial crisis, but not nearly as severely as many other parts of East
and Southeast Asia. In fact, in the period immediately following the ﬁnancial crisis,
Taiwan became something of a model for other economies in the region as to how to
avoid the consequences of such an event. Taiwan’s ability to withstand the forces
unleashed in 1997 has often been attributed to several factors, including huge foreign
currency reserves, relatively strong commercial law (e.g. much tougher bankruptcy laws
than in many neighbouring countries, thus forcing poorly performing companies out of
business) and the ﬂexibility of SMEs to respond quickly to challenging economic
conditions.

Despite the hostility that exists politically between Taiwan and mainland
China, economic relations are much better. Taiwanese ﬁrms have been able to invest
in China since the 1980s. There has been a huge movement of labour-intensive
operations to the mainland to take advantage of low wages and a ready supply of less
skilled labour, coupled with the familiarity of Chinese culture. Although relatively
unaffected by the 1997 crisis and enjoying signiﬁcant growth in the late 1990s, Taiwan’s
economy has been stagnating in recent years, as reﬂected in lower growth rates and
relatively high unemployment. This is partly because of the global recession and partly
because of the competitive pressures generated by China (Chen et al., 2003). Other
factors might
include capital ﬂight (particularly as Taiwanese ﬁrms have shifted
operations to, and invested heavily in, China) and the relocation of many of Taiwan’s
most able workers to China (where career opportunities are often much better). Thus
Taiwan confronts problems similar to Korea: its initial success as an export-oriented
economy is now challenged by emerging economies. Future growth and success will
depend on enhanced competitiveness, particularly in higher value-added and more
capital-intensive industries.

Taiwanese ﬁrms are generally family-owned enterprises with managerial systems that,
as with Korea, are rooted in Confucian values (Chen, 1995). SMEs make up the majority
of businesses in Taiwan, with more than 60 per cent of Taiwanese workers in the private
sector employed by companies having fewer than thirty employees. Less than 10 per cent
of Taiwanese workers are employed by companies with more than 500 employees.
Management systems are less formal and bureaucratic than in the traditional Korean case.
The sample of ﬁrms used in this study (see below) illustrates this difference. There are
some large ﬁrms in our Taiwanese sample and, since both the Korean and Taiwanese
samples were randomly drawn from the set of better-known companies, the samples
are skewed toward larger ﬁrms. However, while the average number of employees per
ﬁrm in indigenously owned Taiwanese companies in our sample was 782, the average
number of employees per ﬁrm in the indigenous Korean ﬁrms in the sample was nearly
5200. The largest indigenous Korean ﬁrm in our sample had 46,000 employees, while the
largest indigenous Taiwanese ﬁrm had only 9200 employees.


1316 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

A paternalistic entrepreneur, supported by an entourage of relatives and trusted
friends, has traditionally been at the centre of Taiwanese companies. The entrepreneur
exercises extensive control over the day-to-day operations of the ﬁrm. In addition, the
ﬁnancial structure of the SME is usually rather simple and its owners are reluctant to
accept outside capital because they fear the dilution of ownership and loss of personal
decision-making power. The responsiveness and ﬂexibility of these ﬁrms derive from the
direct control of the company head and his or her intimate knowledge of all aspects of
the ﬁrm’s operations, which is made feasible by smaller organizational size. However,
Taiwanese SMEs often have a much shorter lifespan than Korean companies and seem
to have signiﬁcant difﬁculty surviving the transition of control from the founding
entrepreneur to his or her heirs.

Indigenous Taiwanese ﬁrms, especially smaller ones, often rely on relatively informal
approaches to HRM (Chen, 1997). Hiring and other aspects of the stafﬁng process are
generally inﬂuenced by interpersonal connections (guanxi). In these types of family
enterprises, owners and managers may put
less emphasis on ability than on an
employee’s potential loyalty and attitude towards the company. Evaluation is also linked
to attitudes and personal qualities not necessarily directly related to work performance
(but the preservation of intra-organizational harmony and interpersonal relationships are
important). Training is apt to be limited and viewed as an expense rather than a long-term
investment. Compensation systems are complex, in part because of labour laws, but pay
is not normally closely linked to performance, depending instead on the seniority of the
employee’s connections to the owner or other important person.

As a result of the economic and political pressures noted above, Taiwanese industry is
shifting more towards high-technology products that local ﬁrms can sell competitively
internationally. The government has established a high-technology-oriented industrial
park in Hsinchu (near Taipei) and another such project is under way in southern Taiwan.
Yet high-technology companies are not so conducive to traditional, Confucian-
inﬂuenced management techniques. For example, deference to age is an important aspect
of Confucianism, but such an approach becomes problematic in organizations in which
critical technical skills are often concentrated in the hands of some of the very youngest
employees. Uen (1997) demonstrated extensive experimentation with HPWSs in
Taiwanese high-tech ﬁrms operating in the Hsinchu National Scientiﬁc Park near Taipei,
where most of Taiwan’s leading high-technology ﬁrms have their operations. Huang
(2001) has noted a more broadly based trend towards larger organizations and increasing
adoption by those ﬁrms of strategic HRM systems, though more so in subsidiaries of
Western MNCs than in locally owned ﬁrms or subsidiaries of Japanese MNCs. This has
involved adoption of many HPWS techniques, including increased training and pay for
performance.

Taiwan is somewhat more ethnically diverse than Korea. Most Taiwanese are
ethnically Chinese, though there is often a distinction made between those who have their
origins in the mainland (and have come to Taiwan since the 1949 communist revolution)
and those whose families have lived long in Taiwan. This distinction is very important in
the political arena, but probably has little impact on workplace relations. There is a
signiﬁcant aboriginal community (i.e. Paciﬁc Islanders) in Taiwan, though this group is
economically disadvantaged and most aboriginal people live in more rural areas and are
not extensively employed in major industries. However, efforts to integrate the
aboriginal community and improve its economic opportunity may generate cultural
diversity issues in the future. As a more traditional and less educated people, one would
speculate aboriginals would be less accepting of HPWS techniques. The same would hold
for the signiﬁcant numbers of guest workers, mainly from Southeast Asia, who work on


Bae et al.: HR strategy and performance in Paciﬁc Rim countries

1317

contract in Taiwan (Chen et al., 2003). These workers are a more important source of
diversity in the workplace than the aboriginals and also often hold more traditional
values. The presence of the guest workers has become more of a source of tension in
recent years, particularly with the recession, as native Taiwanese see the guest workers as
competitors for their jobs. So implementation of a HPWS in a setting with signiﬁcant
numbers of foreign guest workers might be quite difﬁcult. There is a higher proportion of
women in the Taiwanese labour force than in Korea, although there has been
considerable overt discrimination against women, particularly with regard to managerial
and other higher-level
jobs. Taiwan has recently passed a law prohibiting sex
discrimination in employment, so employment opportunities for women are apt to
expand. This might result
in workplace tensions in some industries that could
inhibit HPWS implementation. Finally, many of the same cultural changes noted in
Korea are occurring in Taiwan, particularly the emergence of a younger generation who
are more individualistic, less deferential to authority, and generally less devoted to
traditional values than their parents. Moreover, a very large proportion of Taiwan’s
educated elite has studied overseas, mostly in the US. Many have also worked there.
This has had a signiﬁcant impact on the mindset of professional managers that, as
Huang (2001) noted, makes many companies more open to SHRM efforts and HPWS
techniques.

Singapore Singapore has a long history of government involvement in economic
planning. This has expressed itself in efforts to increase the population’s educational
attainment and encourage investment in high value-added and more capital-intensive
business activities. National industrial policy has long been co-ordinated by Singapore’s
Economic Development Board, which has sought in many ways to emulate Japan’s
Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI). This has clearly inﬂuenced HRM,
both by the types of
in Singapore
(thus facilitating diffusion of management techniques) and by the development paths
that economic planners have encouraged for local ﬁrms.

foreign companies encouraged to invest

Although Singapore did not suffer as greatly from the effects of the 1997 ﬁnancial
crisis as many of its much larger neighbours (especially Indonesia, Malaysia and
Thailand), the crisis did create concern for the island’s vulnerability should the region
experience economic collapse. The resulting economic plan put even greater emphasis
on upgrading workforce skills and moving Singapore in the direction of high-technology
activity. However, despite such initiatives, Singapore has faced greater economic
difﬁculties in the post-2000 period, including an ongoing recession linked to declines in
the American economy and the same global competitive pressures affecting Taiwan
and Korea.

Locally owned ﬁrms are typically Chinese-owned SMEs that are similar in many
respects to Taiwanese ﬁrms. As such, the management systems of these enterprises
have traditionally been dominated by strong entrepreneurs who made most of the
decisions and expected the others to follow. This is also reﬂective of the emphasis
Singapore’s political leaders have placed on Confucianism as a national ideology.
However, the more developed and larger-sized family enterprises tend to employ
more professional staff. With many MNCs operating in the country,
is not
uncommon to ﬁnd local companies importing Western management concepts
and practices to a certain degree, again especially among the larger local ﬁrms.
Also, the rapid growth of the private sector since the early 1990s witnessed more
local ﬁrms becoming public companies and listed on the Singapore Stock Exchange.
This has led to greater managerial professionalism in response to shareholder

it


1318 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

demands for performance and accountability. Interestingly, Singapore requires by law
that virtually all undergraduates, regardless of major ﬁeld, take at least one course in
human resource management. This has led to broad awareness of newer and more
sophisticated HRM policies and strategies.

The 1997 ﬁnancial crisis prompted a typical ﬂurry of activity within governmental
quarters to insulate Singapore from the competitive threats posed by changing economic
pressures. In the HRM area, the Manpower 21 Steering committee was tasked in 1998 to
co-ordinate and develop a blueprint for national human resource planning that came to be
called ‘Manpower 21’. The Manpower 21 vision is for the country to be a ‘Talent
Capital’, a centre of ideas, innovation, knowledge and exchange. Six core strategies were
formulated to address critical aspects of the ‘manpower value chain’. They covered
integrated human resource planning,
lifelong learning for lifelong employability,
augmenting the country’s talent pool, transforming the work environment, developing a
vibrant manpower industry and redeﬁning partnerships among the key players and
institutions (Singapore Ministry of Manpower, 1999).

Although by far the smallest country in our sample, Singapore is also clearly the most
ethnically diverse, evident in the fact that Singapore has four ofﬁcial languages. Ethnic
Chinese constitute 77 per cent of the population and Chinese culture thus permeates most
aspects of Singaporean life. As with Korea and Taiwan, the government promotes
Confucianism as a national ideology. Yet 14 per cent of the population is Malay, with
signiﬁcant numbers of Indians and Europeans as well. Thus there are distinct cultural
inﬂuences that might inhibit the effectiveness of efforts at HPWS implementation. Ethnic
diversity also gives rise to religious diversity, with Buddhism, Islam and Hinduism being
the most common forms. As these religions are quite distinct, this serves to reinforce
cultural diversity. Women participate extensively in the Singaporean economy and
seemingly enjoy considerable employment opportunity at all levels.

Despite the country’s conservative reputation, Singaporean culture has seemingly
been undergoing signiﬁcant changes not unlike those in Korea and Taiwan. Hofstede
(1980) found that the national culture of Singapore was high on power distance, low on
uncertainty avoidance, collectivist and displayed neither prominent masculine nor
feminine features. However, in a much more recent survey of Singaporean workers using
Hofstede’s items, Chew (2000) found Singaporeans were now much lower in power
distance, but higher in uncertainty avoidance. The former change would, according to the
Kirkman and Shapiro (1997) framework, increase the receptivity of these workers to
HPWS techniques. However, greater uncertainty avoidance would lead to greater risk
avoidance, which is not necessarily a desirable attribute for an employee working under
an HPWS. These cultural changes linked to economic growth might also moderate the
impact of some of the other sources of cultural diversity in Singapore.

Thailand Thailand is the least economically developed of the four economies in this
study. There are huge differences in the level of development between the Bangkok
metropolitan area and most of the rest of Thailand. Bangkok enjoys a level of
development comparable to Singapore, yet Thailand as a whole is a surplus labour
economy with extensive poverty in many parts of the country. Although Thailand has had
a succession of ‘ﬁve-year plans’ to address economic development needs and a Board of
Investment to help direct the process, much of the very substantial growth that has taken
place has been fairly chaotic and not well integrated. Over-investment, particularly in
real estate, led in large part to the economic crash of 1997. The country’s ability to
respond to the demands of globalization is also limited by a poorly developed human
resource base. Although Thailand enjoys a high literacy rate and most people have some


Bae et al.: HR strategy and performance in Paciﬁc Rim countries

1319

level of formal education, a signiﬁcant majority of Thais have completed at most only
elementary school. Even today, only 40 per cent of those in the secondary school age
range actually attend school. Thai educational attainment is much lower than that of even
some signiﬁcantly less developed economies in the region (e.g. Vietnam, Indonesia).
Though devastated by the 1997 ﬁnancial crisis – which had its origins in Thailand –
Thailand has been experiencing a slow but steady economic recovery beginning in 2001.
Nonetheless, there is still considerable unemployment and continuing economic distress
(Lawler and Atmiyanandana, 2003).

Most private-sector Thai-owned companies are controlled by families of Chinese
ancestry. Thus, the traditional Chinese family enterprise model seen in Taiwan and
Singapore is common. However, larger companies, especially those with signiﬁcant
external investors (e.g. companies traded on the Stock Exchange of Thailand) have
adopted more in the way of Western-style management and HRM policies (Lawler et al.,
1997; Lawler and Atmiyanandana, 2003). However, many of the larger, more successful
organizations tend to be patterned in ways similar to the Korean chaebols and are thus a
complex of interrelated companies.

The less educated Thai labour force has meant that the strategies Korea, Taiwan and
Singapore have employed in response to globalization (i.e. movement towards less
labour-intensive and more sophisticated technologies) are not so readily available
to Thailand. An HPWS generally requires both the delegation of meaningful authority to
lower-level employees and the equipping of those employees with necessary skills to act
autonomously (Liden and Tewskbury, 1995). So efforts to increase ﬂexibility in Thai
organizations through HPWS implementation could be expected to be thwarted by
educational deﬁciencies and the prevalence of traditional Asian cultural values, such as
high-power distance,
fatalism and a strong preference for harmonious social
relationships. In fact, much of Thailand’s post-1997 recovery has been driven by
a depreciated currency that has lowered the prices of Thai products on the world
market and not by increased productivity. Yet there are clear examples of situations
in which companies have successfully implemented HPWS-like employment
practices, even in the case of lower-level workers with limited education (Lawler and
Atmiyanandana, 2000).

Although Thai culture has certainly been inﬂuenced by the rapid growth experienced
in the 1980s and 1990s, Thailand remains a reservoir of more traditional values,
especially among the rural people that are often drawn into the industrial workforce.
Thailand is not fundamentally a Confucian culture (though Confucian values have
inﬂuence through the Chinese business community), as the dominant
religion
form of Buddhism
is Theravada Buddhism, an older and more traditional
than the Mahayana Buddhism of Taiwan, Korea and Singapore. Connections
to Indian culture mean that Hindu beliefs still have an inﬂuence within Thailand. Thus
class distinctions are often quite pronounced and rooted in ascriptive criteria. This is not
to say Thailand has anything like a caste system, but more of an English-style class
system (supported by the continuing existence of a monarchy and royal titles). Class lines
can be crossed, but not without difﬁculty. The society,
is collectivist
and hierarchical, characteristics very much reﬂected in Thai approaches to management.
is paternalistic, combining both authoritarian
The quintessential Thai manager
and more benevolent styles of
leadership (Atmiyanandana and Lawler, 2001).
Authority relationships are very important
including those in
the workplace.

in Thai society,

then,


1320 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

Hypotheses

The preceding discussion suggests several hypotheses. The pressures of globalization
create signiﬁcant levels of environmental turbulence for ﬁrms in all four countries, so
organizational ﬂexibility and adaptability are desirable states. Traditional Asian cultural
characteristics would presumably militate against effective HPWS implementation.
However, cultural change in the direction of more individualist and less hierarchical
values and some economic environmental changes demanding learning and
organizational capabilities mean these societies are potentially more receptive to
HPWS techniques, as also indicated in the empirical work cited above. Therefore,
we posit:

Hypothesis 1: The degree to which a ﬁrm utilizes HPWS techniques will be
the

positively related to organizational performance across all
countries in our sample.

The country contexts we have identiﬁed above suggest that HPWS receptivity might
vary across these countries. Our discussion of the characteristics of Korea, Singapore and
Taiwan suggest that HPWS techniques are apt to have generally similar effects on
organizational performance in each country. All three have rather advanced economic
systems and sophisticated and educated work forces; cultural change in the direction
of greater individualism is also evident in all three places. Governments have been
actively promoting change, especially in Korea and Singapore. So the environments
of these three economies should be similarly conducive to the effective HPWS
implementation.

Hypothesis 2: The degree to which a ﬁrm utilizes HPWS techniques will be
similarly related to organizational performance in Taiwan, Singapore
and Korea.

In contrast to Korea, Singapore and Taiwan, we have identiﬁed several aspects of the
Thai national context that might well limit HPWS effectiveness. This is not to say that
HPWS techniques will not have a positive effect in Thailand, only that the effect is not
expected to be as strong as in the other three locations. Thus, we posit:

Hypothesis 3: The degree to which a ﬁrm utilizes HPWS techniques will be less
positively related to organizational performance in Thailand than in
Taiwan, Singapore and Korea.

As a ﬁnal issue, we should like to speculate as to HPWS impact as a function of
national origin. Unfortunately, our country sub-samples are not large enough to do
within-country analyses broken down by the ﬁrm’s country-of-origin. To do this,
we need to utilize the pooled sample of cases. The high performance work system, as
deﬁned here, is essentially an American development (though certainly rooted in
Japanese practices). The experience of American ﬁrms in applying HPWS techniques
suggests these companies will most be effective in HPWS implementation. Indigenous
companies in all four countries are increasingly experimenting with HPWS techniques,
but have less experience than American companies. However, indigenous ﬁrms are more
likely to understand the cultural idiosyncrasies of workers and thus may be better able to
adapt these practices to local conditions. Thus, we posit:


Bae et al.: HR strategy and performance in Paciﬁc Rim countries

1321

Hypothesis 4: The degree to which a ﬁrm utilizes HPWS techniques will be
more positively related to organizational effectiveness in afﬁliates
of American MNCs and locally owned ﬁrms than in afﬁliates of
European and Japanese MNCs.

Research methods

The questionnaire developed for this survey assessed the various components of a
ﬁrm’s HR system, ﬁrm size, organizational strategy, ﬁrm performance and other
organizational characteristics (e.g. characteristics of the HRM sub-unit and the ﬁrm’s
geographical location). The questions focused on HRM practices with respect only to
non-managerial employees. The questionnaires were administered to individuals
with principal responsibility for HRM in a random sample of ﬁrms in South Korea,
Thailand, Taiwan and Singapore. The sampling frames in each country consisted of
leading business directories, so the companies tended to be larger organizations or at
least organizations with substantial
in the global market (through
import or export activities). The questionnaire was administered in English in
Singapore and was translated into Korean, Chinese and Thai for administration in the
other locations in the sample. We were able to obtain usable data from a total of
about 680 ﬁrms in all
locations. These were randomly selected from
leading business directories in each country and consisted of both indigenous and
foreign-owned companies. Indigenous ﬁrms are deﬁned as those wholly owned
by host-country nationals or joint ventures with foreign ﬁrms that are controlled by
host-country nationals.

involvement

four

Scales

study is

the ﬁrm’s perceived ﬁnancial
The dependent variable used in this
performance. We employ a subjective measure of performance derived from a scale
developed by Khandwalla (1977). Likert-type items measured perceived ﬁnancial
strength, proﬁtability, growth rate and market share. The reliability (coefﬁcient alpha)
for the scale, composed of four items,
is .77. Although objective measures of
performance, such as return on investment based on accounting data, would seem a
more appropriate measure,
the study
involves companies in four different countries with distinct accounting standards, so
there are comparability problems. Second, many companies in Asia are reluctant to
disclose ﬁnancial data, so the necessary information is often not available. This
creates a limitation in the analysis, as compared to many American-based studies that
rely on rich archival sources of objective organizational performance data. However,
we feel this approach is adequate given the more exploratory nature of this study.
Moreover, some leading studies of
the HR system-organizational performance
relationship have also relied on perceptual measures of performance (e.g. Delaney and
Huselid, 1996).

their use would be problematic here. First,

The principal independent variable in our study is the ﬁrm’s HR system. This was
initially based on four distinct sub-scales (HR ﬂow, work system, reward system and
employee upward inﬂuence) as described by Bae et al. (1998). Various Likert-style items
were used to measure HRM practices argued to reﬂect these underlying dimensions.
In some instances, questions developed by other researchers were used, while other items
were developed by the authors. Firms that are high on the HR ﬂow subscale utilize
extensive selection and training procedures and have relatively high job security.


1322 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

The scale is composed of six items with a reliability (alpha coefﬁcient) of .71. The work
systems subscale covers job design and control types. Firms at the upper end of this scale
tend to use broadly deﬁned jobs with enriched designs, team-based work organization
and employee autonomy. Narrowly deﬁned jobs and a greater presence of rules and
formal controls characterize ﬁrms at the lower end of the scale (four items and alpha
of .68). The reward system subscale reﬂects the degree of the linkage of performance
and pay level and the presence of employee ownership programmes. Firms at the
high end of the scale emphasize pay for performance, gain sharing and/or proﬁt sharing
(six items and alpha of .70). The employee inﬂuence subscale measures the extent to
which employees, as stakeholders, are involved in decision making in job-related and
organizational issues. High values represent high employee involvement and autonomy
(four items and alpha of .71). High values on all of these scales are consistent with
HPWS methods, while low values are consistent with more traditional, bureaucratic
employment systems. Since organizations are likely to design HR systems in order to
achieve internal ﬁt or coherence among various employment practices, it is not surprising
that the scales are highly intercorrelated and may well reduce to a single dimension, as
has been the case in many US-based HPWS studies.

Another important independent variable in the study is the ﬁrm’s organizational
strategy. Likert-type items are used to measure the extent to which the ﬁrm pursues a
business strategy of differentiation (Porter, 1980). The scale consists of eight items with a
coefﬁcient alpha of .88 (Bae and Lawler, 2000). We would generally expect a strategy of
differentiation to be more closely linked to organizational ﬂexibility and thus positively
related to organizational performance.

Cross-cultural equivalence of scales

Despite acceptable reliability levels for all of the scales mentioned above in the pooled
(i.e. four-country) sample, it is necessary to establish that the items measure similar
constructs in Taiwan, Thailand, Korea and Singapore. In order to establish item
equivalence, we performed conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) on each individual
scale. For each item in each scale, we tested the hypothesis that its factor loadings
were equivalent across all four locations (Byrne, 2001). This involved ﬁrst allowing
all factor loadings for a given construct to vary across countries, then comparing these
results to a contrasting model
item was constrained across
locations. If,
it was
discerned that the fully unconstrained model exhibited signiﬁcantly better ﬁt than the
model with the focal item factor loading constrained, we inferred that focal item was
not equivalent in meaning across the four locations. If so, it was deleted from the
scale.

in applying conventional CFA ﬁt measures (Byrne, 2001),

in which the focal

The CFA analysis indicated that most of the items in the scales used here had
equivalent factor loadings across locations. The one exception was the work systems
subscale. Only one of the four items in this scale had equivalent factor loadings across the
four locations. Thus, we could not reasonably assume these items were interpreted in an
equivalent manner in each setting. The entire subscale was deleted from the analysis.
Some other individual items were also deleted from other scales, but those scales still
appeared content valid (i.e. the remaining items with constant factor loadings addressed
issues that adequately assessed the domains of the scales).

After deleting the items from the set of HR system scales with variable factor loadings
across locations (and thus excluding completely the work systems subscale), we
evaluated the overall of ﬁt of the remaining items for the HR ﬂow, reward system and


Bae et al.: HR strategy and performance in Paciﬁc Rim countries

1323

employee inﬂuence subscales. Fit statistics for the model were within generally accepted
limits. The value of the x2 statistic divided by degrees of freedom was 1.82 (values less
than 3.00 are considered consistent with good ﬁt in conﬁrmatory factor analysis), the
goodness of ﬁt index (GFI) was .92 (values higher than .91 are considered acceptable)
and the root means squared error of approximation (RMSEA) was .03 (with values of less
than .10 considered acceptable). The overall ﬁt statistics differed little for this fully
constrained model from the overall ﬁt statistics for the unconstrained model (in which all
factor loading were allowed to vary across locations). Given the expected generally high
correlations among the subscales (ranging from .7 to .9), these three subscales were
summed to construct a single HR system scale for the regression analysis (with HPWS
characteristics increasing the higher the scale value). Coefﬁcient alpha for this composite
HR system scale was .73.

Similar CFA analysis was performed for the perceived ﬁnancial performance and
organizational strategy scales. All three of the items in the perceived performance
scale demonstrated consistent factor loadings across locations and ﬁt statistics were
well within the acceptable range for the scale (x2 to degrees of freedom ratio of 1.83, GFI
of .99 and RMSEA of .03). It was necessary to drop some items from the strategy scale,
but the resulting scale also had acceptable ﬁt measures (x2 to degrees of freedom ratio
of 1.27, GFI of .99 and RMSEA of .02). The revised strategy scale had a reliability
coefﬁcient of .73 (the perceived performance scale was not altered).

Model estimation

To test our hypotheses, we regress perceived ﬁnancial performance against the composite
HR system scale, the organizational strategy (differentiation) scale, dummy variables
representing both host country (Korea served as the reference group, so that dummy
variables representing Singapore, Thailand and Taiwan appear in the regression analysis)
and the ﬁrm’s country of origin (the US served as the reference group, so that dummy
variables Singapore, Korea, Thailand, Taiwan, Japan and Europe appear in the regression
analysis), the years of operation of the ﬁrm in the host country, the natural log of ﬁrm size
(number of employees), union status (coded 1 for unionized ﬁrms, 0 otherwise) and
industrial sector (coded 1 if manufacturer, 0 otherwise). Finally, in order to control for
the effects of the Asian ﬁnancial crisis, we included a dummy variable measured code as
1 for those cases in which data were collected after 1997 and 0 otherwise (data were
collected in 1996, 1998 and 1999). Descriptive statistics and the correlation matrix for
the variables used here are reported in Table 1.

Given the cross-sectional nature of the data, we were concerned that applying ordinary
least squares (OLS) would generate biased estimates of the impact of the HPWS measure
on perceived performance. The causal order of HR system and perceived performance is
ambiguous. Firms that implement HPWS techniques might well experience higher levels
of perceived performance, as hypothesized, but
is,
organizations that achieve higher levels of performance are better able to afford
implementation of often costlier HPWS techniques (that involve more training, more
selective search processes and perhaps higher pay). Bae and Lawler (2000) note that one
way of handling the possible dual causation problem here is to use two-stage least
squares (2SLS) with instrumental variables. Although this problem can be handled
within a structural equation framework (e.g. LISREL), the large number of dichotomous
independent variables prevented us from using this approach. All the independent
variables mentioned above, except
the HR systems composite scale, served as
instrumental variables in this analysis. In addition, a scale measuring management

the converse can occur. That


1324 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

6
1

5
1

4
1

3
1

2
1

1
1

0
1

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

D
S

n
a
e
M

Þ
3
8
6
¼
n
ð

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v

t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
n
i

d
n
a

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
p

l
a
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
n
a
g
r
o

r
o
f

s
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

e
v
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
d

d
n
a

x
i
r
t
a
m
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

1

e
l
b
a
T

7
0
.

8
0
.
2

7
0
.
2

2
1
.

0
0
.

5
1
.

2
1
.
2

1
0
.

2
0
.

2
7
.
2

8
5
.
2

3
5
.
2

5
6
.

2
6
.

7
6
.

3
0
2

.

7
0
2

.

1
0
2

.

3
1
2

.

5
0

.

0
0

.

3
2
2

.

0
1
2

.

1
1
2

.

2
0

.

0
1

.

5
1

.

7
0
2

.

2
0
2

.

1
0
2

.

0
5

.

7
0

.

1
1
2

.

4
1
2

.

7
0
2

.

4
1
2

.

7
0
2

.

8
0
2

.

4
0

.

1
0

.

8
0
2

.

4
0
2

.

2
0

.

2
0
2

.

3
0

.

1
3

.

2
2

.

2
3
2

.

4
1
2

.

9
2

.

1
2

.

0
2

.

5
0

.

4
0

.

3
0
2

.

0
2

.

0
4

.

4
4

.

8
0
2

.

5
0
2

.

2
0
2

.

2
0
2

.

5
2
2

.

6
0
2

.

2
2

.

4
1

.

3
3

.

1
4

.

9
0

.

8
0
2

.

5
0
2

.

1
5
2

.

2
0
2

.

7
0
2

.

1
1

.

1
0

.

3
2

.

6
2

.

8
1

.

7
3

.

1
5

.

9
0
2

.

1
0
2

.

2
3
2

.

5
0

.

0
1

.

4
2
2

.

6
0
2

.

0
0

.

5
0
2

.

3
0
2

.

7
0

.

6
0
2

.

3
1
2

.

0
3
2

.

8
1
2

.

4
1

.

8
1

.

4
0

.

4
0

.

9
0
2

.

2
1

.

6
0
2

.

2
0
2

.

2
0
2

.

3
0

.

3
1
2

.

2
1
2

.

2
0
2

.

4
0
2

.

5
1

.

6
2

.

3
1

.

0
2
2

.

2
0
2

.

5
0
2

.

3
1
2

.

3
0

.

6
0

.

0
4

.

6
1

.

7
1

.

1
1

.

3
0

.

1
2

.

7
2

.

6
6
2

.

7
1
2

.

0
7

.

0
1

.

1

6
1

.

4

5
2

.

5

y
g
e
t
a
r
t
s

n
o
i
t
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

D

)
S
W
P
H

(

m
e
t
s
y
s
R
H

6
4

.

5
4

.

0
3

.

8
2

.

3
2

.

5
3

.

6
3

.

2
3

.

9
2

.

0
1

.

9
0

.

5
0

.

4
1

.

5
1

.

d
e
n
w
o

e
s
e
n
a
w
i
a
T

m
r
ﬁ

d
e
z
i
n
o
i
n
U

d
e
n
w
o

i
a
h
T

d
e
n
w
o

n
a
e
r
o
p
a
g
n
i
S

d
e
n
w
o

n
a
e
p
o
r
u
E

d
e
n
w
o

e
s
e
n
a
p
a
J

d
e
n
w
o

n
a
e
r
o
K

3
1
2

.

2
4

.

1

7
4

.

5

s
e
e
y
o
l
p
m
e

f
o

r
e
b
m
u
n

f
o

g
o
L

1
1

.

8
2
2

.

1
3
2

.

2
1
2

.

7
0

.

4
0
2

.

3
3

.

9
4

.

5
3

.

2
4

.

4
4

.

9
4

.

8
8

.

1
4

.

4
1

.

3
2

.

3
7

.

6
5

.

8
8

.

7
1

3
0

.

2
2

d
n
a
l
i
a
h
T

:
y
r
t
n
u
o
c

t
s
o
H

n
a
w
i
a
T

:
y
r
t
n
u
o
c

t
s
o
H

e
r
o
p
a
g
n
i
S

:
y
r
t
n
u
o
c

t
s
o
H

m
r
ﬁ

g
n
i
r
u
t
c
a
f
u
n
a
M

a
t
a
d

7
9
9
1
-
t
s
o
P

m
r
ﬁ

f
o

e
g
A

3
3

.

4

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
p

l
a
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
n
a
g
r
O

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0
1

1
1

2
1

3
1

4
1

5
1

6
1

7
1


Bae et al.: HR strategy and performance in Paciﬁc Rim countries

1325

perceptions of the value of HR resources (Bae and Lawler, 2000) served as an instrument
in place of HR systems. The HR values variable is presumed to be an exogenous
precursor of HR system. CFA was also used on this
scale to assure
common interpretation of the scale items across locations. There were three items in
this scale, all of which appeared to have constant factor loading across settings
and acceptable ﬁt statistics (x2 to degrees of freedom ratio of 1.22, GFI of .99 and
RMSEA of .02).

Results

2SLS regression results for the pooled sample are reported in Table 2. The overall
regression was statistically signiﬁcant at the .01 level and explained 25 per cent of the
variance in perceived performance across all cases. The HR system coefﬁcient was
positive in sign and statistically signiﬁcant at the .01 level, thus supporting hypothesis
1 that we would ﬁnd that HPWS level exerted a generally positive impact on
perceived performance within this region. Other independent variables in the analysis
impacted on organizational performance in ways we might expect. Firms that utilized
differentiation, rather than cost minimization, as their dominant business strategy
reported higher
levels of organization effectiveness and unionized ﬁrms
reported somewhat lower levels of organizational performance than non-unionized
ﬁrms. Larger ﬁrms reported higher levels of performance, but the age of the ﬁrm
(i.e. years in the host country) does not seem to matter. Although ﬁrms did report
lower levels of performance in the post-1997 period,
this was not statistically
signiﬁcant (but see the discussion below).

The dummy variables controlling for country of origin had little impact on
performance, though there were variations across host country. In general, companies
operating in Thailand and Taiwan had substantially lower levels of reported performance
than those in Korea (the reference group), while ﬁrms operating in Singapore had
slightly, though insigniﬁcantly, lower levels of perceived performance. This pattern is
consistent with the manner in which the data were collected. The Korean data were
collected in 1996, prior to the Asian ﬁnancial crisis. The Thai, Singaporean and most of
the Taiwanese data were collected in the post-crisis era. Thus, the post-1997 dummy
variable was confounded to some extent with the host-country dummy variables.
This may explain the relatively weak impact of the post-1997 indicator in that most of the
adverse economic effects associated with the crisis were picked up by the host-country
variables. These results, taken as a whole, are consistent with the pattern we would have
expected regarding perceived performance: generally substantially lower levels in the
post-1997 period. The only surprising outcome would be the high negative impact for
Taiwan, which seemed to have escaped the brunt of the 1997 crisis (though certainly felt
some impact).

Hypothesis 2 argued that, in the three more economically advanced economies in the
sample, HPWS level would have similar effects on perceived performance. 2SLS
regression results for each host country are also reported in Table 2. As these analyses are
conducted within individual host countries, host-country dummy variables were not used
and some of the county-of-origin dummy variables were also dropped where appropriate.
Also, the post-1997 dummy variable was not required. All host-country regressions were
statistically signiﬁcant at the .01 level and explained between 20 per cent and 30 per cent
of the variance in perceived performance. However, although the HR system variable is
positive and statistically signiﬁcant in the Taiwanese, Korean and Singaporean samples,
it is also apparent that the magnitudes of these coefﬁcients differ, with the effect highest


1326 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

d
n
a
s
t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
c
n
o
i
s
s
e
r
g
e
r
(

s
e
l
p
m
a
s
-
b
u
s
y
r
t
n
u
o
c
-
t
s
o
h
d
n
a
e
l
p
m
a
s
d
e
l
o
o
p
r
o
f
e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
p
l
a
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
n
a
g
r
o
r
o
f

s
t
l
u
s
e
r
n
o
i
s
s
e
r
g
e
r

s
e
r
a
u
q
s

t
s
a
e
l
e
g
a
t
s
-
o
w
T

2
e
l
b
a
T

g
n
i
t
a
r
e
p
o

s
m
r
i
F

e
r
o
p
a
g
n
i
S

n
i

b

)
5
2

.
(

c

)
9
0

.
(

)
9
1

.
(

b

)
1
2

.
(

)
3
2

.
(

)
2
2

.
(

a

)
5
0
.
(

)
5
0
0

.
(

2
5

.

6
1

.

7
2
2

.

1
4
2

.

9
1

.

0
0

.

4
0

.

4
3
2

.

a

)
6
1

.
(

)
7
0

.
(

)
2
1

.
(

)
6
1

.
(

b

)
6
2

.
(

a

)
1
2

.
(

)
4
0

.
(

b

)
3
0
0

.
(

n
a
w
i
a
T

7
8

.

1
1

.

4
0
2

.

6
2
2

.

b

)
3
3

.
(

)
0
1

.
(

)
5
2

.
(

d
n
a
l
i
a
h
T

2
7

.

5
1

.

1
2
2

.

)
5
3

.
(

2
2

.

4
6
2

.

4
5
2

.

3
0
0
2

.

8
0
0
2

.

)
0
4
.
(

)
0
4
.
(

)
7
0

.
(

a

)
5
0
0

.
(

6
1

.

2
3

.

4
0

.

2
0

.

b

)
4
1

a

)
6
0

.
(

.
(

b

)
3
1

.
(

)
1
2

.
(

)
6
1

.
(

b

)
6
0

.
(

)
4
2

.
(

)
4
0
0

.
(

a
e
r
o
K

6
2

.

4
2

.

7
2
2

.

6
1

.

0
3

.

7
1

.

8
1
2

.

6
0
0
2

.

n
i

g
n
i
t
a
r
e
p
o

s
m
r
i
F

n
i

g
n
i
t
a
r
e
p
o

s
m
r
i
F

n
i

g
n
i
t
a
r
e
p
o

s
m
r
i
F

e
l
p
m
a
s

d
e
l
o
o
P

)
5
1

.
(

)
3
8

.
(

6
9

.

7
2
2

.

)
2
1
.
(

)
1
5

.
(

1
1

.

3
3

.

)
8
1

.
(

)
5
3
1
(

.

7
2

.

2
5
2

.

b

)
2
1

.
(

a

)
1
6

.
(

9
6

.

1

8
2
2

.

9
5
1

2
2

.

a
8
0
6

.

3
8
2

9
2

.

a
5
2
4
1

.

3
0
1

0
2

.

a
8
8

.

3

8
3
1

2
2

.

a
7
1

.

5

3
8
6

4
2

.

a
1
4

.

4
1

a

)
0
1
.
(

a

)
4
0

.
(

c

)
8
0

.
(

)
2
1

.
(

c

)
5
1

.
(

)
8
1

.
(

)
7
1

.
(

)
1
1

.
(

a

)
3
0

.
(

)
1
1

.
(

)
2
0
0
.
(

a

)
6
1

.
(

a

)
2
2

.
(

)
7
1

.
(

)
3
1

.
(

a

)
2
3

.
(

)
7
0

.
(

9
5

.

8
1

.

4
1
2

.

3
0
2

.

7
1
2

.

6
2
2

.

5
2
2

.

3
0
2

.

4
1
2

.

7
0

.

0
0

.

2
6
2

.

8
5
2

.

7
0
2

.

7
0
2

.

1
0
2

.

8
0
1

.

y
g
e
t
a
r
t
s

n
o
i
t
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

D

)
S
W
P
H

(

m
e
t
s
y
s
R
H

d
e
n
w
o

e
s
e
n
a
w
i
a
T

m
r
ﬁ

d
e
z
i
n
o
i
n
U

d
e
n
w
o

i
a
h
T

d
e
n
w
o

n
a
e
r
o
p
a
g
n
i
S

d
e
n
w
o

n
a
e
p
o
r
u
E

d
e
n
w
o

e
s
e
n
a
p
a
J

d
e
n
w
o

n
a
e
r
o
K

s
e
e
y
o
l
p
m
e

f
o

r
e
b
m
u
n

f
o

g
o
L

d
n
a
l
i
a
h
T

:
y
r
t
n
u
o
c

t
s
o
H

n
a
w
i
a
T

:
y
r
t
n
u
o
c

t
s
o
H

e
r
o
p
a
g
n
i
S

:
y
r
t
n
u
o
c

t
s
o
H

m
r
ﬁ

g
n
i
r
u
t
c
a
f
u
n
a
M

a
t
a
d

7
9
9
1
-
t
s
o
P

m
r
ﬁ

f
o

e
g
A

2
R
d
e
t
s
u
j
d
A

o
i
t
a
r
-
F

t
n
a
t
s
n
o
C

N

s
e
t
o
N

)
s
r
o
r
r
e

d
r
a
d
n
a
t
s

.
l
e
v
e
l

0
1

.

t
a

t
n
a
c
ﬁ
i
n
g
i
s

c

;
l
e
v
e
l

5
0
.

t
a

t
n
a
c
ﬁ
i
n
g
i
s

b

;
l
e
v
e
l

1
0
.

t
a

t
n
a
c
ﬁ
i
n
g
i
S

a


Bae et al.: HR strategy and performance in Paciﬁc Rim countries

1327

in Taiwan and lowest in Korea. Thus, hypothesis 2 is not supported. Although the
differences in effects between Korea and Singapore, and between Singapore and Taiwan,
are not statistically signiﬁcant, the difference between Korea and Taiwan is signiﬁcant at
the .01 level.

Why might hypothesis 2 not be supported? One explanation would be that the
HR system variables could be of restricted range in some of the host countries.
For example, suppose that a large number of Korean ﬁrms had adopted HPWS
techniques, while only limited numbers of Taiwanese ﬁrms had done so. The HR system
variable would have limited variance in the Korean sub-sample,
thus rendering
the parameter estimate downwardly biased. However, the means and variances for the HR
system scale for these three locations were approximately equivalent. Thus the restriction
of range explanation would not seem appropriate. There are various structural
possibilities. The generally more militant unions in Korea, which have certainly opposed
changes in the direction of introducing greater labour ﬂexibility into the Korean
environment, could perhaps be a factor in limiting the effective implementation of
HPWS techniques there. It fact, it is only in the case of the Korean sub-sample that union
effects on perceived performance are statistically signiﬁcant and negative, suggestive of
the impact of the Korean unions. Unions in Taiwan, especially in the private sector, are
much less militant than Korean unions (Chen et al., 2003), and the same holds in
Singapore. Another factor in Korea may be the large size of the chaebols, which might
make implementation of such policies problematic compared to Taiwan and Singapore.
Finally, as the Korean data precede the 1997 ﬁnancial crisis and most of the Taiwanese
and Singaporean data follow it, there could be an effect related to that speciﬁc event.
That
the post-1997 era might have engendered changes in worker behaviour
that might create more effect implementation of HPWS methods, if, for example,
workers felt insecure and more motivated to co-operate with management in the interest
of preserving their jobs.

is,

Hypothesis 3 posited that HPWS techniques would function less effectively in
Thailand than in Korea, Taiwan or Singapore, given the greater level of educational
attainment and human resource formation in those three locations relative to Thailand,
as well as the prevalence of more traditional values in Thailand, which is much
less developed and more agrarian than Taiwan, Korea and Singapore. But the results
(Table 2) clearly indicate that Thailand ranks second only to Taiwan in terms of the
apparent ability of employers
to implement HPWS techniques effectively
(i.e. the Thai HR systems coefﬁcient is positive, signiﬁcant and relatively high). We
checked for restriction of range problems, but this did not seem to be a possible
explanation. It appears that, when handled properly, workers in Thailand, even relatively
low-level workers, could respond well to HPWS techniques. A case study by Lawler and
Atmiyanandana (2000) demonstrates that workers in Thailand with only three or four
years of formal education, under the right circumstances, can work quite effectively in
circumstances characterized by greater worker ‘empowerment’ and contingent ﬁnancial
incentives. Sivasubramaniam and Venkata Ratnam (1998) observed that HPWS
techniques could be effective in the case of Indian workers similarly limited in terms of
educational attainment.

Our ﬁnal hypothesis argued that locally owned ﬁrms and local afﬁliates of American
MNCs would be more effective at HPWS utilization than local afﬁliates of European or
Japanese MNCs (hypothesis 4). Table 3 contains regression results for the sample broken
down into four groups: locally owned ﬁrms, afﬁliates of American MNCs, afﬁliates of
European MNCs and afﬁliates of Japanese MNCs. All four of these regressions were
statistically signiﬁcant at the .01 level. The HPWS impact on ﬁrm performance in locally


1328 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

Table 3 Two-stage least squares regression results for organizational performance for indigenous
ﬁrms and MNC subsidiaries (regression coefﬁcients and standard errors)

Indigenous
ﬁrms

Afﬁliates of
American
MNCs

Afﬁliates of
European
ﬁrms

Afﬁliates of
Japanese
ﬁrms

HR system (HPWS)
Differentiation strategy
Unionized ﬁrm
Log of number
of employees

.76
.11
.01
.05

.002

Age of ﬁrm
Host country: Taiwan 2 .39
Host country: Thailand 2 .46
2 .02
Host country:
Singapore

(.14)a
(.06)c
(.11)
(.04)

.49
.27
2 .25
.11

.01
(.002)
(.23)c 2 .18
(.27)c 2 .59
(.27)
.28

Post-1997 data
Manufacturing ﬁrm
Constant

.08
2 .09
.55

(.11)
(.19)
(.47)

2 .14
2 .28
.66

(.22)b
(.10)a
(.17)
(.08)

(.01)
(.24)
(.45)
(.34)

(.17)
(.29)
(.86)

.30
.28
2 .30
.09

.00
2 1.20
2 .83
2 .39

(.22)
(.09)a
(.19)
(.09)

.51
.22
2 .37
.18

.00
(.01)
(.30)a 2 1.44
2 1.36
(.53)
2 .90
(.48)

2 .14
.29
1.88

(.17)
(.43)
(.84)b

.01
.23
1.03

(.32)c
(.11)b
(.21)c
(.07)b

(.01)
(.72)b
(.75)c
(.66)

(.18)
(.58)
(.79)

N
Adjusted R2
F-ratio

371
.24

12.92a

105
.17
3.22a

98
.20
3.46a

108
.23
4.33a

Notes
a Signiﬁcant at .01 level; b signiﬁcant at .05 level; c signiﬁcant at .10 level.

owned ﬁrms (across all host countries) was, in fact, quite strong (.76) and statistically
signiﬁcant at the .01 level. Estimated HPWS impact in locally owned ﬁrms was higher
than in any of the MNC afﬁliate sub-samples, though it was signiﬁcantly only higher in
comparison to afﬁliates of European MNCs. Estimated HPWS impact for afﬁliates of
American MNCs was virtually identical to that for Japanese afﬁliates, and was higher,
but not signiﬁcantly so, than the effect for European afﬁliates. So although hypothesis
4 was not supported per se, we did see effects somewhat consistent with its underlying
arguments. In general, locally owned ﬁrms had somewhat better success in HPWS
implementation than any afﬁliates of foreign MNCs. American afﬁliates did somewhat
better than European afﬁliates, though Japanese afﬁliates were about as effective in this
regard as American afﬁliates.

Discussion

We have found that, in general, HPWSs tend to have a positive effect on perceived
organizational performance, after controlling for other organizational characteristics, in a
sample of both locally owned and foreign ﬁrms operating in four signiﬁcant East and
Southeast Asian economies. This is important, as there are many cultural barriers that
might militate against effective HPWS implementation. That there are positive HPWS
effects also means that these techniques have the potential to assist companies operating
in these countries to respond to the increasing challenges of globalization and other
sources of environmental turbulence, such as rapid technological changes and economic
reforms, through greater organizational ﬂexibility. We found the HPWS effects were
not constant across host countries, with the strongest impacts occurring in Thailand
and Taiwan. That the effect was much stronger in Thailand than expected may have to do
with the very high levels of foreign direct investment there, relative to Taiwan and Korea,


Bae et al.: HR strategy and performance in Paciﬁc Rim countries

1329

so that Thai ﬁrms had relatively great exposure to foreign employment practices and
were more culturally malleable (i.e. able or willing to learn for the practices of foreign
companies). Indeed, Lawler and Atmiyanandana (forthcoming) found that, although
Thai indigenous ﬁrms showed a lower propensity to utilize HPWS techniques than MNC
afﬁliates in Thailand, they also showed a greater propensity to use these methods than
indigenous ﬁrms in the three other countries. Moreover, Thailand’s relatively lower level
of economic development might have meant that the return to implementing HPWS
techniques was greater than in more developed economies.

That Korea ranked low relative to the other countries in the sample was surprising
in light of the strong interest in HPWS techniques as reﬂected in the NHRM initiatives.
One factor may be that the Korean companies, particularly the indigenous ones, were
generally much larger than the ﬁrms in the other three countries because of the structure
of the chaebols. HPWS techniques may be more remotely linked to ﬁnancial outcomes in
larger ﬁrms, as it is more difﬁcult for individual employees or groups to see the
connection between their efforts and organizational outcomes. Of course, we
controlled for ﬁrm size, but
the size effect may be more complex than would
be captured in a linear relationship. And the chaebols, as very large companies,
have often had close relationships with the government, the quality of which could be
much more important
in determining organizational effectiveness than internal
activities.

Our comparison of indigenous ﬁrms with MNC afﬁliates revealed that the locally
owned ﬁrms that do implement HPWS techniques have somewhat greater success at
doing this than afﬁliates of Japanese, European and, most surprisingly, especially
American MNCs. This is possibly related, at least in part, to their better understanding of
local cultural and social nuances, which mean they can structure HPWS approaches that
conform better to these conditions. There are other possible explanations as well. Before
the 1997 ﬁnancial crisis, locally owned Asian ﬁrms had little labour market ﬂexibility
and had high levels of loyalty and commitment. Therefore, HR managers in these
companies may have perceived that they could gain signiﬁcant returns from human
capital investment. However, MNC afﬁliates had higher ﬂexibility even before the
ﬁnancial crisis and would not have been so inclined to invest
in training and
development, leading to less effective HPWS implementations.

Our study is clearly exploratory. Thus, it helps in assessing general hypotheses, but the
precision of the measures is not sufﬁciently high to generate strong policy implications.
In addition, the use of perceptions of organizational performance, as opposed to objective
performance, is a clear limitation. However, prior work comparing results obtained using
perceived and objective performance measures in models such as this have shown similar
results for the perceived and objective measures (Bae and Lawler, 2000). There are areas
for future research to address some of the omission and limitations of this paper.
Of course, extending this line of analysis to other countries and regions would be useful.
Future studies could beneﬁt from measuring country-level variables in order to
explain cross-country differences more precisely (and thus not rely on categorical
variables). Finally, the issue of the organizational strategy – HR strategy ﬁt should also be
explored.

Acknowledgements

This project was funded in part by grants provided by the University of Illinois Center
for East Asian and Paciﬁc Studies and by the Campus Research Board.


1330 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

Notes

1 The practice of inferring character and personality from one’s facial features.

In a newer variant, blood type is believed by some to indicate one’s personality.

2 Fung-shui (literally ‘wind and water’), also popular among ‘New Age’ adherents in
the West, is the belief that good fortune is determined by the orientation of physical
objects (one’s house, the internal furnishings, etc.) in relation to topographical
features. It is believed that this occurs through the harnessing of energy ﬂows. Thus a
house may be built at a particular angle to a river or a mountain to assure proper
energy ﬂows. In Thailand, for example, the real estate crash that preceded (and partly
caused) the 1997 crisis there was attributed by some to shifts in the course of the
Chao Phrya River, which runs through Bangkok. Many of the high-rise buildings
suffering low occupancy had been constructed according to fung-shui principles that
dictated a particular alignment with the river. Shifts in the river were seen to have
nulliﬁed the effects and brought ill fortune to owners.

References

Appelbaum, E. and Batt, R. (1993) The New American Workplace: Transforming Work Systems in

the United States. Ithaca, NY, and London: ILR Press.

Atmiyanandana, V. and Lawler, J. (2003) ‘Culture and Management in Thailand’. In Warner, M.

(Ed) Culture and Management in Asia. London: Routledge-Curzon.

Arthur,

J.B.

(1992)

‘The Link between Business Strategy and Industrial Relations
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 45:

Systems in American Steel Minimills’,
488 – 506.

Arthur, J.B. (1994) ‘Effects of Human Resource Systems on Manufacturing Performance and

Turnover’, Academy of Management Journal, 37: 670 – 87.

Bae, J. (1997) ‘Beyond Seniority-Based Systems: A Paradigm Shift in Korean HRM?’, Asia Paciﬁc

Business Review, 3: 82 – 110.

Bae, J. and Lawler, J.

Impact
on Firm Performance in an Emerging Economy’, Academy of Management Journal,
43: 502 – 17.

‘Organizational and HRM Strategies in Korea:

(2000)

Bae, J. and Rowley, C. (2001) ‘The Impact of Globalization on HRM: The Case of South Korea’,

Journal of World Business, 36: 402 – 28.

Bae, J., Chen, S. and Lawler, J.J. (1998) ‘Variations in Human Resource Management in Asian
Countries: MNC Home-Country and Host-Country Effects’, International Journal of Human
Resource Management, 9: 653 – 70.

Bamberger, P. and Meshoulam, I. (2000) Human Resource Strategy: Formulation, Implementation,

and Impact. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Byrne, B.M. (2001) Structural Equation Modeling with AMOS: Basic Concepts, Applications, and

Programming. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Cavusgil, S.T. and Das, A. (1997) ‘Methodological Issues in Empirical Cross-Cultural Research:
A Survey of the Management Literature and A Framework’, Management International Review,
37: 71 – 96.

Chen, M. (1995) Asian Management Systems: Chinese, Japanese, and Korean Styles of Business.

London: International Thomson Press.

Chen, S. (1997) ‘The Development of HRM Practices in Taiwan’, Asia Paciﬁc Business Review,

3: 152 – 69.

Chen, S., Ko, J. and Lawler, J. (2003) ‘Changing Patterns of Industrial Relations’, Industrial

Relations, 42: 315 – 40.

Chew, I. (2000) ‘Singapore’. In Sinha, J.B. (ed.) Managing Cultural Diversity for Productivity:

The Asian Ways. Singapore: Asian Productivity Organization.


Bae et al.: HR strategy and performance in Paciﬁc Rim countries

1331

Delaney, J.T. and Huselid, M.A.

‘The Impact of Human Resource Management
Management Practices on Perceptions of Organizational Performance’, Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, 39: 949 – 69.

(1996)

Delery, J.E. and Doty, D.H. (1996) ‘Modes of Theorizing in Strategic Human Resource
Management: Test of Universalistic, Contingency, and Conﬁgurational Performance
Predictions’, Academy of Management Journal, 39: 802 – 35.

Hamilton, G.G. (ed.) (1996) Asian Business Networks. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Hofstede, G. (1980) Cultures Consequences: International Differences in Work-related Values.

Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

Huang, T. (2001) ‘Human Resource Management in Taiwan’. In Budhwar, P.S. and Yaw, A.D.

(eds) Human Resource Management in Developing Countries. London: Routledge.

Huselid, M.A. (1995) ‘The Impact of Human Resource Management Practices on Turnover,
Productivity, and Corporate Financial Performance’, Academy of Management Journal, 38:
635 – 72.

Ichniowski, C., Shaw, K. and Prennushi, G. (1997) ‘The Effects of Human Resource Management
Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines’, American Economic Review,
87: 291 – 313.

Khandwalla, P. (1977) The Design of Organizations. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanoviche.
Kirkman, B. and Shapiro, D.

‘Resistance to Teams: Toward a Model of
Globalized Self-Managing Work Team Effectiveness’, Academy of Management Review,
22: 730 – 57.

(1997)

Koch, M., Nam, S.H. and Steers, R. (1995) ‘Human Resource Management in South Korea’.
In Moore, L. and Jennings, P.D. (eds) Human Resource Management in the Paciﬁc Rim:
Institutions, Practices, and Attitudes. Berlin: de Gruyter.

Krugman, P. (1994) ‘The Myth of Asia’s Miracle’, Foreign Affairs, 73: 62 – 78.
Lahteenmaki, S., Storey, J. and Vanhala, S. (1998) ‘HRM and Company Performance: The Use of
Measurement and the Inﬂuence of Economic Cycles’, Human Resource Management Journal,
8: 51 – 65.

Lawler, J. and Atmiyanandana, V. (2000) “Sun Valley Thailand”. Working Paper, Gender in
Agribusiness Project, Women and Gender in Global Perspectives Program, University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign.

Lawler, J. and Atmiyanandana, V. (2003) ‘HRM in Thailand: A Post-1997 Update’, Asia-Paciﬁc

Business Review, 9(4): 165 – 185.

Lawler, E.E., III, Mohrman, S.A. and Ledford, G.E., Jr. (1998) Strategies for High Performance
Organizations: Employee Involvement, TQM, and Reengineering Programs in Fortune 1000
Corporations. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Lawler, J., Siengthai, S. and Atmiyanandana, V. (1997) ‘Human Resource Management in

Thailand: Eroding Traditions’, Asia Paciﬁc Business Review, 3(4): 170 – 196.

Lee, M.B. and Johnson, N.B. (1998) ‘Business Environment, High-Involvement Management, and

Firm Performance in Korea’, Advances in Industrial and Labor Relations, 8: 67 – 87.

Liden, R.C. and Tewskbury, T.W. (1995) ‘Empowerment and Work Teams’. In Ferris, G.R., Rosen,
S.D. and Barnum, D.T. (eds) Handbook of Human Resource Management. Cambridge, MA:
Blackwell.

MacDufﬁe, J.P. (1995) ‘Human Resource Bundles and Manufacturing Performance: Organiza-
tional Logic and Production Systems in the World Auto Industry’, Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, 48: 197 – 221.

Morishima, M. (1998) “Changes in Japanese Human Resource Management: Implications for
Firm Performance”. Conference paper presented at Workplace Conﬂict and Cooperation:
Prospects for Employee Representation, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1 – 2 May.
Porter, M.E. (1980) Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors.

New York: Free Press.

Singapore Ministry of Manpower (1999) Manpower 21: Vision of a Talent Capital. Singapore:

Government Printing Ofﬁce.


1332 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

Sivasubramaniam, N. and Venkata Ratnam, C. (1998) “Human Resource Management and Firm
Performance: The Indian Experience”. Paper presented at 1998 Annual Meetings, Academy of
Management, San Diego, CA.

Triandis, H.C. (1995) Individualism and Collectivism. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Uen, J. (1997) “The Conﬁgurations of Human Resource Systems and Their Implications for
Organizational Performance in High-tech Companies in Taiwan”. Working Paper, National Sun
Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Ungson, G., Steers, R. and Park, S. (1997) Korean Enterprise: The Quest for Globalization.

Boston, MA: Harvard Business School.

Wright, P.M. and Snell, S. (1998) ‘Toward a Unifying Framework for Exploring Fit and Flexibility

in Strategic Human Resource Management’, Academy of Management Review, 24: 756 – 72.

Youndt, M.A., Snell, S.A., Dean, J.W., Jr and Lepak, D.P. (1996) ‘Human Resource Management,
Manufacturing Strategy, and Firm Performance’, Academy of Management Journal, 39:
836 – 66.

