Critical Perspectives on Accounting (2001) 12, 293–322
doi:10.1006/cpac.2000.0435
Available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

CULTURE, INSTITUTIONAL FACTORS AND

DIFFERENCES IN ENVIRONMENTAL

DISCLOSURE BETWEEN CANADA AND THE

UNITED STATES

NOLA BUHR* AND MARTIN FREEDMAN†‡

*College of Commerce, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon,

Saskatchewan, Canada 57N 5A7 and †College of Business & Economics,

Towson University, Towson, Maryland 21117, USA

We explore the role of cultural and institutional factors in motivating production
of mandatory and voluntary disclosure by comparing environmental disclosure
produced by Canadian and US companies. We study the years 1988 and 1994 on
a matched pairs basis using content analysis of annual reports, security exchange
ﬁlings (the 10 K in the US and the Annual Information Form in Canada) and
environmental reports. Over the time period, the disclosure produced by Canadian
ﬁrms increased more dramatically than the US disclosure, which was initially greater.
This might suggest that Canadian culture and institutional infrastructure is more
conducive to the production of environmental disclosure than US counterparts. It
would appear that the collectivistic nature of Canadian society has led, in recent
years, to the production of a greater level of voluntary environmental disclosure,
especially in the environmental report. However, the US, a more litigious society,
produces more of the mandated disclosure in the 10 K and annual report.
c(cid:1) 2001 Academic Press

What role do culture and institutional factors play in the production of environmental
disclosure? In the critical accounting literature, environmental disclosure has been
studied from legitimacy theory (Hogner, 1982; Lewis et al., 1984; Guthrie &
Parker, 1989; Patten, 1991, 1992) and political economy theory (Tinker & Neimark,
1987; Guthrie & Parker, 1990; Macintosh, 1990) perspectives. In the mainstream
accounting literature, capital market theory (Ingram, 1978; Anderson & Frankle,
1980; Freedman & Stagliano, 1991) has been utilized as well as a variety of economic

‡ E-mail: mfreedman@towson.edu
Address for correspondence: Nola Buhr, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan,

Canada 57N 5A7. E-mail: buhr@commerce.usask.ca
Received 2 October 1996; revised 9 May 1999; accepted 6 July 1999

1045–2354/01/030293+30/$35.00/0

293

c(cid:1) 2001 Academic Press


294

N. Buhr and M. Freedman

based approaches (Blacconiere & Patten, 1994; Barth et al., 1997; Li et al., 1997).
While we acknowledge the strong explanatory power of these various theoretical
approaches, we choose to bring a new perspective. In this paper we investigate how
the following factors inﬂuence the production of environmental disclosure in Canada
and the United States (US): history, geography, political systems, environmental
values, legal environment, business climate and accounting profession. In so doing,
we leave other factors (e.g. treatment of indigenous peoples, power arrangements
and hegemony) and a more critical analysis for other papers. As a basis for
discussion, environmental disclosure produced by companies in Canada and the
US is compared on a longitudinal basis using the years 1988 and 1994.

The paper continues as follows. The next section outlines the role and nature
of environmental disclosure. This is followed by a description of the relevant and
inﬂuential cultural and institutional factors as they are manifest in Canada and the
US. The empirical sections discussing sample selection, research methodology and
results follow. The results are then examined in connection with the cultural and
institutional factors and we conjecture which factors lead to differences in Canadian
and US environmental disclosure. Finally, we offer some concluding thoughts.

Role of Environmental Disclosure

Environmental disclosure has social as well as economic dimensions. Not only are
excessive emission levels bad for the environment and the health of individuals
but resulting ﬁnes and a negative corporate image can have serious economic
implications for organizations. Provision of environmental disclosure is a necessity if
corporations are to fulﬁll accountability relationships (see, for example, Ramanathan,
1976; Gray et al., 1987; Gray, 1992; Lehman, 1995; Gray et al., 1996). Such a claim
is not only being made by accounting academics, but several organizations have
produced reports that refer to the growing public demand for increased environmental
disclosure: (Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu International, 1993; Canadian Institute of
Chartered Accountants, 1994a; and SustainAbility, 1994). Gray et al. (1996) explicitly
state that information about corporate environmental stewardship is crucial to the
functioning of liberal democracies. Those who control society’s resources must
provide accounts (in the broadest sense) of their use of these resources. Without
such accountability, corporations can (unjustly) exploit natural resources to the
detriment of current and future generations.

In both Canada and the US, the disclosure of certain environmental information
is required by the respective security exchanges. Disclosure of material present
and future capital expenditures for environmental protection is required in the US
by SEC form 10 K and in Canada by the Annual Information Form (AIF). As well,
under the category of general ﬁnancial disclosures, material legal events including
environmental matters are required to be presented in the annual reports, 10 Ks and
AIFs. Contingent liabilities based on both American and Canadian GAAP require
speciﬁc disclosure and environmental degradation often ﬁts the description of a
contingent liability. Canadian GAAP also requires the disclosure of site restoration
costs. Thus, certain types of environmental disclosure are mandated for presentation
in both the 10 K/AIF and the annual report.


Environmental disclosure between Canada and the US

295

Of a much broader nature is the voluntary disclosure that is or can be provided by
companies in the annual report or the 10 K/AIF. This voluntary disclosure can take
one of three basic forms: (1) ﬁnancial information such as the extent of funds invested
in research and development to explore alternative energy sources; (2) quantitative
non-ﬁnancial information such as emissions levels and (3) narrative descriptions
such as the outcomes of environmental auditing.

While this breadth of voluntary information may be included in the 10 K/AIF or
annual report, there is another medium, the stand-alone environmental report, which
is growing in popularity in both Canada and the US. This voluntary report began to
be produced in the early 1990s with content ranging from blatant public relations
material to comprehensive information on an organization’s environmental impact.
In Canada, the Financial Post began providing awards for environmental reports in
1993 as part of its Annual Reports Awards.

Cultural and Institutional Contrasts

Management (Hofstede, 1980) and accounting studies (see, for example, Nobes,
1983; Gray, 1988; Doupnik & Salter, 1993) tend to lump Canada and the US together
with the conclusion that there is very little difference between the two countries when
they are compared to the rest of the world. While these countries do share many
similarities, there are differences in cultural and institutional factors that should affect
the environmental disclosures made by companies in these countries. As citizens
(and disclosure preparers) we are molded by our history, our geography and our
politics. History, geography and politics interact to inﬂuence the environmental values
held by society, the legal environment, the business climate and the nature of the
accounting profession.

Historical and geographical differences

Many of the differences between Canada and the US can be traced from historical
and geographical factors. From a historical perspective, Lipset (1986) sees the
American Revolution as a deﬁning event. Although the peoples of the US and Canada
“resemble each other more than any other two nations on earth” (p. 114), there are
consistent patterns of difference.

. . . Canada has been a more elitist,
law-abiding, statist, collectively-oriented, and
particularistic (group-oriented) society than the United States, and that these fundamental
distinctions stem in large part from the deﬁning event which gave birth to both countries,
the American Revolution (p. 114).

In another publication, Lipset (1990) states that

Americans, from the days of the Revolution on, have resisted authority, demanded their
rights, and preferred weak government, while Canadians have complained less, been less
aggressive, and desired a strong paternalistic government (p. 44).

From a geographical perspective, the two countries have developed differently
over time. Americans expanded easily into a beckoning west whereas Canadians


296

N. Buhr and M. Freedman

struggled in a forbidding north (Lipset, 1990; Merelman, 1991). Because of the harsh
climate in Canada, the vast majority of Canadians live within 150 miles of the US
border (Lipset, 1990). Based on her survey of the two countries’ literature, Atwood
(1972) sees “The Frontier” as the symbol for American society whereas the central
symbol for Canadian society is “Survival”.

Political differences

These historical and geographical differences have inﬂuenced the respective political
and legal systems in Canada and the US. In Canada, there is a parliamentary system
whereas in the US there is a divided-powers system. Merelman (1991) develops
arguments that reﬂect how these two systems have created different modes of
political participation:

. . . in Canada the culture of political participation is dominantly group-oriented, somewhat
dynamic, and divided between a hierarchical model of Parliamentary politics and an
egalitarian model of dualism involving British and French cultural groups. . . In the United
States the culture of political participation is ﬂuid, egalitarian, and individualistic (p. 11).

In a similar vein, we ﬁnd that the American Constitution has a Bill of Rights that
emphasizes due-process guarantees for the individual and limits on the powers of the
state. On the other hand, until the 1982 Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
there were few limits on the power of the Canadian Parliament and Cabinet. Powers
of Parliament and Cabinet included the ability to suspend the rights of free speech
and assembly (Lipset, 1990). These differing views have translated into a “peace,
order and good government” philosophy for Canada and a “life, liberty and the pursuit
of happiness” philosophy for the US (Lipset, 1990).

Thus it would seem that these differences can be depicted as collectivism (Canada)
vs. individualism (US) and respecting authority (Canada) vs. not respecting authority
(US). Accordingly, Canadians would seem to be more likely to reach a cooperative
environmental policy based on mutual respect than would Americans. Also, we might
infer that Canadians should be more stakeholder oriented. We conjecture that this
translates into more disclosure being produced by Canadian companies.

Environmental values

Mitigating these differences is the similar shared concern that the US and Canadian
population have about the quality of the environment. In a poll conducted in October
1996 (Corelli, 1996), both Americans and Canadians were asked to agree or disagree
with the statement that “We need to protect the environment even if it costs money
and/or jobs”. Sixty-ﬁve percent of the Americans and 74% of the Canadians agreed
with the statement. These results are very similar to results of polls carried out six
years earlier. Cambridge reports (Kempton et al., 1995) asked US respondents in
1990 to choose between protecting the environment and economic growth. Sixty-four
percent favored protecting the environment. In a New York Times/CBS poll conducted
in 1990 with US respondents, 56% favored the environment over jobs (Kempton et
al., 1995). In the National Election Survey conducted in Canada in 1988, 65% of
the respondents agreed with the statement that “Protecting the environment is more


Environmental disclosure between Canada and the US

297

important than creating jobs” (Bakvis & Nevitte, 1992). Finally, Decima Research
claims that eight out of ten Canadians express a very consistent high level of concern
about the environment (Nichols, 1994).

These surveys indicate,

that both American and Canadian
populations recognize that it is socially desirable to promote the health of the
environment. Thus, in terms of social pressures, communicating “good news” about
the environment should have positive rewards for industry.

if nothing else,

Legal environment

Disclosure is determined in large part by the legal environment and the fear or threat
of litigation. It is important to differentiate between regulations governing environmen-
tal activity and regulations governing disclosure about environmental activity. While
disclosure requirements may be very similar between the US and Canada, it is critical
to evaluate the requirements surrounding environmental activity. If the environmental
laws are signiﬁcantly different between the two countries then environmental perfor-
mance will be evaluated differently and reﬂected in disclosure differently.

Throughout the twentieth century Canadian and US governments have both
attempted to preserve and protect parts of their natural environment. Numerous
national, state and provincial parks and wilderness areas have been created by
governments of both countries. However, little was done in either country to stop
environmental abuse by corporations until the late 1960s and early 1970s.

The year 1970 was a critical year for the environmental movement in the US. On
1 January, President Nixon signed into law the National Environmental Policy Act,
which led to the formation of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (Munton &
Castle, 1992). In April, America celebrated the ﬁrst Earth Day, with millions of people
expressing their desire to improve the quality of the environment. On 31 December
1970 the Clean Air Act became law. In 1972, the Federal Water Pollution Control Acts
were passed in the US (Harrison, 1993); these have become the guiding legislation
in the cleanup of the nation’s waterways. Two major laws, known as Superfund,
address the remediation of hazardous waste sites. The ﬁrst, the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), was passed
in 1980. The second, the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA),
was passed in 1986, and amends CERCLA (Abdolmohammadi et al., 1997). In 1990,
a new Clean Air Act became law, and from a US–Canadian perspective it is a critical
law. One of the provisions of the law (Title IV) requires the cleanup of sulfur dioxide
and nitrogen oxides, the precursors to acid rain.

Canadians also celebrated the ﬁrst Earth Day in 1970 and in 1971 they created
Environment Canada, a federal department with “a mandate to protect and enhance
the quality of the natural environment” (Environment Canada, 1997a). A key piece of
legislation in Canada is the Canadian Environmental Protection Act. It was passed
in 1988 and consolidated a number of federal environmental acts and, as well,
extended federal authority into areas previously deemed to be the domain of the
provinces (Skogstad & Kopas, 1992). The act governs cross-border air pollution, the
dumping of substances into oceans and navigable waterways and the regulation
of toxic substances (Cotton & McKinnon, 1993). A key government initiative in


298

N. Buhr and M. Freedman

Canada is the federal government’s creation of the “Green Plan” in 1990. The Green
Plan “expresses the government’s commitment to work with Canadians to manage
our resources prudently and to encourage sensitive decision-making” (Canada
Communications Group, 1990, foreword, Statement by the Prime Minister).

Although Canada has been proactive in the areas of acid rain and Great Lakes
pollution (Munton & Castle, 1992) the country has tended to follow US leadership in
terms of environmental policy (Hoberg, 1991) and exhibits lagged emulation of US
environmental initiatives (Howlett, 1994). As a result, there is a great deal of similarity
between US and Canadian environmental legislation.

Hence, Canada and the US appear to exhibit similar environmental values
and attitudes and have similar environmental
laws and similar requirements for
environmental disclosure. Nevertheless, there are contrasts between Canada and
the US in the legal environment. Clarkson and Simunic (1994) discuss Canadian and
US differences and ﬁnd that there is a signiﬁcant difference in the audit quality–risk
relationship, which is attributable to the highly litigious environment in the US. Until
recently (for example, Ontario’s Environmental Bill of Rights) class action suits have
been almost non-existent in Canada whereas in the US they are a major weapon
used by interest groups to elicit social change. Environmental groups in the US
have utilized the court system to ensure that environmental laws are enforced and
interpreted in ways that support the environment. By taking companies to court
through the use of class action suits, environmentalists have been able to force
companies to stop polluting and to clean up their environmental damage. The major
recourse for Canadian environmental groups has been through moral suasion. That
is, through the use of media, environmentalists educate citizens and law makers as
to the detriments caused by pollution. Hence, communication would appear to play
a more important role in the Canadian setting.

Besides differences in the role of class action suits, there are also differences in
the role of the judiciaries of the respective countries. In the US, the judiciary is often
interventionist whereas the Canadian judiciary tends to be non-interventionist and
will not force changes in administrative decisions (Howlett, 1994). Judicial review in
Canada is based solely on issues arising in law. In the US both points of law and
points of fact are considered. Schrecker (1992) elaborates on the role of the judiciary
in Canada with speciﬁc reference to environmental concerns:

Judicial deference to the political executive in the area of public nuisances is one of the
key reasons that in the early 1970s, when environmental concerns intruded themselves
inescapably on public policy, many of the handful of lawyers directly involved with such
issues felt that traditional common law doctrines, although theoretically promising, were
practically irrelevant
to most situations in which citizens might seek protection from
environmental damage (p. 87).

In the intervening years, two factors have reinforced this position. One, demonstrat-
ing the causal connection between polluting source and injury suffered can be ex-
tremely difﬁcult. Two, litigation is costly and in Canada the losing plaintiff may be faced
with paying not only their own legal costs but also the legal costs of the defendant
(Schrecker, 1992). Another difference between the Canadian and US approaches to
environmental legislation is the extent of specifying objectives and timetables in the
legislation. The US approach is highly speciﬁed whereas the Canadian approach is


Environmental disclosure between Canada and the US

299

very general. In Canada this serves to reduce the discretionary power of the courts
and result in “more pervasive exercise of administrative discretion” (Schrecker, 1992,
p. 89).

The legal system can be viewed as a manifestation of the culture. Canada with its
community orientation and its apparent respect for authority has created a judiciary
that honors precedent and respects administrative decisions. In the US, the individual
ﬁghting the system (i.e. government, big business, even unions) tends to be viewed
heroically. The courts are much more lenient as to who has standing and what
constitutes the enforcement of law.

The litigious nature of American society provides a double-edged sword for
disclosers. The absence of certain disclosure can trigger litigation as can the
presence of certain disclosure. Therefore, it would seem that US ﬁrms will make
their disclosure decisions more carefully than Canadian ﬁrms who do not face the
same repercussions. This would lead us to expect more of the mandated disclosure
being provided by the US companies.

Business climate

In terms of expenditures, both countries spend a similar portion (on a relative
basis) of the federal budget on the environment (Hoberg, 1992). However, the
environment plays a bigger role in the Canadian economy than it does in the US
economy. OECD national account statistics (Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development, 1996) reveal that natural resource based activities (agriculture,
hunting, forestry, ﬁshing, mining and quarrying) accounted for 4.82% of the Canadian
GDP in 1992 whereas these activities accounted for 3.43% of the 1992 US GDP.
This may mean that Canadian businesses are more sensitive to the protection of
their economic base provided by natural resources.

Both American and Canadian businesses run the gamut from those that believe
that the role of business is to make a proﬁt in any way possible to those that believe
that improving quality of life should be one of the goals of the corporation. In terms
of the environment, these attitudes lead to corporations that violate environmental
regulation with impunity as well as corporations that create processes that basically
eliminate emissions. Both countries have sets of these companies as do most
industrialized nations.

The critical difference between the US and Canada in terms of corporations dealing
with regulations is one of approach. Because Canada is a more collectivistic society
its approach is basically cooperative. This can be seen in having business lobbyists
and the government work together in formulating laws. Arguably, the door is open for
government to be co-opted by business. However, because Canadian businesses
participated in the creation of the environmental rules they seem to more strongly
endorse environmental protection compared to US ﬁrms. A key example of this
cooperation is the creation of various round tables. Through these round tables
Canadian companies participate with various stakeholder groups in order to advise
the government on environmental and economic issues and develop environmental
policies. In 1988 the Prime Minister, Brian Mulroney, established a national Round
Table on the Environment and the Economy. The round table was designed to be


300

N. Buhr and M. Freedman

an opportunity for leaders from government, business and environmental groups
to seek consensus in developing a strategy to integrate the environment with the
economy at all government levels and across the private sector (Filyk & Cote, 1992).
Since then, each province has set up their own Round Table on the Environment
and the Economy (Conklin et al., 1991). Industry speciﬁc round tables have also
been formed. The pulp and paper industry formed a round table with environmental
activists and created a set of ﬁrst principles under unanimous agreement (May &
Barron, 1995).

While such use of round tables may be conceptually appealing, round tables are
not without their critics. Bruton and Howlett (1992) claim that these initiatives have
failed to live up to expectations and that

. . . the membership and terms of reference of these bodies indicate that in many cases
they were structured, staffed and mandated in a fashion that would prevent the successful
accomplishment of these goals (p. 26).

Round tables may do no more than serve to maintain the status quo.

The Clinton administration has been attempting to create a more cooperative
approach with business, environmentalists and workers. In 1993 President Clinton
formed the President’s Council on Sustainable Development. Twenty-ﬁve leaders
from business, environmental, civil rights and Native American organizations were
appointed to the Council and charged with recommending a national action
strategy for sustainable development. Nevertheless, US environmental protection
has historically been carried out through the threat of ﬁnes and plant closings and
by using class action suits. Most environmental laws in the US have been passed
despite the strong objections of most business lobbyists. Furthermore, the 1972
Water Pollution Control Amendments (the Clean Water Act) was vetoed by President
Nixon and the 1987 Clean Water Act was passed over President Reagan’s veto.

The irony of these two approaches (cooperation and confrontation) is that neither
of them appears to be completely successful from the perspective of a healthy
environment. In both countries air and water pollution has decreased since the ﬁrst
Earth Day in 1970, although the decrease is not to the level that was envisioned by
many of the participants. For example, although the national goal of the 1972 Clean
Water Act was to eliminate the discharge of all pollutants by 1989 (US Government,
1998), the US is a long way from achieving that goal.

Accounting profession

Even though the accounting profession generally has not been credited with being
the source of current environmental disclosure (see, for example, Bebbington et al.,
1994; Gray et al., 1995), we ﬁnd that the Canadian accounting profession, repre-
sented by its standard setting body, the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accoun-
tants (CICA), has promulgated a number of research reports and other documents
surrounding accounting, auditing and reporting of corporate environmental impact.
These documents include Environmental Auditing and the Role of the Accounting
Profession (1992); Environmental Costs and Liabilities: Accounting and Financial
Reporting Issues (1993a); Environmental Stewardship: Management, Accountabil-
ity and the Role of Chartered Accountants: Report of the Task Force on Sustainable


Environmental disclosure between Canada and the US

301

Development (1993b); Reporting on Environmental Performance (1994a); and Au-
diting and Related Services Guideline #19: Audit of Financial Statements affected
by Environmental Matters (1994b). The US accounting profession, represented by
the American Institute of Certiﬁed Public Accountants (AICPA), has taken a very lim-
ited role in accounting for the environment as has the US standard setting body, the
Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). What has been produced is largely
ﬁxated on Superfund (site contamination) liabilities. In 1990, the Emerging Issues
Task Force of the FASB produced EITF 90–8 to deal with the issue of whether to
capitalize or expense cleanup costs (Roussey, 1992). In January 1993 the AICPA
held an environmental issues round table, which included amongst its key ﬁndings
a need for guidance on environment-related liabilities, particularly an entity’s obliga-
tion for remediation. As a result, in 1997, Statement of Position 96-1—Environmental
Remediation Liabilities was produced. It focuses on site remediation, a very small
aspect of accounting for environmental impact. Gray et al. (1995) underscore this
limited view of environment found in the US:

In the litigious atmosphere of the US it would seem that the deﬁnition of “environment” has
been closed down and restricted to a ﬁnancial deﬁnition without the intermediate, discursive,
negotiation of “environment” that one can ﬁnd in the UK and continental Europe. . . the
concept of environment that has been negotiated and captured is an especially narrow
one. Such a narrow deﬁnition excludes all the complexity, doubt and wider social and
ethical issues which a conception of environment would normally entail (p. 232).

For example, an article titled “Auditing environmental liabilities” (Roussey, 1992)
begins by discussing a variety of environmental laws and regulations in the US.
However, the article focuses solely on accounting and auditing for the cleanup
of hazardous waste sites to the exclusion of other environmental
liabilities.
It would appear that somewhere in the early 1990s the Canadian and US
accounting professions diverged signiﬁcantly in their deﬁnitions of what constitutes
environmental accounting and auditing and what they have to say about the area.

In summary then, we see that

the US and Canada exhibit historical and
geographical differences, which have led to differences in their political systems, legal
environment, business climate and accounting profession. In both countries non-
mandated environmental disclosure, including stand-alone environmental reports,
is made by certain publicly reporting companies.
In Canada, where there is
comparatively more cooperation in the environmental arena and a lower prospect of
litigation over disclosure content, we would expect to see more voluntary information
being provided. Although the US places stronger emphasis on the right to know, the
litigious nature of the American system will likely serve to focus US disclosure on
mandated information.

Research Design

Research questions

The purpose of this study is to compare the environmental disclosure produced
by US and Canadian companies on a longitudinal basis. We deﬁne environmental


302

N. Buhr and M. Freedman

disclosure broadly to include any information about an organization’s environmental
impact. Thus,
included are monetary disclosures, quantitative non-monetary
disclosures and narrative disclosures. We examine all such disclosures as provided
in the annual report, 10 K/AIF and environmental report where available. While there
are other media such as brochures and advertisements that can be employed to
communicate environmental performance (Zeghal & Ahmed, 1990) we chose to
concentrate on these three key documents.

Two years chosen for study were 1988 and 1994. The year 1988 was chosen
for comparative purposes as it was a year in which the environment was gaining
public visibility. In the US, Moody’s Investors Service began requiring ﬁnancial data
from companies on environmental liabilities (Marcus, 1989) and Superfund (i.e. the
Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act) had been in place for two years.
According to Marcus, though, it was not until May 1989 that the SEC issued a release
which “speciﬁes for the ﬁrst time how corporate reporting requirements apply to
environmental costs resulting from federal Superfund cleanups” (p. B1). In Canada,
1988 was the year that the Canadian Environmental Protection Act was passed and
the National Round Table on the Economy and the Environment was established.

Based on the cultural and institutional characteristics of Canada and the US and
the growing emphasis on the environment, we proceeded with the following general
research questions in mind.

RQ1 How does the extent and nature of environmental disclosure compare between

Canadian and US companies for the year 1988?

RQ1a For 1988, is there a difference in the extent and nature of environmental

disclosure produced in the annual report?

RQ1b For 1988, is there a difference in the extent and nature of environmental

disclosure produced in the 10 K/AIF?

RQ1c For 1988, is there a difference in the extent and nature of environmental

disclosure produced in the environmental report?

RQ2 What trend emerges when the extent of 1988 disclosure for Canada and US

is compared to the 1994 disclosure levels?

RQ3 How does the extent and nature of environmental disclosure compare between

Canadian and US companies for the year 1994?

RQ3a For 1994, is there a difference in the extent and nature of environmental

disclosure produced in the annual report?

RQ3b For 1994, is there a difference in the extent and nature of environmental

disclosure produced in the 10 K/AIF?

RQ3c For 1994, is there a difference in the extent and nature of environmental

disclosure produced in the environmental report?

The measurement of the extent and nature of environmental disclosure is explained
more fully in the section on content analysis, which follows the next section on sample
selection.


Environmental disclosure between Canada and the US

303

Sample selection

Industry and size have been found to inﬂuence social responsibility disclosure
practices (e.g. Trotman & Bradley, 1981; Cowen et al., 1987). To control for these
factors, we used a matched sample approach in testing the differences between
US and Canadian environmental disclosure. All
large, publicly traded Canadian
companies involved in resource-based or high environmental impact industries were
matched with US companies on an industry and size basis. The logic is that similar
sized companies in the same industry should have similar environmental impact and
therefore, ideally, similar disclosure. Canada has a population about one-tenth of that
of the US and a GDP of about 10% of the US GDP (US Bureau of the Census, 1994).
Therefore, the limiting criterion for the sample was the number of extant Canadian
companies of sufﬁcient size in the relevant industries.

Size cutoff for sample selection was companies with total assets (as at 31
December 1993) greater than $500 000 000 Canadian (approximately $370 000 000
US). Relevant industries were chosen on the basis of two digit SIC codes. These
included forestry (08), metal mining (10), oil and gas extraction (13), lumber and wood
products (24), paper and allied products (26), chemical and allied products (28),
petroleum and coal products (29), primary metal industries (33), pipelines, except
natural gas (46) and electric, gas and sanitary services (49).

The initial sample selection resulted in 85 Canadian companies. An attempt was
made to match all 85 companies with US companies in the same industry and of a
comparable size. Several companies were eliminated because it was not possible
to ﬁnd a sufﬁcient number of US companies of an appropriate size. Most of the US
companies were substantially larger. As well, several companies were eliminated
because they were not publicly traded at some point during the two years being
tested. Companies in the remaining matched pairs were requested (by letter to the
Public Relations Department) to provide the following disclosure documents for 1988
and 1994: (1) annual report; (2) securities exchange ﬁling (the 10 K in the US and
the AIF in Canada) and (3) environmental report where it existed. (There were many
cases where Canadian companies were also trading on US stock exchanges and
therefore provided a 10 K in lieu of an AIF, which is permissible for ﬁling purposes
on the Toronto Stock Exchange.) Follow-up requests were made by telephoning the
Investor Relations Department and writing the Director, Environment. The sample
was reduced further due to unavailability of certain documents. Final sample size
was 56 pairs for 1988 and 68 pairs for 1994. A list of the 68 matched pair companies
is provided in Appendix A.

Content analysis

Content analysis was employed to assess the extent and nature of the environmental
disclosure. Content analysis has been used extensively in the accounting literature in
the analysis of annual reports (e.g. Ingram, 1978; Ingram & Frazier, 1980; Freedman
& Jaggi, 1982; Wiseman, 1982; Rockness, 1985; Tinker & Neimark, 1987; Guthrie
& Parker, 1989; Zeghal & Ahmed, 1990).

The type of content analysis used in this study involved categorizing the disclosure


304

N. Buhr and M. Freedman

based on speciﬁc items of information found in the reports. This method works better
for our purposes than the counting of sentences (Wiseman, 1982; Freedman &
Wasley, 1990) inches of text or characters, which are alternative means to quantify
the extent of the disclosure. The counting of speciﬁc items of information is geared
toward counting and categorizing the information itself as opposed to the format
for delivering the information. Because redundant information bears no information
value, this study excludes repeated information from the coding process, focusing
on unique items of information. We exclude redundant information in a two stage
process, ﬁrst within a given document and then across all three documents.

Academics (most notably Wiseman, 1982) have provided frameworks to guide
the evaluation (and thereby presumably the creation) of environmental disclosure
including both voluntary and mandatory information.
In recent years, several
organizations have provided more sophisticated offerings of disclosure frameworks.
We developed an extensive coding scheme (see Appendix B) with a total of 88
categories based largely on the recommendations of Company Environmental
Reporting, which was written by SustainAbility and published by the United Nations.
These 88 categories fall under 18 types of information. These are

(1) environmental policy,

(2) environmental management systems,

(3) risk management—general,

(4) environmental auditing,

(5) goals and targets,

(6) legal compliance,

(7) other management and system disclosure,

(8) land contamination and remediation,

(9) habitats,

(10) wastes.

(11) air emissions,

(12) water efﬂuents,

(13) spills,

(14) noise and odors,

(15) product stewardship,

(16) environmental spending,

(17) environmental cost accounting and


Environmental disclosure between Canada and the US

305

(18) sustainable development reporting.

These 18 types of information were then grouped into four categories for purposes

of analysis. These are

(I) legal/costs—(6) and (16),

(II) emissions—(8), (10), (11), (12), (13) and (14),

(III) management—(1), (2), (3), (4) and (5)

(IV) miscellaneous—(7), (9), (15), (17) and (18).

The legal/cost category covers legal events and capital expenditures on envi-
ronmental control. Therefore, category I includes primarily mandated information.
The emissions category includes disclosure on Superfund sites and site restoration,
which are mandated disclosure. However, this category also includes voluntary infor-
mation on emissions. Therefore, category II is mixed mandatory and voluntary disclo-
sure. The management category includes discussion about environmental auditing
and environmental policies while the miscellaneous category includes information
about awards and views related to sustainable development. Therefore, categories III
and IV include only voluntary information.

Documents were read in their entirety and coded by a graduate student trained in
content analysis. Because our focus is information content it was possible to have
one sentence containing two or three pieces of information. It was also possible to
ﬁnd two or three sentences that contained only one piece of information. Repeated
information within a document type was not coded. A sample of ﬁve US companies
and ﬁve Canadian companies was test coded for all three document types by both
co-authors (for a total of 20 companies). Discrepancies in coding were found to be
concentrated on the switching of two information types and over-generous coding of
a third information type. All documents were reviewed by the authors for these three
types of coding and corrected.

Research question 1

Results

In order to test the ﬁrst research question, paired t-tests were performed using the
following ﬁve dimensions for the 1988 data:
∗ total disclosure;
∗ legal/cost items (mandatory);
∗ emissions items (mixed mandatory and voluntary);
∗ management items (voluntary) and
∗ miscellaneous items (voluntary).


306

N. Buhr and M. Freedman

Table 1 Matched Pairs Results

1988 Canadian disclosure vs. 1988 US disclosure (56 pairs)

Item of interest

Mean & Range for Canada

Mean & Range for US

Results

Total number of disclosure items

Legal/cost items
(mandatory)
Emissions items
(mandatory and voluntary)
Management items
(voluntary)
Miscellaneous items
(voluntary

4.70
(0–25)

1.67
(0–16)
1.54
(0–9)
0.29
(0–3)
1.21
(0–9)

9.25
(0–43)

5.50
(0–23)
3.18
(0–22)
0.05
(0–3)
0.52
(0–12)

Sig.
p = 0.007
Sig.
p = 0.000
Sig.
p = 0.029
Sig.
p = 0.041
Sig.
p = 0.032

The results, shown in Table 1, reﬂect unique items of information across all

documents (annual report, 10 K/AIF and environmental report).

The data included an annual report and a 10 K for all of the US companies and an
annual report for all of the Canadian companies. Not all of the Canadian companies
produced a 10 K or AIF. In Canada, in 1988, the Annual Information Form was not
yet a mandatory ﬁling requirement of the Ontario Securities Commission. Given the
general paucity of disclosure it is not likely that a mandatory AIF would have made
much difference in the results. None of the companies in the sample provided an
environmental report for 1988.

The results indicate that US companies provided almost double the disclosure
(9.25 items on average) provided by the Canadian companies (4.70 items on
average) on an overall basis. All of the paired t-tests were found to be signiﬁcant.
The US companies provided comparatively more disclosure in the emissions and
legal/cost categories and comparatively less disclosure in the management and
miscellaneous categories. Given the low levels of disclosure, Research Questions
1a, 1b and 1c were not pursued.

Research questions 2 and 3

In the same manner as for Research Question 1, Research Question 3 was tested
using paired t-tests of the following ﬁve dimensions for the 1994 data:
∗ total disclosure;
∗ legal/cost items (mandatory);
∗ emissions items (mixed mandatory and voluntary);
∗ management items (voluntary) and
∗ miscellaneous items (voluntary).
The results shown in Table 2 reﬂect unique items of information across all documents
(annual report, 10 K/AIF and environmental report).


Environmental disclosure between Canada and the US

307

Table 2 Matched Pairs Results

1994 Canadian disclosure vs. 1994 US disclosure (68 pairs)

Item of Interest

Mean & Range for Canada

Mean & Range for US

Results

Total number of disclosure items

Legal/cost items
(mandatory)
Emissions items
(mandatory and voluntary)
Management items
(voluntary)
Miscellaneous items
(voluntary)

32.09
(0–187)
5.21
(0–24)
16.22
(0–118)
4.04
(0–37)
6.62
(0–56)

19.96
(0–111)
8.26
(0–36)
8.82
(0–54)
0.82
(0–10)
2.04
(0–20)

Sig.
p = 0.015
Sig.
p = 0.002
Sig.
p = 0.020
Sig.
p = 0.000
Sig.
p = 0.000

s

m
e
t
i
 
f
o

 

#

 

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

1988

Year

Canada

US

1994

Figure 1. Canadian and US environmental disclosure trends.

Interestingly, by 1994 the comparative levels of disclosure are reversed and
Canadian companies are providing more environmental disclosure (32.09 items on
average) than the US companies (19.96 items on average). This relationship holds
for all areas except for legal/cost items. The disclosure studied in 1994 included an
annual report and a 10 K for all of the US companies and an environmental report for
12 of the US companies in the sample. The Canadian disclosure included an annual
report and 10 K or AIF for all of the companies and an environmental report for 15 of
the Canadian companies in the sample. The differences between the Canadian and
US disclosure in 1994 are much more pronounced than in 1988. The rate of change
within each of the countries is illustrated in Figure 1.


308

N. Buhr and M. Freedman

Table 3 Annual Report Results

1994 Canadian disclosure vs. 1994 US disclosure (68 pairs)

Item of Interest

Mean & Range for Canada

Mean & Range for US

Results

Total number of disclosure items

Legal/cost items
(mandatory)
Emissions items
(mandatory and voluntary)
Management items
(voluntary)
Miscellaneous items
(voluntary)

Research question 3a

9.29
(0–48)
1.85
(0–9)
3.82
(0–28)
1.35
(0–8)
2.26
(0–12)

8.16
(0–32)
3.46
(0–10)
3.10
(0–13)
0.34
(0–5)
1.26
(0–13)

Not Sig.

Sig.
p = 0.001
Not Sig.

Sig.
p = 0.000
Sig.
p = 0.014

Paired t-tests were performed on the matched sample of 68 pairs to analyze the
content of the annual reports. Again, these tests compared the extent of disclosure
between countries on the following dimensions:
∗ total disclosure;
∗ legal/cost items (mandatory);
∗ emissions items (mixed mandatory and voluntary);
∗ management items (voluntary) and
∗ miscellaneous items (voluntary).
The results are shown in Table 3.

The mean number of items of information for the annual report is 9.29 and 8.16 for
Canada and the US, respectively, with some of the companies producing no informa-
tion whatsoever. All but two of the paired t-tests were found to be signiﬁcant. It was
found that there is no difference between countries in the extent of total disclosure
found in the annual report and, upon evaluating the four categories of disclosure in
the annual report, it was found that there is no difference in emissions disclosure.

The US companies provided more environmental disclosure than their matched
Canadian counterpart companies in the legal/cost (mandatory) disclosure. Canadian
companies provided more environmental disclosure in the management (voluntary)
and miscellaneous (voluntary) categories. This would seem to indicate that US
companies are providing more of the mandated type of disclosure while Canadian
companies are providing more of the voluntary disclosure.

Research question 3b

Paired t-tests were performed on the matched sample of 68 pairs to analyze the
content of the 10 K/AIF reports. Again, these tests compared the extent of disclosure
between countries on the following dimensions:


Environmental disclosure between Canada and the US

309

1994 Canadian disclosure vs. 1994 US disclosure (68 pairs)

Table 4 10 K/AIF Results

Item of Interest

Mean & Range for Canada

Mean & Range for US

Results

Total number of disclosure items

Legal/cost items
(mandatory)
Emissions items
(mandatory and voluntary)
Management items
(voluntary)
Miscellaneous items
(voluntary)

7.04
(0–26)
2.56
(0–15)
2.87
(0–12)
0.49
(0–4)
1.13
(0–20)

12.12
(0–40)
6.60
(0–28)
5.18
(0–23)
0.04
(0–1)
0.29
(0–2)

Sig.
p = 0.001
Sig.
p = 0.000
Sig.
p = 0.006
Sig.
p = 0.000
Sig.
p = 0.013

∗ total disclosure;
∗ legal/cost items (mandatory);
∗ emissions items (mixed mandatory and voluntary);
∗ management items (voluntary) and
∗ miscellaneous items (voluntary).
The results are shown in Table 4.

The mean number of items for the 10 K/AIF is 7.04 and 12.12 for Canada and the
US, respectively, with some of the companies producing no information whatsoever.
Thus, as a very general guideline, it would seem that given a choice of an annual
report or a 10 K/AIF as a source of information on environmental performance one
should choose the annual report in Canada and the 10 K in the US

The results in all categories were statistically signiﬁcant. The US companies
provided more environmental disclosure than their matched Canadian counterpart
companies in the legal/cost (mandatory) and emissions (mixed mandatory and
voluntary) categories. Canadian companies provided more environmental disclosure
in management (voluntary) and miscellaneous (voluntary) categories. Again, this
would seem to indicate that US companies are providing more of the mandated
type of disclosure while Canadian companies are providing more of the voluntary
disclosure.

Research question 3c

A total of 27 environmental reports were found in the sample (12 US and
15 Canadian). While the environmental reports were provided from several of the
industries under study, ﬁve of the US reports were provided by the lumber and
wood products (24) and paper and allied products (26) industries and three were
provided by the electric, gas and sanitary service (49) industry. Eight of the Canadian
environmental reports were provided by the lumber and wood products and paper
and allied products industries. The sample was limited to environmental reports that


310

N. Buhr and M. Freedman

Table 5 Environmental Report Results

1994 Canadian disclosure vs. 1994 US disclosure

Item of Interest

Total number of disclosure items

Legal/cost items
(mandatory)
Emissions items
(mandatory and voluntary)
Management items
(voluntary)
Miscellaneous items
(voluntary)

Mean & Range for Canada

n = 15
84.27
(7–183)
6.87
(0–16)
47.20
(4–118)
11.87
(2–36)
18.33
(1–55)

Mean & Range for US

n = 12
19.42
(1–75)
1.58
(0–6)
11.17
(0–41)
2.92
(0–10)
3.75
(0–19)

Results

Sig.
p = 0.001
Sig.
p = 0.006
Sig.
p = 0.003
Sig.
p = 0.001
Sig.
p = 0.001

contained information on 1994 environmental performance. This included bi-annual
reports that contained 1994 and 1995 information. This excluded environmental
reports that were “timeless” because of their very general promotional nature.

Kruskal–Wallis one-way ANOVA analysis was used on the environmental reports

to test the following disclosure dimensions:
∗ total disclosure;
∗ legal/cost items (mandatory);
∗ emissions items (mixed mandatory and voluntary);
∗ management items (voluntary) and
∗ miscellaneous items (voluntary).
The results are shown in Table 5.

All ﬁve categories were found to be signiﬁcant. Canadian companies produce
a signiﬁcantly greater amount of total disclosure (84.27 items on average) in the
environmental report than do US companies (19.42 items on average). Such a gap
follows through to each of the four categories (legal/costs, emissions, management,
miscellaneous). When environmental reports are the medium of choice, Canadian
companies provide more voluntary and more mandatory information than their US
counterparts. This might suggest that Canadian companies view environmental
reports more seriously.

The environmental reports had a signiﬁcant impact on total disclosure levels. The
number of items of information found in the environmental reports ranged from one to
75 for the US companies and from seven to 183 for the Canadian companies. It should
be noted that several of the companies producing environmental reports are moving
much of their voluntary environmental performance information out of the annual
report and into the environmental report in order to avoid a duplication of information.
Therefore, in cases where companies have produced environmental reports, it is
quite possible to ﬁnd very little environmental performance information in the annual


Environmental disclosure between Canada and the US

311

report. This segregation of environmental disclosure creates an information gap
that is exacerbated by the practice that some companies follow of releasing their
environmental report at a different time from their annual report (e.g. Shell Canada)
or of issuing their environmental report on a periodic basis that is not annual (e.g.
Abitibi-Price). This segregation of disclosure should be taken into consideration when
interpreting the results.

Analysis, Speculations and Conclusions

The empirical results can be summarized brieﬂy as follows. In 1988, US companies
provided more environmental disclosure than Canadian companies, with the
disclosure concentrated in legal/cost and emissions items. However, the extent
of this disclosure was so minimal as to create little substantive difference. On an
overall basis, in 1994, Canadian companies provided signiﬁcantly more disclosure
in all areas except
items. Canadian companies tended to produce
more voluntary disclosure and use the environmental report as a more serious
communication medium; serious in the sense that, on average, the Canadian
environmental reports in the sample provided over four times the amount of
information that the US environmental reports did. In 1994 total disclosure in the
annual reports did not differ signiﬁcantly between countries. In contrast, in 1994,
the US companies offered more information in the 10 K than did their Canadian
counterparts.

legal/cost

We set out at the start of this paper to compare various cultural and institutional
factors between Canada and the US as a way of understanding disclosure
differences. Now that these disclosure differences have been identiﬁed, we return to
the various factors: history, geography, political systems, environmental values, legal
environment, business climate and accounting profession. At this stage, it would
be premature to imply a causal relationship between any of these factors and the
disclosure provided. Thus the analyses offered in this section have a component of
speculation and should be read in that vein.

Among the factors evaluated in this paper, the strongest similarities between
Canada and the US come in the areas of environmental values and environmental
laws. A strong majority of the people in both countries feels that protecting the
environment is important even at the cost of money and jobs. The issue here is not
whether these respondents are willing to sacriﬁce their own jobs. If we take a critical
view of such surveys, we can come to the conclusion that the respondents think that
this is what they should say. The survey results are then, at least, a barometer of social
expectations. Because of Canada’s tendency to lag and emulate US legislation,
there is a great similarity between the written form (but not the enforcement and
interpretation) of the environmental laws of both countries. Additionally, with regard
to the business climate, it would seem safe to say that both US and Canadian
companies exist to make proﬁts and will react to threats to their ability to do so.

Given this base of similarity it would appear that country differences in factors
such as history, geography, the political system, the legal system and the business
climate affect the different disclosure responses in the two countries. As for history,


312

N. Buhr and M. Freedman

Canadians have tended to be more law-abiding and collectivistic, seeking “peace,
order and good government”. Americans have tended to be more aggressive,
individualistic and combative, seeking “life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness”.
This difference is manifest in the political system with the US having more rights
for the individual and more limits on the powers of government. Such differences
are also manifest in the legal system. Canada’s community orientation, respect for
authority and relative passivity means that the judiciary in Canada honors precedent
and respects administration. In the US the judiciary has, or perhaps takes, more
interventionist action. The aggressive, individualistic nature of the American people
is also parlayed into a more litigious society than that found in Canada. It can be
argued that geography, the most immutable of all the factors, has served to make
Canadians more aware of the natural environment. The climate in Canada is more
severe (colder) than in the US and there are vast portions of Canada that are
inhospitable and therefore uninhabited. Canada sees itself as a nation with “Survival”
as its symbol in contrast to the US “Frontier” symbol.

The question remains, how do these differences affect disclosure? Given similar
social expectations with regard to the importance of the environment and similar
disclosure requirements mandated by GAAP and securities commissions, why is the
US more prone to providing mandated disclosure and why is Canada more prone to
providing voluntary disclosure with an emphasis on environmental reports?

It would seem that the greater extent of mandatory (i.e. legal/cost) disclosure
in the US is due to the litigious environment. Such an environment encourages
companies to make fuller disclosure of required items in order to avoid any litigation
stemming from omission of information. A litigious environment also reduces the
amount of voluntary disclosure provided as certain information can provide fuel for
a lawsuit. A society with a more individualistic approach such as the US should
be less prone to communicate (provide disclosure) than a group-oriented society
such as Canada. Hence, there is a greater extent of voluntary disclosure provided
in Canada because of greater emphasis on stakeholders and possibly because of
greater awareness of the natural environment. If we speculate further, we might
view the provision of disclosure as a response to external threats such as consumer
action, legal action or perhaps even action on the part of the securities exchange.
The US companies see these potential threats in a more legalistic way, necessitating
more emphasis on doing what is required by law in order to minimize the legal power
of such threats. Canadians, on the other hand, who seek peace and order, would
be more prone to respond to external threats in a placating manner by offering
more information as a way to explain and justify and, ideally, minimize confrontation.
This difference in approaches is played out in differences in the business climate.
American businesses are more prone to lobby government and see themselves
heroically. Canadian businesses are more prone to take part in round tables and
work with government. While it is probable that business and/or government interests
dominate in both countries, to the exclusion of other stakeholders, this power play is
carried out differently in the two different settings.

The extent of Canadian voluntary disclosure can also be explained by an
additional, speculative observation. Canadians are seen to seek a more paternalistic
government. Paternalism can also be sought from and delivered by business in


Environmental disclosure between Canada and the US

313

the form of noblesse oblige. This is possible in Canada because the ownership of
Canadian business is highly concentrated. Lipset (1990) provides several facts to
support this claim. Only 15% of the 500 companies in Standard and Poor’s index
in the US have a large stockholder. In Canada, one-quarter of the stock in 93% of
the largest corporations is held by a family or conglomerate. In the US there are
thousands of banks. In Canada there are ﬁve banks that hold 80% of all deposits.
Proportionately, Canada has ﬁve times as many billionaires as the US. Noblesse
oblige from such a concentration in ownership may well be played out in the form of
more extensive voluntary disclosure.

To this point we have not made reference to the accounting profession in
our speculations and conclusions. The US and Canadian accounting profession
have diverged in their handling of environmentally related matters. The Canadian
profession has deﬁned environment much more broadly and has offered far more
discussion and guidance than has the US profession. However, we can not
conclude or even speculate that these professional differences have led to disclosure
differences unless we can make a case that the accounting profession plays a strong
role in the provision of environmental disclosure. To date, there is little evidence to
suggest that accountants (backed by the accounting profession) have had much of a
role in the production of environmental reports; the key document for the provision of
environmental disclosure. It would seem then that the differences in the accounting
profession are more a manifestation of the other cultural and institutional factors than
they are an inﬂuence on the disclosure differences.

Several explanations for the differences in environmental disclosure have been
offered. However, these explanations apply mainly to 1994. Something needs to
be said about the change in disclosure levels between 1988 and 1994 that has
Canadian companies increasing the extent of their disclosure much more quickly than
the US companies. Most of the cultural and institutional factors that make Canada
different from the US were well in place before 1988. This would seem to indicate that
the differences in disclosure practices are due to recent developments. One recent
development is the growth of round tables in Canada. Since 1988 environmental
round tables in Canada have expanded from the federal level to the provincial level to
the industry level. A youth round table on the environment has recently been set up by
the Canadian federal environment minister (Environment Canada, 1997b). However,
it is doubtful that the rate of change can be explained solely by the emergence of
round tables. Companies from both countries exhibited a growth in the extent of
disclosure. Perhaps it is the smaller population and the concentration of business
in Canada that permits change to take place more quickly. Perhaps the cultural and
institutional setting in Canada provides more fertile ground and therefore more rapid
growth for social changes.

This is not to say the Canadian setting is ideal. Ferguson (1997) comments on the

way in which Canadians are known for being polite and “nice”.

At what point did we, as Canadians, ofﬁcially become nice? When did we cease to be
a nation of voyageurs and become, instead, a nation of habitants, a nation of Associate
Professors, a nation of nice people?

It was a slow process. We rejected revolution, we tamed our frontiers by sending in law
and order ﬁrst (the Canadian Mild West, as it is known), and we founded our nation not on


314

N. Buhr and M. Freedman

political ideals or on ethnicity but on very practical, pragmatic reasons: peace, order and
good government. And yet, as history has repeatedly shown, we were not always such a
swell bunch. I repeat: the only reason our history seems so sweet and gentle is because
we compare ourselves—incessantly—to Americans (p. 90).

While the Canadian companies have produced more voluntary environmental
disclosure than the American companies, disclosure from both countries is far
from sufﬁcient. First, there is a large gap between the number of categories in our
classiﬁcation scheme and the mean number of disclosure items. Second, we found
a number of resource-based companies who chose to disclose absolutely nothing
about their affect on the environment. Despite this less than ideal situation, we hope
that this study of various cultural and institutional factors has served to illuminate
some of the reasons for differences in the production of environmental disclosure.

Acknowledgements

The ﬁnancial support of the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants and the
Binghamton University School of Management is gratefully acknowledged.

Appendix A: Matched Sample

US Companies

SIC Code

Canadian Companies

Cleveland Cliffs
Homestake Mining
Newmont Gold
Newmont Mining
FMC Gold
Battle Mountain Gold
Amax Gold
Nord Resources
Atlantic Richﬁeld
Occidental Petroleum
Andarko Petroleum
Union Texas Petroleum
Louisiana Land
Apache
Noble Afﬁliates
Beard
Wainoco Oil
Pogo Producing
Swift Energy
Wilshire Oil

1000
1040
1040
1040
1040
1040
1040
1090
1311
1311
1311
1311
1311
1311
1311
1311
1311
1311
1311
1311

Inmet
Cominco
Barrick Gold
Teck
Echo Bay Mines
Cambior
Hemlo Gold
Rio Algom
Imperial Oil
Shell Canada
Norcen Energy Resources
PanCanadian
Alberta Energy
Suncor
Home Oil
Talisman Energy
Numac Energy
Poco Petroleums
Crestar Energy
Anderson Exploration


Environmental disclosure between Canada and the US

315

US Companies

SIC Code

Canadian Companies

Vulcan Materials
Weyerhauser
Maxxam
Louisiana Paciﬁc
Georgia Paciﬁc
Ply-Gem Industries
Pope & Talbot
Union Camp
Champion International
Mead
Potlatch
Bowater
James River
Chesapeake
Kimberly Clark
Westvaco
Federal Paperboard
Lydall
Boise Cascade
Great Lakes Chemical
Union Carbide
First Mississippi
Helene Curtis
IMC Fertilizer Group
Tosco
Inland Steel
Armco
Allegheny Ludlum
Carpenter Technology
Texas Industries
Quanex
Keystone Consolidated
Alcoa
Columbia Gas
Consolidated Natural Gas
Williams
Boston Edison
Southwest Gas
Atlantic Energy
Centerior Energy
Equitable Resources
Valero Energy
Onoek
Eastern Utilities

1400
2421
2421
2421
2400
2430
2421
2600
2621
2600
2600
2621
2621
2621
2621
2621
2631
2621
2621
2810
2821
2860
2844
2870
2911
3312
3312
3312
3312
3312
3312
3312
3330
4923
4923
4923
4911
4923
4911
4911
4923
4922
4923
4911

Potash Corp. of Saskatchewan
Macmillan Bloedel
Noranda Forest
Canfor
Doman Industries
Weldwood of Canada
Crestbrook Forest Industries
Quebecor
Avenor
Fletcher Challenge Canada
Domtar
Stone Consolidated
Abitibi-Price
Cascades
West Fraser Timber
Tembec
Cascades Paperboard International
Quno
Repap Enterprises
DuPont Canada
Nova
Methanex
CCL Industries
Cominco Fertilizers
Total Petroleum
Dofasco
Stelco
Ivaco
Co-Steel
Sherritt
IPSCO
Algoma
Alcan Aluminum
Transcanada Pipelines
Westcoast Energy
Petro-Canada
TransAlta Utilities
Atco
Canadian Utilities
Nova Scotia Power
Consumers Gas
Union Gas
BC Gas
Great Lakes Power


316

N. Buhr and M. Freedman

US Companies

Brooklyn Union Gas
Eastern Enterprises
KN Energy
Rollins Environmental

SIC Code

Canadian Companies

4924
4924
4923
4953

BC Gas Utilities
Gaz Metropolitain
Centra Gas Ontario
Philip Environmental

Appendix B: Canada/US Environmental Disclosure—Coding Scheme

(1) Environmental policy

(a) Reference to explicit industry policy statement
(b) Reference to explicit company policy statement
(c) Inclusion of industry policy statement
(d) Inclusion of company policy statement

(2) Environmental management system (EMS)

(a) Description of company’s EMS (how the organization is managed to

achieve its environmental objectives and targets)

(3) Risk management—general (speciﬁcs under spills, emissions and efﬂuents)

(a) Risk identiﬁcation (discussion of activities with signiﬁcant environmental

risks and impacts)

(b) Risk management (how the company plans to control environmental risks)

(4) Environmental auditing

(a) Audit scope—frequency/sites
(b) Audit results
(c) External veriﬁcation

(5) Goals and targets

(a) Explicit qualitative goals
(b) Explicit quantitative goals
(c) Measured performance against targets
(d) Discussion of performance compared to prior targets and goals
(e) Discussion of management’s planned course of action where objectives

not achieved

(6) Legal compliance—court

related or general

(speciﬁcs under spills and

emissions)

(a) Reference to environmental liabilities—not material


Environmental disclosure between Canada and the US

317

(b) Percentage compliance
(c) Reported incidents
(d) Number of prosecutions
(e) Levels of ﬁnes
(f) Corrective action
(g) Future legislative/regulative requirements
(h) Ability to meet future legislative/regulative requirements
(i) References to environmental liabilities—not estimable
(j) May be or is material but is not estimable

(7) Other management and system disclosure

(a) Environmental factors integrated into research and development/technology/

production processes

(b) Awards
(c) Corporate context (proﬁle of company’s operations including discussion

of impact on the environment)

(d) Indication of industry issues and problems
(e) Explicit initiatives with stakeholders

(8) Land contamination and remediation

Waste sites other than Superfund

(a) Number of contaminated sites
(b) Description of sites and speciﬁc clean-up terms and conditions
(c) In progress and completed remediation efforts
(d) Cost of remediation/liability
(e) Identiﬁcation of potential liabilities

Site restoration (restoring land to previous state) (accrual required under
Canadian GAAP)

(f) In progress and completed restoration
(g) Site restoration costs

Superfund (US companies only)

(h) Number of Superfund sites
(i) Amount of responsibility re: Superfund sites
(j) $ value of clean-up of Superfund site
(k) Accepts responsibility and plans to clean up site
(l) Does not accept responsibility


318

(9) Habitats

N. Buhr and M. Freedman

(a) Areas affected by development activity
(b) Areas protected

(10) Wastes

(a) Description of waste management activity
(b) Waste reduction initiatives

(11) Air emissions

(a) Statutory requirements—in general
(b) Statutory requirements—by site
(c) Compliance with requirements—in general
(d) Compliance with requirements—by site
(e) Efforts at reducing emissions
(f) Tonnes per year of key emissions
(g) Emissions on a per site basis
(h) Cost of known liabilities from processes and products
(i) Identiﬁcation of potential liabilities
(j) TRI (Toxic Release Inventory) data (US companies)

(12) Water efﬂuents

(a) Statutory requirements—in general
(b) Statutory requirements—by site
(c) Compliance with requirements—in general
(d) Compliance with requirements—by site
(e) Efforts at reducing efﬂuents
(f) Water toxicity—impact of efﬂuent on receiving water
(g) Kilograms per tonne of production/tonnes per year for key materials
(h) Efﬂuent on a per site basis
(i) Cost of known liabilities
(j) Identiﬁcation of potential liabilities

(13) Spills

(a) Number of spills
(b) Nature of spills
(c) Efforts at reducing spills
(d) Cost of known liabilities


Environmental disclosure between Canada and the US

319

(e) Identiﬁcation of potential liabilities

(14) Noise and odors

(a) Instances where standards are exceeded
(b) Number of complaints
(c) Efforts at reducing noise and odors

(15) Product stewardship

(a) Discussion about environmental impact of packaging
(b) Recycling end product (after customer use) one mention only if part of

business

(16) Environmental spending

(a) Deﬁnition of environmental spending
(b) Expenditure—unknown if operating or capital
(c) Capital expenditures—current
(d) Operating expenditures—current
(e) Capital expenditures—comparative
(f) Operating expenditures—comparative
(g) Capital expenditures—future
(h) Operating expenditures—future

(17) Environmental cost accounting

(a) Full cost accounting

(18) Sustainable development reporting

(a) Discussion of more efﬁcient use of energy/raw materials/free resources

(air, water, land)

(b) Life-cycle analysis
(c) Discussion of global issues

References

Abdolmohammadi, M., Burnaby, P., Greenlay, L. & Thibodeau, J., “Environmental Accounting in the United
States: From Control and Prevention to Remediation”, Asia–Paciﬁc Journal of Accounting, Vol. 4, No. 2,
1997, pp. 199–217.

Anderson, J. C. & Frankle, A. W., “Voluntary Social Reporting: An Iso-Beta Portfolio Analysis”, Accounting

Review, Vol. 55, No. 3, 1980, pp. 470–479.

Atwood, M., Survival: A Thematic Guide to Canadian Literature (Toronto: House of Anansi, 1972).


320

N. Buhr and M. Freedman

Bakvis, H. & Nevitte, N., “The Greening of the Canadian Electorate”, in R. Boardman (ed.), Canadian
Environmental Policy: Ecosystems, Politics, and Process pp. 144–163 (Toronto: Oxford University
Press, 1992).

Barth, M. E., McNichols, M. F. & Wilson, G. P., “Factors Inﬂuencing Firms’ Disclosures About Environmental

Liabilities”, Review of Accounting Studies, Vol. 2, 1997, pp. 35–64.

Bebbington, J., Gray, R., Thompson, I. & Walters, D., “Accountants’ Attitudes and Environmentally-

Sensitive Accounting”, Accounting and Business Research, Vol. 24, No. 94, 1994, pp. 109–120.

Blacconiere, W. G. & Patten, D. M., “Environmental Disclosures, Regulatory Costs, and Changes in Firm

Value”, Journal of Accounting and Economics, Vol. 18, No. 3, 1994, pp. 357–377.

Bruton, J. & Howlett, M., “Differences of Opinion: Round Tables, Policy Networks, and the Failure of

Canadian Environmental Strategy”, Alternatives, Vol. 19, No. 1, 1992, pp. 25–33.

Canada Communications Group, Canada’s Green Plan (Ottawa: Canada Communications Group, 1990).
Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants, Environmental Auditing and the Role of the Accounting Pro-

fession (Toronto: Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants, 1992).

Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants, Environmental Costs and Liabilities: Accounting and Finan-

cial Reporting Issues (Toronto: Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants, 1993a).

Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants, Environmental Stewardship: Management, Accountabil-
ity and the Role of Chartered Accountants: Report of the Task Force on Sustainable Development
(Toronto: Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants, 1993b).

Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants, Reporting on Environmental Performance (Toronto:

Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants, 1994a).

Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants, Auditing and Related Services Guideline#19: Audit
of Financial Statements Affected by Environmental Matters (Toronto: Canadian Institute of Chartered
Accountants, 1994b).

Clarkson, P. M. & Simunic, D. A., “The Association Between Audit Quality, Retained Ownership, and Firm-
Speciﬁc Risk in U.S. vs. Canadian IPO Markets”, Journal of Accounting and Economics, Vol. 17, 1994,
pp. 207–228.

Conklin, D. W., Hodgson, R. C. & Watson, E. D., Sustainable Development: A Manager’s Handbook

(Ottawa: National Round Table on the Environment and the Economy, 1991).

Corelli, R., “How Very Different We Are”, Maclean’s, Nov. 4, 1996, pp. 36–40.
Cotton, R. & McKinnon, K. M., “An Overview of Environmental Law in Canada”, in G. Thompson, M.
L. McConnell & L. B. Huestis (eds), Environmental Law and Business in Canada pp. 3–30 (Ontario:
Canada Law Book, 1993).

Cowen, S. S., Ferreri, L. B. & Parker, L. D., “The Impact of Corporate Characteristics on Social Responsi-
bility Disclosure: A Typology and Frequency-Based Analysis”, Accounting Organizations and Society,
Vol. 12, No. 2, 1987, pp. 111–122.

Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu International, Coming Clean: Corporate Environmental Reporting (London:

Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, 1993).

Doupnik, T. S. & Salter, S. B., “An Empirical Test of a Judgmental International Classiﬁcation of Financial

Reporting Practices”, Journal of International Business Studies, 1993, pp. 41–60.

Environment Canada, A Brief History of Achievements at Environment Canada, http://www.ec.gc.ca/

ec25/hist_e.htm, April 28, 1997a.

Environment Canada, News Release: Youth Round Table on Environment Announced, http://www.ec.

gc.ca/press/youth2_n_e.htm, April 30, 1997b.

Ferguson, W., Why I Hate Canadians (Vancouver: Douglas and McIntyre, 1997).
Filyk, G. & Cote, R., “Pressures from Inside”, in R. Boardman (ed.), Canadian Environmental Policy:

Ecosystems, Politics, and Process pp. 60–82 (Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1992).

Freedman, M. & Jaggi, B., “Pollution Disclosures, Pollution Performance and Economic Performance”,

Omega, Vol. 10, No. 2, 1982, pp. 167–176.

Freedman, M. & Stagliano, A. J., “Differences in Social-Cost Disclosures: A Market Test of Investor

Reactions”, Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal, Vol. 4, 1991, pp. 68–83.

Freedman, M. & Wasley, C., “The Association Between Environmental Performance and Environmental
Disclosure in Annual Reports and 10 Ks”, Advances in Public Interest Accounting, Vol. 3, 1990, pp. 183–
194.

Gray, R., “Accounting and Environmentalism: An Exploration of the Challenge of Gently Accounting for
Accountability, Transparency and Sustainability”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 17, No. 5,
1992, pp. 399–426.


Environmental disclosure between Canada and the US

321

Gray, R., Bebbington, J., Walters, D. & Thompson, I., “The Greening of Enterprise: An Exploration of the
(Non) Role of Environmental Accounting and Environmental Accountants in Environmental Change”,
Critical Perspectives on Accounting, Vol. 6, No. 3, 1995, pp. 211–239.

Gray, R., Owen, D. & Adams, C., Accounting and Accountability: Changes and Challenges in Corporate

Social and Environmental Reporting (London: Prentice-Hall, 1996).

Gray, R., Owen, D. & Maunders, K., Corporate Social Reporting: Accounting and Accountability (Hemel

Hempstead: Prentice-Hall, 1987).

Gray, S. J., “Toward a Theory of Cultural Inﬂuences on the Development of Accounting Systems

Internationally”, Abacus, 1988, pp. 1–15.

Guthrie, J. & Parker, L. D., “Corporate Social Reporting: A Rebuttal of Legitimacy Theory”, Accounting

and Business Research, Vol. 19, No. 76, 1989, pp. 343–352.

Guthrie, J. & Parker, L. D., “Corporate Social Disclosure Practice: A Comparative International Analysis”,

Advances in Public Interest Accounting, Vol. 3, 1990, pp. 159–175.

Harrison, E. B., Going Green: How to Communicate Your Company’s Environmental Commitment (Illinois:

Business One Irwin, 1993).

Hoberg, G., “Sleeping with an Elephant: The American Inﬂuence on Canadian Environmental Regulation”,

Journal of Public Policy, Vol. 11, No. 1, 1991, pp. 107–132.

Hoberg, G., “Comparing Canadian Performance in Environmental Policy”, in R. Boardman (ed.), Canadian
Environmental Policy: Ecosystems, Politics, and Process pp. 246–262 (Toronto: Oxford University
Press, 1992).

Hofstede, G., Culture’s Consequences: International Differences in Work-Related Values (California:

Sage, 1980).

Hogner, R. H., “Corporate Social Reporting: Eight Decades of Development at U.S. Steel”, Research in

Corporate Social Performance and Policy, Vol. 4, 1982, pp. 243–250.

Howlett, M., “The Judicialization of Canadian Environmental Policy, 1980–1990: A Test of the Canada–
United States Convergence Thesis”, Canadian Journal of Political Science, Vol. 27, No. 1, 1994, pp. 99–
127.

Ingram, R. W., “An Investigation of the Information Content of (Certain) Social Responsibility Disclosures”,

Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 16, No. 2, 1978, pp. 270–285.

Ingram, R. W. & Frazier, K. B., “Environmental Performance and Corporate Disclosure”, Journal of

Accounting Research, Vol. 18, No. 2, 1980, pp. 614–622.

Kempton, W., Boster, J. & Hartley, J., Environmental Values in American Culture (Cambridge, MA: MIT

Press, 1995).

Lehman, G., “A Legitimate Concern for Environmental Accounting”, Critical Perspectives on Accounting,

Vol. 6, 1995, pp. 393–412.

Lewis, N. R., Parker, L. D. & Sutcliffe, P., “Financial Reporting to Employees: The Pattern of Development

1919 to 1979”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 9, No. 3/4, 1984, pp. 275–289.

Li, Y., Richardson, G. D. & Thornton, D. B., “Corporate Disclosure of Environmental Liability Information:

Theory and Evidence”, Contemporary Accounting Research, Vol. 14, No. 3, 1997, pp. 435–474.

Lipset, S. M., “Historical Traditions and National Characteristics: A Comparative Analysis of Canada and

the United States”, Canadian Journal of Sociology, Vol. 11, No. 2, 1986, pp. 113–155.

Lipset, S. M., Continental Divide: The Values and Institutions of the United States and Canada, (Routledge:

1990).

Macintosh, N. B., “Annual Reports in an Ideological Role: A Critical Theory Analysis”, in D. Cooper & T.

Hopper (eds), Critical Accounts pp. 153–172 (London: Macmillan, 1990).

Marcus, A. D., “Firms Ordered to Come Clean About Pollution”, Wall Street Journal, Nov. 16,

1989, pp. B1, B8.

May, E. & Barron, D., “Truth is Stranger than Pulp Fiction as Business, Green Activists Join Hands”, The

Globe and Mail, June 6, 1995, p. B28.

Merelman, R. M., Partial Visions: Culture and Politics in Britain, Canada, and the United States (Wisconsin:

University of Wisconsin Press, 1991).

Munton, D. & Castle, G., “The Continental Dimension”, in R. Boardman (ed.), Canadian Environmental

Policy: Ecosystems, Politics, and Process pp. 203–223 (Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1992).

Nichols, M., “The Greying of the Greens”, Maclean’s, April 25, 1994, pp. 54–55.
Nobes, C. W., “A Judgemental International Classiﬁcation of Financial Reporting Practices”, Journal of

Business Finance and Accounting, 1983, pp. 1–19.

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, National Accounts: Detailed Tables 1982–

1994 (Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 1996).


322

N. Buhr and M. Freedman

Patten, D. M., “Exposure, Legitimacy and Social Disclosure”, Journal of Accounting and Public Policy,

Vol. 10, No. 4, 1991, pp. 297–308.

Patten, D. M., “Intra-Industry Environmental Disclosures in Response to the Alaskan Oil Spill: A Note on

Legitimacy Theory”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 17, No. 5, 1992, pp. 471–475.

Ramanathan, K. V., “Toward a Theory of Corporate Social Accounting”, Accounting Review, Vol. 51, No. 3,

1976, pp. 516–528.

Rockness, J. W., “An Assessment of the Relationship Between US Corporate Environmental Performance

and Disclosure”, Journal of Business Finance and Accounting, 1985, pp. 339–354.

Roussey, R. S., “Auditing Environmental Liabilities”, Auditing: A Journal of Practice and Theory, Vol. 11,

No. 1, 1992, pp. 47–57.

Schrecker, T., “Of Invisible Beasts and the Public Interest”, in R. Boardman (ed.), Canadian Environmental

Policy: Ecosystems, Politics, and Process pp. 83–105 (Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1992).

Skogstad, G. & Kopas, P., “Environmental Policy in a Federal System”, in R. Boardman (ed.), Canadian
Environmental Policy: Ecosystems, Politics, and Process pp. 43–60 (Toronto: Oxford University Press,
1992).

SustainAbility Ltd., Company Environmental Reporting: A Measure of the Progress of Business and
Industry Towards Sustainable Development (Paris: United Nations Environment Programme, Industry
and Environment Ofﬁce, 1994).

Tinker, T. & Neimark, M., “The Role of Annual Reports in Gender and Class Contradictions at General

Motors: 1917-1976”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 12, No. 1, 1987, pp. 71–88.

Trotman, K. T. & Bradley, G. W.,

“Associations Between Social Responsibility Disclosure and
Characteristics of Companies”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 6, No. 4, 1981, pp. 355–
362.

US Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract of the United States, 114th ed. (Washington, DC: US Bureau

of the Census, 1994).

US Government, Federal Water Pollution Control Act, http://es.epa.gov/oeca/regstat, April 28,

1998.

Wiseman, J., “An Evaluation of Environmental Disclosures Made in Corporate Annual Reports”,

Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 7, No. 1, 1982, pp. 53–63.

Zeghal, D. & Ahmed, S. A., “Comparison of Social Responsibility Information Disclosure Media Used by

Canadian Firms”, Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal, Vol. 3, No. 1, 1990, pp. 38–53.

