 
 
An Examination of the Antecedents and Consequences of the Use of Family-friendly
Benefits
Author(s): James A. Breaugh and  N. Kathleen Frye
Source: Journal of Managerial Issues, Vol. 19, No. 1 (Spring 2007), pp. 35-52
Published by: Pittsburg State University
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/40601192
Accessed: 31-01-2017 01:55 UTC
 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/40601192?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted

digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about

JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

http://about.jstor.org/terms

Pittsburg State University is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal
of Managerial Issues

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 31 Jan 2017 01:55:18 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES

 Vol. XIX Number 1 Spring 2007: 35-52

 An Examination of the Antecedents and Consequences

 of the Use of Family-friendly Benefits

 James A. Breaugh
 Professor of Management

 University of Missouri - St. Louis

 N. Kathleen Frye

 Doctoral Student

 University of Missouri - St. Louis

 Over the last 30 years, there has

 been an increase in the number of
 dual-career couples, single parent
 families, and workers with eldercare
 responsibility (Eby et al, 2005). Given
 these changes have occurred at the
 same time that the number of hours
 employees work has increased (Glass
 and Finley, 2002), it is not surprising
 that the amount of attention given to
 work-family issues has increased. As
 noted by Eby et al, much of this re-
 search attention has focused on work-
 family conflict (i.e., work activities in-
 terfering with family matters). Such
 conflict has been shown to be nega-
 tively related to employee attend-
 ance, satisfaction, and performance
 (e.g., Hammer et al, 2003).

 In contrast to the attention given to

 work-family conflict, as noted by
 Boles, Howard, and Donofrio (2001),
 relatively little attention has been
 given to family-work conflict (i.e.,
 family responsibilities interfering
 with work activities), and even less at-

 tention has been given to whether the
 use of family-friendly employment
 benefits (e.g., flexible work hours) is
 linked to a reduction of family-work
 conflict (Boyar et al, 2003). We find
 this lack of research attention sur-
 prising given that it is likely that fam-
 ily responsibilities (e.g., caring for a
 sick child, taking an elderly parent to
 the doctor, spending time with a
 spouse, participating in a school car-
 pool) may have detrimental effects
 on such important work-related vari-
 ables as employee attendance, punc-
 tuality, dissatisfaction, and turnover,
 and given that providing family-
 friendly benefits may help employees
 cope with family demands (readers
 interested in a detailed discussion of
 the causes and consequences of fam-
 ily-work conflict are referred to an ex-
 cellent review article by Eby et al
 (2005)).

 Not only have there been few stud-
 ies that have addressed family-work
 conflict and the influence of offering

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XIX Number 1 Spring 2007

 (35)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 31 Jan 2017 01:55:18 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 36 Breaugh and Frye

 underlies them, it may be helpful to
 provide a theoretical model that pres-
 ents an overview of our study. Figure
 I portrays several factors that we hy-
 pothesized as being antecedents of
 the use of family-friendly benefits or
 consequences of their use.

 family-friendly benefits on such con-
 flict, criticisms of the limited research
 which does exist have been raised
 (Eby et al, 2005). One criticism in-
 volves the heavy reliance of past re-
 search on cross-sectional data gath-
 ering. A second criticism is that past
 studies have been somewhat atheo-
 re tical in nature. A third criticism is
 that, rather than looking at the effects
 of using a specific family-friendly ben-
 efit (e.g., on-site child care), re-
 searchers generally have measured
 overall benefit usage (i.e., a compos-
 ite scale reflecting the use of several
 benefits was created) . The use of such
 a global benefit usage scale makes it
 impossible to determine which spe-
 cific benefits may be particularly
 helpful for reducing family-work con-
 flict.

 The first relationship portrayed in
 Figure I is between an employer pro-
 viding family-friendly benefits and
 employees making use of them. Al-
 though it may seem obvious that
 these two variables should be strongly
 related, past research has not always
 found this to be the case. For exam-
 ple, Allen (2001) reported a correla-
 tion of only .39 (p < .05) between
 benefit availability and benefit usage
 (in order to simplify matters,
 throughout this paper, no p-value is
 provided if a correlation does not at-
 tain a p < .05 level). Thompson,
 Beauvais, and Lyness (1999) reported
 a correlation of only .28 (p < .05) be-
 tween benefits being provided and
 being used. One reason this relation-
 ship may not be stronger is discussed
 in the next section which addresses
 the importance of reporting to a fam-
 ily-supportive supervisor.

 In this study, we attempt to advance
 research on family-work issues by ad-
 dressing concerns that have been
 raised with previous studies. More
 specifically, our study tested a theo-
 retical model of both hypothesized
 antecedents and consequences of the
 use of family-friendly benefits. In ex-
 amining these relationships, we did
 not rely solely on cross-sectional data.
 Finally, unlike most previous studies
 that have focused on overall benefit
 use, we focused both on overall use
 and on four specific benefits (i.e., te-
 lecommuting, the ability to take work
 home, flextime, and family leave)
 that have been hypothesized to have
 important consequences for reduc-
 ing family-work conflict and for im-
 proving employee satisfaction.

 ANTECEDENTS AND

 Hypothesis 1: Employee reports of an employer
 providing family-friendly benefits will be posi-
 tively and significantly correlated with their use.

 As a way to reduce conflict between

 family and work responsibilities, em-
 ployers have provided family-friendly
 benefits. However, the results of re-
 cent research (see Eby et al, 2005)
 suggest that providing such benefits
 is not sufficient. For example,
 Thompson et al noted that "even
 where formal work-family policies
 and programs are in place, managers
 may subvert them by refusing to allow
 their employees to participate or by
 applying the policies unevenly"
 (1999: 393). Alternatively, a manager

 CONSEQUENCES OF FAMILY-

 FRIENDLY BENEFIT USE

 Before discussing the specific hy-
 potheses we tested and the logic that

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XIX Number 1 Spring 2007

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 31 Jan 2017 01:55:18 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Antecedents and Consequences of the Benefits 37

 ■Sä % ä

 ^ Ö ^^! :
 ^ C ^^^! ; !
 £ ► / / i

 ^ k ' / ' ι

 ' /' '' !

 ^^ ! !' '
 'S % ' ' ! ' :
 •Sö ' ' i

 •g c V ' ;
 £ w /^' ' I

 Ö > Ο Ο
 DO Cu &>

 ε g 9 oo

 1

 M

 1

 fa
 «M
 Ο

 I
 'S

 • s

 Si g
 ta ο

 'S
 α

 1

 •s
 1

 -α
 Sá

 • PM

 1
 'S

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XIX Number 1 Spring 2007

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 31 Jan 2017 01:55:18 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 38 Breaugh and Frye

 reports of work-family conflict. For
 example, Allen (2001) reported a
 correlation of -.09 (p < .05). Such a
 modest association may, at least par-
 tially, result from supervisors only
 half-heartedly supporting the use of
 such benefits (e.g., although flextime
 is used, meetings are scheduled after
 children have arrived home from
 school) . In terms of benefit use and
 family-work conflict, we could find
 only one study that examined this re-
 lationship. O'Driscoll, Poelmans,
 Spector, Kalliath, Allen, Cooper, and
 Sanchez (2003) reported a non-sig-
 nificant correlation of -.07 between
 these variables. Given this finding, we
 are hesitant to predict a negative re-
 lationship between benefit usage and
 family-work conflict. Nevertheless,
 Figure I reflects this relationship. We
 included this prediction in our model
 since it seems logical that the use of
 the four family-friendly benefits we
 examined (e.g., flextime) should re-
 duce reports of family-work conflict,
 Hypothesis 3: The use of family-friendly benefits
 will be negatively and significantly correlated
 with reports of family-work conflict.

 may allow an employee to make use
 of a family-friendly benefit an organ-
 ization offers while at the same time
 sending a message that the em-
 ployee's career will suffer. In earlier
 research dealing with supervisor sup-
 portiveness (e.g., Geiger, 1989), it was
 common for researchers to focus on
 whether a supervisor supported the
 use of a specific benefit offered by an
 organization. More recently, re-
 searchers typically have focused upon
 the overall family-supportiveness of a
 supervisor. For example, Allen de-
 fined a family-supportive supervisor
 as one who "is sympathetic to the em-
 ployee's desires to seek balance be-
 tween work and family and who en-
 gages in efforts to help the employee
 accommodate his or her work and
 family responsibilities" (2001: 417).
 We adopted this more general per-
 spective of supervisor supportiveness
 of the use of family-friendly benefits
 in our study. In summary, although
 only a few studies have addressed the
 relationship between supervisor sup-
 port and the use of family-friendly
 benefits, two studies that have done
 so (i.e., Allen, 2001; Thompson et al,
 1999) documented a relationship be-
 tween these two variables. Given these
 findings and the logic supporting the
 importance of a supervisor being
 committed to balancing work and
 family responsibilities, we offer the
 following hypothesis.

 As reflected in Figure I, we hypoth-
 esized that, in addition to its indirect
 effect via benefit usage, reporting to
 a family-supportive supervisor would
 have a direct effect on family-work
 conflict. This prediction is based
 upon our assumption that a suppor-
 tive supervisor may influence the de-
 gree of family-work conflict experi-
 enced by a host of informal actions he
 or she takes (e.g., scheduling a per-
 son's work hours to accommodate
 family responsibilities, allowing an
 employee to leave work to take an eld-
 erly parent to the doctor). Behson
 (2005) recently has provided an ex-
 cellent discussion of how informal ac-
 tions taken by a supervisor (i.e., ac-

 Hypothesis 2: Reporting to a family-supportive
 supervisor will be positively and significantly
 associated with the use of family-friendly benefits.

 Past research on family-friendly

 benefits has primarily focused on the
 effects of their use on work-family
 conflict rather than on family-work
 conflict. Surprisingly, this research
 has shown benefit usage to only have
 a modest negative relationship with

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XIX Number 1 Spring 2007

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 31 Jan 2017 01:55:18 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Antecedents and Consequences of the Benefits 39

 tions that do not reflect formal
 organizational benefits) can influ-
 ence work-family conflict (unfortu-
 nately, he did not measure family-
 work conflict). In terms of past
 research that is relevant, O'Driscoll et
 al (2003) found that family-suppor-
 tive supervision was negatively corre-
 lated (r = -.31, ρ < .05) with family-
 work conflict.

 upon an assumption that some indi-
 viduals who may not be experiencing
 family-work conflict may still make
 use of such benefits as flextime or the
 ability to work from home. Using
 such benefits should result in in-
 creased job satisfaction. In terms of
 past research that has examined the
 relationship between overall benefit
 usage and job satisfaction, Allen
 (2001) reported a correlation of .14
 (p<.01).

 Hypothesis 4: Reporting to a family-supportive
 supervisor will be negatively and significantly re-
 lated to reports of family-work conflict.

 Based upon the results of a meta-
 analysis they conducted, Kossek and
 Ozeki (1998) estimated that the cor-
 relation between family-work conflict
 and job satisfaction was -.14. More re-
 cently, Netemeyer, Brashear-Alejan-
 dro, and Boles (2004) reported cor-
 relations between these two variables
 for samples drawn from the United
 States, Puerto Rico, and Romania.
 None of these correlations (i.e., -.07,
 -.13, -.04) was significant at the ρ <
 .05 level. These data suggest at best a
 modest relationship between family-
 work conflict and job satisfaction.
 However, an argument can be made
 that, if family responsibilities inter-
 fere with successfully doing one's job,
 this could negatively affect job satis-
 faction (we recognize that job satis-
 faction is affected by several other fac-
 tors). Therefore, despite the modest
 associations reported in past studies,
 Figure I suggests the following hy-
 pothesis.

 Hypothesis 5: Family-work conflict will be nega-
 tively and significantly correlated with job satis-
 faction.

 Figure I suggests that, in addition
 to its indirect effect on job satisfac-
 tion via family-work conflict, the use
 of family-friendly benefits will have a
 direct effect on job satisfaction. This
 hypothesized relationship is based

 With regard to the relationship be-
 tween the use of a specific family-
 friendly benefit and job satisfaction,
 with the exception of the use of flex-
 time, there is little data available.
 Concerning flextime, based upon
 their meta-analysis of past empirical
 research, Bakes, Briggs, Huff, Wright,
 and Neuman (1999) reported a cor-
 relation of .15. With regard to the im-
 pact of other family-friendly benefits,
 Glass and Finley summarized the cur-
 rent situation, arguing "by conven-
 tional social science standards, we
 know very little" (2002: 319). Despite
 the lack of available research to draw
 upon, Glass and Finley suggested that
 what they referred to as family-re-
 sponsive policies are likely to have a
 positive impact. In sum, based upon
 the fact that even employees who are
 not experiencing family-work conflict
 may choose to use one or more fam-
 ily-friendly benefits, we hypothesized
 that job satisfaction should be posi-
 tively related to the use of each of the
 specific family-friendly benefits we ex-
 amined and to the overall usage scale
 we created.

 Hypothesis 6: The use of family-friendly benefits
 will be positively and significantly related to job
 satisfaction.

 As reflected in Figure I, in addition
 to hypothesizing an indirect effect on
 job satisfaction (e.g., via benefit us-

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XIX Number 1 Spring 2007

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 31 Jan 2017 01:55:18 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 40 Breaugh and Frye

 pects of the work environment that
 may impact job satisfaction. With re-
 gard to past research that is relevant
 to the relationship we have predicted
 (Hypothesis 8), Behson (2005) re-
 ported a correlation of .58 (p < .01)
 between reporting to a family-suppor-
 tive supervisor and job satisfaction,
 and Allen (2001) reported a correla-
 tion of .46 (p< .01).

 age), we also predicted a direct rela-
 tionship between an employer pro-
 viding family-friendly benefits and
 job satisfaction. This hypothesis stems
 from an assumption that, even
 though an employee may not cur-
 rently be using the family-friendly
 benefits available, he or she may still
 be glad they are offered. For exam-
 ple, the person may anticipate mak-
 ing use of such benefits in the future.
 Furthermore, it is likely that offering
 such benefits to employees may re-
 flect a more general concern of the
 organization for its employees. With
 regard to past research relevant to
 our prediction that benefit availabi-
 lity is linked to job satisfaction, Allen
 (2001) reported a correlation of .13
 (p < .01) between these two varia-
 bles.

 Hypothesis 8: Reporting to a family-supportive
 supervisor will be positively correlated with job
 satisfaction.
 The final relationship hypothe-
 sized in Figure I is that family-work
 conflict should be negatively associ-
 ated with family satisfaction. The
 logic for the proposed relationship is
 straightforward. To the extent that
 family responsibilities interfere with
 work activities (e.g., a sick child
 causes one to miss work, a spouse's
 unwillingness to do household chores
 results in a partner being fatigued at
 work), it is logical that such family-
 work conflict might be linked to un-
 happiness with one's family life. As
 part of a larger study, Grandey and
 Cropanzano (1999) examined the re-
 lationship between family-work con-
 flict and family satisfaction. They re-
 ported a strong relationship (r = -.57,
 p<.01).

 Hypothesis 7: An employer providing family-
 friendly benefits will be positively and signifi-
 cantly correlated with job satisfaction.

 As portrayed in Figure I, we pre-
 dicted that reporting to a family-sup-
 portive supervisor would have an in-
 direct influence on job satisfaction
 (e.g., through its effect on the use of
 family-friendly benefits). In addition
 to this indirect effect, we also hypoth-
 esize a direct relationship between
 having a supportive supervisor and
 job satisfaction. This hypothesis is
 based on the assumption that even
 employees who choose not to use a
 family-friendly benefit or do not ex-
 perience family-work conflict will en-
 joy a work environment that is sensi-
 tive to needs that may arise in the
 future (e.g., an elderly parent who
 may not currently require help from
 an employee may require such help
 in the future). Furthermore, we be-
 lieve it is likely that supervisors who
 are sensitive to family issues are also
 likely to be concerned about other as-

 Hypothesis 9: Family-work conflict will be nega-
 tively associated with family satisfaction.

 METHOD

 Participants and Procedure

 The sample for this study was

 drawn from two sources - alumni of
 the College of Business Administra-
 tion of a midwestern university and
 students enrolled in an evening MBA
 program at this university. Question-
 naires, consent forms, and return
 mail envelopes were sent to 1,077

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XIX Number 1 Spring 2007

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 31 Jan 2017 01:55:18 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Antecedents and Consequences of the Benefits 41

 Measures

 alumni with a letter requesting their
 participation in a study involving
 work-family issues. The response rate
 for the alumni was 13%. Although
 this is a low response rate, some of the
 lack of response was due to outdated
 addresses and the fact that alumni
 were instructed they were only eligi-
 ble to participate in the study if they
 were currently working and had a su-
 pervisor (i.e., self-employed individ-
 uals were not eligible). For the MBA
 students, questionnaires and consent
 forms were distributed during class
 time. These students were told they
 should fill out a questionnaire only if
 they were employed by an organiza-
 tion. Thus, we are not able to estimate
 how many of those in the classes con-
 tacted were eligible to participate
 chose to do so. In total, 140 alumni
 and 71 MBA students returned ques-
 tionnaires. Given the focus of our
 study was on family-work conflict, we
 did not include in our final sample
 individuals who did not have respon-
 sibility for a dependent (a child or an
 elder) or who were working less than
 30 hours per week (less than 10% of
 the survey respondents reported
 working less than 40 hours per week) .
 Requiring individuals to have respon-
 sibility for a dependent and that they
 work 30 or more hours per work (the
 average number of hours worked was
 46) reduced our sample to 187 indi-
 viduals.

 lected using a random number ta-
 ble) . The alumni re-test response rate
 was 78%. MBA students were selected
 for re-testing contingent upon in-
 structors allowing us to have access to
 their classes for a second time. The
 re-test response rate for the MBA stu-
 dents was 100%. The final sample for
 the re-test data analysis involved 35
 alumni and 29 MBA students.

 With the exception of our meas-

 ures of the number of hours worked,
 childcare responsibility, non-child re-
 sponsibility, and the use of family-
 friendly benefits, questionnaire re-
 sponses were made on a seven-point
 scale (1 = strongly disagree to 7 =
 strongly agree). Items were scored so
 that higher scores reflected more of
 the attribute measured.

 Number of Hours Worked, Childcare
 Responsibility, and Non-child Responsi-
 bility, In order to measure these vari-
 ables, participants were asked - "On
 average, how many hours do you
 work per week?", "Do you have any
 children under your care?" (coded 1
 = no, 2 = yes), and "Do you have
 care-giving responsibilities for some-
 one other than a child?" (coded 1 =
 no, 2 = yes).

 In order to assess whether the re-
 sults for our cross-sectional data
 would differ from results involving
 data gathered over time, we collected
 re-test data on job satisfaction and
 family satisfaction. To gather re-test
 data, a subset of the alumni who re-
 turned the initial questionnaire were
 sent a second questionnaire approxi-
 mately two weeks after the initial
 mailing was received (alumni were se-

 Family-friendly Benefits Provided, A
 two-item scale (e.g., "My employer
 provides family friendly policies that
 assist in balancing my work and family
 responsibilities.") was used to assess
 the extent to which an employer pro-
 vided family-friendly benefits. Coeffi-
 cient alpha for the scale was .90.

 Family-supportive Supervisor, A five-
 item scale was used to measure super-
 visor support. Three items (e.g., "My
 supervisor disapproves of my efforts
 to combine work and family respon-
 sibilities.", reverse scored) were

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XIX Number 1 Spring 2007

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 31 Jan 2017 01:55:18 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 42 Breaugh and Frye

 The Use of Family-friendly Benefits. In

 isfaction. One of the items compris-
 taken from Shinn, Wong, Simko, and
 Ortiz-Torres (1989); one item (e.g.,
 ing this scale is, "I am satisfied with
 my present job." Coefficient alpha
 "My supervisor understands that I
 was .90 for the main sample and .88
 have to meet family responsibilities as
 for the re-test sample.
 well as those related to my job.") was
 Family Satisfaction. Following Ko-
 adapted from Warren and Johnson
 pelman, Greenhaus, and Connolly
 (1995); one item ("My supervisor is
 (1983), family satisfaction was meas-
 supportive when family problems
 ured with a scale similar to the job
 arise.") was developed for this study.
 satisfaction scale we used. Where pos-
 Coefficient alpha for this scale was
 sible, the word "family" was simply
 .85.
 substituted for the word "job." A
 sample item from the family satisfac-
 order to assess what specific family-
 tion scale is, "I feel satisfied with my
 friendly benefits an employee had
 family life." Coefficient alpha was .87
 used, four specific benefits (i.e., tele-
 for the main sample and .88 for the
 commuting, ability to take work
 re-test sample. This measure has been
 home, flex time, and family leave)
 used previously by Frye and Breaugh
 that have been commonly cited in the
 (2004).
 work-family literature were listed. Par-
 ticipants were asked to check each
 benefit they had used (coded 0 = not
 used, 1 = used). In addition to ana-
 lyzing data on the use of individual
 benefits, a summary score of benefit
 use was computed by adding up the
 number of specific benefits that were
 used. Scores on this summary mea-
 sure could range from 0 to 4.

 In order to provide a sense of the
 data upon which the tests of our hy-
 potheses are based, it is useful to pro-
 vide some preliminary analyses. Table
 1 presents means, standard devia-
 Family-Work Conflict. Family-work
 tions, coefficient alphas, and corre-
 conflict was measured using Nete-
 lations for most of the variables ex-
 meyer, Boles, and McMurrian's
 amined in this study (data for the
 (1996) five-item scale. Sample items
 four specific family-friendly benefits
 from this scale are, "My home life in-
 used are reported in Table 4). Since
 terferes with my responsibilities at
 we used structural equation model-
 work such as getting to work on time,
 ing, it is important to examine distri-
 accomplishing daily tasks, and work-
 butional properties of our data. Ac-
 ing overtime," "Things I need to do
 cording to Kline (1998), skewness
 at work don't get done because of the
 may be a problem if the index for a
 demands of my family or spouse/
 variable is greater than three; kurtosis
 partner," and "I have to put off do-
 may be a problem if the index for a
 ing things at work because of de-
 variable is greater than ten. We found
 mands on my time at home."
 no evidence of either skewness or
 Coefficient alpha was .81.
 kurtosis.

 Preliminary Analysis

 RESULTS

 Job Satisfaction. A five-item version

 of Brayfield and Rothe's (1951) orig-
 inal 18-item measure created by
 Judge, Locke, Durham, and Kluger
 (1998) was used to measure job sat-

 Using the statistical package EQS

 (Bender and Wu, 1995) , we tested the

 Test of the Hypothesized Model

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XIX Number 1 Spring 2007

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 31 Jan 2017 01:55:18 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Antecedents and Consequences of the Benefits 43

 00 <g oo-

 ß
 * * S
 #· -χ- ^

 Ο

 ce

 1 υ

 ce

 I α

 <
 I
 Já Β
 ce ο
 Hü

 I

 Ο

 I I Vi

 ·* ^· -χ- II
 __ ^· -χ- -κ- Κ7
 in on csi οο m ·
 00

 -η Ο t^ ^1- Ο ^
 Tj- 00 O 1-Η O (Ν g

 ■■'■'■■' jg

 E^ oo oo (Ν ^ ^
 en Ο (Sj ο ^] ^i où

 '^>
 * * * -χ- ·ΐί· ^
 ^ °° oo (Nr-o>m on .g
 (N °° (N (N CO ^h CO ^ ^
 l" C/3
 O
 * * * ^ * ^
 o&t^o^^è^ &

 l' ' X
 <υ
 (Λ

 Qcn σ> σ> o^ooo oo #öS

 I -2

 11 Ι 11 -β Ι 1 Ι 1 3 4 ν
 •g Ι &ë -g3 Ι Ι s Ι i -s -a ν ρ,
 ^^ ΐ .s ^^2 · -Β ™ ·Β ^ °° ~ &ö^
 3 ^g ι S ^g ^ co îg η Q tg Q ^ og
 •C §<υ S 3 § ü § 'S S 'S i S i « *ß '/
 •C § pupq fcco 3 fcPQ fc A fc £sb few Õo «
 ^r-î oi en ^ »ri vd r^ oô ÍU*

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XIX Number I Spring 2007

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 31 Jan 2017 01:55:18 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 44 Breaugh and Frye

 Goodness of Fit Indices for the Path Models

 Table 2

 Model I Chi Square I df I CFI I GH I SRMR

 Null 162.81 15 OÕ J3 23

 Simplified 79.00 9 ^52 Ã9 ΛΊ

 Hypothesized 17.26 5 m 37 Ό8

 Note: GFI: Joreskog-Sorbom Goodness of Fit Index, CFI: Comparative Fit
 Index, SRMR: Standardized Root Mean Square Residual.

 model presented in Figure I. In eval-
 uating model fit, a researcher should
 focus both on overall model fit and
 on specific parameter estimates for
 hypothesized relationships between
 variables (Kline, 1998). In terms of
 overall model fit, we report results for
 three indices (i.e., CFI, GFI, and
 SRMR) that were recommended by
 Hoyle and Panter (1995). Both the
 CFI and GFI indices can range from
 0.00 to 1.00. Although there is no ac-
 cepted standard for determining
 model fit, a CFI or a GFI value of .90
 or higher is frequently seen as reflect-
 ing good model fit (Kline, 1998).
 With regard to SRMR, "which is a
 standardized summary of the average
 of covariance residuals" (Kline: 129),
 Kline suggested a value of .10 or
 lower reflects good model fit.

 ported in Table 2 suggest the null
 model is inconsistent with the data.
 Given a null model generally repre-
 sents a very low standard against
 which to compare a hypothesized
 model, we tested a second model
 which is a simplified version of our
 hypothesized model. This simplified
 model consists of the relationships
 between variables represented by the
 solid lines in Figure I (e.g., there is
 no direct path from having a family-
 supportive supervisor to family-work
 conflict). Although the simplified
 model better represents the data than
 the null model (see Table 2), none of
 the three fit indices reached the stan-
 dards suggested for good fit by Kline
 (1998).

 In contrast to the fit for the null

 Maximum likelihood estimation
 was used to estimate the three models
 we tested (i.e., a null model, a simpli-
 fied model, the hypothesized model) .
 As a basis for comparison for assess-
 ing the fit of our hypothesized model,
 we first computed results for a null
 model that assumes the variables por-
 trayed in Figure I are uncorrelated.
 The CFI, GFI, and SRMR values re-

 model and the simplified model, the
 results reported in Table 2 for the hy-
 pothesized model suggest very good
 model fit (i.e., both the CFI and GFI
 are greater than .90 and SRMR is less
 than .10). Given the overall indices of
 model fit supported the hypothesized
 model, it is important to examine spe-
 cific parameter values. These are por-
 trayed in Figure II. From Figure II, it
 can be seen that the path coefficients

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XIX Number 1 Spring 2007

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 31 Jan 2017 01:55:18 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Antecedents and Consequences of the Benefits 45

 for six of the nine hypothesized paths
 reached a p < .05 level of signifi-
 cance. More specifically, as predicted:
 (a) an employer providing formal
 family-friendly benefits was positively
 associated with their use, (b) report-
 ing to a family-supportive supervisor
 was predictive of benefit use, (c) re-
 porting to a supportive supervisor was
 negatively related to family-work con-
 flict, (d) an employer providing fam-
 ily-friendly benefits was positively as-
 sociated with job satisfaction, (e)
 reporting to a family-supportive su-
 pervisor was positively related to job
 satisfaction, and (f) family-work con-
 flict was negatively associated with
 family satisfaction.

 In terms of the three paths for
 which path coefficients did not reach
 a p < .05 level, for our data there
 clearly is no support for the relation-
 ship between the use of family-
 friendly benefits and family-work con-
 flict. This is true not only for the path
 coefficient (i.e., -.01) reported in Fig-
 ure II, but also for the simple corre-
 lation (-.07) reported in Table 1.
 With regard to the relationship be-
 tween benefit use and job satisfaction,
 although the path coefficient of .13
 in Figure II did not attain a .05 level
 of significance, it was significant at
 the .10 level. Given the simple corre-
 lation between family-friendly benefit
 use and job satisfaction was .28 (p <
 .01) and Allen's (2001) finding of a
 significant relationship between
 these two variables, it may be prema-
 ture to assume this relationship is not
 important to consider. With regard to
 the path between family-work conflict
 and job satisfaction, given the sign of
 the path coefficient was in the oppo-
 site direction of that predicted and
 given the simple correlation between
 these two variables was .00, for our

 sample, it is clear that the relation-
 ship predicted was not supported.

 Although one needs to exercise
 caution in drawing conclusions from
 a revised path model in which
 changes have been made after seeing
 one's results for a hypothesized
 model, for completeness, we tested
 an exploratory model in which there
 was no path from benefit use to fam-
 ily-work conflict and no path from
 family-work conflict to job satisfaction
 (these were the two paths that re-
 ceived no support in the hypothe-
 sized model). The overall fit indices
 for this exploratory model (i.e., CFI
 = .90, GFI = .96, SRMR = .08) were
 very similar to those for our hypoth-
 esized model (see Table 2). With re-
 gard to parameter estimates for the
 seven paths in the exploratory model,
 all of them were very similar to those
 for the hypothesized model. The only
 difference was that the path coeffi-
 cient of .14 between benefit use and
 job satisfaction in the exploratory
 model was significant at the ρ < .05
 level. In contrast, the path coefficient
 of .13 in the hypothesized model was
 only significant at the .10 level.

 Cross-sectional vs. Re-test Results

 Given the re-test data on job satis-
 faction and family satisfaction were
 only available for 64 individuals, our
 sample was too small to legitimately
 use structural equation modeling
 (Kline, 1998). Nevertheless, we were
 concerned whether the cross-sec-
 tional nature of the data used to test
 our hypothesized model may have af-
 fected results. As best as we can de-
 termine, this does not appear to be a
 major problem. For example, the cor-
 relation between job satisfaction as
 measured in the first and the second
 questionnaires was .86, and the cor-

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XIX Number 1 Spring 2007

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 31 Jan 2017 01:55:18 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 46 Breaugh and Frye

 •S j*-S
 ο £ S «S
 •"i (Λ Cd C«

 'S
 'S

 Ë
 I a

 sa-
 il

 .8f> £

 i
 I -~

 υ

 I « ^^ ! J^<
 ^ ö ^^^/ / !
 03 / / !
 fc ► / / :
 N ι I I

 i ^ ' / ' '

 q Λ / '
 en /' / !

 ι

 !"* / / ' ■ i
 c| / / ' ;
 «a / i

 £ « / ' si ' j

 * '' ' ' !

 ^ Ι Γι
 =3 3 ts ^
 c > ο ο
 iê I!
 Ig r

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XIX Number 1 Spring 2007

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 31 Jan 2017 01:55:18 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Antecedents and Consequences of the Benefits 47

 A Comparison of Correlations Reflecting Cross-sectional and Longitudinal Data

 Table 3

 Predictor Criterion Main Study Re-test Difference

 Family-friendly Benefits Used Job Satisfaction Ã5* 32* +Λ3

 Family-supportive Supervisor Job Satisfaction .42* .33* +.09

 Family- Work Conflict Job Satisfaction -.02 -.04 -.02

 Family- Work Conflict Family Satisfaction -.24* -.20* +Ό4

 Note: These data reflect data for the same 64 individuals. Correlations in the column
 labeled "main study" reflect the criterion measured at Time 1. Correlations in the re-test
 column reflect the criterion measured at Time 2.
 *p < .05

 relation between family satisfaction
 measured at time 1 and time 2 was
 .80. These are sizable correlations
 (corrected for attenuation, they are
 respectively .97 and .91). Given such
 sizable correlations, one would not
 expect results to have been very dif-
 ferent if the re-test sample had been
 large enough to replicate the results
 reported in Table 2 and Figure II.

 We also attempted to assess the

 cross-sectional effect of our main data
 gathering effort by comparing corre-
 lational results for job satisfaction
 and family satisfaction (the variables
 on which we gathered re-test data) for
 the relationships hypothesized in Fig-
 ure I. The results of these analyses are
 reported in Table 3. Utilizing data on
 the 64 individuals for whom re-test
 data were available, we found similar
 correlations regardless of whether
 the relationship involved cross-sec-
 tional data or data gathered at two
 points in time. For example, the re-
 lationship between reporting to a
 family-supportive supervisor and job
 satisfaction (both variables measured
 at time 1) was .42. In comparison,

 when job satisfaction was measured at
 time 2, the correlation was .33.

 Results for Four Specific Family-
 friendly Benefits

 Although a major objective of our
 study was to test the model presented
 in Figure I, we also were interested in
 examining four specific family-
 friendly benefits (as noted earlier,
 most studies only have examined a
 composite measure reflecting overall
 benefit use). As reflected in Figure I,
 it was predicted that the use of ben-
 efits would be positively related to
 family-friendly benefits being for-
 mally offered by an employer. As
 shown in Table 4, the use of flextime
 (r = .35, ρ < .01) and family leave (r
 = .17, ρ < 05) were positively corre-
 lated with benefits being offered by
 an employer. It also was predicted
 that reporting to a family-friendly su-
 pervisor would be positively associ-
 ated with the use of the four benefits.
 Support was found for three of these
 hypothesized relationships: telecom-
 muting (r = .14, ρ < .05), flextime (r

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XIX Number 1 Spring 2007

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 31 Jan 2017 01:55:18 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 48 Breaugh and Frye

 Correlations between Family-friendly Benefit Use and an Employer Providing Benefits,

 Having a Family-supportive Supervisor, Family-Work Conflict, and Job Satisfaction

 Table 4

 Family-friendly Benefit Use Provided supportive Work Satisfaction
 Supervisor Conflict

 Telecommuting Mean = 1.10 IÏ .14* -.04 .16*

 Benefit Family- Family- Job

 SD= .30

 Ability to take work home Mean = 1 .58 Ό4 IÏ Ό7 .23**

 SD= .49

 Flextime Mean =1.61 .35** .23** ΓΪ8* J~3*

 SD= .49

 Family leave Mean =1.23 T7* !~Ï5* JÕÕ Ό9

 SD= .42

 Note: Coding for benefits was 0 = not used and 1 = used.
 *p<.05,**p<.01.

 = .23, ρ < .01), and family leave (r =
 .15, ρ < .05).

 The use of family-friendly benefits
 also was hypothesized to be negatively
 associated with family-work conflict
 and positively related to job satisfac-
 tion. Concerning family-work con-
 flict, support was only found for the
 use of flextime (r = -.18, ρ < .01).
 With regard to job satisfaction, tele-
 commuting (r = .16, ρ < .05), the
 ability to take work home (r = .23, ρ
 < .01), and flextime (r = .13, ρ <
 .05) all were positively related to use
 (see Table 4).

 DISCUSSION

 single parent homes, research ad-
 dressing work-family issues is increas-
 ingly important. In this study, we at-
 tempted to build upon previous
 research in developing a theoretical
 model that portrays (a) how certain
 variables (e.g., a family-supportive su-
 pervisor) are likely to be linked to the
 use of family-friendly benefits and (b)
 how, in turn, the use of such benefits
 is likely to reduce family-work conflict
 and increase job satisfaction. We
 tested this theoretical model using
 path analysis. In attempting to pro-
 vide insight with regard to what spe-
 cific family-friendly benefits are likely
 to be most beneficial, we focused on
 four specific practices (i.e., telecom-
 muting, ability to take work home,
 flextime, and family leave), in addi-
 tion to examining overall benefit us-

 With the increasing number of
 hours being worked and the growing
 number of dual-career couples, work-
 ers with elder care responsibility, and

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XIX Number 1 Spring 2007

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 31 Jan 2017 01:55:18 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Antecedents and Consequences of the Benefits 49

 Discussion of Results

 age. Given a concern about the use of
 cross-sectional data, we also gathered
 re-test data on job satisfaction and
 family satisfaction and compared re-
 sults using these data to those involv-
 ing cross-sectional data.

 tionship with job satisfaction and
 family satisfaction using data gath-
 ered a couple of weeks after infor-
 mation on hypothesized antecedent
 variables had been gathered. We felt
 that examining results based on lon-
 gitudinal data was important given
 that many of the studies (e.g., Allen,
 2001; O'Driscoll et al, 2003; Thomp-
 son et al, 1999) upon which we based
 our hypotheses only involved cross-
 sectional data. The results for our re-
 test analyses were quite similar to
 those for the cross-sectional analysis.
 In testing the model presented in
 Figure I, we utilized a global measure
 of benefit usage. However, we also
 were interested in the effects on fam-
 ily-work conflict and job satisfaction
 of using four specific benefits. With
 regard to family-work conflict, only
 the use of flextime was significantly
 related to it. With regard to job satis-
 faction, three of the family-friendly
 benefits (i.e., telecommuting, ability
 to take work home, and flextime) had
 positive relationships. Given the mag-
 nitude of the correlations reported in
 Table 4, one might conclude that the
 use of such benefits is unimportant.
 We disagree with this conclusion.
 Given the multitude of factors that
 can influence job satisfaction (e.g.,
 poor pay, boring work), we believe
 the correlations reported are mean-
 ingful. With regard to the relation-
 ship between telecommuting and job
 satisfaction, one also should consider
 that only 10% of the participants in
 our study reported using this benefit.
 Thus, range restriction limited the
 size of the correlation (i.e., .16) re-
 ported. Readers interested in exam-
 ples of how correlations of the mag-
 nitude we report can have substantial
 consequences are referred to Gris-
 som and Kim's (2005) excellent mon-
 ograph on effect sizes.

 Given the number of hypotheses
 we tested and the straightforward na-
 ture of many of our findings, we will
 be selective in discussing our results.
 With regard to the results for our hy-
 pothesized model, each of the three
 indices of overall model fit we used
 (i.e., CFI, GFI, and SRMR) suggested
 very good model fit. In terms of the
 nine hypothesized relationships be-
 tween variables outlined in our
 model, strong support was found for
 six of these (both path coefficients
 and simple correlations were statisti-
 cally significant) . With regard to the
 three remaining paths, some support
 was found for the relationship be-
 tween benefit usage and job satisfac-
 tion (i.e., the simple correlation was
 .28 and the path coefficient was sig-
 nificant at the ρ < .10 level). Unex-
 pectedly, we did not find a relation-
 ship between benefit use and
 family-work conflict or between fam-
 ily-work conflict and job satisfaction.
 The lack of significant path coeffi-
 cients for these two relationships
 could be partly due to the relatively
 low level of family-work conflict
 (mean = 2.70, standard deviation =
 1.05) reported by most of the partic-
 ipants in our study. In addition, we
 may have found stronger relation-
 ships if we had examined the use of a
 greater number of family-friendly
 benefits.

 In addition to examining hypothe-
 sized relationships with cross-sec-
 tional data, we also examined rela-

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XIX Number 1 Spring 2007

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 31 Jan 2017 01:55:18 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 50 Breaugh and Frye

 In summary, given we tested a for-

 ferences, we wished we had measured
 gender in our study. Doing so would
 have enabled us to assess whether the
 results reported varied by gender.

 mal model, did not rely totally upon
 cross-sectional data, and examined
 the use of specific family-friendly ben-
 efits, we believe our study makes a
 meaningful contribution to the work-
 family literature. In particular, our re-
 sults highlight the important role that
 a family-supportive supervisor can
 play (all three of the paths in Figure
 I for the effects of supportive super-
 vision were supported by data) .

 In terms of future research, we be-
 lieve more attention should be given
 to the role a supervisor can play in
 encouraging the use of formal family-
 friendly benefits which are offered by
 an employer and in making informal
 adjustments which may decrease fam-
 ily-work conflict and increase em-
 ployee satisfaction. Attention might
 also be given to co-worker support for
 balancing family and work responsi-
 bilities. In future studies, we also rec-
 ommend that researchers extend the
 range of variables examined to in-
 clude such variables as absenteeism
 and turnover. For example, as noted
 by a reviewer of this article, it is likely
 that by offering family-friendly bene-
 fits an employer may make itself more
 attractive to job applicants as well as
 increase its employee retention rate.
 Another issue that we would high-
 light for future research is the poten-
 tial value of measuring care-giving re-
 sponsibility in more nuanced ways
 than we did. We asked only whether
 a person had any children or others
 under his or her care. There may be
 value in investigating such things as
 whether one has primary care-giving
 responsibility.

 Limitations and Directions for
 Future Research

 As with any study, our study has a
 number of limitations. For example,
 the 13% response rate for the alumni
 survey was disappointing. A second
 limitation is the narrow range of fam-
 ily-friendly benefits we examined. For
 example, Glass and Finley (2002)
 have noted the importance of an or-
 ganization offering day care, a benefit
 we did not examine. With regard to
 the benefits we did address, we could
 have been more specific in measuring
 family leave (i.e., we did not address
 whether the leave used involved that
 mandated under the Family and
 Medical Leave Act or leave that was
 voluntarily offered by the organiza-
 tion). Finally, even though none of
 our hypotheses involved gender dif-

 References

 Allen, T. D. 2001. "Family-supportive Environments: The Role of Organizational

 Perceptions." Journal of Vocational Behavior b&: 414-435.

 Bakes, B. B., T. E. Briggs, J. W. Huff, J.A. Wright and G. A. Newman. 1999.
 "Flexible and Compressed Workweek Schedules: A Meta-analysis of their Ef-
 fect on Work-related Criteria." Journal of Applied Psychology 84: 496-513.

 Behson, S. J. 2005. "The Relative Contribution of Formal and Informal Organ-

 izational Work-family Support." Journal of Vocational Behavior 66: 487-500.

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XIX Number 1 Spring 2007

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 31 Jan 2017 01:55:18 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Antecedents and Consequences of the Benefits 51

 Bender, P. M. and E. Wu. 1995. EQSfor Window. Encino, CA: Multivariate Soft-

 ware.

 Boles, J. S., W. G. Howard and H. H. Donoino. 2001. An Investigation into the
 Inter-relationships of Work-family Conflict, Family-work Conflict, and Work
 Satisfaction." Journal of Managenal Issues 13 (3): 376-390.

 Boyar, S. L., C. P. Maertz, A. W. Pearson and S. Keough. 2003. "Work-family
 Conflict: A Model of the Linkages Between Work and Family Domains and
 Turnover Intentions." Journal of Managerial Issues 15 (2): 175-190.

 Brayfield, A. H. and H. F. Rothe. 1951. "An Index of Job Satisfaction." Journal

 of Applied Psychology 35: 307-311.

 Eby, L. T., W. T. Casper, A. Lockwood, C. Bordeaux and A. Brinley. 2005. "Work
 and Family Research in ΙΟ/OB: Content Analysis and Review of the Literature
 (1980-2002)." Journal of Vocational Behavior 66: 124-197.

 Frye, N. K. andj. A. Breaugh. 2004. "Family-friendly Policies, Supervisor Support,
 Work-family Conflict, Family-work Conflict, and Satisfaction: Test of a Con-
 ceptual Model." Journal of Business and Psychology 19: 197-222.

 Geiger, K. 1989. "Long-held Bias Impedes Efforts to Support Work/Family

 Needs." Business Link 4: 4-5.

 Glass, J. L. and A. Finley. 2002. "Coverage and Effectiveness of Family-responsive

 Workplace Policies." Human Resource Management Review 12: 313-337.

 Grandey, A. A. and R. Cropanzano. 1999. "The Conservation of Resources Model
 Applied to Work-family Conflict and Strain." Journal of Vocational Behavior 5 4:
 350-370.

 Gnssom, R. J. andj. J. Kim. 2005. Effect Sizes for Research. Mahway, NY: Lawrence

 Erlbaum Associates.

 Hammer, L. Β., Τ. Ν. Bauer and A. A. Grandey. 2003. "Work-family Conflict and
 Work-related Withdrawal Behaviors. "Journal of Business and Psychology 17: 419-
 436.

 Hoyle, R. H. and A. T. Panter. 1995. "Writing about Structural Equation Mod-
 els." Chapter in Structural Equation Modeling. Ed. R. H. Hoyle. Thousand Oaks,
 CA: Sage. pp. 158-176.

 Judge, Τ. Α., Ε. A. Locke, C. C. Durham and Α. Ν. Kluger. 1998. "Dispositional

 Effects on Job and Life Satisfaction: The Role of Core Evaluations." Journal of
 Applied Psychology S3: 17-34.

 Kline, R. B. 1998. Structural Equation Modeling. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
 Kopelman, R. E., J. H. Greenhaus and T. F. Connolly. 1983. "A Model of Work,
 Family, and Interrole Conflict: A Construct Validation Study." Organizational
 Behavior and Human Performance 32: 198-215.

 Kossek, E. E. and C. Ozeki. 1998. "Work-family Conflict, Policies, and the Job-
 life Satisfaction Relationship: A Review and Directions for Organizational Be-
 havior-Human Resources Research." Journal of Applied Psychology 83: 139-149.

 Netemeyer, R. G., J. Boles and R. McMurrian. 1996. "Development and Valida-

 tion of Work-family Conflict and Family-work Conflict Scales." Journal of Ap-
 plied Psychology 81: 400-409.

 of Job-related Outcomes of Work Role and Family Variables: A Retail Sales
 Context." Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 32: 49-60.

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XIX Number 1 Spring 2007

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 31 Jan 2017 01:55:18 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 52 Breaugh and Frye

 O'Driscoll, M. P., S. Poelmans, P. E. Spector, T. Kalliath, T. D. Allen, C. L. Cooper

 and J. I. Sanchez. 2003. ' 'Family-responsive Interventions, Perceived Organi-
 zational and Supervisor Support, Work-family Conflict, and Psychological
 Strain." International Journal of Stress Management 10: 326-344.

 Shinn, M., N. W. Wong, P. A. Simko and B. Ortiz-Torres. 1989. "Promoting the

 Well-being of Working Parents: Coping, Social Support, and Flexible Job
 Schedules." American Journal of Community Psychology 17: 31-35.

 Thompson, C. Α., L. L. Beauvais and K. S. Lyness. 1999. "When Work-family

 Benefits Are Not Enough: The Influence of Work-family Culture on Benefit
 Utilization, Organizational Attachment, and Work-family Conflict. "Journal of
 Vocational Behavior 54: 392-415.

 Warren, J. A. and P.J.Johnson. 1995. "The Impact of Workplace Support on

 Work-family Role Strain." Family Relations 44: 163-169.

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XIX Number 1 Spring 2007

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 31 Jan 2017 01:55:18 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

