Edward  H.  Bowman
and Mason Haire

A Strategic  Posture  Toward
Corporate  Social
Responsibility

to 

for 

corporate 

strategists 

It  has  become  an  increasingly  perplexing  prob-
lem 
find  an
appropriate  posture  for  what  may  be  called
corporate  citizenship  or  social  responsibility.
Among  the  things  that  make  it  difficult  are  two
prevalent  myths:  that  activities  in  this  area  are
in  fundamental  conflict  with  the interests of  the
investor,  and  that  resources  committed  to  such
activities  come,  net,  out  of  the  equity  holder's
pocket;  and  that  the  motivation  for  such  activi-
ties  lies  only  in  a sense of noblesse  oblige on  the
part  of  the  group  formulating  the  strategy,  and,
again,  is  an  interest  not  directly  related  to  the
equity  holder's  welfare.

Finally,  a  third  issue  adds  to  the  strategist's
difficulty;  if  he  is  committed  to  activities  under
the  heading of  social responsibility, how much is
enough?  The  relationship  between  cost  and
benefit  is  difficult 
to  determine,  and  it  is  not
clear  that  the  same  relationship  holds  over  the
entire  scale.  Is  more  always  better?  Clearly, it is
not  a  simple  monotonic  plot,  rising  from  left  to
right.  In  pollution, 
there  are
specific  penalties  for  doing  less  than  statutes  or
regulations  provide.  Doing  what  is  demanded
produces the  benefit  of  removing  these penalties,
but  should  one  do  more?  What  benefits  accrue,
and  at  what  rate  if  one  goes  beyond  the  point
of  doing  what  is  required?

instance, 

for 

This  article  deals  with  these  and  related  issues.
We  will  introduce  several  sets  of  empirical  evi-
dence  relating  activities 
in  corporate  social
responsibility  to  the  profit  of  firms  and  carry
the  implications  of  these  data  a little  further  by
inferential  argument  so  that  it is possible to sug-
gest  some  facets  of  an  appropriate  strategic
posture  in  this  area.

Corporate  Social  Responsibility
and  Profit  Performance
One  of  the difficult  tasks in raising the  empirical
issue  of  the relationship  between  social responsi-
bility  and  profits  is  construction  of  an  appropri-
ate  scale  to  measure  the  amount  and  worth  of a
firm's  activities  in  the  area  of  social  responsi-
bility.  A  detailed  examination  of  what  portion
of  an  activity  should  be  charged  to  responsible
behavior  and  what,  in  any  case,  is  the  marginal
cost  and  benefit  of  such  an  activity  is  hard  to
find.  Leaving aside general  financial  studies, such
as  that  of  the  performance  of  the  so-called
"clean"  funds,  the  authors  know  of  only  one
such  study,  by  Bragdon  and  Marlin,!  which will
be  discussed  subsequently.
In  searching  for  a  readily  available  surrogate
measure  for  actual  activities  in  the  area  of  cor-
porate  citizenship,  we  chose  to  measure  the
proportion  of  lines  of  prose in the  annual  report

WINTER  /  1975  /  VOL.  XVIII  /  NO.  2

49


What  They  Say  About  Corporate  Responsibility

For  those  who  don't  pore  over the  prose  of  annual  re-
ports,  a  few  illustrations  may  give  the  flavor  of  its
treatment  (from  the  food-processing  industry).
•  At  the  extreme, five companies  devoted  20 percent or
more  of  the  prose  (exclusive  of  notes  to  the  financial
statement).  The largest  was 23 percent—135 lines out of
580.
•  The  issue is often  mentioned  in  the  president's  letter,
but  the  bulk  is  elsewhere.  In  fifteen  of  the  thirty-one
cases treating  CSR, it  had a separate bold-faced  heading.
The variety  of  the  headings  indicates some of the uncer-
tainty  in  defining  just  what  it  is:
Beyond  the  Profit  Motive
Corporate  Responsibility  (twice)
Social  Responsibility  (twice)
[Company  name]  and  Social  Commitment
Community  Activities
Social  Action
Public  Service
The  Human  Side  of  [company  name]
PubMc  Responsibility
Ecology
Corporate  Citizenship
Social  Responsiveness
People  and  Pubhc  Responsibility
•  The most  frequently  mentioned specific items were:
Action to preserve or improve the environment
Affirmative  action beyond  legal requirements
Cash contributions to charity (hospitals, schools, etc.)
Seeking out minority supphers of goods and services
Special educational opportunities  for  minorities
Time of company personnel for nonbusiness activities
•  It  is  also  interesting  to  see  the  range  of  statements
regarding  the issue. They  cover  a broad  gamut:
"We do  not—nor can we—accept  the simple objective of
increased profitability  as our only  corporate goal. "
"fCompany  name]  believes in  the  social as well as the
fiscal responsibility of  business. "

Edward  H.  Bowman  is Dean  of  the  College of  Administra-
tive  Science  of  Ohio  State  University.  He  was a  professor
at  the  Sloan  School  of  Management  at  MIT  for  many
years,  was  comptroller  of  Yale  University,  and  served  as
Assistant 
the  President  of  Honeywell  Computer
Division.

to 

Mason  Haire  is  Alfred  P.  Sloan  Professor  of  Management
at  the  Sloan  School  of  Management,  MIT.  Previously  he
was  Professor  of  Psychology  at  the  University  of  Cali-
fornia,  Berkeley.  He  has  published  extensively  and  con-
sulted  widely.

"Provision  of goods and services that people need is still
the  primary  obligation  of  the  company,  but  society  is
also placing new  responsibilities upon  corporations."
"Business has  many  dimensions  beyond  the  return  on
assets."
'X)ur overriding goal is to deliver to you  the best possible
return on your  investment. "
"Solid  profit  growth  and  the  enhancerrient of  share-
holders'  investment  remain  fcompany  name]'s  funda-
mental priorities."
"The  basic criterion  of  the success of  our operations is
their ability to produce sustainable long-term growth."

devoted 
to  social  responsibility.  The  annual
report  is  a  kind  of  projective  test  that  allows  a
firm  to express its goals and  motives in much  the
same  way  that  a  Rorschach  or  TAT  does  for  an
individual.  In  the  president's  letter,  after  certain
necessary  formalities  are  out  of  the  way,  the
firm  may  choose  to  say  no  more,  or  if  it  goes
further,  it has wide latitude  in what  it  may  say.

The  report's  authors  may  choose  to  talk  about
the  firm's  responsibilities  to  the  community  or
to  its  shareholders,  or  both.  The  report  may  go
into  some  detail  about  the  kinds  of  activities  it
specifies  as  part  of 
its  socially  responsible
behavior  beyond  simply managing the process of
buying,  converting,  and  selling.  On  the  other
hand,  the  report  may—as  many  do—simply  stick
to  business  and  report  the  cash  in  and  out  and
the  net,  leaving  its  feeling  for  social  responsi-
bility  to  the  belief  that  one  does  good  by  doing
well.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  annual  report
is  essentially  addressed  to  stockholders, and  one
might  expect  this  fact  to  damp  out  possible
puffery  about  activities  that  may  seem  to  run
contrary  to  their  interests.  Since  we  had  an
optional  behavior  sample  that  is  differentially
distributed  among  firms,  we  chose  to  monitor
this  behavior  as  a  tentative  surrogate  for  the
difficult  to  obtain  measure  of  all things the  firm
may  be doing in the  area of  social  responsibility.

is  cheap,  and 

A critic could  immediately  scoff  at  this measure.
It  is  at  least  a  popular  belief  that  "everybody
that  talks  about  heaven  ain't  goin'  there,"  that
talk 
talk  about  socially
desirable  behavior  is  not  necessarily  a  predictor
of  such  behavior.  Since  we  were  not  willing  to
accept,  without  evidence,  the  simple  measure
of  lines  of  prose,  we  conceived  of  a  test  of  the

that 

50

California  Management  Review


efficacy  of  our  measuring  instrument.  We took
a  list  of  fourteen  firms  identified  by  Milton
Moskowitz  in  the New  York  Times  of February
11,  1973,  as  being  outstandingly  responsible
firms.  Moskowitz  is  the  editor  of  Business  &
Society  and a full-time  student  of  such  matters.
In  addition,  each  of  the  fourteen  firms  had met
such  criteria as:

companies  annually 

For  the  past  four  years. Business  Week has been singling
out 
for  business  citizenship
awards. .  ..
.  .  . recognize  those  companies  which  "stand  for  unusu-
ally  important  action  in  the  pubhc  interest."
Beginning  in  1971  at least  three  different  public  opinion
surveys  were  taken  asking  respondents,  mainly  business
people,  how  they  would  rank  the  largest  organizations
in  the  nation  on  social  responsibility.  .  .  . The  top  five
places  are  included  in  the  hst.2

Now  we had  a sample  of  responsible  firms.  For
each  of  them  we chose, at random,  another  firm
in  the  same  industry  of  approximately  equal
size.  This  yielded  a  comparison  group  of "neu-
tral"  firms  to match  our  "premier" group. Note
that  the  control  group  was  not  "bad" or  "ir-
responsible"  but  just  neutral.  We  used  the
procedure  described  above  and  counted  the
proportion  of  lines  of  prose  devoted  to  social
responsibility  in  the  "premier"  and  "neutral"
group  to  test  whether  our  measure  would,  in
fact,  distinguish  between  an  independently  de-
fined  sample  of  socially  responsible  firms  and a
randomly  matched  sample  of  run-of-the-mill
firms.

The  results  were  clear, as can be seen in Table  1.
The  firms  that  behaved  responsibly  refiected  it
in  their  annual  reports.  A  matched  sample  did
so  far  less.  Emboldened  by  this  suggestive  evi-
dence  that  our  surrogate  measure  worked,  we
continued  our more  general  analysis.

We  chose  as  a  sample  Moody's  Industrial  Man-
ual's  1973 list  of all firms in the  food-processing
business.  After  adjusting  for  double  entries,
foreign  firms,  firms  whose  food  business  was
less 
activity,
and  a  trifling  number  of  other  anomalies,  we
had  a list of just  under  a hundred  firms, of which
we  received  and  processed  eighty-two  annual
reports.

than  50  percent  of 

their 

While  wishing  to  give  the  reader  some  feel  for

Table  1.  "Premier" Firms Against

Randomly Matched Firms
(Discussion  of CSR in annual report)

Premier (14 firms)  Neutral  (14)

Median  percent  of
lines devoted  to CSR

Mean  percent  of lines 
devoted  to CSR

Some mention  of
CSR

Superior in  matched
pair  comparison*

.

. .
,80% 

0.30%

1.74%

12/14(86%) 

7/14(50%)

9 

(3 ties) 

2

*The binomial  test  of significance—rejection  of the  null
hypothesis  that  there is no difference  between  popula-
tions-is  at the  1.7-percent level of  confidence, not  count-
ing ties (9/11,  82 percent). If ties are divided  equally
(10.5/14,75  percent), the level of confidence  is 3.1  per-
cent.

the  many  kinds  of  issues  discussed  in  the  food-
processing-industry  annual 
reports,  and  our
sometimes  difficult  coding  choices,  perhaps  an
example  will  suffice.  The  following  paragraphs
are  found  in  the  chief  executive  officer's  letter
to  the  shareholders  at  the  beginning  of  the
annual  report  of a large company. The first para-
graph  was  not  coded  as  "corporate  social  re-
sponsibility"  discussion,  while  the  second  one
was  so  coded:

The  history  of  [company],  in  particular,  successfully
refutes  the  arguments  of  the  protectionists.  We do  not
import  finished  goods produced  abroad, and  certainly  do
not  exploit  low-cost  labor.  We help  the  U.S. balance  of
payments  by  selhng  in markets  we could  not  reach  with-
out  building  or  buying  foreign  facihties  to  serve  those
markets.  The jobs we create abroad  do  not  affect  Ameri-
can  employment,  since  our  export  potential  from  the
U.S.  is  limited  by  freight  cost,  different  labeUng  and
ingredient  requirements,  and  high  import  duties  and
import  quotas.

The other issue of  public interest  has to  do with  what  we
call  pubhc  service,  and  is  discussed  in  detail  in  the
section  of  this  report  headlined  under  that  name.  In
every  area  of  reasonable  public  challenge—for  environ-
mental  improvements,  for  better  nutrition,  for  grants
and  gifts,  for  equal  opportunity,  for  whatever  seemed
appropriate  in  an  impatient  age—we  responded  sym-
pathetically  and  quickly  to the best  of  our abihties. . . .

WINTER  /  1975 /  VOL. XVIII  /  NO. 2

51


than 

to  code 

Most  annual  report  discussions  were  actually
easier 
these  two  paragraphs.
Though  it is difficult  to give the full  flavor  of the
corporate  social  responsibility  (CSR)  coding
process,  we  were  attempting  to  identify  dis-
cussed  efforts  to  either  increase  positive  poten-
tial  externalities  or  decrease  negative  potential
externalities—to  increase apparent  social  benefits
or  decrease  apparent  social  costs.
By  externalities  one  means  those  costs  and
benefits  which  will  not  ever  be  captured  in  a
company's  books  of  accounts.  They  may  be
negative,  as  when,  even  after  a  company  has
made  some  investment  in  pollution  control,
there  are social costs associated  with the remain-
ing  damage  to  a stream,  for  example. They may
be  positive,  as  when  a  firm  makes  a  net
investment  in  training  disadvantaged  workers
rather  than  drawing from  a more  restricted  labor
pool,  thus  increasing  the  social  benefits  associ-
ated  with  these  individuals.  Further,  there  are
degrees  of  potential  externalities, from  activities
that  will  almost  certainly  be  captured  in  a
company's books (such  as safety  expenses which,
in  addition  to social benefit,  will yield  less down
time,  lower  insurance  costs,  fewer  claims  and
law suits, and the like) to activities for which the
benefits  almost  certainly  will  not be captured in
the  books  (such  as  donations  to  charities geo-
graphically  remote  from  the  company's  activi-
ties)  except  under  the  extreme  and  somewhat
nonoperational  argument 
that
makes  a  better  world  makes  a  better  market-
place.  Using this touchstone  of externalities, and
concentrating  on  mid-range  to long-range  poten-
tial  externalities,  we  coded  the prose  in  annual
reports.  The  two  authors  independently  coded
a  sample  and  agreed  closely.  The distribution of
our  data  indicated  that  precise  measurements
were  not  critical  to  the  interpretation  of  the
data.

that  anything 

Results  of  the  First  Study
One  of  the  first  issues  raised  was the  question:
Does  responsible  activity  come,  net, out  of the
stockholder's  pocket?  Table  2  casts  some  light
on 
this,  but  let  us  be  quite  clear.  We  are
reporting  an  association  of two measures; we are
not  implying  a  directional  causal  relationship.
It  does  not  follow,  simply, from  these data,  that

Table 2.  Profitability  and Corporate  Responsibility

Some discussion  of  CR
(31  firms)

No discussion  of CR
(51  firms)

Mean ROE*  Median ROE

14.3% 

14.7%

9.1%

10.2%

*ROE is the last five  years' ROE as reported  in Standard
& Poor's.  It is typically  1969-73;in  a few  cases it was
1968-72.  In some instancesMoo<i>'i  was used, because
Standard  & Poor's did  not  include  5 years. Checking cases
that  appeared  in both sources, the computations  were in-
significantly  different,  because of  difficulties  with  the
average number  of  shares outstanding, and the  like. In all
cases the  ROE was unambiguously  calculated, a sample
cross checked, and  the data  entered independently,  after
the CSR had  been  coded. Both the median  and  the  mean
are given here. Because of  the  nature  of the  distribution,
the  median  seems a more  appropriate measure, and it is
typically  used  throughout.

more  discussion  of corporate  responsibility (and,
inferentially,  on  the  basis  of  our  tests  of  the
measure,  more  activity  in  this  area)  causes
greater  profits.  At the  same  time,  it  is  perfectly
clear  that  more  corporate  social responsibility is
not  associated  with  less  profits.
But  it  is possible to divide these data into a little
finer  and  more  revealing  detail.  The  average
space  devoted  to  corporate  responsibility  was
3.63  percent.  The  firms  that  clustered  around
that  figure  can  appropriately  be  described  as
devoting  a  medium  amount  of  attention  to the
issue,  and  beyond  that  range  is  more  than  a
normal  amount  of  attention.  The way the  data
were  distributed,  a precise  range was not critical
for  these  groups.  Fifty-one  firms  made  no men-
tion  of  corporate  responsibility.  Eighteen  fell
clearly in a middle range, and thirteen  were in an
upper  group,  separated  from  the  middle  by
several  percentage  points.  When  the  data  are
broken  down 
this  fashion,  a  somewhat
startling  result  appears (Table  3). Medium  activi-
ty  in  corporate  responsibility  is  clearly  more
closely  associated  with  high  profitability  than is
either  little  or  much  activity.  Further,  in  this
inverted  U-shaped  curve,  the  left-hand  tail  is
lower  than  the  right;  this  point  is  emphasized
here  because  it  recurs  in  other  sets  of  data.

in 

52

California  Management  Review


Table  3.  Profitability  and Corporate  Responsibility

Low Mention  Medium Mention  High Mentlorf*

Number
of  firms

Percent de-
voted  to CR

Median
ROE

51 

0

18 

13

0.1-9.9

10 or more

10.2%

16.1%

12.3%

•Mention of CR  x = 3.63%.
To test the significance  of the observed  difference  in
medians among these three groups, each of the com-
panies in the middle group was compared  with each of
the companies in the other  two groups. This yielded
1,152  comparisons. If there were truly no  difference
between  the two groups, one would  expect the middle
companies to be larger in 50 percent  of  the cases, or
576 times. In fact, the results were 858/1,152  or 74
percent, a difference  that  would be expected  by chance
virtually never in a hundred cases. The precise  confi-
dence level figure is uncertain but  the significance of
the difference  is not  moot.
Seeing the distribution  helps to clarify  the relation-
ship among the  firms.

These  data  apparently  are  not  an  artifact  of
artificial  groupings.  Neither  the  size  of the  com-
panies  nor  the  number  of  divisions  of  the  CSR
code  destroyed  the  relationship.  Using  the  top
half  of  the  firms  in  size  (over  $280  million  in
sales,  approximately  Fortune's  500),  and  using
either  five  or  six  divisions  of  the  CSR  code
confirmed  these  results.  They  are robust.  Again,
it  should  be  clear that  we are not  suggesting  that
medium  attention  to  or  mention  of  corporate
social  responsibility  causes  higher  profits.  Later
we  will  discuss  the  mechanism  that  we  believe
accounts  for  the  association.  At  this  point,  it  is
sufficient  to  note  the  phenomenon  and  to  look
for  it  elsewhere.  It  should  also  be  noted  that  at
this  point  the  data  begin  to  bear  on  another
question  raised  in  the  opening  paragraph:  Is
more  better?

Other  Data  on  Corporate
Responsibility  and  Profit
Bragdon  and  Marlin's  study,  mentioned  previ-
ously,  used  as  a  base  for  responsible  behavior
a  study  made  by  the  Council  on  Economic
Priorities  (CEP),  which  rated  seventeen  firms  in
the  paper  and  pulp industry  on their behavior in

pollution  control.  The  CEP  investigated  indivi-
dual  plants  and  firms  in  detail  and  determined
whether  they  had  an  adequate  amount  of  pollu-
tion  control  for  water, particulate, gas, and  odor.
In  addition  they  assigned  a  rating  to  their  esti-
mate  of  whether  the  firm  was  good,  average,  or
poor  in  its  overall  activities in pollution  control.
Bragdon  and  Marlin  measured  return  on  equity
(ROE)  in  much  the  same  way  as  we  did  and
found  modest  but  significant  positive  correla-
tions  between  ROE  and  activities  in  pollution
control  as measured  by  the  scale constructed  by
the  CEP.  That  is,  the  better  the  CEP  rating  on
pollution  control,  the  higher  the  ROE.  This
finding  is  in  agreement  with  our  data  (Table  2)
showing  profitability  positively  related  to  cor-
porate  responsibility  as  measured  by  space  in
the  annual  report.

Bragdon  and  Marlin  did  not  go  on  to  ask.  Is
more  better?,  or  to  break  down  the  firms  into
middle,  low,  and  high  groups  on  responsibility
(here,  pollution  control)  as  we  did.  The  data
they  presented  permitted  us  to  make  such  an
analysis,  however,  and  it  is  given  in  Table  4.
The  CEP/Bragdon  and  Marlin  scale  on  pollution
performance  ran  from  a low  of  21  to  a high  of
96. We took  the  average and  a ± 10-percent  range
around  that  figure  to  identify  four  firms  which
we  called  medium.  Twenty  percent  or  more

Table 4.  Profitability  and Corporate  Responsibility

(Recomputation  of  Bragdon and Marlin's Data)

Responsibility (CEP pollution index)
Low

Medium

High

Number of
firms

6

4

5

Median  ROE

9.6%

11.9%

10.3%

Low, less than -20 percent below mean; medium, mean
±10 percent; high, more than 20 percent  above mean.
Note:  N = 15, even though the CEP study reported  17.
Bragdon and Marlin didn't  present full  data on two firms.
Each of the firms in the middle group was compared  with
each in the other two groups (4 x  11, or 44 comparisons).
The middle firms had larger ROE's thirty  times and one tie
or 70 percent, compared  to a null hypothesis of twenty-
two times or 50 percent.

WINTER  /  1975  /  VOL.  XVIII  /  NO.  2

53


below  the  average  were  six  firms  in  the  low
group, and  20 percent  or more  above the  average
were  an  additional  five  firms.  Once  more,  the
same  inverted  U-shaped  curve  is  clear,  and  once
more,  it  appears to be asymmetrical—the  left  tail
is  lower  than  the  right.
Throughout  we  have  argued  that  responsible
activity  is  not  related  to  a  reduction  in  ROE,
and  that  more  is  not  monotonically  better  than
less;  rather,  there  is  a  U-shaped  relationship  in
which  some  is  better  (in  terms  of  association
with  profits)  than  little  or  none  and  that  still
more  tends to be associated  with less return  than
the  middle  ground.  Let  us  now  go  on  to  two
more  points:  the  question.  Is  responsible  be-
havior  motivated  by  a  sense  of noblesse oblige?,
and—the  most  critical  point  of  all—What  is  the
causal  mechanism  lying  behind  this  observed
lawfulness 
the  relation  between  data  on
profits  and  responsible  behavior.  We  are  pre-
pared  to  argue  that  corporate  social  responsi-
bility  is  not  a simple causal  factor  in itself  but is
a signal of  the presence  of  a style of  management
that  extends  broadly  across  the  entire  business
function  and  leads to more profitable  operation.
It  is  a  diagnostic  sign  of  an  appropriate  posture
in  dealing  with  a  multivectored,  changing
environment.

in 

A  study  by  Pfeffer  introduces  the point  nicely.^
The  thrust  of  his argument  is that  to  understand
the  behavior  of  firms  it  is  necessary  to  analyze
the  nature  of  the  relationship  between  the  or-
ganization  and 
its  environment.  He  stresses
Cyert  and  March's'^  point  that,  in  order  to
reduce  uncertainty,  the  firm  tries  to  establish  a
negotiated  environment; Thompson's^  point  that
the  firm  will  actively  try  to  manage  its  depen-
dence  on  external  organizations;  and  Blau's^
suggestion  that  one  way  to  do  this  is  through
coopting  potentially  hostile  external  institutions
through  partial  absorption.  He  uses  a  detailed
examination  of  the  makeup  of  boards  of  direc-
tors  as his  measure  of  the  firm's  activities in  this
area.  Pfeffer  argues  that  firms  with  a  high
debt/equity  ratio,  which  need  special  relations
with  capital  markets,  will  have  more  represen-
tation  of  financial  institutions  on  the  board  and
that  firms  in  regulated  or  quasi-regulated  indus-
tries  will  have  more  attorneys  on  the  board.
Using  a  random  sample  of  eighty  companies

drawn  from  Dun  and  Bradstreet, he  tested  these
hypotheses.  Indeed,  firms  with  higher  debt/
equity  ratios  had  more  outside  financial  direc-
tors,  as  shown  by  a  statistically  significant
rank-order  correlation  coefficient.  Likewise,
firms  in  regulated  industries  tended  to  have
more  outside  attorneys  on  their  boards.  The
argument  seems  clear.  In  dealing  with  facets  of
an environment  that  have  the power to  constrain
the  firm's  activities  in  pursuit  of  its  strategic
objectives,  one  thing  they  do  is try  to  coopt  the
potentially  troublesome  forces  by  partial  ab-
sorption  and  by  devoting  a  part  of  their  re-
sources 
two-way
liaison  with 
threatening  and  uncertain
element.

the  establishment  of  a 

the 

to 

into 

Pfeffer  sometimes  uses  the  number  of  outside
financial  or  legal  directors, as well as the  relative
number  of  inside  directors.  These  numbers  are
not  perfectly 
independent  and  he  sometimes
uses  one  measure  in  lieu  of  the  other.  The  data
are  partially  confounded.  Pfeffer's  data  show
that  firms  with  large  debt/equity  ratios  and
regulated  firms  had  fewer  inside  directors.  Here
he  shows  a  case  in  which  two  parts  of  the
business—running  the  inside,  and  sensing,  adapt-
ing  to,  and  dealing  with  the  external  environ-
ment—are  neatly  divided 
two  separate
groups  of  persons. In some cases, such  as dealing
with  capital  markets  or  regulatory  agencies, this
may  be  a  customary  specialization  of  function.
In  many  others, a single person  (or persons)  may
have  to  do  both—run  the  inside  and  sense  the
outside.  This  is  probably  particularly  true  in
cases  where  the  outside  force  is  more  uncertain
and  harder  to  identify.  The  executive  now  must
not  only  buy  well,  convert  efficiently,  and  sell
well,  but  he  must  also  sense  well and  adapt  well
to  a variety  of  almost  nameless  pressures  in  the
environment  to  which  the  firm  is  subject.  We
will  go  on  to  argue  in  more  detail  that  it  is
exactly  this  ability  to  sense,  adapt,  negotiate
with,  and  cope  with  these  forces  that  is—in
addition  to  the internal  management—the  sign of
managerial  excellence  and  hence  profitability.
Some  demonstrated  concern  for  corporate  re-
sponsibility  is  a sign  of  that  sensitivity.

the  annual  reports—also
Our  own  data—from 
cast  some  light  on 
took
this  issue.  Pfeffer 
financiers  as  a  measure  of  coping  with  capital

54

California  Management  Review


markets  and  lawyers as a measure  of  coping  with
regulatory  agencies.  We  identified  the  presence
of  outside  nonbusiness  directors  on  the  boards
and  were  fairly  strict  in  our  definition  of  these
directors.  In  many  cases  "director  of  various
corporations"  was  impossible  to  classify  with
certainty,  and  consequently  we eliminated  many
from  classification,  not  counting  them  as outside
nonbusiness  directors.  Again  we  used  externali-
ties  as  a  touchstone;  we  accepted  those  who
seemed  primarily  to  bring  to  the  board  a  con-
nection  with  powerful  forces  that  could  poten;
tially  constrain  the  firm's  activities.  We  wound
up,  largely,  with  college  presidents,  foundation
officials,  newspaper  editors,  representatives  of
more  or less organized  groups in society,  and  the
like.  Using  these  fairly  stringent  criteria,  we
identified  thirty-nine  outside  nonbusiness  direc-
tors  among  our  firms.

to  other  companies). 

Among  companies  in  the  food  industry,  it  is
possible  to divide them  into  primarily  consumer-
oriented  (selling  branded  items,  a  close  associa-
tion  between  consumer  response  to  the  name
and  the  company)  and  nonconsumer  (millers,
vegetable  oil  companies,  and  the  like,  primarily
selling 
further
possible—with  only  a  little  stretch  of  the  imagi-
nation—to  argue  that  the  consumer  companies
are more  immediately  pressed  by external  forces,
and  to  be successful,  they  need  to  be more sensi-
tive,  responsive,  and  adaptive,  and  cope  with
these  pressures  (Table  5).  Consumer  companies
have  more  outside  nonbusiness  directors, devote
to  corporate  responsibility  in
more  attention 

is 

It 

Table  5.  Outside Nonbusiness  Directors,
Profitability,  and  Responsibility

Consumer 
Companies  Companies

Nonconsumer

58 

24

27(46%) 

4(17%)

20(34%) 

5(21%)

14.4%

13.5%

13.3%

8.9%

Number of  companies
Some discussion of CSR
Some outside nonbusi-
ness directors

Median  ROE for  firms
with some outside
nonbusiness  diectors
Median ROE for  firms
with no outside non-
business directors

their  annual  reports,  and  over the whole sample,
those  with  outside  nonbusiness  directors  make
more  money.
From  both  of  these  studies—Pfeffer's  data  and
our  own—we  begin  to  see  a  picture  of  a  firm
being  active,  balanced,  sensitive,  responsive,  and
coping  with  pressures  in  the  environment  that
are  intangible,  perhaps  inchoate,  and  hard  to
identify.  Does  this  kind  of  managerial  behavior
have  any  relationship 
to  more  conventional
measures  of  business  activity,  for  example,
profitability?  Pfeffer  performed  a test  that  bears
on  this point.  In addition  to simply  showing  that
the  composition  of  the  board  varies  with  the
kind  of  problems  in  the  firm's  environment,  he
went  on  to  perform  a multiple  regression  analy-
sis,  using  size,  debt/equity  ratio,  and  regulation
as variables,  with  the  percentage  of  inside  direc-
tors  as  the  dependent  variable.  The  results  of
this  analysis  allowed  him  to  compute  a  typical
insider/outsider  director  relationship  for  each
company  derived  from  the  pooled  experience  of
some  eighty  companies.  By  comparing  this  pre-
dicted 
typical  number  with  each  company's
actual  insider/outsider  ratio  he  obtained  a  dif-
ference  score  for  every  firm.  This  score  is  a
measure  of  deviance; it means that  the  company
behaved  (in  this  respect)  in  a  fashion  different
from 
the  standard  or  typical  pattern  of  the
whole  group  of  firms.  When  the  deviance  score
was  compared  with  the  ROE  performance,  firm
by  firm,  a negative  correlation  resulted  that  was
highly  significant  (confidence  level = 0.006).  The
more  deviant  the firm—in either  direction—from
the  norm  derived  from  all  the  firms,  the  less
likely 
it  was  to  be  profitable.  This  finding,
although  it  is  in a different  form,  agrees in  every
way  with  the  inverted  U-shaped  relationship  we
noted  in  the  corporate  responsibility  data  and in
our  reworking  of  the  Bragdon  and  Marlin  data.
Unfortunately,  the  form  in  which  Pfeffer's  data
are  presented  does  not  permit  a plot identical  to
the  other  two,  but  the  logic  of  the  relationship
says  the  same  thing:  the  more  deviance,  the less
the  profit.

this  be  true?  In  interpreting  his
Why  should 
findings,  Pfeffer  refers  to  an  earlier  study  by
Bowman.^  Here,  is  an  internal  scheduling  con-
text.  Bowman  demonstrated 
that,  while  an
individual  manager's  individual estimates may  be

WINTER  /  1975  /  VOL.  XVIII  /  NO.  2

55


far  from  optimal,  these  estimates,  pooled  over
time  or  over  managers,  may  give  very  nearly
optimal  results.  What  accounts  for  the  fact  that
a  set  of  decision  rules  derived  from  a  manager's
own  average  behavior  may  yield  better  results
than 
the  aggregate  behavior  itself?  Bowman
argues:

1.  Experienced  managers  are  aware  of  and  sensitive  to
the  criteria  of  a  system  and  the  system  variables  that
influence  these  critera.
2.  They  tend  to  operate intuitively  with a set of implicit
decision  rules  which  relate  the  variables  to  the  criteria
imperfectly—but  they  are  more  erratic  than  biased  in
their  imperfections.
3. Most cost or criteria surfaces as a function  of the man-
ager's  decision  rules  are  of  a shallow  dish-shaped  form,
and  it  is  the  far-out  (variance  or erratic) behavior that is
expensive  or  damaging.
4.  If  we  think  of  managers  as  decision-rule-coefficient
estimators,  a  decision  rule  based  on  mean  coefficients
estimated  from  the  managers'  behavior  will  damp  out
some  of  the  variance  that  is the  expensive  or  damaging
factor  in  a space  with  dish-shaped  criteria  surfaces. This
is because managers may, from  time to time, ignore some
signals, and at other times overreact  to some. Their mean
interpretation  and  evaluation  of  signals over time damps
out  some  of  this  erratic  behavior.

The  roots  of  this  analysis  are  detailed  at  some
length  here  because  they  provide  a  robust  sup-
port  base  for  interpreting  the  inverted  U-shaped
curve  of  managerial  behavior  and  profitability
that  has  occurred  repeatedly  in  these  data. Two
steps  are  necessary  to  extend  from  the  produc-
tion  scheduling  base  to  the  strategic  posture  for
corporate  responsibility.  First,  the  decision  rule
coefficient  estimation  must  be  extended  from
one  derived  from 
the  mean  of  a  manager's
repeated  decisions  to  one  derived  from  a  mean
of  many  managers'  decisions  in  the  same  or  a
similar  case—in  other  words, from  a longitudinal
to  a  cross-sectional  sample  (though  several  of
the 
tests  in  the  original  sample  were  cross-
sectional).  Second,  it  is  necessary  to  go  beyond
the  relatively  precise  and  well-known  internal
measurement  and  control  processes  to  some
less-well-specified  processes  in  dealing  with  ex-
ternal  forces.  As  Bowman  put  it,  "If  the  theory
can  be  verified  where  it's  felt  that  the  system
criteria  can  be  measured  [as  in  the  cases  pre-
sented 
this  article],  then  some  assurance
might  exist  for  using  it  where  the  criteria  can't
be  measured."^

in 

What  Bowman  did  needs  a moment's  exposition.
He  went  into  a  variety  of  companies  and  used
each  company's  actual  scheduling  behavior  to
perform  a least squares regression  against  a linear
decision  rule.  This  yielded  coefficients  supplied
by  the  manager's  own  behavior.  In  two  of  the
four  firms  studied,  using  the  managers'  past  de-
cisions  as  if  they  were  coefficient  estimations
yielded  better  results  than  the  linear  decision
model,  and  in  three  of  the  four  firms,  did  better
than  the  company's  actual performance.  A plant
size  study  and  a  repair  inventories  study  con-
firmed  these  results.

Conclusions  and  Speculations
The  argument  presented  here  does  three  things.
First,  it  takes  us  beyond  the  realm  of  variables
that  are  easily  scaled,  quantified,  and  measured,
and  hence  amenable  to operations research  tech-
niques,  and 
lets  us  use  the  richness  of  the
manager's  experience  in  identifying  and  weigh-
ing  variables 
implicitly.  For
strategic  issues  we  typically  need  to  go  far
beyond  the  easily  scaled  measures.  March  and
Simon  say:  ".  .  . since  there is no reason  to sup-
pose  that  any  technique  of  decision  making  . . .
will  bring  the  organization  into  the  neighbor-
hood  of  a  geniune  'optimum,'  the  search  for
decision  mechanisms  cannot 
take  criteria  of
optimization  too  seriously, but  must  seek  'work-
able'  techniques  for  satisficing.  .  .  ."^

intuitively  and 

It  is  exactly  in  the  interests  of  increasing  the
proportion  of  relevant  reality 
to  deal  with
strategic  variables  that  this  article  attempts  to
reach  out  to  larger  issues  that  are  harder  to  de-
fine.  Second,  it  provides  a  means  for  damping
out  damaging  extreme  behavior  and  casts  light
on  the  observed  efficacy  of  mean  behavior
patterns.  Finally,  the  Bowman  case  is  a  good
example  of  the  kind  of  refinement  in  the  man-
agement  of  internal  information  and  control
systems that  has been  the hallmark  of  managerial
excellence  since  Alfred  Sloan  and  Donaldson
Brown  began 
the  process  fifty  years  ago  at
General  Motors. It is becoming  increasingly  clear
that,  just  at  the  time  when  the  art  of  internal
control  is  reaching  its  highest  stage,  firms  are
pressed  by  the  need  for  an external  information
system,  for  the  organization  structure  to  utilize

56

California  Management  Review


it,  and  for  decision  rules  to  guide their  interpre-
tation  of  the  signals.

We would  argue that  the presence  of  a discussion
of  corporate  responsibility,  or indeed,  the activi-
ty  itself,  is not  a cause of higher profits.  Rather,
it  is  a  sign  of  the  presence  of  a  tertium  quid
which  lies  behind  and  is  the  causal  factor.  That
is  a  sensitivity  to  a  variety  of  facets  in  the  ex-
ternal  world,  of  which  such  things  as  pollution
control  or  affirmative  action  are only  a part. The
sensitivity,  responsiveness,  fiexibility,  on  one
hand,  are  part  of  the  requisite  strategic  posture.
The  adaptive  readiness  to  cope  proactively  with
the  signals  from  the  outside  world  make  up  the
other  part.  Finally,  in  terms  of  a  decision  rule
coefficient,  the  data  seem  to  suggest  neither  too
much  nor  too 
little—a  platitudinous  precept
which,  however,  can  be  operationalized  here  by
employing  unobtrusive  measures  for  monitoring
median  behavior  across  a  set  of  firms,  a  peer
group.  The  relationship  between  ROE  and  the
intensity  of  indices  of  managerial  strategic  op-
tions  suggests  that,  in  the  face  of  a set  of  dish-
shaped  criteria  surfaces, 
the  mean  really  is
golden.  Indeed,  this  may  partially  explain  the
disappointing  performance  of 
the  so-called
"clean"  funds,  which  are  made  up  largely  of
investments  in  firms  whose  behavior  was  atypi-
cally  "responsible."

Corporate  socially  responsible  behavior,  not  by
itself  and  not  uniquely,  is  a  signal  of  good,
sensitive,  informed,  balanced,  modern,  negoti-
ating,  coping  management.  For  many  issues it is
good  neither  to  underrespond  to  them,  nor  to
overrespond  to  them. The economist  would  find
this  idea  familiar,  especially  when  it  comes  to
the  classical  factors  of  production.  He  would
probably  even  allow  an  increasing  returns  fol-
lowed  by  a  decreasing  returns  curve  for  items
such  as  advertising,  research  and  development,
and  the  use  of  computers.  Perhaps  he  should
now  accept  the  possibility  that  his  old  ideas
apply  to  (potential)  externalities.  Though  the
discovery  that  average  behavior  is  close  to  an
optimum  may  come  to  the  economist  in a novel
form  in  this  research,  upon  refiection  his  con-
cept  of  an  equilibrium  would  suggest that  this is
where  it  "should"  be.

While  the  purpose  of  this  research  report  has

been  largely  descriptive,  or  to  grace  it  with  a
label—"positive  theory"—perhaps  a  few  norma-
tive  speculations  will  be  permitted.  Bowman
writes:

Since  management  as an  activity  or  profession  is proba-
bly  more  of  a craft  than anything else, it is well to point
out  that  managers  learn  most/much  of  what  they  know
from  practice,  both  their  own  and  others. Where prob-
lems  are  new  and/or  puzzling,  a  common  (and  worth-
while) question  is—what  are other managers doing about
it?  . ..  If  particular  behavior  can  be shown  to be rather
common  to  most  successful  companies, can this particu-
lar  behavior  be  recommended  as  appropriate?  The
position  taken  here  is  that,  subject  to  strong  contrary
evidence  and  analysis,  well-documented  and  consistent
behavior  of  successful  companies  is  a strong  normative
guide.  Remembering  that  in  the  admittedly  composite
area  of  corporate  strategy,  which  is synthesis more than
analysis,  and  design  more  than  theory, practice (especi-
ally  that  widely  documented  by  careful  analysis)  is
ignored  only  with some folly. It is a moot  point  whether
this  position  is academically  respectable, but  it  is based
essentially  on  a  Darwinian  concept  of  survival.10

Comparative  analysis is always helpful,  especially
where  theory  is weak.  For the manager  searching
for  appropriate  behavior  with  respect  to  corpor-
ate  social  responsibility,  he  could  probably  do a
lot  worse  than  to  follow 
the  average  of  his
industry.  The  estimate  made  here  is  that  this
would  probably  and  paradoxically  raise  such  an
average  somewhat,  over  time, and  this might  not
be  so  bad  for  either  the  individual  companies,
their  industry,  or society.  It's undoubtedly  going
to  be  a  moving  average  anyway,  and  as shown, a
response  somewhat  greater  than  the  average  is
more  benign  than  a  response  somewhat  smaller
than  the  average.  (To complicate  the  recommen-
dation  a  bit,  and  following  the  "management
coefficients"  theory,  this  average is a hyperplane
in  multidimensional  space.  In  the  same  sense  as
Pfeffer  uses  it,  it  is  a  "predicted"  place  that  is a
function  of  all  the  relevant  variables.)

Though  much  information  gathering  by  and  for
management  will—and  should—continue  to  be
an  informal  process,  some  formal  management
information  systems  exist  in  most  firms,  especi-
ally  information  internal  to  the  firm.  Informa-
tion  gathering  and  analysis  on  external  factors
also  exist  for  virtually  all  firms,  especially  in
such areas as marketing. This information  gather-
ing  is usually  addressed  to what might be  termed
the  objective  problem  or  situation.  In  an  "age

WINTER  I  191S  I  VOL.  XVIII  /  NO.  2

57


of  discontinuity,"  the  results  of  the  research
described  here  might  suggest  that  more  formal
systems  and  organization  arrangements  be  ad-
dressed  to  the  gathering  and  analysis  of  other
companies'  solutions  and  coping  mechanisms  to
both  internal  and  external  situations  and  prob-
lems.  While  simple  average  postures  or  solutions
of  a  peer  group  (the  subjective  response)  may
not  be  entirely  adequate  for  the  objective  and
changing  situation,  such  information  may  be
quite  berieficial.  A  formal  comparative  analysis
of  the  firm  versus  its  industry  or  peer  group
average  behavior  may  be  as  useful  as  an  analy-
sis  of  the  objective  situation  itself.

Acknowledgment:  Financial  support  for  this research
during the summer  of  1974 for  one of the authors from
the  Sloan  School  of  Management, MIT, from  its  Irving
Wilson Fund  for  Management Education  and Research,
established  by  the  Alcoa  Foundation,  and from  Ohio
State  University  research fund,  is gratefully  acknowl-
edged.

REFERENCES

1. J. H. Bragdon, Jr. and J. A. T. Marlin, "Is Pollution

Profitable?", Risk Management (April  1972).
2.  Milton  Moskowitz  in  Business & Society  (24 July
1973).
3.  J.  Pfeffer,  "Size  and  Composition  of  Corporate
Boards  of  Directors: The Organization  and Its Environ-
ment," yldminwf/'arive^'de/jce  Quarterly (June  1972).
4.  R. M. Cyert  and J. G. March, A  Behavioral Theory
of  the  Firm  (Englewood  Cliffs,  N.J.:  Prentice-Hall,
1963).
5.  J.  D.  Thompson,  Organizations in  Action  (New
York:  McGraw-Hill,  1967).
6. Peter  M. Blau,  Exchange and Power in Social Life
(New  York:  John  Wiley & Sons,  1964).
7.  E.  H.  Bowman,  "Consistency  and  Optimality  in
Managerial Decision  Making," Management Science (Vol.
9, No. 2, 1963).
8.  Ibid.
9.  J.  G. March  and H. A. Simon, Organizations  (New
York: John  Wiley & Sons, 1958).
10. E. H. Bowman, "Epistemology, Corporate  Strategy,
and  Academe,"  Sloan  Management  Review  (Winter
1974).

58

California  Management  Review


