The Relationship Between Person–Organization

Congruence, Perceived Violations of the Psychological

Contract, and Occupational Stress Symptoms

Carol C. Bocchino,
Bruce W. Hartman, and Pamela F. Foley

Seton Hall University

Along with rapid changes in the workplace have
been  changes  in  the  workforce,  including  de-
creased congruence between personal and orga-
nizational values (P-OC), an increase in perceived
psychological contract violations (PCV), and an
increase in work stress. This study examined the
relationship between these variables in the con-
text of age, gender, and job tenure.  Results indi-
cated that employees reporting higher levels of
PCV are more likely to experience low P-OC, be
relatively older, and have been in their current
jobs for a relatively shorter time. Employees re-
porting higher stress symptoms are more likely to
be male, and to have been in their current jobs
and  with  the  company  relatively  longer.    Study
findings  have  implications  for  consulting  and
human resource management practices.

The world of work has undergone a radi-
cal transformation in the past two decades.
Many organizations are facing an uncertain
economic  future,  reflecting  the  impact  of
increased global competition, deregulation
of domestic markets, and a shift from a prod-
uct-based  economy  to  a  service  economy.
Organizations have responded to these pres-
sures through downsizing, restructuring, and
reengineering in an attempt to contain costs
and stay competitive (Cascio, 1995). In ad-
dition, Posner and Schmidt (1992) cited the
extraordinary developments in information
technology,  lifestyle  changes,  and  demo-
graphic trends that are modifying workforce
values, skills, and expectations.

In many ways, the complaints of today’s
workforce are the same as those described
by Whyte (1957) more than two generations
ago, including “talk of the ‘treadmill,’ the ‘rat
race,’ of the inability to control one’s direc-

tion”  (p.  4). Whyte  further  described  the
workforce of the 1950s as having “no great
sense  of  plight;  between  themselves  and
[the] organization they believe they see an
ultimate  harmony”  (p.  4).  However,  the
workforce of today does face unique chal-
lenges. Chatman (1991) noted that as both
the organization and the workforce react in
response  to  environmental  changes,  em-
ployee values have often become incongru-
ent with evolving organizational culture. For
example,  increased  global  competition  in
markets with significantly lower labor costs
may prompt an organization whose culture
was traditionally paternalistic and employee
focused to become more marketing and ser-
vice oriented. In an effort to be more respon-

Carol C. Bocchino is now managing director of
CBA, Inc., a consulting firm specializing in orga-
nizational and executive development. She received
her PhD degree in counseling psychology from the
Department of Professional Psychology and Fam-
ily Therapy at Seton Hall University.

Bruce W. Hartman is a professor in the Depart-
ment  of  Professional  Psychology  and  Family
Therapy at Seton Hall University; Pamela F. Foley
is an assistant professor in the Department of Pro-
fessional Psychology and Family Therapy at Se-
ton Hall University, where she teaches courses in
vocational psychology. She has also designed and
conducted  programs  for  survivors  of  organiza-
tional downsizing.

This article was based on Carol C. Bocchino’s

(2001) doctoral dissertation.

Correspondence concerning this article should
be addressed to Carol C. Bocchino, CBA, Inc., 2
Old Fort Road, Bernardsville, NJ 07924. E-mail:
carolbocchino@att.net

Copyright 2003 by the Educational Publishing Foundation and the Society of Consulting Psychology, 1061-4087/03/$12.00
DOI 10.1037/1061-4087.55.4.203
Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research, Vol. 55, No. 4, 203–214

203


sive to customer needs, these organizations
may give employees more decision-making
authority when dealing with customers. If,
however, employees are not properly trained
to handle new responsibilities or do not feel
emotionally  equipped  for  such  empower-
ment,  the  change  is  often  stress-inducing
(Sutherland & Cooper, 1995) and is likely
to cause incongruence between the values
of the employee and the new organizational
culture (Herriot, 1992). Similarly, organiza-
tions that have focused in the past on values
such as long-term employment service and
loyalty may be forced by economic factors
to begin cost cutting and downsizing, which
can result in negative and lasting effects both
in workers who are downsized and in those
who remain (Noer, 1993).

These environmental changes have given
rise to a workforce that has become increas-
ingly  vigilant  in  monitoring  the  promises
made to them by the organization (Morrison
&  Robinson,  1997).  Rousseau  (1990)  de-
fined the psychological contract (PC) in the
workplace as the sum total of the employee’s
understanding of what was promised him or
her by the organization. The concept of the
PC in the field of organizational psychol-
ogy was first discussed by Argyris (1960).
He referred to the “relationship [that] may
be hypothesized to evolve between the em-
ployees  and  the  foremen  which  might  be
called the ‘psychological work contract’” (p.
96). Levinson (1962) was the first researcher
to introduce the concept of reciprocity in re-
gard to the PC. According to Levinson, reci-
procity in the PC assumes that both the em-
ployee  and  the  organization  fulfill  each
other’s expectations. Employees have expec-
tations, such as salary, benefits, work loca-
tion, opportunity for advancement, and the
nature of the work to be performed. Organi-
zations, as well, have expectations of em-
ployees that are listed in their job descrip-
tions, policies, procedures, and performance
standards.

Morrison  and  Robinson  (1997)  sug-
gested, however, that employees and employ-

ers not only exchange promised goods and
services, but that they also do so in the con-
text of a set of values, beliefs, and norms.
Therefore, if an employee believes that terms
of the PC were not met and that the organi-
zation was deceptive in doing so, he or she
is likely to feel greater anger and betrayal if
the organization has historically promoted
values  such  as  integrity  and  concern  for
employees  than  if  the  organization  was
known for treating employees badly (Mor-
rison & Robinson, 1997). By monitoring the
terms  of  their  PCs,  employees  track  their
company’s  compliance  with  those  terms.
Unfortunately,  the  security  and  rules  that
once bound the PC between employer and
employee have become uncertain. Morrison
and Robinson (1997) stated that vigilance
is most likely to be triggered in times of tur-
bulence or dramatic changes in the environ-
ment. With  the  collective  environmental,
organizational,  and  demographic  changes
that have occurred, it is expected that vigi-
lance will be increased, and it is likely that
perceived violations in the PC will increase
as well (Morrison & Robinson, 1997). This
is  not  good  news  for  organizations.  Per-
ceived violation has been found to decrease
employees’  trust  and  loyalty  toward  their
employers (Robinson, 1996), lower satisfac-
tion  with  their  jobs  and  organizations
(McLean & Kidder, 1994), and reduce per-
ceived  obligations  to  their  employers
(Robinson, Kraatz, & Rousseau, 1994). In
extreme cases, perceived violation has been
found to result in acts of sabotage or vio-
lence (Robinson & Bennett, 1997).

The  rapid  pace  of  change  in  the  work-
place  can  also  affect  employees’  physical
well-being. Probst and Brubaker (2001) re-
ported that job insecurity in an environment
of  organizational  restructuring  or  down-
sizing is related to an increased incidence
of workplace injuries and accidents. The U.S.
Department of Labor’s Bureau of Labor Sta-
tistics (Webster & Bergman, 1999) has esti-
mated  that  during  1997,  there  were  3,418
work  absences  due  to  occupational  stress,

204

Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research
Fall 2003


with median absence for cases of occupa-
tional stress of 23 days—over four times the
total median absence for all injuries and ill-
nesses. Some researchers have related oc-
cupational stress symptoms to overwhelm-
ing  environmental  and  organizational
changes that are beyond the employee’s abil-
ity to cope (e.g., French, Caplan, & Harrison,
1982;  Harrison,  1985).  Because  these
changes are believed to trigger a lack of con-
gruence between individual values and or-
ganizational culture (Chatman, 1991), it is
probable  that  employees  who  experience
incongruence will experience stress symp-
toms as well.

Many of the workplace interventions de-
signed  to  deal  with  this  uncertainty  focus
on either organizational solutions (e.g., cul-
ture change initiatives) or individual solu-
tions  (e.g.,  stress  management  programs;
Cartwright & Cooper, 1996). This study pro-
poses that the negative consequences asso-
ciated with current turbulence in the work
environment  arise  from  the  interaction  of
both organizational and employee variables.
The purpose of this study was to examine
the interactive relationship between organi-
zational  culture  and  individual  employee
values and the ways in which a lack of con-
gruence between company culture and em-
ployee values may affect employee percep-
tions of both violations in PCs and reported
stress symptoms.

Congruence and Psychological

Contract Violations

The  term  person–organization  congru-
ence (P-OC) is used in this study to describe
the  relationship  between  the  values  of  an
employee and the culture of the organiza-
tion in which the employee works. As de-
fined  by  Chatman  (1991),  the  term  P-OC
most  suitably  describes  the  harmony,  bal-
ance, and compatibility between patterns of
organizational values (i.e., the organization’s
culture)  and  patterns  of  individual  values
(i.e., what an individual values in an organi-

zation). P-OC can be measured in two ways.
Subjective P-OC, which has also been re-
ferred  to  as  perceived  fit  (Kristof,  1996),
refers to an individual’s assessment of how
well his or her own personal values match
the  organizational  values  of  the  company
(i.e., its culture). Objective P-OC refers to a
comparison of an individual’s assessment of
his or her own personal values to an inde-
pendent measure of the organizational val-
ues  of  the  company  (Kristof,  1996). The
most typical way of obtaining this indepen-
dent assessment of the organization values
is to survey a group of organizational lead-
ers  who  are  knowledgeable  about  the
company’s  culture  and  values  (e.g.,  Chat-
man, 1991). Through rank correlation of the
organizational  leaders’  responses  to  each
item on the survey, their scores are averaged
to establish the culture profile for the orga-
nization  (O’Reilly,  Chatman,  &  Caldwell,
1991).  Chatman  (1991)  suggested  that  a
comparison of subjective and objective mea-
sures  is  desirable,  although  Harris  and
Mossholder  (1996)  argued  that  the  use  of
subjective assessment of P-OC may be best
for  organizations  in  transition,  where  the
views of executives may be too variable to
represent  a  coherent  “objective”  view  of
culture from the perspective of the organi-
zation. While we originally incorporated a
measure  of  objective  P-OC  in  the  present
study,  the  perceptions  of  the  executives
sampled were in fact highly varied. There-
fore, we dropped the objective measure and
limited our study to assessment of subjective
P-OC, which focuses on perceived congruence
between  personal  and  organizational  values
from the perspective of the employees.

The first research question we addressed
was  how  the  level  of  congruence  between
employee values and organization values re-
lates to the employee’s perception of violations
in the PC. We predicted that congruence be-
tween worker values and organizational val-
ues would be negatively related to employee
perceptions of violations in the PC (Hypoth-
esis 1).

Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research
Fall 2003

205


Congruence and

Occupational Stress

treated as exploratory: age, gender, time with
the company, and time in current job.

Various studies have examined the effect
of constructs similar to P-OC on the levels
of  stress  reported  by  employees  (e.g.,
Ivancevich & Matteson, 1980; Matteson &
Ivancevich, 1982). Invariably, these studies
follow  Edwards  and  Harrison’s  (1993)
conceptualization of fit as either (a) the ex-
tent to which the rewards and supplies pro-
vided by the environment match the needs
and preferences of the individual or (b) the
extent  to  which  the  demands  and  require-
ments of the environment match the skills
and abilities of the individual. Misfit between
the person and organization in either of those
conceptualizations of congruence has been
related  to  psychological,  physical,  and  be-
havioral  strains  (Caplan,  1987;  French,
Caplan, & Harrison, 1982). Our second re-
search  question  was  whether  P-OC  as  de-
fined in this study (i.e., the congruence be-
tween  organization  values  and  individual
values) would similarly be related to levels
of occupational stress reported by individu-
als. We predicted that congruence between
worker  values  and  organizational  values
would  be  negatively  related  to  employees’
reported stress symptoms (Hypothesis 2).

The Effect of Demographic

Variables

Much of the research in the areas of P-
OC,  occupational  stress,  and  PC  violation
(PCV) examines how demographic variables
such as age, gender, and length of employ-
ment may affect employee outcomes, includ-
ing organizational commitment, job satisfac-
tion,  and  retention  (e.g.,  Posner,  1992;
Scandura & Lankau, 1997; Sheridan, 1992;
Vagg & Spielberger, 1998). However, there
is little agreement across studies regarding
the relationship of demographic variables to
the important variables in the present study.
Therefore, the following demographic vari-
ables were included in the analyses and were

Method

Sample and Procedure

The participants in this study were 108 full-
time  U.S.-based  employees  of  an  international
organization  that  has  undergone  substantial
changes in the past decade similar to those dis-
cussed above. The sample included 58 men (54%),
with a mean age of 43.3 years (SD = 8.2), and 50
women (46%), with a mean age of 40.2 years (SD
= 9). This sample represented approximately 72%
of  the  total  number  (N  =  149)  of  employees  at
this  location. Their  job  categories  ranged  from
production supervisor to senior analytical chem-
ist,  and  all  had  been  employed  in  their  current
jobs for at least 1 month. Length of service with
the  organization  ranged  between  5  months  and
more  than  408  months  (M  =  113.8;  SD  =
101.9). Because of improperly completed pro-
tocols, data from 10 participants were dropped
from the analysis. Therefore, a total of 98 cases
were  used  to  analyze  the  data,  representing
91% of respondents.

Organization managers identified all employ-
ees who had been with the company for at least 4
months. We then sent a solicitation letter to these
employees asking recruits to participate in a study
of organizational culture, indicating that the com-
pany had given permission for employees to par-
ticipate on company time. As an incentive to par-
ticipate, participants were told that their names
would be entered in a drawing for a prize (gift
certificate  to  an  electronics  store).  Employees
were also advised that their responses and par-
ticipation would be confidential, that they could
withdraw from the study at any time, and that there
was no penalty for not participating.

Measures

Participants  completed  a  demographic  data
sheet  to  collect  information  about  age,  gender,
tenure (time with the company and time in the
current job), job title, and department. In addi-
tion  to  the  demographic  data  sheet,  three  other
instruments were used to collect data in this study:
(a)  the  Organizational  Culture  Profile  (OCP;
O’Reilly  et  al.,  1991),  (b)  the  Personal  Strain

206

Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research
Fall 2003


Scales (PSS) of the Occupational Stress Inven-
tory—Revised (OSI–R; Osipow, 1998), and (c)
the Psychological Contract Questionnaire (PCQ;
based on work of Rousseau, 1990).

OCP. The OCP (O’Reilly et al., 1991) was
used in this study to measure P-OC. The OCP
contains a list of value statements (e.g., “being
socially responsible,” “ respect for individuals,”
“flexibility,” “risk-taking”) that emanated from
a review by O’Reilly and his colleagues of aca-
demic and practitioner writings on organizational
culture and values. The OCP has two parts: Part
1  (“My  Organizational Values”)  asks  each  re-
spondent to rate “How important is it to you that
a particular value be part of the value system of
any company you work for?” From the list of 54
organizational values, respondents sort their an-
swers into nine categories, ranging from 1 (least
important) to 9 (most important). Part 2 (“My
Company’s Organizational Values”) asks respon-
dents, “How characteristic is a particular value
of the value system of the company you currently
work for?” From the same list of 54 organiza-
tional values, respondents sort their answers into
nine  categories,  ranging  from  1  (least  charac-
teristic) to 9 (most characteristic). The Pearson
product–moment  correlation  for  these  two
rankings  is  computed,  yielding  the  OCP  score
for the individual.

Chatman  (1991)  provided  evidence  of  both
convergent  and  discriminant  validity,  adequate
test–retest  reliability  of  individual  preferences
for the OCP value statements over a period of
12 months, and interrater reliability among em-
ployees  within  an  organization.  In  addition,
O’Reilly et al. (1991) found that OCP scores were
not related to social desirability (i.e., an attempt
to make respondent’s firms look like good places
to work).

PSS from the OSI–R. The OSI–R (Osipow,
1998) operationalizes the original authors’ model
of work stress (Osipow & Spokane, 1987). They
based their model on an extensive review of the
stress literature and, as a result, focused on con-
structing measures of three distinct but related
domains: (a) stress-provoking work roles (e.g.,
role overload, role ambiguity), (b) the strain (e.g.,
anxiety,  withdrawal,  development  of  sleeping  or
eating disorders) that may result from experienc-
ing  these  stress-provoking  roles,  and  (c)  coping
behaviors (e.g., social support systems, recreational
activities) used to distract from stressful events.

Because  the  present  study  focused  on  the
strain that may develop as a result of a lack of
value congruence between the individual and the
organization, we administered only the PSS of
the OSI–R (Osipow, 1998) to assess occupational
stress. The PSS contains 40 items (10 per scale)
that measure affective, subjective responses re-
garding four types of occupational stress symp-
toms: Vocational Strain (VS) measures both the
extent to which the individual experiences prob-
lems in work quality or output and attitudes to-
ward  work;  Psychological  Strain  measures  the
extent to which the individual experiences psy-
chological and/or emotional problems; Interper-
sonal  Strain  measures  the  extent  to  which  the
individual  experiences  disruption  (e.g.,  with-
drawal or aggressiveness) in interpersonal rela-
tionships; and Physical Strain measures the ex-
tent  to  which  the  individual  complains  about
physical  illness  and/or  reports  poor  self-care
habits. These items are scored on a 5-point scale,
(a) rarely  or  never  true,  (b)  occasionally  true,
(c) often true, (d) usually true, and (e) true most
of the time.

Several  studies  have  provided  evidence  of
concurrent  validity  for  the  original  OSI  (e.g.,
Anton  &  Reed,  1994;  Holland  &  Gottfredson,
1994).  Furthermore,  Osipow  (1998)  demon-
strated both internal consistency and test–retest
reliability for the revised version.

PCQ. The PCQ was used to measure em-
ployee perception of violations of PCs with the
organization. The PCQ used in this study has two
sections: The first section captures information
on the importance of 15 specific components of
the PC, on a scale ranging from 1 (not important
to me) to 5 (extremely important to me). The 15
components, including items such as high pay,
promotion, training, and regular feedback, have
been identified by previous research as typical
organizational obligations contained in the PC
between employees and their work organizations
(Guzzo, Noonan, & Elron, 1994; Robinsonet al.,
1994; Rousseau, 1990). The second section of
the PCQ captures information on the magnitude
of specific PCVs. For each item promised, re-
spondents were asked to assess their perception
of  how  well  the  organization  has  fulfilled  its
obligations  with  respect  to  the  15  components
of the PC. The ratings were assessed on a 5-point
scale  ranging  from  1  (receive  much  less  than
promised) to 5 (receive much more than prom-

Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research
Fall 2003

207


ised). If there were items that their employer had
never promised to fulfill, respondents were in-
structed to place an X next to the item in addi-
tion to rating it.

To obtain a score for PCV, the magnitude of
violation of each promise (Section 2 responses)
was multiplied by the importance of that promise
(Section 1 responses) and summed across all 15
components.  In  addition  to  Rousseau’s  (1990)
original work that established content validity for
the items in the PCQ, reliability and validity is-
sues were addressed in a number of other studies
(Robinson, 1996; Robinson et al., 1994; Robinson
& Rousseau, 1994). Potential scores for the PCQ
used  in  the  current  study  can  range  from  –150
(very low PC violation score) to +150 (very high
PC violation score).

Results

Preliminary Analyses

Before  performing  data  analysis,  we
screened  all  data  as  recommended  by
Tabachnick  and  Fidell  (1996). Two  of  the
personal variables (age and time in current
job) had outliers that were more than three
standard deviations from the mean. Specifi-
cally, one participant was 72 years old, and
another had been in her current job for 317
months. After ascertaining that these scores
were entered correctly, we used Tabachnick
and Fidell’s (1996) recommended procedure
to reduce the influence of the outliers: The
outlying cases were assigned a raw score that
was one unit smaller than the next most ex-
treme score in the distribution. Specifically,
the maximum age score was changed to 62,
and the maximum time in current job score
was changed to 241 months. The variables
time in current job and time with company
still  required  additional  transformation  to
bring them within normal distribution. We
used a logarithmic transformation (Tabach-
nick  &  Fidell,  1996),  which  resulted  in  a
normal distribution for the first variable and
improved  the  distribution  of  the  second.
Table 1 shows intercorrelations for all pairs
of variables in addition to means, standard

208

Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research
Fall 2003


deviations,  and  minimum  and  maximum
scores. The data represent values with trans-
formed scores for age, time with company,
and time in current job, as discussed above.

Canonical Analysis of Hypotheses

To explore the relationships among vari-
ables in this study, we used a canonical cor-
relation model (Tabachnick & Fidell, 1996).
This procedure creates weighted linear com-
binations of two or more sets of variables,
such that the correlation between these sets
of variables is maximized. The set of predic-
tor variables in this study included P-OC and
the demographic variables age, gender, time
with company, and time in current job. The
criterion set of variables consisted of the two
employee  outcome  variables,  occupational
stress symptoms and reported PCVs.

We used the Statistical Analysis System
(SAS, Version 6.12) to perform the canoni-
cal correlation analysis. Table 2 shows the
results of this analysis, which produced two
pairs  of  canonical  variables,  which  are  re-
ferred to as canonical variates or roots. Ca-
nonical variates are uncorrelated with each
other,  with  second  variate  maximizing  the
correlation between the two sets of variables

after the variance from the first pair is re-
moved. The  correlation  column  provides
univariate  correlations  or  factor  loadings
between the original variables in each set and
their respective canonical variables. The ca-
nonical  coefficients  represent  the  weights
applied to each original variable in creating
the canonical variate for its respective set.

The first canonical correlation was .44,
and the second was .33—both of which were
larger than any of the bivariate correlations
shown in Table 1. These two canonical cor-
relations,  taken  together,  were  statistically
significant, F(8, 184) = 3.19, p = .0008. The
canonical correlation for the second canoni-
cal variate after the first variate was removed
was also significant, F(3, 93) = 2.73, p = .03.
Therefore, both canonical variates could be
interpreted.

The first canonical variate was character-
ized by high negative loading on PCV (r =
–.98) along with high positive loading on P-
OC (r = .86), medium negative loading on
age (r = –.43), and medium positive loading
on time in current job (r = .32). These re-
sults supported Hypothesis 1, that congru-
ence between employee values and organi-
zational  values  is  negatively  related  to  an
employee’s  perception  of  violations  in  the

Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research
Fall 2003

209


PC.  Furthermore,  individuals  who  were
younger and had been in their current jobs
longer were somewhat less likely to perceive
violations of the PC. However, there was no
significant  relationship  between  PCV  and
either gender or time with the company.

The second canonical variate was char-
acterized by a high positive loading on stress
(r = .99), along with medium negative load-
ings  on  gender  (r  =  –.35)  and  P-OC  (r  =
–.30), and higher positive loadings on time
in current job (r = .69) and time with com-
pany (r = .76). These results supported Hy-
pothesis 2, that greater occupational stress
would be associated with lower P-OC. Fur-
thermore, individuals experiencing high lev-
els of stress were more likely to be male and
to have been both in their current jobs and
with  the  company  longer  than  those  with
lower levels of stress. However, occupational
stress in this analysis was unrelated to age.

Discussion

This research found empirical evidence
that  congruence  between  employee  values
and  organizational  values  is  negatively  re-
lated both to perceived PCVs and occupa-
tional  stress.  In  addition  to  supporting  the
importance of attention to P-OC during or-
ganizational change, the results of the present
study offer strong support for the validity of
assessing P-OC on the basis of value con-
gruency. While other studies have examined
the  relationship  between  congruence  and
stress, most prior research defined congru-
ence as the fit between a worker’s vocational
interests  and  specific  jobs  and  industries.
With regard to PCV, almost all previous stud-
ies  have  focused  on  the  early  stage  of  PC
development,  when  the  employee  first  en-
ters the organization. This study provides a
view of the organization–employee relation-
ship  in  a  presumably  more  mature  stage.
Also, although there has been much research
on the effect of PCV, there has been virtu-
ally none on its antecedents. Although this
study is correlational in nature and therefore

cannot imply cause and effect, the findings
presented here support the need for further
study to determine the directional nature of
the relationship between value congruence
and the PC.

In addition to providing evidence of a re-
lationship between value congruence and the
outcomes  of  perceived  PCV  and  occupa-
tional stress, we also found that several de-
mographic variables were related to the two
outcome  variables.  First,  younger  employ-
ees were less likely to perceive violations of
the PC. Given that PCs change over time in
relationship to overall changes in the work-
place,  it  may  be  that  younger  employees’
expectations of their employers are different
from those of older employees in general. It
is  also  possible  that  the  skill  sets  of  older
employees may not be adequate to meet the
technological requirements of the workplace
of today. If the organization now insists that
skills be updated or does not promote older
workers because they lack these skills, it is
likely that older employees will perceive that
the terms of their PCs have been violated.
The finding that perception of contract vio-
lation has a modest negative relationship to
time in the current job suggests that employ-
ees who have been in their current jobs for
shorter  periods  of  time  are  more  likely  to
perceive  violations  in  their  PCs. Although
this finding might appear to contradict the
previous result (i.e., that older workers are
more likely to perceive violations in the PCs),
bivariate correlations showed no significant
relationship between age and time in current
job.

Unlike the findings for PCV, occupational
stress symptoms appeared unrelated to age
but were related to gender and to time both
in the current job and with the company. A
possible explanation for the gender effect in
the present study could be the nature of the
PCs  that  women  often  develop  with  their
organization. Research over the past two de-
cades  has  indicated  that  women  still  have
primary responsibility for home and family
obligations, despite being employed full-time

210

Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research
Fall 2003


(Gjerdingen, McGovern, Bekker, Lundberg,
& Willemsen,  2000). Although  this  might
indicate  an  additional  source  of  stress,
women who feel that the organization sup-
ports  them  in  managing  both  their  careers
and their families might actually perceive less
occupational stress. In this organization, pa-
rental leave was generous, and flexible work
schedules  were  available  to  employees.
Women  have  been  shown  to  make  greater
use of these policies and to have greater or-
ganizational commitment and job satisfac-
tion when they perceive the organization has
family-responsive  policies  (Scandura  &
Lankau, 1997), and these policies do form a
component of the overall PC.

There is little doubt that the old employee
relationship is a thing of the past. As the cur-
rent  employment  relationship  continues  to
undergo  transformation,  understanding
PCVs will be a significant issue for research-
ers and practitioners alike. Although current
research  continues  to  show  evidence  that
PCVs negatively influence employee behav-
ior, organizations often neglect to work with
employees to establish and maintain success-
ful PCs. Consulting psychologists can play
a key role in helping their organizational cli-
ents to define and implement the terms of
employee PCs. From the employee perspec-
tive, insight into shifting workplace demo-
graphics  and  its  effect  on  employee  work
orientation allows consulting psychologists
to assess how these changes alter employee
expectations of the PC. From the company
perspective, organizational development ex-
perience allows consulting psychologists to
assess company expectations regarding em-
ployee behavior and performance. With their
knowledge of both organizational and em-
ployee issues, consulting psychologists are
in a unique position to assure that the terms
of  the  PC  provide  reciprocity  between  the
employee and the organization.

Psychologists in organizational consult-
ing  roles  may  help  guide  organizational
agents  such  as  supervisors  and  human  re-
source managers, who play a critical role in

defining  and  executing  employee  PCs
(Guzzo et al., 1994). Appropriately coached,
these individuals can also play a critical role
in minimizing contract violation. One way
to do this is to provide realistic job previews
and exercise caution when making promises
during the hiring process. Certainly, consult-
ing  psychologists  can  provide  valuable  in-
put to the selection process by assessing or-
ganizational  culture  and  screening  job
candidates  for  fit. Adding  this  perspective
to the selection process is likely to increase
the chance of hiring people who will easily
adjust to and succeed in a particular organi-
zation. This is especially important in light
of the fierce competition among companies
today for first-rate talent. A candidate with
several possible job offers is more likely to
choose  an  organization  whose  culture  fits
well with his or her personal values.

The  expanding  use  of  executive  coach-
ing provides another opportunity for consult-
ing psychologists to partner with the organi-
zation after the selection decision is made.
In the role of executive coach, the consult-
ing psychologist can assist a new executive
in the adjustment process. Through appro-
priate coaching interventions, the consulting
psychologist  can  help  the  coaching  client
increase levels of self-awareness and under-
standing of problems or issues that he or she
may face along the developmental path.

After employees are hired, the organiza-
tion must provide frequent communication
and clarification regarding obligations and
expectations.  Recognizing  that  PCs  are  a
two-way street, organizational agents should
also  provide  clear  feedback  to  employees
whom they believe are failing to uphold their
side  of  the  PC.  Morrison  and  Robinson
(1997)  suggested  that  this  feedback  will
minimize self-serving biases that may cause
employees  to  believe  that  the  organization
alone is responsible for violations. Greater
attention should be given to managing em-
ployee perceptions of PC promises over time
and particularly during periods of organiza-
tion change or upheaval. As organizational

Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research
Fall 2003

211


change agents, consulting psychologists can
help  companies  communicate,  implement,
and manage the change process. As employee
advocates, consulting psychologists can de-
sign stress management programs that pro-
mote healthy coping and alternative direc-
tion  to  those  employees  who  cannot  or  do
not want to live with the changes.

Finally, consulting psychologists are ide-
ally situated to help both employees and or-
ganizations deal with the inevitable stress that
results from the relentless changes occurring
in today’s workplace. While PC violations are
sometimes unavoidable, the destructive re-
actions  that  often  follow  are  not. The  way
that the organization responds when employ-
ees report a violation will do much to mini-
mize negative effects. Feelings of anger and
betrayal following PCV can be reduced if the
employee’s attributions for the violation are
managed (Morrison & Robinson, 1997). This
is  consistent  with  research  indicating  that
employee  adjustment  to  organizational
downsizing is more successful when the rea-
sons for a planned layoff have been commu-
nicated clearly (Brockner, DeWitt, Grover,
&  Reed,  1990;  Noer,  1993).  If  honest  and
adequate reasons are offered by the organi-
zation, employees are less likely to experi-
ence intense emotional upset or even to per-
ceive that a violation has occurred.

Conclusions

The present research examined whether
employees  whose  values  were  congruent
with company values would be less likely to
perceive PCVs and would report lower lev-
els of occupational stress. No attempt was
made to determine the content or direction
of cultural values, for example, whether the
organization in question emphasized inter-
personal  relationship  values  or  work  task
values. In his study of organizational culture
and  employee  retention,  Sheridan  (1992)
found employees stayed longer in organiza-
tions  where  interpersonal  relationship  val-
ues were fostered, regardless of P-OC scores.

This finding suggests that employee reten-
tion is best explained because an organiza-
tional culture that emphasizes interpersonal
relationship values is uniformly more attrac-
tive to employees than a culture emphasiz-
ing work task values. An area for future re-
search  would  be  to  assess  the  content  of
organizational culture values to determine if
a particular type of culture contributes more
to  reported  PCVs  and  occupational  stress
than does P-OC itself.

This research found empirical evidence
for a negative relationship between P-OC and
perceived  PCVs  and  occupational  stress.
Quantitative  measures  were  moderate  to
strong, showing that higher P-OC can lead
to  lower  levels  of  reported  violations  and
occupational stress symptoms.

P-OC  theory  holds  that  occupational
stress can result from the mismatch between
individual and organizational characteristics.
The  findings  of  this  study  support  P-OC
theory  and  emphasize  that  occupational
stress may be understood in light of the con-
gruence  between  organizational  and  indi-
vidual values. This relationship emphasizes
the importance of personnel selection when
hiring  and  transferring  employees  and  the
benefit of allowing the needs and values of
each worker to guide employment decisions.
Consulting psychologists can play an impor-
tant role in assessing organizational culture
and evaluating the fit of job applicants with
this culture. They can also help organizations
manage the effects of change on the work-
force, thereby minimizing the stress that of-
ten accompanies such changes.

Person-organization theory does not in-
clude perceptions of PCVs as one of the pos-
sible outcomes of a lack of congruence be-
tween individual and organizational values.
The  findings  of  this  study  support  such  a
premise and suggest the importance of care-
ful attention to developing and managing the
terms  of  PCs  with  employees.  Consulting
psychologists have insight into shifting work-
place  demographics  and  the  effect  on  em-
ployee work orientation. Therefore, they are

212

Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research
Fall 2003


ideally qualified to assist organizations and
employees negotiate, implement, and man-
age their PCs in light of the organizational
culture.

References

Anton, W. D., & Reed, J. R. (1994). Manual for
the Employee Assistance Program Inventory
(EAPI).  Odessa,  FL:  Psychological Assess-
ment Resources.

Argyris, C. (1960). Understanding organizational

behavior. Homewood, IL: Dorsey Press.

Bocchino, C. C. (2001). The relationship of per-
son–organization congruence to occupational
stress symptoms and perception of violations
of  the  psychological  contract.  Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Seton Hall University.
Brockner, J., DeWitt, R. L., Grover, S., & Reed,
T. (1990). When it is especially important to
explain why: Factors affecting the relationship
between managers’ explanations of a layoff and
survivors’  reactions  to  a  layoff.  Journal  of
Experimental Social Psychology, 26, 389–406.
Caplan,  R.  D.  (1987).  Person–environment  fit
theory and organizations: Commensurate di-
mensions, time perspectives and mechanisms.
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 31, 248–267.
Cartwright, S., & Cooper, C. L. (1996). Coping
in  occupational  settings.  In  M.  Zeidner  &
N.  S.  Endler  (Eds.),  Handbook  of  coping:
Theory, research, applications (pp. 202–220).
New York: Wiley.

Cascio, W. F. (1995). Whither industrial and or-
ganizational psychology in a changing world
of work? American Psychologist, 50, 928–939.
Chatman, J. A. (1991). Matching people and or-
ganizations:  Selection  and  socialization  in
public accounting firms. Administrative Sci-
ence Quarterly, 36, 459–484.

Edwards,  J.,  &  Harrison,  R. V.  (1993).  Job  de-
mand and worker health: Three-dimensional
reexamination  of  the  relationship  between
person–environment fit and strain. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 78, 628–648.

French, J. R. P., Jr., Caplan, R. D., & Harrison,
R. V. (1982). The mechanisms of job stress and
strain. New York: Wiley.

Gjerdingen,  D.,  McGovern,  P.,  Bekker,  P.,
Lundberg,  U.,  &  Willemsen,  T.  (2000).
Women’s  work  roles  and  their  impact  on
health,  well-being  and  career:  Comparisons
between the United States, Sweden, and The
Netherlands. Women & Health, 31(4), 1–20.
Guzzo, R. A., Noonan, K. A., & Elron, E. (1994).
Expatriate  managers  and  the  psychological

contract. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79,
617–626.

Harris, S. G., & Mossholder, K. W. (1996). The
affective implications of perceived congruence
with culture dimensions during organizational
transformation.  Journal  of  Management,
22(4), 527–547.

Harrison, R. V. (1985). The person–environment
fit model and the study of job stress. In T. A.
Beehr & R. S. Bhagat (Eds.), Human stress
and  cognition  in  organizations  (pp.  23–55).
New York: Wiley.

Herriot, P. (1992). Career management challenge.

London, England: Sage.

Holland,  J.  L.,  &  Gottfredson,  G.  D.  (1994).
Manual for the Career Attitudes and Strate-
gies  Inventory  (CASI): An  inventory  for  un-
derstanding adult careers. Odessa, FL: Psy-
chological Assessment Resources.

Ivancevich,  J.  M.,  &  Matteson,  M. T.  (1980).
Nurses and stress: Time to examine the poten-
tial problem. Supervisor Nurse, 11, 17–22.

Kristof, A. L. (1996). Person–organization fit: An
integrative  review  of  its  conceptualizations,
measurement,  and  implications.  Personnel
Psychology, 49, 1–49.

Levinson, H. (1962). Men, management and men-
tal health. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.

Matteson, M. T., & Ivancevich, J. M. (1982). Type
A and B behavior patterns and health symp-
toms: Examining individual and organizational
fit.  Journal  of  Occupational  Medicine,  24,
585–589.

McLean, J. P., & Kidder, D. L. (1994). “Till death
us do part. . .” Changing work relationships in
the 1990s. In C. L. Cooper & D. M. Rousseau
(Eds.),  Trends  in  organizational  behavior
(Vol.1, pp. 113–136). New York: Wiley.

Morrison, E. W., & Robinson, S. L. (1997). When
employees feel betrayed: A model of how psy-
chological contract violation develops. Acad-
emy of Management Review, 22(1), 226–256.
Noer, D. (1993). Healing the wounds: Overcom-
ing  the  trauma  of  layoffs  and  revitalizing
downsized  organizations.  San  Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.

O’Reilly,  C. A.,  III,  Chatman,  J.,  &  Caldwell,
D. F. (1991). People and organization culture:
A profile comparison approach to assessing
person organization fit. Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, 34(3), 487–516.

Osipow, S. H. (1998). Occupational Stress Inven-
tory  revised  edition  professional  manual.
Odessa,  FL:  Psychological  Assessment
Resources.

Osipow, S. H., & Spokane, A. R. (1987). Manual

Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research
Fall 2003

213


for  the  Occupational  Stress  Inventory—re-
search  version.  Odessa,  FL:  Psychological
Assessment Resources.

Posner, B. Z. (1992). Person–organization values
congruence: No support for individual differ-
ences as a moderating influence. Human Re-
lations, 45, 351–361.

Posner, B. Z., & Schmidt, W. H. (1992). Values
and  the American  manager: An  update  up-
dated. California Management Review, 34(3),
80–89.

Probst, T. M., & Brubaker, T. L. (2001). The ef-
fects of job insecurity on employee safety out-
comes:  Cross-sectional  and  longitudinal  ex-
plorations.  Journal  of  Occupational  Health
Psychology, 6, 139–159.

Robinson, S. L. (1996). Trust and breach of the
psychological contract. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 41, 574–599.

Robinson, S. L., & Bennett, R. J. (1997). Work-
place deviance: Its definition, its nature and
its causes. In R. J. Lewicki, B. H. Sheppard, &
R. J. Bies (Eds), Research on negotiation in
organizations(Vol. 6, pp. 3–27). Greenwich,
CT: JAI Press.

Robinson,  S.  L.,  Kraatz,  M.  S.,  &  Rousseau,
D. M. (1994). Changing obligations and the
psychological contract: A longitudinal study.
Academy of Management Journal, 37(1), 137–
152.

lating the psychological contract: Not the ex-
ception  but  the  norm.  Journal  of  Organiza-
tional Behavior, 15, 243–259.

Rousseau, D. M. (1990). New hires’ perceptions
of their own and their employer’s obligations:
A  study  of  psychological  contracts. Journal
of Organizational Behavior, 11, 389–400.

Scandura, T. A., & Lankau, M. J. (1997). Rela-
tionship of gender, family responsibility, and
flexible work hours to organization commit-
ment and job satisfaction. Journal of Organi-
zation Behavior, 18, 377–391.

Sheridan, J. E. (1992). Organizational culture and
employee retention. Academy of Management
Journal, 35, 1036–1056.

Sutherland, V., & Cooper, C. L. (1995). Under-

standing stress. London: Chapman & Hill.

Tabachnick, B. G., & Fidell, L. S. (1996). Using
multivariate  statistics  (3rd  ed.).  New York:
Harper Collins.

Vagg, P. R, & Spielberger, C. D. (1998). Occupa-
tional stress: Measuring job pressure and or-
ganizational support in the workplace. Jour-
nal of Occupational Health Psychology, 3(4),
294–305.

Webster, T., & Bergman, T. (1999). Occupational
stress: Counts and rates, 4(3). Retrieved April
23,  2001,  from  http//stats.bls.gov/opub/ted/
1999/Oct/wk3/art03.htm

Whyte, W. H. (1957). The organization man. Gar-

Robinson, S. L., & Rousseau, D. M. (1994). Vio-

den City, NY: Doubleday Anchor Books.

E-Mail Notification of Your Latest Issue Online!

Would you like to know when the next issue of your favorite APA journal
will be available online? This service is now available to you. Sign up at http://
watson.apa.org/notify/ and you will be notified by e-mail when issues of interest
to you become available!

214

Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research
Fall 2003

The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.
The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.

