Strategic  Management Journal,  Vol. 9, 591403 (1 988) 

/ 
7 

PLANNING AND  FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE 
AMONG SMALL FIRMS IN A  GROWTH INDUSTRY 
JEFFREY  S.  BRACKER 
Biosurge,  Inc.,  Rochester,  New  York, U.S.A. 

BARBARA W. KEATS 
College  of Business, Arizona  State  University,  Tempe, Arizona,  U.S.A. 

\ 7 \ 

JOHN  N.  PEARSON 
College  of Business, Arizona  State  University,  Tempe, Arizona,  U.S.A. 

This  paper  examines  the  relationship  between  planning  process  sophistication  and  the 
financial  performance of  a  select  group  of  small firms  in  a  growth  industry.  Multivariate 
analysis of  variance  is  used  to identify  statistically  significant  differences between firms that 
employ sophisticated plans and  those that do not.  The results support previous  research on 
strategic planning  and financial performance. 

INTRODUCTION 

Owning  and  managing  a  small  firm  is  a  risky 
undertaking. About 400,000 small businesses fail 
each year (Small Business Administration,  1986). 
A  conservative  estimate  of  the  failure  rate  of 
start-up firms in  their  first  5  years  is close to 65 
per cent (Bracker and Pearson, 1986). A number 
of  studies  have  examined  successful  and  unsuc- 
cessful  small businesses.  Results of  these studies 
suggest  that  planning  processes  that  are  well- 
developed, properly implemented, and controlled 
will  contribute  to  a  firm’s  success  (Bracker, 
1982; Robinson,  1982; Sanford, 1982; Timmons, 
Smollen  and Dingee,  1985; Vozikis and  Glueck, 
1980). 

However,  most  of  the  research  on  small-firm 
strategic  planning  focuses  on  firms  less  than  5 
years  old. According  to  Bracker and Pearson: 

The  short  operating  time  frames  for  these 
businesses  may  lead  to  inadequately developed 
strategic planning systems. This leads researchers 
to  make  prescriptions  for  all  small  firms  based 
on a sample that differs significantly from older, 
mature  small  businesses.  Furthermore,  prior 
research fails  to  address  the varying  degrees of 
sophistication  of  planning  processes  employed 
by  small  firms  (1986:  504). 

The  objective  of 
this  paper  is  to  examine 
sophistication  of  strategic  planning  process  and 
financial  performance  among  firms  more  than 
5  years  old  operating  in  a  dynamic  growth 
environment. Thus, this  study  responds  both  to 
the  need  to  examine  planning  process  sophisti- 
cation in growth industries (Bracker and Pearson, 
1986),  and  to  study  firms  that  have  survived 
their  first  5  years  of  operation.  In 
beyond 
addition, the  study  builds  upon  the  strengths of 

0143-2095/88/060591-13$06.50 
0 1988 by  John  Wiley  & Sons, Ltd. 

Received 2  March  1987 
Revised  10  December  1987 


592 

J.  S.  Bracker,  B.  W. Keats  and J .  N .  Pearson 

prior  empirical  works  in  the  strategic  planning 
area. 

OVERVIEW  OF PRIOR  RESEARCH 

Robinson and Pearce (1984) presented a compre- 
hensive  review  of 
the  literature  relating  to 
planning in small firms. They noted a number of 
papers that suggest  a  direct  positive  relationship 
between  the  presence  of  planning  and  financial 
performance.  However,  there  was  little  in  the 
way  of  empirical  evidence to support this  claim. 
Most of  this literature was prescriptive (Robinson 
and  Pearce,  1984),  and  exhibited  substantial 
variation 
the  definition  of  almost  every 
aspect  of  the  firm  and  its  planning  practices. 
Furthermore,  the  papers  reflected  a  relatively 
narrow  treatment  of  planning. 

in 

Most studies have looked at financial perform- 
ance  differences between  planners  and  nonplan- 
ners, or formal and informal planners  (Ramanu- 
jam,  Venkatraman,  and  Camillus,  1986).  This 
limited  focus  fails  to  recognize  that  planning  is 
one  aspect  of  a  possible  range  of  appropriate 
strategic  management  concepts  and  techniques 
(Rhyne,  1985).  It  seems  apparent  that  this 
literature has  failed  to  conceptualize  and  oper- 
ationalize strategic management practices in small 
firms  in  an  adequate  fashion  (Sexton  and  Van 
Auken,  1982). 

Recently,  a  few  studies  have  made  some 
progress in these areas. Ramanujam et al.  (1986) 
proposed  seven  dimensions  of  planning  systems 
that  included  aspects  of  system  design  and 
organizational  context.  These  dimensions  were: 
(1)  system  capability,  (2)  use  of  techniques,  (3) 
attention  to  internal  facets,  (4)  attention  to 
external  facets,  (5)  functional  coverage,  (6) 
resources provided for planning and (7) resistance 
to planning.  However, the focus of  these dimen- 
sions was  larger, publicly  held  firms.  In another 
attempt  to  categorize  strategic  panning,  Rhyne 
(1981,1985) developed a continuum of  corporate- 
level planning systems based on level of  openness 
and  length  of  planning  horizon.  He  identified 
five  points  on  the  continuum:  (1)  short-term 
forecasting,  (2)  budgeting,  (3) annual planning, 
(4) long-range planning and (5) strategic planning. 
According  to Rhyne  (1986)  the major  advan- 
tage of his planning continuum is that it addresses 
the  degree  to  which  firms  under  investigation 

adhere  to  planning  models  prescribed  in  the 
strategic  management  literature.  Unfortunately, 
the  majority  of 
these  normative  models  are 
developed for large publicly held firms. Robinson 
(1982) suggests that the development of  a theory 
of  strategic  planning  based  on  large  firms  may 
be  inappropriate for  small  firms. 

In  a  content analysis of  the literature relating 
to  small  firm  planning  practices,  Bracker  and 
Pearson  (1986)  identified  eight  planning  com- 
ponents: (1) objective  setting; (2) environmental 
analysis; (3) strength, weakness, opportunity  and 
threat (SWOT) analysis; (4) strategy formulation; 
(5)  financial projections;  (6)  functional budgets; 
(7)  operating  performance  measures  and  (8) 
control  and  corrective  procedures.  Based  on 
these  components  they  identified  four  distinct 
levels of planning sophistication  in order to study 
its  relationship  with  performance.  These  levels 
are (1) unstructured, (2) intuitive,  (3) structured 
operational and (4) structured  strategic planners. 
In their study of small mature firms in a relatively 
stable  environment  they  found  statistically  sig- 
nificant 
differences 
between  structured  strategic  planners  and  all 
other categories. 

performance 

financial 

Obviously,  small  firms  are not  all  alike.  They 
differ  in  management  style,  sophistication  of 
managerial  practices,  stage of  development, and 
performance.  Numerous  types  of  entrepreneurs 
and/or small-business owners have been identified 
in  the  literature  (e.g.  Carland  et  al.,  1984; 
Cooper,  1979; Hosmer,  19'77;  Liles,  1974; Smith, 
1967;  and  Vesper,  1979).  Unfortunately,  many 
researchers  and  practitioners  appear  to  assume 
that the term entrepreneur refers to one type  of 
individual.  This  may  account  for  some  of  the 
mixed  findings  in  the  literature.  As  Carland 
et  al.  point  out,  it  is  critical  to  distinguish 
entrepreneurs  from  non-entrepreneurs.  They 
make this  distinction  as follows: 

An entrepreneur is an individual who establishes 
and manages a business for the principal purposes 
of  profit  and  growth.  The  entrepreneur  is 
characterized principally by innovative behavior 
and will  employ strategic management practices 
in the business . . . The small business  owner is 
an  individual  who  establishes and  manages  a 
business for the principle purpose of  furthering 
personal goals. The business must be the primary 
source of  income and will consume the majority 
of  one's time and resources. The owner perceives 
the  business  as  an  extension  of  his  or  her 


Planning and  Financial Performance  in Small  Firms 

593 

personality, intricately bound with  family needs 
and  desires (1984: 358). 

building 

is  consistent  with 

Entrepreneurial types 
Smith’s  (1967)  continuum  of  entrepreneurial 
orientation 
the  distinction 
between  entrepreneur and small  business  owner 
described by  Carland et af. (1984), as well as the 
workmanship/empire 
distinction 
described by Casson (1982), the ‘craft, promotion, 
administration’  types  identified  by  Filley  and 
Aldag (1978) and the ‘caretakedmanager’ distinc- 
tion  discussed  by  Braden  (1977).  According 
to  Smith  (1967)  entrepreneurship  reflects  a 
constellation  of  characteristics  and  behaviors, 
and  these  vary  among all  individuals,  including 
small business owners. The end-points of Smith’s 
continuum  are  characterized  as  opportunistic 
(OE)  and  craftsman  (CE).  According  to  his 
characterization,  the  OE  reflects  an  individual 
that  reacts  to a  broad  range of  culture, exhibits 
breadth  in  education  and  training,  a  high  level 
of  social  awareness  and  involvement,  flexibility, 
confidence  and  an  awareness  and  orientation 
toward the future. The craftsman characterization 
reflects the opposite on each dimension. Research 
reported by  Hornaday and  Bunker  (1970),  Still 
(1974),  Bracker  (1982)  and  Smith  and  Miner 
(1983)  supports the  opportunistic/craftsman  dis- 
tinction. 

In  general,  the  literature  discussed  above 
suggests  a  need  to  consider  the  unique  aspects 
of, and influences of, owner characteristics upon 
the  relationship  between planning  sophistication 
and performance in the small firm. In the pursuit 
of  these needs  the present study includes both a 
consideration  of  entrepreneurial orientation and 
a multivariate approach to the concept of  planning 
in  the study  of  small firm  performance. 

Research  hypothesis 

This  study  examines  planning  process  sophisti- 
cation  and financial performance in  a  sample  of 
small firms. Prior research has indicated that level 
of  planning sophistication is a key determinant of 
financial  performance  (Bracker  and  Pearson, 
1986;  Robinson,  1982;  Resser,  1981).  To  date 
the  majority  of  research  has  dealt  with  new 
ventures or firms in the maturity stage of the life 

cycle.  Little  research  has  been  done  on  firms 
that  have  survived  at  least  5  years  and  whose 
industry  is  characterized  by  dynamic growth. 

In the context of  expanding markets and rapid 
industry  growth,  many  types  of  businesses  may 
be  successful.  In  such  cases,  managers  may  have 
little  incentive  to  look  beyond  the  day-to-day 
operational  aspects  of  the  business.  However, 
marketiindustry growth must  inevitably stabilize. 
Successful survival may  depend on the extent  to 
which the manager has anticipated these changes, 
recognized their  present  and future implications, 
and  developed  strategic  as  well  as  operational 
skills in order to cope with  them. 

The bases for this recognition are both cognitive 
and  motivational.  Prior  research  has  suggested 
that firms with  a  longer history  of  planning out- 
perform  those  with  shorter  planning  histories 
(Bracker  and  Pearson,  1986;  Orpen,  1985  and 
Rue, 1973). Furthermore, the number of planning 
cycles  required  to  establish  this  advantage  may 
be  greater  in  dynamic  industries  (Bracker  and 
Pearson, 1986). Such findings are consistent with 
the  work  of  Keats  and  Montanari,  1986). They 
suggest  that  the  ability  to  comprehend  and 
make  appropriate  use  of  sophisticated  strategic 
management  practices  is  a  function  of  cognitive 
strategic  sophistication  development,  which  in 
turn is partly  a  function of  experience. 

than 

The motivational aspects are related to entrepre- 
neurial types.  Individuals  who may be character- 
ized as opportunistic types are much  more  likely 
to believe  that  the  fate of  the business  is within 
their  control 
those  exhibiting  a  more 
craftsman-like orientation  (Smith, 1967). Integral 
to  this  belief  is  the  assumption  that  critical 
elements  of  the  environment  may  be  identified 
and  understood,  and  their  behavior  predicted 
and  controlled.  Integrating  these  ideas,  then, 
suggests that the higher the level of ‘entrepreneur- 
ial  intensity’  (more opportunistic)  and  cognitive 
strategic sophistication,  the  more the  individual 
is likely to understand the value  of, and want  to 
implement,  sophisticated  strategic  management 
practices. 

This suggestion  is  consistent  with  past  studies 
which  have  demonstrated  that  small  business 
owners  characterized  as  opportunistic  entrepre- 
neurs have financially outperformed those charac- 
terized  as  craftsman  entrepreneurs  in  similar 
settings  (Bracker,  1982; Hornaday  and  Bunker, 
1970; Smith  and  Miner,  1983; and  Still,  1974). 


594 

J.  S .   Bracker,  B.  W. Keats  and J.  N .  Pearson 

To  date  none  of  these  studies  has  dealt  with 
either homogenous  industries  and/or firms in the 
growth  stage  of  the life  cycle.  It  is possible  that 
at  some  point  in  the  life  cycle,  or  with  the 
occurrence  of  a  major  business  cycle  event, 
distinct financial differences between Smith’s two 
entrepreneur types will emerge. That is, craftsman 
types may  fall behind. 

Finally,  an  extensive  body  of  knowledge 
indicates  that  increases  in  firm  size  lead  to 
greater  efficiency  and  profitability 
(Scherer, 
1980). Therefore, this issue should be considered 
when  examining  manufacturing  firms.  That  is, 
larger  companies  may  have  greater  production 
process  efficiencies  due  to  economies  of  scale 
and  experience,  which  subsequently  leads  to 
increased  financial  performance. Based  on these 
issues four research  hypotheses  were considered 
central to this  study. 

H I :   Level  of  planning  sophistication  will  be 

positively  related  to performance. 

H2:  Entrepreneur type (opportunistic or crafts- 

man) will  affect firm performance. 

H3:  Performance differences  will  be  observed 
between large firms (more than $3 million 
gross revenue) and small firms. 

H4:  Performance  differences  will  be  observed 
between firms with long planning histories 
(more than 5  years) and firms  with  short 
planning  histories. 

METHODS 

The present study overcomes many prior studies’ 
methodological  and  practical  problems  by  using 
robust  statistical  procedures  (MANOVA), indus- 
try-specific  financial  performance  data  and  a  5 
year  time  frame,  and  by  limiting  the  domain 
of 
the  environment  in  order  to  control  for 
confounding  influences  of  industry  type,  firm 
size,  and  ownership  characteristics. 

Pursuant  to  Cooper’s  (1979)  and  Susbauer’s 
(1979)  request  for  research  on  small  firms 
with  significant  managerial  sophistication,  the 
membership of  the American  Electronics Associ- 
ation (AEA) was chosen an appropriate industry 
subgroup  for  this  study.  The  AEA  provides 
services  in  both  technical  and  non-technical 
matter  to  its  membership.  It  attracts  members 
of  the  industry  who  are  oriented  toward  the 

development  and  planned  growth  of  their  enter- 
prises. 

The  electronics  industry  consists  of  a  great 
many  small  firms.  Firms  are  considered  in  the 
growth stage of  the life cycle if demand is growing 
at a  rate in  real  terms  greater than  10 per cent 
per  year, products  and  services are diverse,  and 
the technology  and competetive  structure of  the 
industry  is  dynamic  (Zeithaml and  Fry,  1984). 

Sample 
The sample  consisted  of  217 owner/managers  of 
electronic  businesses  who  are  members  of  the 
AEA. Names and addresses were  obtained from 
the  1984  AEA  membership  guide.  Firms  were 
included  in  the  sample  if  they  were  privately 
held, had been in business at least  5 years, were 
ownedmanaged  and  had  no  more  than  100 
employees. 

Survey  instrument and procedure 
Respondents received  the  written  questionnaire 
(a copy of  which  may  be obtained from the first 
author) at their place  of  business,  and  reported 
industry-specific  financial  business  performance 
data  over a  5-year period  (1979-84).  According 
to Bettis  (1981),  Brawley  (1982),  and  Galbraith 
and  Nathanson  (1978),  5  years  is  an  adequate 
period  to  evaluate  change  and  performance  in 
small  firms. 

The  questionnaire  was-  adapted  from  one 
employed by Bracker (1982). Members of  a panel 
consisting  of  AEA  members,  experts  in  the 
electronics industry  and  researchers,  were  inter- 
viewed  to  assist  in  adapting  the  questionnaire. 
Some items were rewritten and others eliminated 
based on these interviews. In addition, structured 
and  unstructured 
interviews  of  a  subset  of 
AEA members were  conducted  to ascertain  the 
applicability of  the questionnaire, and a pilot test 
was  undertaken  before  the final  instrument  was 
developed. 

Dillman’s  (1978)  total  design  method  (TDM) 
was  utilized  in  developing  the  format  of  the 
questionnaire  and  for  the  conduct  of  the  mail 
survey. Postcards were sent to each CEO 1 week 
before  the  initial  mailing,  indicating  that  an 
important survey was being  sent to them. All  of 
the mailings were sent certified mail in an attempt 
to  boost  response  rate  and  make  sure  the 


Planning and  Financial  Performance  in Small  Firms 

595 

proper  individual received  the survey. Following 
Dilman’s  method, the process consisted  of  three 
mailings at 3-week intervals and follow-up phone 
calls after the third mailing. 

Ninety-seven  firms  responded  to the question- 
naire,  for  a  total  response  rate  of  45  per  cent. 
Of  these  97  responses,  73  (34  per  cent)  were 
usable.  According  to  Norton  (1986)  a  response 
rate  of  2&25  per  cent  is  an  acceptable  rate  of 
return  for  this  industry  subgroup. 

The  average  age  of  the  firms  was  9.2  years, 
with  a  range  of  6 1 7  years.  Revenues  ranged 
from  less  than  $500,000  to  over  $12  million 
per  year.  The  average  revenue  per  year  was 
$4,250,000, while  the  average  net  income  before 
taxes  was  $300,000.  The  number  of  employees 
ranged  from  4  to  100,  with  an  average  of  71. 
These ranges suggest that respondents  constitute 
a  representative  sample. 

MEASURES  AND  SCORING 
Dependent  variables 
The  accurate  description  of  performance 
is 
essential to measuring  success within  and  across 
organizations.  Few  planning  researchers  have 
used  industry-specific financial business perform- 
ance  data  as  dependent  variables  (Bracker and 
Pearson, 1986; Rue, 1973 and Wood and LaForge, 
1979).  Furthermore, inappropriate performance 
measures  within  an  industry  impede the  assess- 
ment  of  firm  success  (Bracker  and  Pearson, 
1986).  It  appears that  the  absence  of  industry- 
specific financial business  performance  data may 
have  affected the outcome of  previous  research. 
Typically,  the  consideration  of  performance  in 
the small firm setting has been limited to financial 
performance  alone.  However,  there  is  little 
consistency to the definition of  even the financial 
aspects of  performance. According  to  Dess  and 
Robinson  (1984),  the  consideration  of  organi- 
zational  performance  should  be  based  on  the 
identification  of  accurate available  measures that 
operationalize  performance. The  comparison  of 
inter-industry performance  is confounded by the 
utilization  of  generic  performance  measures.  In 
an  attempt  to  accurately  describe  performance, 
dependent  variables  based  on  interviews  with 
experts in the electronics industry, entrepreneurs 
who  own  and  manage  electronic  firms,  and 
published  industry  data sources. 

The  industry-specific  financial  performance 
data  that  served  as  dependent  variables  were: 
(1) growth  in  revenue;  (2)  net  income  growth; 
(3) present value  (including  book  value,  patents 
and  goodwill)  growth  of  the  firm;  and  (4)  CEO 
cash  compensation  growth  over  the  5  year  time 
frame. Growth in  revenue was the  average sales 
growth  for  the  5-year  time  frame.  Net  income 
growth was  the average net income  before taxes 
for  the 5-year time  frame. Present  value  growth 
of  the  firm  was  the  average  book  value  of  the 
firm,  patents  and  goodwill  for  the  5  year  time 
frame.  CEO  compensation  growth  was 
the 
average  growth  in  CEO cash  compensation  for 
the  5-year  time  frame. 

In  order  to  determine  the  growth  rates  over 
the  5-year  time  frame  we  took  the  initial  year 
value (1979) and subtracted it from the next year 
value  (1980)  and  divided  it  by  the  initial  year 
value  (1979)  to  obtain  the  growth  rate  for  that 
year. This was  done for  each  year.  The sums of 
each year  were added together  and  divided by  5 
and multiplied by 100 to determine the percentage 
growth  rate  in  performance during  the  1979-84 
time  frame.  This  approach  to  measurement  of 
the dependent variables  was used  because  it was 
more likely to reveal true discontinuities in year- 
to-year  firm  performance.  An  approach  such  as 
compound  growth  rates  would  obscure  such 
information.  The  dependent  variables  should 
provide  an  accurate  assessment  of  the  perform- 
ance of  AEA  members. 

Independent  variables 
A multiple  cut-off  classification system was used 
to  determine  planning  sophistication  (Bracker 
and Pearson, 1986; Rue, 1973). Sophistication of 
planning was measured  by  classification into one 
of  three  categories  identified  by  Bracker  and 
Pearson  (1986):  structured  strategic  planners, 
structured operational planners, and unstructured 
planners  (Table  1). Discussions  with  experts  in 
the industry led us to believe  that  the remaining 
category 
(intuitive  planning)  need  not  be 
included.  These  experts  felt  that  the  intuitive 
planning orientation was not characteristic of  the 
technically  oriented  individuals  who  might  own 
and manage  electronic firms.  Size of  firm  (large 
or  small)  was  based  on  a  discussion  with  an 
industry expert  (Norton, 1986). Finally, planning 
histories (long or short) were a function  of  prior 


596 

J.  S.  Bracker,  B.  W .  Keats  and J .  N .  Pearson 

Table  1.  Strategic planning  levels 

Structured  Strategic  Planning.  Formalized,  written  long-range plans  covering  the  process  of  determining 

major outside  interests  focused  on the organization;  expectations  of  dominant inside  interests;  information 
about past.  current,  and  future performance; environmental  analysis; and  determination of  strengths  and 
weaknesses of  the firm  and  feedback. Typically 3-15  years  in  nature. 

~~ 

~ 

Structured  operational planning. Written short-range  operation budgets  and plans  of  action  for current  fiscal 
period.  The  typical  plan  of  action  would  include  basic  controls such  as production  quotas, cost  constraints, 
and personnel  requirements, 

Unstructured planning. No measurable structured planning in  the  firm. 

Source:  Bracker  and  Pearson  1986. 

research  by  Bracker  and  Pearson  (1986). 

Entrepreneur orientation was determined using 
scale 
Smith’s  (1967)  craftsman/opportunistic 
(scoring  guides  for  both 
the  planning  and 
entrepreneur  scale  may  be  obtained  from  the 
first  author).  The  accuracy  and  stability  of  the 
planning  classification procedure  and  entrepre- 
neurial type was verified by  Bracker and Pearson 
(1986).  Bahaee  (1987) computed  the  coefficient 
alpha on  the  Smith scale to  be  0.72.  Studies by 
Bahaee  (1987),  Bracker  (1982),  Hornaday  and 
Bunker (1970), Smith and Miner (1983), and Still 
(1974)  have  all  provided  support  for  the  value 
of  the craftsman  and opportunistic orientation. 

Data  analysis 
A  one-way  multivariate  analysis  of  variance, 
followed by  Scheffe’s multiple  comparison  tech- 
nique, was undertaken  to analyze Hypotheses 1. 
Univariate  tests  were  employed  on  each  depen- 
dent  variable.  Hypotheses  2,  3,  and  4  were 
analyzed  using  multivariate  T-test  (Hotelling’s 

Table 2.  Planning sophistication,  1979-84  (ANOVA) 

T), followed by univariate ANOVA. Multivariate 
analysis of  variance  (MANOVA)  is  a  statistical 
technique that can be used to study the effect of 
independent variables measured  on two or more 
dependent variables (in this case four variables). 
Multivariate analysis of variance is used when the 
independent variables are non-metric, nominal, or 
ordinal in  nature. 

According  to  Hair  et  al.  (1979),  MANOVA 
allows  simultaneous 
testing  of  all  variables 
(dependent  and  independent)  and considers the 
various inter-relationships among them. Multivar- 
iate  analysis  of  variance  provides  a  means  for 
rejecting the overall null hypothesis. It does not, 
however, specify where significant differences lie. 
Since t-tests alone are not  appropriate  in  testing 
for  differences when  a  significant F  is obtained, 
multiple-comparison tests  were  utilized. 

Winer  (1971)  contrasted  various  multiple- 
comparison  tests  of  significance between  paired 
means  as  to  power.  Winer  concluded  that  the 
Scheffe test is the most conservative. Therefore, 
the  use  of  the  Scheffe  test  in  the  multivariate 

Independent  variables 

Dependent  variables 

Growth in  revenue 
Net  income  growth 
Present  value growth 

of  the  firm 

CEO cash compensation 

growth 

Structured 
strategic 
planning 

(11) 

Structured 
operational 
planning 

(27) 

78.0* 
42.6 

69.5* 

78.7* 

29.0 
27.2 

41.5 

33.6 

Unstructured 

planning 

(35) 

22.1 
19.04 

11.6 

16.3 

F 

14.58 
2.73 

7.12 

9.76 

Sig.  of  F 

0.01 
NSD 

0.01 

0.01 

*  Significantly  outperforms  the  other  two  planning orientations. 


Planning and  Financial  Performance  in Small  Firms 

597 

mode  will  ensure  the  robustness  of 
the  data 
analysis.  According  to  Morrison  (1976),  in  a 
multivariate model one wants to determine which 
responses  or  response  treatment  combinations 
lead  to the rejection  of  the null  hypothesis. 

RESULTS 

The  analysis  revealed  a  significant  relationship 
between  planning  orientation  and  financial  per- 
formance  for  the  first  hypothesis  ( F  [8, 1341  = 
5.99, p  <0.0001).  The corresponding multivariate 
eta-squared  indicated  that  planning  orientation 
accounted  for  46  per  cent  of 
the  variance 
in  financial  performance  (Green,  1978).  The 
significant  multivariate  effect  was  interpreted 
through  the use  of  univariate  ANOVAs  (Table 
2)  instead  of  discriminate  analysis  because  this 
research  concerned  hypothesis  testing  (Spector, 
1977). The univariate tests revealed three sources 
(at the p  <0.0001  level) of  this overall significant 
difference:  growth  in  revenue,  present  value 
growth of  the firm, and CEO cash compensation 
growth.  Scheffe’s multiple-comparison  technique 
revealed that firms employing structured strategic 
plans were  statistically more effective than those 
employing  any  other  type  of  planning.  No 
significant  differences  were  found  among  the 
other planning  orientations. 

Statistical  analysis  of  Hypothesis  2  failed  to 
produce  evidence that type  of  entrepreneur was 
a determinant of successful financial performance. 
Univariate tests also failed to produce  significant 
differences  (Table  3). However,  univariate  com- 
Table 3.  Entrepreneur Type 
MANOVA  Wilks’  L  = 0.97;  F(4.68)  = 0.37 NSD 
ANOVA 

revealed 

parisons between entrepreneur type and planning 
orientation 
significant  differences. 
Opportunistic entrepreneurs who employed struc- 
tured  strategic  planning  procedures  significantly 
outperformed OE’s firms who used other planning 
orientations  on  each  of 
the  four  dependent 
variables  (Table  4).  Planning  orientations  of 
craftsman  entrepreneurs  failed  to  produce  any 
significant performance  differences  (Table  5). 

Multivariate tests with regard to firm size failed 
to  produce  any  significant  findings  (Table  6). 
However,  univariate  tests  revealed  that  statisti- 
cally significant differences existed between large 
and small firms. Large firms financially outperfom- 
ed small firms with  regard  to net  income growth 
and CEO cash  compensation  growth  (Table 6). 
Statistical  analysis  of  Hypothesis  4  (Table  7) 
failed to reveal that prior planning history resulted 
in significant performance differences. However, 
univariate  tests  on  firms  with  long  planning 
histories revealed that firms employing structured 
strategic  plans  outperformed 
the  other  two 
planning  orientations  at  the p  <0.01  level  with 
regard to growth in revenue, present value growth 
of  the firm and CEO cash  compensating  growth 
(Table  8).  No  significant  financial  performance 
differences  were  identified  in  firms  with  short 
planning  histories  (Table  9). 

DISCUSSION 

Firms  employing  structured  strategic  planning 
procedures  financially  outperformed  all  other 
planning  categorizations  with  regard  to  overall 

Independent variables 

Dependent variables 

Opportunistic 
entrepreneurs (48) 

Craftsman 

entrepreneurs (25) 

Growth  in  revenue 
Net  income  growth 
Present value growth 

of  the  firm 

CEO cash  compensation 

growth 

35.1 
24.6 

29.9 

34.7 

29.0 
27.7 

34.1 

27.2 

F 

0.49 
0.17 

0.11 

0.45 

Sig. of  F 

NSD 
NSD 

NSD 

NSD 


598 

J.  S.  Bracker,  B. W. Keats  and  J.  N .  Pearson 

Table  4.  Entrepreneur  type  and  planning  orientation, opportunistic  entrepreneurs  (48) 

Independent  variables 

Dependent  variables 

Growth  in  revenue 
Net  income  growth 
Present  value  and 

growth  of  the  firm 

CEO cash compensation 

growth 

Structured 
strategic 
planning 

(10) 

83.8" 
42.9* 

74.4* 

84.2* 

Structured 
operational 

planning 

(15) 

Unstructured 

planning 

(23) 

22.9 
27.1 

27.3 

40.2 

22.01 
14.9 

12.2 

9.6 

F 

16.2 
3.13 

9.07 

17.5 

Sig.  of  F 

0.01 
0.05 

0.01 

0.01 

*  Significantly outperforms the  other  two  planning  orientations 

Table 5.  Entrepreneur type and planning  orientation, craftsman  entrepreneurs (25) 

Independent  variables 

Dependent  variables 

Growth in  revenue 
Net  income  growth 
Present  value  growth 

of  the  firm 

CEO cash  compensation 

growth 

Structured 
strategic 

planning  (1) 

Structured 
operational 
planning 

(12) 

20.0 
40.0 

20.0 

25.0 

36.5 
27.4 

59.23 

25.0 

Unstructured 

planning 

(12) 

22.2 
26.9 

10.2 

29.1 

Table 6. Firm size 
MANOVA 

Wilks'  L  = 0.89;  F  (4.68)  = 2.07  NSD 

ANOVA 

Dependent  variables 

Large  (27) 

Small  (46) 

Independent  variables 

Growth in  revenue 
Net  income  growth 
Present  value 

growth 
of  the  firm 

CEO cash compensation 

growth 

42.8 
34.7* 

39.37 

48.0* 

27.4 
20.3 

27.9 

21.7 

*  Significantly outperforms the  other two  planning  orientations. 

F 

0.79 
0.09 

1.94 

0.02 

Sig.  of  F 

NSD 
NSD 

NSD 

NSD 

F 

3.29 
3.97 

1.05 

4.62 

Sig.  of  F 

NSD 
0.05 

NSD 

0.05 


Planning  and  Financial  Performance  in Small  Firms 

599 

Table  7.  Prior  planning  history 

MANOVA 

Wilks’ L  = 0.98; F(4.68)  = 0.19 NSD 

ANOVA 

Dependent  variables 

Long (52) 

Short (21) 

Independent Variables 

Growth  in  revenue 
Net  income  growth 
Present  value  growth 

of  the  firm 

CEO cash  compensation 

growth 

31.9 
25.4 

29.1 

29.7 

35.9 
26.1 

37.0 

38.1 

Table  8.  Prior  planning  history  and  planning  orientation  (Long 52) 

Independent  variables 

Structured 
strategic 
planning 

(9) 

Structured 
operational 
p I a n n i n g 

(16) 

Dependent  variables 

Unstructured 

planning 

(27) 

Growth in  revenue 
Net  income  growth 
Present  value  and 

growth 
of  the  firm 

growth 

CEO cash compensation 

82.4* 
39.8 

73.8* 

86.03* 

22.34 
30.72 

37.70 

17.90 

20.8 
17.5 

9.0 

17.9 

F 

0.18 
0.01 

0.33 

0.49 

Sig.  of  F 

NSD 
NSD 

NSD 

NSD 

F 

17.10 
2.40 

6.73 

10.26 

Sig.  of  F 

0.01 
NSD 

0.01 

0.01 

*  Significantly outperforms the other  two  planning  orientations 

financial  performance.  These  results  are  consis- 
tent  with  an  earlier  study  conducted  in  a  mature 
stable  industry  by  Bracker  and  Pearson  (1986). 
The results further suggest  that one of  the most 
important  aspects  of  planning  may  be 
the 
level  of  planning  sophistication.  This  further 
substantiates  Orpen’s  (1985)  finding  that  the 
quality  of  planning,  rather  than  the  time  spent 
on  planning,  is  the  most  important determinant 
of  financial  performance. 

Bracker and Pearson  (1986) hypothesized that 
in  a  dynamic  environment  and/or  earlier  stages 
of  the  product  life  cycle,  one  would  expect 
differentiation  in  performance  at  all  levels,  with 
structured  strategic  planners  outperforming  all 
others.  This  was  not  the  case  in  the  current 

and 

efficiency 

(integration) 

study. This may  in  part  be explained by  the fact 
that  these  firms  are  concerned  both  with  issues 
of 
adaptation 
(responding  to  environmental  change).  Owners 
of  firms who are structured strategic planners are 
devoting  attention  both  to  growth  and  cost 
control. Since planning requires a comprehensive 
commitment on the part of owners, future studies 
should  examine  how  an  owner  allocates  hidher 
time  between  adaptation and  integration  issues. 
It seems possible that structured strategic planners 
have  not  only  developed  effective  planning 
procedures  but  have  been  able  successfully  to 
implement  and  control  plans. 

Another possible  explanation  of  these  results, 
the use  of  outsiders in  the  planning process,  has 


600 

J.  S.  Bracker,  B.  W. Keats  and  J.  N .  Pearson 

Table 9.  Prior  planning  history  and  planning  orientation  (Short  21) 

Independent  variables 

Dependent  variables 

Structured 
strategic 
planning 

( 2 )  

Structured 
operational 
planning 

(11) 

Unstructured 

planning 

(8) 

Growth  in  revenue 
Net  income  growth 
Present  value 

growth 
of  the  firm 

growth 

CEO cash compensation 

58.3 
55.0 

50.0 

46.2 

38.7 
22.3 

47.0 

56.5 

26.4 
24.1 

20.0 

10.7 

F 

0.79 
0.09 

1.94 

0.02 

Sig.  of  F 

NSD 
NSD 

NSD 

NSD 

been  ruled  out. A prior study by  Bracker (1986) 
revealed  that  outsiders  did  not  play  a  significant 
role  in  these  firms’  performance  gains.  The 
findings  of  this  study  tend  to  substantiate  the 
importance  of  the individual  entrepreneur’s role 
in  the  process  of  development, implementation, 
and  control of  the  business  plan.  Giice  again  it 
seems  evident  that  the process,  not  the  plan,  is 
a  key  component of  performance. 

Entrepreneurial orientation coupled with  level 
of  planning  sophistication  resulted  in  significant 
performances  differences.  As  hypothesized  by 
type  of 
Smith  (1967)  and  Bracker  (1982), 
entrepreneur (opportunistic)  and planning orien- 
tation  (structured  strategic) accounted for signifi- 
cantly better performance results.  An interesting 
result  revealed  in  this  study was  the fact that  10 
of 
the  48  opportunistic  entrepreneurs  were 
structured strategic planners (21 per cent), while 
only one of  the 25 craftsman entrepreneurs (CE) 
was  a  structured strategic  planner  (4  per  cent). 
These  results  suggest  a  strong  relationship 
between entrepreneur type and planning sophisti- 
cation,  and  provides  support  for  the  suggestion 
developed  earlier  that  opportunistic  types  are 
more  likely  to  be  motivated  to  acquire  and 
implement  sophisticated  strategic  management 
practices.  Additional  support  is  provided  by  a 
previous study in which 38 out of  188 opportunistic 
entrepreneurs  (20  per  cent)  in  a  mature  stable 
industry  were 
strategic  planners 
(Bracker  and  Pearson,  1986).  These  findings 
suggest  that  the  structured  strategic  planner 
may  be  the  result  of 
the  truly  opportunistic 
entrepreneur. Further study  is  needed to deter- 
mine  why  some  entrepreneurs  are  predisposed 

structured 

to sophisticated planning systems and others are 
not. 

Large  firms  had  significantly  greater  returns 
with  regard  to net income growth and CEO cash 
compensation  growth over the 5-year time frame 
than small firms. It appears that large firms were 
able to control expenses at a significantly greater 
rate than small firms. In  addition,  the significant 
difference  in  CEO cash  compensation  may  be  a 
function  of  increased  cash  flows  that  resulted 
from  greater  internal  efficiency.  It  thus appears 
that economies of  scale  and  experience of  larger 
firms play  a  role  in  contributing  to organization 
performance. This  result  takes  on even  greater 
significance  when  one  considers  that  the  differ- 
ence in  size between  large and small firms is not 
that  great.  Therefore,  as  these  firms  grow  and 
the  absolute  differences  in  size  become  much 
larger,  even  greater  differences  in  performance 
may  result. 

Univariate  tests  on  large  firms  revealed  that 
firms  employing  structured  strategic  planning 
procedures significantly outperformed other large 
firms  with  regard  to  net  income  and  CEO cash 
compensation growth. It is suggested that owners 
who are sophisticated in their planning procedures 
are  able  successfully  to control  cost  as  well  as 
the problems associated with  growth.  It  may be 
hypothesized  that  large  firms  that  are  sophisti- 
cated in their planning procedures  are financially 
the  results  of  high-tech 
able  and  aware  of 
manufacturing  procedures.  Since this  is a  highly 
complex  industry  future  studies should  incorpo- 
rate the impact of  various operations management 
activities  and  firm  performance. 

Firms  with  long  planning  histories  failed  to 


Planning  and  Financial  Performance  in Small  Firms 

601 

outperform  firms with  short  planning  histories. 
This finding is not consistent with prior research. 
However,  additional  tests  revealed  that  firms 
with long planning histories, employing structured 
strategic  plans,  outperformed  firms  with  long 
planning  histories  employing  other  planning 
procedures.  The  fact  that  the  majority  of  these 
firms are relatively  young, and that two or three 
planning  iterations  are  necessary  in  most  cases 
to  lead  to  performance  gains,  may  partially 
explain this finding (Bracker and Pearson, 1986). 
The  majority  of  firms  in  this  study  have  been 
planning  for  over  5  years,  but  only  structured 
strategic planners have benefitted financially from 
strategic planning. 

IMPLICATIONS  FOR  ENTREPRENEURS 

The technology that drives the electronics industry 
has  changed  dramatically  in  recent  years.  The 
industry  has  grown  significantly  in  the  past 
decade.  One very  interesting  finding in  all these 
firms, and in this industry, is the prior experience 
and  educational  background  of  these  entrepre- 
neurs.  Results  of  a  study  by  Smith  and  Miner 
(1985),  as  well  as  the  present  study,  revealed 
that  almost  all  the  founders  of 
these  firms 
left  technical  positions  in  large  electronic  or 
technology  firms to start their own  business. 

these 

The  majority  of 

individuals  have 
advanced  technical  degrees.  This  narrow  edu- 
cational  and  work  focus  may  account  for  the 
number of craftsman entrepreneurs in the sample. 
It  is  possible 
that  over  time  firms  run  by 
these  CEs will  experience  financial performance 
difficulties  as  they  tend  to  focus  their  energies 
on running the day-to-day affairs of their business. 
Although these day-to-day activities are important 
the  CE entrepreneurs will  also  need to consider 
the  importance  of  adapting  their  firms  to  the 
environment.  Since  the  industry  as  well  as  the 
firms  under  study  were  experiencing  a  rapid 
growth  rate  during  the  period  of  investigation, 
firm owners were not  confronted  with  the harsh 
realities of an economic downturn. More recently, 
this  industry  has  experienced  a  slowdown,  and 
one would  expect  that,  as the industry  matures, 
many  of  the  firms  run  by  CEs  will  experience 
significant  management  difficulties. 

It  may  be fair  to say  that  entrepreneurs need 
a  major  financial  confrontation  to  realize  the 

importance  of  strategic planning.  Unfortunately, 
the  number  of  years  it  takes  to  integrate  this 
planning  process  into  the  business  may  spell 
doom  for  the  average  firm.  According  to  Keats 
and  Montanari  (1986)  the  ability 
to  utilize 
and  integrate  strategic  planning  into  normal 
operations is a function of cognitive development. 
This process would take place in a series of stages 
dependent  upon  the  appropriate  environmental 
challenge,  and  the  entrepreneur’s  response  to 
that challenge.  In  the growth  stage of  the firm’s 
life  cycle,  one  of  the  most  difficult  tasks  the 
entrepreneur  has  to  encounter  is  probably  the 
initial  planning  for  the  firm.  Often  a  viable 
patent  or  prior  industry  experience  enables the 
entrepreneur  to  secure  venture  money  quickly 
and  achieve  initial  economic  success.  However, 
the  first  time  the  entrepreneur  encounters  an 
economic  downturn  or  major  competitive  chal- 
lenge may spell finanical disaster. The opportun- 
istic entrepreneur who incorporates sophisticated 
strategic  management  procedures  as  early  as 
possible  in  a  firm’s  history  may  be  in  the  best 
position  to  survive  the  inevitable  competitive 
challenge. 

Do  associations  such  as  AEA  attract  entre- 
preneurs who  display  an  external  growth  orien- 
tation, or does being a member of  the association 
foster  this outlook? Obviously,  associations such 
as AEA play a vital role in the development and 
growth  of  firms. From a  pragmatic  standpoint  it 
makes  good  sense  for  a  firm  to  belong  to  such 
an  association.  The  AEA  may  indeed  provide 
some of  the operational and strategic information 
that  assists  a  firm 
in  gaining  management 
sophistication. Thus, organizations like the AEA 
may create a moderating  effect on performance. 
But  industry  associations  seem  to  provide  the 
to  dynamic  growth-oriented 
greatest  benefit 
organizations. 

It  appears  from  this  study  that  planning  for 
the  sake of  planning  does not  lead  to increased 
financial performance.  What  does  seem  important 
is  the  type  of  planning  process  employed,  and 
how  long  the  firm  has  been  planning.  The 
structured  strategic  planning  categorization, 
coupled with  a  long planning  history,  outperform 
ed all other planning categorizations with  regard 
to  financial  performance.  This  finding  is  in 
general  agreement with  both  Quinn  (1980)  and 
his  perception  of  logical  incrementalism,  and 
Keats and  Montanari (1986) and  their  theory  of 


602 

J.  S .   Bracker,  B.  W. Keats and  J.  N .  Pearson 

cognitive  sophistication. 

The results of  this study suggest that opportun- 
istic entrepreneurs who own larger firms employ- 
ing  structure  strategic  planning  processes  will 
financially  outperform other firms in  this  growth 
industry. However, this does not suggest that the 
remaining  firms  are  necessarily  doomed.  The 
very fact that they have survived on average over 
9 years  is  no small accomplishment  in  itself. 

In general, the results of  this  study reflect  the 
value of  the adage ‘know thyself‘. Owners (actual 
or potential) of  small businesses  are encouraged 
to examine their motives for starting the business, 
and  the  belief  system  and/or  assumption  base 
within  which  they  function.  These  tasks  are  by 
no  means easy, and  many  such  individuals  may 
feel  they  constitute  a  waste  of  time.  However, 
the  present  results  provide  evidence  to  the 
contrary. 

Conclusions 

The  entrepreneurial  spirit  housed  in  America’s 
small  firms  is  perhaps  one  of 
the  greatest 
advantages  the  United  States has  in  the  highly 
competitive  world  marketplace.  Unfortunately, 
the increasing complexity of today’s environment 
may force  entrepreneurs either to replace  them- 
selves with  professional  managers  or to become 
dependent on the expertise of  outside consultants 
to  implement  sophisticated  management  prac- 
tices.  Indeed,  the entrepreneurial orientation of 
the firm may be lost if  the entrepreneur is forced 
to  hire  the  professional  manager  or consultant. 
The resulting  situation may cause stress between 
the entrepreneur and the manager, thus resulting 
in  the  loss  of  the  uniqueness  and  creativeness 
that is  characteristic  of  entrepreneurial firms. 

The  results  indicate  that  opportunistic  entre- 
preneurs who employ structured strategic planning 
processes  may  be  better  prepared  to  develop  a 
framework  for  anticipating  and  coping  with 
change. The study of, and understanding, entrepre- 
neurial  firms  is  vital  to  the  continued  economic 
growth  and  vitality  of  the  American  economy. 
Entrepreneurial  firms,  through  the  vision  and 
leadership  of 
their  owners,  may  become  the 
corporate  giants  of  the  1990s,  and  contribute 
significantly  to  the  continued  growth  of  the 
American  economy  and  its  ability  to  compete 
effectively  on  a  worldwide  basis. 

REFERENCES 

Bahaee,  M.  S.  ‘An  empirical  investigation  of  the 
congruency  of  entrepreneurial and  strategic orien- 
tation,  decision-making  process,  and  performance 
in  small  firms.’ Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation, 
Arizona  State University,  1987. 

Bettis,  R.  A.  ‘Risks  and  industry  effects  in  large 
diversified firms’, Proceedings  of  the 41st  Academy 
of Management National Meeting. San Diego, 1981, 
pp.  17-20. 

Bracker,  J.  S.  ‘Planning  and  financial  performance 
among  small  entrepreneurial  firms:  An  industry 
study’.  Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation,  Georgia 
State University,  1982. 

Bracker, J. S. ‘Impact of  consulting on small entrepre- 
neurial  firm  strategic  planning’.  A  paper  presented 
at  the  sixth  annual  Strategic  Management  Society 
annual  meeting,  Singapore,  1986. 

Bracker,  J.  S.,  and  J.  N.  Pearson  ‘Planning  and 
financial  performance  of  small,  mature  firms, 
Strategic Management Journal, 7, 1986, pp. 503-522. 
Braden, P.  Technological Entrepreneurship.  University 

of  Michigan,  Ann  Arbor,  MI,  1977. 

Brawley,  D  E.  ‘Strategy, structure, and  performance 
among  the  “Stars”’,  Unpublished  doctoral  disser- 
tation,  Georgia  State University,  1982. 

Carland, J.  W., F. Hoy, W. R. Boulton  and  J. A.  C. 
Carland.  ‘Differentiating entrepreneurs from  small 
business owners: A conceptualization’.  Academy  of 
Management  Review, 9, 1984, pp.  354359. 

Casson,  M.  C.  The  Entrepreneur.  Martin  Robertson, 

Oxford,  England,  1982. 

Collins,  0. F., and  D.  G.  Moore  The  Enterprising 
Man. Michigan State University,  East Lansing, MI, 
1964. 

Cooper,  A.  C.  ‘Strategic management:  New  ventures 
and  small  business.’ in  D. E. Schendel  and  C.  W. 
Hofer (eds), Strategic  Management.  Little,  Brown, 
Boston,  MA, pp.  316-327. 

Dess  G.  G. and  R. B.  Robinson.  ‘Measuring organi- 
zational  performance  in  the  absence  of  objective 
measures:  The case  of  the  privately-held  firm  and 
conglomerate  business  unit’,  Strategic Management 
Journal,  5, 1984, pp.  265-273. 

Dillman, D. A. Mail and  Telephone Surveys:  The Total 

Design  Method.  Wiley,  New  York,  1978. 

Filley,  A.  C.  and  R.  J.  Aldag.  ‘Characteristics 
and  measurement  of  an  organizational  typology, 
Academy  of  Management  Journal,  21,  1978,  pp. 
578-591. 

Galbraith,  J.  R.  and  D.  A.  Nathanson.  Strategy 
Implementation:  The Role of  Structure and  Process. 
West, St. Paul,  MN,  1978. 

Green,  P.  E.  Analyzing  Multivariate  Data.  Dryden, 

Hinsdale,  IL,  1978. 

Hair,  J.  F.,  R.  E.  Anderson,  R.  L.  Tatham  and 
Grablowsky. Multivariate Data Analysis, Petroleum 
Publishing  Co., Tulsa,  OK,  1979. 

Hornaday,  J.  A.  and  C.  S.  Bunker.  ‘The nature  of 
the entrepreneur’, Personnel Psychology, 23,  1970, 
pp.  47-54. 


Planning  and  Financial  Performance  in Small  Firms 

603 

Hosmer,  L.  The  Entrepreneurial  Function.  Prentice- 

1977. 

Hall,  Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ,  1977. 

Keats, B. W. and J. R. Montanari. ‘Stages of strategic 
sophistication:  A  developmental  model’.  Paper 
presented  at  Decision  Sciences  Institute  National 
Meetings,  Honolulu,  1986. 

Liles, P. R. New  Business  Ventures and the Entrepren- 

eur.  R. D. Irwin,  Homewood,  IL,  1974. 

Morrison, D. Multivariate Statistical Methods, 2nd edn. 

McGraw-Hill, New  York,  1976. 

Norton,  J. Personal communication,  10 April  1986. 
Orpen, C. ‘The effects of  long-range planning on small 
business  performance:  A  further  examination’, 
Journal of  Small Business Management, 23( l), 1985, 
pp.  1C23. 

Quinn, J. B. Strategies for Change: Logical Increment- 

alism,  Irwin, Homewood,  IL, 1980. 

Ramanujam, V., N.  Venkatraman and  J. C.  Camillus. 
‘Multi-objective  assessment  of  effectiveness  of 
strategic planning: A discriminate analysis approach’, 
Academy  of  Management  Journal,  29,  1986,  pp. 
347-372. 

Resser,  C.  ‘Tactical  planning’,  Managerial  Planning, 

24(3),  1981, pp.  27-34. 

Rhyne, L.  C.  ‘Information system  support  for corpo- 
rate-level  planning  in  large  public  manufacturing 
companies’.  Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation, 
Northwestern  University, 1981. 

Rhyne, L.  C.  ‘The relationship  of  informative  usage, 
characteristics  to  planning  system  sophistication: 
An  empirical  examination’,  Strategic  Management 
Journal, 6,  1985, pp.  319-337. 

Rhyne,  L.  C.  ‘The relationship of  strategic  planning 
to  financial  performance’,  Strategic  Management 
Journal, 7, 1986, pp.  423-436. 

Robinson,  R.  B.  ‘The  importance  of  “Outsiders” 
in  small  firm  strategic  planning’,  Academy  of 
Management Journal, 25, 1982, pp.  8G94. 

Robinson,  R.  B.,  and  J.  A.  PearCe ‘Research thrusts 
in  small  firm  strategic  planning’,  Academy  of 
Management  Review, 9, 1984, pp.  128-137. 

Rue, L. W.  ‘Theoretical and  operational implications 
of  long-range  planning  on  selected  measures  of 
financial  performance  in  U.S.  industry’.  Unpub- 
lished  doctoral  dissertation Georgia  State  Univer- 
sity, 1973. 

Sanford,  M.  New  Enterprise  Management,  Reston, 

Publishing,  Reston,  VA,  1982. 

Scherer, F.  M.  Industria  Market  Structure  and  Eco- 
nomic  Perjormance,  Little,  Brown,  Boston,  MA, 
1980. 

Sexton,  D.  L.  and  P.  M.  Van  Auken.  ‘Prevalence  of 
strategic  planning  in  the  small  business,  Journal  of 
Small Business Management, 20(3), 1982, pp. 2G26. 
Siropolis, D. C. Small Business Management: A Guide 
to Entrepreneurship. Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA, 

Small  Business  Administration.  The  State  of  Small 
Business.  U.S.  Government Printing  Office, Wash- 
ington, DC,  1986. 

Smith,  N.  The  Entrepreneur  and  His  Firm:  The 
Relationship  between  Type  of  Man  and  Type  of 
Company. Michigan State University, East Lansing, 
MI,  1967. 

Smith, N.  R., and J. B. Miner  ‘Type of  entrepreneur, 
type  of  firm,  and  managerial  motivation:  Impli- 
cations for organizational life cycle theory’, Strategic 
Management Journal, 4(4),  1983, pp.  325-340. 

Smith, N.  R. and J.  B. Miner  ‘Motivational consider- 
ations in  the  success  of  technologically  innovative 
entrepreneurs:  Extended sample findings’, in J. A. 
Hornaday,  F.  Tarpley,  J.  A.  Timmons  and  K. 
H.  Vesper  (eds),  Frontiers  of  Entrepreneurship 
Research  1985.  Babson  College,  Wellesley,  MA, 
1985. 

Spector, P. E. ‘What to do with significant multivariate 
effects in multivariate  analysis of  variance’, Journal 
of  Applied  Psychology, 62,  1977, pp.  158-163. 

Steiner,  G.  A , ,   J.  B.  Miner  and  E.  R.  Gray. 
Management  Policy  and  Strategy:  Text,  Readings, 
and  Cases. Macmillan,, New  York,  1986. 

Still,  T.  ‘An  explanatory  investigation  of  strategic 
planning  behavior  in  smaIl  business’.  Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation, Florida State University, 1974. 
Susbauer,  J.  C.  ‘Strategic management:  New  ventures 
and small business: Commentary,  in  D. E. Schendel 
and  C.  W.  Hofer  (eds),  Strategic  Management: A 
New  View of  Business  Policy  and  Planning.  Little, 
Brown,  Boston,  MA, 1979, pp.  327-333. 

Timmons, J.  S., L. E .  Smollen and  A. L. M. Dingee. 
New  Venture  Creation,  2nd  edn.  Homewood: 
Illinois,  Richard D.  Irwin, 1985. 

Vesper, K. H. ‘Commentary’,  in D. E. Schendel and 
C.  W.  Hofer  (eds),  Strategic  Management,  pp. 
332-338.  Little, Brown,  Boston, MA,  1979. 

Vozikis, G .  and W. F. Glueck ‘Small business problems 
and stages of  development’. Proceedings of  the 40th 
Annual  Meeting  of  the  Academy  of  Management, 
Detroit, 1980, pp.  373-378. 

Winer,  B.  J.  Statistical  Principles  in  Experimental 
Design, 2nd  edn. McGraw-Hill,  New  York,  1971. 
Wood,  P.  R.  and  R.  L.  LaForge.  ‘The  impact  of 
comprehensive planning  on financial performance’, 
Academy  of  Management  Journal,  22,  1979,  pp. 
5 16-526. 

Zeithaml,  C.  P.  and  L.  W.  Fry.  ‘An  empirical 
examination of  mature  businesses  in  four dynamic 
performance  situations:  contextual  and  strategic 
differences’,  Paper  presented  at  the  44th  Annual 
Meeting  of  Academy  of  Management,  Boston, 
1984. 

