CENTRE 

for 

ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE

DISCUSSION PAPER NO.376

November 1997

HOW TO COMPETE:

THE IMPACT OF WORKPLACE PRACTICES AND

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ON PRODUCTIVITY

S. Black and L. Lynch


ABSTRACT

Using  data  from  a  unique  nationally  representative  sample  of
businesses,  the  Educational  Quality  of  the  Workforce  National
Employers  Survey  (EQW-NES),  matched  with  the  Bureau  of  the
Census’  Longitudinal  Research  Database  (LRD),  we  examine  the
impact  of  workplace  practices,  information  technology  and  human
capital investments on productivity.   We estimate an augmented Cobb
Douglas production function with both cross section and panel data
covering  the  period  of  1987S1993  using  both  within  and  GMM
estimators.  We find that what is associated with higher productivity is
not  so  much  whether  or  not  an  employer  adopts  a  particular  work
practice, but rather how that work practice is actually implemented
within  the  establishment.    We  also  find  that  those  unionized
establishments  that  have  adopted  what  have  been  called  new  or
‘transformed’ industrial relations practices that promote joint decision-
making  coupled  with  incentive  based  compensation  have  higher
productivity  than  other  similar  non-union  plants,  while  those
businesses  that  are  unionized  but  maintain  more  traditional  labor
management relations have lower productivity. We also find that the
higher  the  average  educational  level  of  production  workers  or  the
greater the proportion of non-managerial workers who use computers,
the higher is plant productivity.  
 

This paper was produced as part of the Centre’s 


Industrial Relations Programme

HOW TO COMPETE:

THE IMPACT OF WORKPLACE PRACTICES AND

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ON PRODUCTIVITY

Sandra Black and Lisa Lynch


NOVEMBER 1997


Published by 

Centre for Economic Performance

London School of Economics and Political Science

Houghton Street

London WC2A 2AE

© S. Black and L. Lynch, 1997

ISBN 0 85328 560 8


HOW TO COMPETE:

THE IMPACT OF WORKPLACE PRACTICES AND

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ON PRODUCTIVITY

Sandra Black and Lisa Lynch

Introduction

Background Discussion

The Data

The Model

Page

            1

            4

            9

          12

The Results
5.1 Cross Section Estimation
5.2 Panel Data Two Step Estimation Based

          16
          16

On Within Estimator

5.3 Panel Data Two Step Estimation

Based On GMM Estimator

          20
     
  21

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

Conclusion

Endnotes
Tables
References 

          24

          25
          27
          33

The Centre for Economic Performance is financed by the Economic
and Social Research Council.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Part of the work reported herein was supported under the Education
Research  and  Development  Center  program,  agreement  number
R117Q00011-91, CFDA 84.117Q, as administered by the Office of
Educational  Research  and  Improvement,  U.S.  Department  of
Education.  This funding was administered through the National Center
on the Educational Quality of the Workforce (EQW), University of
Pennsylvania.  The authors have benefitted from comments by Martin
Bailey,  Richard  Freeman,  Dale  Jorgenson,  John  Halitwanger  and
participants in seminars at the Census Bureau, the London School of
Economics,  the  Institute  for  Fiscal  Studies,  and  the  Universities  of
Bristol,  Essex,  Mannheim,  Maryland,  Oxford,  and  Warwick.    We
would especially like to thank Fabio Schiantarelli for his extensive
comments on this paper and Steve Bond, Joyce Cooper, Wayne Gray,
Arnie Reznek, and Steve Rudolph who provided much assistance on
the data used in this project. The findings and opinions expressed in
this report do not necessarily reflect the position or policies of OERI,
the  U.S.  Department  of  Education,  the  Bureau  of  the  Census,  the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or the Federal Reserve System.

Lisa Lynch is at the Fletcher School of Law & Diplomacy, Tufts
University  and  is  affiliated  to  the  NBER  and  Centre  for  Economic
Performance. Sandra Black is at the Department of Economics, Harvard
University and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.


HOW TO COMPETE:

THE IMPACT OF WORKPLACE PRACTICES AND

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ON PRODUCTIVITY

Sandra Black and Lisa Lynch

1.

INTRODUCTION

How do managerial decisions such as whether or not to adopt a Total
Quality  Management  system  or  expand  an  employee  involvement
program affect labor productivity?  Does the implementation of “high
performance”  workplace  practices  ensure  better  firm  performance?
Does the presence of a union hinder or enhance the probability of
success associated with implementing these practices?  Do computers
really  help  workers  to  be  more  productive?      These  questions  and
others have been raised in recent years as many firms have reorganized
or re-engineered their work sites from the old Fordist model of work
organization to new ‘high performance’ work systems that decentralize
decision-making within a firm.  Using data from a unique nationally
representative sample of businesses S the Educational Quality of the
Workforce National Employers Survey (EQW-NES)  S  we  begin  to
examine these and other important questions about the determinants of
productivity.   

While there have been many studies on the impact of  capital
investments  and  R&D  on  firm  or  establishment  productivity,  until
recently  there  has  been  very  little  direct  analysis  of  the  impact  of
workplace practices on productivity.  Some of these studies have also
been hindered by problems such as low survey response rates, firm
level  rather  than  establishment  level  productivity  data,  limited
workplace  practice  data,  and  subjective  measures  of  productivity.
Moreover, while there is ample micro-based evidence on the impact of
human capital accumulation on individuals’ wages, much less is known
about  the  direct  effect  of  human  capital  on  the  productivity  of
businesses.  Finally, although there has been some research using firm
data on the impact of computers on productivity, these studies have not
been able to simultaneously control for workplace practices and human


capital investments as we will be able to do.

Our work builds upon this research by using a large nationally
representative sample of manufacturing businesses.  Because of the
survey design, we have detailed information on workplace practices
(beyond  just  their  incidence),  human  capital  investments,  and  a
measure of the diffusion of computer usage that can be matched with
standard cross section and longitudinal measures of inputs and outputs
of the production process. More specifically, the EQW-NES provides
information on workplace practices such as total quality management
systems, benchmarking, the diffusion of computer usage among non-
managerial employees, recruitment strategies, the use of profit sharing
and  the  extent  of  employee  participation  in  decision-making.    In
addition, we have information on the average educational level of the
establishment, the numbers of employees trained over two years, the
types of training programs offered and where the training took place
(on-the-job  or  off-the-job),  along  with  other  characteristics  of  the
business such as whether or not it is unionized, employee turnover, the
age  of  the  capital  stock,  and  the  demographic  composition  of  the
workforce.  Finally, one design feature of the EQW-NES is that we are
able to match it with the Bureau of the Census’ Longitudinal Research
Database (LRD) so that we can utilize the panel data nature of the
LRD.

We first estimate a standard Cobb Douglas production function
with cross section data that is augmented by our measures of workplace
practices, information technology, and human capital investments.  We
then estimate a production function on the LRD panel covering the
period of 1987S1993 using both within and generalized method of
moments  (GMM)  estimators  to  address  omitted  variable  and
endogeneity bias.  The average residual over this period is then used as
a measure of the establishment fixed effect and is regressed on our
measures of workplace practices, human capital investments, diffusion
of computer usage  and other employee and employer characteristics
to determine their association with productivity.  In this way we try to
see how the information on workplace practices we obtained in our

2


survey is related to which businesses did better or worse on average
over the period 1988S1993.

We find that workplace practices do matter, no matter how the
production  function  is  estimated.    However,  we  find  that  what  is
associated with higher productivity is not so much whether or not an
employer adopts a particular work practice but rather how that work
practice  is  actually  implemented  within  the  establishment.    For
example, simply adopting a Total Quality Management system has an
insignificant or negative impact on productivity unless the proportion
of workers involved in regular decision-making within the plant is also
high.  In other words, it is not so much what you say you do, but how
you do it that matters.  

relations  within 

labor-management 

We also find important differences across plants on the basis of
the 
type  of 
the  plant.
Establishments  with  more  traditional  unionized  labor  management
relations with little or no direct participation of employees in decision-
making have substantially lower productivity than unionized plants that
have  adopted  new  workplace  practices  including  incentive  based
compensation and greater employee participation in decision-making.
In addition, these unionized plants perform much better than even non-
union plants that have adopted similar high performance workplace
practices.

These findings suggest that establishment practices that encourage
workers  to  think  and  interact  in  order  to  improve  the  production
process  are strongly associated with increased firm productivity.  We
find that the higher the average educational level of production workers
within a plant, the more likely the plant has performed better than
average  over  the  period  1988S1993.    In  addition,  although  the
proportion of managerial workers who use computers has no impact on
labor  productivity,  the  greater  the  proportion  of  non-managerial
workers who use computers, the higher is plant productivity.  This has
important implications concerning the potential impact of government
programs  that  encourage  the  extension  of  profit  sharing  to  non-
managerial  employees  and  employee  participation,  education,  and

3


computer  literacy.    The  paper  is  organized  as  follows:    Section  2
contains a review of the literature on the impact of workplace practices
on productivity, Section 3 describes the data used, Section 4 presents
the model used for estimation, Section 5 reports results, and Section 6
summarizes the main findings.

2.

BACKGROUND DISCUSSION

Our paper is not the first to examine the impact of workplace practices
on productivity of businesses, but much of the previous work on this
topic has been limited in several ways.  Some of the most detailed work
on the adoption and nature of new workplace practices has been done
on a case study basis.  This includes work on auto plants by Krafcik
(1988)  and  Womack,  Jones  and  Roos  (1991),  a  paper  mill  by
Ichniowski (1992), two apparel plants by Berg, Appelbaum, Bailey,
and Kalleberg (1996), and a regional phone company by Batt (1995).
While these studies have provided us with a wealth of information on
the chain of events that resulted in the adaptation of new workplace
practices, it is difficult to generalize these results to a broader spectrum
of the economy.  In particular, are the plants that get chosen for a case
study  successful  because  of  their  new  workplace  practices  or  some
other factor that cannot be controlled for in a case study?
  
One  solution  to  this  problem  is  to  conduct  a detailed intra-
industry  study  of  the  adoption  of  workplace  practices  to  see  their
impact  on  a  range  of  industry  specific  performance  measures.    The
advantage of intra-industry studies is that one can collect a high degree
of detailed information on the variation of practices within a sector and
see how they are related to variations in performance.  Examples of
intra-industry studies include work by Ichniowski, Shaw and Prennushi
(1995) and Arthur (1994) on the steel industry, Kelley (1994 and
1996) on the machine tool industry, and Bailey (1993) and Dunlop
and  Weil  (1996)  on  the  apparel  industry.    By  examining  human
resource practices associated with one specific production process it is
possible to greatly reduce problems of underlying heterogeneity of

4


production processes.  Most of the intra-industry studies conclude that
the adoption of a coherent system of new human resource management
practices  such  as  flexible  job  definitions,  cross-training,  and  work
teams,  along  with  extensive  reliance  on  incentive  pay,  results  in
substantially higher levels of productivity than more traditional human
resource management practices (less flexible, close supervision, hourly
pay).  While these results represent an important contribution to the
literature on workplace practices and productivity, it is not easy to
generalize these findings for a broader segment of the economy.  

Another  research  strategy  is  to  take  a  cross  section  of  a  more
representative sample of firms and examine the impact of workplace
practices on broader measures of performance such as productivity or
profitability.  One example of this strategy is Ichniowski (1990) where
he tests the hypothesis that a firm’s system of personnel policies can
affect its economic performance.  To do so, he creates an index of
human resource management practices that has a range of 1S9 based on
a  11-question  survey  of  manufacturing  production  workers.    These
questions measure the incidence of workplace practices such as the
existence  of  formal  information  sharing  programs,  formal  training
programs, merit pay, use of broad job design, and formal grievance
procedures.  He concludes that there is a correlation between human
resource management systems and business performance as measured
by labor productivity or Tobin’s q.  Unfortunately his work is limited
by a low overall response rate (6 per cent) in the survey from which he
draws his subsample of manufacturing firms.  As a result, his sample is
not representative of manufacturing firms and it is quite small (he has
sales/labor ratios for only 126 firms and Tobin’s q for just 65 firms).
In addition, since the survey only has information on the incidence of
workplace practices, he is unable to examine how the diffusion of these
practices affects productivity.  Finally, using an index of workplace
practices  makes  it  difficult  to  determine  the  direct  impact  of
implementing a formal training program versus expanding the role of
employee participation in decision-making or introducing profit sharing
on productivity.  

5


Huselid (1995) looks at the human resource practices of a cross-
section of firms, and Huselid and Becker (1996) use the same data set
with  an  additional  year  of  data.    Huselid  and  Becker  extend  the
concepts developed by Ichniowski and measure factors such as the
proportion  of  the  workforce  in  quality  circles  or  other  forms  of
employee  participation,  the  proportion  eligible  to  receive  profit  or
gainsharing, and the number of hours of training a typical employee
will  get  in  a  year.    They  conclude  that  a  one-standard  deviation
“improvement” in a firm’s human resource strategy (based on their
index of human resource systems) is associated with a present value
gain  in  cash  flow  and  firm  market  value  of  $15,000S$17,000  per
employee.  

Some limitations of this work include a low survey response rate
(28 per cent in the cross section analysis and 20 per cent in the panel
data), the sample is restricted to publicly held firms with more than 100
employees, and the target respondent is not necessarily the plant or
business site manager who actually implements the company human
resource policies.  In addition, Huselid (1995) and Huselid and Becker
(1996)  use  an  index  of  human  resource  practices,  which  leads  to
ambiguities in the interpretation of the results.  The index is not based
on  conceptual  groupings  but  is  the  result  of  statistical  clustering.
Although it probably makes sense to combine subjective responses that
are centered on a particular theme into an index, it is not clear when
there  are  more  detailed  data  on  factors  such  as  the  proportion  of
workers involved in decision-making as to why it is necessary to group
these responses.  Because of the difficulty of interpretation, it seems
advantageous to study workplace practices individually.

Nevertheless,  there  is  a  burgeoning  theoretical  and  empirical
debate  on  the  existence  of  synergies  in  bundles  of  human  resource
management practices.  The theoretical work of Milgrom and Roberts
(1995) and Kandel and Lazear (1992) and empirical studies by Huselid
(1995), Delaney and Huselid (1996) and Ichniowski et al (1995) are
important contributions in this area.  Milgrom and Roberts argue that
the impact of a system of human resource practices will be greater than

6


the  sum  of  its  parts  because  of  the  synergistic  effects  of  bundling
practices together.  Kandel and Lazear argue that introducing a profit
sharing plan for all workers in a firm may have little or no impact on
productivity unless it is linked with other practices that address the
inherent  free  rider  problem  associated  with  corporate  wide  profit
sharing  plans.    The  empirical  evidence  on  synergies  is  mixed,  with
Huselid  and  Ichniowski  arguing  that  bundles  matter  more  than
individual practices and Delaney and Huselid finding no evidence of
bundles.    Empirically  we  have  opted  to  interact  a  wide  range  of
practices with each other to see if there are interaction effects beyond
the own effect of specific HR practices.  We believe that this is a less
restrictive strategy than  arbitrarily grouping our businesses into three
or  four  types  of  HR  practice  bundles  or  using  factor  analysis  to
generate an index of HR practices.  As Osterman (1994) has shown, in
spite of widespread diffusion in the 1980s of new workplace practices,
U.S. companies use a range of combinations of workplace practices and
as a result are not neatly classified into discrete types.

As part of our analysis of the role of synergies in human resource
management  practices,  we  also  look  at  the  impact  of  unions  on
productivity  and  how  the  results  are  affected  by  the  interaction
between  the  presence  of  unions  and  other  workplace  practices.
Theoretically, the presence of unions can have a positive effect on
labor productivity because they lower the costs of introducing new
workplace practices.  This occurs because workers are more willing to
participate in employee involvement programs since they feel the union
will protect their employment security.  Agreements made between
managers and workers may not be legally enforceable so the presence
of unions, as discussed by Malcomson (1983), can address incentive
compatibility problems that may arise at the workplace.  In addition,
negotiations  that  management  undertakes  with  workers  about  the
introduction  of  new  workplace  practices  are  less  expensive  if  the
company  only  has  to  deal  with  union  specialists  rather  than  each
individual worker.  

On  the  other  hand,  unions  can  lower  productivity  if  they

7


constrain the choice set of management and pursue restrictive practices
such as over manning rules.  Empirically, the evidence on the impact
of unions on productivity is mixed.  Most empirical work has looked at
industry level productivity and union density data or industry specific
studies.    The  range  of  estimates  on  the  impact  of  unions  on  labor
productivity runs from minus 3  per cent in Clark (1984) to plus 22 per
cent in Brown and Medoff (1978) to no effect in Freeman and Medoff
(1984).  We try to reconcile these disparate findings by interacting the
union status of an establishment with other workplace practices.  In this
way we try to distinguish between different types of labor management
relations  S  traditional  and  new  S  and  their  impact  on  labor
productivity.    The  only  other  paper  that  has  tried  to  do  something
similar is by Cooke (1994) where he examines the interaction of union
status, profit sharing and employee involvement on productivity in a
sample of manufacturing establishments in Michigan in 1989.  

Barron et al  (1994)  and  Bishop  (1994)  have  studied  the  link
between human resource practices and productivity but use a subjective
measure of productivity rather than output, labor productivity, total
factor productivity, or value added.  Bartel (1989) uses more objective
data (although the response rate of the survey is only 6 per cent) on
firm output and sales but uses the Compustat II line of business data
set.  Unfortunately, examining lines of business can result in some
fairly high level of aggregation of both human resource practices and
performance measures.  For example, in the early 1980s a company like
Exxon would be classified as having only two lines of business in the
Compustat II data set S petroleum and chemical.  Coming up with a
summary measure for HRM practices at this level of aggregation may
miss important variation across plants or business sites within a firm.
It also mixes corporate headquarter practices with what is happening
at the point of physical production of a product.  More generally, while
there is a great degree of heterogeneity across employers in their HRM
strategies, there may be almost as much variation in practices within
multiple  establishment  firms.    Therefore,  conditional  on  data
availability, we believe the preferable level of analysis for the issues we

8


wish to examine is at the establishment level. 

Most of the micro work on education’s impact on individual firm
productivity  has  been  more  indirect  or  focused  on  industry  level
trends1.  Researchers have examined the impact of education on wages
and from this inferred the effect of education on productivity. Empirical
analysis on the returns to schooling suggests that an additional year of
post high school education can raise wages of a worker from 5S12 per
cent.  Therefore, researchers have assumed that productivity increases
for a more highly educated workforce are of similar magnitude.  Again,
one of the features of the EQW-NES is that we are able to construct a
measure  of  the  average  educational  level  of  an  establishment  and
directly examine its effect on productivity.

Finally, the impact of computers on productivity and wages has
been  analyzed  by  several  researchers,  but  nevertheless  remains  a
controversial issue.  Research in the 1980s (e.g. Bailey and Gordon
(1988))  found  little  impact  of  computers  on  trends  in  aggregate
productivity growth, although more recent work by Oliner and Sichel
(1994) argues that this is to be expected given that they represent such
a small percentage of the capital stock.  However, researchers such as
Brynjolfsson and Hitt (1993) who have used more micro-based data
have found a positive relationship between computers and productivity.
In addition, Alan Krueger (1993) found that workers who worked with
computers  were  paid  approximately  15  per  cent  more  than  similar
workers who did not work with computers.  However, none of these
papers have the detailed information that we have in the EQW-NES to
control  for  a  wider  range  of  factors  when  examining  the  impact  of
computer usage on productivity.

This paper seeks to address many of the limitations in previous
work  on  the  impact  of  workplace  practices,  human  capital,  and
information technology on productivity.  We examine a more objective
measure  of  labor  productivity  using  a  data  set  that  is  more
representative, has a higher response rate than most previous studies on
the manufacturing sector, and contains very detailed information on
specific employer practices.  We allow for a less restrictive bundling of

9


human resource management practices, match plant level practices with
plant level outcomes, and use both cross section and longitudinal data
to estimate production functions.

3.

THE DATA

In order to understand the nature and importance of our contribution,
it is useful to start with a description of the data set on which we base
our empirical analysis.  The EQW National Employers Survey was
administered by the US Bureau of the Census as a telephone survey in
August and September 1994 to a nationally representative sample of
more than 3,000 private establishments with more than 20 employees.
The  survey  represents  a  unique  source  of  information  on  how
employers recruit workers, organize work, invest in physical capital,
and  utilize  education  and  training  investments. 
  The  survey
oversampled  establishments 
the  manufacturing  sector  and
establishments with over 100 employees.  Public sector employees,
not-for-profit institutions, and corporate headquarters were excluded
from the sample.  The target respondent in the manufacturing sector
was the plant manager and in the non-manufacturing sector was the
local  business  site  manager.    However,  the  survey  was  designed  to
allow for multiple respondents so that information could be obtained
from establishments that kept financial information such as the book
value of capital or the cost of goods and materials used in production
at a separate finance office (typically at corporate headquarters for
multi-establishment  enterprises).    Computer  Assisted  Telephone
Interviewing (CATI) was used to administer each survey, which took
approximately 28 minutes to complete.

in 

The sample frame for the survey was the Bureau of the Census
SSEL file, one of the most comprehensive and up-to-date listings of
establishments  in  the  United  States.    While  the  survey  included
establishments  in  both  the  manufacturing  and  non-manufacturing
sectors, this paper examines responses from manufacturing respondents

10


only.  This is because we link this survey with the Census Longitudinal
Research Database (LRD) that includes longitudinal information for
manufacturing establishments only.  In other work (Lynch and Black
(1995) and Black and Lynch (1996)), we analyze the cross sectional
data  from  the  EQW-NES  for  both  manufacturing  and  non-
manufacturing establishments.  

The response rate in the EQW National Employers Survey for
manufacturing establishments was 75 per cent, which is substantially
higher than most other voluntary establishment surveys.  Probit analysis
(available from the authors upon request) of the characteristics of non-
respondents indicates that there was no significant pattern at the two
digit industry level in the likelihood of participating in the survey.  The
only  businesses  more  likely  not  to  participate  were  manufacturing
establishments  with  more  than  1000  employees.    Of  the  1,831
manufacturing establishments who participated in the survey, not all
respondents completed all parts of the survey by the interview cutoff
date of 1 October 1994.  Therefore, the final number of manufacturing
establishments  in  the  sample  for  which  all  parts  of  the  survey  was
completed were 1,621 establishments.  This represents a 66 per cent
overall ‘completed’ survey response rate.  

As mentioned above, we are able to match establishments in our
survey  to  the  Longitudinal  Research  Database  (LRD).    The  LRD,
housed  at  the  Center  for  Economic  Studies  at  the  Bureau  of  the
Census, was created by longitudinally linking the establishment level
data from the Bureau of the Census’ Annual Survey of Manufacturers
(ASM).  The LRD data include information on shipments, materials,
inventories, employment, expenditures on equipment and structures,
book values of equipment and structures, and energy use (for more
information on the LRD see Davis and Haltiwanger (1991)).  Because
we are able to match the LRD with the EQW-NES, we can have annual
establishment level data on inputs and outputs of production for the
manufacturing employers in our survey.  

Although we could, in theory, use data from the LRD from as far
back as 1972, we restrict our analysis to just those establishments in

11


the LRD from 1987 through 19932.  We believe that this choice is a
reasonable compromise between having a sufficiently large number of
years of data to obtain an estimate of the establishment fixed effect, yet
few  enough  to  allow  us  to  assume  that  some  of  the  workplace
characteristics are more or less constant over this period.  Because of
this balanced panel restriction, along with problems of missing data,
our final estimation sample is reduced to 627 establishments.  The LRD
is basically the universe of all manufacturing establishments with more
than 250 employees but is only a sub-sample of establishments with
less than 250 employees.  Therefore, by restricting our analysis to
employers in the EQW-NES that were in the LRD from 1987 onwards
we are more likely to omit smaller establishments and establishments
that were ‘born’ after 1987.  However, this does not mean that our
sample does not include smaller establishments.  In fact, almost 20 per
cent of our observations in this restricted sample are on establishments
with less than 100 employees.  In addition, we are able to compare
some of the results in this paper with those obtained using a larger
sample that does not impose these restrictions (see Black and Lynch,
1996).

4.

THE MODEL

We base our empirical analysis of the determinants of establishment
productivity  on  an  augmented  Cobb  Douglas  production  function
containing real sales (Y), labor (L), capital (K), materials (M), and our
workplace  practices,  human  capital  and  information  technology
variables.  We test the restriction implied by constant returns to scale
and find that for our data this restriction is always accepted.  Therefore,
our  reported  results  use  the  following  specification  which  imposes
constant returns to scale (a complete set of all the estimated equations
is available from the authors upon request):

ln(Y/L)i = aln(K/L)i + ßln(M/L)i + d'Zi + ei

(1)

12


and

ln(Y/P)i = aln(K/P)i + ßln(M/P)i + ?ln(N/P)i + d'Zi + ei

(2)

where ei is an error term and d' is a vector of coefficients on Zi which
are establishment specific workplace practices and characteristics of
employees such as education and turnover.  In equation (1) we treat all
workers  identically  and  in  equation  (2)  we  differentiate  between
production workers (P) and non-production workers (N). 

Before  discussing  in  more  detail  the  nature  of  our  empirical
estimation, it is necessary to describe the construction of the input
variables derived from the LRD.  Since we do not have a measure of the
capital stock every year in the LRD we need to construct a measure.
We  use  the  standard  perpetual  inventory  method  to  construct  an
estimate of the value of the capital stock in each year starting from the
book value in a base year and using the information on new investment
together  with  an  estimate  of  the  portion  of  the  capital  stock  that
depreciates each year.3  We chose the total book value of the capital
stock in 1987 as our starting point.  We also tried using 1982 as the
base year, however, we lose many observations when we do this.  In
any case, when we do use 1982 as the base year, none of the empirical
findings change very much.4  In addition, we check the sensitivity of our
estimates  to  the  inclusion  of  end  of  period  or  beginning  of  period
values of the capital stock.  Again, our empirical results are not very
sensitive to this distinction.  Generally, we prefer results using the value
of the beginning of period capital stock on the assumption that it takes
time  before  new  capital  becomes  productive.    Finally,  we  do  not
account for the value of assets sold, retired, scrapped or destroyed
because these data are not available in the ASM after 1988.
 
Total sales, capital, and material numbers were all adjusted using
deflators from the NBER Productivity Database assembled by Eric
Bartelsman and Wayne Gray (1995).  These deflators were constructed
from 5-digit product deflators from BEA.  These are largely created
from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ (BLS) industry-based producer

13


prices which are extrapolated backwards using the old BLS product
prices.  
The  capital  deflator  was  created  by  first  generating a 3-digit
  
industry real net capital stock value.  The 3-digit data are converted to
the 4-digit level by assuming that the industry-asset type flows are the
same  for  all  4-digit  industries  within  a  3-digit  industry.    With  this
information, 4-digit investment deflators were created for equipment
and  structures  separately.    The  materials  deflator  was  created  by
averaging together price deflators for 529 inputs (369 manufacturing
industries and 160 non-manufacturing industries), using as weights the
relative size of each industry’s purchases of that input in the Input-
Output Tables.  The inflation in materials’ prices was calculated as a
Tornquist index (weighting each product’s inflation rate by the average
of the previous and current-year’s shares in total materials used). 

The energy price deflator is based on each industry’s expenditures
on six types of energy (electricity, residual fuel oil, distillates, coal,
coke and natural gas).  These six types of energy represent 94.6 per
cent of all energy expenditures by the manufacturing sector in 1976.
They were a majority of the energy costs for all but one industry, and
over 90 per cent of energy costs for 300 of the industries.

Finally, since the deflator data were unavailable for 1993, we
regressed  current  price  levels  (using  2-  or  3-digit  level  SIC  data,
depending upon availability) on the previous year’s price level and the
current year’s producer price index for stage of processing groupings
from the BLS.  We then generated an imputed value for 1993 deflators
using the predicted values from this regression.

In addition to the effect on output of capital, labor and materials
using data from the LRD, we also allow productivity to depend upon
workplace  practices,  plant  specific  human  capital  measures,  the
diffusion of information technology, employee turnover rates, age of
the  establishment,  R&D  policy  in  the  firm,  age  distribution  of  the
capital stock, and other characteristics of the establishments using data
from the EQW-NES.  In spite of the fact that we are able to control for
many  more  managerial  practices  than  most  previous  studies  on

14


productivity, our estimates may still be subject to omitted variable bias
(see Griliches and Mairesse 1995) due to unobserved establishments
characteristics that we are unable to control for.  Although we believe
that the detailed information contained in our establishment survey
allows us to extract much of the previously unobserved establishment
specific effect, one can remove biases due to omitted but time-invariant
establishment-specific effects using panel data (see Schmidt (1985) for
a  discussion  on  using  panel  data  to  estimate  firm  level  efficiency).
Consider the following equation:

Yit= a'Xit + d'Zi + vi + eit

(3)

where Y is sales per production worker, a' is a vector of coefficients on
capital per production worker, materials per production worker, and
the number of non-production workers per production worker,  d' is
our vector of coefficients on workplace practices from the EQW-NES
survey, vi is an unobserved time invariant establishment fixed effect and
eit  is  the  idiosyncratic  component  of  the  error  term.    If  we  take
deviations from a firm’s mean or take first differences of equation (3),
all firm observed and unobserved time invariant fixed effects drop out
and we can remove the bias in estimating the coefficients in vector a'
that occurs because of the omission of the establishment fixed effect.
However, this means that we are unable to observe the impact of the
observed but time invariant employer fixed effects such as workplace
practices  and  educational  quality  of  the  workforce  on  labor
productivity.  Therefore, we adopt the following two step procedure.
In the first step we use the within estimator to obtain estimates of the
coefficients  (a')  on  capital,  labor  and  materials  (Xit)  from  the
1988S1993  LRD  panel.    Year-industry  specific  constants  are  also
included  in  the  estimated  equation  to  allow  for  differential
technological  progress  by  industry  and  control  for  industry-year
specific business cycle effects that lead to differential intensity of use
of the factors of production.  The use of the within estimator deals with
the correlation between the choice of inputs and the firm specific-time

15


invariant  component  of  the  error  term.    However,  if  capital,
employment, materials, and output are chosen simultaneously, or if
there are measurement errors in the explanatory variables, the within
estimator  will  be  inconsistent  (see  discussion  by  Griliches  and
Hausman (1986)).  For this reason we have also estimated equation (3)
by the Generalized Method of Moments technique (GMM), combining
the equation in differences and levels.  This approach is an extension
of Arellano and Bond (1991) along the lines suggested by Arellano and
Bover (1995), and is implemented in the revised version of the DPD
program by Arellano and Bond (1988)5.

Next we generate predicted values of Yit - a'Xit = d'Zi + vi + eit using
the within estimator or the GMM estimator of a' 6.  We then average
that  value  over  the  period  1988S1993  for  each  business  to  get  an
estimate of the firm specific-time invariant component of the residual7.
We do this for a larger data set than in the second step because we are
not constrained to have information on all of the workplace practices
in  order  to  do  this  estimation.    By  including  a  larger  number  of
observations we hope to improve the precision of our estimates for
capital, labor and materials.  In the second step, we regress our average
residual on the various human resource management practices, human
capital  measures,  a  variable  to  capture  diffusion  of  information
technology,  industry  dummies,  and  other  worker  and  employer
characteristics we find in the EQW-NES in order to obtain estimates of
d'. 

One  advantage  of  this  two  step  procedure  relative  to  the
estimation of the cross section production functions (which include
workplace practices and establishment characteristics) is that we can
address the issue of biases in the estimates of the coefficients of capital,
labor,  and  materials  due  to  correlations  with  the  firm  specific-time
invariant components of the error term, vi.  The GMM estimator can
also  address  the  issue  of  biases  due  to  correlation  with  eit.    These
advantages complement the fact that the panel allows us to bring more
information  to  bear  in  estimating  capital,  labor  and  materials
coefficients.  However, biases can still arise in estimating the d's in the

16


second step.  These biases will be discussed further below.

5.

THE RESULTS

In this section we discuss the econometric results concerning the effect
of workplace practices, establishment and worker characteristics on
productivity.

5.1 Cross Section Estimation8 

Table 1 presents our cross section estimation of an augmented Cobb
Douglas  production  function  with  constant  returns  to  scale  (this
restriction was tested and accepted).  In equation (1) in the table we
use the total number of workers as our measure of labor and then in
equation  (2)  we  separate  employees  into  production  and  non-
production workers.  Therefore, the dependent variable in the first
regression is the log of annual sales per worker for 1993 while the
dependent variable in equations (2) and (3) is the log of annual sales
per production worker for 1993.  Equation (3) allows for interactions
between various workplace practices.  The estimated coefficients on
capital,  labor  and  materials  are  consistent  with  previous  estimation
using the LRD through 1987 except that the coefficient on capital is
rather small.   This may be due in large part to measurement error and
we return to this issue in Table 3.  In terms of the variables we use from
our survey, we find that investments in new technology are associated
with significantly higher establishment productivity.  Although the age
of the capital stock appears to have insignificant effects on productivity,
the existence of a research and development center within the firm is
associated with significantly higher productivity.  In addition, the more
non-managerial  workers  who  use  computers, 
the
establishment’s productivity.  Interestingly, in results not reported here,
the proportion of managers who use computers is never significant in

the  higher 

17


any specification we tested.

In Table 1, education has a significant impact on establishment
productivity in equation (1) when the total number of workers is used
as a measure of labor inputs.  The coefficient on average educational
level for the establishment suggests that raising the average educational
level of the establishment by 10 per cent (approximately one more year
of school) would increase productivity by approximately 5 per cent.
This  is  similar  to  findings  reported  in  Black  and  Lynch  (1996).
However, the effect of education disappears when workers are divided
into production and non-production workers in equations (2) and (3).
In this sample, there is relatively little variation in education once you
distinguish  between  production  and  non-production  workers.
Production workers typically have just a high school degree while non-
production workers have some college.  Employers appear to adjust the
educational  quality  of  their  workforce  by  changing  the  mix  of
production  and  non-production  workers  rather  than  hiring  more
educated production workers.  Since there has been relatively little net
new hiring in manufacturing in recent years, this finding makes sense.

None  of  the  training  variables  we  tried  to  include  in  our
regressions are statistically significant.  In previous work (Black and
Lynch (1996)), using a larger sample of establishments, we found that
the  proportion  of  time  spent  training  workers  off-the-job  raised
establishment productivity in the manufacturing sector.  Unfortunately,
in the EQW-NES we do not have a measure of the accumulated stock
of training for all workers, only training done at two points of time S
1990 and 1993.  This means that our estimates of the impact of training
are most likely underestimates of the true returns to training.  But given
our  finding  that  the  proportion  of  non-managerial  workers  using
computers has a significant and positive relationship to establishment
productivity, we conclude that human capital investments can have an
important impact on labor productivity.  While new entrants into the
labor market are more and more likely to have computer skills, new
ways will have to be found to help incumbent workers acquire these

18


skills either through their employers or off-site at their local community
colleges or training institutes.

to 

is  not  enough 

Workplace  practices  have  very  interesting  effects  on  labor
productivity.    In  particular,  we  find  that  simply  introducing  high
performance  workplace  practices 
increase
establishment  productivity.    The  increased  employee  voice  that  is
associated with these practices seems to be a necessary condition to
making the practices effective.  For example, although almost three-
quarters of all of the establishments in our sample have some form of
a Total Quality Management (TQM) system in place, TQM is not itself
associated with higher productivity.  Instead, the percentage of workers
involved in regular decision-making meetings is positively related to
labor productivity.  On average, about 54 per cent of employees in our
sample  are  involved  in  some  sort  of  regular  meeting  to  discuss
workplace issues.  Benchmarking9 and profit sharing for production
workers, both considered high performance workplace practices, are
also associated with higher establishment productivity, while higher
employee turnover is associated with lower establishment productivity.

Given  that  workplace  practices  are  related  to  establishment
productivity, it is interesting to think about complementarities of these
practices.  We tried a wide range of interaction effects and found that
most were not even remotely significant.  However, equation (3) in
Table  1  presents  results  when  we  interact  unionization  and  TQM,
unionization  and  profit  sharing  for  non-managers,  the  percentage
meeting  in  groups  and  profit  sharing  for  non-managers,  and  the
percentage meeting in groups and TQM.  When these interactions are
included,  the  own  effect  of  unionization  becomes  significant  and
negative while the interactions of unionization and profit sharing for
non-managers and unionization and TQM are significant and positive.
This indicates that more traditional labor management relations, where
employees have little voice in decision-making and pay is not linked to
performance, is associated with lower establishment productivity.  At
the same time, more cooperative unionized labor management relations

19


(where employees have a greater role in decision-making but also have
part of their compensation linked to firm performance) are associated
with higher labor productivity.  

Other results of interest that are not reported in Table 1 include
the lack of significance of the percentage of employees who are women
or minorities.  In manufacturing, everything else held constant, we find
that there seems to be little evidence of lower productivity associated
with hiring a larger proportion of women or minorities.  In addition, we
find that newer establishments have significantly higher productivity,
all else constant, than older establishments.

In Table 2, we take the regression coefficients from equation (3)
in Table 1 and present some different prototype plants to see how
various  combinations  of  workplace  practices  are  related  to  labor
productivity.  We construct a base case which is a non-union multi-
establishment  plant,  has  profit  sharing  for  managers  but  no  profit
sharing for non-managers, no TQM, no benchmarking, 1 per cent of
employees meeting regularly about work issues, 10 per cent of non-
managerial workers using computers, 1 per cent of employees in self-
managed teams, zero values for interaction terms and mean values for
all  remaining  continuous  variables.    We  then  alter  some  of  the
characteristics of this base case to see how labor productivity changes.
If  we  make  the  plant  unionized  with  no  employee  involvement,
productivity drops by 15 percentage points.  If instead we increase the
percentage of non-managerial workers using computers from 10 per
cent to 50 per cent, labor productivity increases almost 5 percentage
points.  Introducing workplace practices associated with what have
been called ‘high performance work systems’ has large and positive
effects on productivity.  If we change the percentage of non-managers
using computers to 50 per cent, have 50 per cent of workers meeting to
discuss workplace issues regularly, profit sharing for non-managers, 30
per cent of workers in self-managed teams, TQM, and benchmarking,
labor productivity increases almost 11 percentage points.  Finally, if we
introduce all of these ‘high performance workplace practices’ and make
the plant unionized, productivity increases by 20 percentage points

20


above  the  base  case.    This  table  helps  highlight  the  synergies  of
workplace practices.  In particular, those unionized firms who have
succeeded in moving to a more cooperative labor management relations
system which gives employees more voice in decision-making but at the
same time links their compensation with performance have higher labor
productivity.

5.2 Panel Data Two Step Estimation Based on Within Estimator

In this section we discuss how the results in Table 1 alter when we
incorporate panel data on establishment inputs and outputs into the
estimation  to  attempt  to  control  for  unobserved  time  invariant
characteristics of the establishment.  Our first step is the estimation of
a simple Cobb Douglas production function with establishment fixed
effects using the panel data from the LRD that includes controls for
capital, labor, materials, and industry by time dummies.   We again test
and accept the restriction of constant returns to scale so our dependent
variable is sales per production worker. 

The estimates from the first stage estimation using the within
estimator are reported in Table 3.  Again, capital is small although still
significant and positive10.  Since we had to construct a measure of the
capital stock there is likely to be significant measurement error in our
proxy for the capital stock.  Using these first step estimates we then
calculated the average residual for each establishment in the sample.
The second column in Table 3 contains the second step results from
regressing  the  average  residual  on  various  workplace  practices  and
employee characteristics.  Again we see that the proportion of non-
managerial workers using computers has a significant and positive effect
on having higher than average productivity over the period 1988S1993.
However, production workers’ education is now  positively related to
those businesses that did better on average over this six year period.
TQM  is  negatively  associated  to  the  average  residual,  while
benchmarking  is  positively  associated.    Unionization  itself  has  no

21


significant effect on which businesses did better or worse on average,
but the interaction of unionization and profit sharing for non-managers
is associated with better than average performance.  In addition, we
also  find  that  those  employers  who  cite  communication  skills  as  a
priority in recruitment also did better than average over the period of
1988S1993. These findings are consistent with the idea that increased
employee voice is positively related to establishment productivity, and
that new forms of labor-management relations are significantly related
to better performing businesses.

5.3  Panel Data Two Step Estimation Based on GMM Estimator

While the fixed effects estimator corrects for the omitted variable bias
associated with unobserved time invariant factors in the cross-section
estimation, the fact that current values of capital, labor, and materials
are simultaneously determined with output leads to an upward bias of
the estimates.  However, measurement error in the capital and materials
variables  may  be  biasing  our  first  step  estimates  of  the  vector  of
coefficients a’ on capital, labor and materials.  In order to attempt to
correct  for  this  endogeneity  bias,  we  use  generalized  method  of
moments  (GMM)  techniques  to  instrument  for  capital,  labor,  and
materials.

It is important to note that if the coefficients in the equation using
the  within  estimator  are  tainted  because  of  measurement  error,  we
would  expect  to  see  larger  and  more  significant  coefficients  in  the
GMM  first  differences  estimation.    This  is  in  fact  what  we  see  for
capital.  If one calculates what our reported GMM estimates in Table
3  imply  about  the  share  of  labor  (production  and  non-production
workers) in value added (output minus materials costs), we find that
labor accounts for two thirds of value added and capital one third.
This is consistent with what we see in national income and product
accounts.    Note  that  the  Hansen-Sargan  test  of  overidentifying
restrictions does not suggest misspecification of the model.  When we

22


look at the second step estimates based the GMM estimation we see a
generally similar pattern of results compared to the within estimator or
even the cross section estimates presented in Table 1.  The only major
changes  are  that  the  percentage  of  non-managers  using  computers
becomes  insignificant,  as  does  the  measure  of  employee  turnover,
although the sign and magnitudes are not inconsistent with previous
estimates. 

While our two-step procedure in Table 3 addresses the biases that
may arise in estimating the vector of coefficients a’ on capital, labor
and materials, it does not address biases that may arise in the second
step when we estimate the vector of coefficients  d’ associated with
observed workplace practices and characteristics.  These biases may be
due to correlations between the second stage regressors and unobserved
time  invariant  plant  level  characteristics  or  with  the  average  of  the
idiosyncratic shocks (since the time period over which we average is
relatively short).  Although we believe that our vector  d’ extracts a
substantial part of the previously unobserved fixed effect and that most
of the endogeneity issues are related to labor, capital and materials,
these potential biases may be affecting our estimates of the impact of
workplace  practices  on  labor  productivity.    For  example,  firms’
decisions to adopt particular workplace practices may be related to
business  performance,  although  it  is  unlikely  that  it  will  be
performance  in  just  one  year.    If  employers  decide  to  adopt  a  new
workplace  practice  in  times  of  trouble  because  it  becomes  less
expensive to switch systems (as suggested theoretically by Caballero
and Hammour (1994) and shown empirically for a sample of British
employers by Nickell et al (1996)), then our coefficients on workplace
practices will likely be biased downwards.  This would mean that it
would be more difficult to find a positive effect of a workplace practice
on labor productivity.  If instead, employers are more likely to adopt
new  workplace  practices  when  times  are  very  good,  then  our
coefficients will be biased upwards.  We believe that the theoretical
and  empirical  support  for  this  latter  view  of  the  world  is  not  very
strong.

23


An omitted variable that may be correlated with our workplace
practices and consequently generate biases is managerial quality.  An
argument could be that the presence of good managers is more likely
to be observed in firms with ‘high performance’ workplace practices.
Therefore,  what  looks  like  an  effect  of  workplace  practices  on
productivity is just good management.  But if good managers are those
who adopt incentive based compensation, get a higher proportion of
their  workers  involved  in  decision-making,  and  train  a  higher
proportion of workers to use computers, then the fact that we are able
to include these variables explicitly as regressors in our analysis means
that it is unlikely that there is much unobserved managerial quality left.
One might think that having a follow-up survey on workplace
practices  would  at  least  help  us  address  any  bias  associated  with
unobserved but time invariant employer fixed effects.  Unfortunately,
short panels on workplace practices are not going to be a magic elixir.
First, workplace practices change very slowly, so if the period of time
between surveys is not long enough there may be very few employers
who change practices.  Second, measurement error affecting workplace
practices will bias our coefficients downwards.  Huselid and Becker
(1996) present estimates on the impact of measurement error on the
coefficients on workplace practices on various firm outcome measures
for a two period panel of 218 employers.  They find large measurement
error (some variables containing 30S40 per cent error variance) and
when they try to adjust for this they find their corrected coefficients on
workplace  practices  are  similar  to  those  found  in  cross  section
estimation.  In other words, the upward bias associated with omitted
employer fixed effects is almost exactly offset in their sample with the
downward bias associated with measurement error.  Clearly, a long
panel  on  establishments  that  included  repeated  information  on
workplace practices would be preferable so that we could use a GMM
estimation procedure as we did on capital, materials and labor to adjust
for endogeneity and omitted fixed effects biases.  Even though these
types of data are unlikely to be produced in the near future, we believe
our results shed some light on the impact of workplace practices and

24


information technology on productivity.

25


6.

CONCLUSION

New technologies and changing workplace practices have altered the
nature and organization of work.  There have been many stories in the
popular press about the successes associated with the introduction of
high performance workplace systems and the revolution computers
have caused on the job.  At the same time, the gains to completing a
college degree relative to a high school diploma have doubled over the
past fifteen years in response to what many have argued are the skill
demands  associated  with  new  technologies  and  changing  work
organization.  We have tried in this paper to get a better understanding
of  how  workplace  practices,  human  capital  investments  and
information technology are related to establishment productivity.  By
using a large representative sample of businesses, we have been able to
examine these factors on a broader cross section of employers unlike
previous studies that have focused on one particular industry, product
or even firm.  

By  relying  on  detailed  measures  of  human  resource  practices
included on their own and interacted with each other, rather than just
using summary indices, we have been able to see that what appears to
matter  most  for  productivity  is  how  HR  systems  are  implemented.
Adopting a TQM system per se does not raise productivity.  Rather,
allowing greater employee voice in decision-making is what seems to
matter most for productivity.  Instituting a profit sharing system has a
positive effect on productivity, but only when it is extended to non-
managerial employees.  Finally, those unionized establishments that
have adopted what have been called new or ‘transformed’ industrial
relations practices that promote joint decision-making, coupled with
incentive  based  compensation,  have  higher  productivity  than  other
similar non-union plants, while those businesses that are unionized but
maintain  more  traditional  labor  management  relations  have  lower
productivity.

26


ENDNOTES

1.

2.

3.

See Jorgenson and Griliches (1967) and Jorgenson, Gallop and
Fraumeni (1987) for a discussion of education, labor quality and
productivity using industry level data, and the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, US Department of Labor (1993) for a discussion about
how educational attainment and workforce composition explain
patterns of productivity growth from 1948S1990.

Note that if an establishment changed ownership it would still be
included in the sample.

in other words:

Kt = (1 - dt)Kt-1 + NIt  S where Kt is the real end-of-period capital
stock,  dt  is  the  depreciation  rate,  and  Nit  is  real  capital
expenditures.  The depreciation used is .1331 for machinery and
.0343  for  buildings.    These  numbers  come  from  Hulten  and
Wykoff, 1981.

4. We also tried using the reported book value of the capital stock
in each year as our measure of the capital stock.  The problem
with  this  measure  is  that  it  does  not  take  into  account
depreciation or price inflation.  In addition, in 1989, 1990, 1991,
and 1993 the ASM did not include questions about the book
value  of  the  capital  stock,  only  new  investment.    We  did  try
various imputations of these data but the results do not seem very
sensitive to the definition of the capital stock.

5.

If the error term is white noise one can use levels of capital, labor,
materials, and sales lagged at least twice as instruments for the
equations in differences.  For the equation in levels, differences
of  these  variables  lagged  at  least  one  period  are  legitimate
instruments under the additional assumption that the correlation
between  the  level  of  the  variables  and  the  firm  specific-time
invariant component of the error term is constant (see Arellano

27


and Bover (1995)).  The orthogonality condition associated with
the equations in differences and levels are estimated jointly.

6. We also subtract from Yit - a'Xit time by industry dummies.
7.

Note that eit are assumed to be zero mean disturbances so that
averaging over time should eliminate (or at least very substantially
reduce) its contribution to the residual.

8.

9.

Note  that  the  results  differ  somewhat  from  those  reported  in
Black and Lynch (1996) because we have restricted the sample
to those establishment in the EQW-NES that are also in the LRD
from 1987 through 1993.

Benchmarking  involves  setting  targets  based  on  other  firms
successes and attempting to meet these goals.  For example, a
manufacturer might use a competitor’s or even another industry’s
scrap rate to establish standards for their own scrap rate.

10. The coefficients on capital, materials and non-production workers
can not be exactly compared with those in Table 1 since the
sample is different (and larger) in the first step in Table 3 than in
Table 1.

28


Determinants of Labor ProductivitySCross Section Results

TABLE 1

Variable

Log (Capital/Workers)

Log (Materials/Workers)

Log (Non-
production/Production)

% Equip < 1 yr.

% Equip 1-4 yr. old

R&D Center

% Non-Managers using
Computers

Mean

Eq. 1

Coefficient
(t-statistic)

Eq. 2

Coefficient
(t-statistic)

Eq. 3

Coefficient 
(t-statistic)

.025*
(1.76)

.55**
(29.49)

-

Technology

6.9%

19.6%

.77

36.01%

.0014
(0.763)

.0011
(1.49)

0.064*
(1.74)

.0016**
(3.27)

Worker Characteristics

.033**
(2.24)

.59**
(30.01)

.20**

(12.085)

.0004
(0.222)

.0013
(1.53)

.06*
(1.64)

.0014**
(2.74)

.034**
(2.32)

.59**
(29.66)

.21**
(12.21)

.0002
(0.11)

.001
(1.29)

.06
(1.61)

.0012**
(2.42)

-

-

Log (Average Education)

Log (Avg Ed non-production
workers)

Log(Avg Ed Production
Workers)

2.54

2.68

2.51

Turnover (% ees < year)

9.9%

.50*
(1.91)

-

-

-.003**
(-2.16)

.28
(1.40)

.18
(0.56)

-.002
(-1.27)

Use of High Performance Work Systems

TQM

Benchmarking

Number of Managerial Levels

.73

.48

2.9

-.040
(-1.159)

.051**
(1.96)

.002
(0.29)

-.03
(-0.78)

.045
(1.47)

.003
(0.39)

.28
(1.41)

.23
(0.74)

-.002
(-1.49)

-.041
(-1.172)

.04
(1.23)

.002
(0.28)


Variable

Mean

Eq. 1

Coefficient
(t-statistic)

Eq. 2

Coefficient
(t-statistic)

Eq. 3

Coefficient 
(t-statistic)

# employees per supervisor

25.42

% workers in self-managed
teams

14.6%

-.0002
(-0.27)

.0006
(1.10)

Unionized

% Workers meeting regularly
in Groups

Managers and Supervisors

Production/Clerical/Technical

Employee Voice

.50

53.9%

.03

(0.907)

.0007*
(1.93)

Profit Sharing

.78

.63

-.03
(-0.64)

.054
(1.41)

Recruitment Strategies

Grades a top priority in
recruitment 

Communication a top priority
in recruitment

0.21

0.74

-.013
(-0.377)

.039
(1.19)

Interaction Terms

union*profit sharing for 
non-managerial workers

union*tqm

% meet*profit sharing for non-
managerial workers

% meet*tqm

N=

Adjusted R2=

0.28

0.37

35.44

42.61

627

-

-

-

-

.0002
(0.25)

.0006
(1.02)

.013
(0.39)

.0006*
(1.68)

-.05
(-1.06)

.07*
(1.71)

-.015
(-0.40)

.039
(0.97)

-

-

-

-

.0002
(0.36)

.0007
(1.10)

-.15**
(-2.22)

.0002
(0.20)

-.05
(-1.09)

.02
(0.26)

-.018
(-0.49)

.034
(0.75)

.133**
(2.11)

.11*
(1.68)

-.0004
(-.052)

.001
(1.25)

627

0.84

627

0.78

627

0.84

Note: t-statistics in parenthesis. ** denotes significant at the 5 per cent level and * denotes significant at the
10 per cent level.  Estimated equations also includes a constant term, 2 digit SIC industry controls, age of
the establishment, a dummy if the establishment is part of a multiple-establishment firm, the percentage of
women employees, the percentage of minority employees, proportion of training done in-house, and a
dummy variables if the primary product is exported.


Table 2:  % Change in Labor Productivity From Base Case

  

HPW system Union

20

HPW system Non Union

10.6

Increase Computer Usage - Non Managers

4.8

Union no Employee Involvement

-15

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

20

Notes:

Base Case: Non union, multi establishment plant, profit sharing for managers, no profit sharing
for non-managers, no TQM, no benchmarking, 1% employees meeting regularly about work issues,
10% nonmanagerial workers using computers, 1% employees in self-managed teams, zero values
for interaction terms and mean values for all remaining continuous variables.

Increase Computer Usage: Base case but increase to 50% non managers using computers in their
job.

HPW system: Base case but 50% of non-managers using computers, 50% of workers meeting to
discuss workplace issues regularly, profit sharing for non-managers, 30% of workers in self-
managed teams, TQM, and benchmarking.


Determinants of Labor Productivity 1988S1993

2-Step Estimates Using Within and GMM Estimators in the First

TABLE 3

Step

(t-statistics in parenthesis)

Within Estimator

GMM Estimator

Dependent Variable:

Independent Variables:
Log (Capital/production Workers)

Log (Materials/Production Workers)

Log (Non-production/Production)

First Step

Second Step

First Step

sales/
prod. ee

avg. residual

1988S93

sales/
prod. ee

.03**
(3.16)

0.61**
(58.54)

.07**
(7.47)

Technology

.18**
(4.24)

.42**
(9.38)

.15**
(4.36)

Sargan

test
=44.8 
[p=.25]

% Equip < 1 yr.

% Equip 1S4 yr. old

R&D Center

% Non-Managers using Computers

.0001
(0.05)

.001
(1.41)

.05
(1.33)

.0015**
(2.98)

Worker Characteristics

Log (Avg Ed non-production workers)

Log(Avg Ed Production Workers)

.47**
(2.51)

1.06**
(3.64)

Second
Step

avg.

residual
1988S93

.0009
(0.48)

.001
(1.07)

.05
(1.21)

.0007
(1.38)

.32
(1.60)

.96**
(3.05)


(t-statistics in parenthesis)

Within Estimator

GMM Estimator

First Step

Second Step

First Step

Turnover (% ees < year)

-.003**
(-2.44)

Use of High Performance Work Systems

TQM

Benchmarking

Number of Managerial Levels

# employees per supervisor

% workers in self-managed teams

Employee Voice

Unionized

% Workers meeting regularly in Groups

Profit Sharing

Managers and Supervisors

Production/Clerical/Technical

Recruitment Strategies

Grades a top priority in recruitment 

Communication a top priority in
recruitment

union*profit sharing for non-managerial
employees

Interaction Terms

-.097*
(-1.63)

.055*
(1.83)

-.001
(-0.17)

-.001*
(-1.70)

-.000
(-0.07)

-.04
(-0.58)

.0007
(0.97)

-.04
(-0.84)

.009
(0.13)

-.008
(-0.57)

.044**
(2.51)

.13**
(2.11)

Second
Step

-.002
(-1.34)

-.15**
(2.31)

.06*
(1.75)

-.008
(-1.13)

-.0004
(-0.53)

.0002
(0.35)

-.11
(-1.6)

.0001
(0.91)

-.07
(-1.46)

.02
(0.32)

-.02
(-1.24)

.04*
(1.90)

.17**
(2.60)


(t-statistics in parenthesis)

union*tqm

% meet*profit sharing for non-
managerial workers

% meet*tqm

Within Estimator

GMM Estimator

First Step

Second Step

First Step

.03
(0.47)

-.0009
(-1.27)

.0006
(0.77)

Second
Step

.07
(1.05)

-.0006
(-0.81)

.001
(1.46)

0.09

N for the First Stage = 984  

N for the Second Stage=627

Adjusted R2=

0.24

Note: T-statistics in parenthesis. ** denotes significant at the 5 per cent level and * denotes
significant at the 10 per cent level.  First stage estimation also includes a constant term, year
dummies, and 2 digit SIC industry controls interacted with the year dummies.  Second stage
equations also include a constant term, 2 digit SIC industry controls, age of the establishment, a
dummy if the establishment is part of a multiple-establishment firm, the percentage of women
employees, the percentage of minority employees, proportion of training done in-house, and a
dummy variables if the primary product is exported.  Appropriately lagged values of capital,
labor, materials, and sales are used as instruments for the GMM estimator.  The Sargan test is
distributed as ?2 with degrees of freedom equal to the number of instruments minus the number of
estimated coefficients.


REFERENCES

Arellano, M. and S. Bond  (1988),  ‘Dynamic Panel Data Estimation
using  DPD  S  A  Guide  for  Users’,  Institute  for  Fiscal  Studies
Working Paper No.88/15.

Arellano, M. and S. Bond (1991), ‘Some Tests of Specification for
Panel  Data:  Monte  Carlo  Evidence  and  a  Application  to
Employment Equations,’ Review of Economic Studies, Vol.58,
pp.277S297.

Arellano, M. and O. Bover (1995),  ‘Another Look at the Instrumental
Variable Estimation of Error-Components Models’,  Journal of
Econometrics, Vol.68, pp.29S51.

Arthur,  J.  (1994),  ‘Effects  of  Human  Resource  Systems  on
Manufacturing  Performance  and  Turnover’,  Academy  of
Management Journal, Vol.37, pp.670S87.

Bailey,  M.  and  R.  Gordon  (1988),  ‘The  Productivity  Slowdown,
Measurement  Issues  and  the  Explosion  of  Computer  Power,’
Brookings    Papers  on  Economic  Activity,  Vol.19,  No.2,
pp.347S420.

Bailey, T. (1993), ‘Organizational Innovation in the Apparel Industry’,

Industrial Relations, Vol.32, pp.30S48.

Barron, J., M. Berger and D. Black (1994), ‘How well do we measure

training?’, Journal of Labor Economics, forthcoming.

Bartel,  A.  (1992),  ‘Productivity  Gains  from  the  Implementation  of
Employee Training Programs’, NBER Working Paper No.3893.

Bartel, A. (1989), ‘Formal Employee Training Programs and Their

35


Impact on Labor Productivity:  Evidence from a Human Resource
Survey’, NBER Working Paper No.3026.

Bartelsman, E. J. and W. Gray (1995), ‘The NBER Manufacturing
Productivity Database’, unpublished paper, Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System (January).

Batt,  R.  (1995),  ‘Performance  and  Welfare  Effects  of  Work
Restructuring:  Evidence  from  Telecommunications  Services’,
Ph.D.  dissertation,  MIT  Sloan  School  of  Management,
Cambridge, MA.

Berg,  P.,  E.  Appelbaum,  T.  Bailey,  and  A.  Kalleberg  (1996),  ‘The
Performance  Effects  of  Modular  Production  in  the  Apparel
Industry’, 

Industrial Relations, Vol.35, pp.356S373.

Bishop, J. (1994), ‘The Impact of Previous Training on Productivity
and Wages’, in L. Lynch (ed), Training and the Private Sector:
International  Comparisons,  University  of  Chicago  Press:
Chicago.

Black, S. E. and L. M. Lynch (1996), ‘Human Capital Investments and

Productivity’, American Economic Review, May.

 
Brown, C. and Medoff, J. (1978), ‘Trade Unions in the Production

Process’, Journal of Political Economy, Vol.86, pp.355S78.

Brynjolfsson, E. and L. Hitt (1993), ‘New Evidence on the Returns to
Information  Systems’,  Working  Paper,  Sloan  School  of
Management, MIT.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, US Department of Labor (1993),  Labor
Composition and U.S. Productivity Growth, 1948S90, Bulletin
2426, US Government Printing Office, December.

36


Caballero, R. and M.L. Hammour (1994),  ‘The Cleansing Effects of
Recessions’, American Economic Review, Vol.84, pp.1350S68.

Clark, K. B. (1984),  ‘Unionization and Firm Performance: The Impact
on  Profits,  Growth,  and  Productivity’,  American  Economic
Review, Vol.74, December, pp.893S919.

Cooke, W. (1994), ‘Employee Participation Programs, Group-Based
Incentives,  and  Company  Performance:  A  Union-Nonunion
Comparison’, Industrial  and  Labor  Relations  Review, Vol.47,
pp.594S609.

Davis, S. and J. Haltiwanger (1991), ‘Wage Dispersion Between and
Within  US  Manufacturing  Plants:    1963S1986’,    Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity; Microeconomics.

Delany, J. and Huselid, M. (1996) ‘The Impact of Human Resource
Management Practices on Perceptions of Performance in For-
Profit and Nonprofit Organizations’,  Academy of Management
Journal, in press.

Dunlop,  J.  and  Weil,  D.  (1996)  ‘Diffusion  and  Performance  of
Modular Production in the U.S. Apparel Industry’,  Industrial
Relations, Vol.35, July, pp.334S354.

Freeman,  R.  and  J.  Medoff  (1984),    What  Do  Unions  Do?,  Basic

Books: New York.

Griliches, Z. and J. A. Hausman (1986), ‘Errors in Variables in Panel

Data’, Journal of Econometrics, Vol.31, pp.93S118.

Griliches,  Z.  and  J.  Mairesse  (1995),  ‘Production  Functions:  The

Search for Identification’, NBER Working Paper No.5067.

37


Hulten,  C.  and  F.  Wykoff  (1981),  ‘Measurement  of  Economic
Depreciation’, in C.R.Hulten (ed), Depreciation, Information,
and the Taxation of Income from Capital, Washington, D.C.,
Urban Institute.

Huselid, M. A. (1995),  ‘The Impact of Human Resource Management
Practices  on  Turnover,  Productivity,  and  Corporate  Financial
Performance’, Academy of Management Journal, Vol.38 No.3,
pp.635S672.

Huselid, M. A. and B. E. Becker (1996), ‘High Performance Work
Systems and Firm Performance: Cross-Sectional Versus Panel
Results’, Industrial Relations, Vol.35, pp.400S422.

Ichniowski (1990), ‘Human Resource Management Systems and the
Performance of U.S. Manufacturing Businesses’,  NBER Working
Paper No.3449.

Ichniowski (1992),  ‘Human Resource Practices and Productive Labor-
Management Relations’, in D. Lewin, O. Mitchell, and P. Sherer
(eds), Research Frontiers in Industrial Relations and Human
Resources, pp.239S271.

Ichniowski, K. Shaw and G. Prennushi (1995), ‘The Effects of Human
Resource  Management  Practices  on  Productivity’,  NBER
Working Paper No.5333, November.

Jorgenson,  D.  and  Griliches,  Z.  (1967),  ‘The  Explanation  of
Productivity  Change’,  Review  of  Economic  Studies,  Vol.34,
pp.249S283.

Jorgenson, D., F. Gallop and B. Fraumeni (1987), Productivity and

U.S. Economic Growth, Harvard University Press.

38


Kandel, E. and E. Lazear (1992),  ‘Peer Pressure and Partnerships’,

Journal of Political Economy, Vol.100, pp.801S817.

Kelley, M. (1994),  ‘Information Technology and Productivity: The
Elusive Connection’,  Management Science, Vol.40, pp.1406S25.

Kelley, M. (1996),  ‘Participative Bureaucracy and Productivity in the
Machined  Products  Sector’,  Industrial  Relations,  Vol.35,
pp.374S399.

Krafcik, J. (1988), ‘Triumph of the Lean Production System’,  Sloan

Management Review, Vol.30, pp.41S52.

Krueger,  A.  (1993),  ‘How  Computers  Have  Changed  the  Wage
Structure:  Evidence  from  Micro  Data,  1984S1989’, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Feb. pp.33S60.

Lynch, L. M. (1995), ‘A Needs Analysis of Training Data:  What do we
want, what do we have, can we ever get it?’, in J.Haltiwanger, M.
Manser  and  R.  Topel  (eds),  Labor  Statistics  Measurement
Issues, NBER/University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.

Lynch,  L.  M.  and  S.  E.  Black  (1995),  ‘Beyond  the  Incidence  of
Training: Evidence from a National Employers Survey’, NBER
Working Paper No.5231.

Malcomson,  J.  (1983),  ‘Trade  Unions  and  Economic  Efficiency’,

Economic Journal, Vol.93, pp.50S65.

Milgrom,  P.  and  J.  Roberts  (1995),    ‘Complementarities  and  Fit:
Strategy, structure and organizational change in manufacturing’,
Journal of Accounting and Economics, Vol.19.  pp.179S208.

Nickell, S., D. Nicolitsas and M. Patterson (1996), ‘Does Doing Badly

39


Encourage  Management  Innovation?’,  Oxford  Institute  for
Economics and Statistics Working Paper, August.

Oliner,  S.  and  D.  Sichel  (1994),  ‘Computers  and  Output  Growth
Revisited:  How  Big  is  the  Puzzle?’,    Brookings  Papers  on
Economic Activity, No.2, pp.273S317.

Osterman, P. (1994),  ‘How Common is Workplace Transformation
and Who Adopts It?’,  Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
Vol.47, No.2, January, pp.173S187.

Schmidt,  P.  (1985),  ‘Frontier  Production  Functions:  A  Review’,

Econometric Reviews, No.4.

Womack,  J.,  D.  Jones  and  D.  Roos  (1991),    The  Machine  that

Changed the World,  Rawson/Macmillan: New York.

40

