  
The Views of Corporate Managers on the Current State of, and Future Prospects 
for, Social Reporting in Bangladesh: An Engagement Based study 
 
 
 
 
Ataur Rahman Belal 
Aston Business School 
 
And 
 
David L. Owen 
International Centre for Corporate Social Responsibility, Nottingham University 
Business School 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correspondence 
 
David L. Owen 
International Centre for Corporate Social Responsibility 
Nottingham University Business School 
Jubilee Campus 
Wollaton Road 
Nottingham NG8 1BB 
E-mail: david.owen@nottingham.ac.uk
Tel. +44 (0) 115 846 6798 
Fax +44 (0) 115 846 8074 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors would like to thank Carol Adams and Carlos Larrinaga-González for their 
editorial guidance and the two anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments. 
The funding provided by Sheffield University Management School to the first author is 
also  duly  acknowledged.  An  earlier  version  of  the  paper  was  presented  at  the  4th 
APIRA Conference, 2004, Singapore. 
 
 

 

1


The Views of Corporate Managers on the Current State of, and Future Prospects 
for, Social Reporting in Bangladesh: An Engagement Based Study 
 
 
Abstract 

Purpose – This paper seeks to respond to recent calls for more engagement based studies (Gray, 2002; 

Parker,  2005)  of  corporate  social  reporting  (CSR)  practice  by  examining  the  views  of  corporate 

managers on the current state of, and future prospects for, social reporting in Bangladesh. 

Design/methodology/approach – The paper uses a series of interviews with senior managers from 23 

Bangladeshi companies representing the multinational, domestic private and public sectors. 

Findings – Key findings are that the main motivation behind current reporting practice lies in a desire 

on the part of corporate management to manage powerful stakeholder groups, whilst perceived pressure 

from external forces, notably parent companies’ instructions and demands from international buyers, is 

driving  the  process  forward.  In  the  latter  context  it  appears  that  adoption  of  international  social 

accounting  standards  and  codes  is  likely  to  become  more  prevalent  in  the  future.  Reservations  are 

expressed as to whether such a passive compliance strategy is likely to achieve much in the way of real 

changes in corporate behaviour, particularly when Western developed standards and codes are imposed 

without consideration of local cultural, economic and social factors. Indeed, such imposition could be 

regarded  as  little  more  than  an  example  of  the  erection  of  non-tariff  trade  barriers  rather  than 

representing any meaningful move towards empowering indigenous stakeholder groups. 

Originality/value – The paper contributes to the literature on CSR in developing countries where there 

is a distinct lack of engagement based published studies. 

Keyword(s):  Corporate  Social  Reporting  (CSR);  Social  accounting  standards/codes;  Developing 

countries; Bangladesh 

 Paper Type: Empirical research paper 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2


The Views of Corporate Managers on the Current State of, and Future Prospects  
for, Social Reporting in Bangladesh: An Engagement Based Study 
 
 
Introduction 
 
As Owen (2004) notes, exploration of managerial motivations for making social and 

environmental  disclosures  has  long  held  a  prominent  position  within  the  corporate 

social  reporting  (CSR)  research  agenda.  Initially,  increasingly  rigorous  content 

analyses  of  published  corporate  reports  were  employed,  with  perspectives  from 

legitimacy, stakeholder and political economy theories utilised, in attempts to explain, 

rather than simply describe practice. In more recent years, at least as far as reporting 

practices  in  developed  economies  are  concerned,  managerial  motivations  have  been 

probed more directly via utilising interview methods (see, for example, Adams, 2002; 

Buhr,  1998,  2002;  Larrinaga-González  &  Bebbington,  2001;  Larrinaga-González, 

Carrasco-Fenech,  Caro-González,  Correa-Ruiz,  &  Páez-Sandubete,  2001;  O'Dwyer, 

2002,  2003).  Research  of  reporting  practices  in  developing  economies,  including 

Bangladesh  (see,  for  example,  Belal,  2000,  2001;  Imam,  1999,  2000),  has  been 

generally of a far more recent vintage and predominantly descriptive in nature. With 

the notable exceptions of Rahaman, Lawrence & Roper’s (2004) study of social and 

environmental reporting practices undertaken by the Volta River Authority in Ghana, 

together  with  Lodhia’s  (2003)  and  Kuasirikun’s  (2005)  studies  of  accountants’ 

perceptions  of  environmental  and  social  accounting  issues  in  Fiji  and  Thailand 

respectively,  there  have  been  a  distinct  lack  of  published  studies  based  within 

developing countries which employ interview methodologies. 

 

The current study begins to address the above gap in the literature via undertaking a 

series of in-depth interviews with local senior managers drawn from 23 Bangladeshi 

 

3


companies.  The  main  research  objective  is  to  critically  examine  the  views  held  by 

these managers towards the emerging phenomenon of CSR in Bangladesh and thus to 

illuminate some of the driving forces behind the current state of, and future prospects 

for, CSR in the Bangladeshi context.  

 

A  primary  motivating  factor  underpinning  this  study  lies  in  a  desire  to  engage  with 

practice  in  order  to  highlight  current  weaknesses  and  thereby  begin  to  provide  a 

platform by which such practice may be improved (Bebbington, 1997). It responds to 

the  calls  for  engagement  based  studies  in  the  literature  by  Gray  (2002)  and  Parker 

(2005).  Our study contributes to the CSR literature in the following ways: 

• 

It adds to the relatively small body of CSR literature that adopts a developing 

country perspective. 

•  As  opposed  to  the  previous  predominant  emphasis  on  descriptive  content 

analysis  in  studying  CSR  issues  within  developing  countries  in  general,  and 

Bangladesh in particular, we employ an interview based approach in order to 

gain a deeper understanding of  the various factors driving the CSR process. 

 

 

The paper proceeds as follows. Following a brief review of prior engagement based 

studies  probing  managerial  motivations  for  CSR,  a  detailed  outline  of  the  socio-

economic context of Bangladesh is provided which, in particular, highlights a number 

of major social and environmental issues that have come to the fore as the country’s 

economy  has  been  transformed  in  recent  times.  There  follows  a  description  of  the 

research method employed in the study. The interview findings are then presented. The 

final section of the paper offers some analytical comments on the interview findings 

together with some reflections on their implications for future practice. 

 

4


 
Prior Literature 

As  noted  above,  a  steady,  albeit  relatively  small,  stream  of  ‘engagement  based’ 

research studies have appeared in recent years which employ interview based methods 

in  order  to  address  the  managerial  motivations  behind,  and  processes  involved  in, 

producing corporate social and environmental reports. Overwhelmingly, it is suggested 

that a concern over threats to organisational legitimacy, and hence a perceived need to 

improve  corporate  image,  is  largely  driving  the  reporting  process,  rather  than  any 

desire on the part of corporate management to be transparent or socially accountable 

per se.  In particular, an emphasis is placed on managing the expectations of powerful 

stakeholders,  notably  capital  providers,  and  offering  the  appearance  of  being 

responsive to ‘public pressure’ (Adams, 2002) and the concerns of influential lobbying 

groups (Deegan & Blomquist, 2006). Furthermore, as studies by Larrinaga-González 

and  Bebbington  (2001)  and  Larrinaga-González  et  al  (2001)  indicate,  there  would 

appear to be severe doubts as to whether such reporting is having much influence at all 

on  actual  corporate  priorities  and  associated  behaviour.  Rather,  reporting  seems  to 

operate  largely  as  an  ‘agenda  controlling’  device,  thus  ensuring  that  organisational 

activities can carry on much as before. 

 

O’Dwyer  (2003)  further  develops  the  latter  point  in  drawing  attention  to  a  strong 

tendency  for  corporate  managers  to  ‘capture’  the  CSR  agenda,  via  interpreting  the 

concept  in  a  constricted  fashion  consistent  with  the  goal  of  shareholder  wealth 

maximisation. Later case study work by O’Dwyer (2005) examining the development 

of a social accounting process in an Irish overseas aid agency, the Agency for Personal 

Services  Overseas  (APSO),  further  points  to  senior  management,  despite  apparently 

 

5


embarking on a wide-ranging consultation exercise, effectively operating a systematic 

strategy  of  denying  a  voice  to  key  stakeholders,  notably  local  communities  in 

developing  countries,  within  the  reporting  process  itself.  A  further  study  by  Owen, 

Swift and Hunt (2001) drawing upon a programme of semi-structured interviews held 

with corporate managers, CSR practitioners and representatives of NGOs, whilst also 

noting  considerable  support  on  the  part  of  corporate  respondents  for  employing 

stakeholder engagement processes, goes on to point out the complete absence of any 

mechanism  by  which  stakeholder  views  can  feed  directly  into  the  reporting  process. 

They argue that for stakeholders to be truly empowered in terms of holding corporate 

management  accountable  administrative  (reporting)  reform  must  be  accompanied  by 

institutional reform offering more participatory forms of corporate governance.  

 

Recent  studies  adopting  a  stakeholder,  as  opposed  to  managerial,  perspective  on 

current CSR practice point similarly to an overall lack of corporate responsiveness to 

stakeholder  needs,  particularly  those  of  economically  weak  stakeholders  (O'Dwyer, 

Unerman,  &  Bradley,  2005;  O'Dwyer,  Unerman,  &  Hession,  2005;  Unerman  & 

Bennett, 2004). A neat illustration of how this  can give rise to a discernible lack of 

completeness in reporting itself is provided by Rahaman et al’s (2004) interview based 

study  of  the  social  and  environmental  reporting  practices  undertaken  by  the  Volta 

River Authority in Ghana. Attention is drawn here to the overriding focus on physical 

environmental  impacts  in  response  to  information  demands  emanating  from  the 

international  investment  agencies  funding  a  large  scale  public  sector  electricity 

generation  project  being  undertaken  by  the  Authority.  By  contrast,  the  less  visible 

social and environmental impacts on Ghanaian rural communities unable to afford the 

charges dictated by the required commercial return on the project are ignored.  

 

6


The  above,  of  necessity,  brief  review  of  engagement  based  research  probing 

managerial  motivations  for  engaging  in  CSR  points  to  it  being  largely  driven  by 

‘business  case’  concerns  with  managing powerful  stakeholder  groups  and  enhancing 

corporate reputation rather than any real desire to promote ideals of transparency or, 

despite  apparent  growing  support  for  employing  stakeholder  consultation  exercises 

(Owen et al, 2001), to alter organisational priorities in order to respond to the needs of 

less economically powerful stakeholders. However, Rahaman et al’s (2004) case study 

suggests that drivers of the ‘business case’ may be somewhat different in developing, 

as  opposed  to  developed,  countries.  Significantly  here,  external  pressures  for 

legitimisation,  in  the  form  of  the  demands  of  international  capital,  appear  to  be 

particularly  influential.  Further  evidence  that  managerial  motivations  may  be 

influenced by situationally specific factors is provided by O’Dwyer’s (2002) study of 

Irish  managers  perceptions  of  CSR.  Interestingly  here,  whilst  O’Dwyer  cites  a  large 

body  of  literature  supporting  legitimacy  based  interpretations  for  the  prevalence  of 

CSR, he is unable to find much evidence to support such an explanation amongst the 

managers he interviewed and goes on to suggest that specific national economic and 

social factors may be driving his findings. 

 

Turning  to  the  Bangladeshi  context,  we  are  led  to  speculate  that  tensions  between 

specific national, and indeed organisational, factors and international pressures facing 

any developing country may influence the motivations of individual managers. In the 

former context, whereas extant research on CSR in Bangladesh is descriptive in nature, 

Belal  (2001)  and  Imam  (2000),  whilst  noting  that  both  quantity  and  quality  of 

disclosure is generally poor, point to human resource issues dominating such reporting 

practice as there is. Belal goes on to suggest that this may well be due to factors such 

 

7


as  the  presence  of  a  unionised  workforce  in  parts  of  the  economy  and  an  apparent 

emphasis on employee welfare in the public policy domain. Conversely, pressures to 

adopt Western codes and standards in order to attract foreign capital and secure access 

to international markets may offer different reporting incentives. Whilst such a process 

is  well  documented  as  far  as  financial  reporting  standards  are  concerned  (see,  for 

example,  Hove  1986),  a  number  of  prominent  social  accounting  standards,  most 

notably  the  Global  Reporting  Initiative  (GRI),  AA1000  and  SA8000  are  being 

increasingly  marketed  in  terms  of  their  internationality  of  application  and  may, 

therefore, be particularly influential in driving future reporting practice. In the light of 

these observations the following section of the paper presents a detailed overview of 

the  socio-economic  context  of  Bangladesh  within  which  the  later  empirical  findings 

may, at least tentatively, be framed.       

     

The Socio-Economic Context of Bangladesh 

Bangladesh is a country located in South Asia with a per capita Gross National Income 

of only $440 per year (WorldBank, 2005). Since the emergence of the democratic era 

in  the  1990s  Bangladesh  has  been  pursuing  the  principles  of  a  market  economy, 

leaving behind the socialistic economic pattern earlier followed. As is the case in many 

other developing countries, a key strategy for achieving faster economic development 

in Bangladesh is one of rapid industrialisation. With that objective in mind, a private 

sector led industrial development policy is being aggressively pursued with the aim of 

attracting  as  much  foreign  investment  as  possible.  Various  measures  have  been 

introduced, most notably fiscal incentives, establishment of Export Processing Zones 

(EPZ)1 and the provision of cheap labour, which have facilitated a growth of foreign 

 

8


investments  from a mere $ 5 million (annual average during 1985-95) to $460 million 

in 2004 (UNCTAD, 2005).  

 

The  current  industrial  policy’s  overriding  emphasis  on  private  sector  led  export-

oriented  industrial  development  is  reflected  in  the  increase  of  export  earnings  from 

$1994 million in 1991/1992 to $8655 million in 2004/2005 (EPB, 2006). Key export 

‘thrust’ sectors have been ready made garments, leather and leather goods, computer 

software  and  agro-processing  products.  The  ready  made  garments  sector  alone  has 

made an impressive contribution, amounting to 74.2% of total exports in 2004/2005 as 

compared to only 1.1% in 1982/1983 (EPB, 2006), and provides employment to about 

2 million people, mostly rural migrant women (Frost, 2005).  

 

By  pursuing  the  above  strategy  of  export  led  industrial  development  Bangladesh 

achieved a GDP growth rate of 6.3% in 2003/2004, as compared to a meagre figure of  

1.7% during the 1980s (Ahmed, 2006). While such a strategy, therefore, clearly makes 

some economic sense, it has at the same time created many significant adverse social, 

ethical  and  environmental  effects.  This  in  turn  has  led  to  increasing  demands  for 

enhanced accountability and transparency in business practices (Byron, 2005; Rahman, 

2003).  

 

The key issues of concern in the garment and textile sector, and also in other export-

oriented industries, are child labour, equal opportunity and workplace health and safety 

matters. Although in the face of pressure from Western consumers and international 

agencies, such as the ILO, the use of child labour is being steadily eliminated, it has 

been argued that their welfare and rehabilitation have been neglected (Hossain, 2001; 

 

9


Murshed, 2005; TheDailyStar, 2004). The consequence here being that while factory 

owners are discontinuing the practice of employing child labour, those displaced are 

compelled  to  live  on  the  streets  and  engage  in  various  anti-social  activities  thereby 

creating  other  social  problems.  Additionally,  women  workers  in  the  sector  have  to 

endure particularly harsh working conditions (Afrin, 2002). In many instances they can 

be required to work 12 hours a day, sometimes throughout the night, with one day’s 

holiday per month and compulsory overtime (Milne, 2001). A further problem lies in 

the issue of unpaid wages which often remain outstanding for months (Frost, 2005). 

Other gender issues include mandatory pregnancy tests for new employees, humiliating 

searches  on  the  way  in  and  out  of  the  factories  and  managements’  preference  for 

unmarried women as they have no family obligations (Rashid, 1998). The neglect of 

health  and  safety  at  workplace  is  starkly  evident  from  the  fact  that  hundreds  of 

employees  have  been  killed  at  work  due  to  several  fire  incidents  in  recent  times 

(Chepesiuk,  2004).  Indeed,  between  1990  and  2005  there  were  115  reported  factory 

fires resulting in 300 deaths and over 2500 injuries. In one particular fire incident in 

Dhaka on 11th April, 2005 73 people were killed and 100 workers were trapped in the 

debris  (Frost,  2005).  The  main  reason  for  the  collapse  of  the  nine-storey  factory 

building,  used  to  produce  garment  items  for  buyers  in  Western  countries,  was 

attributed to illegal construction. In another more recent incident in the KTS garments 

factory  in  Chittagong  56  people  died  and  100  were  injured  due  to  a  fire  caused  by 

boiler  explosion  (Khan,  2006).  Whilst  these  major  incidents  once  again  put  factory 

working conditions in Bangladesh under a harsh spotlight it remains to be seen whether 

this will result in genuine steps being taken towards improvements being made.  

 

 

10


Industrial pollution is considered one of the key environmental problems  (Belal, Khan, 

& Alam, 1998), with concerns expressed that if nothing is done to check it Bangladesh 

runs  the  risk  of  facing  an  ‘ecological  catastrophe’  (Inam,  1995).  Whereas  the 

Bangladeshi government has taken steps towards enhancing environmental protection, 

notably the promulgation of the Environment Conservation Act 1995, it appears that 

the spirit of the Act is yet to be actualised (Khan & Belal, 1999). For example, amongst 

other cases, the tannery companies in the Hazaribagh areas have been blamed in recent 

years for causing serious pollution in the nearby communities and rivers (Khan, 2001a, 

2001b;  Khan  &  Hasan,  2005).  In  addition,  a  large  number  of  other  industrial  units 

located  on  the  banks  of  the  Buriganga,  Karnaphulli  and  other  rivers  are  accused  of 

polluting the river bodies on a daily basis, thereby depriving the indigenous population 

of access to clean water and livelihoods based predominantly on fishing and boating 

activities (Nurunnabi, 2002).   

 

In addition to the above labour and environmental problems, the issues of corruption 

and the violation of consumers’ rights are of particular concern in Bangladesh. Indeed, 

in the former context, according to Transparency International’s 2002 ranking (quoted 

in Mir and Rahaman, 2005), Bangladesh is considered to be the world’s most corrupt 

country,  with  the  monetary  value  of  corruption  estimated  at  around  Taka  700,000 

million,  as  compared  with  Taka  231,980  million  in  1991.  This  corruption  is 

particularly  evidenced  within  the  business  community  in  the  widespread  prevalence   

of activities such as bribery (Khaleque, 2005), tax evasion (Hasan, 2002), loan defaults 

(TheNewNation,  2001)  and  various  share  scandals  (Rahman,  2002).  Turning  to  the 

issue  of  consumer  rights,  in  the  absence  of  any  substantial  measure  of  consumer 

protection law, it is alleged that these are routinely ignored (Aziz, 2002; Roy, 2005). 

 

11


This is evidenced in the widespread provision of sub-standard and poor quality goods 

(TheIndependent, 2001), with particularly serious allegations being made of companies 

marketing adulterated food products which are capable of causing serious public health 

hazards (Roy, 2005).  

 

The prevalence of the problems outlined above is, at least on the surface, somewhat 

surprising  in  view  of  the  existence  of  a  long  established  regulatory  and  institutional 

framework, largely inherited from the British colonial period, which purports to govern 

key social and environmental aspects of organisational performance. Laws regulating 

the social welfare of employees include the Factories Act, 1965, Industrial Relations 

Ordinance,  1969,  Employment  of  Labour  (Standing  Orders)  Act,  1965,  Payment  of 

Wages  Act,  1936  and  Workmen  Compensation  Act,  1923,  and  cover  issues  such  as 

minimum working hours, a safe and healthy working environment, the right to form 

trade unions and minimum working age. The Labour Inspectorate under the Ministry 

of Labour and Welfare undertakes prime responsibility for implementing these rules 

and  regulations.  The  main  laws  relating  to  environmental  matters  include  the 

Environmental Conservation Act, 1995 and Environmental Conservation Rules, 1997. 

Under these laws guidelines and standards are provided for the control and mitigation 

of  environmental  pollution.  In  addition,  the  Factories  Act,  1965  includes  various 

provisions relating to the discharge of wastes and effluents and emission of dust and 

fumes. The Department of Environment (DoE) under the Ministry of Environment and 

Forest is responsible for the implementation of the environmental laws in Bangladesh. 

 

Whilst  government  continually  exhorts  companies  to  observe  the  spirit  of  the  above 

legislation  in  delivering  better  labour  conditions  (TheDailyStar,  2002a,  2002b)  and 

 

12


improved environmental performance (TheDailyStar, 2002c), Khan and Belal (1999) 

argue that such calls largely amount to mere rhetoric due to a failure to make any real 

change  on  the  ground.  State  agencies  seem  to  be  escaping  responsibility  for  taking 

action  against  the  “corrupt  network”  because,  it  is  alleged,  they  are  often  part  of  it. 

Moreover, these agencies lack the knowledge, funds and manpower to ensure proper 

implementation of relevant laws. This explains why more than 1000 industrial units, 

identified as polluters, have ignored repeated notices from DoE since 1986 calling for 

corrective measures to be taken (Belal et al., 1998; Khan & Belal, 1999). In addition, 

the  increasing  number  of  fire  incidents  points  to  the  ineffectiveness  of  the  Factory 

Inspection  Directorate  which  has  failed  to  ensure  a  safe  working  environment  for 

employees (Khan, 2006). Recently this particular agency, with only 20 inspectors for 

50,000 factories, has come under intense media scrutiny focussing on its ‘bureaucratic 

tangles and corruption’ resulting in an unabated spate of accidents (Roy, 2006).  

 
 
It is perhaps encouraging to note that in the absence of an effective state mechanism a 

number  of  pressure  groups  have  emerged  recently  that  are  seeking  to  promote 

accountability  and  transparency  in  all  spheres  of  public  life,  including  responsible 

business practices. However, given their relative infancy and generally restricted scope 

and scale (Islam, 2000)2, a major question mark hangs over their ability to make any 

significant  impact.  Arguably,  of  more  immediate  concern  are  the  mounting  external 

pressures  on  Bangladeshi  companies  to  improve  their  social  and  environmental 

performance. 

 

Internationally, pressure is growing on domestic export-oriented companies, operating 

as suppliers to large Western corporations, to adopt international labour standards and 

 

13


carry  out  operations  in  a  responsible  manner.  Moreover,  operating  subsidiaries  of  

multinational  companies  are  increasingly  coming  under  the  scrutiny  of  international 

lobby  groups  pushing  them  to  enhance  their  social,  ethical  and  environmental 

performance in developing countries (Newson & Deegan, 2002). Of particular interest 

here  from  a  reporting  perspective  is  the  fact  that  one  of  the  major  multinational 

companies operating in Bangladesh published its first social report in accordance with 

AA  1000  and  the  GRI’s  Sustainability  Reporting  Guidelines  in  2003  and  has  since 

maintained a commitment to external social reporting. 

 

Our  concern  in  the  above  analysis  has  been  to  flesh  out  in  some  detail  the  tensions 

arising  from  competing  national,  organisational  and  international  pressures,  briefly 

referred  to  earlier,  which  one  might  expect  to  influence  the  attitudes  of  individual 

managers  towards  issues  of  corporate  social  responsibility  and  associated  reporting 

initiatives, and hence provide some tentative theoretical framework for interpreting our 

subsequent interview data.  We have clearly noted the presence of a number of adverse 

ethical, social and environmental consequences arising from the adoption of policies 

promoting  rapid,  export  led,  economic  growth  and  designed  to  attract  foreign 

investment,  which  has  resulted  in  growing  calls,  including  those  from  government 

sources, for companies to adopt more socially responsible attitudes. However, at the 

same  time,  government  appears  profoundly  reluctant  to  effectively  enforce  existing 

social  and  environmental  regulations,  whilst  also  showing  a  willingness 

to 

considerably  water  them  down  in  key  export  sectors  of  the  economy.  Additionally, 

whilst  civil  society  organisations  seeking  to  promote  greater  levels  of  social  and 

environmental accountability are beginning to emerge, they are presently in very much 

a fledgling state. Whether apparently growing international pressures to adopt social 

 

14


and environmental codes and standards, including in the reporting domain, are likely to 

prove  effective  in  promoting  anything  more  than  merely  cosmetic  change  is  a  moot 

point in view of questions arising over their ability to address the complex needs of the 

society in which they are introduced, as opposed to merely focussing at a superficial 

level  on  public  relations  concerns  and  being  designed  to  appease  Western  interests        

( see, for example, Klein, 2001; Litvin, 2003).  

 

Research Method 

The  main  objective  of  this  study  is  to  examine  the  perceptions  of  a  group  of  senior 

managers towards the emerging phenomenon of CSR in Bangladesh. In pursuit of this 

objective,  evidence  was  collected  via  semi-structured  interviews  carried  out  with 

corporate  managers  from  a  range  of  industrial  sectors.  As  noted  earlier,  a  principal 

motivation here is to critically engage (Gray, 2002) in conversation with this group of 

managers  via  conducting  a  programme  of  interviews,  and  thereby  identify  the 

limitations  of  current  CSR  practice  with  a  view  to  offering  suggestions  for  the 

improvement of such practice.  

 

Selection of Interviewees  

The  objective  behind  the  selection  of  interviewees  was  to  cover  a  wide  range  of 

industrial  sectors  representative  of  the  Bangladesh  economy.  Initial  contact  with  the 

top  100  companies  on  the  Dhaka  Stock  Exchange  was  made  through  formal  letters 

soliciting interviews. The letter was addressed to company secretaries and resulted in 

21 favourable responses being received. In addition, in order to incorporate the views 

of managers working in state owned companies, two public enterprises in the chemical 

sector were selected via the means of personal contact.  

 

15


 
By following the above procedures, 23 corporate managers, all Bangladeshi nationals, 

were interviewed during the period December 2001 to March 2002.  Six interviewees 

were  drawn  from  multi-national  companies  and  seventeen  from  the  domestic  group, 

the  latter  both  representing  the  private  (15)  and  public  (2)  sectors.  The  interviewees 

represent  a  wide  variety  of 

industrial  sectors;  garments  and 

textiles  (3), 

pharmaceuticals  and  chemicals  (6),  jute  (1),  engineering  (3),  food  (2),  cement  (2), 

leather (2), fuel and power (1), bank (2) and miscellaneous (1). 

 

Company  secretaries  (who  in  many  cases  also  held  the  post  of Chief  Accountant or 

Finance Director) formed the initial point of contact with the selected organisations. In 

all  but  two  instances,  where  the  matter  was  referred  to  other  managers,  the  same 

individual  nominated  him/herself  as  the  interviewee.  In  one  case  the  researcher  was 

referred to a manager within the respondent organisation’s Corporate and Regulatory 

Affairs department and in the other case he was referred to the general manager of the 

company.  All  interviewees  held  senior  management  posts  and  furthermore  were 

closely  involved  in  the  compilation  of  annual  reports  within  which  any  social 

disclosures are made. Moreover, as senior managers they possessed overall knowledge 

of the organisation including its strategic objectives which might have implications for 

CSR.  

 
Whilst,  from  the  nature  of  the  selection  process,  we  can  make  no  claim  that  the 

organisations  from  which  interviewees  are  drawn  are,  in  a  statistical  sense, 

representative of the Bangladeshi economy as a whole, they do represent a wide range 

of companies drawn from the key industrial sectors in Bangladesh. Additionally, we 

accept that there might be some self selection bias, in that one might expect companies 

 

16


already  engaged  in  some  form  of  CSR  activity  to  react  favourably  to  an  interview 

request.  Furthermore,  interviewees  themselves  may  well  be  less  than  candid  in  the 

opinions they express and attempt to convey views perceived as socially desirable and 

representative of what they believe the interviewer wishes to hear (Saunders, Lewis, & 

Thornhill, 2000). Attempts were made to minimise the effects of such possible biases 

by thorough preparation, careful design and conduct of the interviews. A further factor 

perhaps  worthy  of  note  is  that  open  communication  between  interviewer  and 

interviewees was arguably encouraged by a sharing of the same cultural background. 

Certainly, interviewees didn’t appear to be defensive, were prepared to debate at length 

issues that particularly concerned them and, as will be seen in the following section of 

the paper, expressed a wide range of views concerning the key topics addressed in this 

study. 

    

Interview Procedures 

Interviews  were  held  at  the  respondent’s  place  of  business  and  lasted  between  30 

minutes and two hours, depending on the degree of interest and detailed knowledge on 

the part of the interviewees. All interviews commenced with a brief introduction to the 

project,  together  with  an  outlining  of  the  objectives  of  the  interview.  In  all  but  one 

instance  interviews  were  recorded  for  subsequent  transcription.  In  the  case  of  the 

interviewee who refused permission to record proceedings, an outline of the interview 

was written up immediately afterwards and sent to the interviewee for verification and 

further  comment.  A  promise  of  anonymity  was  given  in  all  cases,  in  that  neither 

interviewees  nor  their  respective  organisations  would  be  identified  in  subsequent 

writing up of the interview data. 

 

 

17


Following  general  introductory  questions  relating  to  the  organisation  and  the 

interviewee’s role within it, subsequent dialogue broadly focused on the following key 

issues identified from our review of the CSR literature and knowledge of the specific 

context of Bangladesh: 

•  Managerial perceptions as to the need for corporate social reporting (CSR) 

•  Views as to which constituencies comprise the organisation’s key stakeholders, 

and the role, if any, played by stakeholder consultation in the reporting process 

•  The  perceived  relevance  of  prominent  social  accounting  standards  (notably 

GRI, AA1000 and SA8000) 

•  Key factors driving current and possible future disclosure practice. 

 

The interview protocol was followed as a rough guide to the discussion. In most cases 

the  questions  were  asked  in  an  open-ended  fashion  following  a  conversational  style 

(Maykut  &  Morehouse,  1994).  Transcripts  of  interviews,  together  with  notes 

appertaining to the one non-transcribed interview, were subsequently summarised and 

analysed thematically (Miles & Huberman, 1994).   

 

Empirical Findings 

Perceptions as to the Need for CSR 

With  only  four  exceptions,  interviewees  were  in  general  agreement  on  the  need  for 

some form of CSR. Fairly typical was the following comment: 

It  is  necessary,  because  in  addition  to  the  shareholders  there  are  many  other 
stakeholders  such  as  employees,  customers,  suppliers  and  lenders.  We  feel  that  we 
have an obligation to keep them informed through social disclosures. It’s a sort of self-
imposed  accountability.  (General  Manager,  Domestic  Company,  Miscellaneous 
Sector, emphasis added) 
 

 

18


For the public sector respondents in particular, CSR offers an opportunity to underline 

the welfare motives underpinning their activities that would otherwise go unnoticed: 

Our organisation, a state owned public sector organisation, has some social impact 
which may be reported through the CSR mechanism. (Company Secretary, Domestic 
Company, Pharmaceutical and Chemical Sector) 
 
Significantly, one interviewee from a UK multinational, whilst keen to highlight the 

leading role that multinationals may play in CSR initiatives, went on to note that; 

…obviously it can’t be the same for a developing country and a developed country. So 
we need adjustments and adaptations so that the social reporting process does address 
the  reality  of  a  country.  Yes,  I  do  think  there  is  a  need  for  social  reporting  but  the 
definition  needs  to  be  worked  out.  (Head,  Corporate  and  Regulatory  Affairs,  UK 
Multinational, Food Sector) 
 
 

Those  who  rejected  the  need  for  CSR  at  the  present  time  also  drew  attention  to  the 

specific situation prevailing in Bangladesh, but here in terms of low levels of literacy 

and  deficiencies  in  financial  reporting  making  the  whole  concept  somewhat 

superfluous.  As one put it: 

Until  awareness  increases,  literacy  levels  rise  and  the  agenda  is  thrust  from  the 
government level, I don’t see any point in it. In Bangladesh, where companies do not 
disclose  basic  financial  information  properly  and  credibly,  I’m  not  sure  whether  we 
can talk about things like social disclosures. (Company Secretary and Chief Financial 
Officer, Canadian Multinational, Miscellaneous Sector) 
 
 

For  another,  the  ongoing  struggle  with  basic  priorities  meant  that  very  few  people 

would be likely to be interested in CSR. 

CSR could be a nice idea, but very few companies make social and ethical disclosures 
in Bangladesh because shareholders and people in general are not interested…I’m not 
sure who is interested to know about the social and ethical activities of a company. 
Most of the shareholders are only interested in dividends and financial performance. 
(Company Secretary, Domestic Company, Leather Sector) 
 

 
 
 

 

19


Views Concerning the Organisation’s Key Stakeholders and the Role of Stakeholder 
Consultation 
 
Despite the broadly supportive stance for CSR adopted by our interviewees, in keeping 

with  the  views  of  their  Western  counterparts  portrayed  in  earlier  literature, 

shareholders were nevertheless overwhelmingly considered to be the most important 

stakeholder group. Fairly typical was the following comment: 

We’re  working  in  a  commercial  environment,  so  our  first  priority  will  be  our 
shareholders because they’ve invested in this company for the desired return. They’ll 
lose  confidence  in  the  company  if  they  fail  to  get  the  required  return.  (Company 
Secretary, US Multinational, Engineering Sector) 
 
A number of interviewees from domestic companies further drew attention to the fact 

that  founding  family  members  hold  majority  shareholdings  and  therefore  their 

interests, together with particular institutional investors, such as banks and insurance 

companies, took precedence over those of minority shareholders. 

 

To the extent that the interests of other stakeholder groups were taken into account, this 

depended upon specific organisational circumstances conferring economic power onto 

these groups. For consumer orientated companies, customers, and notably international 

buyers, not surprisingly appear to be a particularly powerful group: 

As  a  commercial  concern  in  our  opinion  another  very  important  stakeholder  is  our 
customer…So we’ll take on board, as much as we can, what our consumer wants and if 
we are lacking we need to raise our standard to reach that level. Customers are as 
important  as  the  shareholders.  (Head,  Corporate  and  Regulatory  Affairs,  UK 
Multinational, Food Sector) 
 
 

The above interviewee also drew attention to the difficulty faced in recruiting skilled 

labour in Bangladesh and went on to note: 

I would put at a par with the consumers our own people. To meet the expectations of 
the  consumer,  which  is  the  reason  why  we  are  here,  we  need  our  own  people,  our 
employees,  to  run  the  company  effectively.  So  it’s  all  about  creating  that  enabling 
environment, so that our people are able to meet the demands of the consumer. 

 

20


 
For  the  majority  of  domestic  company  interviewees,  however,  the  workforce  was 

predominantly  largely  unskilled,  whilst  being  readily  replaceable,  and  therefore  not 

regarded as an influential stakeholder. By contrast, within public sector undertakings 

employees exert some degree of economic power due to the influence of their trade 

unions  which  enjoy  a  close  liaison  with  mainstream  political  parties.  As  one 

interviewee noted: 

In the public sector trade unions are particularly powerful. They play an influential 
role in the decision making of the company, particularly in employee related matters 
such  as  pay  and  working  conditions.  (Company  Secretary,  Domestic  Public  Sector 
Company, Pharmaceutical and Chemicals Sector) 
 
 

Both  public  sector  interviewees  also  highlighted  the  importance  of  government  as  a 

stakeholder,  and  the  ultimate  authority  to  whom  they  were  accountable.  Indeed, 

government  was  the  only  other  key  stakeholder  mentioned  by  private  sector 

respondents, particularly those based within multinational companies. As one put it: 

Government is another important stakeholder because they might suspect us if they fail 
to collect the required revenue in the form of various taxes. So we’re accountable to 
the government as well. (Company Secretary, US Multinational, Engineering Sector)  
 
 
 
Particularly  noticeable  from  the  above  comments  are  the  restricted  number  of 

stakeholder groups acknowledged as being influential. With the one exception of the 

media  and  influential  lobby  groups,  mentioned  by  an  interviewee  from  a  company 

operating in a particularly sensitive industrial sector, social stakeholder groups such as 

the community, environment or wider society barely rated a mention in the course of 

the  interviews.  When  the  issue  of  dialogue,  or  consultation,  with  non-shareholder 

groups was raised an even more restrictive picture was painted. Fairly typical were the 

following comments: 

 

21


I  think  only  shareholders  can  have  a  say  because  it  is  ultimately  their  company. 
They’ve provided the finance. (Company Secretary, Domestic Company, Jute Sector) 
 
There is no legal provision other than for shareholders in the annual general meeting. 
We don’t want to invite problems by making such provisions. There is a danger in it. 
(Company Secretary, Domestic Company, Engineering Sector) 
 
 

Whereas a small minority of interviewees made vague reference to other groups such 

as customers, employees and government agencies ‘having a say’ it was clear that no 

formal mechanism existed for regular consultative exercises to be carried out. The only 

example  of  formal  stakeholder  surveys,  utilising  both  questionnaire  and  interview 

methodologies,  we  came  across  was  that  of  a  UK  multinational  which,  under  Head 

Office auspices, had formally adopted AA1000 procedures and had also followed GRI 

Guidelines for the publication of its first social report in 2003. However, even in this 

case there seemed little in the way of intent to empower stakeholders. On raising the 

issue of possible board level representation, for example, the interviewee vehemently 

expressed the view that: 

I don’t think that’s realistic……I think you then start diluting the focus of companies 
on their business……They would come in with their agenda and the last thing you want 
is someone coming onto the board who has no clue about the business and will not 
discuss  anything  about  the  business,  but  would  just  talk  about  society  and  social 
things.  In  the  first  place,  we  are  here  to  do  business  and  any  company  here  to  do 
business  has  to  earn  profit  but  at  the  same  time  maintain  a  reasonable  standard  of 
social responsibilities.   
 
 
 
The Relevance of Social Accounting Standards 

Whilst, as the above example makes clear, strong doubts can be expressed as to the 

efficacy  of  social  accounting  standards  and  guidelines  in  terms  of  empowering 

stakeholders (see also Adams, 2004), their adoption could arguably offer a modest step 

forward, at least in terms of encouraging dialogue. It is, therefore, of some relevance to 

 

22


note that a common feature of the most prominent social accounting standards, namely 

the GRI, AA1000 and SA8000, lies in their claims to internationality of application: 

The  Global  Reporting  Initiative  (GRI)  is  a  long-term,  multi-stakeholder, 
international process   whose  mission  is  to  develop  and  disseminate  globally 
applicable Sustainability Reporting   Guidelines  (“Guidelines”).  (GRI,  2002, 
p.1) 

international  membership 

The  development  process  has  included  extensive  consultation  with  the 
Institute’s 
its  Corporate  Leadership 
Network, and through events held in  association with collaborative institutions 
and networks in Australia, Continental Europe, India, Nordic countries, South 
Africa, the United Kingdom and the United States. (ISEA, 1999, p.4) 

including 

Social  Accountability  International  (SAI)  is  a  human  rights  organisation 
founded in 1996 that   seeks  to  improve  workplaces  and  communities  around 
responsible  standards. 
the world by developing and  implementing  socially 
(SAI, 2005, p.1) 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Despite the standards promulgators claims as to their universal applicability, only one 

respondent organisation had adopted the AA1000 and GRI’s Guidelines in developing 

their own reporting practices, and no other interviewee expressed the view that their 

organisation  was  planning  to  adopt  them  in  the  immediate  future.  Indeed,  five 

respondents,  including  two  from  multinational  companies,  were  unaware  of  the 

existence  of  either  the  GRI  or  AA1000.  More  familiarity  was  expressed  with  the 

provisions of SA8000, largely due to their compatibility with local legal requirements: 

You  will  be  surprised  to  learn  that  many  of  the  requirements  now  embodied  in  ILO 
conventions and SA8000 were made compulsory here through the Factories Act, 1965. 
(General Manager, Domestic Company, Miscellaneous Sector) 
 
Some of the requirements of SA8000 could be relevant. We were already complying 
with some of them as per local laws without even realising that they are required by 
SA8000 as well. (Company Secretary, Domestic Company, Food Sector). 
 
 

However, even more familiar were ISO standards, with nine interviewees noting that 

their organisation has already adopted, or is in the process of adopting, the ISO 9000 

 

23


Quality Standard. Again here, the need to gain the confidence of international buyers 

appears to largely explain the relative popularity of the latter:  

As an export orientated company we are committed to quality and we want to compete 
on  the  basis  of  quality.  This  [the  adoption of  ISO  9000]  has  given  us  a  competitive 
edge  over  our  competitors  in  neighbouring  countries  like  Sri  Lanka.  (Company 
Secretary, Domestic Company, Engineering Sector). 
 
 

For  a  significant  majority  of  interviewees,  the  major  problem  in  adopting  the  GRI 

Guidelines and AA1000 lay in their lack of applicability to the specific circumstances 

of Bangladesh. Fairly typical here was the following comment: 

In order to be relevant, international social accounting standards need to be tuned to 
our local circumstances. Only then might they be useful. Remember, these standards 
were developed in the Western context. Before implementation it must be considered to 
what  extent  these  standards  can  be  applied  to  the  socio-economic  context  of 
developing  countries  like  Bangladesh.  (Company  Secretary  and  Finance  Director, 
Domestic Company, Leather Sector) 
 
Even the interviewee from the sole company which had endorsed wholeheartedly the 

GRI’s Guidelines and AA1000 reporting route expressed similar reservations as to the 

standards applicability in the domestic context: 

I believe there is no such thing as one size fits all as soon as people realise that the 
world itself is lopsided in its ability to deliver. What would you say? These standards 
were developed from a…context which may not be similar to our social and economic 
conditions here. Therefore, imposing these standards on the developing world would 
be unfair, unrealistic and you can never hope to achieve what you want to achieve. 
(Head, Corporate and Regulatory Affairs, UK Multinational, Food Sector) 
 
The perceived unfairness inherent in imposing Western standards of social behaviour 

(and associated reporting practices) was expressed in particularly vehement terms by 

another interviewee in referring to the sensitive issue of child labour: 

If we do not give employment to these children they would have no earnings to feed 
themselves and their families. At least we are giving them work and minimum wages to 
live on.  The Western buyers are forcing us not to employ child labour. If you eliminate 
the child labour then you have the moral responsibility to rehabilitate them and that 
involves costs. The buyers are asking for improved health and safety requirements and 
better working conditions for the employees, which often require additional costs, but 
they  are  reluctant  to  increase  the  price.  They  are  facing  pressure  from  Western 

 

24


consumers to be socially and ethically responsible and then passing the burden on to 
us…We are already working on a very tight margin. Consequently it’s hurting us, not 
them. They are asking for disclosures to monitor us. They are not looking deeply at the 
root  cause  of  the  problem.  It’s  not  fair.  (Company  Secretary,  Domestic  Company, 
Garments and Textile Sector, emphasis added) 
 
 
 
It is of some significance to note in the light of the above comments that the driving 

force  for  implementing  the  GRI/AA1000  reporting  approach  adopted  in  the  UK 

multinational referred to above came from the parent company, in its development of a 

group-wide policy, rather than deriving from a decision taken at the domestic level. To 

the extent that other Bangladeshi organisations may in future go down a similar route, 

it  would  also  seem,  at  least  as  far  as  our  interviewees  are  concerned,  that  external, 

rather than internal, imperatives are likely to provide the deciding factor. Indeed, there 

seemed to be a recognition that such a development was probably inevitable. As one 

simply put it:  

It’s not a question of relevance. If we want to compete in the global market we have to 
adopt some of these standards sooner or later. If you want to get business you have to 
comply with these standards. You have very little choice. (General Manager, Domestic 
Company, Miscellaneous Sector).  
 
 
 
Key Factors Driving Current, and Possible Future, Disclosure Practice 
 
Whilst  there  seems  to  be  a  considerable  level  of  doubt  on  the  part  of  interviewees 

concerning the benefits of following a prescriptive standards based approach towards 

social reporting there was, as noted above, a general perception of the inevitability of 

social  disclosure,  largely  designed  to  address  the  concerns  of  powerful  external 

interests,  becoming  more  prevalent  in  the  future.  In  this  regard,  for  the  garments 

industry in particular, pressure from international buyers is an extremely potent factor 

influencing  disclosure  practice,  which  was  particularly  drawn  attention  to  by  two 

interviewees: 

 

25


I  am  already  under  pressure  from  the  buyers.  They  are  raising  the  issues  of  child 
labour, health and safety and working environment. They are saying that if you want to 
get the order you have got to do it, so I had to implement these requirements to survive. 
I am thinking to include this in our future reports to let the buyers know about it. I will 
send  it  to  different  overseas  exhibitions  and  embassies  for  the  information  of 
prospective  buyers.  (Company  Secretary,  Domestic  Company,  Garments  and  Textile 
Sector) 
 
In  the  wake  of  pressures  from  the  foreign  buyers  the  Bangladeshi  Garments 
Manufacturers  and  Employers  Association  has  framed  certain  guidelines  on  child 
labour, health and safety and minimum wages…and has asked its member companies 
to  follow  these  guidelines.  (Company  Secretary,  Domestic  Company,  Garments  and 
Textile Sector) 
 
Another export oriented company operating in the Hazaribagh area of Dhaka, an area 

which attracted significant media comment for causing very high levels of industrial 

pollution, as noted in the Bangladesh context section of this paper, particularly cited 

strong pressure being exercised by international buyers for environmental compliance: 

For  environmental  matters  there  are  already  pressures  from  international  buyers. 
When they visit our factory for inspection they check our environmental compliance. 
(Company Secretary and Finance Director, Domestic Company, Leather Sector) 
 
 

In  addition  to  the  demands  of  international  buyers  already  referred  to  above,  other 

external  factors  pointed  to  were  the  requirements  of  investors  and  international 

agencies such as the OECD, World Bank and IMF: 

You see, Bangladesh is in need of foreign investment…Foreign investors would look 
into  your  social  and  environmental  aspects  before  they  invest.  (General  Manager, 
Domestic Company, Miscellaneous Sector) 
 
It [CSR] will have to increase. Bangladeshi companies, particularly the multinational 
companies, will have to address the issue of CSR sooner or later, not for any other 
reason but because of the pressure of international agencies. (Company Secretary and 
Finance Director, UK Multinational, Pharmaceutical and Chemicals Sector) 
 
Pressure will come from agencies like UNDP, World Bank etc. The circumstances will 
be like this: if someone wants to do business in Bangladesh they’ll have to address the 
social  and  environmental  issues.  (Company  Secretary  and  Finance  Director,  UK 
Multinational, Engineering Sector) 
 
 
 

 

26


External pressures were also felt more indirectly via the influence of key executives 

influenced by exposure to Western ideas and wanting to create a favourable corporate 

image in accordance with such ideas: 

Our chairman is very keen on corporate social and environmental issues. He speaks on 
these  issues  at  various  forums  and  encourages  us  to  take  these  issues  into 
consideration.  We  have  started  to  address  these  issues  on  a  limited  scale.  It  will 
increase in future. We think it will improve our corporate image. (Company Secretary 
and Finance Director, Domestic Company, Leather Sector) 
 
 
Interestingly,  whilst  not  generally  seeing  internal  public  pressure  as  an  immediate 

driver for social disclosure practice, a number of interviewees expressed a view, albeit 

generally couched in rather vague terms, that it may represent a longer term influence. 

Fairly typical comments in this vein were: 

Because  people  are  becoming  increasingly  conscious  of  these  issues,  the  corporate 
culture is also changing. You will find a lot of youngsters taking on the challenges of 
business…Definitely  a  change  is  about  to  come.  Ours  is  a  sort  of  confrontational 
society.  It  takes  time  to  change  the  system,  but  it  is  bound  to  change.  (Company 
Secretary  and  Finance  Director,  UK  Multinational,  Pharmaceutical  and  Chemicals 
Sector) 
 
It  is  bound  to  increase  in  general  and  also  in  our  company  because  people’s 
awareness  is  increasing.  Moreover,  it  is  becoming  a  global  issue  crossing  the 
boundary.  So  you  will  certainly  see  it  in  Bangladesh  as  well.  (Company  Secretary, 
Domestic Company, Engineering Sector). 
 
 
 
A  small  minority  of  four  respondents  (perhaps  significantly,  all  from  multinational 

companies) were able to point to more specific sources of ‘internal’ public pressure, 

emanating 

largely  from  newly  emerging  domestic  environmental  NGOs  and 

community  pressure  groups,  influencing  their  actions  and  associated  reporting 

initiatives. For example, one interviewee from a company operating in a particularly 

sensitive sector addressed this point at some length, noting that: 

The only thing we foresee is that consumers and other stakeholders are becoming more 
invasive.  Consumers  are  no  longer  satisfied  with  the  product…The  biggest  threat 
comes from the anti-smoking lobby and that’s followed by  general awareness amongst 

 

27


the public as well…What we’re saying is hey, here is the product and you must know 
about it. There are real risks of disease associated with this product and we believe in 
making  that  information  available  to  people…We  now  publish  this  in  our  annual 
report and we want to do more to show that this product carries significant risk with it. 
(Head, Corporate and Regulatory Affairs, UK Multinational, Food Sector) 
 
 

Discussion and Conclusion 

Overwhelmingly,  the  views  expressed  by  our  interviewees  suggest,  as  was  the  case 

with Western based studies considered earlier, a CSR process in Bangladesh driven by 

a concern to improve corporate image and to manage the perceptions of economically 

powerful stakeholders. However, perceived individual sources of pressure for reporting 

change appear to be driven by specific organisational circumstances. Interviewees from 

multinational companies, for example, referred to the influence of parent companies, 

investors  and  the  demands  of  international  agencies  such  as  the  World  Bank.  By 

contrast, respondents from domestic companies, particularly those competing in export 

markets,  drew  particular  attention  to  pressures  emanating  from  international  buyers. 

Additionally,  multinational  company  interviewees  seemed  much  more  aware  of 

internal  influences,  arising  from  a  need  to  maintain  good  relations  with  government 

and  to  attract  suitably  skilled  employees.  Indeed,  a  small  number  went  further  in 

pointing  to  the  growing  power  of  domestic  NGOs  and  community  bodies. 

Significantly,  however,  in  keeping  with  the  stance  adopted  by  their  counterparts  in 

developed  countries,  such  awareness  was  not  accompanied  by  any  intention  to 

empower internal stakeholders via instituting meaningful institutional reform. Only in 

the  case  of  our  public  sector  respondents  were  employees,  through  the  influence  of 

powerful trade unions allied with mainstream political parties, seen to play a direct role 

in corporate decision-making.  

 

 

28


Due  to  the  limited  nature  of  our  interviewee  sample,  a  point  acknowledged  in  the 

Research  Method  section  of  the  paper,  we  would  not  wish  to  make  any  sweeping 

claims on the basis of the above tentative comparative analysis. Nevertheless, there are 

some  grounds  for  expecting  CSR  in  Bangladesh  to  be  more  readily  embraced  by 

multinationals and domestic export orientated companies (rather than their non-export 

orientated counterparts). Perhaps of some significance here is the fact that whereas the 

two multinational company respondents who professed ignorance of the existence of 

the GRI and AA1000 expressed interest in finding out about them, similar interest was 

not  shown  by  their  domestic  company  counterparts.    In  addition,  whilst  a  future 

upsurge  in  domestic  demand  for  improved  disclosure  practice  cannot  be  wholly 

discounted,  our  empirical  findings  echo  those  of  Rahaman  et  al’s  (2004)  study  that 

short  term  pressure  for  change  is  much  more  likely  to  come  from  external  sources. 

Furthermore, with the key motivating factor being one of organisational legitimisation, 

internationally accepted social reporting standards may well, at least in the longer term 

as  a  number  of  our  interviewees  indicated,  prove  particularly  influential  in  driving 

reporting initiatives.  

    

A major problem that arises from pursuing an agenda towards reporting in general, and 

standard setting in particular, driven by external forces is that it will inevitably focus, 

potentially in an over-simplistic fashion, on their interests and demands whilst not fully 

addressing  the  major  specific  environmental  and  social  issues  affecting  Bangladesh 

itself,  outlined  earlier  in  the  paper.  Furthermore,  in  not  directly  addressing  the 

accountability needs of economically less powerful domestic stakeholders, externally 

driven change is unlikely to be fully effective in terms of empowering the latter group. 

Thus,  for  example,  whereas,  on  the  surface,  desirable  outcomes  such  as  the  virtual 

 

29


elimination of child labour in the Bangladeshi garments industry may well be achieved 

(www.bgmea.com/social, accessed 1st. August 2003), as one interviewee noted further 

problems are created if little focus is placed on the rehabilitation of children affected 

whilst the financial burden is borne by the domestic supplier, not the Western buyer.  

 

Indeed, it is perhaps not simply the content of the reporting codes and standards that 

are the problem, rather it is the process by which they are established, a point which 

has been similarly noted in the context of financial accounting standardisation, both in 

developing  countries  in  general  (  see,  for  example,  Hove,  1986)  and  Bangladesh  in 

particular (Mir & Rahaman, 2005). As a number of our interviewees stated, there is 

little  attempt  apparently  being  made  at  present  to  address  the  specific  social  and 

economic  conditions  within  which  the  reporting  initiatives  are  to  be  introduced. 

Certainly, the interviewees in this study, whilst generally supportive of the principle of 

social  and  environmental  reporting  appear  to  be  largely  passive  participants  in  its 

operationalisation.  As  Kuasirikun  (2005)  notes  in  her  study  of  the  prospects  for 

implementing social and environmental accounting in Thailand, domestic input into the 

process  is  essential.  She  further  argues  that  in  a  developing  country  context  the 

involvement of government regulatory agencies is called for. Indeed, on the surface, 

this latter argument would appear particularly apposite in the case of Bangladesh given 

the  present  relative  underdevelopment  of  civil  society  organisations,  and  consequent 

limited  potential  for  non-economic  stakeholder  engagement  designed  to  secure 

completeness of reporting (Adams, 2004), together with the prominent role played by 

the government as a ‘stakeholder’, a point made by a number of our interviewees. 

 

 

30


Notwithstanding the above remarks, serious questions arise as to whether pursuing a 

codes and standards based approach in Bangladesh is in fact premature at the present 

time. Indeed, two of our interviewees made specific mention of the need to meet basic 

social priorities, to which we would add the tackling of prevailing levels of corruption, 

before CSR, in the Western sense of the term, can be meaningfully put on the agenda. 

Placing a focus on standardisation issues in the social domain at this stage may merely 

serve to displace attention from fundamental macro problems centring on basic flaws 

in trade arrangements, perhaps most notably the purchasing policies of Western buyers 

(see UNRISD, 2000). Equally problematical, in the light of Kuasirikun’s call for the 

involvement of government regulatory agencies in the standardisation process, is the 

priority given by the Bangladeshi government itself to the implementation of policies 

designed to promote foreign direct investment, particularly the establishment of export 

processing  zones  whose  essential  attractiveness  to  foreign  investors  centres  on 

‘flexible’  employment  conditions  and  the  banning  of  trade  unions,  together  with  a 

seemingly  profound  reluctance  to  effectively  enforce  such  social  and  environmental 

regulations that are already in place. Given such reluctance, it is difficult to see how 

the introduction of further reporting requirements, whose content is largely prescribed 

by  the  dominant  preoccupations  of  Western  investors  and  consumers,  could  lead  to 

meaningful substantive change in organisational practice. 

 

The  fundamental  point  here  is  that  more  emphasis  is  needed  on  institutions  and 

capacity  building,  such  as  establishing  the  rule  of  law,  empowering  civil  society 

organisations  and  promoting  free  trade  unions,  in  the  relative  absence  of  which 

standardisation initiatives are simply ‘tantamount to putting the cart before the horse’ 

(UNRISD, 2000, p.12).3 The above noted emasculation of trade unions in the export 

 

31


processing  zones  we  would  argue  is  a  particularly  serious  issue  in  the  current 

Bangladeshi  context  in  that  at  the  present  time,  as  may  be  inferred  from  the  views 

expressed  by  our  public  sector  interviewees,  only  they,  in  the  face  of  government 

inaction, or indeed acquiescence to the demands of international capital, are capable of 

providing the necessary degree of countervailing power to that of prevailing economic 

interests (Frank, 2001). Without such countervailing power being exercised key issues 

faced  in  the  major  export  producing  industries  in  particular,  such  as  the  rights  of 

female  workers  and  work-place  health  and  safety,  are  unlikely  to  be  meaningfully 

addressed. Significantly, disempowerment of trade unions would appear to represent a 

major  objective  of  multinationals  setting  up  shop  in  developing  countries  in  general     

(see,  for  example,  Korten,  2001),  a  fact  that  calls  into  question  any  avowed 

commitment  to  social  accountability,  certainly  any  accountability  that  may  be 

effectively enforced.      

 

The  overall  impression  gleaned  from  our  programme  of  interviews  is  that  the 

introduction  of  codes,  standards  and  associated  reporting  initiatives  by  Bangladeshi 

companies is simply part of a process of organisational reputation management largely 

designed  to  appease  Western  economic  interests.  This  is  perhaps  particularly 

noticeable  in  the  relative  popularity  of  the  ISO  9000  Quality  Standard  amongst  our 

interviewees,  a  standard  which,  significantly,  carries  no  reporting  obligations  and 

therefore  adds  little  to  corporate  transparency.  Financial  imperatives,  themselves 

apparently central to government policy, appear to predominate over issues of social 

accountability  to  non-economic  domestic  stakeholders.  In  such  a  climate,  externally 

imposed codes and standards arguably amount to little more than the erection of non-

 

32


tariff trade barriers, particularly where the associated costs, as is highly likely to be the 

case, are borne by domestic suppliers to Western markets.  

 

It is further highly questionable whether non-export orientated companies will buy into 

social  accounting  standards,  or  that  domestic  stakeholders,  notably  employees  and 

consumers, groups that appear to fare particularly badly under current circumstances, 

will  gain  any  benefit.  For  there  to  be  any  progress  towards  empowering  indigenous 

stakeholder  groups  there  needs  to  be  a  substantial  domestic  input  into  the  process. 

However,  as  noted  earlier,  civil  society  organisations  in  Bangladesh  have  not 

developed  to  the  extent  that  they  are  able  to  contribute  meaningfully  at  the  present 

time,  whilst  domestic  management  appears  largely  passive.  In  these  circumstances 

only the commitment of trade unions to the cause of social accountability offers much 

hope, small as that might be, for the immediate future. Most fundamentally, prior to 

introducing administrative (reporting) reform, we would suggest that, as of course is 

also the case in developed countries, there is a pressing need for institutional reform 

designed to bring about more democratic corporate decision making processes within 

which  economically  less  powerful  indigenous  stakeholders  may  have  a  voice  (see 

O'Dwyer, Unerman, & Bradley, 2005; O'Dwyer, Unerman, & Hession, 2005). Sadly, 

the evidence from this particular study provides little grounds for optimism that such 

reform is likely to be forthcoming in the near future. 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

33


 

Notes 

2. 

1.  These are special industrial zones established by the Government of Bangladesh for use by export 
oriented industries mainly run by the foreign investors. The industrial units located in these zones 
enjoy  special  privileges  which  include  access  to  better  infrastructural  facilities,  fiscal  incentives 
such as tax holidays and provision of a cheap labour force. Additionally, under current law, workers 
in these zones are not allowed to organise or bargain collectively (Frost, 2005). 
Islam (2000) argues that pressure groups can play a very important role in the betterment of socio-
economic  life  in  Bangladesh.  However,  he observed  that desirable  change  has  not  occurred with 
regard to social development in general and environmental protection in particular, mainly due to 
the absence of strong, broad-based pressure groups. This is evidenced by the fact that most of these 
groups,  such  as  Bangladesh  Environment  Network  (BEN),  Bangladesh  Environmental  Lawyers 
Association (BELA), Bangladesh Poribesh Andolon (BAPA, Bangladesh Environment Movement), 
Coalition of Environmental NGOs and Forum of Environmental Journalists, Bangladesh (FEJB) are 
of  recent  origin  and  other  groups,  such  as  the  Consumer  Association  of  Bangladesh  (CAB), 
Adhunic,  an  anti-smoking  lobby,  and  Bangladesh  Mohila  Porishad,  promoting  the  concept  of 
women’s emancipation and empowerment, suffer from serious lack of resources. 

3.  We  should  stress  here  that  we  do  not  view  the  addressing  of  financial  reporting  deficiencies,  as 
called for by one interviewee, as a necessary precondition for establishing effective CSR processes. 
The  experience  of  developed  countries  where,  despite  the  existence  of  sophisticated  financial 
reporting regimes, CSR, as we noted earlier, stands in need of significant improvement to achieve 
the fundamental objectives of transparency and accountability, is of some relevance here. Indeed, 
such  an  initial  emphasis  on  financial  reporting  can  be  considered  as  merely  indicative  of  the 
overriding priority extended to the interests of economically powerful stakeholder groups, notably 
investors.  

 

 

 

References 

Adams,  C.  (2002),  "Internal  organisational  factors  influencing  corporate  social  and 
reporting",  Accounting,  Auditing  and  Accountability  Journal, 

ethical 
Vol.15.No.2, pp.223-250. 

Adams,  C.  (2004),  "The  ethical,  social  and  environmental  reporting-performance 
portrayal gap", Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal, Vol.17.No.5, 
pp.731-757. 

Afrin, S. N. (2002, 1st February). Garment Girls Still Left Neglected. The Bangladesh 
Observer,  Available  at:  http://www.bangladesh.net/observer/  [1st  February, 
2002] 
Ahmed,  N. 

(No. 
UNCTAD/LDC/MISC/2006/4).  United  Nations  Conference  on  Trade  and 
Development (UNCTAD), Geneva. 

(2006).  UNCTAD  Case 

Bangladesh 

Study 

on 

 

34


Aziz, M. A. (2002, 16th August). Who cares about consumers? The Financial Express, 

Available at: www.financialexpress-bd.com/editorial [16th August, 2002] 

Bebbington, J. (1997), "Engagement, education and sustainability: a review essay on 
environmental accounting", Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal, 
Vol.10.No.3, pp.365-381. 

Belal,  A.  (2000),  "Environmental  Reporting  in  Developing  Countries:  Empirical 
Evidence  from  Bangladesh",  Eco-Management  and  Auditing,  Vol.7.No.3, 
pp.114-121. 

Belal,  A.  (2001),  "A  Study  of  Corporate  Social  Disclosures  in  Bangladesh", 

Managerial Auditing Journal, Vol.16.No.5, pp.274-289. 

Belal,  A.  R.,  Khan,  N.  A.,  &  Alam,  S.  A.  (1998),  "Industrial  Pollution  and  the 
Environment  in  Bangladesh:  An  Overview",  Asian  Journal  of  Environmental 
Management, Vol.6.No.2, pp.115-124. 

Buhr,  N.  (1998),  "Environmental  Performance,  Legislation  and  Annual  Report 
Disclosure:  The  Case  of  Acid  Rain  and  Falconbridge",  Accounting,  Auditing 
and Accountability Journal, Vol.11.No.2, pp.163-190. 

Buhr,  N.  (2002),  "A  structuration  view  on  the  initiation  of  environmental  reports", 

Critical Perspectives on Accounting, Vol.13.No.1, pp.17-38. 

Byron,  R.  K.  (2005,  9  March).  Corporate  sector  to  be  accountable  to  JS.  The  Daily 
Star,  Available  at:  http://thedailystar.net/2005/02/09/d5020905.htm    [16th 
November, 2005] 

Chepesiuk,  R.  (2004,  19th  May).  South  Asia's  women  garment  workers.  The  Daily 

Star, Available at: http://thedailystar.net/2005/05/19 [16th November, 2005] 

Deegan,  C.,  &  Blomquist,  C.  (2006),  "Stakeholder  influence  on  corporate  reporting: 
An exploration of the interaction between WWF-Australia and the Australian 
minerals  industry",  Accounting,  Organizations  and  Society,  Vol.31.No.4-5, 
pp.343-372. 

EPB. (2006). Review of Export Performance 2004-2005 by Export Promotion Bureau 
of  Bangladesh  (EPB).  Available  at:  http://www.epb.gov.bd/PDF/Statistics-
2004-2005/Bangladesh_Export_Statistics_2004-2005.pdf [20th July, 2006]. 

Frank, T. (2001), One Market Under God: Extreme Capitalism, Market Populism and 

the End of Economic Democracy, Secker and Warburg, London. 

Frost,  S.  (2005),  "Garment  factory  collapses  in  Bangladesh",  CSR  Asia  Weekly, 

Vol.1.No.16, pp.12-13. 

 

35


Gray,  R.  (2002),  "The  social  accounting  project  and  Accounting,  Organisations  and 
Society: Privileging engagement, imaginings, new accountings and pragmatism 
over  critique?"  Accounting,  Organisations  and  Society,  Vol.27.No.7,  pp.687-
708. 

GRI.  (2002).  Sustainability  Reporting  Guidelines.  Global  Reporting  Initiative  (GRI), 

Boston. 

Hasan,  R.  (2002,  14  March).  Tax  Evasion  Charges  Against  Cement  Company.  The 

Daily Star, Available at: www.dailystarnews.com [18th March, 2002] 

Hossain, M. Z. (2001). Child labour in Bangladesh: magnitude, trends and features. 
Available  at:  http://www.cwa.tnet.co.th/booklet/Bangladesh.htm  [27  July, 
2001]. 

Hove,  M.  R.  (1986),  "Accounting  Practices  in  Developing  Countries:  Colonialism's 
Legacy  of  Inappropriate  Technologies",  International  Journal  of  Accounting: 
Education and Research, Vol.22.No. pp.81-100. 

Imam, S. (1999), "Environmental Reporting in Bangladesh", Social and Environmental 

Accounting, Vol.19.No.2, pp.12-14. 

Imam,  S.  (2000),  "Corporate  Social  Performance  Reporting 

in  Bangladesh", 

Managerial Auditing Journal, Vol.15.No.3, pp.133-141. 

Inam,  H.  (1995,  8  April).  Bangladesh  Faces  Threat  of  Ecological  Catastrophe.  The 

Bangladesh Observer, Available at:  

ISEA. (1999). Accountability (AA1000) Framework. The Institute of Social and Ethical 

Accountability (ISEA), London. 

Islam, N. (2000). Protecting Bangladesh's Environment: The Role of the Civil Society. 
In M. F. Ahmed (Ed.), Bangladesh Environment 2000 (pp. 643-666). Dhaka: 
BAPA. 

Khaleque,  A.  (2005,  18th  July).  Transparency,  corporate  corruption  and  Anti-
at: 

Star, 
corruption 
http://thedailystar.net/2005/07/18 [16th November, 2005] 

Commission. 

Available 

Daily 

The 

Khan,  M.  A.  (2001a,  10th  August).  Hazaribagh  residents  face  health  hazards.  News 
[10th 

From  Bangladesh,  Available  at:  www.bangladesh-web.com/news 
August, 2001] 

Khan,  M.  A.  (2001b,  1st  July).  No  step  to  check  toxic  tannery  waste  disposal.  The 

Daily Star, Available at: www.dailystarnews.com [1st July, 2001] 

 

36


Khan,  M.  A.  (2006,  1st  March).  Garments  factories  are  now  death  traps.  The  Daily 

Star, Available at: http://thedailystar.net/2006/03/01 [1st March, 2006] 

Khan, M. A., & Hasan, R. (2005, 16th March). Buriganga turns into a toxic dump. The 
Daily  Star,  Available  at:  http://thedailystar.net/2005/03/16  [16th  November, 
2005] 

Khan, N. A., & Belal, A. R. (1999), "The Politics of the Bangladesh Environmental 

Protection Act", Environmental Politics, Vol.8.No.1, pp.311-317. 

Klein, N. (2001), No Logo, Flamingo, London. 
Korten,  D.  C.  (2001),  When  Corporations  Rule  the  World,  Kumarian  Press, 

Connecticut. 

Kuasirikun, N. (2005), "Attitudes to the development and implementation of social and 
environmental  accounting  in  Thailand",  Critical  Perspectives  on  Accounting, 
Vol.16.No.8, pp.1035-1057. 

Larrinaga-González, C., & Bebbington, J. (2001), "Accounting change or institutional 
implementation  of  environmental 

appropriation?--A  case  study  of 
accounting", Critical Perspectives on Accounting, Vol.12.No.3, pp.269-292. 

the 

Larrinaga-González, C., Carrasco-Fenech, F., Caro-González, F., Correa-Ruiz, C., & 
Páez-Sandubete,  J.  (2001),  "The  role  of  environmental  accounting 
in 
organisational  change:  an  exploration  of  Spanish  companies",  Accounting, 
Auditing and Accountability Journal, Vol.14.No.2, pp.213-239. 

Litvin, D. (2003), Empires of Profit, Texere Publishing, New York. 
Lodhia,  S.  K.  (2003),  "Accountants'  response  to  the  environmental  agenda  in  a 
developing  nation:  an  initial  and  exploratory  study  on  Fiji",  Critical 
Perspectives on Accounting, Vol.14.No.7, pp.715-737. 

Maykut,  R.,  &  Morehouse,  R.  (1994),  Beginning  Qualitative  Research: 

  A 

Philosophical and Practical Guide, The Falmer Press, London. 

Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994), Qualitative Data Analysis, Sage, Beverly 

Hills, CA. 

Milne,  S.  (2001).  Textile  workers  build  solidarity  in  Bangladesh.  The  Guardian 

(Online), Available at: www.guardian.co.uk [9th April, 2001] 

Mir,  M.,  &  Rahaman,  A.  S.  (2005),  "The  adoption  of  international  accounting 
standards  in  Bangladesh",  Accounting,  Auditing  &  Accountability  Journal, 
Vol.18.No.6, pp.816-841. 

 

37


Murshed, S. K. (2005, 20th March). Child labour common in tanneries. The Daily Star, 

Available at: http://thedailystar.net/2005/03/20 [16th November, 2005] 

Newson,  M.,  &  Deegan,  C.  (2002),  "Global  expectations  and  their  association  with 
corporate social disclosure practices in Australia, Singapore, and South Korea", 
The International Journal of Accounting, Vol.37.No.2, pp.183-213. 

Nurunnabi, A. (2002, 29 June). Pollution of River Water. The Daily Star, Available at: 

www.dailystarnews.com [29th June, 2002] 

O'Dwyer, B. (2002), "Managerial perceptions of corporate social disclosure: An Irish 
story", Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal, Vol.15.No.3, pp.406-
436. 

O'Dwyer,  B.  (2003),  "Conceptions  of  corporate  social  responsibility:  the  nature  of 
managerial  capture",  Accounting,  Auditing  and  Accountability  Journal, 
Vol.16.No.4, pp.523 -- 557. 

O'Dwyer, B. (2005), "The construction of a social account: a case study in an overseas 
aid agency", Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol.30.No.3, pp.279-296. 
O'Dwyer, B., Unerman, J., & Bradley, J. (2005), "Perceptions on the emergence and 
future  development  of  corporate  social  disclosure  in  Ireland:  Engaging  the 
voices  of  non-governmental  organisations",  Accounting,  Auditing  and 
Accountability Journal, Vol.18.No.1, pp.14-43. 

O'Dwyer,  B.,  Unerman,  J.,  &  Hession,  E.  (2005),  "User  needs  in  sustainability 
reporting:  perspective  of  stakeholders  in  Ireland",  European  Accounting 
Review, Vol.14.No.4, pp.759-787. 

Owen, D. (2004). Adventures in Social and Environmental Accounting and Auditing 
Research: A Personal Reflection. In C. Humphrey & W. Lee (Eds.), The Real 
Life Guide to Accounting Research (pp. 23-36). Oxford: Elsevier. 

Owen,  D.  L.,  Swift,  T.,  &  Hunt,  K.  (2001),  "Questioning  the  Role  of  Stakeholder 
Engagement  in  Social  and  Ethical  Accounting,  Auditing  and  Reporting", 
Accounting Forum, Vol.25.No.3, pp.264-282. 

Parker, L. D. (2005), "Social and environmental accountability research: a view from 
the  commentary  box",  Accounting,  Auditing  and  Accountability  Journal, 
Vol.18.No.6, pp.842-860. 

Rahaman,  A.  S.,  Lawrence,  S.,  &  Roper,  J.  (2004),  "Social  and  environmental 
reporting  at  the  VRA:  institutionalised  legitimacy  or  legitimation  crisis?" 
Critical Perspectives on Accounting, Vol.15.No.1, pp.35-56. 

 

38


Rahman, M. S. (2002, 1st May). Beximco Shares Grounded. The Daily Star, Available 

at: www.dailystarnews.com [1st May, 2002] 

Rahman,  M.  S.  (2003,  5th  July).  Auditors'  compromise  blocks  good  corporate 
governance.  The  Daily  Star,  Available  at:  www.thedailystar.net  [5th  July, 
2003] 

Rashid, R. B. (1998). Women Employment: change and choice for women workers in 

Bangladesh. Available at: www. oneworld.org/ips2/mar98 [30 July, 2001]. 

Roy, P. (2005, 17th June). Eating dangerously: watchdog's role mostly missing. The 
Daily  Star,  Available  at:  http://thedailystar.net/2005/06/17/d5061701044.htm 
[8th December, 2005] 

Roy, P. (2006, 28th February). Factory safety watch in complete disarray. The Daily 

Star, Available at: http://thedailystar.net/2006/02/28 [28th February, 2006] 

SAI. (2005). Social Accountability International and SA 8000. Social Accountability 

International (SAI), New York. 

Saunders,  M.,  Lewis,  P.,  &  Thornhill,  A.  (2000),  Research  Methods  for  Business 

Students, Financial Times Prentice Hall, Essex. 

TheDailyStar.  (2002a,  7th  August).  Dhaka  firm  to  ensure  int'l  labour  standard.  The 

Daily Star, Available at: www.dailystarnews.com [8th August, 2002] 

TheDailyStar. (2002b, 30th April). Govt to formulate pragmatic gender equity strategy. 

The Daily Star, Available at: www.dailystarnews.com [8th August, 2002] 

TheDailyStar.  (2002c,  29  April).  Govt  to  snap  water,  power  connections,  if  found 
guilty.  The  Daily  Star,  Available  at:  www.dailystarnews.com  [8th  August, 
2002] 

TheDailyStar.  (2004,  16th  September).  Unicef,  ILO  call  for  ending  worst  forms  of 
child  labour.  The  Daily  Star,  Available  at:  http://thedailystar.net/2005/09/16 
[16th November, 2005]. 

TheIndependent.  (2001,  7th  August).  Big  companies  selling  adulterated  goods.  The 
Independent,  Available  at:  www.independent-bangladesh.com  [8th  August, 
2001] 

TheNewNation.  (2001,  29  August).  Defaulters  busy  rescheduling  loans.  The  New 

Nation, Available at: www.nation-online.com [30th August, 2001] 

UNCTAD. 

(2005).  World 

Investment 

Report 

2005.  Available 

at: 

http://www.unctad.org/fdistatistics [11th October, 2005]. 

 

39


Unerman, J., & Bennett, M. (2004), "Increased stakeholder dialogue and the internet: 
towards  greater  corporate  accountability  or  reinforcing  capitalist  hegemony?" 
Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol.29.No.7, pp.685-707. 

UNRISD. (2000). Promoting socially responsible business in developing countries: the 
potential and limits of voluntary initiatives (Workshop Report). United Nations 
Research Institute for Social Development (UNRISD), Geneva. 

WorldBank. (2005). World Development Indicators Database, August 2005. Available 

at: http://www.worldbank.org/data/dataquery.html [12th October, 2005]. 

 
                                                 
 

 

40

