Strategic Management Journal
Strat. Mgmt. J., 27: 1205–1219 (2006)
Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com) DOI: 10.1002/smj.556
Received 15 March 2004; Final revision received 17 March 2006

THE IMPACT OF MARKET ACTIONS ON FIRM
REPUTATION
DAX K. BASDEO,* KEN G. SMITH, CURTIS M. GRIMM, VIOLINA P. RINDOVA
and PAMELA J. DERFUS
RobertH.SmithSchoolofBusiness,UniversityofMaryland,CollegePark,Maryland,
U.S.A.

Drawing on signaling theory, we hypothesize that a ﬁrm’s reputation is shaped by its own market
actions and the actions of its industry rivals. We view market actions as signals that convey
information about the underlying competencies of ﬁrms and inﬂuence stakeholder evaluations
of them. We ﬁnd that the total number of a ﬁrm’s market actions, the complexity of its action
repertoire, the time lag in rivals’ responses to its actions, and the similarity of its repertoire with
those of its rivals positively affect its reputation. These results suggest that a ﬁrm’s reputation is
inﬂuenced both by its own actions and by its rivals’ actions. Copyright  2006 John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.

INTRODUCTION

The importance of a company’s reputation as a
source of competitive advantage is well established
in the strategy literature (e.g., Fombrun and Shan-
ley, 1990; Hall, 1992). Numerous studies have
empirically linked ﬁrm reputation to its ﬁnan-
cial performance and social standing (Brown and
Perry, 1994; Deephouse, 2000; Fombrun and Shan-
ley, 1990; Fryxell and Wang, 1994; Roberts and
Dowling, 2002). While these studies have demon-
strated the positive relationship between reputa-
tion and performance, less research has focused
on how a ﬁrm may build a reputation. Several
authors have advanced conceptual frameworks that
propose how reputations are constructed through
market actions (Clark and Montgomery, 1998;
Weigelt and Camerer, 1988), patterns of resource
ﬂows (Dierickx and Cool, 1989), market signals
(Fombrun and Shanley, 1990; Heil and Robertson,

reputation; market

Keywords:
dynamics
*Correspondence to: Dax K. Basdeo, Robert H. Smith School
of Business, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742,
U.S.A. E-mail: dbasdeo@rhsmith.umd.edu

competitive

actions;

1991), and a combination of resource ﬂows and
strategic communications (Fombrun and Rindova,
1998; Rindova and Fombrun, 1999). Although
these frameworks emphasize to different extents
the role of market actions, investments, and com-
munication in the reputation building process, they
tend to agree that reputations form as stakehold-
ers observe the strategic choices and behaviors of
ﬁrms and draw from these observations inferences
about the strategic characteristics and capabilities
of these ﬁrms. Taken together, these frameworks
suggest that reputation formation can be broadly
understood as a signaling process, in which the
strategic choices of ﬁrms send signals to observers
and observers use these signals to form impres-
sions of these ﬁrms.

In this paper we extend the signaling perspec-
tive (Heil and Robertson, 1991; Robertson, Eliash-
berg, and Rymon, 1995) by theorizing reputation
formation as a communication process in which
industry context and the actions of rivals inﬂuence
how the signals of a focal ﬁrm affect its repu-
tation. Therefore, we develop and test a theory
about how reputation formation is inﬂuenced by
the characteristics of a ﬁrm’s market actions over

Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.


1206

D. K. Basdeo et al.

time, as well as the by the characteristics of the
industry contexts and competitive contexts, within
which its actions are observed and interpreted by
stakeholders. Thus, in contrast
to past research
that has studied how observable strategic choices
with regard to level of diversiﬁcation, R&D invest-
ment, or marketing expenditure, for example, may
serve as signals of unobservable attributes of the
ﬁrm (Fombrun and Shanley, 1990), we study how
more visible market behaviors, such as competitive
actions taken in the marketplace to achieve speciﬁc
competitive goals (e.g., Smith, Grimm and Gan-
non, 1992), affect a ﬁrm’s reputation. Consistent
with signaling theory, we view the visible mar-
ket actions of ﬁrms as signals that communicate
information about the ﬁrms’ intentions, character-
istics, and resources (Weigelt and Camerer, 1988).
These signals shape a ﬁrm’s reputation because
they enable stakeholders to form impressions and
opinions about its ability to create value for them
(Clark and Montgomery, 1998; Rindova and Fom-
brun, 1999).

Our contribution lies in extending this signaling
perspective to account for the effects that industry
context and rivals’ market actions may have on
how stakeholders receive the signals of the focal
ﬁrm, thereby inﬂuencing the focal ﬁrm’s reputa-
tion. In other words, we suggest that a ﬁrm’s repu-
tation depends not only on its own actions, but also
on the actions of its rivals, who must also com-
pete for the attention of stakeholders, and on the
industry context in which the market actions takes
place (Clark and Montgomery, 1998; Rindova and
Fombrun, 1999). Overall, our study contributes to
reputation research a more comprehensive view of
the signaling process through which reputations
form by accounting for the effects of three fac-
tors that inﬂuence the formation of ﬁrms’ reputa-
tions: (1) the pattern and characteristics of a ﬁrm’s
market actions; (2) the characteristics of its com-
petitors’ market actions; and (3) the characteristics
of the industry within which the actions of the ﬁrm
and its competitors are observed and interpreted by
stakeholders (Heil and Robertson, 1991; Robertson
et al., 1995).

MARKET ACTIONS AND REPUTATION
FORMATION

Weigelt and Camerer deﬁne the reputation of a ﬁrm
as ‘a set of attributes ascribed to a ﬁrm, inferred

Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

from the ﬁrm’s past actions’ (Weigelt and Camerer,
1988: 443). A ﬁrm’s reputation therefore reﬂects
stakeholder impressions of the ﬁrm’s disposition
to behave in a certain manner (Clark and Mont-
gomery, 1998),
incorporating information about
how a ﬁrm compares to its competitors (Rao,
1994). Favorable stakeholder impressions are valu-
able to ﬁrms because they increase stakeholders’
willingness to exchange resources with them (Hall,
1992; Rindova and Fombrun, 1999). Favorable
reputations allow ﬁrms to increase prices to con-
sumers (e.g., Kihlstrom and Riordan, 1984), pro-
vide a cushion for ﬁrms to recover from crises
(Gregory, 1998), create mobility barriers within an
industry (Wilson, 1985), and have other direct and
indirect effects on ﬁrms’ proﬁtability (e.g., Black,
Carnes, and Richardson, 2000; Roberts and Dow-
ling, 2002).

Recognizing that a reputation can be a key
strategic resource to a ﬁrm gives rise to a funda-
mental question: how do ﬁrms build a favorable
reputation? Game theorists who study competi-
tive interactions among ﬁrms offer formal mod-
els of reputation building that link certain market
actions to ﬁrm reputation (Weigelt and Camerer,
1988). For example, a ﬁrm that undertakes a series
of price cuts and moves aggressively to expand
capacity leads market participants and rivals to
conclude that it will defend vigorously its compet-
itive position in the future. Over time, such a ﬁrm
will develop a reputation as a ‘tough competitor.’
Thus, the market actions of a ﬁrm convey signals
that may provide important information about its
strategic goals and intent and over time enable
observers to form beliefs and expectations about
the future behaviors of the ﬁrm. Clark and Mont-
gomery (1998) employed this signaling perspective
empirically in a game simulation to examine how
the actions of a ﬁrm inﬂuence the perceptions of
market participants as to its capabilities as a com-
petitor. Their study provides empirical support for
the argument that the market actions of a ﬁrm serve
as signals that shape its reputations; in addition, it
shows that the pattern of these actions, in terms of
how consistent they were over time, also affected
the ﬁrm’s reputation. Overall, while the idea that a
ﬁrm’s reputation is a result of its market actions is
fundamental to game-theoretic models, there have
been limited efforts to study how the actual real
behaviors of ﬁrms in markets may affect their rep-
utations.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 27: 1205–1219 (2006)
DOI: 10.1002/smj


The Impact of Market Actions on Firm Reputation

1207

We address this limitation in prior research by
developing initial theory to explain how the pat-
terns of market actions of a focal ﬁrm, as well
as of its competitors, affect its reputation. View-
ing reputation as an intangible asset depending on
‘the interpretations of multiple constituents about
how ﬁrms create value in an industry’ (Rindova
and Fombrun, 1999: 705), we propose that repu-
tations form through a collective process of infor-
mation exchanges among stakeholders about the
focal ﬁrm based on its market actions. The actions
of the focal ﬁrm ‘emanate’ a variety of signals
to be ‘received’ by various stakeholders (Smith
and Grimm, 1991). Even if stakeholders do not
‘observe’ these signals directly, they receive infor-
mation about them through interpersonal networks
or through information intermediaries, such as the
media (Pollock and Rindova, 2003). Thus, directly
or indirectly, stakeholders participate in discourse
and information exchanges, in which they receive
information related to the market actions of ﬁrms
and form impressions and/or make inferences
about them (Clark and Montgomery, 1998; Fom-
brun and Shanley, 1990). Based on these impres-
sions and inferences, stakeholders then make deci-
sions as to the extent
they are willing to
exchange resources with a particular ﬁrm—which
ultimately affects the ﬁrm’s performance (Rindova
and Fombrun, 1999).

that

We further theorize that a ﬁrm’s market actions
provide visible signals upon which stakeholders
form impressions and inferences about the ﬁrm.
Market actions are externally directed resource
deployments that serve to affect the ﬁrm’s rep-
utation because they convey information about
three fundamental aspects of the ﬁrm’s strategy:
strategic intent, strategic skills and capabilities,
and market position. First, market actions pro-
vide ‘a direct or indirect indication of its inten-
tions, motives, goals, or internal situation’ (Porter,
1980: 75). Therefore, a ﬁrm’s market actions
enable stakeholders and rivals to make inferences
about a ﬁrm’s intentions, including its commitment
to product quality (e.g., Kihlstrom and Riordan,
1984), pricing initiatives (e.g., Kreps and Wil-
son, 1982), and competitive aggressiveness (e.g.,
Clark and Montgomery, 1998; Chen, Smith, and
Grimm, 1992). Second, market actions provide
information that can indicate the development of
the ﬁrm’s skills, routines, and knowledge neces-
sary to undertake and implement these actions. In
other words, market actions enable stakeholders

Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

to infer the presence of certain capabilities within
a ﬁrm, because such underlying capabilities can
be considered necessary for a ﬁrm to undertake
a given type of action or a pattern of actions
(Grimm and Smith, 1997). Third, market actions
reveal information about the competitive or mar-
ket position of a ﬁrm, because a ﬁrm’s pattern of
market actions has been found to inﬂuence its abil-
ity to claim and defend its competitive position
(Ferrier, Smith, and Grimm, 1999; Grimm, Lee
and Smith, 2005). Through market actions, ﬁrms
deter the actions of rivals (Clark and Montgomery,
1998), thereby protecting favorable industry posi-
tions (Milgrom and Roberts, 1982). Overall, we
believe a ﬁrm’s market actions can inform stake-
holders about the ﬁrm’s ability to create value for
them and are likely to inﬂuence their impressions
of the ﬁrm.

To summarize, we theorize that a ﬁrm’s actions
provide visible signals upon which stakeholders
infer various characteristics of the ﬁrm. In aggre-
gate, these inferences determine the reputation of
the ﬁrm. Market actions are therefore a key mech-
anism by which a ﬁrm can build its reputation. We
turn next to a discussion of the attributes of market
actions that may enhance a ﬁrm’s reputation.

EFFECTS OF THE FOCAL FIRM’S
MARKET ACTIONS

Research on competitive dynamics has shown that
the total amount or level of a ﬁrm’s market actions,
rather than any particular type of action, is the
most robust predictor of its performance (Young,
Smith, and Grimm, 1996). This ﬁnding can be
explained by the fact that ﬁrms possess heteroge-
neous resources, which they can deploy in different
types of actions to create value for stakehold-
ers (Barney, 1991). Given that different types of
actions can be used to create value for stakehold-
ers, and that each action has the potential to do so,
it is not surprising that past research ﬁnds that the
totality of a ﬁrm’s actions determines its perfor-
mance (Young et al., 1996). Similarly, we expect
that the totality of a ﬁrm’s actions will inform
stakeholders about its ability to create value for
them because the more actions a ﬁrm takes, the
more information about it becomes available to
stakeholders. The more information stakeholders
have, the easier it is for them to form impressions
about a ﬁrm and better able they are to understand

Strat. Mgmt. J., 27: 1205–1219 (2006)
DOI: 10.1002/smj


1208

D. K. Basdeo et al.

the ﬁrm’s strategy (Smith and Grimm, 1991). As a
result, stakeholders are likely to become more con-
ﬁdent about making choices to exchange resources
with the ﬁrm and are likely to evaluate it more
positively. For example, research shows that avail-
ability of information reduces the perceived risk-
iness of an activity (Heath and Tversky, 1991)
and that simple familiarity leads to choices that
favor the familiar ﬁrms (Pollock and Rindova,
2003). Together these arguments suggest that there
is a positive relationship between a ﬁrm’s level of
actions and its reputation. Therefore, we propose
the following hypothesis:

Hypothesis 1: The total number of market ac-
tions a ﬁrm takes will have a positive effect on
its reputation.

In addition to the total number of actions a
ﬁrm takes, the marketplace advantages it is able
to achieve may depend on the diversity of its
actions. Firms that
take more diverse actions
may achieve superior performance because diverse
actions enable them to generate more diverse
advantages, which may be more difﬁcult for com-
petitors to imitate and compete away. Consistent
with this argument, competitive dynamics research
shows that a ﬁrm’s performance is affected by the
diversity of actions it takes in a given year (Fer-
rier et al., 1999). The diversity of types of actions
that a ﬁrm takes deﬁnes its ‘action repertoire
complexity,’ which differs from ﬁrm complexity
(Miller and Chen, 1996) or product line complex-
ity.1 Complex, diversiﬁed ﬁrms, such as Phillip
Morris, can have relatively simple action reper-
toires, if they rely predominantly on one type of
market action, e.g., advertising campaigns, as the
basis of their competitive advantage; and simple,
single-business ﬁrms like Starbucks can have com-
plex action repertoires, if they use diverse types

1 Firm complexity describes the diversity of business lines and/or
product markets of a ﬁrm. Firm complexity may create difﬁ-
culty for stakeholders to comprehend the ﬁrm’s operations or
may raise doubts about the coherence of the ﬁrm’s strategy,
leading to negative evaluations and less favorable reputations.
Fombrun and Shanley (1990), for example, ﬁnd a negative rela-
tionship between degree of diversiﬁcation and ﬁrm reputation. In
contrast, action repertoire complexity describes the diversity of
competitive actions and moves that a ﬁrm employs in its pursuit
of competitive advantage over its rivals.

Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

of actions, such as product innovation, advertis-
ing, and co-branding, to pursue competitive advan-
tage. Complex action repertoires provide stake-
holders with more information about the under-
lying capabilities and resources of a ﬁrm because
more complex action repertoires require stronger
capabilities to execute. Researchers have argued,
for example, that the positive relationship between
action repertoire complexity and ﬁrm performance
reﬂects a more experienced top management team
(Miller and Chen, 1996) as well as the broader
range of capabilities required for taking more var-
ied actions (Ferrier et al., 1999). Complex action
repertoires may also signal strategic ﬂexibility or
the ability to learn and respond to diverse oppor-
tunities (Rindova and Kotha, 2001). Overall, com-
petitive dynamics research provides evidence that
ﬁrms that carry out more complex repertoires of
actions have higher performance than those that
carry out more simple action repertoires (Ferrier
et al., 1999; Miller and Chen, 1996). Therefore,
ﬁrms that take more complex sets of actions may
enable stakeholders to infer these ﬁrms’ greater
abilities to create value. Based on these arguments
we propose that:

Hypothesis 2: The complexity of the action rep-
ertoire of a ﬁrm will have a positive effect on its
reputation.

EFFECTS OF INDUSTRY CONTEXT

The foregoing discussion argues that because mar-
ket actions provide information about a ﬁrm’s
strategic goals, underlying capabilities, and com-
petitive market positions, they enable stakeholders
to draw inferences about the ﬁrm and contribute to
shaping its reputation. Viewing this signaling pro-
cess from a broader communication perspective,
however, suggests that the context within which
these signals are emitted and received is likely to
inﬂuence their interpretation. In particular, industry
concentration, which describes the number of ﬁrms
competing in an industry and their relative market
presence, may be an important structural character-
istic that inﬂuences ﬁrms’ reputations both directly
and indirectly.
the

structure–conduct–performance
paradigm of industrial organization (IO) econom-
ics, industry concentration has been identiﬁed as
a key structural characteristic of an industry that

Within

Strat. Mgmt. J., 27: 1205–1219 (2006)
DOI: 10.1002/smj


The Impact of Market Actions on Firm Reputation

1209

affects the nature of the interactions among rivals
in the industry (Scherer and Ross, 1990; Waldman
and Jensen, 2001). Highly concentrated industries
are characterized by relatively few large players
holding signiﬁcant shares of the total market. The
actions they take have signiﬁcant impacts on each
other and the market as a whole (Bain, 1959;
Scherer and Ross, 1990). As a result, these play-
ers tend to closely monitor and frequently respond
to each other’s actions (Ferrier et al., 1999). In
contrast, industries with lower levels of concentra-
tion are characterized by a greater number of ﬁrms
with small market shares. The actions that each
ﬁrm takes in such industries have a more limited
impact on its rivals and the market as a whole.

IO economics researchers have amassed consid-
erable evidence that industry concentration affects
ﬁrm performance by inﬂuencing competitors’ cost
structures and pricing levels. This perspective
therefore suggests that industry concentration inﬂu-
ences the reputations of competing ﬁrms directly.2
In contrast, less research attention has been direct-
ed to how industry concentration inﬂuences the
communication context within which stakeholders
observe and comprehend the signals of compet-
ing ﬁrms. More speciﬁcally, industry concentra-
tion may have indirect effects on the formation
of ﬁrms’ reputations by moderating the relation-
ship between their market actions and their rep-
utations. Below we develop theoretical arguments
about how industry concentration may affect the
communication context between competing ﬁrms
and their stakeholders.

First,

industry concentration reﬂects the total
number of ﬁrms competing for stakeholder atten-
tion. A greater number of industry rivals gen-
erate a larger number of signals competing for
the attention of stakeholders. Because of limited
information-processing capacity (Simon, 1955),

2 For example, IO economics research has established that indus-
try concentration can affect the performance of ﬁrms in the
industry by inﬂuencing factors such as economies of scale and
the levels of collusion. Such differences in industry structure
are likely to lead to performance differentials, which in turn
are likely to inﬂuence the reputations of ﬁrms in these indus-
tries. These direct effects of industry concentration on com-
petitors’ performance are well understood (e.g., McGahan and
Porter, 1997; Ravenscraft, 1983; Scherer and Ross, 1990) and
we account for them in our model by controlling for the direct
effects of industry concentration on reputation. We focus our
theoretical discussion on the effects of industry concentration
as a context, within which the actions of competing ﬁrms are
observed and interpreted, because these effects have not been
theorized and studied by past research.

Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

stakeholders are more likely to successfully attend
to the signals of a small number of competitors,
as is the case in more concentrated industries
(Rindova, Becerra, and Contardo, 2004). In less
concentrated industries, the preponderance of sig-
nals from a relatively larger number of sources
may create ‘noise’ in which it becomes difﬁcult
for stakeholders to focus their attention on the sig-
nals of any one ﬁrm. As a result, the effectiveness
of a ﬁrm’s actions to signal information concern-
ing the ﬁrm may be limited in less concentrated
industries, reducing a ﬁrm’s ability to cultivate the
stakeholder opinion necessary for building a repu-
tation.

Second, the expected impact of a given action,
and therefore its importance for future exchanges
between a ﬁrm and stakeholders, may also depend
on industry concentration. In more concentrated
industries, the actions of a few large players have
high information value for stakeholders because
each action is likely to have a signiﬁcant impact on
the industry’s competitors, the conditions of supply
and demand, and the ways in which ﬁrms create
value in the industry (Heil and Robertson, 1991;
Porter, 1980; Scherer, 1980; Scherer and Ross,
1990). In contrast, in less concentrated industries,
each action is expected to have a limited effect on
the industry, and therefore less informational value
for stakeholders seeking to predict the nature of
their future exchanges with industry competitors
(Heil and Robertson, 1991; Porter, 1980; Scherer,
1980; Scherer and Ross, 1990). Thus, in concen-
trated industries the actions of the key competitors
are likely to be more visible and to have higher
information value than the actions of ﬁrms in less
concentrated industries.

Overall, we expect that industry concentration
will moderate the effects of a ﬁrm’s market actions
on its reputation, such that this relationship will be
stronger in more concentrated industries.

3a: The

Hypothesis
relationship
between the total number of a ﬁrm’s actions and
reputation will be stronger for ﬁrms in industries
with higher levels of concentration.

positive

The potential effect of industry concentration as
deﬁning the context within which the signals emit-
ted by ﬁrms’ actions are received and interpreted
may be particularly important for the relation-
ship between a ﬁrm’s repertoire complexity and
its reputation. Interpreting the information content

Strat. Mgmt. J., 27: 1205–1219 (2006)
DOI: 10.1002/smj


1210

D. K. Basdeo et al.

of complex repertoires is difﬁcult and may require
that greater
levels of stakeholder attention be
directed toward the focal ﬁrm for this signal to
inﬂuence their impressions and opinions of the
ﬁrm. In an industry with a large number of com-
petitors, jockeying for position vis-`a-vis industry
stakeholders, the signals of competitors are likely
to generate a noisy background against which it
will be more challenging for stakeholders to inter-
pret and understand the complex repertoire of the
focal ﬁrm. Therefore, we expect that:

3b: The

Hypothesis
relationship
between a ﬁrm’s repertoire complexity and rep-
utation will be stronger for ﬁrms in industries
with higher levels of concentration.

positive

EFFECTS OF RIVALS’ ACTIONS

While industry concentration may inﬂuence the
extent
to which the market actions of a focal
ﬁrm are noticed and the ease with which they
are interpreted by stakeholders, the actions of its
rivals may inﬂuence the impressions that stake-
holders form of the focal ﬁrm. Rivals’ actions
may have direct effects on a focal ﬁrm’s repu-
tation because they also are market signals that
compete for the same stakeholder attention and
favorable interpretations. We theorize that rivals’
actions affect the reputation of a focal ﬁrm because
they may divert stakeholder attention from it and
may change the information value of its actions. In
our view, rivals’ actions can be conceptualized as
having both substitutive effects and complemen-
tor effects on a ﬁrm’s reputation (Brandenburger
and Nalebuff, 1996) because some of their char-
acteristics may reduce the information value of a
ﬁrm’s actions, while others may provide stake-
holders with additional information that is rele-
vant to the inferences that stakeholders may draw
about the focal ﬁrm. Drawing on the idea that
ﬁrms competing in the same industry are ‘substitu-
tors’ when their coexistence and activities reduce
their relative value-added, and ‘complementors’
to each other when their coexistence and activi-
ties increase their value-added (Brandenburger and
Nalebuff, 1996), we deﬁne rivals’ actions as hav-
ing ‘substitutive effects’ on a ﬁrm’s reputation
when these actions reduce the likelihood that stake-
holders will make favorable inferences about the
focal ﬁrm’s actions because these rivals’ actions

Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

reduce the information value of the focal ﬁrm’s
actions. In contrast, rival actions will have ‘com-
plementor effects’ when they increase the likeli-
hood that stakeholders will make favorable infer-
ences about the focal ﬁrm because these rivals’
actions increase the information value of the focal
ﬁrm’s actions.

Substitutive effects arise from competition
between industry rivals for
the limited atten-
tion and resources of stakeholders. For example,
research in competitive dynamics has shown that
rival actions have a negative effect on a focal
ﬁrm’s performance (e.g., Young et al., 1996). In
a similar vein, we suggest that the total number
of rival actions in the industry is likely to have a
negative effect on the reputation of the focal ﬁrm.
For one, rival actions may divert stakeholder atten-
tion away from the focal ﬁrm and interfere with
the signals that it sends to the market. For another,
rival actions also convey information about the rel-
ative competitive situation of the focal ﬁrm, if they
are seen as increasing the cost of the resources
necessary to effectively compete in the industry.
Stakeholders may then infer that it is increasingly
costly for the focal ﬁrm to take actions to defend or
improve its position in the industry. Such percep-
tions are also likely to call into question a focal
ﬁrm’s ability to sustain its level of competitive
activity, suggesting a negative overall effect on
the ﬁrm’s reputation. The complexity of rivals’
action repertoires is also likely to inﬂuence the
amount of attention that stakeholders allocate to
the focal ﬁrm and the way they assess the focal
ﬁrm’s ability to create value. When rivals employ
complex action repertoires (i.e., they take actions
of greater variety than the focal ﬁrm), they gener-
ate a greater variety of information to be attended
to by stakeholders. Given that stakeholders are
cognitively constrained, they will have capacity to
attend to and comprehend the actions of the focal
ﬁrm, if its rivals are taking very diverse actions.
Because they pose additional demands on stake-
holders’ attention and comprehension and reduce
their ability to attend to and follow the com-
plexity of the focal ﬁrm’s action repertoire, the
complexity of its rivals’ action repertoires will
have a negative effect on the focal ﬁrm’s repu-
tation. Together these arguments suggest that both
the total number of rival actions and the rivals’
repertoire complexity will have negative effects
on a focal ﬁrm’s reputation. Stated more for-
mally:

Strat. Mgmt. J., 27: 1205–1219 (2006)
DOI: 10.1002/smj


The Impact of Market Actions on Firm Reputation

1211

Hypothesis 4a: The total number of rival market
actions will have a negative effect on the focal
ﬁrm’s reputation.

HypothesiS 4b: The complexity of rivals’ reper-
toires of market actions will have a negative
effect on the focal ﬁrm’s reputation.

The ‘complementor effects’ of rival actions on
a focal ﬁrm’s reputation arise from the fact that
rival actions can provide stakeholders with addi-
tional information about the value of a focal ﬁrm’s
actions. As a result, stakeholders may be able to
draw additional inferences about the focal ﬁrm that
they could not have drawn based on the actions of
the focal ﬁrm alone. We propose that two charac-
teristics of the pattern of market actions rivals can
enhance stakeholders’ perception of the value of
the focal ﬁrm’s actions. First, the lag between an
action of the focal ﬁrm and the subsequent actions
of its rivals may serve as a signal of the degree to
which rivals can counter the focal ﬁrm’s actions.
Second, the similarity in the action repertoires of
a focal ﬁrm and its rivals may serve as a signal
of the legitimacy of the focal ﬁrm’s actions. We
discuss each of these effects next.

Competitive dynamics research has shown that
the amount of time that elapses between the action
of a focal ﬁrm and a subsequent action of a rival,
known as a ‘response lag’, is positively related to
the performance of the focal ﬁrm (Ferrier et al.,
1999; Lee et al., 2000). The speed with which
a ﬁrm undertakes new actions is a measure of
aggressiveness and proactive behavior and rapid
response timing enables a ﬁrm to improve per-
formance relative to rivals (Chen and MacMillan,
1992; D’Aveni, 1994).3

Because each action a competing ﬁrm takes has
the potential to generate marketplace beneﬁts for it
(Grimm et al., 2005), taking an action may lead to
a favorable change in the relative performance of
the ﬁrm and its competitors. If the ﬁrm taking an
action is a market leader, the performance differ-
ential between it and its followers may increase;
if it is a follower,
the performance differential
between it and the leader may decrease. These
potential changes in performance differentials are

3 In this sense, a subsequent market action by a competitor can
be viewed as a ‘response’ and the time lag between the two as
a ‘response lag’ irrespective of whether a ﬁrm takes an action
with an intention to ‘respond’ to a rival or not.

Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

reduced or offset when a competing ﬁrm takes a
market action of its own. It is therefore costly for
any given ﬁrm not to act if its rivals are taking
actions. The lags between the actions of the focal
ﬁrm and the actions of its rival provide stakehold-
ers with information about the expected duration
of the beneﬁts the focal ﬁrm will obtain from its
actions. Longer lags enable a ﬁrm to beneﬁt from
its market actions for a longer time. They also keep
the ﬁrm in the focus of stakeholder attention until
a rival’s action ‘calls’ for their attention. Finally,
longer lags may also convey information that the
actions of a focal ﬁrm are innovative or difﬁcult to
imitate (Chen et al., 1992); and that the focal ﬁrm
possesses potentially unique resources which facil-
itate creation of value. Longer lags by competitors
therefore provide an indication of the focal ﬁrm’s
competitive strength and may positively contribute
to its reputation. Therefore, we hypothesize that:

Hypothesis 5: The lag between a focal ﬁrm’s
market actions and the actions of its rivals has
a positive effect on the focal ﬁrm’s reputation.

Finally, rivals’ actions may inﬂuence the repu-
tation of the focal ﬁrm by conveying informa-
tion about the legitimacy of its actions. Legiti-
macy refers to the degree to which an organiza-
tion’s actions are considered consistent with exist-
ing institutional logics, norms, and beliefs (Such-
man, 1995). Firms are perceived as more legitimate
when their actions conform to industry norms and
are therefore similar to those of other ﬁrms in
the industry (Meyer and Rowan, 1977; DiMaggio
and Powell, 1983). Thus, although ﬁrms strive to
be different from their competitors because such
differences enable them to gain competitive advan-
tage (Young et al., 1996), they also need to ensure
that they are sufﬁciently similar because the sim-
ilarity ensures that their actions are perceived as
legitimate (Deephouse, 1999).

The similarity of rivals’ action repertoires to that
of the focal ﬁrm are likely to have a complemen-
tor effect on the focal ﬁrm’s reputation because
they afford stakeholders the possibility to assess
the legitimacy of a ﬁrm’s actions. Perceived legit-
imacy of actions is likely to affect positively a
ﬁrm’s reputation because at one level legitimate
actions are more comprehensible and enable stake-
holders to understand and assess the strategy and
the characteristics of the ﬁrm more readily (Such-
man, 1995). Better understanding of the ﬁrm’s

Strat. Mgmt. J., 27: 1205–1219 (2006)
DOI: 10.1002/smj


1212

D. K. Basdeo et al.

strategy increases its predictability to stakehold-
ers, and predictability is positively related to a
ﬁrm’s reputation (Weigelt and Camerer, 1988). At
another level, legitimate actions are likely to be
seen as more appropriate and therefore are likely
to be associated with positive performance expec-
tations. As Suchman (1995: 575) argues, legitimate
organizations are perceived ‘not only as more wor-
thy, but also as more meaningful, more predictable,
and more trustworthy.’ Therefore, we expect that
the similarity of rivals’ actions to those of the
focal ﬁrm will increase the perceived legitimacy
of the latter and will have a positive effect on
the focal ﬁrm’s reputation. We therefore predict
that:

Hypothesis 6: The similarity between a focal
ﬁrm’s repertoire of market actions and the reper-
toire of its rivals will have a positive effect on
its reputation.

METHOD

Sample and data

inferences about

To test our hypotheses we measured ﬁrm rep-
utation, focal ﬁrm market actions, rival market
actions, and industry context. Further, we mea-
sured these variables over time so that we could
make causal
the relationship
between actions and reputation. Thus, the start-
ing point for our sample selection was Fortune’s
‘America’s Most Admired Corporations’ (FMAC)
survey, which is the most commonly used mea-
sure of corporate reputation in current strategy
and organizational research (Brown and Perry,
1994; Fombrun and Shanley, 1990; Fombrun and
Rindova, 1998; Fryxell and Wang, 1994). From
the list of industries within which Fortune rates
ﬁrms, we selected industries consisting of ﬁrms
that are predominantly public, had distinct single-
business entities competing in the industry, and
were focused on the U.S. market. Further, to ensure
that we capture the majority of the interactions
among rivals in each industry, we selected the
industries for which Fortune-rated ﬁrms repre-
sented at least 70 percent of industry sales. These
criteria ensured that we were able to track both
the market actions of a focal ﬁrm, as well as the
actions of its closest rivals within a speciﬁc indus-
try and geographic market, and to relate those

Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

actions to the ﬁrm’s reputation within the indus-
try. Applying these criteria resulted in a sample
of 215 ﬁrm-year observations based on 37 ﬁrms
competing over a 7-year period in 10 industries
that spanned manufacturing, services, and retail-
ing. More speciﬁcally, the industries included in
the study are: appliance manufacturing, athletic
footwear manufacturing, automobile manufactur-
retailing, ofﬁce supplies
ing, brewing, general
retailing,
long-
distance telephone services, steel manufacturing,
and grocery retailing.

lumber and hardware retailing,

We compared the ﬁrms in our sample to the
remaining ﬁrms in the Fortune survey in terms of
total assets and net sales using independent sam-
ples t-tests. There was no signiﬁcant difference
between our sample and the FMAC ﬁrms in terms
of total assets as a measure of size. However, there
was a signiﬁcant difference (<0.05) between the
two samples in net sales, suggesting that our sam-
ple consists of somewhat larger ﬁrms, which is
not surprising given our sampling criterion requir-
ing that the ﬁrms in our sample shared with their
rivals at least 70 percent of industry sales. We
control for the effects of net sales (our market
presence variable) on a ﬁrm’s reputation in our
analysis.

Dependent variable

Company reputation

Data on company reputation were obtained from
Fortune magazine’s survey of ‘America’s Most
Admired Corporations.’ Typically published in
March of each year, this survey is conducted in the
prior year by asking approximately 10,000 execu-
tives, directors, and securities analysts to rate the
companies in their own industries based on eight
criteria: innovation, ﬁnancial soundness, employee
talent, use of corporate assets, long-term invest-
ment value, social responsibility, quality of man-
agement, and quality of products and services (for
an overview of Fortune’s survey methodology see
Roberts and Dowling, 2002). As a measure of ﬁrm
reputation, we used each company’s average rating
across the eight attributes measured by the For-
tune survey. While Fortune publishes both ratings
of the ﬁrms and their relative ranks, we used only
the ratings because we are concerned with the rep-
utational score of each ﬁrm, rather than with its
relative standing.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 27: 1205–1219 (2006)
DOI: 10.1002/smj


The Impact of Market Actions on Firm Reputation

1213

Independent variables
Market actions
Consistent with our research question regarding
the effect of market actions on ﬁrm reputation, we
focused on actions observable to customers, com-
petitors, and other industry watchers. Since such
actions tend to be reported in the business press
(Miller and Chen, 1994), past research has cap-
tured such observable ﬁrm actions through ‘struc-
tured content analysis’ of newspaper and trade
magazine articles (Ferrier et al., 1999; Miller and
Chen, 1994; Smith, Grimm and Gannon, 1991;
Young et al., 1996). The structured content anal-
ysis was conducted through coding of actions
into categories on the basis of a series of key-
words and decision rules. Action types and key-
words were selected to describe general business
activities common to all industries. These key-
words were used, in combination with the ﬁrm
names and sample years, to search the Lexis-Nexis
database and identify articles containing possible
ﬁrm activity. Each competitive action was coded
in eight mutually exclusive activity categories
used in extant research on competitive dynamics
(Ferrier et al., 1999; Smith, Grimm and Gannon,
1991; Young et al., 1996): pricing actions, mar-
keting actions, product announcements, new prod-
uct introductions, capacity and distribution actions,
legal actions, agreements, and licensing activities.
The total number of a ﬁrm’s actions was cal-
culated as a sum of the actions in each action
type category for each company in a given year
to obtain the measure for each ﬁrm-year. Simi-
larly, total rival market actions were calculated by
aggregating total actions for rival ﬁrms within the
industry for each ﬁrm-year.

Repertoire complexity
Following extant research on competitive dynam-
ics this variable was operationalized using a
Herﬁndahl action concentration index (Ferrier
et al., 1999; Miller and Chen, 1996), and was cal-
culated as follows:

1 − (cid:1)

(Na/N T )2

a

where Na/NT is the share or proportion of mar-
ket actions in the ath action category. A higher
score on this measure indicates greater complexity
in an action repertoire. Measures for both ﬁrm and

Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

rival repertoire complexity utilized this formula,
with the measure for rivals’ repertoire complexity
aggregating within action types for all rivals in the
industry.

Rival action time lag
This measure reﬂects the average length of time it
took rivals to take an action following an action
taken by the focal ﬁrm. It was calculated by
determining the number of days between each ﬁrm
action and the ﬁrst rival action, and then averaging
these scores for each ﬁrm for each year.

Repertoire similarity
This variable was operationalized as the difference
between the proportion of actions of a given type
for the focal ﬁrm and for its rivals. The measure
was calculated as follows:

2 − (cid:1)

[(Fa/F T ) − (Ra/RT )]2

a

where Fa/FT is the share or proportion of ﬁrm
market actions in the ath action category and
Ra/RT is the share or proportion of rival market
actions in the ath action category. A higher score
on this measure indicates greater similarity in the
action repertoire of the ﬁrm with that of its rivals.

Industry concentration
Concentration was measured using the aggregate
market share for the four largest ﬁrms in each
industry, a common measure of industry concen-
tration in the IO economics literature (Scherer and
Ross, 1990). We use industry concentration in two
ways in our models: (1) as a moderating variable
in models testing for the effects of context on the
relationships between the focal ﬁrm’s actions and
reputation; and (2) as a control variable in all mod-
els to control for well established by past research
direct effects of industry concentration on ﬁrm per-
formance, and therefore, reputation (Waldman and
Jensen, 2001).

Return on assets
As the most commonly used measure of ﬁrm rep-
utation, the Fortune reputation ratings have been
often evaluated for their reliance on the ﬁnancial
performance of ﬁrms (Fombrun and Shanley, 1990;
Fryxell and Wang, 1994; Roberts and Dowling,

Strat. Mgmt. J., 27: 1205–1219 (2006)
DOI: 10.1002/smj


1214

D. K. Basdeo et al.

2002). Researchers have recommended control-
ling for the ‘halo’ effect of ﬁnancial performance
(Brown and Perry, 1994; Fryxell and Wang, 1994).
To control for this ‘halo’ effect, we implemented
the procedure outlined by Roberts and Dowling
(2002). Speciﬁcally, successive lags of ﬁrm return
on assets (ROA) were utilized to control for the
possible inﬂuence of past ﬁnancial performance on
ﬁrm reputation. We found that up to two lags of
ROA exhibited signiﬁcant relationships with ﬁrm
reputation, and therefore used ROAt−1 and ROAt−2
as controls.

Market presence was also used as a control vari-
able because ﬁrms with larger sales have greater
market presence and receive greater levels of pub-
lic attention, which may result in better reputations
(Shamsie, 2003). Market presence was measured
using the natural logarithm of sales.

Table 1 provides both descriptive statistics and
Pearson correlation coefﬁcients for these vari-
ables. The relatively high correlation between ﬁrm
total actions and ﬁrm repertoire complexity sug-
gests that multicollinearity may be an issue. How-
ever, given the theoretical arguments we developed
about the effects of these variables, it would be
inappropriate to assume that these variables were
redundant. Calculation of variance inﬂation factors
resulted in values that did not exceed 2.41, which
are well below the commonly accepted cut-off of

10. In addition, the ﬁxed-effects model speciﬁca-
tions we use further reduce multicollinearity, as the
ﬁrm-speciﬁc ﬁxed effects are eliminated.

Analysis
Given that our dataset is composed of unbalanced
panel data, ordinary least squares (OLS) regression
can result in biased estimates due to unobserved
heterogeneity (e.g., Bowen and Wiersema, 1999).
A related issue is the possibility that both a ﬁrm’s
reputation and its action characteristic variables
are correlated with some unobserved ﬁrm-speciﬁc
attributes. Therefore, we use ﬁxed-effects models
to control for idiosyncratic effects associated with
each company in our sample. Essentially, using
a ﬁxed-effects speciﬁcation estimates only within-
ﬁrm variation over time, assuming that the effects
of the independent variables are the same across
all ﬁrms, while allowing for variation due to ﬁrm
heterogeneity. This is consistent with Dierickx and
Cool’s (1989) argument that reputations are accu-
mulated through complex processes and, therefore,
it may be possible to identify some of the rele-
vant variables contributing to ﬁrm reputation, but
an exact speciﬁcation may be impossible due to
unobservable factors that vary across ﬁrms.

Preliminary analysis using a Wald test as dis-
cussed by Wooldridge (2002) further indicated the
presence of serial correlation in the idiosyncratic

Table 1. Means, standard deviations, and Pearson correlation coefﬁcients for study variables

Mean S.D.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(1) Reputation
(2)
Total ﬁrm
actions
Firm rep.

(3)

complexity

(4)

Total rival
actions
(5) Rival rep.

complexity
(6) Rival response

lag

(7) Repertoire

similarity

(8)

Ind.

concentration

(9) Market

presence

3.63
13.59 11.50 −0.031

1.00

0.50

0.23

0.049

0.508

64.40 41.50

0.382

0.225

0.227
0.15 −0.023

0.60
10.46 16.18 −0.158 −0.191 −0.180 −0.553 −0.443

0.294

0.350

0.367

1.81

0.71

9.35

0.358

0.248

0.453
0.326
0.112 −0.458

0.31
0.135
0.24 −0.295
1.15 −0.173
0.200
4.96 −0.591 −0.047 −0.052 −0.258
5.13 −0.578 −0.055 −0.034 −0.265

0.539

0.447

0.364 −0.559

0.141
0.437 −0.133

0.433 −0.175

0.175 0.261

4.41
4.17

0.001 0.117 0.123
(10) ROAt−1
0.014 0.121 0.098 0.701
(11) ROAt−2
N = 215. Two-tailed test of signiﬁcance; all correlations with an absolute value greater than 0.135 are signiﬁcant at p ≤ 0.05 or
smaller.

0.005
0.026

0.098
0.086

Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 27: 1205–1219 (2006)
DOI: 10.1002/smj


Table 2. Results of ﬁxed effects regression analysis for the effect of ﬁrm actions on ﬁrm reputation

The Impact of Market Actions on Firm Reputation

1215

Constant

Market presence

ROAt−1

ROAt−2

Industry concentration (C4)

Total ﬁrm actions

Firm repertoire complexity
Total actions × C4
Repertoire complexity × C4

Base
1.826∗∗
(0.634)
−0.039
(0.240)
−0.020
(0.014)
−0.005
(0.013)
3.206
(2.232)

(1)

1.128†
(0.609)
0.057
(0.242)
−0.017
(0.013)
−0.002
(0.013)
2.435
(2.231)
0.011∗
(0.005)
0.316∗
(0.149)

(2)

0.894
(0.611)
0.114
(0.244)
−0.017
(0.013)
−0.003
(0.013)
2.041
(2.240)
0.007
(0.006)
0.314∗
(0.148)
0.039
(0.026)

(3)

0.561
(0.613)
0.141
(0.246)
−0.015
(0.013)
0.002
(0.013)
2.017
(2.241)
0.010∗
(0.005)
0.352∗
(0.148)

1.215∗
(0.614)
178

178

Observations
R2
F -value
R2
†p ≤ 0.10;
parentheses.
a Change in R2 reﬂects a change from Model 1 to Model 3.

p ≤ 0.05;

∗∗

∗

0.0553
2.0202

0.1518
3.4527
0.0245∗a
p ≤ 0.01; two-tailed coefﬁcient tests. Unstandardized coefﬁcients are presented with standard errors in

0.1273
3.3057
0.072∗∗

0.1410
3.1669
0.0137

178

178

errors of our panel-data models. To address this
issue, we used the function xtregar in Stata (2001),
which ﬁrst corrects for serial correlation using the
transformation procedure speciﬁed by Baltagi and
Wu (1999), and then estimates a within effects esti-
mator for a ﬁxed-effects model. This procedure
reduces the sample size by 37 observations due
to the data transformation for each ﬁrm. To reduce
multicollinearity issues resulting from the use of
interaction terms in several of the models, vari-
ables were centered using the procedure suggested
by Cronbach (1987). The results of the analyses
are shown in Tables 2 and 3.

Results
Table 2 shows the results of the analyses predict-
ing the reputation effects of the various facets
of a ﬁrm’s market actions. Hypothesis 1 argues
that a ﬁrm’s total market actions will positively
affect its reputation. Model 1 demonstrates sup-
port
the p < 0.05 level.
According to Hypothesis 2 the complexity in a
ﬁrm’s action repertoire has a positive effect on
a ﬁrm’s reputation. The positive coefﬁcient for
the repertoire complexity variable is signiﬁcant

for Hypothesis 1 at

Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

at the p < 0.05 level in Model 1 and provides
support for Hypothesis 2. Testing for the mod-
erating effect of industry concentration on these
variables in Model 2 and Model 3, we ﬁnd that the
interaction of total actions and industry concen-
tration is not signiﬁcant. Hypothesis 3a is there-
fore not supported. In contrast,
the interaction
effect between repertoire complexity and industry
concentration is signiﬁcant at the p < 0.05 level,
supporting Hypothesis 3b. Figure 1 provides a
graphical depiction of the effect of this interac-
tion revealing, as hypothesized, that the effects
of repertoire complexity on ﬁrm reputation are
stronger in concentrated industries than in less con-
centrated industries. Taken together, the results in
Table 2 suggest that the total level of actions a ﬁrm
takes and the complexity of its action repertoire
have signiﬁcant effects on its reputation; and that
the effects of repertoire complexity are moderated
by industry structure.

Table 3 shows the results of rival actions on
ﬁrm reputation. Model 1 tests the impact of the
substitutive effects of rival actions by assessing
the effects of total rival actions (Hypothesis 4a)
and the complexity of rivals’ action repertoires

Strat. Mgmt. J., 27: 1205–1219 (2006)
DOI: 10.1002/smj


1216

D. K. Basdeo et al.

Table 3. Results of ﬁxed effects regression analysis for
the effect of rival actions on focal ﬁrm reputation

(1)

0.940
(0.617)
0.064
(0.242)
−0.017
(0.014)
−0.001
(0.013)
2.348
(2.236)
0.011∗
(0.005)
0.292†
(0.152)
0.000
(0.003)
0.288
(0.249)

Constant

Market presence

ROAt−1

ROAt−2

Industry concentration

Total ﬁrm actions

Firm repertoire complexity

Total rival actions

Rival repertoire complexity

Repertoire similarity

Response lag

(2)

1.770∗∗
(0.640)
−0.012
(0.240)
−0.016
(0.013)
0.001
(0.013)
1.884
(2.242)
0.012∗
(0.005)

0.259∗
(0.124)
0.006∗
(0.003)
178

178

Observations
0.1440
R2
F -value
3.2442
†p ≤ 0.10;
p ≤ 0.01; two-tailed coefﬁcient tests.
Unstandardized coefﬁcients are presented with standard errors
in parentheses.

p ≤ 0.05;

0.1359
2.6354

∗∗

∗

n
o
i
t
a
t
u
p
e
R
m

 

r
i
F

4

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

Low Industry Concentration
High Industry Concentration

Low Complexity

High Complexity

Figure 1. Plot of interaction between ﬁrm repertoire

complexity and industry concentration

(Hypothesis 4b) on the focal ﬁrm’s reputation. The
lack of signiﬁcance of either of these variables
suggests that the total level and the complexity

Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

of rival actions do not affect negatively a ﬁrm’s
reputation. Hypotheses 4a and 4b are therefore not
supported. Model 2 tests the impact of complemen-
tor effects of rival actions by assessing the effects
of rivals’ action time lag (Hypothesis 5) and the
similarity of a ﬁrm’s action repertoire with those
of its rivals (Hypothesis 6) on the focal ﬁrm’s rep-
utation. Signiﬁcant values for both the rival action
time lag (p < 0.05) and repertoire similarity vari-
ables (p < 0.05) lend support for Hypotheses 5
and 6, respectively. Together these results suggest
that we do not ﬁnd evidence for substitutive effects
of rival actions on a focal ﬁrm’s reputation; how-
ever, we ﬁnd evidence of complementor effects of
rival actions that have a positive effect on a focal
ﬁrm’s reputation.

DISCUSSION

This study advances our understanding of the pro-
cess by which ﬁrms inﬂuence their reputations
through their market actions. More speciﬁcally, we
combined ideas from research on signaling theory
and competitive dynamics to examine the effect of
ﬁrms’ market actions on their reputations. Viewing
market actions as signals that enable stakehold-
ers to form impressions of ﬁrms, we investigate
the effects of two characteristics of a ﬁrm’s mar-
ket actions on its reputation: the total number of
actions a ﬁrm takes and the complexity of its action
repertoire. We ﬁnd that both of these variables have
a positive and signiﬁcant relationship to ﬁrm rep-
utation. Empirical support for the positive effects
of ﬁrm actions and action repertoire complexity on
ﬁrm reputation substantiates our theory that mar-
ket actions are a mechanism through which ﬁrms
can enhance their reputations.

Our results further lend support to the broader
communications perspective advanced in this paper
of the signaling process through which reputations
are formed. Consistent with our theoretical argu-
ments that industry context moderates the effects
of market actions on ﬁrm reputations, we ﬁnd a
signiﬁcant interaction effect between industry con-
centration and repertoire complexity. Although we
do not ﬁnd the same effect with the total number
of actions, our pattern of results is consistent with
our general argument that industry context makes a
difference in how the signals of ﬁrms are received
by stakeholders. Our pattern of results is consis-
tent with the idea that action characteristics that

Strat. Mgmt. J., 27: 1205–1219 (2006)
DOI: 10.1002/smj


The Impact of Market Actions on Firm Reputation

1217

send more complex signals are more likely to be
effective in industries that afford greater levels of
stakeholder attention to a focal ﬁrm, as is the case
in concentrated industries.

Overall, our results are consistent with well-
established economics theory (e.g., Milgrom and
Roberts, 1982) that a ﬁrm’s reputation is shaped
by its actions. Our ﬁrst contribution, however, is to
provide an empirical test of these ideas. This is an
important contribution, because empirical tests of
theories based on formal models are an important
step in validating any theory and in advancing our
knowledge about a given domain. Further, while
rooted in the logic of economic models, our study
extends these ideas further by examining how
ﬁrms’ market actions inﬂuence the general reputa-
tions of ﬁrms. The concept of reputation reﬂected
in the Fortune’s ratings, which we studied, reﬂects
collective perceptions about the ability of a ﬁrm to
create value on multiple dimensions of evaluation.
In contrast, economic models focus on reputations
as the perceptions of competitors regarding a par-
ticular ﬁrm attribute (Weigelt and Camerer, 1988).
Extending our knowledge about how ﬁrms can
inﬂuence their general reputations is of consider-
able theoretical and pragmatic importance because
the general reputations of ﬁrms are generated
through complex social processes and are there-
fore difﬁcult to inﬂuence substantively with any
one particular action (Barney, 1991). Yet, we ﬁnd
evidence that a ﬁrm can enhance its reputation by
taking high levels of market actions and taking a
diverse set of actions. This initial effort can guide
future research that can advance our understanding
of how a ﬁrm can inﬂuence its reputation.

While prior competitive dynamics research has
demonstrated that market actions affect ﬁnancial
performance (Lee et al., 2000; Young et al., 1996)
and the market position of ﬁrms (Ferrier et al.,
1999), our study demonstrates that market actions
also contribute to the ability of ﬁrms to build rep-
utations with stakeholders. An important direction
for future research is to explore to what extent rep-
utations are by-products of market actions under-
taken in pursuit of competitive advantage, and to
what extent they are outcomes of market actions
speciﬁcally targeted to increase reputation. Further,
our research provides empirical evidence about
the characteristics of ﬁrms’ actions through which
ﬁrms enhance their reputations. Previous work
on reputation has not recognized action repertoire
complexity as an important variable that may affect

Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

ﬁrms’ reputations. The positive effects that we ﬁnd
for this variable suggest that future work needs to
be done exploring the social and cognitive mech-
anisms that make complexity a positive action
attribute with regard to reputation building.

A second contribution of our study to reputation
research is that it addresses the question of how
industry context affects signaling process and the
ability of ﬁrms to build their reputations through
market actions. We used industry concentration
as a central structural characteristic of industries
(Scherer and Ross, 1990). Future research should
continue to draw on the wealth of research on
the structural characteristics of industries in order
to develop a more nuanced understanding of the
effect of industry context on the process of repu-
tation building through market actions.

A third contribution of our study is that it is one
of the ﬁrst studies to examine the effects of rival
actions on the focal ﬁrm’s reputation. More specif-
ically we distinguished between substitutive and
complementor effects of rival actions and hypoth-
esized that some characteristics of rival actions will
have substitutive effects and will impact the repu-
tation of the focal ﬁrm negatively, whereas others
will have complementor effects and will impact
its reputation positively. While we found no sup-
port for the hypothesized substitutive effects, we
do ﬁnd support for the hypothesized complementor
effects. These ﬁndings are important because they
address the question of how rival actions impact
a ﬁrm’s reputation and show that the relationship
between a ﬁrm’s reputation and the actions of its
rivals is a complex one and provides fertile ground
for future research. Given that reputation is often
viewed in terms of a rank ordering of ﬁrms (Rao,
1994; Roberts and Dowling, 2002), in which the
success of one rival in building its own reputation
through its actions necessarily detracts from the
reputational standing of other ﬁrms in the indus-
try, rival actions are conventionally expected to
have predominantly negative effects on a ﬁrm’s
reputation. Yet, in our study we ﬁnd support for
the hypotheses that rival actions can have com-
plementor effects when they provide stakeholders
with additional information about a ﬁrm’s actions.
We ﬁnd that slow responses to a ﬁrm’s actions
and the similarity between a ﬁrm’s action reper-
toire and rivals’ action repertoires indeed posi-
tively impacted a focal ﬁrm’s reputation. These
ﬁndings suggest
that although a ﬁrm’s reputa-
tion depends primarily on its own actions, signals

Strat. Mgmt. J., 27: 1205–1219 (2006)
DOI: 10.1002/smj


1218

D. K. Basdeo et al.

regarding the inimitability and legitimacy of its
actions, as emitted through the behaviors of its
rivals, also inﬂuence how stakeholders perceive the
focal ﬁrm.

Like all studies, this one is not without lim-
itations. First, although we used Fortune’s rep-
utational ratings as a measure of a ﬁrm’s repu-
tation, we share concerns other researchers have
expressed about the degree to which this measure
captures a ﬁrm’s reputation with various stake-
holder groups (Fombrun, 1996). We view our study
as a ﬁrst step toward understanding the relation-
ship between reputation and market actions, and
suggest that future research should pursue these
ideas using more reﬁned measures of reputation.
Second, using Fortune’s reputational ratings lim-
its the availability of reputation scores to ﬁrms
that are relatively established, and have already
achieved some degree of market presence and rep-
utation. As a result, our ﬁndings should be inter-
preted in terms of the ability of established ﬁrms to
enhance already existing reputations, rather than to
build reputations de novo. Future research should
endeavor to examine how market actions also
affect the ability of ﬁrms to build reputations, as
in the case of new ﬁrms, less well-known ﬁrms,
or ﬁrms that have lost their reputations. Finally,
because of our interest in examining the role of
competitive interactions on the reputation of a
focal ﬁrm, our sample consisted of ﬁrms with
larger market presence in terms of sales than the
average ﬁrm on the Fortune’s Most Admired Cor-
porations list. While this choice may affect the
generalizability of our results, it should be noted
that we use sales as a control variable and ﬁnd that
it does not affect signiﬁcantly a ﬁrm’s reputation;
therefore, our sample does not detract from the
ﬁndings about the importance of market actions in
enhancing a ﬁrm’s reputation.

In conclusion, this study explored the extent to
which a ﬁrm’s market actions and rivals’ market
actions affect the focal ﬁrm’s reputation. Viewing
actions as signals through which information about
a ﬁrm is conveyed to stakeholders, we identiﬁed
several characteristics of the market actions of
ﬁrms that may facilitate the formation of positive
impressions of a focal ﬁrm and, as a result, enhance
its reputation. Our work offers a fruitful direction
for future research in terms of understanding how
ﬁrms can strategically shape their reputations while
also recognizing the role of industry context and
the actions of rivals.

Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

REFERENCES

Bain J. 1959. Industrial Organization. Wiley: New York.
Baltagi BH, Wu PX. 1999. Unequally spaced panel data
regressions with AR(1) disturbances. Econometric
Theory 15: 814–823.

Barney JB. 1991. Firm resources and sustained competi-
tive advantage. Journal of Management 17: 99–120.
Black E, Carnes T, Richardson V. 2000. The market
value of corporate reputation. Corporate Reputation
Review 1: 31–42.

Bowen HP, Wiersema MF. 1999. Matching method
to paradigm in strategy research:
limitations of
cross-sectional analysis and some methodological
alternatives. Strategic Management Journal 20(7):
625–636.

Brandenburger AM, Nalebuff BJ. 1996. Co-opetition.

Currency Doubleday: New York.

Brown B, Perry S. 1994. Removing the ﬁnancial
performance halo from Fortune’s ‘Most Admired’
companies. Academy of Management Journal 37(5):
1347–1359.

Chen M, MacMillan I. 1992. Nonresponse and delayed
response to competitive moves. Academy of Manage-
ment Journal 35: 539–570.

Chen M, Smith KG, Grimm CM. 1992. Action charac-
teristics as predictors of competitive responses. Man-
agement Science 38: 439–455.

Clark BH, Montgomery DB. 1998. Deterrence, reputa-
tions, and competitive cognition. Management Science
44(1): 62–82.

Cronbach L. 1987. Statistical

variables: ﬂaws
Psychological Bulletin 102: 414–417.

in analysis

tests

for moderator
recently proposed.

D’Aveni R. 1994. Hypercompetition: Managing the
Dynamics of Strategic Maneuvering. Free Press: New
York.

Deephouse DL. 1999. To be different, or to be the
same? It’s a question (and theory) of strategic balance.
Strategic Management Journal 20(2): 147–166.

Deephouse DL. 2000. Media reputation as a strategic
resource: an integration of mass communication
and resource-based theories. Journal of Management
26(6): 1091–1112.

Dierickx I, Cool K. 1989. Asset stock accumulation and
sustainability of competitive advantage. Management
Science 35(12): 1504–1511.

DiMaggio PJ, Powell WW. 1983. The iron cage revisited:
institutional isomorphism and collective rationality in
organizational ﬁelds. American Sociological Review
48: 147–160.

Ferrier WJ, Smith KG, Grimm CM. 1999. The role
of competitive action in market share erosion and
industry dethronement: a study of industry leaders and
challengers. Academy of Management Journal 42(4):
372–388.

Fombrun CJ. 1996. Reputation: Realizing Value from the
Corporate Image. Harvard Business School Press:
Boston, MA.

Fombrun CJ, Shanley M. 1990. What’s in a name?
Reputation building and corporate strategy. Academy
of Management Journal 33(2): 233–258.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 27: 1205–1219 (2006)
DOI: 10.1002/smj


The Impact of Market Actions on Firm Reputation

1219

Fombrun CJ, Rindova VP. 1998. Reputation management
in global 1000 ﬁrms: a benchmarking study. Corporate
Reputation Review 1(3): 205–211.

Fryxell GE, Wang J. 1994. The Fortune Corporate
‘Reputation’ Index: reputation for what? Journal of
Management 20(1): 1–14.

Gregory JR. 1998. Does corporate reputation provide a
cushion to companies facing market volatility? Some
supportive evidence. Corporate Reputation Review 1:
288–290.

Grimm CM, Lee H, Smith KG. 2005. Strategy as Action:
Competitive Dynamics and Competitive Advantage.
Oxford University Press: New York.

Grimm CM, Smith KG. 1997. Strategy as Action. South-

Western College Publishing: Cincinnati, OH.

Hall R. 1992. The strategic analysis of

resources. Strategic Management Journal
135–144.

intangible
13(2):

Heath C, Tversky A. 1991. Preferences and beliefs: ambi-
guity and competence in choice under uncertainty.
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 4: 5–28.

Heil O, Robertson TS. 1991. Toward a theory of
competitive market signaling: a research agenda.
Strategic Management Journal 12(6): 403–418.

Kihlstrom RE, Riordan MH. 1984. Advertising as a
signal. Journal of Political Economy 92(3): 427–450.
Kreps DM, Wilson R. 1982. Reputation and imperfect
27:

Journal of Economic Theory

information.
253–279.

Lee H, Smith KG, Grimm CM, Schomburg A. 2000.
and durability of new product
Timing, order
advantages with imitation. Strategic Management
Journal 21(1): 23–30.

McGahan AM, Porter ME. 1997. How much does indus-
try matter, really? Strategic Management Journal,
Summer Special Issue 18: 15–30.

Meyer JW, Rowan B. 1977. Institutionalized organiza-
tions: formal structure as myth and ceremony. Ameri-
can Journal of Sociology 83(2): 340–363.

Milgrom P, Roberts J. 1982. Predation, reputation and
entry deterrence. Journal of Economic Theory 27(2):
280–312.

Miller D, Chen MJ. 1994. Sources and consequences of
competitive inertia: a study of the U.S. airline industry.
Administrative Science Quarterly 39: 1–23.

Miller D, Chen MJ. 1996. The simplicity of competitive
repertoires: an empirical analysis. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal 17(6): 419–439.

Pollock TG, Rindova VP. 2003. Media legitimation
for initial public offerings.

effects in the market
Academy of Management Journal 46(5): 631–642.

Porter ME. 1980. Competitive Strategy: Techniques for
Analyzing Industries and Competitors. Free Press:
New York.

Rao H. 1994. The social construction of

reputation:
certiﬁcation contests, legitimation, and the survival of
organizations in the American automobile industry:
1895–1912. Strategic Management Journal, Winter
Special Issue 15: 29–44.

Ravenscraft DJ. 1983. Structure–proﬁt relationships at
the line of business and industry level. Review of
Economics and Statistics February: 22–31.

Rindova V, Fombrun CJ. 1999. Constructing competitive
advantage: the role of ﬁrm-constituent interactions.
Strategic Management Journal 20(8): 691–710.

Rindova V, Kotha S. 2001. Continuous morphing:
competing through dynamic capabilities, form, and
function. Academy of Management Journal 44:
1263–1280.

Rindova V, Becerra M, Contardo I. 2004. Enacting
language games, and
consequences. Academy of Management

competitive wars: actions,
market
Review 29: 670–686.

Roberts PW, Dowling GR. 2002. Corporate reputation
and sustained superior ﬁnancial performance. Strategic
Management Journal 23(12): 1077–1093.

Robertson T, Eliashberg J, Rymon T. 1995. New product
reactions.

announcement
Journal of Marketing 59(July): 1–15.

and incumbent

signals

Scherer F.

1980.

Industrial Market Structure and
Economic Performance. Houghton Mifﬂin: Boston,
MA.

Scherer F, Ross D. 1990. Industrial Market Structure and
Economic Performance. Houghton Mifﬂin: Boston,
MA.

Simon HA. 1955. A behavioral model of rational choice.

Quarterly Journal of Economics 69: 99–118.

Shamsie J. 2003. The

an
industry driven framework for exploiting reputation
as a resource. Strategic Management Journal 24(3):
199–215.

context of dominance:

Smith KG, Grimm CM. 1991. A communication-
information model of competitive response timing.
Journal of Management 17(1): 5–23.

Smith KG, Grimm CM, Gannon M. 1992. Dynamics of

Competitive Strategy. Sage: Newbury Park, CA.

Smith KG, Grimm CM, Gannon M, Chen M. 1991.
Organizational
information processing, competitive
responses, and performance in the U.S. domestic
airline industry. Academy of Management Journal
34(1): 60–85.

Stata. 2001. Stata Reference Manuals: Release 7 . Stata

Press: College Station, TX.

Suchman MC. 1995. Managing legitimacy: strategic and
institutional approaches. Academy of Management
Review 20(3): 571–610.

Waldman DE, Jensen EJ. 2001. Industrial Organization:
Theory and Practice. Addison-Wesley: Reading, MA.
Weigelt K, Camerer C. 1988. Reputation and corporate
strategy: a review of recent theory and applications.
Strategic Management Journal 9(5): 443–454.

Wilson R. 1985. Reputations in games and markets. In
Game-Theoretic Models of Bargaining, Roth AE (ed).
Cambridge University Press: New York; 65–84.

Wooldridge JM. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross
Section and Panel Data. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Young G, Smith KG, Grimm CM. 1996. ‘Austrian’ and
industrial organization perspectives on ﬁrm-level
competitive activity and performance. Organization
Science 7(3): 243–254.

Copyright  2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 27: 1205–1219 (2006)
DOI: 10.1002/smj

