Industrial Organization, Corporate Strategy and Structure

Richard E. Caves

Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 18, No. 1. (Mar., 1980), pp. 64-92.

Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-0515%28198003%2918%3A1%3C64%3AIOCSAS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Q

Journal of Economic Literature is currently published by American Economic Association.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.

Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/aea.html.

Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.

The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive is supported by libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

http://www.jstor.org
Thu Sep 27 10:49:37 2007


Journal  of Economic Literature 
Vol. XVIII  (March 1980), pp.  64-92 

Industrial  Organization, 


Corporate Strategy 


and  Structure 


Harvard  University 

The  author  is  indebted for  comments  and  suggestions  to  Alfred 
D.  Chandler, JT.; Herman  Daems; Sharon  Oster; Michael  E.  Porter; 
and  Oliver E.  Williamson. 

LET  US  START with a sketch of  the rela- 

tionships to be surveyed in this paper. 
The large firm sells1 in product  markets 
having  structural  features  that  constrain 
its behavior and define its options. "Mar- 
ket  structure" refers to  certain stable at- 
tributes  of  the market  that influence the 
firm's conduct in the marketplace. Signifi- 
cant elements of market structure include 
the number and size distribution of sellers 
and buyers, height of barriers to entry and 
exit, extent and character  of  product dif- 
ferentiation, extent and character of inter- 
national competition (if the market is de- 
fined  no  more  broadly  than  the  nation), 
and  certain pgrameters  of  demand  (elas- 
ticity, growth rate). The firm holds tangi- 
ble or intangible semi-fixed assets or skills. 
The  top  managers'  perceptions  of  the 
market structure and the firm's strengths 
and  weaknesses  jointly  determine  their 
choice  of  corporate  strategy  (its long-run 
plan for profit maximization) and  organi-
-

-

1 The  discussion in  this  paper  will  relate  to  the 
firm primarily  in  its capacity as  a  seller,  although 
in principle  the analysis should be symmetrical be- 
tween  the  selling and  buying  sides of  the  market. 

zational  structure (the internal allocation 
of tasks, decision rules, and procedures for 
appraisal and reward, selected for the best 
pursuit  of  that  strategy). Both  corporate 
strategy  and  organizational structure  in- 
fluence the economic performance of  the 
firm and the market in which it sells.2 

These  relations  between  the  firm  and 
its market environment lie at the intersec- 
tion  between  industrial  organization,  as 
a branch  of  economics, and  the  study of 
organizational  behavior  and  administra- 
tion. My  intention is not to survey litera- 
ture familiar to economists but to synthe- 
size and report research undertaken from 
other disciplinary bases. One of my objec- 
tives is to report some interesting findings 
about  the  causes  and  consequences  of 
market  structure, arising from the  firm's 

"y 

the  economic  performance  of  the  firm  we 
mean its efficiency (measured by  the divergence of 
its input-output  relation  from  the  best  attainable), 
its srofitabilitv relative  to cornsarable  comsetitors. 
or  some othe;  operational  test of  efficient;.  HOW: 
ever, our inquiry  is  ultimately motivated by  a con- 
cern with market performance, an aggregation over 
the performance  characteristics of  firms in the mar- 
ket. 


Caves: On Corporate Strategy  rlr Structure 

65 

strategic choice and structural adaptation. 
The other goal is to present some promis- 
ing opportunities for theoretical and em- 
pirical research flushed out by  scholars in 
other disciplines. I shall cover a literature 
from business history on the evolution of 
the large multidivisional company as a re- 
sponse to changing technologies and mar- 
ket  opportunities,  studies  from  business 
policy that view the same relation in cross- 
section, and analyses from organizational 
behavior  and  sociology  of  the  influence 
of  technology, uncertainty,  and competi- 
tion on organizational structure. The first 
two literatures are treated together in the 
first part of  this paper because they share 
a  common  conceptual  foundation.  The 
third receives separate treatment. Econo- 
mists' contributions, both  theoretical and 
empirical, are noted  where  appropriate, 
but  my  emphasis  is  on  wares  imported 
from other  discipline^.^ 

I .   The Positive Economics 

of  Corporate Strategy 

A. 	 Corporate Strategy  and  Organiza- 

tional  Structure:  Concepts and  Theo- 
retical Framework 
The unifying concept of corporate strat- 
egy first emerged in the study of  business 
decision-making to provide business man- 
agers  with  a  simple  and  operational 
method for devising a long-term plan  to 
assure  the  maximal  attainment  of  the 
firm's  objective^.^  The firm rests  on con- 

s It should be stressed that  the literature  of  busi- 
ness policy covers a great wealth of  case studies and 
experience  distilled by  practitioners  into a body  of 
normative  instruction for business students and ad- 
vice  for business executives. This survey makes no 
attempt to synthesize that material. It is concerned 
only  with  positive  or  explanatory models and  evi- 
dence that  has  taken  the  form of  systematic cross- 
section studies. Coverage of  the case-study material 
would no doubt enrich the conclusions reported be- 
low. 

Important textbook statements are  Kenneth  R. 
Andrews  (1971) and  H.  Igor  Ansoff  (1965). When 
we h-anslate this process into economic terminology 
we shall assume that the goal is long-run profit maxi- 
mization  (maximum  present  market  value  of  the 

tractual  relations  that  unite  and  coordi- 
nate various fixed  assets or factors, some 
of  them physical, others consisting of  hu- 
man  skills, knowledge, and experience- 
some of  them  shared  collectively by  the 
managerial  hierarchy.  These  factors  are 
assumed  to  be  semipermanently  tied  to 
the firm by  recontracting  costs and, per- 
haps, market imperfections.5 An  implica- 
tion is that the firm does its long-run plan- 
ning taking fixed factors as given, so that 
its maximization process becomes one of 
maximizing quasi-rents to these fixed fac- 
tors. Another implication of  these hetero- 
geneous fixed assets is that a firm can suc- 
ceed  (i.e., forge  a  viable  combination of 
fixed inputs) in a given market by possess- 
ing superior assets of  any of several types. 
Equally successful market rivals thus may 
employ quite different bundles of fixed as- 
set  qualities  (strengths  and  weaknesses). 
These properties of corporate strategies 
and their formation hold several implica- 
tions  for  the  market  environment  in 
which  strategy  is  to  be  employed.  The 
standard model of perfect competition as- 
sumes these fixed factors away, and so the 
concept  of  corporate  strategy  applies to 
market  environments that  would  be  de- 
scribed  as  imperfectly  competitive.  Be- 
cause  the  strategy  model  implies  that 
competing firms earn different efficiency 
rents  and  that  they  can  serve  the  same 
market by means of  quite different input 

firm). The authors surveyed  in  this  section seldom 
tie their analysis to any goal that precise. They often 
imply that avoidance of  risk (especially risk of  bank- 
ruptcy) motivates the firm, and there are occasional 
suggestions of  growth  maximization. No  important 
issues discussed below will turn on the exact ingredi- 
ents in the objective function of  the firm's managers 
or owners. 

Furthermore,  at least some of  them  are simply 
not traded on open markets that permit capitalizing 
their differential qualities into their contract prices. 
Thus rents  that  the  firm can  earn are not  entirely 
passed along to the unique fixed factors responsible 
for them. The strategy model does not itself explain 
why  firms  should  be  organized  around  long-term 
contractual coalitions. Given that they are, it explains 
how  their shared objectives are pursued. 


66 

Journal of Economic Literature,  Vol. XVIII  (March 1980) 

combinations, we expect that the products 
they offer to the market  are multidimen- 
sional and heterogeneous, and that a firm's 
strategic strengths and weaknesses can be 
evaluated meaningfully only with respect 
to  identified  rivals.  The  strategy  model 
hence  has  an affinity for  a market  struc- 
ture of  differentiated  oligopoly. 

Strategic choice is a general process (as 
defined  in  the business literature).  How- 
ever, only a few major  types  of  strategic 
decisions  have  been  studied  systemati- 
cally-those  committing the firm to multi- 
market  activities through  diversification, 
vertical integration, and geographic mar- 
ket  expansion (multiregional or  multina- 
tional prod~ction).~ 
Insight seems to come 
from less general models that explain why 
firms  extend  administrative  links  across 
activities in different markets and thereby 
displace  arm's-length  contracts,  the  eco- 
nomic use of proprietary information, etc. 
Although  multimarket  activity  is  clearly 
a central strategic choice, other strategic 
choices can probably be identified empiri- 
cally and analyzed theoretically.' 

The other key concept is that of organi- 
zational  structure, 
the  arrangements 
whereby  the firm motivates, coordinates, 
appraises, and rewards the inputs and re- 
sources that belong  to  its coaliti~n.~The 
choice of  these arrangements also can be 
conceived as an optimizing decision, and 
some theoretical aspects of  the allocations 

Paul  H.  Rubin  (1973) and  Michael  S.  Proctor 
(1976) deal with the  expansion of  the  firm holding 
fixed assets that cannot be costlessly divested in the 
short run. An important antecedent is Edith T. Pen- 
rose (1959). 

For an attempt, see Derek  F. Abell (forth.). 
The term "structure"  will be employed here be- 
cause it has  become conventional, although it is  in 
some  ways  unfortunate.  It  suggests--quite  prop-
erly-the 
firm's  organization chart, but  it  does not 
adequately  invoke the  control  apparatus  by  which 
the  firm keeps its records, appraises and  evaluates 
the performance  of  its various inputs and activities, 
or motivates and rewards its employees. The breadth 
of  the  concept  should  be  kept  in  mind, especially 
because most empirical research  has addressed the 
organization-chart aspects of  structure. 

involved  are  considered in  Section I1 of 
this survey. For now, we can view the se- 
lection  of  organizational  structure  more 
narrowly as a process of choosing arrange- 
ments  that  maximize  the  value  of  the 
firm's  chosen strategy, given the fixed as- 
sets that warrant that strategic choice. Oli- 
ver  E.  Williamson  (1970) has  formalized 
Alfred D. Chandler's  analysis of  the prop- 
erties  of  two  key  prototype  structures- 
the  functional  and  the  multidivisional- 
and the relation of their respective advan- 
tages  to  the  firm's  strategic alternatives. 
The  functionally  specialized  firm  subdi- 
vides its activities into departments, each 
of  which  undertakes  a  distinctive  func- 
tion-production,  finance, marketing, etc. 
Their heads report to a chief coordinator 
whose  responsibilities  must  include  the 
continuous  reconciliation  of  the subgoals 
set for these departments. The multidivi- 
sional  firm  makes  its  primary  organiza- 
tional  breakdown  into  divisions assigned 
different tasks or having responsibility for 
serving  different  markets.  Each  division 
contains  an appropriate set  of  functional 
departments.  The  top  coordinator  ap-
praises  the  performance  of  divisional 
profit or cost centers, characteristically us- 
ing  return-on-investment  criteria,  and 
concentrates chiefly on formulating long- 
run plans and making a consonant alloca- 
tion of  resources  among the divisions. 

A departmental organization in a func- 
tional firm can achieve economies of  spe- 
cialization and scale and reduce the num-
ber  of  communication  channels  needed 
among members of the firm. However, di- 
versification and geographic expansion by 
the  firm  (with  or  without  departmental 
proliferation) inject problems that are po- 
tentially solvable by switching to a multi- 
divisional  (henceforth  MD)  form.  One 
problem  arises from the mere expansion 
of the organization's size. Given the super- 
visor's span of control, enlargement of the 
number  of  primary  operatives requires a 
predictable increase in the number of  su- 


Caues: On Corporate Strategy  6 Structure 

67 

pervisory  levels;  more  vertical  levels 
mean  greater  "control  loss"  as  messages 
get  garbled  while  passing  up  or  down 
the  hierarchy,  and  the  top  coordination 
increased  problems 
level  experiences 
with  "bounded  rationalityu-its 
ability 
to  absorb  and  act  promptly  upon  all 
relevent  information  (Williamson,  1970, 
chap. 2). 

Another  problem  arises  if  the  firm's 
growth enlarges the number  of  activities 
it  undertakes.  If  so,  each  functional  de- 
partment  may  come  to  carry  on  heter- 
ogeneous  activities,  even  if  additional 
departments  are  created.  Redundant 
communication  channels  are  retained 
within functional departments, and chan- 
nels between them are inefficiently used. 
The  top  coordinator's  task  multiplies  in 
complexity,  especially  because  perfor-
mance  criteria  cannot  easily  be  applied 
to  the  individual  activities  in  the  firm's 
portfolio. The MD  form offers a potential 
solution to either or both  problems. 

The preceding analysis follows William- 
son  and  others  in  explaining  why  firms 
may switch from the functional to the MD 
form  as  their  activities  grow  larger  and 
more  complex.  Although  some  writers 
tend  to  conclude  that  the  MD  firm  has 
all the advantages, the Williamson model 
really implies that the rational  choice be- 
tween the two depends on the firm's cir- 
cumstances  (1975, pp.  148-50). With  the 
firm's activity set held constant, adoption 
of the MD  form presumptively  costs the 
firm the resources  needed  to  add  a new 
top layer of  coordination. It gains the effi- 
ciency of  being able to use better perfor- 
mance  criteria, and it may  gain from re- 
ductions  in  control  loss,  the  deletion  of 
redundant  communication  channels  as 
the  functional  departments  undergo  re- 
organization, and economies in the use of 
specialized resources as the top coordina- 
tor's  elite staff is formed. 

The  elements  of  bounded  rationality, 
control loss, and the avoidance of  redun- 

dant communication channels carry many 
specific implications for the design of  or- 
ganizational structures that minimize ad- 
ministrative  cost  or  maximize  the  ex-
pected  value  of  a  corporate  strategy 
(JamesD. Thompson, 1967; Jay W. Lorsch 
and Stephen A.  Allen, 111,  1973, chap. 8). 
Most of  these implications have emerged 
from empirical investigations rather than 
being  derived  from  abstract  premises. 
Consequently  the  next  sections focus on 
historical  evolution  and  cross-sectional 
analysis. 
B.  Historical  Evolution 
The  development  of 

the  American 
economy  in  the  past  two  centuries  has 
brought great changes in technology, mar- 
ket  structure,  and  the  organization  of 
companies,  and  these  sweeping  changes 
reveal  starkly  the  power  of  the  market 
environment  to  alter  business  strategy 
and  structure.  The  major  systematic  in- 
sights stem from Alfred D. Chandler's two 
books  Strategy  and  Structure  (1962) and 
The  Visible Hand  (1977).9 The former- 
as original conceptually  as it was  histori- 
cally--concentrated  on 
the  changing 
strategies of a small group of large compa- 
nies and analyzed  their groping efforts to 
devise  new  organizational  structures  to 
pursue  these  strategies more  effectively. 
The Visible Hand takes a longer perspec- 
tive  on  the  changing  opportunities  for 
business  enterprise  wrought  by  changes 
in  technology  and  market  organization 
from  the  late  eighteenth  century  down 
to the present, but with emphasis on the 
nineteenth  century.  It  stresses  the  con-
nection between the market's  constraints 
and opportunities and the frontier of com- 
panies'  strategic  choices-the  opportuni-
ties seized by  the frontrunners and later 
disseminated to other competitors and in- 
Chandler  draws  on  a  wide  variety  of  historical 
materials,  including  numerous  company  histories. 
We  shall not  attempt  to  extend  our  survey  to  the 
level  of  these  comgkny histories.  (See ~ e r n a r d  Al-
ford, 1976.) 


68 

Journal of Economic Literature,  Vol. XVIII  (March 1980) 

dustries.  The  following  analytical  sum-
mary  can  only  hint  at  the  richness  of 
Chandler's  analysis. 

Early  in  the nation's  development the 
small  sizes of  markets,  the  slow  pace  of 
transportation  media,  and  the  primitive 
technology  for  transmitting  information 
denied any reward for the productive co- 
ordination  of  economic  activity  through 
the  large  enterprise.  Slow  communica- 
tions,  whether  between  or  within  firms, 
forced  a  decentralized  trading  company 
to employ a "trusted agent"  at each trad- 
ing point; it could not  decentralize deci- 
sion-making beyond equity participants in 
the firm. The restricted opportunities for 
hedging  limited  the  size  of  the  firm,  as 
did  small  markets,  costly  transportation, 
and the lack of  large-scale power sources. 
The firm had little to  gain from sophisti- 
cated accounting systems (costs mattered 
less for trading profits than did skill in act- 
ing  quickly  on  limited  market  informa- 
tion) or  closely  coordinated  logistics (be- 
cause of  the slow pace  of  transportation) 
(Chandler, 1977, chaps. 1, 2). As  a result, 
in  1840 there were no middle  managers 
in the United States and, correspondingly, 
little scope for strategic choice and sophis- 
ticated organization. 

Strategic choices leading  to  large-scale 
organization  first  became  possible  with 
the  rise  of  modern  modes  of  transporta- 
tion  and  communication-the 
railroad 
and the telegraph. Chandler concentrates 
on the railroad enterprises themselves, es- 
pecially the Pennsylvania (1977, chap. 3). 
First the consideration of  safety, then the 
organization's  sheer  volume  of  transac-
tions and size of  its capital requirements 
impelled an integrated, hierarchical orga- 
nization. From the railroad's efforts to deal 
efficiently with its complex task emerged 
many  mainstay features of  modern  busi- 
ness  organization-financial 
accounting, 
the  line-staff  distinction,  and  data  flows 
permitting  the  comparative  appraisal  of 
performance.  Functional,  departmental- 

ized  organization  evolved, as indeed did 
geographic divisions,  and  eventually  the 
multidivisional  form  for  managing  the 
many properties acquired by some major 
railroads.  Chandler  contrasts  this organi- 
zation evolved by "managerial"  railroads 
such  as  the  Pennsylvania  with  the  very 
different  structures of  independent  com- 
panies with interlocking directorates and 
a central financial office employed in the 
railroad empires dominated by financiers, 
such as the New York Central system. The 
lesser  effectiveness  of  this  latter  system 
for long-term planning  and coordination 
was  shown  in  the  greater  centralization 
that their managers imposed on these net- 
works  as  internal  reorganizations  took 
place  (1977, pp.  175-85). 

Fast modes of  transportation and com- 
munication gave rise  to  strategic options 
that led to national and multimarket firms 
in the manufacturing and distribution sec- 
tors. Successful firms could now establish 
branded goods, build national distribution 
systems, and develop multiproduct  lines. 
Which  industries  seized  these  strategies 
also  depended  on  changing  technology; 
Chandler  finds  that  the  firms  venturing 
to  integrate  forward  into  distribution 
were employing new large-scale technolo- 
gies  whose  production  outran  the  firm's 
previous distribution capacity (1977, chap. 
9). He attributes the  resulting  large  size 
of firms and enduring high levels of  seller 
concentration not so much to the new cap- 
ital- and  energy-intensive  technologies 
(except in primary metals) as to the resul- 
tant  vertical  integration  into  marketing 
and  distribution  systems  (1977, pp.  3 6 6  
67).  Integrated  distribution  systems  in 
turn  tended  to  have  excess capacity  and 
hence to promote the broadening of prod- 
uct lines,1° so that integration and diversi- 

lo Chandler  (1977, pp.  307,  326); Thomas  Horst 
(1974, chap. 2). This analysis yields other conclusions 
of  great  interest  for  industrial  organization. First, 
specific  motives  for  displacing arm's-length  distri- 
bution  systems can  be  observed: effecting product 


Caves: On Corporate Strategy  G Structure 

69 

fication  ultimately  proved  complemen- 
tary. While some firms successfully chose 
these strategies of  large-scale integration, 
others  opted for  a strategy of  horizontal 
merger to attain monopoly profits or stem 
the erosion of  local monopolies. Chandler 
argues that merger strategies failed unless 
the  combining  firms  genuinely  consoli- 
dated and adopted  a strategy  of  vertical 
integration (1977, chap. 10). One wonders, 
though,  whether  the  failures  lost  out 
through  oversight or because  integration 
in  some  industries  failed  to  offer  either 
real  or  pecuniary  economies. This prob- 
lem-whether  strategic choice is determi- 
nate  or  involves  entrepreneurial  free 
will-turns  up repeatedly in the literature 
surveyed in this paper. 

If much of Chandler's  The Visible Hand 
traces  the  effect  of  changing technology 
and market structures on firm's  opportu- 
nity sets, his St~ategyand Structu~e (1962) 
shows  how  the  resulting  innovations  in 
corporate  strategy subsequently  induced 
changes in business organization. Compa- 
nies whose success brought them to prom- 
inence  in  the  national  market  for  their 
principal product followed the lead of  the 
early  railroads and  communication  com- 
panies,  employing  a  functional  orga-
nization  to  minimize  costs.  Eventually, 
however,  the  continued  expansion  of 
companies in geographic or product space 
made  their  functional  departments  too 
heterogenous  for  maximal  effectiveness, 
and the multidivisional form was adopted. 
Chandler's  case  studies  reveal  that  this 
form evolved independently in four major 
companies,  emerging  not  full-blown but 
as  a  piecemeal  adaptation  to  recurrent 

differentiation,  guaranteeing  service  on  new  and 
complex machinery, reducing uncertainty and delay 
in  cash flows  associated with the thinner  stream of 
information flowing from arm's-length  distributors. 
Second, the analysis reveals a great deal  about the 
genesis of  entry barriers, conveying the impression 
that barriers  we now tend  to  blame  on advertising 
originally  stemmed  from  scale  economies  in  inte- 
grated distribution systems. 

problems  (1962, chaps. 2-5).  The  timing 
of the change, if not its ultimate fact, often 
depended  on  a  perceived  threat  that 
made clear the hazards of continuing with 
the old organization. Although the MD or- 
ganization itself serves to decentralize op- 
erating  authority  while  centralizing  the 
planning  and  coordination  roles,  these 
companies in some cases went through pe- 
riods  of  tighter  centralization  when  the 
weaknesses  of  previous  organizational 
structures  showed  up  (e.g., excessive  in- 
ventory  accumulation  in  the  1921 reces- 
sion). 

Foreign direct investment resembles in- 
tegration  and  diversification in  carrying 
the firm into multimarket  activity (Peter 
Buckley and Mark Casson, 1976, chap. 2) 
and  so  it  should  receive  parallel  treat-
ment. Mira Wilkins identifies the develop- 
ments in market organization  and public 
policy  that  brought  the  multinational 
companies  into being  (1970). Some com- 
panies  chose  a  strategy  of  foreign  pro- 
duction when foreign agents handling ex- 
port  sales  failed  to  provide  adequate 
servicing  or  to  differentiate the  product 
effectively. Others became  multinational 
when  foreign acquisitions were  made  to 
quell a price war or cement a nonaggres- 
sion  pact  with  foreign  competitors.  Still 
others  were  pushed  into  foreign  pro-
duction by  foreign tariffs  or patent laws, 
which made exports unprofitable. Horst's 
study of the food-processing firm notes the 
stronger propensity to foreign investment 
by  the  "marketersw-firms  skilled  in  the 
promotion of branded goods-than  by the 
"distributors"-firms 
whose  domestic 
strategies  had  emphasized  the  low-cost 
distribution  of  undifferentiated  goods 
through  geographically integrated  distri- 
bution systems (1974, chap. 3). Clearly the 
former  strategy  would  travel  to  distant 
lands  more  effectively  than  the  latter. 
Overall,  the  forces  that  caused  or  facili- 
tated multinational status correspond well 
to those uncovered  by  Chandler. 


Journal  of  Economic Literature,  Vol.  XVIII  (March  1980) 

C.  C~oss-section Evidence 

Chandler's  penetrating  insights  were 
picked  up  by  other  students  of  business 
organization  who  applied  them  to  cross 
sections of  leading  nonfinancial corpora- 
tions  in  several  industrial  countries.  Be- 
sides  testing  in  cross  section  Chandler's 
hypothesis  that  strategic  options  deter- 
mine  organizational  structures, 
these 
studies reveal the channels by which inno- 
vations in business organization spread in- 
ternationally, and the social and economic 
forces that spur or retard them. Other sys- 
tematic empirical studies have probed the 
association between strategy and business 
structure, and its implications for market 
performance. 

John  H.  McArthur  and  Bruce  R.  Scott 
explored  the  reliance  on  strategic  plan- 
ning of a small cross-section of  French en- 
terprises and tested (with negative results) 
for  a  relation  between  major  strategic 
moves and the choice of  appropriate or- 
ganization  structures  (1969,  chap.  5). 
Leonard Wrigley showed that the strate- 
gies  employed  by  large  manufacturing 
firms  can  be  classified  systematically 
(1970), and that strategy and structure are 
aligned  as  Chandler's  work  suggested. 
Wrigley's  classification  of  strategies,  the 
basis  for  most  subsequent  work,  turned 
on  the  degree  of  diversification  of  the 
company and the relation between its di- 
versified  activities and  its basic  business. 
Wrigley  (1970) and  later  Richard  P.  Ru-
melt (1974, chap. 1)emphasized the sub- 
jective and company-specific character of 
the  definition  of  basic  business  and  the 
bonds that link it to the company's  other 
businesses. That  is, firms can make  their 
businesses cohere in a variety of ways, and 
two  firms'  basic businesses  might  consist 
of sets of activities partly overlapping each 
other, integrated to equal degrees but in 
different  ways.  When  he  defined  basic 
businesses in this non-mechanistic fashion, 
Wrigley found that large companies were 

not  distributed  continuously in  their  de- 
gree  of  diversification. He  distinguished 
first  between  single-product  and  domi- 
nant-product  firms,  with  non-basic busi- 
nesses in the latter accounting for no more 
than  one-fifth of  sales. At  that  threshold 
he found  a break  in the distribution: if  a 
company's  diversified  activities  account 
for as much as 20 percent  of  sales, it had 
usually  gone  on  to  raise  the  diversified 
percentage  of  its  sales  to  40  percent  or 
more.  Companies  with  40  percent  or 
more diversified sales were classified into 
"related  product"  and  "unrelated  prod- 
uct"  groups. An  unrelated-product  firm's 
diversifying  activities  carry  it  primarily 
into technologies and markets that are not 
shared with it basic business, whereas re- 
lated-product  firms  exhibit  one  of  many 
linkages  to  the  basic  business  (similar 
products, processes, or markets;  comple- 
mentary  products; jointly  supplied  prod- 
ucts;  common  technology; common mar- 
kets  but  new  technology;  or  application 
of  common research results). 

Rumelt  (1974,  chap.  1) supplied  sub- 
headings  to Wrigley's  categories in order 
to identify the process by which basic and 
peripheral  businesses are linked. He sub- 
divided  the  "related"  and  "dominant" 
groups into companies whose diversifica- 
tion  was  either  "constrained"  (stayed in 
businesses necessarily and directly related 
to  the  basic  business) or  "linked"  (busi-
nesses  entered  were  initially  unrelated, 
but the firm devised  ways  to  tie  them to 
its basic business). The "dominant"  cate- 
gory also contains  a subcategory for ver- 
tically  integrated  dominant  firms.  The 
"unrelated"  group is subdivided into "un- 
related-passive"  and  "acquisitive  con-
glomerates"  (the latter  are  fast-growing 
and  thin  in  their  top  management).  Ru- 
melt's  addition of  these strategic linkages 
nicely complements Wrigley's finding that 
large  companies  were  not  distributed 
continuously in  their  degree  of  diversifi- 
cation. 


Caves: On Corporate Strategy  & Structure 

Indeed,  Wrigley's  key  hypothesis  was 
that  multidivisional structures  would  be 
chosen more frequently by the companies 
whose strategies involved greater diversi- 
fication, and this pattern was strongly ap- 
parent (1970, chap. 3). None of  the single- 
product firms in the Fortune 500 list were 
MD,  while  64 percent  of  the  dominant- 
product group, 95 percent of  the related- 
product  firms,  and  all  of  the  unrelated- 
product companies were MD. This finding 
replicated  Chandler's  strategy-structure 
relation  in  cross-section  and  indirectly 
confirmed 
that  companies'  strategies 
could be classified on a comparable basis. 
Still to be answered were questions of how 
promptly companies adapted their  struc- 
tures  to  strategic  changes,  and  whether 
the  strategy-structure  association  could 
be  replicated  for  other  countries.  These 
questions were pursued in a series of stud- 
ies by Rumelt (1974) on the United States, 
Derek  F.  Channon  (1973) on the United 
Kingdom,  Gareth  P.  Dyas  and  Heinz  T. 
Thanheiser  (1976) on  France  and  Ger- 
many, Robert J. Pavan (1972) on Italy, and 
Wrigley (1976) on Canada.ll TABLE 1sum-
marizes  their  key  results.  The  studies 
cover different numbers of  firms, but the 
sample sizes are desirably correlated with 
the  sizes of  the  countries  and  thus  with 
their  total  numbers  of  firms;  that  is, 
roughly the same proportion of the largest 
nonfinancial  companies  is  covered  for 
each. Two principal  conclusions emerge: 
1. As  Chandler's historical research im- 
plied, the strategies of  leading companies 
have run toward increased diversification 
in  all  of  the  countries.  Some  companies 
move  down  the  categories  from  single- 
product 
to  unrelated-product  passing 
through  all  the  intermediate  stages, but 
others  make  discrete jumps  in  classifica- 
l1 These studies were directed by Professor Bruce 
Scott. Data are also available on Japan, for 1972only. 
Ken'ichi Imai reports that 2.4 percent of  124 leading 
firms  were  single-product, 22.6  percent  dominant- 
product, 33.1 percent related-product, and 41.9 per-
cent unrelated-product (1978, p. 51). 

tion.  Moves  to  a  less  diversified strategy 
are  uncommon  although  not  unknown. 
Diversified strategies emerged first in the 
United  States,  then  spread  gradually  to 
other countries. The authors suggest vari- 
ous factors that help to explain why diver- 
sification came no sooner to Europe. Legal 
access to horizontal mergers reduced the 
incentive  to  diversify  in  order  to  avert 
risks to the basic business, and managerial 
preoccupation with maintaining collusive 
arrangements  in  the  basic  business  re-
duced the firm's capacity to extend its ac- 
tivities to other markets.12 Similarly, oper- 
ation  in  a  regulatory  and  bureaucratic 
environment such as France tended to tie 
down executives to mediating with public 
officials  on  operating  questions  and  dis- 
tract  their  attention  from  questions  of 
long-range  planning  (Dyas  and  Than-
heiser,  1976, pp.  242-44).  Heavier  tasks 
of  reconstruction after World War I1 also 
concentrated  managerial  resources  on 
production problems in the basic business 
and delayed diversification. 

2.  A diffusion of  the MD  structure ap- 
parently  took  place  during  1950-70,  so 
that in all countries the match of structure 
to strategy was appreciably closer in 1970 
than in 1950. The lag in structural adapta- 
tion to strategy is clear in each study, but 
the research designs do not focus cleanly 
on the average  duration  of  the lag or  on 
what  factors  explain  why  firms  in  some 
situations might  delay  longer  than  those 
otherwise  situated.  On  this  issue  only  a 
few hints  appear. Channon  (1973, p.  75) 
and  Pavan  (1972, p.  IV-50) observe  that 
the lag has often been long  and to  some 
degree  extended  by  the  adoption  of  a 
holding  company  structure  that  permit- 
ted diversification to continue but without 
central strategic control. Dyas and Than- 
heiser (1976, p. 115 and chap. 15) confirm 
this for France and Germany and put the 
average lag in adopting MD structure be- 
l2 Channon  (1973, p.  90); Pavan  (1972, chap.  6, 
p.  VII-46); Dyas  and Thanheiser (1976, p. 24950). 


72 

Journal of Economic Literature,  Vol. XVIII  (March 1980) 

TABLE 1 


STRATEGICAND  STRUCTURALCHOICES 

NONFINANCIALCOMPANIES


IN  FIVEINDUSTRIAL 

OF LEADING 
COUNTRIES,1950-1970a 

Country 

Year 

No. of 

companies 

Single 

Strategic  classification 
Related 

Dominant 

Unrelated 

United 
States 

United 
Kingdom 

France 

Germany 

Italy 

1949 

1969 

1950 

1970 

1950 

1970 

1950-
1955 
1970 

1950 

1970 

500b 

500b 

92 

100 

100 

100 

99 

100 

84 

100 

% dist. 
% MD 
% dist. 
% MD 
% dist. 
% MD 
% dist. 
% MD 
% dist. 
% MD 
% dist. 
%  MD 
%  dist. 
% MD 
%  dist. 
%  MD 
% dist. 
% MD 
% dist. 
% MD 

34 
5 
6 
24 
34 
6 
6 
17 
42 
5 
16 
19 
34 
0 
22 
9 
30 
0 
10 
0 

35 
20 
29 
62 
40 
11 
34 
73 
21 
0 
32 
59 
26 
8 
22 
45 
24 
0 
33 
45 

27 
44 
45 
90 
24 
32 
54 
79 
33 
12 
42 
64 
32 
9 
38 
88 
43 
14 
52 
58 

3 
100 
19 
98 
2 
0 
6 
50 
4 
0 
10 
50 
7 
0 
18 
56 
4 
33 
5 
60 

SOURCES:Rumelt  (1974, pp.  51, 71); Channon (1973, Table  111-2);Dyas  (1972, p.  168);Thanheiser  (1972, 
Table V-3); Pavan (1972, Table IV-3).Figures for  Canada from Wrigley (1976, p.  23) are omitted from the 
table because  they are available only for  1961-72  and because they are not  classified by  organization. The 
percentages  of  Wrigley's  86 companies in  the four  strategic categories are respectively 31,  29,  36, and  3 
for  1961; 12, 38, 44, and 6 for  1972. 

a The line labeled "%  dist."  indicates the percentage  distribution of  companies among the four  strategic 
categories. The line labeled "%  MD" indicates the proportion of companies in each category that are multidivi- 
sional. 

Rumelt's  procedure  is  based  on  a  sample taken  from  the  largest 500 companies for  each  year  (1974, 

Appendix A). 

hind diversification around 15 to 20 years 
for  the  median  firm  (1976, pp.  73,  195). 
In both the United  Kingdom and  Italy it 
appears that  family  ownership status de- 
layed both  diversification and  the subse- 
quent adoption of  the MD  structure.13 

in adopting the MD  structure.14 One sus- 
pects  this conclusion slightly because the 
structural  (and strategic)  classification  of 
a  company  in  these  studies is  based  not 
on the organization chart of the subsidiary 
itself  but  on  that  of  its  foreign  parent. 
The international  spread of  MD  struc-  However, the role of American consulting 
firms,  teaching  materials,  and  personal 
tures,  like  that  of  diversified  strategies, 
contacts  was  evident  (Dyas  and  Than- 
shows a lag, which again suggests the inno- 
heiser, 1976, pp. 11213). Also,  Lawrence 
vative role of U.S. companies. In the Euro- 
pean  countries, foreign-controlled enter-  G. Franko found that the European multi- 
nationals that  were  quickest  to  abandon 
prises were in the van of local enterprises 

13 Channon (1973, p.  76); Pavan (1972, p. IV-54). 

14Channon  (1973, p.  69); Dyas  and  Thanheiser 

(1976, pp. 65, 66, 11213); Pavan (1972, chap. 4). 


Caves: On Corporate Strategy  G Structure 

73 

an  informal  "mother-daughter"  control 
mechanism  were  those  with  the  largest 
and  most  successful  operations  in  the 
United States (1976, chap. 8). Pavan found 
a  demonstration  effect  flowing from  the 
two large Italian state-owned companies, 
I.R.I. and E.N.I. (1972, p. IV-30). 

The  cross-section  studies  document  a 
linkage  between  strategy  and  organiza- 
tion, but  they examine only the most  ag- 
gregated  traits  of  business  organization. 
The vintage can be fortified somewhat by 
turning  to  research  on  the  organization 
of  firms'  multinational  activities,  which 
complicate the choice between functional 
and  MD  organization. John  M.  stopford 
and Louis T. Wells point out that the risk 
(initially, at least) and specialized knowl- 
edge associated with international  opera- 
tions demand an internal organization dif- 
ferent from that optimal for a strategy of 
diversification (1972, chaps. 2, 5).Compa-
nies  manage  their  first  foreign  ventures 
through  an  international  division that  is 
viewed  as  highly  risky and  hence  is  cor- 
doned off  from the domestic organization 
(often functional, at that time). As  the do- 
mestic organization gravitates  to product 
divisions, tensions result  because  the do- 
mestic  divisions  have  little  incentive  to 
share  their  intangibles  and  other  assets 
with the international division. The larger 
and  more  diversified foreign  operations 
become,  the  more  likely  is  the  firm  to 
grope for some "global structure"-inter- 
national area divisions, global product  di- 
visions, or some combination of the two.15 
Franko's study of  the viability of  multi- 
national joint  ventures also sheds light on 
the  strategy-structure  relation  (1971). 
l5 Franko's  study  of  European  multinationals 
(1976,chap. 8)shows that their sequence of organiza- 
tional development  differed because  of  their  heri- 
tage of less competitive domestic markets. The inter- 
national division was generally skipped, and the MD 
organization  adopted  internationally  and  at  home 
at about the same time. His evidence suggests that 
the adaptation of  structure to strategy was hastened 
by  the  more  competitive  environment  that  these 
firms faced in their foreign operations. 

Broadly speaking, the multinational  firms 
tolerant of joint  ventures are the diversi- 
fied MD  enterprises.  Conversely, a more 
specialized  and  functionally  organized 
company frequently clings to a core tech- 
nology-an 
intangible  asset  that  cannot 
easily  be  shared with  another enterprise 
on a contractual basis. The functional or- 
ganization  finds its access to  information 
impaired by  a joint  venture and fears for 
the damage to its goodwill asset if its vari- 
ous markets around the world are interde- 
pendent. 

Finally,  the  strategy-to-structure map- 
ping has been checked in studies that in- 
vestigate  whether  the  locus  of  decision- 
making varies with  structure as it should 
if  structures are utilized so as to maximize 
the value of the strategies with which they 
are associated. Jesse W. Markham, follow- 
ing the lead of  previous case studies, col- 
lected  information  from  202  diversified 
companies  and  from  173 firms  acquired 
by these companies. He examined the lev- 
els at which various decisions are taken- 
divisional profit center or corporate head- 
quarters (1973, chap. 4). Capital-expendi-
ture  decisions  were  always  centralized, 
but the centralization of pricing, advertis- 
ing, and research  and development deci- 
sions declined as the acquiring company's 
overall diversification increased. Stephen 
A. Allen argues that the category of multi- 
divisional companies can be further subdi- 
vided according to the degree of divisional 
self-containment,  the  elaborateness  and 
complexity of interdivisional coordinating 
devices, and the fineness of the company's 
divisionalization (1978). He offered some 
evidence  that  this  subdivision  is  opera- 
tional and that firms change their subcate- 
gory  membership  in  explicable  ways. 
Richard F. Vancil showed that the degree 
to  which  a  company  decentralizes  func- 
tions to its divisions varies with its strate- 
gic choices (1979); broadly,  the more di- 
versified the strategy, the more functions 
are decentralized. 


Journal of Economic Literature,  Vol. XVIII  (March 1980) 

These studies demonstrate the adapta- 
tion  of  business organization  to  strategy, 
but they do not explain the genesis of  the 
whole process-the  environmental forces 
that control the choice of  corporate strat- 
egy. Because the Wrigley-Rumelt classifi- 
cation of strategies is obviously correlated 
with diversification-even 
if  not cotermi- 
nous with it-one  expects the causal forces 
of  market structure to resemble those as- 
signed  to  corporate  diversification. That 
expectation  holds,  but  the  determinants 
of  corporate strategy and structure do re- 
veal something more. 

Chandler  analyzed  the  association  be- 
tween  large  companies'  organizational 
structures  and  the  market  structures  of 
their  basic  businesses  (1962, chap.  7)-a 
reduced-form relation with the intermedi- 
ary  choice  of  corporate  strategy  solved 
out. He examined the 70 largest U.S. man- 
ufacturing enterprises in  1948, adducing 
a generous list of  environmental traits as- 
sociated  with  the  choice  between  func- 
tional  and  MD  organization.  Some  are 
simply the traits that cause firms to diver- 
sify  their  product  lines. More interesting 
are the factors that specifically discourage 
such  diversification because  they  imply 
scale  diseconomies in  top-level  manage- 
rial coordination; if  the firm's main activ- 
ity is monolithic and imposes a heavy task 
of  managerial  coordination,  it  seems  to 
have no entrepreneurial forces "left over" 
to  swing  into  diversified  activities  that 
would  lead  to a MD  structure. Chandler 
finds that the following factors discourage 
MD  organization: 

1. Customers and products that are few 
in  number,  making  strategic  decisions 
simple  enough  that  top  management 
needs no insulation from day-to-day con- 
cerns in order to handle them effectively. 
Producer-good  firms  hence  tend  to  es-
chew  MD  organization  unless  their  cus-
tomers  are quite numerous  and/or their 
production  facilities  geographically  de-
centralized  (e.g., metal containers). 

2.  Vertically  related  production  pro-
cesses that require intricate temporal co- 
ordination  and hence  a heavy volume  of 
top-level tactical decisions. Backward ver- 
tical integration thus is negatively related 
to MD organization,  whereas forward  in- 
tegration from manufacturing into distri- 
bution or the fabrication of heterogeneous 
final  products  encourages the MD  struc- 
ture.  The  pattern  is  consistent  with  the 
general proposition that materials become 
more heterogeneous as they pass through 
successive stages of  fabrication. 

3.  Large  absolute  scales  of  efficient 
production and high capital requirements. 
If  a  firm must  be  "very  large"  and  raise 
giant quantities of  capital to carry out its 
base activity efficiently, it neither diversi- 
fies  much  nor  becomes  MD.l6  Disecono- 
mies of scale in top-level coordination are 
suggested by  this pattern. 

4.  The output  of  a  production  process 
can be heterogeneous without mandating 
a MD organization  as long as the process 
itself remains fully integrated. Petroleum 
refiners, for example, have tended  to re- 
tain  functional  organizations  and  to  go 
MD through geographic rather than prod- 
uct-line divisions. The presence of a large 
amount  of  custom  production  promotes 
functional  organization  even  though  the 
output is heterogeneous. 

MD  organization, on the other hand, is 
encouraged by  the standard causes of  di- 
versification-heavy 
investments in  mar- 
keting and distribution systems, extensive 
resort  to  research  activities  or  use  of 
skilled technical  personnel whose capaci- 
ties can be spread to other activities, high 
levels of  risk  or cyclical instability in  the 
base activity that promotes diversification 
through risk-spreading. 

The  subsequent  country  studies  fol-

l6 This pattern was noted among American compa- 
nies  by  Rumelt  (1974, pp.  131-35),  among  British 
companies  by  Channon  (1973,  pp.  68,  77),  and 
among French ones by  Dyas and Thanheiser (1976, 
pp. 207-10). 


Caves: On Corporate Strategy  G Structure 

75 

lowed  Chandler  in  confining themselves 
to  an impressionistic review  of  the mar- 
ket-structure correlates of  companies'  or- 
ganizational choices, but shifted  their  fo- 
cus  from  the  relation  between  market 
structure and business organization to that 
between market structure and corporate 
strategy.  The  patterns  seem  consistent 
with what Chandler found-both  as to the 
specific industrial  sectors associated with 
high and low diversification and the com- 
mon  structural  traits  attributed  to  these 
sectors. Channon argues that high concen- 
tration  and the sheltering effect of  entry 
barriers  deter  diversification  (1973,  pp. 
90-91,  131), and Pavan notes that falling 
tariff  barriers  pose  a  competitive  threat 
that  promotes  it  (1972,  p.  VII-2).  The 
European  studies agree  that  family  con- 
trol discourages diversification because its 
maintenance  tends to limit  the firm's  ac- 
cess  to  both  financial  and  managerial 
r e s o u r ~ e s . ~ ~  

A statistical study of  125 Canadian com- 
panies  by  Caves, Michael  E.  Porter,  and 
Michael  Spence tested  the association  of 
strategic choice with many characteristics 
of  the firm and its base industry, confirm- 
ing statistically a number  of  the relations 
already observed (1980, chap. 12). For ex- 
ample, the related-product firms' base in- 
dustries exhibit significantly higher levels 
of research outlays, labor skills, and profes- 
sional and technical employment than the 
base industries of other firms. In addition, 
their  analysis brings out the influence  of 
differences  in  the  riskiness  of  the  firm's 
base  industry.  Single-product  firms  in 
Canada  are  notably  free  of  competitive 
threats;  compared  with  other  strategic 

groups, their base industries show less ex- 
posure  to  international  competition  and 
penetration  by  multinational  companies, 
more  regional  fragmentation,  and  more 
product differentiation. 

We  can  note  one recent  development 
in the adaptation  of  organizational struc- 
ture to  market  structure-the  matrix  or- 
ganization  recently  surveyed  by  Stanley 
M. Davis and Paul R. Lawrence (1977) and 
not yet sanctified by systematic empirical 
study. The functional organization's main 
virtue is minimizing cost; the MD organi- 
zation's  is  optimizing the firm's  response 
to changing environmental  demands  (es- 
pecially  market  conditions). The  matrix 
organization  tries  for  the  best  of  both 
worlds by  employing  more  than  one  or- 
ganizational stratum, e.g., one in terms of 
functional departments and one in terms 
of product markets. The key consequence 
of matrix organization is that some middle 
managers (e.g., plant managers) will have 
to  answer  to  two  bosses,  and  the bosses 
must  thrash  out  conflicting demands  or 
jointly supervised facilities as they appear. 
Although  the matrix  organization  flies in 
the face of wisdom reaching back to Bibli- 
cal injunction, Davis and Lawrence argue 
that  it  maximizes  profits  for  companies 
that (1)must manage more than one key 
dimension of  activity that can strongly af- 
fect the firm's performance (e.g., attaining 
technical  efficiency  and  discerning  the 
needs of particular customers) and (2) face 
a  heavy  load  of  information  processing 
(because events are uncertain, the organi- 
zation's  task is  complicated,  and interde- 
pendencies  among  its  parts  are  strong) 
(1977, chap. 2).18 The matrix organization 

l7Channon (1973, pp.  75-76);  Dyas  and  Than- 
heiser  (1976, pp.  78-79,  202); Pavan  (1972, p.  IV- 
54, chaps. 5, 7). 

l8This case for  the matrix organization indicates 
a key point in the business literature on MD organi- 
zation that is not  stressed by  economists who have 
written  on it. If  the firm possesses substantial fixed 
factors that cannot be costlessly divested in the short 
run and faces a constantly varying set of  market op- 

portunities, it pays to allocate resources to forecast- 
ing those opportunities and optimizing the realloca- 
tion, refurbishing,  expansion, or  divestment  of  the 
fixed  assets.  The  MD  organization reallocates  top- 
management resources to that purpose. The matrix 
organization  can,  among  other  things, diffuse that 
adaptation machinery  downward through  the orga- 
nization. 


Journal  of Economic Literature,  Vol. XVIII  (March 1980) 

is especially promising where scale econo- 
mies  in  production  must  be  reconciled 
with  fragmented  and  diverse  product 
markets.  This  kind  of  organization  was 
first identified in such sectors as aeronau- 
tics and appears to some degree in many 
multinational  companies.  Matrices  can 
take several dimensions, and neither  the 
incidence of the form nor its chief "objec- 
tive"  structural  determinants  have  yet 
been  charted.  Indeed,  one  wonders 
whether  the matrix  form  can  be  clearly 
distinguished from MD organizations with 
interdivisional coordinating  devices. 

The final link in  the chain of  relation- 
ships runs  from the firm's  organizational 
structure to its market behavior. The prin- 
cipal study to document  this link directly 
is Joseph L. Bower's comparative analysis 
of  investment  projects  undertaken  by  a 
single large MD firm (1970a). Bower holds 
that  a  company's  top  management  ap- 
proves or rejects projects but has little di- 
rect  influence  on  how  they  get  defined 
or on which ones are pushed through the 
firm's  lower  levels of  decision-making to 
become  claimants  for  top-executive  ap- 
proval.' The plans cast up at these crucial 
early stages depend on how problems are 
perceived by persons who can propose in- 
vestment  projects  as  their  solutions and 
whether middle managers find their inter- 
ests served by providing "impetus'.'-put- 
ting their reputations on the line to  sup- 
port  the project.  Definition and impetus 
in  turn  depend  on  the  "situational  con- 
text" of these lower-level decision-makers. 
Context  consists  of  organizational  struc- 
ture, meaning not only the organization-
chart  assignment  of  responsibilities  and 
powers but also the organization's system 
of measuring and rewarding performance; 
it also includes an incrustation of  history 
and  random  events.  Middle  managers 
given responsibility for a certain portion 
of the firm's activities will define problems 
in  terms  of  their  department's  assigned 
goals and formulate solutions in terms of 

the instruments within their experience.lg 
Top management cannot keep the charac- 
ter  and  composition  of  the  projects  that 
rise for their approval from being colored 
by structural context. However, top man- 
agement can influence that structural con- 
text  by  means  of  the  organization  chart 
it establishes (and the power relations em- 
bodied  in  it)  and  the  measurementlre- 
ward  system  it  employs. In their  nature 
Bower's  cases cannot document the effect 
on market competition and performance 
of  the coloration  of  investment  projects. 
But  since  these  projects  determine  the 
long-run context of  a company's behavior 
in its markets, this influence seems impos- 
sible to dispute. 

to 

Bower  contrasts  his  analysis with  that 
of  Richard M.  Cyert and James G. March 
(1963). Although  this survey cannot  give 
recognition 
the  Carnegie-Mellon 
group's impressive body of work on orga- 
nizational  structure  and  behavior,  we 
must note some of  its limitations pointed 
out by Bower in relation to the topic dis- 
cussed. One is that it places great empha- 
sis  on  the  cognitive  process  of  problem 
solving,  which  is  supposed  to  proceed 
mechanistically  from  the  perception  of 
job-defined  discrepancies.  Bower  argues 
that  the  cognitive  process  "merely  de-
scribes how  a  project  gets  defined"  and 
that  the  surrounding  contextual  forces 
permit  a  mechanistic  definition  "only 
when there is no intervention from higher 
levels  with  more  aggregate  viewpoints" 
(1970a, pp.  67-68).  He  also  objects  that 
the Carnegie  model  neglects  the role  of 
impetus and that its analysis of power rela- 
tions  among  decision  centers  within  a 
business organization loses sight of the fact 
that the relative weight swung by  differ- 
ent  decision-makers  itself  is  determined 
by  organizational  choices  made  by  the 
firm's  top decision-makers. 

lg This much of the analysis is anticipated by Yair 
Aharoni's  study of  the foreign investment decision 
process (1966, esp. chap. 6). 


Caves: On Corporate Strategy  G Structure 

77 

Studies of  the relation  between  a busi- 
ness's strategy or organization and its mar- 
ket behavior have not  gone beyond indi- 
vidual  case  studies.  Michael  S.  Hunt 
stresses that differences in the market be- 
havior  of  firms in  the major  home appli- 
ance industry  could be explained  by  dif- 
fering  strategic  choices  (1972). Indirect 
but  compelling  evidence  of  the  impor- 
tance  of  strategic  choice  for  market  be- 
havior  appears in cross-industrial statisti- 
cal  studies,  which  show  that  industries 
seem typically to  contain firms following 
diverse strategies  (Porter, 1979) and that 
the  more  heterogeneous  the  strategic-
group  structure  of  an  industry,  the  less 
fully  is  oligopolistic mutual  dependence 
recognized  (Howard H. Newman,  1978). 
D.  Normative Issues 

The circuit  of  relations  among market 
structure, corporate  strategy and organi- 
zation, and market behavior raises several 
normative  issues  about  the  efficiency  of 
firms  and  the  performance  of  markets. 
The  most  central  of  these  concerns  the 
choice of  strategy and structure. The de- 
velopment  of  diversified  strategies  and 
MD  structures  was  evidently  an  innova- 
tive response to changes in market oppor- 
tunities.  Although  the  strategies  facili- 
tated  by  the  MD  corporation  may  have 
their  drawbacks in  that  they  raise  entry 
issue not 
barriers to new competitors-an 
dealt  with  in  this  paper-this 
invention 
clearly substituted organizational for mar- 
ket  allocation  of  resources  in  many  set- 
tings  where  society's  resources  could 
thereby be used  more effectively. Given 
the  distribution  of  corporate  strategies 
and  structures  that  we  now  observe  in 
modern  industrial  countries,  has 
this 
boundary between administration and the 
market been optimally located? 

Business administration specialists have 
approached this question obliquely via the 
proposition  that  some  one  strategy  or 
structure  might  be  intrinsically  better 

than any other. Bruce R. Scott, in particu- 
lar, argues that MD structures are intrinsi- 
cally more  efficient than  functional  ones 
(1973) and  that  the normative  problems 
of  John Kenneth  Galbraith's  New  Zndus- 
trial  State  (1967)-information 
impacted 
in  the  technostructure,  non-profit  maxi- 
mizing motivation, etc.-are  strictly those 
of  the  functionally  organized  company. 
Does this mean that any group of activities 
that  the  firm  can  encompass  are  better 
organized  in  MD  than  functional  form? 
that  merging five functionally organized 
companies into a five-division MD  enter- 
prise will automatically reform allocations 
among the subtended  functional  depart- 
ments?  Scott  seems  to  offer  an  unsup-
ported Armative answer. Rumelt clearly 
recognized 
that  strategy  should  be 
matched to the opportunities inherent in 
the firm's environment (1974). His first at- 
tempt to control for the firm's opportuni- 
ties  was  not  successful  (1974);  subse- 
quently  he  developed  a  procedure  of 
comparing  each  firm's  actual  profit  rate 
to a synthetic profit rate that is a weighted 
average of aggregate profits for the indus- 
tries in which this firm operates, using its 
own  distribution of  activities for weights 
(1977). The best-performing firms, on this 
test, are the single-business firms, and the 
poorest performers the unrelated-product 
group.  Without  controlling  for  industry 
mix,  the best-performing firms would  be 
those  related-product  firms  that  link  all 
their  activities  around  a  common  core 
skill; but they do not significantly outper- 
form  their  competitors,  on  average.  Ru- 
melt's findings suggest the hypothesis that 
a firm doing very well in its base activity 
carries on with more of the same, whereas 
less successful enterprises  seek  their  for- 
tunes  elsewhere  (with results  depending 
on the transferability  of  their  talents). 

Caves, Porter, and Spence employ a dif- 
ferent approach designed to test the effect 
of  optimal, strategic  choice  on  perfor-
mance (1980, chap. 12). Using many char- 


78 

Journal  of Economic  Literature,  Vol. XVIII  (March 1980) 

acteristics  of  firms'  base  industries,  they 
develop  a model  that  yields  an  estimate 
of the probability that a given firm should 
be in each of  the four strategic categories 
(set out  in  TABLE 1).They  then  regress 
a measure of each firm's profits on numer- 
ous control variables and on the probabil- 
ity that it should have chosen the strategy 
that it in fact employs. They indeed find 
a significant positive influence of the prob- 
ability  of  correct  choice  for  dominant- 
product  and related-product  firms (unre- 
lated-product firms were too few and had 
to  be  dropped). The  positive  regression 
coefficient for the single-product group is 
not  significant, however,  suggesting  that 
the  single-product  group  includes  both 
"mature"  single-product firms and adoles- 
cents that will grow into other strategies. 
Just  as  correct  strategic  choice  should 
improve  economic  performance, 
so 
should an organizational structure that is 
correct  given  the strategy  that  the  firm 
has chosen to follow. Two recent  studies 
test this hypothesis. In both cases the con- 
trol  for  strategy is  an  indirect  one,  pro- 
vided by restricting the sample and/or in- 
cluding  controls  for  difference~ in  the 
firm's  opportunities.  Both classify organi- 
zational  structures  not just  as  functional 
or multidivisional, but in a more elaborate 
classification derived from Williamson and 
Narottam Bhargava that includes holding 
companies, firms in  transition  to  MD  or- 
ganization,  and  "corrupt"  MD  forms  in 
which  top  management  is  still preoccu- 
pied  with  operating  problems  (1972).20 
Peter S. Steer and John R. Cable conclude 
that the functional organizations perform 
best  when  the firm is based  in  a process 
industry or an uncertain environment, but 
otherwise a MD form is preferred  (1978). 
Henry Ogden Armour and David J. Teece 
20This classification  itself  incorporates  perfor-
mance judgments directly, and so a test of profitabil- 
ity in relation to these organization structures must 
take  this  potential  circularity  into  account.  Both 
studies mentioned  in the text deal adequately  with 
the problem. 

structured their analysis of  oil companies 
to emphasize the diffusion of the MD inno- 
vation  throughout  the  industry  (1978). 
They find that during the 1955-68 period 
MD  firms were significantly more profit- 
able, but by  1969 MD  had been adopted 
wherever appropriate, and the difference 
in profits had disappeared. 

Other  studies  using  different  ap-
proaches have found that firms' profits are 
impaired-and 
the social allocation of  re- 
sources worsened-if  organizational struc- 
ture  is  improperly  matched  to  strategy 
or  if  the  elements  of  the  structure  are 
improperly  combined.  Joan  Woodward 
(1965), discussed below, seems to have in- 
novated  the systematic empirical testing 
of the hypothesis that a firm performs bet- 
ter if  its structure matches the requisites 
of  its  environment.  Stopford  and  Wells 
found evidence that firms whose overseas 
operations  are  organizationally  mis-
matched to their domestic structures earn 
lower profits abroad than those with con- 
sistent  structures  (1972,  pp.  79-80).  An 
elaborate study by Jay W. Lorsch and Ste- 
phen  A.  Allen  turns  on  the  proposition 
that the firm that has rationally chosen a 
multidivisional or  a functional  (vertically 
integrated) structure must then optimize 
the inputs needed to coordinate and inte- 
grate its  divisions  (1973). They  find  that 
the  less  successful  diversified companies 
in their small sample undertook too much 
coordination; the less successful vertically 
integrated  companies too little;  but  they 
recognize that the errors could just as eas- 
ily have gone the other direction. Finally, 
K.  R.  Srinivasa Murthy finds that  the in- 
centive structure  of  the firm's  executive 
compensation must accord with its strate- 
gic  choice  (1974). He  investigates  how 
tightly  the top  executive's  compensation 
is  keyed  to  the  firm's  short-run  perfor- 
mance (return to book  equity,  growth in 
earnings per share). If  most disturbances 
faced by the firm are exogenous, as for a 
vertically  integrated  dominant-product 


Caves: On Corporate Strategy  clr Structure 

firm, there is little point  to inflicting risk 
on  the  president  by  tying  his  salary  to 
swings  in  the  firm's  fate.  On  the  other 
hand, the incentive  value of  profit-lever- 
aged  compensation  can  be  realized  in  a 
related-product or unrelated-product firm 
where the top executive's primary role is 
long-range  planning.  The  53 companies 
sampled by  Murthy generally  match  the 
hypothesized  pattern,  but  the  match  is 
clearly better for the more profitable ones. 
Interestingly, the overall level of top-exec- 
utive  compensation  does  not  vary  with 
strategy. 

Doubts  have  been  voiced  about  the 
vaunted effectiveness of the MD organiza- 
tion, echoing  the more  general concerns 
heard  from  economists  about  the  effi-
ciency  of  the  large,  highly  diversified 
company.21 Dennis C. Mueller argues that 
the  large  MD  firm  becomes  ripe  for 
growth-maximizing managerial  behavior 
(1972),  and  Henry  G.  Grabowski  and 
Mueller  found  suggestive  statistical  evi- 
dence that  the mature company (judged 
by age of the company and of its principal 
products) experienced a lower incremen- 
tal  return  on  its  investments  than  did 
younger  companies  (1975). Also,  Bower 
(1970b) and  the  European  studies  stress 
that a holding company is a poor approxi- 
mation  to  an  MD  structure and  unlikely 
to impose rational allocation of  resources 
upon  its controlled  firms as would  a MD 
company on its component divisions. 

These studies of strategy, structure, and 
performance nearly all agree on two prop- 
ositions: (1)correctly matching strategy to 
opportunities and structure to strategy in- 
creases a firm's profits and presumably in- 

creases the efficiency with which society's 
resources  are  used;  (2) certain  strategies 
and  structures  have  diffused  as  innova- 
tions, with large firms progressively mov- 
ing toward choices that make the best of 
their  opportunities. 

11.  Technology and  Organizational 

Design 

farther  down 

Running parallel  to the analysis of  cor- 
porate  strategy  and structure is  an inde- 
pendent  line  of  inquiry,  carried  out  by 
students  of 
industrial  sociology  and 
organizational behavior, into the relation 
between  the technology  of  a production 
unit  and  certain  detailed  features  of  its 
organization  chart. Corporate  strategy is 
invisible in  this  literature, as  indeed  are 
the broad  organizational  divisions of  the 
enterprise.  The  hypotheses  developed 
and tested deal with the relation between 
market structure and organizational struc- 
ture. But the spotlight now shines on de- 
tails 
the  organization 
chart-how 
the  span  of  control  of  each 
supervisor, the number of  supervisory hi- 
erarchies, and the flexibility of  these hier- 
archical  arrangements  respond  to  differ- 
ing 
the  organization.  This 
literature hence addresses the production 
function of organizational design: how the 
organization's structure is best adapted to 
performing a given task in a given market 
environment.  It  complements  the  strat- 
egy-structure  literature  described  above 
while sharing a common form of hypothe- 
sis: market structure determines organiza- 
tional structure, which in turn affects mar- 
ket behavior  and performance. 
A.  Economic  Theory 

tasks  of 

21 We note the considerable number of  papers by 
economists who sought to determine whether corpo- 
rations that have engaged in extensive conglomerate 
expansion are more or less profitable as a result; for 
a survey, see Peter 0.Steiner (1975, chap. 8).Many 
of these papers pay little attention to the opportunity 
set of  the diversifying firm and the very subtle prob- 
lem of finding an appropriate control group for com- 
parison. 

This organizational production function 
has received  some attention in economic 
theory.  Although  the  theoretical  contri- 
butions  are  empirically  more  tantalizing 
than  informative,  they  should  be  juxta- 
posed  with  the  evidence  if  only  to  pro- 
mote  future integrative efforts. A staple 


80 

Journal of Economic Literature,  Vol. XVIII  (March 1980) 

of  the literature of  public  administration 
is a model that relates the span of  control 
(s,  number  of  employees  supervised  by 
each supervisor) and the number of  hier- 
archical levels (k) to an organization's  to- 
tal  number  of  employees  (n). Thus,  n  = 
l ) / ( s- 1).If  s is taken as given, the 
(sk-
formula  explains how  k  must  vary  with 
n. Certain questions naturally occur to an 
economist who contemplates this model: 
1. Why  should the span  of  control not 
be considered a policy variable, to be op- 
timized for the technical and market envi- 
ronment of  each organization? Not much 
economic theory  addresses optimal spans 
of control directly, but a good deal is indi- 
rectly  relevant.  Harvey  Leibenstein  has 
elaborately  investigated  the  behavior  of 
employees performing under incomplete 
(output cannot be specified) employment 
contracts  (1976, chaps.  6-10).  Armen  A. 
Alchian and  Harold  Demsetz  emphasize 
the productivity  of  supervision for moni- 
toring  contracts  and  curbing  the  oppor- 
tunism that would otherwise limit human 
participation  in  efficient  cooperative  en- 
deavors  (1972). It  is  also  pointed  out  by 
Williamson, Michael L. Wachter, and Jef- 
frey E. Harris that many jobs  are idiosyn- 
cratic (1975); their content cannot be de- 
termined in advance through a complete 
contract, nor are spot contracts viable, and 
so a supervisory relationship becomes the 
efficient choice. These considerations are 
closely related to the optimal structuring 
of  the  employment  contract,  e.g.,  the 
combination  of  piece-work  and  straight- 
time rates to be offered (Joseph E. Stiglitz, 
1975). The interrelation between  organi- 
zational  structure and  compensation  has 
been developed  by James A.  Mirrlees on 
the assumption that risk-averse individu- 
als behave to maximize individual utility 
and not some goal of the firm (1976). Spans 
of  control turn out to depend on supervi- 
sors'  levels of  risk  aversion  (constant, in- 
creasing, or decreasing) and to be deter- 
mined  jointly  with 
the  structure  of 

compensation. The model is extended to 
multiple levels of  hierarchy. 

2.  How does the optimal span of control 
relate  to  the  flow  of  information  within 
the organization? The theory of  teams in- 
vestigates  the case in which members of 
a coalition share common preferences but 
have access to diverse information (see Ja-
kob  Marschak  and  Roy  Radner  [1972]). 
Certain conclusions follow about the opti- 
mal  amount of  information  to  be  shared 
and  about  efficient coordinating  devices 
for sharing information  or decentralizing 
decisions. 

3.  How does the multiplication of  hier- 
archical levels, as an organization  grows, 
affect  the  organization's  efficient  overall 
size? Williamson shows formally how con- 
trol  loss  and  bounded  rationality  within 
a hierarchical organization can limit its ef- 
ficient size (1967). Without any limitation 
placed on the firm's size by factor supplies, 
technology,  or  market  demand,  size  is 
nonetheless limited by  the inefficiency of 
expanding levels of hierarchy because (by 
assumption) those  farther up in the hier- 
archy are paid more, and the control loss 
occurring at each hierarchical level is cu- 
mulative  (that  is,  not  offset  by  adding 
higher  levels). Mirrlees's  model  similarly 
implies  a  limitation  on  firm  size  (1976). 
Guillermo A. Calvo and Stanislaw Wellisz 
(1978)  drop  Williamson's  assumption 
about the relation between pay and hier- 
archical  position  and  instead  allow  em- 
ployees  at  each  level  to  optimize  effort 
(and thus determine their pay) contingent 
on the process by  which  they  are super- 
vised. Whether or not the optimal size of 
the firm is bounded depends on the nature 
of  that process. 
B. 	 Technology and Organization: Empir- 

ica1  Evidence 
These 

theoretical  contributions  are 
striking and insightful, but they do not eas- 
ily  yield  testable  hypotheses  about  the 
structures of  actual organizations. There- 


Caves: On Corporate Strategy  G Structure 

81 

fore we pick  up the inductive  empirical 
literature  that  started  two  decades  ago 
from the insight that optimal organization 
is not a constant, but rather a set of param- 
eters  that  depend  on  the  organization's 
tasks, the stability of its environment, etc. 
Tom Burns and G. M. Stalker dramatized 
the issue by  contrasting firms in a highly 
dynamic industry (electronics) with those 
in  a  stable environment  (textile machin- 
ery)  (1961).  The  latter  firms  chose  a 
"mechanistic"  system  of  management, 
with well-defined responsibilities and spe- 
cialist  functions laid  down  from the top. 
Electronics firms employed an "organic" 
approach with ill-defined hierarchies and 
responsibilities and little stable content to 
any  individual's job.  In  an organic  firm, 
changes coming from any direction gener- 
ally modify (and are expected to modify) 
everybody's  responsibilities. When some- 
thing disturbs a mechanistic firm, it char- 
acteristically creates a new group to deal 
with the problem and leaves other respon- 
sibilities unchanged. Similarly, William R. 
Dill  argued  in  an  influential  case  study 
that the delegation of authority in a mana- 
gerial hierarchy depends on the structure 
of  the  firm's  environment,  access  to  in- 
formation  about  that  environment,  and 
managerial  perceptions  about  the mean- 
ing of  the information  (1958). 

These insights came together into a sys- 
tematic line of  research with the publica- 
tion  of  Joan  Woodward's  Industrial  Or- 
ganization: Behaviour and Control (1965) 
(see also, 1970). Woodward's study of  one 
hundred firms and plants in the southeast- 
Essex area began from the hypothesis that 
successful  firms  (successful  relative  to 
their  competitors) share common organi- 
zational traits that will reveal the vaunted 
universal best organization. But she found 
that the best-performing firms were quite 
diverse  organizationally,  as  were  the 
worst-performing. Then began the search 
for a correlation between the unit's organ- 
ization and its technology or task. The ini- 

tial hypothesis was transformed: the best- 
performing units are those using organiza- 
tional structures most appropriate to their 
tasks. 

Woodward's  procedure  for  detecting 
links  between  technology  and  organiza- 
tion  was  largely  ad  hoc  but  contains 
threads of a model. She eventually arrived 
at a  taxonomy  of  production  systems di- 
chotomized  between  assembly  and  pro- 
cess technology; the former is divided into 
small-batch  or  custom  production,  large 
batch,  and mass  production;  the latter  is 
divided  into  batch  and  continuous-flow 
production. As we move from customized 
assembly to continuous-flow processes, the 
decision-making autonomy best delegated 
to the primary  operatives diminishes and 
the optimal span of control changes at var- 
ious levels of  the organization.  The span 
for top management widens as the pacing 
of production becomes more built into the 
technology, but the span of control of mid- 
dle  management  shrinks  as  technology 
grows more complex. On balance, Wood- 
ward concludes that the ratio of  manage- 
rial to total personnel increases along her 
scale,  with  the  size  of  the  organization 
held constant (1965, chap. 4). 

The mechanistic-organic  distinction  of 
Burns and Stalker does not change mono- 
tonically  along  Woodward's 
typology, 
however. The largest spans of  control for 
first-line  supervisors  come  in  the  large- 
batch  and  mass-assembly  firms,  where 
relationships with operatives are least in- 
formal and intimate. The linelstaff distinc- 
tion  is  most  fully  developed  here,  and 
these  firms  find  it  easiest  to  produce  an 
organization  chart.  Fluid,  organic  man-
agement  systems  appear  at  the  ends  of 
Woodward's  spectrum, where  either the 
heterogeneity of  the output or  the com- 
plexity of  the technology is great (Wood- 
ward,  1965,  pp.  60-65;  Tom  Kynaston 
Reeves and Barry A.  Turner, 1972). 

Woodward  tests  her  hypothesis  about 
performance  by  cross-classifying firms by 


Journal of Economic  Literature,  Vol. XVIII  (March 1980) 

technology  and  degree  of  success  (1965, 
pp. 68-72).  The highly successful tend to 
cluster  tightly  around  the organizational 
characteristics best suited to their technol- 
ogies;  the  poor  performers  are  more 
d i s p e r ~ e d . ~ ~Thus, technology  appears to 
determine the optimal structure of  an or- 
ganization. 

Woodward's  insights have  generated  a 
large literature that refines and retests her 
propositions  and  seeks  to  place  some  of 
them  alongside  competing  hypotheses. 
This  body  of  material  makes  somewhat 
frustrating reading for an economist.  On 
the one hand,  the authors deserve great 
credit for  attempting to  explain features 
of  economic  organization  that  have  suf- 
fered  almost  total  neglect  from  profes- 
sional economists. On the other hand, the 
authors  are  addressing  problems  of  op- 
timizing  behavior  by  the  firm,  although 
they  are  largely  unfamiliar  with  the 
methods devised by economic theory for 
dealing with the firm's  decisions. As  a re- 
sult, parameters  determined  outside  the 
firm are treated as decision variables and 
vice versa, and many asserted results be- 
come unacceptable. Empirically, some bi- 
zarre samples are drawn that mix branch 
plants with independent firms, service es- 
tablishments  with manufacturing compa- 
nies,  and  government departments  with 
profit-seeking  enterprise^.^^  I shall report 
what  conclusions seem sound from- these 
studies  and  forego  criticism  except  in  a 
few strategic cases. 

Some  studies  replicate  Woodward's 
analysis  or  propose  direct  extensions  or 
modifications  of  it.  William L.  Zwerman 
(1970) repeated  Woodward's  procedure 
using a sample of 55 firms in the Minneap- 
olis-St. Paul area, drawn once again from 
a wide range of manufacturing industries. 
Like many subsequent studies, Zwerman 

22 Woodward  supports this proposition only with 
charts  for  selected  organizational traits,  so  the  ro- 
bustness of  the finding is  hard  to judge. 

23 A particularly unfortunate  victim is  the  arnbi- 
tious  series  of  studies  by  the  University  of  Aston 
group; for a critique, see Howard E. Aldrich (1972). 

typology  of  pro-
shrinks  Woodward's 
duction structures somewhat-in 
this case 
to  small batch,  large  batch  or  mass  pro- 
duction,  and  process  technologies.  He 
confirms most of her results while employ- 
ing somewhat improved controls for other 
variables that might affect them. Her asso- 
ciation of  mechanistic management with 
large-batch and mass-production technol- 
ogies is  confirmed  and  shown to  survive 
after control for the size of  the organiza- 
tion  and  any  divorce  of  ownership from 
management  of  the enterprise. There  is 
no  relation  between  the mechanisticlor- 
ganic  management  distinction  and  com- 
pany  size  except  for  some  suggestion  of 
a  mechanistic  tilt  for  firms  employing 
more  than  one  thousand.  Owner-con-
trolled firms lean toward organic manage- 
ment, but  there is no tendency for man- 
agement-controlled  firms  to  choose  a 
mechanistic  style.24 Zwerman  confirmed 
Woodward's  finding  that  top-manage-
ment spans of  control enlarge as we pro- 
ceed from unit  or  small-batch to process 
technologies, but her nonmonotonic rela- 
tion  for  first-line  supervisors  (broader 
spans for mass assembly technologies) was 
not  confirmed.  Zwerman  found  (1970, 
chap. 4), as did Woodward, that the pro- 
portion  of  supervisory personnel and the 
number  of  levels  of  management  hier- 
archy both rise as we move along the tech- 
nology scale. Zwerman finds some support 
for  the  hypothesis  that  successful  firms 
have  chosen  better  suited organizational 
arrangements than have other firms; it is 
not  clear, though, that he follows Wood- 
ward  in defining success relative to com- 
petitors in the firm's chief industry. 

24 Zwerman  (1970, chap.  3). Zwerman  hypothe- 
sized that the controlling owner would choose a nar- 
rower span of control at the top in order to maximize 
his  knowledge and  control  of  his  subordinates, and 
confirmed this in his sample (1970, chap. 5).Because 
owner-control tends to diminish along the technol- 
ogy scale, however, the respective influence on con- 
trol spans of  technology and owner-management is 
not  clear  (either for  Zwerman  or  Woodward, who 
did  not  address  the  implications of  an  ownership 
control split). 



84 

Journal of Economic Literature,  Vol. XVIII  (March 1980) 

for a sample of department stores. A store 
with  more  horizontal  subdivision of  de- 
partments or more vertical levels of  hier- 
archy  should  resort  more  to  output-re- 
lated controls because direct observation 
of  behavior  (i.e., the  transformation  pro- 
cess) becomes more costly. This prediction 
is not fully supported, but among groups 
of  employees Ouchi does find that output 
measures are used where the transforma- 
tion  process is  less  well  known  and  that 
training of employees (as a form of behav- 
ior  control) and managers'  access to  out- 
put measures are inversely related. 

An  issue  discussed  more  extensively 
than fi-uitfully in this literature is the rela- 
tive  influence of  size and  technology  on 
business  organization. The trouble  is  im- 
mediately  apparent  to  an  economist: 
Given input prices, any technology has its 
own  well-defined scale-economy charac- 
teristics,  which  will  surely  influence  the 
sizes of  establishments using it (if not de- 
termine them entirely). Because size and 
technology  are  collinear,  the  researcher 
must either go after  their joint  influence 
or use a fine hand in sampling to hold one 
constant while letting the other vary. Be- 
fore Woodward, analysts of  organizations 
had presumed a relation between the size 
of a functional organization and the height 
and  breadth  of  its best  managerial  hier- 
archy, and many empirical studies of  the 
relation  had  been  carried 
Post-
Woodward  researchers  have  found  that 
her relation between technology  and or- 
ganization  tends to weaken  or  disappear 
in any heterogeneous sample of establish- 
ments  (or whatever) that  vary  widely  in 
size of  unit, and the authors of  the Aston 
studies (e.g., D. S. Pugh et al. [1969]) gen- 
erally conclude that Woodward's findings 
hold for only small establishments  or en- 

26See John  R.  Kimberly's  critical  survey, which 
concludes rhetorically, "Does  size determine struc- 
ture?  Does  structure  determine  size?  Or,  perhaps 
more fundamentally, are these even the right ques- 
tions to ask?"  (1976). 

terprises.  This  conclusion  was  not  sup-
ported by  one of  the better size-us.-tech- 
nology studies, Peter M. Blau et al. (1976), 
who  observe  correctly  that  Woodward's 
technology scale is really a list of  catego- 
ries and not a monotonic ordering. Orga- 
nizational  variables-horizontal 
subdivi-
sion of  the organization, number of  verti- 
cal  hierarchies,  extent  of 
functional 
specialization, width  of  spans of  control, 
etc.-are 
all  correlated  with  size  (for  a 
sample of  110 New Jersey manufacturing 
plants), but none shows any relation to  a 
linearized  score  based  on  Woodward's 
technology  scale  except  for  the  smaller 
plants. With the nonmonotonic  character 
of her scale recognized, however, most of 
her  conclusions come  t h r o ~ g h . ~ '  It is  re- 
grettable that the authors of these studies 
have tended  to see technology and  scale 
as competitive rather than additive expla- 
nations  of  organizational  structure.  No 
samples have  been  drawn  to  isolate size 
variations for a given technology (or indus- 
try) or technology  differences for a given 
size of  unit. 

A  more  fruitful  line  of  research  has 
tested  Max  Weber's  proposition  that  or- 
ganizations can pursue coherent purposes 
either by  centralizing  authority  (control- 
ling the substance of decisions as they get 
made) or  by  structuring the activities of 
persons within the hierarchy (prescribing 
decision  rules 
through  specialization, 
standardization,  formalization,  or  high 
vertical  spans of  control). The prediction 
translates comfortably into economic anal- 
ysis of  the organization of  firms; the pro- 
portion of these control techniques should 
evidently depend on the nature and fre- 
quency of events requiring decisions. The 

27 An  interesting  incidental  result  of  Blau  et  al. 
is that the introduction of  computers affects organi- 
zation in a way similar to the use of  process technol- 
ogy, raising average  skill levels and  narrowing the 
spans of  first-level supervisors (1976); but it does not 
have the effect sometimes predicted of reducing the 
horizontal subdivision and number of vertical hierar- 
chies in the organization. 


Caves: On Corporate Strategy  G Structure 

85 

Aston  study  had  not  confirmed  a  trade- 
off  between centralization and formaliza- 
tion; however, that study's scoring system, 
when applied to a sample of units varying 
widely  in  their  independence  of  higher 
authority,  could not  be  expectedto pro- 
duce satisfactory results. John Child (1972) 
replicated the Aston procedures on a care- 
fully selected sample of companies in Brit- 
ain  and  tended  to  support  Weber's  hy- 
pothesis. 
C.  Effect  of  Competition 

The studies reported so far deal mainly 
with  the "production  set"  for organizing 
a firm or  division-how 
to  find the most 
effective organization, given the technol- 
ogy of the unit's activity. Its organizational 
structure can also be affected by the mar- 
ket  processes  surrounding  the  unit,  and 
the  influence  of  competition  and  uncer- 
tainty have both received  a good deal of 
attention. 

The central hypotheses in Jeffrey Pfef- 
fer  and  Huseyin  Leblebici  (1973)  flow 
from the economic argument that a com- 
petitive environment requires tighter co- 
ordination and more shipshape use of  the 
firm's  resources, while in its absence the 
additional  profits  can  be  taken  partly  in 
the  utility  derived  from  organizational 
slack.  Thus,  a  competitive  firm  should 
choose less horizontal separation into de- 
partments and more hierarchical layers of 
supervisors. It should demand  more  fre- 
quent reporting and specify decision-mak- 
ing procedures more fully in advance. It 
should restrict the resources under discre- 
tionary control of  department heads  and 
depend  more  on  oral  communication 
(writing it  down  takes  too  long). Pfeffer 
and Leblebici (1973) recognize that these 
hypotheses  interact  with  Woodward's; 
diverse and  changing  technologies  are a 
countervailing  force  for  decentralization 
and  horizontal  differentiation,  so  some 
parts of  her technology-structure  relation 
should be more  evident  in  less  competi- 

tive environments.  For a sample of  small 
manufacturing firms (for which size is un-
correlated  with  the  extent  of  competi- 
tion),  they  find  competition  (measured 
from the chief executive's  perception-a 
worrisome  practice)  indeed' to  be  posi- 
tively related  to  advance specification of 
decision  procedures,  proportion  of  oral 
communication,  and  review  of  perfor-
mance. The interaction with Woodward's 
hypotheses  also emerges clearly.  For  ex- 
ample, department heads' ceilings on dis- 
cretionary spending are positively and sig- 
nificantly correlated with  the number of 
product and process changes only in non- 
competitive  environments; 
the  same 
holds  for  the horizontal decentralization 
of  the  company  and  the  absence  of  ad- 
vance  specification  of  decision  proce-
d u r e ~ . ~ ~  

Pfeffer's  and  Leblebici's  finding  that 
competition is inimical to written commu- 
nication and performance review accords 
with  a  study  by  Pradip  N.  Khandwalla, 
which  posits  that  sophisticated  formal 
management  controls may  not  pay  their 
way where quick competitive response is 
necessary (1973a). The intensity of compe- 
tition  (price,  product,  marketing)  rated 
subjectively  by  executives  is  correlated 
with measures of the delegation of author- 
ity  and  the use  of  sophisticated  controls 
in nine decision areas, and with a measure 
of the selectivity of delegation and control 
usage. The use of  controls actually shows 
a significant positive relation to competi- 
tion overall, but this turns out to ride on 
product  competition alone (their relation 
to  the  intensity  of  price  competition  is 
negative  and  insignificant), and  product 
competition similarly encourages the del-

28 Contrary to Pfeffer and Leblebici, Johannes M. 
Pennings treats competition as an incentive for rela- 
tively  loose  control  (1975;  1976). His  sample  of 
branch brokerage offices of  a single company seems 
to  c o d r m   this.  However,  one  wonders  whether, 
within  a company, the  causation might  not  be  re- 
versed:  the  better  performing  offices  are  given  a 
longer leash by  top management. 


86 

Journal of Economic Literature,  Vol. XVIII  (March 1980) 

egation of authority (which has an insignif- 
icant  negative relation  to  price  competi- 
tion). The selectivity with which controls 
are used is positively and significantly re- 
lated  to  the intensity  of  competition  (all 
dimensions)  and  positively  but  not  sig-
nificantly related to the selectivity of dele- 
gation. Thus, the speedy and selective re- 
sponse  necessary  to  compete  in product 
dimensions turns out to qualify Khandwal- 
la's  hypothesis,  but  generally  it  gains 
strong  support.  Broadly  similar  results 
emerge from a paper by Jack L. Simonetti 
and  I?.  Glenn  Boseman,  who  conclude 
from a study of  Italian and Mexican com- 
panies  that firms in competitive markets 
perform  better if  they  employ more  de- 
centralized  decision-making  structures, 
whereas this trait is unrelated to the per- 
formance of firms in noncompetitive mar- 
kets  (1975).29 

Another  arresting  analysis of  competi- 
tion  and  organization  emerges from  Mi- 
chael A. DuBick's  study of  72 newspapers 
(1978). The differentiation of their organi- 
zational  structures  (number  of  depart-
ments,  unevenness  of  department  sizes) 
is  positively  related  to  the  intensity  of 
competition (a two-firm concentration ra- 
tio), after  account  is  taken  of  their  sizes 
and various  aspects of  the differentiation 
of their urban environments. Competition 
induces a significant increase in the num- 
ber of departments; also, the organizations 
of  newspapers in competitive markets re- 
spond more sensitively to  the degrees of 
differentiation  found  in  their  environ-
ments  than  do  those  of  noncompetitive 
papers. 

The  firm's  autonomy  or  competitive 
vulnerability  should influence a very dif-

29 Simonetti and Boseman compile not only an in- 
dex  of  economic  performance  (profits, growth  of 
sales) but  also  one  of  behavioral performance  that 
chiefly registers employees' contentment.  Content- 
ment  always  increases  with  decentralization,  but 
economic performance  does not.  For  a  similar but 
less  satisfactory  study see Anant  R.  Negandhi  and 
Bernard  C. Riemann (1973). 

ferent aspect of its organization-the  com-
position of  its board  of  directors.  Pfeffer 
argues a co-optation hypothesis: when the 
firm is beholden to an external power cen- 
ter which it can neither absorb nor be ab- 
sorbed by, it awards a "say"  on the board 
of directors (1972). Firms with larger capi- 
tal  requirements  should have  more  out- 
side  directors  and  more  representatives 
of financial institutions. Firms based in re- 
gional industries should appoint more out- 
side  directors  affiliated with  local power 
centers.  The  total  number  of  directors 
should  increase  with  needs  for  external 
funds  and  the  presence  of  regulation  as 
well  as  with  the firm's  size (because the 
bigger  and  more  diversified  firm  has  a 
wider  range  of  impacts  on  the  commu- 
nity). A  sample  of  80 large  nonfinancial 
companies  provides  confirmation  for  es- 
sentially all  of  these  hypotheses  (not ev- 
erything is  quite  significant  statistically), 
and  firms  using  the  "wrong"  proportion 
of  inside directors (i.e., deviants fi-om the 
regression  plane)  tend  to  be  less  profit- 
able.30 

D.  Effect of Environmental  Uncertainty 
Although  the  effect  of  uncertainty  on 
organization  had  been  recognized  in the 
organic-mechanistic  distinction  of  Tom 
Burns  and  G.  M.  Stalker  (1961), Paul  R. 
Lawrence  and  Jay  W.  Lorsch  advanced 
the analysis greatly with their specific and 
subtle  treatment  of  uncertainty's  effects 
on an organization's differentiation and in- 
tegration (1967). Whereas Woodward em- 
phasized  uncertainty  in  the  production 
department (1965), Lawrence and Lorsch 
are  concerned  with  uncertainties  facing 
all  departments  (production,  sales,  re-
search,  etc.) and  in  particular  the  prob- 

30 Michael  Patrick  Allen  suggests  (and confirms) 
that directoral interlocks grew less localized over a 
35-year period in which the average large company 
surely  found  itself  subject  to  more  national  than 
localized disturbances and threats (1974). Otherwise, 
Allen's  empirical  conclusions  diverge  somewhat 
from Pfeffer's. 


Caves: On Corporate Strategy  G Structure 

87 

lems  of  integrating  these  departments 
when  uncertainty  levels  differ  consider- 
ably among them. Empirically, they com- 
pare  better-performing  with  worse-per- 
forming firms in a given industry as well 
as  the  organization  of  better-performing 
firms  in  different  industries.  The  more 
that  uncertainty  levels  faced  by  a  firm's 
departments  differ,  the  more  differenti- 
ated  those  departments'  organizational 
traits should be (formality of organization, 
goal  orientation,  time  horizons,  style  of 
personal interaction, etc.). Lawrence and 
Lorsch  find  that  the  better-performing 
firms  have  matched  the  organizational 
traits of each department more effectively 
to the demands of  its environment31 and 
also  attuned  the  relative  importance  of 
their  departments  better  to-the  impor- 
tance (for the firm's  objectives) of  uncer- 
tainty  stemming  from  various  environ- 
mental  corners  (1967,  chap.  2).32 The 
more  differentiated  are  departments, 
however, the more resources must be de- 
voted  to  integrating  their  efforts  to  the 
performance  of  their joint  task;  the bet- 
ter  performing  organizations  also  distin- 
guished themselves in seeming to allocate 
the right amount of resources to the inte- 
grating function.33 

here search design developed by Law- 
31 The  same  conclusion  seems  to  emerge  from 
Khandwalla  (1973b), although the  conceptual  basis 
of  his study is rather murky. 

(subjectively,  from 

32 Lawrence's  and  Lorsch's  measure  of  environ- 
mental  uncertainty 
top-
managers'  responses  to  a  questionnaire)  has  been 
criticized by W.  Kirk  Downey, Don Hellriegel, and 
John W. Slocum for its low correlation with objective 
measures of  short-term uncertainty  (e.g., number of 
competitors, volatility of  price  or sales) (1975). It is 
not clear which group is closer to the ideal concept 
of  the  ex  ante probability distribution of  outcomes. 
33 Lawrence  and  Lorsch  give  some  evidence  of 
the  resources  committed  to  integration,  but  their 
measure  of  "integration"  is  ex  post  contentment  of 
managers  with  the  achieved  state  of  coordination. 
Integration in this sense does not vary among better 
performing  companies  in  different  industries,  al- 
though  differentiation  differs  substantially.  For  a 
study that identifies a specific resource commitment 
to integration,  see Anders Edstrom  and Jay  R.  Gal-
braith  (1977). 

rence and Lorsch (1967) for the function- 
ally organized firm was applied by Lorsch 
and  Allen  (1973) to  the  multidivisional 
firm. Once more, they find that the com- 
panies performing better have suited the 
structures  of  their  division more  aptly  to 
the  uncertainties  of  their  environments. 
Given  the  differentiation  (defined as  be- 
fore) of  the divisions of  the MD firm, the 
conclusion again  emerges  that  the  com- 
mitment of  resources to integrative effort 
must be optimized. The conclusions of the 
two  studies  parallel  each  other  quite  ex- 
tensively  and  lead  the  authors  to  a  rich 
"contingency theory of complex organiza- 
tions" (1973, chap. 8),i.e., that optimal or- 
ganization  depends  in  a  complex  but 
predictable  way  on  the  firm's  market 
environment. Nonetheless, I am not  con- 
vinced that the problem of  differentiation 
us.  integration  translates  from  the  func- 
tional  to  the  MD  organization  as  simply 
as Lorsch and Allen imply. In the MD or- 
ganization, the fineness with which activi- 
ties  are  divided  among  divisions is  itself 
a policy variable-one 
that should be op- 
timized jointly with the differentiation of 
those divisions and the integrating  effort 
applied in coordinating them, in order to 
maximize the value of  the firm's strategy. 
The  findings of  Lorsch  and  Allen  imply 
that integrative effort should be optimized 
for any given degree of  differentiation  of 
divisions, but the joint decision variable-
degree  of  subdivision-does  not  receive 
parallel attention. 

Lawrence and Lorsch show that uncer- 
tainty  affects not  only the differentiation 
of the organization's departments but also 
the  structure  of  those  departments  and 
the character of  the devices used to inte- 
grate them (1967). Pennings drew a blank 
in his attempt.to associate external uncer- 
tainty with the absence of  bureaucracy in 
brokerage-house  offices  (1975).  He  ex-
plains that failure  (1977) on lines consis- 
tent with Lawrence and Lorsch-that 
the 
firm may  respond  to  uncertainty  not  by 


88 

Journal of Economic Literature,  Vol. XVZZZ  (March 1980) 

adopting a more  flexible organization  (as 
Burns and  Stalker  [I9611 had  suggested) 
but  by  creating  organizational buffers  to 
fend it off. 

111.  Conclusions 

The goals of  this paper, mainly positive 
and  methodological,  are  best  stated  in 
terms of  the structuralist  paradigm of  in- 
dustrial organization. We have been con- 
cerned with  the way  in which  the firm's 
rational  selection of  a corporate strategy 
and  an  internal  organizational  structure 
responds  to  the  market  structure  sur-
rounding  it  and  with  the effect  of  those 
choices on the firm's behavior, and hence 
on the structure and performance of mar- 
kets. Although economists have made im- 
portant  contributions  to  our  knowledge 
of  these relations, this survey has concen- 
trated  on  evidence  from  other  fields- 
business  history, business  policy,  and  or- 
ganizational behavior. 

Two  symmetrical  types  of  conclusions 
result.  First,  economists have  something 
to learn from this literature. For example, 
there  is  strong  evidence  to  support  the 
following propositions: The structures  of 
markets have been affected by the organi- 
zational  options open  to  firms. The pro- 
ductivity  with  which  resources  are  used 
depends  on  whether  or  not  firms  make 
the best  choices of  strategy and business 
organization, given the market and tech- 
nological environments in which they op- 
erate.  Innovations  in  business  organiza- 
tion have arisen in the United States and 
diffused  through  the  industrial  world. 
They have enlarged the feasible scope of 
the corporation but have not  liberated  it 
from diseconomies in the top-level coordi- 
nation of  diffuse activities. Diversification 
is not, in  the long run, a continuous  pro- 
cess because organizational choices are dis- 
crete.  Economists'  vague  suspicion  that 
competition is the enemy of  sloth can be 
specifically documented  in  the  effect  of 
competition  (and  environmental  uncer-

tainty) on the decision-making structures 
and control devices used by firms. 

professional 

The  second  conclusion  is  that  econo-
mists have something to offer in this line 
of  research.  I  shall  not  let  professional 
modesty  blur  an  important  conclusion: 
well-trained 
economists 
could  have  carried  out  many  of  the  re- 
search projects  cited  in  this paper  more 
proficiently  than  did  their  authors,  who 
were  less  effectively  equipped  by  their 
own  discipline^.^^ If one accepts the weak 
postulate  that  the firm is  a purposive  or- 
ganization  maximizing  some  objective 
function,  it  follows  that  its  strategic  and 
structural choice represents a constrained 
optimization problem. My reading is that 
students of business organization with dis- 
ciplinary  bases  outside  of  economics 
would  accept  that  proposition  but  have 
lacked  the  tools  to  follow  its  blueprint. 
Constrained-maximization  problems  are 
mother's  milk  to  the well-trained  econo- 
mist.  However,  economists'  preconcep- 
tions have steered them  away from busi- 
ness strategy and organization as an area 
of  research.  Business  organization  in-
volves in essence selecting the right point 
on a production function, but "production 
function"  for  the economist  evokes only 
the harmonies  of  labor, capital, and land. 
Business  organization is  concerned  with 
assigning responsibilities  to  persons  and 
evaluating, and  rewarding  their  perfor-
mance-matters 
that turn on individuals' 
optimizing  behavior.  The  ingenuity  lav- 

34 The shortcomings include both errors and omis- 
sions. In business administration, the field of business 
policy has downplayed the influence of market envi- 
ronment  on  the  firm's  strategic  choices  and  has 
sometimes fostered the delusive notion that a "best 
strategy" does not  depend sensitively on the firm's 
market  opportunity  set. Students of  organizational 
behavior have recognized the dependence of  opti- 
mal  organization  on  the  environment  ("contin-
gency"  in  their  parlance). But  they have dealt  too 
casually with the theoretical complexities of optimiz- 
ing organizational structures, have treated the firm's 
objectives unclearly, and  have  embraced  research 
designs that  lack  controls for  differing opportunity 
sets and objectives. 


Caves: On Corporate Strategy  rD Structure 

89 

ished  on  individual optimizing  behavior 
in  marriage, procreation,  and  church  at- 
tendance has not been matched by atten- 
tion to persons' adaptation to an organiza- 
tional hierarchy. 

There  are  many  opportunities  for  the 
logical  extension  of  economic  research 
into the questions covered in this survey, 
and they range  widely from pure theory 
to empirical and statistical research. Here 
are a few tentative suggestions: 

1. The standard taxonomy of  corporate 
strategies has  proved  fruitful, but  is  cer- 
tainly incomplete. For instance, the alter- 
native strategies available to firms directly 
competing in a given market often seem 
to differ in many ways other than the ex- 
tent  of  their  diversification and  vertical 
integration.  We  must  determine  what 
other  families  of  strategic  choices  are 
widely represented in industrial markets, 
what conditions lead firms to select them, 
and  what  consequences  they  hold  for 
firms' organization and market behavior. 
2.  Industrial  organization  economists 
have only begun  to incorporate  strategic 
choice into their analyses of market struc- 
ture, conduct, and performance. The cen- 
tral hypothesis considered to date is  that 
the more heterogeneous are the strategies 
chosen by an industry's oligopolistic mem- 
bers, the less effectively monopolistic will 
be the bargain they reach. The quality of 
performance  associated  with  particular 
strategies could be investigated more  ef- 
fectively,  and  the  performance  dimen-
sions should reach  beyond allocative effi- 
ciency, the sole one addressed so far. 

3.  Even more incomplete is the taxon- 
omy of organizational structures. The pro- 
totypes of personal, functional, and multi- 
divisional organization do not necessarily 
exhaust the possible alternatives. And the 
structural  options  for  organizing  and 
transmitting  information,  or  appraising 
and rewarding performance  have  hardly 
been  identified  as  prototypes,  let  alone 
tested  for  their  optimal  selection.  Eco- 

nomic theorists have recently made some 
arresting  contributions  in  this  area;  can 
theory and evidence be brought closer to- 
gether? 

4.  There lurks  in  the  literature  on  or- 
ganizational behavior  an  unfamiliar  but 
fundamentally economic notion of  an or- 
ganizational  production  function.  The 
"output"  is  the  ability  to  reallocate  the 
firm's  complement of  fixed  factors (espe- 
cially its personnel, contractually commit- 
ted  and  with fixed  endowments of  skills) 
in  response  to  unexpected  disturbances. 
"More  output"  means  faster  adjustment 
to  a new  optimal configuration of  activi- 
ties, following an unexpected change. The 
inputs are resources devoted to collecting 
and  analyzing information,  coordinating 
agents  to  whom  different  tasks  are  as-
signed, etc. Can theorists clarify this con- 
cept of resources committed to a capacity 
to adapt to disturbances and indicate the 
specific kinds  of  optimization that  it im- 
plies? 

ABELL,DEREKF. Defining the business: The starting 
point  of strategic planning. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: 
Prentice-Hall, forthcoming. 

AHARONI,YAIR.The foreign  investment  decision 
process.  Boston: Division of  Research,  Graduate 
School of  Business  Administration, Harvard  Uni- 
versity, 1966. 

ALCHIAN, ARMEN A.  AND  DEMSETZ, HAROLD. 

"Production,  Information  Costs,  and  Economic 
Organization,"Amer. Econ. Rev., Dec. 1972, 62(5), 
pp. 777-95. 

ALDRICH,HOWARDE. "Technology and Organiza- 
tional Structure: A Reexamination of the Findings 
of  the  Aston  Group," Admin.  Science  Q., March 
1972, 17(1), pp. 26-43. 

ALFORD,BERNARDW.  E.  "The Chandler Thesis- 

Some General Observations," in HANNAH, LESLIE, 
ed. (1976), pp. 5 2 7 0 .  

ALLEN,MICHAEL 

PATRICK. 

"The Structure of Inter- 
organizational Elite Cooptation: Interlocking Cor- 
porate Directorates," Amer. Soc. Rev., June 1974, 
39(3), pp. 393-406. 

ALLEN, STEPHEN A.  "Organizational  Choices  and 
General Management Influence Networks in Divi- 
sionalized  Companies,"  Acad.  Management  J., 
Sept. 1978, 21(3), pp. 341-65. 


90 

Journal  of Economic Literature,  Vol. XVIII  (March 1980) 

ANDREWS,KENNETHR.  The  concept  of  corporate 
strategy.  Homewood,  Ill.:  Dow  Jones-Irwin, 
1971. 

ANSOFF, H.  IGOR. Corporate  strategy: A n  analytic 
approach to business policy for growth and expan- 
sion. New  York: McGraw-Hill, 1965. 

ARMOUR,HENRYOGDEN AND TEECE, DAVID J. "Or- 

ganizational  Structure  and  Economic  Perfor-

mance: A Test of  the Multidivisional Hypothesis," 

Bell J. Econ., Spring 1978, 9(1), pp. 106-22. 


BLAU, PETER M., ET AL.  "Technology and organiza- 

tion  in  Manufacturing," Admin.  Science  Quart., 

March  1976, 21(1), pp. 20-40. 


BOWER,JOSEPHL. Managing the resource allocation 

process: A study of corporate planning  and invest- 

ment.  Boston:  Division  of  Research,  Graduate 

School of  Business Administration, Harvard  Uni- 

versity, 1970a. 


"Planning  within  the  Firm,"  Amer.  Econ. 


. 

Rev.,  May  1970[b], 60(2), pp.  186-94. 


BUCKLEY,PETER J.  AND  CASSON,MARK.The fu- 

ture  of  the  multinational  enterprise.  New  York: 

Holmes and Meier, 1976. 


BURNS,TOMAND STALKER,G. M.  The management 


of innovation. London: Tavistock, 1961. 


CALVO,GUILLERMO
A.  AND  WELLISZ, STANISLAW. 

"Supervision, Loss of  Control, and  the  Optimum 
Size of  the Firm," J. Polit. Econ., Oct. 1978, 86(5), 
pp. 94352. 

CAVES, RICHARD E.;  PORTER, MICHAEL E.  AND 

SPENCE,MICHAEL.Competition in the open econ- 

omy:  A  model  applied  to  Canada.  Cambridge: 

Harvard  University Press, 1980. 


CHANDLER,ALFRED D., JR. Strategy  and structure: 
Chapters in the history of the industrial enterprise. 
Cambridge: M.I.T. Press, 1962. 

The visible hand: The managerial revolution 
i n  American  business. Cambridge: Harvard  Uni- 
versity Press, Belknap Press, 1977. 

. 

CHANNON,DEREK F.  The strategy  and structure  of 
British  enterprise.  Boston:  Division  of  Research, 
Graduate School of  Business Administration, Har- 
vard University, 1973. 

CHILD, JOHN. "Organization Structure  and  Strate- 
gies of  Control: A Replication of  the Aston Study," 
Admin. Science  Quart., June 1972, 17(2), pp. 163-
77. 

CYERT, RICHARD M.  AND  MARCH,JAMES G. A  be- 
havioral theory of the jirm. Englewood  Cliffs, N.J.: 
Prentice-Hall,  1963. 

DAVIS, STANLEY M.  AND  LAWRENCE,PAUL R.  Ma-

trix. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1977. 

DILL, WILLIAM R.  "Environment  as  an  Influence 
on  Managerial  Autonomy,"  Admin.  Science 
Quart.,  1958, 2, pp. 409-43. 

DOWNEY, W.  KIRK;  HELLRIEGEL, DON  AND 

SLOCUM,JOHN W.,  JR. "Environmental  Uncer-
tainty:  The  Construct  and  Its  Applications," 
Admin. Science Quart., Dec. 1975,20(4),pp. 613-
29. 

DUBICK,MICHAELA. "The Organizational Structure 
of  Newspapers in Relation to Their  Metropolitan 
Environments,"  Admin.  Science  Quart.,  Sept. 
1978, 23(3), pp. 418-33. 

DYAS, GARETH P.  The  strategy  and  structure  of 
French  industrial enterprise. Unpublished D.B.A. 
thesis,  Graduate  School  of  Business  Administra- 
tion, Harvard University, 1972. 

-AND  THANHEISER,HEINZ T.  The emerging 
European  enterprise:  Strategy  and  structure  i n  
French and German industry. London: Macmillan, 
1976. 

EDSTROM,ANDERS 

AND GALBRAITH, 

JAY R. "Trans- 
fer  of  Managers  as  a  Coordination  and  Control 
Strategy in Multinational Organizations," Admin. 
Science  Quart., June  1977, 22(2), pp. 248-63. 

FRANKO,LAWRENCEG. Joint  venture  survival  in 
multinational  corporations.  New  York:  Praeger, 
1971. 

The  European  multinationals:  A  renewed 
challenge  to American  and  British  big  business. 
Stamford, Conn.: Greylock, 1976. 

. 

GALBRAITH,JOHN KENNETH. The  new  industrial 
state.  Second  edition.  Boston:  Houghton  Mifflin, 
[I9671 1971. 
GRABOWSKI, 

DENNIS C. 
"Life-Cycle  Effects on Corporate Returns on Re- 
tentions," Rev. Econ. Statist., Nov. 1975,57(4),pp. 
400-409. 

HENRY G. AND  MUELLER, 

HANNAH, LESLIE, ed.  Management  strategy  and 
business development: A n  historical and compara- 
tive study. London: Macmillan, 1976. 

HARVEY,EDWARD."Technology  and the Structure 
of  Organizations,"  Amer.  Soc.  Rev.,  April  1968, 
33(2), pp. 24759. 

HORST, THOMAS. A t  home abroad: A  study  of  the 
domestic and foreign  operations of the American 
food-processing  industry. Cambridge,  Mass:  Bal- 
linger,  1974. 

HUNT, MICHAEL S.  Competition in the major home 
industry,  1960-1 970.  Unpublished 

appliance 
Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard  University, 1972. 

IMAI, KEN'ICHI. "Japan's  Industrial  Organization," 
Japanese  Econ.  Studies,  Spring-Summer  1978, 
6(3-4), pp. 3-67. 

INKSON,J. H. K., ET AL. "A  Comparison of Organiza- 
tion Structure and Managerial Roles: Ohio, U.S.A., 
and the Midlands, England,"J. Management Stud., 
Oct. 1970,  7(3), pp. 347-63. 

KELLER,ROBERT 

T.; SLOCUM, 

JOHN W., JR. AND SUS-
MAN,  GERALD I. "Uncertainty  and Type of  Man- 
agement System in Continuous Process Organiza- 


Caves: On Corporate Strategy  6 Structure 

91 

tions," Acad. Management J., March  1974, 17(1), 
pp. 56-68. 

KHANDWALLA,PRADIP N.  "Effect  of  Competition 
on  the  Structure of  Top  Management  Control," 
Acad.  Management  J., June  1973[a],  16(2), pp. 
285-95. 

"Viable  and  Effective  Organizational  De- 
signs  of  Firms,"  Acad.  Management  J.,  Sept. 
1973[b], 16(3), pp. 481-95. 

. 

KIMBERLY,JOHN R.  "Organizational  Size  and  the 
Structuralist Perspective: A Review, Critique and 
Proposal,"  Admin.  Science  Quart.,  Dec.  1976, 
21 (4), pp. 571-97. 

KYNASTONREEVES, TOM AND  TURNER,BARRYA. 
"A  Theory of  Organization and Behavior in Batch 
Production  Factories,"  Admin.  Science  Quart., 
March  1972, 17(1), pp. 81-98. 

LAWRENCE, 
PAUL R. AND LORSCH, 
-

JAY W.  Organi-
zation  and  environment:  Managing  differentia- 
tion and integration. Boston: Division of Research. 
Graduate School of  Business Administration, Har- 
vard University, 1967. 

LEIBENSTEIN, 

HARVEY. 

Beyond  economic  man: A 
new foundation  for  microeconomics. Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press,  1976. 

LORSCH,JAY W. AND ALLEN,STEPHENA., 111. Man-
aging  diversity and  interdependence: An  organi- 
zational  study  of  multidivisional firms.  Boston: 
Division of  Research, Graduate School of  Business 
Administration, Harvard University, 1973. 

MARKHAM,JESSE W.  Conglomerate enterprise  and 
public  policy.  Boston: Division of  Research, Grad- 
uate  School of  Business Administration, Harvard 
University, 1973. 

AND 

MARSCHAK, 

JAKOB 

~ D N E R ,  

ROY. Economic
theory  of  teams. Cowles Foundation  Monograph 
No.  22.  New  Haven:  Yale  University  Press, 
1972. 

MCARTHUR,JOHN H. AND SCOW, BRUCE R.  Indus-
trial  planning  in France. Boston: Division of  Re- 
search,  Graduate  School of  Business  Administra- 
tion, Harvard University, 1969. 

MCMILLAN,CHARLESJ.,  ET  AL.  "The  Structure of 
Work Organization across Societies," Acad.  Man- 
agement J., Dec. 1973, 16(4), pp. 555-69. 

MIRRLEES,JAMESA.  "The Optimal Structure of  In- 
centives and  Authority within  an  Organization," 
Bell J. Econ., Spring 1976, 7(1), pp.  105-31. 

MUELLER,DENNIS C.  "A  Life Cycle Theory of  the 
Firm,"  J.  Ind.  Econ., July  1972,  20(3), pp.  199-
219. 

MURTHY,K.  R.  SRINIVASA. Corporate  strategy  and 
top  executive  compensation.  Boston:  Division  of 
Research, Graduate School of Business Administra- 
tion, Harvard University,  1974. 

NEGANDHI,ANANTR.  AND  REIMANN,BERNARDC. 

"Correlates of  Decentralization: Closed and Open 
Systems Perspective," Acad. Management J., Dec. 
1973, 16(4), pp. 570-82. 

NEWMAN,HOWARDH.  "Strategic  Groups and  the 
Structure-Performance Relationship,"  Rev. Econ. 
Statist., August  1978, 60(3), pp. 417-27. 

OUCHI, WILLIAM G. "The Relationship between Or- 
ganizational  Structure  and  Organizational  Con- 
trol,"  Admin.  Science  Quart., March  1977, 22(1), 
pp. 95-113. 

"The  Transmission  of  Control  through  Or- 
ganizational  Hierarchy,"  Acad.  Management  J., 
June 1978, 21 (2), pp. 173-92. 

. 

PAVAN,ROBERTJ. The strategy and structure of Ital- 
ian enterprise. Unpublished D.B.A. thesis, Gradu- 
ate  School  of  Business  Administration,  Harvard 
University, 1972. 

PENNINGS,JOHANNESM.  "The  Relevance  of  the 
Structural-Contingency Model for Organizational 
Effectiveness," Admin. Science Quart., Sept. 1975, 
20(3), pp. 393410. 

"Dimensions of Organizational Influence and 
Their  Effectiveness Correlates."  Admin.  Science 
Quart., Dec. 1976, 21(4), pp. 688-99. 
"Structural Correlates of  the Environment," 
in Strategy + structure = performance: The strate- 
gic  planning 
imperative.  Edited  by  HANS B. 
THORELLI. Bloomington:  University  of  Indiana 
Press,  1977, pp. 260-76. 

. 

. 

PENROSE,EDITH T. The theory of the growth of the 

firm.  Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1959. 

PFEFFER,JEFFREY."Size and Composition of Corpo- 
rate  Boards  of  Directors:  The  Organization  and 
Its  Environment,"  Admin.  Science  Quart., June 
1972, 1 7(2), pp. 218-28. 

-AND  LEBLEBICI,HUSEYIN."The  Effect  of 
Competition  on  Some  Dimensions  of  Organiza- 
tional Structure,"  Social  Forces, Dec. 1973. 52(2), 
pp. 268-79. 

-AND SALANCIK, 

R.  The external con- 
trol of organizations: A  resource dependence  per- 
spective. New York: Harper  & Row, 1978. 

GERALD 

PORTER, MICHAEL E. "The Structure within Indus- 
tries  and  Companies'  Performance,"  Rev.  Econ. 
Statist., May  1979, 61 (2), pp. 214-27. 

PROCTOR, MICHAEL S.  "Production,  Investment, 
and  Idle Capacity,"  Southern Econ. J., July  1976, 
43(1), pp. 855-63. 

PUGH, D.  S., ET  AL.  "The  Context of  Organization 
Structures," Admin.  Science  Quart., March  1969, 
14(1),pp. 91-114. 

RUBIN, PAUL H. "The Expansion of  Firms," J.  Polit. 

Econ., July-August  1973, 81 (4), pp. 936-49. 

RUMELT,RICHARDP.  Strategy,  structure,  and  eco- 
nomic performance.  Boston: Division of  Research, 
Graduate School of  Business Administration, Har- 


Journal of Economic Literature,  Vol. XVIII  (March 1980) 

. 

vard University, 1974. 

"Diversity and Profitability," Paper MGL-51, 
Managerial Studies  Center,  Graduate  School  of 
Management, University of  California, Los Ange- 
les, 1977. 

SCOTT, BRUCE R.  "The Industrial State: Old Myths 
and  New  Realities,"  Harvard  Bus.  Rev.,  March-
April  1973, 51 (2), pp.  133-48. 

SIMONETTI, 

JACK L. AND BOSEMAN, 

"The 
Impact  of  Market  Competition  on  Organization 
Structure  and  Effectiveness:  A  Cross-Cultural 
Study,"  Acad.  Management J.,  Sept.  1975,  18(3), 
pp. 631-638. 

F. GLENN. 

STEER, PETER S. AND CABLE,JOHN R.  "Internal  Or- 
ganization  and  Profit:  An  Empirical  Analysis  of 
Large U.K. Companies," J. Znd. Econ., Sept. 1978, 
27(1),pp.  13-30. 

STEINER,PETER0. Mergers:  Motives,  effects,  poli- 
cies.  AM  Arbor:  University  of  Michigan  Press, 
1975. 

STIGLITZ,JOSEPHE. "Incentives, Risk, and Informa- 
tion: Notes Towards a Theory of  Hierarchy,"  Bell 
J. Econ., Autumn 1975, 6(2), pp. 55279. 

STOPFORD,JOHN M. AND WELLS, LOUIS T., JR. Man-
aging the multinational enterprise: Organization 
of thefirm and ownership of the subsidiaries. New 
York: Basic Books, 1972. 

THANHEISER,HEINZ T.  Strategy  and  structure  of 
German industrial enterprise. Unpublished D.B.A. 
thesis,  Graduate  School  of  Business  Administra- 
'tion, Harvard University, 1972. 

THOMPSON,JAMES D.  Organizations  in action: So- 
cial  science  bases of administrative  theory. New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1967. 

VANCIL,RICHARDF.  Decentralization:  Managerial 
ambiguity by design. New York: Dow Jones-Irwin, 
1979. 

WILKINS,MIRA.The emergence of multinational en- 

terprise: American business abroad from  the colo- 
nial era  to 1914. Cambridge: Harvard  University 
Press,  1970. 

WILLIAMSON,OLIVER E. "Hierarchical Control and 
Optimum  Firm  Size," J.  Polit.  Econ., April 1967, 
75(2),pp.  123-38. 

Corporate  control  and  business  behavior. 

Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1970. 

Markets  and  hierarchies.  New  York:  Free 

Press, 1975. 

. 
. 

-AND BHARGAVA, 

NAROTTAM. 

"Assessing  and 
Classifying the Internal Structure and Control Ap- 
paratus  of  the  Modern  Corporation"  in  Market 
structure  and  corporate  behaviour.  Edited  by 
KEITH COWLING. London:  Gray-Mills, 1972, pp. 
125-49. 

; 

WACHTER, MICHAEL L.  AND  HARRIS, 

JEFFREYE. "Understanding  the Employment Re- 
lation:  The  Analysis  of  Idiosyncratic Exchange," 
Bell J. Econ.,  Spring 1975, 6(1), pp. 250-78. 

WOODWARD,JOAN.Industrial  organization:  Theory 
and  practice.  London:  Oxford  University  Press, 
1965. 

, 

ed.  Industrial  organization:  Behavior  and 
control.  London:  Oxford  University  Press, 
1970. 

WRIGLEY,LEONARD.Divisional  autonomy and  di- 
versification. Unpublished D.B.A. thesis, Harvard 
Business School, 1970. 

. 

"Conglomerate  Growth  in  Canada,"  brief 
prepared  for  Royal  Commission  on  Corporate 
Concentration.  Mimeographed. London, Ontario: 
School  of  Business Administration, University of 
Western Ontario,  1976. 

ZWERMAN, 

WILLIAM 

L. New perspectives on organi- 
zation  theory. Contributions in  Sociology, No.  1. 
Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1970. 


http://www.jstor.org

LINKED CITATIONS

- Page 1 of 2 -

You have printed the following article:

Industrial Organization, Corporate Strategy and Structure
Richard E. Caves
Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 18, No. 1. (Mar., 1980), pp. 64-92.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-0515%28198003%2918%3A1%3C64%3AIOCSAS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Q

This article references the following linked citations. If you are trying to access articles from an
off-campus location, you may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR. Please
visit your library's website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR.

[Footnotes]

6 The Expansion of Firms
Paul H. Rubin
The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81, No. 4. (Jul. - Aug., 1973), pp. 936-949.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-3808%28197307%2F08%2981%3A4%3C936%3ATEOF%3E2.0.CO%3B2-9

References

Production, Information Costs, and Economic Organization
Armen A. Alchian; Harold Demsetz
The American Economic Review, Vol. 62, No. 5. (Dec., 1972), pp. 777-795.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28197212%2962%3A5%3C777%3APICAEO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Q

Planning within the Firm
Joseph L. Bower
The American Economic Review, Vol. 60, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the Eighty-second
Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association. (May, 1970), pp. 186-194.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28197005%2960%3A2%3C186%3APWTF%3E2.0.CO%3B2-8

NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.


http://www.jstor.org

LINKED CITATIONS

- Page 2 of 2 -

Supervision, Loss of Control, and the Optimum Size of the Firm
Guillermo A. Calvo; Stanislaw Wellisz
The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 86, No. 5. (Oct., 1978), pp. 943-952.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-3808%28197810%2986%3A5%3C943%3ASLOCAT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-%23

The Effect of Competition on Some Dimensions of Organizational Structure
Jeffrey Pfeffer; Huseyin Leblebici
Social Forces, Vol. 52, No. 2. (Dec., 1973), pp. 268-279.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0037-7732%28197312%2952%3A2%3C268%3ATEOCOS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-%23

The Expansion of Firms
Paul H. Rubin
The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81, No. 4. (Jul. - Aug., 1973), pp. 936-949.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-3808%28197307%2F08%2981%3A4%3C936%3ATEOF%3E2.0.CO%3B2-9

Hierarchical Control and Optimum Firm Size
Oliver E. Williamson
The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 75, No. 2. (Apr., 1967), pp. 123-138.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-3808%28196704%2975%3A2%3C123%3AHCAOFS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-R

NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.

