 

 

1

The Relationship of Employee Perceptions of Organizational Climate to Business-Unit 

Outcomes:  An MPLS Approach 

 
 
 
Bruce Cooil, Dean Samuel B. and Evelyn R. Richmond Professor of Management  
Owen Graduate School, Vanderbilt University 
401 21st Ave., S. 
Nashville, TN.   37203 
Phone: (615) 322-3336 ; Fax:  (615) 343-7177 ; E-mail: bruce.cooil@owen.vanderbilt.edu
 
Lerzan Aksoy, Associate Professor of Marketing 
Koç University, College of Administrative Sciences and Economics 
Rumeli Feneri Yolu, Sariyer 34450 Istanbul, Turkey 
Phone: (90-212) 338 14 56; Fax: (90-212) 338 16 42; Email: laksoy@ku.edu.tr
 
Timothy L. Keiningham, Global Chief Strategy Officer and Executive Vice President 
(corresponding author) 
IPSOS Loyalty, Morris Corporate Center 2, 1 Upper Pond Rd, Bldg D., Parsippany, NJ 07054   
Phone: (973) 658 1719 ; Fax: (973) 658 1701 ; Email: tim.keiningham@ipsos-na.com
 
Kiersten M. Maryott, Assistant Professor of Marketing 
Department of Marketing and Business Law 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
Box 844000 
Richmond, VA 23284-4000 
Phone: (804) 828-3201 ; Fax: (804) 828-0200; E-mail: KMMaryott@vcu.edu
 
Key Words:  Employee Perceptions, Organizational Climate, Employee Turnover, Customer 
Satisfaction, Financial Performance  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Acknowledgment:  Bruce Cooil acknowledges support from the Dean's Fund for Faculty 

Research, Owen Graduate School, Vanderbilt University. 


 

 

 

2

The Relationship of Employee Perceptions of Organizational Climate to  

Business-Unit Outcomes:  An MPLS Approach 

Abstract 

There has been an extensive exploration of how organizational climate is related to 

various business outcomes, but these studies have generally examined outcomes separately or 

developed univariate measures that combine outcomes. These approaches fail to (a) 

accommodate the multivariate character of important business results, and (b) facilitate the 

firm’s need to achieve success on several dimensions. This research proposes a methodological 

approach new to the service domain to address these issues. Using data from a large, multi-

national retail grocery superstore based in continental Western Europe, this study illustrates how 

multivariate partial least squares (MPLS) models can be used.  MPLS provides three 

interpretable factors – Overall Organization Climate, Self Efficacy versus Leader’s Efficacy and 

Personal Empowerment versus Management Facilitation of – climate that are important 

predictors of three business outcomes:  employee retention, customer satisfaction, and scaled 

revenue. The use of the MPLS approach in other services domains is also explored.    

 


 

 

3

INTRODUCTION 

From the inception of scientific management, a primary focus of human resource 

management has been on employee perceptions of work environments.  Schneider (1994) notes 

that Frederick Taylor’s (1911) basic motivation for his “Scientific Management” movement of 

the early 1900s was to design work processes so that employees could perform in a climate 

conducive to greater productivity. Accordingly, employee perceptions of organizational climate 

and work experiences have become one of the most researched aspects of management, with 

well over 10,000 papers having been published on the topic (Harter, Schmidt, and Hayes 2002; 

Salanova, Agut and Peiro 2005). 

The origins of climate research date back to Lewin and his colleagues (Lewin, Lippitt and 

White 1939) who emphasized the role of leaders in the creation of climate. Today, organizational 

climate can be defined as perceptions attributed to the work environment (Rousseau, 1988) 

which is used primarily as a framework to understand how employees experience their work 

environment and is distinct from employee satisfaction (Schneider and Snyder 1975). 

Furthermore, even though employee perceptions and organizational climate is sometimes used 

distinctly, Dean’s (2004) conclusions indicate similar findings regardless of the previous and 

distinct use of employee perceptions and organizational climate. The importance of measuring 

organizational climate is critical as it has been shown to link to a variety of outcomes and 

successful organizational functioning. Researchers have sought to understand how the 

dimensions of organizational climate are related to a variety of business outcomes such as 

employee retention, turnover, intentions to quit (Dean 2004; Hemingway and Smith 1999; 

Mulki, Jaramillo and Locander 2006; Ryan, Schmit and Johnson 1999), customer satisfaction 

(Gelade and Young 2005; Heskett, Sasser, and Schlesinger 1997; Schneider, White and Paul 


 

 

4

1998; Schneider, Ehrhart, Mayer, Saltz and Niles-Jolly 2005), and firm financial performance 

such as growth, sales, revenue and profitability (Borucki and Burke 1999; Gelade and Young 

2005; Schneider, Ehrhart, Mayer, Saltz and Niles-Jolly 2005). 

In the services domain, the Service Profit Chain (SPC) (Heskett et al. 1994; Heskett, 

Sasser, and Schlesinger 1997) has been of particular interest. The SPC is typically 

conceptualized as a virtuous chain of effects beginning with the internal service quality, 

(including workplace design, job design, employee selection and development, employee reward 

and recognition) which ultimately facilitates greater customer satisfaction, loyalty and 

profitability.  This in turn is expected to lead to improved business results (for example, Heskett 

et al. 1994; Schneider et al. 2003).  The direct implication of these models is that the internal 

employee environment, customer satisfaction, and profits are all positively linked. 

Studies examining the specific relationships proposed in the SPC have been mixed, with 

some finding support for the proposed associations, while others offer contradictory findings. 

Heskett, Sasser, and Schlesinger (1997) suggest that improvements in the internal climate 

increase the satisfaction of employees, which then ‘reflects’ on customers and vice-versa 

resulting in a cycle of ‘good service’.  The ultimate result of this cycle was increased 

profitability. In their meta-analytic approach, Harter, Schmidt and Hayes (2002) present 

compelling evidence that positive employee perceptions are linked to improved organizational 

performance. In an extensive study of the retail banking industry in Brazil however Kamakura et 

al. (2002) were unable to support the proposed satisfaction-mirror effect proposed by the Service 

Profit Chain.  

The majority of these studies have focused on discrete links in the chain and studied one 

outcome measure (or a univariate composite of outcomes) rather than examining several 


 

 

5

outcomes concurrently, such as financial performance along with employee turnover and 

customer satisfaction. This focus on discrete links is of enormous value, and it has helped 

identify the issues and the type of data that was needed for further investigation. There are, 

however, several statistical and managerial advantages to studying multiple business outcomes 

simultaneously and to modeling their multivariate relationship.  

Typically, important business outcomes have substantial and statistically significant 

correlations.  Consequently, they cannot really be understood or studied if they are modeled in 

isolation.  Multivariate methods, which accommodate the interrelationships between these 

outcomes, are needed if we are to find the common factors that affect their joint distribution.   

Furthermore, from a practical application standpoint, managers often try to balance present needs 

with future needs which often results in essential tradeoffs between objectives (MIT Sloan 

Management Review, 2001). This requires that multiple objectives and outcomes be considered 

simultaneously rather than separately.  

The purpose of modeling business outcomes is to enhance firms’ future financial 

performance.  Short- and long-term objectives, however, do not always overlap neatly.  Taken to 

the extreme, one could imagine a firm spending extravagantly in an effort to create a positive 

organizational climate for its employees while giving products away to customers; employees 

and customers would be happy (for as long as the firm remained in business), but the impact on 

long-term profitability would be compromised.  Clearly, a manager’s short-term focus could hurt 

a company in the longer term. Furthermore, the nature of these outcomes can exhibit potential 

trade-offs (i.e. increasing one outcome could lead to a deterioration in the other).   

Researchers have acknowledged these trade-offs and suggested the formation of 

composite indices. In their meta-analytic approach Harter, Schmidt and Hayes (2002) choose to 


 

 

6

focus on each outcome independently but suggest an alternate point of view where they combine 

customer satisfaction-loyalty, employee turnover, productivity and profitability measures into a 

composite index indicative of “overall performance” (p. 271). This is because they find high 

correlations particularly between some of the outcome variables (such as productivity and 

profitability). Nevertheless, the formation of such an index does not explicitly factor in the 

tradeoffs between these measures and how changes in one variable affect the others.  

As a result there is a need to consider various dimensions of organizational climate and 

their concomitant relationship with important business outcomes simultaneously rather than 

pooling them into a single measure. This research contributes to knowledge by proposing the use 

of multivariate partial least squares (MPLS) as a novel means of accomplishing this objective. 

We have not come across any research in the service area that employs this statistical technique 

as a means of modeling several business outcomes simultaneously in terms of a large number of 

potential predictors. Fornell and Bookstein (1982) and Fornell and Cha (1994) have shown how 

MPLS provides an important alternative to LISREL when maximum likelihood estimation is 

inappropriate or does not provide proper solutions. White, Varadarajan, and Dacin (2003), 

Ribbink et al. (2004), Semeijn et al. (2005), and Jagpal (1981) also use partial least squares to 

estimate and test structures for multiple response variables from constructs or predictors that are 

chosen, a priori, as part of the relevant scientific model.  We are proposing that MPLS be used 

more generally as a way of finding the most relevant set of predictive factors for a group of 

business outcomes when there are a large number of possible predictor variables, especially 

when the structure of the relationships is not known, or not completely understood.  Like 

standard forms of factor analysis, the MPLS factors are functions only of the original items (not 

the outcomes). Unlike standard forms of factor analysis, MPLS is designed to provide 


 

 

7

uncorrelated factors that are good predictors of multiple outcomes, so that the results can be 

evaluated directly in terms of predictive performance.  Also, it provides a direct empirical way of 

discovering the appropriate dimension; the number of factors can be chosen to maximize the 

cross-validatory (predictive) R-squared for each dependent variable.  Since the goal of MPLS is 

to provide predictive factors for a set of outcome variables, that orientation also provides a 

context that helps reify the factors that emerge.  That is, the task of interpreting the factors is 

generally less subjective than it would be in a typical factor analysis because one can use the 

correlations of each factor with each outcome, along with the factor loadings, to guide these 

interpretations. 

MPLS is especially appropriate for finding the underlying factors that are predictive of a 

set of correlated outcomes and is conducive to not only the organizational climate area but to a 

variety of research questions in service marketing.  It is a viable analytic tool for a variety of 

service marketing related issues such as when examining the dimensionality and nature of 

service quality, e-service quality, service recovery, service climate, servicescape, customer 

orientation, relationship management, relational benefits and their impact on a variety of multiple 

outcomes including but not limited to satisfaction, commitment, loyalty, attitudes, repurchase, 

word of mouth, revenue, sales, profitability etc. This approach provides a way of constructing the 

most important predictors for an array of outcomes of these kinds from a potentially 

overwhelming set of organizational and operational variables, and thereby helps guide the most 

effective management of those outcomes.  Partial least squares regression is also especially 

appropriate in settings like this where there are a large number of highly correlated predictor 

variables (Sundberg 2002; Tobias 1997) and generally performs as well, or nearly as well, as the 


 

 

8

best shrinkage methods, including ridge regression, in terms of both prediction error and 

coefficient estimation (Frank 1989; Frank and Friedman 1993). 

To test the viability of the MPLS technique in this context, employee perceptions of 

organizational climate are collected from 107 ‘superstore’ locations from a large, multi-national 

retail grocery ‘superstore’ based in continental Western Europe. This research provides an 

examination of the dimensions of employee perceptions as they relate to three outcome 

variables; 1) employee retention, 2) customer satisfaction, and 3) unit-level revenue (using 1-3 as 

components of a multivariate dependent variable).  In the next sections, we will propose a 

theoretical framework regarding the dimensionality of organizational climate, review the 

literature to date on the relationship between different dimensions of organizational climate and 

the three business outcomes under consideration, discuss and illustrate the superiority of using an 

MPLS approach, and present the findings, managerial implications, and suggestions for future 

applications of this approach in the services marketing domain. 

 

THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 

Dimensionality of Employee Perceptions of Organizational Climate 

Organizational climate is referred to primarily as perceptions attributed to the work 

environment (Rousseau, 1988) and is used primarily as a framework to understand how 

employees experience their work environment. Research results on the dimensions of 

organizational climate, however, have been wide-ranging since the inception of the area.  

Initially, it was assumed that the social environment could be described by a limited number of 

dimensions such as individual autonomy, structure, reward orientation and consideration, 

warmth and support (Campbell et al.1970). Later, other dimensions were added such as role 


 

 

9

stress and lack of harmony, job challenge, autonomy, leadership facilitation, work group 

cooperation, friendliness and warmth (James and James 1989; James and McIntyre 1996). In a 

review of the field, Glick (1985) found that psychological distance (Payne and Mansfield 1978), 

managerial trust and consideration (Gavin and Howe 1975), open mindedness (Payne and 

Mansfield 1978), communication flow (Drexler 1977), risk orientation (Lawler, Hall and 

Oldham 1974), service climate (Schneider, Parkington and Buxton 1980), equity (James 1982) 

and centrality (Joyce and Slocum 1979) were the most frequently used constructs to describe 

organizational climate. Formal scales such as the Business Organization Climate Index were also 

developed (Payne and Pheysey 1971).  

The definition and dimensionality of organizational climate has also been customized to 

specific contexts. Perhaps one of the most popular is that of “service climate.” Schneider (1994) 

defines service climate as “practices and procedures that exist in an organization with regard to a 

particular outcome. Thus, service climate refers to the practices and procedures existing in an 

organization that promote service delivery excellence.”   

Given the variety of dimensions and the multitude of definitions proposed, there is both 

significant overlap and disparity among these constructs and there is little consensus on a single 

definition of what constitutes organizational climate. This is largely because the concept of 

organizational climate is very broad and complex, in part because it consists of a variety of 

interrelated factors. It therefore becomes difficult to include all relevant dimensions in 

diagnosing organizational climate and with the emergence and proliferation of different 

dimensions of organizational climate, consensus on a single theoretical framework remains 

difficult. One of the earlier meta-analytic studies performed to date is that of Quinn and his 

colleagues (Quinn and Rohrbaugh 1981 and 1983; Quinn and McGrath 1985) where they 


 

 

10

engaged in a series of studies to review the organizational climate literature and compile a list of 

dimensions, which they termed the “Competing Values Model.” This model is an empirically 

derived and comprehensive framework that encompasses many of the proposed dimensions in 

the literature and it has proven to have both face and empirical validity. With this model, Quinn 

and colleagues proposed that organizational climate can best be classified by the fundamental 

dimensions of internal versus external orientation and flexibility versus control. The framework 

suggests four main quadrants, each associated with different managerial ideologies encapsulating 

the means by which outcomes may be achieved. The model was termed “competing values 

model” to emphasize the potential for opposing values to exist concurrently in organizations to 

attain predetermined goals. One of the major advantages of this model is the fact that it derives 

its approach from long standing theories in management and organizational psychology during 

the last 100 years and hence has gained wide acceptance (Patterson et al. 2005). These four 

approaches can be described as 1) the human relations approach, 2) the internal processes 

approach, 3) the open systems approach and 4) the rational goal approach. 

Each of the four approaches in the Competing Values framework has been associated 

with a number of organizational climate dimensions. Patterson et al. (2005) propose that the 

dimensions associated with the human relations approach are employee welfare, autonomy, 

participation, communication, emphasis on training, integration and supervisory support. They 

also indicate that formalization and tradition should be part of the internal process approach and 

that flexibility, innovation, outward focus and reflexivity should be associated with the open 

systems approach. Finally, clarity of goals, efficiency and pressure to produce, quality and 

performance feedback are proposed as part of the rational goal approach. 


 

 

11

This research relies on the Competing Values framework as a theoretical basis for 

generating the organizational climate dimensions and draws upon the work of Patterson and 

colleagues (2005) to help determine the dimensions to be included in the study. Since the focus 

of this research is on employee perceptions, the dimensions that are most relevant to employees 

have been selected from the four approaches. 

  

Organizational Climate and Relationship with Business Outcomes 

As demonstrated in the literature review, the organizational climate literature (Quinn and 

Rohrbaugh 1983; Patterson, et al. 2005) indicates that organizational climate is a 

multidimensional construct.  Many of the studies in this area have focused on single links (e.g., 

employee perceptions of climate to customer satisfaction, or to financial performance) between 

these different dimensions and business outcomes and have found relationships of varying 

strength (e.g., Harter and Creglow 1999; Keiningham, Aksoy, Cooil, Peterson, and Vavra 2006; 

Schneider et al. 2003). Before we turn to the superiority of employing the MPLS approach, we 

review the literature on the relationships between organizational climate and each of the three 

business outcomes that are considered in this study; employee retention, customer satisfaction 

and financial performance.  

Overall, research on the relationships between organizational climate and business 

outcomes are the result of three key associations:  

1.  Organizational climate to employee-specific outcomes (turnover, productivity, etc.; in 

this study we consider turnover); 

2.  Organizational climate to customer satisfaction; 

3.  Organizational climate to financial performance. 


 

 

12

Below is a brief summary of these relevant streams of research.  

1. Organizational Climate and Employee Turnover 

Employee turnover is of considerable importance to human resource managers.  

Consequently, it has been the focus of a large body of research for the past half century.  Much 

of this research posits that positive employee perceptions of climate are an antecedent of 

employee retention. March and Simon (1958) introduced a seminal theory of organizational 

equilibrium based on the idea that positive job associations reduced the desirability of leaving an 

organization. More recently, Peterson (2004) presented a theoretical two-period model of 

employee persistence, which posited that employee expectations, motivation, and satisfaction in 

Time 1 and Time 2 were mediated by organizational experiences, while expectations, 

motivation, and satisfaction in Time 2 were proposed to link directly to employees’ turnover 

decisions. 

Generally, empirical research has also verified that there is a positive link between 

positive employee perceptions of climate and employee retention.  For example, Ryan, Schmit, 

and Johnson (1996) examined the relationship between positive job associations and employee 

retention for a large automobile finance company, finding a positive correlation. In a 

pharmaceutical personal selling context, Mulki, Jaramillo and Locander (2006) find that a 

salesperson’s perceptions of ethical climate is a significant predictor of trust in supervisor and 

turnover intentions. In another study, Hemingway and Smith (1999) examine the withdrawal 

behaviors (turnover and absenteeism) of nurses and find that specific dimensions of 

organizational climate were related to turnover and absenteeism. Furthermore, specifically in the 

services context, support was found for the relationship between service climate and voluntary 

turnover (Sowinski, Fortman and Lezotte 2008).     


 

 

13

Therefore, we would expect the relationship between favorable organizational climate 

and employee turnover to be negative. 

2. Organizational Climate and Customer Satisfaction

A number of researchers have sought to examine the various links in the SPC model 

(Hallowell and Schlesinger 2000; Gelade and Young 2005; Kamakura et al. 2002; Loveman 

1998; Rucci, Kirn and Quinn 1998). Schneider, White and Paul (1998) examine how service 

oriented behaviors by employees can promote reporting of positive customer service 

experiences. Heskett, Sasser, and Schlesinger (1997) focus specifically on the relationship 

between positive employee perceptions and customer satisfaction and suggest that the 

satisfaction of employees ‘reflects’ on customers, and vice-versa.  The ultimate result of this 

chain of effects is increased profitability.  Several investigators have attempted to demonstrate 

the existence of the satisfaction mirror.  While there is research that would appear to support 

such a conclusion (Schlesinger and Heskett 1991), other research offers contradictory findings 

(for example, Kamakura et. al. 2002).  Nonetheless, the majority of employee perception 

research appears to show a positive relationship with customer satisfaction (Crotts, Dickson, and 

Ford 2005; Dean 2004; Payne and Webber 2006; Schneider and White 2004) 

However, research that specifically examines aspects of service climate almost always 

finds a positive relationship with customer satisfaction.  Schneider, Ehrhart, Mayer, Saltz and 

Niles-Jolly (2005) develop a framework from service-focused behavior to customer satisfaction. 

They find that there are significant mediated relationships between service climate and customer 

satisfaction. In a study of the SPC in the retail banking sector, Gelade and Young (2005) find 

that favorable climate evaluations are associated with increased customer satisfaction. In another 

study of the banking industry, Johnson (1996) finds that all service climate dimensions are 


 

 

14

significantly related to at least one facet of customer satisfaction. Solnet (2006) finds that service 

climate is closely linked to customer satisfaction in the Australian hotel industry and Liao and 

Chuang (2004) find that service climate explains between store variance in customer satisfaction 

in a restaurant context. Finally, Rogg, Schmidt, Shull and Schmitt (2001) find that organizational 

climate mediates the relationship between human resource practices and customer satisfaction. .   

Therefore, we would expect the relationship between organizational climate and 

customer satisfaction to be positive. 

3. Organizational Climate and Financial Performance 

There have also been a range of studies that examine the links between organizational 

climate and firm performance, including financial outcomes such as growth, revenue and 

profitability. For example, Schneider et. al (2005) propose a framework that ultimately links 

organizational climate to sales. In the banking industry Gelade and Young (2005) examine the 

links between organizational climate and sales performance. Harter, Schmidt, and Hayes (2002) 

present compelling meta-analytic evidence that generalizable relationships large enough to have 

substantial practical value between unit-level employee satisfaction–engagement and business-

unit outcomes are found.  Additionally, in an extensive study of thirty-five companies over eight 

years, Schneider et al. (2003) found that employee perception data was linked to financial 

outcomes (return on assets; ROA) and market performance (earnings per share; EPS). In 

particular, positive employee perceptions of “overall job” “security,” and “pay” were positively 

and significantly correlated with ROA and EPS. Borucki and Burke (1999) find that service 

related antecedents lead to store performance. Using the retailing context, they find that service 

climate variables predict the service performance of sales personnel and ultimately the store‘s 

financial performance. Ozcelik, Langton and Aldrich (2008) recently found that leadership 


 

 

15

practices, that foster a positive emotional climate in an organization, are significantly linked to 

revenue growth. In the high technology industry, organizational social climates of trust, 

cooperation, shared codes and language were found to be positively linked to a firm’s capability 

to exchange and combine knowledge, and the quality of this relationship is predictive of firm 

revenue from new products and services and firm sales growth (Collins and Smith 2006). On the 

other hand, Paradise-Tornow (1991) found a strong negative correlation between management 

culture (including service climate) and financial performance. Despite the contradictory findings 

of Paradise-Tornow (1991), positive employee perceptions of organizational climate are 

expected to be positively linked to unit revenue, since large-scale longitudinal studies report a 

positive relationship between employee perceptions and firm financial performance. Therefore, 

we would expect the relationship between organizational climate and financial performance to be 

positive. 

Advantages of the Proposed MPLS Approach 

The MPLS model provides a method of finding uncorrelated linear factors, based on 

employee perceptions that are designed to be predictive of multiple outcomes.  In this way, 

MPLS provides a natural compromise between multivariate regression analysis (where all 

possible variables measuring employee perceptions are considered as candidate predictors) and 

principal component analysis.  At one extreme, multivariate regression models do not provide 

much insight about the underlying ways in which perceptual constructs may be related to 

outcomes, even when an appropriate model selection criterion is used to select a subset of 

perceptual variables.  At the other extreme, principal component analysis, or more general 

exploratory factor analysis, may help identify important factors that differentiate among firms or 

business-units, but they will not generally provide the best predictors of multiple outcomes.  


 

 

16

Also, even if the goal were just one of minimizing prediction error, partial least squares methods 

generally perform quite well in empirical studies and simulations (Stone and Brooks 1990) and 

this is especially true of MPLS (Frank and Friedman 1993).  Finally, in contrast to many factor 

analytic approaches, there is a direct way to determine the optimal number of MPLS factors. 

PLS has been used widely in the analysis of chemical engineering process data, sensory 

evaluation and in chemometrics.  More recently it has been used to identify genomic and 

protemic variables that are most directly related to clinical outcomes (Boulesteix and Strimmer, 

2006). In these areas the method provides a way of describing the most relevant factors that are 

related to an outcome variable of interest, when there may be hundreds or thousands of potential 

predictor variables.  Applications where investigators actually apply MPLS to study more than 

one dependent variable are less common, but these do include studies of brain imaging 

(McIntosh, Bookstein, Haxby and Grady 1996) where several dependent variables are used to 

represent pixel content, and when chemometrics is employed as a method of calibration in 

spectroscopy, where spectral measurements are used to predict the concentrations of several 

constituents (Bro 1996). 

In the next section we use the MPLS approach to find those dimensions of the employee 

perceptions of organizational climate that are most predictive of business outcomes.   

Methodology 

The data for this analysis came from a large, multi-national retail grocery ‘superstore’ 

based in continental Western Europe.  Most climate research employs an aggregate unit of 

analysis, such as the work group, store, department or organization. The rationale behind 

aggregation lies in the belief that organizational collectives have their own climate and this can 

be identified through differences and similarities between units (James 1982). Aggregation 


 

 

17

allows the creation of a higher-level construct where individual differences are distilled to a 

single collective perception. Hence, given the unit of analysis, most research in this area focuses 

on aggregate (“organizational”) climate that is distinct from individual (“psychological”) climate 

(James and Jones 1974; Schneider, Smith and Goldstein 2000).  In any case, business outcomes 

can only really be meaningfully defined at the store level, and so any predictive model requires 

that the employee perceptions also be aggregated at this level. 

Measures in this study consisted of employee perceptions of organizational climate 

collected at each of 107 ‘superstore’ locations in 2002.  The questions were part of a battery of 

employee perception questions developed by a large research firm specializing in employee 

perception research, and consist of 1) questionnaire items generated based on the Competing 

Values Framework and (2) firm-specific questions based upon internal interviews with 

employees and managers.   As a whole, the survey was designed to capture employee-related 

organizational climate dimensions (see Table 1) and all items were measured using a four-point 

Likert scale to discern employee perceptions of organizational climate (1 = strongly disagree, 4 = 

strongly agree). 

[Insert Table 1 Here] 

Unit-level data were acquired in a way that was consistent with the literature that studies 

the relationship between employee perceptions and business outcomes (e.g., Harter, Schmidt, 

and Hayes 2002; Schneider, Parkington, and Buxton 1980; Schneider, White, and Paul 1998).  

Mean values of the employee perception variables were acquired from each store (n=107).  

These means were based on an average response rate of 80%, or approximately 360 employees 

per store.  Customer satisfaction levels, staff turnover (expressed as the proportion that left 

during the year) and store revenue for each store were also supplied by the retailer and appended 


 

 

18

to the file.  Customer satisfaction levels represent the mean overall satisfaction level for each 

store based on a 10-point Likert scale.  A third party research provider collects this information 

on behalf of the firm. 

THE MULTIVARIATE PARTIAL LEAST SQUARES MODEL 

 

We use a multivariate partial least squares analysis to find latent factors based on 

employee perceptions of climate that provide a way of predicting each of three business outcome 

variables that are measured during the subsequent year:  employee retention, customer 

satisfaction, and revenue per employee (as a way of adjusting for store size).  This approach is 

appropriate when working with correlated dependents, and customer satisfaction is significantly 

and positively correlated with the other two outcomes.  Surprisingly, employee retention and 

revenue per employee do not have a significant direct correlation, although the partial correlation 

between these two variables does approach significance. 

 

Correlations and Partial Correlations (with p-values) 

 

 
 
Customer Satisfaction 

 

 
Revenue per Employee 

 
 

Employee Retention 
0.21 (0.033) 
0.26 (0.009) 
 
-0.10 (NS) 
-0.18 (0.064) 
 

Customer Satisfaction  
 

 
0.33 (0.000) 
0.36 (0.000) 

Interestingly, all partial correlations are nominally larger in absolute terms than the 

corresponding direct correlations, but otherwise reflect the same pattern of relationships (in each 

case, these partial correlations reflect only the removal of the effect of the third business 

outcome).   


 

 

 

19

The multivariate partial least squares (MPLS) approach provides a way of finding 

uncorrelated factors that are important and interpretable predictors for all three of the dependent 

variables although these factors generally will not be orthogonal (i.e., the inner product of two 

PLS vectors will  not  generally be zero)1.  This distinguishes MPLS from principal component 

analysis and other types of factor decompositions that are based on the covariances or 

correlations among only the predictor variables, because such factors are not chosen for, and may 

not have, any predictive value.  Let Y represent the (n x 3) matrix of dependent variables, and X 

be the (n x k) matrix of employee perceptions (n=107 stores, k=31 perceptions).   In MPLS, the 

first (n x 1) latent factor, z = Xγ, is chosen to maximize the sum of squared covariances between 

z and Y (subject to a length restriction on γ), i.e., the (k x 1) weights γ that define z= Xγ, are 

chosen so that,  

 

γ’X’YY’Xγ = sup α  [α’X’YY’Xα], such that α’α =1. 

(1) 

 

Consequently, the vector of weights, γ, is simply the largest eigenvector of X’YY’X.  The 

subsequent latent factors maximize the sum of squared covariances between “deflated” versions 

of X and Y derived by projecting each into the subspace of X, that is orthogonal to the earlier 

factors.  That is, the (k x 1) vector of weights γp+1 for the factor zp+1 = X p+1γ p+1 , p = 1, 2, …, k, is 

the eigenvector of the matrix Xp+1’Y p+1Y p+1’X p+1, where, 

 

X

=+
1

p

'
zz
pp

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

I

⎛
⎜
−
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

( '
zz
pp

)

X

p

,     

Y

=+
1

p

'
zz
pp

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣

I

⎛
⎜
−
⎜
⎜
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎤
⎥
Y
⎥
⎥
⎦

, 

p

( '
zz
pp

)

(2) 

with  z1≡ z,  X1≡ X, and  Y1≡ X  (Burnham, Viveros and MacGregor 1996).  Here we are 

assuming X is of rank k, and if we extract all k factors in this way, the regression on those factors 

                                                 
1 For a discussion of the difference between “uncorrelated” and “orthogonal” see Rogers, Nicewander, and 
Toothaker 1984, and Frank and Friedman 1993, pp. 113-114. 


 

 

20

is equivalent to a multiple regression of each dependent variable on all k predictors.  In this 

analysis, we select only the first three factors because this choice actually maximizes the 

predicted R-squared value across all possible regressions of each dependent variable on a 

common set of factors.  These results are summarized in Table 2. Clearly this is a serendipitous 

result, and typically one would have to settle for a common set of factors that only maximized 

some function (e.g., the sum) of the corresponding set of predicted R-squared values of the 

dependent variables (in each row of the table).  Predicted R-squared is calculated as the cross-

validatory R-squared value achieved when each observed value of Y is predicted by fitting the 

regression without that observation: 

 

Predicted R-squared = 

1

PRESS

⎡−
⎢⎣

(SS

Total

)

⎤
1
−=⎥⎦

∑

n
1i
=

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣

)yy(
)i(

−

)

2

∑

n
1i
=

)yy(

−

2

, 

(3) 

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

where PRESS (Allen 1971 and 1974) represents the leave-one-out predicted residual sum of 

squares based on the cross-validatory predictions 

)(iy)

.  This is an asymptotically optimal 

criterion for prediction-based model selection (Stone 1977; Yang 2005). 

 

[Insert Table 2 Here] 

 

THE MPLS MODEL FOR BUSINESS OUTCOMES 

Dimensions of Organizational Climate 

 

The relationship between these findings and the Competing Values framework is 

important to note. Table 3 summarizes how these three latent factors are correlated with the 

original employee perception variables.  Recall that while these factors are uncorrelated, they are 

not orthogonal.  In contrast, the principal components would be both orthogonal and 


 

 

21

uncorrelated.  The correlations reported in Table 3 can be used as factor loadings to calculate 

factor scores. 

 

The reification of these factors is relatively straightforward. 

[Insert Table 3 Here] 

1.  Overall Organizational Climate: Component 1 comprises positive employee perceptions 

of all aspects of the work experience.  This construct is significantly correlated with all 

positive perceptions and most highly correlated with clarity of goals, integration, 

involvement and welfare some of which include perceptions of well-defined 

objectives/tasks, necessary qualifications and solidarity, assimilation, usefulness of 

meetings, and the supervisor’s predilection to share the vision of senior management, and 

to manage teamwork well. This factor appears to resemble overall employee perceptions 

of organizational climate as it is typically described in the literature. 

2.  Self Efficacy versus Leader’s Efficacy: Component 2 encompasses personal preparedness 

versus supervisor’s leadership. It is a contrast between perceptions relating to personal 

efficacy (clarity of goals such as qualifications, task definition and clear daily 

expectations and not needing more training today) versus the supervisor’s leadership 

(especially sufficient experience with the team and leadership through communication, 

by example, and ability to build confidence and competence). In other words it is a factor 

that provides a contrast between the “self” (self efficacy) versus “other” (efficacy of the 

leader). 

3.  Personal Empowerment versus Management Facilitation:  Component 3 involves a 

contrast between personal empowerment through training versus facilitating managerial 


 

 

 

22

resources. It might be more completely described as “preemptive training to prevent 

errors versus good management through supervisory support including knowledge, 

management of teamwork, and communication,” where communication is interpreted 

more broadly to also include supervisor’s availability, leadership by example, tendency to 

consult coworkers and finally task definition, and sufficient meetings. 

Each of these three components has aspects of both the rational goal approach (e.g., 

clarity of goals, pressure to produce, and performance feedback) and the human relations 

approach (e.g., employee welfare, empowerment, emphasis on training, and supervisory support) 

(Patterson et al. 2005). Component 1 is a factor that provides an overall organizational climate 

dimension. The MPLS approach however has provided a deeper understanding of the 

relationships by identifying components 2 and 3 in addition to an overall organizational climate 

dimension. Substantively this adds to our knowledge of the area since these two additional 

factors emerge when the dimensions are related to the outcomes simultaneously. It is interesting 

to note that components 2 and 3 are similar in that they both provide a contrast between the 

“self” (individual efficacy, resources and empowerment) versus “other” (leadership efficacy and 

managerial facilitation and enabling) as it relates to organizational climate dimensions. The 

primary difference is that the personal aspects of component 3 relate primarily to training, the 

unacceptability of errors, and empowerment whereas component 2 tends to have weaker but still 

positive correlations with personal items, such as qualifications to reach objectives, task 

definition and clear daily expectations.  Both components 2 and 3 have significant correlations 

with the variables related to the supervisor’s ability to communicate and manage, but component 

2 has much stronger negative correlations with these variables, and it has even larger absolute 

(and significant) correlations with a broad set of leadership variables, especially the supervisor’s 


 

 

23

leadership qualities, the abilities to build competence and confidence, to share success, and an 

organization’s ability to make an employee want to “overdo.”  

 

Relationship of Organizational Climate Dimensions with Business Outcomes 

The first part of Table 4 shows how these three factors are related to the three business 

outcome dependent variables.  In this study, the dependent variables are business outcomes that 

occurred and were measured following the employee perception measurements.  So, we are 

studying the general main effect relationships between employee perceptions with each of the 

three business outcomes during a subsequent period.  All significance levels referred to in this 

paper are two-sided.  These correlations may also be regarded as standardized multiple 

regression coefficients because the PLS factors are uncorrelated by design (although not 

orthogonal). For each dependent variable, the predicted R-squared value (see equation (3)) of the 

multiple regression on factors is substantially smaller than the corresponding adjusted R-squared, 

as is typically the case with linear models (Efron 1986). 

 

[Insert Table 4 Here] 

  

The correlations show an interesting pattern of relationships.  Employee retention is 

positively related to all three factors (adjusted R-squared is 31%), but the most significant 

predictors are Overall Organizational Climate and Personal Empowerment versus Management 

Facilitation, each of which account separately for over 10% of the standardized variance in 

employee retention (predicted standardized variance is the squared direct correlation, or 13% and 

17% for these two factors, respectively). Overall Organizational Climate is marginally 

significant as a predictor of customer satisfaction and it accounts for less than 5% of the variance 

in customer satisfaction.  Self Efficacy versus Leader’s Efficacy is also positively correlated with 


 

 

24

all business outcomes, but the most significant correlations are with customer satisfaction, and 

revenue per employee. 

 

The most striking finding is that Personal Empowerment versus Management Facilitation 

has the largest positive correlation with employee retention among all factors, and significantly 

negative correlations with both customer satisfaction and revenue per employee.  As a predictor 

of revenue per employee it accounts for 24% of the variance of this business outcome. So the 

model indicates that although employee retention depends more on employee perceptions of the 

value of personal empowerment through training versus management facilitation, customer 

satisfaction (and revenue per employee to a lesser extent) depends more on management 

facilitation relative to training, where in each case the training and management variables are 

contrasted so that they are uncorrelated with Overall Organizational Climate.  That is, given a 

fixed level of Overall Organizational Climate, employee training (especially training that 

empowers, meets needs and expectations, and preparation that prevents errors) is more important 

to employee retention, but managerial facilitation and resources (especially supervisor’s 

knowledge, and ability to manage teamwork) are more important to customer satisfaction and 

revenue per employee. 

Employee Retention 

 

All three employee perception constructs are positively correlated to retention, although 

the correlation with the second factor, Self Efficacy versus Leader’s Efficacy, is only marginally 

significant (p<0.1)   Overall Organizational Climate accounts for 13% of the standardized 

variance in retention (p<0.001), while the third factor, Personal Empowerment versus 

Management Facilitation accounts for 17% of the standardized variance in employee retention 

(p<0.001).  


 

 

25

Customer Satisfaction 

 

Customer satisfaction is also directly linked to all three latent factors of employee 

perceptions, although its weakest correlation is with Overall Organizational Climate.  This is a 

positive correlation of marginal significance (p<0.05 only for the one-sided test for positive 

correlation).   

Customer satisfaction has stronger relationships with each of the other latent factors 

(p<0.001), especially Self Efficacy versus Leader’s Efficacy. Customer satisfaction actually has 

a negative correlation with the last factor Personal Empowerment versus Management 

Facilitation. Taken together the last two factors show that, conditional on fixed Overall 

Organizational Climate, customer satisfaction is positively correlated with employee perceptions 

relating to clarity of goals such as clear daily expectations, well-defined objectives/tasks and 

responsibilities, feeling qualified to reach objectives, but it is negatively correlated with the 

perception that training really met expectations and needs (this has a negative relationship 

through each of the last two factors).  Perhaps this last effect is due in part to the unmet 

employee expectation that training should better prepare them to serve customers.   

Revenue per Employee 

 

Overall Organizational Climate, which emerges as our first factor and indicates overall 

positive employee perceptions, is not significantly linked to revenue per employee.  Given that 

the majority of studies have shown a positive relationship between other primary measures of 

organization climate and financial performance, this finding is unexpected.  Skeptics of the 

financial implications of improving a firm’s organization climate may see this as support of the 

common lament by consultants that “culture is not a strategy.”  This finding may also indicate 


 

 

26

that a positive organizational climate is necessary to achieve financial success, but not the 

“cause” of such success (i.e., it is the price of entry).   

Based upon the analysis, however, this finding is perhaps best explained by the other two 

latent factors.  Interestingly, through the other two latent factors, employee perceptions does 

have nearly as strong a relationship with revenue per employee, as it does with employee 

retention.  The strongest factor is the negative correlation of scaled revenue with Personal 

Empowerment versus Management Facilitation.  Here the indication is that the employee’s 

unwillingness to concede that “to err is human” (i.e., the employee is unwilling to accept failure), 

and the supervisor’s knowledge and ability to manage teamwork, are all positively linked to 

revenue per employee.  This indicates that it is not simply the positive overall climate per se that 

results in positive financial outcomes, but commitment of employees to succeed, and managers’ 

ability to get the most of their teams.   

 

COMPARISONS WITH OTHER FACTOR ANALYTIC APPROACHES 

 

The remaining parts of Table 4 summarize the performance of factors from two other 

common approaches:  principal component (PC) analysis and maximum likelihood factor 

analysis with varimax rotation.  The loadings of these factors are provided in the Appendix.   

In the PC analysis, only the first four factors account for significantly more standardized 

variance than an individual item (i.e., only the first four characteristic roots are greater than 1, 

p<005).  In contrast, maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) indicates that only the first three 

factors account for more standardized variance than an individual item.  Nevertheless, the first 

three MLE factors are almost identical to the first three principal components--the factor scores 

from the first PC have a 0.99 correlation with those of the first MLE factor (and score 


 

 

27

correlations are 0.98, and 0.90 between PC and MLE versions of the second and third factors, 

respectively). Consequently it would be reasonable to use only the first three factors when 

considering alternative approaches, and the loadings (see the Appendix) and correlations for the 

PC analysis in Table 4 are nearly the same for unrotated MLE factors.  The varimax factor 

analysis, referred to at the bottom of Table 4, is probably the next most popular approach.  The 

varimax rotation (Kaiser 1958) of the maximum likelihood factors is an orthogonal rotation 

intended to simplify the interpretation of factors by reducing the number of large loadings. 

Comparison of Predictive Performance 

As shown in Table 4, the varimax factors are nominally more useful than the principal 

components for predicting each of the outcomes, and the difference is quite substantial in the 

case of revenue per employee, where R-squared (adjusted) is nearly twice as large.  Of course, 

the MPLS factors are designed to be good predictors and those R-squared (adjusted) values are 

generally from 40% ( revenue per employee) to 130% (employee retention) larger than the 

values corresponding to models based on the varimax factors.  Note that any extraction of three 

orthogonal factors by maximum likelihood estimation (including varimax, quartimax, or 

unrotated solutions) would provide the same overall performance in terms of adjusted and 

predicted R-squared that is shown in the last section of Table 4, and the superiority of the MLE 

approaches relative to the PC approach is presumably due primarily to the difference in the third 

extracted factor (even though the correlation of 0.90 between the factor scores of the third  PC 

and third MLE  factors indicate that they are quite  similar). 

Relative Advantages of Each Approach 

 

Table 4 illustrates one of the primary advantages of MPLS relative to standard types of 

factor analysis. Overall, MPLS provides better predictors and better models for outcomes 


 

 

28

overall.  Presumably this also makes the selection and reification of MPLS factors more 

objective because the selection is based on the joint predictive value of a set of factors and the 

correlations of the factors with the outcomes, along with their loadings, helps direct their 

interpretations.  On the other hand, some standard forms of factor analysis may be more 

appropriate if the goal is primarily to identify latent variables that explain the most variance in 

the original space of items.  In this setting, the goal of subsequent model development may not 

be intended to develop the best predictive models, but instead it could be used as a way to study 

how various outcomes are related to the latent variables (factors) that best summarize the 

underlying differences among observations in the space defined by the original set of items.   

As an illustration, below is a comparison of methods in terms of the variance explained 

by each factor in the space of the 31 items considered in this study.  Relative to MPLS, only the 

varimax solution explains less variance in the first factor. 

Percent Standardized Variance by Factor 

Factor 1 

Factor 2 

Factor 3 

43 

53 

52 

31 

52 

19 

11 

10 

18 

8.6 

5.6 

5.4 

4.2 

17 

5.7 

 

MPLS 

Principal Components 

MLE Unrotated 

MLE Varimax 

MLE  Quartimax 

 

 


 

 

29

GENERAL DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 

The analysis reported here advances the empirical research on the relationship between 

the components of employee perceptions of organizational climate and business outcomes (i.e., 

employee turnover, customer satisfaction, and revenue) in several ways.  This study also 

illustrates the advantages of the MPLS approach, an approach that, to the best of our knowledge, 

has not been used in the service science domain to date. It is potentially a useful statistical tool 

whenever the goal is to find interpretable and uncorrelated factors that are also good predictors 

of a multivariate dependent variable.   In this study, a cross-validation confirms that the first 

three MPLS factors are jointly the best set of predictors for all outcomes.   

Using data on items that were designed to capture employee perceptions of organizational 

climate, along with data on three business outcomes, MPLS was used to construct three latent 

factors from the climate variables that have substantial and significant relationship with the three 

business outcomes. The first factor is described as the Overall Organizational Climate 

dimension. It is positively correlated with all positive perceptions and most highly correlated 

with the perceptions of well-defined objectives/tasks, necessary personal resources, and with 

perceptions relating to teamwork.   

The second factor, Self Efficacy versus Leader’s Efficacy contrasts personal dimensions 

with those aspects related to how the employee interacts with management and the perceived 

quality of that management.  The third factor, Personal Empowerment versus Management 

Facilitation, contrasts positive perceptions that training met expectations (even if more daily 

training may be needed), of being empowered, and the unacceptability of error, and the 

supervisor’s overall knowledge and her/his ability to manage teamwork.  


 

 

30

It is important to note that these last two dimensions are factors that emerged in addition 

to the overall organizational climate dimension. Hence when all climate items are included 

within an MPLS analyses approach, two new factors become evident. Both factors have a 

common underlying similarity. They contrast the employee with the management /leader. The 

second component contrasts perceptions of self efficacy with perceptions of the leader’s efficacy. 

The third component contrasts personal empowerment through training with the management’s 

ability to facilitate processes in the work place. Hence both these factors have an inherent “self” 

versus “other” contrast which is different and distinct than the “internal” (human relations) 

versus “external” (rational goals) focus emphasized by the Competing Values Framework 

(Patterson et. al 2003).  

As a result, by focusing on those constructs that are jointly predictive of several business 

outcomes, this research provides a different multivariate view of employee perceptions both in 

terms of primarily demonstrating a novel methodological approach (MPLS) in addition to 

indicating the presence of two new factors.  This approach also allows one to directly compare 

the strength and direction of the relationships between each perceptual dimension and each 

outcome. Overall Organizational Climate is significantly and positively correlated with both 

retention and customer satisfaction but not revenue.  This finding would appear to indicate that 

organization climate alone is not enough in positive financial outcomes.  Rather, other latent 

factors which can be thought of as specific components of the employee-management interaction 

appear to affect firm revenue. Self Efficacy versus Leader’s Efficacy is also positively and 

significantly related to all three business outcomes but most strongly related to customer 

satisfaction and revenue per employee. The third factor Personal Empowerment versus 

Management Facilitation is positively linked to retention. It is however negatively correlated to 


 

 

31

customer satisfaction.  We conjecture that this effect may result from high employee standards 

for customer service but that it is represented as the concomitant effect of unmet employee 

expectations for training on how to best serve customers. Furthermore, this third factor is also 

negatively correlated to revenue. The results for factor 3 are interesting and show that while 

employee retention depends more on perceptions of the value of training vis-à-vis managerial 

facilitation, customer satisfaction and revenue depends more on managerial facilitation relative 

to personal empowerment through training. In other words, given a fixed level of organizational 

climate, training is more important to employee retention whereas managerial facilitation is more 

important to customer satisfaction and revenue per employee. Hence companies that emphasize 

one goal over another can invest accordingly. 

 Our findings identify multiple factors that make up the employment experience. When 

the goal is to improve a range of outcomes, in addition to the individual links that effect business 

outcomes, it is critical to employ methods that use all concurrent relationships to construct a 

model. Since managers must balance various short-term and long-term objectives 

simultaneously, it is important that they understand the differential effects of various employee 

perception constructs on total business performance.    

Finally, this illustration of MPLS demonstrates that it has a number of advantages relative 

to typical methods of factor analysis. First, it can be used to summarize a large number of 

potential predictors in terms of a low-dimensional summary of the most predictive factors for a 

group of outcome (dependent) variables.  Second, the selection of the number of factors can be 

made objectively by cross-validation to maximize predictive R-squared values.  Third, the 

predictive focus of the analysis makes the task of reifying the factors less subjective than it 

would be in a typical factor analysis because they can now to be viewed in terms of their 


 

 

32

relationship to the outcomes, as well as to the variables of which they are composed. Fourth, the 

analysis provides an assessment of each factor and of the overall analysis in terms of cross-

validatory summaries and significance testing. (see Table 4).  Thus, MPLS provides an important 

tool for developing multivariate predictive models, and it has potential whenever the goal is to 

jointly model more than one business outcome in terms of key factors that may depend on a large 

number of organizational or operational variables.   

 

LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH 

One limitation of this study is that it is not possible to conclusively generalize these 

findings, as they deal with only one retailer in a single market category.  While the dynamics of a 

retailer maybe generalizable to other industries, it is not possible to make conclusive 

generalizations to all industries. Hence, future research can attempt to replicate the same 

methodology in other contexts. Furthermore, the data collected and used as part of the analysis 

here is cross-sectional employee perception data. It is not clear however if and how the results 

would hold up in other time periods. Therefore, future research can also attempt to put the results 

and methodology to test using longitudinal data on employee perceptions. Our analysis has only 

identified the presence of statistically significant relationships between employee perception and 

business outcomes in a subsequent year.  Therefore, inferences regarding causality cannot be 

made. In addition, there are several studies that test the direction of causality between service 

climate, employee attitudes, service quality and firm performance (Schneider, White and Paul 

1998; Schneider, Hanges, Smith and Salvaggio 2003).  

When considering the ultimate effect that employee perceptions have on various business 

outcomes, we looked at only direct relationships (as simultaneous dependent variables).  There 


 

 

33

may be mediating variables that affect these relationships.  For example, the Service Profit Chain 

(Heskett et al. 1997) posits several mediator variables that constitute a chain of effects between 

employee perceptions and business outcomes. Moreover, Schneider et. al (2005) posit 

hierarchical relationships where the effects are mediated by different variables.  Therefore, to 

determine the robustness of these findings, further longitudinal studies are needed that examine 

mediating variables and include other variables such as industry and cultural effects.  For 

example, Schneider, Salvaggio and Subirats (2002) have shown these types of relationships to be 

moderated by variables such as service climate strength. That study found that there is an 

interaction of service climate and climate strength in predicting customer satisfaction. Hence 

future research should include such moderating variables to gauge their impact.       

The items measuring organizational climate focused solely on an “inward” outlook 

including employee perceptions of the work environment. There is however also an “outward” 

focus in organizational climate that examines employees perceptions with regards to a more 

outward /customer focus. Although this outward focus was not within the scope of the study, 

future research should include this dimension to analyze the impact on firm performance 

outcomes.  


 

34

 

Table 1 

Items Comprising the Employee Survey 

 
Autonomy 

Integration 

Involvement 

Supervisor Support 

May Question Processes
Allowed to Speak

Solidarity
Attention to Assimilation

Everyone’s Consulted

Available
Makes You Confident
Communicates Well
Shows by Example
Builds Competence
Shares Senior-Mgmt Vision
Shares Success
Manages Teamwork Well
With Team Long Enough
Knowledgeable
Consults Coworkers

Training 

Need More Training Today (Reversed)
Training Met Expectations and Needs
Empowered

Welfare 

Fair Workload
Error is Human

 
Clarity of Goals 

Objectives Defined
Clear on Daily Expectations
Tasks/Responsibilities Defined
Qualifications to Reach Objectives
Tools Provided

Efficiency 

Sufficient Meetings
Meetings Are Useful

Performance Feedback 

Know Evaluative Criteria
Provides Feedback

Effort and Pressure to Produce 

Makes You Want to Overdo


 

 

Table 2 

35

Predicted R-squared for Each Dependent Variable Regressed on from 1 to 5 or More Factors 

 
 

Number of Factors 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 or more 

Predicted R-squared (%) for Each Dependent Variable 

Employee 
Retention 

 

 7.0  

 6.1  

22.5 

21.9 

<12.9 

Customer 
Satisfaction 

Revenue per 
Employee 

 0.0   

  7.1   

12.4 

 9.0 

 0.0   

0.0  

0.0  

21.5 

20.5 

<17.0 


 

 
 Table 3 

 

 

36

Factor 3 

6 

The Correlations of the Factors with Each of the Itemsa 

 

% Standardized Varaince 
 
Reification 

Autonomy 

Integration 

May Question Processes 
Allowed to Speak 

Solidarity 
Attention to Assimilation 

Involvement 

Everyone’s Consulted 

Supervisor Support 

Available 
Makes You Confident 
Communicates Well 
Shows by Example 
Builds Competence 
Shares Senior-Mgmt Vision 
Shares Success 
Manages Teamwork Well 
With Team Long Enough 
Knowledgeable 
Consults Coworkers 

Training 

Need More Training Today 
(Reversed) 
Training Met Expectations and 
Needs 
Empowered 

Welfare 

Fair Workload 
Error is Human 

Clarity of Goals 

Objectives Defined 
Clear on Daily Expectations 
Tasks/Responsibilities Defined 
Qualifications to Reach 
Objectives 
Tools Provided 

Efficiency 

Sufficient Meetings 
Meetings Are Useful 

Performance Feedback 

Know Evaluative Criteria 
Provides Feedback 

Effort and Pressure to Produce 

Makes You Want to Overdo 

Factor 1 

43 

Overall 

Organizational 

Climate 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.55 
0.67 

0.72 
0.74 

0.75 

0.63 
0.64 
0.59 
0.57 
0.63 
0.73 
0.61 
0.70 
0.31 
0.52 
0.66 

-0.21 

0.61 

0.73 

0.78 
0.04 

0.91 
0.67 
0.87 
0.80 

0.80 

0.60 
0.73 

0.58 
0.68 

0.66 

Factor 2 

19 

Self Efficacy 
vs. Leader’s 

Efficacy 

-0.32 
-0.24 

-0.29 
-0.13 

-0.44 

-0.49 
-0.65 
-0.64 
-0.66 
-0.69 
-0.33 
-0.63 
-0.44 
-0.74 
-0.46 
-0.62 

-0.63 

-0.25 

-0.26 

0.04 
-0.20 

-0.04 
0.23 
0.23 
0.24 

0.06 

0.11 
-0.30 

-0.38 
-0.48 

-0.66 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Personal Empowerment 

vs. Management 

Facilitation 

0.10 
-0.16 

0.12 
0.18 

0.01 

-0.32 
-0.20 
-0.30 
-0.29 
-0.10 
-0.16 
-0.10 
-0.37 
-0.24 
-0.43 
-0.26 

0.22 

0.57 

0.24 

-0.09 
-0.50 

0.04 
-0.11 
-0.25 
-0.02 

-0.03 

-0.25 
0.06 

0.07 
-0.06 

0.02 


 
 
aAbsolute correlations greater than 0.2 correspond to more than 4% of explained variance and 
are significant at the 0.05 level. Significant positive correlations are in bold; significant negative 
correlations are shaded grey.

 

37


 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 4 

38

How Organizational Climate Factors Relate to Business Outcomes a 

Relation to MPLS Factors 
Correlations 
 (& Standardized Regression Coefficients) 
Overall Organizational Climate 
Self Efficacy vs. Leader’s Efficacy 
Personal Empowerment vs. Management 
Facilitation 
Adjusted R-squared (%) 
Predicted R-squared(%) 
Overall Significance (p-value) 

 
Relation to Principal Components 

Correlations  
(& Standardized Regression Coefficients) 

Overall Climate 
Job Clarity vs. Effective Supervision 
Personal Input vs.Competent Direction 

Adjusted R-squared (%) 
Predicted R-squared(%) 
Overall Significance (p-value) 

 
Relation to Varimax Factors 

Correlations  
(& Standardized Regression Coefficients)

Empowered, Clear Goals and Efficiency 
Common Vision & Good Support 
Autonomy, Integration & Informed Direction

Customer 
Satisfaction 

Employee 
Retention 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Revenue per 
Employee 

0.36 
 0.17 c 

0.41 
30.8 
22.5 
<0.001 

 
 
 

   0.17 c 
 0.40 

-0.28 
24.3 
12.4 
<0.001 

 
 
 

   0.10 d 
 0.27 

-0.49 
30.3 
21.5 
0.045 

 
 
 

  0.19 c 
0.30 
  0.00 d 
10.0 
6.3 
0.003 

 

 
 
 

  0.00 d 
0.33 
- 0.25 b  
14.4 
7.2 

<0.001 

 

 
 
 

  0.02 d 
  0.16 c 
-0.33 
11.2 
6.7 
0.002 

 

 
 
 

 

  -0.10 d 
 0.30 
    0.25 b 

 

  -0.10 d 
 -0.18 c 
 0.38 

 

  -0.06 d  
-0.32 
 0.34 

13.3 
9.7 
0.001 

21.6 
Adjusted R-squared (%) 
17.6 
Predicted R-squared(%) 
<0.001 
Overall Significance (p-value) 
aAll correlations and models are significant at the 0.005 two-sided level, unless noted otherwise (all 
significance levels are two-sided).  Since the factors in each group are mutually uncorrelated, these 
correlations are  also the standardized regression coefficients for each factor when each standardized 
outcome is regressed on the three standardized factors. 
b  p < 0.05  
c  p < 0.1 
d Not significant (p > 0.1). 

16.9 
10.1 
<0.001 


 

 

Appendix 

The Correlations of Factors from Standard Analyses with Each of the Itemsa 

39

 
  
% of Standardized Variance 
 
 
Reification     

Autonomy 

May Question Processes 
Allowed to Speak 

Integration 

Solidarity 
Attention to Assimilation 

Involvement 

Everyone’s Consulted 

Supervisor Support 

Available 
Makes You Confident 
Communicates Well 
Shows by Example 
Builds Competence 
Shares Senior-Mgmt Vision 
Shares Success 
Manages Teamwork Well 
With Team Long Enough 
Knowledgeable 
Consults Coworkers 

Training 

Need More Training Today 
(Reversed) 
Training Met Expectations 
and Needs 
Empowered 

Welfare 

Fair Workload 
Error is Human 

Clarity of Goals 

Objectives Defined 
Clear on Daily Expectations 
Tasks/Responsibilities 
Defined 
Qualifications to Reach 
Objectives 
Tools Provided 

Efficiency 

Sufficient Meetings 
Meetings Are Useful 

Performance Feedback 

Know Evaluative Criteria 
Provides Feedback 

Effort and Pressure to 
Produce 

Makes You Want to Overdo 

Principal Components 

1 
53 

2 
11 

Overall 
Climate 

Job Clarity 
vs. Effective 
Supervision

3 
5 

Personal 
Input vs. 
Competent 
Direction 

0.62 
0.71 

 

0.76 
0.69 

 

0.86 

 

0.82 
0.89 
0.85 
0.84 
0.89 
0.81 
0.84 
0.86 
0.64 
0.72 
0.90 

 

0.08 

0.58 
0.73 

 

0.67 
0.18 

 

0.81 
0.50 

0.68 

0.59 
0.68 

 

0.50 
0.77 

 

0.67 
0.83 

 

0.88 

0.15 
0.17 

 

0.21 
0.31 

 

0.06 

 

-0.18 
-0.31 
-0.34 
-0.38 
-0.33 
-0.02 
-0.31 
-0.19 
-0.52 
-0.30 
-0.29 

 

-0.52 

0.15 
0.22 

 

0.39 
-0.02 

 

0.42 
0.56 

0.54 

0.62 
0.42 

 

0.30 
0.04 

 

0.03 
-0.12 

 

-0.29 

0.54 
0.24 

 

0.26 
0.08 

 

0.25 

 

-0.17 
-0.01 
-0.12 
-0.16 
0.01 
-0.18 
0.00 
-0.33 
-0.10 
-0.34 
-0.07 

 

0.55 

0.20 
0.34 

 

-0.19 
0.35 

 

-0.02 
-0.05 

-0.28 

-0.01 
-0.13 

 

-0.20 
0.05 

 

0.28 
0.01 

 

0.05 

MLE Varimax Factors 

1 
31 

& 

Empowered, 
Clear Goals 

Efficienncy 
 

2 
18 

Common 
Vision & 

Good 
Support 

0.32 
0.26 

 

0.08 
0.26 

 

0.30 

 

0.27 
0.49 
0.22 
0.10 
0.27 
0.33 
0.25 
0.50 
0.37 
0.05 
0.17 

 

0.38 

0.74 
0.86 

 

0.82 
0.64 

 

0.89 
0.83 

0.85 

0.85 
0.75 

 

0.76 
0.64 

 

0.78 
0.78 

 

0.22 

0.52 
0.36 

 

0.37 
0.21 

 

0.26 

 

0.72 
0.65 
0.66 
0.13 
0.51 
0.61 
0.16 
0.48 
0.50 
0.30 
0.31 

 

0.55 

0.25 
0.29 

 

0.46 
0.31 

 

0.26 
0.43 

0.15 

0.37 
0.46 

 

0.53 
0.47 

 

0.09 
0.16 

 

0.61 

3 
17 

Autonomy, 
Integration, 
& Informed 
Direction 

0.68 
0.63 

 

0.75 
0.86 

 

0.68 

 

0.35 
0.33 
0.21 
0.04 
0.47 
0.39 
0.49 
0.34 
0.36 
0.66 
-0.48 

 

0.21 

0.31 
0.17 

 

0.11 
0.42 

 

0.16 
0.15 

0.40 

0.21 
0.10 

 

0.12 
0.26 

 

0.24 
-0.03 

 

0.19 


 
aAbsolute correlations greater than 0.2 correspond to more than 4% of explained variance and are 
significant at the 0.05 level. Significant positive correlations are in bold; significant negative 
correlations are shaded grey.

 

40


 

 

REFERENCES 

41

Allen, David M. (1971), “The Prediction Sum of Squares as a Criterion for Selecting 

Predictor Variables.” Technical Report 23, University of Kentucky, Department of Statistics.  

 

----- (1974), “The Relationship between Variable Selection and Data Augmentation and a 

Method for Prediction,” Technometrics 16, 125-127. 

Boulesteix, Anne-Laure and Korbinina Strimmer (2007), “Partial Least Squares: A 

Versatile Tool for the Analysis of High-Dimension Genomic Data,” Briefings in Bioinformatics, 

8, No. 1, 32-44. 

Bro, Ramus (1996), “Multiway Calibrtion. Multilinear PLS,” Journal of Chemometrics, 

10, 47-61. 

Borucki, Chester C. and Michael J. Burke (1999), “An Examination fo Service-Related 

Antecedents to Retail Store Performance,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, 20 (6), 943. 

Burnham, Allison J., Roman Viveros, and John F. MacGregor (1996), “ Frameworks for 

Latent Variable Multivariate Regression,” Journal of Chemometrics, 10, 31-45. 

Campbell, John P., Dunnette, Marvin D., Lawler, Edward E. and Karl E. Weick (1970), 

Managerial Behavior, Performance and Effectiveness, New York: McGraw Hill.  

Collins, Christopher J. and Ken G. Smith (2006), “Knowledge Exchange and 

Combination: The Role of Human Resource Practices in the Performance of High Technology 

Firms,” Academy of Management Journal, 49 (3), 544-560. 

 

Crotts, John. C., Duncan R. Dickson, and Robert C. Ford (2005), “Aligning 

Organizational Processes with Mission: The Case of Service Excellence,” The Academy of 

Management Executive, 19 (3), 54-68. 


 

 

42

Dean, Alison M. (2004), “Links Between Organisational and Customer Variables in 

Service Delivery: Evidence, Contradictions, and Challenges,” International Journal of Service 

Industry Management, 15 (3-4), 332-350.  

Drexler, John (1977), “Organizational Climate: Its Homogeneity with Organizations,” 

Journal of Applied Psychology, 62, 38-42. 

Efron, Bradley (1986), “How Biased Is the Apparent Error Rate of a Decision Rule?” 

Journal of the American Statistical Association, 81, 461-470. 

Fornell, Claes, and Fred L. Bookstein (1982), “Two Structural Equation Models: LISREL 

and PLS Applied to Consumer Exit-Voice Theory,” Journal of Marketing Research, 19 

(November), 440-452. 

-----, and J. Cha (1994), "Partial Least Squares", in Bagozzi, R.P (Eds), Advanced 

Methods of Marketing Research, Blackwell, Oxford, 52-78. 

Frank, Ildiko E. (1989), “Comparative Monte Carlo Study of biased Regression 

Techniques,” Technical Report LCS 105, Stanford University, Department of Statistics. 

-----. and Jerome H. Friedman (1993), “A Statistical View of Some Chemometrics 

Regression Tools,” Technometrics, 35,109-135. 

Gavin, James R. and John G. Howe (1975), “Psychological Climate: Some Theoretical 

and Emprical Considerations,” Behavioral Science, 20, 228-240.  

Gelade, Garry A. and Stephen Young (2005), “Test of a Service Profit Chain Model in 

the Retail Banking Sector,” Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 78.  

Glick, William H. (1985), “Conceptualizing and Measuring Organizational and 

Psychological Climate: Pitfalls in Multi-Level Research,” Academy of Management Review, 10, 

601-616. 


 

 

43

Hallowell, Roger, and Leonard A. Schlesinger (2000), “The Service Profit Chain: 

Intellectual Roots, Current Realities, and Future Prospects,” in Handbook of Services Marketing 

and Management, Teresa A. Swartz and Dawn Iacobucci, eds. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 203-

221. 

Harter, James K., and Ame Creglow (1999), “Appendix E: The Meta-analysis,” in First 

Break All the Rules, Marcus Buckingham and Curt Coffman, New York: Simon and Schuster, 

255-267. 

-----, Frank L. Schmidt, and Theodore L. Hayes (2002), “Business-unit-level Relationship 

between Employee Satisfaction, Employee Engagement, and Business Outcomes: A Meta-

analysis,” Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 87, no. 2 (April), 268-279. 

Hemingway, Monica A. and Carlla S. Smith (1999), “Organizational Climate and 

Occupational Streessors as Predictors of Withdrawal Behaviors and Injusries in Nurses,” Journal 

of Occupational and Organizational Psycology, 72 (3), 285-299. 

Heskett, James L., Thomas O. Jones, Gary W. Loveman, W. Earl Sasser, Jr., and Leonard 

A. Schlesinger (1994), “Putting the Service-Profit Chain to Work,” Harvard Business Review, 

72, No. 2 (March-April), 164-174. 

----, W. Earl Sasser, Jr., and Leonard A. Schlesinger (1997), The Service Profit Chain: 

How Leading Companies Link Profit and Growth to Loyalty, Satisfaction and Value, Free Press: 

New York, NY. 

Jagpal, Harsharanjeet S. (1982), “Multicollinearity in Structural Equation Models with 

Unobservable Variables,” Journal of Marketing Research, 19 (November), 431-439. 

----- (1981), Measuring Joint Advertising Effects in Multiproduct Firms,” Journal of 

Advertising Research, 21, No. 1, 65-69. 


 

 

 

44

James, Lawrence R. (1982) “Aggregation bias in estimates of perceptual agreement,” 

Journal of Applied Psychology, 67 (2), 219-229. 

---- and Allan P. Jones (1074), “Organizational Climate: A Review of Theory and 

Research,” Psychological Bulletin, 81, No. 12, 1096-1112.  

James, Lois A. and Lawrence R. James (1989), “Integrating Work Environment 

Perceptions: Explorations into the Measurement of Meaning,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 

74, 739-751.  

---- and M. D. McIntyre (1996), “Perceptions of Organizational Climate,” in Individual 

Differences and Behavior in Organizations, K. R. Murphy, ed. San Francisco: Jossey Bass, 416-

450. 

Johnson, Jeff W. (1996), “Linking Employee Perceptions of Service Climate to Customer 

Satisfaction,” Personnel Psychology, 49 (4), 831-851. 

Joyce, William F. and John W. Slocum, Jr. (1979), “Climates in Organizations,” in 

Organizational Behavior, Kerr, ed. Columbus: Ohio, 317-333. 

Kaiser, H.F. (1958), “The Varimax Criterion for Analytic Rotation in Factor Analysis, 

Psychometrika, 23, 187-200. 

Kamakura, Wagner, Vikas Mittal, Fernado de Rosa, and José Afonso Mazzon (2002), 

“Assessing the Service Profit Chain,” Marketing Science, 21, No. 3 (Summer), 294-317. 

Keiningham, Timothy L., Lerzan Aksoy, Bruce Cooil, Kenneth Peterson, Terry G. Vavra 

(2006), “A Longitudinal Examination of the Asymmetric Impact of Employee and Customer 

Satisfaction on Retail Sales,” Managing Service Quality, 16 (5), 442-459. 


 

 

45

Lawler, E. E., Hall, D. T. and G. R. Oldham (1974), “Organizational Climate: 

Relationship To Organizational Structure, Process and Performance,” Organizational Behavior 

and Performance, 11, 139-155. 

Lewin, Kurt, Lippitt, R. and R. K. White (1939), “Patterns of Aggressive Behavior in 

Experimentally Created Social Climates,” Journal of Social Psychology, 10, 271-301. 

Liao, Hui and Aichia Chuang (2004), “A MutliLevel Investigation of Factors Influencing 

Employee Service Performance and Customer Outcomes,” Academy of Management Journal, 47 

(1), 41-58. 

Loveman, Gary W. (1998), “Employee Satisfaction, Customer Loyalty, and Financial 

Performance: An Empirical Examination of the Service Profit Chain in Retail Banking,” Journal 

of Service Research, 1, No. 1 (August), 18-31. 

March, J. and H. Simon (1958), Organizations, New York: John Wiley. 

McIntosh, A.R.,F.L. Bookstein, J.V. Haxby, and C.L. Grady (1996), “Spatial Pattern 

Analysis of Functional Brain Images Using Partial Least Squares,” Neuroimage, 3, 143-157. 

MIT Sloan Management Review (2001), “From The Editors,” 42 (3), 6. 

Mulki, Jay Prakash, Fernando Jaramillo and William B. Locander (2006), “Effects of 

Ethical Climate and Supervisroy Trust on Salesperson’s Job Attitudes and Intentions to Quit,” 

Journal of Personal Selling and Sales Management, 26 (1), 19-26. 

Ozcelik, Hakan, Nancy Langton and Howard Aldrich (2008), “Doing Well and Doing 

Good; The Relationship between Leadership Practices that Facilitate a Positive Emotional 

Climate and Organizational Performance,” Journal of Managerial Psychology, 23 (2), 186. 

Paradise-Tornow, C. A. (1991), “Management Effectiveness, Service Quality and 

Organizational Performance in Banks,” Human Resource Planning, 30 (3), 335-364. 


 

 

46

Patterson, Malcolm G., West, Michael A., Shackleton, Viv J., Dawson, Jeremy F., 

Lawthom, Rebecca, Maitlis, Sally, Robinson, David L., and Alison M. Wallace (2005), 

“Validating the Organizational Climate Measure: Links to Managerial Practices, Productivity 

and Innovation,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, 26, 379-408. 

Payne, Roy and Roger Mansfield (1978), “Correlates of Individuals’ Perceptions of 

Organizational Climate,” Journal of Occupational Psychology, 51, 209-218. 

________ and Diana C. Pheysey (1971), “G.G. Stern’s Organizational Climate Index: A 

Reconceptualization and Application to Business Organizations,” Organizational Behavior and 

Human Performance, 6, 77-78. 

Payne, Stephanie C., and Webber, Sheila S. (2006), “Effects of service provider attitudes 

and employment status on citizenship behaviors and customers’ attitudes and loyalty behavior,” 

Journal of Applied Psychology, 91, 365-378. 

Peterson, Shari L. (2004), “Toward a Theoretical Model of Employee Turnover: A 

Human Resource Perspective,” Human Resource Development Review, vol. 3, no. 3 

(September), 209-227. 

Quinn, Robert E. and Michael R., McGrath (1985), “The Transformation of 

Organizational Culture: A Competing Values Perspective,” in Organizational Culture, P.J. Frost, 

L. F. Moore, C. C. Lundberg and J. Martin, eds. Beverly Hills: Sage, 315-344. 

---- and Rohrbaugh John (1981), “A Competing Values Approach to Organizational 

Effectiveness,” Public Productivity Review; 5, 122-140. 

---- and ---- (1983), “A Spatial Model of Effectiveness Criteria: Toward a Competing 

Values Approach to Organizational Analysis,” Management Science, 29, 363-377. 


 

 

47

Ribbink, Dina, Allard C.R. van Riel, Veronica Liljander and Sandra Streukens (2004), 

“Comfort Your Online Customer: Quality, Trust and Loyalty on the Internet,” Managing Service 

Quality, 14(6), 446-456. 

Rogg, Kirk, L., David B. Schmidt, Carla Shull and Neal Schmitt (2001), ”Human 

Resource Practices, Organizational Climate and Customer Satisfaction,” Journal of 

Management, 27, 431-449. 

Rousseau, Denise M. (1988), The Construction of Climate in Organizational Research, in 

International Review of Industrial Psychology, Vol. 3, C.L. Cooper and I.T. Robertson, eds. New 

York: Wiley, 139-158. 

Rucci, Anthony J., Steven P. Kirn, and Richard T. Quinn (1998), “The Employee-

Customer Profit Chain at Sears,” Harvard Business Review, 76, No. 1 (January-February), 82-97. 

Ryan, Ann Marie, Mark J. Schmit, and Raymond Johnson (1996), “Perceptions and 

Effectiveness: Examining Relations at an Organizational Level,” Personnel Psychology, 49 (4), 

853-882. 

Salanova, Maria, Sonia Agut, and Jose Maria Peiro (2005), “Linking organizational 

resources and work engagement to employee performance and customer loyalty: the mediation 

of service climate,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 90 (6), 1217-1227. 

Schlesinger, Leonard A., and James L. Heskett (1991), “Breaking the Cycle of Failure in 

Services,” Sloan Management Review, 32 (3), 17-28. 

Schneider, Benjamin (1994), “HRM – A Service Perspective: Towards a Customer-

focused HRM,” International Journal of Service Industry Management, 5 (1), 64-76. 

-----, and David E. Bowen (1999), “Understanding Customer Delight and Outrage,” 

Sloan Management Review, 41, No. 4 (Fall), 35-45. 


 

 

48

----, Mark G. Ehrhart, David M. Mayer, Jessica L. Saltz and Kathryn Niles-Jolly (2005), 

“Understanding Organization – Customer Links in Service Settings,” Academy of Management 

Journal, 48 (6), 1017-1032. 

-----, Paul J. Hanges, D. Brent Smith and Amy Nicole Salvaggio (2003), “Which Comes 

First: Employee Perceptions or Organizational Financial and Market Performance?” Journal of 

Applied Psychology, 88, No. 5 (October), 836-851. 

-----, John P. Parkington, and Virginia M. Buxton (1980), “Employee and Customer 

Satisfactions of Service in Banks,” Administrative Science Quarterly, 25, 252-267. 

-----, Susan S. White, and Michelle C. Paul (1998), “Linking Service Climate and 

Customer Satisfactions of Service Quality: Test of a Causal Model,” Journal of Applied 

Psychology, Vol. 83, No. 2 (April), 150-163. 

-----, and Susan S. White (2004), Service Quality: Research Perspectives, Thousand 

Oaks, CA: Sage. 

----, Salvaggio, Amy Nicole and Montse Subirats (2002), “Climate Strength:  A New 

Direction for Climate Research,” Journal of Applied Pscyhology, 87 (2), 220-229. 

----, Smith, Brent D. and Harold W. Goldstein (2000), “Attraction-Selection-Attrition: 

Toward a person-environment psychology of organizations,” in New directions in person-

environment psychology, W. Bruce Walsh, ed. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

----, and R.A. Snyder (1976), “Some Relationships between Job Satisfaction and 

Organizational Climate,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 60, 318-328. 

----, Scott A. Young and William H. Macey (2007), “Service Smarts,”Marketing 

Management, July/August, 29-34. 


 

 

49

Semeijn, Janjaap, Allard C.R. van Riel, Marcel J.H. van Birgelen, and Sandra Streukens 

(2004), “E-services and Offline Fulfillment:  How E-Loyalty Is Created,” Managing Service 

Quality, 15(2), 182-194. 

Solnet, David (2006), “Introducing Employee Social Identification into Satisfaction 

Research,” Managing Service Quality, 16 (6), 575-594.   

Stone, M. (1977), “An asymptotic equivalence of choice of model by cross-validation 

and Akaike’s criterion,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 39 (1), 44-47. 

-----. and Brooks, R.J. (1990), “Continuum regressing: cross-validated sequentially 

constructed prediction embracing ordinary least squares, partial least squares and principal 

components regression (with discussion),” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 52 

(2), 237 – 269. 

Sundberg, Rolf (2002), “Shrinkage Regression,” in Encyclopedia of Environmetrics, 

Abdel H. El-Shaarawi and Walter W. Piegorsch., eds. Chichester: Wiley, Volume 4, 1994-1998. 

Taylor, Frederick W. (1911), Principles of Scientific Management, New York, NY: 

Norton. 

Tobias, Randall D. (1997), An Introduction to Partial Least Squares Regression, SAS 

Technical Note 509, Cary, NC: SAS Institute.  

White, Chris J., P. Rajan Varadarajan, and Peter A. Dacin (2003), “Market Situation 

Interpretation and Response: The Role of Cognitive Style, Organizational Culture, and 

Information Use,” Journal of Marketing, 67(July), 63-79. 

Yang, Yuhong (2005), “Can the strengths of AIC and BIC be shared? A conflict between 

model estimation and regression estimation,” Biometrika, 92 (4), 937-950. 

 

