 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Do Customer Partnerships 

Improve New Product 

Success Rates?
Alexandra J. Campbell

Robert G. Cooper

This  empirical  study  investigates  the  impact  of  customer
partnering in new product development by comparing the per-
formance  of  new  products  undertaken  in  partnerships  versus
those developed in-house. The results demonstrate that overall,
partnership  projects  were  no  more  successful  than  in-house
projects. This surprising result was true regardless of the per-
formance metric used. Not all new product development is im-
proved by close cooperation with customers. © 1999 Elsevier
Science Inc. All rights reserved.

INTRODUCTION

The knowledge, market information, and additional re-
sources provided by customers in new product develop-

Address  correspondence  to  Alexandra  Campbell,  Schulich  School  of
Business, York University, 4700 Keele Street, North York, Ontario, M3J 1P3,
Canada.

The authors thank Dr. Elko J. Kleinschmidt, Michael G. Degroote School of
Business, McMaster University, for his invaluable assistance in helping with
this research.

ment partnerships all represent potential sources of com-
petitive advantage. But whether this potential gets translated
into  superior  performance  results  is  an  open  question.
While much has been written about the potential benefits
of  partnering  with  customers  for  new  product  develop-
ment, there is little empirical evidence about the effective-
ness and outcomes of such arrangements versus in-house
development. The question of whether customer partner-
ships achieve superior results compared to in-house de-
velopment projects remains unanswered.

This research focuses on the results of customer part-
nering  in  new  product  development  by  comparing  the
performance results of new products developed via cus-
tomer  partnerships  with  new  products  developed  in-
house.  The  empirical  study  investigates  the  impact  of
customer  partnering  on  both  new  product  performance
and on some of the drivers of new product performance.
Over the last decade, the body of theoretical and em-
pirical  literature  about  business-to-business  cooperation
has grown enormously in Europe and in North America.

 
Industrial Marketing Management
© 1999 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.
655 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10010

, 507–519 (1999)

28

0019-8501/99/$–see front matter
PII S0019-8501(99)00058-9


 

 
 

 
 

 

 

The ROI on customer partnering is unknown.

Much of the IMP literature [1–4] has demonstrated that
both suppliers and customers can benefit from engaging
in  closer  working  relationships  and  partnerships.  In  the
new product development area, research into cooperation
has been dominated by the study of vertical relationships
[5–9].  Many  theoretical  and  empirical  studies  suggest
that  collaboration  with  customers  is  a  valuable  way  to
achieve both innovation and economic success [5, 8, 10,
11]. These studies have identified a number of potential
benefits  arising  from  partnering  such  as  new  product
ideas, enhanced product development effectiveness, and
even reduced time to market for new products. As a re-
sult, the managerial implications from these studies usu-
ally  advise  firms  to  utilize  partnering  to  improve  their
new product success rates.

Managers have been heeding the advice [8]. For exam-
ple,  Microsoft  has  established  beta  sites  to  incorporate
customer knowledge in all important phases of new soft-
ware development. Silicon Graphics Inc. has also adopted
a policy of integrating customer knowledge into its prod-
uct innovation process [12]. Increasingly, these and other
companies  are  involving  customers  in  their  entire  new
product development process. This is done to reduce un-
certainty, share financial risks, and provide input into key
decisions in the development process. It is likely that the
possibilities for co-development with customers will in-
crease further as new information technologies enable an
integration of structures, systems, and processes [13].

However, a major unresolved issue for managers about
partnering with customers for new product development
is its return on investment. The majority of research stud-
ies  have  restricted  their  scope  to  examining  the  factors
associated with the success [8, 9, 14, 15] or failure [5, 16]
of collaborative product development rather than exam-
ining its performance relative to other options available

ALEXANDRA CAMPBELL is Associate Professor of Marketing 
at the Schulich Business School, York University, Canada.

ROBERT COOPER is Marketing Professor and Lawson Mardon 
Chair in Technology Management at McMaster University in 
Canada.

508

to  firms.  As  a  result,  operating  managers  who  face  the
complex day-to-day issues involved in improving the ef-
ficiency and effectiveness of the NPD process and the ul-
timate  success  of  new  products  are  grappling  with  the
trade-offs involved in partnering with customers.

Understanding  whether  customer  partnerships  do,  in
fact, increase the probability of new product success is an
important  strategic  issue  for  firms.  Turbulent  environ-
ments and rapidly changing technologies make the devel-
opment of successful new products critical for the growth
and even the survival of companies. Customer partnering
requires  a  huge  investment  in  managerial  time  and  re-
sources,  and  a  failed  project  may  represent  significant
lost opportunity costs.

This  study  seeks  answers  to  two  primary  questions.
First, do customer partnerships improve the market per-
formance of new products? Second, do customer partner-
ships enhance product or internal company factors which
have been previously demonstrated to drive new product
success? A customer partnership is defined as a formal-
ized working relationship between a customer and a man-
ufacturer which involves performing coordinated devel-
opment activities to develop a new product. The goal of
this partnership is “to produce superior mutual outcomes
or  singular  outcomes  with  expected  reciprocity  over
time”  [17].  Partnership  projects  are  compared  with  in-
house  projects  on  new  product  performance  measures
(such as profitability, timeliness, and meeting objectives)
and  on  four  key  drivers  of  new  product  performance
(new product advantage, fit with existing resources, qual-
ity of execution of the new product process, and senior
management commitment).

CUSTOMER PARTNERING AND NEW
PRODUCT PERFORMANCE

Because customer partnering in new product develop-
ment appears to be a logical outcome of firms’ desire to
better understand their customers’ needs, the tone of aca-
demic  and  business  literature  on  co-development  with
customers  has  generally  been  positive.  Two  major  rea-
sons  have  been  advanced  in  the  new  product  develop-
ment (NPD) literature to explain why customer partner-


 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Customer partnering was expected to 

improve both new product performance and 

its drivers.

ing  may  increase  new  product  success  rates.  The  first
reason is that customers can provide major inputs which
improve the quality of innovation. A number of studies
have  suggested  that  the  knowledge  gained  from  first-
hand contact with customers allows the manufacturer to
capture  market  information  more  effectively  in  product
design [5, 8, 12, 18]. In addition to market information,
Hakansson [2] suggests that new, more innovative ideas
or  new  ways  of  combining  resources  may  emerge
through  partnerships  as  different  kinds  of  knowledge
from each partner are combined.

The second rationale given for customer partnering is the
complexity of many industrial products. A developing com-
pany often does not possess the necessary knowledge or ex-
pertise to design, test, manufacture, and commercialize the
product in-house. Close partnerships with customers during
product  development  may  provide  access  to  development
capabilities and other resources that the manufacturer lacks
in-house [13, 19]. As a result, partnerships can shorten de-
velopment time and reduce development costs [20].

Despite the enthusiasm for customer partnering in new
product development, there is some evidence to suggest
that  such  partnerships  do  not  automatically  guarantee
success [21]. Johne [22] warns that a cooperative manu-
facturer may end up as nothing more than a subcontractor
for key customers. Bidault and Cummings [21] argue that
the  tension  between  the  logic  of  new  product  develop-
ment  and  partnering  may  offset  possible  economic  and
technological advantages. For example, difficulties may
arise  in  new  product  development  partnerships  because
of disagreements on the allocation of property rights [9].
In a series of qualitative interviews with both customers
and suppliers, Schrader and Gopfert [23] conclude that co-
development with customers may result in inefficient new
product development due to customers’ limited domain of
expertise. Leonard-Barton [24] also highlights the uncer-
tainty associated with involving customers in new product
development arising from issues such as partner selection,

determining the timing and intensity of customer involve-
ment,  customers’  ability  and  willingness  to  provide  the
right kind of knowledge, and the nature and extent of the
knowledge to be embodied. Other risks include damaged
relationships with key customers; negative publicity due to
premature  dissemination  of  positive  test  results;  and  the
generation of inaccurate or unrepresentative feedback [15].
While existing evidence on the results of customer part-
nering on new product development is somewhat contra-
dictory, one recurring theme in the NPD literature is that a
strong market and customer orientation is fundamental to
superior  new  product  performance  [25–28].  Studies  over
the  last  two  decades  into  new  product  failures  have  re-
vealed that key reasons include poor market research, in-
adequate  market  analysis,  weak  market  studies,  and  too
few resources devoted to marketing actions [26, 29]. Suc-
cess factors identified in almost every new product devel-
opment  study  include  customer  need  recognition,  under-
standing  user  needs,  market  need  satisfaction,  strong
market  knowledge,  market  research,  and  more  spending
on marketing homework activities [26, 30–32].

Coordinating  activities  and  resources  among  compa-
nies has been demonstrated in a variety of settings to be
an effective way to solve the problems firms have due to
insufficient knowledge or scarce resources [8]. Based on
the logic that partnering with a customer will improve a
firm’s market orientation, we propose that customer part-
nering has a positive effect on new product performance:

H1

: New  products  developed  via  customer  partnerships
have  superior  overall  performance  when  compared  to
in-house development projects.

CUSTOMER PARTNERING AND DRIVERS OF 
NEW PRODUCT PERFORMANCE

A logical corollary to our first hypothesis is that part-
nering with customers should improve some of the perfor-

509


 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

There were no significant differences found 
between partnerships and in-house projects 

on any performance measure.

mance drivers which have been empirically demonstrated
to discriminate between successful and unsuccessful new
products. Because new product development has tradition-
ally been defined as an internal management task, signifi-
cant research progress has been made in understanding the
internal company factors associated with new product per-
formance.  Researchers  have  related  new  product  success
to the number and quality of the specific stages undertaken
in the new product development process [25, 31], the prod-
uct’s characteristics [30, 33], or to internal situational fac-
tors such as senior management commitment [15] and in-
terdepartmental  coordination  [13,  18].  Many  of  these
factors seem intuitively linked to customer partnering. For
example, cross-functional teams call on customers to iden-
tify opportunities for value creation [34].

Because  customer  partnerships  are  expected  to  con-
tribute  new  resources  and  capabilities  to  the  manufac-
turer, it seems reasonable that several of the performance
drivers of new product success, identified in the NPD lit-
erature, are positively affected by customer partnering. In
this current study, a subset of the more important success
determinants [25, 31, 35, 36], which logically might be
affected by partnering, are considered: new product ad-
vantage, fit with existing resources, quality of execution
of  the  NPD  process,  and  senior  management  commit-
ment.  The  rationales  for  the  positive  effect  of  customer
partnering on these factors are described below.

New Product Advantage

Product advantage gained by offering new, important,
and visible benefits to customers when compared to com-
petitive solutions, has been identified as a critical factor
influencing new product success in numerous empirical
studies  [30,  33].  Because  product  advantage  is  defined
from  the  customer’s  perspective,  co-development  with
customers  should  improve  a  firm’s  understanding  of
what customers need and want from the new product. Re-
cently, Li and Calantone [12] have found empirical sup-

510

port for the positive effect of customer interaction on new
product advantage. These authors found that a customer
knowledge  process  (defined  as  acquiring,  interpreting,
and integrating customer information) in developer firms
significantly  improved  developers’  new  product  advan-
tage.  Based  on  these  results,  we  expect  that  customer
partnering will also improve a new product’s advantage.

H2

: New  products  developed  via  customer  partnerships
have greater product advantage than in-house develop-
ment projects.

Fit with Existing Resources

Fit with existing resources refers to how well the inter-
nally  available  resources  fit  with  the  new  development
project’s  requirements.  Resource  fit  has  been  found  to
improve new product success rates and to reduce product
development  times  [26].  By  partnering  with  customers,
firms have access to improved information, capabilities,
and resources that would otherwise be unavailable. Ac-
cess to technological know-how residing in the customer
firm should improve a firm’s ability to mobilize and ac-
cess  resources  required  to  complete  a  new  project.  We
therefore  hypothesize  that  customer  partnering  will  im-
prove  the  overall  resource  fit  required  to  execute  the
project versus in-house product development.

H3

: New  products  developed  via  customer  partnerships
have a higher level of resource fit than in-house devel-
opment projects.

Execution Quality of the New Product 
Development Process

In  a  series  of  studies,  Cooper  and  Kleinschmidt  [16,
26, 31, 33] have identified 16 stages in the new product
process and examined which stages relate to new product
success and failure. They found a significant difference
between  new  product  successes  and  failures  related  to
whether or not a firm completed these stages.


 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

If firms did their homework well, having a 

partnership made no difference.

Product success is particularly influenced by how well
firms execute certain key stages in the new product pro-
cess [25, 31]. Predevelopment activities such as prelimi-
nary  market  and  technical  analysis  are  critical  because
the insight and information gained may reduce costs and
problems in the later, more expensive and risky develop-
ment and post-development stages of new product devel-
opment.  Testing  and  evaluation  stages  are  likewise  im-
portant  as  they  provide  valuable  precommercialization
feedback which reduces the changes of new product fail-
ure. We expect that a firm’s ability to execute these key
development  activities  will  be  enhanced  by  the  insight
and information gained through customer partnering.

H4

: New  products  developed  via  customer  partnerships
have a higher quality of execution of the new prod-
uct development process than in-house development
projects.

Senior Management Commitment

How  strongly  senior  management  is  committed  to  the
project has been identified as a major factor in new prod-
uct success [26]. Because customer partnerships take time
and  effort  to  establish  [37],  new  products  undertaken  in
partnerships are likely to require a higher level of involve-
ment  by  senior  management  than  in-house  development
projects. Due to the higher visibility of customer partner-
ship projects within the firm, we expect a higher level of
senior  management  support  and  commitment  to  such
projects compared to in-house development projects.

H5

: New  products  developed  via  customer  partnerships
have a higher level of senior management commitment
superior to in-house development projects.

RESEARCH STUDY

Sample

Developer firms as opposed to the customer are the fo-
cus of our investigation. The sample of firms was taken

from industry lists in the chemical, electronic, and indus-
trial products sectors which identified those firms active
in  new  product  development.  Firms  were  initially  con-
tacted by telephone to ensure that they were indeed active
in new product development, to identify the key respon-
dents, and to solicit cooperation. Of the 250 firms con-
tacted,  90  firms  agreed  to  participate  in  the  research
study representing a 35% response rate. Two firms were
subsequently eliminated due to missing data, resulting in
a final sample size of 88 firms.

Mean annual sales for the 88 manufacturers in the final
sample were 2.4 billion (US$). Respondents included vice
presidents  (16%),  marketing  directors  (29%),  and  new
product development managers (55%). Firms were prima-
rily involved in manufacturing, chemicals, and electronics
industrial products. Industry representation of the sample
was  as  follows:  materials  and  process  industries  such  as
chemicals, pulp and paper, and ceramics (58%), electron-
ics  and  electronic  equipment  including  software  (19%),
heavy  and  industrial  equipment  (12%),  other  industries
such as information systems and medical systems (11%).

Projects  reported  were  self-selected  by  respondents.
To ensure reasonable reliability of the data, respondents
were asked to select a typical new product project with
which they were familiar and which had been selling on
the market for several years so that its commercial results
were  known.  Respondents  were  instructed  to  select  a
project that met the following criteria: (1) it represented a
typical new product development for that company; (2) it
was a non-customized industrial product targeted at the
entire market; (3) it had been completed within the last
three years; and (4) it was completed either through a for-
mal  customer  partnership  (where  both  partners  worked
closely together and shared both the costs and benefits of
the project) or through in-house development (with arms-
length  customer  involvement).  To  ensure  that  respon-
dents understood the meaning of a customer partnership
versus  an  in-house  development  project,  respondents
were asked to use the definitions provided on the ques-
tionnaire  to  classify  the  project.  A  partnership  was  de-

511


 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 

fined  as  a  formal  working  relationship  in  which  both
partners  worked  closely  together  and  shared  both  the
costs  and  benefits  of  the  project;  in-house  development
was defined as an internal development with either mini-
mal, or some contact with multiple customers undertaken
at arms length and not with any one lead customer. In ad-
dition, respondents were also asked to classify the inten-
sity of the customer interaction in the project.

Of the 88 NPD projects studied in this research, 59%
(52  projects)  were  classified  by  respondents  as  partner-
ships and 41% (36 projects) were classified as in-house
developments. All 52 partnership projects were classified
by respondents as being characterized by a close working
relationship  with  a  particular  customer.  Thirteen  of  the
36  in-house  projects  were  classified  by  respondents  as
having no customer involvement in the development pro-
cess at all and 23 of the projects were classified as having
some customer involvement.

Measurement

A  survey  questionnaire  was  used  to  collect  data  on
new  product  performance,  the  various  expected  drivers
of new product performance (new product advantage, re-
source fit, quality of execution of the NPD process, and
senior  management  commitment),  some  characteristics
of  the  partnership  itself  (such  as  joint  problem  solving,
firm and customer commitment to the project, scope of
the  relationship,  and  formal  responsibilities),  and  some
characteristics of the development project (such as mar-
ket concentration, payback period, degree of innovative-
ness,  and  project  risk).  The  research  questionnaire  con-
sisted  largely  of  10-point  Likert-type  scaled  questions
(anchored “strongly agree to strongly disagree”) and was
pre-tested on a sub-sample of 15 firms not included in the
final  sample.  Wherever  possible,  pre-validated  scales
were used or adapted from the marketing and new prod-
uct literature.

Because  new  product  success  is  a  multi-faceted  con-
cept [38], 10 measures of the new product’s performance
were  used  (which  reflected  commercial  success/failure;
timeliness of the project; and whether the product opened
up a strategic window of opportunity for the firm) in ad-
dition to the manager’s overall assessment of the success
or failure of the project. Summary statistics for variables
used in the analysis, such as the number of items in the
scale,  the  items  used,  the  mean  and  standard  deviation
and the reliability estimate are provided in Appendix 1.

512

EMPIRICAL RESULTS

Effect of Customer Partnering on New
Product Performance

Analysis of variance, and 

-tests were used to test the
t
research  hypotheses.  Table  1  reports  the  distribution  of
respondents’ overall assessment of the success and fail-
ure  of  partnership  versus  in-house  projects.  While  the
proportion of project successes in each group was mar-
ginally  different:  69%  for  partnerships  and  75%  for
in-house  projects,  this  difference  is  not  statistically  sig-
nificant.

Contrary  to  expectations,  there  were  no  significant
differences  found  between  partnerships  and  in-house
projects on any performance metric used. Regardless of
the performance measure—financial outcomes, schedule,
and adherence to the budget or the degree to which the
new  product  opened  up  other  new  product  windows  or
opportunities for the company—on average, partnership
projects did not yield better (or worse) results compared
to  in-house  ones  (Table  2).  Thus,  no  empirical  support
was found for the first research hypothesis.

As shown in Table 2, the pattern of performance results
was similar for partnership versus in-house projects. Both
partnership and in-house projects achieved reasonable suc-
cess on technical success and timeliness (means are in the
range of 6–7 on the 10-point scale) and were less success-
ful in meeting company’s profit or sales objectives.

Effect of Customer Partnering on Drivers of New 
Product Performance

As  suggested  by  Hypotheses  2–5,  it  is  possible  that
rather than having a direct effect on new product success,
customer partnering has an indirect effect on new product
success  by  positively  affecting  some  of  the  drivers  of
new product performance. A 
-test was conducted to in-
t
vestigate whether customer partnering has a positive ef-
fect on selected drivers of new product success as we hy-
pothesized.  Support  was  found  only  for  Hypotheses  2

TABLE 1
Success and Failure of Partnership vs In-House Projects

Project

Success (%)

Failure (%)

Total (%)

Partnership
In-House
Total Projects

36 (69)
27 (75)
63

16 (31)
9 (25)
25

52 (100)
36 (100)
88


 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

TABLE 2
Performance Results of Partnerships versus In-House Projects (Mean Values of 0-10 scaled items)

Performance Measures

In-House Projects

Partnership Projects

a
Significance

Profitability relative to other projects
Met sales objectives
Met profit objectives
Positive impact on co. sales
Positive impact on co. profits
Was undertaken quickly and time efficiently
Adhered to time schedule (Launched on time)
Opened windows on other product opportunities
Provided access to new markets
Was a technical success

a

Significance reported at the 0.05 level.

4.97
4.64
4.58
5.77
5.31
6.28
6.1
5.42
4.54
7.68

and  4.  (Table  3).  Compared  to  in-house  development,
partnership projects did result in products with a higher
level  of  product  advantage  with  more  visible  benefits
which were easier to explain (H2), and in a higher quality
of execution of the development process (H4). However,
no  significant  differences  were  found  between  the  part-
nering and in-house projects on fit with existing resources
(H3) or on senior management commitment (H5).

,

All  measures  of  new  product  advantage  were  signifi-
cantly correlated with financial performance and opening a
 0.01). Although partnerships
 
window of opportunity (
p
had higher levels of product advantage, the data shows that
it was new product advantage which affected new product
performance and not customer partnerships. When the data
were split between projects with high levels of product ad-
vantage versus those with low levels, having a partnership
made  no  significant  difference  on  the  project’s  perfor-
mance results. An ANOVA analysis showed that products
with a high new product advantage undertaken in partner-
ships had no greater effect on the firm’s financial perfor-
mance, time to market, or in opening a window of opportu-
nity than superior products developed in-house. The same
was true for quality of execution of the new product pro-
cess.  While  the  quality  of  the  NPD  process  was  signi-
ficantly  correlated  with  all  performance  measures,  an
ANOVA analysis showed that if firms did their homework
well in the quality of their development process, having a
partnership (compared to doing the project alone) had no
effect on the project’s performance results.

When the measures which comprise the quality of the
NPD process are considered individually, Table 3 shows
that very few of the individual steps scored higher when
conducted in partnerships versus in-house development.
The  data  did  not  support  the  expectation  that  working

4.72
5.34
5.06
5.52
4.96
6.59
6.0
5.84
5.12
7.58

n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.

closely with a customer partner would improve many of
the steps involved in new product development. By defi-
nition, partnership projects scored higher on the steps of
working with a lead customer and in conducting field tri-
als  than  in-house  projects,  but  other  expected  improve-
ments resulting from partnerships did not materialize.

Although partnerships did score higher on the steps of
conducting  a  business/financial  analysis  of  the  project
and  on  doing  pilot  production  than  in-house  projects,
these  effects  are  only  marginally  significant  (
  .10).
p
Thus,  despite  the  fact  that  conducting  a  business/finan-
cial analysis was significantly correlated with timeliness
of the project (0.310, 
 .05), the effect of partnerships
on conducting a business/financial analysis is too weak to
produce a significant timeliness difference between part-
nership and in-house projects.

,

,

p

 

 

The data in Table 3 suggests that partnering with a cus-
tomer does not compensate for fundamental weaknesses
in  the  execution  of  the  new  product  process.  Previous
studies  in  the  NPD  literature  focussing  on  in-house  de-
velopment have found that marketing and business analy-
sis activities are executed more poorly than technical ac-
tivities  [26].  This  pattern  emerges  in  our  study  as  well.
The mean score for marketing and business analysis ac-
tivities is lower in both partnership and in-house projects
than the means of technical activities.

WHY DOESN’T CUSTOMER PARTNERING 
AFFECT NEW PRODUCT SUCCESS?

Given  the  surprising  lack  of  impact  of  partnering  on
new  product  performance  results,  an  obvious  question
becomes: are there other factors not accounted for which

513


 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE 3
Influence of Partnership versus In-house Projects on Key Development Drivers of New Product Success

Project Characteristic

Product Advantage (4 measures)

Product superiority in meeting customer needs vs competition
Superior product quality vs competition
Visible benefits to customer
Benefits easy to explain

Fit with existing resoures (9 measures)

Fit between R&D requirements
Fit between manufacturing requirements
Fit with existing plant
Fit between selling skills
Fit between distribution skills
Fit between advert and promo
Fit between cust service
Fit between market research
Fit between mgmt skills/resources

Quality of the new product process (16 measures)

Initial screening of new idea
Preliminary Market Assessment
Preliminary Technical Assess.
Work with lead customer
Detailed market study
Field Trials
Competitive analysis
Bus and fin analysis
Product Development
In-house testing
Test market/trial sell
Pilot production
Precommercializ. bus. analy.
Production start up
Product launch
Post-launch analysis

Senior management commitment (4 measures)

Top management commit
Product champion
Team follow-through on project
Dedicated team

In-House Projects

Partnership Projects

a
Significance

7.15
7.13
6.94
6.97
6.80
6.66
7.36
7.00
6.11
5.80
6.77
6.69
6.86
6.38
7.13
5.65
6.11
5.77
6.50
2.95
4.56
5.51
5.78
5.00
7.80
7.54
4.00
6.66
4.96
7.16
6.31
3.39
7.72
8.08
8.08
7.52
7.05

7.67
8.09
7.58
8.09
8.17
6.78
7.39
6.83
5.22
6.52
7.05
6.50
7.32
6.58
6.75
6.56
6.40
6.22
6.56
6.42
5.24
7.86
5.58
6.07
7.96
8.15
5.62
7.68
5.00
7.10
6.34
3.28
7.74
7.79
8.20
7.75
6.98

.05
.014
.072
.015
.001
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
.021
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
.000
n.s.
.001
n.s.
.107
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
.071
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.

a

Only significant levels at 
p

 

,

 ,
 .05 and 
p

 .10 level are reported.

may  explain  the  insignificant  results?  We  investigated
two possible explanations for our findings. The first pos-
sible  explanation  is  that  the  complexity,  risk  level,  and
difficulty  of  projects  may  differ  between  in-house  and

customer partnering projects. The reason firms choose to
partner with a customer in the first place may be because
such  projects  are  more  complex,  more  risky,  and  more
ambitious than in-house projects.

TABLE 4
Characteristics of Partnership versus In-house Projects

Project Characteristic

In-House Projects

Partnership Projects

Significance

Payback period (in years)
Project riskiness
Project complexity (ie scientific discovery vs application of existing knowledge)
Required complex technology
Degree of innovativeness
How concentrated the market was

3.37
5.02
4.36
4.19
6.44
2.91

6.48
5.64
5.32
4.30
6.25
5.58

.11
.257
.123
.857
.742
.000

514


 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Partnership projects were no more risky 

than in-house projects.

A second possible explanation for the lack of perfor-
mance results from partnering may be due to a lack of co-
operation  in  the  partnerships  themselves.  The  partner-
ships in our sample may have been characterized by poor
cooperation and coordination of activities which affected
product performance results.

Project Characteristics

To  assess  whether  the  lack  of  performance  differences
between partnerships and in-house projects was due to the
nature of projects undertaken in partnerships, several addi-
tional one-way ANOVAs were carried out. Projects were
split between partnering versus in-house development and
then  a  series  of  one-way  ANOVA  were  run  on  various
project  descriptors  such  as  technical  complexity,  innova-
tiveness, and risk. Few differences were detected, however.
Although directionally suggestive, the data do not sup-
port  any  definitive  conclusions  that  project  characteris-
tics are different in partnerships versus in-house develop-
ment. There was no difference between partnerships and
in-house  development  in  project  riskiness,  innovative-
ness,  or  complexity  of  technology  and  the  longer  pay-
back  period  and  higher  project  complexity  of  partner-
ships are only marginally significant at the 
 .10 level
(Table 4). Because respondents were asked to report on a
project which was typical for their firm, the data suggest
that the lack of performance results of partnering versus
in-house development cannot be attributed solely to dif-
ferences in the nature of the development project. There
is no evidence in this sample to support the explanation
that partnering projects are any more demanding than in-
house development projects.

,

p

 

The  only  significant  project  characteristic  which  was
different between partnerships and in-house development
was that partnering projects were aimed at concentrated
markets in which a few users represented the bulk of the
market  whereas  in-house  projects  were  aimed  at  frag-
mented markets. This finding has two possible implica-

tions which may explain the insignificant effect of part-
nering  on  new  product  performance.  The  first  is  that
firms  may  be  partnering  for  sales  or  marketing  reasons
rather than selecting the best possible resource and tech-
nical fit in their partners. This could mean that the cus-
tomer partners may not possess the requisite skills to im-
prove  the  firm’s  new  product  development  efforts.  A
second implication is that the lack of impact of partnering
on new product profitability is due to the customer’s mis-
use of power in the relationship. Because market concen-
tration increases a customer’s buying power, it is possi-
ble that the customer partners in our sample were using
their market power either to appropriate a disproportion-
ate share of the new product’s profits or to pass on a dis-
proportionate share of development costs to their supplier
partners. In either case, the result would be lower profits
to the supplier from the new product project. While only
speculative, this finding suggests that the quality of coop-
eration  in  the  partnerships  may  affect  new  product  per-
formance.

Partnership Characteristics

To investigate whether the quality of cooperation in the
partnership  affected  the  new  product’s  performance  re-
sults, partnerships were divided between high and low lev-
els of seven sentiments and behaviors acknowledged in the
literature  to  represent  cooperation  [17,  39]:  the  level  of
joint problem-solving, the level of trust, the level of ongo-
ing  involvement  with  the  customer,  the  degree  to  which
formal responsibilities were spelled out, commitment, the
scope of the relationship, and satisfaction. A series of one-
way ANOVAs was then run on the 10 performance met-
rics used in this study. Only one difference was detected.

The only behavior characteristic of partnership coopera-
tion which affected new product performance was the level
of  ongoing  involvement  between  the  firm  and  the  cus-
tomer.  Partnership  projects  in  which  the  firm  had  a  high
level of ongoing involvement with the customer had a sig-

515


 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

Managers should no more rely on simplistic 

recommendations about the benefits of 

closeness to the customer.

 

,

nificantly greater financial impact than either partnerships
with low ongoing involvement or in-house development
(
  0.05).  None  of  the  other  partnership  characteristics
p
measured  in  this  study  had  a  significant  impact  on  any
product performance metric used in this study. Thus, while
not an exhaustive assessment of the cooperative nature in
the partnership, the data in our study suggest that the qual-
ity of cooperation (at least as it was measured in this study)
does not directly affect new product performance.

Although the quality of cooperation did not directly in-
fluence the project’s performance results, it did influence
respondents’  overall  assessment  of  the  success  of  the
partnership. Cooperation quality and new product perfor-
mance were both higher in successful NPD partnerships.
Successful  partnerships  were  characterized  by  greater
 .10),
joint problem solving (
p
 .01). As would be
and higher levels of satisfaction (
p
expected,  successful  partnerships  in  turn  were  signifi-
cantly related to several measures of new product perfor-
,
mance such as meeting sales and profit objectives (
p
 .05), and adhering to a time
.01), technical success (
p
schedule (
 .05). This is not surprising as it is likely
p
that a respondent’s assessment of “success” was based on
the new product’s overall performance.

 .05), greater trust (
p

,

,

,

,

,

 

 

 

 

 

 

,

While not the focal point of our study, one interesting
result was that successful partnerships were characterized
by  lower  technical  innovation  (
  .01).  This  finding  is
 
p
contrary  to  the  traditional  advice  given  to  managers  that
firms should seek partnerships for innovative products to
alleviate development risks. This finding suggests that the
outcomes from partnering may not always be as expected.
Highly  innovative  products  undertaken  in  partnerships
may be more trouble than they are worth due to the addi-
tional complexity of managing a partnership on top of the
difficulties  inherent  in  developing  the  product.  As  has
been  suggested  elsewhere,  it  is  also  possible  that  unless
customers  are  selected  carefully,  in  some  cases  the  sup-
plier may be technically ahead of its customer partner [23].

516

CONCLUSIONS

Companies do not cooperate just for the sake of coop-
eration. This study addressed two research questions con-
cerning  the  use  of  customer  partnering  to  improve  new
product success rates. First, customer partnering does not
predict the ultimate success of a new product. There was
no  difference  between  new  products  developed  through
customer  partnerships  and  those  developed  in-house  on
any performance metric examined in this study. This sug-
gests that there are no automatic short-term commercial
benefits associated with customer partnering when com-
pared to in-house development.

However, our results should not be interpreted to mean
that customer partnering in new product development has
no value—because our findings suggest that there is no
performance  penalty  to  pay  from  partnering,  firms  may
undertake customer partnering for other reasons. Partner-
ing  may  be  important  from  a  longer-term  strategic  per-
spective to gain access to customers (partnership projects
had  more  concentrated  markets),  or  from  a  longer-term
learning  perspective  (partnership  projects  had  greater
new product advantage).

The underlying objective of this study was to shed some
light  on  the  role  that  customer  partnerships  play  in  new
product  performance.  The  second  research  question  ad-
dressed  by  our  study  provides  some  empirical  evidence
that  there  are  benefits  for  firms  in  treating  customers  as
partners in new product development. When compared to
in-house development, customer partnerships improved a
new product’s advantage, and the quality of execution of
the NPD process, both of which were significantly corre-
lated  with  new  product  performance.  This  suggests  that
further  investigation  is  needed  on  the  mediating  role  of
customer partnerships in new product development.

There  is  a  pressing  need  to  develop  better  and  more
comprehensive models to understand the antecedents and
outcomes of partnering on new product performance. For


example, empirical evidence already exists that partner se-
lection  is  critical  to  achieving  benefits  from  closer  cus-
tomer interaction in new product development [12]. Rather
than relying on general guidelines, academics need to de-
velop a contingency framework which may help to explain
when, why, and how partnerships with customers will lead
to superior new product performance.

Managerial Implications

From  a  managerial  perspective,  three  important  con-
clusions emerge from our study. First, managers need to
recognize that relationships cost time and effort to estab-
lish;  the  appropriate  type  of  new  product  development
process should be determined in light of the firm’s evalu-
ation of its potential benefits. Managers need to carefully
scrutinize new product projects to ensure that partnering
suits the nature of the new product being developed.

Second,  managers  need  to  be  alert  to  the  potential
costs  of  customer  partnerships.  While  not  statistically
significant, the payback in years was considerably longer
for  partnership  than  for  in-house  projects.  Partnership
projects may also consume more firm resources because
of  the  additional  costs  and  time  of  managing  the  com-
plexities of such a cooperative initiative.

Finally,  our  study  highlights  that  it  is  important  for
managers  to  have  realistic  expectations  about  the  out-
comes  of  customer  partnering.  For  example,  managers
need a better understanding about how value gets shared
between partners before committing to new product de-
velopment partnerships. The data in our sample point to
the possibility that the rewards from new product devel-
opment  may  not  be  equally  shared  if  customers  have
greater market power than their supplier partners. In gen-
eral, the results from our study serve as a cautionary note
to managers who are focussing on customer partnering as
a panacea for new product success and are ignoring the
rich diversity of alternatives which not only exist but are
appropriate in different contexts. Our results underscore
that there is no recipe for new product success.

Limitations and Future Research

As noted by other researchers [11, 39], partnering with
any outside firm requires that costs must be compared to
possible gains derived from the relationship. Because this
study  focussed  only  on  a  comparison  of  the  benefits  of
customer partnering versus in-house development, one of
the limitations of this research is that we were not able to
compare the costs of partnering compared to in-house de-

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

velopment. Yet if customer partnering has positive influ-
ences on new product development, it can also have neg-
ative influences. More research is needed on identifying
which drivers of performance may suffer from too close a
partnership with the wrong partner. The costs of manag-
ing the relationship also need to be taken into account in
assessing  the  desirability  of  co-development  with  cus-
tomers. Researchers in the IMP tradition and elsewhere
have  developed  many  measures  for  adaptations  and  in-
vestments which could be used to better understand the
cost/benefit tradeoff involved in partnering with custom-
ers to develop new products.

Several other limitations of this study should be iden-
tified.  First,  the  respondents’  choice  of  new  product
project may have caused a bias in the results, especially
with  regard  to  the  performance  outcomes.  Respondents
were asked to answer the questionnaire for a representa-
tive new product but were not directed in their choice of
a successful or unsuccessful project nor in their choice of
an in-house versus a partnership project. This limits the
generalizeability  of  the  results  because  partnership  and
in-house projects could not be directly matched in terms
of their sales and profit expectations.

A  related  limitation  is  that  project  characteristics
which  likely  make  customer  partnerships  mandatory
were  not  measured.  For  example,  the  market  study  and
market testing stages of the NPD process are particularly
important for new products which target new-to-the-firm
customers/market  segments  or  that  project  usage  situa-
tions  very  dissimilar  to  current  industry  practice  [35].
Such  products  may  be  more  suitable  for  customer  part-
nering than other types of new products.

Finally,  an  important  limitation  of  this  study  is  its
cross-sectional  nature.  Thus,  there  is  no  indication  of
whether developers of new products learned skills from
their  customer  partners  which  could  be  used  to  further
improve the quality of their development projects in the
future.  Future  longitudinal  research  is  needed  to  deter-
mine  whether  the  real  value  of  customer  partnering  in
new product development lies not in its commercial out-
comes but in its ability to help firms access new knowl-
edge and complementary assets which can be redeployed
elsewhere.

REFERENCES

1. Gemunden, Hans George, Ritter, Thomas, and Achim, Walter (eds): 

tionships  and  Networks  in  International  Markets
Elsevier Science, Oxford, 1998.

Rela-
.  Pergamon  Press,

517


 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2. Hakansson,  Hakan: 

Industrial  Technological  Development:  A  Network

Approach.

 Croom Helm Ltd, London, Great Britain, 1987.

Development: An Italian Case Study. Journal of Product Innovation Man-
agement 11, 134–145 (1994).

3. Moeller, Kristian, and Wilson, David (eds): 

Business Marketing: An Inter-

21. Bidault,  F.,  and  Cummings,  T.:  Innovating  Through  Alliances:  Expecta-

action and Network Perspective.

 Kluwer, Boston, MA, 1995.

tions and Limitations. R&D Management 24, 33–45 (1994).

4. Ford, David (ed): 

Understanding Business Markets: Interaction, Relation-

ships, Networks.
5. Biemans, W. G.: 

 Academic Press, London, 1990.
Managing Innovation within Networks.

 Routledge, Lon-

don, 1992.

6. Gemunden, Hans George, Ritter, Thomas, and Heydebreck, P.: Network
Configuration and Innovation Success: An Empirical Analysis in German
13,
High-Tech Industries. 
449–462 (1996).

 
International Journal of Research in Marketing

22. Johne, A.: Listening to the Voice of the Market. International Marketing

Review 11(1), 47–59 (1994).

23. Schrader,  Stephan,  and  Gopfert,  Jan:  Structuring  Manufacturer-Supplier
Interaction in New Product Development Teams: An Empirical Analysis,
in  Relationships  and  Networks  in  International  Markets,  Hans  George
Gemunden,  Thomas  Ritter,  and  Achim  Walter,  eds.,  Pergamon  Press,
Elsevier Science, Oxford, 1998.

24. Leonard-Barton, D.: Wellsprings of Knowledge: Building and Sustaining

7. Parkinson, St T.: The Role of the User in Successful New Product Devel-

the Sources of Innovation. HBS Press, Boston, MA, 1995.

25. Cooper, Robert G.: Winning at New Products: Accelerating the Process

from Idea to Launch, 2nd edition. Addison Wesley, Reading, MA, 1993.

26. Cooper, Robert G., and Kleinschmidt, Elko J.: Benchmarking the Firm’s
Critical Success Factors in New Product Development. Journal of Product
Innovation Management 12, 374–391 (1995).

27. Deleted in proof.

28. Cooper,  Robert  G.:  The  Dimensions  of  Industrial  New  Product  Success

and Failure. Journal of Marketing 43, 93–103 (1979).

29. Cooper, Robert G.: Why New Industrial Products Fail. Industrial Market-

ing Management 4, 315–326 (1975).

30. Cooper, Robert G.: Identifying Industrial New Product Success. Industrial

Marketing Management 8, 124–135 (1979).

31. Cooper, Robert G., and Kleinschmidt, Elko J.: An Investigation into the
New Product Process: Steps, Deficiencies and Impact. Journal of Product
Innovation Management 3, 71–85 (1986).

32. De Brentanni, U.: Success Factors in Developing New Business Services.

European Journal of Marketing 15(2), 33–59 (1991).

33. Cooper,  Robert  G.,  and  Kleinschmidt,  Elko  J.:  New  Products:  The  Key
Factors in Success. American Marketing Association, Chicago, IL, 1990.

34. Von  Hippel,  Eric:  The  Sources  of  Innovation.  Oxford  University  Press,

Oxford, England, 1994.

35. Rochford, Linda, and Rudelius, William: New Product Development Pro-
cess:  Stages  and  Successes  in  the  Medical  Products  Industry.  Industrial
Marketing Management 26, 67–84 (1997).

36. Zirger,  B.  J.,  and  Maidique,  M.  A.:  A  Model  of  New  Product  Develop-

ment: An Empirical Test. Management Science 36, 867–883 (1990).

37. Blois, Keith J.: When is a Relationship a “Relationship”?, in Relationships
and Networks in International Markets, Hans Georg Gemunden, Thomas
Ritter, and Achim Walter, eds., Elsevier, UK, 1997.

38. Griffin,  A.,  and  Page,  A.  L.:  An  Interim  Report  on  Measuring  Product
Development  Success  and  Failure.  Journal  of  Product  Innovation  Man-
agement 4, 291–308 (1993).

39. Ganesan,  S.:  Determinants  of  Long-Term  Orientation  in  Buyer-Seller

Relationships. Journal of Marketing 58, 1–19 (1994).

opment. 

 
R&D Management

12,

 123–131 (1982).

8. Gemunden, Hans George, Heydebreck, P., and Herden, R.: Technological
R&D Man-

Interweavement: A Means of Achieving Innovation Success. 
 
agement

 359–376 (1992).

22,

9. Bruce,  M.,  Leverick,  F.,  Littler  D.,  and  Wilson,  D.:  Success  Factors  for
Collaborative Product Development: A Study of Suppliers of Information
and Communication Technology. 
 134–145 (1995).

 
R&D Management

11,

10. Gales,  L.,  and  Mansour-Cole,  D.:  User  Involvement  in  Innovation
Journal of Engineer-

Projects: Toward an Information-Processing Model. 
 77–109 (1995).
 
ing and Technology Management

12,
11. Hakansson, Hakan, and Snehota, I.: 
 Routledge, London, 1995.

Networks.

Developing Relationships in Business

12. Li,  Tiger,  and  Calantone,  Roger,  J.:  The  Impact  of  Market  Knowledge
 13–29

 
Journal of Marketing

62,

Competence on New Product Advantage. 
(1998).

13. Ruekert, Robert, and Walker, Orville: Marketing’s Interaction with Other
Functional  Units:  A  Conceptual  Framework  and  Empirical  Evidence.
 
Journal of Marketing

 1–19 (1987).

51,

14. Foxall,  G.  R.:  User  Initiated  Product  Innovations. 

Industrial  Marketing

 
Management

18,

 95–104 (1989).

15. Dolan,  R.  J.,  and  Matthews,  J.  M.:  Maximizing  the  Utility  of  Customer
Journal of Product

Product Testing: Beta Test Design and Management. 
 
Innovation Management

 318–330 (1993).

10,

16. Cooper, Robert G., and Kleinschmidt, Elko J.: Determinants of Timeliness
Journal  of  Product  Innovation  Manage-

in  New  Product  Development. 
 
ment

 374–391 (1994).

12,

17. Anderson, James C., and Narus, James A.: A Model of Distributor Firm
Journal of Marketing 54,

and Manufacturer Firm Working Partnerships. 
42–58 (1990).

18. Souder, William E.: Managing Relations between R&D and Marketing in
New Product Development Projects. Journal of Innovation Management
5, 6–19 (1988).

19. Athaide, G. A., Meyers, P. W., and Wilemon, D. L.: Seller-Buyer Interac-
tion during the Commercialization of Technological Process Innovations.
Journal of Product Innovation Management 13, 406–421 (1996).

20. Bonaccorsi, A., and Lipparini, A.: Strategic Partnerships in New Product

518


APPENDIX 1
Selected Variable Summary Statistics

Number of

Items

Sample Items
(0–10 scale)

Variable

New Product Performance

Financial impact

Opened a window of

opportunity for firm

Timeliness

Performance Drivers
Product advantage

Fit with resources

Quality of NPD process

Top management support

Partnership Characteristics

Joint problem solving

Trust

Commitment

Scope of relationship

Ongoing involvement with

customer

Formal responsibility

5

2

2

4

9

16

4

6

5

4

5

2

3

Rate the profit of this product vs other new products of your firm
What impact did this product have on company sales
To what degree did this new product open a window of opportunity

in terms of a new product category/market opportunity for firm
To what extent was the project undertaken quickly and in a time-

efficient manner. To what extent did the project adhere to its time 
schedule

Mean

SD

Reliability

4.65

5.29

6.25

1.76

2.84

2.36

.921

.764

.848

To what extent was this new product superior to competing products

7.53

1.44

.843

in meeting customer needs

To what extent was the product superior to competitive products
To what extent did the R&D skills and resources needed for this 

project fit closely with existing R&D skills

To what extent did the manufacturing skills and resources needed

for this project fit closely with manufacturing skills

Rate how well the following steps were carried out: initial screening

of new idea; preliminary market assessment

To what extent was top management in your firm committed to the
project. To what extent was there a strong champion driving the 
project

To what extent do you agree with the following statement about your
firm’s relationship with your partnership customer for this project:
We made joint decisions (e.g., about product specs, etc.) In this 
relationship both sides worked together to achieve productivity
gains from which both sides benefited

6.73

2.31

.909

5.88

6.49

1.98

2.33

.776

.670

6.05

2.14

.851

The people in the customer’s organization demonstrated a high level

7.30

1.63

.905

of honesty and frankness with us
We trusted the customer’s people very much

My firm was extremely committed to this relationship 

I felt that this customer was extremely committed to this 
relationship

7.83

1.74

.821

To what extent does your customer partnership also involve any of

7.83

1.74

.778

the following areas in addition to product development: marketing,
quality improvement, etc

We intend to do more new product projects in the future with this

5.57

3.86

.843

customer
We have been involved in other new product projects
with this customer

The formal responsibilities of each partner were clearly spelled out

4.53

2.93

.805

in advance
We had a formal contract specifying the roles, commitments, and 
responsibilities of both the customer and ourselves

519

