The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/0143-7739.htm

Developing the strategic

resources of Chinese
entrepreneurial ﬁrms

Nancy Yi Feng Chen

Department of Management, Lingnan University, Tuen Mun, Hong Kong

Mike Chen-Ho Chao

Department of Marketing and International Business, Baruch College,

The City University of New York, New York, New York, USA, and

Department of Management, Lingnan University, Tuen Mun, Hong Kong

Dean Tjosvold

Developing
strategic
resources

213

Received March 2009
Revised July 2009
Accepted August 2009

Abstract
Purpose – Applying the theory of cooperation and competition,
this paper proposes that
entrepreneurial ﬁrms can obtain social capital in terms of trust and reciprocity by developing
cooperative goals with other ﬁrms, rather than competitive and independent goals. Such cooperative
relationships may then enhance the ﬁrm’s strategic resources, including corporate reputation and
market access.
Design/methodology/approach – Results were obtained from structural equation modeling of
data from 120 entrepreneurial ﬁrms in Shanghai, China.
Findings – The hypotheses were supported, except that reciprocity was found to affect corporate
reputation negatively. The results suggest that cooperative interdependence and trust in the network
of entrepreneurial ﬁrms, not self-sacriﬁcing reciprocity, can foster a ﬁrm’s business development.
Originality/value – Although there is evidence in the literature suggesting that social capital
inﬂuences the performance of entrepreneurial ﬁrms both directly and indirectly, there is less evidence
addressing the mechanisms by which entrepreneurial ﬁrms can acquire and maintain social capital.
This study addresses this research gap.

Keywords China, Entrepreneurialism, Social values, Resources

Paper type Research paper

Introduction
Today, ongoing pressures push both public and private sector organizations to
streamline activities, improve efﬁciency and achieve demanding organizational goals.
The ability of top management teams to understand the culture and dynamics of
organizations and to deliver strong leadership during periods of change could make a
difference between organizational failure and success in this context. Thanks to many
governmental policies, private sector companies in China, especially entrepreneurial
ﬁrms, are in the same context mentioned above struggling to grow or even survive
since they face difﬁculty getting access to vital resources. Entrepreneurial ﬁrms

The research on which this paper is based was supported in part by the RGC grant project No.
LU3404/05H to the third author.

Leadership & Organization
Development Journal
Vol. 31 No. 3, 2010
pp. 213-229
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
0143-7739
DOI 10.1108/01437731011039334


LODJ
31,3

214

typically have limited ﬁnancial capacity, which hinders their acquisition of strategic
resources that yield a competitive advantage. Though entrepreneurs have become
more valued in China in recent years, indeed small- and medium-sized enterprises
provide 60 percent of the gross national product and 40 percent of proﬁts and taxes
(Anderson et al., 2003), many Chinese governmental policies continue to challenge the
survival of small private businesses (Carlisle and Flynn, 2005). These entrepreneurial
ﬁrms will struggle to grow and thrive if they lack resources,
legitimacy, and
governmental support.

In this study, we provide implications for senior managers of entrepreneurial ﬁrms
in China and scholars in the leadership and organizational development ﬁeld by
integrating the theory of cooperation and competition with social capital and
performance concepts. Based on a sample of 120 entrepreneurial ﬁrms in Shanghai,
China, we found that entrepreneurial ﬁrms can obtain social capital (i.e. trust and
reciprocity) by developing cooperative instead of competitive and independent goals
with other companies. Such cooperative relationships may then enhance the ﬁrm’s
strategic resources including corporate reputation and market access.

Our research also contributes to both social capital and strategic management
literatures. Extensive research suggests that ﬁrms gain value capital by working with
their partners (Dyer and Singh, 1998; Nahapiet and Ghoshal, 1998; Adler and Kwon,
2002). Less empirical research has examined the effects of social capital on ﬁrm-level
outcome, especially how social capital inﬂuences business strategy and performance
(Hitt et al., 2006). To address this gap, the present study examines the implications that
social capital has on the acquisition of strategic resources by entrepreneurial ﬁrms in
China. Moreover, this study serves as an empirical test of the universal aspirations of
the theory of cooperation and competition, speciﬁcally its application at
the
organizational level. This work provides an initial step in elucidating the utility of
applying the theory of cooperation and competition for developing social capital and
managing it for fostering strategic resources.

Theoretical background and hypotheses
Strategic resources for entrepreneurial ﬁrms
Recent studies of strategy suggest that valued, difﬁcult to imitate resources are critical
drivers of a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage (Barney, 1991; Haanes and Fjeldstad, 2000).
A ﬁrm’s strategic resources for competitive advantage are those capabilities that
facilitate the development of value and the attainment of outstanding proﬁts, but are
difﬁcult for competitors to imitate; these resources are typically embedded in unique
procedures and practices that have evolved and accumulated over time (Barney, 1991).
Increasing strategic resources is a viable way for entrepreneurial ﬁrms to earn
satisfactory returns by increasing their price points and/or saving costs (Hackl and
Westlund, 2000; Abdullateef, 2000; Zhang et al., 2003).

Corporate reputation may be a valuable strategic resource world-wide (Hall, 1992,
1993; Fombrun, 1996; Reuber and Fischer, 2005). An organization’s public image can
greatly affect its performance (Page and Fearn, 2005). Indeed, many companies are
investing in managing and promoting their reputation (Page and Fearn, 2005).
Corporate reputation can yield a competitive advantage by generating stakeholder
support. It can also constitute a reservoir-of-goodwill that protects the company from
downturns (Fombrun and Van Riel, 2004).


Developing
strategic
resources

215

A strong reputation can impart a company with an enduring competitive advantage
that can be employed to earn above average proﬁts (Barney, 1991; Roberts and
Dowling, 2002; Weigelt and Camerer, 1988; Hall, 1993; Barney, 1991; Fombrun and Van
Riel, 2004). Corporate reputation was found to inﬂuence people’s perceptions of a ﬁrm’s
ability to deliver the desired outcome to its customers (Fombrun and Van Riel, 1997).
Corporate reputation may play an important role in fostering word-of-mouth
recommendations, as well as in maintaining or even increasing patrons’ buying
behaviors (Barich and Kotler, 1991; Andreassen and Lindestad, 1998). Having a
favorable reputation has been argued to be one of the best ways to attract investors
(Fombrun and Shanley, 1990). Firms operating in China are increasingly recognizing
the importance of corporate reputation (Wang et al., 2006).

Market access is perceived as a critical element in corporate strategy and a means of
business sustenance and growth. Because of
its importance, researchers have
dedicated considerable efforts to investigating its performance implications. Market
access can improve corporate performance by expanding sales into new markets and
consequently diversifying risks beyond its core markets during economic downturns.
Market access can also lower per unit costs by taking advantage of economies of scale
in manufacturing and of economies of scope in entities like research and development
(R&D), marketing, and distribution systems. Based on the resource-based view of the
ﬁrm, a company can apply its competitive advantages by expanding its operations into
new markets to take advantage of its core competences (Bartlett and Ghoshal, 1989;
Hamel, 1991; Porter, 1990). In other words, a ﬁrm can use its existing rent-yielding core
competences in new markets to generate economies of scale and scope and
consequently achieve better performance. In summary, the common rewards of market
access are from the following four sources:

learning;

(1) economies of scale and scope;
(2)
(3) exploiting relationships among business segments and geographic areas; and
(4)
taking advantage of differences in factor markets (Kogut, 1985; Porter, 1990).

For the aforementioned reasons, this study used corporate reputation and market
access as measures of strategic resource outcome.

Previous studies have suggested that the most valuable strategic resources are
socially constructed and emerge from social interaction (Dierickx and Cool, 1989; Knott
et al., 2003; Pike et al., 2005; Baker and Nelson, 2005; Black et al., 2006; Hall, 1992;
Schoemaker and Jonker, 2005). Accordingly, leveraging social capital may be critical
for entrepreneurial ﬁrms to acquire strategic resources. The next section discusses the
role of social capital in the development of strategic resources.

Social capital
Baker (2000) suggested that “social capital refers to the resources available in and
through personal and business networks.” The word “social” is used to emphasize that
the capital is not owned by any single person, but rather resides in networks of
relationships. The word “capital” indicates that it can be used to create value, achieve
goals, and make contributions to the world.


LODJ
31,3

216

Although many researchers agree that social capital is very valuable and that it is
based on relationships, deﬁning it and understanding its basic processes have proven
to be difﬁcult. Social capital has been deﬁned as the actual web of social networks
within a community or organization that is guided by the norms, expectations, and
beneﬁts that are derived from it (Saxton and Benson, 2005). Nahapiet and Ghoshal
(1998) refer to social capital as the “sum of the actual and potential resources embedded
within, available through and derived from the network”. Social capital is also deﬁned
as the set of relationships between people or groups of people that can be used to
develop, access, and use resources. Stone (2000) deﬁned social capital as social relations
characterized by norms of trust and reciprocity. While Coleman (1988) argued that
social capital, acting as a resource for organizations and individuals, exists in the
structure of relations among actors.

This study proposes that trust and reciprocity are two key elements of social
capital. This proposition is consistent with the view of Carpenter and colleagues who
argued that social capital emanates from group interactions of trust, reciprocity, and
collaboration (Carpenter et al., 2004). Trust is fundamental to social capital as it can
create the conditions under which ﬁrms develop industry-speciﬁc assets capable of
delivering real services to other ﬁrms that are unavailable through ordinary market
channels (Carney, 1998). Incorporation of mutual trust into inter-ﬁrm interactions is
economically beneﬁcial as it may increase ﬂexibility and reduce costs (Baron et al.,
2000). Trust appears to be a basic condition for helping technologically and legally
separate entities engage in mutually beneﬁcial agreements rather than bargaining
strictly for one’s own interest (March and Simon, 1958). Trust increases interaction
among related businesses and facilitates the transmission of reliable information
(Axelrod, 1984). Trust is usually affected by the volume of exchanges and the length of
a relationship (Dyer and Singh, 1998).

Reciprocity has long been considered to be an important principle of social
exchange. Reciprocity refers to a rule of behavior in social exchange situations
where mutual reinforcement exists between two parties (Gouldner, 1960), or in those
situations where people feel obligated to reciprocate one another in a social
exchange (Ekeh, 1974). The principle of reciprocity has a built-in change-generating
factor, since continuity of social interaction requires some equality in the exchange;
when this expectation is frustrated the social exchange situation is threatened
relationships tend to afford stability and
(Ekeh, 1974). Prolonged reciprocal
continuity, which contribute to norms of reciprocity and trust
(Nahapiet and
Ghoshal, 1998).

Based on the above literature and reasoning, this study proposes that trust and
reciprocity are the bases of the social capital that enables groups of people to live and
work together successfully. Those companies that develop well-established trust and
that practice reciprocity with other ﬁrms in the network will be deemed as reputable
actors in the community and gain access to new markets. Therefore, we hypothesize
that social capital generated based on trust and reciprocity promotes entrepreneurial
ﬁrms’ strategic resources of corporate reputation and market access as follows:

H1a. Trust enhances entrepreneurial ﬁrms’ strategic resource of corporate

reputation.

H1b. Trust enhances entrepreneurial ﬁrms’ strategic resource of market access.


Developing
strategic
resources

217

H2a. Reciprocity enhances entrepreneurial ﬁrms’ strategic resource of corporate

reputation.

H2b. Reciprocity enhances entrepreneurial ﬁrms’ strategic resource of market

access.

Entrepreneurial ﬁrms can use social capital to develop strategic resources for success,
but little theoretical or empirical work has directly investigated the procedures by
which ﬁrms gain and sustain social capital. Research that will identify elements for
developing and maintaining social capital and complement the ongoing theoretical
work examining the utility of social capital is needed. The present study proposes that
the theory of cooperation and competition can identify the conditions under which
companies can develop social capital.

Theory of cooperation and competition
Deutsch (1949, 1973) theorized that people pursue their goals based on their own
self-interest and that one’s view of the association between his or her own goals with
those of others greatly affects the dynamics and consequences of their relationships
with other people. The basic premise of the theory of cooperation and competition is
that the structure of goals determines how people interact and their interaction in turn
determines outcomes (Deutsch, 1949, 1973; Johnson and Johnson, 1989).

In the case of cooperative goals, people believe that others’ success facilitates their
own success, such that the progression of others toward goal attainment brings oneself
toward one’s own goals. Emphasizing that they can be successful together, people
exchange their ideas, combine their positions, and develop mutually beneﬁcial
solutions (De Dreu et al., 2001). When goals are compatible, people discuss opposing
positions open-mindedly, and try to integrate their ideas and work for mutually
acceptable solutions (Deutsch, 1973).

In the case of competitive goals, people believe that their goals are negatively
related, that is, one’s own goal attainment precludes, or at least makes it less likely, that
others will attain their goals. Believing that others’ goal attainment interferes with
their own success, people pursue their interests in a “zero-sum game” way. With the
emphasis on competitive interests, they believe that they are better off when others act
ineffectively. Thus in a competitive environment, people will withhold information and
ideas to increase their chance of winning the competition; they may attempt to coerce
competitors to do their bidding, but do not want to compromise themselves and may
even actively obstruct the other’s effective actions. Accepting the belief that their goals
are incompatible, they may intentionally mislead or impede the progress of others in an
effort to “win.” The frustrating exchange and the failure to integrate their diverse ideas
within competitive goals often results in deadlock or imposed solutions. These
negative interactions result in mutual hostility and restricted communication (Deutsch,
1973).

Persons with independent goals believe their goals are unrelated to others’ goals. As
others’ attainment of goals does not impact their achievement, people pursue their
goals independently. Thus in the case of independent goals, people conclude that their
success depends directly on their own efforts, and they will work for their own goals
with little regard for the goals of others. They tend to communicate their intentions to
apply one’s abilities toward one’s own success without reference to enhancing or


LODJ
31,3

218

frustrating others, and work to reach their goals by their own efforts. Believing that
promoting or obstructing the other’s goal attainment has no impact on their own
success, people have little incentive assist or obstruct one another, and hence withdraw
from interaction and become indifferent to the interests of others. Generally speaking,
independence has been found to have effects on interaction and productivity that are
similar to, though not as strong as, those of competition (Deutsch, 1973).

Studies have speciﬁcally documented that cooperative relationships help partners
apply and develop their abilities for mutual success (Lawler and Yoon, 1993, 1996).
Partners with cooperative goals provided reciprocated support and assistance and
developed trusting and friendly attitudes (Tjosvold, 1991; Liu et al., 2004). Cooperative
goals have been found to result in the development of mutual solutions to problems,
especially complex ones, and conﬁdence in working together (Alper et al., 1998;
Johnson and Johnson, 1989).

On the other hand, people with competitive and independent goals gave little
assistance to one another though they had the capacity to do so (Lawler and Yoon,
1993, 1996). Competitive goals are associated with frustration,
fragmented
relationships, and low performance (Stanne et al., 1999). Findings of experimental
and ﬁeld studies indicate that, relative to competitive goals, cooperative goals induce
people to provide greater support and assistance and to develop trusting and friendly
attitudes (Tjosvold et al., 1991). When motivated by cooperative goals, people are
forthright with their assistance because they recognize that they can succeed while
helping others. In contrast, competitive goals discourage people from assisting others
because doing so may reduce one’s own likelihood of success.

This study suggests that applying the theory of cooperation and competition can
help entrepreneurial ﬁrms obtain and maintain social capital that may facilitate growth
of
their strategic resources. Based on the theory and literature reviewed, we
hypothesize that:

H3a. Cooperative goals facilitate trust development between entrepreneurial

ﬁrms and other ﬁrms in their network.

H3b. Competitive goals undermine trust development between entrepreneurial

ﬁrms and other ﬁrms in their network.

H3c.

Independent goals undermine trust development between entrepreneurial
ﬁrms and other ﬁrms in their network.

H4a. Cooperative goals facilitate reciprocity between entrepreneurial ﬁrms and

other ﬁrms in their network.

H4b. Competitive goals undermine reciprocity between entrepreneurial ﬁrms and

other ﬁrms in their network.

H4c.

Independent goals undermine reciprocity between entrepreneurial ﬁrms and
other ﬁrms in their network.

linking goal
The overall purpose of the present work is to examine a model
interdependence (whether goals are cooperative, competitive, or independent), social
capital (in terms of trust and reciprocity), and strategic resources (i.e. corporate
reputation and market access). The expectation is that cooperative, but competitive or


Developing
strategic
resources

219

independent, goals will induce trust and reciprocity that in turn will enhance corporate
reputation and improve market access (Figure 1).

Methods
Participants
In the academic year of 2007-2008, 168 managers who were or had been enrolled in
Master’s of Business Administration (MBA) programs at a university in Shanghai,
China volunteered to participate in our study. From this pool of volunteers, 48 were
excluded because they had been working for their ﬁrms for less than one year, or they
worked for ﬁrms with more than 500 employees. The ﬁnal valid study sample included
120 ﬁrms, either privately or collectively owned, with fewer than 500 employees, in
Shanghai, China.

All of the participants were middle-level managers, in charge of one or more
departments. Most (68 percent) of them had marketing related duties, such as customer
service, marketing operations, and public affairs. They were in a good position to know
the resources, competitors, and customers of their ﬁrms. There were 94 male and 26
female respondents with an average age of 34.5. In total, 35 of them were aged 20-30, 56
of them were aged 30-40, 23 of them were aged 40-50, and six of them were over 50. A
total of 92 of them only had a bachelor’s degree; 18 of them had a Master’s degree or a
doctorate when they responded to our questionnaire. To reduce potential concerns
about evaluating others, participants were told that their responses would be kept
totally conﬁdential and would be used for research only.

Measures
Goal interdependence. A scaled questionnaire for cooperative and competitive goal
interdependence were developed from previous questionnaire studies conducted in
China and North America (Tjosvold, 1995; Tjosvold et al., 1991; Liu et al., 2004).
Respondents were asked to evaluate ﬁve items for cooperation that were intended to
measure commonality of goals, tasks and beneﬁts among members of their business
network. A sample item for the cooperative goal scale is “Our company and those ﬁrms
that interact with us share common goals”. There were four competitive scale items
that were designed to measure the incompatibility of goals, tasks, and rewards. A
sample competitive scale item is “Those ﬁrms that interact with us get in our way”.

Figure 1.
Conceptual framework


LODJ
31,3

220

There were also ﬁve independent scale items that were designed to measure the
independence of goals, tasks and beneﬁts. A sample independent scale item is “Our
company and those ﬁrms that interact with us do our own thing”. Participants were
required to rate their level of agreement with each item on a ﬁve-point scale, where
1 ¼ strongly disagree and 5 ¼ strongly agree. The scales demonstrated acceptable
reliability. The coefﬁcient alphas were 0.83, 0.81 and 0.78 respectively.

Social capital. Social capital was measured by assessments of trust and reciprocity.
The scales on trust and reciprocity were adopted from previous studies (Florin et al.,
2003; Lin, 2001; Coleman, 1988). The three-item trust scale assessed whether the ﬁrms
and those they interacted with have mutual trust. A sample social capital item is “We
and those ﬁrms that interact with us treat each other with credit and integrity”. The
scale demonstrated acceptable reliability with a coefﬁcient alpha of 0.86.

The single-item reciprocity scale measured whether the target companies and their
network associates tried to do favors for one another. The reciprocity item was “We
and those ﬁrms that interact with us insist on the reciprocal principle; our company
tries to help them in consideration of our good relationship, even it won’t help us make
money”. Participants were required to rate their level of agreement with the social
capital items on the same ﬁve-point scale introduced above.

Strategic resources. Strategic resources of entrepreneurial ﬁrms were measured by
their reputation and market access, both of which can greatly impact proﬁts through
effects on sales prices and production costs. The scales on reputation and market
access were developed from previous studies (Florin et al., 2003; Lin, 2001; Coleman,
1988). A two-item scale measured whether or not the companies have a good reputation
in their industry. A sample such item is: “Our ﬁrm has good (brand/product
quality/service) reputation among our industry”. We also used two items to measure
whether the target companies had good market access. A sample such item is: “Our
ﬁrm has very smooth access to the market”. Participants were required to rate their
agreement on the ﬁve-point scale described above. The scales demonstrated acceptable
reliability. The coefﬁcient alpha for the corporate reputation was 0.88 and for market
access was 0.82.

Questionnaire translation and pilot test. The original questionnaire was ﬁrst
translated into Chinese by one researcher and then was translated back into English by
another independent researcher to check the accuracy of the English-to-Chinese
translation, as described by Brislin (1970) and Chapman and Carter (1979). The
translators were bi-lingual researchers who had studied in both Chinese and English
speaking environments and thus had achieved sufﬁcient mastery of both languages as
recommended by Bracken and Barona (1991). The translator and back-translator met
with the English speaking, monolingual researchers to examine any differences found
in the back-translation. After considering their suggestions, necessary modiﬁcations
were made to complete the Chinese version of the questionnaire.

The ﬁrst version of the questionnaire was pre-tested to conﬁrm that every question
was stated appropriately so that respondents could clearly understand every concept
and question. The pilot-test was conducted among employees (ten male and ten female)
in a multinational company in Beijing, China. Based on their feedback, a few questions
were rephrased for clarity, and then the ﬁnal version was prepared for data collection.


Results
Correlation analysis was used to test the hypotheses linking goal interdependence,
social capital, and strategic resources. As summarized in Table I, the observed
correlations among the scales support the overall framework that how ﬁrms’ goals
interact with network ties’ affects social capital and the resultant outcomes.

A vigorous examination of the hypotheses employing structural equation analysis
in which the goal interdependence (cooperation, competition and independence) were
speciﬁed as exogenous variables revealed that goal type affected the company’s
pursuit of social capital, which in turn may affect the strategic resources of the
company. The proposed mediating effects model was compared to the direct effects
model. The direct effects model posited that goal interdependence impacts outcomes
directly, whereas the mediating effects model proposes that social capital mediates
between goal interdependence and outcomes. Table II shows the path estimates for the
models tested herein.

Developing
strategic
resources

221

We compared the mediating effects model, our hypothesized model, the saturated
model, and the direct effects model, and found that among these models the
hypothesized model provides the best ﬁt for the data (Table II). The x2 of the
mediating effects model was 20.88 (df ¼ 6, p , 0.01). The difference between the x2
values for the mediating effects model and the direct effects model was signiﬁcant
(x2 difference ¼ 75.33), indicating that omission of the mediating effects of social
capital signiﬁcantly deteriorated the validity of the mediating effects model. The
results of
is
acceptable for the data.

the model comparison suggest

the mediating effects model

that

Our path coefﬁcient ﬁndings provided generally good support for the study’s
hypotheses (Table II). H1a and H1b were well supported in that trust was positively
and signiﬁcantly related to both corporate reputation (b¼ 0.63, p , 0.01) and market
access (b¼ 0.49, p , 0.01). H2a and H2b were rejected in that reciprocity was
negatively and signiﬁcantly related to corporate reputation (b¼ 2 0.19, p , 0.05), and
not signiﬁcantly related to market access (b¼ 0.14, p ¼ ns). The results also
supported H3a and H4a in that cooperative goals had positive and signiﬁcant effects
on trust (b¼ 0.56, p , 0.01) and reciprocity (b¼ 0.20, p , 0.05). Meanwhile,
competitive and independent goals did not consistently have statistically signiﬁcant
negative effects on trust and reciprocity among network associates. Therefore, H3b,
H3c, H4b and H4c were not supported.

Mean SD

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(1) Cooperative goals
(2) Competitive goals
(3) Independent goals
(4) Trust
(5) Reciprocity
(6) Corporate
reputation
(7) Market access

5.43
3.17
3.47
5.71
4.99

5.03
5.25

0.88
(0.83)
1.18 20.46 *
1.04 20.36 * *
1.08
1.44

(0.81)
0.58 * *

(0.78)

0.54 * * 20.19 * 20.24 * *
0.25 * * 20.25 * * 20.13

(.86)
0.27 * *

1.34
0.99

0.27 * * 20.13
0.40 * * 20.08

20.12
20.23 * * 0.53 * * 0.27 * *

0.59 * * 0.03

(0.88)
0.37 * * (0.82)

Notes: * p , 0.05; * * p , 0.01

Table I.
Descriptive statistics


LODJ
31,3

222

Table II.
Results of SEM analyses

Hypothesized modela

Direct effects modelb

Path from

Path to

coefﬁcient Path from

Path to

Path

Path

coefﬁcient

Saturated
modelc

0.31 * *
2 0.45 * *
2 0.17

0.56 * * Cooperative Reputation
Competitive Reputation
Independent Reputation
Cooperative Market access
Competitive Market access
Independent Market access

Cooperative Trust
Competitive Trust
Independent Trust
Cooperative Reciprocity
Competitive Reciprocity
Independent Reciprocity
Trust
Reputation
Reciprocity Reputation
Trust
Market access
Reciprocity Market access
Notes: aModel x2 ¼ 20.88, df ¼ 6, NFI ¼ 0.92, CFI ¼ 0.94; bModel x2 ¼ 94.43, df ¼ 4, NFI ¼ 0.33,
CFI ¼ 0.31; cModel x2 ¼ 0, df ¼ 0, NFI ¼ 1, CFI ¼ – ; * p , 0.05; * * p , 0.01

2 0.14
2 0.11
0.20 *
2 0.18
0.05
0.63 * *
2 0.19 *
0.49 * *
0.14

0.53 * *
2 0.31 * *
2 0.13

Discussion
Strategic resources are key sources of a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage, but
entrepreneurial ﬁrms typically have considerable difﬁculty obtaining and
maintaining these resources. Previous work suggested that social capital may help
these ﬁrms increase their strategic resources and reduce organizational costs (Watson
and Papamarcos, 2002). Consistent with this reasoning, the present results support the
that by strengthening cooperative goals with
study’s hypothesized model
organizations in their network, entrepreneurial ﬁrms can augment
their social
capital in terms of trust, which in turn may enhance their strategic resources of
reputation and market access. Unexpectedly, however, the ﬁndings suggested that
social capital in terms of reciprocity is not conducive, and may even impede, reputation
development. These ﬁndings question the popular assertion of the value of social
capital in that they suggest that the dimensions of social capital may have different
and not uniformly positive consequences. More generally, the ﬁndings indicate that
social capital has to be effectively managed, not simply augmented.
Consistent with our hypotheses, our results indicate that

trust between
entrepreneurial ﬁrms and other organizations in their network can increase their
strategic resources of ﬁrm reputation and market access. These ﬁndings provide
empirical support for the view that it is worthwhile to develop social capital, at least in
terms of strengthening trust. The trusting relationships among entrepreneurial ﬁrms
appear to be quite constructive because they foster interaction that facilitates
enhancement of entrepreneurial ﬁrm reputation and market access. Developing aspects
of social capital such as trust seems to offer entrepreneurial ﬁrms an approach to
develop their strategic resources without a large ﬁnancial investment.

The present results challenge the assertion that trust and reciprocity are key
constituents of social capital that work in tandem to add value (Lorenzoni and
Baden-Fuller, 1995). Instead, the ﬁndings suggest that rigid reciprocity might be
destructive to the corporate reputation of entrepreneurial ﬁrms. Reciprocity that
requires ﬁrms to do favors for other companies, even though doing so is costly,
demonstrated a negative relationship with ﬁrm reputation and no signiﬁcant


Developing
strategic
resources

223

relationship with market access in the structural equation analysis. These ﬁndings are
consistent with the view that social capital can be both an asset and a liability (Adler
and Kwon, 2002), and that it does not necessarily result in competitive advantages (Hitt
et al., 2006). Distinct dimensions of social capital may differentially affect ﬁrm
performance (Koka and Prescott, 2002); it is important to investigate potentially
negative impacts of social capital on a ﬁrm’s assets and performance (Wu and Leung,
2005).

Previous researchers have offered insights into why reciprocity may be
counter-productive. Coleman (1988) has argued that the obligations of reciprocity
embedded in social capital may place those organizations inside the social network
boundary in more problematic situations and lead to unproductive risk-taking. Given
this possibility, reciprocity might not always be a useful scheme for the strategic
resource development of entrepreneurial ﬁrms.

Trust appears to lead to the useful, mutual exchange of resources, but rigid
reciprocity may oblige the expenditure of both money and time, and may reduce a
ﬁrm’s ﬂexibility in the development of its own corporate reputation and market access.
Thus reciprocity that requires actions that obstruct
the actor appears to be
counter-productive in the long-term. Firms beneﬁt from one another’s information and
abilities, but they should principally use these resources to develop their own business.
Future research can explore the extent to which trust leads to ﬂexible, mutually
proﬁtable exchanges, whereas rigid reciprocity that requires self-sacriﬁce hampers the
performance of network ﬁrms.

the results support

Developing social capital
Previous research has focused on documenting the effects of social capital, whereas
this study provides additional information about how social capital can be developed.
Overall,
interdependence among
entrepreneurial ﬁrms within a network affects trust and reciprocity. Cooperative,
instead of competitive or independent, goals were found to be important antecedents of
social capital and, speciﬁcally, to enhance trust and reciprocal behavior among
networked entrepreneurial ﬁrms. When the entrepreneurial ﬁrms in this study believed
that their goals were cooperative with others, they were much more likely to develop
mutual trust and reciprocity within their network.

the theory that goal

The theory of cooperation and competition provides a framework for understanding
how goal interdependence affects interaction dynamics and how these dynamics affect
outcomes. Research on cooperation and competition has been largely conducted on the
interpersonal and inter-group level (Deutsch, 1973). This study demonstrates its utility
for understanding the relationships among organizations. Trust and reciprocity
between organizations appear to develop when there is a context in which companies
believe that they have a vested interest in each other’s success. Company personnel
believe that they can rely upon each other if they recognize that helping each other will
serve both of their interests.

Although theories based on North American data cannot be assumed to apply to
other cultural settings (Adler, 1983), the present results demonstrate the usefulness of
the theory of cooperation and competition in China (Deutsch, 1973). The research
approach of identifying conditions that impact organizational dynamics and outcomes
in China with a theory that has universal applications may be a viable addition to the


LODJ
31,3

224

traditional alternatives of comparing samples from different cultures and exploring a
culture variable with an indigenous theory (Bass, 1997; Leung, 1997). The research
approach used in this study can both probe general theories and improve our
understanding of cooperative dynamics in non-Western cultures.

Limitations and future research
Naturally, the sample size and operations limit the results of this study. Because the
data are self-reported, they are inherently subject to biases; though some research
suggests that self-reported data are more accurate than commonly expected (Spector,
1992). The data from this study are also correlational and thus do not provide direct
evidence of causal links between goal interdependence, social capital, and strategic
resources. Spector and Brannick (1995) have argued that the most effective way to
overcome recall and other methodological weaknesses is to test ideas with different
methods.

The immediate applications of these ﬁndings may be limited to China and
societies heavily inﬂuenced by Chinese culture (Kirkbride et al., 1991; Westwood et al.,
2004). Nevertheless, they are still of broad interest because entrepreneurial ﬁrms in
China are becoming a formidable economic force that is changing the face of China’s
economic reforms and, to some extent, business development internationally through
their increasing integration into global production value chains (Wu and Leung,
2005).

It will be of interest for future research to investigate the reasons why reciprocity
may frustrate reputation development as well as to test whether reciprocity has a
comparable negative effect with established ﬁrms and in other cultures. Replication of
this work could further elucidate the poorly understood value of social capital for
strategic resources and ﬁrm performance (Hitt et al., 2006).

Implications for leadership and organizational development
Today’s senior managers should possess the ability to understand both organizational
culture and dynamics in order to achieve organizational goals. The empirical ﬁndings
of this present study show that by creating cooperative interdependence with other
ﬁrms in the network, entrepreneurs in China can create trust and reciprocity strategic
resources. Furthermore, trust can enhance their ﬁrms’ reputation and market access
opportunities. In other words, by understanding the inter-organizational dynamics,
entrepreneurs in China can overcome their lack-of-resource problem and achieve
survival and growth goals.

Senior managers also need to be able to deliver leadership during the periods of
change. This present study shows that reciprocity affects corporate reputation
negatively. The results suggest that self-sacriﬁcing reciprocity cannot foster a ﬁrm’s
business development. Entrepreneurs in China should deliver their leadership and
guide their ﬁrms to discourage rigid reciprocity, so ﬁrms can use one another’s
resources to develop their business in China and perhaps internationally.

Practical implications for managing social capital
In addition to developing theoretical understanding, continued support for the
hypotheses could have important practical implications for businesses developing
relationships in networks. The results emphasize that beyond simply enhancing social


Developing
strategic
resources

225

it would be prudent

capital,
for entrepreneurial ﬁrms to manage it skillfully.
Entrepreneurial ﬁrms can use the theory of cooperation and competition to help them
develop social capital by strengthening their cooperative interdependence with their
network members. Managers of entrepreneurial ﬁrms can be taught that cooperative
goal interdependence is an important antecedent for mutual trust that will support the
development of their company’s social capital. Common interests, joint tasks, and
shared rewards can be emphasized so that the network members believe that as one
succeeds, others will succeed in tandem (Hambrick, 1994; Hanlon et al., 1994; Li et al.,
1999; Pearce, 1997). They can all attain their goals, and perhaps more quickly, by
establishing trust, sharing information, and providing one another with resources.

Importantly,

the ﬁrms can establish an understanding that, despite their
cooperative interdependence, strict reciprocity is not necessary. Although ﬁrms
should help each other with information and other resources, they should perform
those actions that help themselves as well as their partners achieve their goals rather
than be obligated to provide favors that obstruct their own performance. Networked
ﬁrms use each other’s abilities and resources to develop their own competitive
advantages; they do not sacriﬁce their own performance to help others. Indeed, this
mutual exchange is more consistent with cooperative interdependence, where ﬁrms
help each other perform effectively so that they can both succeed, not so one can
succeed at the expense of another. Cooperative network members develop norms that
foster trust and mutual reliance and assistance so that each acts effectively to build
their own business.

The present study can contribute both to theoretical understanding and
management practice in identifying the approaches that Chinese entrepreneurial
ﬁrms can use to develop and apply social capital constructively to improve their
strategic resources. Previous research has emphasized the value of social capital. This
study complements these prior studies by showing that the theory of cooperation and
competition can be applied to the development of social capital and showing more
speciﬁcally that fostering cooperative goals can strengthen trust and reciprocity
among ﬁrms in a network. On the other hand, the ﬁndings provide some support for
arguments that the dimensions of social capital may have different effects given that
reciprocity was negatively related to corporate reputation and not related to market
access. Hence, future research should carefully distinguish different aspects of social
capital. In conclusion, the present results suggest that entrepreneurial ﬁrms should
manage cooperative goals and social capital to foster trust that encourages mutually
beneﬁcial actions, but meanwhile discourage rigid, self-sacriﬁcing reciprocity, so that
ﬁrms can use one another’s resources to develop their business in China and perhaps
internationally.

References
Abdullateef, E. (2000), “Developing knowledge and creativity: asset tracking as a strategy

centerpiece”, Journal of Arts Management, Law & Society, Vol. 30 No. 3, pp. 174-92.

Adler, B. (1983), “Cross-cultural management research: the ostrich and the trend”, Academy of

Management Review, Vol. 8 No. 2, pp. 226-32.

Adler, P. and Kwon, S. (2002), “Social capital: prospects for a new concept”, Academy of

Management Review, Vol. 27 No. 1, pp. 17-40.


LODJ
31,3

226

Alper, S., Tjosvold, D. and Law, S.A. (1998), “Interdependence and controversy in group decision
making: antecedents to effective self-managing teams”, Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, Vol. 74 No. 1, pp. 33-52.

Anderson, A., Li, J., Harrison, R. and Robson, P. (2003), “The increasing role of small business in
the Chinese economy”, Journal of Small Business Management, Vol. 41 No. 3, pp. 310-16.

Andreassen, T.W. and Lindestad, B.

(1998), “Customer loyalty and complex services”,

International Journal of Service Industry Management, Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 7-23.

Axelrod, R. (1984), The Evolution of Cooperation, Basic Books, New York, NY.

Baker, T. and Nelson, R.E. (2005), “Creating something from nothing: resource construction
through entrepreneurial bricolage”, Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 50 No. 3,
pp. 329-66.

Baker, W. (2000), Achieving Success through Social Capital: Tapping Hidden Resources in Four

Personal and Business Networks, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA.

Barich, H. and Kotler, P. (1991), “A framework for marketing image management”, Sloan

Management Review, Vol. 32 No. 2, pp. 94-104.

Barney,

J.

(1991), “Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage”,

Journal of

Management, Vol. 17 No. 1, pp. 99-120.

Baron, S., Field, J. and Schuller, T. (2000), Social Capital: Critical Perspectives, Oxford University

Press, Oxford.

Bartlett, C.A. and Ghoshal, S. (1989), Managing across Borders: The Transnational Solution,

Harvard Business School, Boston, MA.

Bass, B.

(1997), “Does the transactional-transformational

leadership paradigm transcend
organizational and national boundaries?”, American Psychologist, Vol. 52 No. 2, pp. 130-9.

Black, J.A., Oliver, R.L., Howell, J.P. and King, J.P. (2006), “A dynamic system simulation of
leader and group effects on context for learning”, Leadership Quarterly, Vol. 17 No. 1,
pp. 39-56.

Bracken, B.A. and Barona, A. (1991), “State-of-the-art procedures for translating, validating, and
tests for cross-cultural assessment”, School Psychology

using psychoeducational
International, Vol. 12 Nos 1-2, pp. 119-32.

Brislin, R. (1970), “Back translation and cross-cultural research”, Journal of Cross-Cultural

Psychology, Vol. 1 No. 3, pp. 185-216.

Carlisle, E. and Flynn, D. (2005), “Small business survival in China: guanxi, legitimacy, and social

capital”, Journal of Developmental Entrepreneurship, Vol. 10 No. 1, pp. 79-96.

Carney, D. (1998), Sustainable Rural Livelihoods, Department for International Development,

London.

Carpenter, J.P., Daniere, A.G. and Takahashi, L.M. (2004), “Cooperation, trust and social capital in
southeast Asian urban slums”, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, Vol. 55
No. 4, pp. 533-51.

Chapman, D.W. and Carter, J.F. (1979), Reliability and Validity Assessment, Sage, Beverly Hills,

CA.

Coleman, J. (1988), “Social capital in creation of human capital”, American Journal of Sociology,

Vol. 94 No. 3, pp. 95-120.

De Dreu, C., Evers, A., Beersma, B., Kluwer, E. and Nauta, A. (2001), “A theory-based measure of
conﬂict management strategies in the workplace”, Journal of Organizational Behavior,
Vol. 22 No. 6, p. 645.


Developing
strategic
resources

227

Deutsch, M. (1949), “A theory of cooperation and competition”, Human Relations, Vol. 2 No. 2,

pp. 129-52.

Deutsch, M. (1973), The Resolution of Conﬂict, Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.
Dierickx, I. and Cool, K. (1989), “Asset stock accumulation and sustainability of competitive

advantage”, Management Science, Vol. 35 No. 12, pp. 1504-14.

Dyer, J.H. and Singh, H. (1998), “The relational view: cooperative strategy and sources of
interorganizational competitive advantage”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 23
No. 4, pp. 660-79.

Ekeh, P.P. (1974), Social Exchange Theory: The Two Traditions, Heinemann Educational Books,

London.

Florin, J., Lubatkin, M. and Schulze, W. (2003), “A social capital model of high-growth ventures”,

Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 46 No. 3, pp. 374-84.

Fombrun, C. (1996), Reputation: Realizing Value from the Corporate Image, Harvard Business

School Press, Boston, MA.

Fombrun, C. and Shanley, M. (1990), “What’s in a name? Reputation building and corporate

strategy”, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 33 No. 2, pp. 233-58.

Fombrun, C. and Van Riel, C.B.M. (1997), “The reputational landscape”, Corporate Reputation

Review, Vol. 1, pp. 5-13.

Fombrun, C.J. and Van Riel, C.B.M. (2004), Fame and Fortune: How Successful Companies Build

Winning Reputations, Financial Times Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.

Gouldner, A. (1960), “The norm of reciprocity: a preliminary statement”, American Sociological

Review, Vol. 25 No. 2, pp. 161-78.

Haanes, K. and Fjeldstad, O. (2000), “Linking intangible resources and competition”, European

Management Journal, Vol. 18 No. 1, pp. 52-62.

Hackl, P. and Westlund, A.H. (2000), “On structural equation modeling for customer satisfaction

measurement”, Total Quality Management, Vol. 6 Nos 4-6, pp. 820-5.

Hall, R. (1992), “The strategic analysis of intangible resources”, Strategic Management Journal,

Vol. 13 No. 2, pp. 135-44.

Hall, R. (1993), “A framework linking intangible resources and capabilities to sustainable

competitive advantage”, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 14 No. 8, pp. 607-18.

Hambrick, D.C. (1994), “Top management groups: a conceptual integration and reconsideration
of the ‘team’ label”, in Staw, B.M. and Cummings, L.L. (Eds), Research in Organizational
Behavior, Vol. 16, pp. 171-213.

Hamel, G. (1991), “Competition for competence and inter-partner learning within international

strategic alliances”, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 12, pp. 83-103.

Hanlon, S.C., Meyer, D.C. and Taylor, R.R.

(1994), “Consequences of gainshairing: a ﬁeld
experiment revisited”, Group and Organizational Management, Vol. 19 No. 1, pp. 87-111.
Hitt, M.A., Bierman, L., Uhlenbruck, K. and Shimizu, K. (2006), “The importance of resources in
the internationalization of professional service ﬁrms: the good, the bad, and the ugly”,
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 49 No. 6, pp. 137-57.

Johnson, D.W. and Johnson, R.T. (1989), Cooperation and Competition: Theory and Research,

Interaction Book Company, Edina, MN.

Kirkbride, P.S., Tang, S.F.Y. and Westwood, R.I. (1991), “Chinese conﬂict preferences and
negotiating behavior: cultural and psychological inﬂuences”, Organization Studies, Vol. 12
No. 3, pp. 365-86.


LODJ
31,3

228

Knott, A.M., Bryce, D.J. and Posen, H.E. (2003), “On the strategic accumulation of intangible

assets”, Organization Science, Vol. 14 No. 2, pp. 192-207.

Kogut, B.

(1985), “Designing global strategies: proﬁting from operational ﬂexibility”,

Sloan Management Review, Vol. 27 No. 1, pp. 27-38.

Koka, B. and Prescott, J. (2002), “Strategic alliances as social capital: a multidimensional view”,

Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 23 No. 9, pp. 795-816.

Lawler, E.J. and Yoon, J. (1993), “Power and the emergence of commitment behavior in negotiated

exchange”, American Sociological Review, Vol. 58 No. 4, pp. 465-81.

Lawler, E.J. and Yoon, J. (1996), “Commitment in exchange relations: test of a theory of relational

cohesion”, American Sociological Review, Vol. 61 No. 1, pp. 89-108.

Leung, K. (1997), “Negotiation and reward allocations across cultures”, in Earley, P.C. and
Erez, M. (Eds), New Perspectives on International Industrial/Organizational Psychology,
Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA, pp. 640-75.

Li, J., Xin, K.R., Tsui, A. and Hambrick, D.C. (1999), “Building effective international joint venture

leadership teams in China”, Journal of World Business, Vol. 34 No. 1, pp. 52-68.

Lin, N.

(2001), “Building a network theory of social capital’”,

in Lin, N., Cook, K.S. and
Burt, R.S. (Eds), Social Capital: Theory and Research, Aldine de Gruyter, New York, NY,
pp. 3-29.

Liu, J., Curry, J.A. and Hu, Y. (2004), “Recent Arctic Sea ice variability: connections to the Arctic
oscillation and the ENSO”, Geophysical Research Letters, Vol. 31 No. 9,
pp. L09211.1-LL09211.4.

Lorenzoni, G. and Baden-Fuller, C. (1995), “Creating a strategic center to manage a web of

partners”, California Management Review, Vol. 37 No. 3, pp. 146-63.

March, J.G. and Simon, H.A. (1958), Organizations, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.

Nahapiet, J. and Ghoshal, S. (1998), “Social capital, intellectual capital, and the organizational

advantage”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 23 No. 2, pp. 242-66.

Page, G. and Fearn, H. (2005), “Corporate reputation: what do consumers really care about?”,

Journal of Advertising Research, Vol. 45 No. 3, pp. 305-13.

Pearce, R.J.

(1997), “Towards understanding joint venture performance and survival:
theory”, Academy of

a bargaining and inﬂuence approach to transaction cost
Management Review, Vol. 22 No. 1, pp. 203-35.

Pike, S., Roos, G. and Marr, B. (2005), “Strategic management of intangible assets and value

drivers in R&D organizations”, R&D Management, Vol. 35 No. 2, pp. 111-24.

Porter, M.E. (1990), The Competitive Advantage of Nations, Free Press, New York, NY.

Reuber, R. and Fischer, E. (2005), “The company you keep: how young ﬁrms in different
competitive contexts signal reputation through their customers”, Entrepreneurship Theory
and Practice, Vol. 29 No. 1, pp. 57-78.

Roberts, P.W. and Dowling, G.R. (2002), “Corporate reputation and sustained superior ﬁnancial

performance”, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 23 No. 12, pp. 1077-93.

Saxton, G. and Benson, M. (2005), “Social capital and the growth of the nonproﬁt sector”, Social

Science Quarterly, Vol. 86 No. 1, pp. 16-35.

Schoemaker, M. and Jonker, J. (2005), “Managing intangible assets: an essay on organising
contemporary organisations based upon identity, competencies and networks”, Journal of
Management Development, Vol. 24 No. 6, pp. 506-18.


Developing
strategic
resources

229

Spector, P.E. (1992), “A consideration of the validity and meaning of self-report measures of job
conditions”, in Cooper, C.L. and Robertson, I.T. (Eds), International Review of Industrial
and Organizational Psychology, Wiley, Chichester, pp. 123-51.

Spector, P.E. and Brannick, M.T.

(1995), “The nature and effects of method variance in
organizational research”, in Cooper, C.L. and Robertson, I.T. (Eds), International Review of
Industrial and Organizational Psychology, Wiley, Chichester, pp. 249-74.

Stanne, M.B., Johnson, D.W. and Johnson, R.T. (1999), “Does competition enhance or inhibit

motor performance? A meta-analysis”, Psychological Bulletin, Vol. 25 No. 1, pp. 133-54.

Stone, W. (2000), “Social capital, social cohesion and social security”, paper presented at the 2000

International Research Conference on Social Security, Helsinski, 25-27 September.

Tjosvold, D. (1991), Team Organization: An Enduring Competitive Advantage, John Wiley

& Sons, Chichester.

Tjosvold, D. (1995), Team Organisation: An Enduring Competitive Advantage, John Wiley

& Sons, Chichester.

Tjosvold, D., Andrews, I.R. and Struthers, J. (1991), “Power and interdependence in work groups:
views of managers and employees”, Group Organization Studies, Vol. 16 No. 3, pp. 285-99.
Wang, Y., Kandampully, J.A., Lo, H. and Shi, G. (2006), “The roles of brand equity and corporate
reputation in CRM: a Chinese study”, Corporate Reputation Review, Vol. 9 No. 3, pp. 179-97.
Watson, G.W. and Papamarcos, S.D. (2002), “Social capital and organizational commitment”,

Journal of Business and Psychology, Vol. 16 No. 4, pp. 537-52.

Weigelt, K. and Camerer, C. (1988), “Reputation and corporate strategy: a review of recent theory

and applications”, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 9 No. 5, pp. 443-54.

Westwood, R., Chan, A. and Linstead, S. (2004), “Theorizing Chinese people employment
relations comparatively: exchange, reciprocity and the moral economy”, Asia Paciﬁc
Journal of Management, Vol. 21 No. 3, pp. 365-89.

Wu, W. and Leung, A. (2005), “Does a micro-macro link exist between managerial value of
reciprocity, social capital and ﬁrm performance? The case of SMEs in China”, Asia Paciﬁc
Journal of Management, Vol. 22 No. 4, pp. 445-63.

Zhang, C., Cavusgil, S.T. and Roath, A.S. (2003), “Manufacturer governance of foreign distributor
relationships: do relational norms enhance competitiveness in the export market?”, Journal
of International Business Studies, Vol. 34 No. 6, pp. 550-6.

Corresponding author
Mike Chen-Ho Chao can be contacted at: chen-ho.chao@baruch.cuny.edu

To purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: reprints@emeraldinsight.com
Or visit our web site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints

