Public Relations Review 36 (2010) 256–262

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Public Relations Review

Restoring reputations in times of crisis: An experimental study of the
Situational Crisis Communication Theory and the moderating effects of
locus of control
An-Soﬁe Claeys∗, Verolien Cauberghe 1, Patrick Vyncke 2

Universiteit Gent, Korte Meer 7-11, 9000 Gent, Belgium

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 17 December 2009
Received in revised form 19 April 2010
Accepted 20 May 2010

Keywords:
Crisis communication
Corporate reputation
Crisis responsibility
Crisis response strategy
Locus of control

This study attempts to provide empirical evidence for Coombs’ (2007) Situational Crisis
Communication Theory (SCCT), which provides guidelines for matching crisis response
strategies to crisis types to best restore organizational reputations in times of crisis. The
impact of crisis type and crisis response strategies on perceptions of corporate reputation is
measured for 316 consumers participating in a 3 (crisis type: victim crisis, accidental crisis,
preventable crisis)× 3 (crisis response: deny strategy, diminish strategy, rebuild strategy)
between-subjects experimental design. The results show that preventable crises have the
most negative effects on organizational reputation and that the rebuild strategy leads to
the most positive reputational restoration. Moreover, the more severe people judge a crisis
to be, the more negative are their perceptions of the organization’s reputation. The inter-
action effect between crisis type and crisis response strategies on corporate reputation is
not signiﬁcant. However, a person’s locus of control has a moderating impact on the rela-
tionship between crisis response strategy and organizational reputation. Speciﬁcally, the
results show that people with an external locus of control prefer the use of deny strategies
more than people with an internal locus of control.

© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

The Situational Crisis Communication Theory (SCCT) was developed recently to investigate which crisis response strategy
managers should apply in speciﬁc crisis situations to restore an organization’s reputation in the best possible way (Coombs,
2007). This is essential, considering that no organization is spared having to go through crises during its lifetime (Spillan,
2003). These crises challenge organizational reputations and credibility (Arpan, 2002; Weiner, 2006). Prior research has rarely
applied experimental, quantitative designs to investigate the topic of crisis response strategies (Benoit, 1995). Therefore,
the main goal of this study is to test the matches between crisis types and crisis response strategies, as recommended by
the SCCT, using a between-subjects 3× 3 factorial experimental design.

Until now, research on crisis communication has paid little attention to the moderating role of personality traits that
may affect respondents’ reactions either to a crisis or to the crisis response strategy used to manage the crisis (Coombs,
2007). Therefore, the current study investigates the moderating inﬂuence of locus of control—a personality trait that refers

∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +32 494 26 69 32.
E-mail addresses: ansoﬁe.claeys@ugent.be (A.-S. Claeys), verolien.cauberghe@ugent.be (V. Cauberghe), patrick.vyncke@ugent.be (P. Vyncke).

1 Tel.: +32 472 23 07 87.
2 Tel.: +32 09 264 68 91.

0363-8111/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.pubrev.2010.05.004


A.-S. Claeys et al. / Public Relations Review 36 (2010) 256–262

257

Table 1
Match between crisis types and crisis response strategies.

Crisis types

Victim cluster

Natural disaster
Rumor
Workplace violence
Product tampering/Malevolence

Accidental cluster

Challenges
Technical-error accidents
Technical-error product harm

Preventable cluster

Human-error accidents
Human-error product harm
Organizational misdeed with no injuries
Organizational misdeed management misconduct
Organizational misdeed with injuries

Source: adapted from: Coombs (2007), p. 168 and 170.

Crisis response strategies

Deny strategies

Attack the accuser
Denial
Scapegoat

Diminish strategies

Excuse
Justiﬁcation

Rebuild strategies
Compensation
Apology

to the attributions that people make for behavioural consequences and reinforcements (Duffy, Downey, & Shiﬂett, 1977).
A person’s locus of control may inﬂuence the value he or she places on either internal or external control in organizational
crisis responses (Rotter, 1966). Because crisis response strategies differ in the way they attempt to convince an audience
that a crisis is attributed to either internal or external factors, it stands to reason that people with an internal locus of control
prefer the use of different crisis response strategies than people with an external locus of control.

In what follows, we present a theoretical overview and develop the hypotheses. Then, we discuss the method of the

experiment and the results.

2. The SCCT

The SCCT divides crisis types into three crisis clusters (Coombs, 2007; Coombs & Holladay, 2002). The victim cluster is
deﬁned as crises with weak attributions of organizational responsibility. The accidental cluster involves crises in which a
certain, but low, level of responsibility are attributed to the organization. The preventable cluster includes crises for which
the organization is perceived as being responsible (see Table 1).

The more responsibility that is attributed to the organization with respect to the crisis, the more negative is the impact
on the organizational reputation (Coombs, 1998). Therefore, different types of crisis inﬂict different amounts of reputational
damage. This leads to the following hypothesis:

H1. The victim crisis leads to a less negative effect on organizational reputation than the accidental or preventable crisis. The
accidental crisis leads to a moderately negative effect on organizational reputation compared with the victim or preventable
crisis. The preventable crisis leads to the most negative impact on organizational reputation compared with the victim or
accidental crisis.

Within the range of response strategies, several clusters have also been detected (Coombs, 2004, 2007; Huang, Lin, & Su,
2005) (see Table 1). Deny strategies claim that no crisis exists (denial) or declare that the organization has no responsibility for
it (scapegoat) (Coombs, 2007). Diminish strategies argue that a crisis is not as serious as people think (justiﬁcation) or minimize
organizational responsibility (excuse). Rebuild crisis strategies offer compensation for the crisis or apologize. Research has
shown that offering an apology—a rebuild crisis response strategy—leads to more effective reputation restoration than the
more defensive deny or diminish response strategies (Coombs & Holladay, 2008). Thus:

H2. The reputation of an organization using rebuild crisis response strategies is more positive than the reputation of an
organization using either deny or diminish crisis response strategies.

The reputational threat is determined by the crisis type, which is deﬁned in terms of the perceived responsibility attributed
to the organization (Coombs, 2004, 2007). This idea is based on attribution theory (Coombs, 2007). Crisis managers should
select crisis response strategies that are appropriate for the potential extent of reputational damage a certain crisis may inﬂict
(Coombs & Holladay, 2002). In an experimental study, Coombs and Holladay (1996) ﬁnd that when crisis communication
responses match the crisis type in terms of responsibility attribution, this leads to a more positive reputation perception than
either no response or a mismatched response. Their research ﬁnds that organizational reputation beneﬁts when diminish
strategies are used in response to accidental crises and when rebuild strategies are matched with preventable crises.

Previous research has examined the match between crisis type and a single crisis response strategy (Coombs & Holladay,
1996). However, Benoit (1997) suggests that the use of a combination of strategies can increase the effectiveness of image
restoration. The SCCT advises crisis managers to combine crisis response strategies from the same cluster (Coombs, 2007).
In line with the SCCT, the best option appears to be a combination of several strategies from the same response cluster into


258

A.-S. Claeys et al. / Public Relations Review 36 (2010) 256–262

a crisis response, depending on the crisis type. On the basis of previous SCCT-related research, we expect deny strategies to
match with victim crises, diminish strategies to match with accidental crises, and rebuild strategies to match with preventable
crises (Coombs, 2007). Thus:

H3. Matching crisis type and crisis response strategy leads to a less negative effect on organizational reputation than
mismatches between crisis type and crisis response strategy.

Although Coombs (1998) has not been able to empirically prove that the severity of a crisis has an incrementally negative
effect on reputational damage, the author asserts the likelihood that more severe crises indeed have a greater negative
impact on organizational reputation than crises that lead to trivial damage (Coombs, 1998; Coombs & Holladay, 2002).
Coombs (1998) tests his assumption by operationalizing crisis severity as the amount of property damage and seriousness
of related injuries. An alternative to this approach would be simply to use perceived crisis severity. Therefore, we use the
latter operationalization in the current study, which may help further uncover the impact of crisis severity on reputational
damage.

H4. The greater the perceived severity of a crisis, the greater is the negative impact on organizational reputation.

3. Moderating inﬂuence of locus of control

A theory that informs the SCCT is attribution theory, which focuses on the causal inferences people make (Coombs &
Holladay, 1996; Folkes, 1988). Organizations in crisis situations attempt to inﬂuence these causal inferences by using certain
crisis response strategies. Most research has focused on environmental factors that lead an observer to make internal and
external attributions about behaviour (Collins, 1974). However, little research has been conducted on observer characteristics
that might affect causal attribution.

According to Collins (1974), many of the conclusions an observer reaches are inﬂuenced more by the observer him- or
herself than by the external stimulus, which is represented herein as the organization. One of these important personality
traits is locus of control. People believe that events are controlled either by internal, personal forces of the actor or by external,
situational forces of the environment (Lefcourt, 1966). For example, when a student has bad test results, he or she might
think either that the teacher asked the wrong questions (external locus of control) or that he or she did not study enough
(internal locus of control). Rotter (1966) states that although a person’s locus of control is not immediately connected to a
preference for internal or external control in others, it may be correlated with the value the person places on either internal
or external control.

If locus of control implies the preference for internality or externality, various strategies will be more or less preferred
by internally versus externally focused people. For example, internally focused people would be likely to assign more value
to organizations that take full responsibility for their own actions (rebuild strategies), a response indicating that the ﬁrm
controls its own actions. Likewise, externally focused people would assign more value than internally focused people to
organizations that reject responsibility for what happened (deny strategies), a response indicating that the ﬁrm believes
that the environment controlled what happened more than the actions of the organization itself. Because diminish strategies
are somewhere in between in terms of taking responsibility, we posit that such strategies are equally preferred by both
externally and internally focused people. This leads to the following hypotheses:

H5a. When an organization uses deny strategies, people with an external locus of control perceive the ﬁrm’s reputation in
a more positive light than people with an internal locus of control.

H5b. When an organization uses diminish strategies, people with an external locus of control and those with an internal
locus of control have similar perceptions of the ﬁrm’s reputation.

H5c. When an organization uses rebuild strategies, people with an internal locus of control perceive the ﬁrm’s reputation
in a more positive light than people with an external locus of control.

4. Methods

4.1. Design and stimuli

We used a 3 (crisis type)× 3 (crisis response) between-subjects factorial experimental design to investigate the hypothe-

ses. We manipulated crisis type and crisis response strategy using various scenarios.

More speciﬁcally, we manipulated crisis type by the selection of one crisis from each of the three clusters (victim cluster,
accidental cluster, preventable cluster). We chose the crisis types on the basis of a practical consideration—namely, being
able to describe each crisis type realistically. From the victim cluster, we selected product tampering (Coombs, 2007; Coombs
& Holladay, 2002). From the accidental cluster, we used technical-error product harm. From the preventable cluster, we chose
organizational misdeed with injuries. We used a ﬁctitious organization in the three scenarios to avoid potential confounding
effects of pre-existing knowledge. We held the objective crisis damage stable in all situations, namely, by mentioning the
death of two adults.


A.-S. Claeys et al. / Public Relations Review 36 (2010) 256–262

259

To manipulate the response strategy, two strategies were selected from each cluster. From the diminish cluster, we
combined excuse and justiﬁcation into one reaction (Coombs, 2007). From the rebuild cluster, we combined compensation
and apology. We used only one crisis response strategy from the deny cluster because all three deny strategies tend to
conﬂict. Combining strategies will only enhance their individual impacts when the responses are compatible (Huang, 2006).
Therefore, we describe the scapegoat reaction for the deny scenario.

4.2. Participants and procedure

We conducted two pre-tests to ensure that the manipulations were effective. For the actual study, we collected data
from 316 respondents using an online questionnaire. We randomly divided the respondents across the nine conditions and
instructed them to read a scenario containing a combination of a crisis type with a crisis response. After reading the scenario,
respondents ﬁlled in the questionnaire. Participants were Dutch-speaking Belgian men and women with an average age of
35 years (SD = 14.46; range = 13–70 years). Approximately 47% were male, and 53% were female.

4.3. Measures

We measured organizational responsibility for a crisis using the four-item 10-point Likert scale from the work of Grifﬁn et

al. (1992) (e.g., “How responsible was the organization with respect to the crisis?”) (˛ = .81).

We measured organizational reputation with a combination of the Reputation Quotient scale from the work of Fombrun,

Gardberg, and Sever (2000) and McCroskey’s (cited in Coombs & Holladay, 1996) scale of credibility (˛ = .97).

We held crisis damage constant across scenarios by telling respondents that each crisis caused the death of two adults.
To measure the possible effects of the perceived crisis severity, respondents answered one question on a 10-point scale,
ranging from 1 (not at all severe) to 10 (very severe): “How severe do you consider the damage caused by this crisis?”

We measured locus of control using Rotter’s (1966) internal–external (I–E) locus-of-control scale. The I–E scale has a
Cronbach’s ˛ of .73 and consists of nine factors with eigenvalues greater than 1.0. The two factors with the highest eigenvalues
were labelled control over politics and misfortunes, and together they explained 23% of the total variance. The control-over-
politics dimension considers the perceived control a person can have over politics. The misfortunes dimension considers the
perceived causes of peoples’ misfortunes. Because the I–E scale has been shown to oversimplify the multidimensionality of
the locus-of-control construct, these two dimensions were also taken separately into analyses (Duffy et al., 1977).

5. Pre-tests

We conducted two pre-tests to test the manipulated variables crisis response and crisis type.

5.1. Pre-test 1

Twelve respondents participated in an order task to check the internal validity of the crisis responses. The respondents
were instructed to read each of the three crisis response scenarios and then to order them based on a list containing all
ﬁve-crisis response strategies. Some neutral sentences were mistakenly interpreted as strategies. We removed these lines
from the crisis responses used in the main experiment.

5.2. Pre-test 2

According to the SCCT typology (Coombs, 2007; Coombs & Holladay, 2002), we can manipulate crisis types through
the assessment of crisis responsibility. Therefore, the second pre-test assessed (with a seven-point scale) the manipulation
of corporate responsibility for each crisis type. Twenty-one respondents participated. The questionnaire used a within-
subjects design, and all respondents saw the three crisis types. The results show that in the victim crisis (M = 4.31, SD = 1.49),
respondents perceived the company as less responsible than in the accidental crisis (M = 5.31, SD = .98; t(40) = 2.56, p = .015)
and the preventable crisis (M = 5.79, SD = 1.01; t(40) = 3.75, p = .001). However, there were no signiﬁcant differences between
the accidental crisis (M = 5.31, SD = .98) and the preventable crisis (M = 5.79, SD = 1.01; t(40) = 1.55, p = .13). We adapted all
scenarios for the main study on the basis of these results.

6. Results

6.1. Manipulation checks

We performed a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) to check for the manipulation of crisis type, measured by the
amount of crisis responsibility. The mean difference in crisis responsibility among the three crisis types is signiﬁcant (F(2,
313) = 82.93, p < .001). The Scheffé follow-up procedure shows that the victim crisis (M = 4.78, SD = 2.11) results in signiﬁ-
cantly lower attributions of responsibility to the organization than the accidental crisis (M = 6.81, SD = 1.87, p < .001) and the


260

A.-S. Claeys et al. / Public Relations Review 36 (2010) 256–262

Fig. 1. Interaction between crisis response cluster and crisis cluster.

preventable crisis (M = 8.07, SD = 1.62, p < .001). Furthermore, the accidental crisis results in signiﬁcantly lower attributions
of crisis responsibility than the preventable crisis (MAccidental crisis = 6.81, SD = 1.87; MPreventable crisis = 8.07, SD = 1.62, p < .001).

6.2. Impact of crisis type and response strategy on reputation

To address the main effects of crisis types (H1) and response strategies (H2) on organizational reputation and to test the
interaction effect of crisis type and crisis response strategies predicted in H3, we use a univariate two-way ANOVA (general
linear model). Two main effects occur. Both crisis type (F(8, 307) = 94.72, p < .001) and crisis response strategy (F(8, 307) = 4.68,
p = .01) have a signiﬁcant main effect on organizational reputation (see Fig. 1). To detect the signiﬁcant differences between
the three conditions of crisis type and crisis response pairwise, we also conduct separate one-way ANOVA’s with Scheffé
follow-up tests. This enables us to assess H1 and H2.

The results of a separate one-way ANOVA (F(2, 313) = 95.33, p < .001) show that respondents perceive the organization’s
reputation less favourably in the case of a preventable crisis (M = 2.72, SD = 1.42) than in the cases of both the victim crisis
(M = 5.95, SD = 1.97, p < .001) and the accidental crisis (M = 5.48, SD = 2.04, p < .001). No signiﬁcant difference in reputation
occurs between the victim crisis (M = 5.95, SD = 1.97) and the accidental crisis (M = 5.48, SD = 2.04, p = .18). These results
partially support H1. Preventable crises, in which the organization is responsible for a crisis, have the most negative impact
on organizational reputation.

The ﬁndings also conﬁrm the main effect of crisis response strategy on organizational reputation (F(2, 313) = 4.52, p = .012).
The Scheffé procedure reveals that rebuild strategies (M = 5.26, SD = 2.36) signiﬁcantly lead to a more positive reputation
than diminish strategies (M = 4.35, SD = 2.24, p = .018). The difference between the rebuild strategies and the deny strategies
is only marginally signiﬁcant (p < .1; MRebuild strategies = 5.26, SD = 2.36; MDeny strategies = 4.57, SD = 2.28, p = .087). Therefore, H2
is partially supported. Respondents assess the reputation of organizations using rebuild strategies (i.e., when ﬁrms accept
responsibility) more positively than the reputation of organizations using diminish strategies (i.e., when organizational
responsibility is minimized).

The interaction effect of crisis type and crisis response strategies on reputation is not signiﬁcant (F(8, 307) = 1.28, p = .28).
Therefore, H3 is not supported. Crisis responses that are matched to crisis type, in accordance with the SCCT recommendation,
do not differ in their impact on organizational reputation compared with mismatched responses.

To investigate the impact of the perceived severity of the crisis on organizational reputation, we calculate a correla-
tion coefﬁcient. There is a signiﬁcant, negative correlation between the severity of the crisis and organizational reputation
(r(314) =−.12, p = .034). These results show that the more severe respondents perceive a crisis to be, the worse the reputation
of the organization confronted with the crisis will be, in support of H4.

6.3. Moderating inﬂuence of locus of control

We tested H5a to H5c with a univariate two-way ANOVA (general linear model). A signiﬁcant interaction effect occurred
between crisis response strategy and one of the factors in the locus-of-control scale—namely, misfortunes (F(5, 310) = 3.82,
p = .023). The plot in Fig. 2 shows that when a company uses a deny response strategy, its reputation is perceived more
positively by respondents with an external locus of control (M = 5.30, SD = 2.15) than by respondents with an internal locus
of control (M = 3.90, SD = 2.20; t(105) = 3.33, p = .001). Therefore, H5a is supported. However, when an organization uses
diminish strategies, its reputation is perceived as equally positive by both externally focused respondents (M = 4.27, SD = 1.91)


A.-S. Claeys et al. / Public Relations Review 36 (2010) 256–262

261

Fig. 2. Interaction between crisis response cluster and locus of control factor.

and internally focused respondents (M = 4.44, SD = 2.53; t(99) = .38, p = .70), in support of H5b. We do not ﬁnd support for
H5c—rebuild strategies do not lead to a less negative reputation for respondents with an internal locus of control compared
with respondents with an external locus of control. The other dimensions of locus of control do not offer signiﬁcant results.

7. Conclusions and discussion

The SCCT advises communication managers to select crisis response strategies that match the speciﬁc crisis type (Coombs
& Holladay, 2002). However, matching crisis types and crisis responses does not lead to more positive perception of ﬁrm
reputation than mismatches. This contradicts Coombs and Holladay’s (1996) ﬁndings. An explanation for this might be the
difference in methodology. Coombs and Holladay (1996) use a within-subjects design, whereas we use a between-subjects
design. Another explanation may be that we combine two response strategies into one response, whereas Coombs and
Holladay (1996) only use one strategy.

However, we ﬁnd two main effects for crisis type and crisis response in relation to organizational reputation. First,
corporate reputation is least favourable when organizations are confronted with a preventable crisis. In this type of crisis,
companies are considered responsible for the crisis (Coombs, 2007; Coombs & Holladay, 2002). We ﬁnd no signiﬁcant
difference in reputational perceptions between the accidental crisis and the victim crisis. Second, there is a main effect
of crisis response strategy on organizational reputation. Speciﬁcally, the reputations of organizations using rebuild crisis
response strategies are more positive than the reputations of organizations using diminish strategies. The results also provide
evidence for the relationship between the perceived severity of the crisis and organizational reputation, conﬁrming Coombs
and Holladay’s (2002) assumption. Speciﬁcally, the more severe people perceive a crisis to be, the more negative are there
perceptions of the organization’s reputation.

Locus of control (more speciﬁcally, the misfortunes factor) as a personality trait has a moderating impact on the effect of
response strategy on reputation. For the deny strategy, respondents with an external locus of control perceive the corporate
reputation more positively than respondents with an internal locus of control. Because diminish strategies attempt to take
on some of the responsibility, while minimizing part of it, such strategies lead to similar results for both internally focused
respondents and externally focused respondents. However, contrary to our expectations, respondents with an external locus
of control do not prefer the use of rebuild strategies less than those with an internal locus of control. Further research is
needed to explore this unexpected result.

8. Limitations and further research

The limitations of the current study provide some possibilities for further research. First, we measured reputation after
only one exposure to a ﬁctitious company. Therefore, it can be argued that the reputation measure resembles more of an
attitude rather than a reputation developed over time. Second, our use of the I–E locus-of-control scale might be questioned.
Despite its popularity, there has been evidence that it may oversimplify the actual dimensionality of the construct (Duffy et
al., 1977). Third, the current study does not incorporate a condition in which the company does not react to the crisis. This
would be worthwhile to measure in further research to detect the impact of a company’s reaction to a crisis versus a situation
in which a company does not react in any way. Fourth, we based the selection of respondents on a convenience sample.
Further research should use a more systematic procedure to select the respondents. In addition, the number of respondents
could be increased. Fifth, further research should investigate whether there are different personality traits that inﬂuence
the impact of crisis response strategies. Finally, the current study compared the impact of matching response strategies


262

A.-S. Claeys et al. / Public Relations Review 36 (2010) 256–262

and crisis types across the different clusters of each. It would be worthwhile to examine the impact of each of the different
strategies within each cluster.

References

Arpan, L. M. (2002). When in Rome? The effects of spokesperson ethnicity on audience evaluation of crisis communication. Journal of Business Communication,

39(3), 314–340.

Benoit, W. L. (1995). Accounts, excuses, and apologies: A theory of image restoration strategies. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Benoit, W. L. (1997). Image repair discourse and crisis communication. Public Relations Review, 23(2), 177–186.
Collins, B. E. (1974). Four components of the Rotter internal–external scale: Belief in a difﬁcult world, a just world, a predictable world, and a politically

responsive world. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 29(3), 381–391.

Coombs, W. T. (1998). An analytic framework for crisis situations: Better responses from a better understanding of the situation. Journal of Public Relations

Research, 10(3), 177–191.

Coombs, W. T. (2004). West Pharmaceutical’s explosion: Structuring crisis discourse knowledge. Public Relations Review, 30(4), 467–473.
Coombs, W. T. (2007). Protecting organization reputations during a crisis: The development and application of situational crisis communication theory.

Corporate Reputation Review, 10(3), 163–176.

Coombs, W. T., & Holladay, S. J. (1996). Communication and attributions in a crisis: An experimental study in crisis communication. Journal of Public Relations

Research, 8(4), 279–295.

Coombs, W. T., & Holladay, S. J. (2002). Helping crisis managers protect reputational assets: Initial tests of the situational crisis communication theory.

Management Communication Quarterly, 16(2), 165–186.

Coombs, W. T., & Holladay, S. J. (2008). Comparing apology to equivalent crisis response strategies: Clarifying apology’s role and value in crisis communi-

cation. Public Relations Review, 34(3), 252–257.

Duffy, P. J., Downey, R. G., & Shiﬂett, S. (1977). Locus of control: Dimensionality and predictability using Likert scales. Journal of Applied Psychology, 62(2),

214–219.

Folkes, V. S. (1988). Recent attribution research in consumer behavior: A review and new directions. Journal of Consumer Research, 14(4), 548–565.
Fombrun, C. J., Gardberg, N. A., & Sever, J. M. (2000). The reputation quotient sm: A multi-stakeholder measure of corporate reputation. Journal of Brand

Management, 7(4), 241–255.

Grifﬁn, M., Babin, B. J., & Darden, W. R. (1992). Consumer assessments of responsibility for product-related injuries: The impact of regulations, warnings,
and promotional policies. In J. F. Sherry, & B. Brian Sternthal@@Jr. (Eds.), Advances in consumer research, vol. 19 (pp. 870–878). Provo, UT: Association
for Consumer Research.

Huang, Y. (2006). Crisis situations, communication strategies, and media coverage: A multicase study revisiting the communicative response model.

Communication Research, 33(3), 180–205.

Huang, Y., Lin, Y., & Su, S. (2005). Crisis communicative strategies in Taiwan: Category, continuum, and cultural implication. Public Relations Review, 31(2),

229–238.

Lefcourt, H. M. (1966). Internal versus external control of reinforcement: A review. Psychological Bulletin, 65(4), 206–220.
Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized expectancies for internal versus external control of reinforcement. Psychological Monographs, 80(1), 1–27.
Spillan, J. E. (2003). An exploratory model for evaluating crisis events and managers’ concerns in non-proﬁt organizations. Journal of Contingencies and Crisis

Management, 11(4), 160–169.

Weiner, D. (2006). Crisis communications: Managing corporate reputation in the court of public opinion. Ivey Business Journal, 70(4), 1–6.

