The Spanish Journal of Psychology
2007, Vol. 10, No. 1, 122-130

Copyright 2007 by The Spanish Journal of Psychology
ISSN 1138-7416

Social Comparison and Perceived Breach of Psychological
Contract: Their Effects on Burnout in a Multigroup Analysis

Gabriela Topa Cantisano, J. Francisco Morales Domínguez, and J. Luis Caeiro García

Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia (UNED)

This study focuses on the mediator role of social comparison in the relationship between
perceived breach of psychological contract and burnout. A previous model showing the
hypothesized effects of perceived breach on burnout, both direct and mediated, is proposed.
The final model reached an optimal fit to the data and was confirmed through multigroup
analysis using a sample of Spanish teachers (N = 401) belonging to preprimary, primary,
and secondary schools. Multigroup analyses showed that the model fit all groups adequately.  
Keywords: perceived breach of psychological contract, social comparison, burnout,
structural equation modeling, multigroup analysis

Este estudio se centra en el papel de la comparación social en la relación entre la ruptura
percibida del contrato psicológico y el burnout. Se propone un modelo previo mostrando
los efectos hipotetizados, tanto directos como mediados, de la ruptura percibida sobre
el burnout. El modelo final alcanzó un ajuste óptimo a los datos y se confirmó a través
del  análisis  multigrupo  usando  una  muestra  de  profesores  españoles  (N  =  401)
pertenecientes a escuelas infantiles, primarias y secundarias. Los análisis multigrupo
mostraron que el modelo se ajusta adecuadamente a todos los grupos. 
Palabras clave: ruptura percibida del contrato psicológico, comparación social, burnout,
modelos de ecuaciones estructurales, análisis multigrupo

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Gabriela Topa Cantisano, UNED, c/ Juan del Rosal, 10 Despacho

1.53. 28040. Madrid (Spain). E-mail: gtopa@psi.uned.es 

Translation: Virginia Navascués Howard

122


SOCIAL COMPARISON AND PERCEIVED BREACH OF PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTRACT

123

In the last few decades, investigators’ interest in the role
of social comparison in people who face some kind of threat
has increased progressively. The direction of the comparison
has been the main object of these works, focusing on whether
individuals tend to compare themselves with those who are
worse off than they are (downward comparison) or with those
who are better off (upward comparison). Studies with various
populations that experience threats, either from the perspective
of health, such as patients with rheumatoid arthritis, cancer,
infertility, and chronic pain (for a review, see Tennen, McKee,
& Affleck, 2000), or from the perspective of work, such as
health staff in psychiatric institutions, professional military
staff, nurses, and teachers (Buunk & Ybema, 1997, 2003;
Buunk, Ybema, Gibbons, & Ipenburg, 2001; Buunk, Ybema,
Van der Zee, Schaufeli, & Gibbons, 2001), have shown that
downward  comparisons  are  more  frequent  and  that  the
perception of being better off than one’s peers seems to be
related to subjective well-being. 
The identification and contrast model (Buunk & Ybema,
1997) indicated that social comparison has diverse effects
depending on whether people feel identified with or opposite
to  the  people  with  whom  they  compare  themselves.
However, despite the renewed impulse that this perspective
has contributed to studies on social comparison, there are
still some deficiencies. First, most works show consistent
relations but very few of them propose broader causal
models (Buunk, Zurriaga, González-Roma, & Subirats,
2003). Second, most of the works have focused on a limited
range of results and have ignored antecedent variables of
social comparison in specific contexts. Lastly, the empirical
studies have focused on individual differences, ignoring the
variables  concerning  the  social  context  in  which  the
comparison takes place. 
The present study of populations by means of surveys
is  an  attempt  to  correct  some  of  these  deficiencies  by
analyzing a model that considers certain person-context
interaction  variables  to  be  the  antecedents  of  social
comparison, and it provides results on a personal level.
Specifically, we analyze the mediator role of the processes
of social comparison in teachers’ perception of breach of
psychological contract and the burnout syndrome experienced
by these employees. 
A psychological contract is a mutual agreement between
two members of a relation about the terms of their reciprocal
exchange based on a series of promises that both parts made
when initiating the relation (Rousseau, 1995). This series
of beliefs is gradually adjusted during the development of
the work relation, helping the employee to construct the
sense of reality that is new to him or her (Rousseau, 2001,
2004). Throughout this development, one of the parts may
arrive at the conclusion that the other part has not fulfilled
the promises, thus producing the perceived breach of the
psychological contract (Robinson, 1996). The negative effects
of this phenomenon are extensively documented and a recent
meta-analytic review summarizes such effects as an increase

in undesirable results for the person and the organization
such as work dissatisfaction, negligence in task performance,
and intention to quit; and, at the same time, a decrease in
desirable  results  such  as  satisfaction,  organizational
commitment, or civil behavior (Topa & Palací, 2004). Within
this range of negative results, some studies have shown that
breach of contract becomes a source of workers’ burnout,
partly because it threatens predictability and the sense of
control that people believe they have over their environment
(Gakovic & Tetrick, 2003; Leiter, 1999; Topa & Morales,
2005). Teacher burnout is a decrease in well-being caused
by chronic work stress and characterized by emotional
exhaustion, a cynical attitude towards the students, and a
diminished feeling of professional efficacy. Although burnout
seems prevalent among secondary teachers, studies show
that it is frequent at all educational levels (Byrne, 1999).
On the basis of these findings, in this study, we predict that
the breach of the psychological contract will have direct
influence on the three components of the burnout syndrome:
emotional exhaustion, cynicism, and lack of professional
efficacy.
Most of the studies on social comparison that have used
professional groups assumed that these groups were under
some kind of work-related threat, but they did not focus on
breach of psychological contract. However, some authors
have proposed that processes of social comparison are to
be expected following the employees’ perception of breach
of contract (Morrison Wolfe, & Robinson, 1997). By such
processes, people relate their own situation to that of their
peers.  This  comparison,  while  becoming  the  basis  for
researchers to identify the behaviors that are prevalent in
certain social contexts (Morrison, Wolfe, & Robinson, 1997),
is also useful for the employees to adapt to the stressing
situation they must deal with (Bennenbroek, Buunk, van
der Zee, & Grol, 2002). On the basis of these statements,
in this study, we propose that the breach of psychological
contract will affect the three components of burnout mediated
by social comparison.
Traditionally, it has been noted that, under threatening
circumstances, people tend to compare their situation with
that of those who are worse off than they are and that this
downward comparison may contribute to their well-being
(for a review, see Van der Zee, Oldersma, Buunk, & Bos,
1998). This statement is based on the assumption that people
contrast their situation with that of other people in the
process of comparison and this leads them to the comforting
conclusion  that  they  are  doing  better  than  the  others.
However, not all the studies support this direction of social
comparison, as some works report that comparison with
people who are worse off can have negative effects (Gibbons
& Gerrard, 1991), and it has also been shown that, in many
cases, people prefer contact with those who are better off,
partly because this provide them with useful information
about how to solve their problems (among others, see Van
der Zee et al., 1998). 


124

TOPA, MORALES, AND CAEIRO

On the basis of this evidence, Buunk and Ybema (1997)
proposed their identification and contrast model, arguing
that the consequences of social comparison not only depend
on  the  direction  of  the  comparison  but  also  on  the
psychological processes involved. Thus, whereas by means
of contrast, people oppose their situation to that of the people
with  whom  they  compare  themselves,  by  means  of
identification, they assume a future similarity with the object
of comparison. It is expected that, in comparison with those
who are better off, identification is comforting, and contrast
causes unease, whereas in comparison with those who are
worse off, the opposite pattern would be observed (Van der
Zee, Buunk, Sanderman, Botke, & van den Bergh, 2000).
These authors verified that the four proposed tendencies
were ultimately better classified in two basic strategies of
social comparison: a tendency to focus on the negative
interpretation  of  information,  by  means  of  downward
identification and upward contrast (that is, identifying with
those who are worse off and contrasting oneself with those
who are better off) , and a tendency of positive interpretation
by means of identification with those who are better off
(upward identification) and contrast with those who are
worse off (downward contrast) (Van der Zee et al.). 
On the basis of these findings, in this study, we predict
that breach of psychological contract will have the opposite
effect on the two basic dimensions of social comparison:

identification and contrast. Moreover, we predict that the
two dimensions of comparison will have the opposite effect
on the results, that is, negative comparison will have a
positive influence on emotional exhaustion, cynicism, and
the lack of fulfillment, whereas positive comparison will
follow  the  opposite  pattern.  The  predicted  model  is
represented in Figure 1. 
Summing up, in the present study, the hypotheses are
as follows:
1. We expect to find direct effects of the breach of
psychological contract on emotional exhaustion,
cynicism, and the lack of professional efficacy.
2. We  expect  the  effects  of  breach  of  contract  on
emotional  exhaustion,  cynicism,  and  lack  of
achievement to be mediated by positive and negative
social comparison.
3. We expect to observe positive effects of negative
social comparison on emotional exhaustion, cynicism,
and lack of professional efficacy. 
4. We expect to find negative effects of positive social
comparison on emotional exhaustion, cynicism, and
lack of professional efficacy. 
5. Due to the similarity in conditions of teaching, we
predict that this model will be adequate for teachers
of preprimary, primary, and secondary educational
levels.

Figure 1. Original model and re-specified model.


SOCIAL COMPARISON AND PERCEIVED BREACH OF PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTRACT

125

Method

Participants

The sample was made up of 401 teachers from the
Community of Madrid, of whom 64% were women and
36% men, working at various educational levels (17.7% in
preprimary education, 54.3% in primary education, 18% in
secondary education, and 10.22% who did not provide this
information).  Most  of  them  worked  in  public  centers
(82.6%). Mean age was 37.4 years (SD =10.4) and mean
time in the same post was 12.4 years (SD =10.3). Data were
collected between the months of December of 2003 and
February of 2004. Before completing the questionnaire,
participants  were  informed  about  the  study  and  the
confidential nature of the data. After obtaining informed
consent, they filled in a series of scales.
Instruments and Procedure

Perception of Breach of Psychological Contract. We used
a global of measure of perceived contract breach  (Robinson
& Morrison, 2000) which consists of 5 items that assess the
participants’ perceptions about how adequately the organization
has fulfilled the psychological contract. The level of reliability
was adequate (α = .81). Responses were rated on a 5-point
Likert-type scale, ranging from 1 (totally disagree) to 5 (totally
agree). Examples of items are: “I am annoyed because the
institution for which I work has provided fewer benefits than
promised” or “I am satisfied with the extent to which the
institution has fulfilled its promises to me.”
Social comparison. This was assessed with the scale of
identification and contrast (Van der Zee et al., 2000), focusing
item formulation on the comparison of work aspects. The
original instrument is made up of four subscales of 3 items
each  (upward  identification,  downward  comparison,
downward identification, and upward comparison). The final
scale had adequate reliability (α = .78). To confirm the bi-
factorial structure of the original scale, confirmatory factor
analysis  was  employed  using  the  raw  data  matrix  and
maximum likelihood procedure. Despite the fact that the
sensitivity of the chi-square statistic for a large sample does

not allow to reach the desired level of probability, the two-
factor model fit the data well, as can be observed in the
following goodness-of-fit indexes: χ 2(26, N  =  395 ) =
60.66, p  <  .00;  normal  chi-square  (CMIN/DF  =  2.3);
goodness of fit index (GFI = .97); adjusted goodness of fit
index (AGFI = .95); comparative fix index (CFI = .96); and
root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA = .05).
Two items with very low factor loadings were eliminated
and  the  resulting  factors  were  called  Negative  Social
Comparison (downward identification-upward contrast) and
Positive Social Comparison (upward identification-downward
contrast). They were moderately correlated and had adequate
levels of reliability (α = .81 and α = .70, respectively).
Burnout syndrome. This was evaluated with a Spanish
version (Salanova et al., 2000) of the Maslach Burnout
Inventory (MBI; Maslach & Jackson, 1981). This scale has
15  items  with  responses  ranging  from  1  (never)  to  5
(always). The reliability of the global scale is adequate (α
= .87), as with the three subscales (α = .83, .70, and .80 for
emotional exhaustion, cynicism, and lack of professional
efficacy, respectively).

Results

The results are grouped into two sections. In the first one,
the initial structural equation model was tested and re-specified
until a better fit to the data was achieved. In the second
section, this model was applied by means of multigroup
analysis, classifying the teachers according to the educational
level at which they were teaching. Descriptive statistics and
the correlation matrix of the study are offered in Table 1. 
Structural  equations,  which  offer  the  possibility  of
appraising the diverse relations simultaneously, were used in
order to test hypotheses 1 to 4. As in the structural model each
latent variable has only one observable indicator, which is the
mean of the corresponding scale, the relations among the latent
dimensions and the observable indicators were restricted to
one, and the measurement errors of the model were eliminated.
For the sake of clarity, neither the regression errors nor the
corresponding observable variables are shown in the figures.
Various indexes are suggested to test the fit of the model, such

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics and Correlations among Variables
Variables                                         M                   SD                 1                 2               3                  4               5
1. Breach of psychological contract
2. Negative social comparison
3. Positive social comparison 
4. Emotional exhaustion
5. Cynicism 
6. Lack of personal efficacy
**p < .001.

.31**
.01
.38**
.32**
.18**

.39**
.31**
.22**
.21**

2.7
2.5
2.8
2
1.7
2.5

.73
.73
.73
.55
.55
.59

.02
.05
–.06

.58**
.45**

.32**


126

TOPA, MORALES, AND CAEIRO

as the Chi-square statistic and its associated level of probability.
Because of the sensitivity of this statistic to the size of the
sample and the deviations from normality of the data, other
goodness-of-fit indexes are proposed, such as GFI, CFI, and
AGFI, and it is recommended that all of them reach values
near 1. Some authors recommend values at least over .95 for
these indexes. The index RMSEA is also used. Its value should
not be less than .05 to indicate a good fit. When comparing
models,  two  other  indexes  are  also  used:  the  Akaike
information criterion (AIC) and the Browne-Cudeck criterion
(BCC), which tend to penalize more complex models with
worse fit and benefit more parsimonious models with lower
values and a better fit to the data. In Table 2 are displayed the
goodness-of-fit statistics of the model compared. The re-
specification procedure began by eliminating the relations
among variables that do not reach statistical significance, such
as the relation between breach of contract and the lack of
processional  efficacy,  and  the  relation  between  negative
comparison and cynicism, on the basis of their critical ratios
(CR). The elimination of these relations (called a and b,
respectively, in the initial model) improved the fit of the model,
but it did not reach optimal values until the relation between
negative and positive social comparison suggested by the
modification indexes of the statistical program was established. 
The preceding analyses show that the hypotheses were
supported by the data, except for two relations, a direct one
between  perceived  breach  of  contract  and  lack  of

professional  efficacy,  and  a  relation  between  negative
comparison and cynicism. We will comment upon this in
the following section. 
In order to test the fifth hypothesis, we used multigroup
analysis of the structural model established in the previous
step. Multigroup analysis allows one to test the invariance
of the relations among variables in several participant groups.
It is recommended to use groups of similar size, but in our
case, our sample of primary teachers was much larger than
the other two groups. As recommended (Byrne, 2001) in
multigroup analysis, a model with proved adequate fit should
be used at the beginning in each of the samples separately.
This model is considered the base model with which the
other more restrictive models are compared. In this model,
empirical data matrixes were used and the analysis was
performed with the maximum likelihood procedure, as it
provides more stable indicators. The proposed structural
model fits the preschool teachers’ data notably better than
it does the remaining groups’, although in all cases, the
model was statistically significant.
Multigroup analysis imposes successive restrictions on
the regression weights, on the covariance of the latent
variables, and on the covariance of the measurement errors,
forcing them to remain identical in the three samples. Thus,
it allows one to determine, on the basis of the increment
values of χ2 and its associated probability level, whether
the imposition of these restrictions sensibly worsens the

Table 2
Goodness-of-Fit Statistics of the Initial Model and the Re-Specified Models
Models                                                        χ2 (df)        p    CMIN/DF      CFI
.84
Original model 
.85
Re-specified model (without paths a and b)
Re-specified model (with path c)
.99
Note. Path a refers to the relation between breach of contract and the lack of professional efficacy. Path b refers to the relation between
negative comparison and cynicism. Path c refers to the relation between negative and positive social comparison (see Figure 1). CMIN/DF
= normal chi-square; CFI = comparative fix index; AGFI = adjusted goodness of fit index; AIC = Akaike information criterion; BCC =
Browne-Cudeck criterion; RMSEA = root mean square error of approximation.

BCC         RMSEA
111.8
107.8
39.8

AGFI    AIC   
111.1
.44
107.1
.72
.98
39.2

73.1 (2)
73.1(4)
3.25 (3)

36.55
18.29
1.08

.30
.21
.01

.00
.00
.35

Table 3
Goodness-of-Fit Statistics for the Multigroup Analysis
Goodness-of-fit statistics                                                χ2(df)        p    CMIN/DF     ∆χ2 (df)      p     CFI    AGFI  RMSEA
Base model (Preprimary)
Base model (Primary)
Base model (Secondary)
Multisample analysis: model with no restrictions
Model with restricted regression weights
Model with restricted regression weights and covariance
Model with restricted regression weights, latent variable 
covariance, and measurement errors covariance
Note. CMIN/DF = normal chi-square; CFI = comparative fix index; AGFI = adjusted goodness of fit index; RMSEA = root mean square
error of approximation.

1.23 (3)
4.00 (3)
6.01 (3)
11.28 (9)
32.9 (29)
35.53 (31)

.411
1.33
2.00
1.25
1.34
1.14

21.62 (20)
24.24 (22)

.97
.96
.81
.93
.93
.94

.99
.99
.97
.99
.99
.99

.00
.04
.12
.03
.02
.02

.75
.26
.11
.26
.28
.26

49.14 (41)

37.86 (32)

.36
.34

1.19

.18

.22

.94

.98

.02


SOCIAL COMPARISON AND PERCEIVED BREACH OF PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTRACT

127

statistical fit of the model. When testing the models, if the
value of the probability associated with the statistic exceeds
α =.05, this indicates that there is no variation among the
three samples because the imposition of the restrictions does
not worsen the fit of the model to the data. In Table 3 are
shown the statistics of the basic model and of the multigroup
analysis that allows us to state that the structural model is
invariant in the three samples, both in the regression weights
and in the covariance of the structural dimensions and of
the residual errors. The goodness-of-fit statistics do not
decrease when restrictions are imposed and the value of the
probability level associated with the increment of the global
statistic is never less than that of α. On the basis of these
data, the last hypothesis of the study has found partial
support and the proposed model explains reasonably well
the relations between perception of breach of psychological
contract and burnout, mediated by negative and positive
social comparison. Moreover, the model is fairly adequate
for the groups of teachers from preprimary, primary, and
secondary educational levels. We must also point out that
some relations of the model that do not totally fit our
hypothesis were found; for example, the effects of positive
comparison on the results were not negative in all the
subsamples, as predicted, but instead were positive some
cases, although their values were low.
The standardized estimations of the models for each of
the subsamples are displayed in Figures 2, 3, and 4.

Figure 3. Standardized estimations for the model in Primary
Education.

Figure 2. Standardized estimations for the model in Preprimary
Education.

Figure 4. Standardized estimations for the model in Secondary
Education.


128

TOPA, MORALES, AND CAEIRO

Discussion

Most of the results of this study are in line with the
hypotheses, as the appropriateness of a general model, in
which the perception of breach of psychological contract
adequately predicted burnout, was verified. Moreover, it
was verified that these effects are partially mediated by
social comparison.
Firstly, this study found support for the affirmation
(Leiter,  1999)  that  stated  that  teacher  burnout  is  the
consequence of breach of psychological contract. This
statement had obtained previous empirical support in other
professional collectives, such as civil servants of penitentiary
institutions  or  intervention  groups  in  emergencies  and
catastrophes (Topa & Morales, 2005), but it had not been
tested in samples of teachers.
Secondly, this study found empirical support for the
theoretical affirmation that the processes of social comparison
mediate between perceived breach of contract and the results.
We believe this is the first work that provides data to better
understand the processes that surround employees’ perception
that their organization has failed to satisfy its promises to
them (Morrison Wolfe & Robinson, 1997). This model
assumes a proposal about the relations between burnout and
social comparison that, up to a point, is new, as some studies
found support for the idea that emotional exhaustion was
the  antecedent  that  led  people  to  social  comparison
(Brenninkmeijer,  Vanyperen,  &  Buunk,  2000;  Buunk,
Ybema,  Gibbons,  et  al.,  2001).  However,  although
longitudinal results are required before making statements
about causalities, in this study, we tested a consistent model
that seems to show that the relations could go in the opposite
direction. This is not an attempt to ignore the possibility
that the process may be circular, and an increase in emotional
exhaustion may once more lead people to social comparison.
This idea has been suggested by other authors who note that
emotional exhaustion and the perception of being inferior
to others reinforce each other in a circular relation (Friedman
& Farber, 1992).
Thirdly, in this study we have found that this global
model is adequate for teachers of various educational levels.
In this sense, despite the fact that work conditions may vary
to some extent at the different levels, it seems clear that the
most determining characteristics of the task of teaching are
stable. 
When examining the results in more detail, it can be
seen that, in the general model, the influence of breach of
contract on the lack of professional efficacy is not direct
but mediated by the two types of social comparison, both
negative and positive. These data are novel and cannot be
compared with the findings of previous studies, as they
either resorted to global measures of the burnout syndrome
(Topa & Morales, 2005) or else focused exclusively on the
aspect of emotional exhaustion (Gakovic & Tetrick, 2003).
A feasible explanation of this fact is not obvious but it seems

logical to assume that professional efficacy is a perception
established by the comparison of one’s work results with
the results that one’s colleagues were capable of achieving
and, hence, one’s efficacy would be more affected by social
comparison than by perceived breach. It is also possible that
this result will reveal a tendency to examine one’s own
levels of achievement when searching for explanations for
perceived breach of contract, and that this examination will
once more lead people to look at their work environment.
As mentioned in the theoretical development (Morrison
Wolfe & Robinson, 1997), it is highly likely that, when
facing organizational breach of psychological contract and
searching for an explanation for this disconcerting and
aversive fact, workers will engage in processes of appraisal
of their own contributions along with processes of social
comparison. Although theoretical speculations have suggested
that these processes are simultaneous, the relations between
them are probably more complex than has been initially
assumed.  Summing  up,  if  workers  perceive  breach  of
contract,  they  will  simultaneously  ask  “Why  is  this
happening to me?” “How are they treating my colleagues?”
and “How am I responding to the organization?” In their
search for answers to these questions, social comparison
will  provide  the  clues  to  appraise  their  own  lack  of
professional efficacy and the results that other colleagues
achieve. In this sense, the direct relation predicted between
negative comparison and cynicism was not confirmed in the
data. Taking into consideration preceding studies, one might
suppose that cynicism is the burnout syndrome dimension
with the weakest relation to social comparison because it
most clearly represents the cognitive aspects of psychological
well-being (cynicism considered a distant attitude towards
work in the case of burnout; Salanova et al., 2000 ), whereas
the  influence  it  receives  from  breach  of  contract  is
overwhelming. Lastly, when examining the standardized
estimations for each of the separate multigroup models, it
can be observed that, in preprimary education, both positive
and negative social comparison seem to have little effect
on cynicism and lack of efficacy. Their influence is only
considerable on the dimension of emotional exhaustion. In
primary and secondary education, the impact of negative
social comparison on the results and, to a lesser extent, of
positive social comparison, is more pronounced. In the group
of primary teachers, we detected a relation between positive
comparison and cynicism, but of the opposite sign from the
predicted one. This was also present in secondary teachers,
although its value is very low. Likewise, we observed results
in the opposite direction from the predicted one in the
relations between positive comparison, emotional exhaustion,
and lack of professional efficacy, although, once again, the
standardized regression weights were very low. In any case,
it seems clear that support for the last hypothesis is only
partial and that the consequences of positive comparison on
personal results are not as consistent as expected across the
subsamples. 


SOCIAL COMPARISON AND PERCEIVED BREACH OF PSYCHOLOGICAL CONTRACT

129

Lastly,  this  study  ex-establishes  the  importance  of
peoples’ social identity with regard to social comparison.
As  noted  recently  (Hogg,  2000),  social  comparisons
occurring within groups are probably oriented towards
reducing uncertainty rather than towards emphasizing one’s
own personal prominence, and moreover, they are probably
comparisons with those who are better off, in the comparison
dimension, that is, the so-called upward comparisons. This
could explain why, in the models of this study for each
educational level, the weight of positive social comparison—
a  dimension  made  up  almost  exclusively  of  items  of
downward contrast—had little influence on the results. In
contrast, the so-called dimension of negative comparison—
made up of more items of upward comparison—seemed to
have more influence on the results. The teachers within each
group tended to compare themselves only with members of
their own group, and mainly in order to reduce uncertainty,
looking for the prototypical group members as referents.
On the basis of this, we suggest that, in future studies,
investigators should explore in more detail the relations
between these two aspects of people’s relations within
groups.
The following two main limitations of this study are
noted: the use of a cross-sectional design, which is not the
most adequate to appraise causal mechanisms in the relations
among predictors and results, and resorting exclusively to
self-report data. Longitudinal studies and contrasting the
information  with  objective  data  from  sick-leave  or
absenteeism reports are suggested for future studies, as well
as  the  need  to  extend  the  sample  to  make  it  more
representative. It would be worthwhile to be able to count
on the support of the educational institutions, which, in
general, were not eager to facilitate the access of social
psychology researchers to this body of employees. Despite
these limitations, we believe that this study can improve the
understanding  of  the  antecedents  of  the  physical  and
psychological well-being of the workers of these collectives. 

References

Bennenbroek, F.T.C., Buunk, B.P., van der Zee, K.I., & Grol, B.
(2002). Social comparison and patient information: What do
cancer patients want? Patient Education & Counseling, 47, 5.
Brenninkmeijer, V., Vanyperen, N.W., & Buunk, B.P. (2000). I am
not a better teacher, but others are doing worse: Burnout and
perceptions of superiority among teachers. Social Psychology
of Education, 4, 259-274.

Buunk,  B.P.,  & Ybema,  J.F.  (1997).  Social  comparisons  and
occupational stress: The identification-contrast model. In B.P.
Buunk & F.X. Gibbons (Eds.), Health, coping, and well-being:
Perspectives from social comparison theory (pp. 359-388).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Buunk, B.P., & Ybema, J.F. (2003). Feeling bad, but satisfied: The
effects of upward and downward comparison upon mood and

marital satisfaction. British Journal of Social Psychology, 42,
613-628.

Buunk, B.P., Ybema, J.F., Gibbons, F.X., & Ipenburg, M. (2001).
The affective consequences of social comparison as related to
professional  burnout  and  social  comparison  orientation.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 31, 337-351.

Buunk, B.P., Ybema, J.F., Van der Zee, K., Schaufeli, W.B., &
Gibbons, F.X. (2001). Affect generated by social comparisons
among nurses high and low in burnout. Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, 31, 1500-1520.

Buunk, B.P., Zurriaga, R., González-Roma, V., & Subirats, M.
(2003). Engaging in upward and downward comparisons as a
determinant of relative deprivation at work: A longitudinal
study. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 62, 370-388.

Byrne, B. (1999). The nomological network of teacher burnout: A
literature review and empirically validated model. In R V.M.
Huberman (Ed.), Understanding and preventing teacher burnout
(pp. 15-37.). New York: Cambridge University Press.

Byrne, B. (2001). Structural equation modeling with AMOS, EQS,
and  LISREL:  Comparative  approaches  to  testing  for  the
factorial validity of a measuring instrument. International
Journal of Testing, 1, 55-86.

Friedman, I., & Farber, B. (1992). Professional self-concept as a
predictor of teacher burnout. Journal of Educational Research,
86, 28-35.

Gakovic, A., & Tetrick, L.E. (2003). Psychological contract breach
as a source of strain for employees. Journal of Business &
Psychology, 18, 235-246.

Gibbons, F.X., & Gerrard, M. (1991). Downward comparison and
coping with threat. In J.S.T. Wills (Ed.), Social comparison:
Contemporary theory and research (pp. 316-346.). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.

Hogg, M.A. (2000). Social identity and social comparison. In J.S.L.
Wheeler (Ed.), Handbook of social comparison: Theory and
research (pp. 401-421). New York: Kluwer Academic.

Leiter,  M.  (1999).  Burnout  among  teachers  as  a  crisis  in
psychological contracts. In R. Vandenberghe & A. Huberman
(Ed.), Understanding and preventing teacher burnout. (pp. 202-
210). New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Maslach, C., & Jackson, S.E., 1981. The measurement of experienced

burnout. Journal of Occupational Behavior, 2, 99-113.

Morrison Wolfe, E., & Robinson, S. (1997). When employees feel
betrayed: A model of how psychological contract violations
develop. Academy of Management Review, 22, 226-256.

Robinson, S. (1996). Trust and breach of the psychological contract.

Administrative Science Quarterly, 41, 576- 599.

Robinson, S., & Morrison, E.W. (2000). The development of
psychological contract breach and violation: A longitudinal
study. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 21, 525-546.

Rousseau, D. (1995). Psychological contracts in organizations.
Understanding written and unwritten agreements. London:
Sage.

Rousseau, D. (2001). Schema, promise and mutuality: The building
blocks of the psychological contract. Journal of Occupational
and Organizational Psychology, 74, 511-541.


130

TOPA, MORALES, AND CAEIRO

Rousseau, D. (2004). Psychological contracts: Understanding the
ties that motivate. Academy of Management Executive, 18, 120-
127.

Salanova, M., Schaufeli, W., Llorens, S., Peiró, J., & Grau, R.
(2000).  Desde  el  burnout  al  engagement.  ¿Una  nueva
perspectiva?  Revista  de  Psicología  del  Trabajo  y  de  las
organizaciones, 16, 117 - 134. 

Tennen, H., McKee, T.E., & Affleck, G. (2000). Social comparison
processes in health and illness. In J. Suls & L. Wheeler (Eds.),
Handbook of social comparison: Theory and research (pp.
443-483). New York: Kluwer Academic.

Topa, G., Fernández, I., & Lisbona, A. (2005). Ruptura de contrato
psicológico  y  burnout  en  Equipos  de  intervención  en
emergencias y catástrofes. Ansiedad y Estrés, 11, 265-279.

Topa, G., & Morales, F. (2005). Determinantes específicos de la
satisfacción laboral, el burnout y sus consecuencias para la
salud: Un estudio exploratorio con funcionarios de prisiones.
(Specific determinants of work satisfaction, burnout and health

consequences: An exploratory study among prison officers)
International Journal of Psychology and Psychological Therapy,
5, 71-81.

Topa, G., & Palací, F. (2004). ¿Ruptura o cumplimiento del contrato
psicológico? Una revisión meta-analítica de la investigación
empírica. Acción Psicológica, 3, 155-171.

Van der Zee, K., Buunk, B.P., Sanderman, R., Botke, G., & van
den Bergh, F. (2000). Social comparison and coping with
cancer treatment. Personality and Individual Differences, 28,
17-34.

Van der Zee, K., Oldersma, F., Buunk, B.P., & Bos, D. (1998).
Social Comparison preferences among cancer patients as related
to neuroticism and social comparison orientation. Journal of
Personality & Social Psychology, 75, 801-810.

Received December 30, 2005
Revision received September 14, 2006
Accepted September 20, 2006

