See	discussions,	stats,	and	author	profiles	for	this	publication	at:	https://www.researchgate.net/publication/251170815

Environmental	and	Financial	Performance:	Are
They	Related?

Article	·	January	1997

CITATIONS
165

3	authors,	including:

Mark	A.	Cohen
Vanderbilt	University

106	PUBLICATIONS			5,871	CITATIONS			

SEE	PROFILE

READS
1,635

All	content	following	this	page	was	uploaded	by	Mark	A.	Cohen	on	06	August	2014.

The	user	has	requested	enhancement	of	the	downloaded	file.


 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

Environmental and Financial Performance: Are They Related?* 

Mark A. Cohen 

Owen Graduate School of Management 

Vanderbilt University 
Nashville, TN 37203 

(615) 322-6814 

Scott A. Fenn 

Investor Responsibility Research Center, Inc. 

1350 Connecticut Ave., N.W., Suite 700 

Washington, D.C. 20036-1701 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

(202) 833-0700 

and 

Shameek Konar 

Department of Economics 

Vanderbilt University 

Nashville, TN 

May 1997 (Revised) 

 
 
 
*  We thank Peter Chines and Manohar Kamath for their assistance in generating the data used in 
this study.  Thanks but no blame to Seema Arora, Carol Graham, Jonathan Naimon, and several 
anonymous referees for useful comments on earlier drafts of this paper. The first author also 
acknowledges support for this research from the Dean's Fund for Summer Research, Owen 
Graduate School of Management, Vanderbilt University. 
 


 

ABSTRACT 

Prior research has been contradictory on the relationship between financial and 

 
 
 
 
environmental performance.  There are both theoretical and empirical reasons for this lack of 
consensus.  Complying with environmental regulation is costly and thus might hurt a firm's 
bottom line. On the other hand, a firm that is efficient at pollution control might also be efficient 
at production.  Moreover, a firm that does well financially can afford to spend more of its 
resources on cleaner technologies.   Among the reasons for the past discrepancy in empirical 
findings is the lack of objective criteria to evaluate environmental performance. Some authors 
have looked at subjective rankings by public interest groups, others have examined pollution 
control expenditures across industries, while others have compared the market returns of socially 
conscious mutual funds to overall market trends.  This study reports on a new objective data set 
detailing the environmental performance of the Standard and Poor's 500 companies.  We 
construct two industry-balanced portfolios and compare both accounting and market returns of 
the "high polluter" to the "low polluter" portfolio.  Overall, we find either no "penalty" for 
investing in the "green" portfolio, or a positive return from green investing.  The paper also 
examines the stock market reaction to new information on the environmental performance of 
individual firms, and provides a preliminary analysis of which comes first - good financial 
performance or good environmental performance. 
 
 


I. 
 
 

Introduction 

Prior research has been contradictory on the relationship between financial and 

environmental performance.  There are both theoretical and empirical reasons for this lack of 

consensus.  Complying with environmental regulation is costly and thus might hurt a firm's 

bottom line. On the other hand, a firm that is efficient at pollution control might also be efficient 

at production.  Moreover, a firm that does well financially can afford to spend more of its 

resources on cleaner technologies.   Among the reasons for the past discrepancy in empirical 

findings is the lack of objective criteria to evaluate environmental performance. Some authors 

have looked at subjective rankings by public interest groups, others have examined pollution 

control expenditures across industries, while others have compared the market returns of socially 

conscious mutual funds to overall market trends.  This study reports on a new objective data set 

detailing the environmental performance of the Standard and Poor's 500 companies.  We 

construct two industry-balanced portfolios and compare both accounting and market returns of 

the "high polluter" to the "low polluter" portfolio.  Overall, we find either no "penalty" for 

investing in the "green" portfolio, or a positive return from green investing.  We also examine 

the stock market reaction to new information on the environmental performance of individual 

firms, and provide a preliminary analysis of which comes first - good financial performance or 

good environmental performance. 

 

The subject of corporate environmental performance -- what it means, how to measure it 

and why it matters -- is rapidly gaining prominence among business leaders, academics and 

investors.  A key element in this debate is the question of how an individual firm's environmental 

performance impacts its financial performance.  Does a company that strives to attain good 

environmental performance gain advantages over competitors, or is environmental performance 


just an extra cost for these firms?  Answers to these questions have important implications for 

the role that corporations can be expected to play in promoting pollution reduction efforts and 

the use of cleaner technologies. 

 

Historically, investments by corporations in environmental protection measures have 

tended to be viewed as a drag on financial performance.  For the U.S. economy as a whole, the 

EPA estimates that total annualized costs for all pollution control activities in the United States 

amounted to $115 billion in 1990, or about 2.1 percent of the nation's GNP.  Moreover, EPA 

expects this annual cost to increase to $171 billion (in 1990 dollars) by the year 2000, or 2.6 

percent of estimated GNP (U.S. EPA, 1990). Environmental investments were often viewed by 

business as a necessary evil: necessary to meet societal standards for controlling pollution and 

protecting public health, but evil because they resulted in lower overall profitability by diverting 

resources to a fundamentally non-productive use. 

 

In recent years, this premise has come under increasing attack, however, not only by 

environmental advocates, but also by important business and academic leaders and investors.  

Perhaps this is not surprising, since until recently firms had looked towards end-of-pipe 

treatment as the main method of pollution control.  More recent trends toward pollution 

prevention may have shifted some of the debate away from compliance costs toward 

competitiveness.   

 

The notion that environmental performance is an important component of competitive 

advantage has found acceptance by a growing number of corporate leaders over the last several 

years.1  For example, Ben Woodhouse, director of Global Environmental Issues at Dow 

                                                           
1 A related debate centers around whether environmental regulation might provide an impetus for 
innovation that ultimately benefits companies in the regulated country in terms of international 
competitiveness.  See Porter (1995) and a critique by Palmer, Oates and Portney (1995). 


Chemical, states that "the degree to which a company is viewed as being a positive or negative 

participant in solving sustainability issues will determine, to a very great degree, their long-term 

business viability" (Schmidheiny 1992, p. 11). "Monsanto's ability to develop new products, 

enter new markets, sell our current products and operate our manufacturing facilities profitably 

depends upon continuous improvement in environmental performance," adds Richard J. 

Mahoney, Chairman and CEO of Monsanto Co. (Monsanto, 1991). Finally, according to Richard 

Druckman, Vice-President for Strategic Planning for Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., "continuous 

improvement of environmental management throughout the organization is a key factor for our 

competitiveness in the 1990s.  Each business group and division now incorporates strategies to 

address environmental management improvement in its strategic plan," (Bristol-Myers Squibb 

Co., May 1993.)  

 

This paper offers new evidence on whether or not firms that perform well on 

environmental criteria also perform well financially.  Previous research on this issue has been 

limited in scope due to lack of data availability.  Unlike previous research, our analysis is based 

on a relatively comprehensive list of companies - the Standard and Poor's 500.  In addition, the 

environmental performance measures are based on actual government records or government-

mandated securities filing disclosures. Unlike previous studies, we do not rely on subjective or 

anecdotal analysis to characterize environmental performance.  The primary source of data was 

published by Investor Responsibility Research Center (1992).  Although these environmental 

performance measures are based on publicly available information, they have not previously 

been available to researchers in an accessible format.  

 

Although there are many ways in which one could compare environmental and financial 

performance, this paper is concerned with whether or not "green investing" provides a positive 


financial return relative to a more neutral investing strategy.  Unlike previous authors, we define 

green investing to be investing in companies that are the environmental leaders in their 

respective industries.  This would allow for investing in oil and chemical companies and firms in 

other heavy polluter industries.  We construct two “portfolios” consisting of the “low pollution” 

and “high pollution” firms in their respective industries.  Our main finding is that the “low 

pollution” portfolio does as well as - and often better than - the “high pollution” group.   

 

It is important to state at the outset, however, that any relationship that is found does not 

necessarily imply the direction of causation.  For example, a finding that good environmental 

performance is correlated with high earnings does not necessarily mean that firms who improve 

their environmental performance will also improve their earnings.  It is possible that causation 

runs the other way - that firms are good environmental citizens because they are strong 

financially and are able to afford to be good citizens.   

 

Section II provides a brief literature review and some background into the empirical 

evidence on the relationship between financial and environmental performance.  Section III 

describes the IRRC and financial performance data used in the analysis, as well as the empirical 

tests employed.   Section IV presents the main results of the paper, comparing the financial 

performance of "low polluter" portfolios to industry-matched "high polluter" portfolios .  Section 

V considers the question of which comes first - good environmental performance or good 

financial performance. Some concluding remarks and suggestions for further research are 

reserved for Section VI. 

 

II.  

Prior Evidence on Environmental and Financial Performance 


 

The premise that corporate environmental performance may be linked with financial 

performance has attracted limited academic research.  Most of the research in this area has 

focused on the performance of socially-screened portfolios relative to broader market indices.  A 

firm's social performance has typically been quantified using reputational indices.  These indices 

have been of two types: those which combine a firm's social performance reputation on a variety 

of issues into a single rating of social performance, or those which focus on a single aspect of 

social performance, such as involvement in South Africa or environmental performance. 

 

Results from these earlier studies have been mixed; see for example Vance (1975), 

Bowman (1975), Cochran and Wood (1984), and McGuire, Sundgren and Schneeweis (1981). In 

one recent study, Covenant Investment Management attempted to rate 1,000 companies on 36 

different social and environmental criteria, sorted companies into three social performance tiers, 

and then compared the performance of the three groups for a five-year period.  The 200 

companies with the highest social performance scores produced a 100 percent return to investors 

over five years, compared to a 92 percent return by the 600 middle tier companies and a 76.6 

percent return by the 200 bottom tier companies.  On a capitalization-weighted basis, the 

financial performance of the top tier companies came out virtually identical to the performance 

of the S&P 500.   

 

On the other hand, White (1991) tracked the performance of a group of six mutual funds 

that employ social responsibility screening criteria and found that for the one-year period ending 

June 28, 1991, the funds slightly underperformed the S&P 500 index on both a nominal and a 

risk- adjusted basis.  Even if this finding holds up over time, it is not necessarily evidence that 

firms who are socially responsible underperform financially.  Whether or not 

social/environmental mutual funds perform well financially may have more to do with the ability 


of fund managers to pick stocks, than with whether or not environmentally conscious firms 

perform well in general.   

 

A second group of studies has addressed more directly the relationship between 

environmental performance and financial performance.  Most of the early work in this area was 

based on a series of industry studies published by the Council on Economic Priorities (CEP) in 

the early 1970s, that examined the pollution control records of the petroleum refining, steel, pulp 

and paper, and electric utility industries.  Bragdon and Marlin (1972) and Spicer (1978) found 

significant correlations between CEP's measures of firm environmental performance in the pulp 

and paper industry and firm financial performance.  However, Chen and Metcalf (1980) using 

the same original data, argued that environmental performance was not related to financial 

performance when differences in firm size were taken into account. 

 

More recently, Erfle and Fratantuono (1992) analyzed CEP's reputation indices of 

environmental performance, which classified 49 companies as high, medium or low 

environmental performers based on anecdotal information about regulatory compliance and the 

existence or lack of proactive environmental programs such as recycling or waste reduction 

programs.  They concluded that environmental performance for these firms is positive and 

significantly correlated with return on assets, return on equity and return on investment. 

 

However, Mahaptra (1984) concluded just the opposite, using a larger sample and time 

period.  He compared pollution control expenditures across six different industries to the average 

market returns in those industries and concluded that pollution control expenditures are a “drain 

on resources which could have been invested profitably, and do not 'reward' the companies for 

socially responsible behavior.”  Of course, higher firm expenditures on pollution control does 

not necessarily translate into better environmental performance. 


 

There are many reasons why previous authors could find opposite results, not the least of 

which is that most of their samples are rather small.  In fact, however, the results are not 

necessarily contradictory.  It is possible that comparisons made across industries would find a 

negative effect - as all firms in one industry are called upon to "internalize" their externalities, 

we expect product prices to increase and profits to decrease for all firms in that industry.  

However, there may still be an important differential effect within an industry that could work to 

either the benefit or detriment of "green" firms.  This paper does not compare financial 

performance across industries.  Instead, as described below, we construct industry-balanced 

portfolios. Thus, we are not asking whether or not environmental regulation drains an industry, 

but whether or not environmental performance is related to financial performance within an 

industry.  

III. 

Description of Data and Statistical Tests 

 

This section describes both the environmental performance and financial performance 

variables.  It also describes the methodology used for constructing portfolios of companies based 

on their environmental performance.  In each case, two portfolios were constructed, one 

consisting of "high polluter" firms and the of "low polluter" firms.  These portfolios will form 

the basis of our comparison in a subsequent section. 

 

 

A. Environmental Performance Variable Definitions 

The environmental performance data consists of nine different measures for each of the 

firms in the sample.  Eight of these measures come directly from government data; one is taken 

from corporate 10-K filings as required by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.  In all 

cases, we measure environmental performance as the average over three years, 1987-1989.  This 

is done primarily to ‘smooth out’ any variations due to one-time data miscoding or random 


fluctuations.  For example, large spills or government enforcement actions are relatively 

infrequent events, and the TRI data were not reported consistently during its earliest years. 

 

The environmental performance variables differ in the extent to which they depend on 

recent actions or firm culpability.  Some variables, such as Superfund sites, have virtually 

nothing to do with either current environmental performance, and may simply be liabilities that 

the firm has incurred.  Other variables, such as fines, are more likely to be correlated with firm 

compliance efforts.  A brief list of these variables follows. 

Number of environmental litigation proceedings -- The number of government or other legal 

proceedings related to environmental matters that the company disclosed in its Form 10-
K reports during the period 1987-1989. 

 
Superfund sites -- The number of National Priority List hazardous waste cleanup sites at which 
the company, or its subsidiaries, had been named a Potentially Responsible Party (PRP) 
by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency as of November 1990. 

 
 
Number of noncompliance penalties -- The number of federal noncompliance penalties assessed 
against the company or its subsidiaries under nine major federal environmental statutes 
for the three-year period 1987-1989.  These include civil, criminal and administrative 
penalties. 

 
Dollar value of noncompliance penalties -- The value of federal noncompliance penalties 

assessed against the company or its subsidiaries under nine major federal environmental 
statutes for the three-year period 1987-1989. 

 
Volume of toxic chemical releases (TRI) -- The sum of the reported 1988 emissions of 

approximately 300 selected toxic chemicals from domestic manufacturing facilities 
owned by the company or its subsidiaries and required to be reported under the 
Emergency Planning and Community Right to Know Act. 

 
Number of oil spills -- The number of reported oil spills exceeding 10,000 gallons in volume 

attributable to the company or its subsidiaries for the period 1987-1989. 

 
Volume of oil spills -- The estimated volume of all oil spills exceeding 10,000 gallons 

attributable to the company or its subsidiaries for the period 1987-1989. 

 
Number of chemical spills -- The number of reported chemical spills exceeding 10,000 pounds 

attributable to the company or its subsidiaries for the period 1987-1989. 

 


In all cases, the environmental measure of interest was divided by the firm's revenues to adjust 

for firm size.  The rationale for this is twofold.   First, firm size contributes to the ability of a 

firm to absorb the financial consequences of environmental risks.  Second, firm size has been 

previously shown to affect environmental performance because larger firms are likely to be 

exposed to greater risk of environmental accidents, emissions and incidents of non-compliance. 

Thus, the study variables effectively measure the relative environmental performance of a firm’s 

operations, not its absolute environmental impacts. 

 

 

B. Selection of Portfolios 

The basic approach used throughout the analysis was to construct two portfolios - one 

containing firms with "low" values of the environmental measure of interest and another with 

"high" values.  The portfolios were designed to contain a matched group of firms, where the 

matching was based on industry category.  This approach controls for the level of polluting 

activity inherent in specific industrial processes.  It also controls for the market risk inherent in 

different industries.  Any remaining variation is likely due to pollution-related factors or other 

factors that are correlated with the pollution measures we use, such as age of a firm's plant 

capacity. 

  

The procedure used to generate these two portfolios was as follows:  First, companies 

were sorted into 85 different groups based on the industry categories used by Standard & Poor's 

Corp. to classify companies in the S&P index.  Within each industry, firms were ranked by the 

environmental variable of interest.  A dummy variable was constructed equal to 0 if that firm's 

environmental measure was below the median for its industry group, and 1 if its measure was 

higher than the median.  In instances where there were an odd number of firms in the industry, 

the median value was excluded from the analysis.  In industries where all firms ranked equally 


on the environmental measure of interest (which occurred only when all values for the 

environmental measure was zero), all firms in that industry were excluded from the analysis.  In 

many industries, although the median value of the environmental variable was zero, there were 

also positive values of the environmental measure. In these instances, all firms with a zero on the 

environmental measure were coded 0, all others were coded 1. 

 

Table 1 presents some summary statistics from this initial stage.  All environmental 

variables were measured so that a "low" value indicated they were a "good" environmental actor 

or had relatively little environmental liability.  A "high" value indicated the firm had a relatively 

larger environmental liability.  For example, the median number of environmental lawsuits for 

those in the "low litigation portfolio" is 0, while it is 6 for the "high litigation portfolio."  As seen 

in Table 1, the variation across firms is quite large for some environmental variables.2  Note, 

however, that Table 1 does not report the environmental performance measures after adjusting 

for firm size.  As noted earlier, when constructing the portfolios, “low” and “high” were 

measured relative to volume of sales.  

 

Table 2 compares firm size and beta for the “low” and “high” group for each of the nine 

pollution measures.  Since our environmental variables have been measured per dollar of 

revenue, we would not expect there to be any significant size difference between the two 

portfolios.  This is true for litigation, superfund and toxic releases.  However, it appears that 

large firms are more likely to be in the high pollute category for oil and chemical spills and 

government-imposed fines.  There is also a statistically significant difference in beta for the 

chemical spill portfolios. 

                                                           
2 Note that there are more firms in the "low" portfolios than in the "high" portfolios.  This occurs 
when more than 50% of the firms in an industry have a 'zero' measure of the environmental 
performance variable of interest.  


 

 

C. Financial Performance Variable Definitions 

Throughout the analysis, two different types of firm performance measures were used: 

accounting returns and stock market returns.  Accounting returns were measured using return on 

assets (ROA) and return on equity (ROE).  Stock market performance was measured utilizing the 

total return to a common shareholder, both before and after adjustments for risk.  Both types of 

measures are widely used in previous studies.  All financial performance data were taken from 

the Compustat database published by Standard & Poor’s Corp.  A brief discussion of each 

measure follows: 

Return on assets (ROA) is widely used by market analysts as a measure of firm 

 
performance, as it measures the efficiency of assets in producing income.  For purposes of this 
analysis, we calculated ROA as aftertax income plus interest expense, divided by average total 
assets.3  Interest expenses are added back to income because we want to know the total income 
generated by the firm per dollar of assets -- irrespective of whether equity or debt financing is 
used.4 
 
 
shareholder investment.5  Since this is a measure of shareholder returns rather than overall firm 
profitability, interest expenses are subtracted out of income for this measure.  
 
 

Return on equity (ROE) is a measure of the performance of the firm relative to 

Total risk-adjusted return to shareholders was measured based on cash dividends paid out 

plus stock market share price appreciation.  Returns were adjusted for stock-price variability by 

                                                           
3 The formula for this measure is: 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

(Income Before Extraordinary Items + Interest Expense)* (1- Taxrate)  
 

Average Total Assets  

 

where variables were defined and taken from COMPUSTAT. 

4 As a test of robustness, an alternative formula was also used, where ROA is defined as income 
before extraordinary items, divided by average total assets plus accumulated depreciation.  This 
definition allows for better cross-firm comparison, as returns are not contingent on the method of 
depreciation used for tax purposes. The results (not reported here) are essentially unchanged. 

5 The formula used for this measure is: 

 
 

Income before Extraordinary Items  
  Average Stockholders' Equity  

 


using the standard firm-specific “beta” calculated directly from stock prices.6  To the extent that 

risk is associated with environmental performance, controlling directly for it will tend to reduce 

the significance level of any results relating the effect of differences in environmental 

performance on firm performance.7 

 

For our purposes, stock market returns are a better measure of firm performance.  First, 

they represent true gains to shareholders, through both dividends paid out and appreciated stock 

prices.  In contrast, accounting returns cannot be directly realized by shareholders.  Second, 

stock market returns are more directly comparable across firms, as they are not subject to the 

accounting manipulations of items such as taxes and depreciation.  Finally, those who adhere to 

an efficient markets theory of stock prices would argue that they are a good measure of future 

profits.  Of course, we are measuring changes in the stock prices - not their absolute levels.  

Thus, market returns in this context refer to the sum of current shareholder returns (cash 

dividends and changes in stock prices) plus improvement in the long-run prospects of the firm.  

 

 

D. Statistical Tests 

The main hypothesis being tested in this paper is whether or not firms that perform well 

in the environmental arena also perform well financially.  Operationally, this is a rather simple 

test, in which we ask whether the "low pollution" portfolio performs differently from the "high 

pollution" portfolio, where "low" and "high" refer to each of the environmental measures.  For 

 

                                                           
6 The formula used for risk-adjusted total return to shareholders was: 
 
  
 
where Beta's were computed over the 6 year period from approximately 1987-1992. These Beta's 
were taken from the Compustat database, as were all other firm performance data. 

 Change in Stock Price + Dividends  
     

Initial Stock Price * Beta 

      

7  Although not reported here, we also calculated a ‘non-adjusted’ market return. The results are 
essentially identical. 


example, we want to know if an investor would benefit from choosing firms with fewer 

environmental lawsuits relative to other firms in the industry.  Since the portfolios were 

constructed by matching firms within industry groups, we are able to control directly for industry 

specific risk and return variation.8  Thus, we employ a simple statistical test to determine 

whether mean financial performance is higher, lower or the same in the high versus low 

pollution portfolios.9 

 

Although environmental performance is measured over the three year time period 1987-

1989, we measure financial performance over three different time frames: 1987-1989, 1990 and 

1991.  The reason for including the subsequent time periods is to test for lag structures in the 

returns data.  For example, a firm that is sued in period one may experience an immediate stock 

price reaction, but the accounting returns may only be affected several years later if the litigation 

results in substantial legal or compliance costs.  Similarly, although a firm may emit toxic 

chemicals in one year, this information is only released to the public with at least a one year lag. 

                                                           
8 One potential statistical problem with the portfolio analysis is the fact that in many industry 
categories, there are more firms with a “low” level of the environmental risk or pollution 
measure than with a “high” level.  This is due to the fact that there are often many firms with 
zero instances of a particular environmental performance measure. One way to control for this 
unbalanced sample is to average the firm performance for all firms in the industry with a “high” 
environmental measure and all within the industry with a “low” environmental measure.  This 
produces a portfolio with the same sample size in each group, where each element is a composite 
industry average of firm performance.  A matched t-test can then be performed, comparing the 
difference in the mean performance within each industry category.  This was also done for all of 
the environmental measures of interest. The results are generally consistent with those reported 
here. 

9 We also employed two nonparametric tests, a Median test and Mann-Whitney.  The latter 
compares the low and high portfolios to see if they are drawn from the same distribution.  The 
test first ranks each firm in a "combined" portfolio by the performance measure of interest.  It 
then compares the sum of the ranks in the "low" versus "high" subsets.  Some minor differences 
do arise, and some of the cells in Tables 3-5 that are not significant using a t-test are significant 
using one of the nonparametric tests.  However, since our purpose is to compare investor returns, 
a simple comparison of means is reported here. 


IV. Are Better Environmental Performers Also Better Financial Performers? 

 

This section reports on the main empirical tests in this paper, the hypothesis being that 

good environmental performers are also good financial performers.   Tables 3 through 5 compare 

the financial performance of the "low polluter" versus "high polluter" portfolios - using the 

different environmental performance measures as the defining characteristic of each portfolio.  

Table 3 compares these firms using risk-adjusted market returns. Table 4 examines return on 

assets, while return on equity is shown in Table 5. 

 

There are a total of 54 comparisons made in the three tables, with each table comparing 

six different measures of environmental performance over three different time periods.  In over  

80% of the portfolio comparisons (44 out of 54),  the "low polluter" portfolio performs better 

than the "high polluter" portfolio.  If we restrict the comparison to only the risk-adjusted stock 

returns, about 75% (13 out of 18) of the "low polluter" portfolios performed better. Thus, it does 

not appear that investors who construct a balanced portfolio of good environmental performers 

will pay a penalty in terms of market performance.10  Only about 20% of these comparisons, 

however, are statistically significant.  Thus, this result should not be interpreted as strong 

                                                           
10 Market performance of our portfolios cannot be directly compared to the S&P 500 index for 
several reasons.  First, we report the average returns in the portfolio, whereas the S&P 500 index 
is weighted by capitalization.  Second, our portfolios exclude firms that are in industries with no 
variation on environmental performance - primarily financial services firms.  Third, we report 
risk-adjusted returns here.  Our comparison of the “toxic chemical” portfolios provides the 
closest approximation to the S&P 500, with a little over 400 firms represented.  The following 
table compares the total returns for the S&P 500 index, the "unweighted" S&P 500 as reported in 
Compustat and used for this study, and the high versus low toxic emission portfolios: 
 
 
YEAR S&P 500 
 
 
1987-9 17.8%   
1990 
1991 

Unweighted 
 
 
 
16.0%   
 
32.3%   

"Low    
 
14.9% 
 
28.5%   

 
S&P 500 
18.2%   
-8.4%   

-3.1%   
30.4%   

-6.6%   
25.4% 

 
Toxic"  

"High   
Toxic" 

-4.6% 

 
 

 

 


evidence of a ‘green investing premium.’  Instead, it is strong evidence that there is not a ‘green 

investing penalty.’  

 

The finding of no ‘green investing’ penalty is contrary to much of the earlier literature on 

socially conscious investing.  However, as mentioned above, most of the previous analysis has 

been limited to socially conscious mutual funds that are actively managed. Few mutual fund 

managers (regardless of their investment style or objective) consistently outperform the market.   

Moreover, it is important to note that the "low" and "high" portfolios constructed here are made 

within each industry category.  Thus, for example, a chemical company that is one of the top 25 

toxic chemical emitters in the country might also be one of the lowest emitters on a per dollar 

basis in the chemicals industry, and will thus be classified in the low polluter portfolio.  Few 

environmentally screened mutual funds invest in this manner, often preferring firms that pollute 

less in absolute, rather than relative, terms. In contrast to the socially conscious mutual funds, 

since our portfolios are balanced subsets of the S&P 500, it is possible to closely mimic the 

performance of such an index while at the same time choosing only those firms that are in the 

upper half of their industry’s environmental performance distribution.  Such a strategy does not 

appear to penalize investors in the way that a socially conscious mutual fund investment does.   

 

Although not reported here, similar results obtained for the number of oil spills, number 

of chemical spills and number of fines.  Instead, we report the volume of oil spills, volume of 

chemical spills and dollar value of fines.  Similar (and often slightly stronger) results were also 

obtained by limiting the two contrasting portfolios to the upper and lower quadrant of firms in an 

industry instead of the upper and lower halves of each industry. 

 

A brief discussion of the relationship between each of the individual environmental 

performance measures and the financial performance measures follows: 


(a) Environmental Litigation 

 

Firms with a relatively large number of environmental lawsuits as compared to their 

industry cohorts are likely to earn a lower level of return on assets and return on equity. 

However, this finding is statistically significant in only one case.  Differences in ROA range 

from 1.0% to 6.0% per year, while ROE differs very little, from a low of 0.4% to a high of 2.0%.  

 

Despite these lower accounting returns, there were no differences in stock market returns.  

In fact, risk adjusted market returns in 1987-9 were actually higher in the "high litigation" 

portfolio than in the "low litigation" group, although this difference was not statistically 

significant.11  Thus, it appears that despite slightly lower current earnings, the market does not 

react to 10-K disclosures of pending environmental lawsuits. To the extent that environmental 

litigation is a good proxy for environmental performance, this finding is not consistent with a 

"good environmental=good financial performance" hypothesis.  However, it is consistent with a 

weaker hypothesis that being a good environmental actor does not hurt the bottom line.   Further, 

the litigation variable is not the best proxy for environmental performance, as it is not an 

objective measure of pollution, but a measure of legal activity. 

 (b) Superfund Sites 

 

IRRC identified 313 firms (or majority-owned subsidiaries) out of the 500 S&P firms that 

were listed as being a "potentially responsible party" (PRP) to a National Priority List (NPL) 

site.  NPL sites are abandoned waste disposal sites which EPA has ranked as posing the greatest 

threats and thus requiring remediation.  As of 1989, when these data were reported, very few 

sites had been cleaned up, yet future costs were estimated to be substantial.  A recent study 

                                                           
11 When the portfolios are restricted to the upper and lower quartiles, the low litigation group has 
higher total returns; but this is not statistically significant. 


estimates the cost of cleanup of NPL sites in the U.S. to range from $30 billion to $120 billion 

(Dixon et al., 1993, p. 3). 

 

Being listed as a PRP does not implicate current environmental management practices in 

any manner, since disposal activities that caused the Superfund site took place many years ago.  

Moreover, PRP's often disposed of their wastes under completely legal and/or state-of-the art 

disposal practices at the time.  Nevertheless, being listed as a Superfund PRP may be an 

indicator of past environmental performance, since firms who polluted more are more likely to 

become PRPs. More importantly, given the high cost of cleanup, being listed as a PRP may have 

an impact on future earnings. 

 

As seen in Table 3, the "low site" portfolio outperformed the "high site" portfolio 

between 1987-1989: 18.1% to 16.0% on a risk adjusted market return basis.  It also 

outperformed the “high site” portfolio in 1990 and 1991. However, these differences are not 

statistically significant at p < .05. Although not shown here, these results are stronger when the 

portfolios are constructed using the upper and lower quartiles of the number of Superfund sites. 

For example, risk adjusted returns in 1987-9 were 20.6% for the low site portfolio and 14.9% for 

the high site portfolio (with significance level at p<.05).  These results are consistent with the 

hypothesis that the market anticipates significant Superfund cleanup expenditures for these firms 

in the future.12   

(c) Fines 

 

Although civil and criminal environmental penalties are sporadically reported in leading 

newspapers, administrative penalties - which constitute the majority of the compliance data 

                                                           
12 This is consistent with the findings of Barth and McNichols (1995), that the market partially 
incorporated expected Superfund liabilities during the 1982-1991 period. 


IRRC collected - are much less frequently reported in the press. They are also seldom mentioned 

in 10-K submissions.  Thus, although we might anticipate some impact on accounting returns,  

we would not expect a large stock market reaction to the fines themselves.  Instead, we would 

expect any difference in financial earnings to be due to additional compliance expenditures or 

other actions that the firm is required to undertake as part of the administrative or court action.   

 

Indeed, as shown in Table 3, the stock market reaction is relatively small and not 

significant.  In the 1987-1989 time period, risk adjusted returns were 17.2% for the “low fine” 

portfolio compared to 16.2% for the “high fine” portfolio.   However, as shown in Table 5, we 

find that during the time these fines were being assessed, 1987-9, ROE was significantly higher 

for the “low fine” portfolio than the “high fine” portfolio, 16.0% versus 12.9% (p < .05). 

(d) Oil Spills 

 

Although the few very large oil spills attract significant media attention, most spills are 

smaller and do not get noticed in either the national or business press.  All of the spills reported 

in the IRRC dataset, however, are of some consequence, being over 10,000 gallons.  The firms in 

these portfolios represent 20 different industries ranging from oil and chemical companies, 

natural gas and electric companies, truckers, as well as other manufacturing and fabricating 

industries.  

 

As shown in Table 3, although risk adjusted returns are lower in the 1987-1989 time 

period (18.1% versus 20.2%), these differences are not statistically significant.  There are 

significant differences in 1990, however, as the low spill portfolio earns a -4.2% compared to -

14.2% for the high spill portfolio (p< .05)13.  It is possible that this large lagged stock price 

                                                           
13 These results do not change if we take out the few outliers, firms with spills involving more 
than 500,000 gallons. 


reaction is due to an unanticipated time lag in expenditures, as the most significant oil spills in 

our sample occurred in 1989.  Perhaps more likely, oil spills may be a "leading indicator" that a 

firm is undergoing a management problem of some sort.  Future research on this issue would be 

of interest.  As shown in Tables 4 and 5, return on assets and return on equity are also generally 

lower for the high oil spill portfolio.  The differences are quite large and statistically significant.   

(e) Chemical Spills 

 

Chemical spills are similar to oil spills in terms of their reporting rates and media 

attention, as IRRC data only include spills larger than 10,000 gallons. As we found for oil spills, 

the difference in risk adjusted market returns (Table 3) are not statistically significant.  In fact, 

the “high spill” portfolio actually had higher returns than the “low spill” portfolio.  On the other 

hand, as shown in Tables 4 and 5, in both the years of chemical spills, 1987-9, and the two 

subsequent years, 1990 and 1991, accounting returns are significantly lower for firms in the high 

spill portfolio than in the low spill portfolio. These differences are generally significant. 

(f) Toxic Chemical Releases 

 

Public disclosure of TRI emissions was mandated by the Emergency Planning and 

Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986.  The first public disclosure of TRI emissions was made 

in June 1989, for 1987 emissions.  Subsequent disclosure of 1988 emissions followed shortly 

thereafter, between the end of 1989 and early 1990.  Public pressure followed immediately after 

the first disclosures, as environmental groups (notably the Natural Resources Defense Fund) 

publicized the highest emitters and called for community-based protests.14  

                                                           
14    "A New EPA Database Details the Sources of Toxics Releases," Chemical Week,  June 28, 
1989, p. 8.  Following release of the data, local newspapers were filled with details of nearby 
manufacturing plants emissions, based on information obtained from either the EPA or the 
NRDC reports. 


 

Our findings for TRI are quite provocative.  As shown in Table 5, risk adjusted returns in 

1987-9 were significantly lower for the "high toxic" portfolio, 14.9% compared to 18.3%.  

Although not shown here, virtually all of this difference is due to 1989, the year in which TRI 

emissions were first announced.  In that year, the low toxic portfolio return was 32.1%, 

compared to 23.7% for the high toxic portfolio (p < .01).  This result is consistent with the 

findings of Hamilton (1995) and Konar and Cohen (1996), in which a significant negative stock 

market effect is shown on the day of the announcement of TRI emissions for firms who were 

relatively high toxic emitters in their industry.   

 

Perhaps more interesting, however, is what happened to accounting returns in the years 

following the first announcement of TRI emissions. As shown in Tables 4 and 5, in 1990, both 

ROA and ROE were significantly lower for the “high TRI” portfolio, although not statistically 

significant.  Thus, ‘dirtier’ firms had lower earnings.  However, in 1991, ROA was actually 3% 

higher for the “high TRI” portfolio, 7.9% versus 4.9% (p < .02). Recall that the 1991 financial 

performance measures are based on a “high TRI” portfolio that is measured as of 1987-1989.  

Thus, one possible explanation for this finding is that firms who emitted high levels of toxic 

chemicals in 1987-1989 subsequently found low cost ways to emit less, thereby saved money 

previously wasted on raw materials that ended up as toxic releases.  Although this is a very 

tentative finding, it is consistent with the findings of Hart and Ahuja (1996) who find efforts to 

prevent pollution and reduce emissions in a sample of S&P 500 companies has positive financial 

results (ROS, ROA and ROE) within 1-2 years of initiation.  

 

V. Does Good (Bad) Financial Performance Precede Good (Poor) Environmental Performance? 


 

Although we have shown that firms that perform well on environmental dimensions also 

perform well financially, that analysis was entirely static.  We did not ask the question of which 

comes first or why this correlation might exist. This section briefly considers the question of why 

firms are good or bad environmental performers.  Economists have often been interested in a 

related question - why firms comply with government regulation.  In a world of rational utility 

maximizing individuals with profit maximizing firms, the only reason we would expect 

compliance is if the expected cost of noncompliance exceeded the cost of compliance. Similarly, 

the only reason we would expect firms to ‘overcomply’ with regulations is if the benefits to the 

firm exceed the costs.   

 

The theory of optimal penalties15 is generally the starting point for most economic 

analysis of compliance or overcompliance.  This theory relies on the simple proposition that 

firms will base compliance decisions on the probability of detection and the expected penalty if 

detected.  This often stated proposition is not simple to operationalize.  For example, when a risk 

neutral firm faces a bankruptcy constraint, it acts as though it is risk loving and might be less 

likely to comply than otherwise.16  When the firm compliance decisions are made by an agent of 

the firm owners, moral hazard might distort the incentives facing the firm managers.17  Many 

observers have noted that government-imposed sanctions are too small to deter noncompliance, 

suggesting either that they need to be higher or that there are other sanctions already in operation 

                                                           
15 See Becker (1968). 

16 See e.g., Cohen (1987). 

17 See e.g., Segerson and Tietenberg (1992) and Polinsky and Shavell (1993).  


such as the threat of future more stringent enforcement actions,18 losing firm reputation and 

goodwill,19 or for gaining strategic competitive advantage over competitors.20  

 

Previous empirical work that attempts to understand why firms comply with the law have 

focused on the role of government enforcement and/or penalties in reducing observed pollution 

or noncompliance.21  Data availability in most of these studies is rather limited.  Thus, they have 

seldom been able to examine a large number of firms or a comprehensive set of environmental 

performance variables.  Moreover, previous work has generally focused on enforcement issues, 

not on the underlying firm characteristics that might influence environmental performance.22 

 

Based on the above discussion, the following factors are likely to affect environmental 

performance for an expected profit maximizing firm: 

Environmental Performance =      F (Probability of Detection, Expected Sanction if Detected, 
 
Cost of Compliance, Reputation Cost of Noncompliance, 
 
Likelihood of Bankruptcy) 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

                                                           
18 See e.g., Harrington  (1988). 

19 Karpoff and Lott (1993) argue that firm reputation loss is substantial in the case of corporate 
fraud.  Although there is yet scant empirical evidence on the role of firm reputation on 
environmental performance, Arora and Gangopadhyay (1995) provide a theoretical argument for 
a firm overcomplying with environmental standards.  

20 See e.g., Barrett (1992).   

21 For example, Cohen (1987) estimated the effect of increased enforcement on the frequency and 
size of oil spills, and Magat and Viscusi (1990) examined the effect of compliance inspections 
on pollution discharges in the pulp and paper industry.  A recent dissertation by Graham (1994) 
summarizes the empirical literature on corporate environmental performance and provides an 
empirical analysis of corporate social responsibility and organizational theory explanations for 
environmental performance.  Graham uses the total monetary penalties reported in the IRRC 
database as a measure of corporate environmental performance. 

22 A notable exception is Arora and Cason (1995), who examine why firms join the  voluntary 
33/50 emissions reduction program.  However, that paper does not explicitly distinguish between 
good and bad environmental performers, only those who join this voluntary program.  


 

Environmental performance is expected to be positively related to the probability of 

detection, expected size of sanction, and firm reputation loss from lack of a good environmental 

record.  It is expected to be negatively related to the cost of compliance and firm financial 

difficulties such as high probability of bankruptcy or capital constraints. 

 

Although a complete investigation of the determinants of environmental performance is 

beyond the scope of this paper, as a preliminary exploration we report on a reduced form 

equation taking into account the theoretical model. We operationalize the enforcement variables 

(e.g. probability of detection and expected sanctions) by including a measure of past 

environmental performance as measured by fines for environmental violations.  The cost of 

compliance is proxied by age of assets of the firm (since older plants may have more costly 

control technologies).  The likelihood of bankruptcy is proxied by the prior financial 

performance of the firm. Thus, environmental performance is hypothesized to be a function of 

the age of firm assets, prior year financial performance, and growth in market value of the firm 

in the years prior to measurement of environmental performance.  We expect firms with older 

assets and those with worse financial performance to perform worse on environmental variables. 

 

Tables 6 lists the main variables entered into two different regression equations 

explaining environmental performance.  Table 7 reports on a Tobit regression equation, where 

the dependent variable is the natural log of TRI emissions in 1988.  Since TRI emissions are not 

normally distributed, and involve a few very large emissions levels, they have been converted to 

natural logs. TRI emissions cannot be negative; thus the distribution is truncated at zero, and we 

employ a Tobit regression model for estimation.  The first column of Table 7 reports on the 

natural log of 1988 TRI emissions, while the second column shows the same equation with the 

dependant variable being the natural log of TRI emission per dollar of sales.  After controlling 


for 22 different industry categories, this table regresses TRI emissions on size of firm, superfund 

sites, prior year government enforcement activities (fines), age of assets, and prior year financial 

performance.  The industry dummies - which are primarily control variables - are not reported 

here.  

 

The main finding in Table 7 is that prior financial performance does not help explain TRI 

emissions.  Neither prior year risk adjusted returns (BTOT87) nor prior 5-year growth in market 

value of firm (GR8286) offer any significant explanatory power.23  Instead, as shown in Table 7, 

the key explanatory variables for TRI emissions appear to be the number of Superfund sites, 

volume of sales, and age of assets, all of which were significant at p < .01. Thus, as we would 

suspect, high TRI emissions occurred at older, larger firms that had a large number of Superfund 

sites. Also consistent with the above theoretical discussion, prior year government fines are 

negatively related to emissions (p < .05).  That is, government imposed fines against illegal 

emissions are related to a subsequent lowering of TRI emissions (which are legal).  

 

Table 8 reports on one final measure of environmental performance, the number and size 

of government imposed fines in 1987.  Since many firms were not fined during that year, and we 

are using fines as a proxy for environmental performance, the dependant variable is truncated at 

                                                           
23Although not shown here, other specifications of growth rates and firm financial performance 
were also tried without success.  Despite this result, the "high TRI portfolio" constructed in the 
earlier sections performed poorly in the years prior to TRI emissions.  In 1986, the low toxic 
portfolio risk adjusted return was 28.5%, compared to 23.2% for the high toxic group (p<.10);  in 
1985, the low toxic group earned 37.8% versus 31.1% (p<.05),  and in 1984 the returns were 
13.4% versus 5.4% (p <.01).  This result is consistent with a positive correlation between 
financial and environmental performance.  To examine this further,  we tested several 
variations of a probit analysis, where the dependent variable was coded one if the firm was in the 
high TRI portfolio and zero if in the low TRI group.  Although not reported here, the only 
significant explanatory variables are age of assets and number of Superfund sites.  Once these 
variables are factored into the analysis, prior year financial performance was not a significant 
predictor of a firm's TRI portfolio classification.  


zero, and a Tobit regression model is used.  As expected, firms with higher TRI emissions and 

more Superfund sites also had more and higher levels of fines.  That is, our different measures of 

environmental performance are related.  Now, however, one of the financial performance 

measures is significant.  Firms that were growing rapidly in the 1982-1986 time period (as 

evidenced by change in market value) had fewer and lower dollar fines than firms that were not 

growing very rapidly or were declining.   Thus, it appears that financial distress may be a 

precursor to poor environmental performance, at least in terms of regulatory compliance. This is 

consistent with the findings of Alexander and Cohen (1996) in the context of corporate criminal 

actions. 

 

VII. Concluding Remarks 

 

This study has presented new evidence on whether or not so-called “green” investors 

need to pay a premium for their convictions.  The answer appears to be no.  Investors who 

choose the environmental leaders in an industry-balanced portfolio were found to do as well (or 

better) than choosing the environmental laggards in each industry.  Based on this finding, one 

could construct a well-balanced portfolio that tracked the S&P 500 index and included only the 

environmental leaders in each industry category.  Such a portfolio would be expected to meet or 

exceed the market returns of the S&P 500. 

 

Of course, the above finding is tentative and based on historical data on environmental 

and financial performance.  Global concern for the environment is a relatively new and fast 

changing issue.  Indeed, little if any of the information on environmental performance used in 


this study was available in any systematic manner until recently.  As environmental issues have 

taken on more and more importance, we would expect the relationship to become even stronger. 

This is especially true as firms adopt pollution prevention technologies and as the cost of waste 

disposal continues to rise.  Thus, a follow up study could examine whether environmental 

leaders are outperforming their environmental laggard counterparts.   Ultimately, however, 

whether the market will more heavily value or discount firms based on their environmental 

records in the future remains to be seen.  

 

This paper has only begun to address the issue of causation.  The fact that greener firms 

are doing as well or better than their more polluting counterparts may be due to the fact that 

firms with more efficient manufacturing processes also pollute less. On the other hand, firms that 

pollute less might do so because they can better afford to invest in pollution control technologies.  

Put differently, high polluter firms might simply be those who cannot afford to comply. Finally, 

it is also possible that there are other underlying reasons for any association we find.  We have 

examined this issue somewhat, by controlling for age of assets and the existence of older 

Superfund sites.   However, to examine which explanation is more plausible would require 

considerably more time-series data than available for this study.  


Environmental Performance Variable 

Summary Statistics on Pollution Portfolios, 1987-1989  
 

“Low” 

 

TABLE 1 

“High” 

Pollution Portfolio  

 

Litigation: Number of Firms 
Mean number of lawsuits 
Median 
Min - Max 
Superfund Sites: Number of Firms 
Mean number of Superfund sites 
Median 
Min - Max 
Monetary Fines: Number of Firms 
Mean number of Fines 
Median 
Min - Max 
Dollars of Fines: Number of Firms 
Mean dollar value of fines 
Median 
Min - Max 
Toxic Releases Number of Firms 
Mean pounds of toxic releases 
Median 
Min - Max 
Oil Spills: Number of Firms 
Mean number of oil spills 
Median  
Min - Max  
Volume of Oil Spilled: Number of Firms 
Mean gallons of oil spilled 
Median  
Min - Max  
Chemical Spills: Number of Firms  
Mean number of chemical spills 
Median  
Min - Max  
Volume of Chemical Spills: Number of Firms 
Mean gallons of chemicals spilled 
Median  
Min - Max  

Pollution Portfolio  
189 
.47 
0 
0- 20 
230 
2.7 
0 
0 - 45 
239 
3.7 
0 
0 - 177 
238 
$30,134 
0 
0 - 1,449,527 
240 
3,700,270 
0 
0 - 76,054,075 
117 
.315 
0 
0 - 16 
129 
21,669 
0 
0 - 1,698,000 
197 
.8 
0 
0 - 39 
203 
106,038 
0 
0 - 6,549,150 

104 
2169 
6 
1- 114,752 
186 
8.0 
4 
1- 51 
194 
150 
7.5 
1 - 5610 
194 
$384,811 
50,210 
100- 9,486,120 
173 
28,897,520 
3,879,357 
1 - 718,262,639 
32 
6.6 
2 
1 - 41 
35 
2,248,185 
35,700 
11,000 - 55,346,980 
109 
7.8 
3 
1 - 108 
112 
2,086,390 
193,494 
10,830 - 34,223,367 


Portfolios are industry-balanced subsets of the S&P 500, consisting of the “lowest” or “highest” polluting 
firms in their respective industry categories.  Since portfolios were constructed based on the median levels 
of the environmental performance measure of interest, and the median company in a given industry might 
have zero fines (for example), portfolios do not contain equal number of companies. See text.  SOURCE: 
IRRC Corporate Environmental Profiles. 


Environmental Performance 
Variable 

TABLE 2 

Comparison of Firm Size & Beta for High/Low Portfolios 
“High” 

“Low” 

 

 

p-value 

Pollution Portfolio  

Pollution 
Portfolio 

 

 

 

 
$5,070 
1.07 
 
$5,476 
1.12 
 
$4,894 
1.12 
 
$4,875 
1.12 
 
$5,308 
1.08 
 
$6,768 
0.925 
 
$6,469 
0.919 
 
$4,570 
0.97 
 
$4,015 
1.09 

Litigation:   
Revenue (millions) 
Ave. Beta 
Superfund Sites:  
Revenue (millions) 
Ave. Beta 
Monetary Fines:   
Revenue (millions) 
Ave. Beta 
Dollars of Fines:   
Revenue (millions) 
Ave. Beta 
 
Toxic Releases:  
Revenue (millions) 
Ave. Beta 
Oil Spills:   
Revenue (millions) 
Ave. Beta 
Volume of Oil Spilled:  
Revenue (millions) 
Ave. Beta 
Chemical Spills:  
Revenue (millions) 
Ave. Beta 
Volume of Chemical Spills:  
Revenue (millions) 
Ave. Beta 
Portfolios are industry-balanced subsets of the S&P 500, consisting of the “lowest” or “highest” polluting 
firms in their respective industry categories. Since portfolios were constructed based on the median levels 
of the environmental performance measure of interest, and the median company in a given industry might 
have zero fines (for example), portfolios do not contain equal number of companies. See text.  SOURCE: 
IRRC Corporate Environmental Profiles. 
* p < .10; ** p< .05; *** p < .01 

 
.30 
.81 
 
.81 
.19 
 
.06* 
.35 
 
.03** 
.24 
 
0.14 
0.09* 
 
.19 
.43 
 
.10* 
.18  
 
.003*** 
.002*** 
 
.001*** 
.10* 

 
$6,405 
1.06 
 
$5,706 
1.07 
 
$6,730 
1.09 
 
$7,028 
1.08 
 
$6,985 
1.13 
 
$11,649 
0.979 
 
$13,117 
1.00 
 
$9,159 
0.97 
 
$9,271 
0.99 


TABLE 3 

Risk-Adjusted Market Returns 

Comparison of High versus Low Pollution Portfolios 

Environmental 

Performance Variable 
Litigation    
1987-1989 (ave) 
1990 
1991 
Superfund Sites 
1987-1989 (ave) 
1990 
1991 
Total Value of Fines 
1987-1989 (ave) 
1990 
1991 
Oil Spill Volume 
1987-1989 (ave) 
1990 
1991 
Volume of Chemical 
Spills 1987-9 (ave) 
1990 
1991 
Toxic Releases 
1987-1989 (ave 
1990 
1991 

“Low” Pollution 

Portfolio  
.1750 

“High” Pollution  

Portfolio  
.1926 

-.0538 
. 2727 
.1808 

-.0513 
.2915 
.1721 

-.0446 
.3077 
.2024 

-.0417 
.2940 
.1747 

-.0481 
.2552 
.1829 

-.0657 
.2854 

-.0634 
.2713 
.1598 

-.0734 
.2674 
.1625 

-.0644 
.2510 
.1813 

-.1425 
.2016 
.1954 

-.0420 
.3061 
.1498 

-.0464 
.2538 

t-test 

.425 

.754 
.978 
.215 

.366 
.534 
.571 

.421 
.140 
.550 

.047** 
.088 
.328 

.841 
.334  
.044** 

.439 
.391 

Number of 

firms 
288 

289 
289 
404 

406 
408 
417 

419 
421 
158  

161 
162 
305 

308 
309 
401 

404 
406 

Portfolios are industry-balanced subsets of the S&P 500, consisting of the “lowest” or “highest” polluting 
firms in their respective industry categories. Since portfolios were constructed based on the median levels 
of the environmental performance measure of interest, and the median company in a given industry might 
have zero fines (for example), portfolios do not contain equal number of companies. See text.  SOURCE: 
IRRC Corporate Environmental Profiles. 
* p < .10; ** p< .05; *** p < .01 


TABLE 4 
Return on Assets  

 

Comparison of High versus Low Pollution Portfolios 

Environmental 

Performance Variable 

Low Pollution 

Portfolio 
(Returns) 

High Pollution  

Portfolio 
(Returns) 

Litigation    
1987-1989 (ave) 
1990 
1991 
Superfund Sites 
1987-1989 (ave) 
1990 
1991 
Total Value of Fines 
1987-1989 (ave) 
1990 
1991 
Oil Spill Volume 
1987-1989 (ave) 
1990 
1991 
Volume Chemical 
Spills 1987-9 (ave) 
1990 
1991 
Toxic Releases 
1987-1989 (ave 
1990 
1991 

.086 

.127 
.065 
.086 

.121 
.042 
.087 

.122 
.054 
.081 

.072  
.059 
.094 

.130  
.053 
.086 

.117  
.049 

.076 

.067 
.048 
.076 

.077 
.066 
.079 

.069  
.072 
.064 

.058 
.047 
.076 

.068 
.051 
.079 

.071 
.079 

t-test 

.125 

.26 
.45 
.078* 

.371 
.142 
.088*  

.261 
.386 
.034** 

.083* 
.253 

.005*** 

.348 
.931  
.212 

.353 
.021** 

Number of 

firms 

293 

292 
291 
414 

414 
409 
430 

431 
422 
163  

163 
163 
314 

313 
311 
410 

411 
407 

Portfolios are industry-balanced subsets of the S&P 500, consisting of the “lowest” or “highest” polluting 
firms in their respective industry categories. Since portfolios were constructed based on the median levels 
of the environmental performance measure of interest, and the median company in a given industry might 
have zero fines (for example), portfolios do not contain equal number of companies. See text.  SOURCE: 
IRRC Corporate Environmental Profiles. 
* p < .10; ** p< .05; *** p < .01 


TABLE 5 
Return on Equity 

 

Comparison of High versus Low Pollution Portfolios 

Environmental 

Performance Variable 
Litigation    
1987-1989 (ave) 
1990 
1991 
Superfund Sites 
1987-1989 (ave) 
1990 
1991 
Total Value Fines 
1987-1989 (ave) 
1990 
1991 
Oil Spill Volume 
1987-1989 (ave) 
1990 
1991 
Volume Chemical 
Spills 1987-9 (ave) 
1990 
1991 
Toxic Releases 
1987-1989 (ave) 
1990 
1991 

Low Pollution 

Portfolio  

High Pollution  

Portfolio  

.145 

.100 
.097 
.161 

.120 
.118 
.160 

.123 
.116 
.169 

.132  
.059 
.180 

.121  
.109 
.154 

.126  
.114 

.129 

.121 
.093 
.132 

.105 
.087 
.129 

.107  
.092 
.102 

.091 
.047 
.124 

.149 
.098 
.139 

.117 
.092 

t-test 

.27 

.66 
.90 
.07* 

.66  
.15 
.05**  

.59 
.27 
.082* 

.12 
.253 

.009*** 

.50 
.70   
.33 

.76  
.32 

Number of 

firms 
293 

292 
291 
414 

414 
409 
430 

431 
422 
163  

163 
163 
314 

313 
311 
410 

411 
407 

 

Portfolios are industry-balanced subsets of the S&P 500, consisting of the “lowest” or “highest” polluting 
firms in their respective industry categories. Since portfolios were constructed based on the median levels 
of the environmental performance measure of interest, and the median company in a given industry might 
have zero fines (for example), portfolios do not contain equal number of companies. See text.  SOURCE: 
IRRC Corporate Environmental Profiles. 
* p < .10; ** p< .05; *** p < .01 


 
 

Variable Name 
AGE87 

BTOT?? 

FINE87 
GR8286 

SALES8789 
SFUND 
SFUNDADJ 
TOXIC 
TOXADJ 

TABLE 6 

Variable Definitions for Tables 7 and 8 

Description 
Net (depreciated) Assets divided by Gross Assets, 1987;  Ranges from 0-1, 
with higher numbers indicating newer plant & equipment 
Risk Adjusted Stock Market Returns, 19?? 
(dividends plus end of year stock appreciation as percentage of beginning year 
stock value) 
Dollar Value of Fines imposed in 1987 
Growth in Market Value of Firm (share price x shares outstanding) from 1982 
to 1986 
Average Revenue for years 1987-1989 
Number of Superfund Sites 
Number of Superfund Sites divided by SALES8789 
Aggregate 1988 TRI emissions 
TOXIC divided by SALES8789 

 
 


TABLE 7   

TRI Emissions in 1988 

(Tobit Model) 

 

Variable 

 Dependent Variable: 
  Ln(TOXIC) 
 2.94 (0.43)*** 
 3.69 (0.40)*** 
-5.59 (1.87)*** 
-0.0007 (.0005) 
 -0.89 E-06 (.46 E-.06)** 
-0.23 (1.21) 
 1.67 (3.09) 
375 

Ln(SFUNDADJ) 
Ln(SALES8789) 
Ln(AGE87) 
GR8286 
FINE87 
BTOT87 
Constant 
Sample Size 
NOTE: standard errors in parentheses;  * p <.10;  ** p< .05;  *** p<.01 
 
 

Industry dummy variables were included but are not reported in table. 

Dependent Variable:  
Ln(TOXICADJ) 
 1.69 (0.22)*** 
 1.52 (0.19)*** 
-3.01 (0.91)*** 
-0.000069 (0.00023) 
- 0.42 E-06 (0.23 E-06)* 
 0.085 (0.60) 
2.62 (1.54)* 
 375 


 

Variable 

Government-imposed Fines, 1987 

TABLE 8 

(Tobit Model) 

 

SFUND 
Ln(SALES8789) 
AGE87 
GR8286 
BTOT86 
Constant 
Sample Size 
NOTE: standard errors in parentheses;  * p <.10;  ** p< .05;  *** p<.01 
 
 

 Dependent Variable:     
 Number of Fines  
  14 (3.9)*** 
  42 (28) 
522 (248)** 
-5.2 (2.6)** 
-65 (85) 
 -1045 (254)*** 
368 

Industry dummy variables were included but are not reported in table. 

Dependent Variable:  
 Dollar Value of Fines 
    47,455 (10,130)**    
   68,210 (51,890) 
 446,200 (450,000) 
  -9,128   (4729) ** 
  204,430 (154,800) 
 -1,496,700 (459,500)*** 
 368 


 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Alexander, C.R., M.A. Cohen, “New Evidence on the Origins of Corporate Crime,” 17 Managerial and 

Decision Economics pp. 421-35, 1996. 

 
Arora, S., T.N. Cason, "An Experiment in Voluntary Environmental Regulation: Participation in EPA's 

33/50 Program," 28 Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 1995. 

 
Arora, S., S. Gangopadhyay, "Toward a Theoretical Model of Voluntary Overcompliance," 25 Journal 

of Economic Behaviour and Organization, 1995, pp. 289-309. 

 
Barrett, S., "Strategy and the Environment," 28 Columbia Journal of World Business, 1992, pp. 202-8. 
 
Barth, Mary E. and Maureen F. McNichols, “Estimation and Market Valuation of Environmental 

Liabilities Relating to Superfund Sites,” 32 Journal of Accounting Research, 1994, pp. 177-209. 

 
Becker, G.S. (1968). "Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach," 76 Journal of Political 

Economy 169-217. 

 
Bowman E.H., M. Haire, "A strategic posture toward corporate social responsibility," California 

Management Review 18: No. 2, 1975. 

 
Bragdon J.H., and J. Marlin, "Is pollution profitable?," Risk Management 19: No. 4, 1972. 
 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., "Report on environmental progress," May 1993, p. 14. 
 
Chen K.H., and R.W. Metcalf, "The relationship between pollution control records and financial 

indicators revisited," Accounting Review 55: 1980. 

 
Cochran P. and R. Wood, "Corporate social responsibility and financial performance," California 

Management Review, 18: No. 2, 1975. 

 
Cohen, M.A., "Optimal Enforcement Strategy to Prevent Oil Spills: An Application of a Principal-Agent 

Model with 'Moral Hazard,' 30 Journal of Law and Economics, 1987,  
p. 23-51. 

 
 
Dixon, L. S., D. S. Drezner, and J. K, Hammitt, "Private-Sector Cleanup Expenditures and Transaction 

Costs at 18 Superfund Sites," Rand Corporation, 1993. 

 
 
Erfle S., and M. Fratantuono, "Interrelations among corporate social performance, social disclosure, and 
financial performance: An empirical investigation," Working paper, Dickinson College, January 
1992. 

 
Graham, C.R., "Corporate Environmental Crime: An Empirical Test of a Model Integrating Concepts 
from Organizational Crime Theory and Corporate Social Performance Theory," Dissertation, 
Owen Graduate School of Management, Vanderbilt University, May 1994. 

 


 

     

Hamilton, J. T., "Pollution as News: Media and Stock Market Reactions to the Toxics Release Inventory 

Data," 28 Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 1995, p. 98-113. 

 
Harrington, W., Enforcement Leveredge when Penalties are Restricted, 37 Journal of Public Economics, 

1988, pp. 222-53. 

 
Hart, Stuart and Ahuja Gautum, “Does It Pay to be Green? An Empirical Examination of the 

Relationship Between Emission Reduction and Firm Performance,” 5 Business Strategy and the 
Environment, 1996, pp. 30-7. 

 
Investor Responsibility Research Center, Corporate Environmental Profiles Directory, 1992. 

(Washington, D.C: IRRC). 

 
Karpoff, J.M., J. R. Lott, Jr. "The Reputational Penalty Firms Bear from Committing Criminal Fraud," 

36 Journal of Law and Economics, 1993, p. 757.  

 
Konar, Shameek and Mark A. Cohen, "Information As Regulation: The Effect of Community Right to 

Know Laws on Toxic Emissions," Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 
(forthcoming, 1996). 

Magat, W.A., W. Kip Viscusi, "Effectiveness of EPA's Regulatory Enforcement: The Case of 
Industrial Effluent Standards," 33 Journal of Law and Economics, 1990, 331-60. 

                    
Mahapatra, S., "Investor Reaction to Corporate Social Accounting," Journal of Business Finance and 

Accounting, 11 (1), Spring 1984, pp. 29-40. 

 
McGuire J., A. Sundgren, and T. Schneeweis, "Corporate social responsibility and firm financial 

performance," Academy of Management Journal 31: 1981. 

 
Monsanto Co., Environmental Annual Review , 1991 p. 2. 
 
 
 
Palmer, K., W. Oates and P. Portney. 1995. “Tightening Environmental Standards: The Benefit-Cost or 

the No-Cost Paradigm?” The Journal of Economic Perspectives. Vol 9, No. 4. pp. 119-132. 

 
Polinsky, A.M., S. Shavell, "Should Employees be Subject to Fines and Imprisonment Given the 

Existence of Corporate Liability?" 13 International Review of Law and Economics, 1993, p. 239.  

 
Porter, M. "America's Green Strategy," Scientific American, April 1991, p. 168. 
 
Segerson, K., T. Tietenberg, "The Structure of Penalties in Environmental Enforcement: An Economic 

Analysis," 23 Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 1992, p. 179. 

 
Schmidheiny, S., Changing Course, (MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1992). 
 
Spicer B.H., "Investors, corporate social performance and informational disclosure: An empirical 

study," Accounting Review 53: 1978. 


 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Environmental Investments: The Cost of a Clean Environment, 
Report Summary of the administrator of the EPA to the Congress of the United States (EPA-230-
12-90-084), December 1990. 

 
Vance S., "Are socially responsible corporations good investment risks," Management Review, No. 64, 

1975, pp. 18-24. 

 
White M.A., "Green Investing: The recent performance of environmentally-oriented mutual funds," 

McIntire School of Commerce, University of Virginia, July 1991. 

 
 
 

View publication stats
View publication stats

