 
 
The Determinants of Job Seekers' Reputation Perceptions
Author(s): Daniel M. Cable and  Mary E. Graham
Source: Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 21, No. 8 (Dec., 2000), pp. 929-947
Published by: Wiley
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3100362
Accessed: 02-08-2017 16:50 UTC
 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3100362?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms

Wiley is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of
Organizational Behavior

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:50:44 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Journal of Organizational Behaviour
 J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 929-947 (2000)

 The determinants of job seekers' reputation
 perceptions

 DANIEL M. CABLE1* AND MARY E. GRAHAM2
 ' University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, The Kenan-Flagler Business School, Chapel Hill, USA
 2Department of Management Science, School of Business and Public Management, The George
 Washington University, Washington, USA

 Summary Although job seekers' reputation perceptions may be based on different factors than

 other constituents (e.g., investors, consumers), we know little about the antecedents of
 job seekers' reputation perceptions. The present study utilizes verbal protocol analysis to
 explore the factors that job seekers consider when evaluating employers' reputations.
 Results from this qualitative investigation are complemented and cross-validated with an
 experimental policy capturing study and a field study of recruiting organizations. Data
 from all three methodologies suggest that some factors affecting job seekers' reputation
 perceptions are quite different from factors that have been revealed in previous reputation
 research, which has focused primarily on executives. For example, results from the
 present study reveal that the type of industry in which a firm operates, the opportunities
 that a firm provides for employee development, and organizational culture affect job
 seekers' reputation perceptions. Copyright ) 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Introduction

 An organization's reputation, defined as a public's affective evaluation of a firms' name relative
 to other firms (Fombrun, 1996; Fombrun and Shanley, 1990), affects many outcomes that are
 directly related to organizational performance. For example, organizational reputation affects
 workforce composition because job seekers' initial attraction to organizations are affected by
 their perceptions of organizational reputation (Belt and Paolillo, 1982; Gatewood et al., 1993;
 Rynes, 1991). Moreover, applicants are potential consumers for most firms. Thus, creating a
 positive reputation during recruitment can affect brand equity and future marketing success
 (Keller, 1993; Rynes and Barber, 1990).

 We know relatively little about the factors that affect job seekers' reputation perceptions. This

 is an important omission from the literature because understanding the antecedents of job
 seekers' reputation perceptions may help managers change employment conditions or emphasize
 certain organizational information to improve their firms' reputations. For example, if job
 seekers base their reputation perceptions primarily on organizational profits, or workforce
 diversity, or opportunities for professional growth, managers can give emphasis to these
 attributes during recruitment (e.g., in brochures, information sessions, interviews). Also, for
 organizational theorists, it is necessary to understand the antecedents of job seekers' reputation
 perceptions in order to know how the criteria for organizational reputation vary across different

 * Correspondence to: Daniel Cable, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, The Kenan-Flagler Business School,
 Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490, USA.

 Copyright ( 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Accepted 19 May 2000

 Received 16 August 1999

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:50:44 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 930 D. M. CABLE AND M. E. GRAHAM

 constituents (Fombrun and Shanley, 1990). The goal of the present study is to use multiple
 research methodologies to learn about the antecedents of job seekers' reputation perceptions.

 Overview of past research

 Although the antecedents of job seekers' reputation perceptions have not been the focus of
 a large research literature, several investigations have been conducted of corporate
 executives' reputation perceptions using Fortune's annual survey. Fombrun and Shanley
 (1990) used the Fortune reputation data to examine several different classes of reputation
 determinants (e.g., profitability, advertising, charitable donations). Results revealed that
 firms' reputations were predicted by both financial performance (e.g., accounting
 profitability, market value, and dividend yield) and, to a far lesser degree, non-financial
 firm attributes (e.g., media visibility, firm size, institutional ownership, and demonstrations
 of social concern). McGuire et al. (1988) examined the Fortune rankings of firms'
 reputations and found that stock-market returns and accounting-based measures of financial
 performance were the best predictors. Similarly, Hammond and Slocum (1996) found that
 firms' financial risks and costs were the best predictors of Fortune's reputation data, and
 Sobol and Farrelley (1988) revealed that several financial performance measures (e.g.,
 earnings per share, average yield) affected Fortune's reputation ratings. Preston and
 O'Bannon (1997), also using Fortune's reputation data, confirmed the positive relationship
 between financial performance and reputation. In general, these results are consistent with
 literature reviews indicating that Fortune's reputation rankings are predominantly financial-
 orientated, probably because they are reported by corporate executives and financial
 analysts (Baucus, 1995; Brown and Perry, 1994; Fryxell and Wang, 1994).

 While some organizational attributes (e.g., indicators of financial success) have emerged in the

 literature as consistent predictors of executives' reputation perceptions, research generally has
 treated perceptions of reputation as constant across the publics. This approach runs counter to a
 stakeholder perspective on reputation, where corporations are viewed as constellations of
 competitive and cooperative interests from different stakeholders, and any corporation's survival
 depends upon the ability of its managers to create sufficient satisfaction for those who belong to
 each stakeholder group (Clarkson, 1995). Moreover, social identity theory suggests that unlike
 other constituents (e.g., consumers, investors), employees share an especially close affiliation with
 organizations such that individuals' self-concepts are connected to their employer (Ashforth and
 Mael, 1989; Dutton et al., 1994). The connection between an organization's image and a person's
 identity should be particularly strong during the job pursuit process, because the act of pursuing
 and accepting a job highlights the volitional nature of the affiliation (Popovich and Wanous,
 1982). Accordingly, the criteria job seekers use to evaluate an organization's reputation may be
 attributes related to their personal identity and needs, such as personal growth or the opportunity
 to work with compatible coworkers.

 Consistent with social identity theory and a stakeholder perspective, some research suggests
 that job seekers use very different criteria than executives when forming reputation perceptions.
 For example, while Schwoerer and Rosen (1989) found that firms' employment at will and
 compensation policies affected job seekers' reputation perceptions, Gatewood and colleagues
 (1993) found that none of the organizational attributes examined by Fombrun and Shanley
 (1990) (e.g., profitability, risk, advertising, demonstrations of social concern) were significantly
 related to job seekers' reputation beliefs. Interestingly, Gatewood et al. (1993) found that

 Copyright ? 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 929-947 (2000)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:50:44 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 JOB SEEKERS' REPUTATION PERCEPTIONS 931

 reputation perceptions were strongly related to job seekers' familiarity with organizations (e.g.,
 knowing someone who works for the company, using the company's products).

 Turban and Greening (1997) examined the relationship between job seekers' organizational
 reputation perceptions and the activities that are traditionally viewed as social performance (i.e.,
 community relations, employee relations, treatment of environment, product quality, treatment
 of women and minorities). None of these attributes were individually related to job seekers'
 organizational reputation perceptions, although as a group they accounted for a significant
 proportion of variance (R2 = 0.07). Turban and Greening (1997) also found that organizations'
 profitability accounted for a significant amount of variance in job seekers' reputation
 perceptions.

 Highhouse et al. (1999) focused on the company employment images of fast food chains. While

 the results from this study might be confined to the restaurant industry, Highhouse et al. (1999)
 revealed several antecedents to reputation that are very different from the factors found to affect
 executives' reputation perceptions, including atmosphere, customers, and product image. In
 general, then, some emerging research suggests that few of the factors that affect job seekers'
 reputation perceptions match the factors that have been found to affect executives' reputation
 perceptions in the Fortune data.

 In summary, several general problems restrict the implications that managers can draw from

 past research on the antecedents of organizational reputations. First, most existing research on
 the antecedents of reputation has examined data from one source, namely, the Fortune reputation
 rankings (Fombrun and Shanley, 1990; Gatewood et al., 1993; Hammond and Slocum, 1996;
 McGuire et al., 1988; Sobol and Farrely, 1988; Wartick, 1992). This research has treated
 corporate reputation as if it were viewed the same by different publics, although this approach is
 inconsistent with a stakeholder perspective. Moreover, caution must be exercized whenever
 interpreting results from a single methodology and source of data, and there also are several
 measurement problems specific to the Fortune data including single-item measures, strong halo
 effects, a lack of specificity in measurement, and a predominately financial perspective on
 reputation (Baucus, 1995; Brown and Perry, 1994; Fryxell and Wang, 1994; Preston and
 O'Bannon, 1997).

 The goal of the present study is to answer the research question 'What are the antecedents of
 job seekers' reputation perceptions?' In answering this question, we advance the existing
 reputation literature in three ways. First, we focus on the perspective of job seekers because they
 comprise an important stakeholder group that has been the subject of little research. Next, to
 redress the constrained set of reputation predictors examined in previous research, we begin our
 investigation by allowing job seekers to tell us in their own words about the factors that affect
 employers' reputations. Finally, to extend reputation research beyond the Fortune data, we
 triangulate our qualitative data regarding the antecedents of employers' reputations with data
 from experimental and field studies. Specifically, we used policy capturing to examine how
 different factors predict reputation perceptions when other variables are experimentally
 controlled, and we conducted a survey field study with job seekers evaluating actual recruiting
 organizations. Each of these methodologies offers unique, complementary information about the
 antecedents of job seekers' reputation perceptions.

 Method

 Because each of our investigations examined a different set of subjects with a different
 methodology, they are described next as independent studies.

 Copyright ? 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 929-947 (2000)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:50:44 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 932 D. M. CABLE AND M. E. GRAHAM

 Study 1. verbal protocol analysis
 When scant evidence exists for creating specific hypotheses and survey questions, often it is
 advantageous to ground investigations with solid descriptive findings (Glaser and Strauss, 1967;
 Patton, 1990; Schwab et al., 1987). Verbal protocol analysis (VPA) is a qualitative process-tracing
 method that requires subjects to 'think aloud' while making decisions or judgments (Barber and
 Roehling, 1993; Martin and Klimoski, 1990). Respondents' statements are tape recorded,
 transcribed, and content coded, yielding rich data that grounds formative research questions in
 reality (Barber and Roehling, 1993; Rynes and Barber, 1990). Also, VPA does not require a
 complete a priori list of predictors and does not constrain respondents to conform to researchers'
 preconceived expectations or survey questions (Ford et al., 1989).

 Sample
 Our VPA sample consisted of 14 upper-level undergraduate students at two large state
 universities in the southeastern United States. Half of the respondents attended University A, a
 large state school known for adult education in management, and the other half attended
 University B, a large engineering-oriented university. Due to the richness and quantity of VPA
 data, this sample size is consistent with past VPA research (e.g., Isenberg, 1986; Payne, 1976).
 Half of the students were pursuing engineering degrees and the other half were pursuing
 management degrees. The sample was demographically diverse: respondents' ages ranged from
 17 to 44 with a median age of 22, six respondents were women, and two were from racial/ethnic
 minority groups.

 Procedure
 Subjects read an instruction sheet that described the VPA process (e.g., they should speak all
 of their thoughts aloud). The instructions told subjects that their goal during the study was to
 evaluate the reputations of three employers. To control for job characteristics, subjects were
 given a management trainee job description and were told that the job description was the
 same across the three organizations that they would be considering. Subjects were given
 recruitment brochures from the three organizations to help them think about each
 organization's reputation. The companies that subjects rated were General Electric, Wal-
 Mart, and Broadview Associates (a consulting firm specializing in mergers and acquisitions
 that was recruiting at University B).

 Coding
 Before parsing the transcripts (i.e., identifying subjects' unique thoughts), we examined data
 from two pretest subjects to develop a consistent parsing procedure. Each author then parsed
 seven transcripts, identifying and isolating statements based on the breaks between
 participants' thoughts. After the parsing was completed and each parse was assigned a
 unique identification code, the two authors independently assigned each parse to a particular
 category of organizational characteristics. Our parse categories were drawn from the
 recruitment and job search literatures (e.g., Barber, 1998; Breaugh, 1992; Gatewood et al.,
 1993; Rynes, 1991; Turban and Keon, 1993) and the literature on organizational reputation
 (e.g., Fombrun, 1996; Fombrun and Shanley, 1990; Garbett, 1988; McGuire et al., 1988;
 Suchman, 1995; Talbott, 1996; Wartick, 1992). These literatures suggested and defined a
 number of factors that could affect job seekers' reputation perceptions, including
 organizational familiarity, size, age, industry, profitability, legitimacy, opportunities for
 personal development, culture, demographic diversity, globalization, and the endorsement of

 Copyright C 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 929-947 (2000)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:50:44 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 JOB SEEKERS' REPUTATION PERCEPTIONS 933

 Table 1. Categories, category descriptions, percentage time spent on category, and sample quotes

 Category Definition of category % Time Sample quote

 Industry

 Opportunities
 for growth

 Company's primary business and
 products, including product
 diversity and types of employees
 typically working in a particular
 industry

 Any opportunities the company
 offers to employees (positive or
 negative) including training and
 growth opportunities

 spent by

 subjects on
 category*

 19.6

 18.9

 It sounds like they offer some
 good services

 ... all I really know about them
 is the appliance industry

 ... they have a vast array of
 opportunities no matter what
 your major or what you want to
 do ...

 ... a job at company B ... it
 may be a dead-end job

 Organizational
 culture

 The company's shared belief
 systems, values, 'personality', and
 'type of people'

 15.2

 I also get the feeling ... that
 they have a good working
 relationship

 Lots of interaction with others in
 the company

 It talks about integrity which is
 high on my list. I don't want to
 work for a company that doesn't
 value integrity and morals

 Organizational
 familiarity/
 previous
 exposure

 Knowledge or experience with
 the company or its products
 prior to viewing the brochure

 13.8

 'Company C' I don't really know
 much about, I never heard about
 them before

 I know nothing about them, I'm
 not familiar with them

 History/age Historical information about the

 7.2 So company B hasn't been ...

 company or its age in years

 around for a long time like some
 companies who have been
 around since early 1900s or some
 even 1800s

 ... they're telling me here their
 history, so basically they're letting
 me know what they have done so
 far ... I like that

 (continued on next page)

 Copyright ? 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 929-947 (2000)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:50:44 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 934 D. M. CABLE AND M. E. GRAHAM

 Category Definition of category % Time Sample quote

 Table 1 (continued)

 spent by
 subjects on
 category*

 Endorsement

 Someone the respondent trusts
 validates or supports the
 company

 6.9 I've known ... two people that

 have worked for company B.
 Both said that company B treats
 their employees very well

 ... what does catch my eye are
 the companies ... they do
 business with

 Size Size of the company in terms of

 5.9 They're a huge company

 number of employees, revenues,
 number of locations,etc.

 The number of employees is
 probably going to be ... a
 million associates within the near
 future. That's a lot of people

 Legitimacy Organization actions that are
 judged to be consistent with
 prevailing norms or what other
 companies are doing

 5.3 ... I'm the kind of person that

 likes a company to be large and
 well established

 Global

 Company's location in countries
 other than the United States

 Financial/ Strength of the financial position
 profitability of the company

 (In) this other picture the two are
 interacting, again the pencil,
 typical desk, typical work table
 ... this gives me the feel of a
 reputable, professional company

 3.1 Company A seems like it's a

 multinational corporation
 because it's all the way from
 Wisconsin to Asia to Canada to
 Europe

 I think it (would) be ... an
 interesting company to work for,
 especially since they're so global

 1.7 ... tells me how many times (the

 stock) split, which would make
 me want to purchase the stock in
 hopes that it would split again

 That's good ... a strong
 business doing well, I guess

 (continued on next page)

 Copyright ? 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 929-947 (2000)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:50:44 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 JOB SEEKERS' REPUTATION PERCEPTIONS 935

 Table 1 (continued)

 Category Definition of category % Time Sample quote

 spent by

 subjects on
 category*

 Diversity Demographic variation in the 1.6 ... okay, they have an Asian,
 company's workforce African-American, looks like a

 Hispanic, and a woman on here,
 so it looks like ... they don't
 discriminate, and it tells me to
 apply

 Corporate Corporate headquarters and 0.1 I would probably have to go into
 headquarters where the organization has the corporate offices and meet
 located its corporate some people that were working
 headquarters there

 So, they're trying to get different
 types of people ...

 *Represents the average importance of category to reputation perceptions, computed across all respondents.

 It's hard to imagine being a part
 of data processing and
 merchandising in some big
 corporate office

 the firm by trustworthy people. To maximize accuracy and consistency as the parsed data were
 coded into categories, we created definitions of the categories based on the topics suggested in
 the literature and by our pilot transcripts. The percentage agreement between coders was 82
 per cent. Table 1 depicts the categories, category descriptions, percentage time spent on each
 category, and sample quotes from each category.

 Analyses and results
 We calculated category scores reflecting the number of times each category was discussed by each
 respondent. To ensure comparability across individuals, scores were normed by each individual's
 total number of statements. Category scores were averaged across all 14 subjects for each
 category, and the means are presented in descending order in the third column of Table 1. For
 example, subjects discussed firms' industries 19.6 per cent of the time, on average. The largest
 decline in relative importance between any two consecutive factors occurred between familiarity
 and history/age, where importance dropped 59 per cent (from 13.8 per cent to 5.7 per cent).
 Thus, the majority of respondents' statements regarding the antecedents of organizational
 reputation (68 per cent) related to four factors: industry, perceived opportunity for personal
 development, organizational culture, and familiarity/previous exposure.

 In general, the grounded, rich data from the verbal protocol analysis revealed that job seekers'

 reputation perceptions are based on a number of interesting factors that have not been examined
 in past reputation research and that are quite different from the factors that affect other

 Copyright ? 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 929-947 (2000)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:50:44 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 936 D. M. CABLE AND M. E. GRAHAM

 stakeholders' reputation perceptions (e.g., corporate executives). Despite the strengths of the
 VPA methodology, however, potential limitations exist. First, it is possible that other coders may
 have interpreted subjects' statements differently, particularly if they were blind to the purposes of
 the study and were unaware of the categories in the literature. Also, it is possible that the three
 particular organizations examined in this study shared some attributes that might not be relevant
 to other organizations. Finally, it is difficult to interpret the causal direction of verbal protocol
 results; although subjects were asked to discuss why the firms possessed positive or negative
 reputations, it is possible that firms' pre-existing reputations influenced the way that subjects
 interpreted the firms' attributes.

 Study 2: policy capturing

 Confidence in the VPA results would be improved by confirming the antecedents of job seekers'
 reputation perceptions using an experimental design. Thus, we employed a policy capturing
 methodology to confirm the effects of the firm attributes on job seekers' reputation perceptions,
 and to examine the effect sizes of each attribute relative to other factors that may be relevant to an
 employer's reputation (e.g., profitability, pay level). Policy capturing has often been used to study
 job seekers' decision-making processes because it obviates problems with self-insight and social
 desirability (Cable and Judge, 1994; Schwab et al., 1987). Also, the level of experimental control
 in policy capturing designs facilitates causal inferences, enabling researchers to better assess the
 effects of the within-subjects factors.

 Sample
 Sixty-six undergraduate job seekers enrolled in two different southeastern universities (University
 A and University B) were asked to complete a survey, and 60 students responded (90 per cent).
 None of the respondents participated in Study 1, and respondents were either currently seeking
 jobs or would be seeking jobs shortly. Fifty-five per cent of respondents were attending
 University B, a large engineering-oriented university, and the remaining 45 per cent were enrolled
 in University A, a large state school known for adult education in management. The average
 respondent was 24 years old (SD = 5 years) and had six years (SD = 6 years) of work experience.
 The ages and work experience of this sample are greater than many other studies of
 undergraduate students due to the fact that many respondents were adult returning students.
 Fifty per cent of respondents were female, 68 per cent were Caucasian, 18 per cent were African
 American, 5 per cent were Asian, 3 per cent were Hispanic, and 3 per cent were other races. Sixty
 six per cent of respondents were pursuing degrees in management or social science, 33 per cent in
 engineering, and 3 per cent were pursuing degrees in other areas.

 Procedure
 Participants read a series of 32 scenarios where each scenario described an organization along
 several organizational attributes. Each scenario contained each of five attributes (or factors)
 manipulated at one of two levels (Hoffman, 1960). The high and low conditions of each factor are
 presented in Table 2.

 After reading each scenario, participants reported their perceptions of each company's
 reputation. The relative effect of each organizational factor on their reputation perceptions was
 assessed with a regression equation using a repeated measures design. In the results, the
 magnitude of the standardized beta weights represent the policy decisions used to evaluate
 organizational reputation (Hoffman, 1960).

 Copyright C 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 929-947 (2000)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:50:44 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 JOB SEEKERS' REPUTATION PERCEPTIONS 937

 Table 2. Policy capturing variables and levels

 Industry

 High: This company is in the business of providing products and services that you would be proud to

 represent

 Low: This company is in the business of providing products and services that you would not be

 particularly proud to represent

 Opportunities for growth

 High: There seems to be a vast array of opportunities for employees in this company (in terms of

 promotions, training, etc.)

 Low: It seems as though a job at this company may be a dead-end job (in terms of promotions,

 training, etc.)

 Organizational Culture

 High: Based on your interviews, this company seems to have a friendly 'culture' or atmosphere where

 people enjoy working with each other

 Low: Based on your interviews, this company seems to have a reserved 'culture' or atmosphere where

 people do not really enjoy working with each other

 Profitability

 High: This company's financial return (return on invested capital) was 12% last year
 Low: This company's financial return (return on invested capital) was 2% last year

 Pay Level*

 High: The starting annual salary for this position is $39,200
 Low: The starting annual salary for this position is $28,600

 *These are the manipulated starting salary conditions for management majors at University A. The manipulated start-
 ing salary conditions for engineering majors at University A were $40,400 and $33,600. The manipulated starting sal-
 ary conditions for management majors at University B were $39,300 and $26,000.

 Measures
 Although it would be ideal to include all of the factors suggested by the VPA results in the policy
 capturing study, this tactic was not possible because the number of scenarios that subjects must
 read grows exponentially with the number of factors examined (see Schwab et al., 1987). To keep
 the number of scenarios manageable in the present study, we examined how job seekers'
 reputation perceptions were affected by five organizational factors. The first three factors were
 those that emerged as the most important factors in the verbal protocol analysis: industry,
 opportunities for personal development, and corporate culture. When creating the scenario
 descriptions, we did not use verbatim comments from any one VPA respondent but instead used
 composites of subjects' statements to capture the underlying factors.

 The fourth factor that we examined in the policy capturing study was organizational
 profitability. We included profitability because Turban and Greening (1997) revealed a
 relationship between profitability and job seekers' reputation perceptions, and because
 profitability has consistently emerged as the most important predictor of other stakeholders'
 reputation perceptions (Fombrun and Shanley, 1990; Hammond and Slocum, 1996; McGuire et
 al., 1988). Profitability was manipulated as return on investments of either 2 per cent or 12 per
 cent. This manipulation represents one standard deviation added to and subtracted from the
 mean return on investments reported in Fombrun and Shanley's (1990) study, where it emerged
 as the most important predictor of executives' reputation perceptions.

 Pay level was the final factor manipulated in the policy capturing design because past research
 suggests that it is important to examine job seekers' reactions to scenarios of company attributes

 Copyright ? 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 929-947 (2000)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:50:44 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 938 D. M. CABLE AND M. E. GRAHAM

 relative to realistic pay levels in order to improve interpretations of policy capturing results
 (Cable and Judge; 1994; Rynes et al., 1983). Moreover, pay levels may provide a salient signal to
 job seekers about an employer's reputation because it is an objective means of comparing
 organizations' willingness and ability to invest in their workforce. To account for any differences
 in expected salaries between different majors or universities, we obtained the prior year's salary
 means for the two majors at the two universities (University A and University B), and then added
 and subtracted one standard deviation from the mean pay levels to calculate the high and low pay
 level manipulations depicted in Table 2.

 The dependent variable was respondents' evaluations of firms' reputations. Subjects responded

 to two items ('This company probably has an excellent reputation,' and 'This company probably
 is very reputable') using a 7-point graphic rating scale anchored by 1 = strongly disagree to
 7 = strongly agree. Perhaps not surprisingly given the similarity between the items, the internal
 consistency reliability or alpha between these two items was high (a = 0.91) and the items were
 combined to form the dependent variable.

 To create the scenario descriptions of the organizations, the attributes described in Table 2

 were completely crossed, creating every possible combination of the manipulations and
 permitting assessment of the relative importance placed on each factor by respondents
 (Hoffman, 1960). This created 32 discrete scenarios (25) which were presented in random order
 and each organizational attribute was presented randomly within each scenario. To assess the
 consistency of respondents' policies between the scenarios, two scenarios were replicated at the
 end of the survey. The correlation coefficient between applicants' responses to the initial and the
 replicated scenarios was 0.65 (p < 0.0001) and the difference between individuals' initial and
 subsequent responses to the same scenarios was not significant (p > 0.40), indicating that
 respondents used relatively consistent policies throughout the survey.

 Analyses and results
 The means, standard deviations, and correlations among the variables used in the policy
 capturing analysis appear below the diagonal in Table 3. Because each of the 60 respondents
 made 32 reputation evaluations, the independence assumption in regression was violated and it
 was necessary to use a repeated measures analysis (Pedhazur, 1982). Following Pedhazur (1982,
 p. 556) we created dummy variables representing each of our subjects, then inserted the 59
 dummy variables in our regression equation. This approach allowed us to control for the lack of
 independence in our observations.

 Table 3. Means, standard deviations, and correlations between variables

 Variable M SD 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 M SD

 1. Organizational reputation 4.29 1.31 - 0.55 0.55 0.59 0.73 0.53 0.49 4.83 1.39
 2. Opportunities for growth 0.50 0.50 0.20 - 0.71 0.56 0.47 0.61 0.34 4.47 1.49
 3. Industry 0.50 0.50 0.43 0.00 - 0.55 0.49 0.54 0.36 4.46 1.66
 4. Organizational culture 0.50 0.50 0.21 0.00 0.00 - 0.62 0.49 0.45 4.71 1.32
 5. Organizational profitability 0.50 0.50 0.26 0.00 0.00 0.00 - 0.44 0.49 4.93 1.51
 6. Pay level 0.50 0.50 0.16 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 - 0.32 4.45 1.18
 7. Organizational familiarity - 4.37 2.07

 Note: Below diagonal: policy capturing data (n = 1909). Above diagonal: field study data (n = 657). Zero correlations
 of policy capturing variables reflects the orthogonality of the design. Familiarity was not manipulated in policy cap-
 turing data.

 Copyright ? 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 929-947 (2000)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:50:44 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Table 4. Regression estimates predicting reputation perceptions

 JOB SEEKERS' REPUTATION PERCEPTIONS 939

 Policy capturing results Field study results

 /B Sig. ,B Sig.

 Control variables

 AR2 due to dummy variables for each respondent? 0.16t 0.10*

 Pay level 0.16t 0.12t

 AR2 due to pay level 0.03t 0.0 t

 Reputation predictors
 Organizational familiarityll 0.1 lt
 Opportunities for growth 0.20t 0.08
 Industry 0.43t 0.16t
 Organizational culture 0.20t 0.04
 Organizational profitability 0.26t 0.49t

 AR2 due to reputation predictors 0.34t 0.30t

 Total R2 0.52t? 0.74t?
 n 1909 664

 *p < 0.05; tp < 0.01.
 tStandardized beta coefficients.
 ?Following Pedhazur (1982), we inserted one dummy variable for each person as control variables before inserting
 reputation predictor variables in our regression equation. We do not report the coefficients for the dummy variables in
 the Table but they are available from the authors.
 IIFamiliarity was not manipulated in the policy capturing study.
 ?We determined the unique amount of variance accounted for by each block of variables by examining the decrease in
 R2 caused by removing each block of variables from the full model (Cohen and Cohen, 1983). Thus, the total R2 does
 not equal the sum of the change in R2s.

 To examine the unique effects of each set of predictors on reputation perceptions, we used

 hierarchical multiple regression analysis. Specifically, we regressed reputation perceptions on all
 of the variables described above (control variables and the reputation predictors). Then, to
 determine the unique amount of variance accounted for by each block of variables, we examined
 the decrease in R2 caused by removing each block of variables from the full model (Cohen and
 Cohen, 1983). While this approach offers an accurate estimate of the variance accounted for by
 the blocks of variables, note that the total R2 does not equal the sum of the change in R2s.

 The first columns of Table 4 depict the results from the policy capturing study. We do not

 report the coefficients for the 59 dummy variables in Table 4 but they are available from the
 authors. Results suggested that 16 per cent of the variance in reputation perceptions was
 accounted for by the dummy variables representing respondents' individual differences. Results
 also revealed that pay level was related to reputation (,f = 0. 16), although the beta weight for pay
 level was the smallest of the predictors and accounted for only 3 per cent of the variance in
 reputation perceptions. In general, the substantive policy capturing results support the verbal
 protocol analysis: job seekers' reputation beliefs were affected by opportunities for personal
 development (ft = 0.20), identification with the industry (ft = 0.43), and organizational culture
 (f = 0.20). Organizational profitability had large effects on job seekers' reputation perceptions in
 the policy capturing study (ft = 0.26).

 We also examined the internal consistency of individual subject's responses to the policy

 capturing scenarios. Specifically, we ran separate regressions for each respondent responses
 (n = 32), and we examined the R2s to gather information about how consistently respondents
 used their policies. In general, results revealed that subjects were quite consistent: the median R2

 Copyright ? 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 929-947 (2000)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:50:44 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 940 D. M. CABLE AND M. E. GRAHAM

 across subjects was 0.67. To examine whether our results were affected by subjects with the least
 consistent responses, we selected out the four outliers with R2s below 0.30 and reanalysed the
 data using the Pedhazur (1982). The results changed very little: the overall R2 was identical
 (R2 = 0.52), and the average change in the beta weights for the predictors was 0.01, with no
 changes in significance levels.

 Although the experimental nature of policy capturing designs improves our confidence in the

 results from the verbal protocol analysis, policy capturing too has limitations. The policy
 capturing design made it unrealistic to manipulate organizational familiarity, despite the results
 from our verbal protocol analysis and Gatewood et al.'s (1993) findings that familiarity is an
 important predictor of job seekers' reputation perceptions. Also, the factors manipulated in
 policy capturing scenarios may prime respondents to use organizational information that job
 seekers may not actually know or use, limiting the external validity of the results. Finally, the
 specific wording of policy capturing manipulations can affect individuals' responses, although we
 do believe our manipulations are realistic and are representative of the constructs at hand.

 Study 3: field study

 To redress the potential limitations of verbal protocol and policy capturing designs, we
 conducted a field investigation of job seekers' reputation perceptions. Consistent with Rynes
 (1991), information obtained about relevant organizations should have greater external validity
 than experimental data, and survey research also helps obviate the subjectivity inherent in verbal
 protocol analysis.

 Sample
 One hundred twenty-six junior, senior, and masters-level job seekers at two different universities
 were asked to complete a survey, and 112 respondents (89 per cent) completed surveys. None of
 these individuals were part of the samples from Studies 1 or 2. Individuals were either currently
 seeking jobs or would be soon (i.e., within one year). Fifty-five per cent of respondents were
 undergraduates at University B, a large engineering-oriented university in the southeast, and the
 remaining 45 per cent were earning masters degrees at University C, a large eastern state
 university. The average job seeker was 22 years old (SD = 2 years) and had two years of relevant
 work experience. Fifty per cent of respondents were female, and 22 per cent were racial/ethnic
 minorities. Respondents' undergraduate majors included management (53 per cent), engineering
 (26 per cent), social sciences (11 per cent), natural sciences (4 per cent), health policy (4 per cent),
 math/statistics (2 per cent), and liberal arts (1 per cent).

 Procedure
 In the first wave of the survey, individuals reported their familiarity with, and beliefs about, six
 organizations: Wal-Mart, Broadview Associates, TWA, General Electric, Coca-Cola, and
 AirTran. Although this is a smaller group of companies than Gatewood et al. (1993) investigated,
 we examined these organizations because (a) they recruited at the universities, (b) they
 represented a diverse set of companies with regard to industry, familiarity, etc., and (c) they
 represent a diverse set of reputations, with two of the companies named 'most admired' and 'least
 admired' in Fortune's 1996 reputation survey (our surveys were administered in 1997).

 For each organization, individuals used a 7-point scale (1 = strongly disagree, 7 = strongly

 agree) to respond to the following statements: 'I am very familiar with this company,' 'I believe
 that this company offers a vast array of opportunities for my career,' 'I believe I would like to

 Copyright ? 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 929-947 (2000)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:50:44 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 JOB SEEKERS' REPUTATION PERCEPTIONS 941

 work in the industry that this company is in (e.g., electronics, retail, etc.),' 'I think the 'culture' or
 'personality' of this company is excellent,' 'This company is very profitable (e.g., high return on
 capital investments),' and 'I believe that this company's pay level is very high.'

 Although one-item measures are not inherently deficient, their reliability is unknown.

 Accordingly, when we collected data at University C (43 per cent of the database) we added an
 additional item to each scale in order to assess the reliability of the one-item organizational
 attribute scales. The additional items for each respective organizational attribute included: 'I
 have had a high degree of previous exposure to this organization's name,' 'I believe that
 employees in this company have many opportunities to develop their careers,' 'The industry that
 this company is in (e.g., electronics, retail) is attractive,' 'This firm has an attractive corporate
 culture,' 'The company has done very well in terms of its financial profitability,' and 'I believe
 that this company pays well.' When we conducted a factor analysis of the 12 items using principal
 factors analysis with varimax rotation of factors with eigenvalues above 1, the items loaded on
 their expected dimensions. The average factor loading on the items' expected dimensions was
 0.82 while the average loading of their unpredicted dimensions was 0.18. Moreover, the average
 internal consistency reliability or alpha resulting from these two-item scales was 0.88 (minimum
 a = 0.76, maximum a = 0.96), indicating that the organizational attribute scales provided
 adequate measures of job seekers' perceptions.

 Three weeks after respondents completed the initial survey about their company beliefs, the

 same individuals completed a second survey that assessed the reputations of the same six
 organizations described above. The three week interval between our assessment of the
 independent and dependent variables was interjected to mitigate potential survey biases (e.g.,
 self-generated validity, self-consistency biases, survey priming, mood effects). For each
 organization, individuals used a 7-point scale (1 = strongly disagree, 7 = strongly agree) to
 respond to the following statements: 'This company has an excellent reputation,' and 'This
 company is very reputable.' The internal consistency reliability or alpha for these two items was
 a = 0.92.

 It is useful to verify the theoretical distinction between a firm's public reputation and an
 individual job seeker's attraction to the firm (Turban et al., 1997). While these constructs are
 related empirically (e.g., Belt and Paolillo, 1982; Gatewood et al., 1993), they are conceptually
 independent because a job seeker can decide that he or she is not attracted to a given organization
 (e.g., due to a poor fit) but nevertheless acknowledge that the firm has a positive public
 reputation. We examined this distinction empirically by conducting a confirmatory factor
 analysis of the reputation-personal attraction distinction using data collected from a different
 sample of 240 job seekers at 11 major southeastern universities (none of whom were involved in
 the focal study). These job seekers responded to two reputation items (e.g., 'I believe that this
 company has an excellent reputation as an employer') and three personal attraction items (e.g., 'I
 am very interested in getting a job from this company') using a 7-point scale ranging from
 'strongly disagree' to 'strongly agree.' Consistent with past research, the two constructs were
 related (r = 0.43) but were far from unity.

 Analyses and results
 The means, standard deviations, and correlations among the company variables appear above
 the diagonal in Table 3. Because each of the respondents evaluated six organizations, the
 independence assumption in regression was violated and it was necessary to use a repeated
 measures design. Following Pedhazur (1982, p. 556) we created dummy variables representing
 each of our subjects, then inserted the dummy variables in as control variables before inserting

 Copyright ? 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 929-947 (2000)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:50:44 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 942 D. M. CABLE AND M. E. GRAHAM

 the variables of interest in our regression equation. Again, we do not report the coefficients for
 the dummy variables in Table 4 but they are available from the authors.

 Consistent with the policy capturing study, we used hierarchical multiple regression analysis to
 examine the unique effects of each set of predictors on reputation perceptions. Again, we
 regressed reputation perceptions on all of the variables (control variables and the reputation
 predictors). Then, to determine the unique amount of variance accounted for by each block of
 variables, we examined the decrease in R2 caused by removing each block of variables from the
 full model (Cohen and Cohen, 1983).

 The second columns of Table 4 provide the results from the field study. Given that the simple
 correlations between the predictors were positive and significant (see Table 3), it is possible that
 the relationships between the predictor variables (i.e., collinearity) affected the size and
 significance of the beta coefficients from the regression analysis. Thus, below we discuss both the
 standardized beta regression coefficients and the simple correlations between each predictor and
 reputation perceptions.

 Results revealed that 10 per cent of the variance in reputation perceptions was accounted for by
 the dummy variables representing respondents' individual differences. Consistent with the policy
 capturing study, pay level was related to job seekers' reputation perceptions (,/ = 0.12, r = 0.53),
 but accounted for only 1 per cent of the variance in reputation perceptions. In general, the
 substantive results from the field study reinforce results from the previous studies, but also
 suggest trends not revealed by any one method alone. First, consistent with Gatewood et al.
 (1993) and our VPA study, individuals' familiarity with companies was significantly related to
 their perceptions of those companies' reputations (,B = 0.11). Note, however, that the simple
 correlation between familiarity and reputation perceptions was much higher (r = 0.49). Results
 also confirmed the policy capturing results that job seekers' reputation perceptions are related to
 an organization's industry (/3 = 0.16, r = 0.55) and organizational profitability (,/ = 0.49,
 r = 0.73). Interestingly, opportunities for growth and organizational culture, which were related
 to reputation in the policy capturing and VPA studies, and shared large simple correlations with
 reputation in the field study (r = 0.55 and 0.59, respectively), were not significantly related to
 reputation in the regression analysis of the field study (/3 = 0.08 and 0.04, respectively).

 Discussion

 Job seekers' reputation perceptions are important because they can affect workforce
 composition, brand equity, and future marketing success (Gatewood et al., 1993; Keller, 1993;
 Rynes, 1991; Rynes and Barber, 1990). Although a large literature has examined executives'
 reputation perceptions using the Fortune data, we have an ambiguous understanding of what
 organizational characteristics job seekers focus on when evaluating an organization's reputation.
 Relatively few studies to date have focused on the determinants of job seekers' reputation beliefs,
 and the few existing studies suggest that job seekers' reputation perceptions are based on different
 criteria than corporate executives (Gatewood et al., 1993).

 In the present investigation, we employed three very different methods to provide information

 about the determinants of job seekers' reputation perceptions because multiple research methods
 increase the confidence that we can place in the results. Our investigation revealed several
 determinants that have not been examined or revealed in past reputation research. Based on the
 large percentage of variance in reputation perceptions that was accounted for in the present
 investigation (average R2 = 0.63), it appears that future research can benefit by examining firms'

 Copyright ? 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 929-947 (2000)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:50:44 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 JOB SEEKERS' REPUTATION PERCEPTIONS 943

 reputations from the perspective of specific types of stakeholders and their idiosyncratic
 concerns.

 Perhaps the most robust finding, emerging clearly from three very different methodologies, is
 that job seekers' reputation perceptions are affected by the industry in which employers operate.
 In the VPA, respondents spent 20 per cent of their time discussing industry, the standardized beta
 coefficient from the policy capturing study was 0.43, and the standardized beta coefficient from
 the field study was 0.16. These findings are interesting, but may seem paradoxical to managers,
 who clearly cannot change their firms' product or service line in order to improve their reputation
 among job applicants. On the other hand, it may be possible for employers operating in multiple
 industries to emphasize their more attractive industries in communications to job seekers. It also
 may be possible to change job seekers' perceptions about the industries themselves by investing in
 industry-wide public relations initiatives. Thus, discount retailers including Wal-Mart and Target
 have started to educate job seekers (who immediately envision irregular hours on the sales floor)
 about the multifaceted nature of the industry and the opportunities that exist for personal growth
 (Noe et al., 1996). Similarly, the National Restaurant Association educates job seekers that the
 negative 'burger flipper' stereotype has little connection with the positive, high-growth aspects of
 the restaurant industry (Caldiera, 1997).

 Results from our investigation also confirm Gatewood et al.'s (1993) findings regarding

 organizational familiarity. In the two studies where we examined familiarity, results indicated
 that job seekers' familiarity with employers was positively related to their reputation beliefs.
 Results also extend Gatewood et al.'s findings, however, because they indicate the importance of
 familiarity relative to other company attributes. For example, although job seekers spent 14 per
 cent of their time discussing employer familiarity when rating reputation during the verbal
 protocol analysis, they spent even more time discussing other factors (e.g., opportunities for
 personal growth, industry). These findings were confirmed in the field investigation, where
 familiarity predicted reputation beliefs, but accounted for less variance than other organizational
 attributes. Perhaps future research will reveal that familiarity is most important as a predictor of
 job seekers' reputation beliefs when information about other organizational attributes is
 unavailable.

 Results from the policy capturing and field studies also indicated that company profitability

 affects job seekers' reputation perceptions, confirming results presented by Turban and Greening
 (1997). In fact, the field study results suggested that profitability was the best predictor of job
 seekers' reputation perceptions (f = 0.49). In general, these results suggest that some overlap
 exists between the criteria job seekers' and executives use to evaluate company reputation
 (Fombrun and Shanley, 1990).

 Regarding opportunities for personal development and employers' company cultures, we
 found a similar pattern of results across our methodologies. In the exploratory VPA, these factors
 were discussed by respondents 19 per cent and 15 per cent of the time, respectively. Likewise, in
 the experimental policy capturing study, these factors accounted for substantial variance in job
 seekers' reputation perceptions (ft = 0.20, p < 0.01, for both variables). However, neither of
 these factors significantly predicted job seekers' reputation perceptions in the field study. It is
 possible that the substantial correlation between these factors (r = 0.56) affected the results of the
 regression equation from the field study data. Thus, the present investigation offers some
 evidence that job seekers' reputation perceptions are affected by opportunities for personal
 development and company culture, but future research is needed to establish their importance
 relative to other factors.

 Taken together, our results suggest that social identity theory may provide one perspective for
 understanding why job seekers attune to different organizational factors than other constituents

 Copyright ( 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 929-947 (2000)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:50:44 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 944 D. M. CABLE AND M. E. GRAHAM

 when forming reputation perceptions. Given the close relationship between people's employers
 and their self-concepts, social identity theory suggests that the criteria used by job seekers to
 evaluate employers' reputations may be those organizational attributes that are public and that
 are relevant to people's personal identities. For example, in the present study employers'
 reputations were predicted by the industries in which they operated, perhaps indicating that job
 seekers are reluctant to associate their self identities with firms that do not produce 'respectable'
 or 'prestigious' products and services (Fombrun, 1996; Frank, 1996). Similarly, consistent with
 Cable and Judge (1996), the relationship between corporate culture and reputation implies that
 job seekers consider the impact of associating themselves with certain 'types' of employers and
 base their reputation perceptions, in part, on these considerations. Finally, an employer's
 profitability may promote positive self identity by allowing individuals the opportunity to 'bask
 in the reflective glory' of the organization's financial success (Cialdini et al., 1976).

 Limitations

 Several limitations of this investigation should be noted. First, while there are benefits to using
 multiple methods, all methods have limitations. For example, in the VPA it is possible that the
 results based on the particular organizations we studied might not generalize to other
 organizations, and it is possible that we misinterpreted the causal directionality. While these
 problems are mitigated with the policy capturing study, policy capturing also has weaknesses.
 For example, the number of scenarios in policy capturing investigations grows exponentially with
 each variable, limiting the number of reputation predictors that we could examine. Moreover, we
 constructed the factors in the policy capturing study to be orthogonal, even though job seekers
 may view the factors as related (see Table 3). Thus, many of the hypothetical organizations that
 job seekers rated in the policy capturing study probably do not often exist. In general, like all
 experimental studies, our policy capturing study sacrificed generalizability for the ability to infer
 causality.

 To extend the generalizability of the investigation we conducted a field study of actual
 organizations, although this method too has limitations. For example, the field study data all
 were reported by respondents, such that self-report and survey biases may have influenced the
 results even though we assessed reputation perceptions three weeks after respondents reported the
 organizational attributes. Moreover, the statistical relationships between the predictor variables
 in the field study (average r = 0.49) affected the beta weights that emerged from the regression
 equation. Also, given the differences in the intercorrelations between the reputation predictors in
 the field study and the orthogonality of the reputation predictors in the policy capturing study, it
 would be difficult to expect very similar regression results between the two studies. In general,
 however, while each of our methods have limitations, together they provided a complementary
 investigation of the antecedents of job seekers' reputation perceptions.

 Our results also may be limited because this investigation focused on college students. Thus, it

 is not clear whether our results would generalize to job seekers at all stages of their careers.
 Although many respondents to the policy capturing study had substantial work experience
 (M = 6 years), it is possible that middle- to upper-level managers or executives who are seeking
 jobs may rely on other factors when developing their reputation perceptions. On the other hand,
 college graduates now comprise a large percentage of new job entrants (Powell and Goulet, 1996).
 Since our samples were comprised of demographically diverse students pursuing over six different
 majors and two degree levels at three different universities, respondents should be reasonably
 representative of interviewing college graduates.

 Copyright ? 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 929-947 (2000)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:50:44 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 JOB SEEKERS' REPUTATION PERCEPTIONS 945

 Implications and future research

 Organizations can improve their recruiting success and perhaps gain a competitive advantage by
 strategically managing their reputation among job seekers (Martin and Franz, 1994; Rynes,
 1991). The present investigation confirms the findings of Gatewood and colleagues (1993) that
 reputations are based on the information that publics hold about organizations. Thus, to the
 extent that employers can successfully manage job seekers' knowledge about organizational
 attributes, it may be possible for managers to shape organizational reputation perceptions and
 ultimately enhance firm performance.

 Consistent with Fombrun's (1996) recommendations, our results suggest that a recruiting

 organization would benefit from conducting a 'reputational audit' in order to: (1) identify the
 organization's current reputation among a targeted group of job seekers; and (2) locate any
 incorrect beliefs that job seekers might hold about the organization's characteristics. To the
 extent that job seekers hold inaccurate beliefs about an organization, and these beliefs negatively
 affect reputation perceptions, recruiters may improve the organization's reputation by educating
 job seekers about those organizational attributes. For example, recruiters may improve their
 organization's reputation by highlighting opportunities for employee training and development
 (e.g., global project assignments), or positive industry trends. Alternatively, if job seekers'
 negative perceptions of an organization's attributes are accurate, it may be possible for
 organizations to change some characteristics in order to appeal to job seekers. For example,
 organizations could introduce and publicize rotational training programmes for new recruits in
 order to enhance their reputations among job seekers.

 Finally, given the impact of industry on job seekers' reputation perceptions, it would be
 interesting for future research to identify which industries are viewed as attractive by job seekers,
 and why these industries are appealing. For example, Fombrun (1996) suggested that
 organizations residing in tobacco, liquor, and gaming industries may have poor reputations
 regardless of their other characteristics (e.g., profitability). Furthermore, the effects of specific
 industries on reputation may change across time as societal trends change the definition of a
 desirable industry, indicating that longitudinal and archival data may reveal interesting trends.

 Conclusion

 Results from three very different methodologies suggested that job seekers' reputation
 perceptions are based on different factors than those used by corporate executives. For example,
 the type of industry in which a firm operates, the opportunities that a firm provides for employee
 development, and organizational culture affect job seekers' reputation perceptions. Knowledge
 concerning the antecedents of job seekers' reputation perceptions may help managers modify
 their firms' reputations by emphasizing certain organizational information. It would be
 interesting for future research to investigate how and why the criteria for organizational
 reputation varies for different constituents.

 References

 Ashforth E, Mael F. 1989. Social identity theory and the organization. Academy of Management Review 14:

 20-39.

 Barber AE, Roehling MV. 1993. Job postings and the decision to interview: a verbal protocol analysis.

 Journal of Applied Psychology 78: 845-856.

 Copyright ? 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 929-947 (2000)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:50:44 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 946 D. M. CABLE AND M. E. GRAHAM

 Baucus MS. 1995. Halo-adjusted residuals-prolonging the life of a terminally ill measure of corporate

 social performance. Business and Society 34: 227-235.

 Belt JA, Paolillo JG. 1992. The influence of corporate image and specificity of candidate qualifications on

 response to recruitment advertisement. Journal of Management 8: 105-112.

 Breaugh JA. 1992. Recruitment: Science and Practice. PWS-Kent Publishing: Boston, MA.
 Brown B, Perry S. 1994. Removing the financial performance halo from Fortune's 'most admired'

 companies. Academy of Management Journal 37: 1347-1359.

 Cable DM, Judge TA. 1996. Person-organization fit, job choice decisions, and organizational entry.

 Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 67: 294-311.

 Cable DM, Judge TA. 1994. Pay preferences and job search decisions: a person-organization fit perspective.

 Personnel Psychology 47: 317-348.

 Caldiera SJ. 1997. Seniors and fast-food jobs: hold the scorn. Business Week Oct. 20: 14.
 Cialdini RB, Borden RJ, Thorne A, Walker MR, Freeman S, Sloan LR. 1976. Basking in reflected glory:

 three (football) field studies. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 39: 406-415.

 Clarkson MBE. 1995. A stakeholder framework for analyzing and evaluating corporate social performance.

 Academy of Management Review 20: 92-117.

 Cohen J, Cohen P. 1983. Applied Multiple Regression Correlation Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences. L.

 Erlbaum Associates: Hillsdale, NJ.

 Dutton JE, Dukerich JM, Harquail CV. 1994. Organizational images and member identification.

 Administrative Science Quarterly 39: 239-263.

 Fombrun C. 1996. Reputation: Realizing the Value from the Corporate Image. Harvard Business School:

 Boston, MA.

 Fombrun C, Shanley M. 1990. What's in a name? Reputation building and corporate strategy. Academy of

 Management Journal 33: 233-258.

 Ford JK, Schmitt N, Schechtman SL, Hults BM, Doherty ML. 1989. Process tracing methods:

 contributions, problems, and neglected research questions. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
 Processes 43: 75-117.

 Frank R. 1996. What price the moral high ground? The Southern Economic Journal 63: 1-17.
 Fryxell GE, Wang J. 1994. The Fortune corporate reputation index: reputation for what? Journal of

 Management 20: 1-14.

 Garbett T. 1988. How to Build a Corporation's Identity and Project its Image. Lexington Books: Lexington,

 MA.

 Gatewood RD, Gowan MA, Lautenschlager DJ. 1993. Corporate image, recruitment image, and initial job

 choice decisions. Academy of Management Journal 36: 414-427.

 Glaser BG, Strauss AL. 1967. The Discovery of Grounded Theory. Aldine: Chicago, IL.
 Hammond SA, Slocum JW. 1996. The impact of prior firm financial performance on subsequent corporate

 reputation. Journal of Business Ethics 15: 159-165.

 Highhouse S, Zickar MJ, Thorsteinson TJ, Stierwalt SL, Slaughter JE. 1999. Assessing company

 employment image: an example in the fast food industry. Personnel Psychology 52: 151-172.

 Hoffman PJ. 1960. The paramorphic representation of clinical judgement. Psychological Bulletin 57: 116-

 131.

 Isenberg DJ. 1986. Thinking and managing: a verbal protocol analysis of managerial problem solving.

 Academy of Management Journal 29: 775-788.

 Keller KL. 1993. Conceptualizing, measuring, and managing customer-based brand equity. Journal of

 Marketing 57: 1-22.

 Martin JH, Franz EB. 1994. Attracting applicants from a changing labor market: a strategic marketing

 framework. Journal of Managerial Issues 6: 33-53.

 Martin SL, Klimoski RJ. 1990. Use of verbal protocols to trace cognitions with self- and supervisor

 evaluations of performance. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 46: 135-145.

 McGuire JB, Sundgren A, Schneeweis T. 1988. Corporate social responsibility and firm financial

 performance. Academy of Management Journal 31: 854-872.

 Noe RA, Hollenbeck JR, Gerhart B, Wright PM. 1996. Human Resource Management: Gaining a

 Competitive Advantage. Irwin: Chicago.

 Patton MQ. 1990. Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods, 2nd edn. Sage: Newbury Park.
 Payne JW. 1976. Task complexity and contingent processing in decision making: an information search and

 protocol analysis. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 16: 366-387.

 Copyright ( 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 929-947 (2000)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:50:44 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 JOB SEEKERS' REPUTATION PERCEPTIONS 947

 Pedhazur EJ. 1982. Multiple Regression in Behavioral Research. Explanation and Prediction. Holt, Rinehart,

 and Winston: New York.

 Popovich P, Wanous JP. 1982. The realistic job preview as persuasive communication. Academy of

 Management Review 7: 570-578.

 Powell GN, Goulet LR. 1996. Recruiters' and applicants' reactions to campus interviews and employment

 decisions. Academy of Management Journal 39: 1619-1640.

 Preston LE, O'Bannon DP. 1997. The corporate social-financial performance relationship. Business and

 Society 36: 419-429.

 Rynes SL. 1991. Recruitment, job choice, and post-hire consequences: a call for new research directions. In
 Handbook of Industrial/Organizational Psychology, vol. 2, Dunnette M, Hough L (eds). Consulting
 Psychologists Press: Palo Alto, CA; 399-444.

 Rynes SL, Barber AE. 1990. Applicant attraction strategies: an organizational perspective. Academy of

 Management Review 15: 286-310.

 Rynes SL, Schwab DP, Heneman HG. 1983. The role of pay and market pay variability in job application

 decisions. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance 31: 353-364.

 Schwab DP, Rynes SL, Aldag RJ. 1987. Theories and research on job search and choice. In Research in

 Personnel and Human Resource Management, vol. 5, Rowland K, Ferris G (eds). JAI Press: Greenwich,
 CT; 126-166.

 Schwoerer C, Rosen B. 1989. Effects of employment-at-will policies and compensation policies on corporate

 image and job pursuit intentions. Journal of Applied Psychology 74: 653-656.

 Sobol MG, Farrelly G. 1988. Corporate reputation: a function of relative size or financial performance?

 Review of Business and Economic Research 24: 45-59.

 Suchman MC. 1995. Managing legitimacy: strategic and institutional approaches. Academy of Management

 Review 20: 571-610.

 Talbott SP. 1996. Building a global workforce starts with recruitment. Personnel Journal March: 9-11.
 Turban DB, Greening DW. 1997. Corporate social performance and organizational attractiveness to

 prospective employees. Academy of Management Journal 40: 658-672.

 Turban DB, Keon TL. 1993. Organizational attractiveness: an interactionist perspective. Journal of Applied

 Psychology 78: 184-193.

 Turban DB, Forret ML, Hendrickson CL. 1997. Applicant attraction to firms: Influences of organization
 reputation, job and organizational attributes, and recruiter behaviors. Journal of Vocational Behavior 51:
 1-35.

 Wartick SL. 1992. The relationship between intense media exposure and change in corporate reputation.

 Business and Society 31: 33-49.

 Copyright ? 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 J. Organiz. Behav. 21, 929-947 (2000)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:50:44 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

