 
 
Does a Firm's Product-Recall Strategy Affect Its Financial Value? An Examination of
Strategic Alternatives during Product-Harm Crises
Author(s): Yubo Chen, Shankar Ganesan and  Yong Liu
Source: Journal of Marketing, Vol. 73, No. 6 (Nov., 2009), pp. 214-226
Published by: American Marketing Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/20619070
Accessed: 02-08-2017 16:57 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms

American Marketing Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and
extend access to Journal of Marketing

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:57:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Yubo Chen, Shankar Ganesan, & Yong Liu

 Does a Firm's Product-Recall

 Strategy Affect Its Financial Value?

 An Examination of Strategic

 Alternatives During Product-Harm

 Crises

 Product-harm crises often result in product recalls, which can have a significant impact on a firm's reputation, sales,
 and financial value. In managing the recall process, some firms adopt a proactive strategy in responding to
 consumer complaints, while others are more passive. In this study, the authors examine the impact of these
 strategic alternatives on firm value using Consumer Product Safety Commission recalls during a 12-year period
 from 1996 to 2007. Using the event study method, the authors show that regardless of firm and product
 characteristics, proactive strategies have a more negative effect on firm value than more passive strategies. An
 explanation for this surprising result is that the stock market interprets proactive strategies as a signal of substantial
 financial losses to the firm. When a firm proactively manages a product recall, the stock market infers that the
 consequence of the product-harm crisis is sufficiently severe that the firm had no choice but to act swiftly to reduce
 potential financial losses. Therefore, firms dealing with product recalls must be sensitive to how investors might
 interpret a proactive strategy and be aware of its potential drawbacks.

 Keywords: product recalls, firm financial value, proactive and passive strategies, firm reputation, crisis

 management, event study

 Incidents of negative publicity are ubiquitous in the mar

 ketplace, ranging from lead paint-contaminated toys, to
 faulty tires, to tainted pet food, to unhygienic food prod
 ucts. These well-publicized incidents are referred to as
 "product-harm crises" (Dawar and Pilluda 2000). They
 occur when a firm's product fails to meet a mandatory
 safety standard, contains a defect that could cause substan
 tial harm to consumers, creates an unreasonable risk of seri
 ous injury or death, or fails to comply with a voluntary stan
 dard adopted by the specific industry (Mullan 2004).

 Often, the consequence of product-harm crises involves
 product recalls, in which the implicated firm must retrieve
 recalled products from all distribution channels and from
 the end consumers. According to the Consumer Product
 Safety Commission (CPSC), more than 400 consumer prod

 Yubo Chen is Assistant Professor of Marketing (e-mail: yubochen@eller.
 arizona.edu), Shankar Ganesan is Office Depot Professor of Marketing
 (e-mail: sganesan@eller.arizona.edu), and Yong Liu is Assistant Professor
 of Marketing (e-mail: yoliu@eller.arizona.edu), Eller College of Manage
 ment, University of Arizona. The authors thank Mrinal Ghosh and Jinhong
 Xie for many helpful comments, Dean Paul Portney and Jane Prescott
 Smith for their valuable suggestions, and Yuan Yuan and Liang Zhao for
 excellent research assistance in the preparation of this article. They also
 thank Guest Editor Dominique Hanssens and the three anonymous JM
 reviewers for their constructive comments. The authors are listed alpha
 betically and contributed equally to the article.

 ucts were recalled in 2007 because of safety concerns.1
 Moreover, product recalls are likely to occur more often in
 the future because of increased globalization of production,
 greater complexity of products, greater demand by con
 sumers for product quality and safety, and closer monitor
 ing by both firms and government agencies (Berman 1999).
 Product-harm crises in general and product recalls in

 particular have the potential to damage carefully developed
 brand equity, spoil consumers' quality perceptions, tarnish a
 company's reputation, and lead to revenue and market share
 losses (e.g., Laufer and Coombs 2006; Rhee and Hauns
 child 2006; Siomkos and Kurzbard 1994; Sullivan 1990;
 Van Heerde, Helsen, and Dekimpe 2007). In the worst case,
 product recalls could destroy investor confidence in the
 firm, which in turn leads to either a decline in the financial
 value of publicly traded firms or the unwillingness of
 investors to continue funding private firms. Thus, the funda
 mental sustainability of the firm may be at risk. For exam
 ple, Merck's stock price plummeted from $45.07 to $33.00
 in a single day on September 30, 2004, when Vioxx was
 recalled. Topps, one of the largest makers of frozen ham
 burgers in the United States, went bankrupt after it was
 forced to recall 21.7 million pounds of frozen hamburger on
 September 29, 2007.

 *See http://www.cpsc.gov/cpscpub/ prerel/prerel.html.

 ? 2009, American Marketing Association Journal of Marketing
 ISSN: 0022-2429 (print), 1547-7185 (electronic) 214 Vol. 73 (November 2009), 214-226

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:57:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Given the increased frequency of product recalls and the

 potentially devastating consequences for the firms involved,
 managing such crises effectively has become a top priority
 for many firms. Previous literature has classified crisis man
 agement strategies into four distinct categories: denial,
 involuntary recall (or forced compliance), voluntary recall,
 and "super-effort" (Dawar and Pillutla 2000; Laufer and
 Coombs 2006). These four strategies make up the so-called
 company response continuum. At one extreme, firms for
 sake (or try to forsake) any responsibility for the defective
 product by denying culpability and delaying the recall
 process. At the other extreme, firms respond to consumer
 complaints early, issue speedy voluntary recalls, communi
 cate extensively with consumers and other stakeholders,
 and often provide additional compensation beyond the legal
 requirement. Thus, a major distinction among various
 product-recall strategies is whether the firm acts passively
 and defensively or proactively and responsibly (Siomkos
 and Kurzbard 1994).2 A fundamental question is whether a
 proactive strategy helps attenuate the effects of product
 recalls on firm value. The theoretical and empirical evi
 dence for this question remains equivocal.

 Only a limited number of marketing studies have inves
 tigated the impact of product-harm crisis management
 strategies by focusing on consumer evaluations of products
 and services (e.g., Ahluwalia, Burnkrant, and Unnava 2000;
 Dawar and Pillutla 2000). These studies provide valuable
 insights into how consumers perceive and respond to
 product-recall strategies. Most of these studies were con
 ducted in a laboratory setting, and the broader issue of how
 different crisis management strategies might influence
 firms' financial value has not been studied. This paucity in
 research is glaring because there has been increased atten
 tion on understanding the linkage between firm strategies
 and stock market performance. Moreover, most consumer
 based strategies have the ultimate goal of maximizing
 shareholder value. Compared with consumer-level and
 firm-level measures (e.g., Ramani and Kumar 2008), stock
 returns provide a direct assessment of stockholder value
 (Prince and Rubin 2002). Therefore, an examination of
 how product-recall strategies influence stock returns is
 warranted.

 Several studies in economics and finance have exam
 ined the impact of product recalls on firm value for several
 product categories, but the results are mixed (e.g., Davidson
 and Worrell 1992; Hoffer, Pruitt, and Reilly 1988; Jarrell
 and Peltzman 1985; Thomsen and McKenzie 2001). For
 example, Jarrell and Peltzman (1985) find that automobile
 and drug recalls are associated with negative abnormal
 stock returns. Hoffer, Pruitt, and Reilly (1988) reexamine
 the same data and find that recall announcements do not
 significantly affect firm value after controlling for potential
 confounding events. Thomsen and McKenzie (2001) find
 significant shareholder losses when publicly traded food
 companies are involved in a serious food recall. Most of

 2There could be other ways to categorize the product-recall
 strategies that firms adopt. We focus on the most commonly used
 typology?namely, proactive and passive strategies.

 these studies focus on the automobile, food, or pharmaceu
 tical industries. One exception is the study by Davidson and
 Worrell (1992), who examine product recalls in multiple,
 nonautomobile categories. However, their sample is
 restricted to only recalls reported in the Wall Street Journal.
 The recall effects across a broad range of consumer prod
 ucts, such as toys, electronics, and household products,
 which have received a great amount of public attention in
 recent years, remain largely unexamined. More important,
 when examining the impact of product recalls, the extant
 studies have not considered the role of alternative product
 recall strategies.

 The focus of this article is to investigate how proactive
 (versus passive) recall strategies during the recall process
 influence stock returns. We test our theoretical prediction
 with data from multiple sources on recalls, firm strategies,
 and firm/product characteristics in different consumer prod
 uct categories (e.g., toys, child products, household prod
 ucts, sports and recreation products, outdoor products, other
 specialty products). We study product recalls during a 12
 year period from 1996 through 2007. We collected the
 recall details from the official CPSC recall announcements.
 The long time span enables us to have a sufficient sample
 even after excluding recalls for which the effects on stock
 returns may be contaminated by confounding events
 (MacKinlay 1997; McWilliams and Siegel 1997). In reality,
 it is difficult for researchers to directly observe and measure
 how firms manage product recalls. Fortunately, we were
 able to identify a viable measure of recall strategies (i.e.,
 proactive versus passive strategies) from the CPSC recall
 announcements. We match the CPSC recalls with stock
 return data from the Center for Research in Security Prices
 at the University of Chicago, as well as the characteristics
 of these firms from sources such as Fortune magazine's
 annual surveys of "America's Most Admired Companies."

 Our key finding is that contrary to the conventional wis
 dom, proactive recall strategies have a more negative effect
 on the firms' stock returns than passive strategies, regard
 less of firm and product characteristics. This finding is dif
 ferent from the existing literature (e.g., Dawar and Pillutla
 2000; Siomkos and Kurzbard 1994), which focuses on
 potentially positive consequences from the consumers' per
 spective and indicates that when a firm is more responsive
 to the recall, the negative effect on brand equity, consumer
 perceptions, and future purchase intentions may be attenu
 ated. In contrast, our findings indicate that investors may
 view proactive recall strategies differently from consumers,
 interpreting them as a signal of severe product hazard and
 financial damage (i.e., the expenses related to the recall
 process, potential litigation, liability, and penalty payment
 for damages to consumers or properties are substantial) to
 the firm. In turn, such perceptions will influence the firm's
 financial value negatively. Consistent with this explanation,
 we find that proactive strategies tend to be used more often
 by less reputable firms (which have little buffer against the
 negative impact of product-harm crisis) than by more rep
 utable firms. As a result, firms need to be sensitive to how
 the stock market might interpret proactive strategies
 because there could be significant, negative repercussions in
 terms of stock market reactions associated with them. This

 A Firm's Product-Recall Strategy and Financial Value / 215

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:57:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 underscores the importance of linking firm strategies to
 financial market value when studying product recalls.

 We organize the remainder of this article as follows:
 Next, we provide an overview of the product-recall process
 and discuss two strategic alternatives (proactive versus pas
 sive strategies) available to firms managing product recalls.
 We then discuss the theoretical background on how these
 strategies may influence firm financial value. Next, we pre
 sent the data, the event study methodology, and the main
 empirical findings. We conduct a cross-sectional analysis to
 complement the event study and show that recall strategies
 are a major influencer of abnormal stock returns. This is
 followed by an analysis of the mediating role of recall
 strategies and a Heckman estimation to address the poten
 tial influence of endogeneity, which confirm the robustness
 of our findings. We conclude with a summary, a discussion
 of managerial and policy implications, and suggestions for
 further research.

 Theoretical Background

 In the United States, product safety is overseen by several
 federal government agencies, depending on the product
 category. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administra
 tion is responsible for safety issues related to motor vehi
 cles and related equipment. The Food and Drug Administra
 tion has jurisdiction over safety recalls involving foods,
 drugs, medical devices, and cosmetics. The CPSC is
 responsible for the product safety of most "consumer prod
 ucts," which include household, outdoor, sports and recre
 ation, and children's products.3

 Managing Product Recalls: Proactive Versus
 Passive Strategies
 The basic process that leads to a potential product recall is
 relatively straightforward. The recall process the CPSC uses
 is as follows: In the beginning, either the firm or the CPSC
 receives information from consumers or distribution chan
 nel members about the potential hazard of a product. Often,
 such information comes from consumer complaints directly
 to either the firm or the federal agency. For example, the
 CPSC receives approximately 400,000 calls annually from
 consumers through its 24-hour hotline (Schoem 2001). A
 firm has the obligation to report to CPSC within 24 hours if
 it receives information or evidence that "reasonably sup
 ports the conclusion" that safety issues exist (Mullan 2004).
 The CPSC and the firm are then involved in "risk analysis"
 to identify patterns or data that suggest that the product
 "creates a substantial product hazard." If a product is identi
 fied as potentially harmful and it is determined that a recall
 is in order, the firm and the CPSC can decide to issue a
 recall at any time. A firm can also issue a "fast-track" recall
 without waiting for the "risk analysis" to be completed.

 In either case, the CPSC initiates an official recall
 announcement in a standard format jointly with the firm.

 3A11 phrases in quotation marks reflect the terminology speci

 fied by the CSPC in its recall procedures.

 216 / Journal of Marketing, November 2009

 The firm is not allowed to provide its own news release
 before the CPSC announcement. Such recalls are "volun
 tary" recalls. In rare cases, the firm does not agree with the
 agency's decision that a recall is warranted. The agency
 then needs to decide whether to impose a mandatory (i.e.,
 involuntary) recall. Because mandatory recalls require elab
 orate legal proceedings before an administrative judge,
 which can be lengthy and costly and involve uncertain out
 comes, it is usually in the interest of the agency and the firm
 to cooperate in the recall process. For example, in the case
 of the CPSC, almost all recalls are voluntary recalls. On
 average, the mandatory recall process is used less than once
 a year (Mullan 2004). Regardless of the type of recall, the
 main purpose is to locate and remove all defective products
 as quickly as possible from consumers and channel mem
 bers and to give the public accurate and understandable
 information about the product defect, the extent of hazard it
 poses, and the firm's corrective plan in a timely manner
 (CPSC 1999).

 The recall process gives the firm the opportunity to act
 strategically on whether and when to cooperate with the
 regulatory agent to issue (or agree to issue) a recall. It can
 work with the agency to do so earlier in the investigation
 process, or it can delay to the maximum extent until there is
 no other choice. As we discussed previously, the literature
 suggests that firms differ considerably in terms of when
 they announce a recall and how they handle a recall incident
 (e.g., Dawar and Pillutla 2000; Laufer and Coombs 2006;
 Siomkos and Kurzbard 1994).

 In line with Siomkos and Kurzbard's (1994) framework,
 firms' recall strategies can be categorized according to their
 responsiveness to the recall incident. Some firms adopt a
 proactive recall strategy. If the firm or the federal agency
 discovers a product flaw that might necessitate a potential
 recall, the firm adopting the proactive strategy is more
 likely to work with the agency and issue a voluntary recall
 early in the process. Such recalls often occur when the firm
 becomes aware of a potentially hazardous product through
 internal inspections and before any consumer safety inci
 dents have been reported to the firm or agency (CPSC
 1999). For example, on February 15, 2007, Fisher-Price (a
 division of Mattel) and the CPSC announced the recall of
 approximately 500,000 toys that could pose a choking haz
 ard to young children. This proactive recall was mainly
 based on internal testing and was issued even though there
 had been no incidents or injuries reported by consumers.

 In contrast, firms may adopt a passive strategy in man
 aging product recalls. The passive approach may entail
 delaying the recall process and/or trying to shift the respon
 sibility to other firms or entities. These recalls tend to be
 issued much later in the investigation process and usually
 happen after serious consumer complaints have been made
 to the firm or the CPSC. Unfortunately, such recalls are
 often issued after serious injuries and/or death to con
 sumers. As an example, Playskool recalled approximately
 255,000 of its Team Talkin' Tool Bench toys only after
 receiving the death reports of two toddlers (CPSC 2006).

 We now turn to the conceptualization of proactive ver
 sus passive recall strategies. We also provide theoretical
 predictions for their impact on firm financial value.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:57:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Effects of Product-Recall Strategies on Firm
 Financial Value
 A significant amount of information asymmetry exists
 between firms and the stock market (Myers and Majluf
 1984). This information asymmetry is accentuated during
 crisis events, such as product recalls. Typically, firms
 involved in recalls possess more private information about
 the nature of the product hazard and its potential conse
 quences than the stock market. This is due to the complex
 ity in the production and distribution processes, the firms'
 proximity to consumers, and their frequent communication
 with regulatory agencies. In contrast, the stock market relies
 on a multitude of external information sources (e.g., corpo
 rate or government news releases, third-party business pub
 lications) to determine the impact of a crisis event on the
 firm. In addition to publicly available information, the stock
 market pays close attention to a firm's actions and strategies
 and tries to interpret these as signals of future earnings and
 firm value (Ross 1977). An important signal of the potential
 fallout from a crisis event is the type of product-recall strat
 egy a firm adopts.

 Previous research has indicated that a proactive strategy
 may have positive consequences on consumer perceptions.
 For example, consumers perceive firms that act in a socially
 responsible manner as being of a higher quality (Siegel and
 Vitaliano 2007). A more active firm response helps reduce
 the negative impact of product-harm crises on consumers'
 perceptions of the firm and their future purchase intentions
 (Siomkos and Kurzbard 1994). Furthermore, the negative
 effect on brand equity and consumer perceptions can be
 reduced when a firm accepts the responsibility for its prod
 uct recall (e.g., Dawar and Pillutla 2000; Siomkos and
 Kurzbard 1994). Finally, a proactive strategy can be inter
 preted as an indication that the firm is trustworthy and cares
 about its consumers. For example, Fortune magazine
 recently selected Mattel for its 2008 list of "100 Best Com
 panies to Work For," mainly because of Mattel's quick and
 responsible actions in recalling defective toys in 2007.4
 Overall, consumers tend to use a firm's recall strategy as a
 signal of its product and service quality and trustworthiness.
 However, it is likely that the stock market and investors
 view the implications of a proactive product-recall strategy
 differently from consumers. The stock market is sensitive to
 news about and signals of a firm's financial prospect (Ross
 1977). Although a proactive strategy may have the potential
 benefits of maintaining consumer confidence and instilling
 brand loyalty, investors tend to be more concerned about the
 firm's ability to maintain a healthy cash flow in the short
 run and how the recall event may negatively affect product
 sales.5 By observing that the firm is moving quickly and
 early to initiate the recall and is proactively managing it,

 4The complete list and the reference to Mattel are available at
 the following Web site: http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/
 bestcompanies/2008/snapshots/70.html.

 5Another reason the investors may take a short-term perspective
 is that because of investment alternatives, they can move their
 investment out of a firm if the cash and profitability prospects
 appear to be at risk. We thank the guest editor and two anonymous
 reviewers for helpful suggestions regarding the theoretical
 discussions.

 investors may speculate that the financial consequences are
 going to be severe and that the firm had no other choice but
 to act proactively to reduce the potential impact. In other
 words, the investors are likely to interpret proactive actions
 as a signal of severe financial loss, which typically includes
 expenses related to the recall process, potential litigation,
 liability, and penalty payment for damages to consumers or
 properties. This negative implication of proactive recalls is
 directly related to some aspects of investor behavior. As
 Benartzi and Thaler (1995) indicate, investors weigh possi
 ble losses 2.5 times more heavily than possible gains
 because of loss aversion (Tversky and Kahneman 1991).
 Sharma and Lacey (2004) examine stock market reaction to
 new product development outcomes and find that stock
 market losses from product development failures are much
 larger than stock market gains from product development
 successes. Moreover, if the implications of a crisis-related
 news item are ambiguous, investors often process the infor
 mation as if the worst-case scenario was going to happen
 (Epstein and Schneider 2008). When the crisis-related news
 involves both positive and negative aspects, Viale (2007)
 indicates that the stock market will react categorically to the
 negative rather than the positive aspects. As a result, the
 stock market will be more sensitive to the negative implica
 tions of proactive recall strategies than to positive implica
 tions, such as those from the consumer perspective.

 Furthermore, firms are ill-prepared to handle product

 harm crises and tend to react to them passively (e.g., Dawar
 and Pillutla 2000; Pearson and Clair 1998). This is sup
 ported in our data, in which passive recalls are more fre
 quently observed.6 This implies that compared with passive
 strategies, proactive strategies might receive greater atten
 tion and scrutiny from the investors, resulting in more nega
 tive interpretations.

 Therefore, we propose that a proactive strategy will
 receive greater investor attention and that the stock market
 will interpret it as a signal of significant financial losses. In
 turn, firm financial value will be affected more negatively
 when the recall strategy is proactive than when it is passive.

 H{: Proactive product-recall strategies are more negatively
 related to the firms' financial value than passive product
 recall strategies.

 Data

 We test the hypothesis with CPSC product recalls from Jan
 uary 1996 to December 2007 (see http://www.cpsc.gov/
 cpscpub/prerel/prerel.html). We chose the recalls issued by
 the CPSC for several reasons. First, the CPSC (2005) does
 not allow any news releases or information leaks before the
 recall announcement. This policy remained unchanged dur
 ing the 12-year period of our study. After it is determined
 that a recall is to be issued, all official recall information
 originates from the CPSC. This feature of the recall process
 enabled us to accurately measure the date on which a recall
 announcement was made to the public. The recall and the
 firm's recall strategy are unanticipated events to the public

 6Among the 153 recall events studies in this article, 115 (or

 75%) are passive recalls, and 38 (or 25%) are proactive recalls.

 A Firm's Product-Recall Strategy and Financial Value / 217

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:57:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 when the CPSC announces the recall. This offers an ideal
 setting for the event study method (MacKinlay 1997).

 Second, each CPSC recall announcement specifically
 indicates the number of safety incidents related to the
 recalled products that had been reported to the firm and the
 CPSC by the time the recall was issued. If any, these inci
 dents tend to be injuries, deaths, and severe property dam
 age to the users of the products. These reports provide use
 ful information that enables us to distinguish between
 proactive and passive recall strategies. If the firm and the
 CPSC have not received any incident report but a recall is
 issued, it suggests that the firm moved quickly in managing
 the crisis and adopted a proactive strategy. If this is not the
 case, it suggests that firms are relatively passive in manag
 ing the recall. Note that these incidents were reported either
 to the firm or to the CPSC; the general media may not be
 aware.

 Third, among all federal agencies that regulate product

 recalls, the CPSC is responsible for the most diversified
 range of consumer products. Many of the recent large-scale
 product recalls have occurred for nondurable goods, such as
 toys and toothpaste, which fall under the regulatory author
 ity of the CPSC. Thus, using the recall data from the CPSC
 helps enhance the generalizability of our findings.

 Finally, the CPSC does not handle automotive-related

 recalls. Product recalls in the automobile industry are con
 sistently more frequent than in other industries. For exam
 ple, Davidson and Worrell (1992) report that the number of
 recalls from the "big three" automakers in their 20-year
 sample is larger than all other recalls combined. Pruitt and
 Peterson (1986) find that the number of automobile recalls
 from the three automakers is about twice as large as all
 other recalls combined. The inclusion of a large number of
 automobile product recalls may lead to significant sample
 bias unless the focus is on the automobile industry itself.

 We collected information for product recalls that were
 issued for firms publicly traded on the New York Stock
 Exchange. We obtained the daily stock return data from the
 Center for Research in Security Prices at the University of
 Chicago. Because CPSC regulations on reporting product
 safety problems are different between manufacturers and
 retailers (Mullan 2004), we exclude all retailer recalls (e.g.,
 Target, PetSmart) and focus only on manufacturer recalls.
 We obtain key firm characteristics, such as firm reputation
 and revenue, from the annual survey of "America's Most
 Admired Companies" by Fortune magazine (e.g., Fombrun
 and Shanley 1990) and from the firms' annual financial
 reports.

 Event Study Analysis

 Methodology
 Event studies have traditionally been employed in the
 finance and accounting disciplines. MacKinlay (1997) pro
 vides a comprehensive review of the key considerations and
 methodological issues in event studies. In marketing, event
 studies have been used to examine the impact of various
 marketing strategies on stock returns, such as the addition
 of Internet distribution channels (Geyskens, Gielens, and
 Dekimpe 2002), celebrity endorsement (Agrawal and

 218 / Journal of Marketing, November 2009

 Kamakura 1995), brand extension announcements (Lane
 and Jacobson 1995), and the change of company names
 (Horsky and Swyngedouw 1987). The recent studies by
 Joshi and Hanssens (2009) and Tellis and Johnson (2007)
 provide useful descriptions of the key features of this
 methodology.

 An important issue in event studies is identifying an
 investigation period during which there are no confounding
 events that could obscure the effects associated with the
 event under consideration (MacKinlay 1997; McWilliams
 and Siegel 1997). If there is uncertainty about when the
 event actually occurred, the researcher must use fairly long
 event windows. Unfortunately, a long event window
 increases the possibility of confounds because of a greater
 number of intervening events. Therefore, the literature has
 suggested that the event window should be set as short as
 possible (e.g., McWilliams and Siegel 1997). Consistent
 with this requirement, the CPSC data provide a unique and
 accurate event day, namely, the day when a recall was
 announced. We further exclude any recall observations for
 which the firm involved in a recall experienced other eco
 nomically relevant events on the recall date. As per the
 event study literature, we located the confounding events by
 searching the archives and indexes of the Wall Street Jour
 nal, which is considered the most comprehensive news
 source for financially relevant events (e.g., McWilliams and
 Siegel 1997).

 To prevent the impact of potential leakage of recall
 information before the event day, we follow Davidson and

 Worrell's (1992) suggestion and exclude recalls for which
 there were news reports in the Wall Street Journal before
 the recall announcement on safety issues related to the
 recalled product (e.g., safety incidents, product inspection).
 By doing so, we can uniquely examine the financial impact
 of unanticipated recall announcements and ensure that any
 differential effects between proactive and passive strategies
 on stock returns is not due to investors' prior knowledge
 about safety incidents from media reports. More important,
 this helps rule out the alternative explanation that the differ
 ential effect of a passive recall strategy occurs because
 investors might have more prior information about passive
 recalls (relative to proactive recalls) and are less likely to be
 surprised about them.

 Finally, we identify and exclude recall cases in which
 the potential hazard is chronic and manifests over time,
 such as those based on concerns about lead paint. Such haz
 ards may not induce immediately visible incidents but are
 harmful in the long run if left unchecked. These cases could
 cause ambiguity for the classification of proactive and pas
 sive recalls because the chance of incident reporting is
 inherently minimal.7 For similar reasons, we also exclude
 the recall cases in which a firm initiated multiple recalls
 that included both proactive and passive recalls on the same
 day.

 After these screening steps to ensure data quality for the

 even study, we obtained a final sample of 153 recalls.
 Among them, 38 were issued before the firm or the CPSC
 had received any report of safety incidents. We categorized

 7We thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing out this issue.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:57:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 these as proactive recalls. We classified the remaining 115
 recalls as passive recalls. Our sample size compares favor
 ably with previous event studies. For example, there were
 58 observations in Horsky and Swyngedouw's (1987) study,
 89 in Lane and Jacobson's (1995) study, 110 in Agrawal
 and Kamakura's (1995) study, and 93 in Geyskens, Gielens,
 and Dekimpe's (2002) study. Davidson and Worrell's
 (1992) cross-product category study of product recalls had
 133 recalls.

 The "event" in our study is a product-recall announce
 ment from the CPSC. Thus, the official announcement date
 by the CPSC is the event day (Day 0). The theory of stock
 market efficiency from the finance literature indicates that
 the impact of recall strategies, if any, should be detectable
 on the event day. As is common in event studies (MacKin
 lay 1997), we used a period of 250 prior trading days (i.e.,
 Day -270 to Day -21), which is approximately one year in
 calendar days, as the period to estimate normal returns.8 We
 estimated normal returns through the market model
 (MacKinlay 1997):

 (1) Rit = a{+^Rm+Eit,

 where Rit and Rmt are the day t (t = -270, ..., -21) returns
 of stock i (the company for which the recall was issued) and
 a standard market portfolio m. We used the typical market
 portfolio, Standard & Poor's S&P 500 index, in the estima
 tion. We applied estimations of a and ? to the event day to
 calculate the expected return, which we then subtracted
 from the actual return to obtain the abnormal return (AR):
 (2) ARi0=Ri0-ai-?iRm0.

 Following the event study process (e.g., Agrawal and
 Kamakura 1995; Davidson and Worrell 1992; Geyskens,
 Gielens, and Dekimpe 2002; Lane and Jacobson 1995;
 MacKinlay 1997), we tested our hypothesis by examining
 whether the abnormal returns for proactive and passive
 recall strategies were significantly different from zero and
 whether the abnormal returns of the two strategy groups
 were significantly different from each other.
 Results and Discussion
 Table 1 presents the event study results related to the effects
 of proactive versus passive product-recall strategies on
 abnormal returns. We use multiple test statistics to examine
 abnormal returns for each type of recall. In addition to the
 common t-test, we examined Patell's (1976) test statistic
 (t-Patell), which is robust to potential bias caused by stocks
 with large standard deviations in returns, and Boehmer,
 Musumeci, and Poulsen's (1991) standardized cross
 sectional test (t-BMP), which is robust to potential event
 induced changes in variance.

 As Table 1, Panel A, shows, the average abnormal
 return for the proactive recalls is -.59%, which is consistently
 significant in the common t-test, the t-Patell test, and

 8To reduce concerns related to potential information leakage, it
 is important that we specify an estimation period that ends several
 days before the event period. We follow this accepted practice but
 note that our results remain unchanged for alternative specifica
 tions of the estimation period.

 TABLE 1

 Impact of Product-Recall Strategies on Firm

 Financial Value

 A: Abnormal Stock Returns (AR) for Proactive and

 Passive Recalls

 Recall
 Strategy N AR t-Statistic t-Patell t-BMP
 Proactive 38 -.59% -2.31* -2.27* -2.35*
 Passive 115 .097% .63 .45 .46

 B: Comparison of AR Between Proactive and Passive

 Recalls

 Two-Sample Wilcoxon

 t-Test Rank-Sum Test

 AR Difference t-Statistic W-Score Z-Statistic
 -.69%_-2.24* 2406.00 -2.19*

 *p < .05.

 the t-BMP test. In contrast, none of the three tests are sig
 nificant for the passive recalls. Therefore, significantly neg
 ative abnormal stock return is associated with proactive
 recalls but not with passive recalls.9

 We further compare the abnormal returns of different
 recall strategies by conducting a two-sample t-test and a
 nonparametric Wilcoxon rank-sum test. As Table 1, Panel
 B, shows, proactive recalls have significantly more negative
 abnormal returns than passive recalls. The difference is
 -.69% (p < .05). The rank sum of the abnormal returns (the
 Wilcoxon score) for proactive recalls is 2406, and the distri
 bution of abnormal returns for proactive recalls is signifi
 cantly shifted to the left of the distribution for passive
 recalls (Z =-2.19, p<.05).

 Overall, these results provide consistent evidence that
 the proactive recalls are associated with significantly more
 negative abnormal returns than the passive recalls. On aver
 age, the abnormal return for proactive strategies is approxi
 mately .7% lower than that for passive strategies (p < .05).
 Thus, our hypothesis is supported, suggesting that the stock
 market interprets a proactive product-recall strategy as a
 signal of severe financial losses.

 In contrast to previous studies that have focused on the
 positive aspects of proactive recall strategies from a con
 sumer's perspective (e.g., Dawar and Pillutla 2000; Laufer
 and Coombs 2006; Siomkos and Kurzbard 1994), our find
 ings point to the potential drawback of proactive strategies
 by examining stock returns for a recall sample that spans a
 broad array of product categories. Our results indicate that
 in product-recall crises, though overtly socially responsible
 behavior by a firm may generate positive responses from

 9As we discussed previously, several studies examine whether
 product recalls have any impact on firm value for several product
 categories, but they report mixed findings (e.g., Davidson and
 Worrell 1992; Hoffer, Pruitt, and Reilly 1988; Jarrell and Peltzman
 1985; Thomsen and McKenzie 2001). Our results offer a strong
 contribution to this literature by showing that the impact of recalls
 may depend on key factors, such as recall strategies, and that it is
 useful to differentiate product recalls accordingly.

 A Firm's Product-Recall Strategy and Financial Value / 219

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:57:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 consumers, it may be interpreted by the stock market nega
 tively. Therefore, firms need to be sensitive to how the stock
 market might interpret their proactive actions.

 Product-Recall Strategies as a Key

 Influencer of Abnormal Stock

 Returns

 Cross-Sectional Analysis
 In this section, we examine the source of abnormal returns
 to complement the event study and show that product-recall
 strategies are a significant influencer of abnormal returns.
 The typical approach in event studies to examine the influ
 ence of a factor is to conduct cross-sectional regression of
 abnormal returns against a set of explanatory variables
 (MacKinlay 1997). Thus, we estimate an empirical model
 that includes both recall strategies and important firm and
 product characteristics:
 (3) ARi0 = ct0 + (XjPROACTi + oc2 _ 15Xj + e?,

 where PROACTj is a binary variable that denotes whether
 the firm adopts a proactive recall strategy (PROACTj =1)
 or a passive strategy (PROACTj = 0), Xj includes firm and
 product variables that may influence stock market reactions
 to the recall event, and oc2 _ 15 is the vector of coefficients to
 be estimated for these variables. To support the results of
 the event study, the parameter estimate of proactive strate
 gies (cCi) must remain significantly negative when the set of
 variables (X) is included in the empirical model.

 We were able to gather the following firm characteris
 tics for the recall sample: the level of firm reputation, firm
 size in terms of sales revenue, the level of financial liability,
 and whether the recalled product used the company name in
 its brand or carried an individual brand name. These vari
 ables may influence abnormal returns in different ways. For
 example, strong firm reputation and a larger firm size may
 help buffer the firm from negative events, such as product
 recalls (Ahluwalia, Burnkrant, and Unnava 2000; Dawar
 and Pillutla 2000; Siomkos and Kurzbard 1994). A high
 level of financial liability may make the firm more suscepti
 ble to the consequences of product-harm crises. The brand
 ing strategy a firm adopts is relevant because it captures the
 potential spillover effect, especially if the recalled product
 uses the company name in its brand (Sullivan 1990).

 Similar to previous measures of firm reputation (e.g.,
 Fombrun and Shanley 1990), we assess REPUTATION
 with the reputation ratings data from Fortune's annual sur
 vey of "America's Most Admired Companies." This survey
 asks executives, directors, and security analysts to rate the
 largest companies in their own industry. An overall reputa
 tion score is assigned to each company on the basis of how
 it is rated on eight attributes relative to its major competi
 tors. Note that the reputation scores are based on firms' rel
 ative performances within their industries. Thus, REPUTA
 TION of a firm takes the value of the standardized
 reputation score with respect to the means and standard
 deviations of the corresponding industry (Fombrun and
 Shanley 1990). Because the Fortune survey provides repu
 tation scores for up to ten companies in each industry, we
 assign the industry average to companies that were not

 220 / Journal of Marketing, November 2009

 included in the survey. We collected sales revenue (FIRM
 SIZE) and financial liability (LIABILITY) from the firms'
 annual 10-K reports for the year before the recall event, so
 they reflect the information that the stock market had about
 the firm at the time of the recall. For the same reason, we
 measured firm reputation for the year before the recall as
 well. The branding variable (BRAND) is coded as 1 if the
 recalled product used the company name in its brand and 0
 if it used an individual brand name that is different from the
 company name.10

 We obtained product characteristics from the original
 CPSC recall announcements. These include VOLUME (vol
 ume of the product to be recalled), SELLTIME (how long
 the recalled product had been sold in the market before the
 recall), PRICE (retail price of the recalled product), HAZ
 ARD (the level of potential product hazard [most severe
 injury, more severe injury, and minor injury]), and a set of
 product category dummies following the CPSC categoriza
 tion (TOY for toy products; CHILD for nontoy children
 products; OUTDOOR for outdoor product, such as lawn
 mowers; SPORTS for sporting goods; and SPECIALTY for
 specialty products).11 The omitted reference category
 includes household products. Finally, we include a time
 variable (YEARTREND) to capture possible trends of the
 impact of recalls on abnormal returns. YEARTREND is the
 number of years between 1996 (the first year of our recall
 sample) and the year when the recall occurred. Table 2 lists
 the variables and their description, and Table 3 provides
 descriptive statistics and the correlation matrix.

 Table 4 presents the estimation results, which support
 our finding of the event study that proactive recall strategies
 are associated with more negative abnormal returns than
 passive strategies.12 First, the estimation shows that a
 product-recall strategy is an important influencer of abnor
 mal stock returns. Its impact is greater than any other firm
 or product characteristics in terms of t-statistics. Second, (Xi
 is significantly negative, indicating that proactive strategies
 have a more negative effect on firm financial value than
 passive strategies. Third, among independent variables,
 HAZARD, YEARTREND, and OUTDOOR also signifi
 cantly influence abnormal returns. However, firm character
 istics, such as REPUTATION, FIRMSIZE, and BRAND, do
 not have a significant impact.

 Mediation Test of Recall Strategies
 The cross-sectional analysis shows that firm characteristics,
 such as REPUTATION and FIRMSIZE, do not influence
 abnormal returns directly when we include the product

 10For example, we do not categorize the Jordan Trunner cross
 training shoe recalled by Nike as the family brand because its
 brand name does not carry the firm name Nike. However, we cate
 gorize the Nike Air Face Up basketball shoe as the family brand
 because it contains the firm name Nike.

 uIn coding the hazard level of each recall, we followed the
 CPSC guideline of categorizing hazard: Class A hazard, Class B
 hazard, and Class C hazard. The risk of death or grievous injury or
 illness ranges from likely or very likely for Class A hazard to not
 likely but possible for Class C hazard.

 12We inspected the variance inflation factor for every regression

 reported in this article to ensure that there is no multicollinearity.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:57:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 TABLE 2

 List of Variables in the Analysis

 Variable

 Meaning

 PROACT Whether the recall strategy is proactive (1)

 or not (0)

 REPUTATION The level of firm reputation
 FIRMSIZE Firm size as measured by the sales
 revenue (in billions of U.S. dollars)

 LIABILITY The level of current liability of the recalling

 BRAND Whether a recalled product used its

 firm (in billions of U.S. dollars)

 company name in its brand name (1) or
 not (0)

 VOLUME The number of recalled product units sold

 (in millions)

 SELLTIME How long the recalled products have been

 sold in the market before the recall (in
 thousands of days)

 PRICE The (maximum) retail price of the recalled

 product (in thousands of U.S. dollars)
 HAZARD The level of product hazard risk (1 = high,

 2 = moderate, and 3 = low)

 CHILD Whether a recalled product is in the nontoy
 children's product category (1) or not (0)

 TOY Whether a recalled product is in the toy

 product category (1) or not (0)

 OUTDOOR Whether a recalled product is in the

 SPORTS Whether a recalled product is in the

 outdoor product category (1) or not (0)

 sports/recreation product category (1) or
 not (0)

 SPECIALTY Whether a recalled product is in the

 YEARTREND Number of years between 1996 and the

 specialty product category (1) or not (0)

 year of the recall

 recall strategy dummy. A question, then, is whether these
 firm characteristics influence firms' choice of product-recall
 strategies. If we obtain significant effects of firm character
 istics on strategy choice, it would indicate that recall strate
 gies, as a signal to the stock market, mediate the effects of
 firm characteristics on abnormal returns (e.g., Kenny,
 Kashy, and Bolger 1998; Song, Xie, and Dyer 2000).

 In addition to the empirical model (Equation 3), the

 mediation test requires an estimation of how the firm and
 product characteristics influence the probability that a
 proactive recall strategy is adopted. In previous sections, we
 suggested that one reason investors react negatively to
 proactive recall strategies is that they infer from a proactive
 recall that the likely consequence of the product-harm crisis
 is sufficiently severe and that the firm is reacting quickly to
 reduce potential financial losses. Any delay in the recall
 would create greater financial risk in terms of recall costs,
 litigation costs, and payments for penalties and damages.
 Firm reputation is strongly correlated with product quality
 (Waddock and Graves 1997), and firms with a strong repu
 tation are typically those that compare favorably with com
 petitors on products and services (Fombrun and Shanley
 1990). Because of the perception of high quality, when
 high-reputation firms (e.g., Toyota) are involved in product
 recalls, their recalls may be perceived as an occasional error
 or a temporary aberration. Thus, reputation can be a useful

 asset for firms in buffering the negative impact of recalls?
 that is, the impact of recalls is lower for a firm with a strong
 reputation (Ahluwalia, Burnkrant, and Unnava 2000; Dawar
 and Pillutla 2000; Siomkos and Kurzbard 1994). As a result,
 proactive strategies are less useful for high-reputation firms
 than for low-reputation firms, and high-reputation firms are
 less likely to engage in proactive recalls.

 Similarly, we expect that FIRMSIZE is negatively cor
 related with the use of proactive strategies and that BRAND
 and LIABILITY are positively correlated with it. First,
 compared with small-size firms, large firms are less sensi
 tive to potential losses because they have more resources
 and a greater financial cushion. They are less likely to take
 preventive measures by initiating proactive recalls to reduce
 recall costs and lessen the risk of potential litigation and lia
 bility payments. Second, products that use a family brand
 name are more subjected to negative brand-image spillover
 than products that use different brand names (e.g., Aaker
 and Keller 1990; Sullivan 1990). If a firm using the com
 pany name on a product that is a potential hazard does not
 act quickly to initiate recalls, incidents due to the product
 hazard are more likely to occur, which can trigger greater
 public attention to and scrutiny of the firm's other products
 that share the same family brand name. This may lead to
 recalls of other products and higher litigation and liability
 costs. As a result, a firm with family branding is more likely
 to adopt a proactive recall strategy. Finally, firms with a
 higher level of debt are more sensitive to potential financial
 losses; thus, they are more likely to initiate proactive recalls
 to reduce recall costs and the risk of litigation.

 At the product level, the volume of the recalled product
 (VOLUME) may affect recall strategies. From the perspec
 tive of reducing financial losses, firms are less likely to ini
 tiate a proactive recall when VOLUME is large because
 many product hazard investigations do not eventually result
 in a recall. Compared with a proactive strategy, which
 makes it unavoidable for the firm to pay the costs of recall
 ing a large volume of products, delaying the potential recall
 might be financially worthwhile if a recall eventually does
 not need to be issued. In contrast, if the volume of the
 recalled product is small, the direct recall cost is lower than
 the high costs that could result from litigation and damage
 payments.

 We estimate the following probit model as part of the

 mediation test:

 (4) Pr(PROACTi) = y,Zi+8i.

 Here, the vector Zj includes the intercept and variables X?,
 which are defined similarly to Equation 3, in which y are
 the parameters to be estimated. Equations 3 and 4 constitute
 two essential steps in mediation tests suggested by Kenny,
 Kashy, and B?iger (1998).13 By inspecting the significance

 13Some studies suggest a third step in the mediation test and run
 a regression of the abnormal returns on all control variables (e.g.,
 Baron and Kenny 1986). However, the mediation literature has
 shown that this step is not required because it excludes many
 inconsistent mediation cases in which opposing indirect effects
 may cancel out the direct effects (e.g., Kenny, Kashy, and Bolger
 1998; MacKinnon, Krull, and Lockwood 2000). An alternative

 A Firm's Product-Recall Strategy and Financial Value / 221

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:57:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 io

 CM

 O)

 CO
 m
 T?
 II
 z
 (ft
 c
 o
 js

 -i 32
 m (0
 (ft
 o
 "i*
 (ft
 (0 4-?
 </>
 o
 >

 o
 (ft
 o
 a

 (O

 m

 o
 o o
 o
 O T
 o
 C\] CvJ
 t- h- CO

 o
 o
 o

 i- co co o
 CO LO CM CO
 O -^ O T
 r ^

 O 00 -r- i- f^ o o
 o r^ '?t co lo co co
 O OCOO^fi-CO

 o
 o
 o

 Wt-^tNOCDOO
 Noo^tcoomco
 CMOOCMOh-CM^

 O CM^O^-CMOOOOCOCMO
 O COCMLOCOLOCVJLOI^OCO
 O t-Ot-OOLOO^-OCN

 O ^-CMCMi-LOCOCOLOCMOlOO
 O COOLOCOCMCXJ^tO'^-i-COLO
 O OCOt-Oi-t-OlOOCOOCM

 O ^t-CVIO^t-(DC0^t-C0 0)OO
 O Oi-OT-NCOCOOOCD^tm^O
 O CMO-r-CVI-r-OCMOOCOOLOCMCO

 o o o i- cm o lo co o co o co i- o i- h- ^
 O COO'?OONCOWOOOt-SCMt-COCO
 O CvJ O i- O t- O CO O CO O O 00 i? i- 00 CM
 r-: " ^? f o |->j. o ^? |-o- "^cmlo

 O COLOCOT-COOCMCOCMr^LOOOOCOOCOi-O
 O 0)LOCO"^-LOO>OOt-COt-LOCMOCMOCMLO
 O OWrOOtrWrrr-r-OCOOCOOOO
 t-' " i- ?=^ i" ?=^ i" ?=^ i" ?=- "^ r^ "^ \m^ "i

 O CO-r-LOT-COCOOOCO^t^-I^LOCOCOCOCOLOOLO
 O C0OI^C0^"^-CVlTfC0^CMCMt-LOL000^-05O^
 O MOrOOlfirrrOi-rrrO^OlflWlO

 O mC0C0C0CMi-i-CM^00C0O0)i-C0CMC00)C0C0OO
 O C0C0^t0)I^.O<M0)^00i-O^tL0L0O00OOC0C0l0
 O OCOOLOCMOOr^OLOCOOOLOCMOOCOOCOh-Tl

 O 0505COCOr^l^COCT)CvJCO,^-OCMCOCOI^Cr>COCOOLO^tOCM
 O ONCOCOlOCOOr-COi-CDCONNCM^O)C\JCOCOO)^N^
 O i-T-0(DO^OO)OCOO^OCOONOWO(OOWO)CO
 r-: " " -^ f ^ ^ f o. |- ^ f ^ |- ^ ^ , ^ , o- ^oo ^ co

 o
 o
 o

 LOO^LOI^i-^CDI^^COlOCvJ'i-i--r-COC\lLO'^-COCOCM'^-COLO
 00OOrN^lOOC0WOOOr0)(0Or^N^t00rOW
 COO'?-CMOCOOLOOCOt-CM'?-CMOCMOO)'i-OOLOOCOI^CM
 ^ -^ -^ ^ |-^ |-^ |->^ ,-^j. -^ ,-^> |-^ "-->cdr^
 t- CM

 CM

 O 0)Or-OC0C0C0C0C\IC0l?)C0lOir)T-C0T-NT-i-N0)C0lOC0C0NCD
 O NO<UOCOCOO)CO(O^lOincOC?^i-0^i-N(OOOOOOOOCOCO
 O ^O^OrOOWO^rOO^O(?rOrrO^rrO(0r(?

 coo^i-cococo^i-^^i-incoMn^NCMcoococvjCMiOT-mcooo
 coooo^o)inr-Nco(?OT-mc\ioifiif)coowcooooo)^c\icMinco
 rrr?\|OlOOlOrOWOOOOC\IOrOrrrrOaO?\|rr?\|^

 o
 o
 o
 T" I

 z
 o

 ? ce

 a.

 Q_
 LU
 ce

 LU >.
 N ?
 CO -J
 er <  <
 CL
 cu
 co

 LU

 LU

 9

 LU
 CO

 Q
 rr
 <
 N
 <
 I

 LU
 o
 DC
 ?L

 X
 o

 CO

 rr
 o
 o
 ?
 h
 o

 s
 CO ? o CL

 ?
 LU
 ?.
 co

 CO
 co

 LU
 oc
 ?c <
 LU
 >
 LO

 Q
 co

 222 / Journal of Marketing, November 2009

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:57:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 TABLE 4

 Cross-Sectional Regression of the Abnormal

 Returns

 Independent
 Variable Parameter
 (Parameter) Estimates SE
 Intercept -1.534** .756
 PROACT (aO -.859** .337
 REPUTATION (a2) .239 .250
 FIRMSIZE(a3) .005 .011
 LIABILITY (a4) -.007 .009
 BRAND (a5) -.004 .327
 VOLUME (a6) -.237 .275
 SELLTIME(a7) .091 .138
 PRICE (a8) -.011 .033
 HAZARD (a9) .522** .257
 CHILD (a10) .466 .616
 TOY (an) -.031 .526
 OUTDOOR (a12) .777** .389
 SPORTS(a13) -.298 .436
 SPECIALTY(a14) .904 .869
 YEARTREND (a15) .079* .043
 R2 .16
 Sample size 153

 __

 **p < .05.
 Notes: To enhance the readability of the results, we note the depen
 dent variable, abnormal returns, as a percentage in this
 analysis.

 of the coefficients for the strategy dummy and the other
 explanatory variables in both equations, we can assess the
 mediation effects of recall strategies.

 The probit results appear in Model 1 of Table 5. Consis

 tent with our prior discussion, the effect of firm reputation
 (REPUTATION) is significantly negative, suggesting that
 high-reputation firms are less likely to adopt a proactive
 recall strategy than low-reputation firms. Furthermore, the
 estimation shows negative parameter estimates for FIRM
 SIZE and VOLUME and positive estimates for LIABILITY
 and BRAND. However, while the estimate for VOLUME is
 highly significant, the others did not achieve the traditional
 level of significance.

 More important, Table 4 and Table 5 (probit estimation)
 jointly show the mediation effects: (1) The direct impact of
 proactive recall strategy on abnormal return is significant in
 Equation 3, and (2) firm characteristics that influence recall
 strategy choices in Equation 4, especially REPUTATION,
 do not affect abnormal returns in Equation 3. Based on the
 steps that Kenny, Kashy, and Bolger (1998) outline, these
 effects indicate that product-recall strategies completely
 mediate the influences of firm characteristics on abnormal
 returns. Therefore, the stock market consolidates the impact
 of various firm and product characteristics and reacts
 mainly to a firm's recall strategy. In other words, during a
 product recall, the financial market uses a firm's strategic

 way to test mediation effects is to use structural equation models.
 However, because of the categorical nature of proactive recall vari
 able (which violates the normality assumption of structural equa
 tion models), it is difficult to pursue this approach.

 choice of a recall strategy as a signal to evaluate the poten
 tial consequence of the crisis.

 Heckman Two-Step Estimation
 In anticipation of the potential outcomes of different strate
 gies, forward-looking firms may choose a particular strat
 egy on the basis of its characteristics (e.g., Shaver 1998). If
 firm characteristics are unobservable to the researcher but
 affect both market outcomes and firm strategy, the problem
 of self-selection bias may arise in the estimation of, in our
 context, the impact of recall strategies on stock returns
 (Greene 2000; Hamilton and Nickerson 2003; Shaver
 1998).

 The Heckman two-step estimation is an effective
 approach to check and correct for potential self-selection
 bias and endogeneity (Heckman 1979). This procedure has
 been extensively used in the management and economics
 literature (e.g., Hamilton and Nickerson 2003; Shaver
 1998). In this section, we carry out the Heckman estimation
 to show that the cross-sectional analysis we reported is not
 subject to self-selection bias and that the finding about the
 negative impact of proactive strategies on abnormal returns
 is robust after accounting for potential endogeneity.

 The first stage of the Heckman process involves a probit
 model on the choice of product-recall strategies, as in the
 empirical model (Equation 4). The inverse Mills ratio ?,,
 which serves as the self-selection correction parameter in
 the Heckman model, is constructed using the probit esti
 mates. The second stage includes ordinary least squares
 (OLS) regressions of abnormal returns on the explanatory
 variables plus X for the proactive recall subsample and the
 passive recall subsample, separately:
 (5) ARi0(PROACT = 1) = ?/W; + ?^^ + e?, and
 (6) ARi0(PROACT = 0) = %'W{ + ?^0 + ei0,

 where W? includes the intercept and the exogenous vari
 ables that may influence abnormal returns and Xi and Xq are
 inverse Mills ratios for each observation in the proactive
 subsample and the passive subsample. We calculate them as
 follows:

 Xl = (KY'ZyOKy'Z), and
 ?0=-^(rZ)/[l-O(Y/Z)],

 where <|) and O are the probability density function and
 cumulative distribution function of the standard normal dis
 tribution. For model identification purpose, at least one
 variable that affects strategic choice but does not directly
 affect abnormal returns must be included in the probit stage
 but not the OLS stage (Hamilton and Nickerson 2003).
 Thus, we exclude SELLTIME and PRICE from the OLS
 estimation because there is no a priori reason to believe that
 they will significantly influence abnormal returns, which is
 also confirmed by the results in Table 4. Because the error
 terms in Equations 5 and 6 are subject to heteroskedasticity,
 we use consistent asymptotic standard errors to test the sig
 nificance of the parameters.

 The key to the Heckman estimation is that the signifi

 cance of the inverse Mills ratio terms reflects the degree of

 A Firm's Product-Recall Strategy and Financial Value / 223

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:57:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Firm Choice of Recall Strategy and the Heckman Two-Step Estimation

 TABLE 5

 2 (OLS Regression of Abnormal Returns)b
 Independent Variable 1 (Probit on Recall Strategy)3 Proactive Recalls Passive Recalls
 Intercept -.682 -5.222 -1.095
 REPUTATION -.436 -.633 .468
 FIRMSIZE -.012 .005 .002
 LIABILITY .011 .010 -.008
 BRAND .176 -.046 -.410
 VOLUME -5.067 -.488 -.131
 (1.868)** (5.949) (.295)
 SELLTIME -1.257
 (.458)**

 (.013) (.028) (.013)
 (.009) (.018) (.010)
 (.351) (.677) (.361)

 (.809) (3.131) (.758)
 (.262)* (.602) (.295)

 PRICE -.013
 (.034)
 HAZARD .192 .967 .465
 CHILD .461 2.096 -.765
 TOY 1.060 -.370 .114
 (.557)** (1.029) (.676)
 OUTDOOR -.028 .315 .767
 SPORTS -.165 -.433 -.427
 SPECIALTY 1.400 2.636 -.081
 YEARTREND .055 .097 .061

 (.253) (.679) (.277)
 (.559) (1.003)** (.837)

 (.429) (.832) (.371)**

 (.446) (1.014) (.461)
 (.970) (1.467)* (1.185)
 (.046) (.097) (.049)

 Correction for self-selection 1.194 .196

 parameter (X) (1.540) (.645)

 Log-likelihood -60.39

 R2 .38 .14
 Sample size_153_38_115

 *p<.10.
 **p < .05.
 aFirst-stage probit model parameter estimates with standard errors of estimates are in parentheses.
 bSecond-stage OLS parameter estimates with consistent asymptotic standard errors of estimates are in parentheses.
 Notes: To enhance the readability of the results, we note the dependent variable, abnormal returns, as a percentage in this analysis.

 self-selection bias. If ?^ = 0 and ?^0 = 0, self-selection bias
 is not a concern for the cross-sectional regression of abnor
 mal returns reported in Table 4. As Model 2 in Table 5
 shows, this is indeed the case. The coefficients of the self
 selection bias parameters ?^i and ?^0 are not significantly
 different from zero for the proactive subsample and the pas
 sive subsample. Therefore, the cross-sectional model
 (Equation 3) yields an unbiased estimate of the effect of
 product-recall strategies (i.e., proactive recalls have a sig
 nificantly negative impact on firm value). In addition, the
 firm and product characteristic variables REPUTATION
 and VOLUME, respectively, lose significance in the
 second-stage OLS regressions of abnormal returns.
 Together with the significance of product-recall strategies in
 the cross-sectional model (Equation 3), the Heckman
 results further demonstrate that product-recall strategies are
 key influencers of abnormal stock returns, regardless of
 firm and product characteristics.

 224 / Journal of Marketing, November 2009

 General Discussion

 A key finding in this research is that the use of a proactive
 product-recall strategy, which firms can use to elicit posi
 tive responses from consumers, actually hurts a firm's
 financial value more than a passive recall strategy. We also
 find that less reputable firms are more likely to use proac
 tive recall strategies. These results suggest that in choosing
 proactive versus passive strategies, firms are primarily con
 cerned with minimizing potential financial losses associated
 with the recall. In essence, the stock market and investors
 use recall strategies as a proxy or signal to estimate the
 financial impact of recalls. They interpret proactive strate
 gies as a signal of severe product hazard and substantial
 financial losses to the firm. This explains our result that
 proactive recalls are more negatively related to a firm's
 value than passive recalls.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:57:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Implications
 Our findings have direct managerial and public policy
 implications. A growing body of literature has argued that
 there is a positive link between firms' socially responsible
 strategies and their financial market performance (Margolis,
 Elfenbein, and Walsh 2007). Our results suggest that at least
 in the context of product-harm crises, when firms imple
 ment proactive strategies to reduce the impact of a crisis
 and maintain long-term viability, they need to be aware of
 alternative interpretations of their behavior by consumers
 and investors. Their views might differ, but both are impor
 tant facets of crisis management. In terms of financial
 value, the stock market's pessimistic views of a proactive
 strategy could actually hurt firm value. As a result, when a
 firm proactively recalls a product, it needs to communicate
 effectively to the stakeholders about the rationale for its
 actions so that the stock market will not simply interpret the
 situation as just another case of severe product hazard and
 significant financial losses.

 Although the study shows a surprising negative effect of
 proactive recall strategies, it suggests the effect of firm rep
 utation in reducing the need for a proactive approach (i.e.,
 firms with a high reputation are less likely to adopt proac
 tive strategies), thus buffering the negative impact on firm
 value. In this sense, our study provides support for the
 extant studies that, mostly from consumer perspectives,
 have found a positive role of firm reputation in product
 harm crises (e.g., Ahluwalia, Burnkrant, and Unnava 2000;
 Dawar and Pillutla 2000; Siomkos and Kurzbard 1994).

 From a public policy perspective, it has long been
 argued that the stock market has the governance role of
 monitoring and disciplining corporate behavior (Samuel
 1996). The socially responsible investing trend has added
 more weight to the significance of this role. However, our
 findings indicate that during a product-harm crisis, the
 stock market does not seem to reward seemingly socially
 responsible behavior. As we discuss, information asymme
 try between the firm and investors can be an important rea
 son behind such failure. When the market itself cannot
 resolve the issue of information asymmetry, appropriate
 regulatory measures should be taken to aid communication
 and information exchange, thus increasing market effi
 ciency and social welfare.

 Although the marketing discipline has begun to exam
 ine the linkage between corporate social responsibility and
 firms' financial performance (Luo and Bhattacharya 2006),
 the findings from the literature have been relatively incon
 sistent, particularly among studies that use market-based
 measures, such as stock returns (Orlitzky, Schmidt, and
 Rynes 2003). Our results suggest that such inconsistency
 could have occurred because a "responsible" corporate pol
 icy can be interpreted in different ways by different stake
 holders. Further research on corporate social responsibility
 may need to consider why firms adopt such policies and
 how the market might interpret them.

 Directions for Further Research

 This study could be a harbinger of several new issues that
 link marketing strategies to firm performance. For example,
 drawing on the previous literature, we classified product
 harm crisis management strategies along the proactive
 versus-passive dimension. Because of the greater frequency
 of product recalls in recent years, firms need clear guidance
 on the available strategies and the effectiveness of these
 strategies under different market and product conditions.
 Thus, a comprehensive study of recall strategies could offer
 a useful typology and assessment of their effectiveness.

 In this article, we mainly focused on the impact of
 product-recall strategies on firm value when the recall is
 announced. Because event studies are often limited in
 detecting long-term stock market effects, alternative meth
 ods that complement event studies will be useful in examin
 ing possible long-term effects (e.g., Mitchell and Stafford
 2000). It would also be worthwhile to examine whether the
 benefits of proactive strategies from the consumer perspec
 tive (through increased consumer confidence and brand loy
 alty) could benefit firm value in the long run.

 Finally, it would be useful to examine the role of news
 media in a recall event. Certain types of product recalls,
 such as those for toys, might garner greater attention or bias
 from the media. For similar reasons, it would be worthwhile
 to examine potential differences in recalls and stock market
 reactions across industries and government agencies (e.g.,
 the CPSC, the Food and Drug Administration).

 REFERENCES
 Aaker, David A. and Kevin Lane Keller (1990), "Consumer
 Evaluations of Brand Extensions," Journal of Marketing, 54
 (January), 27-41.

 Agrawal, Jagdish and Wagner Kamakura (1995), "The Economie
 Worth of Celebrity Endorsers: An Event Study Analysis," Jour
 nal of Marketing, 59 (July), 56-62.

 Ahluwalia, Rohini, Robert E. Burnkrant, and H.R. Unnava (2000),
 "Consumer Response to Negative Publicity: The Moderating
 Role of Commitment," Journal of Marketing Research, 37
 (May), 203-214.

 Baron, Reuben M. and David A. Kenny (1986), "The Moderator
 Mediator Variable Distinction in Social Psychological
 Research: Conceptual, Strategic, and Statistical Considera
 tions," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51 (6),
 1173-82.

 Benartzi, Shlomo and Richard H. Thaler (1995), "Myopie Loss

 Aversion and the Equity Premium Puzzle," Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 110 (1), 73-92.

 Berman, Barry (1999), "Planning for the Inevitable Product

 Recall," Business Horizons, 42 (2), 69-78.

 Boehmer, Ekkehart, Jim Musumeci, and Annette Poulsen (1991),

 "Event-Study Methodology Under Conditions of Event-Induced
 Variance," Journal of Financial Economics, 30 (2), 253-72.

 CPSC (1999), Recall Handbook. Bethesda, MD: U.S. Consumer

 Product Safety Commission, Office of Compliance, Recalls and
 Compliance Division, (May), (accessed March 15, 2009),
 [available at http://www.cpsc.gov/BUSINFO/8002.html].

 - (2005), Regulated Products Handbook. Bethesda, MD:
 U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Office of Compli
 ance, Recalls and Compliance Division, (January), (accessed

 A Firm's Product-Recall Strategy and Financial Value / 225

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:57:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 March 15, 2009), [available at http://www.cpsc.gov/businfo/
 8001.pdf].

 -(2006), "Playskool Voluntarily Recalls Toy Tool Benches
 After the Death of Two Toddlers," (September 22), (accessed
 March 15, 2009), [available at http://www.cpsc.gov/cpscpub/
 prerel/prhtml06/06266.html].

 Davidson, Wallace, III, and Dan Worrell (1992), "The Effect of
 Product Recall Announcements on Shareholder Wealth," Strate
 gic Management Journal, 13 (6), 467-73.

 Dawar, Niraj and Madan M. Pillutla (2000), "Impact of Product
 Harm Crises on Brand Equity: The Moderating Role of Con
 sumer Expectations," Journal of Marketing Research, 37 (May),
 215-26.

 Epstein, Larry G. and Martin Schneider (2008), "Ambiguity, Infor
 mation Quality, and Asset Pricing," Journal of Finance, 63 (1),
 197-228.

 Fombrun, Charles and Mark Shanley (1990), "What's in a Name?
 Reputation Building and Corporate Strategy," Academy of Man
 agement Journal, 33 (2), 233-58.

 Geyskens, Inge, Katrijn Gielens, and Marnik Dekimpe (2002),
 "The Market Valuation of Internet Channel Additions," Journal
 of Marketing, 66 (April), 102-119.

 Greene, William (2000), Econometric Analysis. Upper Saddle

 River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

 Hamilton, Barton and Jackson Nickerson (2003), "Correcting for
 Endogeneity in Strategic Management Research," Strategic
 Organization, 1 (1), 51-78.

 Heckman, James (1979), "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification

 Error," Econometrica, 47 (1), 153-61.

 Hoffer, George, Stephen Pruitt, and Robert Reilly (1988), "The
 Impact of Product Recalls on the Wealth of Sellers: A Reexam
 ination," Journal of Political Economy, 96 (3), 663-70.

 Horsky, Dan and Patrick Swyngedouw (1987), "Does It Pay to
 Change Your Company's Name? A Stock Market Perspective,"
 Marketing Science, 6 (4), 320-35.

 Jarrell, Gregg and Sam Peltzman (1985), "The Impact of Product
 Recalls on the Wealth of Sellers," Journal of Political Economy,
 93 (3), 512-36.

 Joshi, Amit and Dominique Hanssens (2009), "Movie Advertising
 and the Stock Market Valuation of Studios: A Case of 'Great
 Expectations'?" Marketing Science, 28 (2), 239-50.

 Kenny, David A., Deborah A. Kashy, and Niall Bolger (1998),
 "Data Analysis in Social Psychology," in The Handbook of
 Social Psychology, Vol. 1, 4th ed. Daniel Gilbert, Susan Fiske,
 and Gardner Lindzey, eds. Boston: McGraw-Hill, 233-65.

 Lane, Vicki and Robert Jacobson (1995), "Stock Market Reactions
 to Brand Extension Announcements: The Effects of Brand Atti
 tude and Familiarity," Journal of Marketing, 59 (January),
 63-77.

 Laufer, Daniel and W Timothy Coombs (2006), "How Should a
 Company Respond to a Product Harm Crisis? The Role of Cor
 porate Reputation and Consumer-Based Cues," Business Hori
 zons, 49 (5), 379-85.

 Luo, Xueming and C.B. Bhattacharya (2006), "Corporate Social

 Responsibility, Customer Satisfaction, and Market Value," Jour
 nal of Marketing, 70 (October), 1-18.

 MacKinlay, A. Craig (1997), "Event Studies in Economics and

 Finance," Journal of Economics Literature, 35 (1), 13-39.

 MacKinnon, David P., Jennifer Krull, and CM. Lockwood (2000),
 "Equivalence of the Mediation, Confounding, and Suppression
 Effect," Prevention Science, 1 (4), 173-81.

 Margolis, Joshua D., Hillary Elfenbein, and James Walsh (2007),
 "Does It Pay to Be Good? A Meta-Analysis and Redirection of
 Research on Corporate Social and Financial Performance,"
 working paper, Harvard Business School, Harvard University.

 McWilliams, Abagail and Donald Siegel (1997), "Event Studies in

 Management Research: Theoretical and Empirical Issues,"
 Academy of Management Journal, 40 (3), 626-57.

 Mitchell, Mark and Erik Stafford (2000), "Managerial Decisions
 and Long-Term Stock Price Performance," Journal of Business,
 73 (3), 287-329.

 Mullan, J. Gibson (2004), "Reporting Safety Problems: U.S. Per
 spective," (accessed March 15, 2009), [available at http://www.
 icphso.org/oldfiles/international/2004Euro/2004/London 1 .pdf].
 Myers, Stewart and Nicholas S. Majluf (1984), "Corporate Financ
 ing and Investment Decisions When Firms Have Information
 That Investors Do Not Have," Journal of Financial Economics,
 13 (June), 187-221.

 Orlitzky, Marc, Frank L. Schmidt, and Sara Rynes (2003), "Corpo
 rate Social and Financial Performance: A Meta-Analysis,"
 Organization Studies, 24 (3), 403^141.

 Patell, James (1976), "Corporate Forecasts of Earnings per Share
 and Stock Price Behavior: Empirical Tests," Journal of Account
 ing Research, 14 (2), 246-76.

 Pearson, Christine and Judith Clair (1998), "Refraining Crisis
 Management," Academy of Management Review, 23 (1), 59-76.
 Prince, David and Paul Rubin (2002), "The Effects of Product Lia

 bility Litigation on the Value of Firms," American Law and
 Economics Review, 4(1), 44-87.

 Pruitt, Stephen W. and David R. Peterson (1986), "Security Price
 Reactions Around Product Recall Announcements," Journal of
 Financial Research, 9 (2), 113-22.

 Ramani, Girish and V. Kumar (2008), "Interaction Orientation and
 Firm Performance," Journal of Marketing, 72 (January), 27-45.
 Rhee, Mooweon and Pamela R. Haunschild (2006), "The Liability

 of Good Reputation," Organization Science, 17 (1), 101-117.

 Ross, Stephen A. (1977), "The Determination of Financial Struc

 ture," Bell Journal of Economics, 8(1), 23^40.

 Samuel, Cherian (1996), "Stock Market and Investment: The Gov
 ernance Role of the Market," World Bank Policy Research
 Working Paper (March).

 Schoem, Marc (2001), "Product Safety Enforcement and Recalls in
 the United States," (accessed March 15, 2009), [available at
 http://www.konsumentverket.se/Documents/in_english/
 conferences_seminars/consumer_product_recall_2001/
 Swedenl.ppt].

 Sharma, Anurag and Nelson Lacey (2004), "Linking Product

 Development Outcomes to Market Valuation of the Firm," Jour
 nal of Product Innovation Management, 21 (5), 297-308.

 Shaver, J. My les (1998), "Accounting for Endogeneity When
 Assessing Strategy Performance: Does Entry Mode Choice
 Affect FDI Survival?" Management Science, 44 (4), 571-85.

 Siegel, Donald S. and Donald F. Vitaliano (2007), "An Empirical
 Analysis of the Strategic Use of Corporate Social Responsibil
 ity," Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 16 (3),
 773-92.

 Siomkos, George and Gary Kurzbard (1994), "The Hidden Crisis in
 Product-Harm Crisis Management," European Journal of Mar
 keting, 28 (2), 30-41.

 Song, X. Michael, Jinhong Xie, and Barbara Dyer (2000),
 "Antecedents and Consequences of Marketing Managers'
 Conflict-Handling Behaviors," Journal of Marketing, 64 (Janu
 ary), 50-66.

 Sullivan, Mary (1990), "Measuring Image Spillovers in Umbrella

 Branded Products," Journal of Business, 63 (3), 309-329.

 Tellis, Gerard and Joseph Johnson (2007), "The Value of Quality,"

 Marketing Science, 26 (6), 758-73.

 Thomsen, Michael and Andrew McKenzie (2001), "Market Incen
 tives for Safe Foods," American Journal of Agricultural Eco
 nomics, 82 (3), 526-38.

 Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman (1991), "Loss Aversion in
 Riskless Choice: A Reference-Dependent Model," Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 107 (4), 1039-1061.

 Van Heerde, Harald, Kristiaan Helsen, and Marnik Dekimpe
 (2007), "The Impact of a Product-Harm Crisis on Marketing
 Effectiveness," Marketing Science, 26 (2), 230-45.

 Viale, Ariel M. (2007), "Testing Overreaction and Underreaction to
 Macroeconomic News," working paper, Mays Business School,
 Texas A&M University.

 Waddock, Sandra A. and Samuel B. Graves (1997), "Quality of
 Management and Quality of Stakeholder Relations: Are They
 Synonymous?" Business & Society, 36 (3), 250-79.

 226 / Journal of Marketing, November 2009

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:57:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

