JOURNAL OF PUBLIC RELATIONS RESEARCH, 13(4), 321–340
Copyright © 2001, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

An Extended Examination of the Crisis
Situations: A Fusion of the Relational
Management and Symbolic Approaches

W. Timothy Coombs and Sherry J. Holladay

Department of Communication

Wayne State University

This article begins to integrate ideas from the relational management perspective of
public relations with the symbolic approach to crisis communication. The fusion cen-
ters on the relation history as part of an organization’s performance history. The belief
is that relationship affects the crisis situation by shaping perceptions of the crisis and
the organization in crisis. The experimental study found support connecting relation-
ship history to the crisis situation. The results are termed the velcro effect because only
a negative relationship history produced an effect on organizational reputation and
crisis responsibility. The article offers a model of the crisis situation to explain how
relationship history fits with the variables used in the symbolic approach.

Part of the success of a crisis management effort is dependent on what an organiza-
tion says and does after a crisis hits: the crisis response (Benoit, 1997). Hence, it is
critical that researchers be able to detail the dynamics of the crisis response pro-
cess—the factors that shape the selection of the crisis response. The more we know
about the crisis response process, the more effective a crisis manager can be
(Coombs, 1999a). The symbolic approach has begun to unpack the crisis response
process. The symbolic approach to crisis communication moves beyond the basic
lists of crisis response strategies to an examination of how the crisis situation can
influence the selection and effectiveness of crisis response strategies (Coombs &
Holladay, 1996). It is wrong to think the symbolic approach ignores stakeholder
safety. It is assumed that crisis managers provide instructing information prior to,
or in conjunction with, crisis responses (Coombs, 1999b). Instructing information
represents the information stakeholders need including precautionary actions they

Requests for reprints should be sent to W. Timothy Coombs, Department of Communication, Wayne

State University, 540 Manioogian Hall, Detroit, MI 48202. E-mail: tcoombs@wayne.edu


322

COOMBS AND HOLLADAY

need to take (e.g., boil water or stay indoors) and a description of what happened in
the crisis (Sturges, 1994). The crisis response is viewed as a symbolic resource that
can be used to protect the organization’s reputation and to affect stakeholders’ fu-
ture interactions with the organization. The crisis response does so by shaping per-
ceptions of the crisis and the organization in crisis (Coombs, 1999a, 1999c;
Coombs & Holladay, 1996).

In the symbolic approach, the crisis situation is an integral part of the crisis re-
sponse process. The crisis situation is both a constraint and an asset when articulat-
ing a crisis response. The crisis managers evaluate the crisis situation to select the
appropriate crisis response strategies (Coombs, 1998). It follows that, the more
comprehensive an understanding crisis managers have of the crisis situation, the
better prepared they are to deliver an effective crisis response. Although integral,
mapping the crisis situation is still in its infancy. Coombs (1995, 1998, 1999a) ar-
ticulated a basic matching system for crisis responses and crisis situations.
Although crude, this conceptualization of the crisis situation does suggest addi-
tional research that would lead to its refinement. One crisis situation component
that has great explanatory potential is the relationship between an organization and
its various stakeholders. Drawing from other works, Coombs (1998) noted that an
organization’s performance history should affect perceptions of the crisis or orga-
nization, or both, in crisis. He divided performance history into crisis history
(whether the crisis was isolated or part of a pattern) and past relationship–good
works. Early tests show limited, minor support for crisis history’s impact on the
crisis situation (Coombs, 1998; Coombs & Holladay, 1996). However, what we
term relationship history (relationships–good works) has gone untested but is pos-
ited to be a potentially important aspect of the crisis situation (Fearn-Banks, 1996).
The purpose of this study is to explore and to begin to illuminate the effect of re-
lationship history, as part on performance history, on perceptions of the crisis situ-
ation and its potential effect of selecting a crisis response. The study begins with a
review of existing work relevant to performance history, including a consideration
of the relational management perspective. Next, the experiment designed to test
for possible effects of relationship history and results is explained. Finally, the im-
plications for relationship history on crisis management are unpacked.

LITERATURE ANALYSIS AND HYPOTHESES

According to the symbolic approach, the relationship history between an organiza-
tion and its stakeholders is considered to be part of an organization’s performance
history and is believed to influence a crisis situation and response (Coombs, 1999b).
Furthermore, the developing line of research called the relational management per-
spective argues for consideration of relationship history when developing public re-
lations actions (Ledingham & Bruning, 1998). However, the ideas associated with


FUSION

323

relationship history and crisis communication have never been tested. This section
begins to fuse the relational approach to crisis communication by placing relation-
ship history within the symbolic approach, moves to potential benefits of drawing
from a relational approach, and concludes with the presentation of the hypotheses.

Symbolic and Relational Approaches

The symbolic approach to crisis communication has always considered perfor-
mance history to be an important element when evaluating the crisis situation
(Coombs, 1995; Coombs & Holladay, 1996). As noted earlier, performance history
has been divided into crisis history and relationship history. The crisis history indi-
cates whether the crisis was a one-time event or part of a pattern of similar crises.
The justification of crisis history is steeped in the attribution theory roots of the
symbolic approach. Repeated crises reflect stability, a core dimension people use
when making attributions of responsibility (McAuley, Duncan, & Russell, 1992;
Wilson, Cruz, Marshall, & Rao, 1993). The more people see a crisis as stable (being
repeated), the more likely they are to perceive the organization as responsible for
the crisis (Griffin, Babin, & Attaway, 1991).

Previous research using transgression (purposely placing stakeholders at risk)
and accident crisis types found minimal support for the stability connection. The
repeated crisis conditions had significantly lower organizational reputation scores
and significantly higher perceptions of crisis responsibility than the single crisis
conditions. Coombs and Holladay (1996) collapsed accident and transgression
conditions in their analysis so no separate means were reported for the different
crisis types. Coombs (1998) did separate analyses for accident and transgression
conditions. Single accidents had means of 3.48 for reputation and 1.99 for crisis re-
sponsibility, whereas repeated accidents had means of 3.10 for reputation and 2.35
for crisis responsibility. A single transgression had means of 2.52 for reputation
and 3.18 for crisis responsibility, whereas repeated transgressions had means of
2.14 for reputation and 3.44 for crisis responsibility. Although statistically signifi-
cant, the mean differences were small, with the highest being .38.

Relationship history, the second component of performance history, has not
been tested empirically, but reasons for its inclusion in the crisis situation mix are
well established. In a variety of publications, crisis experts have stated that a favor-
able precrisis stakeholder relationship is an important and valuable asset to crisis
management (e.g., Birch, 1994; Couretas, 1985; Fearn-Banks, 1996; Seitel, 1983).
As Coombs (1999a) noted, “A favorable precrisis relationship reflects a favorable
organizational reputation. A reputation is derived from experiences with the orga-
nization, the relationship history with stakeholders” (p. 51). A favorable stake-
holder relationship can be taken as a marker of a positive reputation. The
relationship history is built on an organization meeting or failing to meet stake-


324

COOMBS AND HOLLADAY

holder expectations (Finet, 1994). Organizations build favorable relationship his-
tories by meeting and exceeding stakeholder expectations (Coombs, 1999b).

A crisis is one event or interaction within a larger relationship between an orga-
nization and its stakeholders. A crisis becomes part of that larger, ongoing rela-
tionship. One facet of a crisis is that it can damage or be a threat to a quality
relationship. Moreover, as with any relationship, the current interaction is shaded
by past interactions. For example, a relative spills a drink at your party and stains a
favorite chair. If your relationship with that relative is very positive, the accident
will have little impact on the relationship. However, if the relationship with the rel-
ative is rather negative, the accident will worsen the ill feelings toward the relative.
Ledingham and Bruning (1998) crystalized a perspective they term the rela-
tional management perspective. The relational management perspective is embed-
ded in a movement that places the organization–stakeholder relationship at the
center of the public relations practice (Broom, Casey, & Ritchey, 1997). The per-
spective holds that relationships are the core, defining aspect of public relations.
As a result, a bad relationship reflects bad public relations. The relationship history
affects how stakeholders interpret current events or interactions in the relationship.
Current events do not exist in isolation but are viewed as part of the larger relation-
ship (Ledingham, Bruning, & Wilson, 1999). The organization–stakeholder rela-
tionship forms around the interdependence of the two parties (J. E. Grunig, 1990).
The relationship is managed through the communication between the two parties;
communication is the primary tool for relationship management (J. E. Grunig & L.
A. Grunig, 1992). The relationship management perspective has been applied to a
variety of stakeholders such as media and communities, and has been recom-
mended for use in crisis management (Ledingham et al., 1999). The relational
management perspective becomes fused with the symbolic approach to crisis com-
munication when relationship history is treated as part of the crisis situation.

Once established, a relationship history and reputation are fairly stable
(Boulding, 1979). The stability may serve to deflect and reduce the negatives gener-
ated by a crisis from attaching themselves to the organization. A favorable relation-
ship history acts as a buffer against crisis damage. Research on the halo effect is the
basis for explaining the deflective power of a favorable relationship history. Once a
positive view of a person or organization is established, people will ignore informa-
tion that contradicts the favorable reputation (Balzer & Sulsky, 1992; Nisbett & Wil-
son, 1977). In a crisis, stakeholders may ignore negative implications from the crisis
or unfounded speculation about causes of the crisis, or be more receptive to the orga-
nization’s interpretation of the crisis. Conversely, an unfavorable relationship his-
tory or reputation might intensify the negatives generated by the crisis and lead
stakeholders to discount the organization’s interpretation of the crisis (Coombs,
1999a). The favorable relationship history becomes a bank account of goodwill. Past
efforts place deposits in the account, whereas a crisis leads to small withdrawals
(Druckenmiller, 1993; Siomkos & Shrivastava, 1993). Following this logic, a large


FUSION

325

account ensures that during a crisis stakeholders will not create an overdraft that
harms the organization’s reputation.

A favorable relational history can affect both perceptions of the crisis and the or-
ganization in crisis. Stakeholders should see the crisis as less negative because they
are discounting the negative implications of the crisis, and they should be willing to
cling to their initial positive perception of the organization. Once more, stability may
be a useful explanatory tool. When there is a favorable relationship history, stake-
holders see a crisis as an anomaly for an organization. The crisis is one misstep in a
history of positive actions. However, the crisis becomes just another example of bad
behavior for an organization if there is an unfavorable relationship history.

Hypotheses

It is instructive at this point to provide a visual representation of the variables be-
lieved to be involved in the crisis situation. A model of the crisis situation allows us
to see the variables and relationships being discussed. Figure 1 is a model of the cri-
sis situation derived from a fusion of the symbolic and relationship management
approaches. A discussion of the model is a useful lead-in to the hypotheses. Crisis
responsibility and organizational reputation are at the center of the dynamic. Per-
ceptions of perceived control and performance history shape attributions of crisis
responsibility. These relationships are derived from attribution theory. Perfor-
mance history is patterned after stability, whereas perceived control is derived from
personal control. In attribution theory, stability and personal control are important
determinants for attributing responsibility for an action. Crisis responsibility and
performance history influence perceptions of organizational reputation. Both fac-
tors will increase reputational damage as they intensify. Potential supportive be-
havior is a function of organizational reputation; the stronger the reputation, the
more likely a person is to report potential support behavior.

Performance history has two components: (a) relationship history and (b) crisis
history. There is no empirical research connecting relationship history to the crisis
situation, and limited research on crisis history’s connection. According to Figure

FIGURE 1 Crisis situation model.


326

COOMBS AND HOLLADAY

1, performance history is directly and indirectly connected to organizational repu-
tation. It is speculated that performance history’s primary effect is indirect through
attributions of crisis responsibility. This belief stems from performance history be-
ing considered a form of stability. The first set of hypotheses (Hs) addresses per-
formance history’s relationship to crisis responsibility:

H1a: Respondents in the favorable relationship condition will attribute less crisis
responsibility to the organization than those in the unfavorable or neutral
conditions.

H1b: Respondents in the unfavorable relationship condition will attribute more
crisis responsibility to the organization than those in the favorable or neu-
tral conditions.

H2a: Respondents in the favorable crisis history condition will attribute less cri-
sis responsibility to the organization than those in the unfavorable or neutral
conditions.

H2b: Respondents in the unfavorable crisis history condition will attribute more
crisis responsibility to the organization than those in the favorable or neu-
tral conditions.

Performance history also should have a direct effect on organizational reputa-
tion. Performance history could have a halo effect on the organizational reputa-
tion. A favorable performance history could lead people to disregard the negatives
generated by a crisis, thus protecting the reputation. Conversely, a negative perfor-
mance history could intensify the reputational damage (Coombs, 1999a). Accord-
ing to the relationship management perspective, the crisis is but one event in a
larger relationship. Past interactions will color interpretations of (be a halo for) the
current crisis. Performance history should influence perceptions of the organiza-
tion itself. The second set of hypotheses addresses performance history’s relation-
ship to organizational reputation:

H3a: Respondents in the favorable relationship condition will hold more positive or-
ganizational reputations than those in the unfavorable or neutral conditions.
H3b: Respondents in the unfavorable relationship condition will hold more negative

organizational reputations than those in the favorable or neutral conditions.

H4a: Respondents in the favorable crisis history condition will hold more positive

organizational reputations than those in the unfavorable or neutral conditions.

H4b: Respondents in the unfavorable crisis history condition will hold more nega-
tive organizational reputations than those in the favorable or neutral conditions.

The answers generated for Hypotheses 1a through 4b will help to assess whether
stability and the halo effect are viable explanations for modeling performance his-
tory’s role in the crisis situation.


FUSION

327

Crisis history and relationship history are related conceptually; both are part of
performance history but posited to be separate as well. H5 and H6 address the ex-
pected distinctiveness between crisis history and relationship history. To be dis-
tinct, the two variables must contribute uniquely to the explanation of the variance
for organizational reputation and crisis responsibility.

H5: Crisis history and relationship history contribute unique explanations of

variance for organizational reputation.

H6: Crisis history and relationship history contribute unique explanations of

variance for attributions of crisis responsibility.

Figure 1 is based in large part on correlations from earlier studies of perceived
control, crisis responsibility, organizational reputation, and potential supportive
behavior. The correlations are checked again in this study to test for the stability of
the correlations and to examine the structure of the crisis situation dynamic mod-
eled in Figure 1.

H7: There will be significant correlations between organizational responsibility,

potential supportive behavior, crisis responsibility, and personal control.

METHOD

Participants

The respondents in this study were 174 undergraduate students enrolled in commu-
nication courses at a Southeastern university. Of the respondents, 61% were
women (n = 106) and 39% were men (n = 68). The respondents ranged in age from
18 to 25 years old (M = 21, SD = 1.25).

Design and Materials

An accident was selected for the crisis type for two reasons. First, accidents are a
common type of crisis (Irvine & Millar, 1996). The results of applied research are
more beneficial when they address common crises rather than anomalies. The les-
sons are more valuable when they can be applied more frequently. Second, acci-
dents provide a greater variance in perceptions. Accidents vary in terms of the per-
ceptions formed about the crisis and the organization in crisis. For instance,
technical breakdowns and workplace violence produce minimal perceptions of cri-
sis responsibility, whereas human error produces fairly stronger perceptions of cri-
sis responsibility (Coombs, 1999a). Although unintentional, stakeholders do be-
lieve many accidents are preventable and others are more a result of neglect than


328

COOMBS AND HOLLADAY

chance (Heath, 1994; Tyler, 1997). Basically stakeholders can perceive accidents
very differently. It is logical to utilize a crisis type that demonstrates variance on
many of the perceptual variables used in a study.

The crisis case was based on an actual industrial accident. The accident was an
explosion at the Ford Kentucky Truck Plant in Jefferson County. Phosphoric acid
was pumped accidentally into a tank of sodium nitrate. The two chemicals reacted,
causing the tank to explode. An orange–yellow cloud of mostly nitrous oxide
drifted out of the plant. More than 1,000 employees and 2 day care centers were
evacuated while local residents were advised to stay indoors. It took 7 hr before
people were given the all-clear signal. All descriptions of the accident were taken
from actual coverage of the event by The Courier-Journal of Louisville, Ken-
tucky. Respondents were exposed to real media coverage, not a “fake” story. The
description of the incident comprised 90% of the sample case.

The experimental design involved the manipulation of two components of per-
formance history: crisis history and relationship history. Both stakeholder rela-
tionships and crisis history (an accident record) needed to have a favorable, neutral
(no history mentioned), and an unfavorable condition. A neutral condition was in-
cluded to better judge the effect of the favorable and unfavorable conditions. It is
important to know that the favorable and unfavorable conditions produced effects
different from a neutral condition that makes no mention of relationship or crisis
history. No mention of relationship or crisis history is a possibility. Stakeholders
may know little about performance history if they have minimal contact with the
organization. Hence, we must determine if a favorable mention is better than no
mention, or if an unfavorable mention is worse than no mention at all.

The 3 × 3 design required the development of nine different scenarios. Four dif-
ferent history paragraphs were developed for the study, favorable and unfavorable
conditions for both relationship history and crisis history. Table 1 provides a de-
scription of each scenario and the number of respondents for each scenario. Each
scenario had at least 18 respondents, which exceeds the minimum of 15 per condi-
tion required for analysis of variance (ANOVA) analyses (Morgan & Griego,
1998). The favorable stakeholder relationship had the plant rated highly in the
“Best Places to Work” survey and noted contributions to the community through
blood drives and the United Way. The unfavorable stakeholder relationship had
the plant rated low on the “Best Places to Work” survey and noted a general failure
to support community efforts such as blood drives and the United Way. The favor-
able accident record indicated the plant had a very strong safety record. The unfa-
vorable safety record indicated the plant had a history of safety violations,
including two chemical spills that occurred during unloading (a history of similar
crises). The neutral condition contained neither crisis nor relationship history in-
formation. Filler information, such as other companies in the area, was included to
balance the length of the nine scenarios. All nine variations of the case had 30 lines
of text.


FUSION

329

TABLE 1

Experimental Conditions

Scenario

Number of Respondents

1. Positive relationship history & neutral crisis history
2. Negative relationship history & neutral crisis history
3. Neutral relationship history & positive crisis history
4. Neutral relationship history & negative crisis history
5. Positive relationship history & positive crisis history
6. Negative relationship history & negative crisis history
7. Positive relationship history & negative crisis history
8. Negative relationship history & positive crisis history
9. Neutral relationship history & neutral crisis history

Measures

19
19
22
19
18
19
19
19
20

The perceptual measures and scales were taken from past research studies using the
symbolic approach. Using consistent measures allows for comparisons between
studies and provides scales previously tested for reliability. Organizational reputa-
tion was measured using Coombs and Holladay’s (1996) 10-item revised version of
McCroskey’s (1966) character instrument. External and personal control, the two
attribution dimensions, were measured with items from McAuley, Duncan, and
Russel’s (1992) attribution scale. Coombs and Holladay adapted the attribution
scale to include a 3-item scale for external control and a 6-item scale for personal
control. Crisis responsibility was measured using a 3-item scale from Griffin,
Babin, and Darden’s (1992) study of blame and responsibility. Potential supportive
behavior was measured with an 8-item scale developed by Coombs (1998). The po-
tential supportive behavior scale simply asks people how likely they would be to
engage in a variety of different behaviors that would support the organization (e.g.,
sign a petition, attend a rally, etc.). The instrument also included 3 manipulation
check items and 1 item asking if the respondent felt the organization are likely to
have a repeat of the crisis. The potential supportive scale ranged from 1 (very un-
likely) to 5 (very likely). The internal and external control scales ranged from 1
(strongly disagree) to 9 (strongly agree). All other items ranged from 1 (strongly
disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).

Procedures

Each respondent received a packet containing a cover page with directions, the
stimulus crisis case, and a four-page survey. Respondents also were instructed ver-
bally to read the case carefully and respond to the following questions. The admin-
istration required about 15–20 min.


330

COOMBS AND HOLLADAY

RESULTS

Reliabilities

The reliability analysis of items produced an internal consistency of .92
(Cronbach’s alpha) for organizational reputation, .86 for potential supportive be-
havior, .81 for crisis responsibility, .70 for personal control, and .83 for external
control. Although crisis responsibility and personal control were lower than in pre-
vious studies, all fell within the acceptable range (Morgan & Griego, 1998). For
each individual factor, the items were summed, resulting in the creation of compos-
ite scores for organizational reputation, potential supportive behavior, crisis re-
sponsibility, personal control, and external control.1 The creation of composite
scores follows the procedures used in past symbolic approach research.

Manipulation Checks

The study used two different manipulations, stakeholder relationships and crisis
history. A series of one-way ANOVAs was performed to assess the effectiveness of
the experimental manipulations. To assess the perception of the quality of the
stakeholder relationship, the favorable, neutral, and unfavorable stakeholder rela-
tionship conditions were compared on two items, “The organization has done a lot
to help the community” and “The organization tries to provide workers a quality
place to work.” The results indicated significant differences on both items: for
“community,” F(2, 171) = 122.65, p < .001; and for “workers,” F(2, 174) = 98.88, p
< .001. Respondents rated the favorable relationship condition as helping the com-
munity more (M = 4.36) than either the unfavorable condition (M = 1.72) or the neu-
tral condition (M = 3.13). Similar results were found for trying to provide a quality
workplace, with the favorable conditions being viewed significantly more favor-
able (M = 4.41) than the negative condition (M = 1.96) or the neutral condition (M =
3.44). In each case, the neutral condition was viewed as more positive than the unfa-
vorable condition. Respondents did perceive the relationship to be significantly
more positive in the favorable condition than in the neutral or unfavorable condi-
tions and more negative in the unfavorable than in the neutral or favorable condi-
tions. The stakeholder relationship manipulation was considered a success.

To assess perceptions of similar crises, the favorable, neutral, and unfavorable
crisis history conditions were compared on the item, “The organization has a his-
tory of similar accidents.” The results indicated a significant difference for the
item, F(2, 171) = 82.01, p < .001. Respondents rated the unfavorable history condi-
tion significantly higher (M = 4.25) than the favorable history condition (M = 2.02)

1External control was measured but was not involved in any of the comparisons in this study. The data

were collected for future comparisons.


FUSION

331

or the neutral condition (M = 2.45) conditions. Respondents did perceive the unfa-
vorable history condition as having had similar crises more often than the favor-
able or neutral conditions. Moreover,
the favorable history condition was
perceived as having less similar crises than the unfavorable or neutral conditions.
Table 2 provides a summary of the manipulation check analyses. Overall, the crisis
history manipulation was considered a success.

Tests of Hypotheses

Two ANOVAs were used to test H1a–H4b. Relationship history and crisis history
were the dependent variables in both analyses. The crisis responsibility hypotheses
(H1a, H1b, H2a, and H2b) were analyzed using a 3 (favorable relationship history,
neutral relationship history, and unfavorable relationship history) × 3 (favorable
crisis history, neutral crisis history, and unfavorable crisis history) ANOVA. The
results revealed a significant main effect for relationship history, F(2, 165) = 4.87, p
< .05, eta2 = .04, power = .680; and crisis history, F(2, 165) = 6.47, p < .01, eta2 =
.06, power = .81. The interaction effect was not significant; thus, the focus was on
the main effects. A least significant difference (LSD) post hoc analysis was used to
explore the differences between the conditions. Respondents in the unfavorable re-
lationship history condition perceived the organization to have more crisis respon-
sibility (M = 3.58) than the favorable relationship history condition (M = 3.18). The
neutral condition was no different than either the favorable or unfavorable condi-
tions. The results found no support for H1a and mixed support for H1b. The unfa-
vorable crisis history condition produced greater perceptions of crisis responsibil-
ity (M = 3.68) than the favorable crisis history condition (M = 3.26) or the neutral
condition (M = 3.30). There was no significant difference between the favorable
and neutral relationship history conditions. The unfavorable crisis history condi-
tion was more harmful to the organizational reputation and created stronger percep-

TABLE 2

Manipulation Checks

Positive

Neutral

Negative

Item

M

SD

M SD

M SD

F

df

p

Relationship history
Help community
Provide quality place to work

Crisis history

4.36a
4.41a

.36
.43

3.13b
3.44b

History of similar crises

2.02a

.74

2.45b

0
0

0

1.72c
.91
1.96c 1.36

122.65 2, 171 < .001
98.88 2, 171 < .001

4.25c 1.01

82.01 2, 171 < .001

Note. For each test, means indexed by different subscripts are significantly different using Dunette C

procedure, p < .01.


332

COOMBS AND HOLLADAY

tions of crisis responsibility than the favorable or neutral crisis history conditions,
but there were no differences between the positive history and neutral conditions.
The results found support for H2b but provided no support for H2a.

The organizational reputation hypotheses (H3a, H3b, H4a, and H4b) were ana-
lyzed using a 3 (favorable relationship history, neutral relationship history, and un-
favorable relationship history) × 3 (favorable crisis history, neutral crisis history,
and unfavorable crisis history) ANOVA. The results revealed a significant main
effect for relationship history, F(2, 165) = 34.19, p < .001, eta2 = .32, power = 1.00;
and crisis history, F(2, 165) = 13.98, p < .001, eta2 = .16, power = .99. The interac-
tion effect was not significant; thus, the focus was on the main effects. An LSD
post hoc analysis was conducted to explore the differences between the conditions.
Respondents in the unfavorable relationship history condition held significantly
less positive organizational reputations (M = 2.69) than those in the favorable rela-
tionship history (M = 3.71) or the neutral condition (M = 3.57). There was no sig-
nificant difference between the favorable and neutral relationship history
conditions. The crisis history post hoc analysis followed the same pattern. The un-
favorable crisis history condition produced significantly less positive organiza-
tional reputation scores (M = 2.92) than either the favorable crisis history
condition (M = 3.53) or the neutral condition (M = 3.51). There was no significant
difference between the favorable and neutral crisis history conditions. Table 3 pro-
vides a summary of the analyses for H1a–H4b. The results support H4a and H4b
but not H3a and H3b.

H5 and H6 sought to determine if relationship history and crisis history contrib-
ute uniquely to predictions of organizational reputation and crisis responsibility or
if there is a major overlap between the two variables. Two regression analyses

Analyses of Variance for Relationship History and Crisis History

TABLE 3

Source

SS

df

ms

F

p

Organizational responsibility

Total
Relationship history
Crisis history
Relationship history × crisis history
Residual

Crisis responsibility

Total
Relationship history
Crisis history
Relationship history × crisis history
Residual

121.79
34.19
13.98
0.46
73.06

121.24
4.87
6.47
3.74
106.16

173
2
2
4
165

173
2
2
4
165

—
38.60
15.78
0.44

—
3.78
5.03
1.45

—

17.10
6.99
0.11
0.44

—
2.43
3.24
0.93
0.64

—
.001
.001
—

—
.025
.008
—

ns

—

.903

—

.219

Note. SS = sum of squares; ms = mean square; ns = not significant.


FUSION

333

were performed for each variable, resulting in a total of four regression analyses.
For both crisis responsibility and organizational reputation, we needed to deter-
mine if crisis history contributed to both variables above and beyond relationship
history, and whether relationship history contributed above and beyond crisis his-
tory. Two multiple regression analyses were conducted to determine the overall
crisis responsibility prediction from relationship history and crisis history. For
each regression, the order of the predictor variables was controlled. In the first cri-
sis responsibility regression, crisis history was entered first, whereas relationship
history was entered first in the second crisis responsibility regression. The adjusted
R2 were examined for differences. The crisis history variable (adjusted R2 = .04)
predicted crisis responsibility over and above the relationship history variable (ad-
justed R2 = .03), and the relationship history variable (adjusted R2 = .03) predicted
crisis responsibility over and above the crisis history variable (adjusted R2 = .04).
Regardless of order, crisis history and relationship history explain the same
amount of variance for crisis responsibility. The results suggest that relationship
history and crisis history contribute unique and similar amounts of variance for cri-
sis responsibility.

Two multiple regression analyses were conducted to determine the overall or-
ganizational reputation prediction from relationship history and crisis history. For
each regression, the order of the predictor variables was controlled. In the first or-
ganizational reputation regression, relationship history was entered first, whereas
crisis history was entered first in the second crisis responsibility regression. The
adjusted R2 were examined for differences. The relationship history variable (ad-
justed R2 = .23) predicted organizational reputation over and above the crisis his-
tory variable (adjusted R2 = .09), and the crisis history variable predicted (adjusted
R2 = .09) organizational reputation over and above the relationship history variable
(adjusted R2 = .24). Regardless of order, crisis history and performance history ex-
plain roughly the same amount of variance for organizational reputation. The re-
sults suggest
that relationship history and crisis history contribute unique
explanations of variance for organizational reputation with relationship history
contributing a much large percentage of the variance. See Table 4 for a complete
presentation of the regression results.

Hypothesis 7 was examined using correlations. Table 5 presents the correla-
tions table for organizational reputation, potential supportive behavior, crisis re-
sponsibility, and personal control. The correlations are consistent with three
previous studies reporting such correlations (Coombs, 1998, 1999b; Coombs &
Schmidt, 2000). For the most part, the correlations were moderate to strong. Of
special note are the correlations for the predicted relationships in the crisis situa-
tion model. The personal control–crisis responsibility correlation was strong (.63),
whereas the crisis responsibility–organizational reputation (–.34) and organiza-
tional reputation–potential supportive behavior (.46) were moderate. H7 was sup-
ported. There seems to be a fairly consistent pattern of relationships among these
four variables.


334

COOMBS AND HOLLADAY

Regression Analysis Summary Table for Performance History Variables

TABLE 4

Criterion Variable

B

β

Partial

t

p

Adjusted R2
Correlation R2 Change

Organizational reputation

Relationship history
Crisis history

Crisis responsibility

Relationship history
Crisis history

.51
.31

–.21
–.20

.49
.30

–.21
–.19

.51
.35

–.21
–.20

7.85
4.85

.001
.001

–2.85
–.2.66

.01
.01

.23
.32

.04
.07

.23
.09

.04
.03

TABLE 5

Correlation Table for Perceptual Variables

1. Organizational reputation
2. Potential supportive behavior
3. Crisis responsibility
4. Personal control

*p < .05. **p < .01.

1

2

.46**

3

–.34**
–.31**

4

–.23**
–.29**
.63**

DISCUSSION

This study provides a more refined understanding of performance history’s role in
the crisis situation. Dividing performance history into relationship and crisis his-
tory seems to make conceptual sense. Although similar, relationship and crisis his-
tory do have differing effects on the crisis situation. Combining the results from this
study with others based in the symbolic approach affords the opportunity to refine
the modeling of the crisis.

Performance History

One purpose of this research project was to understand better how performance his-
tory affects the crisis situation. Two possible explanatory frames were consid-
ered—attribution theory and the halo effect. Performance history could be a form
of stability, an unfavorable crisis, or performance history would suggest the current
crisis is one among many missteps by the organization. Attribution theory posits
that stability is one of the primary predictors of causal attributions. For crisis man-
agement, crisis responsibility is the focal casual attribution. Previous research has


FUSION

335

established personal control, another primary predictor of causal attributions, has a
strong connection to attributions of crisis responsibility (Coombs, 1999b; Coombs
& Schmidt, 2000). Performance history, if it is a variation of stability, also should
have a strong connection to crisis responsibility. The relational approach suggests
the value of the halo effect. The halo effect states that previous reputation affects
the acceptance and interpretation of new information. For instance, stakeholders
might discount or ignore negative information associated with a crisis if their prior
reputation of the organization is very positive. Performance history could be a re-
flection of the organization’s reputation. A favorable performance history suggests
a positive reputation, whereas an unfavorable one reflects a negative reputation. If
the halo effect is at work, performance history should be closely related to organi-
zational reputation.

The results found that relationship history does shape how people perceive the
crisis and the organization in crisis. An unfavorable relationship history or crisis
history leads people to perceive the organization as having more responsibility for
the crisis. However, the effect is small. Relationship history accounts for 3% and
crisis history 4% of the variance for crisis responsibility. Stability does not appear
to be the most useful explanatory frame for performance history’s effect on the cri-
sis situation. The halo effect seems to be a more viable explanatory frame. The ef-
fect on perceptions of organizational reputation are much stronger than those on
crisis responsibility. Relationship history accounts for about 23% and crisis his-
tory 9% of the variance for organizational reputation. However, the effect is gener-
ated by negative performance histories. People perceive the organization’s
reputation more negatively when there is an unfavorable rather than a favorable or
neutral relationship or crisis history. A favorable relationship or crisis history ap-
pears to be no different than the neutral condition where no relationship or crisis
history is given. When no relationship or crisis history is given, respondents give
the organization the benefit of the doubt and assume a positive relationship or his-
tory exists. The halo effect denotes a positive effect. Here the results clearly sup-
port the effect of a negative reputation. We term this negative result the velcro
effect. A performance history is like velcro; it attracts and snags additional
reputational damage. Anyone with velcro on their coat will recognize this effect.
Relationship and crisis history can create a strong, negative velcro effect.

When relationship history and crisis history were compared, the main differ-
ence was for perceptions of the organizational reputation. Although both contrib-
uted similar explanations of variance for crisis responsibility, relationship history
explained nearly three times as much of the variance for organizational reputation
than crisis history. Relationship history appears to be a more powerful predictor of
organizational reputation than crisis history.

This study adds to the consistent pattern of correlation results among organiza-
tional reputation, potential supportive behavior, personal control, and crisis re-
sponsibility found in other symbolic approach studies. The consistent pattern of


336

COOMBS AND HOLLADAY

correlations was the foundation for the crisis situation model in Figure 1. Crisis re-
sponsibility and personal control are positively related to one another and nega-
tively related with organizational reputation and potential supportive behavior. Of
the two variables, crisis responsibility has the stronger correlation with the organi-
zational perception variables. The stronger correlations suggest crisis responsibil-
ity should be placed closer to organizational reputation in the model. A partial
correlation analysis adds further weight to this conclusion. When controlling for
crisis responsibility, personal control has no significant relationship with either or-
ganizational reputation or potential supportive behavior. The results indicate per-
sonal control’s effect on the organizational perception variables is indirect through
crisis responsibility. Potential supportive behavior is predominantly a function of
organizational reputation. When controlling for organizational reputation, poten-
tial supportive behavior’s relationships with personal control and crisis responsi-
bility drop 27% and 42%,
respectively. The regression analyses found
performance history (relationship history and crisis history) to be closer to organi-
zational reputation than crisis responsibility. As a result, a slightly revised crisis
situation model is presented in Figure 2. Figure 2 seems to be an accurate depiction
of the basic variables in a working model of the crisis situation.

Limitations

This study suffers from limitations common to any experimental study using
student participants. The study cannot account for all possible variables, and the
respondents are not actual stakeholders in a crisis. Still, past psychological re-
search based in attribution theory used similar methods and participants as a ba-
sis for theory building. Another limitation is that the relationship history was
given to respondents and not experienced by them. The artificial history is how
many stakeholders will experience the organization if they are not tightly con-
nected to the organization. If you do not have an intimate knowledge of an orga-
nization, you will only know what
the

the media reports tell you about

FIGURE 2 Refined crisis situation model.


FUSION

337

organization, the agenda-setting effect. It would be useful to study an ongoing
relationship and compare the results to this more artificial presentation of rela-
tionship history. Although not perfect, the examination of performance history
does help to build knowledge about crisis communication.

IMPLICATIONS

By examining relationship history as part of performance history, this study fused
ideas from the relational management perspective with the symbolic approach to
crisis communication. The fusion was a natural process since the symbolic ap-
proach has never denied the value of relationship history to crisis communication.
Rather, previous studies have just not included relationship history. The implica-
tions can be divided into three categories:

1. The understanding of performance history and perceptions of crises and or-

ganizations in crisis.

2. Implications for crisis responses.
3. Speculation on modeling the crisis situation dynamic.

The symbolic approach argues for a detailed understanding of the crisis situa-
tion. Only by understanding the crisis situation can the crisis manager select the
appropriate or most effective crisis response strategies (Coombs, 1998, 1999a).
This study advances our understanding of the crisis situation by delving deeper
into performance history and examining the effect of relationship history on the
crisis situation—the fusion of ideas. Relationship history in large part affects per-
ceptions of organizational reputation and crisis responsibility to a lesser degree.
An organization with an unfavorable relationship history will experience greater
reputational damage from a crisis than those with a favorable history or no history
known or given. Stakeholders will have increased attributions of crisis responsibil-
ity and weaker perceptions of organizational reputation if the relationship is unfa-
vorable. The reverse is true when the relationship history is favorable or neutral.
Crisis managers should factor stakeholder relationship history into their evalua-
tion of the crisis situation and subsequent selection of a crisis response strategy.
Crisis history produces a similar effect, but it does not seem to be as strong as those
produced by relationship history. This finding is consistent with previous sym-
bolic approach studies that used crisis history (Coombs, 1998; Coombs &
Holladay, 1996). These studies found small connections between crisis history and
crisis responsibility and crisis history and organizational reputation. Additional re-
search is needed to unpack the connection between relationship and crisis history
and further explore the role of performance history in crisis communication.

In terms of developing the crisis response, two ideas are noteworthy. First, the
results do not bode well for the bolstering response strategy, reminding stake-


338

COOMBS AND HOLLADAY

holders of past good works and relationships (Benoit, 1995). One could argue that
the news stories used in the study offer de facto bolstering by recalling past good
works of the organization. In this crisis situation, bolstering did not help the orga-
nization; the bolstering condition produced the same amount of positive symbolic
rewards as the no mention history (non-bolstering) condition. However, the bol-
stering was delivered as part of the news story; the source was the media and not an
organizational spokesperson. Would an organization realize different results if the
message came from an organizational spokesperson instead of a news media
source? It is doubtful given the third-party effect of the news media, but the ques-
tion warrants further attention. What we do know is that the identification of past
bad works and negative relationships do create a less favorable crisis situation for
the crisis manager.

Second, the unfavorable situation (strong crisis responsibility and predisposi-
tion to a negative reputation evaluation) should make it more difficult to protect
the organization’s reputation. The organization seems to start from a one-down po-
sition when there is an unfavorable relationship or crisis history—the velcro effect.
The crisis manager would need to use more accommodative response strategies
than normally would be needed due to increased perceptions of crisis responsibil-
ity. For instance, in a moderate accident with an unfavorable relationship history, a
crisis manager is advised to use the more accommodative corrective action or mor-
tification strategies rather than a less accommodative strategy such as an excuse.
Additional testing is required to determine the true effect of relationship and crisis
history on the ability of various response strategies to further protect the organiza-
tional reputation. This should include efforts to determine whether favorable rela-
tionship and crisis histories boost, and unfavorable relationship and crisis histories
erode, the power of credibility-based crisis response strategies—make the strate-
gies more or less believable or accepted. We do know that an unfavorable relation-
ship and crisis history predispose stakeholders to view the crisis situation as more
negative and the organization as less positive. In turn, these perceptions can affect
the type of crisis response strategies that are appropriate for the crisis at hand.

Finally, the results of this study and past symbolic approach studies were com-
bined to form a picture of the crisis situation dynamic. Figure 2 provides a picture of
how performance history might fit with the core variables of personal control, crisis
responsibility, organizational reputation, and potential supportive behavior. The re-
lationship among the four core variables is fairly solid, whereas performance his-
tory’s role is tentative. Those researching in the symbolic approach should consider
efforts designed to test and extend the crisis situation model presented in Figure 2.

Crisis communication is a risky aspect of public relations. The stakes are high
in crisis management and the margin for error low (Barton, 2000). A number of
crisis experts and writers from the relational management perspective have specu-
lated on the effect of organization–stakeholder relationship history on crisis com-
munication. Fusing ideas from the relational approach to public relations with the


FUSION

339

symbolic approach to crisis communication, this study tested some ideas about re-
lationship history and crisis communication. The results indicate that understand-
ing the relationship history improves a crisis manager’s understanding of the crisis
situation. Relationship history is a relevant variable that adds to our understanding
of the crisis situation dynamic. In turn, a better understanding of the crisis situation
should produce a more effective crisis response. Further research is needed to flesh
out the findings of this exploratory study of relationship history and crisis commu-
nication. For now, we have a better understanding and verification of relationship
history’s role in the crisis situation and some implications for the selection of crisis
response strategies.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This article was a Top Four paper presented to the Public Relations Division, Na-
tional Communication Association, Seattle, Washington, November 2000.

REFERENCES

Balzer, W. K., & Sulsky, L. M. (1992). Halo and performance appraisal research: A critical examina-

tion. Journal of Applied Psychology, 77, 975–985.

Barton, L. (2000). Crisis in organizations II ( 2nd ed.). Cincinnati, OH: College Divisions South-Western.
Benoit, W. L. (1995). Accounts, excuses, and apologies: A theory of image restoration. Albany: State

University of New York Press.

Benoit, W. L. (1997). Image repair discourse and crisis communication. Public Relations Review, 23,

177–180.

Birch, J. (1994, Spring). New factors in crisis planning and response. Public Relations Quarterly, 39(1),

31–34.

Boulding, K. E. (1977). The image: Knowledge in life and society. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan

Press.

Broom, G. M., Casey, S., & Ritchey, J. (1997). Toward a concept and theory of organization–public re-

lationships. Journal of Public Relations Research, 9, 83–98.

Coombs, W. T. (1995). Choosing the right words: The development of guidelines for the selection of the

“appropriate” crisis response strategies. Management Communication Quarterly, 8, 447–476.

Coombs, W. T. (1998). An analytic framework for crisis situations: Better responses from a better un-

derstanding of the situation. Journal of Public Relations Research, 10, 177–191.

Coombs, W. T. (1999a). Crisis management: Advantages of a relational perspective. In J. A. Ledingham
& S. D. Bruning (Eds.), Relationship management: A relational approach to the study and practice
of public relations (pp. 75–93). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

Coombs, W. T. (1999b). Information and compassion in crisis responses: A test of their effects. Journal

of Public Relations Research, 11, 125–142.

Coombs, W. T. (1999c). Ongoing crisis communication: Planning, managing, and responding. Thou-

sand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Coombs, W. T., & Holladay, S. J. (1996). Communication and attributions in a crisis: An experimental

study of crisis communication. Journal of Public Relations Research, 8, 279–295.

Coombs, W. T., & Schmidt, L. (2000). An empirical analysis of image restoration: Texaco’s racism cri-

sis. Journal of Public Relations Research, 12, 163–178.


340

COOMBS AND HOLLADAY

Couretas, J. (1985, November). Preparing for the worst. Business Marketing, 70, 96–100.
Druckenmiller, B. (1993, August). Crises provide insights on image. Business Marketing, 40.
Fearn-Banks, K. (1996). Crisis communications: A casebook approach. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence

Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

Finet, D. (1994). Sociopolitical consequences of organizational expression. Journal of Communication,

44, 114–131.

Griffin, M., Babin, B. J., & Attaway, J. S. (1991). An empirical investigation of the impact of negative pub-

lic publicity on consumer attitudes and intentions. Advances in Consumer Research, 19, 870–877.

Griffin, M., Babin, B. J., & Darden, W. R. (1992). Consumer assessments of responsibility for prod-
uct-related injuries: The impact of regulations, warnings, and promotional policies. Advances in
Consumer Research, 19, 870–877.

Grunig, J. E. (1990). Theory and practice of interactive media relations. Public Relations Quarterly,

35(3), 18–23.

Grunig, J. E., & Grunig, L. A. (1992). Models of public relations and communication. In J. E. Grunig
(Ed.), Excellence in public relations and communication management (pp. 285–326). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

Heath, R. L. (1994). Management of corporate communication: From interpersonal contacts to exter-

nal affairs. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

Irvine, R. B., & Millar, D. P. (1996). Debunking the stereotypes of crisis management: The nature of busi-
ness crises in the 1990’s. In L. Barton (Ed.), New avenues in risk and crisis management, Volume V
(pp. 51–63). Las Vegas: University of Nevada, Las Vegas Small Business Development Center.

Ledingham, J. A., & Bruning, S. D. (1998). Relationship management in public relations: Dimensions

of an organization–public relationship. Public Relation Review, 24, 55–65.

Ledingham, J. A., Bruning, S. D., & Wilson, L. J. (1999). Time as an indicator of perceptions and behav-
ior of members of a key public: Monitoring and predicting organization–public relationships. Jour-
nal of Public Relations Research, 11, 167–183.

McAuley, E., Duncan, T. E., & Russell, D. W. (1992). Measuring causal attributions: The revised causal

dimension scale (CDII). Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 18, 566–573.

McCroskey, J. C. (1966). An introduction to rhetorical communication. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice

Hall.

Morgan, G. A., & Griego, O. V. (1998). Easy use and interpretation of SPSS for windows: Answering re-

search questions with statistics. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. (1977). The halo effect: Evidence for unconscious alteration of judg-

ments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 250–256.

Seitel, F. P. (1983, May). 10 myths of handling bad news. Bank Marketing, 12–14.
Siomkos, G., & Shrivastava, P. (1993). Responding to product liability crises. Long Range Planning,

26(5), 72–79.

Sturges, D. L. (1994). Communicating through crisis: A strategy for organizational survival. Manage-

ment Communication Quarterly, 7, 297–316.

Tyler, L. (1997). Liability means never being able to say you’re sorry: Corporate guilt, legal constraints,
and defensiveness in corporate communication. Management Communication Quarterly, 11(1),
51–73.

Wilson, S. R., Cruz, M. G., Marshall, L. J., & Rao, N. (1993). An attribution analysis of compli-

ance-gaining interactions. Communication Monographs, 60, 352–372.


