The Impact of Green Supply Chain Management Practices on Firm 
Performance: The Role of Collaborative Capability 
 
 
 
 
 

School of Air Transport, Transportation, Logistics, and Air & Space Law 

Korea Aerospace University, South Korea 

Donghyun Choi 

Email: dchoi@kau.ac.kr 

Telephone: 82-2-300-0374 

 

Taewon Hwang* 

Harley Langdale Jr. College of Business Administration 

Valdosta State University, USA 
Email: thwang@valdosta.edu 
Telephone: 1-229-245-2238 

 

* Corresponding author 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

To appear in Operations Management Research 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

1 


Abstract 

This  study  attempts  to  contribute  to  the  growing  research  on  green  supply  chain  management 

(GSCM) strategies by relying on the Natural Resource Based View (NRBV) and relational view. 

Specifically, this study investigates the role of collaborative capability in moderating the effects of 

GSCM  practices  on  firm  performance.    Using  hierarchical  regression,  this  study  analyzes  data 

from a survey of 230 South Korean manufacturers. The results show that the implementation of 

GSCM practices can improve both environmental and financial performance of the firm. Also, the 

findings  indicate  that  firms  can  expect  improved  financial  performance  when  they  seek  a 

synergistic effect by involving their partners in the GSCM implementation process.  

 

Key words:  Green supply chain  management; Collaborative capability;  Natural resource based 

view; Eco-design; Investment recovery; South Korea. 

 

1 Introduction 

Green supply chain management (GSCM) can be generally defined as the practice of improving 

environmental  performance  along  the  supply  chain,  including  product  design,  operations 

management,  and  customer  relationships  (Srivastava  2007).  A  significant  number  of  GSCM 

studies  have  investigated  whether  the  implementation  of  environmetal  supply  chain  strategies 

leads  to  enhanced  firm  performance  (Sarkis  2012).  However,  the  results  of  these  studies  were 

mostly mixed, ranging from little or no improvement (Zhu et al. 2005). To explain these contrasting 

results, several researchers have explored factors that influence this relationship (Lopez-Gamero 

et al. 2009; Sarkis et al. 2010; Zhu and Sarkis 2007). Following this stream of thought, the present 

 

2 


study intends to examine another possible moderating effect – collaborative capability, which can 

be defined as a firm's ability to leverage other actors’ resources and knowledge (Kotabe et al. 2003; 

Koufteros et al. 2007; Patnayakuni et al. 2006). Collaboration relationships have helped firms to 

reduce transaction costs and create a sustainable competitive position in highly uncertain business 

environments (Cao and Zhang 2011).  

 

Recently, a number of major firms have begun to capitalize on the potential of supply chain 

collaboration in the implementation of green strategies. For instance, Coca-Cola has launched a 

wide range of collaborative green practices such as the  Community Water Partnership (Reuters 

2011).  Working  jointly  with  bottling  partners  and  environmental  charities,  it  has  developed 

PlantBottle, the first recyclable plastic beverage bottle made partially from plants. Coca-Cola has 

also  formed  a  strategic  partnership  with  H.  J.  Heinz  Company,  which  uses  PlantBottle  for  its 

ketchup.  

 

Despite  the  popularity  of  collaborative  green  strategies,  there  has  been  little  systematic 

research on the role of collaborative capability in the adoption of these strategies.  The purpose of 

this  study  is  to  investigate  the  relationship  between  GSCM  practices  and  firm  performance  by 

answering  the  following  research  questions:  (1)  Is  GSCM  implementation  positively  related  to 

firm performance? (2) Does the firm’s level of collaboration moderate the relationship between 

GSCM practices and firm performance? To answer these research questions, this study conducts a 

field  survey of South  Korean manufacturers. South  Korea has been  credited with  adopting low 

carbon  and  green  growth  as  a  national  goal  (Lee  et  al.  2012).  Most  importantly,  the  Korean 

government has placed a greater emphasis on collaboration across the supply chain by encouraging 

large  manufacturers  to  share  their  environmental  management  know-how  with  supply  chain 

 

3 


partners (Lee 2008; Lee and Klassen 2008). Thus, South Korea could provide a unique setting to 

examine the role of collaboration between GSCM practices and firm performance.  

 

This  study  is  organized  as  follows. The  second  section  introduces  GSCM  practices  and 

collaborative capability by focusing on the perspective of the natural resource based view (NRBV) 

and  relational  view.  The  third  section  presents  the  conceptual  framework  of  this  study  and 

development  of  hypotheses.  The  fourth  section  provides  the  research  methodology.  The  fifth 

section  presents  the  results  and  the  sixth  section  discusses  the  findings  of  the  study.  The  final 

section concludes the study and also discusses the limitations of the study.  

 

2 Theoretical backgrounds  

2.1 The natural-resource based view (NRBV) and GSCM practices 

The resource-based view (RBV) has been widely used to explain the impact of GSCM practices 

on firm performance (Sharma and Vredenburg 1998). The resource-based view (RBV) suggests 

that  firms  need  to  increase  their  strategic  resources  and  leverage  them  to  create  sustainable 

competitive advantage (Barney 2001). These resources can include both tangible and intangible 

assets such as human, information technology, capital, equipment, and knowledge. RBV defines a 

strategic asset as a resource that is rare, valuable, imperfectly imitable and non-substitutable. Firms 

that establish distinctive competencies through unique combinations of strategic assets can achieve 

advantage over competitors and earn above-normal rates of return (Acedo et al. 2006).  

 

Recently,  Hart  (1995)  has  attempted  to  expand  the  scope  of  RBV  by  including  the 

constraints and opportunities given by the natural environment. Hart’s typology, referred to as the 

natural resource-based view (NRBV), suggests that firms can gain competitive advantage from the 

 

4 


implementation  of  green  strategies  such  as  pollution  prevention,  product  stewardship,  and 

sustainable development. Pollution prevention seeks to prevent waste and emissions at the source 

instead of at the end-of-the-pipe. Product stewardship ensures that all those involved in the life 

cycle  of  a  product  share  responsibility  for  reducing  its  environmental  impacts.  Sustainable 

development, which goes beyond simply reducing environmental damage, encompasses economic 

and  social  concerns. A  significant  body  of  GSCM  research  has  examined  the  competitiveness 

effects of these strategies, pollution prevention in particular (Hart and Dowell 2011). For example, 

Klassen and Whybark  (1999) found that pollution prevention technologies, instead of pollution 

control  technologies,  were  associated  with  improved  firm  performance.  The  NRBV  has  been 

further  elaborated  through  the  work  of  many  researchers,  showing  the  importance  of 

environmental  practices  as  a  strategic  asset  that  contributes  directly  to  better  firm  performance 

(Shi et al. 2012).  

 

2.2 The relation view and collaborative capability as a moderator 

The RBV is considered to be essentially static in its nature. Adopting an inward-looking view, the 

RBV  assumes  that  firms  should  own  or  fully  control  strategic  resources  in  order  to  create 

sustainable  competitive  advantage. This  assumption  of  ownership  or  control  implies  that  firms 

should establish barriers to protect their core resources from being imitated by competitors. 

 

However, a growing number of studies have begun to question this proprietary assumption, 

arguing that resources of supply chain partners have a considerable impact on firm performance 

(Lee et al. 2001). They criticized the RBV for remaining trapped in an internal perspective (Priem 

and  Butler  2001).  To  address  this  theoretical  challenge,  some  researchers  have  attempted  to 

 

5 


reformulate  the  RBV  by  arguing  that  a  firm’s  competitiveness  not  only  arises  from  internal 

resources but also depends on inter-firm collaborations (Dyer 1996; Dyer and Singh 1998). This 

line  of  thought,  called  the  relational  view,  has  been  applied  to  the  environmental  sustainability 

context (Christmann 2000). Vachon and Klassen  (2008) found that collaborative environmental 

activities  with  suppliers  are  related  to  process-based  performance  while  collaborative  green 

practices with  customers  are linked with  product-based performance.  Zhu et  al.  (2008) showed 

that  knowledge  created  by  collaboration  plays  a  crucial  role  in  eliminating  environmentally 

harmful materials or processes. Sharfman et al. (2009) found that inter-firm trust is one of the main 

factors that  affect the  extent to  which firms  engage in  cooperative  GSCM. Albino  et  al. (2012) 

simultaneously  considered  the  effects  of  environmental  collaborations  with  different  types  of 

actors on environmental performance. They found that collaborations with a wide range of actors, 

including  suppliers,  customers,  governments  and  non-governmental  organizations,  can  be 

beneficial for a firm’s environmental performance.  

 

These previous studies made significant contributions to understanding the importance of 

collaborations  in  the  context  of  GSCM.  However,  they  did  not  differentiate  between  GSCM 

practices and a firm’s collaborative capability. There is growing evidence that a firm's collaborative 

capability should be conceptualized as a distinct factor (Hofmann et al. 2012). For instance, many 

original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) have implemented asset recovery programs for their 

end-of-life (EOL) products (Toffel 2004). According to the NRBV, such GSCM practices can be 

considered a strategic resource that directly improves firm performance. However, when it comes 

to  the  question  of  whether  these  OEMs  work  with  their  supply  chain  partners  to  obtain  the 

maximum benefits from asset recovery programs, it is another issue. In fact, after initiating asset 

 

6 


recovery programs, quite a few OEMs are still unwilling to collaborate with other actors such as 

independent  product  recovery  companies  (Toffel  2004).  Although  these  OEMs  can  reduce 

potential losses of both market share and brand image, this practice is self-defeating over the long 

run because it could be difficult for a single firm to possess all the resources required to implement 

GSCM programs successfully (Wiens 2014). After all, GSCM programs involve a wide range of 

activities,  requiring  expertise  from  almost  all  members  of  the  entire  supply  chain  (Nakano  and 

Hirao 2011). Based on this rationale, this study draws a distinction between a firm’s collaborative 

capability and GSCM programs, suggesting that firms with high levels of collaborative capability 

are likely to achieve better performance from the implementation of GSCM programs. In addition, 

this  study  focuses  on  a  firm's  collaborations  and  partnerships  with  actors  such  as  suppliers, 

customers, governments, and non-governmental organizations because working with these actors 

does not have a different impact on firm performance (Albino et al. 2012). 

 

3 Hypotheses development 

Figure 1 shows our conceptual model. Building on the NRBV, we posit that GSCM practices are 

positively associated with firm performance. We also posit that a firm’s collaborative capability 

moderates  the  relationship  between  GSCM  practices  and  firm  performance.  Previously,  GSCM 

practices largely operated under a firm-centered paradigm, focusing on environmental activities 

within the boundaries of a firm (Bansal and Roth 2000; Handfield et al. 2005). Although internally 

focused  GSCM  practices  contribute  to  improving  firm  performance,  achieving  full  value  from 

GSCM  programs  requires  a  significant  commitment  to  developing  strong  collaborations  with 

various  actors  (Albino  et  al.  2014).  Following  this  line  of  thought,  we  focus  on  two  GSCM 

 

7 


practices that are most likely to be influenced by a firm’s collaborative capability: eco-design and 

investment recovery (Zhu and Sarkis 2004, 2007; Zhu et al. 2008). The purpose of eco-design is 

to reduce the negative environmental impacts of a product over its full life cycle (Aoe 2007). The 

objective of investment recovery is to recover the highest value from obsolete, EOL, and surplus 

items (Ayres et al. 1997).  

 

We exclude internally oriented GSCM practices such as commitment of GSCM from senior 

managers, total quality environmental management, and ISO 14001 certification because they are 

likely to receive limited benefits from collaborations. In addition, as mentioned earlier, we intend 

to distinguish a firm’s collaborative capability from GSCM practices. Thus, some external GSCM 

practices such as cooperation with external partners for environmental objectives are excluded for 

this study.  

 

We  use  two  important  indicators  of  firm  performance.  The  first  is  environmental 

performance, defined as the ecological results of a firm-wide commitment to preserve and improve 

the natural environment (Nawrocka and Parker 2009). With the growing number of firms that are 

committed  to  creating  social  and  environmental  value,  the  measurement  and  evaluation  of 

environmental performance are becoming more important than ever before (Kainuma and Tawara 

2006;  Testa  and  Irald  2010).  The  second  is  financial  performance,  which  is  one  of  the  most 

common  drivers  for  the  implementation  of  GSCM  practices. A  number  of  studies  showed  that 

firms  that  perform  better  environmentally  are  also  the  most  successful  financially  (Berry  and 

Rondinelli 1998; Tsoulfas and Pappis 2008).  

 

 

< Figure 1> 

8 


 

3.1 GSCM practices and firm performance 

The concept of eco-design has been described under various terms such as green design, design 

for environment, sustainable design, etc. (Luttropp and Lagerstedt 2006). As shown in Figure 2, 

eco-design  seeks  to  create  a  sustainable  product  by  incorporating  environmental  considerations 

throughout its life cycle, from raw material acquisition to final disposal (Aoe 2007). Some eco-

design strategies include: 

 

- Using renewable and recyclable materials at the procurement stage 

- Using less energy and water at the manufacturing stage 

- Using less packaging at the distribution stage 

- Reducing greenhouse gas emissions at the use stage 

 

 

Eco-design  seeks  to  systematically  integrate  environmental  aspects  into  product  design 

while  maintaining  all  functional  and  safety  requirements  for  consumers.  It  also  emphasizes the 

importance of early product design decisions because approximately 80% of all product-related 

environmental  impacts  can  be  identified  during  the  design  phrases  of  product  development 

(Karlsson and Luttropp 2006). Researchers have proposed a number of eco-design tools to enhance 

the design of the product from an environmental perspective (Bovea and Pérez-Belis 2012). One 

of the most popular tools is life cycle assessment (LCA), which evaluates all relevant resources 

and emissions consumed at each stage of the product’s life cycle (Arena et al. 2013).  

Eco-design  has  been  widely  recognized  as  a  useful  tool  for  improving  environmental 

9 

 

 


performance, as evidenced by a number of empirical studies conducted in various fields such as 

electronics (Aoe 2007) and disposable diapers (Mirabella et al. 2013). However, despite explicit 

advantages from lower production costs, eco-design was often found to be related to poor financial 

performance  (King  and  Lenox  2001).    Recently,  with  growing  consumer  awareness  about  the 

environment, this conventional view has been challenged (Griskevicius et al. 2010). A number of 

environmentally conscious consumers are willing to pay more for eco-design products (Akehurst 

et al. 2012). Moreover, continuous eco-design innovations not only improve a firm’s image as a 

green  champion  but  also  serve  as  the  principal  source  of  competition,  leading  to  higher  sales 

growth  (Chen  2008).  For  example,  Toyota  Motor  Corporation  has  introduced  an  LCA  system 

called Eco-VAS (Eco-Vehicle Assessment System) to heighten the environmental performance of 

its vehicles (Nakano et al. 2007). The Toyota Prius has earned a reputation as the first hybrid car, 

achieving  significant  sales  growth  since  its  introduction  in  1997. Therefore,  it  is  reasonable  to 

expect that eco-design contributes to financial performance as well as environmental performance. 

 

H1a: Eco-design is positively related to environmental performance.  

H1b: Eco-design is positively related to financial performance.  

 

 

 

< Figure 2> 

While eco-design is concerned with sustainable product/process development, investment 

recovery focuses on obsolete, EOL, and surplus asset recovery (Ayres et  al. 1997).  In addition, 

investment recovery differs from eco-design in that the former seeks to achieve a higher form of 

 

10 


recycling/reuse  by  pursuing  value-added  recovery  involving  remanufacturing  (Guide  2000). As 

shown in Figure 2, investment recovery attempts to integrate obsolete, EOL, and surplus assets 

back into reverse logistics processes so that these assets can be properly recovered or disposed of 

(Chan et al. 2010). In this way, investment recovery can help firms to maximize cost savings and 

value recovery.  Investment recovery has been successfully applied to a wide range of industries 

such  as  computers  (White  et  al.  2003)  and  automobiles  (Gerrard  and  Kandlikar  2007).  Some 

investment recovery strategies include: 

 

- Consolidating product returns from multiple locations at the collection stage 

- Recovering valuable components from used materials at the recycling stage 

- Making refurbished products for sales at the remanufacturing stage 

 

 

Investment recovery has received increased attention in recent years as a growing number 

of environmental  regulations  impose  greater responsibilities on  OEMs for managing their  EOL 

products  (e.g.,  the  European  Union’s  Extended  Producer  Responsibility)  (Spicer  and  Johnson 

2004). Instead of simply banning EOL products from landfills or incinerators, these “product take-

back” regulations offer financial incentives to encourage manufacturers to develop effective asset 

recovery strategies (Toffel 2004). Another significant driver towards investment recovery is the 

increasing volume of product returns (Petersen and Kumar 2009). According to a recent survey 

from the Reverse Logistics Association, the annual volume of products returned by consumers in 

the U.S. is estimated at between $150 and $200 billion at cost. This trend is expected to continue 

with  more  liberal  return  policies  (Jayaraman  and  Luo  2007).  Previously,  product  returns  were 

 

11 


considered  troublesome;  product  returns  were  usually  shipped  in  bulk  to  minimize  costs,  often 

resulting in significant delays in the recovery process (Guide et al. 2005). However, firms are now 

recognizing the potential value of product returns; product returns have recoverable value and can 

bring additional revenue into firm, if properly managed (Blackburn et al. 2004; Ilgin and Gupta 

2010).  For  instances,  Xerox  has  established  an  asset  recovery  program  called  the  Xerox  Green 

World  Alliance,  which  aims  to  improve  the  environmental  performance  of  its  EOL  products 

through a closed-loop supply chain (Xerox 2014). The program has helped Xerox to save millions 

of dollars in  raw material  costs over the past  20  years. Therefore, it is  reasonable to  argue that 

investment recovery contributes to financial performance as well as environment performance. 

 

H2a: Investment recovery is positively related to environmental performance. 

H2b: Investment recovery is positively related to financial performance. 

 

3.2 Collaborative capability, GSCM practices and firm performance  

As mentioned earlier, conventional eco-design approaches were internally oriented. As eco-design 

includes a broad range of environmental activities among supply chain members, it has become 

more difficult for a single firm to have all the information on a product and its production processes 

(Nakano  and  Hirao  2011).  To  truly  maximize  the  value  of  eco-design,  a  firm  should  leverage 

potential synergistic effects  of supply chain  collaboration (Thabrew et  al. 2009). This  notion is 

clearly  supported  by  the  International  Electrotechnical  Commission  (IEC),  which  suggests  that 

eco-design requires collaborations and contributions of all supply chain participants (IEC 2010).  

A  number  of  studies  also  indicate  that  firms  can  expect  more  substantial  environmental  and 

 

12 


financial  improvements  when  they  take  into  account  design  factors  outside  of  their  immediate 

control,  including  suppliers,  customers,  recyclers,  etc.  (González-Benito  and  González-Benito 

2005). Previously, it was difficult to collect all the data required to analyze eco-design activities 

from  globally  dispersed  business  partners  (Nakano  and  Hirao  2011).  With  the  recent  rapid 

advances in information and communication technologies, it is now possible for firms to easily 

share  their  valuable  experiences  on  eco-design.  For  instance,  LCA  software  packages  such  as 

SimaPro  can  help  firms  to  quantify  their  eco-design  activities  and  goals,  enabling  them  to 

accurately measure the potential environmental and financial consequences of their new product 

(Vallet et al. 2013). 

 

Indeed, collaboration is not optional anymore, but a basic requirement for eco-design. For 

example,  collaborative  environmental  assessment  is  one  of  the  keys  to  L’Oréal’s  eco-design 

initiative (Fayolle et al. 2008). Specifically, L’Oréal works closely with its suppliers to evaluate 

the environmental impact of raw materials throughout their life-cycle. This is an important part of 

L’Oréal’s  long-term  environmental  plan,  which  aims  to  source  100  percent  renewable  raw 

materials from sustainable sources by the year 2020. Collaborations are also crucial to Levi Strauss 

& Co.’s efforts to use less water in the life cycle of its new “Water<Less” jeans collection (Joule 

2011). Because it was found that the majority of water use is for the cotton production process, 

Levi’s joined the Better Cotton Initiative, a program  that helps  cotton suppliers to  make cotton 

more sustainable. Since the launch of the collection in 2011, Levi's has saved over 770 million 

liters of water, selling over 13 million "Water<Less" pairs of jeans. These examples clearly show 

that collaborative improvement activities are essential to reap the full benefits of eco-design. Based 

on the above discussion, the following hypotheses are suggested. 

 

13 


 

H3a: Collaborative capability moderates the relationship between eco-design and environmental 

performance.  

H3b:  Collaborative  capability  moderates  the  relationship  between  eco-design  and  financial 

performance.  

 

 

Previously, investment recovery tended to focus on how to handle surplus items within the 

boundaries of a firm (e.g., idle equipment within a firm) (Sinding 2000). Managers viewed reverse 

logistics as a series of fragmented non-value-added activities; this lack of supply chain visibility 

led them to address each reverse logistics activity in isolation from a silo perspective (Guide et al. 

2005). Consequently, the focus of most investment recovery strategies was to achieve maximum 

local efficiencies and economies of scale.  

 

However,  as  mentioned  earlier,  the  responsibility  to  handle  the  EOL  management 

increasingly shifts back  to  the manufacturers. As a result, the traditional  supply chain  has been 

expanded to include both forward and reverse logistics (Olorunniwo and Li 2010). Such a supply 

chain framework, the combination of forward and reverse logistics, is called a closed-loop supply 

chain (Savaskan et al. 2004). In this integrated environment, firms can benefit from collaborative 

investment recovery strategies; for example, a manufacturer facing time-sensitive product returns 

such  as  laptop  computers  can  establish  partnerships  with  its  retailers  to  minimize  the  loss  in 

product value due to time delays; retailers evaluate product condition as early as possible at the 

point of customer returns to identify product returns with high recoverable value (Blackburn et al. 

2004). 

 

14 


 

Many  firms  have  attempted  to  maximize  the  value  of  investment  recovery  through 

collaborative  efforts  of  closed-loop  supply  chain  members  (Toffel  2004).  For  instance,  Nissan 

Motor Corporation in Japan works with a number of supply chain partners to improve the recovery 

rate for its EOL vehicles (Nissan 2014). Nissan relies on its dealerships, which collect discarded 

bumpers. Nissan pulverizes these discarded bumpers so that bumper materials can be used to make 

new bumpers. In addition, Nissan has teamed with the Sumitomo Corporation to evaluate the reuse 

of the Nissan LEAF battery for commercial purposes. Nissan recovered over 100 thousand tons of 

automobile shredder residue collected from vehicles in Japan, earning a profit of over 800 million 

Japanese  yen  (8  million  US  dollars).  These  examples  clearly  indicate  that  collaborative 

improvement efforts are  important to maximize the value of investment recovery.  Based on the 

above discussion, the following hypotheses are suggested. 

 

H4a:  Collaborative  capability  moderates  the  relationship  between  investment  recovery  and 

environmental performance. 

H4b:  Collaborative  capability  moderates  the  relationship  between  investment  recovery  and 

financial performance. 

 

3.3 Control variables 

Following the literature, this study included firm size as a control variable (Zhu and Sarkis 2004, 

2007). Large firms are more likely to adopt GSCM practices because they have a greater amount 

of resources and typically face higher environmental pressure than small or medium sized firms. 

Industry type was also included as a control variable.  

 

15 


 

4. Research methodology 

4.1 Sample 

The data for this study were collected from South Korean manufacturers. Our empirical setting is 

particularly appropriate for several reasons: First, South Korea has taken many green initiatives as 

a national development strategy (Lee et al. 2012). For example, it has become the first Asian nation 

to pass legislation introducing the nation-wide greenhouse gas emission trading scheme, which is 

set  to  come  into  force  in  2015  (Chae  2010).  Recent  studies  have  focused  on  South  Korea  to 

understand a variety of GSCM related issues (Kim and Rhee 2012; Kim et al. 2011). Second, the 

increasing global competition over the past decade has enabled South Korean firms to improve the 

ability to react to global standards for green business (Kwon et al. 2002; Lee and Kim 2011). The 

majority  of  South  Korean  firms  rely  on  international  trade  for  a  large  portion  of  their  annual 

revenue. According to OECD statistics in 2010, 45% of Korean GDP is from international trade. 

To create opportunities for new markets in the global market, South Korea’s large firms such as 

Samsung, Hyundai, and LG have sought to develop green strategies that effectively address global 

environmental  issues  (Green  Growth  Korea  2010).  Third,  the  Korean  government’s  Green 

Partnership  project  is  actively  encouraging  large  manufacturers  to  contribute  their  green 

philosophy to small and medium-sized suppliers (Lee 2008; Lee and Klassen 2008). This has led 

manufacturers to shift the focus of their  green strategies from single plant improvements to the 

entire supply chain. For instance, Samsung SDI has started the Global Green Partnership project, 

which  aims  to  help  its  suppliers  to  enhance  the  ability  to  respond  to  environmental  regulations 

(Samsung SDI 2012). Samsung SDI has recently created a green management collaboration system 

 

16 


for its suppliers in China and plans to expand the systems to its suppliers in other countries such 

as  Vietnam  and  Malaysia.  For  all  of  the  reasons  above,  South  Korea  provides  a  quite  suitable 

empirical setting for our research purposes.  

 

4.2 Survey questionnaire and data collection 

The  survey  questionnaire  was  developed  to  collect  research  data. The  initial  pool  of  items  was 

selected  from  existing  scales,  with  wording  changed  to  reflect  the  context  of  manufacturing 

processes. The design process for the questionnaire consisted of two stages. In the first stage, an 

extensive literature review on environmental practices was conducted to ensure the questionnaire’s 

content  validity.  Five  academic  colleagues  were  asked  to  review  the  initial  questionnaire  for 

ambiguity and appropriateness of the items. We modified the instrument based on their feedback. 

In  the  second  stage,  the  survey  questionnaire  was  pilot-tested  in  a  sample  of  ten  supply  chain 

practitioners.  They were also asked to evaluate whether the items reflect adequately the domain 

of interest. Their feedback resulted in minor changes.  The double translation protocol was used 

for the questionnaire development because data were collected from South Korean firms (Brislin 

1976).  The  authors  of  this  study  translated  the  final  English  version  of  the  questionnaire  into 

Korean and then translated the Korean version back into English. Two bilingual researchers who 

teach  operation  management  in  the  US  also  examined  the  English  versions  and  found  no 

significant differences. As shown in Table 1, the questionnaire included seven items for GSCM 

practices (Zhu and Sarkis 2004, 2007; Zhu et al. 2008), eight items for firm performance (Zhu and 

Sarkis 2004, 2007), and eight items for collaborative capability (Kotabe et al. 2003; Koufteros et 

al.  2007;  Patnayakuni  et  al.  2006). They  were  measured  using  a  seven-point  Likert  scale  with 

 

17 


anchors ranging from strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree (7) in order to ensure high statistical 

variability among survey responses.  

 

 

<Table 1> 

 

The Web-based questionnaire was sent out to supply chain managers of 910 South Korean 

manufacturing firms with ISO 14001, ISO 9001, or ROHS certification. The Web-based survey is 

a  more  convenient  method  with  substantially  fewer  missing  responses  than  mail-based  surveys 

(Boyer et al. 2002). About two weeks later, we sent follow-up emails to remind managers who had 

not  responded to  take part in  the survey. The non-response bias was  assessed to  compare early 

respondents who answered within the first two weeks, later respondents who answered after the 

third  week,  and  non-respondents  (a  sub-sample  of  25  non-respondents  were  randomly  selected 

from the sample of 910) (Armstrong and Overton 1977). A simple paired t test was conducted for 

three pairs (early-late; early-non respondent; late-non respondent). T test comparison showed no 

significant  difference  (p<0.05)  between  the  firm  size,  industry  sector,  eco-design,  investment 

recovery, two performance factors or levels of collaborative capability. 

 

The  survey  yielded  230  useable  responses  (a  response  rate  of  25.3%),  achieving  an 

acceptable response rate for a supply chain management survey (Rosenzweig et al. 2003). The data 

shows the firms’ annual sales ranged from 2.5 million to 325 million US dollars with a median of 

184.1 million US dollars. Also, most respondents were from operations, purchasing, and supply 

chain management team. Relatively few respondents were (10 out of 230) from other departments 

such as marketing and R&D. Table 2 shows the sample characteristics in terms of industry type 

 

18 


and the number of employees. Descriptive data, including means, standard deviations, and samples 

size are shown in Table 3.   

 

<Table 2> 

< Table 3> 

 

4.3 Factor analysis 

The influence of common methods variance might be problematic when data on the independent 

and dependent variables are collected from the same respondents in the same survey.  A principal 

component factor analysis (with a direct oblimin rotation, delta = 0) was conducted through SPSS 

18.0 to further confirm grouping GSCM practices, collaborative capability and firm performance. 

The  Kaiser  criterion  (eigenvalues  >  1)  was  employed  in  conjunction  with  parallel  analysis  and 

Cattell’s  (1966)  scree  test. As  expected,  the  results  showed  the  presence  of  two,  one,  and  two 

components for GSCM practices, collaborative capability and firm performance, respectively. It 

means that common methods bias is not a serious problem in the data. Tables 4 and 5 present the 

pattern matrix for GSCM practices and firm performance, respectively. The two GSCM practice 

components  explained  84.16%  of  the  total  variance  and  two  firm  performance  components 

accounted for 82.07% of the total variance. As shown in Table 6, collaborative capability, extracted 

as one component with no cross-loadings, explained 69.55% of total variance. For all the scales, 

Cronbach's alpha exceeded the recommended level of 0.70 (Gefen et al. 2000).  

 

 

< Table 4> 

19 


< Table 5> 

< Table 6> 

 

 

Table 7 shows the means, standard deviations, and correlations of all the factors. Because 

investment  recovery  is  correlated  at  0.61  with  eco-design  and  at  0.60  with  environment 

performance, Fornell and Larcker’s (1981) test was conducted for discriminant validity. This test 

requires  that  the  average  variance  extracted  (AVE)  for  each  factor  should  be  greater  than  the 

squared correlation between the factor and other factors in the model.  Table 7 shows the square 

root  of  AVE  on  the  diagonal  axis.  All  diagonal  elements  are  larger  than  their  corresponding 

correlation coefficients, indicating appropriate discriminant validity. 

 

 

5 Results 

<Table 7> 

Hierarchical  regression  was  used  to  test  hypotheses. The  analysis  was  conducted  in  four  steps. 

First,  the  control  variable,  firm  size  was  entered  into  the  regression. Then  one  GSCM  practice 

variable was entered into the regression. Third, the moderator variable,  collaborative capability, 

and the interaction term of one GSCM practice variable and collaborative capability was entered. 

The  data  were  mean-centered  in  order  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  multicollinearity  in  regression 

models with interaction terms (Cronbach 1987).  

 

Hypotheses  1a  and  1b  posit  a  direct,  positive  relationship  between  eco-design  and  two 

performance  factors.  Table  8  indicates  that  both  relationships  were  statistically  significant, 

 

20 


supporting both Hypotheses 1a and 1b. Hypotheses 2a and 2b posit a direct, positive relationship 

between  investment  recovery  and  two  performance  factors.  Table  9  shows  that  investment 

recovery had a direct, positive association with two performance factors, supporting Hypotheses 

2a and 2b.  

 

Hypotheses  3a  and  3b  suggest  that  collaborative  capability  moderates  the  relationship 

between eco-design and two performance factors. Table 7 shows that the interaction terms between 

eco-design  and  collaborative  capability  had  significant  positive  coefficients  for  financial 

performance,  supporting  Hypothesis  3b.  Hypotheses  4a  and  4b  suggest  that  collaborative 

capability moderates the relationship between investment recovery and two performance factors. 

The same pattern was observed as shown in Table 9. The interaction terms between investment 

recovery  and  collaborative  capability  had  significant  positive  coefficients  for  financial 

performance only, supporting Hypothesis 4b. 

 

Figure  3  and  Table  10  summarize  the  results  of  the  hypotheses  testing.  Overall,  the 

implementation  of  GSCM  practices  was  positively  related  to  both  firm  performance  factors. 

Collaborative  capability  positively  moderated  the  relationship  between  GSCM  practices  and 

financial performance. 

 

 

 

< Table 8> 

< Table 9> 

< Table 10> 

< Figure 3> 

21 


6 Discussion  

6.1 The impacts of GSCM practices on firm performance  

We  found  that  GSCM  practices  can  be  beneficial  for  a  firm’s  performance,  thereby  providing 

support to the NRBV. Thus, it can be argued that the implementation of GSCM practices helps a 

firm to develop unique environmental management capabilities that lead to higher performance. 

This finding is consistent with the results of recent studies drawing on the NRBV (Lee and Klassen 

2006; Shi et al. 2012). Previously, most firms have relied on the  “win-win” argument to justify 

investments in GSCM programs. This assumption has often been criticized on the ground that such 

investments will raise the cost burden and in turn influence financial performance negatively. For 

example,  Green  et  al.  (2102)  have  shown  that  both  eco-design  and  investment  recovery  are 

positively linked to environmental performance but not financial performance. 

 

However, we found that GSCM strategies can be integrated into business with improved 

environmental  and  financial  performance. The  discrepancy  between  these  two  studies  could  be 

due to differences in the samples. Green et al. (2012) used a diverse group of US manufacturers 

while this study employed a focused group of South Korean manufacturers. In fact, the results of 

this study are consistent with those of Zhu and Sarkis (2004), who used a homogeneous group of 

Chinese manufacturers.  

 

Another  explanation  for  improved  financial  performance  is  the  Korean  government’s 

supply chain environmental management (SCEM) program, which includes special funds and tax-

cut incentives for firms that actively implement environmental initiatives (Lee 2008). With such 

assistance  programs,  it  is  possible  that  South  Korean  manufacturers  reduce  costs  related  to  the 

implementation of GSCM programs, leading to significant financial improvement. 

 

22 


 

6.2 The moderating effects of collaborative capability on firm performance  

We  found  that  firms  with  high  levels  of  collaborative  capability  tend  to  gain  better  financial 

performance  from  the  implementation  of  GSCM  programs.  Figures  4a  and  4b  show  that  the 

stronger  collaborative  capability,  the  greater  the  positive  relationship  between  GSCM  practices 

and  financial  performance.  In  other  words,  firms  that  implement  GSCM  programs  with  close 

collaboration  with  their  supply  chain  partners  are  more  likely  to  experience  high  financial 

performance than those who do not have such strong relationships. Recent studies that focused on 

South Korean firms also reported similar results (Kim et al. 2011; Kim and Rhee 2012; Lee and 

Kim 2011).  

 

 

 

<Figure 4> 

However, the results of this study indicate that there is no significant moderating effect of 

collaboration for environmental performance. The results have an important implication for our 

understanding of how firms use their resources for supply chain collaboration. In South Korea, it 

is possible that some manufacturers implement environmental programs reactively because they 

are required to meet the government’s environmental requirements. Those manufacturers that are 

less environmentally motivated are likely to  put  more resources into collaborative activities for 

financial improvement rather than environmental improvement. Presumably, after simply meeting 

the minimum requirements set by the government, less environmentally motivated manufacturers 

may  focus  on  maintaining  the  status  quo  without  further  attempting  to  improve  environmental 

 

23 


performance. 

 

Another explanation for this insignificant moderating effect may be simply that our sample 

firms  did  not  collaborate  on  environmental  activities.  In  this  study,  the  scale  of  collaborative 

capability  did  not  differentiate the context  of collaboration. Therefore, it could  be possible that 

these firms collaborated more on traditional issues such as quality improvements and cost savings 

rather than on environmental issues.  

 

6.3 Contributions of this study 

Overall, this study contributes to the growing research  on GSCM strategies by highlighting the 

role  of  another  important  complementary  asset  –  collaborative  capability.  As  discussed  earlier, 

previous studies that examined the effects of GSCM practices underscored the necessity to identify 

possible moderators. Researchers should continue to explore potential moderators to better explain 

the effects of GSCM practices on firm performance.  

 

Another contribution of this study is to add to a growing body of GSCM research conducted 

in a variety of countries. GSCM studies have traditionally tended to focus on developed countries 

such as Germany (Thun and Müller 2010), the UK (Holt and Ghobadian 2009), the US (Green et 

al. 2010), etc. As more and more firms are moving a significant portion of their manufacturing 

operations to Asia, recent GSCM research efforts have shifted toward countries such as China (Zhu 

et al. 2008), India (Mitra and Datta 2014), Malaysia (Eltayeb et al. 2011), Taiwan (Shang et al. 

2010),  Thailand  (Setthasakko    2009),  etc.  These  studies  showed  that  those  countries  have 

developed unique green initiatives, suggesting that country-specific characteristics in this region 

deserve more research attention in the study of GSCM (Rao and Holt 2005). The results of this 

 

24 


study  also  indicate  that  future  GSCM  studies  should  continue  to  place  a  greater  emphasis  on 

country-specific aspects. 

 

7 Conclusion 

As an important new strategy, GSCM allows firms to achieve financial and market share goals by 

lowering their environmental costs while ensuring environment friendly operations. Recently, the 

importance of GSCM has received considerable attention. Implementing GSCM can benefit the 

firm as it can be a revenue driver. However, most GSCM related studies have yet to investigate 

which capability of the firm is needed for successful GSCM. This study proposed collaborative 

capability as an important moderator for the relationship between GSCM implementation and firm 

performance. The results of this study show that the positive relationship between GSCM practices 

and financial performance is stronger when a firm actively collaborates with various partners. In 

an 

increasingly  competitive  and  dynamic  global  business  environment,  multinational 

manufacturers can seek benefits from investing in GSCM through collaboration with suppliers that 

implement  operations  that  satisfy  green  standards.  Firms  that  implement  GSCM  practices  by 

building close relationships with their partners can obtain higher financial outcome. The literature 

on collaboration between inter-firm involvements also indicates that collaboration plays a critical 

role  when  the  complexity  increases  in  the  business  environment.  Through  communication, 

coordination,  and  conflict  resolution  processes  with  various  partners,  firms  can  obtain  shared 

interpretation of the information, which enables swift and decisive actions to solve environmental 

problems.  

 

25 


There are some limitations to this study. Since our data were collected from a single source, 

the risk of common methods bias might be problematic. Also, financial performance is measured 

by perception of respondents, not by real financial data. This perception has potential to exaggerate 

the performance. The self-reported survey data used in this study might not fully reflect the actual 

situation. However, the self-reported survey data are commonly used to measure performance and 

we  believe  that  our  approach  is  sufficient  to  provide  a  snapshot  of  current  practices  of  green 

practices  among  South  Korean  manufacturers.    Last  but  not  least,  some  supply  chain  partners 

might achieve some type of environmental certification, biasing our findings. These limitations 

should be addressed in the future research, including a longitudinal analysis of GSCM practices 

over time.  

 

Acknowledgement 

This research was supported by the MSIP (Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning) Korea 

under  the  C-ITRC  (Convergence  Information  Technology  Research  Center)  support  program 

(NIPA-2014-H0401-14-1021) supervised by the NIPA (National IT Industry Promotion Agency). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

26 


References    

Acedo FJ, Barroso C, Galan JL (2006) The resource-based theory: dissemination and main trends. 

Strategic Management Journal 27:621-636 

Albino V, Dangelico RM, Pontrandolfo P (2012) Do inter-organizational collaborations enhance a 

firm’s  environmental  performance?  a  study  of  the  largest  US  companies.  Journal  of  Cleaner 

Production 37: 304-315 

Akehurst G, Afonso C, Gonçalves H (2012) Re-examining green purchase behaviour and the green 

consumer profile: new evidences. Management Decision 50: 972-988 

Aoe  T  (2007)  Eco-efficiency  and  eco-design  in  electrical  and  electronic  products.  Journal  of 

Cleaner Production 15: 1406-1414 

Arena  M, Azzone  G,  Conte A  (2013) A  streamlined  LCA  framework  to  support  early  decision 

making in vehicle development. Journal of Cleaner Production 41: 105-113 

Armstrong  JS,  Overton  TS  (1977)  Estimating  nonresponse  bias  in  mail  surveys.  Journal  of 

Marketing Research 14: 396-402 

Ayres R, Ferrer G, Van Leynseele T (1997) Eco-efficiency, asset recovery and remanufacturing. 

European Management Journal 15: 557-574 

Bansal  P,  Roth  K  (2000)  Why  companies  go  green:  a  model  of  ecological  responsiveness. 

Academy of Management Journal 43: 717-736 

Barney  JB  (2001)  Is  the  resource-based  view  a  useful  perspective  for  strategic  management 

research? Yes. Academy of Management Review 26:41-56 

Berry  MA,  Rondinelli  DA  (1998)  Proactive  corporate  environmental  management:  a  new 

industrial revolution. Academy of Management Executive 12:38-50 

 

27 


Blackburn J, Guide V, Souza G, Van Wassenhove L (2004) Reverse supply chains for commercial 

returns. California Management Review 46:6-22 

Boyer K, Olson J, Calantone R, Jackson E (2002) Print versus electronic surveys: a comparison of 

two data collection methodologies. Journal of Operations Management 20:357-373 

Bovea  M,  Pérez-Belis  V  (2012) A  taxonomy  of  ecodesign  tools  for  integrating  environmental 

requirements into the product design process. Journal of Cleaner Production 20: 61-71 

Brislin  RW  (1976)  Comparative  research  methodology:  cross-cultural  studies.  International 

Journal of Psychology 11:215-229 

Cao M, Zhang Q (2011) Supply chain collaboration: impact on collaborative advantage and firm 

performance. Journal of Operations Management 29:163-180 

Cattell  RB  (1966)  The  scree  test  for  the  number  of  factors.  Multivariate  Behavioral  Research  

1:245-276 

Chae  Y  (2010)  Co-benefit  analysis  of  an  air  quality  management  plan  and  greenhouse  gas 

reduction strategies in the Seoul metropolitan area. Environmental Science & Policy 13:205-216 

Chan  HK,  Yin  S,  Chan  FT  (2010)  Implementing  just-in-time  philosophy  to  reverse  logistics 

systems: a review. International Journal of Production Research 48: 6293-6313 

Chen YS (2008) The driver of green innovation and green image – green core competence. Journal 

of Business Ethics 81: 531-543 

Christmann P (2000) Effects of “best practices” of environmental management on cost advantage: 

the role of complementary assets. Academy of Management Journal 43:663-680 

Cronbach L (1987) Statistical tests for moderator variables: flaws in analyses recently proposed. 

Psychological Bulletin 102:414-417 

 

28 


Dyer  JH  (1996)  Specialized  supplier  networks  as  a  source  of  competitive  advantage:  evidence 

from the auto industry. Strategic Management Journal 17:271-291 

Dyer  JH,  Singh  H  (1998)  The  relational  view:  cooperative  strategy  and  sources  of 

interorganizational competitive advantage. Academy of Management Review 23:660-679 

Eltayeb  TK,  Zailani  S,  Ramayah  T  (2011)  Green  supply  chain  initiatives  among  certified 

companies in Malaysia and environmental sustainability: investigating the outcomes. Resources, 

Conservation and Recycling 55:495-506 

Fayolle  A,  Basso  O,  Legrain  T  (2008)  Corporate  culture  and  values:  genesis  and  sources  of 

L’Oreal's entrepreneurial orientation. Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship 21:215-230 

Fornell C, Larcker DF (1981) Evaluating structural equation models with unobservable variables 

and measurement error. Journal of Marketing Research 18: 39-50 

Gefen  D,  Straub  DW,  Boudreau  MC  (2000)  Structural  equation  modelling  and  regerssion: 

guidelines for research practice. Communications of the AIS 4: 1-79 

Gerrard J, Kandlikar M (2007) Is European end-of-life vehicle legislation living up to expectations? 

assessing the impact of the ELV Directive on ‘green’ innovation and vehicle recovery. Journal of 

Cleaner Production 15: 17-27 

González-Benito  J,  González-Benito  O  (2005)  Environmental  proactivity  and  business 

performance: an empirical analysis. OMEGA: The International Journal of Management Science 

33: 1–15 

Green  KW,  Zelbst  PJ,  Meacham  J,  Bhadauria  MV  (2012)  Green  supply  chain  management 

practices: impact on performance. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal 17:290-

305 

 

29 


Green 

Growth 

Korea 

(2010) 

Korea's 

green 

growth 

footprint. 

http://www.greengrowth.go.kr/?page_id=42454. Accessed 24 April 2015 

Griskevicius V, Tybur JM, Van den Bergh B (2010) Going green to be seen: status, reputation, and 

conspicuous conservation. Journal of personality and social psychology 98: 392-404 

Guide, VDR (2000) Production planning and control for remanufacturing: industry practice and 

research needs. Journal of Operations Management, 18: 467-483 

Guide VDR, Muyldermans L, Van Wassenhove LN (2005) Hewlett-Packard company unlocks the 

value potential from time-sensitive returns. Interfaces 35: 281-293  

Handfield  RB, Sroufe R, Walton SV (2005) Integrating environmental  management and supply 

chain strategies. Business Strategy and the Environment 14: 1-19 

Hart SL (1995) A natural-resource-based view of the firm. Academy of Management Review 20: 

986-1014 

Hart SL, Dowell G (2011) A natural-resource-based view of the firm: fifteen years after. Journal 

of Management 37:1464-1479 

Hofmann KH, Theyel G, Wood CH (2012) Identifying firm capabilities as drivers of environmental 

management and sustainability practices – evidence from small and medium‐sized manufacturers. 

Business Strategy and the Environment 21: 530-545 

Holt  D,  Ghobadian A  (2009) An  empirical  study  of  green  supply  chain  management  practices 

amongst UK manufacturers. Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management 20:933-956 

IEC  (2010)  Environmentally  conscious  design  for  electrical  and  electronic  products. 

http://www.nema.org/Standards/ComplimentaryDocuments/62430-Contents-and-Scope.pdf. 

Accessed 24 April 2015 

 

30 


Ilgin  MA,  Gupta  SM  (2010)  Environmentally  conscious  manufacturing  and  product  recovery 

(ECMPRO): a review of the state of the art. Journal of environmental management 91: 563-591 

Jayaraman V, Luo Y (2007) Creating competitive advantages through new value creation: a reverse 

logistics perspective. Academy of Management Perspectives 21: 56-73 

Joule E (2011) Fashion-forward thinking: sustainability as a business model at Levi Strauss. Global 

Business and Organizational Excellence 30: 16-22 

Kainuma Y, Tawara N (2006) A multiple attribute utility theory approach to lean and green supply 

chain management. International Journal of Production Economics 10:99-108 

Karlsson R, Luttropp C (2006) Eco-design: what's happening? an overview of the subject area of 

eco-design and of the papers in this special issue. Journal of Cleaner Production 14: 1291-1298 

Kim J, Rhee  J (2012) An empirical study on the impact of critical success factors on the balanced 

scorecard  performance  in  Korean  green  supply  chain  management  enterprises.  International 

Journal of Production Research 50:2465-2483 

Kim J, Youn S, Roh J (2011) Green supply chain management orientation and firm performance: 

evidence from South Korea. International Journal of Services and Operations Management 8:283-

304 

King AA, Lenox MJ (2001) Lean and green? an empirical examination of the relationship between 

lean production and environmental performance. Production and Operations Management 10: 244-

256 

Klassen RD, Whybark DC  (1999) The impact  of environmental technologies on manufacturing 

performance. Academy of Management Journal 42:599-615 

Kotabe M, Martin X, Domoto H (2003) Gaining from vertical partnerships: knowledge transfer, 

 

31 


relationship duration, and supplier performance improvement in the US and Japanese automotive 

industries. Strategic Management Journal 24:293-316 

Koufteros XA, Cheng TCE, Lai KH (2007) Black-box and gray-box supplier integration in product 

development:  antecedents,  consequences  and  the  moderating  role  of  firm  size.  Journal  of 

Operations Management 25:847-870 

Kwon DM, Seo MS, Seo YC (2002) A study of compliance with environmental  regulations of 

ISO 14001 certified companies in Korea. Journal of Environmental Management 65:347-353 

Lee S (2008) Drivers for the participation of small and medium-sized suppliers in green supply 

chain initiatives. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal 13:185-198 

Lee C, Lee K, Pennings JM (2001) Internal capabilities, external networks, and performance:  a 

study on technology-based ventures. Strategic Management Journal 22:615-640 

Lee K, Kim J (2011) Integrating suppliers into green product innovation development: an empirical 

case study in the semiconductor industry. Business Strategy and the Environment 20:527-538 

Lee SM, Kim ST, Choi D (2012) Green supply chain management and organizational performance. 

Industrial Management & Data Systems 112:1148-1180 

Lee S, Klassen R (2008) Drivers and enablers that foster environmental management capabilities 

in small and medium-sized suppliers in supply chains. Productions and Operations Management 

17:573-586 

Lopez-Gamero MD, Molina-Azorin JF, Claver-Cortes E (2009) The whole relationship between 

environmental  variables  and  firm  performance:  competitive  advantage  and  firm  resources  as 

mediator variables. Journal of Environmental Management 90:3110-3121 

Luttropp C, Lagerstedt J (2006) Eco-design and the ten golden rules: generic advice for merging 

 

32 


environmental aspects into product development. Journal of Cleaner Production 14: 1396-1408 

Mirabella N, Castellani V, Sala S (2013) Life cycle assessment of bio-based products: a disposable 

diaper case study. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 18: 1036-1047 

Mitra S, Datta PP (2014) Adoption of green supply chain management practices and their impact 

on  performance:  an  exploratory  study  of  Indian  manufacturing  firms.  International  Journal  of 

Production Research 52:2085-2107 

Nakano  K,  Hirao  M  (2011)  Collaborative  activity  with  business  partners  for  improvement  of 

product environmental performance using LCA. Journal of Cleaner Production 19: 1189-1197 

Nakano K, Nakaniwa C, Kabeya T,  Iguchi T, Aoki  R  (2007) Current  activities of the  life cycle 

assessment society of Japan. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 12: 546-546 

Nawrocka D, Parker T (2009) Finding the connection: environmental management systems and 

environmental performance. Journal of Cleaner Production 17:601-607 

Nissan  (2014)  Nissan  Motor  Corporation  sustainability  report  2014.  http://www.nissan-

global.com/EN/DOCUMENT/PDF/SR/2014/SR14_E_P014.pdf. Accessed 24 April 2015 

Olorunniwo FO, Li X (2010) Information sharing and collaboration practices in reverse logistics. 

Supply Chain Management: An International Journal 15: 454-462 

Patnayakuni R, Rai A, Seth N (2006) Relational antecedents of information flow integration for 

supply chain coordination. Journal of Management Information System 23:13-49 

Petersen JA, Kumar V (2009) Are product returns a necessary evil? antecedents and consequences. 

Journal of Marketing 73: 35-51 

Priem  RL,  Butler  JE  (2001)  Is  the  resource-based  theory  a  useful  perspective  for  strategic 

management research? Academy of Management Review 26:22–40 

 

33 


Rao P, Holt D (2005) Do green supply chains lead to competitiveness and economic performance? 

International Journal of Operations & Production Management 25:898- 916 

Reuters 

(2011)  Heinz 

to 

use  Coke's 

“plant 

bottle” 

for 

its 

ketchup. 

http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/02/23/coke-heinz-idUSN2315974620110223.  Accessed  24 

April 2015 

Rosenzweig  E,  Roth A,  Dean  J  (2003) The  influence  of  an  integration  strategy  on  competitive 

capabilities and business performance: an exploratory study of consumer products manufacturers. 

Journal of Operations Management 21:437-456 

Samsung 

SDI 

(2012) 

Supply 

chain 

environmental 

management. 

http://www.samsungsdi.com/sustainability/approach/eco-value-creation. Accessed 24 April 2015 

Sarkis J (2012) A boundaries and flows perspective of green supply chain management. Supply 

Chain Management: An International Journal 17:202-216 

Sarkis  J,  Gonzalez-Torre  P,  Adenso-Diaz  B  (2010)  Stakeholder  pressure  and  the  adoption  of 

environmental  practices:  the  mediating  effect  of  training.  Journal  of  Operations  Management 

28:163-176 

Savaskan RC, Bhattacharya S, Van Wassenhove LN (2004) Closed-loop supply chain models with 

product remanufacturing. Management Science 50: 239-252 

Setthasakko  W  (2009)  Barriers  to  implementing  corporate  environmental  responsibility  in 

Thailand: a qualitative approach. International Journal of Organizational Analysis 17:169-183 

Shang  K,  Lu C,  Li  S  (2010) A taxonomy of  green supply  chain  management capability among 

electronics-related  manufacturing  firms  in  Taiwan.  Journal  of  Environmental  Management 

91:1218-1226 

 

34 


Sharfman MP, Shaft TM, Anex RP  (2009) The road to  cooperative supply  chain  environmental 

management:  trust  and  uncertainty  among  pro-active  firms.  Business  Strategy  and  the 

Environment 19:1-13 

Sharma S, Vredenburg H (1998) Proactive corporate environmental strategy and the development 

of competitively valuable organizational capabilities. Strategic Management Journal 19:729-753 

Shi VG,  Koh  SCL,  Baldwin  J,  Cucchiella  F  (2012)  Natural  resource  based  green  supply  chain 

management. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal 17:54-67 

Sinding K (2000) Environmental management beyond the boundaries of the firm: definitions and 

constraints. Business Strategy and the Environment 9:79-91 

Spicer AJ, Johnson MR (2004) Third-party demanufacturing as a solution for extended producer 

responsibility. Journal of Cleaner Production 12: 37-45 

Srivastava  SK  (2007)  Green  supply-chain  management:  a  state-of-the-art  literature  review. 

International Journal of Management Reviews 9:53-80 

Testa F, Iraldo F (2010) Shadows and lights of green supply chain management: determinants and 

effects of these practices based on a multi-national study. Journal of Cleaner Production 18:953-

962 

Thabrew L, Wiek A, Ries R (2009) Environmental decision making in multi-stakeholder contexts: 

applicability  of  life  cycle  thinking  in  development  planning  and  implementation.  Journal  of 

Cleaner Production 17: 67-76 

Thun J, Müller A (2010) An empirical analysis of green supply chain management in the German 

automotive industry. Business Strategy and the Environment 19:119–132 

Toffel MW (2004) Strategic management of product recovery. California Management Review 46: 

 

35 


120-141 

Tsoulfas GT, Pappis  CP (2008) A model for supply chains  environmental  performance  analysis 

and decision making. Journal of Cleaner Production 16:1647-1657 

Vachon S, Klassen RD (2008) Environmental management and manufacturing performance: the 

role of collaboration in the supply chain. International Journal of Production Economics 111:299 

-315 

Vallet  F, Eynard B, Millet D, Mahut  SG, Tyl  B,  Bertoluci  G (2013) Using eco-design tools:  an 

overview of experts’ practices. Design Studies 34: 345-377 

White  CD,  Masanet  E,  Rosen  CM,  Beckman  SL  (2003)  Product  recovery  with  some  byte:  an 

overview of management challenges and environmental consequences in reverse manufacturing 

for the computer industry. Journal of Cleaner Production 11: 445-458 

Wiens  K  (2014)  Intellectual  property  is  putting  circular  economy  in  jeopardy.  The  Guardian. 

http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/intellectual-property-circular-economy-bmw-

apple. Accessed 24 April 2015 

Xerox 

(2014)  Sustainable 

services 

and 

products. 

http://www.xerox.com/corporate-

citizenship/2014/sustainability/sustainable-products/enus.html. Accessed 24 April 2015 

Zhu Q, Sarkis J (2004) Relationships between operational practices and performance among early 

adopters  of  green  supply  chain  management  practices  in  Chinese  manufacturing  enterprises. 

Journal of Operations Management 22:265-289 

Zhu Q, Sarkis J (2007) The moderating effects of institutional pressures on emergent green supply 

chain practices and performance. International Journal of Production Research, 45:4333-4355 

Zhu Q, Sarkis J, Geng Y (2005) Green supply chain management in China: pressures, practices 

 

36 


and performance. International Journal of Operations & Production Management 25:449-468 

Zhu Q, Sarkis J, Cordeiro JJ, Lai KH (2008) Firm-level correlates of emergent green supply chain 

management practices in the Chinese context. Omega 36:577-591 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

37 


Figure 1 Conceptual framework 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Eco design and investment recovery in a closed loop supply chain 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

38 


Figure 3 Results of the hypotheses testing 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Moderating effects of collaboration on financial performance  
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

39 


Table 1 List of questionnaire items  

 GSCM practice factors 
Eco-design 
We design our products to avoid or reduce the use of hazardous products and their manufacturing process. 
We provide design specifications to our partners that include environmental requirements for purchased items. 
We design products considering life cycle assessment (LCA). 
We design our products for reuse, recycle, and recovery of material and component parts. 
Investment recovery 
We have implemented collecting policies.  
We have implemented recycle policies.  
We have implemented remanufacturing policies. 
Collaborative capability factor 
We rely on our partners’ engineering capability.  
Our partners’ tools and machinery are customized to our needs.  
Our partners spend a significant amount of time and effort to our relationship. 
Our partners’ knowledge of our procedures, culture, and technological know-how are difficult to replace. 
The frequent contacts between our partners and our engineers are important. 
The direction of our communication is bilateral rather than unilateral.  
Our engineers and sales staff work closely with our partners’ staff. 
We share our high level of engineering capability with our partners. 
Firm performance factors 
Environmental performance 
Our CO2 emission has been reduced after the introduction of green management. 
Our waste water has been reduced after the introduction of green management. 
Our solid waste has been reduced after the introduction of green management. 
Our energy consumption has been reduced after the introduction of green management. 
Financial performance 
Our profitability has increased after the introduction of green management. 
Our market share has increased after the introduction of green management.    
Our sale growth rate has increased after the introduction of green management.    
Our earnings per share rate has increased after the introduction of green management.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

40 


Table 2 Sample charateristics 
 

Industry  type 

Miscellaneous manufacturing 

Automobile hardware, metal, and manufacturing 

Industrial, commercial machinery and computer equipment 

Transportation services 

Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products 

Primary metal industries 

Electronic/other electrical equipment and components, except computer 

Equipment 

Total 

Number of employees 

Up to 100 
101-300 
301-500 
501-700 
701-900 
Over 900 

Total 

Frequency 

Percent 

56 
42 
39 
29 
26 
25 
7 
6 

24.3 
18.3 
17.0 
12.6 
11.3 
10.9 
3.0 
2.6 

230 

Frequency 

100.0 

Percent 

34 
23 
19 
30 
39 
85 
230 

14.8 
10.0 
8.3 
13.0 
17.0 
37.0 
100.0 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

41 


Table 3 Descriptive statistics  
 

GSCM practice factors 
Eco-design  
We design our products to avoid or reduce the use of hazardous products and their manufacturing process. 
We provide design specifications to our partners that include environmental requirements for purchased 

items. 

We design products considering life cycle assessment (LCA). 
We design our products for reuse, recycle, and recovery of material and component parts. 
Investment recovery  
We have implemented collecting policies.  
We have implemented recycle policies.  
We have implemented remanufacturing policies. 
Collaborative capability factor 
We rely on our partners’ engineering capability.  
Our partners’ tools and machinery are customized to our needs.  
Our partners spend a significant amount of time and effort to our relationship. 
Our partners’ knowledge of our procedures, culture, and technological know-how are difficult to replace. 
The frequent contacts between our partners and our engineers are important. 
The direction of our communication is bilateral rather than unilateral.  
Our engineers and sales staff work closely with our partners’ staff. 
We share our high level of engineering capability with our partners. 
Firm performance factors 
Environmental performance 
Our CO2 emission has been reduced after the introduction of green management. 
Our waste water has been reduced after the introduction of green management. 
Our solid waste has been reduced after the introduction of green management. 
Our energy consumption has been reduced after the introduction of green management. 
Financial performance 
Our profitability has increased after the introduction of green management. 
Our market share has increased after the introduction of green management.    
Our sale growth rate has increased after the introduction of green management.    
Our earnings per share rate has increased after the introduction of green management.   

Mean 
 
4.713 
4.548 
 
4.574 
4.696 
 
4.683 
4.735 
4.726 

2.969 
3.017 
3.057 
3.026 
3.017 
3.044 
2.913 
2.935 

 
4.752 
4.835 
4.883 
4.752 
 
4.817 
4.578 
4.630 
4.574 

SD 
 
1.368 
1.343 
 
1.345 
1.309 
 
1.193 
1.191 
1.185 

1.302 
1.233 
1.223 
1.274 
1.226 
1.125 
1.160 
1.215 

 
1.176 
1.163 
1.129 
1.198 
 
1.208 
1.268 
1.225 
1.275 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

42 


Table 4 Factor matrix-GSCM practices  
 

Survey items 

We design products considering life cycle assessment (LCA). 
We provide design specifications to our partners that include environmental requirements for purchased items. 
We design our products to avoid or reduce the use of hazardous products and their manufacturing process. 
We design our products for reuse, recycle, and recovery of material and component parts. 
We have implemented recycle policies. 
We have implemented remanufacturing policies. 
We have implemented collecting policies. 
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis  
Rotation Method: Oblimin with Kaiser Normalization 
Rotation converged in 5 iterations 

 
 
 
Table 5 Factor matrix-firm performance  
 

Survey items 

Our waste water has been reduced after the introduction of green policies.  
Our solid waste has been reduced after the introduction of green policies. 
Our energy consumption has been reduced after the introduction of green policies. 
CO2 emission has been reduced after the introduction of green policies. 
Our earnings per share rate has increased after the introduction of green management. 
Our sale growth rate has increased after the introduction of green management. 
Our market share has increased after the introduction of green management. 
Our profitability has increased after the introduction of green management. 
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis  
Rotation Method: Oblimin with Kaiser Normalization 
Rotation converged in 6 iterations 

Component 
1 
2 
-.065 
.955 
.012 
.888 
.063 
.858 
.160 
.734 
.244 
.880 
.247 
.858 
.376 
.791 
 
 

Component 
2 
1 
-.007 
.924 
-.031 
.921 
.006 
.909 
.042 
.844 
-.061 
.941 
.013 
.916 
-.032 
.914 
.099 
.775 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

43 


Table 6 Factor matrix-collaborative capability  
 

Survey items 

Our partners’ tools and machinery are customized to our needs. 
We rely on our partners’ engineering capability. 
Our partners spend a significant amount of time and effort to our relationship. 
Our engineers and sales staff work closely with our partners’ staff. 
Our partners’ knowledge of our procedures, culture, and technological know-how are difficult to replace. 
The frequent contacts between our partners and our engineers are important. 
We share our high level engineering capability with our partners. 
The direction of our communication is bilateral rather than unilateral. 
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis  
1 component extracted 

 
 
 
Table 7 Mean, standard deviations, correlations, and the square root of AVE  
 

Component 

1 

.856 
.855 
.852 
.845 
.823 
.816 
.815 
.790 
 

 

 

Eco-design (ED) 

Investment 

recovery (IR) 

Collaborative 
capability (CC) 

Environmental 

performance (EP) 

Financial 

performance (FP) 

Firm size 

** p < 0.01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Mean 
4.63 

SD 

1.19 

ED 

.838 

IR 

 

CC 

EP 

FP 

1.06 

.610** 

.903 

1.01 

-.467** 

-.434** 

.883 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.71 

2.99 

4.80 

4.65 

4.18 

1.05 

.545** 

.600** 

-.436** 

.889 

1.10 

.429** 

.426** 

-.504** 

.401** 

.922 

1.85 

607** 

.550** 

-.448** 

.631** 

.312** 

44 


Table 8 Hierarchical regression with eco-design and collaborative capability interaction  
 

Variable 
entered 

Firm size 
(control) 

Industry 
(control) 

Eco-design 

Collaborative 

capability 

Collaborative 
capability × 
Eco-design 

F 
R2 

R2 Change 

** p < 0.01 

Environmental performance 

Financial performance 

Dependent variable 

Step 1 
0.349** 
(0.030) 

-.023 
(0.022) 

 

 

 

Step  2 
0.265** 
(0.036) 

-0.016 
(0.021) 

0.221** 
(0.055) 

 

 

76.193** 

0.402 

0.402** 

59.574** 

0.442 

0.039** 

Step  3 
0.241** 
(0.037) 

-0.015 
(0.021) 
0.183** 
(0.057) 

-0.116 
(0.066) 

0.039 
(0.041) 

37.873** 

0.446 

0.004 

Step  1 
0.186** 
(0.038) 

-0.053 
(0.028) 

 

 

 

Step  2 
0.035  
(0.045) 

-0.042 
(0.027) 
0.342**   
(0.069) 

 

 

14.190** 

0.103 

0.103** 

18.514** 

0.187 

0.083** 

Step  3 
-0.043 
(0.042) 

-0.037 
(0.024) 

0.227** 
(0.064) 

-0.271 
(0.075) 

0.219**   
(0.046) 

26.931** 

0.362 

0.175** 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

45 


Table 9 Hierarchical regression with investment recovery and collaborative capability interaction  
 

Environmental performance 

Financial performance 

Dependent variable 

Step 1 
0.349** 
(0.030) 

-0.023 
(0.022) 

 

 

 

Step  2 
0.241** 
(0.033) 

-0.011 
(0.020) 

0.356** 
(0.057) 

 

 

Step  3 
0.223** 
(0.034) 

-0.009 
(0.020) 
0.316** 
(0.059) 

-0.100 
(0.060) 

0.035 
(0.039) 

Step  1 
0.166** 
(0.039) 

-0.053 
(0.028) 

 

 

 

Step  2 
0.054 
(0.043) 

-.040 
(0.027) 
0.370** 
(0.075) 

 

 

Step  3 
-0.010 
(0.040) 

-0.029 
(0.024) 
0.204** 
(0.070) 

-0.339 
(0.071) 

0.186** 
(0.046) 

76.193** 

0.402 

0.402** 

72.684** 

45.235** 

14.190** 

0.491 

0.089 

0.502 

0.011* 

0.111 

0.111** 

18.649** 

0.198 

0.087** 

25.358** 

0.361 

0.163** 

Variable 
entered 

Firm size 
(control) 

Industry 
(control) 

Investment 

recovery 

Collaborative 

capability 

Collaborative 
capability × 
Investment 

recovery 

F 
R2 

R2 Change 

* p < 0.05 
** p < 0.01 

 
 
 
Table 10 Hypotheses and results summary 
 

Hypothesis 

H1a 

H1b 
H2a 
H2b 

H3a 

H3b 

H4a 

H4b 

Eco-design is positively related to environmental performance. 

Eco-design is positively related to financial performance. 
Investment recovery is positively related to environmental performance. 
Investment recovery is positively related to financial performance. 
Collaborative capability moderates the relationship between eco-design and 
environmental performance. 
Collaborative capability moderates the relationship between eco-design and 
financial performance. 
Collaborative capability moderates the relationship between investment recovery 
and environmental performance. 
Collaborative capability moderates the relationship between investment recovery 
and financial performance. 

** p < 0.01 

Statistics  

(beta) 
0.252** 
0.342** 
0.360** 
0.355** 

Support 

Supported 

Supported 
Supported 
Supported 

0.056 

Not supported 

0.301** 

Supported 

0.048 

Not supported 

0.245** 

Supported 

 

 

 

 

46 

