 
 
Explaining Interfirm Cooperation and Performance: Toward a Reconciliation of Predictions
from the Resource-Based View and Organizational Economics
Author(s): James G. Combs, David J. Ketchen and  Jr.
Source: Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 20, No. 9 (Sep., 1999), pp. 867-888
Published by: Wiley
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3094210
Accessed: 01-02-2017 17:31 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted

digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about

JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

http://about.jstor.org/terms

Wiley is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Strategic Management
Journal

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Strategic Management Journal
 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

 K

 I

 N

 EXPLAINING INTERFIRM COOPERATION AND
 PERFORMANCE: TOWARD A RECONCILIATION OF
 PREDICTIONS FROM THE RESOURCE-BASED VIEW
 AND ORGANIZATIONAL ECONOMICS

 JAMES G. COMBS1 and DAVID J. KETCHEN, JR.2*
 1School of Business Administration, University of Dayton, Dayton, Ohio, U.S.A.
 2College of Business, Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida, U.S.A.

 Interfirm cooperation and its performance implications are examined in the context of two
 widely cited theoretical approaches to organizations. Broadly speaking, the resource-based view
 suggests that firms seek to capitalize on and increase their capabilities and endowments,
 whereas organizational economics asserts that firms focus on minimizing the costs of organizing.
 Although these perspectives agree on managers' likely actions in many areas, their predictions
 diverge when interfirm cooperation is considered. We take a step toward reconciling these
 differences by positing that firms place resource-based concerns in front of considerations from
 organizational economics when deciding whether or not to engage in interfirm cooperation.
 We examined this prediction using data from 94 publicly held restaurant chains. The results
 support our integrated view, but also suggest that giving primacy to resource concerns detracts
 from the performance of some firms. We derive several implications of these findings in an
 effort to guide subsequent inquiry. Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 The capacity to bring multiple and often com-
 peting perspectives to bear on important organi-
 zational phenomena is one of the appealing qual-
 ities of strategic management research. Indeed,
 some consider strategic management's status as
 a pluralistic arena for examining complex prob-
 lems to be its distinctive competence (Meyer,
 1991). By encouraging scholars to look beyond
 singular views, the application and juxtaposition
 of multiple theoretical approaches can furnish
 rich descriptions of organizational actions, their
 antecedents, and their consequences (e.g., Allison,
 1971; Gray and Wood, 1991).

 The resource-based view (RBV) and organi-
 zational economics (OE) are two perspectives
 on organizations that have gained considerable
 currency in recent years (e.g., Conner and Pra-
 halad, 1996; Dyer, 1996; Markides and William-

 Key words: resource-based view, organizational eco-
 nomics, interfirm cooperation, performance
 * Correspondence: David J. Ketchen, Jr., College of Business,
 Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 32306, U.S.A.

 son, 1996; Roth and O'Donnell, 1996). The for-
 mer argues, in essence, that top managers choose
 actions that best capitalize on a firm's unique
 endowments of resources and capabilities. In con-
 trast, the latter posits that managers' central con-
 cern is organizing activities efficiently. Given
 their different emphases, the RBV and OE are
 generally treated as independent approaches that
 each focus on a distinctive set of research ques-
 tions. In some research contexts, however, both
 have been applied to explain the same phenom-
 enon. When the perspectives diverge, there is
 little extant information from which to resolve
 the contradictory explanations offered.

 The purpose of this paper is to examine an
 important strategic decision-whether to manage
 new operations as wholly-owned entities or
 through interfirm cooperation-where predictions
 from the RBV and OE differ and to take a step
 toward reconciling these differences. Interfirm
 cooperation exists when two or more otherwise
 sovereign organizations act in concert to pursue
 mutual gain (Borys and Jemison, 1989). From

 CCC 0143-2095/99/090867-22 $17.50
 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Final revision received 10 March 1999

 Received 16 May 1997

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 868 J. G. Combs and D. J. Ketchen, Jr.

 the RBV, interfirm cooperation permits firms to
 share resources and thereby overcome resource-
 based constraints to growth (e.g., Hamel, 1991).
 According to OE, cooperation is advisable only
 if it minimizes the cost of governing (i.e., moni-
 toring and controlling) organizational activities
 (Hesterly, Liebeskind, and Zenger, 1990). For
 many firms, both views suggest the same course
 of action. As detailed in this paper, however,
 some resource-poor firms confront a dilemma in
 that the RBV points them toward cooperation
 whereas OE discourages cooperation. The reso-
 lution, we argue below, is that firms in need
 of certain resources will have to use interfirm
 cooperation even when cooperation is not prudent
 from an OE perspective. The effects of interfirm
 cooperation on organizational performance under
 different RBV and OE contingencies are also
 examined. Whereas the RBV places resources at
 the center of competitive advantage and therefore
 performance (Wererfelt, 1984), OE suggests that
 strong performance depends on matching strategic
 decisions (e.g., whether or not to enact interfirm
 cooperation) to exchange conditions (Williamson,
 1994). Through investigating the performance
 implications of interfirm cooperation under vari-
 ous RBV and OE considerations, we work toward
 integration of the two perspectives' disparate
 insights on the determinants of performance.

 resources and capabilities. Considerable research
 attention has been devoted to describing how
 resources might affect organizational action (e.g.,
 Argyres, 1996; Bergh, 1995; Mahoney and Pan-
 dian, 1992) and to defining the specific processes
 through which resources affect performance (e.g.,
 Barney, 1991; Peteraf, 1993; Wernerfelt, 1984).

 Resources can influence a variety of the actions

 taken by top management. Because firms'
 decisions about how to manage new operations
 (interfirm cooperation vs. full ownership) is our
 focus, we limit our discussion to resources'
 influence on growth. First, resources can influence
 the direction of growth. Firms can more
 efficiently expand into activities that draw upon
 existing resources than into activities with no
 relation to current resources (Barney, 1988; Chat-
 terjee and Wernerfelt, 1991). The notion that
 resources guide the direction of growth is
 reflected in multinational firms that expand first
 into markets that are culturally similar (Barkema,
 Bell, and Pennings, 1996), diversified firms that
 expand into resource-related businesses (Robins
 and Wiersema, 1995), and in manufacturers that
 vertically integrate to make inputs where their
 capabilities facilitate lower production costs
 (Argyres, 1996).

 THEORETICAL BACKGROUND

 Although the RBV and OE approaches to stra-
 tegic management both grew from traditions
 within economics (Rumelt, Schendel, and Teece,
 1994), they differ considerably in terms of the
 factors believed to influence organizational action
 and the performance consequences of such
 actions.

 The resource-based view

 Resources can be defined as 'those assets that
 are tied semi-permanently to the firm'
 (Wererfelt, 1984: 173). Some authors make a
 distinction between resources and capabilities
 wherein capabilities refer to skills based in human
 competencies and resources refer to all other
 assets (e.g., Markides and Williamson, 1996).
 Following Barney (1991) and Peteraf (1993), we
 use the term resources broadly to refer to both

 Resources can also influence the rate of growth.

 As Penrose (1959) explained, for example, the
 time required to hire and develop experienced
 and committed managers can act as a brake on
 growth. Once new managerial resources have
 been developed, however, they accelerate growth
 as the firm places its new managers into produc-
 tive service. Subsequent to Penrose's work, other
 resources such as the development of organi-
 zational routines (Nelson and Winter, 1982;
 Shane, 1996) and access to capital (Martin and
 Justis, 1993) have been shown to have similar
 effects on organizational growth rates. Growth-
 minded firms thus are often compelled to identify
 ways to overcome resource scarcities (Mahoney
 and Pandian, 1992). One common solution is to
 engage in interfirm cooperation in order to grow
 with the aid of a partner's resources (Erramilli
 and Rao, 1990; Ingham and Thompson, 1994).
 Indeed, because firms can often perform activities
 together that neither could perform alone,
 resource sharing has become a primary expla-
 nation for interfirm cooperation (Borys and Jemi-
 son, 1989; Hamel, 1991).

 Regarding performance, resource-based differ-

 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Explaining Interfirm Cooperation and Performance

 869

 ences among firms can help explain performance
 differences because the outputs that can efficiently
 emerge from any unique configuration of
 resources are themselves unique. In other words,
 resource differences among firms drive
 product/service differences. Because buyers often
 favor the outputs of some resource configurations
 over others, performance differences emerge
 (Wernerfelt, 1984). The sustainability of these
 differences depends on the difficulty competitors
 have in accessing similar resources (Barney,
 1991; Dierickx and Cool, 1989).

 To be a source of sustained above-average

 performance, resources must meet three criteria.
 They must be: (1) valuable, meaning buyers are
 willing to purchase the resources' outputs at
 prices significantly above their costs; (2) rare, so
 that buyers cannot turn to competitors with the
 same or substitute resources; and (3) imperfectly
 imitable, meaning it is difficult for competitors
 to either imitate or purchase the resources
 (Barney, 1991; Peteraf, 1993). Further, the ability
 of a resource to meet these criteria depends on
 industry characteristics that affect a resource's
 value (Amit and Schoemaker, 1993). Brand name
 reputation, for example, may be more valuable
 in experiential service industries than in industries
 where quality can be determined prior to purchase
 (Nayyar, 1990). Resources that are rare, difficult
 to imitate, and create value in a given industry
 are labeled 'strategic resources' (Chi, 1994).

 Orgsnizational economics
 Whereas resource-based research focuses on the
 implications of resources for organizational action
 and performance, OE's central concern is iden-
 tifying actions that minimize the costs of govern-
 ance which, in turn, maximize performance. Over-
 all, OE offers a means to explain the way
 economic activity is organized (Barney and
 Ouchi, 1986). From the view of OE, the various
 intra- and interfirm arrangements observed in con-
 temporary economies represent alternative ways
 of organizing the exchange of goods and services
 in the context of self-interested behavior, diverg-
 ing goals, and imperfect information (Hesterly et
 al., 1990). Such arrangements offer a variety of
 incentive systems and authority relationships that
 are not available to participants in simple market
 transactions (Williamson, 1975). Any given
 arrangement can thus be viewed as an attempt to

 minimize the cost of economic exchange by
 aligning authority relationships and incentives to
 the unique conditions surrounding the exchange.
 The important conditions that affect an

 exchange are perhaps best described by the two
 theories most central to the OE paradigm: trans-
 action costs and agency theory. The former
 focuses on the characteristics of an exchange that
 encourage managers to increase firm boundaries
 (i.e., full ownership), share with others (i.e., inter-
 firm cooperation), or exchange in markets.1
 Among the exchange conditions initially identified
 by Williamson (1975), asset specificity is perhaps
 the most robust empirically (Williamson, 1994).
 Specific assets, in contrast to general purpose
 assets, are costly to redeploy to alternative uses
 (Williamson, 1991). Asset specificity generally
 encourages enlargement of a firm's boundaries
 because, if the firm invests in specific assets in
 the context of a cooperative arrangement, it has
 little recourse if a partner attempts to alter the
 terms of their agreement post hoc (Anderson and
 Coughlan, 1987; Monteverde and Teece, 1982).
 If such opportunism arises, the firm faces an
 unpleasant choice between continuing to work
 with its recalcitrant partner or forgoing the
 expected value of its specific assets.

 Under certain conditions, however, asset speci-

 ficity encourages interfirm cooperation
 (Williamson, 1983). When both firms in a coop-
 erative agreement must invest in specific assets,
 the assets form a reciprocal dependency that
 reduces each partner's incentive to engage in
 opportunism, thus reducing the costs of interfirm
 cooperation (Dyer, 1996; Klein and Murphy,

 ' We draw exclusively from Williamson's version of trans-
 action cost theory, which has, over time, come to rely heavily
 on asset specificity to explain organizational form
 (Williamson, 1994). We acknowledge, however, that other
 researchers conceive transaction costs more broadly. Accord-
 ing to this broader view, anything that affects the short- or
 long-run costs of conducting market exchange can be con-
 sidered a 'transaction cost' (e.g., Coase, 1988; North, 1990).
 Following this logic, constructs developed in the resource-
 based literature can perhaps be considered 'transaction costs'
 because these constructs affect the choice of organizational
 form. However, this broader view of transaction costs has yet
 to receive the same theoretical development that has been
 given to Williamson's narrower approach (Coase, 1988).
 Further, Williamson's version of transaction cost theory is
 more accessible to practitioners and other noneconomists and
 therefore it is the most commonly used statement of trans-
 action cost found in strategic management research (Ghoshal
 and Moran, 1996). For these reasons, we rely on Williamson's
 'narrow' version of transaction cost theory in this study.

 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 870 J. G. Combs and D. J. Ketchen, Jr.

 1988; Teece, 1987). Hence, whereas unilateral
 investments in specific assets should lead to full
 ownership, mutual investments can encourage
 cooperation.

 A second OE perspective, positive agency
 theory,2 focuses on exchanges wherein one
 party, the principal, delegates responsibility to
 another, the agent (Eisenhardt, 1989; Jensen
 and Meckling, 1976). Unless induced to behave
 otherwise, self-interested agents are expected to
 pursue their own goals, not those of principals.
 As a result, the firm (as principal) must spend
 resources monitoring and controlling the
 behavior of its agents (e.g., employees, man-
 agers, cooperative partners). The costs of such
 monitoring varies with the ease with which
 information about agents' job performance is
 available and can be effectively evaluated
 (Eisenhardt, 1989). In situations where the costs
 of direct monitoring are high, principals often
 substitute incentives that redirect agents' goals
 toward principals' rather than attempting to
 oversee agents' activities directly (Eisenhardt,
 1989). Forcing agents to take an equity position
 in the operations under their control is a com-
 mon way to realign agents' goals (Phan and
 Hill, 1995). Interfirm cooperation offers this
 type of incentive because cooperative partners'
 rewards are largely dependent upon their own
 performance outcomes (e.g., Shane, 1996).

 franchisors (i.e., principals) invest heavily in
 advertising (Williamson, 1983). Consequently,
 staying fully engaged in this cooperative venture
 offers each partner the highest potential for maxi-
 mizing profits.

 The exchange conditions described in OE

 research are generally not associated directly
 with performance (Williamson, 1994). Rather,
 these variables (e.g., asset specificity) only
 affect performance after organizational arrange-
 ments have been selected to monitor and control
 the behavior of organizational participants.
 Superior performance is expected when, given
 the conditions of exchange, organizational
 arrangements are selected that minimize the
 costs of governing participants. In contrast,
 competitors that ignore exchange conditions
 when choosing among alternative organizational
 arrangements should experience relatively
 higher governance costs and therefore lower
 performance (Hill and Snell, 1988; Phan and
 Hill, 1995). Thus, the relation between OE
 exchange conditions and performance is contin-
 gent upon the selection of organizational
 arrangements that minimize potential opportun-
 ism and align the goals of participants with
 those of the firm (Hill, Hitt, and Hoskisson,
 1992; Mahoney, 1992).

 In sum, the RBV and OE are widely cited

 Although interfirm cooperation can be used to
 reduce the need for costly direct monitoring by
 the firm (Bradach, 1997), it can create a new set
 of potential agency problems. Specifically, after
 an interfirm cooperative agreement has been
 reached, both parties may possess incentives to
 'shirk' by reducing their inputs at the expense of
 their cooperative partner. As in the case of trans-
 action costs, the solution to this problem is that
 each party must make binding and credible com-
 mitments to the other. In the context of franchis-
 ing, for example, franchisees (i.e., agents) make
 highly specific investments in their outlets and

 perspectives that inform questions of interfirm
 cooperation and cooperation's performance conse-
 quences. The RBV is focused on the effects of
 resource endowments on managerial action and
 performance. When facing resource limitations,
 managers are attracted to cooperative arrange-
 ments designed to overcome such constraints. OE
 theories, in contrast, concentrate on the costs of
 controlling any organized effort. When the use
 of interfirm cooperation is directed toward the
 minimization of these costs, good performance
 should result.

 2 There are two streams of agency literature. The principal-
 agent stream is found primarily in the economics literature
 and uses mathematical models to demonstrate how optimal
 employment contracts can be designed under various sets of
 assumptions. This branch is generally not considered compat-
 ible with strategic management (Rumelt, Schendel, and Teece,
 1994). The positivist branch, however, seeks to identify real-
 world governance problems and to understand the mechanisms
 firms use to solve them (Eisenhardt, 1989; Mahoney, 1992).

 Relating the resource-based view and
 organizational economics
 Broadly speaking, two patterns can be seen in
 the literature that help define how the RBV and
 OE are related. First, the RBV and OE can be
 portrayed as independent explanations in which
 one perspective is used to explain a phenomenon
 with little consideration of the other. For example,
 much of the research on vertical integration and

 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Explaining Interfirm Cooperation and Performance

 871

 HYPOTHESES

 international entry mode is grounded in OE (e.g.,
 Anderson and Coughlan, 1987; Monteverde and
 Teece, 1982; see Argyres, 1996 for a recent
 exception), whereas the study of the evolution of
 competitive advantage is usually grounded in the
 RBV (e.g., Barnett, Greve, and Park, 1994; Lev-
 inthal and Myatt, 1994). The independent view
 may be due to the RBV's emphasis on identifying
 which resources require enhancements; OE
 focuses on how to manage those resources once
 identified (Wernerfelt, 1989). A second view is
 that the RBV and OE are complementary, each
 offering unique insights that generally point man-
 agers in similar directions. The complementary
 view is, in part, grounded in the recognition that
 specific assets share an important quality with
 strategic resources-both are difficult to trade or
 imitate (Chi, 1994; Peteraf, 1993). This com-
 monality explains why high performance among
 firms with certain diversification postures can be
 explained as a product of efficient organizational
 governance (Hill et al., 1992; Teece, 1982) or
 the exploitation of strategic resources in new
 markets (Chatterjee and Wernerfelt, 1991; Mar-
 kides and Williamson, 1996; Robins and Wier-
 sema, 1995). The complementary view is also
 reflected in Gray and Wood's (1991) suggestion
 that neither resource nor economics-based per-
 spectives adequately explain collaboration but
 rather that both perspectives are needed.

 In addition to the independent and comple-
 mentary views, the relationship between the
 RBV and OE can be conflictive. For example,
 Conner and Prahalad (1996) suggest that, from
 the RBV, housing an activity within an organi-
 zation's hierarchy may be preferred over market
 transactions even when managers confront no
 fear of opportunism, which is the driving force
 toward ownership under OE. We submit that the
 decision whether or not to engage in interfirm
 cooperation is one such instance wherein pre-
 scriptions from the RBV and OE can conflict.
 Specifically, managers confront a dilemma when
 resource constraints point managers toward
 interfirm cooperation in situations where
 cooperation is not an efficient response to
 exchange conditions. Further, firms that use
 interfirm cooperation according to the predic-
 tions of the RBV may perform quite differently
 from those whose use of interfirm cooperation
 is best explained by OE. Our investigation
 offers an initial look at this quandary.

 Before hypotheses can be stated, it is important
 to identify and describe the industry under inves-
 tigation. As noted above, the strategic value of
 a resource can be industry-specific (Amit and
 Schoemaker, 1993). Thus, the choice of which
 resources to investigate must be informed by
 knowledge about the industry. Furthermore, the
 way a specific form of interfirm cooperation is
 implemented varies among industries (e.g.,
 Ingham and Thomas, 1994). Such variance affects
 the efficacy of a given form to minimize govern-
 ance costs in the presence of an OE variable
 (Williamson, 1991). Consequently, it is important
 to view RBV and OE hypotheses in relation to
 the industry under investigation. Service indus-
 tries appear to be under-represented in the litera-
 ture relative to their importance; thus we exam-
 ined restaurant chains. The largest 100 chains
 operate over 110,000 outlets in the United States
 alone (Ritzer, 1993); when to use interfirm
 cooperation, if at all, in managing these vast
 empires is a key question for chains' top man-
 agers (Shook and Shook, 1993).

 Given the variety of resource and exchange
 condition variables that have been studied pre-
 viously, any single investigation is unlikely to be
 exhaustive. Hence, the focus here is on three
 resources and three exchange conditions that are
 frequently cited as important both (1) within RBV
 or OE research, and (2) by research on res-
 taurant chains.

 The influence of resources on interfirm
 cooperation
 Interfirm cooperation makes fewer resource
 demands than full ownership because individual
 firms do not have to supply all resources. If a
 firm possesses some but not all needed resources,
 a common response is to combine resources with
 an external organization using a cooperative
 arrangement (Erramilli and Rao, 1990; Teece,
 1987). For the resource-constrained firm, the pri-
 mary advantage of this tactic is that markets can
 be entered more quickly than if full ownership
 is used (Oviatt and McDougall, 1994). This is a
 critical concern in many contexts, including those
 where windows of opportunity are short or there
 are significant first mover advantages (Wernerfelt
 and Karani, 1987). In this study, two strategic

 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 872 J. G. Combs and D. J. Ketchen, Jr.

 resources, brand name reputation and top man-
 agement experience, and one important nonstra-
 tegic resource, slack capital, are examined.

 Brand name reputation is critical in the res-
 taurant industry because it is a key determinant
 of whether or not potential customers patronize
 an establishment. Indeed, because restaurants
 offer an experiential good (cf. Nayyar, 1990),
 customers often make first-time purchases based
 on brand name reputation (Luxenberg, 1985;
 Shook and Shook, 1993). Restaurant chains build
 reputations by establishing multiple outlets within
 a region, thereby creating visibility as well as
 economies of scale in both advertising and pur-
 chasing. Because outlets can be built more
 quickly using a network of cooperative partners
 (Martin and Justis, 1993; Shane, 1996), interfirm
 cooperation offers a viable route for rapidly build-
 ing a brand name. Thus, chains with unknown
 brand names should engage in more interfirm
 cooperation than those with established brand
 names.3

 capital can be rare (e.g., Martin and Justis, 1993),
 which is one important quality of a strategic
 resource (Barney, 1991). Further, the rarity of
 capital has been shown to affect the choice of
 interfirm cooperation. Scarcity of slack capital
 increases the use of both joint ventures (Ingham
 and Thompson, 1994) and franchising (Martin
 and Justis, 1993)-the two central forms of inter-
 firm cooperation in the restaurant industry. The
 reason the use of interfirm cooperation is higher
 among capital scarce firms is because suppliers
 of capital (e.g., banks and stockholders) confront
 an adverse selection problem when choosing
 among alternative investment opportunities.
 Because passive investors must act on the basis
 of publicly available information, they cannot
 know a priori which firms have (1)offered full
 disclosure of information, or (2) will continue to
 act in investors' best interest over the long term
 (Martin and Justis, 1993). Consequently, the price
 of capital is determined by investors' expectation
 concerning the average firm's risk level, causing
 low-risk firms to 'select out' of the market
 An experienced and knowledgeable top man-
 agement team (TMT) can also be a strategic
 (Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981). Cooperative partners
 resource (Castanias and Helfat, 1991). Because
 can often supply lower-cost capital because
 (1) they are not exposed to the same agency costs
 the restaurant industry is relatively stable, execu-
 that result from a separation of ownership and
 tives with knowledge of operational practices and
 control (cf. Jensen and Meckling, 1976) and
 the idiosyncratic characteristics of a specific res-
 (2) they possess private information concerning
 taurant concept are best suited to build and main-
 tain the consistent service standards and cost
 their managerial abilities that is unavailable to
 passive investors (Shane, 1996). Thus, we expect
 controls that offer a foundation for long-term
 success (Justis and Judd, 1989; Shook and Shook,
 scarcities of slack capital to be associated with
 1993). For firms lacking a well-seasoned TMT,
 greater use of interfirm cooperation among res-
 cooperation may be attractive because partners
 taurants.
 can furnish (1) skilled local managers that require
 minimal supervision, (2) a pool of expertise for
 top managers to draw upon, and (3) increased
 market penetration, which can improve the firm's
 ability to attract new managerial talent (Bradach,
 1997; Shane, 1996).

 firms' existing resource endowments is an
 important influence on the use of interfirm
 cooperation. Accordingly, we predict that, among
 restaurant chains, resources and interfirm
 cooperation will be inversely related. Specifically:

 Overall, from the RBV, the sufficiency of

 A third variable, slack capital, is generally not
 considered to be a strategic resource (cf. Barney,
 1991). In certain circumstances, however, slack

 Hypothesis la: Brand name reputation and
 interfirm cooperation will be negatively
 related.

 3 One could construct a similar argument using OE; brand
 name is a specific asset that must be protected from potential
 opportunism through company ownership (e.g., Michael,
 1998). Although we acknowledge that brand name can reason-
 ably be examined using either perspective, firms in the res-
 taurant industry have several tools to reduce potential oppor-
 tunism (e.g., denying partner's expansion requests-Bradach,
 1997). These mechanisms do not necessitate company owner-
 ship. Thus, we examine brand name in this study from
 the RBV.

 Hypothesis lb: TMT experience and interfirm
 cooperation will be negatively related.

 Hypothesis Ic: Slack capital and interfirm
 cooperation will be negatively related.

 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Explaining Interfirm Cooperation and Performance

 873

 The influence of exchange conditions on
 interfirm cooperation

 According to OE, the decision whether or not to
 use interfirm cooperation rests on the firm's
 ability to monitor and motivate cooperative part-
 ners given extant exchange conditions. Asset
 specificity is a key exchange condition in the
 context of interfirm cooperation because such
 investments expose one party in a cooperative
 agreement to the potential for costly opportunistic
 behavior by the other. In the restaurant industry,
 cooperative partners could supply low-quality
 inputs and, because of the transient nature of
 the industry, pass much of the cost of customer
 dissatisfaction along to other outlets in the chain
 (Brickley and Dark, 1987). Likewise, firm man-
 agers could reduce efforts to promote and upgrade
 the chain, leaving cooperative partners with lower
 revenues (Scott, 1995).

 One solution to these problems can be found
 in the binding and credible commitments that are
 available to reduce the potential for opportunism
 (Williamson, 1983). Firm managers make two
 important commitments to their cooperative part-
 ners that signal ongoing commitment. First, the
 presence of company-owned outlets signals coop-
 erative partners that the firm is committed to
 promoting and upgrading the chain (Minkler,
 1992). Second, regardless of the form of the
 cooperative arrangement (i.e., franchise, joint
 venture), a significant portion of the firm's rev-
 enues are contingent upon sales at outlets owned
 by cooperative partners (Scott, 1995). The value
 of these revenues depends on firm managers'
 ongoing investment in chain-wide enhancements
 (e.g., advertising, new product development). In
 exchange for these commitments, firm managers
 expect that their cooperative partners will also
 make significant and credible commitments.
 Cooperative partners generally build, or help
 build, restaurants for a chain. If assets required
 to operate these new outlets (e.g., physical plant,
 kitchen equipment) cannot be easily transformed
 for use in another type of restaurant or another
 business (i.e., the assets are highly specific), then
 cooperative partners must continue to cooperate
 with the firm in order to recover their investment.
 Thus, investments in outlet-level specific assets
 tie cooperative partners to the chain, making
 interfirm cooperation attractive to the chain (Klein
 and Murphy, 1988).

 Another important exchange condition is the
 type of knowledge that must be transferred
 between principal and agent. Knowledge can be
 categorized as general knowledge that is easy to
 transfer to agents or specific knowledge that is
 costly to transfer (Jensen and Meckling, 1995).
 Specific knowledge can become embedded in the
 operational systems of restaurant chains as they
 evolve (Darr, Argote, and Epple, 1995). Once
 created, specific knowledge can help reduce costs
 and improve service, thus becoming a source of
 competitive advantage (Collis, 1994). However,
 specific knowledge is often tacit (Polanyi, 1962)
 or complex (Shane, 1998) and therefore costly
 to transfer to agents (Jensen and Meckling, 1995);
 it is best learned through experience and practice
 rather than through explanation (Kogut and
 Zander, 1992). Consequently, specific knowledge
 flows more easily within firms than between them
 (Darr et al., 1995). Thus, among retail operations
 such as restaurants, company ownership is pre-
 ferred when extensive training and support are
 needed to facilitate transfer of specific knowledge
 (Lafontaine, 1992; Scott, 1995).

 A third variable, the geographic dispersion of
 operations, affects the costs of organizing in many
 service industries where operations must be
 located in close proximity to consumers (Carman
 and Langeard, 1980). According to agency theory,
 constraints to the free flow of information
 increase the cost of monitoring managers'
 behavior (Eisenhardt, 1989; Roth and O'Donnell,
 1996). Within restaurant chains, outlet-level man-
 agers are generally monitored by district and
 regional managers with the aid of the chain's
 information system (Bradach, 1997). As geo-
 graphic dispersion increases, the firm must hire
 additional district and regional managers to visit
 and monitor outlet-level managers. One way to
 minimize this cost is to delegate this responsi-
 bility to cooperative partners who are closer to
 the outlets (Brickley and Dark, 1987; Rubin,
 1990). Thus, the attractiveness of interfirm
 cooperation increases as a chain disperses geo-
 graphically.

 In sum, we predict that, among restaurant
 chains, certain exchange conditions will be posi-
 tively related to the use of interfirm cooperation
 whereas other conditions discourage its use.
 Specifically, (1) outlet-level asset specificity is an
 important form of credible commitment made
 by cooperative partners to facilitate cooperation,

 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 874 J. G. Combs and D. J. Ketchen, Jr.

 (2) transferring specific knowledge to agents
 entails costs that discourage cooperation, and
 (3) geographic dispersion renders interfirm
 cooperation attractive by raising the cost of moni-
 toring fully-owned operations. Stated formally:

 firms facing other resource/exchange combi-
 nations. Interfirm cooperation will be prevalent
 among firms with favorable exchange conditions
 and firms confronting resource scarcities. Stated
 formally, we expect the following:

 Hypothesis 2a: Outlet-level asset specificity
 and interfirm cooperation will be positively
 related.

 Hypothesis 2b: Specific knowledge and inter-
 firm cooperation will be negatively related.

 Hypothesis 2c: Geographic dispersion and
 interfirm cooperation will be positively related.

 Hypothesis 3: The combination of high
 resource levels and unfavorable exchange con-
 ditions (low outlet-level asset specificity and
 geographic dispersion, and high specific
 knowledge) will be negatively related to inter-
 firm cooperation. Other combinations (low
 resource levels with any exchange conditions
 and high resource levels with favorable
 exchange conditions) will be positively related
 to interfirm cooperation.

 The joint influence of resources and exchange
 conditions on interfirm cooperation

 This hypothesis is depicted visually in Figure 1.

 Determinants of firm performance

 If both sets of Hypotheses (Hypotheses la-c
 and 2a-c) accurately depict decisions regarding
 interfirm cooperation, a dilemma is created when
 a firm's resources and exchange conditions exert
 pressure in different directions. Specifically, what
 is a firm to do when resource constraints push
 managers toward interfirm cooperation even
 though cooperation may not be the efficient
 choice from an OE perspective? Our contention
 is that resources moderate firms' responses to
 exchange conditions. A firm without sufficient
 resources to exploit opportunities using full own-
 ership has an incentive to use interfirm
 cooperation because cooperation permits the firm
 to leverage its resources in combination with
 other firms for long-term competitive advantage
 (Erramilli and Rao, 1990; Mahoney and Pandian,
 1992)-regardless of whether or not cooperation
 may result in higher governance costs. Such
 firms' lack of resources simply will not allow
 them to rely heavily on full ownership even if it
 is preferred from an OE perspective. In essence,
 resources serve as a 'litmus test' for the consider-
 ation of exchange-related issues in the interfirm
 cooperation decision.

 In contrast, when resources do not present a
 significant constraint, managers are empowered
 to use full ownership or interfirm cooperation,
 whichever is the most efficient form of govern-
 ance. Thus, firms with exchange conditions that
 make cooperation costly (labeled 'unfavorable' in
 the hypothesis below) and ample resources will
 rely on full ownership more heavily than will

 Strategic resources evolve along different and
 unique trajectories (Barnett et al., 1994) and these
 differences lead to important product differences
 and/or differences in production costs (Argyres,
 1996; Barney, 1991). When resources enable a
 firm to establish either a lower cost structure or
 demand a price premium for its products or ser-
 vices, then the opportunity for superior profits
 exists (Porter, 1980). Furthermore, when the
 advantage afforded by these resources is difficult
 for competitors to imitate or purchase, superior
 profits are sustainable (Barney, 1991; Peteraf,
 1993). Thus, from the RBV, the link between
 strategic resources and performance is direct.
 Indeed, Rumelt (1991) provided evidence that
 differences in the configuration of strategic
 resources better predict performance differences
 than do industry or market characteristics.

 The two strategic resources examined here-

 brand name reputation and top management
 experience-are purportedly important to res-
 taurant chain success (Shook and Shook, 1993).
 Brand name reputation is among the most critical
 factors influencing long-term success in the res-
 taurant industry because it adds perceived value
 to a chain's service and is difficult for competitors
 to imitate (Barney, 1991; Itami, 1987). With
 respect to top management experience, executives
 with deep roots in the industry and firm often
 develop a unique base of knowledge that enables
 them to uphold the consistent standards necessary

 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Explaining Interfirm Cooperation and Performance

 875

 Exchange Conditions: Cost of Interfirm Cooperation

 High

 I -- -- - m
 Proclivity toward

 Low

 Proclivity toward

 full-ownership i

 I

 interfirm cooperation

 Proclivity toward

 Proclivity toward

 interfirm cooperation

 interfirm cooperation

 Figure 1. Hypothesized interaction between resources and exchange conditions.

 for good performance (Justis and Judd, 1989;
 Luxenberg, 1985). Regarding slack capital, the
 third resource examined in this study, there is no
 extant logic linking nonstrategic resources with
 performance, thus no relevant hypothesis is
 offered here. In sum, we predict that, among
 restaurant chains, strategic resources and perform-
 ance will be positively related. Specifically:

 to enjoy greater efficiency in motivating, monitor-
 ing, and evaluating operations; such administra-
 tive proficiency should be reflected in perform-
 ance (Williamson, 1994). Following this logic,
 we expect:

 Hypothesis 4a: Brand name reputation and
 performance will be positively related.

 Resource
 Levels

 High

 Low

 - --- - --- K--- ir -- - -d

 Hypothesis 4b: Top management team
 experience and performance will be positively
 related.

 Whereas the RBV ties resources directly to per-
 formance, the OE literature asserts a contingency
 relationship between exchange conditions, inter-
 firm cooperation, and performance (Hill and
 Snell, 1988; Williamson, 1994). After analyzing
 their exchange conditions, managers are expected
 to select an organizational form that minimizes
 the governance costs associated with conducting
 the organization's activities. If managers choose
 wisely, governance costs are minimized and prof-
 its are maximized (e.g., Dyer, 1996; Hill et al.,
 1992). Above, we predicted that the three
 exchange conditions examined here affect the use
 of interfirm cooperation: outlet-level asset speci-
 ficity offers firm managers a credible commitment
 thereby reducing the risk of opportunism, specific
 knowledge increases the cost of interfirm
 cooperation by accentuating communication
 difficulties, and geographic dispersion makes
 interfirm cooperation attractive by raising the cost
 of monitoring fully-owned operations. In essence,
 OE argues that firms will perform best by com-
 paring their governance costs under full owner-
 ship and interfirm cooperation and selecting the
 least costly option. Chains that do so are expected

 Hypothesis 5: The interaction of exchange
 conditions and interfirm cooperation will be
 significantly related to firm performance.
 Specifically, (a) the combination of unfavor-
 able exchange conditions (i.e., low outlet-level
 asset specificity and geographic dispersion,
 and high specific knowledge) and low interfirm
 cooperation, and (b) the combination offavor-
 able exchange conditions (i.e., high outlet-level
 asset specificity and geographic dispersion,
 and low specific knowledge) and high interfirm
 cooperation will be positively related to per-
 formance.

 This hypothesis is depicted visually in Figure 2.

 METHOD

 Sample and data sources

 The hypotheses were tested across restaurant
 chains that were publicly held between 1992 and
 1995. Firms that did not constitute a chain (at
 least four outlets-Hawes and Crittenden, 1984),
 were franchisees (e.g., of chains such as McDon-
 ald's or Wendy's), or whose food service was a
 component of a larger operation (e.g., hotels and
 casinos) were excluded. Using the Compact Dis-
 closure data base, 94 firms were identified that
 surpassed these hurdles.

 Archival data

 Most measures were acquired from archival
 sources. Measures of one resource (slack capital),

 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 876 J. G. Combs and D. J. Ketchen, Jr.

 Exchange Conditions: Cost ofInterfirm Cooperation

 High

 -

 Low

 High

 Low

 High

 Use of Interfirm
 Cooperation

 Performing

 Performing

 -~~~~~~~~~~~~
 High

 Low

 Low Performing

 Performing

 ^

 Figure 2. Hypothesized interaction between interfirm cooperation and exchange conditions.

 performance, and a control variable (size) were
 obtained using Compact Disclosure. Data for one
 resource (TMT experience), one exchange con-
 dition (geographic dispersion), interfirm
 cooperation, and two control variables (age and
 growth) were obtained from annual reports, proxy
 statements, and 10-Ks. Although chains reported
 this information in a variety of formats, all infor-
 mation was reported. As others have found (e.g.,
 Michel and Hambrick, 1992), coding was
 straightforward owing to the objective nature of
 the data.

 There were 226 surveys returned. Forty-four
 respondents did not rate any chains because they
 did not feel qualified to make the requested judg-
 ments, leaving a usable response rate of 45.5
 percent-higher than the response rate obtained
 in most strategic management research (Snow
 and Thomas, 1994). On average, raters were

 Expert panel
 No archival measures were available for two
 exchange conditions (outlet-level asset specificity
 and specific knowledge) and one resource meas-
 ure (brand name reputation), thus these variables
 were assessed through an expert panel survey
 of hospitality management educators. In similar
 research contexts, expert opinions furnished by
 relevant academics have been shown to be an
 effective and valid measure of unobservable con-
 structs (Chen, Farh, and MacMillan, 1993).

 Following a series of pretests, 400 hospitality
 management professors were identified through
 the Council for Hotel, Restaurant, and Insti-
 tutional Educators (CHRIE), the major pro-
 fessional association for hospitality educators. In
 each of 10 regions of the United States, 40
 experts were asked to rate an average of 10
 chains headquartered in their region. Respondents
 were asked to rate only those chains for which
 they felt confident making an expert judgment.
 The survey was constructed in 1994 and distrib-
 uted following Dillman's (1978) total design
 method.4

 4 Because our resource and exchange condition measures
 needed to depict conditions in 1992, we faced an important
 trade-off. Expert panel respondents could be asked to furnish

 retrospective accounts of conditions 2 years earlier or we
 could adopt, and support, the assumption that the three vari-
 ables assessed in the survey are moderately invariant over
 relatively short periods of time and ask for assessments of
 current conditions. The major concern with the use of retro-
 spective data is whether or not informants are capable of
 accurately recalling some past event or condition. The use of
 retrospective data has a long history in strategic management
 research (e.g., Mintzberg, Raisinghani, and Theoret, 1976),
 but such data are often misleading and inaccurate (Golden,
 1992). In our case, we feared that asking about 1992 would
 be a source of confusion in that experts would struggle to
 mentally isolate 1992 from the years immediately preceding
 and following; feedback received during the pretests confirmed
 our fear.

 Golden's study and our own pretests results led us to
 examine the temporal stability of the focal variables. Specific
 knowledge and outlet-level asset specificity tend to be stable
 because they are defined by the very nature of a restaurant
 chain's daily operations and physical infrastructure respec-
 tively and firms rarely change their core infrastructure (cf.
 Gersick, 1991)-especially in the restaurant industry
 (Luxenberg, 1985; Shook and Shook, 1993). In contrast, it
 could be argued that the third variable, brand name reputation,
 can change in just a couple of years. This possibility was
 investigated by examining how the relationship between the
 expert panel measure of brand name reputation and an index
 of a related but distinct variable, consumer satisfaction,
 changed over the 2-year period. A customer satisfaction meas-
 ure based on a random sample of over 2000 households'
 satisfaction ratings is published annually in Restaurants and
 Institutions. The ratings of between 70 and 80 restaurant
 chains (depending on the year) in that survey overlap our
 sample by 45 chains. The correlation between our measure
 of brand name reputation and the satisfaction index was
 significant in both years (0.42 in 1992 and 0.41 in 1994;
 both p < 0.01), but not significantly different across the
 years (Ar = 0.01; p > 0.10). Thus, there is at least indirect
 evidence that brand name reputation was stable across 1992-
 94. Overall, we believe the expert panel measures from 1994
 to be realistic portrayals of conditions in 1992 and,
 importantly, to be superior to measures that could have been
 obtained through retrospective accounts.

 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Explaining Interfirm Cooperation and Performance

 877

 knowledgeable about 5.4 chains. The average
 number of ratings for a chain was 9.3, with a
 standard deviation of 6.1 and an average interrater
 reliability of 0.81. Because late respondents' per-
 ceptions match closely with those of nonrespon-
 dents (Kanuk and Berenson, 1975), significant
 correlations between item scores and survey
 response time would indicate the presence of a
 nonresponse bias. We examined all such corre-
 lations; none were statistically significant.

 Control variables

 Several past studies use measures of age and size
 as proxies for resource availability (e.g., Carney
 and Gedajlovic, 1991; Lafontaine, 1992). Their
 logic, centered in the life cycle concept, is that
 resources tend to grow as firms mature. Because
 resources are measured directly in this study, the
 potential confounding effects of the life cycle
 needed to be controlled. Therefore, the organi-
 zation's age and total sales in 1992 were used
 as control measures; the latter was not normally
 distributed, thus its natural log was used. A firm's
 growth rate is another variable that may affect
 the choice of organizational form (Shane, 1996).
 Growth was measured as the sum of new units
 added during 1992 and 1993 divided by the
 number of units that existed at the start of 1992.

 Resource variables

 questions). This process was also used with the
 other variables assessed through the survey.

 Top management team (TMT) experience.

 Although no consensus has been reached as to
 which executives to include when studying TMTs,
 one popular approach has been to include only
 'inside directors' executives with a seat on the
 board of directors (Bantel and Finkelstein, 1995).
 This approach has the advantage of providing a
 clear demarcation between top tier and second
 tier managers. Furthermore, directorships indicate
 membership in the dominant coalition and high
 organizational power (Bantel and Finkelstein,
 1995). Therefore, to measure TMT experience,
 we compiled (1)the total number of years of
 executive-level food service experience and
 (2) the total number of years in the firm for
 all inside directors in each restaurant chain as
 of 1992.

 Slack capital. We used slack measures pre-
 viously used by Singh (1986) and Hambrick and
 D'Aveni (1988). Each chain's equity-to-debt ratio
 in 1992 was used to assess its amount of unused
 borrowing capacity, or potential slack. Firms with
 high equity-to-debt ratios can potentially borrow
 more funds to finance expansion efforts than can
 firms with low ratios. Available slack represents
 highly liquid, existing capital that is available for
 immediate investment. It was measured for 1992
 as cash and marketable securities divided by the
 number of outlets in the chain.

 Exchange conditions

 Brand name reputation. Data on brand name
 reputation was culled through four items on the
 expert panel survey: Comparing this company to
 all other food service operations, (1)How well
 respected is this company? (anchored by 'Not
 respected' and 'Very respected'); (2) How good
 of a value is this company perceived to provide
 for the price? (Not good/Very good); (3) How
 strong is this company's reputation for consistent
 quality and service? (Not strong/Very strong);
 and (4) How strong is this company's brand name
 recognition in its service area? (Not strong/Very
 strong). Seven-point Likert scales were used.
 Each chain's brand name reputation was calcu-
 lated by summing responses to the four questions
 and dividing by the number of expert raters.
 Thus, values could range from 4 (all raters gave
 the chain the lowest possible score, 1, on all four
 questions) to a high of 28 (all raters gave the
 chain the highest possible score, 7, on all four

 Outlet-level asset specificity was assessed through
 four survey items: Comparing this company to
 all other food service operations, (1)How diffi-
 cult would it be to use this company's kitchen
 equipment for another food service format?
 (Anchored by 'Not difficult' and 'Very difficult');
 (2) How difficult would it be to use this com-
 pany's dining room decor for another food service
 format? (Not difficult/Very difficult); (3) How
 difficult would it be to convert an average unit's
 building and grounds to another type of business?
 (Not difficult/Very difficult); and (4)How cus-
 tomized is the kitchen equipment for this com-
 pany? (Not customized/Very customized). Seven-
 point Likert scales were used.

 Specific knowledge was assessed through four
 survey items: Comparing this company to all
 other food service operations, (1) How long

 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 878 J. G. Combs and D. J. Ketchen, Jr.

 would it take to train competent assistant man-
 agers? (Anchored by 'Not long' and 'Very long');
 (2) How long would it take to train competent
 hourly employees? (Not long/Very long);
 (3) How difficult would it be to communicate
 job requirements to unit-level managers? (Not
 difficult/Very difficult); and (4) How difficult
 would it be to include all of the unit manager's
 job tasks in an operations manual? (Not
 difficult/Very difficult). Seven-point Likert scales
 were used.

 Geographic dispersion. Two measures that
 reflect a chain's geographic dispersion and that
 have been studied extensively among retail chains
 (e.g., Carney and Gedajlovic, 1991; Lafontaine,
 1992) were examined here: the number of states
 and number of countries with operations in 1992.

 Interfirm cooperation

 Most interfirm cooperation in the restaurant indus-
 try is structured as franchises or joint ventures.5
 Although franchises and joint ventures are quite
 different forms in many industries, the differences
 between them are rather small in the restaurant
 industry. A franchise exists when a cooperative
 partner supplies equity, management, and pays
 the firm a fee in exchange for use of the latter's
 trademark and operational standards (Justis and
 Judd, 1989). Joint ventures in this industry are
 structured similarly except that the firm takes a
 substantial (usually 50%) equity position in out-
 lets managed by its cooperative partners.

 Our measure of interfirm cooperation had to
 reflect the pattern of interfirm cooperation that
 chains used in response to resource and exchange
 conditions present at the beginning of the study
 period. Thus, interfirm cooperation was measured
 as the percent of growth accomplished through
 interfirm cooperation during 1992 and 1993. That
 is, we divided the number of new restaurants

 5 Five sample firms structured a small minority of their outlets
 as management contracts. Under these cooperative arrange-
 ments, an outside cooperative partner constructs and owns the
 outlet(s), which are then managed by the chain for a fee.
 Although management contracts constitute interfirm
 cooperation wherein two or more otherwise sovereign organi-
 zations act in concert to pursue mutual gain, from the perspec-
 tive of chain managers, these outlets engender exchange con-
 ditions similar to company ownership. Consequently, we
 eliminated these outlets from the calculation of our interfirm
 cooperation measure. Doing so had an inconsequential effect
 on the results.

 built with cooperative partners by the total added
 to the chain (cooperative ventures plus wholly-
 owned facilities) in those years. This measure-
 ment period was selected for three reasons. First,
 the interfirm cooperation measure begins in the
 same year as the resource and exchange condition
 variables because many chains can implement
 growth decisions (i.e., build restaurants) in less
 than a year (e.g., McDonald's can build a free-
 standing unit in 6 weeks). Second, a 2-year period
 was selected because it is consistent with strategic
 planning and implementation horizons discussed
 in many chains' annual reports and 10-Ks. Third,
 the 2-year measure is an improvement on studies
 that use the proportion of interfirm cooperation
 over the firm's entire life span (e.g., Carney and
 Gedajlovic, 1991) because that measure con-
 founds 5, 10, or even 20-year-old changes in
 strategic direction by aggregating interfirm
 cooperation over extended periods of time.

 Performance variables

 Performance is a multidimensional construct; thus
 multiple, disparate measures should be examined
 (Venkatraman and Ramanujam, 1986). Accord-
 ingly, we measured performance from both a
 financial and a stock market perspective. In keep-
 ing with prior strategic management research
 (e.g., Hill et al., 1992), return on assets (ROA)
 was used to measure financial performance. This
 is a measure of the efficiency of business oper-
 ations (Hill et al., 1992). Our market performance
 measure, market-to-book value, approximates the
 stock market's perception of the value of the
 firm's present and future income and growth
 potential (Montgomery, Thomas, and Kamath,
 1984). Because market-to-book value measures
 performance at the corporate level, following the
 standards set by Rumelt (1974), only single and
 dominant chain firms (those with over 70% of
 revenues derived from a single chain) were
 included in this part of the analysis.6 This meas-
 ure was available for 77 of the 94 chains.

 Based on comments by restaurant CEOs in

 firm's annual reports, we believed that the choice

 6 Although Rumelt's standards were based on a firm's diversi-
 fication into different businesses, they are used here to guide
 measurement at the chain level because, for a restaurant chain,
 ownership of different chains is operationally analogous to
 related diversification (Carman and Langeard, 1980).

 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Explaining Interfirm Cooperation and Performance

 879

 of interfirm cooperation would impact perform-
 ance quickly (e.g., '1993 revenues increased 27%
 to $123 million, primarily due to 19 new com-
 pany-operated bakery cafes ... and net income
 jumped 29% to $6.8 million'-Au Bon Pain,
 Annual Report, 1993). Therefore, performance
 measures were averaged over 1994 and 1995, the
 2 years immediately following the last year of our
 interfirm cooperation measure. The performance
 measures were averaged over 2 years to guard
 against any 1-year 'outlier' performance (cf.
 Thomas, Clark, and Gioia, 1993).

 Data analysis

 Confirmatory factor analysis
 Construct validity of the three variables measured
 through the expert panel (outlet-level asset speci-
 ficity, specific knowledge, and brand name
 reputation) was assessed through confirmatory
 factor analysis of the total set of ratings produced
 by the experts (N = 874). Three factors emerged
 with all items loading on their theoretically cor-
 rect factor. Average loadings for variables on
 their theoretically correct factor was 0.81,
 whereas the average loading on other factors was
 0.08. Reliability coefficients were 0.87, 0.86, and
 0.85 for brand name reputation, specific knowl-
 edge, and outlet-level asset specificity respec-
 tively, surpassing Nunnally's (1978) standards for
 reliability in basic research. Thus, there was sup-
 porting evidence vis-a-vis construct validity.

 The usual way to test for interactions among
 continuous variables (such as in Hypotheses 3
 and 5) is with moderated regression (Aiken and
 West, 1991). However, Hypothesis 3 is unique
 in that it is an a priori ordinal interaction, where
 one independent variable (i.e., exchange
 conditions) affects the dependent variable (i.e.,
 interfirm cooperation) at only one level of the
 other independent variable (i.e., resources). By
 analogy to the basic 2 x 2 factorial design in
 ANOVA, an a priori ordinal interaction exists
 when one cell is significantly different from the
 other three and the 'unique' cell has been speci-
 fied a priori (e.g., when resource levels are high
 and exchange conditions render cooperation
 costly, chains are expected to use cooperation
 significantly less than under other
 resource/exchange condition combinations-see
 Figure 1). If moderated regression is used, main
 effects can mask the interaction even if the inter-
 action (i.e., the unique cell) is the only important
 effect on the dependent variable (see Bobko,
 1986, for an empirical demonstration). Instead,
 the appropriate analytical technique is a simple
 planned comparison of hypothesized differences
 (i.e., one cell vs. the other three).

 Accordingly, after placing firms into the four
 cells portrayed in Figure 1 based on resource and
 exchange condition variable medians, we created
 two groups: those firms expected to prefer full
 ownership according to Hypothesis 3 (the top left
 cell of Figure 1) vs. those expected to prefer
 interfirm cooperation (all firms in the other three
 cells). Because variance explained by the control
 variables had to be removed first, ANCOVA was
 used to perform the planned comparison.

 One exchange condition variable (geographic
 dispersion) and two resource variables (slack
 capital and top management experience) had
 multiple archival measures. Confirmatory factor
 analysis also supported the validity of these meas-
 ures with average loadings of 0.84 for items on
 their theoretically correct factor and 0.06 on other
 factors. The measures of each of the three vari-
 ables were standardized and then summed to
 create unit-weighted scales.
 Hypothesis testing
 Hypotheses la-c and 2a-c were tested using
 regression analysis. Hypotheses 4a-b, which
 specified direct relationships between resources
 and performance, were also tested using
 regression. In testing Hypotheses 4a-b, we
 included interfirm cooperation as an additional
 control variable to ensure that resource effects on
 performance were direct and not mediated by
 interfirm cooperation.

 Hypothesis 5, in contrast to Hypothesis 3, is
 an a priori disordinal interaction in which one
 independent variable (i.e., interfirm cooperation)
 affects the dependent variable (i.e., performance)
 differently at different levels of the other inde-
 pendent variable (i.e., exchange conditions).
 Using the 2 x 2 factorial analogy again, two
 diagonal cells are expected to be different from
 the other two (see Figure 2). The luxury of direct
 planned comparison does not exist here because
 it cannot be known whether results are due to
 any one cell rather than the hypothesized two
 cells. Moderated regression was therefore used as
 an initial test of the hypothesis because it is the
 most powerful technique for detecting disordinal
 interactions among continuous data (Aiken and

 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 880 J. G. Combs and D. J. Ketchen, Jr.

 West, 1991). Once moderated regression iden-
 tified the presence of an interaction effect, firms
 were partitioned into subgroups based on median
 exchange condition and interfirm cooperation
 values and group means were inspected to see if
 the nature of the interaction was consistent with
 Hypothesis 5 as depicted in Figure 2.

 RESULTS

 Table 1 reports descriptive statistics and Pearson
 product-moment correlations among measures
 used in the study. Table 2 displays the results
 relevant to our initial predictions. Hypotheses la-
 c predicted that chains' levels of three resources
 would be inversely related to the use of interfirm
 cooperation. Our predictions were supported for
 brand name reputation (Hla: 13 = -0.25; p <
 0.05) and slack capital (Hlc: p = -0.25; p <
 0.05) but not for top management experience
 (Hlb: P = -0.01; n.s.). Hypotheses 2a-c pre-
 dicted a direct relationship between exchange
 conditions and interfirm cooperation. All three
 sub-hypotheses were supported: outlet-level asset
 specificity (H2a: 13 = 0.20; p < 0.05) and geo-
 graphic dispersion (H2c: 13 = 0.39; p < 0.01)
 were positively related to interfirm cooperation
 whereas specific knowledge (H2b: p = -0.23; p
 < 0.05) was negatively related.

 experience was not significantly related to either
 performance measure (1 = 0.11; n.s., and P =
 0.10; n.s., for ROA and market-to-book
 respectively).

 Regarding Hypothesis 5, the second and fourth
 regression equations in Table 5 show that the
 interaction terms for both ROA (3 = 0.29; p <
 0.01) and market-to-book value (3 = 0.28; p
 <0.05) were significant. This offered initial sup-
 port for our expectation that exchange conditions
 and interfirm cooperation interact to affect per-
 formance. The next step was to partition the firms
 into groups according to their median exchange
 condition and interfirm cooperation values and
 inspect the nature of the interaction. As shown
 in Table 6, group mean values revealed some
 deviations from the predictions of Hypothesis 5.
 When both performance variables are considered,
 the interaction appears to be largely a function
 of significantly lower performance among firms
 using interfirm cooperation when exchange con-
 ditions pointed toward full ownership (i.e., those
 in the top left cell of Table 6). In addition, when
 market-to-book value is considered, there was a
 positive performance effect for firms using inter-
 firm cooperation when exchange conditions made
 this an appropriate choice (i.e., the top right cell).
 Finally, in contrast to our expectations, firms that
 made greater use of full ownership when
 exchange conditions facilitate interfirm
 cooperation performed as well as those who acted
 in accordance with their exchange conditions (i.e.,
 bottom left cell vs. bottom right). Overall, there
 was mixed evidence regarding Hypothesis 5: an
 interaction effect between exchange conditions
 and interfirm cooperation on performance was
 found, but the nature of the interaction was only
 partially consistent with expectations.

 As shown in Table 3, there was a significant

 resource-exchange condition interaction effect on
 interfirm cooperation (F = 23.52; p < 0.001). As
 predicted, firms that possessed high resource lev-
 els and faced exchange conditions that facilitate
 full ownership (i.e., low outlet-level asset speci-
 ficity, high specific knowledge, and low geo-
 graphic dispersion) used interfirm cooperation sig-
 nificantly less than other firms. Indeed, as shown
 in Table 4, firms in this situation used interfirm
 cooperation in an average of 5 percent of their
 new outlets whereas firms facing other resource
 and exchange condition contingencies on average
 used interfirm cooperation between seven to ten
 times more often. Together, the results in these
 tables offer support for Hypothesis 3.

 Table 5 shows the results for Hypotheses 4a-
 b and 5. Brand name reputation was a significant
 predictor of ROA (P = 0.21; p < 0.05) but not
 market-to-book value (1 = 0.01; n.s.), offering
 only partial support for Hypothesis 4a. No support
 was found for Hypothesis 4b; top management

 DISCUSSION

 The resource-based view and organizational eco-
 nomics have become regarded as valuable instru-
 ments for enhancing knowledge of interfirm
 cooperation, its antecedents, and its consequences.
 Given these perspectives' different emphases,
 they are generally treated as independent
 approaches-despite considerable evidence that
 complex relationships seldom can be fully under-
 stood when viewed through a single theoretical
 lens (e.g., Allison, 1971; Gray and Wood, 1991).

 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 .

 . Table 1. Descriptive statisticsa

 Mean s.d. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14

 1) Interfirm 0.33 0.37
 Cooperation
 Performance Variables
 2) ROA 0.05 0.16 -0.26*
 3) Market-to-Book 2.24 2.07 0.06 0.34**
 Control Variables
 4) Age 25.12 16.53 0.07 0.13 -0.27*
 5) Total Salesb 1098.2 3980.42 -0.01 0.19 -0.06 -0.07
 6) Growth 41.58 86.55 -0.02 0.02 0.39* -0.25* -0.08
 Resource Variables
 7) Brand name 18.58 4.12 -0.34*** 0.34*** 0.01 0.00 0.09 0.00
 8) TMT Experience 35.17 24.23 -0.08 0.16 -0.01 0.31** -0.17 -0.11 0.14
 9) TMT Tenure 34.06 30.49 -0.03 0.32** -0.07 0.44*** 0.19 -0.23* 0.13 0.72***
 10) Potential Slack 0.76 0.71 -0.16 0.19 0.31** 0.05 -0.25* 0.31** 0.28** 0.22* 0.03
 11) Available Slack 108.89 176.20 -0.24** 0.19 0.33** -0.19 0.14 0.41*** 0.18 -0.12 0.14 0.21*
 Exchange Condition
 Variables
 12) Asset Specifity 14.89 3.40 0.29** 0.11 0.25* 0.04 0.11 0.15 0.07 -0.02 0.01 -0.15 -0.11
 13) Specific 14.22 3.89 -0.28** -0.22** -0.25* -0.26** -0.10 -0.06 0.20 -0.02 -0.16 0.13 0.09 -0.15

 Knowledge

 14) Number of States 16.32 14.44 0.17 0.36*** 0.01 0.12 0.53*** -0.21* 0.10 0.09 0.40*** -0.12 -0.13 0.10 -0.26**
 15) Number of 4.44 11.76 0.17 0.25* 0.11 0.02 0.75*** -0.10 0.12 -0.02 0.30** -0.13 0.02 0.17 -0.14 0.60***

 Countries

 aN = 94, except for market-to-book (N = 77)

 Total sales are in millions (000,000)

 *p<0.05

 J **p<0.01
 . ***P<0.001

 S

 oo 00
 <?

 00
 _g
 00
 00

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 882 J. G. Combs and D. J. Ketchen, Jr.

 Table 2. Effects of resources and exchange conditions
 on interfirm cooperation

 Table 4. Average use of interfirm cooperation for each
 resource-exchange condition combinationa,b,c

 Resources Exchange
 Conditions

 Age 0.09 0.82 0.05 0.43
 Size -0.05 0.43 -0.43** 3.12
 Growth 0.10 0.86 -0.07 0.67
 Brand name -0.25* 2.39
 TMT Experience -0.01 0.12
 Slack Capital -0.25* 2.10
 Asset Specificity 0.20* 2.06
 Specific Knowledge -0.23* 2.23
 Geographic Dispersion 0.39** 2.85
 df (6,87) (6,87)
 R2 0.16 0.24
 F 2.83* 4.42***

 N = 94
 *p<0.05
 **p<0.01
 ***p<0.001

 Table 3. Planned comparison of firms expected to use
 full-ownership versus interfirm cooperation

 df mean F

 square

 Model 4 0.71 6.33***

 Age 1 0.09 0.78
 Size 1 0.11 0.99
 Growth 1 0.05 0.05
 Groupa 1 2.62 23.52***

 Error 89 0.11

 aGroup equals all firms with higher than median resources
 and lower than median exchange condition scores versus all
 other firms.
 *p<0.05
 **p<0.01
 ***p<0.001

 Exchange Conditions: Cost of

 Interfirm Cooperation

 High Low

 Resource High 0.05*** 0.44
 Levels (0.11) (0.40)
 Low 0.37 0.48
 (0.40) (0.35)

 aSignificance level is from the planned comparison shown in
 Table 3.
 bHypothesized full-ownership group cell is bolded.
 cStandard deviation of cell means in parentheses.
 *p<0.05
 **p<0.01
 ***p<0.001

 1991), restaurant chains with unknown brand
 names and little slack capital used more interfirm
 cooperation than did their resource-abundant
 counterparts (Hypotheses la, Ic). Experience
 among top managers, however, did not affect
 cooperation (Hypothesis lb). Given that past
 research has established that top management
 characteristics are related to a variety of organi-
 zational phenomena (Bantel and Finkelstein, 1995),
 perhaps inquiry examining whether or not mana-
 gerial characteristics other than experience play a
 role in decisions surrounding interfirm cooperation
 may be fruitful. For example, heterogeneous TMTs
 are thought to enact more innovative actions than
 homogeneous teams (Bantel and Jackson, 1989);
 perhaps the former are likely to devise new, creative
 forms of interfirm cooperation.

 This study offers new insight into how managers
 resolve the sometimes conflicting demands of
 resource and exchange conditions when deciding
 whether or not to use interfirm cooperation and
 establishes a link between the motivations for
 interfirm cooperation and performance outcomes.

 The effects of resources and exchange
 conditions on interfirm cooperation

 Consistent with the resource-based notion that
 firms cooperate in order to gain access to critical
 resources (Borys and Jemison, 1989; Hamel,

 As others have found (e.g., Monteverde and
 Teece, 1982), managers in this sample also
 brought governance issues into focus when con-
 sidering alternative ways to manage new outlets.
 Given our intention to study OE variables that
 are established in the literature, the support we
 found for Hypotheses 2a-c is perhaps not surpris-
 ing. Thus, this study adds to the substantial base
 of empirical support for the OE approach (Rumelt
 et al., 1994). Future inquiry should investigate a
 broader array of variables, however, because the
 number of factors that affect the cost of exchange
 is potentially large (Coase, 1988; North, 1990).
 Although our findings demonstrate that the
 RBV and OE are each viable explanations for
 interfirm cooperation, they offer more informative
 insights when viewed in tandem. The finding

 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Table 5. Effects of resources and exchange conditions on performance

 Explaining Interfirm Cooperation and Performance

 883

 ROA (N = 94) Market-to-Book (N = 77)

 Resources Interfirm Coop. X Resources Interfirm Coop. X

 Exchange Exchange
 Conditions Conditions
 P t tB t P t P t

 Age 0.06 0.59 0.00 0.04 -0.26* 2.10 -0.36** 3.23
 Size 0.32** 3.21 0.14 1.35 0.11 0.90 -0.09 0.78
 Growth 0.11 1.17 0.03 0.38 0.36** 3.24 0.25* 2.47
 Interfirm Coop. -0.15 1.57 -0.43*** 4.41 0.11 0.97 -0.07 0.64
 Brand Name 0.21* 2.13 0.01 0.02
 TMT Experience 0.11 1.05 0.10 0.78
 Exchange Conditions 0.39*** 3.64 0.39** 3.27
 Interfirm Cooperation X
 Exchange Conditions 0.29** 3.27 0.28* 2.63
 df (6,87) (6,87) (6,70) (6,70)
 R2 0.28 0.39 0.21 0.37
 F 5.50*** 9.08*** 3.17** 6.75***

 *p<0.05
 **p<0.01
 ***p<0.001

 Table 6. Average performance for each exchange con-
 dition-interfirm cooperation combination.a

 Exchange Conditions: Cost of

 Interfirm Cooperation
 High Low
 Use of High ROA = -0.07* ROA = 7.3
 Interfirm M/B = 1.50* M/B = 3.07*
 Cooperation

 Low ROA = 7.4 ROA = 10.4
 M/B = 2.02 M/B = 2.21

 *Duncan multiple range test. Significance indicates differences
 from the grand mean.
 bHypothesized high performance cells are bolded.
 *p<0.05
 **p<0.01
 ***p<0.001

 of a significant interaction effect on interfirm
 cooperation, in support of Hypothesis 3, enhances
 knowledge about the link between resources and
 exchange conditions by demonstrating how man-
 agers resolve the dilemma created when these
 forces collide. Whereas resource-abundant chains
 used interfirm cooperation only when cooperation
 helped minimize their governance costs, low-
 resource firms often cooperated regardless of their
 exchange conditions, indicating that resources
 take primacy over exchange conditions when con-
 sidering cooperation. One implication is that when
 the objective of research is to predict organizational

 form, the OE perspective should be applied cau-
 tiously in low-resource contexts such as start-up
 ventures, turnarounds, and initial foreign expansions
 (cf. Oviatt and McDougall, 1994).

 Our results have implications for prior research

 that draws on one, but not both, of the perspec-
 tives examined here. We found a joint resource
 and exchange condition effect on interfirm
 cooperation. Thus, independently, the RBV and
 OE each tell only part of the story. If this study
 had investigated the effects of resources or
 exchange conditions, any significant results would
 have been of limited value because an important
 explanatory variable-i.e., the interaction-would
 have been left unexamined. To the extent that
 our results generalize to other samples and to
 related research questions, the results of prior
 research having a singular focus on one perspec-
 tive or the other need to be considered cautiously.
 Future researchers need to recognize that when a
 study is driven by one of the perspectives, find-
 ings may be more robust if the other perspective
 is incorporated or, at a minimum, accounted for
 through the selection of control variables.

 The effects of resources, exchange conditions
 and interfirm cooperation on performance

 Consistent with the notion that resources lay at
 the center of competitive advantage, we found a

 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 884 J. G. Combs and D. J. Ketchen, Jr.

 performance advantage for firms with well-
 respected brand names when ROA was con-
 sidered (Hypothesis 4a). A respected brand name
 can convey competitive advantage because it
 reduces uncertainty for buyers, thus making it
 costly for competitors to lure buyers away (Itami,
 1987). We can only speculate on why this advan-
 tage did not translate into stock market perform-
 ance. Perhaps any brand name effect on stock
 market performance is offset by investors' prefer-
 ence for the potentially high growth latent in
 many not-yet-established brand names. The nega-
 tive effect of age and the positive effect of growth
 on market-to-book value support this reasoning.
 One implication is that the importance of a parti-
 cular strategic resource may vary, sometimes
 unpredictably, over time (Dierickx and Cool,
 1989). Thus, managers may often be aiming at a
 moving target when they attempt to identify
 which strategic resources deserve nurturing.

 No support was found for Hypothesis 4b; top
 management experience was not significantly
 related to either performance measure. Although
 industry observers consider top management to
 be vital to superior performance (e.g., Luxenberg,
 1985; Shook and Shook, 1993), experience is
 apparently not alone sufficient. Future studies
 might benefit from considering a broader array of
 team characteristics such as composition (Priem,
 1990) or reward structure (Boyd, 1994). The
 significant effect of size on ROA suggests that
 the potential role of economies of scale should
 be accounted for in such inquiry.

 Consistent with Hypothesis 5, exchange con-
 ditions and chains' use of interfirm cooperation
 interacted to influence performance. The relation-
 ship was not as simple as predicted, however.
 For firms with appropriate exchange conditions,
 using interfirm cooperation to surmount resource
 limitations can be lucrative; such firms performed
 quite well. Thus, it is appropriate for a low-
 resource firm (e.g., a start-up) to use interfirm
 cooperation when exchange conditions permit.
 However, those low-resource firms that attempted
 to use interfirm cooperation when exchange con-
 ditions pointed toward full ownership were the
 worst performers in the study. This result suggests
 that whereas firms may give primacy to resource
 considerations when deciding whether or not to
 engage in interfirm cooperation (Hypothesis 3),
 they might be well advised not to. What our
 results do not address, however, is whether a

 low-resource firm that should, according to OE,
 be using full ownership can expect any long-term
 benefits from interfirm cooperation. Can these
 firms use interfirm cooperation to eventually build
 the resources necessary to revert to full ownership
 and hence improve profitability?

 Preliminary evidence indicates that the answer
 may be yes; long-term benefits from using
 cooperation to build resources despite unfavorable
 exchange conditions appear possible. We investi-
 gated the possible effects of firms' exchange
 condition-interfirm cooperation posture (i.e.,
 firms' categorization in Table 6) on firm perform-
 ance for 1996 and 1997. For 1996, the pattern
 of mean performances echoed those found for
 1994-95. However, whereas the performance dif-
 ferences were significant when 1996 market-to-
 book values were considered (F = 3.12; p <0.05),
 ROA differences were not (F = 0.18; n.s.). By
 1997, no significant performance differences
 could be identified (F = 2.04 for market-to-book
 and F = 0.65 for ROA , both n.s.). One reason
 performance differences may have deteriorated
 over time may be that low-resource firms had
 (1) used interfirm cooperation effectively to build
 a stronger resource base, (2) improved the align-
 ment between their use of interfirm cooperation
 and exchange conditions, and thus (3)improved
 performance. This speculation is consistent with
 Shane's (1996) investigation, which found that
 franchising enhances survival among (presumably
 low-resource) start-ups. Our post hoc analysis is
 highly tentative, however. The deterioration of
 effects by 1997 could have been caused by
 actions unrelated to interfirm cooperation
 decisions made in 1992 and 1993. For example,
 in the intervening years, low-resource firms could
 have initiated cost-cutting programs or improved
 their strategic decision-making processes. Thus,
 additional research is needed to investigate the
 interplay of interfirm cooperation, resource levels,
 exchange conditions, and long-term performance
 before low-resource firms can be advised to
 engage in interfirm cooperation without regard to
 exchange conditions.

 Our results were also informative for firms that

 faced few OE-based impediments to interfirm
 cooperation but chose instead to emphasize full
 ownership. In contrast with our expectations,
 these firms were as profitable as those that fol-
 lowed OE logic by emphasizing interfirm
 cooperation. The reason may rest in the nature

 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Explaining Interfirm Cooperation and Performance

 885

 of the industry under investigation. The restaurant
 industry is relatively stable when compared to
 industries such as health care (Ketchen, Thomas,
 and Snow, 1993) and airlines (Chen and Ham-
 brick, 1995). In dynamic settings, uncertainty and
 risk are great; thus the risk-sharing benefits of
 cooperative ventures are particularly valuable
 (Harrigan, 1985). Perhaps some restaurant chains
 are unable to take advantage of some of the
 benefits of interfirm cooperation that are prevalent
 in more dynamic industries. This might also help
 explain why full ownership remained popular
 even among those chains that relied heavily on
 interfirm cooperation. Thus, examining if industry
 dynamism plays a role in the links among
 exchange conditions, interfirm cooperation, and
 performance would be useful. Such research
 would help managers understand when alternative
 organizational arrangements with differing
 governance costs may nevertheless result in simi-
 lar performance.

 pendent or even competing perspectives, our
 results show that firms do not simply respond to
 the logic of only the RBV or OE, but rather
 react to contingencies identified by both. These
 responses have important implications for per-
 formance. Our findings should encourage future
 researchers to strive for a deeper understanding
 of how such forces combine to influence organi-
 zational action and performance.

 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

 We thank Don Bergh, Jim Chrisman, Kevin
 Mossholder, Tim Palmer, and two SMJ reviewers
 for their helpful comments on previous versions
 of this paper.

 REFERENCES

 Limitations

 Aiken, L. S. and S. G. West (1991). Multiple

 Regression: Testing and Interpreting Interactions.
 Sage, Newbury Park, CA.

 The results of this study should be viewed in
 light of its limits. Because data were drawn from
 public firms in a single industry, the generaliz-
 ability of our findings may be limited. Generaliza-
 tions to dissimilar industries (e.g., dynamic ones)
 should be viewed with caution; future research is
 needed to determine if the relationships found
 here hold in such settings. The number and com-
 prehensiveness of the variables selected to oper-
 ationalize resources and exchange conditions are
 a second concern. Whereas a variety of variables
 have been introduced in the literature, this study
 focused on a limited set that had been strongly
 linked to managerial action and performance in
 prior research. Future research would benefit from
 consideration of additional resources and
 exchange conditions, as well as their interactions.

 CONCLUSION

 Understanding the antecedents and consequences
 of organizational actions is a central theme in
 strategic management research. The RBV and OE
 offer rich and powerful explanations for a diverse
 range of phenomena including diversification, ver-
 tical integration, and interfirm cooperation.
 Although they are usually thought of as inde-

 Allison, G. T. (1971). Essence of Decision: Explaining

 the Cuban Missile Crisis. Little, Brown, Boston,
 MA.

 Amit, R. and P. Schoemaker (1993). 'Strategic assets

 and organizational rent', Strategic Management
 Journal, 14(1), pp. 33-46.

 Anderson, E. and A. T. Coughlan (1987). 'International
 market entry and expansion via independent or inte-
 grated channels of distribution', Journal of Market-
 ing, 51(January), pp. 71-82.

 Argyres, N. (1996). 'Evidence on the role of firm

 capabilities in vertical integration decisions', Stra-
 tegic Management Journal, 17(2), pp. 129-150.
 Au Bon Pain (1993). Annual Report. Boston, MA.
 Bantel, K. A. and S. Finkelstein (1995). 'The determi-
 nants of top management teams', Advances in Group
 Processes, 12, pp. 139-165.

 Bantel, K. A. and S. E. Jackson (1989). 'Top man-
 agement and innovations in banking: Does the
 composition of the top management team make a
 difference?', Strategic Management Journal, Sum-
 mer Special Issue, 10, pp. 107-124.

 Barkema, H. G., J. H. J. Bell and J. M. Pennings
 (1996). 'Foreign entry, cultural barriers, and learn-
 ing', Strategic Management Journal, 17(2),
 pp. 151-166.

 Barnett, W. P., H. R. Greve and D. Y. Park (1994). 'An
 evolutionary model of organizational performance',
 Strategic Management Journal, Winter Special
 Issue, 15, pp. 11-28.

 Barney, J. B. (1988). 'Returns to bidding firms in

 mergers and acquisitions: Reconsidering the
 relatedness hypothesis', Strategic Management Jour-
 nal, Summer Special Issue, 9, pp. 71-78.

 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 886 J. G. Combs and D. J. Ketchen, Jr.

 Barney, J. B. (1991). 'Firm resources and sustained

 competitive advantage', Journal of Management,
 17(1), pp. 99-120.

 Barney, J. B. and W. G. Ouchi (1986). Organizational
 Economics: Toward a New Paradigm for Under-
 standing and Studying Organizations. Jossey-Bass,
 San Francisco, CA.

 Bergh, D. D. (1995). 'Size and relatedness of units

 sold: An agency theory and resource-based perspec-
 tive', Strategic Management Journal, 16(3),
 pp. 221-240.

 in service organizations: Productivity in franchises',
 Management Science, 41, pp. 1750-1762.

 Dierickx, I. and K. Cool (1989). 'Asset stock accumu-
 lation and sustainability of competitive advantage',
 Management Science, 35, pp. 1504-1514.

 Dillman, D. A. (1978). Mail and Telephone Surveys.

 Wiley, New York.

 Dyer, J. H. (1996). 'Specialized supplier networks as

 a source of competitive advantage: Evidence from
 the auto industry', Strategic Management Journal,
 17(4), pp. 271-292.

 Bobko, P. (1986). 'A solution to some dilemmas when
 testing hypotheses about ordinal interactions', Jour-
 nal of Applied Psychology, 71, pp. 323-326.

 Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). 'Agency theory: An assess-
 ment and review', Academy of Management Review,
 14, pp. 57-74.

 Borys, B. and D. B. Jemison (1989). 'Hybrid arrange-

 Erramilli, M. K. and C. P. Rao (1990). 'Choice of

 ments as strategic alliances: Theoretical issues in
 organizational combinations', Academy of Manage-
 ment Review, 14, pp. 234-249.

 foreign market entry modes by service firms: Role
 of market knowledge', Management International
 Review, 30(2), pp. 135-150.

 Boyd, B. K. (1994). 'Board control and CEO compen-
 sation', Strategic Management Journal, 15(5),
 pp. 335-344.

 Bradach, J. L. (1997). 'Using the plural form in man-
 agement of restaurant chains', Administrative
 Science Quarterly, 42, pp. 276-303.

 Brickley, J. A. and F. H. Dark (1987). 'The choice of
 organizational form: The case of franchising', Jour-
 nal of Financial Economics, 18, pp. 401-420.

 Carman, J. M. and E. Langeard (1980). 'Growth strate-

 gies for service firms', Strategic Management Jour-
 nal, 1(1), pp. 7-22.

 Carney, M. and E. Gedajlovic (1991). 'Vertical inte-
 gration in franchise systems: Agency theory and
 resource explanations', Strategic Management Jour-
 nal, 12(8), pp. 607-629.

 Castanias, R. P. and C. E. Helfat (1991). 'Managerial
 resources and rents', Journal of Management, 17,
 pp. 155-172.

 Chatterjee, S. and B. Wernerfelt (1991). 'The link

 between resources and type of diversification:
 Theory and evidence', Strategic Management Jour-
 nal, 12(1), pp. 33-48.

 Chen, M., J. Farh and I. C. MacMillan (1993). 'An

 exploration of the expertness of outside informants',
 Academy of Management Journal, 36, pp. 1614-1632.
 Chen, M. and D. C. Hambrick (1995). 'Speed, stealth,

 and selective attack: How small firms differ from
 large firms in competitive behavior', Academy of
 Management Journal, 38, pp. 453-482.

 Chi, T. (1994). 'Trading in strategic resources: Neces-

 sary conditions, transaction cost problems, and
 choice of exchange structure', Strategic Management
 Journal, 15(4), pp. 271-290.

 Coase, R. E. (1988). 'The nature of the firm: Influence',

 Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 4,
 pp. 33-47.

 Collis, D. J. (1994). 'How valuable are organizational
 capabilities?', Strategic Management Journal,
 Winter Special Issue, 15, pp. 143-152.

 Conner, K. R. and C. K. Prahalad (1996). 'A resource-

 based theory of the firm: Knowledge versus oppor-
 tunism', Organization Science, 7(5), pp. 477-501.

 Darr, E. D., L. Argote and D. Epple (1995). 'The

 Gersick, C. J. G. (1991). 'Revolutionary change

 theories: A multi-level exploration of the punctuated
 equilibrium paradigm', Academy of Management
 Review, 16, pp. 10-36.

 Ghoshal, S. and P. Moran (1996). 'Bad for practice:
 A critique of the transaction cost theory', Academy
 of Management Review, 21, pp. 13-47.

 Golden, B. R. (1992). 'The past is the past-Or is it?
 The use of retrospective accounts as indicators of
 past strategy', Academy of Management Journal, 35,
 pp. 848-860.

 Gray, B. and D. J. Wood (1991). 'Collaborative

 alliances: Moving from practice to theory', Journal
 of Applied Behavioral Science, 27(1), pp. 3-22.

 Hambrick, D. C. and R. A. D'Aveni (1988). 'Large

 corporate failures as downward spirals', Administra-
 tive Science Quarterly, 33, pp. 1-23.

 Hamel, G. (1991). 'Competition for competence and

 inter-partner learning within international strategic
 alliances', Strategic Management Journal, Summer
 Special Issue, 12, pp. 83-103.

 Harrigan, K. R. (1985). 'Joint ventures and competitive
 strategy', Strategic Management Journal, 9(2),
 pp. 141-158.

 Hawes, J. M. and W. F. Crittenden (1984). 'A tax-

 onomy of competitive retailing strategies', Strategic
 Management Journal, 5(3), pp. 275-287.

 Hesterly, W. S., J. Liebeskind and T. R. Zenger (1990).
 'Organizational economics: An impending revolution
 in organization theory?', Academy of Management
 Review, 15, pp. 402-420.

 Hill, C. W. L., M. A. Hitt and R. E. Hoskisson (1992).

 'Cooperative versus competitive structures in related
 and unrelated diversified firms', Organization
 Science, 3, pp. 501-521.

 Hill, C. W. L. and S. Snell (1988). 'External control,

 corporate strategy, and firm performance in research
 intensive industries', Strategic Management Journal,
 9(6), pp. 577-590.

 Ingham, H. and S. Thompson (1994). 'Wholly-owned

 versus collaborative ventures for diversifying finan-
 cial services', Strategic Management Journal, 15(4),
 pp. 325-334.

 Itami, H. (1987). Mobilizing Invisible Assets. Harvard

 acquisition, transfer, and depreciation of knowledge

 University Press, Cambridge, MA.

 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Explaining Interfirm Cooperation and Performance

 887

 Jensen, M. C. and W. Meckling (1976). 'Theory of
 the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs, and
 ownership structure', Journal of Financial Eco-
 nomics, 3, pp. 305-360.

 Jensen, M. C. and W. Meckling (1995). 'Specific and
 general knowledge, and organizational structure',
 Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 8(2),
 pp. 4-18.

 Justis, R. T. and R. Judd (1989). Franchising. South-

 western, Cincinnati, OH.

 Kanuk, L. and C. Berenson (1975). 'Mail surveys

 and response rates: A literature review', Journal of
 Marketing Research, 22, pp. 440-453.

 Ketchen, D. J., J. B. Thomas and C. C. Snow (1993).

 'Organizational configurations and performance: A
 comparison of theoretical approaches', Academy of
 Management Journal, 36, pp. 1278-1313.

 Klein, B. and K. M. Murphy (1988). 'Vertical restraints
 as contract enforcement mechanisms', Journal of
 Law and Economics, 31, pp. 265-297.

 Kogut, B. and U. Zander (1992). 'Knowledge of the
 firm, combinative capabilities, and the replication
 of technology', Organization Science, 3,
 pp. 383-397.

 Lafontaine, F. (1992). 'Agency theory and franchising:
 Some empirical results', RAND Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 23, pp. 263-283.

 Levinthal, D. and J. Myatt (1994). 'Co-evolution of

 capabilities and industry: The evolution of mutual
 fund processing', Strategic Management Journal,
 Winter Special Issue, 15, pp. 45-62.

 Luxenberg, S. (1985). Roadside Empires: How the

 Chains Franchised America. Viking, New York.

 Mahoney, J. T. (1992). 'The choice of organizational
 form: Vertical financial ownership versus other
 methods of vertical integration', Strategic Manage-
 ment Journal, 13(8), pp. 559-584.

 esses', Administrative Science Quarterly, 21,
 pp. 246-275.

 Monteverde, K. and D. J. Teece (1982). 'Supplier
 switching costs and vertical integration in the auto-
 mobile industry', RAND Journal of Economics, 13,
 pp. 206-213.

 Montgomery, C. A., A. R. Thomas and R. Kamath
 (1984). 'Divestiture, market valuation, and strategy',
 Academy of Management Journal, 27, pp. 830-840.
 Nayyar, P. R. (1990). 'Information asymmetries: A
 source of competitive advantage for diversified ser-
 vice firms', Strategic Management Journal, 11(7),
 pp. 513-519.

 Nelson, R. and S. Winter (1982). An Evolutionary Theory

 of Economic Change. Belknap, Cambridge, MA.

 North, D. C. (1990). Institutions, Institutional Change
 and Economic Performance. Cambridge University
 Press, Cambridge, MA.

 Nunnally, J. (1978). Psychometric Theory. McGraw-

 Hill, New York.

 Oviatt, B. and P. McDougall (1994). 'Toward a theory
 of international new ventures', Journal of Inter-
 national Business Studies, 25, pp. 45-64.

 Penrose, E. T. (1959). The Theory of the Growth of

 the Firm. Wiley, New York.

 Peteraf, M. A. (1993). 'The cornerstones of competitive
 advantage: A resource-based view', Strategic Man-
 agement Journal, 14(3), pp. 179-191.

 Phan, P. H. and C. L. W. Hill (1995). 'Organizational
 restructuring and economic performance in leveraged
 buyouts: An ex post study', Academy of Manage-
 ment Journal, 38, pp. 704-739.

 Polanyi, M. (1962). Personal Knowledge: Towards a

 Post-critical Philosophy. Harper, New York.

 Porter, M. E. (1980). Competitive Strategy. Free Press,

 New York.

 Mahoney, J. T. and J. R. Pandian (1992). 'The
 resource-based view within the conversation of stra-
 tegic management', Strategic Management Journal,
 13(5), pp. 363-380.

 Markides, C. C. and P. J. Williamson. (1996). 'Corpor-

 ate diversification and organization structure: A
 resource-based view', Academy of Management
 Journal, 39, pp. 340-367.

 Martin, R. E. and R. T. Justis (1993). 'Franchising,
 liquidity constraints and entry', Applied Economics,
 25, pp. 1269-1277.

 Meyer, A. D. (1991). 'What is strategy's distinctive

 competence?', Journal of Management, 17,
 pp. 821-833.

 Preim, R. L. (1990). 'Top management team group
 factors, consensus, and firm performance', Strategic
 Management Journal, 11(6), pp. 469-478.

 Ritzer, G. (1993). The McDonaldization of Society.

 Pine Forge, Newbury Park, CA.

 Robins, J. and M. F. Wiersema (1995). 'A resource-
 based approach to the multibusiness firm: Empirical
 analysis of portfolio interrelationships and corporate
 financial performance', Strategic Management Jour-
 nal, 16(4), pp. 277-300.

 Roth, K. and S. O'Donnell (1996). 'Foreign subsidiary
 compensation strategy: An agency theory perspec-
 tive', Academy of Management Journal, 39,
 pp. 678-703.

 Rubin, P. H. (1990). Managing Business Transactions.

 Michael, S. C. (1998). 'Quality management in fran-

 Free Press, New York.

 chise chains', Advances in Management of Organiza-
 tional Quality, 3, pp. 161-184.

 Michel, J. G. and D. C. Hambrick (1992). 'Diversifi-

 Rumelt, R. P. (1974). Strategy, Structure, and Eco-

 nomic Performance. Harvard University, Cam-
 bridge, MA.

 cation posture and top management team character-
 istics', Academy of Management Journal, 35(1),
 pp. 9-37.

 Rumelt, R. P. (1991). 'How much does industry mat-

 ter?', Strategic Management Journal, 12(3),
 pp. 167-185.

 Minkler, A. P. (1992). 'Why firms franchise: A search
 cost theory', Journal of Institutional and Theoretical
 Economics, 148, pp. 240-259.

 Mintzberg, H., D. Raisinghani and A. Theoret (1976).
 'The structure of 'unstructured' decision proc-

 Rumelt, R. P., D. E. Schendel and D. J. Teece (1994).
 'Fundamental issues in strategy'. In R. P. Rumelt,
 D. E. Schendel and D. J. Teece (eds.), Fundamental
 Issues in Strategy. Harvard Business School Press,
 Boston, MA, pp. 9-54.

 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 888 J. G. Combs and D. J. Ketchen, Jr.

 Scott, F. A., Jr. (1995). 'Franchising vs. company
 ownership as a decision variable of the firm', Review
 of Industrial Organization, 10, pp. 69-81.

 Shane, S. A. (1996). 'Hybrid organizational arrange-

 'Strategic sensemaking and organizational perform-
 ance: Linkages among scanning, interpretation,
 action, and outcomes', Academy of Management
 Journal, pp. 239-270.

 ments and their implications for firm growth and
 survival: A study of new franchisors', Academy of
 Management Journal, 39, pp. 216-234.

 Shane, S. A. (1998). 'Making new franchise systems
 work', Strategic Management Journal, 19(7),
 pp. 697-707.

 Shook, C. and R. L. Shook (1993). Franchising: The

 Business Strategy that Changed the World. Prentice-
 Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

 Singh, J. V. (1986). 'Performance, slack, and risk
 taking in organizational decision making', Academy
 of Management Journal, 29, pp. 652-685.

 Snow, C. C. and J. B. Thomas (1994). 'Field research

 methods in strategic management: Contributions to
 theory building and testing', Journal of Management
 Studies, 31, pp. 457-479.

 Venkatraman, N. and V. Ramanujam (1986). 'Measure-
 ment of business performance in strategy research:
 A comparison of approaches', Academy of Manage-
 ment Review, 11, pp. 801-814.

 Wererfelt, B. (1984). 'A resource-based view of the

 firm', Strategic Management Journal, 5(2),
 pp. 171-180.

 Wererfelt, B. (1989). 'From critical resources to

 corporate strategy', Journal of General Management,
 14(3), pp. 4-12.

 Wererfelt, B. and A. Karani (1987). 'Competitive
 strategy under uncertainty', Strategic Management
 Journal, 8(2), pp. 187-194.

 Williamson, O. E. (1975). Markets and Hierarchies:

 Analysis and Antitrust Implications. Free Press,
 New York.

 Stiglitz, J. E. and A. Weiss (1981). 'Credit rationing

 Williamson, O. E. (1983). 'Credible commitments:

 in markets with imperfect information', American
 Economic Review, 71, pp. 393-410.

 Using hostages to support exchange', American Eco-
 nomic Review, 83, pp. 519-540.

 Teece, D. (1982). 'Towards an economic theory of the
 multiproduct firm', Journal of Economic Behavior
 and Organization, 3, pp. 39-63.

 Teece, D. J. (1987). 'Profiting from technological inno-
 vation: Implications for integration, collaboration,
 licensing, and public policy'. In D. J. Teece (eds.),
 The Competitive Challenge. Ballinger, New York,
 pp. 185-219.

 Thomas, J. B., S. M. Clark and D. A. Gioia (1993).

 Williamson, O. E. (1991). 'Comparative economic

 organization: The analysis of discrete structural alter-
 natives', Administrative Science Quarterly, 36,
 pp. 269-296.

 Williamson, O. E. (1994). 'Strategizing, economizing,
 and economic organization'. In R. P. Rumelt, D. E.
 Schendel and D. J. Teece (eds.), Fundamental Issues
 in Strategy. Harvard Business School Press, Boston,
 MA, pp. 361-402.

 Copyright ? 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 867-888 (1999)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:31:55 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

