Journal of Occupational Health Psychology
2003, Vol. 8, No. 4, 247–265

Copyright 2003 by the Educational Publishing Foundation
1076-8998/03/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/1076-8998.8.4.247

Raising Voice, Risking Retaliation: Events Following Interpersonal

Mistreatment in the Workplace

Lilia M. Cortina

University of Michigan

Vicki J. Magley
DePaul University

This study advances the literature on workplace deviance, addressing retaliation victimization in
the context of interpersonal mistreatment. Using survey data from 1,167 public-sector employees,
the authors investigated experiences of work retaliation victimization and social retaliation
victimization among employees who have vocally resisted interpersonal mistreatment. Regression
analyses suggest that different victim voice mechanisms trigger different forms of retaliation,
depending on the social positions of the mistreatment victim and instigator. Discriminant function
analyses demonstrate lower professional, psychological, and physical well-being among mis-
treated employees who have been further victimized with retaliation. These analyses also reveal
health-related costs associated with victim silence—that
is, enduring mistreatment without
voicing resistance. Results are interpreted in light of theory on power, emotions, and justice in
organizations.

Recent years have seen increasing popular and
scholarly interest in the “dark side” of organizational
life. Amid a ﬂurry of high-proﬁle corporate scandals,
issues of organizational deviance and whistle-blow-
ing are now front and center in the American media.
Interpersonal mistreatment is a speciﬁc, antisocial
variety of organizational deviance, involving a situ-
ation in which at least one organizational member
takes counternormative negative actions— or termi-
nates normative positive actions—against another
member (e.g., Andersson & Pearson, 1999; Gia-
colone & Greenberg, 1997; Robinson & Bennett,
1995). Interpersonal mistreatment can thus range
from subtle social slights to general
incivility to
blatant harassment and violence. Theory and research
are emerging on the larger processes in which this
form of deviance is embedded, addressing events that

Lilia M. Cortina, Department of Psychology and Program
in Women’s Studies, University of Michigan; Vicki J.
Magley, Department of Psychology, DePaul University.

Vicki J. Magley is now at the Department of Psychology,

University of Connecticut.

We presented portions of this article in June 2001 at the
annual meeting of the American Psychological Society. The
Eighth Circuit Gender Fairness Task Force supported this
research. We owe special appreciation to the following
individuals for their contributions to the larger project:
Louise F. Fitzgerald, Leslie V. Freeman, Kimberly A. Lon-
sway, Jill Hunter Williams, Regina Day Langhout, and
Amanda Hammond.

Correspondence concerning this article should be ad-
dressed to Lilia M. Cortina, Department of Psychology,
University of Michigan, 525 East University, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109-1109. E-mail: lilia@umich.edu

precede and follow mistreatment (e.g., Barling, Rog-
ers, & Kelloway, 2001; Cortina, Lonsway, et al.,
2002; Cortina, Magley, Williams, & Langhout, 2001;
Glomb, Steel, & Arvey, 2002; Grifﬁn, O’Leary-
Kelly, & Collins, 1998). The present article focuses
on the latter—speciﬁcally, victims’ experiences of
voice, retaliation victimization, and impaired well-
being following interpersonal mistreatment
in the
workplace.

Central Concepts

Organizational members can resist interpersonal
mistreatment using various active strategies, includ-
ing exit and voice (Farrell, 1983; Hirschman, 1970;
Rusbult, Farrell, Rogers, & Mainous, 1988). Exiting
an organization as a means of coping with mistreat-
ment would be considered a destructive mea-
sure— by deﬁnition, it breaks off the relationship
with the organization (Farrell, 1983; Rusbult et al.,
1988). Exit is clearly a permanent measure taken by
a victim when the situation becomes absolutely in-
tolerable. In the present article, we focus on voice
strategies that either precede or substitute for exit;
employees “use voice” when they vocalize their dis-
sent or dissatisfaction with an organizational practice.
Voice “can be graduated, all the way from faint
grumbling to violent protest; it implies articulation of
one’s critical opinions” (Hirschman, 1970, p. 16).
Voice functions as a means of active resistance to
mistreatment, but it comes from employees who are
members of the organization and seek to preserve

247


248

CORTINA AND MAGLEY

that status; in that sense, voice is considered a con-
structive act (Farrell, 1983; Rusbult et al., 1988).

In some cases, resistance to interpersonal mistreat-
ment may trigger retaliation victimization.1 The law
deﬁnes retaliation as an employer (or employer’s
“agent”) taking adverse action against an employee
for opposing an unlawful employment practice or
participating in any investigation, proceeding, or
hearing related to such a practice. When the mistreat-
ment qualiﬁes as illegal status-based discrimination
(e.g., harassment based on gender, race, national
original, etc.), Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 applies and speciﬁcally prohibits retaliation
(Crockett & Gilmere, 1999). Importantly, however,
legal statutes do not delineate the outer boundaries of
this experiential domain. Employees can “feel” retal-
iated against in a psychological sense, whenever they
perceive a fellow member of the organization taking
negative action against them as a direct result of their
having opposed an employment practice.

Retaliatory acts can be divided into two categories:
work related and social. The former, which we term
work retaliation victimization (WRV), to date has
been the focus of most retaliation research and juris-
prudence (e.g., Crockett & Gilmere, 1999; Miceli &
Near, 1988). WRV involves adverse work-related
actions that are often tangible, formal, and docu-
mented in employment records. Examples include
discharge, involuntary transfer, demotion, poor per-
formance appraisal, and deprivation of perquisites or
overtime opportunities. WRV has the purpose or
effect of negatively altering aspects of the target’s
job, and it typically originates from supervisors, man-
agers, and other employees with authority to make
such alterations. For the actions to qualify as retali-
ation victimization per se, the instigator must intend
them or the target must perceive them to be a reprisal
for the target’s behavior. In sum, we propose the
following deﬁnition for this construct:

Work retaliation victimization (WRV) involves ad-
verse work-related actions that have the purpose or
effect of negatively altering the target’s job and that are
intended by the instigator or perceived by the target to
be a reprisal for the target’s behavior.

A second variant of retaliation entails less tangible
social reprisals; we term these actions social retali-
ation victimization (SRV). This refers to antisocial
behaviors, both verbal and nonverbal, that often go
undocumented—for example, harassment, name-
calling, ostracism, blame, threats, or the “silent treat-
ment.” SRV has the purpose or effect of negatively
altering the target’s interpersonal relations with other

organizational members. It can come from individu-
als at any level of the organization—peers, superiors,
and subordinates. Again, retaliation victimization
only covers actions intended by the instigator or
perceived by the target to be a reprisal for the target’s
behavior. We offer the following deﬁnition:

Social retaliation victimization (SRV) involves antiso-
cial behaviors that have the purpose or effect of neg-
atively altering the target’s interpersonal relations with
other organizational members and that are intended by
the instigator or perceived by the target to be a reprisal
for the target’s behavior.

In the following sections, we detail hypotheses that
revolve around a multistage conceptualization of the
retaliation victimization process: (a) An employee
victimizes a fellow employee; (b) the victim “voices”
dissatisfaction with the situation; (c) the victim ex-
periences further victimization in the form of retali-
ation and (d) suffers negative consequences from this
WRV or SRV. In particular, we focus on Steps c and
d of this process.2 Consistent with prior retaliation
victimization research (e.g., Miceli & Near, 1992;
Near & Miceli, 1996), we examine this process from
the perspective of individual victims—attending to
their perceptions. This reﬂects our reliance on a cog-
nitive stress framework, which deﬁnes psychological
stress as “a relationship between the person and the
environment that is appraised by the person [italics
added] as taxing or exceeding his or her resources
and endangering his or her well-being” (Lazarus &
Folkman, 1984, p. 21). This approach necessarily
implies a subjective component to experiences and
deﬁnitions of stressors (such as WRV and SRV) and
requires an individual focus.

1 Note that our use of the term retaliation is consistent
with its use in the well-established whistle-blowing and
legal literatures (Crockett & Gilmere, 1999; Miceli & Near,
1985, 1988, 1992; Miceli, Rehg, Near, & Ryan, 1999; Near,
Dworkin, & Miceli, 1993; Near & Miceli, 1986). It should
not be confused, however, with the more recent concept of
organizational retaliation behavior (ORB), which refers to
disgruntled employees’ acts of revenge (e.g., Skarlicki &
Folger, 1997). In part to avoid confusion with ORB, we use
the terms social and work retaliation victimization (SRV
and WRV).

2 Research on Steps a and b— employee experiences of
interpersonal mistreatment and the strategies they use to
cope with it—appears elsewhere (e.g., Cortina, Lonsway, et
al., 2002; Cortina et al., 2001; Magley, 2002; Schneider,
Swan, & Fitgerald, 1997; Wasti & Cortina, 2002).


MISTREATMENT, VOICE, AND RETALIATION VICTIMIZATION

249

Voice and Power

Within organizations, victims can resist interper-
sonal mistreatment by expressing their discontent to
colleagues—social-support seeking. They can also
communicate their dissatisfaction directly to the in-
stigator of the mistreatment, confronting that person
about his or her misbehavior. Further, victims may
report the situation to organizational authorities—
whistle-blowing. All of these strategies represent re-
lated forms of voice, and all are public behaviors that
can alert organizations to internal wrongdoing. How-
ever, only the last has received attention in retaliation
research. In particular, Miceli and Near have pio-
neered research efforts to understand whistle-blow-
ers’ experiences of retaliation (Miceli & Near, 1985,
1988, 1992; Miceli, Rehg, Near, & Ryan, 1999; Near,
Dworkin, & Miceli, 1993; Near & Miceli, 1986).

We contend that, in addition to whistle-blowing,
social-support seeking and confronting merit schol-
arly scrutiny. Victimized employees turn to these
latter two voice strategies more commonly than whis-
tle-blowing in their responses to interpersonal mis-
treatment (e.g., see Fitzgerald, Swan, & Fischer,
1995, for a review of responses to sexual harassment;
see Cortina, Lonsway, et al., 2002, for results on
coping with incivility). Further, the different types of
victim voice expression could all trigger WRV and
SRV from the wrongdoer, because of their similar
resistance function. That is, confrontation involves
clear, direct opposition to the wrongdoer, potentially
making the wrongdoer angry, aggressive, and vindic-
tive. Social support seeking can be a more indirect
expression of resistance, but it nevertheless exposes
wrongdoing
dissatisfaction.
Again, this could set off a negative response in the
wrongdoer.

communicates

and

Not only the wrongdoer but also peers and other
organizational members may react negatively to vic-
tims who seek support or—in particular— blow the
whistle or confront their wrongdoers. Lepore, Evans,
and Schneider (1991) as well as Shinn, Lehman, and
Wong (1984) argue that negative social responses are
more likely with stressors that involve stigma or
interpersonal difﬁculty, which would certainly in-
clude interpersonal mistreatment in the workplace.
Theories of emotion (e.g., Cropanzano, Weiss,
Suckow, & Grandey, 2000; Gross, 1998b; Masten-
broek, 2000) can explain this counterintuitive social
reaction, as previously supportive colleagues may
fear entanglement in emotion- and conﬂict-laden ex-
changes between the victim and wrongdoer. Further,
coworkers may manage their affective reactions to

the victim’s plight by diverting attention away from
the situation, reappraising the situation as less threat-
ening, or minimizing or hiding emotions. Such co-
worker responses could easily appear to victims as
coldness, trivialization of a difﬁcult situation, and
rejection—that is, SRV—regardless of coworker in-
tentions or motivations. We thus hypothesize the
following:

Hypothesis 1: WRV and SRV will increase as
victims express voice about interpersonal mis-
treatment—seeking social support, blowing the
whistle, or confronting the wrongdoer. This will
be particularly true when victims engage one of
the two latter voice mechanisms.

In addition to voice, the social power of the victim
and wrongdoer may be crucial variables in the retal-
iation process. Miceli et al. (1999) alluded to the
importance of power by drawing on Black’s (1976)
sociological theory of justice:

The theory considers the act of a subordinate blowing
the whistle on a supervisor as deviant behavior and a
more serious offense in a socially stratiﬁed society.
According to Black (1976, p. 28), “upward deviance”
(that is directed from a person of lower status toward
one higher in status) is the most serious kind of deviant
behavior; it is most likely to evoke the greatest sanc-
tion. (Miceli et al., 1999, p. 147)

Black’s (1976) theory of upward deviance suggests
interactions between power and voice: Vocal resis-
tance in and of itself may depart from workplace
norms, but victims may appear especially deviant
when speaking out against wrongdoers who consid-
erably “outrank” them in the organization.

More speciﬁcally, exposing the misbehavior of a
highly placed member of the organizational hierar-
chy—thus characterizing that person as unlawful,
unethical, or inappropriate— questions that hierar-
chy. The organization’s dominant coalition, includ-
ing the wrongdoer, may therefore retaliate against the
victim to correct this challenge to authority (Near et
al., 1993). Further, organizational peers who are typ-
ically supportive of the victim could respond to the
victim’s voice expression with distance and rejec-
tion—particularly when a powerful wrongdoer is in-
volved—as the peers may fear reprisals for aligning
with the less powerful (and thus more deviant) vic-
tim. Peers may also retaliate as a means of signaling
to the victim that she or he has deviated from behav-
ior prescribed by social-structural norms (Miceli &
Near, 1992). This logic leads us to the following
hypothesis:


250

CORTINA AND MAGLEY

Hypothesis 2: WRV and SRV will increase as
lower power victims voice against higher power
wrongdoers.

zations that engage in more policy dissemination
(Miceli & Near, 1985). Thus, we made the following
hypothesis:

Wrongdoing and Related Policies

The object of victims’ vocal

resistance—the
wrongdoing itself— could also inﬂuence retaliation
victimization. For example, Miceli et al. (Miceli et
al., 1999; Near & Miceli, 1986, 1987, 1996) drew on
resource dependence theory to posit that more serious
wrongdoing triggers more retaliation. Operationaliz-
ing wrongdoing seriousness in terms of frequency,
they reasoned that organizations whose leaders allow
or participate in frequent wrongdoing would likely
tolerate additional wrongdoing in the form of retali-
ation. We therefore expect the following:

Hypothesis 3: WRV and SRV will increase with
mistreatment frequency.

In addition to frequency, type of wrongdoing can
be an indicator of seriousness. Forms of interpersonal
mistreatment range from inappropriate (e.g., general
disregard for workplace norms of respect) to uneth-
ical (e.g., sex discrimination that does not meet legal
criteria) to illegal (e.g., adverse treatment of pro-
tected classes of employees). Exposure of mistreat-
ment that is formally proscribed by organizational
policy could make the wrongdoer vulnerable to sanc-
tions imposed by management. In cases when the
mistreatment violates law, a judge or jury could ﬁnd
the organization liable for civil rights violation and,
consequently, order it to pay monetary damages. Or-
ganizational wrongdoers, leaders, and economically
vulnerable members may retaliate to prevent such
possibilities. We therefore hypothesize the following:

Hypothesis 4: WRV and SRV will be more
likely in the context of mistreatment
is
formally prohibited, compared with mistreat-
ment that is merely perceived as inappropriate.

that

With respect to formal prohibitions, many Amer-
ican organizations presently have policies that reﬂect
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 —protecting
employees from certain forms of mistreatment as
well as retaliation victimization for opposing that
mistreatment (Crockett & Gilmere, 1999). Miceli et
al. (1999) found that organizational policies and pro-
cedures have stronger inhibiting inﬂuences on retal-
iation than does the passage of stronger laws. They
also documented lower fears of retaliation in organi-

Hypothesis 5: WRV and SRV will decrease with
greater dissemination of antimistreatment/retal-
iation policies.

Impact of Retaliation on Individual Victims

We contend that victims endure adverse conse-
quences from both WRV and SRV, for a number of
reasons. As noted earlier, we conceptualize retalia-
tion victimization as a workplace stressor that chal-
lenges or threatens the victim (Lazarus & Folkman,
1984). The type of stress and outcomes experienced
from retaliation may therefore resemble those that
accompany interpersonal mistreatment (e.g., incivil-
ity, Cortina et al., 2001; sexual harassment, Fitzger-
ald, Drasgow, Hulin, Gelfand, & Magley, 1997; an-
tigay harassment, Waldo, 1999). However, retaliation
victims might experience a greater degree of stress
and negative outcomes than victims of mistreatment
alone, with the cumulative effects of multiple stres-
sors intensifying the harm.

Organizational justice theory could further explain
negative outcomes of WRV, as the victim might
perceive performance criticisms, transfers, lack of
promotions or pay raises, and so on—resulting from
their lawful resistance to wrongdoing—as procedur-
ally and distributively unjust (e.g., Colquitt, Conlon,
Wesson, Porter, & Ng, 2001; Greenberg & Cropan-
zano, 2001). Perceived injustice could then result in
decreased job performance and satisfaction as well as
psychological distress in the victim. In fact, per-
ceived injustice may amplify the stress that the victim
experiences, with the retaliation adding insult to an
already injurious mistreatment situation. Empirical
evidence of WRV’s negative outcomes remains
somewhat sparse, limited to self-reports of perfor-
mance decrements (Miceli et al., 1999; Near &
Miceli, 1987) and anecdotal evidence of lowered
self-esteem (Crull, 1982).

Although less tangible than WRV, SRV may also
be detrimental to the well-being of employees. K. D.
Williams (1997) referred to a particular type of SRV
in arguing that social ostracism can threaten employ-
ees’ fundamental needs for belonging, self-esteem,
control, and meaningful existence, eventually leading
to depression, helplessness, low self-efﬁcacy, and
anxiety. He further posited that the ambiguity inher-
ent in ostracism exacerbates the stress of the situa-
tion. In sum, theories of stress and coping, organiza-


MISTREATMENT, VOICE, AND RETALIATION VICTIMIZATION

251

tional justice, and social ostracism support our ﬁnal
hypothesis:

Hypothesis 6: WRV and SRV will relate to
lower professional, psychological, and physical
well-being among victims.

The Present Study

We tested hypotheses among federal court employ-
ees—an interesting population from a policy standpoint.
The federal court system consists of 12 regional circuits
that function as traditional, bureaucratic, “tall” organi-
zations in the public sector. In many respects, these
courts are quite similar to other governmental work-
places, with the exception of their management of in-
terpersonal mistreatment and retaliation: Ironically, fed-
eral circuits are largely exempt from federal civil rights
legislation (including Title VII). In lieu of Title VII, the
federal courts do have Equal Employment Opportunity
policies; however, these local policies provide fewer
protections than those available in other workplaces.
This less protective policy environment creates a unique
context in which to study retaliation; further, it offers an
interesting contrast to the U.S. Civil Service, which has
been the focus of previous retaliation research (Miceli
& Near, 1988; Miceli et al., 1999; Near & Miceli, 1986).

Method

Procedure and Participants

Data were collected by means of pencil-and-paper sur-
veys mailed to all employees (N ⫽ 1,662), excluding
judges, of one of the larger federal court circuits. Using
procedures recommended by Dillman (1978) to maximize
the return rate, we sent nonresponding employees a postcard
and second survey, which eventually yielded a 71% response
rate. We obtained usable data from 833 women, 325 men, and
9 individuals who declined to identify their gender.

Participants ranged in age from 21 to 78 years (M ⫽
40.31), had worked in this organization for an average of
81⁄2 years, and were nearly all (96%) employed full time.
Most of these employees were European American/White
(88%), had at least some college if not a college or profes-
sional degree (85%), and were married (69%). Their job
classiﬁcations varied somewhat, with 16% employed as
managers, supervisors, or unit heads; 17% as attorneys;
25% as specialists (e.g., budget analysts, systems adminis-
trators, automation support specialists); 11% as secretaries;
and 31% as administrative support staff (e.g., library tech-
nicians, data quality analysts, mail room clerk).

Instrumentation

Several considerations inﬂuenced the construction of this
survey. First, we used measures with strong psychometric

histories. We also attempted to minimize response biases,
placing measures of retaliation “outcomes” prior to the
retaliation scales, so that respondents’ retaliatory experi-
ences would not bias their descriptions of psychological
well-being, job satisfaction, and so on. Table 1 presents
summary statistics, coefﬁcient alphas, and intercorrelations
for all constructs analyzed in the present study. Except where
otherwise noted, response options were patterned after the
Job Descriptive Index (Smith, Kendall, & Hulin, 1969),
detailed below. All items were coded such that higher scores
reﬂect greater levels of the underlying construct.

Interpersonal mistreatment. Although

interpersonal
mistreatment can take many forms in organizations, survey-
length restrictions necessitated that we assess only two
types: general incivility and sexual harassment. The Work-
place Incivility Scale (WIS; Cortina et al., 2001) measured
the frequency of participants’ experiences of incivility (e.g.,
disrespect, rudeness, condescension) from superiors or co-
workers. Sample behaviors include “made demeaning or
derogatory remarks about you” and “addressed you in un-
professional terms, either publicly or privately.” Cortina and
colleagues (Cortina, Lonsway, et al., 2002; Cortina et al.,
2001) provided information on this measure’s validity and
reliability (coefﬁcient ␣ ⫽ .88 in an independent sample).
All of the participants completed an abbreviated version3
of the Sexual Experiences Questionnaire—Revised (SEQ–R;
Fitzgerald, Gelfand, & Drasgow, 1995; Fitzgerald et al.,
1988), which assessed the frequency of their encounters
with harassing behavior from superiors or coworkers. These
behaviors fell into the categories of gender harassment (e.g.,
“made offensive remarks or jokes about women”), un-
wanted sexual attention (“made sexually suggestive com-
ments to or about you”), and sexual coercion (“made you
afraid that you would be treated poorly if you didn’t coop-
erate sexually”). The SEQ is widely considered to be the
most reliable and valid method for assessing sexual harass-
ment (Arvey & Cavanaugh, 1995; Beere, 1990). Fitzgerald
et al. (1988) reported SEQ coefﬁcient alphas ranging from
.86 to .92 and a test–retest reliability coefﬁcient of .86. Both
the WIS and SEQ–R had a 5-year time frame and 5-point
response scale (from 0 ⫽ never to 4 ⫽ most of the time).
On the basis of the WIS and SEQ, we created two
variables to indicate interpersonal mistreatment seriousness.
First, we summed responses to the two measures into an
overall mistreatment frequency score. Second, we created a
dichotomous variable to indicate mistreatment type, with 0
corresponding to incivility alone (typically a mild form of
inappropriate behavior) and 1 referring to incivility paired
with sexual harassment (behavior that is often formally
proscribed by organizational policy, if not by law).4

Respondents who had experienced either form of inter-
personal mistreatment within the organization were
branched to questions asking about the one mistreatment
situation that they identiﬁed as having made the greatest
impression on them. This “one situation” section included

3 Because of concerns about the total length of the ques-
tionnaire, measures such as this were shortened, based on
psychometric analyses from previous scale administrations.
4 Because sexual harassment almost never occurred with-
out concomitant incivility, we could not create a “pure”
harassment-only group.


252

CORTINA AND MAGLEY

Table 1
Means, Standard Deviations, Numbers of Items, Reliabilities, and Intercorrelations

Scale

M

SD

No. of
items

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

1. Mistreatment

frequency

2. Mistreatment typea
3. Social retaliation

victimization

4. Work retaliation

victimization
5. Social-support

seekinga

6. Confrontinga
7. Whistle-blowinga
8. Victim statusa
9. Wrongdoer power
10. Policy dissemination
11. Work satisfaction
12. Coworker satisfaction
13. Supervisor
satisfaction

14. Pay and beneﬁts

satisfaction
15. Promotional
opportunities
satisfaction

16. Work withdrawal
17. Job withdrawal
18. Job stress
19. Psychological well-

being

20. Psychological distress
21. Life satisfaction
22. Health satisfaction
23. Interpersonal justice

climate

24. Retaliation criteriona

7.27
0.68

8.56
0.47

22
22

(.90)
.42 —

3.58

4.03

1.60

2.79

0.78
0.46
0.41
1.90
8.59
1.93
20.90
19.89

0.42
0.50
0.49
0.86
5.60
2.09
6.60
5.34

20.34

7.47

18.69

7.22

9.95
4.06
2.35
12.53

8.77
13.58
17.90
10.67

25.60
0.43

6.71
2.88
2.58
7.70

2.05
5.73
3.52
3.13

8.50
0.74

7

7

2
2
3
1
8
6
9
8

9

9

8
5
4
9

3
9
5
7

18
1

.47

.03

(.87)

.36 ⫺.05

.65

(.85)

.01
.26
.30
.03
.23 ⫺.01

.15
.19
.12

.06 —
.22
.10

.28 —
.38

.28 —

⫺.05

.04 ⫺.14 ⫺.18 ⫺.08 ⫺.02 ⫺.09 —
.13 ⫺.00
.10
.03 ⫺.13 ⫺.03

.33 ⫺.04
⫺.05 ⫺.03
⫺.20 ⫺.01 ⫺.24 ⫺.39 ⫺.08 ⫺.07 ⫺.02
⫺.34 ⫺.08 ⫺.28 ⫺.18 ⫺.09 ⫺.09 ⫺.02

.47
.32
.04 ⫺.09

.54
.05

(.90)
.01
.26 ⫺.12
.07 ⫺.18

⫺.41 ⫺.04 ⫺.44 ⫺.35 ⫺.15 ⫺.04 ⫺.01

.07 ⫺.40

⫺.17

.01 ⫺.22 ⫺.26 ⫺.01 ⫺.01

.00

.15 ⫺.20

.23 ⫺.27
⫺.33 ⫺.09 ⫺.44 ⫺.37 ⫺.13 ⫺.06 ⫺.04
.15 ⫺.09
.02 ⫺.05
.29
.08
.05
.02
.12 ⫺.01
.05
.26

.15 ⫺.02 ⫺.05 ⫺.01
.13
.08
.04
.13

.18
.32
.31

.39
.14

.41
.10

⫺.17 ⫺.01 ⫺.06 ⫺.12 ⫺.04

.30

.09

.21

.16

⫺.17 ⫺.00 ⫺.18 ⫺.11 ⫺.02
⫺.12
.01 ⫺.08

.02 ⫺.03

.13 ⫺.02 ⫺.01 ⫺.03

.03 ⫺.01 ⫺.01 ⫺.13
.20
.17 ⫺.11
.07 ⫺.08

.08
.02
.01 ⫺.01

⫺.52 ⫺.09 ⫺.42 ⫺.31 ⫺.20 ⫺.08 ⫺.12
.11

.43 ⫺.01

.66

.61

.18

.16

.18 ⫺.34
.46
.06

Note. Correlations appear below the diagonal, and coefﬁcient alphas (where applicable) are presented in parentheses along
the diagonal.
a Being either a binary index or single item, Cronbach’s alpha does not apply.

questions pertaining to retaliation victimization, voice, and
wrongdoer power, detailed below.

Retaliation victimization. Mistreatment victims de-
scribed whether they had experienced a range of retaliatory
behaviors after reporting or resisting the “one situation,”
using a 3-point response scale (1⫽ yes, 2⫽ not sure, and
3 ⫽ no). The items, which fell into the theoretically distinct
categories of WRV or SRV, came from the U.S. Merit
Systems Protection Board surveys (USMSPB; Near &
Miceli, 1986) and research by Parmerlee, Near, and Jensen
(1982). Given the nature of the response scale, we esti-
mated the underlying factor structure from polychoric
correlations via diagonally weighted least squares esti-
mation (with asymptotic variances used as the weights)
in LISREL VIII (Jo¨reskog & So¨rbom, 1993). The data
supported a two-factor model quite well: ␹2(76, N ⫽ 223)
⫽ 97.07, ns; root-mean-square error of approximation

(RMSEA) ⫽ .036; nonnormed ﬁt index (NNFI) ⫽ .99;
goodness-of-ﬁt index (GFI) ⫽ .99; and adjusted goodness-
of-ﬁt index (AGFI) ⫽ .98. All items and factor loadings
appear in Table 2.

Voice.

Items from Fitzgerald’s (1990) Coping With Ha-
rassment Questionnaire (CHQ) assessed how participants
had coped with sexual harassment or incivility. Speciﬁcally,
victims described whether they had used various behavioral
and cognitive strategies to “handle” the one situation. For
the present article, we focused only on CHQ items that
addressed methods of expressing voice: social-support
seeking (e.g., “talk with someone for advice and support),
confronting (“ask the person to leave you alone”), and
whistle-blowing (“make a formal complaint”). For each
voice method, we created a binary index (resulting in a total
of three indices). Victims who had used at least one voice
strategy in a given category received a 1 for that index; if


MISTREATMENT, VOICE, AND RETALIATION VICTIMIZATION

253

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

(.84)
.02
.06

.02

.02

(.87)
.34

.33

.23

(.85)

.37

.24

(.89)

.25

(.83)

.33

.39

⫺.02
.42
(.84)
.45
⫺.02 ⫺.07 ⫺.08 ⫺.05
.05 ⫺.01
⫺.05 ⫺.44 ⫺.33 ⫺.42 ⫺.29 ⫺.38
⫺.18 ⫺.13 ⫺.20 ⫺.36 ⫺.23 ⫺.25

(.59)
.13
.05

(.73)
.30

(.85)

.05

.34

.21

.27

.16

⫺.06 ⫺.26 ⫺.23 ⫺.32 ⫺.14 ⫺.19

.01
⫺.02

.31
.15

.16
.10

.20
.14

.25
.05

.20 ⫺.09 ⫺.26 ⫺.31

.18

.29

.21 ⫺.05 ⫺.16 ⫺.20
.09 ⫺.04 ⫺.03 ⫺.14

(.83)
.40 ⫺.66

(.91)
.52 ⫺.45
.39 ⫺.39

(.85)
.36

(.76)

.06

.36

.56

.61

.31

.54 ⫺.07 ⫺.45 ⫺.40

.29 ⫺.34

⫺.08 ⫺.21 ⫺.14 ⫺.40 ⫺.22 ⫺.34 ⫺.12

.40

.17 ⫺.12

.21
.16 ⫺.17

(.91)

.17
.04 ⫺.34 —

they had not used any strategy within that category, they
received a 0.

Power. To assess victims’ and wrongdoers’ organiza-
tional power, we used indices of the victim’s absolute power
(i.e., occupational status) as well as the wrongdoer’s power
in relation to the victim. On the basis of victims’ self-
reported job positions, we constructed an ordinal variable to
indicate victim occupational status—more speciﬁcally, po-
sition in the organizational hierarchy, from lowest to highest
levels (1 ⫽ support staff or secretary; 2 ⫽ specialist; 3 ⫽
attorney, unit head, manager, or supervisor). Our wrong-
doer relative power measure came from the Perpetrator
Power Scale, which gauged victims’ perceptions of how
much formal authority the wrongdoer had over speciﬁc
aspects of their jobs—for example, the extent that he or she
could affect their “pay raises,” “chances of moving up in the
company,” “performance evaluations,” and so on. Two in-

dependent studies using this scale reported reliability coef-
ﬁcients around .85 and correlations with mistreatment mea-
sures
(Cortina,
Fitzgerald, & Drasgow, 2002; Swan, 1997).

in theoretically appropriate directions

Organizational policy. We adapted items from the
USMSPB surveys (U.S. Merit Systems Protection Board,
1981, 1987) to assess for perceived dissemination of poli-
cies, by means of written or oral channels, prohibiting
interpersonal mistreatment in each work unit. Speciﬁcally,
participants noted whether (0 ⫽ no or don’t know, 1 ⫽ yes)
their organizational unit had established such policies, pro-
vided information about them to employees, publicized the
availability of formal complaint channels, or provided pol-
icy-relevant training to employees, unit heads, managers,
and supervisors.

Professional well-being. A subset of items from the Job
Descriptive Index (JDI; Smith et al., 1969; revised by


254

CORTINA AND MAGLEY

Table 2
Social Retaliation Victimization (SRV) and Work Retaliation Victimization (WRV) Items and
Factor Loadings

Item

I was shunned or excluded by others at work.
I was slighted or ignored by others at work.
I was gossiped about in an unkind way.
I was threatened.
I was criticized for complaining about the situation.
I was blamed for the situation.
I was considered a “troublemaker.”
I was given less favorable job duties.
I was unfairly demoted.
I was denied a promotion I deserved.
I was denied an opportunity for training I deserved.
I was given unfair poor job performance appraisals.
I was transferred to a less desirable job.
I was unfairly disciplined.

Factor loading

WRV

SRV

.92
.88
.83
.83
.82
.81
.80

.91
.87
.85
.85
.84
.82
.77

Roznowski, 1989) measured satisfaction with ﬁve aspects of
the job. Speciﬁcally, employees indicated whether lists of
descriptors (e.g., “boring,” “slow,” “praises good work,”
“easy to get ahead”) characterized their work, coworkers,
supervisor, pay and beneﬁts, and promotional opportunities.
We used standard JDI response options (no, ?, yes) and
scoring. The JDI is the most widely used measure of job
satisfaction, and extensive psychometric evaluation sup-
ports its reliability (alphas exceeding .80) and validity
(Cranny, Smith, & Stone, 1992; Roznowski, 1989; Smith et
al., 1969).

Using adapted versions of scales developed by Hanish
and Hulin (1990, 1991), we measured both job withdrawal
and work withdrawal. The former instrument asked partic-
ipants to describe turnover thoughts and intentions (e.g.,
“how often do you think about QUITTING your job?”). In
the latter scale, participants indicated how often they
avoided tasks associated with their work roles, for example,
“missing meetings” or “being late for work.” Responses to
both measures fell along a 5-point scale. Hanish and Hulin
(1990, 1991) discussed the development and validation of
these measures, reporting average coefﬁcient alphas of .70
(job withdrawal) and .60 (work withdrawal) and linking
prior job attitudes to subsequent withdrawal.

Finally, participants described levels of general job stress
through items from the Stress in General scale (Stanton,
Balzer, Smith, Parra, & Ironson, 2001). This scale repre-
sents a global measure of occupational stress, and Stanton
and colleagues provided strong evidence of its reliability
and convergent and discriminant validity. Like the JDI,
items simply ask respondents if each of a list of adjectives
(e.g., “hectic,” “tense,” “calm”) describes their “job in
general.”

Psychological and physical health. To measure psycho-
logical well-being and distress, we used items from the
Mental Health Index (MHI; Veit & Ware, 1983). The MHI
assesses emotional well-being and common psychiatric
symptoms of anxiety (feeling “tense or ‘high strung’” or
“restless, ﬁdgety, or impatient”) and depression (feeling

“downhearted and blue” or “in low or very low spirits”).
Respondents indicated the frequency (from 0 ⫽ never to
4 ⫽ most of the time) of these feelings in the prior month.
This psychometrically sound scale (Brooks et al., 1979) has
appeared in various studies of general health and of victim-
ization (Koss, Koss, & Woodruff, 1991).

In addition, Diener and his colleagues’ (Diener, 1984;
Diener, Emmons, Larsen, & Grifﬁn, 1985) widely used
Satisfaction With Life Scale assessed participants’ agree-
ment with statements about global subjective well-being
(“If I could live my life over, I would change almost
nothing”), using a scale from 1 to 5.5 According to Diener
and colleagues (Diener, 1984; Diener et al., 1985), these
items show high internal consistency (␣ ⫽ .87) and tempo-
ral reliability (2-month test–retest correlation coefﬁcient ⫽
.82), have a unidimensional structure, and correlate appro-
priately with personality scales.

We assessed health satisfaction using a subscale of the
Retirement Descriptive Index (Smith et al., 1969), which
contains short, descriptive, health-related phrases and ad-
jectives (e.g., “never felt better” and “feel tired all the
time”). Respondents indicated whether each phrase de-
scribed their health. Hanisch and Hulin (1990) reported
links between health conditions and health satisfaction,
and between health satisfaction and organizational with-
drawal—independent of the relation between health condi-
tions and withdrawal behaviors.

Methodological variables. To assess the validity of the
retaliation victimization constructs, we measured the per-
ceived climate of interpersonal justice, using items from the
highly reliable and valid Perception of Fair Interpersonal
Treatment Scale (PFIT; Donovan, Drasgow, & Munson,
1998). This measure requested perceptions of global orga-

5 To maintain some degree of consistency across re-
sponse scales, we modiﬁed this scale’s original 7-point
response format to a 5-point format.


MISTREATMENT, VOICE, AND RETALIATION VICTIMIZATION

255

nizational norms for superiors and coworkers treating em-
ployees respectfully and justly (e.g., “employees are treated
fairly,” “coworkers treat each other with respect,” and “su-
pervisors threaten to ﬁre employees”). In addition, employ-
ees responded to a single retaliation criterion item follow-
ing the WRV and SRV scales, indicating whether “I was
retaliated against.”

Results

Analyses followed three general stages. We ﬁrst
reviewed descriptive analyses and then evaluated the
validity of the two retaliation scales. We then con-
ducted multiple regression analyses to test Hypothe-
ses 1–5, concerning correlates of retaliation. Lastly, we
ran a multivariate analysis of covariance (MANCOVA)
and discriminant function analyses to test Hypothesis 6,
regarding retaliation outcomes.

Descriptive and Psychometric Analyses

Out of 1,167 respondents, 834 described some
experience with interpersonal mistreatment in their
workplace in the previous 5 years. Of those, 223
expressed voice about the mistreatment, and then
described whether SRV or WRV followed. Sixty-
seven of these employees (30% of the 223) experi-
enced only SRV, and 80 (36%) described both SRV
and WRV; WRV never occurred in isolation. Finally,
76 mistreated employees (34%) reported that they
had not encountered either
retaliation
victimization.

form of

To assess the validity of the SRV and WRV scales,
we correlated them with Donovan et al.’s (1998)
PFIT scale. Because the latter instrument measures
perceptions of (or climate for) interpersonally fair
treatment in the workplace, it should be signiﬁcantly
negatively correlated with experiences of retaliation
that are, by deﬁnition, perceived to be unfair. As
expected, the PFIT signiﬁcantly correlated –.42 with
the SRV scale and –.31 with the WRV (ps ⬍ .01).
Both correlations fell into the moderate range, which
is likely a reﬂection of the fact that the PFIT mea-
sures global organizational norms, whereas the SRV
and WRV scales assess speciﬁc behaviors. The
higher correlation with the SRV scale seems logical,
given that both the PFIT and SRV instruments tap
interpersonal perceptions, unlike the WRV scale,
which assesses perceptions of more tangible work-
related actions. We also examined the correlation
between the two retaliation scales and the retaliation
criterion item (“I was retaliated against”). Strong
positive correlations emerged: .66 for the SRV scale
and .61 for the WRV scale (ps ⬍ .001). Taken as a

whole, these correlation patterns support the con-
struct validity of the two retaliation scales.

Correlates of Retaliation Victimization

We conducted parallel regression analyses to de-
termine whether and how the mistreatment, voice,
power, and policy variables relate to the extent of
SRV and WRV experienced. These analyses only
included employees who had used at least one of the
three voice strategies—support-seeking, confronting,
or whistle-blowing—in response to their mistreat-
ment (n ⫽ 200 for the WRV and 201 for the SRV
analysis, following listwise deletion). In terms of
independent main effect variables, mistreatment fac-
tors included both frequency and type; voice in-
volved the three dichotomous voice indices; power
variables consisted of victim occupational status and
wrongdoer relative power; and perceived policy dis-
semination comprised the policy variable. Finally, we
the victim-relative-to-wrongdoer-power
tested for
and victim-voice-by-wrongdoer-power
interactions
implied in Hypothesis 2—speciﬁcally, Victim Sta-
tus ⫻ Wrongdoer Power, Victim Support-Seeking ⫻
Wrongdoer Power, Victim Confronting ⫻ Wrong-
doer Power, and Victim Whistle-Blowing ⫻ Wrong-
doer Power. To minimize problems of multicollinear-
ity, we centered wrongdoer power
(the only
continuous variable in the interactions) in both its
main effect and interaction terms. Standardized beta
coefﬁcients and corresponding hypotheses appear in
Table 3.

The regression model accounted for a signiﬁcant
47% of the variance in SRV, F(12, 187) ⫽ 14.57,
p ⬍ .001. According to the betas in Table 3, victims
endured more SRV when they worked in lower status
jobs, experienced greater interpersonal mistreatment,
and confronted the wrongdoer about this mistreat-
ment. Several signiﬁcant interactions also emerged,
appearing in Figure 1. According to Figure 1a, the
lowest status victims mistreated by high-power
wrongdoers were most likely to endure SRV. As
Figures 1b and 1c display, SRV also increased con-
siderably when victims talked to colleagues about
mistreatment from powerful wrongdoers and when
victims confronted powerful wrongdoers.

The regression model explained a signiﬁcant 42%
of the variance in WRV, F(12, 188) ⫽ 11.54, p ⬍
.001. Victim confronting, victim occupational status,
and mistreatment frequency again emerged as signif-
icant main effects, as did wrongdoer power (see
Table 3). Two interactions also reached signiﬁcance:
Victim Status ⫻ Wrongdoer Power and Victim Con-


256

CORTINA AND MAGLEY

Table 3
Standardized Beta Weights and Hypotheses Corresponding to Regressions

Predictor

Main effect terms

Victim support-seeking
Victim confronting
Victim whistle-blowing
Victim occupational status
Wrongdoer relative power
Mistreatment frequency
Mistreatment type
Policy dissemination

Interaction terms

Victim Status ⫻ Wrongdoer Power
Victim Support-Seeking ⫻ Wrongdoer Power
Victim Confronting ⫻ Wrongdoer Power
Victim Whistle-Blowing ⫻ Wrongdoer Power

SRV

(n ⫽ 200)

WRV

(n ⫽ 201)

Corresponding
hypothesis (H)

.07
.12*
⫺.04
⫺.12*
.39
.34***

⫺.07
⫺.07

⫺.34*
.35*
.21*
.18

⫺.08
.14*
.01

⫺.19***

.58*
.24***

⫺.08
⫺.11†

⫺.55***

.05
.29**
.10

H1
H1
H1
H2
H2
H3
H4
H5

H2
H2
H2
H2

Note. SRV ⫽ social retaliation victimization; WRV ⫽ work retaliation victimization.
† p ⬍ .10.

*** p ⬍ .001.

** p ⬍ .01.

* p ⬍ .05.

fronting ⫻ Wrongdoer Power. Speciﬁcally, Figures
2a and 2b illustrate that WRV generally increased
with higher power wrongdoers, but this effect was
again most pronounced for the lowest status victims
and victims who confronted wrongdoers. Finally, we
also noted a trend such that less dissemination of
antimistreatment policies related to more WRV; al-
though this effect fell just short of conventional cut-
offs for statistical signiﬁcance (p ⬍ .07), we chose to
highlight the trend owing to its applied value.6

Retaliation Victimization and Well-Being

To examine relations between retaliation and victim
well-being, we began with an omnibus MANCOVA.
This test included all 12 outcome measures as depen-
dent variables, and retaliation history (three levels:
none vs. SRV vs. SRV with WRV) was the indepen-
dent variable. To ensure that any negative effects of
retaliation could not be attributed to mistreatment
seriousness, we added mistreatment frequency as a
covariate. Once again, the analysis included only
those employees who had used at least one of the
three voice strategies in response to their mistreat-
ment (n ⫽ 200 following listwise deletion). After
covarying mistreatment frequency (Wilks’ ⌳ ⫽ .84),
F(12, 185) ⫽ 2.85, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽ .16, this analysis
revealed a multivariate main effect of retaliation type
(Wilks’ ⌳ ⫽ .74), F(24, 370) ⫽ 2.53, p ⬍ .001, ␩2 ⫽
.14.

Given the generality of the omnibus test and the
complexity inherent in the voice/retaliation process,

we conducted follow-up analyses that (a) distinguish
among victims based on not only retaliation but also
voice and (b) examine professional versus health
outcomes separately. Speciﬁcally, we divided re-
spondents into groups based on their mistreatment,
voice, and retaliation histories (see below) and then
conducted multiple-group discriminant function anal-
yses. A discriminant
function represents a linear
combination of discriminating variables—in this
case, outcomes—weighted in such a way that maxi-
mizes the between-group differences. Average dis-
criminant scores (“centroids”) can be computed for
each group. We can then plot and compare the group
centroids to determine how each group fares relative
to other groups, based on this multivariate collection
of outcomes (for more details about this methodolog-
ical approach, see Klecka, 1980).

To create the groups for discriminant analysis, we
ﬁrst divided mistreated respondents according to
whether they had experienced (a) no retaliation, (b)
SRV only, or (c) both SRV and WRV. We also
identiﬁed respondents who had experienced (d) mis-

6 With two supplementary regression analyses, we tested
whether indirect, “proxy” indicators of victim power would
account for signiﬁcant variance in retaliation victimization.
Speciﬁcally, we added a second block of variables to both
regression equations, including victim gender, ethnicity,
age, education, and tenure in the organization. The addition
of these variables did not lead to signiﬁcant increases in R2
in either SRV, change F(5, 159) ⫽ 0.87, ns, or WRV,
change F(5, 160) ⫽ 1.25, ns.


MISTREATMENT, VOICE, AND RETALIATION VICTIMIZATION

257

Figure 1.

Interactive effects of wrongdoer power on social retaliation victimization.

treatment without subsequent use of voice strategies;
thus, they did not experience retaliation. Further, we
separated respondents within each of these four
groups into higher and lower mistreatment frequen-
cies, based on median splits—in effect, controlling
for mistreatment seriousness. Finally, we drew a ran-
dom sample of 100 respondents who had experienced
no mistreatment whatsoever, creating a similarly
sized “control group” of sorts. In sum, we based
discriminant function analyses on nine groups of
respondents; group cell sizes appear in Table 4.

Professional well-being. When considering job-
related measures, we found one signiﬁcant discrimi-
nant function (Wilks’ ⌳ ⫽ .54), ␹2(64, N ⫽ 353) ⫽
212.79, p ⬍ .001, accounting for 76% of the be-

tween-group variance. To interpret the substantive
meaning of the function, we examined the structure
coefﬁcients (i.e., correlations between each of the
measures and the function); these appear in Table 5.
According to these coefﬁcients, the function is de-
ﬁned positively by supervisor and promotion satis-
faction and negatively by job stress and withdrawal,
suggesting a continuum of professional well-being.
Figure 3 displays the group centroids (i.e., each
group’s mean score on the linear combination of
outcomes). Consistent with literally all extant re-
search on outcomes of workplace mistreatment (e.g.,
Cortina, Lonsway, et al., 2002; Cortina et al., 2001;
Schneider et al., 1997), victims of higher frequency
mistreatment described worse job-related states than


258

CORTINA AND MAGLEY

Figure 2.

Interactive effects of wrongdoer power on work retaliation victimization.

did their less-mistreated counterparts. Further, within
mistreatment frequency groups, jobs became increas-
ingly negative with additional types of retaliation.
That is, the mistreated “no retaliation” groups were
more positive about their jobs than were those who
experienced SRV alone; victims who endured both
SRV and WRV described the most job dissatisfac-
tion, job stress, and organizational withdrawal. How-
ever, victims who voiced without encountering sub-
sequent retaliation were more positive about their
jobs than were victims who remained silent. These
patterns were consistent within both levels of mis-
treatment frequency.

Psychological and physical health. We used a
parallel strategy to examine associations between re-
taliation victimization and psychological/physical
health. The discriminant function analysis yielded
one signiﬁcant function (Wilks’ ⌳ ⫽ .85), ␹2(32,
N ⫽ 394) ⫽ 64.89, p ⬍ .001, which accounted for
71% of the between-group variance. According to the
structure coefﬁcients in Table 5, health satisfaction
and psychological distress deﬁne the positive and
negative poles, respectively, of this continuum of
psychological and physical well-being.

Figure 4 depicts the group centroids for this anal-
ysis. Similar to professional well-being ﬁndings and

consistent across all of the voice/retaliation groups,
victims of frequent mistreatment described worse
health conditions than less-mistreated victims. In
fact, at lower mistreatment frequencies, the “voice
without retaliation” group was literally indistinguish-
able from the SRV group, neither of which differed
substantially from the “SRV and WRV” group.

At higher frequencies of mistreatment, individuals
who expressed voice but escaped retaliation re-
sponded most positively about their psychological
and physical health. Among the retaliation victims,
the two forms (SRV and WRV) functioned nearly
identically in relating to health difﬁculties. Perhaps
the most striking feature of this last analysis was the
health impairment reported by the “mistreatment, no
voice” group. Speciﬁcally, highly mistreated victims
who did not voice described the worst psychological
and physical health.

Discussion

The present study advances the literature on work-
place deviance, focusing on retaliation victimization
in the context of interpersonal mistreatment. We re-
view major ﬁndings below and interpret them in light


MISTREATMENT, VOICE, AND RETALIATION VICTIMIZATION

259

Table 4
Numbers of Respondents Falling Within Classiﬁcation Scheme Used in Discriminant Function Analyses

Group

None

Lower

Higher

Frequency of mistreatment

Professional well-being analysis

No voice (thus, no retaliation victimization)
Voice without retaliation victimization
Voice ⫹ SRV
Voice ⫹ SRV and WRV

Psychological/physical health analysis

No voice (thus, no retaliation victimization)
Voice without retaliation victimization
Voice ⫹ SRV
Voice ⫹ SRV and WRV

75

94

60
45
23
19

65
49
24
21

16
25
36
54

18
25
40
58

Note. Due to listwise deletion based on outcome measures, cell sizes differed between the two discriminant function
analyses. SRV ⫽ social retaliation victimization; WRV ⫽ work retaliation victimization.

theory on power, emotions, and justice in

of
organizations.

Forms of Retaliation Victimization

The psychometric properties of our retaliation
measure, consisting of two coherent factors that dif-
ferentially correlated with other constructs, suggested
that workplace retaliation consists of (at least) two
related but distinguishable types of victimization.
WRV, although infrequent, has received the most
attention in prior research. In our large and represen-

tative sample, employees more commonly encoun-
tered SRV after resisting interpersonal mistreatment.
Given that SRV involves altered interpersonal rela-
tions with coworkers, who are members of victims’
daily social environments, its higher frequency is
perhaps not surprising. Further, the law remains quite
blurry on when SRV crosses into illegal territory, so
the absence of clear legal repercussions may reduce
organizational vigilance about such behavior. In sum,
SRV in organizations differs from WRV in its sub-
stance, prevalence, legality, and relations to other
constructs in the nomological net— clearly deserving
further study.

Table 5
Structure Coefﬁcients (i.e., Correlations Between
Each of the Measures and the Function) for Both
Discriminant Function Analyses

Measure

Professional well-being function

Supervisor satisfaction
Promotion opportunity satisfaction
Coworker satisfaction
Work satisfaction
Pay and beneﬁt satisfaction
Work withdrawal
Job stress
Job withdrawal

Psychological and physical health function

Health satisfaction
Psychological well-being
Life satisfaction
Psychological distress

r

.803
.702
.436
.430
.268
⫺.147
⫺.456
⫺.654

.501
.413
.402
⫺.927

Correlates of Retaliation Victimization

Victim voice. With the exception of a confront-
ing effect, we found few direct relations between
victim voice and retaliation victimization,
largely
failing to support Hypothesis 1. Results instead fa-
vored the Voice ⫻ Power interaction suggested in
Hypothesis 2. Speciﬁcally, compared with silent vic-
tims, those who voiced against their wrongdoers ei-
ther directly or indirectly (to colleagues) generally
experienced more SRV—particularly when dealing
with powerful wrongdoers. The effect was most pro-
nounced for social-support seeking. Perhaps when
victims turned to colleagues for support, advice, or
help with mistreatment coming from powerful
wrongdoers, relationships cooled with at least some
colleagues. However, another interpretation is that, as
victims of mistreatment from powerful wrongdoers
experienced more SRV, the victims coped by seeking
support from colleagues. It is clear that longitudinal


260

CORTINA AND MAGLEY

Figure 3. Group centroids for the job-related (professional well-being) discriminant func-
tion analysis. The vertical dimension is for display purposes only, to separate the different
levels of mistreatment; only one function was signiﬁcant. SRV ⫽ social retaliation victim-
ization; WRV ⫽ work retaliation victimization.

research is needed to clarify the outcomes of support-
seeking in the context of mistreatment and retaliation.
Relations between voice and WRV were less per-
vasive, possibly due to the relative infrequency of
work-related reprisals. WRV increased only as a
function of confrontation, particularly when powerful
wrongdoers were involved. By contrast, victim sup-
port-seeking efforts showed no association with
WRV. A possible explanation is that this voice mech-
anism largely involved peers and colleagues who
were able to ostracize the victim (SRV) but who
lacked the organizational power necessary to alter
formal aspects of the victim’s job (WRV).

To our surprise, victim whistle-blowing also
showed no relation to WRV. The modest inﬂuence of
policies could partly explain this. That is, organiza-
tional units that disseminated antimistreatment poli-
cies tended to have less WRV (limited support for
Hypothesis 5). These policies may include Title VII
language that expressly protects whistle-blowers,
counteracting any increased retaliation risk for these
particular victims. Alternatively, at the other extreme,
perhaps whistle-blowers tended to exit the organiza-
tion— either “voluntarily” due to frequent mistreat-

ment or retaliation, or involuntarily, which is perhaps
the most severe form of WRV. However, given that
we only surveyed current employees, we can only
speculate how employee exit might factor into the
retaliation victimization process.

Power. Social-organizational power proved cen-
tral to retaliation processes. First, we found modest
associations between the occupational status of the
victim and both SRV and WRV; lower status em-
ployees experienced more retaliation victimization.
Consistent with Hypothesis 2, wrongdoers’ power
relative to victims’ also related to retaliation, with
greater SRV and WRV experienced by lower status
victims voicing against higher power wrongdoers.
Black’s (1976) theory of upward deviance can ex-
plain this ﬁnding: The greater the power disparity
between wrongdoer and victim, the more that the
victim’s resistance deviates from behavior prescribed
by his or her social position; thus, organizational
members sanction the insurgent victim. Near and
Miceli (1987) elaborated on this idea, suggesting that
organizations use retaliation to maintain social con-
trol over dissidents and restore group norms. In ad-
dition, retaliation fear might motivate colleagues to


MISTREATMENT, VOICE, AND RETALIATION VICTIMIZATION

261

Figure 4. Group centroids for the health-related (psychological/physical health) discrimi-
nant function analysis. The vertical dimension is for display purposes only, to separate the
different levels of mistreatment; only one function was signiﬁcant. SRV ⫽ social retaliation
victimization; WRV ⫽ work retaliation victimization.

instigate SRV. That is, the more deviant the victim’s
behavior,
the more that colleagues may distance
themselves from that victim—worried about being
punished themselves for supporting an employee
who challenges authority.

Mistreatment. Conﬁrming Hypothesis 3, mis-
treatment frequency related to both SRV and WRV—
indeed, being one of the stronger correlates. One
explanation lies in organizational climates and lead-
ership: Climates pervaded by mistreatment and lead-
ers who model or tolerate mistreatment could foster
additional misconduct
in the form of retaliation.
However, to our surprise, type of interpersonal mis-
treatment had no bearing on retaliation, contrary to
Hypothesis 4. Neither SRV nor WRV varied if the
original mistreatment involved incivility alone versus
incivility paired with sexual harassment.7 In most
workplaces, only the latter behavior might violate
organizational policy and law. Of course,
in the
unique federal court context, any of these forms of
mistreatment are technically legal, despite local pol-
icies prohibiting them; this could explain why mis-
treatment type had no impact on retaliation. Another
possibility is that restricted range on the type variable

made it difﬁcult to detect signiﬁcant relations to other
variables. That is, less than 1% of participants had
experienced the most egregious form of mistreatment
assessed in our survey: sexual coercion. Further, the
survey did not inquire into more violent, assaultive
forms of interpersonal mistreatment. Retaliation in
the context of more serious varieties of mistreatment
will be an important topic for future research.

Retaliation Victimization and Well-Being

Experiences of retaliation victimization related to
victims’ health and well-being in clear and theoreti-
cally meaningful patterns,
largely supporting Hy-
pothesis 6. Controlling for mistreatment frequency
and comparing with a nonmistreated “control group,”

7 We also reran all analyses, recoding type into the fol-
lowing categories: general incivility only (n ⫽ 60); gender
harassment, with and without incivility (n ⫽ 47); and un-
wanted sexual attention, with and without incivility, gender
harassment, or sexual coercion (n ⫽ 116). Results did not
change, with type having no signiﬁcant effect on either form
of retaliation.


262

CORTINA AND MAGLEY

victims’ professional well-being became increasingly
negative as they endured more retaliation. Even ex-
periences of SRV alone, without WRV, related to job
dissatisfaction, job stress, and organizational with-
drawal. These victim outcomes can translate into
ﬁnancial harm for organizations, which must absorb
the costs of performance declines, absenteeism, turn-
over, and—in more extreme cases—law suits alleg-
ing a hostile workplace or wrongful termination.

Results regarding the psychological and physical
health of retaliation victims were somewhat surpris-
ing. Voice and retaliation had little impact on the
health of less-mistreated employees. By contrast,
among highly mistreated employees, vocal victims
suffered when they experienced any type of retalia-
tion. That is, employees with extensive histories of
mistreatment accompanied by retaliation described
greater sadness and anxiety; fewer feelings of tran-
quility, happiness, and life satisfaction; and more
somatic complaints. The marked difference between
low- and high-frequency mistreatment groups sug-
gests that high levels of prior mistreatment must be
present before retaliation triggers psychological and
physical distress in victims.

Of particular interest, restraining from speaking
out against frequent mistreatment was associated
with the most psychological and physical harm. Al-
though unexpected, this ﬁnding is highly consistent
with research documenting that self-silencing, emo-
tional suppression, and repressive personality and
coping styles involve labor that takes a toll on the
body— disrupting emotional regulation and exacer-
bating psychosomatic processes. The result can be
rumination, depression, memory impairment, reactiv-
ity to stress-related cues, poorer immune response,
and disease progression. Conversely, disclosing the
thoughts and emotions associated with a stressful
event has various beneﬁts for the individual: greater
sense of control; less effortful processing; and the
ability to see structure, logic, and meaning in a for-
merly chaotic and overwhelming event. This can
enhance adaptive coping, reduce rumination, and
yield closure—resulting in improved immune func-
tion, psychosomatic and subjective well-being, and
fewer medical visits or absentee days (Brewin, Dal-
gleish, & Stephen, 1996; Esterling, L’Abate, Murray,
& Pennebaker, 1999; Gross, 1998a; Gross & Leven-
son, 1997; Hochschild, 1983; Milligan & Waller,
2000; Pennebaker, 1993, 1997; Richards & Gross,
1999; Wegner, Shortt, Blake, & Page, 1990; Wein-
berger, Schwartz, & Davison, 1979). In short, health
risks may accompany silence in the face of injustice.
An alternative interpretation of this silence– health

relation bears mention. Because our data were en-
tirely correlational and cross-sectional, we cannot
determine deﬁnitively whether victims’ failure to
voice preceded their health impairment or vice versa.
The latter is certainly possible, with unhappy or sick
employees lacking assertiveness, self-esteem, en-
ergy, or other resources necessary to vocally resist
interpersonal mistreatment. Again, more longitudinal
work is in order
to disentangle these complex
relationships.

Limitations and Future Directions

Like any research, this study is not without its
limitations. Recall that federal court organizations are
unique in their exemption from Title VII. One might
also wonder whether court employees are unique in
having a heightened sensitivity to incivility, owing to
a recent movement to combat uncivil conduct in
modern legal practice (e.g., Burger, 1971; Committee
on Civility of the Seventh Federal Judicial Circuit,
1991; Cortina, Lonsway, et al., 2002). However, this
movement has primarily focused on the behavior of
attorneys, who composed only 17% of our employee
sample. Generally speaking, this federal court circuit
is quite similar to many other large organizations in
the public sector, being bureaucratic, hierarchical,
and horizontally and vertically sex segregated. We
believe that our ﬁndings would generalize to similar
organizations, and future studies should determine
whether they apply in other contexts as well.

As noted earlier, the cross-sectional and correla-
tional nature of our data limits causal and temporal
inferences. Also— due to the single-source, self-re-
port nature of the data— common method variance or
response set could potentially explain some signiﬁ-
cant relationships. We attempted to minimize such
biases by measuring “outcomes” independent of and
prior to assessing mistreatment and retaliation. Fur-
ther, the diversity of correlations among variables—
including near-zero correlations—argues against a
monomethod-bias explanation of ﬁndings.

A ﬁnal limitation lies in the perceptual nature of
our variables. We cannot know for sure whether
negative performance evaluations, changes in job
assignments, promotion denials, and so on emerged
as a function of managers’ retaliatory intentions or if
they were simply a response to victims’ poor perfor-
mance. Similarly, social slights may have been
driven by peers’ distraction or oversight, rather than
desire to ostracize the victim. Nevertheless, regard-
less of manager and peer intentions, victims per-
ceived these behaviors as retaliatory, and it is pre-


MISTREATMENT, VOICE, AND RETALIATION VICTIMIZATION

263

cisely this subjective experience of stress that was the
focus of the present article.

This study suggests a number of interesting ave-
nues for future research, some of which are noted
earlier. In particular, there is more work to be done
on organizational interventions surrounding retalia-
tion. Our data suggest that mere dissemination of
policies has little impact on the extent
to which
retaliation occurs, underscoring the need for more
vigorous management efforts. The workplace mis-
treatment literature highlights various actions for pre-
venting abuse and intervening when it occurs (e.g.,
Andersson & Pearson, 1999; Bergman, Langhout,
Palmieri, Cortina, & Fitzgerald, 2002; Fitzgerald et
al., 1997; Pearson, Andersson, & Porath, 2000;
Rayner & Hoel, 1997; J. H. Williams, Fitzgerald, &
Drasgow, 1999). For example, Pearson et al. (2000)
asserted that,
to manage incivility, organizational
leaders should establish clear expectations for—and
model—appropriate interpersonal behavior; new em-
ployees should receive education about these expec-
tations; employees at all levels should have interper-
sonal skills training; and instigators should be
swiftly, justly, and consistently sanctioned. These
practices could also present highly effective methods
for managing retaliation.

Conclusion

Rather than framing interpersonal mistreatment in
organizations as a private problem for individuals to
resolve, we should hold organizations responsible for
managing misbehavior within. Nevertheless, in the
unfortunate event that interpersonal abuse does arise,
victimized employees face a Catch-22 dilemma.
Speaking out about the mistreatment could trigger
social isolation, professional devaluation, and per-
haps even demotion—particularly if the mistreatment
came from powerful others. Alternatively, victims
could endure the injustice in silence, but then their
psychosomatic health may suffer. Thus, the respon-
sibility should be on organizational leaders, not em-
ployee victims, to take corrective action. Vocal re-
sistance to mistreatment should be the right of all
employees, and organizations should empower them
to exercise this right and raise their voices without
retribution.

References

Andersson, L. M., & Pearson, C. M. (1999). Tit for tat? The
spiraling effect of incivility in the workplace. Academy of
Management Review, 24, 452– 471.

Arvey, R. D., & Cavanaugh, M. A. (1995). Using surveys to
assess the prevalence of sexual harassment: Some meth-
odological problems. Journal of Social
Issues, 51,
39 –52.

Barling, J., Rogers, G. A., & Kelloway, E. K. (2001).
Behind closed doors: In-home workers’ experience of
sexual harassment and workplace violence. Journal of
Occupational Health Psychology, 6, 255–269.

Beere, C. (1990). Gender roles: A handbook of tests and

measures. New York: Greenwood Press.

Bergman, M., Langhout, R. D., Palmieri, P., Cortina, L. M.,
& Fitzgerald, L. F. (2002). The (un)reasonableness of
reporting: Antecedents and consequences of reporting
sexual harassment. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87,
230 –242.

Black, D. C. (1976). The behavior of law. New York:

Academic Press.

Brewin, C. R., Dalgleish, T., & Stephen, J. (1996). A dual
representation theory of posttraumatic stress disorder.
Psychological Review, 103, 670 – 686.

Brooks, R. H., Ware, J. E., Davies-Avery, A., Stewart,
A. L., Donald, C. A., Rogers, W. H., et al. (1979).
Overview of adult health status measures ﬁelded in
Rand’s Health
Insurance Study. Medical Care,
17(Suppl.), 1–131.

Burger, W. (1971). The necessity for civility. 52 F.R.D.

211.

Colquitt, J. A., Conlon, D. E., Wesson, M. J., Porter, C., &
Ng, K. Y. (2001). Justice at the millennium: A meta-
analytic review of 25 years of organizational justice
research. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 425– 445.
Committee on Civility of the Seventh Federal Judicial Cir-
cuit. (1991). Interim report of the Committee on Civility
of the Seventh Federal Judicial Circuit. 143 F.R.D. 371.
Cortina, L. M., Fitzgerald, L. F., & Drasgow, F. (2002).
Contextualizing Latina experiences of sexual harass-
ment: Preliminary tests of a structural model. Basic and
Applied Social Psychology, 24, 295–311.

Cortina, L. M., Lonsway, K. A., Magley, V. J., Freeman,
L. V., Hunter, M., Collinsworth, L. L., & Fitzgerald,
L. F. (2002). What’s gender got to do with it? Incivility
in the federal courts. Law and Social Inquiry, 27,
235–270.

Cortina, L. M., Magley, V. J., Williams, J. H., & Langhout,
R. D. (2001). Incivility in the workplace: Incidence and
impact. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 6,
64 – 80.

Cranny, C. J., Smith, P. C., & Stone, E. F. (1992). How
people feel about their jobs and how it affects their
performance. New York: Free Press.

Crockett, R. W., & Gilmere, J. A. (1999). Retaliation:
Agency theory and gaps in the law. Public Personnel
Management, 28, 39 – 49.

Cropanzano, R., Weiss, H. M., Suckow, K. J., & Grandey,
A. A. (2000). Doing justice to workplace emotion. In
N. M. Ashkanasy, C. E. J. Hartel, & W. J. Zerbe (Eds.),
Emotions in the workplace: Research, theory, and prac-
tice (pp. 49 – 62). Westport, CT: Quorum Books.

Crull, P. (1982). Stress effects of sexual harassment on the
job: Implications for counseling. American Journal of
Orthopsychiatry, 52, 539 –545.

Diener, E. (1984). Subjective well-being. Psychological

Bulletin, 95, 542–575.

Diener, E., Emmons, R. A., Larsen, R. J., & Grifﬁn, S.


264

CORTINA AND MAGLEY

(1985). The satisfaction with life scale. Journal of Per-
sonality Assessment, 49, 71–75.

Dillman, D. A. (1978). Mail and telephone surveys: The

total design method. New York: Wiley-Interscience.

Donovan, M. A., Drasgow, F., & Munson, L. J. (1998). The
Perceptions of Fair Interpersonal Treatment Scale: De-
velopment and validation of a measure of interpersonal
treatment in the workplace. Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, 83, 683– 692.

Esterling, B. A., L’Abate, L., Murray, E. J., & Pennebaker,
J. W. (1999). Empirical foundations for writing in pre-
vention and psychotherapy: Mental and physical health
outcomes. Clinical Psychology Review, 19, 79 –96.

Farrell, D. (1983). Exit, voice, loyalty, and neglect as re-
sponses to job dissatisfaction: A multidimensional scal-
ing study. Academy of Management Journal, 26,
596 – 607.

Fitzgerald, L. F. (1990, March). Assessing strategies for
coping with sexual harassment: A theoretical/empirical
approach. Paper presented at the meeting of the Associ-
ation for Women in Psychology, Tempe, AZ.

Fitzgerald, L. F., Drasgow, F., Hulin, C. L., Gelfand, M. J.,
& Magley, V. J. (1997). The antecedents and conse-
quences of sexual harassment in organizations: A test of
an integrated model. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82,
578 –589.

Fitzgerald, L. F., Gelfand, M. J., & Drasgow, F. (1995).
Measuring sexual harassment: Theoretical and psycho-
metric advances. Basic and Applied Social Psychology,
17, 425– 427.

Fitzgerald, L. F., Shullman, S. L., Bailey, N., Richards, M.,
Swecker, J., Gold, A., et al. (1988). The incidence and
dimensions of sexual harassment in academia and the
workplace. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 32, 152–
175.

Fitzgerald, L. F., Swan, S., & Fischer, K. (1995). Why
didn’t she just report him?: The psychological and legal
implications of women’s strategies for responding to
sexual harassment. Journal of Social Issues, 51, 117–
138.

Giacalone, R. A., & Greenberg, J. (1997). Antisocial behav-

ior in organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Glomb, T. M., Steel, P. D. G., & Arvey, R. D. (2002). Ofﬁce
sneers, snipes, and stab wounds: Antecedents, conse-
quence, and implications of workplace violence and ag-
gression. In R. G. Lord, R. J. Klimoski, & R. Kanfer
(Eds.), Emotions in the workplace: Understanding the
structure and role of emotions in organizational behavior
(pp. 227–259). New York: Wiley.

Greenberg, J., & Cropanzano, R. (2001). Advances in or-
ganization justice. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University
Press.

Grifﬁn, R. W., O’Leary-Kelly, A., & Collins, J. M. (1998).
Dysfunctional behavior in organizations: Violent and
deviant behaviors. Stamford, CT: JAI Press.

Gross, J. (1998a). Antecedent- and response-focused emo-
tion regulation: Divergent consequences for experience,
expression, and physiology. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 74, 224 –237.

Gross, J. (1998b). The emerging ﬁeld of emotion regulation:
An integrative review. Review of General Psychology, 2,
271–299.

Gross, J. J., & Levenson, R. W. (1997). Hiding feelings:
The acute effects of inhibiting negative and positive

emotions. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106, 95–
103.

Hanisch, K. A., & Hulin, C. L. (1990). Job attitudes and
organizational withdrawal: An examination of retirement
and other voluntary withdrawal behaviors. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 37, 60 –78.

Hanisch, K. A., & Hulin, C. L. (1991). General attitudes and
organizational withdrawal: An evaluation of a causal
model. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 39, 110 –128.

Hirschman, A. O. (1970). Exit, voice, and loyalty. Cam-

bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Hochschild, A. R. (1983). The managed heart: Commer-
cialization of human feeling. Berkeley: University of
California Press.

Jo¨reskog, K. G., & So¨rbom, D. (1993). New features in

LISREL 8. Chicago: Scientiﬁc Software.

Klecka, W. R. (1980). Discriminant analysis. Newbury

Park, CA: Sage.

Koss, M. P., Koss, P., & Woodruff, W. J. (1991). Delete-
rious effects of criminal victimization on women’s health
and medical utilization. Archives of Internal Medicine,
151, 342–357.

Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal and

coping. New York: Springer.

Lepore, S. J., Evans, G. W., & Schneider, M. L. (1991).
Dynamic role of social support
in the link between
chronic stress and psychological distress. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 61, 899 –909.

Magley, V. J. (2002). Coping with sexual harassment: Re-
conceptualizing women’s resistance. Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 83, 930 –946.

Mastenbroek, W. (2000). Organizational behavior as emo-
tion management. In N. M. Ashkanasy, C. E. J. Hartel, &
W. J. Zerbe (Eds.), Emotions in the workplace: Research,
theory, and practice (pp. 19 –35). Westport, CT: Quorum
Books.

Miceli, M. P., & Near, J. P. (1985). Characteristics of
organizational climate and perceived wrongdoing asso-
ciated with whistle-blowing decisions. Personnel Psy-
chology, 38, 525–544.

Miceli, M. P., & Near, J. P. (1988). Individual and situa-
tional correlates of whistle-blowing. Personnel Psychol-
ogy, 41, 267–281.

Miceli, M. P., & Near, J. P. (1992). Blowing the whistle:
The organizational and legal implications for companies
and employees. New York: Lexington Books.

Miceli, M. P., Rehg, M., Near, J. P., & Ryan, K. C. (1999).
Can laws protect whistle-blowers? Results of a naturally
occurring ﬁeld experiment. Work and Occupations, 26,
129 –151.

Milligan, R. J., & Waller, G. (2000). Anger and bulimic
psychopathology among nonclinical women. Interna-
tional Journal of Eating Disorders, 28, 446 – 450.

Near, J. P., Dworkin, T. M., & Miceli, M. P. (1993).
Explaining the whistle-blowing process: Suggestions
from power theory and justice theory. Organizations
Science, 4, 393– 411.

Near, J. P., & Miceli, M. P. (1986). Retaliation against
whistle blowers: Predictors and effects. Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology, 71, 137–145.

Near, J. P., & Miceli, M. P. (1987). Whistle-blowers in
organizations: Dissidents or reformers? Organizational
Behavior, 9, 321–368.


MISTREATMENT, VOICE, AND RETALIATION VICTIMIZATION

265

Near, J. P., & Miceli, M. P. (1996). Whistle-blowing: Myth

and reality. Journal of Management, 22, 507–526.

Parmerlee, M. A., Near, J. P., & Jensen, T. C. (1982).
Correlates of whistle-blowers’ perceptions of organiza-
tional retaliation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 27,
17–34.

Pearson, C. M., Andersson, L. M., & Porath, C. L. (2000).
Assessing and attacking workplace incivility. Organiza-
tional Dynamics, 29, 123–137.

Pennebaker, J. W. (1993). Putting stress into words: Health,
linguistic, and therapeutic implication. Behaviour Re-
search and Theory, 31, 539 –548.

Pennebaker, J. W. (1997). Opening up: The healing power
of expressing emotions (Rev. ed.). New York: Guilford
Press.

Rayner, C., & Hoel, H. (1997). A summary review of
literature relating to workplace bullying. Journal of Com-
munity and Applied Social Psychology, 7, 181–191.

Richards, J. M., & Gross, J. J. (1999). Composure at any
cost? The cognitive consequences of emotion suppres-
sion. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25,
1033–1044.

Robinson, S. L., & Bennett, R. J. (1995). A typology of
deviant workplace behaviors: A multidimensional scal-
ing study. Academy of Management Journal, 38,
555–572.

Roznowski, M. (1989). An examination of the measurement
properties of the Job Descriptive Index with experimental
items. Journal of Applied Psychology, 74, 805– 814.

Rusbult, C. E., Farrell, D., Rogers, G., & Mainous, A. G.
(1988). Impact of exchange variables on exit, voice,
loyalty, and neglect: An integrative model of responses
to declining job satisfaction. Academy of Management
Journal, 31, 599 – 627.

Schneider, K. T., Swan, S., & Fitzgerald, L. F. (1997).
Job-related and psychological effects of sexual harass-
ment in the workplace: Empirical evidence from two
organizations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82,
401– 415

Shinn, M., Lehmann, S., & Wong, N. W. (1984). Social
interaction and social support. Journal of Social Issues,
40, 55–76.

Skarlicki, D. P., & Folger, R. (1997). Retaliation in the
workplace: The roles of distributive, procedural, and
interactional justice. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82,
434 – 443.

Smith, P. C., Kendall, L., & Hulin, C. L. (1969). The

measurement of satisfaction in work and retirement. Chi-
cago: Rand McNally.

Stanton, J. M., Balzer, W. K., Smith, P. C., Parra, L. F., &
Ironson, G. (2001). A general measure of work stress:
The Stress in General scale. Educational and Psycholog-
ical Measurement, 61, 866 – 888.

Swan, S. (1997). Explaining the job-related and psycholog-
ical consequences of sexual harassment in the work-
place: A contextual model. Unpublished doctoral disser-
tation, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

U.S. Merit Systems Protection Board. (1981). Sexual ha-
rassment of federal workers: Is it a problem? Washing-
ton, DC: U. S. Government Printing Ofﬁce.

U.S. Merit Systems Protection Board. (1987). Sexual ha-
rassment of federal workers: An update. Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce.

Veit, C. T., & Ware, J. E., Jr. (1983). The structure of
psychological distress and well-being in general popula-
tions. Journal of Counseling and Clinical Psychology,
51, 730 –742.

Waldo, C. R. (1999). Working in a majority context: A
structural model of heterosexism as minority stress in the
workplace. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 46,
218 –232.

Wasti, S. A., & Cortina, L. M. (2002). Coping in context:
Sociocultural determinants of responses to sexual harass-
ment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83,
394 – 405.

Wegner, D. M., Shortt, J. W., Blake, A. W., & Page, M. S.
(1990). The suppression of exciting thoughts. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 409 – 418.

Weinberger, D., Schwartz, G. E., & Davidson, R. J. (1979).
Low-anxious, high-anxious, and repressive coping styles:
Psychometric patterns and behavioral and physiological
responses to stress. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 88,
369 –380.

Williams, J. H., Fitzgerald, L. F., & Drasgow, F. (1999).
The effects of organizational practices on sexual harass-
ment and individual outcomes in the military. Military
Psychology, 11, 303–328.

Williams, K. D. (1997). Social ostracism. In Kowalski
(Ed.), Aversive interpersonal behaviors (pp. 133–170).
New York: Plenum Press.

Received September 26, 2002
Revision received January 27, 2003

Accepted March 2, 2003 y

