 
 
The Relationships between Intangible Organizational Elements and Organizational
Performance
Author(s): Abraham Carmeli and  Ashler Tishler
Source: Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 25, No. 13 (Dec., 2004), pp. 1257-1278
Published by: Wiley
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/20142198
Accessed: 01-02-2017 17:20 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted

digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about

JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

http://about.jstor.org/terms

Wiley is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Strategic Management
Journal

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Strategie Management Journal
 Streit. Mgmt. J.. 25: 1257-1278 (2004)
 Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI: 10.1002/smj.428

 THE RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN INTANGIBLE
 ORGANIZATIONAL ELEMENTS AND
 ORGANIZATIONAL PERFORMANCE
 ABRAHAM CARMELI1 and ASHLER TISHLER2*
 1 Graduate School of Business Administration, Bar-Han University, Ramat-Gan, Israel
 2 Faculty of Management, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel

 Despite the growing awareness of the importance of researching core strategic resources and
 activities, the work that has been done to date has largely taken the form of anecdotal reports
 and case study analysis. We have yet to see large-sample studies demonstrating how organiza
 tional elements, independently, complementarily and interactively, may or may not enhance the
 organization 's performance. Moreover, little attention has been given to researching this topic in
 public sector organizations. The present study aims to bridge this gap by examining the impact of
 a set of independent intangible organizational elements and the interactions among them on a set
 of objective organizational performance measures in a sample of local government authorities in
 Israel. The results of a multivariate analysis indicate that organizational performance (measured
 by self-income ratio, collecting efficiency ratio, employment rate, and municipal development)
 can be well explained by six intangible organizational elements (managerial capabilities, human
 capital, internal auditing, labor relations, organizational culture, and perceived organizational
 reputation) and the interactions among them, which need to be taken into account in any cost
 effective development. Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 INTRODUCTION

 Recognizing that organizations, whether for-profit,
 governmental or non-profit, are complex entities,
 researchers often describe and analyze them as sys
 tems of interdependent core elements (resources,
 activities, and policies) (see Porter, 1996; Rivkin,
 2000; Siggelkow, 2002) that by complementing
 one another contribute to enhancing and sustaining
 competitive advantages. The problem is that mea
 suring core resources and their effect on organiza
 tional performance is often difficult (see Hoskisson

 Keywords: intangible organizational elements; comple
 mentarities; organizational performance; public sector
 organization
 * Correspondence to: Ashler Tishler, Faculty of Management,
 Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.
 E-mail: atishler@post.tau.ac.il

 et al., 1999; Robins and Wiersema, 1995), partic
 ularly when one needs to estimate the effect of a
 possibly large set of intangible resources with all
 manner of possible complementarities and interac
 tions among them, on a possibly large set of orga
 nizational performance measures. Though anecdo
 tal and case study evidence does exist (Porter,
 1996; Siggelkow, 2002; Stalk, Evans, and Shul
 man, 1992), we have not yet seen large-sample
 studies that demonstrate how several core ele
 ments, independently or together, enhance orga
 nizational performance.

 Substantial effort has been devoted in the last
 decade to enhancing the theoretical insights of
 the resource-based view (RBV) of strategic man
 agement, which serves as the paradigm of this
 study, and examining it empirically in profit
 maximizing firms (see Barney, 2001, for a partial
 review). Generally, the design of most quantitative

 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Received 19 September 2002

 Final revision received 7 May 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1258 A. Carmeli and A. Tishler

 RBV studies has employed a single major factor
 (resource) to explain variations in firm perfor
 mance, which often consist of a single measure.
 Moreover, studies applying the core concepts of
 the RBV in general and testing the effect of strate
 gic elements on the performance of public sector
 organizations are rare.

 This study attempts to bridge these gaps by using
 a quantitative method to empirically test the effect
 of intangible core elements (resources) on the per
 formance of public sector organizations. We first
 argue that the RBV can serve as a useful paradigm
 for the analysis of variations in the performance
 of public sector organizations and then empiri
 cally test our approach on a sample of 99 local
 government authorities in Israel. Specifically, we
 estimate the influence of a set of intangible ele
 ments and their interactions on a set of perfor
 mance measures while controlling for the effects of
 environmental uncertainty, organization size, and
 geographical location. The intangible elements are
 managerial capabilities, human capital, perceived
 organizational reputation, internal auditing, labor
 relations, and organizational culture, and perfor
 mance is evaluated by two measures of financial
 performance, the employment rate, a measure of
 municipal development, and internal migration.

 The findings, which lend support to the premise
 that intangible elements have a significant effect on
 organizational performance, are especially impor
 tant considering that we estimate the simultaneous
 impact of a set of intangible elements on a set of
 several performance measures. All six organiza
 tional elements and all the interactions among them
 are found to be important in explaining the varia
 tions in the performance of local authorities. The
 positive effect of the interactions among the orga
 nizational elements on organization performance
 is such that the higher the values of the other
 intangible organizational elements, the larger the
 effect of any given intangible organizational ele
 ment. Organizational culture and perceived orga
 nizational reputation are found to be the two most
 important elements in explaining organizational
 performance. Size has little or no effect, while per
 ceived environmental uncertainty and geographical
 location are important factors in explaining varia
 tions in organizational performance.

 develops the research hypotheses. The research
 method?participants, measures, and data analy
 sis?is in the third section, followed by the results
 of this study. The final section includes a dis
 cussion of the results, an analysis of the study's
 limitations, and suggestions for directions of future
 research.

 THEORY AND HYPOTHESES

 Organizations are viewed as systems of core, elab
 orating, independent, and inconsistent elements
 and the interconnections among all or part of these
 elements (Siggelkow, 2002). The elements denot
 ing resources, activities, processes, and policies
 are essential for the viability of the organiza
 tion. Although studies that have examined the core
 concepts of the resource-based view (RBV) have
 generally used three main constructs?resources,
 capabilities, and competencies (Javidan, 1998)?
 they have tended to refer to those that are core
 to the organization in the sense of contributing
 to differentiating it strategically from its rivals
 (Leonard-Barton, 1992). In this study we use
 the construct of strategic organizational element
 (resource) to refer to a special type1 of ele
 ment which is unique, imperfectly imitable, non
 transferable and aims to improve the productiv
 ity of the organization (Makadok, 2001) indepen
 dently or through a process of interacting with
 other elements.

 The RBV suggests that the variability in an
 organization's performance can be attributed to
 heterogeneity in the distinct bundles of orga
 nizational elements (resources) (Barney, 1991;
 Peteraf, 1993; Prahalad and Hamel, 1990; Reed
 and DeFillippi, 1990; Wernerfelt, 1984). Though
 the RBV has clearly made a powerful impact in
 the field of strategy, scholars question the extent
 to which it may be considered as a paradigm in
 the field (see Barney, 2001; Priem and Butler,
 2001). Notably, a decade ago, Peteraf (1993: 179)
 asked whether the RBV 'provides much additional
 insight over traditional understandings.' Although
 she and others (Barney, 2001) have advocated
 the RBV as a paradigm, the debate has not yet
 been resolved, particularly in the face of the lack

 The study is organized as follows. The next
 section presents the theoretical and methodolog
 ical aspects of the resource-based view in gen
 eral and in the public sector in particular, and
 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. /., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

 1 The term 'special type' is taken from the work of Makadok,
 who refers to a capability as a special type of resource (Makadok,
 2001: 389).

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 of sufficient empirical studies to lend support to
 the RBV s theoretical propositions (see Farjoun,
 1994). Though in recent years we have been
 observing an increased effort to develop an empir
 ical body of literature on the RBV (see Barney,
 2001, for a review), it remains an area that can
 benefit from additional study. First, most quanti
 tative studies have used a single element such as
 human capital (e.g., Hitt et ah, 2001) or leader
 ship (e.g., Waldman et ai, 2001). Although such
 studies yield useful knowledge, it must be recog
 nized that the organization's competitive position
 is derived from a complex combination of orga
 nizational elements. Generally speaking, it is not
 likely that a firm with a sustainable competitive
 advantage relies on a single element, important as
 it may be. For example, the competitive advan
 tage of Wal-Mart (Stalk et ah, 1992), Southwest
 (Porter, 1996), and Vanguard (Siggelkow, 2002)
 cannot be explained by just one element; it is based
 on a successful integration of various strategic and
 non-strategic elements. Whereas rivals are enthu
 siastic to imitate such successful designed system,
 the organizations that hold it seek ways to deter
 such imitation. What makes a system inimitable?
 Rivkin (2000) suggests that the number of ele
 ments and the degree of interaction among them
 create such a complexity that is difficult to imi
 tate by the rivals. By having a large number of
 elements that positively interact with one another
 a firm can deter imitation even if each particular
 element is imitable (Rivkin, 2000).

 Intangible Organizational Elements 1259

 the applicability of the basic elements of the RBV
 in the public sector. This is particularly problem
 atic in view of the increasing recognition among
 researchers, policy-makers and managers alike of
 the importance of strategic management, whether
 in the private or public sector, for creating and
 delivering value (Moore, 1995, 2000).

 This study of local government authorities at

 tempts to overcome some of the limitations of pre
 vious studies by adopting a multivariate approach
 in which a bundle of intangible organizational ele
 ments and the interactions among them are exam
 ined for their simultaneous effect on several mea
 sures of performance.

 The impact of intangible organizational
 elements

 Both tangible elements (e.g., facilities, raw mate
 rials, equipment) and intangible elements (e.g.,
 culture, communication, and knowledge) have an
 important role in creating an organization's value.
 However, 'as the industrial society becomes a ser
 vices society, where knowledge and information
 are the mainstays of business growth, the impor
 tance of intangible resources will come increas
 ingly to the forefront' (Canals, 2000: 118). In com
 parison with tangible elements, intangible elements
 such as organizational culture are less flexible
 (Chatterjee and Wernerfelt, 1991), hard to accu
 mulate, and not easily transferred; they can affect
 multiple uses at the same time, serve simultane
 ously as inputs and outputs of corporate activities
 (Itami with Roehl, 1987), and are not consumed
 when in use (Collis and Montgomery, 1998). Teece
 (2000) suggests that a firm's superior performance
 depends on its ability to defend and use the intan
 gible assets it creates (e.g., knowledge). According
 to Hitt et al. (2001: 14), 'intangible resources are
 more likely than tangible resources to produce a
 competitive advantage.'

 The problem is that our knowledge to date
 is contained in anecdotal and case study evi
 dence (see, for example, Porter, 1996; Siggelkow,
 2002; Stalk et al, 1992), and we have yet to see
 large-sample studies that demonstrate how strate
 gic elements and complementarities among them
 enhance an organization's performance. The sec
 ond problem is the difficulty of measuring these
 compellingly important intangible elements (see
 Godfrey and Hill, 1995; Hitt et al, 2001). This
 problem is compounded when more than one ele
 ment is involved and, particularly, when interac
 tions among them may affect the organization's
 performance. Third, most studies have examined
 each performance measure separately and, thus,
 did not capture the simultaneity embedded in the
 multidimensionality of performance. Fourth, very
 little has been done to test empirically the rela
 tionship between organizational elements and the
 performance of public sector organizations, that is,
 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. 7., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

 Drawing on these insights, according to which
 intangible elements have strategic importance for
 the viability of the organization, this study focuses
 on a set of six intangible elements and their effect
 on the performance of the organization: manage
 rial capabilities, human capital, perceived organi
 zational reputation, internal auditing, labor rela
 tions, and organizational culture.
 We chose to concentrate on these six elements
 on the basis of a pre-test we made. First, we inter
 viewed central government officials with a view

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1260 A. Carmeli and A. Tishler

 to identifying the key factors that influence fis
 cal health, education, migration, and other per
 formance aspects of local government. Second,
 we interviewed the heads and senior officials of
 local government authorities to elicit their per
 ceptions of the elements that are critical to the
 management of their local authority. Third, we
 reviewed the relevant literature in order to select
 the most important elements needed for manage
 ment of organizations in general and local author
 ities in particular. Finally, we administered a pilot
 questionnaire, structured on the basis of the list of
 elements obtained in steps one to three above, to
 13 managers who participated in an annual meeting
 of the general managers of the local government
 authorities in Israel. This process identified the six
 critical elements that we use in this paper to assess
 organizational performance. Other possible critical
 elements are noted in the limitations subsection.
 We now give a reasoned account of the critical
 role of the six particular elements that we chose as
 the basis for our study.

 Managerial capabilities
 It has long been established that a superior top
 management team is likely to generate higher rent
 for its organization (Barney, 1991; Castanias and
 Helfat, 1991; Finkelstein and Hambrick, 1996;
 Hambrick and Mason, 1984; Katz, 1974; Norburn
 and Birley, 1988; Penrose, 1959). The manage
 ment team's superiority rests on the managerial
 capabilities or skills that it possesses because 'the
 attributes of the management team may satisfy
 the conditions for achieving and maintaining com
 petitive advantage' (Mahoney, 1995: 92). Attain
 ing superiority in a particular competitive market
 requires that the organization's top management
 possesses a broad set of complementary skills. A
 single person, however talented, is unlikely to pos
 sess all the managerial skills that are required for
 the successful operation of a complex organization.
 Thus, the organization needs to have a combination
 of capabilities (Barney, 1991; Mahoney, 1995),
 such as technical, human, and conceptual skills
 (Katz, 1974) in order to build a superior manage
 ment team.

 been acknowledged (Pfeffer, 1994), hence the
 drive to establish the superior human capital to
 generate a competitive advantage (e.g., Boxall
 and Steeneveld, 1999; Farjoun, 1994; Huselid,
 1995; Lado and Wilson, 1994; Pfeffer, 1994).
 Researchers seeking to establish a theoretical
 framework for the contribution of the human factor
 to organizational efficiency and effectiveness have
 focused on the educational level of employees
 as a source of labor productivity and economic
 growth for the organization and the nation (Asefa
 and Huang, 1994; Becker, 1993; Hershberg, 1996;
 OECD, 2001; Schultz, 1961).

 Perceived organizational reputation

 A favorable organizational reputation is a core
 intangible resource that creates competitive advan
 tage when competitors are not able to match
 the prestige and esteem it creates, and enables
 an organization to attain sustained superior out
 comes (Roberts and Dowling, 2002; Shrum and
 Wuthnow, 1988). Constituents always prefer to
 enter into a contract with an organization with
 a favorable reputation, and sometimes they are
 even willing to pay a reasonable premium to do
 so (Fombrun, 1996; Fombrun and Shanley, 1990;
 Weigelt and Camerer, 1988); residents and busi
 nesses are likely to select their location on the
 basis of the match between their expectations and
 the reputation of the local authority. A distinc
 tion is made between the organization's reputa
 tion and the perceived external prestige (Smidts,
 Pruyn, and van Riel, 2001) or construed exter
 nal image (Dutton, Dukerich, and Harquail, 1994).
 Whereas organizational reputation refers to out
 siders' beliefs about what distinguishes an organi
 zation, perceived external prestige and construed
 external image refer to the organizational mem
 bers' view of the outsiders' beliefs. Assuming that
 the CEO (or general manager), as the representa
 tive of the management team, has the ability to
 correctly assess the organization's reputation, we
 use the term perceived organizational reputation
 to mean top management's view of the outsiders'
 beliefs about the organization.

 Human capital
 The idea that an organization's members are the
 real source of its competitive advantage has long
 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. /., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

 Internal auditing is a process that examines and
 evaluates the functioning of the organization (Eden

 Internal auditing

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 and Moriah, 1996: 263). It is an ongoing pro
 cess of comparing actual performance with stan
 dards or expectations, based on relevant indexes,
 in order to improve the organization's achieve
 ments (Globerson and Globerson, 1990). An inter
 nal auditing system plays an important role in man
 aging the organization efficiently and effectively.
 It is extremely important in complex organiza
 tions because of the need to pinpoint and examine
 a large array of activities in order to (1) teach
 the organization's members how to execute their
 job better by pointing out weaknesses, (2) enhance
 the motivation of the organization's members by
 demonstrating that the audit's goal is to improve
 the efficiency and effectiveness of the organization,
 (3) deter members from actions that may damage
 the organization, and (4) increase the probability
 that the appropriate actions are taken in relation
 to goal setting and accomplishment (Eden and
 Moriah, 1996).

 Labor relations

 Labor relations are to the relationships between
 the management team and the employees and/or
 their representatives. Organizations with positive
 labor relations are likely to obtain high benefits
 from their employees (see Dastmalchian, Blyton,
 and Adamson, 1991, for a review). For example,
 labor relations may affect the level of the employ
 ees' commitment to the organization. Committed
 employees are more likely to produce high-yield
 outcomes, and have a positive effect on organiza
 tional performance (Meyer and Allen, 1997).

 Organizational culture

 Organizational culture refers to the 'underlying
 values, beliefs, and principles that serve as a foun
 dation for the organization's management system
 as well as the set of management practices and
 behaviors that both exemplify and reinforce those
 basic principles' (Denison, 1990: 2). Klein, Masi,
 and Weidner (1995) place organizational culture at
 the heart of an organization's endeavors to improve
 its overall effectiveness and the quality of its prod
 ucts and services. Many strategy researchers (e.g.,
 Barney, 1986) assert that organizational culture
 is an important source of competitive advantage.
 Much of the evidence from both the private and
 the public sector supports this argument. For exam
 ple, Nordstrom, one of America's most successful

 Intangible Organizational Elements 1261

 fashion retailers, ascribes its success to its unique
 culture of customer service, or, as it is often called,
 'the Nordstrom way' (see Spector and McCarthy,
 1995).
 Virtually none of the successful organizations,
 from either the private or the public sector, will
 attribute its success to just one strategic element.
 Superior organizational performance is due to the
 combination of several strategic elements that
 complement and strengthen one another. Given the
 importance of the intangible elements, we suggest
 the following hypothesis:

 Hypothesis 1: Intangible organizational ele
 ments (managerial capabilities, human capi
 tal, perceived organizational reputation, inter
 nal auditing, labor relations and organizational
 culture) have a significant, positive effect on the
 performance of the organization (as measured
 by financial performance, municipal develop
 ment, internal migration, and employment rate).

 Interactions among intangible organizational
 elements

 The concept of fit has a long tradition in strat
 egy literature (Itami with Roehl, 1987). Strategic
 fit, unlike specification of an individual element,
 indicates nets of tightly linked elements (Porter,
 1996) that become a major source of inimitabil
 ity (Rivkin, 2000) and contribute to enhancing
 the performance of an organization. Porter (1996)
 identifies three types of fit: (1) simple consistency
 between each activity and the overall strategy,
 (2) mutual reinforcement amongst activities, and
 (3) optimization of effort across activities. Much
 of the literature refers to elements that reinforce
 one another. That is, the interaction amongst them
 is complementary in that the value of one ele
 ment is increased by the presence of other elements
 (see Rivkin, 2000; Siggelkow, 2002). The recent
 study by Makadok (2003) demonstrated the strate
 gic implication of a synergistic interaction between
 governance and competence (similar, for instance,
 to the interaction between managerial competence
 and internal auditing/control in this study), argu
 ing that superior firms (e.g., Microsoft, Wal-Mart,
 Crown Cork & Seal, and Vanguard Group) are 'fre
 quently unusual in both their competence and their
 governance.'

 Hence, it can be hypothesized that a strategic,
 or core, element is likely to interact with one or

 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1262 A. Carmeli and A. Tishler

 more other elements in affecting organizational
 performance. Given the importance we attribute
 to the six intangible elements that are discussed in
 this study, we suggest the following hypothesis:

 Hypothesis 2: The interactions among the intan
 gible organizational elements enhance organi
 zational performance; that is, the effect of an
 intangible organizational element is higher, the
 higher are the values of the other intangible
 organizational elements.

 THE DATA AND THE RESEARCH
 METHODOLOGY

 Selecting the research population
 Researchers have recognized the importance of
 public sector organizations and sought to exam
 ine the generalizability of the core concepts of
 business strategy to the public sector (see Moore,
 1995; Porter, 1998). Here we choose to investi
 gate the local government sector in Israel because
 of its critical impact on the business sector, the
 social structure of the country, and its citizens.
 Though building viable organizations is clearly a
 focal subject of inquiry not just for the business
 sector but also for the public and not-for-profit
 sectors, applying the core concepts of business
 strategy to the public sector depends on the type
 of competition in this sector and its magnitude.
 We argue here that competition does indeed exist
 among organizations in the local government sec
 tor, and can sometimes even be very intense (see
 Tiebout, 1956). The consensus is that competition
 in general fosters economic development by yield
 ing better production efficiency. It is the relentless
 drive of the competitors to find and apply new
 ways to improve productivity that is the source
 of the firm's profitability, the wealth of the state
 and the world (Porter, 1998). The possibility of
 obtaining more and better output from the same
 tangible resources is the foundation of the argu
 ment for some type of competition in the public
 sector (Propper and Halonen, 1999).

 jurisdiction, and they are the drivers of the com
 petition among local authorities as they seek to
 maximize the benefit/cost ratio of their location by
 buying into local authorities that offer the package
 of services they most prefer at the most reasonable
 price in terms of the taxes they pay (Schneider,
 1989: 613). If a local authority does not meet its
 consumers' needs and expectations, it is likely to
 lose desirable consumers to other local authorities
 (Peterson, 1981; Schneider, 1989), and its head
 (mayor) is likely not to be re-elected. The desire to
 be re-elected is a major driver of the competition
 as the local authority heads do whatever they can
 to be perceived as successful.

 Though competition among local authorities can

 be staged on many fronts, in the resource and prod
 uct market alike, in this study we concentrate on
 competition in the resource market. Public sector
 organizations compete over unique and valuable
 resources that can enhance their capacity?one
 of the sides of the JFK School of Government's
 strategic triangle for public sector organizations
 (see Moore, 1995). Thus, government authorities
 compete on prestige in key areas, presuming that it
 will generate rent by attracting new businesses and
 a strong population, leading eventually to sound
 fiscal health. They also invest considerable effort
 in building a strong organizational culture that will
 enhance the quality of the services they provide to
 their residents. It is in this way that the fierce com
 petition between the cities of Ramat Gan and Tel
 Aviv, located in the center of Israel, to attract busi
 nesses to their jurisdictions has resulted in better
 incentive packages being offered by both cities.
 These incentives are not restricted to discounts in
 property tax, but lie rather in the unique capacity
 to provide better services. Similarly, the cities in
 Coachella Valley, located approximately 120 miles
 east of Los Angeles, have been competing over
 land for future growth and outside investment.2

 Appropriate performance measures are critical
 for any organization, and even more so for pub
 lic sector organizations. To quote The National
 Academy of Public Administration of the United
 States (1999: 17): 'The American people will not
 invest significantly higher levels of trust or con
 fidence in their government until they perceive
 improvements in the way it makes decisions and

 That being said, the nature of the competition in
 the public sector needs some clarification. In gen
 eral, 'the local market for public goods is really
 a "quasi market" in which the benefits of com
 petitive markets may be approached but not fully
 achieved' (Schneider, 1989). A local authority nor
 mally provides services only to residents within its
 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

 2 We are indebted to Lynndee Kemmet for providing us with
 her unpublished comprehensive study on the Coachella Valley
 situation.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 delivers results/ Local authorities are complex
 organizations that serve multiple constituencies
 and are accountable for various functional areas
 such as education, employment, municipal devel
 opment, recreation, and sanitation. Hence, it is
 of importance to develop appropriate performance
 criteria upon which these multiple and complicated
 tasks are evaluated. These measures are not readily
 available in Israel since the Israeli local authorities
 do not systematically publish assessments or mea
 sures of their performance (Carmeli, 2002), mak
 ing evaluation a very difficult task. In this study
 we developed five performance measures, for two
 consecutive years, based on secondary data.

 Data
 The Israeli local authority structure includes
 three types of local authorities: (a) a municipality
 (city)?an urban community (a city) usually with a
 population of 20,000 or more residents; (b) a local
 council?a small city (normally fewer than 20,000
 residents) that developed over time from one large
 rural community or several small, geographically
 related, rural communities; and (c) a regional
 council?the governing body of several, possibly
 many, rural communities that are located within a
 given geographical region. Our targeted research
 population consisted of 263 local authorities in
 Israel: 62 municipalities, 148 local councils, and
 53 regional councils.

 After completing a pre-test (see description
 above), a questionnaire with a self-addressed reply
 envelope was mailed from a university address to
 the general management of each local authority
 in Israel. Ninety-nine of the 106 questionnaires
 (38%) that were completed and returned to us were
 usable, that is, they included all the necessary data.
 The response rate across the three different types
 of local authorities was about equal: that is, of the
 99 usable questionnaires 24 were from municipal
 ities (cities), 56 from local councils, and 19 from
 regional councils. This is similar to the distribution
 of the population of local authorities in Israel.

 Intangible Organizational Elements 1263

 (Local authorities in Israel 1995: Physical data
 1997) of the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics,
 as well as from internal reports of the Ministry
 of Interior. Data on the employment rate were
 obtained from the Social Science Data Archive
 (SSDA) of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
 Finally, the data that were used to develop the
 measures of the local authority's organizational
 elements, and the data representing perceived envi
 ronmental uncertainty, were obtained from the
 questionnaire.3

 Measures
 This study investigates the effect of organiza
 tional elements, perceived environmental uncer
 tainty, geographical location, and organization size
 (the independent variables) on a set of perfor
 mance measures of the local authority (the depen
 dent variables).

 Dependent variables
 Financial performance
 Two measures are used to represent the fiscal
 strength of the local authority (see Carmeli, 2002):
 self-income ratio and collecting efficiency ratio.

 Self-income ratio is the proportion of self
 income in the local authority's overall income as
 reported in its regular budget. Self-income con
 sists of all the income (taxes, grants, and fees)
 that the local authority collects directly from its
 residents, businesses, and other assets within its
 jurisdiction. Overall income in the regular budget
 consists of property taxes, fees, surcharges, gen
 eral grants, financing from ministries, and single
 sources of income. The closer the self-income ratio
 to unity, the greater is the fiscal strength (health)
 of the local authority.

 Collecting efficiency ratio is the proportion of
 the current year's actual collecting (the total
 amount of income that was collected by the local
 authority) in the total income theoretically col
 lectable during the current year. Actual collecting

 The variables that we used in this study were

 obtained from several sources. Measures of finan
 cial performance, geographical location, and muni
 cipal development were obtained from a Ministry
 of Interior (1999) report and the annual financial
 reports of the local authorities for 1997 and 1998.
 Variables representing the local authority's organi
 zational size were extracted from Publication 1046

 3 This design raises some concerns about the probability that the
 respondents are biased in estimating the elements of their orga
 nization. To circumvent this problem, or at least diminish it, we
 asked the respondents (general managers) to refer to the entire
 organization, rather than themselves. A second concern with
 the data collected by questionnaires is whether the respondents
 possess sufficient knowledge to accurately assess organizational
 elements. Previous studies indicate that top managers are a reli
 able source of information (O'Reilly, Snyder, and Boothe, 1993;
 Miller, Burke, and Glick, 1998).

 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. 7., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1264 A. Carmeli and A. Tishler

 consists of property taxes, water, and sewage fees.
 The total income to be collected consists of accu
 mulated debt from earlier years, the current year's
 'income to be collected' minus discounts and can
 cellation of self-income.

 Employment rate is one of the most important
 performance measures by which a local author
 ity in Israel is evaluated. It is defined as the ratio
 of the number of permanent residents net of the
 number of job seekers (monthly average), to the
 number of permanent residents. The total number
 of permanent residents consists of all the perma
 nent residents and migrants in Israel, including the
 permanent residents who were away from Israel
 for less than 1 year during the survey that collected
 the data for this measure (Israel Central Bureau of
 Statistics, 1997: 19). It should be noted in this con
 text that local authorities strive to reduce the level
 of unemployment by creating business zones and
 attracting new enterprises (by providing them with
 special incentives).
 Municipal development consists of two ratios:
 development expenditure ratio and local services '
 expenditure ratio. Development expenditure ratio
 is the ratio between the total amount of expenses
 aimed at local development, and the number of
 permanent residents. Local services' expenditure
 ratio is the ratio between the budget expendi
 tures on services, and the number of permanent
 residents. Cronbach's alpha of this measure is
 0.87. It should be noted in this context that the
 local authority better serves its goals by allocat
 ing its resources directly to the various munici
 pal services.

 Internal migration is the ratio between the num
 ber of permanent residents at the end of the current
 and previous year. A strong local authority is likely
 to exhibit an increase in its permanent population.

 Independent variables
 The independent variables are divided into two
 groups: (a) organizational elements and (b) all oth
 er variables (denoted control variables) that may
 influence performance. We first describe the orga
 nizational elements.

 agree. The six measures are defined as follows and
 their items are detailed in Appendix 1.
 Managerial capabilities is an adaptation of the
 measure developed by Hitt and Ireland (1985).
 It consists of 12 items such as 'attracting and
 retaining well-trained and competent top man
 agers,' and 'ability to unify conflicting opinions,
 improve coordination and enhance effective col
 laboration between key executives, generate enthu
 siasm, and motivate sufficient managerial drive for
 better performance'. Cronbach's alpha of this mea
 sure is 0.88.
 Human capital has three dimensions: educa
 tion, work experience, and competence of the
 firm's members (Aryee, Chay, and Tan, 1994).
 The respondents were asked to evaluate four items
 relating to education and work experience, and
 eight items relating to competence (Wagner and
 Morse, 1975). Sample items are 'in my local
 authority, employees have suitable education to
 fulfill their jobs,' and 'in my local authority,
 employees are well trained.' Cronbach's alpha for
 this measure is 0.80.

 Internal auditing is based on the model devel
 oped by Eden and Moriah (1996). It consists of
 seven items that cover four aspects of the auditing
 system: teaching, motivating, deterrence, and pro
 cess improvement. Sample items are 'the internal
 auditing prevents inappropriate actions which may
 harm the organization,' and 'the internal auditing
 is perceived as a threat to the position and status
 of the employees' (a reverse-scored item). Cron
 bach's alpha for this measure is 0.89.

 Labor relations are measured by a development
 of the model presented by Kitay and Marching
 ton (1996) consisting of nine items. The measure
 covers the degree of trust and satisfaction in the
 relations between the management and employ
 ees, the degree to which the labor relations are
 planned and managed, and the extent to which
 the labor relations system pursues the principles
 of safety, fairness, individualism, and democracy.
 Sample items are 'there is complete trust between
 the management and employees,' and 'there are
 mutual respect and good intentions between the
 management and employees.' Cronbach's alpha
 for this scale is 0.93.

 Organizational elements
 Six intangible organizational elements obtained
 from the local authorities' general managers are
 used in this study. Scores are on a 7-point scale
 ranging from 1 = strongly disagree to 7 = strongly
 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

 Organizational culture is based on Denison's
 (1990) model with its four hypotheses. (1) The
 involvement hypothesis: organizational effective
 ness is a function of the level of involvement
 and participation of the organization's members.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Intangible Organizational Elements 1265

 and Wang (1994), Gatewood, Gowan, and Laut
 enschlager (1993), and McGuire, Sundgren, and
 Schneeweiss (1988).

 To preserve the general definition of perceived
 organizational reputation while integrating into it
 the unique characteristics of a public sector orga
 nization (a local authority in our case), we use
 here a measure that consists of four items based
 on the corporate reputation survey, and five items
 that are based on the city reputation survey. Sam
 ple items are 'the ability of my local authority to
 attract, develop, and keep talented people is rated
 very favorably,' and 'in my local authority, the
 municipal facilities are credited with a very favor
 able reputation.' Cronbach's alpha for this measure
 is 0.82.

 Control variables

 (2) The consistency hypothesis: organizational ef
 fectiveness is a function of the degree to which
 the organization's members understand and hold
 a shared system of beliefs, values, and sym
 bols. (3) The adaptability hypothesis', organiza
 tional effectiveness is a function of the organiza
 tion's ability to perceive the external and internal
 environment and respond to it through reinstitu
 tionalization of a set of behaviors and processes.
 (4) The mission hypothesis: organizational effec
 tiveness is a function of the degree to which the
 organization's members hold a shared definition of
 the function and purpose of the organization and
 its members. A mission enhances employees' con
 nection with the organization and provides direc
 tion and goals that serve to define the appropriate
 course of action for the organization and its mem
 bers. Eight items (phrases/questions) represent the
 four ingredients of the model. Sample items are
 'all have a common set of values, creeds, and
 symbols,' and 'there is high involvement of the
 employees in the processes, decisions, and their
 implementation.' Cronbach's alpha for this mea
 sure is 0.81.

 The variability of performance across heteroge
 neous organizations may be due, in addition to
 organizational elements, to various other effects
 that may represent the unique nature of particular
 organizations and the environment in which they
 operate. Three variables?perceived environmen
 tal uncertainty, organizational (community) size,
 and location?are used in this study to control for
 these effects across the local government authori
 ties in Israel.

 Perceived organizational reputation is an inte
 gration of two measures established by a city
 reputation survey (see Bromley, 1993) and the
 reputation survey of Fortune magazine, adapted
 to the unique function of the local authorities in
 Israel. The first measure is derived from items in a
 survey among 600 managers and experts regard
 ing the reputation of U.S. cities (see Bromley,
 1993). It consists of items such as: flexible and
 high-quality manpower; accessibility to markets;
 favorable attitude toward businesses; fine public
 education system; comfortable flying service to
 major cities; low cost of housing; jobs; facilities;
 taxes; and quality of life. The other measure is
 derived from Fortune's annual corporate reputa
 tion survey among 8000 high-ranking executives,
 outside directors and financial analysts, who were
 asked to rate the 10 largest companies in their
 own industry on eight attributes, using a scale of
 0 (poor) to 10 (excellent). The attributes were:
 quality of management; quality of products or ser
 vices; innovativeness; long-term investment value;
 financial soundness; ability to attract, develop and
 keep talented people; community and environmen
 tal responsibility; and use of corporate assets (see,
 for example, Smith, Fortune, January 29, 1990).
 This measure has been used by numerous scholars,
 including Fombrun and Shanley (1990), Fryxell
 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

 Perceived environmental uncertainty is defined
 here as the perception of the organization's top
 management regarding its ability, or inability, to
 decide and direct the future of its task environment.
 Israel's local government has faced many chal
 lenges over the last two decades, one of the most
 important being the increased interest of the con
 stituencies in the way the local authority is man
 aged. Whereas 20 years ago the country's political
 parties dominated the process of electing the local
 authority head, whose primary obligation was to
 the party, growing public awareness, brought about
 in part by increased media coverage, has made the
 local authority elections far more open and com
 petitive. The result is that residents now expect
 their local authorities to be well managed, account
 able, and responsible for job creation by attracting
 businesses and investors. Clearly, the current envi
 ronment in which the local authorities operate has
 become more uncertain, which may be an impor
 tant factor influencing organizational performance.

 The theoretical background for our measure of
 perceived environmental uncertainty derives from

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1266 A. Carmeli and A. Tishler

 Dess and Beard's (1984: 64) suggestion that an
 environmental classification would provide useful
 building blocks to improve the conceptualization
 and measurement of organizational task environ
 ments. It also reflects the view that in an uncer
 tain competitive environment the organization may
 experience difficulties in understanding what its
 future direction will be (see Milliken, 1987).

 The measure of perceived environmental uncer
 tainty that we employ here was developed by
 Miller and Droge (1986) and has been used in
 many organizational research studies (e.g., Wald
 man et al., 2001). The measure consists of five
 items, including 'my local authority rarely has
 to change its customer practices to keep up with
 other local authorities,' and 'actions of other local
 authorities are quite easy to predict.' Cronbach's
 alpha for this measure is 0.64.

 Organizational (community) size, defined as the

 number of permanent residents in a particular juris
 diction, may affect the performance of a local
 authority. Though a large local authority may pre
 sumably enjoy economies of scale, a recent study
 by Martins (1995) shows that it is difficult to
 determine an optimal size. Furthermore, large local
 authorities tend to be over-bureaucratic and, hence,
 may find it difficult to successfully fulfill their
 duties (Leach, Stewart, and Walsh, 1994). Be that
 as it may, local authority size is represented by the
 number of its permanent residents.

 Location may also play a significant role in the
 success of a local authority. The local authorities
 in Israel are classified into three geographical loca
 tions: south, center, and north. Each of these loca
 tions is represented by a dummy variable. Local
 authorities in the center of the country, where the
 majority of the population resides, enjoy signifi
 cant resources from the central government, with
 Tel Aviv clearly Israel's business and financial hub.
 Local authorities from the north and south have
 long been arguing against the ongoing discrimi
 nation against their communities. Thus, we expect
 local authorities at the center to exhibit better orga
 nizational performance than those in the north and
 south.

 sets of variables. This method facilitates the iden
 tification of the effects of key variables in one data
 set on all or several of the variables in other sets.
 There are several types of multivariate analysis.
 In the case of two or more data sets, canonical
 correlation analysis (CCA) has been successfully
 used in different applications in the behavioral,
 social and economic sciences (Cliff, 1987; Dillon
 and Goldstein, 1984; Timm, 1975; Tishler et al,
 1996). However, when the number of variables in
 one of the data sets is large (relative to the num
 ber of observations), which is often the case in
 studies in the area of management, the weights
 obtained by CCA (and regression analysis) are usu
 ally extremely unreliable due to multicollinearity
 among the variables (Judge et al, 1985; Tishler
 and Lipovetsky, 2000).

 To circumvent the multicollinearity problem
 and obtain reliable and robust weights, Tishler
 and Lipovetsky (2000) developed and applied the
 method of robust canonical analysis (RCA), which
 has been used successfully in management appli
 cations (Ahituv, Lipovetsky, and Tishler, 1999;
 Azulay, Lerner, and Tishler, 2002; Tishler et al,
 1996).
 Applying the RCA method to two data sets
 amounts to estimating the weights which max
 imize the covariance between linear aggregators
 (weighted averages) of the two data sets. RCA is
 applied to standardized variables. Thus, although
 formal statistical inference of the RCA estimates is
 unavailable (as is the case with other multivariate
 canonical correlation methods; see Cliff, 1987; Dil
 lon and Goldstein, 1984), a variable with a large
 estimated weight affects the connection between
 the two data sets more than a variable with a small
 weight. Variables in one data set are defined as
 critical (important) relative to those in the second
 data set when their weights in the RCA between
 the two data sets are large (see Tishler et al, 1996;
 Tishler and Lipovetsky, 2000) for algorithms that
 select critical variables from large data sets. Vari
 ables that are not designated as critical relative to
 the other data set may still affect this set. How
 ever, their influence on the second data set may
 not be as pronounced as the influence of critical
 variables.

 The multivariate analysis approach
 Multivariate analysis is often employed when
 researchers need to represent a very large data set
 by several, easy-to-interpret variables or when it
 is necessary to relate one set of variables to other
 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

 Finally, the statistic q2, which measures the
 share of the explained variability out of the total
 variability among the correlations of the variables
 in the two data sets, is equivalent to the well
 known R2 in a regression model. The squared

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 canonical correlation among the critical variables,
 r2cc, which, like forecasting with the RCA method,
 uses all the correlations among the critical vari
 ables and is also an important measure of goodness
 of fit of the final RCA model (see Tishler and
 Lipovetsky, 2000; Tarn, 2003).4

 RESULTS

 The means, standard deviations, and correlations
 among the research variables are presented in
 Table 1. The correlations between each organiza
 tional element and the control variables or vari
 ables representing performance are relatively low,
 as are the correlations among the variables repre
 senting performance and between these variables
 and the control variables. Most of the correla
 tions among organizational elements are, however,
 rather large, which is only to be expected since
 organizations being aware of the importance of
 most of their organizational elements to their per
 formance tend to balance their values. The high
 correlations, however, mean that we cannot use
 multiple regression analysis or CCA, which are
 prone to multicollinearity, in assessing the effect
 on organizational performance of organizational
 elements, let alone the interactions among them.
 The RCA procedure provides estimates that are
 robust and more reliable than multiple regression
 or CCA when multicollinearity among the vari
 ables is severe (see Tishler and Lipovetsky, 2000;
 Tarn, 2003). Hence, the effects of the six intan
 gible organizational elements and their interac
 tions on the performance of the local authorities
 in Israel were estimated by RCA. Table 2 reports
 the effect of the control variables on organiza
 tional performance. Table 3 reports the effect of
 the control variables and the intangible organi
 zational elements on organizational performance.
 Table 4 presents the effect of the control variables,
 the intangible organizational elements (the 'main
 effects'), and the interactions among the intangible
 organizational elements on organizational perfor
 mance.

 Intangible Organizational Elements 1267

 effect on organizational performance. The good
 ness of fit is q2 = 0.71 when organizational perfor
 mance is explained only by the control variables. It
 increases to q2 = 0.85 when intangible organiza
 tional elements are added to the model, and further
 increases to q2 = 0.93 when organizational per
 formance is explained by the interactions of the
 intangible organizational elements in addition to
 the control variables and the intangible organiza
 tional elements. The results in Table 4, the full
 model, are discussed below.

 The intangible organizational elements that we
 use here are positively related to all the organi
 zational performance measures, except for inter
 nal migration. Thus, the results in Table 4 pro
 vide strong support for the postulate of Hypoth
 esis 1 that intangible organizational elements are
 positively associated with organizational perfor
 mance. We find that organizational culture and
 perceived organizational reputation are the mea
 sures most important to organizational perfor
 mance (with coefficients of 0.24 and 0.23, respec
 tively), while the other four intangible organiza
 tional elements exhibit a similar degree of impor
 tance, as do perceived environmental uncertainty
 and geographical location (with absolute values of
 the estimated coefficients at or somewhat below
 0.20). This clearly indicates that organizations with
 strong organizational culture and favorable per
 ceived organizational reputation achieve above
 normal performance, and that high measures of
 labor relations, human capital, internal auditing,
 and managerial capabilities are also critical to
 organizational performance.

 The estimates in Table 4 also lend strong support
 to Hypothesis 2. All the coefficient estimates of the
 15 interactions among the six organizational ele
 ments are positive and substantial in size, showing
 that the effect of any given organizational ele
 ment on the organization's performance is larger,
 the larger are the effects of the other organiza
 tional elements. That is, organizational elements
 enhance each other in their effect on the perfor
 mance of the sample local authorities. As is the
 case with the direct effects of organizational ele
 ments on organizational performance, the effects
 of the interactions of organizational culture and
 perceived organizational reputation with the other
 organizational elements are somewhat larger (i.e.,
 more important in their effect on organizational
 performance) than the effects of the interactions
 with the remaining four organizational elements.

 The results in Tables 2-4 lend support to Hypo
 theses 1 and 2. That is, intangible organizational
 elements and their interactions have a positive

 4 A brief formal presentation of the RCA method and the
 goodness-of-fit measures are in Appendix' 2.

 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. i., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1268 A. Carmeli and A. Tishler

 O

 O -H
 ? O O
 I I
 OOOh
 t^ en o
 ? odd
 I I

 00 un o m
 ^o r-* m o
 -h d d d d

 I I
 ? m un Tt Tt
 ? ? ? ? ?

 oo
 -H ?

 <n m o 00 i>
 O O O O ?

 ^ ? ?

 r? -h m un o
 m m o ? ^h
 d d d d d

 m in ^t
 r- r- t>
 ? odd

 m ON On (N
 r- t^ so r
 ? dodo

 tj- un rf f- m
 m (N ^h ? o
 d d d d d

 I I

 un on on vo (N
 m (N ^h o o
 d d d d d

 r- r- oo r- r
 > ? ? ? ? d>

 t?- un o r- r^
 m (N ? o ?
 d d d d d

 ^o m r- in Tt m
 ti in in in ^o *o
 ^ d d d d d d

 o
 ?< d

 O O O O O -h
 O O O O O O
 I I I I I

 r- ^ m r- ?
 m (N (N o o
 ? ? ? ? ?

 I I
 ^o ? r^ tj- on
 m O -h en ?
 d d d d d

 I I I

 o
 o
 -o
 g

 q

 >
 T3

 73
 G
 cd

 ? o o

 ^t r^ en
 Tf ^ <n
 ? O O O

 rH (S 0\ rH fT! Tt
 ?' O O -H -H ^H
 d d d d d d
 lilil?
 oo m o m o o
 -H ^ -H -H (N <N
 O O O O O O

 (N 00 VO 1?1 \0
 m (N o ? ?
 d d d d d

 Il II
 vo un Tt (N on
 Tt <N (N O O
 d ? ? ? ?

 q

 Os O <N (N
 m un m o>
 dddd _; ^ ^_; _; _; r-;

 mrHO\om^
 -h O ?-H (N O (N

 (N Un r-H
 (N (N un un ^
 OOro Jen
 r-i <N T^

 G
 a

 X vo o> Tf

 vq ^q oo r~; p os
 ^r **t ^t tJ-' un ^r

 ? ? so ? ^
 (N <N ^

 +-> c/3

 S 3 S -o
 2 g,
 a Si
 G 'C O
 'S &g
 ?-" ed S
 ? c S
 S? ?* S

 G \3
 G
 O

 a.2

 0) 5-H

 O?

 g g)
 .2 ?
 ' *s 'S

 ?3 G ? S
 138
 C <? ?H (U
 ^> ,
 5 JO?X

 o 5 ? '
 w V D G
 G <4-^ ?G 0)
 -O G
 <U

 G O

 cd .G
 cd
 G ??

 unvoi^ocONO ^h M m i- ?n

 c fe
 <u o
 O G
 G G ^o
 .2 .2 ? ?
 ^ ^ ^T?
 & g N B
 J J 00 P-,
 ? (N m ^t

 o
 o
 V
 ?
 o
 (N
 O

 ^^

 >U

 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. /., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Intangible Organizational Elements 1269

 Table 2. The effects of location, size and environmental uncertainty on organizational
 performance3

 Performance Measures

 Weight

 Control and Independent Variables

 Weight

 S elf-income ratio 0.83
 Collecting efficiency ratio 0.47
 Employment rate 0.29
 Municipal development ?0.03
 Internal migration 0.02

 Location: center 0.47
 Location: north ?0.64
 Organizational size (LOG) ?0.29
 Perceived environmental uncertainty ?0.54

 *q2 =0.71; r\c =0.55

 Table 3. The effects of the control variables and the organizational elements on organizational
 performance3

 Performance measures

 Weight

 Control and independent variables

 Weight

 Self-income ratio
 Collecting efficiency ratio
 Employment rate
 Municipal development
 Internal migration

 0.73 Location: center 0.35
 0.59 Location: north -0.27
 0.27 Organizational size (LOG) 0.09
 0.16 Perceived environmental uncertainty ?0.31
 0.04 Managerial capabilities (MC) 0.28

 Human capital 0.31
 Internal auditing 0.29
 Labor relations 0.31
 Organizational culture 0.41
 Perceived organizational reputation 0.40

 V = 0.85; r\  :0.60

 Table 4 also indicates that four performance
 measures (self-income ratio, collecting efficiency
 ratio, employment rate, and municipal develop
 ment) can be well explained by the six intan
 gible elements and the interactions among them,
 together with variables representing the perceived
 environmental uncertainty and location of the
 local authority. The squared canonical correlation
 between the weighted average of the indepen
 dent variables?intangible organizational elements
 and the interactions among them, as well as the
 other control variables, and the weighted average
 of the variables representing organizational per
 formance?is 0.71. The estimates in Table 4 also
 indicate that the 'financial performance' measures,
 represented by self-income ratio and collecting
 efficiency ratio, are by far the most important to
 the local authority's overall organizational perfor
 mance. The local authority's employment rate and
 its municipal development, while of importance
 in forming the measure of overall organizational
 performance, are less critical than the financial per
 formance measures.

 uncertainty are important factors in explaining the
 variability in the performance of local authorities
 in Israel, but organizational size (whether mea
 sured in absolute value or in logarithms) is not.
 Perceived environmental uncertainty was related
 negatively to all four measures of performance. It
 seems that organizations that perceive their envi
 ronment as highly uncertain are more likely to
 show below-normal performance than those that
 perceive the task environment as more certain.
 Location is also critically associated with organiza
 tional performance. That is, local authorities in the
 central part of Israel outperform local authorities
 in the north and in the south.

 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

 Today, perhaps more than in the past, managers,
 whether in the business or public sector, are finding
 it difficult to cope with the increasingly uncertain
 environment and are therefore coming to the real
 ization that the rules have changed and they now
 need to compete on strategic elements in order
 to outperform their rivals (Prahalad and Hamel,

 Finally, the estimates in Table 4 indicate that
 geographical location and perceived environmental
 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1270 A. Carmeli and A. Tishler

 Table 4. The effects of the organizational elements and their interactions on organizational
 performance3

 Performance measures

 Weight
 Self-income ratio 0.73
 Collecting efficiency ratio 0.60
 Employment rate 0.24
 Municipal development 0.20
 Internal migration 0.02

 Weight
 0.20
 -0.16
 0.05
 -0.18
 0.16
 0.18
 0.17
 0.18
 0.24
 0.23

 Control and independent variables

 Location: center
 Location: north
 Organizational size (LOG)
 Perceived environmental uncertainty
 Managerial capabilities (MC)
 Human capital
 Internal auditing
 Labor relations
 Organizational culture
 Perceived organizational reputation
 Managerial capabilities x Human capital 0.18
 Managerial capabilities x Internal auditing 0.18
 Managerial capabilities x Labor relations 0.18
 Managerial capabilities x Org. culture 0.21
 Managerial capabilities x Reputation0 0.21
 Human capital x Internal auditing 0.19
 Human capital x Labor relations 0.19
 Human capital x Org. culture 0.23
 Human capital x Reputation 0.23
 Internal auditing x Labor relations 0.19
 Internal auditing x Org. culture 0.21
 Internal auditing x Reputation 0.22
 Labor relations x Org. culture 0.22
 Labor relations x Reputation 0.22
 Org. culture x Reputation 0.25

 3 This model consists of all the control and independent variables and interactions that are discussed in
 the research.
 b 'Reputation' stands for 'Perceived organizational reputation'.
 q2 =0.93; r2cc =0.71

 1990). In this public sector study of local author
 ities in Israel, we focus on a set of six intangible
 elements and their direct and interactive effects
 on a set of five organizational performance mea
 sures, while controlling for the effects of location,
 perceived environmental uncertainty, and orga
 nizational (community) size. Using multivariate
 analysis, we demonstrate that intangible elements,
 together with environmental uncertainty and geo
 graphical location, strongly affect the performance
 of local authorities.

 (1995), we adopt a behavioral approach to opera
 tionalize and measure the strategic characteristics
 of organizations as identified by the RBV. Third,
 this study does not limit itself to the analysis of
 one resource (or capability) on the performance
 of the organization. Rather, it analyzes the simul
 taneous effect of a set of organizational elements
 on organization performance (as do, for example,
 Hitt and Ireland, 1985). Thus, we emphasize that
 no organization is likely to outperform its rivals
 based on a single strategic resource. Fourth, this
 study uses measures that capture the multidimen
 sionality of organizational performance. Clearly,
 neither business firms nor local authorities can be
 evaluated solely on the basis of their financial per
 formance. Public organizations in particular are
 also judged on their social performance (such as
 contribution to the community and environmental
 responsibility). Also, as noted above, local author
 ities are now responsible for activities that they

 We adopt the argument that the resource-based
 view (RBV) can serve as a useful paradigm for the
 analysis of variations in the performance of public
 sector organizations, designing the study to over
 come some of the difficulties that RBV researchers
 have been facing. In so doing, we contribute to
 filling the gap in the literature on the applicabil
 ity of the RBV to the public and not-for-profit
 sector. Second, following Robins and Wiersema
 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Intangible Organizational Elements 1271

 take care to ensure that the rent generated by posi
 tive labor relations is not offset by costs associated
 with the establishment and maintenance of these
 labor relations (see Coff, 1999). Human capital is
 also found to be a source of higher performance
 by local authorities. It seems that local authorities
 implementing strategic human resource manage
 ment practices that result in organization-specific
 educated and trained employees outperform those
 that do not implement such practices (Huselid,
 1995; Huselid, Jackson, and Sch?ler, 1997), which
 strengthens the premise that people are a valuable
 organizational resource (Collis and Montgomery,
 1998; O'Reilly and Pfeffer, 2000; Pfeffer, 1994).
 Internal auditing is also a critical resource for the
 local authority, apparently helping the employees
 to focus on doing the right things and doing them
 right, through teaching, motivating, deterrence, and
 process improvement (Eden and Moriah, 1996). It
 may also be an important aid to local authorities
 in the proper management of their complex orga
 nizations, leaving them less open to accusations of
 mismanagement. The estimation results show that
 managerial capabilities are also important for the
 success (high performance) of a local authority.
 These findings are consistent with the importance
 that business organizations attribute to their top
 management and the capabilities they possess in
 generating rent for the firm (Castanias and Helfat,
 1991; Hambrick and Mason, 1984; Finkelstein and
 Hambrick, 1996; Mahoney, 1995; Yukl, 1981).

 had not been concerned with in the past, such as
 job creation.

 The estimation results demonstrate several im
 portant effects of intangible elements on the per
 formance of local authorities. First, it is clearly
 shown that intangible elements are critical for an
 organization to attain its goals and accomplish
 above-normal performance, organizational culture
 and perceived organizational reputation appearing
 to be far more important than the other intangible
 resources. The finding that strong organizational
 culture is critical to a local authority in achiev
 ing an advantageous position is especially notable,
 since it generalizes previous theoretical proposi
 tions on its importance for business organizations
 (see Barney, 1986). A local authority with a strong
 organizational culture that emphasizes elements
 such as high involvement of the organization's
 members, shared beliefs, ability to adapt to the
 environment, and a sense of mission (Denison,
 1990) is likely to perform better than its counter
 parts lacking such an organizational culture. The
 finding that perceived organizational reputation is
 also a highly critical resource is consistent with
 the theory as well as empirical findings of pre
 vious research (see Fombrun, 1996; Roberts and
 Dowling, 2002; Shrum and Wuthnow, 1988). As
 in the business sector, local authorities exploit a
 favorable reputation that cannot be easily imitated
 by competitors to achieve superior performance.
 Highly reputable local authorities can, for exam
 ple, attract new residents from the higher socio
 economic levels, as well as new investors, and thus
 strengthen their fiscal state, create new jobs, and
 offer a higher standard of living.

 Labor relations, human capital, internal audit

 One of the most important findings of this study
 is that organizational elements enhance each other
 in their effect on organizational performance. That
 is, the 'marginal productivity' of each organiza
 tional element is higher the higher are the values
 of all other organizational elements. This result
 suggests that local authorities seeking to maxi
 mize their performance subject to a given budget
 should balance the development of their organiza
 tional elements. Though optimal values of various
 organizational elements may differ due to the dif
 ferent cost entailed in developing each of them,
 our results indicate that local authorities should
 attempt to estimate not only the direct effect of
 each organizational element on performance, but
 also assess the effects on performance of the inter
 actions among them.

 ing, and managerial capabilities are also important
 in achieving above-normal organizational perfor
 mance. Good labor relations between the man
 agement and the employees are likely to improve
 the performance of a local authority. The results
 indicate that upholding principles such as fair
 ness, safety, and trust is likely to motivate mem
 bers to higher production and overall standards,
 thereby countervailing the effects of inefficiency,
 ineffectiveness, and concealed unemployment that
 too often burden local authorities in Israel. The
 implication is that organizations with good labor
 Perceived environmental uncertainty is nega
 relations will manage to retain the rent generated
 tively related to organizational performance. That
 is, the more uncertain the environment is per
 rather than enabling the employees to appropri
 ate large portions of it. Clearly, managers should
 ceived to be, the lower the performance of the local
 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1272 A. Carmeli and A. Tishler

 authority. It seems that organizations that outper
 form their competitors better analyze and under
 stand their task environment and are thus more
 adaptable. Their superior understanding of the cur
 rent and future environmental trends makes them
 better able to fit into the ever-changing environ
 ment.

 As to geographical location, local authorities
 located in central Israel perform better in a variety
 of functions than those located in the north and
 south of the country. This outcome is due mainly
 to the concentration of business and government
 activities in the center of Israel.

 In conclusion, the observation made by Collis

 and Montgomery (1998: 27) that resources are
 'the substance of strategy, the very essence of
 sustainable competitive advantage' finds support
 in our study, as does the argument that gaining
 and preserving superiority in competitive environ
 ments rests on a set of strategic elements (Amit
 and Schoemaker, 1993; Barney, 1991; Wernerfelt,
 1984). The design of this study may also con
 tribute to overcoming some difficulties in quan
 titative analyses in the field and extend the use of
 the RBV to the public sector.

 Limitations and suggestions for future research

 The second concern is the generalizability of the
 study, which may be limited due to the unique
 ness of the local government task environment
 (Dess, Ireland, and Hitt, 1990: 13). It was pre
 cisely the fact that local government in Israel can
 be viewed as a definable task environment (i.e., a
 single industry) that allowed us to apply the RBV,
 with its primary interest on competitive advantage,
 which, by definition, is task-environment specific.
 Moreover, the elements of local government that
 are the focus of this study are task-environment
 specific and cannot be easily transferred across
 environment boundaries. Also, by studying a sin
 gle task environment, the researcher eliminates the
 need to measure and control for a broad range of
 environment-specific factors. Nevertheless, despite
 the obvious need to exercise cautious in generaliz
 ing the results of applying the RBV in a single-task
 environment to other environments, we are confi
 dent that the findings of this study can, with some
 modifications, be applied to other settings. For
 example, a strong organizational culture has been
 found to play a significant role in business and
 public organizations alike. Thus, the issue is how,
 not whether, to match the competitive strategy and
 the culture of the organization (Itami with Roehl,
 1987). We believe that an interesting avenue of
 research would be to compare the effect of intangi
 ble elements on organizational performance across
 the private and the public sectors.

 Conclusion

 Two limitations of the study need elaboration:
 causality and generalizability. It seems important
 to inquire whether the performance of local gov
 ernment authorities is driven mainly by intangible
 elements and not by other, possibly unobserved,
 variables. Clearly, this is possible. Though we have
 made a substantial effort to explain the importance
 of intangible elements in a service and knowledge
 society, more research is needed to extend the set
 of intangible resources, and simultaneously esti
 mate the effect of tangible and intangible resources
 on organizational performance. Another issue con
 cerning causality is the large number of functions
 that the local authority is expected to carry out.
 A study of the performance of these organizations
 may have to explore all the activities for which
 they are accountable. This study employs objective
 data on several performance measures of the local
 authorities in order to capture the multidimen
 sionality of their performance. Further research is
 needed to extend the measures that relevant stake
 holders use to evaluate the performance of public
 organizations such as local authorities.
 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

 In this article we have made an attempt to advance
 the research on complementarities from anecdo
 tal and case study evidence to a relatively large
 sample study. We estimated the influence of a set
 of intangible elements and their interactions on a
 set of performance measures in a public sector
 setting. Our results, in general, indicate the value
 of intangible elements (resources) and their mutu
 ally enhancing interactions for organizational per
 formance. However, the task of coordinating and
 balancing the development of organizational ele
 ments, within investment constraints, in the effort
 to maximize performance is quite complex (cf.
 Rivkin, 2000; Siggelkow, 2002). To practically
 resolve this complexity, it may be beneficial to dis
 aggregate the organization into discrete elements,
 as in Porter's (1985) value chain, and examine the
 value of each element independently and interac
 tively with one or more elements. Though this may

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 seem at first sight to be a mission beyond the orga
 nization's capability, we believe that senior man
 agers have the knowledge and circumspection to
 provide relatively accurate observations regarding
 the core and non-core elements and the interactions
 among them that ultimately constitute the over
 all value of the organization. Finally, the notion
 of complementarities is especially important given
 the findings of previous studies (e.g., Barnett and
 Freeman, 2001) that too much emphasis on a par
 ticular good element may produce a negative effect
 by creating an imbalance among the individual ele
 ments and within the system as a whole. We extend
 this insight by discouraging managers from placing
 too much emphasis on a particular set of interac
 tions, encouraging them rather to create a balance
 in such a way that the whole is greater than the
 sum of its parts (see Makadok, 2003).

 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

 We wish to thank Aaron Cohen, Associate Editor
 Will Mitchell, and two anonymous reviewers for
 their insightful comments and suggestions. We also
 thank the participants of the research seminar in the
 Department of Management at Drexel University
 for their comments on an earlier draft of this paper.

 REFERENCES

 Ahituv N, Lipovetsky S, Tishler A. 1999. The rela
 tionship between firm's information systems policy
 and business performance: a multivariate approach.
 In Measuring Information Technology Investment
 Payoff: Contemporary Approach, Mahmood MA,
 Szewizak EJ (eds). Idea Group: Hershey, PA; 62-82.

 Amit R, Schoemaker PJH. 1993. Strategic assets and
 organizational rent. Strategic Management Journal
 14(1): 33-46.

 Aryee S, Chay YW, Tan HH. 1994. An examination of

 the antecedents of subjective career success among
 a managerial sample in Singapore. Human Relations
 47(5): 487-509.

 Asefa S, Huang WC (eds). 1994. Human Capital and
 Economic Development. W. E. Upjohn Institute for
 Employment Research: Kalamazoo, MI.

 Azulay I, Lerner M, Tishler A. 2002. Converting mili
 tary technology through corporate entrepreneur ship.
 Research Policy 31: 419-435.

 Barnett WP, Freeman J. 2001. Too much of a good
 thing? Product proliferation and organizational failure.
 Organization Science 12(5): 539-558.

 Barney JB. 1986. Organizational culture: can it be a
 source of sustained competitive advantage? Academy
 of Management Review 11(3): 656-665.

 Intangible Organizational Elements 1273

 Barney JB. 1991. Firm resources and sustained com

 petitive advantage. Journal of Management 17(1):
 99-120.

 Barney JB. 2001. Is the resource-based 'view' a useful
 perspective for strategic management research? Yes.
 Academy of Management Review 26(1): 41-56.

 Becker GS. 1993. Human Capital: A Theoretical
 and Empirical Analysis, with Special Reference to
 Education (3rd edn). University of Chicago Press:
 Chicago, IL/National Bureau of Economic Research:
 New York.

 Boxall P, Steeneveld M. 1999. Human resource strategy
 and competitive advantage: a longitudinal study of
 engineering consultancies. Journal of Management
 Studies 36(4): 443-463.

 Bromley DB. 1993. Reputation, Image and Impression

 Management. Wiley: Chichester.

 Canals J. 2000. Managing Corporate Growth. Oxford

 University Press: New York.

 Carmeli A. 2002. A conceptual and practical framework
 of measuring performance of local authorities in
 financial terms: analysing the case of Israel. Local
 Government Studies 28(1): 21-36.

 Castanias RP, Helfat CE. 1991. Managerial resources and

 rents. Journal of Management 17(1): 155-171.

 Chatterjee S, Wernerfeit B. 1991. The link between
 resources and type of diversification: theory and
 evidence. Strategic Management Journal 12(1):
 33-48.

 Cliff N. 1987. Analyzing Multivariate Data. Harcourt

 Brace Jovanovich: San Diego, CA.

 Coff RW. 1999. When competitive advantage doesn't
 lead to performance: the resource-based view and
 stakeholder bargaining power. Organization Science
 10(2): 119-133.

 Collis DJ, Montgomery CA. 1998. Corporate Strategy:
 A Resource-Based View. Irwin/McGraw-Hill: Boston,
 MA.

 Dastmalchian A, Blyton P, Adamson R. 1991. The
 Climate of Workplace Relations. Routledge: London.
 Denison DR. 1990. Corporate Culture and Organiza

 tional Effectiveness. Wiley: New York.

 Dess GG, Beard DW. 1984. Dimensions of organi
 zational task environments. Administrative Science
 Quarterly 29: 52-73.

 DessGG, Ireland RD, Hitt MA. 1990. Industry effects

 and strategic management research. Journal of
 Management 16(1): 7-27.

 Dillon WR, Goldstein M. 1984. Multivariate Analysis,

 Methods and Applications. Wiley: New York.

 Dutton JE, Dukerich JM, Harquail CV. 1994. Organiza
 tional images and member identification. Administra
 tive Science Quarterly 39(2): 239-263.

 Eden D, Moriah L. 1996. Impact of internal auditing on
 branch bank performance: a field experiment. Orga
 nizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
 68(3): 262-271.

 Farjoun M. 1994. Beyond industry boundaries: human
 expertise, diversification and resource-related industry
 groups. Organization Science 5: 185-199.

 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. /., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1274 A. Carmeli and A. Tishler

 Finkelstein S, Hambrick D. 1996. Strategic Leadership:
 Top Executives and their Effects on Organizations.
 West: St Paul, MN.

 Fombrun CJ. 1996. Reputation: Realizing Value from the
 Corporate Image. Harvard Business School Press:
 Boston, MA.

 Fombrun CJ, Shanley M. 1990. What's in a name?
 Reputation building and corporate strategy. Academy
 of Management Journal 33(2): 233-258.

 Fryxell GE, Wang J. 1994. The Fortune corporate
 'reputation' index: reputation for what? Journal of

 Management 20(1): 1-14.

 Gatewood RD, Gowan MA, Lautenschlager GJ. 1993.
 Corporate image, recruitment image, and initial job
 choice decisions. Academy of Management Journal
 36(2): 414-427.

 Globerson A, Globerson S. 1990. Control and Evaluation
 in Organizations: Management by Measurement. Tel
 Aviv University: Tel Aviv, Israel.

 Godfrey PC, Hill CWL. 1995. The problem of unob
 servables in strategic management research. Strategic
 Management Journal 16(7): 519-533.

 Hambrick DC, Mason PA. 1984. Upper echelons: the
 organization as a reflection of its top management.
 Academy of Management Review 9: 193-206.

 Hershberg T. 1996. Human capital development: Amer
 ica's greatest challenge. Annals of the American
 Academy of Political Science 544(March): 43-51.

 Hitt MA, Ireland RD. 1985. Corporate distinctive com

 petence, strategy, industry and performance. Strategic
 Management Journal 6(3): 273-293.

 Hitt MA, BiermanL, Shimizu K, Kochhar R. 2001.
 Direct and moderating effects of human capital on
 strategy and performance in professional service
 firms: a resource-based perspective. Academy of
 Management Journal 44(1): 13-28.

 Hoskisson RR, Hitt MA, Wan WP, Yiu D. 1999. Theory
 and research in strategic management: swings of a
 pendulum. Journal of Management 25(3): 417-456.
 Huselid MA. 1995. The impact of human resource
 management practices on turnover, productivity,
 and corporate financial performance. Academy of
 Management Journal 38(3): 635-672.

 Huselid MA, Jackson SE, Schuler RS. 1997. Technical
 and strategic human resource management effective
 ness as determinants of firm performance. Academy of
 Management Journal 40(1): 171-188.

 Israel, Central Bureau of Statistics. 1997. Local
 Authorities in Israel 1995: Physical Data (Publication
 1046). Central Bureau of Statistics: Jerusalem.

 Itami H, Roehl WT. 1987. Mobilizing Invisible Assets.

 Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA.

 Javidan M. 1998. Core competence: what does it mean

 in practice? Long Range Planning 31(1): 60-71.

 Judge GG, Griffiths WE, Hill RC, L?tkepohl H, Lee TC.
 1985. The Theory and Practice of Econometrics (2nd
 edn). Wiley: New York.

 Katz RL. 1974. Skills of an effective administrator.

 Harvard Business Review 52(5): 90-102.

 Kitay J, Marchington M. 1996. Review and critique
 of workplace industrial relations typologies. Human
 Relations 49(10): 1263-1290.

 Klein AS, Masi RJ, Weidner II CK. 1995. Organization

 culture, distribution and amount of control, and
 perceptions of quality: an empirical study of
 linkages. Group and Organization Management 20(2):
 122-148.

 Lado AA, Wilson MC. 1994. Human resource systems

 and sustained competitive advantage: a competency
 based perspective. Academy of Management Review
 19(4): 699-727.

 Leach S, Stewart J, Walsh K. 1994. The Changing
 Organisation and Management of Local Government.
 Macmillan Press: London.

 Leonard-Barton D. 1992. Core capabilities and core
 rigidities: a paradox in managing new product devel
 opment. Strategic Management Journal, Summer Spe
 cial Issue 13: 111-125.

 Mahoney JT. 1995. The management of resources and
 the resources of management. Journal of Business
 Research 33: 91-101.

 Makadok R. 2001. Toward a synthesis of the resource

 based and dynamic-capability views of rent creation.
 Strategic Management Journal 22(5): 387-402.

 Makadok R. 2003. Doing the right thing and knowing

 the right thing to do: why the whole is greater than
 the sum of the parts. Strategic Management Journal,
 Special Issue 24: 1043-1055.

 Martins MR. 1995. Size of municipalities, efficiency, and
 citizen participation: a cross-European perspective.
 Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy
 13(4): 441-458.

 Meyer JP, Allen NJ. 1997. Commitment in the Work
 place: Theory, Research and Application. Sage: Thou
 sand Oaks, CA.

 McGuire J, Sundgren A, Schneeweiss T. 1988. Corporate
 social responsibility and firm financial performance.
 Academy of Management Journal 31(4): 854-872.

 Miller C, Burke L, Glick W. 1998. Cognitive diversity
 among upper-echelon executives: implications for
 strategic decision processes. Strategic Management
 Journal 19(1): 39-58.

 Miller D, Droge C. 1986. Psychological and traditional

 determinants of structure. Administrative Science
 Quarterly 31: 539-560.

 Milliken FJ. 1987. Three types of perceived uncertainty
 about the environment: state, effect, and response
 uncertainty. Academy of Management Review 12:
 133-143.

 Ministry of Interior. 1999. Report of Auditing Financial
 Data Local Authorities 1998 (no. 4) (in Hebrew).
 Ministry of Interior: Jerusalem.

 Moore MH. 1995. Creating Public Value: Strategic

 Management in Government, Harvard University
 Press: Cambridge, MA.

 Moore MH. 2000. Managing for value: organizational
 strategy in for-profit, nonprofit, and governmental
 organizations. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quar
 terly 29(Suppl.): 183-204.

 National Academy of Public Administration. 1999.
 A Government to Trust and Respect: Rebuilding
 Citizen-Government Relations for the 21st Century.
 A report on civic trust and citizen responsibility

 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 (June), National Academy of Public Administration:
 Washington, DC.

 Norburn D, Birley S. 1988. The top management team
 and corporate performance. Strategic Management
 Journal 9(3): 225-237.

 OECD. 2001. The New Economy: Beyond the Hype. The

 OECD Growth Project, Economics: Paris.

 O'Reilly III CA, Pfeffer J. 2000. Hidden Value: How
 Great Companies Achieve Extraordinary Results with
 Ordinary People. Harvard Business School Press:
 Boston, MA.

 O'Reilly CA, Snyder RC, Boothe JN. 1993. Executive
 team demography and organizational change. In
 Organizational Change and Redesign: Ideas and
 Insights for Improving Performance, Huber GP,
 Glick WH (eds). Oxford University Press: New York;
 147-175.

 Penrose ET. 1959. The Theory of the Growth of the Firm.

 Basil Blackwell: Oxford.

 Peteraf MA. 1993. The cornerstones of competitive
 advantage: a resource-based view. Strategic Manage
 ment Journal 14(3): 179-191.

 Peterson P. 1981. City Limits. University of Chicago

 Press: Chicago, IL.

 Pfeffer J. 1994. Competitive Advantage Through People:
 Unleashing the Power of the Work Force. Harvard
 Business School Press: Boston, MA.

 Porter ME. 1985. Competitive Advantage. Free Press:

 New York.

 Porter ME. 1996. What is strategy? Harvard Business

 Review 74(6): 61-78.

 Porter ME. 1998. On Competition. Harvard Business

 School Press: Boston, MA.

 Prahalad CK, Hamel G. 1990. The core competence
 of the corporation. Harvard Business Review 68(3):
 79-91.

 Priem RL, Butler JE. 2001. Is the resource-based 'view' a
 useful perspective for strategic management research?
 Academy of Management Review 26(1): 22-40.

 Propper C, Halonen M. 1999. The allocation of effort in
 government bureaucracies. A paper presented at the
 Royal Economic Society's 1999 Annual Conference
 at the University of Nottingham.

 Reed R, DeFillippi RJ. 1990. Causal ambiguity, barriers
 to imitation, and sustainable competitive advantage.
 Academy of Management Review 15(1): 88-102.

 Rivkin JW. 2000. Imitation of complex strategies.

 Management Science 46(6): 824-844.

 Roberts PW, Dowling GR. 2002. Corporate reputation

 and sustained superior financial performance. Strategic
 Management Journal 23(12): 1077-1093.

 Robins J, Wiersema MF. 1995. A resource-based ap
 proach to the multibusiness firm: empirical analysis
 of portfolio interrelationships and corporate financial
 performance. Strategic Management Journal 16(4):
 277-299.

 Schneider M. 1989. Intermunicipal competition, budget
 maximizing bureaucrats, and the level of suburban
 competition. American Journal of Political Science
 33(3): 612-628.

 Schultz TW. 1961. Investment in human capital.

 American Economic Review 51(1): 1-17.

 Intangible Organizational Elements 1275

 Shrum W, Wuthnow R. 1988. Reputational status of

 organizations in technical systems. American Journal
 of Sociology 93(4): 882-912.

 Siggelkow N. 2002. Evolution toward fit. Administrative

 Science Quarterly 47(1): 125-159.

 Smidts A, Pruyn ATH, van Riel CBM. 2001. The impact
 of employee communication and perceived external
 prestige on organizational identification. Academy of
 Management Journal 44(5): 1051 -1062.

 Smith S. 1990. America's most admired corporations.

 Fortune (1 January): 30-46.

 Spector R, McCarthy PD. 1995. The Nordstrom Way:

 The Inside Story of America 's #1 Customer Service
 Company. Wiley: New York.

 Stalk G, Evans P, S hulm?n LE. 1992. Competing on

 capabilities: the new rules of corporate strategy.
 Harvard Business Review 70(2): 57-67.

 Tarn A. 2003. Robust canonical analysis (RCA):
 identifying the most important variables in a two
 set multivariate problem. MSc thesis, Faculty of
 Management, Tel Aviv University.

 Teece DJ. 2000. Strategies for managing knowledge
 assets: the role of firm structure and industrial context.
 Long Range Planning 33(1): 35-54.

 Tiebout CM. 1956. A pure theory of local expenditures.

 Journal of Political Economy 64: 416-424.

 Timm NH. 1975. Multivariate Analysis with Application
 in Education and Psychology. Brooks: Belmont, CA.
 Tishler A, Dvir D, Shenhar A, Lipovetsky S. 1996. Iden
 tifying critical success factors of defense development
 projects: a multivariate analysis. Technological Fore
 casting and Social Change 51(2): 151-171.

 Tishler A, Lipovetsky S. 2000. Modeling and forecast

 ing with robust canonical analysis: method and
 application. Computers and Operations Research 27:
 217-232.

 Wagner FR, Morse JJ. 1975. A measure of individual
 sense of competence. Psychological Reports 36:
 451-459.

 Waldman DA, Ramirez GG, House RJ, Furanam P.
 2001. Does leadership matter? CEO leadership
 attributes and profitability under conditions of
 perceived environmental uncertainty. Academy of
 Management Journal 44(1): 134-143.

 Weigelt K, Camerer C. 1988. Reputation and corporate
 strategy: a review of recent theory and applications.
 Strategic Management Journal 9(5): 443-454.

 Wernerfeit B. 1984. The resource-based view of the firm.

 Strategic Management Journal 5(2): 171 -180.

 Yukl GA. 1981. Leadership in Organizations. Prentice

 Hall: Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

 APPENDIX 1: MEASUREMENT ITEMS
 FOR THE INTANGIBLE ELEMENTS

 Managerial capabilities

 1. Attracting and retaining well-trained and com

 petent top managers.

 2. Achieving a better overall control of general

 organization performance.

 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1276 A. Carmeli and A. Tishler

 3. Perceiving new organizational opportunities

 and potential threats.

 4. Developing and communicating a unified
 sense of direction and a sense of common
 purpose to which all members of the
 organization can relate.

 5. Unifying conflicting opinions, improve coor
 dination and enhance effective collaboration
 between key executives, generate enthusiasm
 and motivate sufficient managerial drive for
 better performance.

 6. Developing a more effective organization

 wide strategic planning system for planned
 overall organizational development.

 7. Generating advanced developmental and train
 ing programs for our organizational members.

 8. Increased use of management by objective.
 9. Increased use of 'financial accountability.'
 10. Increased participative decision making at se

 nior and middle management levels.

 11. An extensive and effective use of quantitative

 techniques in decision making.

 12. An extensive use of cost-effective analyses.

 Human capital

 1. Employees have suitable education to fulfill

 their jobs.

 2. Employees are well trained.
 3. Employees hold suitable work experience for

 accomplishing their job successfully.

 4. Employees are well-skilled professionally to

 accomplish their job successfully.

 5. No one knows this job better than our employ

 ees.

 6. Problems here are easy to solve once the

 employees understand the various consequen
 ces of their actions, a skill they have acquired.
 7. Employees do not know why, but sometimes
 when they are supposed to be in control
 they feel they are being manipulated (reverse
 scored item).

 8. If anyone here can find the answer, it is our

 employees.

 9. Employees go home the same way they arrived
 in the morning, feeling they have not accom
 plished much (reverse-scored item).

 10. Considering the time spent on the job, employ

 ees feel thoroughly familiar with their tasks.

 11. Doing this job well is a reward in itself.
 12. Mastering their jobs meant a lot to our employ

 ees.

 Internal auditing
 1. The internal auditing helps to a better function

 ing of the organizational members.

 2. The internal auditing clarifies aspects of work

 ing processes.

 3. The internal auditing is perceived as a threat

 to the position and status of the employees'
 (reverse-scored item).

 4. Organizational members are not afraid of the

 results revealed by the internal auditing.

 5. The internal auditing prevents inappropriate

 actions which may harm the organization.

 6. The internal auditing helps achieve the organi

 zational goals.

 Labor relations

 1. There is complete trust between management

 and employees.

 2. There is complete satisfaction of the relation

 ships between management and employees.

 3. There is a clear and accepted managerial pol

 icy on all parts (management and employees)
 regarding labor relations system.

 4. There is a constant consultation between man

 agement and employees.

 5. There are mutual respect and good intentions

 between management and employees.

 6. The principle of security, namely caring for the

 employee's health, safety, livelihood, and her
 future employment, is a common one among
 both management and employees.

 7. The principle of fairness, namely caring that the
 employee is getting fair compensation for her
 effort and contribution, is a common one among
 both management and employees.

 8. The principle of individualism, namely caring
 that the employee is making meaningful work
 independently, on the basis of her planning
 and reasonable performance, is a common one
 among both management and employees.

 9. The principle of democracy, namely caring that

 the employee participates actively in the deci
 sion making, is a common one among both
 management and employees.

 Organizational culture
 1. There is a high involvement of the employees
 in the processes, decisions, and their implemen
 tation.

 2. The employees are committed and hold a high

 sense of responsibility to the organization.

 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Intangible Organizational Elements 1277

 of presentation, suppose that all variables are stan
 dardized (variables are standardized by subtracting
 their mean and dividing them by their standard
 deviations). Define the scores of the two data sets
 as follows:

 n = Xa,$ = Yb (Al)

 where a and b are (n x \) and (m x 1) vectors
 of constant weights (parameters). The (/ x 1) vec
 tors of scores rj and ? can be interpreted as the
 weighted averages of their respective matrices (sets
 of variables). For example, ? includes the average
 of project success across all projects; that is, a rela
 tively high value of i=x means that project 1 is very
 successful, relative to other projects in the sample.
 In this paper we try to find the relations, or con
 nections, between data sets X and Y by means of
 the weighted averages ('aggregators') rj and ?; that
 is, we say that X and Y are closely related to each
 other if rj and ? are 'close' to each other. Clearly,
 the weights a and b may have managerial or other
 meanings that should be taken into account in the
 analysis.

 RCA uses covariance as the measure of con
 nection between two data sets; that is, rather than
 maximizing the correlation (as is the case with
 canonical correlations analysis) RCA seeks to esti
 mate a and b that maximize the following sam
 ple covariance:

 cov (?, rj) = ?'?y = a'X'Yb (A2)

 3. All have a common set of values, creeds, and

 symbols.

 4. There is a high coordination and agreement

 among the employees.

 5. The organization knows the external environ

 ment and provides appropriate responses.

 6. The organization adapts its structure and the

 way it functions to changes in the external
 environment.

 7. The organizational goals are clear and agreeable

 to all members.

 8. The organization strives hard to achieve its

 goals.

 Perceived organizational reputation

 1. The quality of management of my local author
 ity is credited with a very favorable reputation.
 2. The ability of my local authority to attract,

 develop, and keep talented people is credited
 with a very favorable reputation.

 3. The quality of services my local authority sup
 plies is credited with a very favorable reputa
 tion.

 4. The financial soundness of my local authority

 is credited with a very favorable reputation.

 5. In my local authority, the education system is

 credited with a very favorable reputation.

 6. In my local authority, the municipal facilities
 are credited with a very favorable reputation.

 7. In my local authority, the tax system is credited

 with a very favorable reputation.

 8. In my local authority, the transportation system

 is credited with a very favorable reputation.

 9. The quality of life in my local authority's juris
 diction is credited with a very favorable repu
 tation.'

 APPENDIX 2: A BRIEF DESCRIPTION
 OF THE RCA METHOD

 with the usual normalizing conditions a'a ? 1 and
 b'b = 1. Thus, applying the RCA method to two
 data sets amounts to estimating the weights which
 maximize the covariance between linear aggre
 gators (weighted averages) of the two data sets.
 RCA is applied to standardized variables. Thus, a
 variable with a large estimated weight affects the
 connection between the two data sets more than
 a variable with a small weight. Variables in one
 data set are defined as critical (important) relative
 to those in the second data set when their weights
 in the RCA between the two data sets are large
 (see Tishler et al, 1996; Tishler and Lipovetsky,
 2000) for algorithms that select critical variables
 from large data sets. Variables that are not desig
 nated as critical relative to the other data set may
 still affect this set. However, their influence on the
 second data set may not be as pronounced as the
 influence of critical variables.

 Suppose that we are given two sets of data, each
 organized in a matrix, as follows: Xihi = 1, ..., /;
 j = 1,..., n, and Yi]-,, i = 1,..., /; j = 1, ..., m.
 In the field of management, each data set may
 include a group of specific variables describing
 various attributes of / projects or assessments of
 / individuals. For example, X may represent data
 on n variables describing the managerial structure
 of projects, and Y may contain m different mea
 sures of success (see Tishler et al, 1996). For ease
 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1278 A. Carmeli and A. Tishler

 Tishler and Lipovetsky (2000) show that the
 RCA estimates (the estimated vectors a and b)
 can also be obtained as a least squares (LS)
 approximation of Rxy = X'Y, the matrix of cor
 relations among the variables in the two data sets.
 That is:

 Rxy = kba + s (A3)
 where A, is a scalar and s is a matrix of residuals.
 The LS function of the residuals is

 LS=\\e\\2=\\Rxy-\baf\\2 (A4)

 The RCA estimates a and b are obtained for ?max,
 the maximal eigenvalue of Rxy. At the optimum:

 LS= \\Rxy\\2-k2 = \\Rxy\\2(l - Xma\)
 - max } y \\Rxy\\ J  (A5)

 Thus, the goodness of fit of the RCA estimates,
 where r?j is the simple correlation between x? and
 y?, is as follows:

 <?2s^f^ = , r - o<<72<i

 i = l 7=1

 (A6)

 The measure q2, which measures the share of the
 explained variability in the total variability among
 the correlations of the variables in the two data
 sets, is equivalent to the well-known R2 in a regres
 sion model. Finally, the squared canonical correla
 tion among the critical variables, r2cc, which, like
 forecasting with the RCA method, uses all the cor
 relations among the critical variables is also an
 important measure of goodness of fit of the final
 RCA model (see Tishler and Lipovetsky, 2000;
 Tarn, 2003).

 Copyright ? 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 25: 1257-1278 (2004)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 17:20:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

