Journal of Leadership & 
Organizational Studies
Volume 15 Number 3
February 2009  227-240
© 2009 Baker College
10.1177/1548051808326596
http://jlos.sagepub.com
hosted at
http://online.sagepub.com

Authentic Leadership and Positive
Psychological Capital

The Mediating Role of Trust at the
Group Level of Analysis

Rachel Clapp-Smith
University of Nebraska–Lincoln
Gretchen R. Vogelgesang
State University of New York at New Paltz
James B. Avey
Central Washington University

This study investigates the relationship between authentic leadership, trust, positive psychological capital (PsyCap),
and performance at the group level of analysis. Data were collected from a small Midwestern chain of retail clothing
stores, a context in which the needs for both authentic leadership and a positive sales staff are integral to the firm’s
performance.  Constructs  were  aggregated  to  the  store  (group)  level  to  test  relationships  between  perceptions  of
authentic leadership, trust in management, positive psychological capital, and performance. Trust in management was
found to mediate the relationship between PsyCap and performance and to partially mediate the relationship between
authentic leadership and performance. Future discussions and implications are discussed.

Keywords:

authentic leadership; psychological capital; trust

The importance of authentic approaches to lead-

ership is far reaching in both the research and
practitioner  domains.  Economic, geo-political, and
technological developments over the past few decades
have placed demands on leaders that require them to
be  transparent, be  aware  of  their  values, and  guide
organizations with a moral/ethical perspective. In turn,
organizations are looking to extant research to deter-
mine how to select and develop leaders that will add
competitive  advantage  not  only  by  impacting  the
short-term bottom line but also by leading with values
that reflect those of stakeholders and creating a long-
term vision. Management scholars have responded to
these  calls  by  pursuing  research  in  both  authentic
leadership  and  positive  psychological  capital.
Authentic  leadership  (Walumbwa, Avolio, Gardner,
Wernsing, & Peterson, 2008) has been identified as a
root construct that may influence leaders who exhibit
multiple leadership styles and behaviors, opening up
an unexplored area in leadership research. Emerging
research  in  positive  psychological  capital  (Luthans,
Avolio, Avey, &  Norman, 2007)  suggests  there  is

value  in  management  scholars  pursuing  employee
positive deviance, and although considerable research
has examined negative deviance in organizations, pos-
itivity and its outcomes is largely unexplored.

More  recent  reviews  of  leadership  theory  also
highlight  that  the  future  direction  of  leadership
research must move away from a hierarchical, leader-
centric  approach  to  a  more  integrative  approach  in
which followers, context, and group levels of analysis
are  hypothesized  and  tested  to  advance  leadership
theory  (Avolio, 2007;  Johns, 2006;  Meindl, 1995).
Furthermore, there is a continued call for leadership
research  to  quantify  how  leadership  behaviors  can
impact organizational outcomes such as firm perfor-
mance (Avolio, 2007).

Avolio (2007) suggested that leadership theory has
“reached a point in its development at which it needs

Authors’ Note: Please  address  correspondence  to  Rachel  Clapp
Smith, Global  Leadership  Institute, College  of  Business
Administration, University  of  Nebraska–Lincoln, 1240  R  Street,
114, Lincoln, NE  68588-0497; e-mail: roclapp@global.t-bird.edu.

227


228 Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies

to move to the next level of integration” (p. 25). He
noted  that  although  several  researchers  have  called
for  integrating  all  actors  in  the  leadership  process,
namely, followers, leaders, and  the  context  they  are
embedded in, a dearth of research has actually tested
the role of followers in the leadership process while
offering conclusions about their impact on the bottom
line. To  this  end, the  current  study  aims  to  advance
leadership  and  organizational  behavior  research  by
extending the integrative theory of authentic leader-
ship. Included in this theory are the roles of both pos-
itive  psychological  capital  (PsyCap)  and  trust  as
contributors  to  firm  performance.  Furthermore, our
study considers the group level of analysis in order to
capture  what  Meindl  (1995)  deemed  necessary  for
understanding  the  social  construction  of  leadership.
As such, we measure followers’ group-level percep-
tions of authentic leadership, group-level psycholog-
ical capital, and group-level trust in management as
related  to  group-level  financial  performance.  This
level  of  analysis  is  based  upon  social  contagion
theory, which captures the importance of peer influ-
ence  among  followers  in  an  organizational  setting.
Finally, we feel that this study adds value to the liter-
ature by investigating these constructs in the specific
context of a small family-owned business, similar to
the types of businesses that represent approximately
50%  of  the  nonfarm  United  States  gross  domestic
product (Joel Popkin & Company, 2002).

Theoretical Underpinnings of Authentic
Leadership and Psychological Capital at

the Individual Level of Analysis

Many scholars cite the importance of the principle
“to  thine  own  self  be  true,” which  has  become  the
central tenet of authentic leadership theory. However,
we often neglect that one must also be true to others
in  order  to  be  truly  authentic.  Luthans  and  Avolio
(2003) suggested that our authenticity is represented
in part by our positive psychological capacities (psy-
chological capital), whereas Gardner and colleagues
(Gardner, Avolio, Luthans, May, & Walumbwa, 2005)
maintained  that  authentic  relations  with  followers
lead to trust. Although ethicists suggest that leaders
who are true to their values will be more successful,
scant  empirical  research  has  linked  authenticity  to
organizational performance indicators. However, ini-
tial empirical findings suggest that authentic leader-
ship at the individual level has an impact on follower
Organizational  Citizenship  Behaviors  (OCBs), fol-
lower  commitment, follower  satisfaction  with  the

leader, and follower performance (Walumbwa et al.,
2008).

The  relationship  of  individual-level  PsyCap  with
individual  performance  has  been  tested  and  estab-
lished  in  many  contexts, ranging  from  immigrant
workers  (Youssef  &  Luthans, 2003),
to  Chinese
factory workers (Luthans, Avolio, Walumbwa, & Li,
2005), to  business  students  and  engineers  (Luthans,
Avey, Avolio, Norman, &  Combs, 2006;  Luthans,
Avolio, Avey, & Norman, 2007).

We suggest, given evidence that a relationship exists
between follower perceptions of authentic leadership,
follower  psychological  capital, and  follower  perfor-
mance  at  the  individual  level, an  investigation  into
these constructs at the group level of analysis warrants
investigation. Klein and colleagues (Klein, Dansereau,
&  Hall, 1994)  and Waldman  and Yammarino  (1999)
proposed that single variables may have effects at mul-
tiple levels of analysis. In addition, Meindl (1995) pre-
sented a strong argument for research in leadership to
consider constructs at the group level to properly cap-
ture the social construction of leadership.

Theoretical Underpinnings of Authentic
Leadership and Psychological Capital

at the Group Level of Analysis

Given that social phenomena often occur in groups
and  that  these  group  interactions  influence  the  very
nature  of  psychological  constructs  (Bandura, 1977;
Meindl, 1995;  Mischel, 1973), this  study  was  con-
ducted at the group level of analysis to determine if
these  social  processes  affect  the  relationships
between  authentic  leadership, psychological  capital,
and  performance, with  trust  as  a  mediator.  Such  an
approach  moves  away  from  the  traditional  assump-
tion  of  leadership, which  focuses  primarily  on  the
behavior of leaders. Rather, Meindl (1995) argued the
perceptions  followers  have  of  leaders  are  far  more
influential in determining follower behavior and that
these  perceptions  are  influenced  by  such  interfol-
lower factors as social contagion. As a result, Meindl
noted that to truly capture the social process of lead-
ership, studies  utilizing  the  group  level  of  analysis
show  evidence  of  the  role  that  peers  play  in  con-
structing  how  followers  perceive  their  leaders.
Waldman  and  colleagues  (Waldman  & Yammarino,
1999;  Yammarino, Dionne, Chun, &  Dansereau,
2005) demonstrated that shared perceptions of lead-
ership  are  valuable  perspectives  in  terms  of  unique
information yielded, adding to our understanding of
leadership and organizational behavior.


Clapp-Smith et al. / Authentic Leadership 229

Figure 1

Theoretical Model

Follower Perceptions
of Authentic
Leadership (AL) 

Follower PsyCap (PC)

Trust in  Leadership
(TL)

Financial Performance

Note: PsyCap = positive psychological capital.

Given  the  framework  of  social  cognitive  theory
and social contagion theory (Bandura, 1977, 2001;
Meindl, 1995), which  describe  the  interactions  of
individuals  to  create  a  social  context, we  argue
authentic  leadership  and  PsyCap  can  also  exist  at  a
group  level  and  influence  group  performance.  This
assertion for PsyCap in relation to team performance
has been supported previously both theoretically and
empirically through aggregation and hierarchical lin-
ear modeling using a student sample (West, Patera, &
Carsten, in press). Therefore, in order to better quan-
tify  the  impact  of  authentic  leadership  and  psycho-
logical  capital  in  relation  to organization-level
outcomes  such  as  firm  performance, we  have  fol-
lowed Meindl’s (1995) suggestion that there may be
a  social  contagion  process  that  exists  beyond  vari-
ables analyzed at the individual level of analysis.

We  suggest  that  when  followers  believe  their  top
management team exhibits the dimensions of authentic
leadership, they will have greater amounts of trust in
those leaders, which may lead to an increase in sales
over  the  time  period  because  the  followers  are  more
willing to invest time and resources toward some pos-
itive future outcome. Furthermore, we also believe that
follower  positive  psychological  capital  will  have  an
effect on the positivity climate of each unit within the
company, again increasing the amount of trust the unit
will have in top management because of positive future
expectations and again leading to an increase in sales.
Now that we have offered a theoretical overview of the
constructs included in our model, we turn to a discus-
sion of the mechanisms underlying our hypotheses.

Authentic Leadership

Overview of the Theoretical Model

Exploring  the  relationships  between  authentic
leadership, psychological capital, and performance at
the group level of analysis is the foremost purpose of
this  study, but  we  also  recognize  the  importance  of
extending the empirical research on authentic leader-
ship and psychological capital by including trust as a
mediating  variable  in  our  theoretical  model  (see
Figure 1) (Baron & Kenny, 1986). Scholars have the-
orized  that  authentic  leadership  and  psychological
capital both independently relate to trust in manage-
ment, which in turn has also been theorized to have
an  impact  on  firm  performance  (Luthans  & Avolio,
2003; Mayer & Gavin, 2005).

Authentic leadership has emerged as a central com-
ponent in positive leadership studies since its concep-
tualization in the late 1970s and theoretical extension
as  a  “root  construct  in  leadership  theory” (Avolio  &
Gardner, 2005, p. 315). Authentic leadership, as pro-
posed  by  Luthans  and  Avolio  (2003), and  further
developed  by  Gardner  et  al.  (2005)  and  Avolio  and
Luthans  (2006), is  a  process  by  which  leaders  are
deeply aware of how they think and behave, of the con-
text in which they operate, and are perceived by others
as being aware of their own and others’ values/moral
perspectives, knowledge, and  strengths  (Avolio,
Gardner, Walumbwa, Luthans, & May, 2004). They are
not only concerned with their personal authenticity but
also how that authenticity can be conveyed to others in


230 Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies

order to influence followers to work toward common
goals and objectives. The theoretical model of authentic
leadership includes not only the leader’s behaviors but
also characteristics of the followers and leaders, such
as  their  levels  of  psychological  capital, suggesting  a
more integrative approach to studying leadership and
organizational behavior (Gardner et al., 2005; Luthans,
Norman, & Hughes, 2006).

Current findings indicate that authentic leadership
is  a  “higher-order, multidimensional  construct, com-
prised of self-awareness, balanced processing, relational
transparency, and internalization of a moral/ethical per-
spective” (Walumbwa  et  al., 2008, p.  89).  When
leaders are aware of how their actions affect those around
them and are open and transparent about the processes
and  influences  inside  and  outside  of  their  organiza-
tions, followers have a better sense of organizational
goals/challenges. In the context of a sales-oriented
organization that relies upon a self-assured and ethical
workforce, we  expect  authentic  leadership  and  its
effects to positively predict performance growth.

Attaining these outcomes of authentic leadership is
only  possible  when  followers  perceive  leaders  to  be
authentic.  Thus, authentic  leadership  in  this  study  is
measured as the followers’ perceptions of their leaders.
While an individual’s perceptions of authentic leader-
ship may lead to higher motivation to perform well as
an individual, shared perceptions of authentic leader-
ship  are  likely  to  have  an  effect  at  the  group  level,
based  upon  social  contagion  theory  (Meindl, 1995).
Group  members  engaging  in  interactions  with  each
other reinforce sentiments about leaders, which leads
to perceptions that are shared and are interdependent
with the individual perceptions of authentic leadership.
This discussion brings us to our first hypothesis:

Hypothesis  1: Group-level  perceptions  of  authentic
leadership (AL) will be positively related to perfor-
mance as measured by sales growth (SG).

In  this  section, we  have  discussed  how  follower
perceptions of the authenticity of the top management
team can have an impact on the performance of the
group.  As  dictated  by  authentic  leadership  theory,
there  are  also  characteristics  of  followers, such  as
psychological  capital, that  can  have  an  impact  on
trust in management and performance indicators.

Positive Psychological Capital

In this particular study, we were interested in exam-
ining the effects of not only the group-level perceptions

of  authentic  leadership  with  organizational  outcomes
but also the extent to which followers’ PsyCap levels
are related to performance outcomes. Positive psycho-
logical capital represents positive psychological states
that  contribute  to  higher  levels  of  effectiveness  and
flourishing  in  organizations  (Luthans, Youssef, &
Avolio, 2007;  Luthans  & Youssef, 2007).  PsyCap  is
defined as a positive state of development character-
ized  by  self-efficacy, hope, resiliency, and  optimism
(Luthans, Avolio, Avey, et al., 2007).

Given that PsyCap has been argued to be what Law,
Wong, and Mobley (1998) described as a multidimen-
sional  construct  and  that  PsyCap  has  been  shown  to
account  for  more  variance  in  predicting  outcomes
when considered as a core construct as opposed to each
individual  component  (Luthans, Avolio, Avey, et  al.,
2007), we are primarily concerned with the combined
effect of self-efficacy, hope, optimism, and resiliency
on  the  relationship  with  performance  and  how  trust
mediates  this  relationship.  As  previously  stated,
PsyCap  is  best  understood  as  the  shared  variance
between self-efficacy, hope, optimism, and resiliency.

Self-efficacy is the positive belief or confidence in
one’s  ability  to  perform  specific  tasks  (Bandura,
1997). Individuals high in self-efficacy perceive they
have  the  ability  to  take  action  to  modify  their  envi-
ronment to be successful at a given task. Self-efficacy
is consistently related to performance through several
mechanisms.  For  example, Stajkovic  and  Luthans
(1998)  argued  that  those  higher  in  PsyCap  are  less
likely to resign due to failure, expend more effort dur-
ing task performance, and are more persistent in that
effort  until  the  task  is  accomplished.  Therefore, we
expect self-efficacy to be positively related to perfor-
mance, contributing  to  the  combined  relationship
PsyCap has with performance.

Hope  is  characterized  by  two  dimensions: will
power  and  pathways  (Snyder, Feldman, &  Taylor,
2000; Snyder & Lopez, 2002). The will power is the
drive individuals experience to attain a goal. The path-
ways complement this drive by providing the psycho-
logical resources to find multiple, alternative paths to
attaining a desired goal. High levels of hope are asso-
ciated with deriving more courses of action to accom-
plish  the  same  goal  (pathways), which  is  associated
with  achieving  goals  more  often.  In  addition, those
high in hope derive the agentic motivation (will power)
to  execute  those  pathways  to  success.  Thus, overall
hope may be related to higher levels of performance.
Optimism, or  the  positive  explanatory  style  of
individuals  and  groups, also  contributes  to  perfor-
mance.  When  individuals  experience  instances  of


optimism, they tend to internalize positive events and
externalize negative events, resulting in more positive
expectancies of outcomes (Seligman, 1998; Seligman
& Schulman, 1986). When individuals attribute suc-
cesses to themselves, they are more likely to expend
energy to create additional successes. Likewise, when
optimists attribute failures to external circumstances
(outside  the  self)  they  are  less  likely  to  believe  the
failure will be repeated and thus be more willing to
repeat attempts to be successful. This motivation and
persistence  will  likely  be  associated  with  higher
levels of performance.

Finally, resiliency is the ability of groups and indi-
viduals to bounce back from adverse or stressful situ-
ations (Luthans, 2002; Masten, 2001; Masten, Best,
&  Garmezy, 1990).  Resiliency  is  unique  from  the
other three components of PsyCap in that it is reactive
rather than proactive. In other words, resiliency is a
response  to  events, specifically  negative  setbacks.
When  individuals  and  groups  have  a  setback  in
accomplishing  their  tasks  or  goals,
the  extent  to
which they “bounce back” quickly and effectively is
the  outworking  of  resiliency.  Luthans, Youssef, and
Avolio (2007) argued that resiliency would be posi-
tively  related  to  employee  performance  using  two
assumptions: (a)  that  setbacks  are  inevitable  during
in-role performances and (b) that the extent to which
an  individual  responded  favorably  to  those  setbacks
would be associated with performance. Thus, through
the mechanisms of responding favorably to setbacks,
we anticipate resiliency will be positively associated
with performance.

Hypothesis 2: Group-level psychological capital will be
positively  related  to  performance  as  measured  by
sales growth.

Trust in Management

Although  we  hypothesize  a  direct  relationship
between group-level perceptions of authentic leader-
ship and group-level psychological capital with firm
performance measured by sales growth, we are also
interested in exploring whether trust in management
mediates  these  relationships.  In  this  study, we  also
felt it important to elevate trust at the group level, to
continue  to  explore  the  relationships  between  each
specific unit within the organization.

There have been many different conceptualizations
of trust in the organizational behavior literature over
the past few decades (Clark & Payne, 1997; Cook &
Wall, 1980; McAllister, 1995); however, the most agreed

Clapp-Smith et al. / Authentic Leadership 231

upon definition is “a psychological state comprising
the intention to accept vulnerability based upon posi-
tive  expectations  of  the  intentions  or  behavior  of
another” (Dirks  &  Ferrin, 2002, p.  612;  Rousseau,
Sitkin, Burt, & Camerer, 1998, p. 395). Trust is nor-
mally treated as a perception by the follower of the
leader  or  upper  management  of  a  firm;  however, it
can  also  be  elevated  to  the  group  or  climate  level
(Collins & Smith, 2006).

Collective trust, or trust elevated to a level consist-
ing of more than one individual, is a shared percep-
tion  by  followers  that  the  top  management  team
attempts to act in accordance with stated beliefs about
goals  (Cummings  &  Bromiley, 1996;  Jarvenpaa  &
Leidner, 1999).  Numerous  studies  have  found  that
trust is a critical component of any successful busi-
ness  relationship  (Blau, 1964;  Mayer  &  Gavin,
2005). In addition, it has been hypothesized and sup-
ported  to  be  an  important  mediator  between  leader-
ship constructs and follower outcomes. Therefore, we
turn to a discussion of the mediating role of trust as to
understand  how  this  critical  component  to  business
relationships may be fostered.

The Mediating Role of Trust in Management
Although  we  have  hypothesized  a  direct  link
between authentic leadership and PsyCap and perfor-
mance as measured by sales growth, it is important to
account  for  the  testable  mechanisms  and  processes
that  may  explain  how  these  relationships  manifest.
The process of building trust with followers depends
upon  such  antecedents  as  accommodation  and  will-
ingness to sacrifice (Wieselquist, Rusbult, Foster, &
Agnew, 1999) and consideration (Nugent & Abolafia,
2006). Trustworthy behaviors such as open commu-
nication  and  showing  concern  for  employees  also
have an impact upon trust in the manager (Korsgaard,
Whitener, & Brodt, 2002). Furthermore, the percep-
tions  of  organizational  support  and  organizational
justice as well as participative decision-making pro-
cedures  are  deemed  important  for  the  creation  and
sustainability of trust (Dirks & Ferrin, 2002).

Trust as a Mediator Between Authentic
Leadership and Performance

The  exhibition  by  an  authentic  leader  of  self-
awareness, relational  transparency, a  moral/ethical
perspective, and a consistent and balanced method of
weighing information and decision outcomes can be
expected to foster a trusting relationship with followers
because  these  behaviors  illustrate  accommodation,


232 Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies

consideration, and communication. Furthermore, when
authentic leaders take an ethical approach to decision
making and engage in balanced processing instead of
making snap decisions, followers may be more willing
to place trust in the leader’s future actions because they
can  use  past  experiences  to  predict  future  responses.
This  knowledge  and  trust, although  yet  to  be  tested
empirically, should allow followers to approach their
roles with confidence and vigor.

The  more  followers  believe  that  their  leaders  are
being true to themselves and behaving in accordance
with  their  deeply  held  beliefs, the  more  followers
may take a risk by offering further dedication to the
top management team. In a climate for trust in man-
agement, each  individual  follower  may  see  others’
loyalty  and  increase  his  or  her  own  in  response.
Followers who perceive leader authenticity are theo-
rized  to  experience  both  greater  levels  of  trust
(Gardner et al., 2005) as well as development of their
own  capacities  for  authenticity  and  engagement  in
their work (Gardner et al., 2005). Higher levels of
trust  are  subsequently  expected  to  contribute  to
higher levels of growth and sustainable performance
(Gardner  et  al., 2005;  Nugent  &  Abolafia, 2006).
Therefore, we  suggest  that  follower  perceptions  of
authentic leadership will contribute to follower trust
within an organization’s top management team and in
turn result in a positive change in sales performance
(Luthans & Avolio, 2003).

Hypothesis  3: Group-level  trust  in  management  (TM)
will  partially  mediate  the  relationship  between
authentic leadership and performance as measured
by sales growth.

Trust as a Mediator Between Psychological
Capital and Performance

In the same manner in which we feel the percep-
tions of authentic leadership may have both direct and
indirect impacts upon sales growth, we propose a sim-
ilar relationship with psychological capital and sales
growth. Although follower psychological capital is an
important  antecedent  to  variables  such  as  trust, job
satisfaction, and  some  types  of  job  performance
(Luthans, Avolio, Avey, et al., 2007), the impact upon
sales  performance  growth  may  also  be  mediated
through the followers’ trust in management. The com-
munal principles of group trust in management create
an  organizing  force, changing  the  common  goal
(sales)  from  the  individual’s  achievement  to  a  team
success  (Jones  &  George, 1998).  We  suggest  that
group PsyCap manifests into an overarching climate

impacting  store-level  sales  performance.
for  trust,
Thus, a top management team that is able to envelop
the psychological capital of each group into an over-
riding trust variable is able to reap the gains of higher
sales  performance.  Follower  psychological  capital
merely allows for the emergence of trust by allowing
the groups to be vulnerable to management in order to
see positive outcomes. This relationship brings us to
our final hypothesis:

Hypothesis  4: Group-level  trust  in  management  will
partially mediate the relationship between PsyCap
and performance as measured by sales growth.

Sales Growth as an Indicator

of Performance

The aforementioned hypotheses refer to an outcome
variable of sales growth as an indicator of unit perfor-
mance.  Whereas  unit-level  performance  may  be
assessed using several indicators, one indicator that was
available and appropriate for this particular study was
sales growth over a 4-month period. Sales growth is a
primary indicator used by the field site as it may be ana-
lyzed per square foot, which neutralizes confounds pre-
sent in other indicators of performance due to variations
in store size, number of employees, and overhead costs.
From an extant research perspective, 4 months was pre-
viously  used  when  determining  the  relationship
between  PsyCap  and  performance  (Luthans, Avolio,
Avey, et al., 2007) and argued to be appropriate based
on  test-retest  reliabilities  of  the  state-like  PsyCap.  In
other words, when viewing constructs on a continuum
of stability, where personality traits are relatively stable
over the life span and emotions are relatively fleeting,
state-like constructs such as PsyCap have been found to
be  relatively  stable  over  4-month  periods.  From  this
perspective, such psychological states can be expected
to impact outcomes at 4-month intervals.

Method

Context of the Study

Johns  (2006)  recommended  incorporating  infor-
mation  about  context  into  studies  in  organizational
behavior. Given Johns’s comments, we felt the con-
text of this study played a particularly important role
in  the  hypothesized  relationships.  The  company
where  the  data  were  collected  was  a  small-  to
medium-sized family-owned enterprise that started as
a general store and grew into a chain of department


the  company  operates  26  retail
stores.  Currently,
stores that focus on women’s and children’s apparel.
The company is now led by the fourth generation and
has  existed  for  more  than  125  years.  The  current
employees  of  the  company  range  from  floor  sales
staff to general office employees who have been with
the company anywhere from 6 months to 50 years.

Each  generation  of  the  family  carries  on  company
values  through  folklore.  For  instance, the  importance
for honesty and integrity is expressed through a story of
the  founder’s  general  store  in  which  one  employee
neglected to fill bags of sugar to the full weight of sale.
A local competitor quickly took advantage of this dis-
crepancy by displaying the overvalued bag of sugar in
his store’s window to tarnish the image of the general
store. At the time, the founder of the company espoused
the importance of honesty and integrity for recapturing
an  image  in  the  small  town  that  the  store  could  be
trusted for quality service. This story is repeated today
to  make  a  connection  with  the  need  to  maintain
integrity in the small towns in which the company cur-
rently  operates, where  anonymity  is  nonexistent  and
word of mouth plays a large role in company image.

The  current  organizational  structure  of  a  geo-
graphically  dispersed  organization  makes  the  pres-
ence of authentic leadership even more important to
maintaining  the  value  of  integrity.  The  president  of
the company visits each store once a year while com-
pany supervisors make frequent trips to each location
in order to maintain a connection with the central val-
ues  of  the  firm.  Each  store  location  has  a  manager
who  oversees  daily  operations. Therefore, as  values
of  the  firm  cascade  through  various  layers  of  man-
agement, greater levels of relational transparency are
critical in conveying clear messages of integrity and
quality  service  to  customers.  In  addition, company
leadership must maintain high levels of awareness as
their limited personal interactions with store associ-
ates become critical to how the company values are
communicated.  Balanced  processing  further  allows
the  authentic  leadership  to  emerge  as  company
leaders keep in mind the local needs of an individual
store while integrating these needs into the company
values  and  needs.  For  example,
in  many  towns
national  apparel  chains  pose  a  competitive  threat.
However,
the  company  seeks  to  overcome  such
threats  by  offering  localized  knowledge  and  service
that  goes  beyond  the  one-size-fits-all  management
and  service  mentality  of  national  chains.  Finally, a
moral/ethical perspective is ingrained in Midwestern
values and must be perpetually renewed. Therefore, we

Clapp-Smith et al. / Authentic Leadership 233

expect that characteristics of small Midwestern towns,
where  the  company’s  stores  operate, require  greater
levels of authentic leadership among top management
and positivity across the firms’ employee base.

Given the company’s long history, it has weathered
many changes in the competitive landscape. Focusing
on  women’s  and  children’s  fashion  at  affordable
prices, it seems the organization could be threatened
by  the  rise  of  big  box  retailers.  Although  some
national apparel chains are present in some towns, the
company has remained under the radar of competitive
threats  of  big  box  retail  by  providing  products  in
towns  that  are  too  small  to  be  interesting  to  large
retailers such as Wal-Mart. Furthermore, authenticity
plays a strategic role in the value proposition of the
company in that employees (associates) provide sin-
cere, personalized service to customers.

The company’s size also provides a unique insight
into leadership dynamics of small- to medium-sized
companies. We chose to focus on the authentic lead-
ership perceptions followers have of the top manage-
ment team (TMT) and how this relates to sales teams’
trust in management and performance because unlike
large  multinationals, the  top  management  team  and
sales associates come into contact on a regular basis.
Therefore, we found the top management team to be
the  most  relevant  referent  for  authentic  leadership
within this particular organization.

Sample and Procedure

Survey and unit sales data were collected from 89
employees  at  26  small  retail  stores, representing  a
response  rate  of  45%  of  the  198  total  employees.
Employees were predominantly female (> 90%) and
52 years old on average (SD = 15.4), with 3.2 years
tenure (SD = 1.5) with the organization. The roles of
the  participants  ranged  from  store-level  associates,
assistant  managers, and  managers  to  administrators
working  in  the  general  office.  This  chain  operates
throughout  the  Midwestern  United  States  in  several
different cities that range in population from 6,197 to
73,990, with an average population of 22,535 (SD =
16,234). The units also range in size of establishment
from 3,500 to 10,000 square feet with an average size
of  6,265  (SD =  2,001)  square  feet  (see  Table  1).
Monthly  sales  for  each  unit  range  between  $8,463
and $92,348 with a mean of $41,324 (SD = $13,564).
Surveys in paper-and-pencil format were adminis-
tered  to  participants  at  Time  1.  This  administration
included instruments for authentic leadership, positive
PsyCap, and trust in management. Unit sales data were


234 Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies

Table 1

Details of Stores in the Sample

Store 
Number

Number of
Employees

Years in 
Operation

Square
Footage

1
3
4
5
6
8
9
10
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
23
25
26
DC
GO

11
9
4
7
4
6
8
6
6
7
7
6
5
5
6
6
6
4
5
6
6
24
10

10,000
10,000
5,000
6,690
5,000
7,000
4,250
5,850
4,360
5,830
4,018
7,100
3,500
7,200
4,800
5,913
5,200
5,200
5,000
3,500
5,000

68
78
44
40
37
25
21
24
42
17
20
14
15
11
10
6
4
4
3
2
1
127
127

Note: Original store opened in 1880 but has been closed.
DC = distribution center; GO = general office

then gathered and tracked from the survey administra-
tion date (Time 1) to 4 months later (Time 2).

Measures and Psychometric Properties

Authentic leadership was measured with the multi-
dimensional instrument developed by Walumbwa and
colleagues (2008). This instrument measures authen-
tic  leadership  as  a  second-order  factor  comprised  of
the first-order factors of transparency, self-awareness,
balanced processing, and an ethical component. There
are 4 items used to measure each of the four factors
for a total of 16 items in the instrument. The measure
uses  leader  behavioral  statements  and  is  based  on  a
scale of 1 (not at all) to 5 (frequently, if not always).
Example items include: “Says exactly what he or she
means” (transparency), “Makes  difficult  decisions
based on high standards of ethical conduct” (ethical),
“Listens  carefully  to  different  points  of  view  before
coming  to  conclusions” (balanced  processing), and
“Knows when it is time to reevaluate his or her posi-
tions on important issues” (self-awareness). Each sub-
scale  and  the  overall  16-item  scale  demonstrated
adequate internal reliability with α > .70.

Given the novel nature of the authentic leadership
instrument, a  confirmatory  factor  analysis  was  con-
ducted to ensure consistent item loadings. Using the
Mplus software, each item was fit to the correspond-
ing factor (e.g., transparency item was fit to an over-
all factor called transparency). Next, each of the four
factors were fit to an overall second-order factor that
comprised the multidimensional authentic leadership
latent  variable.  Hu  and  Bentler  (1999)  argued  that
good  fitting  models  should  have  a  comparative  fit
index (CFI) of .95 or greater, a root mean square error
of approximation (RMSEA) of equal to or less than
.06, and  a  standardized  root  mean  square  residual
(SRMR) equal to or less than .08. In this study, the
CFI  =  .95, RMSEA  =  .09, and  the  SRMR  =  .06.
Given Hu and Bentler’s combinatorial rule that two of
three  indices  should  meet  minimum  cutoffs,
the
authentic  leadership  scale  represented  adequate
factor-analytic fit despite less than ideal sample size
for  confirmatory  factor  analyses.  Items  generally
loaded  significantly  on  their  respective  factor  and
there were no cross significantly loaded items (e.g.,
transparency item that significantly loaded on a self-
awareness factor). Therefore, we determined overall
acceptable  psychometric  properties  of  the  authentic
leadership  scale  replicating  findings  of  Walumbwa
and colleagues (2008).

Trust  was  measured  with  Mayer  and  Gavin’s
(2005) trust in management instrument. Similar to the
work  of  Mayer  and  Gavin,
the  trust  instrument
yielded  acceptable  internal  reliability  (α =  .73). An
example  item  from  this  scale  is  “If  someone  ques-
tioned management’s motives, I would give manage-
ment the benefit of the doubt.”

Positive  PsyCap  was  measured  with  the  24-item
instrument developed by Luthans, Youssef, and Avolio
(2007). This instrument has demonstrated strong psy-
chometric properties in confirmatory factor analyses in
several  studies  (e.g.  Luthans  et  al., 2005;  Luthans,
Avolio, Avey, et  al., 2007).  Similar  to  the  authentic
leadership  instrument, positive  PsyCap  is  a  second-
order  factor  comprised  of  efficacy, hope, resilience,
and  optimism.  The  instrument  includes  6  items  for
each  of  the  four  factors.  Example  items  are: “I  feel
confident helping to set targets/goals in my work area”
(efficacy); “If I should find myself in a jam at work, I
could  think  of  many  ways  to  get  out  of  it” (hope);
“When I have a setback at work, I have trouble recov-
ering  from  it  and  moving  on” (reversed;  resilience);
and “When things are uncertain for me at work I usu-
ally  expect  the  best” (optimism).  The  PsyCap  scale
demonstrated adequate internal reliability of α = .87.


The dependent variable in this study was unit sales
performance. Sales performance was operationalized
by determining the sales delta between Time 1 (time
of  survey  administration)  and  Time  2  (4  months
later). Change in sales is considered a more rigorous
and  accurate  measure  of  the  relationship  with  inde-
pendent variables as it controls for previous levels of
unit sales performance.

In  addition  to  controlling  for  previous  unit  sales
performance, each store ranges in both square foot of
the  unit  (e.g., store  space)  and  population  of  city,
which heavily influence sales quantity. Therefore, the
change  in  sales  performance  was  calculated  per
square foot by dividing the delta by the total square
feet of the unit. Thus, the final dependent variable was
calculated as the change in unit sales from Time 1 to
Time  2  divided  by  the  square  feet  of  the  unit.  The
change in sales per square foot also compensates for
the  difference  in  store  sizes  and  the  difference  in
overhead costs that flat profit or sales figures would
ignore.  Furthermore, the  company  strives  to  create
growth among its stores year over year and views a
change  in  sales  as  its  primary  indicator  of  perfor-
mance  improvement.  In  addition  to  controlling  for
square feet of the unit, population of city was added
to the path analysis as a covariate on the dependent
variable unit sales performance.

We  also  used  Jarvenpaa, Knoll, and  Leidner’s
(1998) Propensity to Trust Scale. This is a seven-item
scale that aims to address an individual’s global level
of  trust  versus  situational  or  leader-specific  trust.
Examples of items from this 5-point Likert scale are:
“One  should  be  very  cautious  when  working  with
leaders” (reverse scored) and “Most leaders are honest
in describing their experiences and abilities.” The pur-
pose for this instrument was to control for the individ-
ual  differences  in  the  trait-like  measure  of  overall
propensity to trust, which is different from the domain-
specific  aspect  of  trust  in  management.  This  scale
demonstrated adequate internal reliability (α = .74).

Clapp-Smith et al. / Authentic Leadership 235

Table 2

Aggregation Statistics for All Variables

Variable

Unit PsyCap
Unit AL
Unit trust

rwg

.80
.86
.90

ICC(1)

ICC(2)

.42
.48
.48

.76
.93
.90

Note: ICC = intraclass correlation; PsyCap = positive psychological
capital; AL = authentic leadership.

recommended  to  properly  incorporate  the  levels  of
management into the levels of analysis (Waldman &
Yammarino, 1999).  Thus, we  did  so  by  utilizing
James, Demaree, and  Wolf’s  (1993)  rwg statistic  to
examine the variance within each unit. rwg indices of
.70 or greater have been argued to represent support
for aggregation such that the group tends to “share”
perceptions of the construct of interest. The observed
rwg statistics can be seen in Table 2. Each of the vari-
ables  of  authentic  leadership,
trust, and  PsyCap
demonstrate adequate rwg indices (rwg > .70). Thus, we
moved to the next set of aggregation analyses.

We  performed  analysis  of  variance  (ANOVA)  on
the three variables based on the grouping factor (e.g.,
store)  and  found  a  statistically  significant  between-
group difference, also evident in Table 2. Given the
importance  of  both  rwg and  intraclass  correlation
(ICC)  statistics  in  aggregation  analyses, to  estimate
the level of agreement between raters we also com-
puted  the  ICCs. Although  there  are  no  clear  cutoffs
for  ICC  values, we  found  indices  to  be  consistent
with prior research justifying aggregation (see Bliese,
2000, for  a  discussion  of  ICC  in  organizational
research; see also Shrout & Fleiss, 1979). Given the
theoretical  nature  of  the  constructs  and  operational-
izations, complemented  by  adequate  findings  when
we  employed  indices  of  rwg, ANOVA, ICC(1), and
ICC(2), we found evidence to support aggregation of
the authentic leadership, trust, and PsyCap variables.

Levels of Analysis

Hypothesis Tests

Research in organizational behavior has long con-
sidered  the  influence  of  levels  of  analysis  including
empirical  issues  of  aggregation  of  variables  (Klein
et  al., 1994;  Rousseau, 1985;  Yammarino  et  al.,
2005). We conducted a series of within-group analyses
to  assess  levels  of  homogeneity  on  the  variables  of
interest. Given the varying echelons that exist within
organizations, particularly when the top management
team  is  the  referent  focus, aggregation  has  been

Path  analysis  in  structural  equation  modeling
(SEM) software (MPlus) was used to test hypotheses
represented in Figure 2 at the unit level of analysis.
This SEM technique is considered more rigorous than
typical  stepwise  regression  techniques  as  all  media-
tion  paths  are  measured  simultaneously  rather  than
step by step. In addition, the model fit indices, error
indices, and  modification  indices  indicate  missing
paths that may improve the overall fit of the model. In


236 Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies

Path Model With Beta Weights Path Model With Beta Weights

Figure 2

Authentic
Leadership

(AL)

.21*

H3

.30**

H1

Trust in

Management

(TM)

.44**

Follower Positive

Psychological

Capital

.53**
H 4

.05
H2

Unit Sales

Growth

(SG)

(PsyCap)

CFI = 1.00

RMSEA = .00

SRMR = .038

Note: CFI = Comparative Fit Index; RMSEA = root mean square error of approximation; SRMR = standardized root mean square residual.

this  study, the  data  demonstrate  strong  fit  with  the
model  as  the  CFI  =  1.00, RMSEA  =  .00, and  the
SRMR  =  .038  including  all  covariates  in  the  path
model. In addition, modification indices recommend
no additional paths other than those specified in the
original model.

When  conducting  these  path  analyses, all  covari-
ates described in the measures section were included
in  the  path  model  analysis.  Hypothesis  1  predicted
that authentic leadership would be positively related
to  change  in  unit  sales  performance.  As  seen  in
Figure  2,
this  hypothesis  was  fully  supported  as
authentic  leadership  was  significantly  related  to
change in unit sales performance (α = .30, p < .05).
Hypothesis  2  predicted  that  PsyCap  would  have  a
positive relationship to a change in sales from Time 1
to Time 2. Surprisingly, in light of earlier empirical
evidence of this relationship, this direct relationship
was not supported.

Hypothesis  3  predicted  that  trust  would  partially
mediate the relationship between authentic leadership
and  change  in  unit  sales  performance.  Baron  and
Kenny’s  (1986)  technique, as  revised  by  Kenny,
Kashy, and  Bolger  (1998), for  testing  mediation
hypotheses was the guiding analysis technique used
for testing the main hypothesis on trust as a mediator.
According to Baron and Kenny, there is support for
mediation if the following are obtained: (a) The inde-
pendent variables relate to the dependent variable, (b) the

independent variables relate to the mediating variable,
and  (c)  the  mediating  variable  relates  to  the  depen-
dent variable and the relationship of the independent
variables with the dependent variable is significantly
lower in magnitude. In this path analysis, as seen in
Figure  2, authentic  leadership  was  significantly
related to the mediating variable trust, and trust was
significantly related to the dependent variable change
in unit sales. With trust in the path model, authentic
leadership remained a significant predictor of change
in  unit  sales  performance  suggesting  partial  media-
tion.  Thus, overall  we  observed  full  support  for
Hypotheses 3.

In the final hypothesis (4), we predicted that trust
would  partially  mediate  the  relationship  between
PsyCap  as  the  independent  variable  and  change  in
unit  sales  performance  as  the  dependent  variable.
Similar to the mediation test in Hypothesis 3, Baron
and Kenny’s (1986) technique, as revised by Kenny
et al. (1998), as applied in path analysis was the guiding
analysis technique.

As depicted in Figure 2, PsyCap was significantly
related to the mediating variable trust, and trust was
significantly related to the dependent variable change
in unit sales. With regard to PsyCap and the depen-
dent variable unit sales growth, modification indices
in  the  structural  model  recommended  no  additional
path  from  PsyCap  to  the  dependent  variable.
Therefore, to  further  determine  mediation, a  Sobel


(1982)  test  was  conducted.  This  test  is  designed  to
assess whether a mediating variable (trust) carries the
effects  of  the  independent  variable  (PsyCap)  to  a
dependent variable (unit sales growth). The test sta-
tistic  computed  measures  the  indirect  effect  of  the
independent  variable  on  the  dependent  variable  by
way of the mediator. Reported p values are obtained
from the unit normal distribution under the assump-
tion  of  a  two-tailed  test  of  the  hypothesis  that  the
mediated  effect  equals  zero  in  the  population  using
±1.96 as the critical values, which contain the central
95%  of  the  unit  normal  distribution  (Preacher  &
Hayes, 2004). A significant p value indicates support
for mediation. Results of the Sobel test indicate that
trust fully mediates the relationship between PsyCap
and change in unit sales performance generated (z =
2.194, p <  .05).  Thus, with  support  from  both  path
analysis  and  the  Sobel  test, we  conclude  that  trust
fully mediates the relationship between PsyCap and
change in unit sales performance, partially supporting
Hypothesis 4.

Post Hoc Analyses

As  previously  stated, Luthans, Avolio, Avey, and
Norman  (2007)  tested  the  stability  of  PsyCap  and
suggested 4 months to be adequate time for such self-
opinion constructs to be relatively stable. As applied
to this model, a shorter period of time may not allow
for constructs to manifest to behaviors that affect per-
formance  and  a  longer  period  of  time  may  lead  to
change  in  the  construct  levels  rendering  prediction
faulty without measuring predictor variables a second
time. Given that the sales data were available at mul-
tiple points in time, we conducted a post hoc analysis
to determine the extent that a change in temporal sep-
aration  between  the  predictors  and  criterion  would
demonstrate differing results. Using the same model,
results for sales growth at 2 months (vs. 4 months as
in Figure 2) show no significant relationship between
authentic leadership (β = –.08, p = .54), trust in man-
agement (β = –.01, p = .93), or PsyCap (β = .22, p = .16)
and  sales  growth  for  the  organization.  Replicating
these  analyses  using  the  sales  growth  criterion  at  6
months, results again show no significant relationship
between authentic leadership (β = –.22, p = .11), trust
in management (β = –.19, p = .23), or PsyCap (β = .16,
p =  .30)  and  sales  growth.  Overall, this  supports
Luthans’ and  colleagues’ assertions  that  4  months
may be an ideal temporal separation for some state-
like  constructs  in  terms  of  predicting  theoretically
related outcomes.

Clapp-Smith et al. / Authentic Leadership 237

Discussion

In proposing a model of authentic leadership devel-
opment, Luthans  and  Avolio  (2003)  suggested  that
positive psychological capacities provide evidence of
“who I am,” which plays a role in the self-development
of the individual. Gardner et al. (2005) recommended
that when considering authentic leadership, the role of
the follower is equally important to understanding the
leadership  process  as  is  the  leader. Therefore, in  this
study we examined how the leader’s authenticity and
the  followers’ PsyCap  each  contribute  to  group-level
trust  in  management.  This  is  a  critical  distinction  as
many studies in the past have considered the positive
capacities  of  the  leader  only  and  the  impact  of  these
characteristics on follower perceptions (Luthans, Avey,
Avolio, Norman, & Combs, 2006). Here, we consider
both  group-level  perceptions  of  the  leader  (authentic
leadership)  and  group-level  follower  characteristics
(PsyCap) and their relationship with the group’s trust
in management.

Support for Hypotheses 1 and 3 provides the first
empirical  test  of  the  relationship  proposed  by
Gardner et al. (2005), namely, that authentic leader-
ship is related to both performance and trust. When
followers  perceive  that  their  leaders  are  authentic,
they  also  will  believe  they  can  trust  those  leaders.
Trust  has  been  suggested  as  a  mediator  to  perfor-
mance  for  many  leadership  theories, and  this  study
adds further evidence that this relationship is consis-
tent. In addition, this study shows that trust in leader-
ship  may  be  considered  at  the  group  level  and
maintains  the  relationship  with  performance  when
tested at this level of analysis.

Hypothesis  4  suggested  that  group-level  follower
PsyCap has a relationship with trust, which mediates
the  relationship  with  performance.  The  significant
findings provide evidence for the importance of not
only capturing the perceptions that followers have of
their  leaders  but  also  the  perceptions  they  have  of
themselves. Indeed, followers and their psychological
states  are  equally  important  to  understanding  how
leadership  processes  influence  performance.  Thus,
because the level of follower PsyCap had a positive
relationship with the level of trust that groups had in
their company leadership, we come closer to under-
standing  not  only  the  states  and  behaviors  of  the
leaders that are crucial to organizational performance
but also the role of followers’ positivity. In addition, by
analyzing  PsyCap  at  the  group  level, we  find  further
evidence  for  how  the  dynamics  of  social  cognitive


238 Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies

theory and social contagion may influence tradition-
ally individual-level constructs to also exist at group
levels.  We  therefore  supported  what  Meindl  (1995)
suggested with regard to group-level follower charac-
teristics in the leadership process.

The post hoc analysis raises an interesting contribu-
tion  with  regard  to  development  of  leadership
processes  within  organizations.  Luthans, Avolio, and
colleagues have argued that one approach to develop-
ing authentic leadership within organizations is to uti-
lize micro interventions (Luthans, Avey, Avolio, et al.,
2006). One implication of the state-like nature of psy-
chological  constructs  addresses  an  issue  that  many
development  theorists  raise: the  efficacy  of  one-time
training  seminars  in  impacting  true  effects.  Results
from our study suggest that to impact change, devel-
opment may be more successful with booster interven-
tions in roughly 4-month intervals.

Limitations

Naturally, some limitations to this study exist, par-
ticularly with the sample size and a study design that
does  not  allow  for  interpretations  of  causality.
Nonetheless, the study does capture a temporal com-
ponent of relationships as well as control for a number
of  potentially  confounding  variables, although  we
recognize  that  with  field  studies  all  confounds  may
not be controlled. Future directions for this particular
stream of research are to take a longitudinal approach
to capture more data points throughout a given time
frame and understand how fluctuations of psycholog-
ical  states  may  influence  the  trust  relationship.  In
addition, a  developmental  intervention  would  give
further evidence of the role of authentic leadership in
terms of its contribution to building trust and perfor-
mance. A greater sample size would allow for more
sophisticated  analysis  that  could  capture  the  multi-
level relationships that exist in most organizations.

We also recognize that sales growth of stores per
square foot is but one of many indicators of perfor-
mance.  Thus, we  do  not  portend  to  explain  perfor-
mance outright; rather, we believe we have displayed
evidence  that  authentic  leadership, positive  PsyCap,
and  trust  have  relationships  with  aspects  of  store-
level  performance  and  believe  that  this  is  a  contri-
bution to our understanding of leadership and trust in
organizations.  However, we  are  cautious  to  make
broad sweeping assumptions about the results of this
study given the limitations of the performance indi-
cator that was available to us. Furthermore, a 4-month
time  period  provides  only  a  brief  snapshot  into  a

company’s inner workings. As mentioned previously,
we recommend future study designs that collect the
study variables as well as performance indicators at
multiple time points to more accurately reflect fluctu-
ations  over  time.  Such  a  design  was  not  possible  at
the current field site.

Overall,

this  study  provides  evidence  for  the
importance of authentic leadership and the establish-
ment  of  trust  in  organizations  that  are  built  around
groups.  Future  directions  beyond  this  study  could
include testing additional outcome variables such as
organizational citizenship behaviors and satisfaction.
In conclusion, we sought to test relationships in the
authentic  leadership  development  models  proposed
by  Luthans  and  Avolio  (2003)  and  Gardner  et  al.
(2005).  We  found  that  when  a  firm’s  leadership
embraces the idea of “to thine own self be true,” sig-
nificant  relationships  with  trust  and  performance
arise.  Furthermore, we  found  that  the  positive  psy-
chological capital of follower groups also positively
relates  to  the  level  of  trust  in  top  management  per-
ceived  by  followers.  Therefore, we  have  tested  a
model that represents both the leader and the follow-
ers and provides an objective measure of unit perfor-
mance  for  the  group  level  of  analysis.  We  were
further able to represent the group level for each of
the constructs of interest and show that PsyCap and
trust can exist at the group level and have meaningful
relationships with performance.

References

Avolio, B. J. (2007). Promoting more integrative strategies for
leadership  theory-building.  American  Psychologist, 62,
25-33.

Avolio, B.  J., &  Gardner, W.  L.  (2005).  Authentic  leadership
development: Getting to the root of positive forms of leader-
ship. Leadership Quarterly, 16, 315-338.

Avolio, B. J., Gardner, W. L., Walumbwa, F. O., Luthans, F., &
May, D. R. (2004). Unlocking the mask: A look at the process
by  which  authentic  leaders  impact  follower  attitudes  and
behaviors. Leadership Quarterly, 15, 801-823.

Avolio, B.  J., &  Luthans, F.  (2006).  The  high  impact  leader:
Moments matter in accelerating authentic leadership develop-
ment. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Upper Saddle River,

NJ: Prentice Hall.

Bandura, A. (2001). Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspec-

tive. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 1-26.

Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator-mediator
variable  distinction 
in  social  psychological  research:
Conceptual, strategic, and  statistical  considerations.  Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1173-1182.

Blau, P. M. (1964). Exchange and power in social life. San Diego,

CA: Academic Press.


Bliese, P. D. (2000). Within-group agreement, non-independence
and reliability: Implications for data aggregation and analysis.
In  K.  J.  Klein  &  S.  Koslowski  (Eds.), Multi-level  theory,
research  and  methods  in  organizations: Foundations, exten-
sions  and  new  directions (pp.  349-381).  San  Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.

Clark, M. C., & Payne, R. L. (1997). The nature and structure of
workers’ trust  in  management.  Journal  of  Organizational
Behavior, 18, 205-224.

Collins, C. J., & Smith, K. G. (2006). Knowledge exchange and
combination: The role of human resource practices in the per-
formance of high-technology firms. Academy of Management
Journal, 49, 544-560.

Cook, J., & Wall, T. (1980). New work attitude measures of trust,
organizational commitment and personal need nonfulfillment.
Journal  of  Occupational  &  Organizational  Psychology, 53,
39-52.

Cummings, L.  L., &  Bromiley, P.  (1996).  The  Organizational
Trust Inventory (OTI): Development and validation. In R. M.
Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations (pp. 302-330).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Dirks, K. T., & Ferrin, D. L. (2002). Trust in leadership: Meta-
analytic  findings  and  implications  for  research  and  practice.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 611-628.

Gardner, W.  L., Avolio, B.  J., Luthans, F., May, D.  R., &
Walumbwa, F.  (2005).  “Can  you  see  the  real  me?” A  self-
based  model  of  authentic  leader  and  follower  development.
Leadership Quarterly, 16, 343-372.

Hu, L., & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit indices in
covariance  structure  analysis: Conventional  criteria  versus
new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling, 61, 1-55.

James, L. R., Demaree, R. G., & Wolf, G. (1993). rwg: An assess-
ment of within-group interrater agreement. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 78, 306-309.

Jarvenpaa, S. L., Knoll, K., & Leidner, D. E. (1998). Is anybody
out there? Antecedents of trust in global virtual teams. Journal
of Management Information Systems, 14, 29-64.

Jarvenpaa, S. L., & Leidner, D. E. (1999). Communication and
trust in global virtual teams. Organizational Science, 10, 791-815.
Joel Popkin & Company. (2002). Small business share of NAICS
industries. Washington, DC: Office of Advocacy, U.S. Small
Business Administration.

Johns, G. (2006). The essential impact of context on organizational

behavior. Academy of Management Review, 31, 386-408.

Jones, G. R., & George, J. M. (1998). The experience and evolu-
tion  of  trust: Implications  for  cooperation  and  teamwork.
Academy of Management Review, 23, 531-546.

Kenny, D. A., Kashy, D. A., & Bolger, N. (1998). Data analysis in
social psychology. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey
(Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (4th ed., pp. 233-265).
New York: McGraw-Hill.

Klein, K. J., Dansereau, F., & Hall, R. J. (1994). Level issues in
theory development, data collection and analysis. Academy of
Management Review, 19, 195-229.

Korsgaard, M. A., Whitener, E. M., & Brodt, S. E. (2002). Trust
in  the  face  of  conflict: The  role  of  managerial  trustworthy
behavior  and  organizational  context.  Journal  of  Applied
Psychology, 87, 312-319.

Law, K. S., Wong, C., & Mobley, W. H. (1998). Toward a taxon-
omy of multidimensional constructs. Academy of Management
Review, 23, 741-755.

Clapp-Smith et al. / Authentic Leadership 239

Luthans, F. (2002). The need for and meaning of positive organi-
zational  behavior.  Journal  of  Organizational  Behavior, 23,
695-706.

Luthans, F., Avey, J. B., Avolio, B. J., Norman, S. M., & Combs,
G.  M.  (2006).  Psychological  capital  development: Toward  a
micro-intervention.  Journal  of  Organizational  Behavior, 27,
387-393.

Luthans, F., & Avolio, B. J. (2003). Authentic leadership devel-
opment. In R. E. Quinn (Ed.), Positive organizational schol-
arship (pp. 241-261). San Francisco: Barrett-Koehler.

Luthans, F., Avolio, B. J., Avey, J. B., & Norman, S. M. (2007).
Psychological  capital: Measurement  and  relationship  with
performance and satisfaction. Personnel Psychology, 60, 541-572.
Luthans, F., Avolio, B. J., Walumbwa, F. O., & Li, W. (2005). The
psychological capital of Chinese workers: Exploring the rela-
tionship  with  performance.  Management  and  Organization
Review, 1, 249-271.

Luthans, F., Norman, S., & Hughes, L. (2006). Authentic lead-
ership: A new approach for a new time. In R. J. Burke &
C. L. Cooper (Eds.), Inspiring leaders (pp. 84-104). London:
Routledge.

Luthans, F., & Youssef, C. M. (2007). Emerging positive organi-

zational behavior. Journal of Management, 33, 321-349.

Luthans, F., Youssef, C. M., & Avolio, B. J. (2007). Psychological
capital: Developing  the  human  competitive  edge.  Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.

Masten, A.  S.  (2001).  Ordinary  magic: Resilience  processes  in

development. American Psychologist, 56, 227-239.

Masten, A. S., Best, K. M., & Garmezy, N. (1990). Resilience and
development: Contributions from the study of children who over-
come adversity. Development and Psychopathology, 2, 425-444.
Mayer, J. D., & Gavin, M. B. (2005). Trust in management and
performance: Who minds the shop while the employees watch
the boss? Academy of Management Journal, 48, 874-888.

McAllister, D.  J.  (1995).  Affect-  and  cognition-based  trust  as
foundations  for  interpersonal  cooperation  in  organizations.
Academy of Management Journal, 38, 24-59.

Meindl, J. R. (1995). The romance of leadership as a follower-
centric theory: A social constructionist approach. Leadership
Quarterly, 6, 329-341.

Mischel, W.  (1973). Toward  a  cognitive  social  reconceptualiza-

tion of personality. Psychological Review, 80, 253-283.

Nugent, P.  D., & Abolafia, M. Y.  (2006).  The  creation  of  trust
through interaction and exchange: The role of consideration in
organizations. Group & Organization Management, 36, 628-650.
Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2004). SPSS and SAS procedures
for  estimating  indirect  effects  in  simple  mediation  models.
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 36,
717-731.

Rousseau, D.  M.  (1985).  Issues  of  level  in  organizational
research: Multi-level and cross-level perspectives. Research in
Organizational Behavior, 7, 1-37.

Rousseau, D. M., Sitkin, S. B., Burt, R. S., & Camerer, C. (1998).
Not  so  different  after  all: A  cross-discipline  view  of  trust.
Academy of Management Review, 23, 393-404.

Seligman, M. E. P. (1998). Learned optimism. New York: Pocket

Books.

Seligman, M. E. P., & Schulman, P. (1986). Explanatory style as
a predictor of productivity and quitting among life insurance
agents.  Journal  of  Personality  and  Social  Psychology, 50,
832-838.


240 Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies

Shrout, P.  E., &  Fleiss, J.  L.  (1979).  Intraclass  correlations:
Uses  in  assessing  rater  reliability.  Psychological  Bulletin,
86, 420-428.

Snyder, C. R., Feldman, D. B., & Taylor, J. D. (2000). The roles of
hopeful  thinking  in  preventing  problems  and  enhancing
strengths. Applied & Preventive Psychology, 9, 249-269.

Snyder, C. R., & Lopez, S. J. (Eds.). (2002). Handbook of pos-

itive psychology. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Sobel, M.  E.  (1982).  Asymptotic  intervals  for  indirect  effects  in
structural  equations  models.  In  S.  Leinhart  (Ed.), Sociological
methodology 1982 (pp. 290-312). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Stajkovic, A., &  Luthans, F.  (1998).  Self-efficacy  and  work-
related performance: A meta-analysis. Psychology Bulletin,
44, 580-590.

Waldman, D. A., & Yammarino, F. J. (1999). CEO charismatic
leadership: Levels-of-management  and  levels-of-analysis
effects. Academy of Management Review, 24, 266-285.

Walumbwa, F. O., Avolio, B. J., Gardner, W. L., Wernsing, T. S., &
Peterson, S. J. (2008). Authentic leadership: Development and
analysis of a multidimensional theory-based measure, Journal
of Management, 34, 89-126.

West, B. J., Patera, J. L., & Carsten, M. K. (in press). Team level
positivity: Investigating positive psychological capacities and
team level outcomes. Journal of Organizational Behavior.

Wieselquist, J., Rusbult, C.  E., Foster, C. A., & Agnew, C.  R.
(1999).  Commitment, pro-relationship  behavior, and  trust  in
close  relationships.  Journal  of  Personality  and  Social
Psychology, 77, 942-966.

Yammarino, F.  J., Dionne, S.  D., Chun, J.  U., &  Dansereau, F.
(2005).  Leadership  and  levels  of  analysis: A  state-of-the-
science review. Leadership Quarterly, 16, 879-919.

Youssef, C. M., & Luthans, F. (2003). Immigrant psychological
capital: Contributing  to  the  war  for  talent  and  competitive
advantage. Singapore Nanyang Business Review, 2(2), 2-13.

Rachel  Clapp-Smith is  a  PhD  candidate  in  Leadership  and
Organizational Behavior at the University of Nebraska– Lincoln.
She  received  her  MBA  in  International  Management  from
Thunderbird, The  Graduate  School  of  Global  Management.  Her
current research interests include global mindset, authentic leader-
ship development, and positive psychological capital. 

Gretchen R. Vogelgesang is an associate professor of manage-
ment  at  the  State  University  of  New  York  at  New  Paltz.  She
received  her  PhD  in  Leadership  and  Organizational  Behavior
from  the  University  of  Nebraska–Lincoln  and  her  MBA  from
DePaul University. Her current research interests include leader
transparency, authentic leadership development, and positive psy-
chological capital.  

James B. Avey, PhD, is an assistant professor of management at
Central Washington University. Before attaining his PhD, he was
a human resource manager at The Boeing Company’s commercial
airplane  division  in  Washington  State.  His  research  interests
include psychological capital, psychological ownership, authentic
leadership and employee selection.

