Journal of Cleaner Production 64 (2014) 81e90

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Cleaner Production

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / j c l e p r o

The link between eco-innovation and business performance: a
Taiwanese industry context
Colin C.J. Cheng a, Chen-lung Yang b, Chwen Sheu c, *
a Department of Marketing and Distribution Management, National Kaohsiung First University of Science and Technology, Kaohsiung, Taiwan
b Department of Technology Management, Chung Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
c Dept. of Management, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506, USA

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 8 June 2012
Received in revised form
29 September 2013
Accepted 30 September 2013
Available online 12 October 2013

Keywords:
Eco-innovation
Green innovation
Sustainability
Environmental management

In practice, there are various types of eco-innovation. While each type of innovation has its own attri-
butes, determinants, and contribution to business performance, it is not effective to implement eco-
innovation programs without a holistic view. This study draws from the resource-based view theory
to investigate inter-relationships among three types of eco-innovation (process, product, organizational)
and their relative impact on business performance. Using structural equation modeling with 121 samples
collected from Taiwan Environmental Management Association, we ﬁnd that eco-organizational inno-
vation has the strongest effect on business performance. Additionally, eco-process and eco-product in-
novations partially mediate the effects of eco-organizational innovation, and eco-product innovation
mediates eco-process innovations’ effects on business performance. Business performance is directly and
indirectly affected by eco-organizational, eco-process, and eco-product innovations. The ﬁndings suggest
that, in order to develop effective eco-innovation programs, managers must understand the interde-
pendence and co-evolutionary relationships between different types of eco-innovation. Overall, this
study extends the discussion of innovation to the area of environmental innovation or eco-innovation.
Ó 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Many organizations have advocated innovation programs per-
taining to environmental management to effectively reduce waste
and improve the utilization of scarce resources (Carrillo-Hermosilla
et al., 2010). Kemp and Pearson (2008, p. 7) referred to those
innovative programs in relation to environmental management as
eco-innovation, which is deﬁned as “The production, assimilation or
exploitation of a product, production process, service or manage-
ment or business methods that is novel to the organization
(developing or adopting it) and which results, throughout its life
cycle, in a reduction of environmental risk, pollution and other
negative impacts of
resources used (including energy use)
compared to relevant alternatives.” With the ever increasing
pressure from the government and marketplace regarding
manufacturing sustainability, developing an effective
eco-
innovation program and making it an integrative part of a ﬁrm’s

* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: cjcheng@nkfust.edu.tw (C.C.J. Cheng), clyang@chu.edu.tw

(C.-l. Yang), csheu@ksu.edu (C. Sheu).

0959-6526/$ e see front matter Ó 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.09.050

management programs is important (Carrillo-Hermosilla et al.,
2010; Dangelico and Pujari, 2010).

In practice, there are various types of eco-innovation (OECD and
Eurostat, 2005, p. 16), including product innovations, process in-
novations, organizational innovations and marketing innovations.
While each type of innovation has its own attributes, determinants,
and contribution to environmental performance (Christensen,
2011; Damanpour et al., 2009), researchers have cautioned that it
is not effective to implement innovation programs separately
without a systemic view (Damanpour et al., 2009; Chou et al., 2012;
Xing et al., 2013). Nonetheless, previous studies have mostly
focused on the development and performance of individual eco-
innovation programs (e.g., Pujari, 2006; Anttonen et al., 2013),
such as product service innovation (Maxwell et al., 2006), service
innovation (Chou et al., 2012; Xing et al., 2013), technological
innovation (Moore and Ausley, 2004; Tseng et al., 2013), and
infrastructure and policy innovation (Rehfeld et al., 2007; Shin
et al., 2008).

Developing eco-innovation without a holistic view could be
counter-productive. For instance, several researchers addressed
eco-innovation issues from a purely technological perspective (e.g.,
Dangelico and Pujari, 2010; Weinberger et al., 2012). Socio-
technical system theory argues that implementing innovations


82

C.C.J. Cheng et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 64 (2014) 81e90

should be coupled with proper social and managerial systems in
order to optimize business performance (Cummings and Srivastva,
1977). In addition, an organization must be able to adjust and ﬁne-
tune its structure and internal activities to support technological
aspects of eco-innovation (Lam, 2005). Brunnermeier and Cohen
(2003) and Horbach (2008) also pointed out that an effective eco-
innovation program should not be the sole responsibility of the
R&D unit. Instead, an organization must take a holistic approach to
developing and supporting its eco-innovation programs. Accord-
ingly, knowing how different types of eco-innovation complement
each other is critical for ﬁrms to effectively implement their entire
innovation programs.

Responding to the call from the literature, this study intends to
offer a holistic view of eco-innovation programs by investigating
the inter-relationships among different types of eco-innovation and
their impact on business performance. Speciﬁcally, this study ex-
amines the relative effects and inter-relationship effects of three
types of eco-innovation (eco-process, eco-product, eco-organiza-
tional). The following section reviews relevant
literature on
different types of eco-innovation to develop research hypotheses,
followed by a discussion of research methodology, including sam-
ples and measurements. The statistical results and discussion are
presented and, ﬁnally, managerial implications and suggestions for
future research are provided.

2. Eco-innovation types

The literature deﬁnes the boundary of eco-innovation into
external and internal eco-innovation. The external boundary of
eco-innovation includes all external activities of the organization
for green and sustainable activities, including suppliers (Lee and
Kim, 2011), regulators (del Río et al., 2010), and market demand
(Lin et al., 2013). The internal boundary of eco-innovation activities
is related to practices for effectively and efﬁciently managing eco-
innovation processes within organizations,
including organiza-
tional management (Eiadat et al., 2008), production process
(Dangelico and Pontrandolfo, 2010), and new product development
(Lin et al., 2013). For the purpose of this study, we focus on the
internal boundary of eco-innovation.

Furthermore, researchers have addressed eco-innovation from
different perspectives, including government policy (Veugelers,
2012), stakeholders (e.g., customers, suppliers) Klewitz et al.,
2012), organizational strategies (Boons and Lüdeke-Freund, 2012),
organizational leadership (Chen and Chang, 2012), organizational
culture (Porter-O’Grady and Malloch, 2010), and the characteristics
of the eco-innovation itself (Lin et al., 2013). With a focus on the
internal boundary of eco-innovation, this study investigates the
effects of eco-innovation from the organizational
strategic
perspective.

An extensive literature review was conducted to ensure inclu-
sion of all relevant aspects of the internal boundary of eco-
innovation. For example, Kemp and Arundel (1998) argued that
eco-innovations include technical, organizational, and marketing
innovations. del Río et al. (2010) classiﬁed eco-innovation types
into process/product innovation, mature/immature innovation, and
radical/incremental innovation. Horbach (2008) and Triguero et al.
(2013) studied three types of eco-innovation: eco-process, eco-
product, and eco-organizational innovations. The Oslo Manual,
developed by the OECD (2005), identiﬁed four distinct types of eco-
innovation: product innovation, process innovation, organizational
innovation, and marketing innovation. Overall, for examining in-
ternal innovation, the literature seems to suggest a focus on eco-
process, eco-product, and eco-organizational innovation activities
(Horbach, 2008; Triguero et al., 2013). This classiﬁcation was later
conﬁrmed by a ﬁeld study consists of interviews with 24 managers

who has more than ﬁfteen years of work experience in environ-
mental innovation management. The interviewees shared their
experience and offered suggestions regarding the types of eco-
innovation activities involved inside of organizations. (More de-
tails of the interviews will be described in the research methods
section.) This ﬁeld study revealed that eco-innovation imple-
mentation should cover every major aspect of the organization,
including activities arising from the setting up of the different
forms of organization and management in different functions of the
organization, activities related to the change or improvement of the
manufacturing process function, as well as activities that contribute
to the improvement to existing products or the development of
new products.

In conclusion, synthesizing insights from the literature and the
ﬁeldwork,
three key eco-innovation types (eco-process, eco-
product, and eco-organizational innovations) were identiﬁed for
further study. While those three eco-innovation programs have
been studied separately, their inter-relationships have never been
properly examined in a holistic manner (Hallstedt et al., 2013;
Lozano, 2013). The remainder of this section deﬁnes activities
related to these three forms of eco-innovations.

An eco-process innovation stands for new elements introduced
into an organization’s production system for producing eco-
products (Negny et al., 2012). In general, eco-process innovation
refers to the improvement of existing production processes or the
addition of new processes to reduce environmental
impact.
Rennings (2000) suggested that innovation can be additive solu-
tions (e.g., smokestack scrubbers) or be integrated into the pro-
duction processes through substitution of inputs, optimization of
production, and reclamation of outputs. As a result, eco-process
innovation modiﬁes the organization’s operation processes and
systems, decreases unit costs of production, produces new or
signiﬁcantly improved eco-products, and reduces environmental
impacts (Negny et al., 2012).

In contrast, an eco-product innovation is the introduction of
new or signiﬁcantly improved products (regarding their charac-
teristics), such as improvements in technical components and
materials (Pujari, 2006). Eco-product innovation is usually inspired
by advanced eco technologies, shortening product life cycles, and
increasing competition (Carrillo-Hermosilla et al., 2010). The
environmental impact of eco-product innovations stems from their
use (e.g., fuel consumption and CO2 emissions of cars) and disposal
(e.g., heavy metals in batteries) rather than their production. Ac-
cording to Pujari et al. (2004), product life cycle analysis involves all
aspects of a product, from its creation and use, to its disposal. This
concept can be applied to eco-product innovations. For instance,
electricity produced from wind power is an example of the use of
creation. The compact ﬂuorescent bulb is another example of en-
ergy
a
chloroﬂuorocarbon-free air conditioner is considered green pri-
marily due to its reduced disposal impact. In short, eco-product
innovations aim at reducing environmental impacts during an
eco-product’s entire life cycle (Christensen, 2011).

a product, while

through the use

saving

of

Finally, according to Birkinshaw et al.

(2008), an eco-
organizational innovation refers to upgrading the organization’s
management processes through a new and eco method in business
practices. Eco-organizational innovations thus can improve busi-
ness performance by supporting necessary changes, reducing
administrative and transaction costs, improving workplace satis-
faction, or reducing costs of supplies (Cruz et al., 2006). Eco-
organizational
innovation generally does not reduce environ-
mental impacts directly, but facilitates the implementation of eco-
process and eco-product innovations (Murphy and Gouldson,
2000). Kemp and Arundel
summarized that eco-
innovations include eco-training programs, eco-
organizational

(1998)


C.C.J. Cheng et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 64 (2014) 81e90

83

product design programs, eco-learning techniques, or the creation
of management
teams to deal with eco issues. Thus, eco-
organizational innovations are related to administrative efforts
toward renewing organizational routines, procedures, mecha-
nisms, or systems to produce eco-innovations in the end (Cruz
et al., 2006).

In summary, eco-process innovations are directly related to
operations activities, while eco-organizational
innovations are
indirectly related to the organization’s basic work activities and
infrastructure, and eventually affect the entire management sys-
tems.
In addition, eco-product innovations can be viewed as
creating new products aimed at satisfying market needs, while eco-
process innovations are concerned with introducing new tech-
niques into production operations. While the relationship between
three types of eco-innovation might have been discussed individ-
ually, to our knowledge, there are no studies that speciﬁcally
examine the formation of different types of eco-innovation as a
whole. The next section discusses such relationships and the rela-
tive impact each eco-innovation type has on business performance.
Accordingly, a research model with several hypotheses
is
developed.

3. Theoretical development

Resource-Based View (RBV) provides a good theoretical basis to
discuss the contribution of resources and capabilities to perfor-
mance in each of
the aforementioned three types of eco-
innovation. Speciﬁcally, these theories shed light on the relations
among internal resources, capabilities and performance, which
constitutes the basis for discussing eco-innovation in a holistic
view.

The principal idea of the RBV and Natural RBV is that the
competitive advantage of a ﬁrm lies in its heterogeneous resources,
which are valuable,
inimitable, and non-substitutable (Barney,
1991). In order to use such assets, a ﬁrm has to develop and accu-
mulate them over time (Markard and Worch, 2010). However, the
RBV has been criticized for not being able to explain how resources
are deployed to achieve competitive advantage (DeSarbo et al.,
2005). Teece et al. (1997) proposed the concept of Dynamic Capa-
bilities that emphasizes appropriating, adapting, integrating, and
reconﬁguring internal and external organizational competence to
match the requirements of changing environments. Therefore,
competence is seen as the basis of competitiveness, and it enables a
ﬁrm to innovate new products, to offer new values to customers,
and thus to develop a sustained competitive advantage (van Kleef
and Roome, 2007).

Built on the concept of RBV, Hart (1995, 2005) developed Nat-
ural RBV by including the constraints and opportunities of the
natural environment. According to Natural RBV, environmental
practices require the accumulation of resources and the manage-
ment of capabilities within the ﬁrm. Thus, Hart (1995) developed a
concept of green capabilities, while Sharma and Vredenburg
(1998), Hart (2005), and Hart and Dowell (2011) further elabo-
rated and empirically corroborated this concept to highlight the
links among environmental strategies, capabilities development,
and competitive advantage.

Accordingly, eco-process innovation, eco-product innovation,
and eco-organizational innovation can be viewed as distinctive
green capabilities developed with various resources including
administrative support, organizational activities and structure,
green infrastructure, eco technologies, and so on. The accumulation
of those resources toward green activities develops unique green
capabilities in the form of the three types of eco-innovation, which
should in turn contribute to competitive advantage and business
performance.

Fig. 1 displays the basic model that displays the theoretical re-
lationships among three types of eco-innovation on business
performance.

in the form of structural

First, previous studies implied that an organizational innovation
leading to administrative and structural renewal is a facilitator for
the other types of innovation (Damanpour et al., 2009). In practice,
through organizational renewal
im-
provements, eco-organizational innovation can create better intra-
organizational coordination and cooperation mechanisms toward
effective environmental management. Namely, eco-organizational
innovations are able to contribute to a ﬁtting environment
conducive with the development of eco-product and eco-process
innovations. For instance, Staropoli (1998) veriﬁed the impor-
tance of organizational innovation in enhancing technological in-
novations in the pharmaceutical industry. Germain (1996) found
that organizational innovations might be signiﬁcant predictors of
process
sector. More recently,
Armbruster et al. (2008) indicated that organizational innovations
lead to product innovations. Walker (2008) asserted that organi-
zational and product innovations were found to be inter-related.
Borrowing from the general innovation literature, we propose
that the same relationships exist in the context of eco-innovation.
Namely, eco-organizational innovations can contribute to the for-
mation of eco-process and eco-product innovations.

in the logistics

innovations

H1: The greater the ﬁrm’s eco-organizational innovation, the
greater its eco-process innovation.
H2: The greater the ﬁrm’s eco-organizational innovation, the
greater its eco-product innovation.

While the literature does not offer explicit empirical results for
the relationship between eco-process innovation and eco-product
innovation, previous general innovation studies lend theoretical
support for their relationship. For example, Klepper (1996) argued
that product innovation must precede process innovation for better
effect. On the other hand, Damanpour and Aravind (2006) and
Adner and Levinthal (2001) both indicated that product and pro-
cess innovations are complementary to each other and that ﬁrms
that pursue both simultaneously would produce better perfor-
mance. Finally, Ettlie and Reza (1992) suggested that various pro-
cess innovation activities such as installing new equipment,
redeﬁning task speciﬁcations, and upgrading information ﬂow,
could facilitate new product development. Oke (2007) also found
that an effectively new manufacturing process (e.g., a decrease in
the unit costs of production) was necessary to facilitate product
innovation. Many recent studies (e.g., Bigliardi and Dormio, 2009;
Raymond and St-Pierre, 2010; Maine et al., 2012) seem to support
the notion that process innovation often equips existing production
processes with advanced techniques which, in turn, improves the
capability of adding new product features to meet the market
needs. In short, the improvement of eco-process innovations is a

Fig. 1. The research model. (H: Hypothesis).


84

C.C.J. Cheng et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 64 (2014) 81e90

driving force for eco-product innovations. Therefore, the following
hypothesis is proposed.

H3: The greater the ﬁrm’s eco-process innovation, the greater its
eco-product innovation.

Many studies on the innovationeperformance relationship
suggested successful innovations improve business performance.
For example, Baer and Frese (2003) examined the effects of process
innovation, and Li and Atuahene-Gima (2001) conﬁrmed the ben-
eﬁts of product innovation. The contribution of environmental
management (including all three types of eco-innovation) on
business performance has also been recognized since Porter and
Van der Linde’s seminal work (1995). Several publications clearly
conﬁrmed the links between pro-active environmental strategy
(including innovation) and business performance, as well as the
generation of organizational capabilities through environmental
practices (see,
for example, Christmann, 2000; Klassen and
Whybark, 1999; Marcus and Geffen, 1998). All of them supported
positive associations between process/product innovations and
business performance. Accordingly, we propose that business per-
formance (measured by ROI, market share, proﬁtability, and sales)
can be enhanced by eco-process innovation and eco-product
innovation.

H4: The greater the ﬁrm’s eco-process innovation, the greater its
business performance.
H5: The greater the ﬁrm’s eco-product innovation, the greater
its business performance.

Previous studies also advocated the contribution of both regular
organizational and eco-organizational innovations (e.g., innovative
design, speed, or ﬂexibility) to a ﬁrm’s business performance (e.g.,
Armbruster et al., 2008; Klassen and Whybark, 1999). Strategic
theories suggest that organizations that adopt an innovation (e.g.,
capabilities, resources, technologies, or knowledge of the innova-
tion) would subsequently create a unique mechanism that protects
proﬁt margins, thus enabling the organization to gain great beneﬁts
(Teece et al., 1997). Lin and Chen (2007) speciﬁcally associated
organizational innovation with improved business performance.
Accordingly, the following hypothesis is proposed.

H6: The greater the ﬁrm’s eco-organizational innovation, the
greater its business performance.

Overall, these research hypotheses allow the study to closely
examine both the direct effects and indirect effects of eco-process
and eco-organizational innovations. Speciﬁcally, eco-process, eco-
product and eco-organizational
innovations directly improve
business performance respectively (H4, H5 and H6). Moreover, eco-
organizational innovation indirectly affects business performance
via the mediators, eco-process innovation (H1) and eco-product
innovation (H2), and eco-product innovation also mediates the
relationship between eco-process innovation and business perfor-
mance (H3). Namely through eco-product innovation, eco-process
innovation and eco-organizational
innovation could indirectly
enhance ﬁrms’ business performance. Eco-product innovation al-
lows a ﬁrm to incorporate its organizational innovative activities
into developing new goods or services. Similarly, those activities
also facilitate eco-process innovation to enhance business perfor-
mance. Consequently, the total effects of eco-organizational inno-
vation and eco-process innovation on business performance are
likely to include their direct effects as well as indirect effects
through eco-product innovation. Previous research has demon-
strated other types of capabilities as mediators, such as marketing

capabilities or operations capabilities, within the capabilityeper-
formance relationship (e.g., Murray et al., 2011; Yu et al., 2013). To
our best knowledge, no studies have investigated the inter-
relationships among the three forms of eco-innovation.

4. Research methods

The survey method is used in this study to provide an overview
of the existing eco-innovation practices and effectiveness in
Taiwan. This section presents the development and validation of
eco-innovation measurement. A discussion of data collection and
sample used for statistical analysis is also presented.

4.1. Measurement development

While previous studies have identiﬁed and validated the scales
of innovation variables (e.g., Damanpour et al., 2009), none of the
scales was speciﬁcally developed for eco-innovation. To ensure the
validity of the study, we decided to develop new scales for eco-
innovation, following suggestions of Churchill (1979).

Based on ﬁeld studies and the relevant literature (e.g., Rennings
and Zwick, 2002; Murphy and Gouldson, 2000; Kemp and Arundel,
1998), the domain of eco-innovation was created and an initial list
of items was generated. The ﬁeld studies were conducted in Taiwan,
including 24 in-depth interviews with managers and one focus
group. All the interview participants were managers with more
than ﬁfteen years of work experience in environmental innovation
management. The computer manufacturers in Taiwan rely heavily
on exporting to Europe and the U.S., and they have to regularly
engage in various eco-innovation programs to meet strict interna-
tional environmental regulations (e.g., WEEE) (Tung and Wan,
2013; Yang and Sheu, 2011). As a result, Taiwanese manufacturers
seem to offer an appropriate case for the study of eco-innovation
issues.

As suggested by Eisenhardt (1989) and Yin (2009), an interview
protocol was developed and subsequently pretested by two aca-
demics specializing in marketing research. Next, each interviewee
received a ﬁle with a brief introduction, the purpose of this study, a
guarantee of conﬁdentiality, and a request for an interview. During
the interviews, notes were taken and the proceedings of each
interview were tape recorded. If necessary, follow-up interviews
were conducted to clarify issues or explore for more details. On
average, each interview took 54 min. Finally, the authors and two
other academics used the software NVivo 8 (NVivo, 2008) to code
interviewees’ open-ended responses electronically and then to
organize them into theoretical themes, meaningful phrases, cross-
tabulated items, and initial sets of scale items.

To ensure a comprehensive list of eco-innovation items was
generated, we also conducted one focus group discussion with 12
participants. Following the same procedure as that used for the
interviews, the focus group discussions were video-recorded,
transcribed and then analyzed using NVivo 8 computer software.
Six of the 12 participants were academics specializing in eco-
innovation research and six were senior managers with a mini-
mum of 15 years of work experience related to eco-innovation. All
participants were screened to conﬁrm their willingness to partici-
pate and their familiarity with our study. The focus group was
conducted in a conference room at a convention center and it lasted
88 min. As a result, 20 items were generated, including ﬁve items
measuring the eco-process construct, eight items measuring the
eco-product construct, and seven items measuring the eco-
organizational construct.

Business performance was measured using four items devel-
oped by Im and Workman (2004). All the items were self-reported
by asking respondents to rate their market and ﬁnancial


C.C.J. Cheng et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 64 (2014) 81e90

85

performance (ROI, sales, proﬁt, and market share) compared with
that of their major competitors. The use of subjective performance
measures is a well-accepted approach (Atuahene-Gima and Ko,
2001; Im and Workman, 2004).

All items were subsequently evaluated by two university pro-
fessors who specialized in innovation research and four senior
managers with extensive experience developing eco-innovation to
ensure content and face validity. Suggestions for additional mea-
sures were also requested. As a result, all items remained on the list,
while a few of the items were revised to improve their speciﬁcity
and precision (e.g., “radically improve” was replaced with “inno-
vatively update”). For those items adapted from previous studies
(e.g., business performance) and written in English, a double-
translation method was used to translate them into Chinese. Spe-
ciﬁcally, the authors initially translated the items into Chinese;
another two academics then translated the Chinese version back
into English; and ﬁnally, this translation work was checked by the
third academic to ensure conceptual equivalence. The initial in-
strument contained 24 items that were measured on a 7-point
Likert scale (1 ¼ strongly disagree; 7 ¼ strongly agree).

Once the initial set of items was ready, a pilot-test was performed
to ensure its reliability and validity. Performing a pilot-test is an
important step in the scale development process, because it can
remove invalid items (Anderson and Gerbing, 1991). The pilot-test
used a convenience sample of 53 senior managers with experience
in eco-innovation activities. Of the respondents, 72% were from IT
manufacturing, 54% of were product managers, 65% were male, the
average number of years working was 18.4 years, and all were be-
tween the ages of 38 and 62. They were asked to complete a ques-
tionnaire to indicate any ambiguity or difﬁculty in responding to the
questions and to offer any suggestions they thought appropriate. At
this stage, some wordings were reﬁned but all 24 items were retained.

4.2. Sample and data collection

Samples were collected from Taiwan Environmental Manage-
ment Association (www.ema.org.tw), a renowned trade association
with more than 20,000 members. During the sample screening,
emails were sent to identify those who had extensive experience in
eco-innovation. Similar to the previous innovation studies (e.g.,
Atuahene-Gima and Ko, 2001), senior managers responsible for
eco-innovation development were selected. Based on these criteria,
each member was requested to provide the name of a senior
manager involved in eco-innovation development. To this end,
these procedures produced a sample of 611 ﬁrms.

Using Dillman’s (2000) design method for mail surveys, 611
copies of the questionnaire were mailed, along with preaddressed
postage-paid envelopes and a cover letter explaining the purpose of
the study, expressing appreciation for participating, and assuring
the conﬁdentiality of the shared information. The questionnaire
included three sections: (1) the covering page with contact infor-
mation, (2) a series of items on eco-process innovation, eco-product
innovation, eco-organizational innovation, and business perfor-
mance, and (3) demographics. After a follow up contact by mail,
telephone, or fax, 121 usable questionnaires were collected,
resulting in a response rate of 19.8%. Of the participants, 58% were
male, the average number of working years was 14.2, and their ages
ranged between 36 and 55 years. The samples covered four in-
dustries and were classiﬁed under the three-digit level of Taiwan’s
Standard Industry Classiﬁcation (SIC), including Manufacture of
Communication Equipment (SIC: 272, 29%), Manufacture of Com-
puters and Peripheral Equipment (SIC: 271, 32%), Manufacture of
Integrated Circuits (SIC: 261, 34.5%), and others (4.5%). More than
70% of the sample consists of large ﬁrms with over 3000 employees
and 68.9% have been established over 15 years.

4.3. Non-response bias and common method bias

To assess the possibility that those participants who responded
were systematically different from those who chose not to partic-
ipate, an assessment
for non-response bias was performed
(Armstrong and Overton, 1977). A comparison of the means of all
items was conducted by one-way ANOVA using SPSS 19. All mean
pair comparisons exhibit insigniﬁcant differences at .05, suggesting
no non-response bias occurs.

Since the measures for the independent and dependent variables
are collected from the same respondents in the same way, there is a
potential for common method bias (Podsakoff et al., 2003). If com-
mon method variance exists, a Conﬁrmatory Factor Analysis con-
taining all constructs should produce a single method factor
(Podsakoff and Organ, 1986). The goodness-of-ﬁt indices (c2/
d.f. ¼ 27.8, RMSEA ¼ .33, CFI ¼ .42, NFI ¼ .31, PNFI ¼ .37) indicate a
poor ﬁt for the single factor model. In addition, Harman’s one-factor
test is also used, where all variables are simultaneously entered into
an exploratory factor analysis through principal components
without rotation. According to the results, no single factor emerges
that could account for the majority of the covariance in the mea-
sures. Overall, both tests suggest no common method bias occurs.

5. Statistical results

This section examines the psychometric properties of mea-
surement, including reliability, and convergent and discriminant
validity. Structural equation modeling (SEM) analysis was applied
to test research hypotheses with ﬁrm size and ﬁrm age as control
variables. For ﬁrm size, we used the logarithm of the number of
employees. Firm age is deﬁned as the number of years the ﬁrm has
been in operation. The results of SEM analysis regarding the direct,
indirect, and total effects of three types of eco-innovation on
business performance are also presented.

5.1. Psychometric properties

To purify the sample, we conducted Exploratory Factor Analysis
to identify dimensionality of eco-innovation, and then assessed
reliability and item-to-total correlations (see Table 1).

Five factors were extracted, accounting for 78.3% of the variance
in the construct with the ﬁrst factor explaining 22.8%. Three items
in the ﬁfth factor were temporarily regarded as outliers. The tests
for reliability and item-to-total correlations were then conducted
and a factor was accepted if the Cronbach’s alpha value was greater
than .7 (Nunnally, 1978). Items were deleted if they negatively
correlated to other items within a scale or had a correlation value
below .1. The results show that, without the three outliers, all fac-
tors have Cronbach’s alpha values from .86 to .93. Previous re-
searchers have suggested that unusual patterns of scores can cause
a threat to validity/reliability of a scale and disproportionately in-
ﬂuence the results (Tabachnick and Fidell, 2006). Three outliers
identiﬁed were discarded for their low correlation value, below .1,
and negative correlations with other items. As a result, 21 items
were retained for the subsequent tests (see Appendix for the
complete list of measurement items).

We further evaluated measurement properties by running
Conﬁrmatory Factor Analysis. Following the suggestions from Hult
et al. (2004), we divided the items into four related groups. Each
item was set to load only on its respective latent construct, and the
latent constructs were allowed to be correlated. The results indicate
that the measurement model of eco-process innovation (c2/
d.f. ¼ 1.94, RMSEA ¼ .07, CFI ¼ .91, NNFI ¼ .92, PNFI ¼ .81), eco-
product innovation (c2/d.f. ¼ 2.34, RMSEA ¼ .10, CFI ¼ .92,
NNFI ¼ .93, PNFI ¼ .84), and eco-organizational innovation ﬁt the


86

C.C.J. Cheng et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 64 (2014) 81e90

Table 1
The results of exploratory factor analysis.

Scale
item

Factor 1

Factor 2

Factor 3

Factor 4

Eco-organizational
innovation

Eco-product
innovation

Eco-process
innovation

Business
performance

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

.809****
.082
.747****
.622**
.728****
.698****
.822****
 .293
 .347
 .329
 .340
.197
 .361
 .339
 .409
 .397
.203
 .414
 .251
 .370
.040
 .002
.004
.036

.393
 .015
.393
.387
.352
.280
.226
 .159
 .149
 .174
 .180
.123
.664****
.695**
.605****
.727****
.046
.749****
.601****
.717**
.253
.328
.392
.392

.284
 .158
.262
.287
.216
.169
.251
.765****
.734****
.798****
.819****
 .102
 .039
 .009
.096
 .029
 .060
.035
.022
 .028
.173
.151
.091
.195

.242
.295
.343
.244
.174
.290
.258
.150
.135
.152
.002
.015
 .074
 .051
 .010
 .009
 .017
.072
.117
.098
.762****
.567****
.575****
.679****

Factor 5

Outliers

 .024
.692****
 .071
 .118
.074
 .126
 .042
.082
.098
.140
.086
.868****
.064
.021
.121
 .008
.750****
 .126
 .061
.062
.249
.269
.206
.301

**p < .01; *p < .05.
data satisfactorily (c2/d.f. ¼ 1.32, RMSEA ¼ .05, CFI ¼ .92,
NNFI ¼ .95, PNFI ¼ .76). Business performance measures are also
represented satisfactorily (c2/d.f. ¼ 1.46, RMSEA ¼ .05, CFI ¼ .94,
NNFI ¼ .97, PNFI ¼ .87). The factor loading of indicators is signiﬁcant
(p < .01) and well above the recommended levels (Joreskog and
Sorbom, 1993).

We proceeded to examine construct convergent and discrimi-
nant validity. Composite reliability is an indicator of shared variance
among the set of observed variables used as indicators of a latent
construct (Fornell and Larcker,1981). As shown in the Appendix, the
composite reliabilities of all constructs exceed the usual .60 bench-
mark (Bagozzi and Yi, 1988). The results provide the necessary evi-
dence that all the constructs exhibit convergent validity.

Discriminant validity was reviewed by comparing the average
variance extracted (AVE) with the variance each factor shared with
the other factors in the model (Fornell and Larcker, 1981). The re-
sults in Table 2 suggest that all the diagonal elements representing
the square root of the AVE are greater than the highest shared
variance (the off-diagonal correlations).

In addition to Fornell and Larcker’s procedure, we also examined
discriminant validity, using an alternative approach that Anderson
and Gerbing (1988) recommended. The chi-square values for the
unconstrained models, which allowed each pair of constructs to co-
vary freely, were always signiﬁcantly lower than those of the con-
strained models, which constrained the estimated correlation of
each pair of estimated constructs to one. In this study, the value of
the unconstrained model is signiﬁcantly lower than that of the

Table 2
The correlation matrix.

Factors

1 Eco-process innovation
2 Eco-product innovation
3 Eco-organizational innovation
4 Business performance
5 Firm size
6 Firm age

**p < .01; *p < .05.

1

.69
.28**
.30**
.20**
.18*
.23**

2

3

4

5

6

.72
.31**
.18*
.17*
.26**

.73
.35**
.06
.28**

.67
.19*
.35**

N/A
.08

N/A

constrained model in all cases (for example, for the pair of con-
structs, eco-process and eco-product, the unconstrained model had
a chi-square of 45.4 and the constrained model had a chi-square of
152.8. The chi-square difference is signiﬁcant at p < .001). Since the
criteria for both approaches are satisﬁed, an inference error of
multicollinearity is unlikely. Accordingly, the measurement model
ﬁts the data satisfactorily and exhibits unidimensionality, conver-
gent, and discriminant validity.

5.2. SEM analysis

SEM was applied because it accounts for measurement error and
corrects for attenuation, thereby overcoming many of the problems
associated with regression models (Jaccard and Wan, 1996). As
such, following Ping (1995), this study uses SEM with maximum
likelihood estimation to test the hypotheses. The SEM results (c2/
d.f. ¼ 1.89, RMSEA ¼ .03, CFI ¼ .95, NNFI ¼ .93, PNFI ¼ .84) conform
to the acceptable standards, demonstrating an acceptable level of
model ﬁt for our research model. Turning to individual research
hypotheses, eco-organizational innovation is positively and signif-
icantly related to both eco-process and eco-product innovations
(b ¼ .59, p < .01; b ¼ .46, p < .01), supporting H1 and H2. Eco-
process innovation is signiﬁcantly related to eco-product innova-
tion (b ¼ .41, p < .01) and H3 is supported. Finally, eco-process, eco-
product, and eco-organizational innovations are positively and
signiﬁcantly related to business performance (b ¼ .42, p < .01;
b ¼ .36; p < .01; b ¼ .51, p < .01). Thus, H4, H5, and H6 are sup-
ported. In summary, all the arrows in Fig. 1 are signiﬁcant (p < .01),
conﬁrming our hypotheses regarding the relationships among
three different eco-innovation types and business performance.

5.3. Mediation effects

The direct effects of eco-organizational and eco-process in-
novations on eco-performance are expected and consistent with
the extant innovation literature (e.g., Damanpour et al., 2009).
However, their indirect effects were never properly examined.
Using Baron and Kenny (1986)’s approach, we examined the
mediating effects of eco-organizational and eco-process in-
novations in greater details. Three competing models were tested:
full mediating, partial mediating, and no mediating. The hypothe-
sized (partial mediating) model was used as the basis for
comparing with the nested model. The signiﬁcance level of the
changes in chi-square results between three models reﬂects the
effects of the added paths. If chi-square difference tests show that
the competing models do not improve the ﬁt signiﬁcantly, at the .05
level, then the partial mediating model will be supported (Baron
and Kenny, 1986).

The SEM results in Table 3 reveal that the partial mediating
model has better ﬁt than the “full mediating” model, and the full
mediating model is better than the “no mediating” model. This
ﬁnding suggests that the partial mediating models most accurately
represent the data and should be used to illustrate the relationships
among all eco-innovation types. Namely, eco-product innovation
mediates the performance of eco-organization and eco-process
innovations. Eco-process innovation, which is found to be signiﬁ-
cantly associated with performance, inﬂuences business perfor-
mance through eco-product
In addition, eco-
organization innovation has direct and indirect (through eco-
product innovation) effects on business performance.

innovation.

5.4.

Indirect and total effects

The proposed model accounted for 54% of the variance in
business performance. According to the path coefﬁcients, eco-


C.C.J. Cheng et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 64 (2014) 81e90

Table 3
Fit indices for the mediating effect.

c2/d.f.

RMSEA

CFI

NNFI

PNFI

Eco-organizational innovation, Eco-process innovation, and Business

Performance

Partial mediating
Full mediating
Non-mediating
c2 test results: Partial vs. Full (Dc2 ¼ 74.56), p<.001; Full vs. No

1.39
3.79
6.41
(Dc2 ¼ 115.14), p < .001

.06
.08
.17

.94
.83
.81

.94
.89
.69

.84
.68
.53

Eco-organizational innovation, Eco-product innovation, and Business

Performance

Partial mediating
Full mediating
Non-mediating
c2 test results: Partial vs. Full (Dc2 ¼ 15.75), p<.01; Full vs. No (Dc2 ¼ 113.57),

1.48
2.10
7.01

.05
.07
.13

.81
.88
.42

.90
.92
.71

.91
.90
.73

p<.001

Eco-process innovation, Eco-product innovation, and Business Performance
Partial mediating
Full mediating
Non-mediating
c2 test results: Partial vs. Full (Dc2 ¼ 64.37), p<.001; Full vs. No (Dc2 ¼ 10.01),

1.79
4.97
5.56

.80
.72
.50

.07
.10
.21

.92
.90
.73

.93
.89
.79

p<.01

organizational innovation exhibits the strongest direct effect on
business performance. Eco-process innovation, despite showing a
slightly weaker direct effect than eco-organizational innovation on
business performance, exhibits a stronger total effect on business
performance than that of eco-product innovation. The total effect of
eco-organizational and eco-process innovations on business per-
formance is b ¼ .36 and b ¼ .43, respectively. The direct, indirect,
and total effects of eco-organizational, eco-process, and eco-
product innovations on business performance are summarized in
Table 4.

6. Discussion

Examining all three types of eco-innovation and reviewing
their inter-relationship offers a holistic view of eco-innovation
programs that previous studies fail to do. The analysis of direct
and indirect effects of individual eco-innovation types also pro-
vides valuable guidelines for developing well-aligned eco-inno-
vation programs.

First, the results on Table 3 delineate the inter-relationship be-
tween eco-organizational, eco-process, and eco-product innova-
tion. While eco-process innovation mediates the effect of eco-
product innovation, both types of innovation act as bridges be-
tween eco-organizational innovation and business performance. It
is important to recognize the mediating effect of organizational and
process innovation, as previous studies are likely to under-estimate
the impact of organizational innovation by focusing only on its
direct effect. The statistical ﬁndings in Table 4 further indicate that,
among
eco-organizational

eco-innovation types,

three

all

87
innovation has the strongest effect (b ¼ .77) on business perfor-
mance due to its direct (b ¼ .51) and especially indirect effects
(b ¼ .26) via eco-process and eco-product innovations. In addition,
it has stronger positive direct (b ¼ .46) and indirect (b ¼ .22) im-
pacts on eco-product innovation than that of eco-process innova-
tion (b ¼ .41). These results extend the organizational literature and
stress that eco-organizational innovation indeed plays a funda-
mental role in enhancing eco-process and eco-product innovative
activities.

The ﬁndings in Tables 3 and 4 also lend additional support for a
causal relationship between eco-process and eco-product in-
novations. Namely, process innovation activities could effectively
facilitate new product development. Additionally, including orga-
nizational innovation in this discussion would provide managers
with a holistic view of eco-innovation management. Our results
imply that ﬁrms should ﬁrst engage in eco-organizational innova-
tion, develop necessary infrastructure, and obtain eco knowledge in
order to be ready for improving their manufacturing processes and
existing eco-products. Along with eco-organizational innovation,
innovative
eco-process innovation develops competence (e.g.,
tools,
upgrading
required
manufacturing processes for new eco-product development,
which, as a result, leads to introduction of new eco-products to the
marketplace.

knowledge)

devices,

and

in

Treating organizational

innovation as the fundamental of
developing eco-innovation programs seems to be consistent with
the industry practice. For instance, when developing its eco-
innovation programs, Asus, a renowned IT manufacturer in
Taiwan, ﬁrst engaged in extensive organizational innovation ac-
tivities by distributing new eco-knowledge within the ﬁrm and
building a management team to guide further process and
product innovations (Asus Annual Report, 2008). Consequently,
the company was able to develop innovation capability and
continuously deliver impressive sales growth. This example
clearly illustrates how organizational
innovation can provide
organizations with continual organizational
learning, which
leads to more effective eco-innovation and better business per-
formance. Overall, this study lends additional evidence to orga-
nizational
technical
innovation is directly related to organizational innovation activ-
ities (Damanpour et al., 2009).

innovation

literature

indicates

that

Another interesting ﬁnding is the differential business per-
formance between eco-process and eco-product innovations.
Without considering eco-process innovation’s mediating effect,
one would have concluded that both eco-process and eco-
product innovations have similar inﬂuence on business perfor-
mance. Nonetheless, based on total effect, eco-product innova-
tion clearly has less inﬂuence on business performance (b ¼ .36)
compared to that of eco-process innovation (b ¼ .67). One
possible interpretation is that new eco-products are a necessary
result of eco-innovation. Fig. 2 summarizes the results of the
mediating effects.

Table 4
The direct, indirect, and total effects of eco-innovation.

Direct effect

Proc

Prod

Proc
Prod
Org
R2

N/A
N/A
.59
N/A

.41
N/A
.46
N/A

Indirect effect

Proc

Prod

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

N/A
N/A
.22
N/A

BP

.25
N/A
.26
N/A

Total effect

Proc

Prod

N/A
N/A
.59
.48

.41
N/A
.68
.50

BP

.67
.36
.77
.54

BP

.42
.36
.51
N/A

Org: eco-organizational
product innovation; BP: business performance.

innovation; Proc: eco-process innovation; Prod: eco-

Fig. 2. Model testing results. ***p < .001; **p < .01.


88

7. Conclusions

C.C.J. Cheng et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 64 (2014) 81e90

Drawing from the extant innovation literature and the ﬁeld
studies, we constructed a research model that demonstrates the
relative importance of each type of eco-innovation, and the nature
of the interdependency between them. While previous studies
suggested possible relationship between organizational innovation
and product/process innovation, there is never a deﬁnite conclu-
sion as to how eco-organizational innovation can contribute to the
formation of eco-product or eco-process innovations. Our statistical
results suggest that eco-process and eco-product innovations
partially mediate the effects of eco-organizational innovation, and
eco-product innovation mediates eco-process innovations’ effects
on business performance. Business performance is directly and
indirectly affected by eco-organizational, eco-process, and eco-
product innovations.

Several

research contributions are noteworthy. First,

the
importance of systematically implementing various aspects (e.g.,
technological, sustainable, social, organizational, etc.) of innovation
programs has been previously suggested. However, the current eco-
innovation research does not offer a holistic view of eco-innovation
(Hallstedt et al., 2013; Lozano, 2013). As indicated by Jayal et al.
(2010), to achieve green and sustainable manufacturing requires a
holistic view spanning product, manufacturing processes, and
managerial systems across multiple product life cycles. As such, a
major contribution of this study to the eco-innovation literature is
to employ the RBV theory to frame a conceptual model that links
organizational resources (three types of eco-innovation) and
business performance, and therefore, provide a holistic view in
explaining the inter-relationship among eco-process, eco-product,
and eco-organizational innovations. Consequently, a holistic view
of the eco-innovation program provides a valuable, inimitable, and
non-substitutable resource that should enable a ﬁrm to develop the
competence leading to better business performance.

Second, the relationships among the three eco-innovation
components and their effects on business performance suggest
that all components could be performed in a distinct role but also
be performed in a systemic manner. In particular, the eco-process
innovation literature typically focused on cost reduction or oper-
ating system adjustment but failed to recognize the need for dis-
cussing how process innovation facilitates eco-product innovation
or mediates eco-organizational innovation. Moreover, our ﬁndings
add to the eco-innovation literature by uncovering the underlying
innovation development process of which eco-organizational
innovation is the fundamental for building eco-process and eco-
product innovations. Evidently, without a systemic view of all
three types of eco-innovation simultaneously, managers would not
be able to realize effective eco-innovation programs.

Finally, previous studies related to organizational innovation
have focused primarily on the technological aspect and neglected
change in the social system. This study enriches the organizational
innovation literature by arguing that a simultaneous adoption of
technological (e.g., eco-produce and eco-process) and administra-
tive (e.g., eco-organizational) innovation is important to ﬁrms.

Our ﬁndings also offer several managerial implications. First,
eco-organizational restructuring brings about managerial and
structural renewal and facilitates creating eco-manufacturing pro-
cesses. In practice, managers must rebuild their eco-infrastructure
to motivate and reward eco-organizational members, devise
strategy and structure of tasks and units, and modify the organi-
zation’s management processes (e.g., new management accounting
methods, or an enterprise resource planning system).

Second, management must fully understand the relative bene-
ﬁts and limitations of each eco-innovation type, in order to improve
and eco-process
business performance.

Eco-organizational

innovations are able to help ﬁrms directly in achieving better
business performance, compared with eco-product innovation.
However, both eco-organizational and eco-process innovations can
achieve better business performance due to their inﬂuences on eco-
product innovation. Therefore, when adopting eco-innovation,
management needs to rely on, invest in and implement all three
types of eco-innovation, with an initial emphasis on eco-
organizational innovation.

Third, the results of this study could offer policy makers
guidelines regarding developing effective environmental regula-
tions to enforce the development of effective eco-innovation pro-
grams in industry. The lack of resources would hinder the
development of environmental management. The literature has
suggested proper environmental
regulation could force or
encourage the industry to make eco-decisions that lead to better
resource efﬁciency and higher environmental productivity (Porter
and van der Linde, 1995; Brio and Junquera, 2003; Yang and Sheu,
2011). Our ﬁndings indicate that a successful eco-innovation pro-
gram requires a systemic approach. In particular, administrative
support programs must be in place to enhance the technological
aspects of eco-innovation. Administrative activities generally do
not reduce environmental impacts directly, and managers are in-
clined to place more emphases on technological aspects of inno-
vation (Brio and Junquera, 2003). Evidently, without necessary
procedures and administrative support, resource investment in
eco-product and eco-process innovations would not be as effective,
considering the indirect effects of eco-organizational innovation.
Therefore, policy makers should set regulations or offer incentives
to prompt companies to design and implement eco-innovation
programs in a more effective sequence.

In short, this study conﬁrms the inter-relationships and contri-
butions of three eco-innovation types. The synergetic mechanism
identiﬁed in this study should assist managers in gaining an inte-
gral understanding of the concept of eco-innovation and its
implementation for improving business performance.

This study has several limitations that should be considered in
the interpretation and implication of its ﬁndings. First, while
business performance was measured by several subjective in-
dicators, a true effect of eco-innovation on performance can be
evaluated more effectively through collecting a diversity of view-
points (e.g., objective data) to potentially overcome such biases.
Second, the relationship between eco-innovation and business
performance may be moderated by factors including innovation
attributes (e.g. relative advantage) and managers’ characteristics
(e.g. entrepreneurship orientation). Moderating effects were not
examined here and would need to be explored in the future. Third,
this study only examined three types of eco-innovation. Other
types of
innovation (e.g., marketing innovation, technological
innovation) should be included in the future studies. Finally, the
ﬁndings may be peculiar to Taiwanese ﬁrms. Pohlmann et al. (2005,
p. 3) found that innovation activities are closely related to “social
behavior of a speciﬁc culture setting.” The applicability of our
ﬁndings to other countries should be considered with caution. The
replication of this research in other countries is necessary to ensure
global generalizability of the ﬁndings. Similarly, we have grounded
our arguments on concepts and models, from innovation literature,
which have mainly been developed in the context of manufacturing
organizations. Additional tests of our theoretical argument across
other business organizations (e.g., service) and with other mea-
sures of performance should add to the conclusiveness of our
ﬁndings. Finally, this study examined how the increased compe-
tence resulting from a holistic view of eco-innovation programs
improves business performance. Future studies should also review
the eco-innovation e environmental performance e business per-
formance connection.


Appendix. Eco-innovation Measurement

(continued )

C.C.J. Cheng et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 64 (2014) 81e90

89

Eco-innovation measurement items
Eco-process innovation (a ¼ .87, CR ¼ .90)
Rate your ﬁrm relative to your major competitors over the last three years on

Factor loading

t-value

the extent to which.

Our ﬁrm often innovatively updates

manufacturing processes to
protect against contaminations.

Our ﬁrm often innovatively updates
manufacturing processes to meet
standards of environmental law.

Our ﬁrm often uses innovative

technologies in manufacturing
processes to save energy.

Our ﬁrm often innovatively updates

.82

.85

.80

.86

8.97

13.58

8.53

11.22

manufacturing equipment in
manufacturing processes to save energy.
Eco-product innovation (a ¼ .90, CR ¼ .95)
Rate your ﬁrm relative to your major competitors over the last three years on

the extent to which.

Our ﬁrm often places emphasis on

developing new eco-products
through new technologies to
simplify their package.

Our ﬁrm often places emphasis on

developing new eco-products
through new technologies to
simplify their construction.

Our ﬁrm often places emphasis on

developing new eco-products
through new technologies to
easily recycle their components.
Our ﬁrm often places emphasis on

developing new eco-products
through new technologies to
easily decompose their materials.

Our ﬁrm often places emphasis on

developing new eco-products
through new technologies to use
natural materials.

Our ﬁrm often places emphasis on

developing new eco-products
through new technologies to
reduce damage from waste as
much as possible.

Our ﬁrm often places emphasis on

developing new eco-products
through new technologies to use
as little energy as possible.

.90

.84

.80

.89

.86

.81

.82

13.58

11.13

9.27

10.88

12.01

10.88

10.94

Eco-organizational innovation (a ¼ .93, CR ¼ .94)
Rate your ﬁrm relative to your major competitors over the last three years on

the extent to which.

Our ﬁrm’s management often uses

novel management systems to
manage eco-innovation.

Our ﬁrm’s management often
collects information on eco-
innovation trends.

Our ﬁrm’s management often

actively engages in eco-
innovation activities.

Our ﬁrm’s management often

communicates eco-innovation
information with employees.

Our ﬁrm’s management often
invests a high ratio of R&D
in eco-innovation.

Our ﬁrm’s management often
communicates experiences
among various departments
involved in eco-innovation.

.82

.90

.83

.87

.84

.86

9.62

12.29

11.13

10.78

10.22

10.61

Eco-innovation measurement items
Eco-process innovation (a ¼ .87, CR ¼ .90)
Business performance (a ¼ .86, CR ¼ .89)
Relative to competing eco-innovation ﬁrms’ business performance during the

Factor loading

t-value

last three years, our ﬁrm’s business performance is very successful in
terms of

Return on investment
Proﬁts
Market share
Sales

.82
.81
.84
.80

10.22
8.97
11.64
9.67

References

Adner, R., Levinthal, D., 2001. Demand heterogeneity and technology evolution:
implications for product and process innovation. Manage. Sci. 47 (5), 611e628.
Anderson, C., Gerbing, D., 1988. Structural equation modeling in practice: a review

and recommended two step approach. Psychol. Bull. 1033, 411e423.

Anderson,

J., Gerbing, D., 1991. Predicting the performance of measures in a
conﬁrmatory factor analysis with a pretest assessment of their substantive
validities. J. Appl. Psychol. 765, 732e740.

Anttonen, M., Halme, M., Houtbeckers, E., Nurkka, N., 2013. The other side of sus-
tainable innovation: is there a demand for innovative services? J. Clean. Prod
45, 89e103.

Armbruster, H., Bikfalvib, A., Kinkela, S., Lay, G., 2008. Organizational innovation:
the challenge of measuring non-technical innovation in large-scale surveys.
Technovation 28, 644e657.

Armstrong, S., Overton, T., 1977. Estimating non-response in mailed surveys.

J. Market. Res. 14 (3), 396e402.

Atuahene-Gima, K., Ko, A., 2001. An empirical investigation of the effect of market
orientation and entrepreneurship orientation alignment on product innovation.
Organ. Sci. 12 (1), 54e74.

Baer, M., Frese, M., 2003. Innovation is not enough: climates for initiative and
psychological safety, process innovations, and ﬁrm performance. J. Organis.
Behav. 24, 45e68.

Bagozzi, R., Yi, Y., 1988. On the evaluation of structural equation models. J. Acad.

Market. Sci. 143, 74e94.

Barney, B., 1991. Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. J. Manage. 17,

99e120.

Baron, M., Kenny, A., 1986. The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social
psychological research: conceptual, strategic and statistical considerations.
J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 51, 1173e1182.

Bigliardi, B., Dormio, A., 2009. An empirical

innovation de-
terminants in food machinery enterprises. Eur. J. Inn. Manage. 12 (2), 223e242.
Birkinshaw, J., Hamel, G., Mol, M., 2008. Management innovation. Acad. Manage.

investigation of

Rev. 33, 825e845.

Boons, F., Lüdeke-Freund, F., 2012. Business models for sustainable innovation:
state-of-the-art and steps towards a research agenda. J. Clean. Prod. 45, 9e19.
Brio, J.A., Junquera, B., 2003. A Review of the Literature on Environmental Innova-
tion Management in SMEs: Implications for Public Policies, vol. 23, pp. 939e
948.

Brunnermeier, S., Cohen, M., 2003. Determinants of environmental innovation in US

manufacturing industries. J. Environ. Econ. Manage. 45, 278e293.

Carrillo-Hermosilla, J., del Río, P., Könnölä, T., 2010. Diversity of eco-innovations:

reﬂections from selected case studies. J. Clean. Prod. 18, 1073e1083.

Chen, Y., Chang, C., 2012. The determinants of green product development perfor-
mance: green dynamic capabilities, green transformational leadership, and
green creativity. J. Bus. Ethics 116, 107e119.

Chou, C., Chen, C., Conley, C., 2012. A systematic approach to generate service model

for sustainability. J. Clean. Prod. 29e30, 173e187.

Christensen, T., 2011. Modularised eco-innovation in the auto industry. J. Clean.

Prod. 19, 212e220.

Christmann, P., 2000. Effects of best practices of environmental management on cost

advantage: the role of complementary assets. Acad. Manage. J. 43, 663e680.

Churchill, G., 1979. A paradigm for developing better measures of marketing con-

structs. J. Market. Res. 16, 64e73.

Cruz, L., Pedrozo, E., de Fátima Barros Estivalete, V., 2006. Towards sustainable
development strategies: a complex view following the contribution of Edgar
Morin. Manage. Dec. 44, 871e891.

Cummings, T., Srivastva, S., 1977. Management of Work: a Socio-technical System

Approach. Kent State University Press, Kent, OH.

Damanpour, F., Aravind, D., 2006. Product and process innovations: a review of
organizational and environmental determinants. In: Hage, J., Meeus, M. (Eds.),
Innovation, Science, and Institutional Change. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
pp. 38e66.

Damanpour, F., Walker, R., Avellaneda, C., 2009. Combinative effects of innovation
types and organizational performance: a longitudinal study of service organi-
zations. J. Manage. Stud. 46 (4), 650e675.


90

C.C.J. Cheng et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 64 (2014) 81e90

Dangelico, R., Pontrandolfo, P., 2010. From green product deﬁnitions and classiﬁ-

cations to the green option matrix. J. Clean. Prod. 18, 1608e1628.

Dangelico, R., Pujari, D., 2010. Mainstreaming green product innovation: why and
how companies integrate environmental sustainability. J. Bus. Ethics 95 (3),
471e486.

del Río, P., Carrillo-Hermosilla, J., Könnölä, T., 2010. Policy strategies to promote eco-

innovation. J. Ind. Ecol. 14, 541e557.

DeSarbo, W., Benedetto, C., Song, M., Sinha, I., 2005. Revisiting the miles and snow
strategic framework: uncovering interrelationships between strategic types,
capabilities, environmental uncertainty, and ﬁrm performance. Strat. Manage. J.
26, 47e74.

Dillman, D., 2000. Mail and Internet Surveys: the Tailored Design Method. Wiley,

New York.

Eiadat, Y., Kelly, A., Roche, F., 2008. Eyadat green and competitive? An empirical test
of the mediating role of environmental innovation strategy. J. World Bus. 43,
131e145.

Eisenhardt, K., 1989. Building theory from case study research. Acad. Manage. Rev.

14, 532e550.

Murphy, J., Gouldson, A., 2000. Environmental policy and industrial innovation:
integrating environment and economy through ecological modernisation.
GEOFORUM 31, 33e44.

Murray, J., Gao, G., Kotabe, M., 2011. Market orientation and performance of export
ventures: the process through marketing capabilities and competitive advan-
tages. J. Acad. Market. Sci. 39 (2), 252e269.

Negny, S., Belaud, J., Robles, C., Reyes, R., Ferrer, B., 2012. Toward an eco-innovative
method based on a better use of resources: application to chemical process
preliminary design. J. Clean. Prod. 32, 101e113.

Nunnally, J., 1978. Psychometric Theory. McGraw-Hill, New York.
NVivo 8, 2008. NVivo Qualitative Data Analysis Software. QSR International Pty Ltd.
OECD and Eurostat, Published by Oslo Manual OECD and Eurostat, 2005. Guidelines
for Collecting and Interpreting Innovation Data, third ed. OECD Publishing,
Paris.

Oke, A., 2007. Innovation types and innovation management practices in service

companies. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manage. 27 (6), 564e587.

Ping, R., 1995. A parsimonious estimation technique for interaction and quadratic

latent variables. J. Market. Res. 32 (3), 336e347.

Ettlie, J., Reza, E., 1992. Organizational integration and process innovation. Acad.

Podsakoff, P.M., Organ, D.W., 1986. Self-reports in organizational research: prob-

Manage. J. 35, 795e827.

Fornell, C., Larcker, F., 1981. Evaluating structural equation models with unobserv-

able variables and measurement errors. J. Market. Res. 181, 39e50.

Germain, R., 1996. The role of context and structure in radical and incremental

logistics innovation adoption. J. Bus. Res. 35 (2), 117e127.

Hallstedt, S., Thompson, A., Lindahl, P., 2013. Key elements for implementing a
strategic sustainability perspective in the product innovation process. J. Clean.
Prod. 51, 277e288.

Hart, S., 1995. Natural-resource-based view of the ﬁrm. Acad. Manage. Rev. 20, 986e

1014.

lems and prospects. J. Manage. 12 (4), 531e544.

Podsakoff, P., MacKenzie, S., Lee, J., Podsakoff, N., 2003. Common method biases in
behavioral research: a critical review of the literature and recommended
remedies. J. Appl. Psychol. 88, 879e903.

Pohlmann, M., Gebhardt, C., Etzkowitz, H., 2005. The development of innovation
systems and the art of innovation management: strategy, control and the cul-
ture of innovation. Technol. Anal. Strat. Manage. 17, 1e7.

Porter, M.E., van der Linde, C., 1995. Green and competitive: ending the stalemate.

Harvard Bus. Rev. 73 (5), 120e134.

Porter-O’Grady, T., Malloch, K., 2010. Innovation: driving the green culture in

Hart, S., 2005. Innovation, creative destruction and sustainability. Res. Technol.

healthcare. Nurs. Adm. Q. 34, 1e5.

Manage. 48, 21e27.

Pujari, D., 2006. Eco-innovation and new product development: understanding the

Hart, S., Dowell, G., 2011. A natural-resource-based view of the ﬁrm: ﬁfteen years

inﬂuences on market performance. Technovation 26, 76e85.

after. J. Manage. 37, 1464e1479.

Horbach, J., 2008. Determinants of environmental innovation-new evidence from

German panel data sources. Res. Policy 37, 163e173.

Hult, G., Hurley, R., Knight, G., 2004. Innovativeness: its antecedents and impact on

business performance. Ind. Market. Manage. 33, 429e438.

Im, S., Workman, J., 2004. Market orientation, creativity, and new product perfor-

mance in high-technology ﬁrms. J. Marketi. 68, 114e132.

Jaccard, J., Wan, C., 1996. LISREL Approaches to Interaction Effects in Multiple

Regression. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks.

Jayal, A., Badurdeen, F., Dillon, O., Jawahir, I., 2010. Sustainable manufacturing:
modeling and optimization challenges at the product, process and system
levels. J. Manufact. Sci. Technol. 2, 144e152.

Joreskog, K., Sorbom, D., 1993. LISREL 8: a Guide to the Program and Applications.

SPSS Inc, Chicago.

Kemp, R., Arundel, A., 1998. Survey Indicators for Environmental Innovation. IDEA
(Indicators and Data for European Analysis) paper series 8/1998. STEP Group,
Norway http://htp//www.sol.no/step/IDEA.

Kemp, R., Pearson, P., 2008. Final Report MEI Project about Measuring Eco-

innovation: Deliverable 15 of MEI Project (D15).

Klassen, D., Whybark, D., 1999. The impact of environmental technologies on

manufacturing performance. Acad. Manage. J. 42, 599e615.

Klepper, S., 1996. Entry, exit and innovation over the product life cycle. Am. Econ.

Rev. 86, 562e583.

Klewitz, J., Zeyen, A., Hansen, E., 2012. Intermediaries driving eco-innovation in

SMEs. A qualitative investigation. Eur. J. Inn. Manage. 15, 442e467.

Lam, A., 2005. Organizational innovation. In: Fagerberg, J., Mowery, D., Nelson, R.
(Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Innovations. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
pp. 115e147.

Lee, K., Kim, J., 2011. Integrating suppliers into green product innovation develop-
ment: an empirical case study in semiconductor industry. Bus. Strat. Environ.
20, 527e538.

Li, H., Atuahene-Gima, K., 2001. Product innovation strategy and the performance of

new technology ventures in China. Acad. Manage. J. 44 (6), 1123e1134.

Lin, C., Chen, M., 2007. Does innovation lead to performance? An empirical study of

SMEs in Taiwan. Manage. Res. News 30 (2), 115e132.

Lin, R., Tan, K., Geng, Y., 2013. Market demand, green product innovation, and ﬁrm
performance: evidence from Vietnam motorcycle industry. J. Clean. Prod. 40,
101e107.

Lozano, R., 2013. A holistic perspective on corporate sustainability drivers. Corp.

Soc. Responsib. Environ. Manage.. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/csr.1325.

Maine, E., Lubik, S., Garnsey, E., 2012. Process-based vs. product-based innovation:

value creation by nanotech ventures. Technovation 32 (3), 179e192.

Marcus, A., Geffen, D., 1998. The dialectics of competency acquisition: pollution

prevention in electric generation. Strat. Manage. J. 19, 1145e1168.

Markard, J., Worch, H., 2010. Technological innovation systems and the resource
based view e resources at the ﬁrm, network and system level. In: DIME
Workshop on Environmental Innovation, Industrial Dynamics and Entrepre-
neurship. Utrecht University, May 10e12 2010.

Maxwell, D., Sheate, W., van der Vorst, R., 2006. Functional and systems aspects of
the sustainable product and service development approach for industry.
J. Clean. Prod. 14, 1466e1479.

Moore, S., Ausley, L., 2004. Systems thinking and green chemistry in the textile

industry: concepts, technologies and beneﬁts. J. Clean. Prod. 12, 585e601.

Pujari, D., Peattie, K., Wright, G., 2004. Organizational antecedents of environmental
responsiveness in industrial new product development. Ind. Market. Manage.
33, 381e391.

Raymond, L., St-Pierre,

innovation in
manufacturing SMEs: an attempt at empirical clariﬁcation. Technovation 30,
48e56.

J., 2010. R&D as a determinant of

Rehfeld, K., Rennings, K., Ziegler, A., 2007. Integrated product policy and environ-

mental product innovations: an empirical analysis. Ecol. Econ. 61, 91e100.

Rennings, K., 2000. Redeﬁning innovation e eco-innovation research and the

contribution from ecological economics. Ecol. Econ. 32, 319e332.

Rennings, K., Zwick, T., 2002. The employment impact of cleaner production on the
ﬁrm level e empirical evidence from a survey in ﬁve European countries. Int. J.
Inn. Manage. 6 (3), 319e342.

Sharma, S., Vredenburg, H., 1998. Proactive corporate environmental strategy and
the development of competitively valuable organizational capabilities. Strat.
Manage. J. 19, 729e753.

Shin, D., Curtis, M., Huisingh, D., Zwetsloot, D., 2008. Development of a sustain-
ability policy model for promoting cleaner production: a knowledge integration
approach. J. Clean. Prod. 16, 1823e1837.

Staropoli, C., 1998. Cooperation in R&D in the pharmaceutical industry e the
network as an organizational innovation governing technological innovation.
Technovation 18 (1), 13e23.

Tabachnick, B., Fidell, L., 2006. Using Multivariate Statistics. Allyn & Bacon.
Teece, D., Pisano, G., Shuen, A., 1997. Dynamic capabilities and strategic manage-

ment. Strat. Manage. J. 18, 509e533.

Triguero, A., Moreno-Mondéjar, L., Davia, M., 2013. Drivers of different types of eco-

innovation in European SMEs. Ecol. Econ. 92, 25e33.

Tseng, M., Wang, R., Chiu, A., Geng, Y., Li, Y., 2013. Improving performance of green

innovation practices under uncertainty. J. Clean. Prod. 40, 71e82.

Tung, A., Wan, H., 2013. Chinese Electronics Export; Taiwanese Contract
Manufacturing e the WineWin Outcome along the Evolving Global Value
Chain. World Economy. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/twec.12045.

van Kleef, J., Roome, N., 2007. Developing capabilities and competence for sustainable
business management as innovation: a research agenda. J. Clean. Prod. 15, 38e51.
Veugelers, R., 2012. New ICT Sectors: Platforms for European Growth?. Bruegel

Policy Contribution, 2012/14, August.

Walker, R., 2008. An empirical evaluation of innovation types and organizational
and environmental characteristics: towards a conﬁguration framework. J. Pub.
Adm. Res. Theor. 18 (4), 591e615.

Weinberger, N., Jorissen, J., Schippl, J., 2012. Foresight on environmental technol-
ogies: options for the prioritization of future research funding-lessons learned
from the project “roadmap environmental technologies 2020þ”. J. Clean. Prod.
27, 32e41.

Xing, K., Ness, D., Lin, F., 2013. A service innovation model for synergistic com-
munity transformation: integrated application of systems theory and product-
service systems. J. Clean. Prod. 43, 93e102.

Yang, C., Sheu, C., 2011. The effects of environmental regulations on green supply

chains. Afr. J. Bus. Manage. 5 (26), 10601e10614.

Yin, R.K., 2009. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. Sage Publications, Los

Angeles, Calif.

Yu, W., Ramanathan, R., Nath, P., 2013. The impacts of marketing and operations
capabilities on ﬁnancial performance in the UK retail sector: a resource-based
perspective. Ind. Market. Manage.. Available online 26 July 2013.

