 
 
Modes of Theorizing in Strategic Human Resource Management: Tests of Universalistic,
Contingency, and Configurational Performance Predictions
Author(s): John E. Delery and  D. Harold Doty
Source: The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 39, No. 4 (Aug., 1996), pp. 802-835
Published by: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/256713
Accessed: 13-02-2017 20:23 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted

digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about

JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

http://about.jstor.org/terms

Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The
Academy of Management Journal

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 ? Academy of Management Journal
 1996, Vol. 39, No. 4, 802-835.

 MODES OF THEORIZING IN STRATEGIC

 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT:

 TESTS OF UNIVERSALISTIC, CONTINGENCY,

 AND CONFIGURATIONAL

 PERFORMANCE PREDICTIONS

 JOHN E. DELERY

 University of Arkansas

 D. HAROLD DOTY
 Syracuse University

 The field of strategic human resource management (SHRM) has been
 criticized for lacking a solid theoretical foundation. This article docu-
 ments that, contrary to this criticism, the SHRM literature draws on
 three dominant modes of theorizing: universalistic, contingency, and
 configurational perspectives. Seven key strategic human resource prac-
 tices are identified and used to develop theoretical arguments consistent
 with each perspective. The results demonstrate that each perspective
 can be used to structure theoretical arguments that explain significant
 levels of variation in financial performance.

 During the last decade there has been a dramatic shift in the field of
 human resource (HR) management. This shift has broadened the focus of HR
 research from the micro analytic research that dominated the field in the
 past to a more macro or strategic perspective. The strategic perspective of
 HR, which has been labeled strategic human resource management (SHRM),
 has grown out of researchers' desire to demonstrate the importance of human
 resource practices for organizational performance.

 The basic premise underlying SHRM is that organizations adopting a

 particular strategy require HR practices that are different from those required
 by organizations adopting alternative strategies (Dyer 1984a, 1984b; Fom-
 brum, Tichy, & Devanna 1984; Jackson & Schuler, 1995; Jackson, Schuler, &
 Rivero, 1989; Schuler & Jackson, 1987a, 1987b, 1988; Schuier & MacMillan,

 We would like to thank Patrick M. Wright, Susan L. Shackelford, Daniel C. Ganster, and

 Nina Gupta for their helpful comments on earlier drafts of this article. The first author would
 also like to thank Lyle F. Schoenfeldt for his direction and guidance of the dissertation on
 which this study is based.

 This study was partially funded by grants from the Center for Human Resource Management,

 the College of Business Administration, and the Office of Graduate Studies, all of Texas A&M
 University.

 802

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Delery and Doty

 803

 1984). If this fundamental assumption is correct, then much of the variation in
 HR practices across organizations should be explained by the organizations'
 strategies, and organizations that have greater congruence between their HR
 practices and their strategies should enjoy superior performance. There is
 some support for this assumption. For example, Schuler and Jackson (1988)
 and Arthur (1992) demonstrated that organizations following different strate-
 gies utilize different HR practices. Other researchers have demonstrated that
 HR practices can influence organizationally relevant outcomes such as pro-
 ductivity and profitability (Arthur, 1994; Gerhart & Milkovich, 1990; Huselid,
 1993, 1995; Terpstra & Rozell, 1993).

 Despite the growing body of empirical SHRM research, the field has
 been criticized for lacking a solid theoretical foundation (Bacharach, 1989;
 Dyer, 1985). This criticism arises, in part, because three different modes of
 theorizing have been employed in the field, but the differences among the
 alternative perspectives have not been explicitly acknowledged. Some au-
 thors have adopted a universalistic perspective (cf. Dewar & Werbel, 1979)
 and argued for a "best practices" approach to SHRM (Delaney, Lewin, &
 Ichniowski, 1989; Huselid, 1993, 1995; Osterman, 1994; Pfeffer, 1994; Terp-
 stra & Rozell, 1993). These researchers, like many micro-level HR researchers,
 posit that some HR practices are always better than others and that all
 organizations should adopt these best practices. For instance, Pfeffer argued
 that greater use of 16 management practices, such as participation and em-
 powerment, incentive pay, employment security, promotion from within,
 and training and skill development, results in higher productivity and profit
 across organizations. Similarly, Osterman (1994) argued that a number of
 innovative work practices, such as teams, job rotation, quality circles, and
 total quality management, result in productivity gains for all American orga-
 nizations. In general, the practices identified by Pfeffer and Osterman have
 been labeled "high performance work practices," or simply "best practices."

 A second group of researchers has adopted a contingency perspective

 (Butler, Ferris, & Napier, 1991; Dyer, 1985; Fombrum et al., 1984; Golden &
 Ramanujam, 1985; Gomez-Mejia & Balkin, 1992; Lengnick-Hall & Lengnick-
 Hall, 1988; Milkovich, 1988; Schuler & Jackson, 1987a). Contingency theo-
 rists argue that, in order to be effective, an organization's HR policies must be
 consistent with other aspects of the organization. For example, contingency
 theorists have attempted to show how a number of HR practices are consistent
 with different strategic positions and how these practices relate to firm perfor-
 mance (Balkin & Gomez-Mejia, 1987; Begin, 1993; Gomez-Mejia & Balkin,
 1992; Schuler & Jackson, 1987a).

 A third group of SHRM theorists has developed arguments that are
 consistent with the configurational approach that is emerging in the organiza-
 tion theory and strategic management literatures. Configurational theories
 differ from universalistic and traditional contingency theories because con-
 figurational theories are guided by the holistic principle of inquiry, are usu-
 ally based on typologies of ideal types, and explicitly adopt the systems
 assumption of "equifinality" (Doty, Glick, & Huber, 1993; Doty & Glick,

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 804

 Academy of Management Journal

 August

 1994; Meyer, Tsui, & Hinings, 1993; Miller & Friesen, 1984; Venkatraman &
 Prescott, 1990). In general, configurational theories are concerned with how
 the pattern of multiple independent variables is related to a dependent vari-
 able rather than with how individual independent variables are related to
 the dependent variable. Wright and McMahan appeared to suggest that the
 configurational perspective was an appropriate approach for SHRM when
 they argued that SHRM is concerned with "the pattern of planned human
 resource deployments and activities intended to enable an organization to
 achieve its goals" (1992: 298, emphasis added) and that, in order to be
 effective, an organization must develop an HR system that achieves both
 horizontal and vertical fit. Horizontal fit refers to the internal consistency
 of the organization's HR policies or practices, and vertical fit refers to the
 congruence of the HR system with other organizational characteristics, such
 as firm strategy. An ideal configuration would be one with the highest degree
 of horizontal fit.

 Configurational notions are currently incorporated in both theoretical

 and empirical SHRM studies. Numerous authors have attempted to develop
 a priori typologies of effective HR systems and link the performance of
 HR systems to firm strategy. For example, Miles and Snow (1984) and Arthur
 (1992) developed multiple equally effective combinations of HR practices
 and argued that the different sets of practices are suited for different firm
 strategies. Configurational ideas are incorporated in empirical SHRM studies
 when researchers attempt to identify configurations of HR practices that
 predict superior performance when used in association with each other, or
 the correct strategy, or both. For example, Arthur (1992) argued that there
 are two prototypical employment systems, or groups of HR practices. Al-
 though he did not specifically state the idea, Arthur (1992) appeared to
 argue that the closer an organization's HR practices resemble the correct
 prototypical system (for its business strategy), the greater the performance
 gains. Similarly, MacDuffie (1995) derived specific configurations, or "bun-
 dles," of HR practices that enhance firm performance. Finally, Ichniowski,
 Shaw, and Prennushi attempted to test the hypothesis that "combinations
 of HRM practices have bigger effects on productivity than the sum of the
 component effects due to individual practices" (1994: 9, emphasis deleted).
 This is clearly an argument in support of a configurational perspective.

 This article advances the SHRM literature by clearly articulating the
 important differences among the universalistic, contingency, and configura-
 tional perspectives that are used in the literature and then empirically testing
 hypotheses that are consistent with the logic of each of the three perspectives.
 Seven important HR practices that are common to much of the theoretical
 work in SHRM are identified. The individual practices are used to formulate
 a series of universalistic and contingency arguments that are parallel to
 different arguments found in the SHRM literature. Configurational arguments
 are then formulated by organizing the individual HR practices into two ideal-
 type employment systems that are posited to enhance firm performance. The
 employment systems form the basis of a series of configurational predictions.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Delery and Doty

 805

 The article demonstrates that each theoretical perspective is valuable and that
 explicitly acknowledging the theoretical frameworks will aid in developing
 SHRM theories.

 THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES OF STRATEGIC HUMAN

 RESOURCE MANAGEMENT

 To date, SHRM has predominately been an applied field. The field's

 dominant focus has been to demonstrate the importance of effectively manag-
 ing the human resources of organizations. Thus, a growing number of articles
 are appearing in the publications aimed at the practitioner community. Al-
 though this applied focus has helped to highlight the contributions of SHRM
 to organizations, it has not fostered sound theoretical development. What
 has emerged is a growing literature discussing the benefits of SHRM without
 sufficient articulation of the specific theoretical underpinnings of the field.
 Presented below are more complete articulations of the three major modes
 of theorizing imbedded in the field: the universalistic, contingency, and
 configurational perspectives.
 Universalistic Perspective

 Universalistic arguments are the simplest form of theoretical statement
 in the SHRM literature because they imply that the relationship between a
 given independent variable and a dependent variable is universal across the
 population of organizations. Developing universalistic predictions requires
 two steps. First, important strategic HR practices must be identified. Second,
 arguments that relate the individual practices to organizational performance
 must be presented.

 Strategic HR practices. Strategic HR practices are those that are theoreti-

 cally or empirically related to overall organization performance. Although
 not all HR practices are strategic, there is growing consensus about which
 practices can be considered strategic. Drawing on the theoretical works of
 Osterman (1987), Sonnenfeld and Peiperl (1988), Kerr and Slocum (1987),
 and Miles and Snow (1984), we identified seven practices that are consis-
 tently considered strategic HR practices. These are: internal career opportuni-
 ties, formal training systems, appraisal measures, profit sharing, employment
 security, voice mechanisms, and job definition. Nearly all of these are also
 among Pfeffer's (1994) 16 most effective practices for managing people.

 The first practice, internal career opportunities, refers to the use of inter-
 nal labor markets. In other words, organizations can choose to hire predomi-
 nantly from within or from outside. The second practice, training systems,
 refers to the amount of formal training given to employees. Organizations
 can provide extensive formal training or rely on acquiring skills through
 selection and some socialization. Third, appraisals can be based on results
 or behavior. Behavior-based appraisals focus on the behaviors of individuals
 necessary to perform the job effectively, whereas results-oriented appraisals
 focus merely on the consequences of those behaviors. Fourth, profit-sharing
 plans, which tie pay to organizational performance, have been seen as an

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 806

 Academy of Management Journal

 August

 integral part of a strategic HR system. Fifth, the degree to which employees
 are given employment security has many strategic implications. Although it
 is apparent in today's economy that even the most senior employees are not
 free from layoffs, there are particular groups of employees in organizations
 who undoubtedly have a greater sense of security in their jobs than other
 employees, either because of a formal or an informal policy of employment
 security. Sixth, voice mechanisms, both formal grievance systems and partici-
 pation in decision making, have emerged as key factors. Finally, the degree
 to which jobs are tightly or narrowly defined is important. Tightly defined
 jobs are those in which the employees know the content of their jobs exactly.
 The job is limited in scope, and incumbents do not perform duties that are
 not considered part of the job. The job duties are more likely shaped by a
 well-defined job description than by individual action.

 We view these seven practices as critical characteristics of employment
 systems in organizations and will use these practices individually and in
 combinations as the basis for hypotheses that are consistent with the alterna-
 tive theoretical perspectives investigated here. There are other HR practices
 that might affect organizational performance. For example, Schuler and Jack-
 son (1987a) presented a very comprehensive list of HR practices. However,
 the seven practices listed above appeared to have the greatest support across
 a diverse literature. Thus, in the interest of parsimony, we restricted our
 arguments and analyses to these seven practices.

 Universalistic predictions. Theorists adopting a universalistic perspec-
 tive posit that greater use of specific employment practices will always result
 in better (or worse) organizational performance. Many universalistic argu-
 ments seem reasonable. For example, conducting more valid performance
 appraisals or using more valid selection devices should always be better
 than using less valid measures.

 Many researchers have supported universalistic predictions. Leonard

 (1990) found that organizations having long-term incentive plans for their
 executives had larger increases in return on equity over a four-year period
 than did other organizations. Abowd (1990) found that the degree to which
 managerial compensation was based on an organization's financial perfor-
 mance was significantly related to future financial performance. Gerhart and
 Milkovich (1990) found that pay mix was related to financial performance.
 Organizations with pay plans that included a greater amount of performance-
 contingent pay achieved superior financial performance. In combination,
 these studies indicate that organizations with stronger pay-for-performance
 norms achieved better long-term financial performance than did organiza-
 tions with weaker pay-for-performance norms. Terpstra and Rozell (1993)
 posited five "best" staffing practices and found that the use of these practices
 had a moderate, positive relationship with organizational performance. Fi-
 nally, Huselid (1993, 1995) identified a link between organization-level out-
 comes and groups of high performance work practices. Instead of focusing
 on a single practice (e.g., staffing), Huselid assessed the simultaneous use of
 multiple sophisticated HR practices and concluded that the HR sophistica-

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Delery and Doty

 807

 tion of an organization was significantly related to turnover, organizational
 productivity, and financial performance. Overall, the level of support gener-
 ated for universalistic predictions indicates that the universalistic perspec-
 tive is a valid theoretical perspective for SHRM theorists.

 The current study draws on research on HR system sophistication and

 high performance work practices to predict positive relationships between
 each of the seven strategic HR practices and organizational performance.
 Thus, we hypothesize

 Hypothesis 1: There will be a positive relationship between
 financial performance and (a) the use of internal career
 ladders, (b) formal training systems, (c) results-oriented
 appraisal, (d) performance-based compensation, (e) em-
 ployment security, (f) employee voice, and (g) broadly de-
 fined jobs.

 Contingency Perspective

 Contingency arguments are more complex than universalistic arguments
 because contingency arguments imply interactions rather than the simple
 linear relationships incorporated in universalistic theories (Schoonhoven,
 1981; Van de Ven & Drazin, 1985; Venkatraman, 1989). In other words,
 contingency theories posit that the relationship between the relevant inde-
 pendent variable and the dependent variable will be different for different
 levels of the critical contingency variable. The organization's strategy is
 considered to be the primary contingency factor in the SHRM literature.
 Thus, a contingency perspective requires a researcher to select a theory of
 firm strategy and then specify how the individual HR practices will interact
 with firm strategy to result in organizational performance.

 A strategic contingency. We selected Miles and Snow's (1978) theory
 of strategy, structure, and process for the current study because this theory
 has several advantages. First, it has been shown to be a relatively powerful
 predictor of organizational effectiveness (Doty et al., 1993). Second, Miles
 and Snow (1984) explicitly stated that the theory had implications for an
 organization's HR policies. Third, the theory has commonly been used in
 the SHRM literature. Finally, existing studies present alternative interpreta-
 tions of Miles and Snow's theory that allow it to be interpreted both as a
 contingency theory (Golden, 1992; Hambrick, 1983; Zajac & Shortell, 1989)
 and as a configurational theory (Doty et al., 1993; Segev, 1989). Thus, Miles
 and Snow's theory can be used with both the contingency perspective and
 the configurational perspective presented in this article.

 Interpreting Miles and Snow's (1978) theory as a contingency theory
 requires a researcher to identify a single variable that differentiates the alter-
 native strategies specified in the original theory. Most previous work has
 used rate of product, service, or market innovation as the central contingency
 variable (e.g., Hambrick, 1983; Zajac & Shortell, 1989). Firms that are highly
 innovative are considered prospectors, firms that are moderately innovative
 are considered analyzers, and firms that rarely innovate are considered de-

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 808

 Academy of Management Journal

 August

 fenders. Thus, the strategic positioning of all firms can be characterized by
 a single contingency variable: innovation.

 Contingency predictions. In contingency predictions, the relationship
 between the use of specific employment practices and organizational perfor-
 mance is posited to be contingent on an organization's strategy. The behav-
 ioral perspective (Jackson et al., 1989) implies that successful implementation
 of business strategy relies heavily on employee behavior. An organization's
 strategy necessitates behavioral requirements for success, and the use of HR
 practices in the organization can reward and control employee behavior.
 Therefore, the organization should implement HR practices that encourage
 the employee behaviors that are consistent with the organization's strategy.
 This alignment of strategy and HR practices allows organizations to achieve
 superior performance.

 Agency theory (Eisenhardt, 1988; Fama, 1980; Fama & Jensen, 1983)

 leads to similar predictions. If an employer knows what employee behaviors
 it needs, then the organization will enact policies and procedures that elicit
 these behaviors. In agency theory terms, the organization would simply be
 aligning the interests of the employer (principal) and the employee (agent).
 Organizations that do a better job of aligning these interests will achieve
 greater performance.

 There are many ways that HR practices can be used to elicit from employ-
 ees behaviors that are consistent with an organization's strategy. Since behav-
 ior is a function of ability and motivation, an organization can set up HR
 practices that ensure that individuals with the required abilities are hired
 and retained and can also use HR practices to ensure that employees are
 motivated to behave in ways consistent with the business strategy. Kerr
 and Jackofsky (1989) used the organizational growth strategies described by
 Leontiades (1980) to illustrate that, given a specific strategy, it is more useful
 to rely on employee selection than on employee development. They argued
 that "effectiveness will be greater for steady-state firms utilizing development
 to align managers with strategies" (1989: 165). Thus,

 Hypothesis 2: The relationship between human resource
 practices and financial performance will be contingent on
 an organization's strategy.

 Configurational Perspective

 Configurational arguments are more complex than those of either of the
 previous two theoretical perspectives for several reasons. First, configura-
 tional theories draw on the holistic principle of inquiry (Doty et al., 1993;
 McKelvey, 1982; Meyer et al., 1993; Miller & Friesen, 1984; Venkatraman &
 Prescott, 1990) to identify configurations, or unique patterns of factors, that
 are posited to be maximally effective. These configurations represent nonlin-
 ear synergistic effects and higher-order interactions that cannot be repre-
 sented with traditional bivariate contingency theories (Doty & Glick, 1994).
 Second, configurational theories incorporate the assumption of equifinality
 by positing that multiple unique configurations of the relevant factors can

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Delery and Doty

 809

 result in maximal performance (Doty & Glick, 1994; Meyer et al., 1993).
 Third, these configurations are assumed to be ideal types that are theoretical
 constructs rather than empirically observable phenomena (Blalock, 1969;
 Doty & Glick, 1994; Meyer et al., 1993; McKinney, 1966; Weber, 1904). As a
 consequence of these differences, configurational theorists working in SHRM
 must theoretically derive internally consistent configurations of HR practices,
 or employment systems, that maximize horizontal fit, and then link these
 employment systems to alternative strategic configurations to maximize verti-
 cal fit.

 Employment systems. A handful of SHRM researchers have developed
 theoretically derived employment systems (e.g., Kerr & Slocum, 1987; Oster-
 man, 1987; Sonnenfeld & Peiperl, 1988). Drawing on the works of these
 previous theorists, we propose the following two employment systems: the
 market-type system and the internal system. These two systems, each of
 which can be described in terms of the seven employment practices discussed
 earlier, are summarized in Table 1.

 TABLE 1

 Characteristics of Employment Systems

 Market-Type System

 Internal System

 Hiring almost exclusively

 from outside the
 organization

 Very little use of internal

 career ladders

 Hiring mainly from within the

 organization

 Extensive use of well-defined

 career ladders

 No formal training provided
 Little if any socialization
 taking place within the
 organization

 Performance measured by

 quantifiable output or
 results-oriented measures

 Feedback in the form of

 numbers and evaluative

 Extensive formal training

 provided

 Great amount of socialization

 within the organization
 Performance measured by

 behavior-oriented measures

 Feedback more for

 developmental purposes

 Profit sharing used extensively

 HR Practices

 Internal career
 opportunities

 Training

 Results-oriented

 appraisals

 Profit sharing

 Employment security

 Very little employment

 security given

 Participation

 Employees given little voice

 in the organization

 Job descriptions

 Jobs are not clearly defined
 Job definitions are loose

 Few incentive systems used
 Very little use of profit sharing
 Great deal of employment

 security among those who
 make it through the initial trial
 period

 Extensive benefits to those

 "outplaced"

 Formal dismissal policies
 Employees likely have access to

 grievance systems

 Employees more likely to

 participate in decision making

 Jobs very tightly defined

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 810

 Academy of Management Journal

 August

 The market-type system is characterized by hiring from outside an orga-
 nization, providing little training, and evaluating performance through the
 use of results measures. Employees who work under this system are compen-
 sated or rewarded for individual performance as measured by the output
 measures. They are given little employment security and voice, and their
 jobs are usually broadly defined. This system is similar to the performance-
 based system outlined by Kerr and Slocum (1987), the baseball teams of
 Sonnenfeld and Peiperl (1988), and the type B system of Miles and Snow
 (1984).

 The internal system is characterized by the existence of an internal labor
 market. Extensive socialization and training are common. Performance is
 assessed through behavior, and appraisal feedback is given for developmental
 purposes rather than evaluative purposes. A rather high degree of employ-
 ment security is given. Employees are viewed as valuable sources of informa-
 tion and are provided a great deal of voice. Individuals in these jobs often
 have tightly defined job descriptions. This employment system is similar to
 the hierarchy-based system of Kerr and Slocum (1987), the clubs of Sonnen-
 feld and Peiperl (1988), and the type A system of Miles and Snow (1984).1

 Strategic configurations. Miles and Snow's (1978) strategic typology can
 be interpreted as a configurational theory that identifies three ideal strategic
 types: the prospector, the analyzer, and the defender (Doty et al., 1993). The
 defender has a narrow and stable product-market domain and seldom makes
 major adjustments in its technology or structure. The emphasis is on better
 and more efficient ways to produce a given product or service and on defend-
 ing a market. A defender does little research and development. When defend-
 ers pursue new products, they import the technology from outside the organi-
 zation. Prospectors are characterized by their constant search for new
 products and markets. They continually experiment with new product lines
 and venture into new markets. These organizations are the creators of change
 in their markets and are the forces to which competitors must respond. As
 such, prospectors are more concerned with searching for new opportunities
 and will likely not be as efficient as defenders. Analyzers have characteristics
 of both defenders and prospectors. They usually operate in both stable prod-
 uct domains, like defenders, and new changing product domains-like pros-
 pectors. They are usually not the initiators of change, as are prospectors, but
 they follow the changes much more rapidly than do defenders.

 Alignment of employment systems and strategic configurations. The

 strategic differences among the prospector, analyzer, and defender suggest

 1 It should be noted that the internal system described here is similar to other systems
 labeled broadly as internal labor markets. However, as a reviewer noted, this internal system
 is different from the adversarial system that was found in many industrial settings, in that
 employees are highly valued and are given the opportunity to participate in decisions. For
 a more thorough discussion of the many forms of internal labor markets, see Pinfield and
 Berner (1994).

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Delery and Doty

 811

 that organizations pursuing these alternative strategies should implement
 different employment systems. Because defenders concentrate on efficiency
 in current products and markets, effective employment practices should
 emphasize a long-term commitment to an organization. The organization
 should value employees with greater firm- and product-specific skills and
 knowledge. The special skills and knowledge will be enhanced through
 formal training, well-established career paths within the organization, and
 performance appraisal and feedback systems that foster employee develop-
 ment rather than short-term results. These practices should create an environ-
 ment that fosters long-term commitment to the organization and reduces the
 costs associated with replacement of workers and the knowledge, skills, and
 abilities they possess. To further limit "voluntary dysfunctional turnover"
 (Dalton & Todor, 1982), employees should be given a high amount of employ-
 ment security and voice.

 Prospectors, on the other hand, are constantly changing. They emphasize

 exploration into products and markets in which they traditionally have had
 little or no experience. Therefore, they are less aware of the specific behaviors
 that are necessary to perform well in these areas. Consequently, they will
 not be able to look inside their current organizations for the necessary skills
 and will have to hire from the outside to acquire the talent that will keep
 performance high. Because of the constant change in such an organization,
 there will be little emphasis on long-term commitment to it. The organization
 is constantly trying out new products and markets and will likely move on
 quickly if it appears that there is little opportunity for profit in an area. Thus,
 the organization will create a results-oriented appraisal system that measures
 performance on bottom-line measures.

 In sum, the HR practices consistent with the internal system are ap-
 propriate for the defender strategy and include the use of (1) internal ca-
 reer opportunities, (2) formal training systems, (3) behavior-based appraisal,
 (4) hierarchy-based compensation (i.e., little profit sharing), (5) employment
 security, (6) employee voice, and (7) tightly defined jobs. Conversely, the
 prospector strategy requires the market system, which entails (1) few internal
 career opportunities, (2) lack of formal training systems, (3) output-based
 appraisal, (4) profit-sharing systems, (5) little employment security, (6) little
 employee voice, and (7) broadly defined jobs.2

 Configurational predictions. The configurational predictions are based
 on the assumption that implementing the employment systems discussed
 above will result in higher organizational performance. However, there are

 2 The most parsimonious interpretation of Miles and Snow's (1978) theory implies that the

 analyzer is at the midpoint between the prospector and defender (Doty et al., 1993). Thus, in
 the configurational analysis reported later in the article, we included a third employment
 subsystem suitable for the analyzer that is specified as the midpoint between the market-type
 and internal employment subsystems. We will refer to this employment system as the middle-
 of-the-road system.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 812

 Academy of Management Journal

 August

 at least three different configurational arguments relating the employment
 systems to organizational performance.

 The simplest configurational argument is based on the assumption that
 the employment systems are ideal types that are equally effective under all
 conditions (Doty & Glick, 1994). Given this interpretation, greater similarity
 to any ideal-type employment system will increase organizational perfor-
 mance. To be consistent with this interpretation, we predict that

 Hypothesis 3: The greater the similarity to the ideal-type
 employment system that is most similar to an organiza-
 tion's employment system, the higher the financial perfor-
 mance.

 This first configurational assertion is different from traditional universal-

 istic assertions in two ways. First, the configurational assertion relies on a
 systems perspective and is based on the holistic pattern of HR practices,
 whereas universalistic assertions are based on the individual HR practices.
 Second, this configurational assertion includes the assumption of equifinality
 and implies that multiple employment systems are equally effective for the
 same set of conditions. Universalistic assertions, in contrast, posit that certain
 individual HR practices are better in all conditions.

 A somewhat more complex configurational interpretation incorporates

 vertical fit by constraining an organization's choice of employment system
 to be consistent with the organization's strategy. Thus, the organization must
 adopt the one ideal type of employment system that is most consistent with
 the organization's strategy. In other words, the organization must maximize
 both horizontal and vertical fit. Consistent with this second configurational
 interpretation, we hypothesize

 Hypothesis 4: An employment system's similarity to the
 one ideal-type employment system that is appropriate for
 an organization's strategy will be positively related to fi-
 nancial performance.

 The second type of configurational assertion is similar to a traditional

 contingency argument in that both types of arguments assert that the effective-
 ness of a firm's HR practices are contingent on firm strategy. The configura-
 tional assertion differs from a traditional contingency assertion, however,
 because it retains the notion of discrete, ideal-type employment systems that
 result in maximal organizational performance. In other words, the second
 configurational argument is that a given employment system will enhance
 firm performance only when it is used in association with the appropriate
 firm strategy. Therefore, the closer the organization's employment system to
 the one ideal employment system that is congruent with the organization's
 strategy, the more effective the organization.

 The most complex configurational interpretation is that two employment

 systems, the market type and the internal system, are polar opposites (Kerr &
 Slocum, 1987; McKinney, 1966) that define a continuum of effective hybrid
 employment systems. These hybrid employment systems are combinations

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Delery and Doty

 813

 of the initial ideal-type employment systems. This third configurational inter-
 pretation implies that there are an infinite number of effective combinations,
 or hybrids, of the employment systems that result in horizontal fit. So long
 as the hybrid employment system an organization implements falls along
 the continuum, the employment system will be effective. However, the orga-
 nization must maximize vertical fit in addition to horizontal fit. In order to
 maximize vertical fit, the extent to which the organization's employment
 system deviates from the ideal-type employment systems that define the
 continuum must be exactly proportional to the extent to which the organiza-
 tion's strategy deviates from the ideal-type strategies that are consistent with
 each ideal-type employment system. For example, if an organization's strat-
 egy falls halfway between an analyzer and prospector strategy, then the
 organization will be maximally effective only if its employment system falls
 halfway between the market type and middle-of-the-road employment sys-
 tems. Thus, to maximize performance, the organization must choose the one
 hybrid employment system that is appropriate for its strategy. Consistent
 with this argument,

 Hypothesis 5: An employment system's similarity to the
 one hybrid employment system that is appropriate for an
 organization's strategy will be positively related to finan-
 cial performance.

 This third configurational interpretation is very similar to a traditional

 contingency assertion. Both types of assertions imply that there are an infinite
 number of combinations of HR practices that will lead to superior organiza-
 tional performance if they are used in association with the correct strategy.
 The primary difference between the two types of assertions involves the
 relationships between the HR practices and firm strategy. Contingency argu-
 ments focus on the relationships between the individual HR practices and
 firm strategy. The configurational assertion, by contrast, retains a system
 perspective by focusing on the pattern of relationships among the HR prac-
 tices and by constraining the variation in each HR practice to be exactly
 proportional to the variation in the system of HR practices.

 Summary

 The purpose of this study was to articulate and test three different theo-

 retical frameworks in strategic human resource management. According to
 the universalistic framework, some HR practices are universally effective.
 Organizations that adopt these best practices will reap higher profits. In
 the contingency framework, the effectiveness of individual HR practices
 is contingent on firm strategy. An organization that adopts HR practices
 appropriate for its strategy will be more effective. Finally, in the configura-
 tional framework there are synergistic effects among HR practices. Thus,
 consistency within the configuration of HR practices and between the HR
 practices and strategy are necessary to enhance performance. Empirical tests

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 814

 Academy of Management Journal

 August

 of these alternate theoretical perspectives are reported in the remainder of
 this study.

 Sample and Procedures

 METHODS

 The current study was conducted in a single industry to control for
 between-industry differences. The banking industry was selected for several
 reasons. First, recent deregulation in this industry is likely to increase the
 heterogeneity of strategies used across the industry. Some banks offer a wide
 variety of services to a diverse set of customers; others offer a limited set of
 services to a largely homogeneous set of customers. Second, a given set of
 jobs is relatively stable and common across the industry. These common
 jobs provide some control for between-job variation across banks. Third,
 government regulations require all banks to report the same types of financial
 data in a consistent fashion. Thus, the representitiveness of a sample of banks
 will not be biased by failures to report the financial information on which the
 dependent variables in the current study are based. These three advantages of
 the banking industry were thought to compensate for the loss of generalizabil-
 ity that resulted from restricting the study to a single industry.

 We selected an initial stratified random sample of 1,050 banks using the
 following procedure. First, the total population of banks was stratified into
 three assets categories: assets greater than $25 million and less than or equal
 to $100 million, assets greater than $100 million and less than or equal to $300
 million, and assets greater than $300 million. We then randomly selected 350
 banks from each asset category, a process resulting in a total sample of
 1,050 banks.

 The data from respondents in the banks were collected using two ques-

 tionnaires. First, one questionnaire was sent directly to a senior HR manager
 in each bank. The HR questionnaire solicited information about the bank's
 business strategy and about the HR practices used for specific jobs within
 the bank. A description of the relevant jobs adapted from the Dictionary
 of Occupational Titles was included with the questionnaire to preclude
 confusion about the relevant jobs. After the HR questionnaire was returned,
 we sent a second questionnaire directly to the bank's president. This second
 questionnaire solicited general information and information about the bank's
 strategy. (See the Results section for response rates.)

 Measures

 The design of this study required a wide range of measures collected
 from four different data sources. Measures of the various HR practices were
 provided by the HR contact in each bank. Strategy measures were constructed
 from the data provided by bank presidents. The dependent measures and
 the control measures were drawn from the Sheshunoff Bank Search database,
 which contains information obtained from the call reports to the Federal
 Reserve that all banks must complete quarterly. The values used to construct

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Delery and Doty

 815

 the ideal strategic profiles necessary for testing the configurational hypothe-
 ses were drawn from the values published by Segev (1989). Finally, the
 values used to construct the ideal HR profiles were specified by the data
 provided by the HR contact.

 HR practices measures. Seven different HR practices were conceptual-
 ized and measured. (The Appendix presents the questionnaire items associ-
 ated with all measures.) Internal career opportunities referred to the extent
 to which a bank had an internal career ladder or internal career opportunities
 and was measured as the mean of four 7-point Likert-type items. Higher
 scores indicated the existence of a well-defined internal career and staffing
 system with greater opportunities. The degree to which training, both formal
 and informal, was provided for employees in a job was assessed using the
 mean of four Likert-type items. Higher scores reflected more extensive and
 formalized training programs for employees. Appraisal was defined as the
 degree to which performance appraisals focused on output or results mea-
 sures rather than on behavioral measures and was calculated as the mean of
 two items. Higher values represented a greater reliance on results or output
 measures. Profit sharing was measured with a single item that asked respon-
 dents the extent to which employees received bonuses based on an organiza-
 tion's profit. Higher responses represented a greater use of profit sharing in
 a bank. Employment security was conceptualized as the degree to which an
 employee could expect to stay in his or her job over an extended period of
 time and was measured as the mean of four items. Higher scores represented
 a greater degree of employment security. Employee participation, or voice,
 was defined as the degree to which employees were allowed to have input
 into their work and the degree to which the organization valued their input;
 it was measured as the mean of four items, with higher scores reflecting a
 greater amount of participation and voice. Finally, job description referred
 to the extent to which jobs were clearly and precisely defined. This measure
 was computed as the mean of four items and scored so that higher values
 reflected a higher degree of job description.

 Strategy measures. The design of the current study required two different
 types of strategy variables. First, a single measure of strategy was required
 to test the contingency hypotheses. Following previous contingency interpre-
 tations of Miles and Snow's theory (Hambrick, 1983, Shortell & Zajac, 1990),
 we defined the strategic contingency variable as rate of product/market inno-
 vation. Innovation was measured as the mean of six Likert-type items adapted
 from Segev (1989) and presented in the Appendix. A second, larger set of
 strategy measures was required to test the configurational hypotheses. Thus,
 in addition to the six previously mentioned items, nine strategy measures
 adapted from Segev (1989) were included in the questionnaire (see the Ap-
 pendix). Each of the strategic items included in the questionnaire used a
 seven-point Likert-type response scale.

 Performance measures. The current study incorporated two financial

 measures important to the banking industry as dependent variables: return
 on average assets (ROA) and return on equity (ROE). The financial measures

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 816

 Academy of Management Journal

 August

 were obtained from the Sheshunoff Bank Search database. The measures of
 ROA and ROE were the year-end measures for 1992, the year in which the
 surveys were completed.

 Control variables. Several control variables were included in the analy-

 ses. These data were also obtained from the Sheshunoff Bank Search database.
 Bank size was measured as the total dollar value of assets. Bank age was the
 number of years from the founding date. A dummy variable was included
 to indicate whether a bank was part of a holding company (1 = yes, 0 = no).
 Finally, we included a series of dummy variables to control for the Federal
 Reserve district in which a bank was located.

 Ideal profiles. Tests of the configurational hypotheses required the con-

 struction of two sets of ideal profiles: ideal strategic profiles and ideal employ-
 ment system profiles. These ideal profiles contain the value of each measure
 that best characterizes the relevant ideal type (Doty & Glick, 1994). The ideal
 strategic profiles, operationally defined as the values for each ideal type
 reported by Segev (1989), are reported in Table 2. We theoretically specified
 the values for the ideal employment system profiles using the approach
 initially suggested by Govindarajan (1988) and operationally defined them
 using the values reported in Table 2. The ideal profile for the middle-of-the-
 road system was specified as the mean value for each of the relevant variables.

 TABLE 2

 Values for the Ideal Profiles

 (a) Ideal Strategic Profiles
 Variables Prospector

 Analyzer

 Defender

 4.82
 5.18
 4.68
 5.30
 4.40
 5.54
 5.83
 5.18
 4.59
 5.62
 5.24
 2.62
 4.90

 Technological progress 5.64
 Product/market breadth 5.68
 Product innovation 6.95
 Quality 5.47
 Price level 6.61
 Active marketing 6.52
 Long-range financial strength 4.11
 Resources level 4.86
 Investment in production 2.91
 Internal analysis level 3.68
 External analysis level 6.95
 Level of risk 6.00
 Proactive management style 6.76
 (b) Ideal Employment System Profiles Market-Type
 Results-oriented appraisals 4.44
 Profit sharing 6.33
 Job descriptions 3.38
 Employment security 2.79
 Internal career opportunities 3.86
 Training 3.08
 Participation/voice 4.60

 3.41
 4.26
 4.49
 3.90
 4.67
 4.24
 5.36

 Middle-of-the-Road

 4.86
 1.59
 1.68
 5.86
 1.32
 3.14
 4.88
 4.30
 6.18
 6.82
 2.05
 2.68
 2.86

 Internal

 2.38
 2.19
 5.60
 5.01
 5.48
 5.40
 6.12

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Delery and Doty

 817

 The market-type and internal systems were specified as plus or minus one
 standard deviation from the mean of each variable. This approach ensures
 that for each variable the relevant position of the employment system is
 consistent with the substantive theory and that the values for individual
 profiles are consistent with those for the banks in the sample.

 Configurational fit measures. We computed the measures of configura-
 tional fit that assessed the similarity of an organization to an ideal profile
 using the mathematical models presented by Doty and associates (Doty &
 Glick, 1994; Doty et al., 1993). Ideal-types fit was used to test Hypothesis 3 and
 was operationally defined as the additive inverse of the deviation between a
 real organization's employment system and the ideal employment system
 that the organization most closely resembled. Contingent ideal-types fit, used
 to test Hypothesis 4, was measured as the additive inverse of the deviation
 between an organization's employment system and the ideal employment
 system that was appropriate for the ideal strategic type most similar to the
 organization's strategy. Finally, contingent hybrid-types fit, used to test Hy-
 pothesis 5, was defined as the additive inverse of the deviation between the
 organization's employment system and a hybrid ideal employment system
 most consistent with the organization's strategy. In each of the three measures
 of configurational fit, the computation of the final similarity indexes was
 restricted to the HR practice measures.
 Analysis

 A key concept in the SHRM literature is that employment systems should
 be designed to maximize performance in the jobs that are most critical to an
 organization's performance. Thus, we limited the current analyses to the job
 of loan officer because this job was common to all banks, was determined
 to be one of the most important jobs in banks, and was critical to bank
 performance (Delery, 1993). The approach taken here is similar to those of
 Osterman (1994) and Arthur (1992, 1994). Osterman argued that there should
 be variation in the practices used to manage different employee groups within
 an organization but that it should be most important to investigate the use
 of practices for "core" employee groups. Arthur (1992) limited his studies
 in steel minimills to maintenance and production workers, likely to be the
 core employees in that context. Limiting the analyses to a single job may
 reduce the generalizability of results, but the alternative-measuring HR
 practices as a composite that was a weighted sum of the practices used across
 broad job catgories-was likely to dilute the observed relationships between
 the HR practices and organizational performance. Thus, limiting the analyses
 to a single, critical job in an organization is consistent with prior work
 and should increase the accuracy of the tests of the relevant theoretical
 perspectives.

 Each hypothesis was tested using hierarchical regression analyses. The
 tests were based on changes in the level of explained variation before and after
 the variable of interest was added to the set of control variables. Significant
 changes in the adjusted R2 provided support for the hypotheses.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 818

 Academy of Management Journal

 August

 RESULTS

 A total of 216 usable questionnaires were returned from the HR contacts.
 This total represented a 21 percent response rate. These respondents had an
 average tenure with their banks of 12.24 years and an average tenure in their
 current jobs of 5.32 years. A total of 114 usable questionnaires were returned
 from the bank presidents. This total represented a 53 percent response rate
 from banks that received the second questionnaire and an 11 percent response
 rate from the overall sample. Bank presidents had an average tenure with
 their bank of 13.43 years and an average tenure as president of 5.89 years.

 Response Bias Check

 The analyses used to test the hypotheses in the current study drew on

 data from multiple sources and thus were based on different sample sizes.
 Given these differences, we conducted two analyses to check for response
 bias. First, we assessed whether characteristics of individual banks made
 their HR managers less likely to complete and return the survey. Following
 the work of Osterman (1994), we used a logistic regression with the dependent
 variable defined as a dummy variable coded 1 if an HR director responded
 and 0 if he or she did not. The independent variables included whether the
 bank was federally or state chartered, total equity, total deposits, total loans,
 total cash, total assets, total income, holding company ownership, and age.
 None of the variables were significant. Next, we investigated whether there
 were characteristics of banks that made their presidents less likely to com-
 plete and return the questionnaire. As above, we used a logistic regression
 analysis; the variables included in the equation included ROA, ROE, total
 assets, age, and holding company ownership. Again, no significant differ-
 ences were detected. The lack of significant results in these two analyses
 indicated that response bias was not a significant problem in the current data.

 Universalistic Hypotheses

 Table 3 presents means, standard deviations, correlations, and reliabili-

 ties (where appropriate). Moderate correlations between several of the HR
 practices indicate that these practices are not completely independent. Three
 of the HR practices are significantly related to either or both ROA and ROE:
 results-oriented appraisal (r = .13, p < .05; r = .09, p < .10), employment
 security (r = .17, p < .01; r = .08, n.s.), and profit sharing (r = .22, p < .01;
 r = .16, p < .01). These results support some of the relationships specified
 in Hypothesis 1.

 We conducted two additional types of analyses to further test Hypothesis
 1. First, ROA and ROE were used as the dependent variables in a set of
 hierarchical regressions. The seven HR practices were independently entered
 into the equation after the set of control variables had been entered. These
 results indicate that three of the seven HR practices explained a significant
 incremental level of the variance in ROA. The use of results-oriented apprais-
 als was positively related to ROA (AR2 = .02, F = 4.64, p < .05) and marginally

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Means, Standard Deviations, Reliabilities, and Correlations among Variablesa

 TABLE 3

 Variables Mean s.d. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

 1. Appraisals 3.41 1.03 (.80)
 2. Job descriptions 4.49 1.13 -.38** (.78)
 3. Job security 3.90 1.12 -.02 -.25** (.66)
 4. Career opportunities 4.65 0.82 -.34** .34** -.10 (.64)
 5. Training 4.24 1.16 -.24** .31** -.10 .41** (.83)
 6. Participation 5.37 0.77 -.19** .17** .00 .30** .30** (.80)
 7. Profit sharing 4.28 2.07 .00 -.03 .06 .02 .10 .18**
 8. Assets 12.10 1.28 -.01 .24** -.31** .11 .09 -.08 -.14*
 9. Age 66.53 39.27 .05 .07 -.09 .12* .19** .12* -.07 .27** o
 10. Holding company 0.53 0.50 -.08 .24** -.20** .06 .11 -.04 -.22** .57** .22**
 11. Innovation 4.36 0.97 .01 .19* -.29** .33** .23** .13 .01 .27** .12 .24** (.91)
 12. ROA 1.07 0.55 .13* -.02 .17** -.07 .01 .03 .22** -.12* .12* .04 -.05
 13. ROE 12.87 7.03 .09t .03 .08 .00 .08 .06 .16** -.03 .12* .20** .09 .90**

 aCronbach's alphas appear on the diagonal for multiple-item measures.
 tp < .10
 * p < .05
 **p < .01

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 820

 Academy of Management Journal

 August

 positively related to ROE (AR2 = .013, F = 3.49, p < .10). This pattern
 indicates that banks using results-oriented appraisals to manage their loan
 officers achieved higher returns. Employment security and profit sharing
 were both positively related to ROA (AR2 = .023, F = 6.06, p < .01, and AR2 =
 .086, F = 24.38, p < .001, respectively), and profit sharing was significantly
 related to ROE (AR2 = .07, F = 20.34, p < .001). This result suggests that
 the greater employment security given to loan officers, the greater the returns
 to banks. In addition, banks that used profit sharing to a greater extent also
 performed better.

 To further test Hypothesis 1, we entered all the HR practices simultane-
 ously into two hierarchical regression equations, one predicting ROA and
 one predicting ROE. The results of these two additional analyses, which are
 presented in Table 4, are entirely consistent with the individual analyses
 discussed above. When entered simultaneously, the HR practices were able
 to explain an additional 12.55 percent of variance (p < .01) in ROA and an
 additional 9 percent of variance (p < .01) in ROE over what the controls
 explained. Thus, the results provide relatively strong support for Hypothe-
 sis 1.

 Results of these two regressions can also be discussed in terms of ROA

 and ROE. Banks one standard deviation higher than the average on profit
 sharing are estimated to be 0.17 and 1.96 higher on ROA and ROE, respec-
 tively. Additionally, banks one standard deviation higher on results-oriented
 appraisals and job security are estimated to be 0.08 and 0.09 higher on ROA,
 and 0.98 and 0.63 higher on ROE. In sum, banks one standard deviation

 Simultaneous Hierarchical Regression Results Testing Hypothesis la

 TABLE 4

 ROA ROE

 Variables i AR2b f AR2b
 Controls .28**(.23) .31**(.25)
 HR practices .13**(.11) .09**(.07)

 Results-oriented appraisals .14* .14t
 Profit sharing .31** .28**
 Job descriptions .04 .01
 Employment security .16** .09
 Internal career opportunities .00 .06
 Training -.01 .00
 Participation/voice -.07 -.03

 Full equation .41**(.34) .40**(.32)

 a N = 192. Controls included 11 dummy-coded variables capturing Federal Reserve district,

 total assets (log), age, and holding company ownership.

 b Adjusted R2 is in parentheses.
 tp <.10
 * p < .05
 **p < .01

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Delery and Doty

 821

 higher on all three of these significant HR practices are estimated to be 0.34
 higher than average on ROA and 3.57 higher on ROE.

 Contingency Hypothesis

 Hypothesis 2 states that the relationships between HR practices and
 performance are contingent on an organization's strategy. These contingency
 predictions can be evaluated by determining whether an HR practice-strategy
 interaction term significantly increases the level of explained variation in
 a hierarchical regression analysis. Thus, we ran a total of 14 hierarchical
 regression analyses, seven predicting ROA and seven predicting ROE. In the
 first step of each analysis, the control variables, the strategy measure, and a
 single HR practice measure were included. In the second step, the interaction
 term between the single HR practice and the strategy measure was added to
 the regression equation.

 The results indicate that none of the interaction terms significantly in-
 creased the explained variation in ROA, and only the appraisal-strategy
 interaction term explained a significant portion of the variance in ROE
 (AR2 = .038, F = 5.55, p < .05). No other interactions were significant. These
 analyses provide virtually no support for Hypothesis 2.

 One explanation for the null results is that the combination of HR prac-
 tices a firm uses is more important than specific, individual practices. For
 example, Huselid (1993, 1995) argued that a more accurate assessment of
 the relationships between HR practices and performance can be made when
 all HR practices are simultaneously included in analyses. Therefore, we
 conducted two post hoc hierarchical regressions (one for ROA and one for
 ROE) in which all seven HR practices were included in the first step and
 the interaction terms between each of the HR practice measures and the
 innovation measure were included in the second step.3 The increase in the
 level of explained variation was marginally significant for ROE (AR2 = .087,
 F = 1.82, p < .10) and approached marginal significance for ROA (AR2 =
 .081, F = 1.68, p = .13). Two of the individual interaction terms in the
 equation predicting ROE and three of the interaction terms in the equation
 predicting ROA were significant, as were both of the overall equations. Table
 5 presents these results. When the interaction terms that were not significant
 in either equation were removed from the analyses, the interaction between
 innovation and career opportunities, results-oriented appraisals, and partici-
 pation explained an additional 7 percent of variance in ROA (AR2 = .071, F =
 3.53, p < .05) and an additional 7.4 percent of the variance in ROE (AR2 =
 .074, F = 3.71, p < .05).

 An analysis of the interaction terms showed that prospector banks had

 higher ROA and ROE when using results-oriented appraisals. Conversely,

 3 We conducted the analyses after mean-centering all variables (Cronbach, 1987; Jaccard,
 Turrisi, & Wan, 1990; Stone, 1988), because there was relatively high multicollinearity among
 the independent variables, particularly among the interaction terms.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 822

 Academy of Management Journal

 August

 TABLE 5

 Results of the Contingency Regressionsa

 ROA ROE

 Variables f AJR2b P R2b
 Controls
 Innovation -.20 .32**(.21) -.14 .33**(.21)
 HR practices .10t(.06) .10t(.06)

 1. Results-oriented appraisals .33** .35**
 2. Profit sharing .21* .19*
 3. Job descriptions -.08 -.09
 4. Employment security .19 .15
 5. Internal career opportunities .01 .04
 6. Training .00 .08
 7. Participation/voice .03 .02

 Interactionsc .08(.04) .09t(.05)

 Innovation X 1 .22* .29**
 Innovation X 2 .03 -.06
 Innovation x 3 -.09 -.07
 Innovation X 4 .03 .02
 Innovation X 5 .29* .26*
 Innovation x 6 -.03 -.09
 Innovation x 7 -.22* -.17

 Full equation .43**(.27) .51**(.32)

 a N = 101. Controls included 11 dummy-coded variables capturing Federal Reserve district,

 total assets (log), age, and holding company ownership.

 b Adjusted R2 is in parentheses.
 c Numbers refer to HR practices listed above.
 tp < .10
 p < .05
 **p < .01

 defender banks had higher ROA and ROE when relying less on results-
 oriented appraisals. In a similar fashion, defender banks obtained higher
 ROA and ROE the more they allowed loan officers to participate in decision
 making. The reverse was true of prospectors. Finally, ROA and ROE were
 greatest for prospector banks when there were greater internal career opportu-
 nities for loan officers. Again, the reverse was true for defenders.

 From the regression equations presented in Table 5, the mean effect on

 ROA and ROE of having HR practices consistent with strategy was estimated.
 For instance, the results show that among prospector banks (banks one stan-
 dard deviation above the mean on the strategy variable), those that were also
 one standard deviation above the mean on internal career opportunities and
 results-oriented appraisals were estimated to have an ROE 6.52 higher than
 those at the mean on those practices.

 These post hoc results indicate that there is support for some of the
 contingency relationships posited in Hypothesis 2. Thus, the contingency
 perspective should not be rejected out of hand. These results must be viewed

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Delery and Doty

 823

 with caution, however, given the lack of support for the individual HR
 practice interaction tests. Future studies will have to investigate these rela-
 tionships more fully.
 Configurational Hypotheses

 Prior to testing the configurational hypotheses, we classified each bank
 according to the ideal employment system it most closely resembled. Table
 6 reports the number of banks with employment systems most similar to
 each ideal employment system and the means and standard deviations of
 each HR practice for each group of banks. In addition, the F-values reported
 in Table 6 indicate that there are significant differences among the groups
 of banks.

 The first configurational hypothesis, Hypothesis 3, states that similarity

 to the one ideal-type employment system most similar to an organization's
 employment system will be positively related to organizational performance.
 In other words, if a bank's employment system resembled the market-type
 system more than other systems, the greater that similarity, the stronger the
 performance.

 To test Hypothesis 3, we first computed the appropriate similarity mea-

 sure (i.e., ideal-types fit) and then entered this measure in the second step
 of a hierarchical regression. (The first step of the hierarchical regression
 contained each of the control variables.) The ideal-types measure of fit did
 not add significantly to the explained variation in either analysis (ROA: AR2 =
 .008, F = 1.91, n.s.; ROE: AR2 = .008, F = 1.95, n.s.). Thus, Hypothesis 3
 was not supported.

 Description of HR Types and Comparison of Meansa

 TABLE 6

 Employment Systems

 Middle-of-

 Market the-Road Internal

 HR Practices Mean s.d. Mean s.d. Mean s.d. F

 Results-oriented appraisals 4.22 1.07 3.38 0.93 2.84 0.88 18.31**
 Profit sharing 6.28 0.85 4.48 1.78 1.62 1.01 80.96**
 Job descriptions 3.55 1.27 4.55 1.00 5.06 0.89 20.41**
 Employment security 3.44 1.14 3.94 1.06 4.09 1.20 3.43*
 Internal career opportunities 4.31 0.79 4.63 0.74 5.14 0.86 10.86**
 Training 3.59 1.20 4.25 1.08 4.78 1.22 9.69*
 Participation/voice 5.23 0.92 5.35 0.74 5.54 0.69 1.63
 Total N 32 145 37

 a The values reported in this table were computed after each bank was classified according

 to the ideal employment system it most closely resembled. These values differ from the ideal
 employment system profiles presented in Table 2 because, unlike ideal system values, the values
 presented above were calculated after banks had been classified.

 * p < .05
 ** p < .01

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 824

 Academy of Management Journal

 August

 Hypothesis 4 posits that similarity to the one ideal-type employment
 system that was appropriate for an organization's strategy would be positively
 related to organizational performance. To test this hypothesis, we computed
 the contingency ideal-types measure of fit and entered the result into hierar-
 chical regression equations predicting ROA and ROE. The results show that
 this measure was unable to explain a significant amount of variance in either
 ROA (AR2 = .00, F = .00, n.s.) or ROE (AR2 = .002, F = .22, n.s.). Thus,
 Hypothesis 4 was not supported.

 The third configurational hypothesis, Hypothesis 5, predicts that similar-
 ity to the one hybrid employment system appropriate for an organization's
 strategy will be positively related to organizational performance. To test this
 hypothesis, we computed the contingent hybrid-types measure of fit and
 then entered this measure into hierarchical regression equations in the same
 manner as in previous analyses. The results of these regressions do not
 support Hypothesis 5. Similarity to the appropriate hybrid employment sys-
 tem did not explain a significant amount of variance in either ROA (AR2 =
 .001, F = .11, n.s.) or ROE (AR2 = .02, F = 2.01, n.s.).

 One plausible explanation for the null results associated with the con-
 figurational perspective is that too many or too few ideal employment systems
 were included in the analyses. Altering the set of ideal types included in
 the test of a theory can have a substantial effect on the results of the test
 (Doty, 1994). Thus, prior to abandoning the configurational perspective, we
 conducted an exploratory post hoc analysis.

 The most parsimonious configurational theory would posit that a single
 ideal employment system will result in maximal organizational performance.
 To determine if any one of the employment systems described in this article
 was superior to the others, we calculated the similarity between the organiza-
 tions' employment systems and each of the ideal employment systems. Each
 of the similarity measures was then entered into a separate hierarchical
 regression equation predicting the financial measures. The results of these
 analyses show that deviations from the internal and the market-type employ-
 ment systems were both related to ROA (AR2 = .03, F = 7.33, p < .01; AR2 =
 .06, F = 15.51, p < .01) and ROE (AR2 = .02, F = 5.44, p < .05; AR2 = .05,
 F = 13.20, p < .01). The more closely an organization's employment system
 resembled the market-type system, the higher the ROA and ROE. The reverse
 was true for the internal system. These results show that ROA and ROE are
 estimated to be 0.14 and 1.67 higher, respectively, for banks that are one
 standard deviation from the mean closer to the market-type employment
 system than the average bank. Although this effect is not nearly as large as
 those for the universalistic and contingency results, it still represents a sizable
 difference on these measures.

 These results indicate that the market-type system is superior to both
 of the other two employment systems and provide limited support for the
 configurational perspective. However, when the individual HR practices
 were used simultaneously to predict performance, they explained a greater
 portion of the variation in the dependent variables than did the market-type

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Delery and Doty

 825

 system. Thus, the market-type system should not be labeled the best system
 but rather should be viewed as the starting point for constructing an ideal-
 type employment system in future studies.

 DISCUSSION

 The results of this study provided relatively strong support for a univer-
 salistic perspective and some support for both the contingency and configu-
 rational perspectives. Three individual HR practices, profit sharing, results-
 oriented appraisals, and employment security, had relatively strong univer-
 salistic relationships with important accounting measures of performance.
 Contingency relationships between strategy and three HR practices-
 participation, results-oriented appraisals, and internal career opportuni-
 ties-explained a significant portion of the variation in the same performance
 measures. Finally, similarity to the market-type employment system was
 also positively related to firm performance. In combination, these results
 demonstrate that managing human resources as prescribed by each of the
 different perspectives enhances organizational performance.

 It is clear from the statistical analyses that there is strong support for

 the universalistic perspective. More important, the results of these analyses
 show that differences in HR practices are associated with rather large differ-
 ences in financial performance. For instance, financial performance was esti-
 mated to be approximately 30 percent higher for banks one standard deviation
 above the mean on each of the three significant practices than it was for
 those banks at the mean. These results appear to be even stronger than those
 of previous research (Huselid, 1995). In addition, the present results are
 consistent with the theoretical work to date.

 The universalistic support for the effectiveness of results-oriented ap-

 praisals is consistent with agency theory (Eisenhardt, 1988; Fama, 1980;
 Fama & Jensen, 1983), control theory (Snell, 1991), and the transaction cost
 perspective (Jones & Wright, 1992). Each of these theoretical perspectives
 implies that results-oriented appraisals will enhance performance when mea-
 sures of the desired results are either readily available or are less costly to
 obtain than other performance measures. Banks regularly collect and calcu-
 late results-oriented measures for the job of loan officer, such as default rate
 and number of nonperforming loans. Thus, the monitoring costs associated
 with these measures are extremely low. Behavioral measures for loan officers,
 on the other hand, are much more difficult to define and expensive to monitor.
 Each of the three theories implies that the use of behavioral control mecha-
 nisms for loan officers would be counterproductive, perhaps as a conse-
 quence of these difficulties.

 The universalistic relationship between the use of profit sharing and
 performance also supports both an agency theory and a behavioral theory
 explanation. Agency theory posits that basing employee rewards on profits
 ensures that employee interests are aligned with owner interests. The cost of
 monitoring profits for a profit-sharing plan is negligible because government
 regulations require banks to report profit measures. In addition, many profit-

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 826

 Academy of Management Journal

 August

 sharing plans do not distribute profits equally among employees. Instead,
 profits are distributed differentially according to employee performance. As
 discussed above, measures of loan officer performance are readily available.
 In terms of the behavioral perspective, profit sharing may be seen as universal-
 istic because, by definition, all banks strive for profit. By tying individual
 compensation to organizational profit, the organization is rewarding behavior
 that is consistent with its overall performance.

 The third HR practice that had a universalistic effect on performance
 was employment security. The effects of employment security are somewhat
 more difficult to explain in terms of the theories mentioned above. Granting
 employment security without monitoring employee performance does not
 assure that employees will engage in the appropriate behaviors. However,
 employment security may marginally align the interests of employees and
 owners. If the employees fail to perform in a way that generates continued
 profits for the organization, the organization may cease to exist, thereby
 ending the guarantee of employment security. Further, employment security
 sends a signal that an organization is committed to its workforce. If employees
 reciprocate this commitment, the organization should have a workforce with
 a high level of commitment and motivation. This is a key principle behind
 the rise of high performance-high commitment work systems (Lawler, 1986;
 Lawler, Mohrman, & Ledford, 1992), and it is the cornerstone of several organi-
 zations' HR management strategy. For instance, Lincoln Electric has for many
 years successfully employed an HR system that is characterized by lifetime
 employment.

 The contingency results provide support for the strategic focus of the

 SHRM literature. The post hoc analyses revealed that the links between organi-
 zational performance and three HR practices-performance appraisal, partici-
 pation, and internal career opportunities-are contingent on strategy. In gen-
 eral, banks that were able to align their HR practices with strategy are estimated
 to have nearly 50 percent higher ROA and ROE than those banks whose HR
 practices were just one standard deviation out of alignment. Specifically,
 banks that implemented a prospector strategy involving high innovation
 reaped greater returns from more results-oriented appraisals and lower levels
 of employee participation than did banks that relied on a defender strategy.
 Banks implementing a defender strategy performed better if they relied less on
 results-oriented appraisals and gave their loan officers higher levels of partici-
 pation in decision making and voice. These findings are consistent with the
 behavioral perspective of Miles and Snow's (1984) strategic theory.

 The direction of the relationship between internal career opportunities

 and strategy was opposite that hypothesized. Miles and Snow (1984) and
 Sonnenfeld and Peiperl (1988) both explicitly stated that internal career
 paths should be more consistent with the defender strategy. The reverse
 was true in the current study. Prospector banks with more internal career
 opportunities for their loan officers had higher returns than did defenders.
 One explanation for this unexpected finding involves the high mobility of
 talented employees within the banking industry. Talented employees may

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Delery and Doty

 827

 be likely to change jobs unless their banks offer internal career opportunities.
 Prospectors were able to keep talent in the organization only if that talent
 saw future opportunities. In addition, greater opportunities for advancement
 into a variety of different positions may help prospector banks attract spe-
 cially skilled employees. Defender banks would most likely not be able to
 match the variety of opportunities, given their focus on stable markets, and
 consequently they would focus on other aspects for recruitment. Additional
 theoretical and empirical work is needed to more fully explore the relation-
 ship between internal career opportunities, strategy, and performance.

 The configurational results suggest that some configurations of HR prac-
 tices are better than others. For example, the more closely a bank's employment
 system resembled the market-type system, the higher its performance. Con-
 versely, HR systems that more closely resembled the internal system resulted
 in decreased organizational performance. In terms of ROA and ROE, a decrease
 in distance from the market-type system of one standard deviation from the
 mean is estimated to result in a 13 percent increase in financial performance.
 Our interpretations of the configurational results are the most speculative.
 First, most configurational theorists argue for multiple effective configura-
 tions of the relevant parameters. For example, our a priori arguments and
 the arguments of Miles and Snow (1984), Sonnenfeld and Peiperl (1988),
 and others identify multiple maximally effective HR configurations. The
 configurational analyses we conducted, however, identified a single HR con-
 figuration that resulted in better performance. Thus, although the configura-
 tional results support the notion that future SHRM researchers should con-
 sider employment systems, the current results do not allow us to argue for
 multiple, equally effective employment systems.

 A second limitation to the configurational results presented in this article

 involves level of explained variation. The key assertion imbedded in config-
 urational theories is that the ideal configurations represent nonlinear syner-
 gistic effects of the dimensions used to construct the configurations (Meyer
 et al., 1993). In the current results, however, the variation explained in the
 configurational analyses did not exceed the variation explained when the
 individual dimensions were simultaneously used to predict performance.
 Thus, we cannot make strong arguments that synergy among the HR practices
 under investigation enhance organizational performance. So although the
 configurational approach appears to hold promise for SHRM researchers,
 additional theory development and testing are necessary to validate the effi-
 cacy of the configurational perspective.4

 4 We do not discuss the use of difference scores as a plausible explanation for the null

 results because the configurational fit methodology differs substantially from the traditional
 difference score approach. For example, in the current study we calculated the deviation between
 each real organization and one of two discrete points in multidimensional space. Thus, the
 point of reference for the deviation analysis associated with the ideal-types model of fit does
 not vary for each organization in the sample, as it would for the difference score approach. As
 a result of such substantive differences, many of the limitations typically associated with the
 use of difference scores are not limitations of the configurational fit methodology.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 828

 Academy of Management Journal

 August

 CONCLUSIONS

 The primary purpose of this study was to demonstrate that, contrary to

 current criticisms, the strategic human resource management literature is
 not an atheoretical wasteland. We have demonstrated that three different
 modes of theorizing are incorporated in that literature: universalistic, contin-
 gency, and configurational perspectives. The results reported in this study
 indicate that each of these perspectives is viable and leads to different as-
 sumptions about the relationships among HR practices, strategy, and organi-
 zational performance. Future theorists should clearly articulate the perspec-
 tive they are using to structure their arguments and test their arguments with
 an analytical strategy that is consistent with the relevant perspective.

 A second contribution of this study is that it explicitly links characteris-
 tics of an organization's employment system to organizational performance.
 To date, only a few other studies have attempted to make this link. For
 example, Huselid (1995) and Arthur (1994) showed that HR practices can
 have a significant impact on organizationally relevant performance measures.
 Like Huselid's and Arthur's findings, the current findings indicate that some
 HR practices always have a positive effect on organizational performance.
 Further, this study is one of the few to document that the relationships
 between some HR practices and organizational performance are contingent
 on firm strategy. Thus, the results of the current study suggest different
 theoretical frameworks are necessary to represent the different forms of rela-
 tionships between HR practices and organizational performance.

 The current study differs from these previous studies, however, because
 our results suggest a stronger relationship between HR practices and mea-
 sures of financial performance. Arthur (1992, 1994) did not assess the rela-
 tionship between HR practices and financial performance, and Huselid's
 (1995) results explained only 1 to 3 percent of the variation in financial
 performance. In contrast with these previous studies, the universalistic, con-
 tingency, and configurational analyses incorporated in the current study
 explained as much as 11, 10, and 6 percent, respectively, of the variation in
 financial performance. Thus, the current work indicates that HR practices
 may be even more important than was previously suspected. The current
 results must be interpreted with caution, however, because the inclusion of
 other determinants of both the HR practices and financial performance may
 reduce the variation explained by the HR practices alone.

 The results of this study also have applied implications for organizations.
 First, organizations that adopt best HR practices can generate greater returns.
 Such practices include profit sharing, results-oriented appraisals, and greater
 employment security. Huselid (1995) pointed out that although organizations
 may not be able to sustain a competitive advantage because these practices
 are imitable (Barney, 1991), many organizations are not currently using these
 more effective practices. Thus, in the short run, organizations that adopt a
 greater number of these practices are likely to gain a short-term competitive
 advantage and enjoy superior performance. Pfeffer (1994), however, pointed

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Delery and Doty

 829

 out that the implementation of these practices is not always an easy task.
 Therefore, he argued that it is unlikely that organizations can quickly or
 easily imitate the practices of the best organizations. If this is true, it may
 be even more important for newly established, or "greenfield," facilities to
 spend a great deal of time and effort ensuring that their employment systems
 are in fact consistent with high performance (Ichniowski et al., 1994).

 The universal adoption of all HR practices, however, is not completely
 appropriate. The results presented in this study indicate a more complex
 relationship between the management of human resources and organizational
 performance. Some HR practices are more appropriate under certain strategic
 conditions and less appropriate under others. Thus, the current results sup-
 port the primary assertion in the SHRM literature. Human resource managers
 must align some key organizational HR practices with business strategy (Jack-
 son & Schuler, 1995). At least three practices, internal career opportunities,
 results-oriented appraisals, and participation/voice, may exhibit this contin-
 gency relationship. Future research will likely identify other HR practices
 that must be consistent with an organization's strategy.

 Future SHRM research will undoubtedly increase the complexity of the
 HR manager's job. HR managers should not only keep current with the most
 effective universalistic practices, but should also be aware of the HR practices
 that work in concert with the greater goals of the organization's strategy.
 However, future SHRM research will likely provide more evidence that the
 manner in which an organization manages its employees has a bottom-line
 impact. Such research should aid HR managers in their quest to achieve
 greater status and control in their organizations.

 Despite the contributions of this study, several factors limit the generaliz-
 ability and usefulness of the findings. First, we limited the study to the
 banking industry to control for between-industry differences. Thus, the re-
 sults may not be valid in other industries. Although several authors (Huselid,
 1995; Pfeffer, 1994) have argued that it is unlikely that the best HR practices
 vary across industries, the current findings need to be validated in other
 industries to rule out industry as an important contingency factor. Second,
 this study was limited to a single job within the banking industry, that of
 loan officer, selected because it represented a core job within banks and is
 critical to bank performance. This approach is consistent with previous work
 (Arthur, 1992, 1994; Osterman, 1994), but characteristics of this job may
 limit the generalizability of the findings. For example, a loan officer's job is
 very professionalized and requires considerable training and education. The
 HR practices that are best for this type of job may differ from those that
 are best for semiskilled or trade-oriented jobs. Thus, future studies should
 investigate whether alternative HR practices are better suited for other types
 of jobs. Third, this study is limited because it included a relatively small set
 of the population of HR practices currently used by organizations. Although
 the HR practices included in this research are generally thought to be strategic
 and were derived from existing theory, other HR practices may constitute
 best practices, may have important contingency relationships with firm strat-

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 830

 Academy of Management Journal

 August

 egy, or may be critical to the specification of alternative ideal configurations
 of HR practices.

 A fourth limitation of this study is the use of a cross-sectional research
 design. Although we have argued that the effective use of HR practices should
 lead to stronger performance, our cross-sectional design does not allow us
 to rule out the possibility that organizations performing well adopt a greater
 number of high-quality HR practices. The issue of causality can be better
 addressed in longitudinal designs. Doing so would be an enormous task
 given the large number of organizations needed; however, we urge future
 researchers to adopt such designs. Additionally, future studies that include
 other organizational attributes that are related to both HR practices and
 organizational performance are needed to provide more accurate estimates
 of the full effect of HR practices on organizational performance.

 REFERENCES

 Abowd, J. M. 1990. Does performance-based managerial compensation affect corporate perfor-

 mance? Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 43: 52-73.

 Arthur, J. B. 1992. The link between business strategy and industrial relations systems in Ameri-

 can steel minimills. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 45: 488-506.

 Arthur, J. B. 1994. Effects of human resource systems on manufacturing performance. Academy

 of Management Journal, 37: 670-687.

 Bacharach, S. 1989. Organizational theories: Some criteria for evaluation. Academy of Manage-

 ment Review, 14: 496-515.

 Balkin, D. B., & Gomez-Mejia, L. R. 1987. Toward a contingency theory of compensation strategy.

 Strategic Management Journal, 8: 169-182.

 Barney, J. 1991. Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of Management,

 17: 99-120.

 Begin, J. P. 1993. Identifying patterns in HRM systems: Lessons learned from organizational
 theory. In J. Shaw, P. Kirkbride, & K. Rowland (Eds.), Research in personnel and human
 resource management, suppl. 3: 3-20. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

 Blalock, H. M., Jr. 1969. Theory construction: From verbal to mathematical formulations.

 Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

 Butler, J. E., Ferris, G. R., & Napier, N. K. 1991. Strategy and human resources management.

 Cincinnati: South-Western.

 Cronbach, L. J. 1987. Statistical tests for moderator variables: Flaws in analyses recently pro-

 posed. Psychological Bulletin, 102: 414-417.

 Dalton, D. R., & Todor, W. D. 1982. Turnover: A lucrative hard dollar phenomenon. Academy

 of Management Review, 7: 212-218.

 Delaney, J. T., Lewin, D., & Ichniowski, C. 1989. Human resource policies and practices in

 American firms. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

 Delery, J. E. 1993. An interorganizational investigation of human resource managementprac-

 tices: The relationship between business strategy, job and task characteristics, and
 human resource management practices. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Texas A&M
 University, College Station.

 Dewar, R., & Werbel, J. 1979. Universalistic and contingency predictions of employee satisfaction

 and conflict. Administrative Science Quarterly, 24: 426-448.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Delery and Doty

 831

 Doty, D. H. 1994. Structuring in threes: A partial resurrection of Mintzberg's theory. Proceedings

 of the Southern Management Association: 382-384.

 Doty, D. H., & Glick, W. H. 1994. Typologies as a unique form of theory building: Toward

 improved understanding and modeling. Academy of Management Review, 19: 230-251.

 Doty, D. H., Glick, W. H., & Huber, G. P. 1993. Fit, equifinality, and organizational effectiveness:
 A test of two configurational theories. Academy of Management Journal, 36: 1196-1250.
 Dyer, L. 1984a. Linking human resource and business strategies. Human Resource Planning,

 7(2): 79-84.

 Dyer, L. 1984b. Studying human resource strategy: An approach and an agenda. Industrial

 Relations, 23: 156-169.

 Dyer, L. 1985. Strategic human resources management and planning. In K. Rowland & G. Ferris
 (Eds.), Research in personnel andhuman resource management, vol. 3: 1-30. Greenwich,
 CT: JAI Press.

 Eisenhardt, K. M. 1988. Agency- and institutional-theory explanations: The case of retail sales

 compensation. Academy of Management Journal, 31: 488-511.

 Fama, E. F. 1980. Agency problems and the theory of the firm. Journal of Political Economy,

 88: 288-307.

 Fama, E. F., & Jensen, M. C. 1983. Separation of ownership and control. Journal of Law and

 Economics, 26: 301-325.

 Fombrum, C. J., Tichy, N. M., & Devanna, M. A. 1984. Strategic human resource management.

 New York: Wiley.

 Gerhart, B., & Milkovich, G. T. 1990. Organizational differences in managerial compensation

 and financial performance. Academy of Management Journal, 33: 663-691.

 Golden, B. R. 1992. The past is the past-Or is it? The use of retrospective accounts as indicators

 of past strategy. Academy of Management Journal, 35: 848-860.

 Golden, K., & Ramanujam, V. 1985. Between a dream and a nightmare: On the integration of the
 human resource management and strategic business planning processes. Human Resource
 Management, 24: 429-452.

 Gomez-Mejia, L. R., & Balkin, D. B. 1992. Compensation, organizational strategy, and firm

 performance. Cincinnati: South-Western.

 Govindarajan, V. 1988. A contingency approach to strategy implementation at the business-

 unit level: Integrating administrative mechanisms with strategy. Academy of Management
 Journal, 31: 828-853.

 Hambrick, D. C. 1983. Some tests of the effectiveness and functional attributes of Miles and

 Snow's strategic types. Academy of Management Journal, 26: 2-26.

 Huselid, M. A. 1993. Estimates of the impact of human resource management practices on
 turnover and productivity. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Academy of
 Management, Atlanta.

 Huselid, M. A. 1995. The impact of human resource management practices on turnover, produc-
 tivity, and corporate financial performance. Academy of Management Journal, 38:
 635-672.

 Ichniowski, C., Shaw, K., & Prennushi, G. 1994. The impact of human resource management
 practices on productivity. Columbia Business School working paper 015, Columbia Univer-
 sity, NY.

 Jaccard, J., Turrisi, R., & Wan, C. K. 1990. Interaction effects in multiple regression. Sage
 University Paper series on quantitative applications in the social sciences, 07-069. Newbury
 Park, CA: Sage.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 832 Academy of Management Journal August

 Jackson, S. E., & Schuler, R. S. 1995. Understanding human resource management in the context

 of organizations and their environments. In M. R. Rosenzweig & L. W. Porter (Eds.), Annual
 review of psychology, vol. 46: 237-264. Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews.

 Jackson, S. E., Schuler, R. S., & Rivero, J. C. 1989. Organizational characteristics as predictors

 of personnel practices. Personnel Psychology, 42: 727-786.

 Jones, G. R., & Wright, P. M. 1992. An economic approach to conceptualizing the utility

 of human resource management practices. In K. Rowland & G. Ferris (Eds.), Research
 in personnel and human resource management, vol. 10: 271-300. Greenwich, CT: JAI
 Press.

 Kerr, J. L., & Jackofsky, E. F. 1989. Aligning managers with strategies: Management development

 versus selection. Strategic Management Journal, 10: 157-170.

 Kerr, J. L., & Slocum, J. W. 1987. Linking reward systems and corporate cultures. Academy of

 Management Executive, 1(2): 99-108.

 Lawler, E. E. 1986. High-involvement management: Participative strategies for improving

 organizational performance. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

 Lawler, E. E., Mohrman, S. A., & Ledford, G. E. 1992. Employee involvement and total quality

 management. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

 Lengnick-Hall, C. A., & Lengnick-Hall, M. L. 1988. Strategic human resource management: A
 review of the literature and a proposed typology. Academy of Management Review, 13:
 454-470.

 Leonard, J. S. 1990. Executive pay and firm performance. Industrial and Labor Relations

 Review, 43: 13-29.

 Leontiades, M. 1980. Strategies for diversification and change. Boston, MA: Little, Brown.
 MacDuffie, J. P. 1995. Human resource bundles and manufacturing performance: Organizational
 logic and flexible production systems in the world auto industry. Industrial and Labor
 Relations Review, 48: 197-221.

 McKelvey, B. 1982. Organizational systematics: Taxonomy, evolution, classification. Berkeley:

 University of California Press.

 McKinney, K. D. 196. Constructive typology and social theory. New York: Appelton-

 Century-Crofts.

 Meyer, A. D., Tsui, A. S., & Hinings, C. R. 1993. Guest co-editors' introduction: Configurational

 approaches to organizational analysis. Academy of Management Journal, 36: 1175-
 1195.

 Miles, R. E., & Snow, C. C. 1978. Organizational strategy, structure, and process. New York:

 McGraw-Hill.

 Miles, R. E., & Snow, C. C. 1984. Designing strategic human resource systems. Organizational

 Dynamics, 13(1): 36-52.

 Milkovich, G. T. 1988. A strategic perspective on compensation management. In G. Ferris & K.
 Rowland (Eds.), Research inpersonnel andhuman resource management, vol. 6:263-288.
 Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

 Miller, M., & Friesen, P. H. 1984. Organizations: A quantum view. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:

 Prentice-Hall.

 Osterman, P. 1987. Choice of employment systems in internal labor markets. Industrial Rela-

 tions, 26: 46-67.

 Osterman, P. 1994. How common is workplace transformation and who adopts it? Industrial

 and Labor Relations Review, 47: 173-188.

 Pfeffer, J. 1994. Competitive advantage through people: Unleashing the power of the work

 force. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Delery and Doty

 833

 Pinfield, L. T., & Berner, M. F. 1994. Employment systems: Toward a coherent conceptualization
 of internal labor markets. In G. Ferris (Ed.), Research in personnel and human resource
 management, vol. 12: 41-78. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

 Schoonhoven, C. B. 1981. Problems with contingency theory: Testing assumptions hidden

 within the language of contingency theory. Administrative Science Quarterly, 26: 349-377.
 Schuler, R. S., & Jackson, S. E. 1987a. Linking competitive strategies with human resource

 management practices. Academy of Management Executive, 1(3): 207-219.

 Schuler, R. S., & Jackson, S. E. 1987b. Organizational strategy and organizational level as determi-
 nants of human resource management practices. Human Resource Planning, 10(3):
 125-141.

 Schuler, R. S., & Jackson, S. E. 1988. Linking remuneration practices to innovation as a competi-

 tive strategy. Human Resource Management Australia, 10(May): 6-21.

 Schuler, R. S., & MacMillan, I. C. 1984. Gaining competitive advantage through human resource

 management practices. Human Resource Management, 23(3): 241-255.

 Scott, W. R. 1987. The adolescence of institutional theory. Administrative Science Quarterly,

 32: 493-511.

 Segev, E. 1989. A systematic comparative analysis and syntheses of two business-level strategic

 typologies. Strategic Management Journal, 10: 487-505.

 Shortell, S. M., & Zajac, E. J. 1990. Perceptual and archival measures of Miles and Snow's
 strategic types: A comprehensive assessment of reliability and validity. Academy of Man-
 agement Journal, 33: 817-832.

 Snell, S. A. 1991. Executive use of human resource management controls to improve firm
 performance: Moderating effect of administrative information. Academy of Management
 Best Papers Proceedings: 277-281.

 Sonnenfeld, J. A., & Peiperl, M. A. 1988. Staffing policy as a strategic response: A typology of

 career systems. Academy of Management Review, 13: 588-600.

 Stone, E. F. 1988. Moderator variables in research: A review and analysis of conceptual and

 methodological issues. In G. Ferris & K. Rowland (Eds.), Research in personnel/human
 resources management, vol. 6: 191-230. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

 Terpstra, D. E., & Rozell, E. J. 1993. The relationship of staffing practices to organizational level

 measures of performance. Personnel Psychology, 46: 27-48.

 Van de Ven, A. H., & Drazin, R. 1985. The concept of fit in contingency theory. In L. L. Cum-

 mings & B. M. Staw (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, vol. 7: 333-365. Green-
 wich, CT: JAI Press.

 Venkatraman, N. 1989. The concept of fit in strategy research: Toward verbal and statistical

 correspondence. Academy of Management Review, 14: 423-444.

 Venkatraman, N., & Prescott, J. E. 1990. Environment-strategy coalignment: An empirical test

 of its performance implications. Strategic Management Journal, 11: 1-23.

 Weber, M. 1949. Objectivity in social science and policy. In E. A. Shis & H. A. Finch (Eds. &

 trans.). Max Weber on the methodology of the social sciences: 1-188. Glencoe, IL: Free
 Press.

 Wright, P. M., & McMahan, G. C. 1992. Alternative theoretical perspectives on strategic human

 resource management. Journal of Management, 18: 295-320.

 Zajac, E. J., & Shortell, S. M. 1989. Changing generic strategies: Likelihood, direction, and perfor-

 mance implications. Strategic Management Journal, 10: 413-430.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 834

 Academy of Management Journal

 August

 APPENDIX
 Measures

 Strategy Configurational Items

 The Segev (1989) categories appear first, followed by the item or items used for this research.

 Technological progress: Is innovative in the way services are delivered.
 Product/market breadth: Offers a wide variety of services. Has a very diverse customer group.
 Product innovation: Is innovative in terms of the number of new services offered. Is innovative

 in terms of the novelty of new services offered.

 Quality: Offers high-quality services in comparison to the competition.
 Price level: Gives customers more for their money than competitors.
 Active marketing: Allots a large amount of resources to marketing.
 Long-range financial strength: Is able to raise large amounts of financial resources for long-

 term investments.

 Resources level: Has an abundant supply of material resources.
 Investment in production: Invests heavily in equipment and facilities.
 Internal analysis level: Is able to assess organizational performance, focusing on internal trends

 and developments.

 External analysis level: Is able to systematically track opportunities and threats in the environ-

 ment in order to design long-range strategies.

 Level of risk: Is willing to make commitments which involve many resources and risky projects.
 Proactive managerial style: Attempts to shape its environment, as opposed to merely reacting

 to trends.

 Innovation Strategy Measure

 Is innovative in the way services are delivered. Offers a wide variety of services. Has a

 very diverse customer group. Is innovative in terms of the number of new services offered. Is
 innovative in terms of the novelty of new services offered. Allots a large amount of resources
 to marketing.

 HR Practices

 Internal career opportunities: Individuals in this job have clear career paths within the

 organization. Individuals in this job have very little future within this organization (reverse-
 coded). Employees' career aspirations within the company are known by their immediate super-
 visors. Employees in this job who desire promotion have more than one potential position they
 could be promoted to.

 Training: Extensive training programs are provided for individuals in this job. Employees
 in this job will normally go through training programs every few years. There are formal training
 programs to teach new hires the skills they need to perform their jobs. Formal training programs
 are offered to employees in order to increase their promotability in this organization.

 Results-oriented appraisals: Performance is more often measured with objective quantifiable

 results. Performance appraisals are based on objective, quantifiable results.

 Employment security: Employees in this job can expect to stay in the organizations for as

 long as they wish. It is very difficult to dismiss an employee in this job. Job security is almost
 guaranteed to employees in this job. If the bank were facing economic problems, employees in
 this job would be the last to get cut.

 Participation: Employees in this job are allowed to make many decisions. Employees in

 this job are often asked by their supervisor to participate in decisions. Employees are provided
 the opportunity to suggest improvements in the way things are done. Superiors keep open
 communications with employees in this job.

 Job descriptions: The duties of this job are clearly defined. This job has an up-to-date job

 description. The job description for this job contains all of the duties performed by individual
 employees. The actual job duties are shaped more by the employee than by a specific job
 description (reverse-coded).

 Profit sharing: Individuals in this job receive bonuses based on the profit of the organization.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996 Delery and Doty 835

 John E. Delery is an assistant professor of management at the University of Arkansas.
 He received his Ph.D. degree in management from Texas A&M University. His current
 research interests include the strategic management of human resources, the structure
 of employment systems, and the selection interview.
 D. Harold Doty is an associate professor of strategy in the School of Management at
 Syracuse University. He received his Ph.D. degree in management from the University
 of Texas at Austin. His current research interests include configurational theories,
 organizational design and effectiveness, business strategy, and the use of innovative
 employment practices to attain sustainable competitive advantage.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Mon, 13 Feb 2017 20:23:37 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

