The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/0144-3577.htm

Modularity and the impact on new

product development time

Modularity
impact on
NPD

performance

Investigating the moderating effects of

supplier involvement and interfunctional

integration

Pamela Danese and Roberto Filippini
Department of Management and Engineering,

University of Padova, Vicenza, Italy

1191

Received August 2008
Revised March 2010
Accepted June 2010

Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this paper is to analyze the impact of product modularity on new product
development (NPD) time performance, and the moderating effects of interfunctional integration and
supplier involvement on the product modularity-time performance relationship.
Design/methodology/approach – The paper analyzes data from a sample of 186 manufacturing
plants settled in several countries, and operating in mechanical, electronic and transportation
equipment sectors. Three hypotheses are tested through a hierarchical regression analysis.
Findings – Data analyses show that product modularity has a direct positive effect on NPD time
performance, and that interfunctional integration positively moderates the product modularity-time
performance relationship. Finally, this research does not support the hypothesis that a positive
interaction effect exists between product modularity and supplier involvement.
Research limitations/implications – Future research should replicate and extend the model to
samples drawn from other industries. Moreover, analyses carried out provide some interesting
directions for future research on the effect of supplier involvement on NPD time performance.
Practical implications – The practical implication for managers is that NPD time performance
reduction requires levering simultaneously on product modularity and interfunctional integration to
foster their interaction, rather than investing and acting on product modularity only. In addition,
before deciding to invest on product modularity, managers should ascertain the level of interfunctional
integration. In fact, it acts as prerequisite for the successful implementation of product modularity.
Originality/value – Empirical studies on the impact of product modularity on NPD time performance
are really scant. This research empirically analyzes this effect, and contributes to the advancement of
theory by investigating the effect of product modularity and integration practices in NPD in a
comprehensive way.

Keywords Product development, Time to market, Supplier relations, Cross-functional integration

Paper type Research paper

Introduction
Time-based competition has received much attention in the literature and in industry
(Karagozoglu and Brown, 1993; Handﬁeld, 1995; Dro¨ge et al., 2004). Customers expect
new products even more quickly than before and in this environment a company must
explore all available opportunities for shortening the time-to-market for new products.
Literature suggests several methods to cut new product development (NPD) time

International Journal of Operations &
Production Management
Vol. 30 No. 11, 2010
pp. 1191-1209
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
0144-3577
DOI 10.1108/01443571011087387

