Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 1199–1216

www.elsevier.com/locate/jom

Impact of eBusiness technologies on operational performance:

The role of production information integration in the supply chain

Sarv Devaraj 1, Lee Krajewski *, Jerry C. Wei 2

Management Department, Mendoza College of Business, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, United States

Available online 17 January 2007

Abstract

While the information technology (IT) literature is mixed regarding the direct beneﬁts of eBusiness technologies on
performance, the impact of such technologies on supply chain practices remains largely an unexplored area of research. We
hypothesize that while there may be no direct beneﬁt of eBusiness technologies on performance, these technologies might support
customer integration and supplier integration in the supply chain, which in turn might impact operating performance.

To examine our hypotheses, we collected data from respondents who focused their responses to a single major product the
process that manufactures it, a signiﬁcant customer, and an important supplier. Our analyses showed that there was no direct beneﬁt
of eBusiness technologies on performance; however these technologies supported customer integration and supplier integration.
Further, supplier integration was found to positively impact cost, quality, ﬂexibility, and delivery performance; however there was
no relationship between customer integration and performance. Consequently, there is a relationship between eBusiness
technologies and supplier integration that leads to better performance. Further, there is an interactive effect between customer
integration and supplier integration that supports the notion that ﬁrms that have both forms of integration, supported by eBusiness
technologies, signiﬁcantly outperform the others.
# 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: eBusiness technologies; Customer integration; Supplier integration; Operational performance; Supply chain management

1. Introduction

With the advent of new eBusiness technologies,
ﬁrms have engaged in initiatives that link supply chain
processes across enterprises to create efﬁciencies and
gain a competitive edge. The thrust of investment in
eBusiness technologies is to create a seamless integra-
tion of entities in a supply chain, which calls for the
sharing of accurate and timely information and the

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +574 631 9063.

E-mail addresses: sdevaraj@nd.edu (S. Devaraj),

lkrajews@nd.edu (L. Krajewski), jwei@nd.edu (J.C. Wei).

1 Tel.: +1 574 631 5074.
2 Tel.: +1 574 631 5460.

0272-6963/$ – see front matter # 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jom.2007.01.002

coordination of activities between business entities.
Distorted information from one end of a supply chain to
the other can lead to exaggerated order swings causing
tremendous inefﬁciencies (Lee et al., 1997).

it

Despite the widespread adoption of eBusiness
technologies,
is not clear whether eBusiness
technologies have a direct affect on supply chain
in eBusiness
performance. Certainly, ﬁrms invest
technologies with the presumption that
they will
facilitate supply chain integration and that performance
will
‘‘supply chain
planning,’’ ‘‘linkages with customers,’’ and ‘‘linkages
with suppliers’’
the greatest operational
improvement opportunities, all of which are the
capabilities most often transformed by eBusiness

improve. Executives consider

to offer


1200

S. Devaraj et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 1199–1216

technologies in supply chain initiatives (D’Avanzo
et al., 2003). Unfortunately, managerial expectations for
these technologies have exceeded actual performance
(Poirier and Quinn, 2003). Further, while the payoff
from investing in information technologies has been a
subject of long standing academic research and intense
discussion, no clear conclusion has resulted. Payoffs
from IT have been and continue to be open to debate in
the literature, where it is called the ‘‘IT paradox’’
(Brynjolfsson and Yang, 1996). Largely due to the
nature of the research designs employed, this stream of
research has not deﬁnitively attributed the impact of
individual technologies on organizational performance
(Lee and Barua, 1999; Devaraj and Kohli, 2003). A
direct
linkage between eBusiness technologies and
supply chain performance still remains an elusive entity.
Thus, the ﬁrst critical research question that this study
seeks to address is ‘‘Do eBusiness technologies have a
signiﬁcant impact on supply chain performance?’’

One possible reason for the dissatisfaction with the
performance of eBusiness technologies on the part of
supply chain executives is that technology solutions were
selected before certain process improvements were
made, thereby diluting the paybacks for these invest-
ments (Poirier and Quinn, 2003; Zhu and Kraemer,
2002). A potential remedy may be the development of
processes to improve integration, which can enhance
relationships with distribution channel partners (John-
son, 1999) or cultivate supplier capabilities (Krause et al.,
1998). To realize these beneﬁts, ﬁrms use eBusiness
technologies to engage in information sharing and other
forms of collaboration between customers and suppliers
that address the issues of production planning and
scheduling of their products. We will refer to this speciﬁc
form of integration as production information integra-
tion. New eBusiness
facilitate quick
information sharing between downstream and upstream
partners and enable companies like Dell Computer to
‘‘trade inventory for
(Milgrom and
Roberts, 1988; Dell, 1999). Capturing and sharing
real-time information has become essential to improving
supply chain performance. Timely information sharing
helps speed up decision making and often results in
shorter lead times and smaller batch sizes (Cachon and
Fisher, 2000).
In addition to information sharing,
eBusiness technologies also facilitate the collaboration
of supply chain entities. Examples include jointly
developing demand forecasting (Koloczyc, 1998; Aviv,
2001) and vendor-managed inventory (VMI), also
referred to as direct shipment or automatic replenishment
(Buzzell and Ortmeyer, 1995; Cetinkaya and Lee, 2000;
Kulp et al., 2004). Conceivably, if eBusiness technol-

information’’

technologies

ogies for production planning and scheduling do not have
a direct effect on ﬁrm performance, they may have an
indirect effect on performance via their impact on the
processes developed for supplier and customer produc-
tion information integration. This possibility has not been
addressed in the literature. Thus, our second research
question is ‘‘Does production information integration
constitute an important
link in the pathway from
eBusiness technology to supply chain performance?’’

As indicated by Kauffman and Walden (2001), much
of the existing eBusiness literature still relies heavily on
case studies and anecdotes, with few empirical studies
to measure Internet-based initiatives or gauge the scale
of their impact on ﬁrm performance. Thus, there is a
paucity of scientiﬁc analysis that clearly establishes the
impact of eBusiness technology on strategic measures
(Mukhopadhyay and Kekre, 2002). Since the evidence
of both the success and failure of eBusiness initiatives
has been generally anecdotal, we use a rigorous survey
methodology in this paper to answer the two research
questions. Speciﬁcally, we developed a set of hypoth-
eses based on the literature to empirically test the
pathway from eBusiness technology to performance,
mediated by information integration. A unique aspect of
our data set is that the respondents were asked to focus
on their major product,
the speciﬁc process that
manufactures that product, the most important customer
for the product, and the most important supplier for
parts or components for the product. All data for the
production information integration and performance
variables were gathered in that context, which allowed
the respondents to be speciﬁc about the value chain.

2. Literature and hypotheses

Our overarching premise is that eBusiness technol-
ogies add value to supply chain operations by enhancing
production information integration. The focus of this
paper is to provide insight into how ﬁrms can realize the
beneﬁts of those technologies. In this section we
develop three constructs and a set of theory-based
hypotheses on the role of eBusiness technologies in
supply chain performance. These hypotheses are
supported by three theories: resource-base view theory,
the relational view theory, and the theory of swift and
even ﬂow, which will be discussed later. We performed
an extensive survey of the literature that spanned the
three areas pertinent to this study: eBusiness capabil-
ities, production information integration, and opera-
tional performance. Table 1 is a concise summary of the
representative references categorized by the three
constructs mentioned above.


S. Devaraj et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 1199–1216

1201

Table 1
Constructs and supporting literature

eBusiness capabilities

EBUSCUST

(1) Customer buying online

(2) Customer conﬁguration/customization

(3) Customer online order tracking

EBUSPUR

(4) Find/select suppliers
(5) Online purchasing/auctions

EBUSCOLL

(6) Web-based EDI

(7) Collaboration on forecast, schedule,

and replenishment

(8) Advanced planning and

scheduling (APS)

Production information integration

(1) Sales forecast

(2) MPS

(3) Inventory

(4) Collaboration on net requirements

(5) Supplier automatically

replenishes inventory (VMI)

Operational performance

(1) Percent returns
(2) Percent defects
(3) Delivery speed

(4) Delivery reliability

(5) Production costs

(6) Production lead time

(7) Inventory turns
(8) Flexibility

Key references

Frohlich and Westbrook (2002), Lancioni et al. (2000), Mukhopadhyay and Kekre (2002)
and Zhu et al. (2004)
Barua et al. (2004), Pﬂughoeft et al. (2003), Ranganathan et al. (2004) and Zhu and
Kraemer (2002)
Barua et al. (2004), Chen and Paulraj (2004), Frohlich and Westbrook (2002) and
Zhu and Kraemer (2002)

Barua et al. (2004), Pﬂughoeft et al. (2003), Zhu and Kraemer (2002) and Zhu et al. (2004)
Barua et al. (2004), Poirier and Quinn (2003), Ranganathan et al. (2004) and Zhu and
Kraemer (2002)

Frohlich and Westbrook (2001), Hill and Scudder (2002), Mukhopadhyay and Kekre (2002)
and Zhu and Kraemer (2002)
Barua et al. (2004), Frohlich and Westbrook (2002) and Hill and Scudder (2002)

Barua et al. (2004), Frohlich and Westbrook (2002) and Poirier and Quinn (2003)

Barua et al. (2004), Cachon and Lariviere (2001), Frohlich and Westbrook (2001),
Krajewski and Wei (2001) and Lee et al. (1997)
Barua et al. (2004), Frohlich and Westbrook (2001), Krajewski and Wei (2001)
and Lancioni et al. (2000)
Barua et al. (2004), Frohlich and Westbrook (2001), Krajewski and Wei (2001),
Lee et al. (1997) and Zhu and Kraemer (2002)
Barua et al. (2004), Cachon and Lariviere (2001), Krajewski and Wei (2001),
Lee et al. (1997) and Zhu and Kraemer (2002)
Buzzell and Ortmeyer (1995) and Lee et al. (1997)

Frohlich and Westbrook (2001), Poirier and Quinn (2003) and Rosenzweig et al. (2003)
Frohlich and Westbrook (2001) and Rosenzweig et al. (2003)
Buzzell and Ortmeyer (1995), Chen and Paulraj (2004), Frohlich and Westbrook (2001)
and Frohlich and Westbrook (2002)
Buzzell and Ortmeyer (1995), Chen and Paulraj (2004), Poirier and Quinn (2003)
and Rosenzweig et al. (2003)
Chen and Paulraj (2004), Frohlich and Westbrook (2001), Frohlich and Westbrook (2002),
Poirier and Quinn (2003), Rosenzweig et al. (2003) and Zhu and Kraemer (2002)
Buzzell and Ortmeyer (1995), Frohlich and Westbrook (2001), Ranganathan et al. (2004)
and Rosenzweig et al. (2003)
Frohlich and Westbrook (2001), Ranganathan et al. (2004) and Zhu and Kraemer (2002)
Chen and Paulraj (2004) and Rosenzweig et al. (2003)

2.1. eBusiness capabilities

eBusiness capability is the ability of a ﬁrm to use
technologies to share information, process
Internet
transactions, coordinate activities, and facilitate colla-
boration with suppliers and customers. Clearly, tradi-
tional modes of communication such as phone and fax
are still used by many ﬁrms to do business with

customers and suppliers. Nonetheless, we focus on
eBusiness technologies because so little is known about
their impact on performance (Devaraj and Kohli, 2003;
Mukhopadhyay and Kekre, 2002). In addition, many
ﬁrms are using the Internet to do business in their supply
chains. Ninety percent of the respondents in a survey
reported in Lancioni et al. (2000) used the Internet in
some part of their supply chain program. Although


1202

S. Devaraj et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 1199–1216

some ﬁrms have successfully integrated eBusiness
technologies into their traditional bricks-and-mortar
business models, many others still struggle with
implementing and justifying eBusiness
initiatives
(Barua et al., 2000). The potential beneﬁts for supply
chains, however, are signiﬁcant. Organizations use the
web to improve customer relations by providing easier
access to information, developing more ﬂexibility to
respond to customer information requests, and speeding
up the transaction time to shorten product cycles
(Lederer et al., 2001). Information technology has vast
potential
to facilitate collaborative planning among
supply chain partners by sharing information on
demand forecasts and production schedules (Chen
and Paulraj, 2004). Through the Internet, information
technology also enhances supply chain efﬁciency by
providing real-time information regarding product
availability,
inventory levels, shipment status, and
production requirements
(Radstaak and Ketelaar,
1998; Lancioni et al., 2000; Chen and Paulraj, 2004).
the
relationship between information technology imple-
mentation and productivity is determined in part by the
use of
Information technology that
becomes a part of the production process is associated
with productivity improvements, unlike information
technology that only documents or collects information.
The mere institution of traditional EDI no longer results
in strategic beneﬁts to the supply chain; advancements
such as fully integrated order-processing systems or
electronic invoicing systems are also required (Mukho-
padhyay and Kekre, 2002). The Internet, however, has
enhanced traditional EDI systems by making them more
ﬂexible and affordable to smaller businesses (Lancioni
et al., 2000; Zhu and Kraemer, 2002; Zhu et al., 2004).
Nonetheless, many ﬁrms have gone beyond the conﬁnes
of EDI and incorporated a multitude of Internet-based
technologies to facilitate the connections between
customers and suppliers.

Boone and Ganeshan (2001)

indicate that

technology.

Our eBusiness capability construct includes a broad
set of technologies that are being used by ﬁrms to
manage their supply chains. Table 1 shows the eight
technologies we address in this study. While many more
technologies exist, this set is based on the literature of
the research and practicing communities and relates
nicely to the types of technology most ﬁrms are
acquiring to advance their supply chain competency:
inventory planning and optimization, web-based appli-
cations, advanced planning and scheduling, and e-
procurement systems (Poirier and Quinn, 2003). We
classify the eight eBusiness technologies into three
categories depending on their focus. The ﬁrst category

the capability of

of technologies focuses on the demand side, which we
call EBUSCUST, and relates to allowing customers to
order online, conﬁgure or customize products online,
and check the status of orders online. The second set of
technologies focuses on the supply side, which we call
EBUSPUR, and addresses
the
company to ﬁnd and select suppliers online and
purchase material
through online auctions. Finally,
the third set of technologies focuses on collaboration
with customers or suppliers, which we call EBUS-
COLL, and relates to web-based EDI, forecasting,
inventory replenishment, and scheduling capabilities.
Our eBusiness capability construct focuses on those
technologies that conceivably relate to production
information integration, which is the focus of this study.

2.2. Production information integration

Our production information integration construct
embodies the nature of the information that is shared
between entities in a supply chain and supported by the
collaborative efforts that result in improved production
information accuracy.
Information sharing can be
divided into demand oriented and supply oriented
information sharing. Demand-oriented information
sharing includes the sharing of real-time point-of-sales
data, sales forecasts (Cachon and Lariviere, 2001; Aviv,
2001), customer proﬁling, and customer relationship
management (Frohlich and Westbrook, 2002). Supply-
oriented integration includes inventory ordering poli-
cies, inventory levels (Gavirneni et al., 1999) and master
production schedules (Narasimhan and Das, 2001;
Lancioni et al., 2000; Frohlich and Westbrook, 2001).
Firms vary in the intensity of
their production
information integration depending upon the degree of
Internet-based demand integration and the degree of
Internet-based supply integration in their strategy.
These strategies can range from little or no Internet-
based integration to total integration from customers to
suppliers (Frohlich and Westbrook, 2002; Straub et al.,
2004).

Collaborative planning efforts must be considered
along with information sharing to get a complete picture
of production information integration. One of the most
often cited initiatives ﬁrms put in place to enhance
supply chain performance is collaborative planning
with key customers/suppliers (Poirier and Quinn, 2003).
One such form of collaborative planning is VMI, which
has been shown to be positively related to manufac-
turer’s margins (Kulp et al., 2004). Conceivably,
information sharing gives ﬁrms a ﬁrst step in supply
chain integration; however,
is the capability for

it


S. Devaraj et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 1199–1216

1203

collaboration that separates the most successful ﬁrms
from the rest of the pack.

Integration with supply chain partners is reﬂected by
the ﬁve measures that are included in our production
information integration construct, shown in Table 1.
Demand forecasts from the customer provide suppliers
more visibility to plan for capacity and material
requirements (Lee et al., 1997; Frohlich and Westbrook,
2001). Further, sharing master production schedules
with suppliers reduces forecast uncertainty and enables
more detailed production quantity and timing (Lancioni
et al., 2000; Wei and Krajewski, 2000; Krajewski and
Wei, 2001). In addition, when a supplier has access to
the customer’s inventory status, more precise replen-
ishment production and shipment can be scheduled.

A company invests in eBusiness technologies to
facilitate more information sharing and collaboration
with either its suppliers or its customers in the value
chain. Web-based technologies that process purchase
orders and track or expedite shipments are often cited as
critical
integration tools (Frohlich and Westbrook,
2002; Chen and Paulraj, 2004; Barua et al., 2004). Thus,
we expect that eBusiness capability will have a positive
inﬂuence on production information integration.
Further, as Frohlich and Westbrook (2001, 2002) point
out, integration efforts can take place with customers
and/or suppliers. Consequently, our production infor-
mation integration construct applies to customers
separately from suppliers, which we will refer to as
customer integration and supplier integration, respec-
tively. This discussion leads to the following hypoth-
eses, all being equal.

Hypothesis 1. eBusiness capability inﬂuences the
degree of customer integration.

Hypothesis 1a. EBUSCUST has a positive inﬂuence
on the degree of customer integration.

Hypothesis 1b. EBUSPUR has a positive inﬂuence on
the degree of customer integration.

Hypothesis 1c. EBUSCOLL has a positive inﬂuence
on the degree of customer integration.

Hypothesis 2. eBusiness capability inﬂuences the
degree of supplier integration.

Hypothesis 2a. EBUSCUST has a positive inﬂuence
on the degree of supplier integration.

Hypothesis 2b. EBUSPUR has a positive inﬂuence on
the degree of supplier integration.

Hypothesis 2c. EBUSCOLL has a positive inﬂuence
on the degree of supplier integration.

2.3. Operational performance

There is growing empirical evidence suggesting that
higher levels of integration along the supply chain are
associated with greater potential beneﬁts. Armistead
and Mapes (1993) use ﬁve items to measure strength of
integration, including the extent of shared ownership of
master production schedules and the level of informa-
tion system integration. The results of their study
indicated that increasing the level of integration does
increase operating performance in quality, cost, delivery
time, and ﬂexibility. Using data from 215 North
American manufacturing ﬁrms, Narasimhan and
Jayaram (1998) propose that supply chain integration
impacts external customer responsiveness and internal
manufacturing performance via the key linkage
between sourcing and degree of manufacturing goal
achievement. Johnson (1999) shows that strategic
integration results in enhanced economic rewards for
the customer (distributor) ﬁrm. Based on the data from
57 tier-1 automotive suppliers, Vickery et al. (2003)
found that customer service fully mediates the relation-
ship between supply chain integration and ﬁrm
performance. There was no signiﬁcant direct relation-
ship to ﬁrm performance from supply chain integration,
or from integrated information technology.

While most studies in the literature focus on either
the supply side or the demand side of integration,
Frohlich and Westbrook (2001) address the question ‘‘Is
it more important to link with suppliers, customers, or
both?’’ Among the industrial goods manufacturers they
surveyed,
the ﬁrms with the greatest degree of
integration, with both suppliers and customers, had
the strongest performance improvement. In addition,
ﬁrms that participated in the survey had a stronger
degree of integration with their suppliers than with their
customers in the following integrative activities: access
to planning systems, sharing production plans, and
knowledge of inventory mix/levels. In a separate but
related study, Frohlich and Westbrook (2002) further
distinguish web-based demand chain integration from
supply chain integration. They report that manufactur-
ing and services ﬁrms adopting both the demand
integration and supply integration had the highest
operational performance in delivery time, transaction
costs, proﬁtability, and inventory turnover. Ranganathan
et al. (2004) found signiﬁcant positive associations
between the beneﬁts realized from web technologies
and both internal assimilation and external diffusion of
such technologies to suppliers.

Rosenzweig et al. (2003) introduce supply chain
integration intensity as a proxy variable for Frohlich and


1204

S. Devaraj et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 1199–1216

Westbrook’s (2001) ‘‘arc of integration.’’ Their study
involves a sample of 238 consumer products companies
dominated by market leaders. They found no empirical
evidence to support a direct effect between integration
intensity and sales growth or customer satisfaction.
Rather, it appears that the beneﬁts of integration must
ﬁrst be translated into operational capabilities, such as
product quality, delivery reliability, process ﬂexibility,
and cost. In other words, these operational capabilities
mediate the relationship between supply chain integra-
tion and multiple measures of business performance.
Our operational performance construct, shown in
Table 1, also includes measures for cost, quality,
delivery, and ﬂexibility. Therefore, based on the above
arguments, we propose the following hypotheses.

Hypothesis 3. A higher degree of customer integration
leads to improved operational performance.

Hypothesis 4. A higher degree of supplier integration
leads to improved operational performance.

2.4. Underlying theoretical support

While the above discussion provides support for our
research model, our study of the relationships between
eBusiness capabilities, production information integra-
tion, and operational performance is grounded on three
theories: resource-based view (RBV), relational view,
and theory of swift and even ﬂow. While the ﬁrst two
theories have a basis in strategic management, the third
one is rooted in operations management literature. The
resources-based view (RBV) is based on the notion that
a ﬁrm’s performance is founded on its unique resources
and capabilities that are hard to imitate, such as resource
heterogeneity and immobility (Wernerfelt, 1984;
Barney, 1991; Peteraf, 1993). In the context of RBV,

studies have shown that the ability of a ﬁrm to develop
and exploit new technologies and organizational
processes, including eBusiness capabilities, will lead
to sustainable competitive advantages (Mata et al.,
1995; Teece et al., 1997; Straub and Klein, 2001; Zhu
and Kraemer, 2002; Zhu, 2004). RBV provides the
underlying foundation for the development of our
eBusiness construct because this construct describes a
ﬁrm’s capability in eBusiness, which may be applied in
a host of ways other than production information
integration.

From the perspective of the relational view, a ﬁrm’s
critical resources may span its boundaries and be
embedded in inter-ﬁrm resources and relationships
(Dyer and Singh, 1998). This view takes the position
that RBV tends to focus on the resources housed within
a ﬁrm and, hence, overlooks the network of relation-
ships in which the ﬁrm is embedded (Powell et al., 1996;
Dyer, 1996, 1997). While the RBV theory tends to focus
on the ﬁrm and understanding its competitive advantage
from a resource perspective, the relational view theory
focuses on the dyad or network relationships and
processes (Straub et al., 2004; Chen and Paulraj, 2004).
In this research, our production information integration
construct is grounded on the relational view because we
focus on a major product and its manufacturing process.
We then investigate the intensity of integration speciﬁc
to the product and process between the respondent ﬁrm
and its customer, and between the respondent ﬁrm and
its supplier, respectively.

Finally, our study is also grounded in the operation
management theory of swift and even ﬂow (Schmenner
and Swink, 1998). The theory holds that the swifter and
more even the ﬂow of materials through a process, the
more productive that process is. Thus, productivity for
any process rises with the speed by which the material

Fig. 1. Hypothesized model.


S. Devaraj et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 1199–1216

1205

ﬂows through the process, and falls with the increases in
the variability associated with the ﬂow. We postulate that
strong eBusiness capabilities will lead to better produc-
tion information integration with both the supplier and the
customer. As a result, materials will ﬂow through the
supply chain more swiftly and evenly and bring forth
improved operational performance.

Based on this discussion, Fig. 1 shows

the

hypothesized model.

3. Research design

3.1. Survey development

The survey was created in several stages. Initially,
we developed questions involving eBusiness capabil-
ities, production information integration, and operating
performance based on the literature (see Appendix A).
Next, we asked eight managers to take the survey and
give us their suggestions for improvement and clarity.
Finally, as a result of that pre-test, we made a number of
changes to the instrument.

3.2. Sample

The target audience for the survey was selected from
the following industries and SIC codes: computer
components and peripherals (SIC 357), printed circuit
boards and semiconductors
(SIC 367), electronic
equipment and supplies (SIC 369), and automotive
bodies and parts (SIC 371). These SIC codes are within
the ranges of recent supply chain studies (Dyer, 1996,
1997; Krause et al., 1998; Narasimhan and Das, 2001;
Zhu and Kraemer, 2002; Chen and Paulraj, 2004). We
used a stratiﬁed random sample of companies to ensure
coverage of the target industries. The contact informa-
tion was obtained from a professional database. To
ensure that the respondent had expertise to accurately
respond to the questions, we focused the survey on
senior managers as key informants with titles such as
‘Vice President,’ ‘Manager,’ or ‘Director’, and with
functional areas of expertise such as ‘Operations’,
‘Production’, or ‘Manufacturing’. Key informants were
used to obtain all of the data used in this study for
several reasons. First, operational performance data at
the plant level is generally not available from any source
other than company records which is privy only to key
persons in the organization. Further, many of the
questions in the survey required adequate knowledge
about the eBusiness capability, information sharing in
the supply chain, and performance. It is more likely that
a limited number of individuals in the plant rather than

somebody selected at random in the plant would
generally have an adequate knowledge of, or access to,
this information. Under these conditions, key infor-
mants are commonly used to obtain the necessary data
and enhance the likelihood of valid and reliable data
(Huber and Power, 1985). Although key informants can
provide reliable data as discussed above, consistent with
prior research in operations management using key
informants, inter-rater reliability cannot be assessed.

The data collection process resulted in 120 usable
responses. After accounting for undelivered surveys and
incomplete responses, we obtained a useable or effective
response rate of 8.4%. A priori, a low response rate was
anticipated due to the length of the survey and the fact we
focused on top-level managers (Pﬂughoeft et al., 2003).
Nevertheless, the proportions among the SIC codes in the
120 usable responses were close to the proportions in the
surveys that were mailed out. This sample size is in
comparable range with other respected empirical studies
(Krause et al., 1998; Kulp et al., 2004). In general, the
absolute size of the sample is more important than the
proportion of the population sampled (Black, 1999;
Fowler, 1993). Consequently, to ensure that our sample
size was adequate, we used Verma and Goodale (1995)
guidelines for computation of statistical power; for a
medium effect sample size, the power is greater than 0.90
at a signiﬁcance level of 0.05. The computation of
statistical power yielded a value of 0.91.

3.3. Respondent proﬁle

About 55% of the responses came from companies
with less than 250 employees (small), 18% from
companies with between 250 and 500 employees
(medium), and the remaining 27% from large companies
more than 500 employees. In terms of the distribution of
responses from the various industries, about 49.2% of the
responses were from the automotives industry and the
remaining 50.8% from the electronics and computer
industry. The percentages of the industries within the
sample distribution are very close to the percentages of
the surveys that were originally mailed out. There was no
statistical difference between the distribution of
responses and the sample distribution at a 5% level of
signiﬁcance.

As a test of non-respondent bias, we compared the
responses of early respondents with those that were
collected from respondents by telephone solicitation
(non-respondents in the ﬁrst round). A statistical test of
the comparison between the two groups for
the
constructs employed in this study yielded no signiﬁcant
difference.


1206

S. Devaraj et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 1199–1216

3.4. Measures

3.4.1. Construct validation

Appendix A provides the scale items and the
exploratory factor analysis (EFA) factor loadings of
the items utilized in this study.

construct

capabilities. Our

3.4.1.1. eBusiness
for
eBusiness capability has three categories as shown in
Table 1: EBUSCUST, EBUSPUR, and EBUSCOLL.
We examined the statistical properties of the scales in
several ways. First, we performed a principal compo-
nent factor analyses to examine if the underlying factor
pattern for the eBusiness capabilities construct was
consistent with the three categories mentioned above.
The factor loadings using Varimax rotation are shown in
Appendix A. All the items relating to eBusiness capa-
bilities separate out into the three categories discussed
above. A factor analysis of the constructs indicated that
all
items load onto a single factor with all factor
loadings greater than 0.679, which are substantially
above the minimum requirements of 0.40 (Nunnally and
Bernstain, 1994; Gefen et al., 2000). Also there were no
cross-loadings of any items on more than one compo-
nent. In Table 2 we present evidence of this in terms of
the factor loadings of the eight items of eBusiness
capabilities. The eigen values are 2.093, 1.953, and
1.372. An examination of the factor loadings, eigen
values, as well as scree plots provided robust evidence
of a three-factor solution to the eBusiness capabilities
scale. Taken together, this is preliminary evidence of the
convergent and divergent validity of the scales for
eBusiness capabilities. The cumulative percent of
variance extracted by this factor structure was 67.8%.
We next examined the reliabilities of these scales as
indicated by Cronbach’s alpha. The reliabilities for

Table 2
eBusiness capabilities—factor loadings

EBUSCUST, EBUSPUR, and EBUSCOLL were 0.72,
0.70, and 0.76, respectively, which is considered higher
than the recommended threshold (Nunnally, 1978).

3.4.1.2. Supplier integration. The items employed in
the construct
for supplier production information
integration (SUPINTEG) are extracted from the
literature as shown in Table 1. A factor analysis of
the items measuring supplier integration revealed a
single factor solution with factor loadings in excess of
0.65 for each item. The percent of variance explained
was 55.8%. Further, Cronbach’s alpha for the reliability
of the scale was 0.80.

3.4.1.3. Customer integration. Similar to the construct
for supplier integration, our construct for customer
production information integration (CUSINTEG) taps
into the information sharing that takes place between
the ﬁrm and its customers. The items for this construct
were derived from the literature as shown in Table 1.
The items loaded onto a single factor with factor
loadings in excess of 0.67, providing evidence of the
unidimensionality of the scale. The percent of variance
explained was 53.4%. Reliability of this scale as
assessed by Cronbach’s alpha was 0.78.

performance

3.4.1.4. Performance. Operational
is
typically assessed along the dimensions of cost, quality,
ﬂexibility, and delivery (Vickery et al., 1993; Miller and
Roth, 1994; Devaraj et al., 2004). The cohesiveness of
the items measuring operational performance was very
high; all items loaded onto a single factor with factor
loadings greater than 0.61. The percent of variance
extracted was 57.3%. The reliability of the scale for
performance was also very high (Cronbach’s alpha of
0.89). Thus, we treat operational performance as a
unidimensional construct in our analyses.

3.4.1.5. Control variables. We controlled for
two
variables that can also conceivably affect perfor-
mance—type of industry and size of the ﬁrm (Zhu
et al., 2004; Rosenzweig et al., 2003; Zhu and Kraemer,
2002; Frohlich and Westbrook, 2002). Respondents to
our survey were from the automotive and computers/
electronics industries. Thus, we used an indicator
variable to depict the industry classiﬁcation in our
estimation models. Further, we also had information on
the size of the ﬁrm (small—less than 250 employees,
medium—between 250 and 500 employees, and
large—greater than 500 employees). We used two
indicator variables to capture the effect of the ﬁrm size
on performance.


S. Devaraj et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 1199–1216

1207

3.4.2. Conﬁrmatory factor analysis

Structural equation modeling was used to perform a
conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) for the measurement
model. CFA allows for tests to be conducted for
unidimensionality, convergent validity, and divergent
validity of the scales employed in the study. Consistent
with extant literature in eBusiness technologies (Zhu
and Kraemer, 2002) we use EFA to develop the
constructs and CFA to conﬁrm their properties.

3.4.2.1. Unidimensionality. Unidimensionality is the
extent to which empirical measures (indicators) are
strongly associated with each other and represent a
single concept. Tests for unidimensionality indicated
that the factor loadings associated with constructs were
statistically signiﬁcant ( p  0.01).

3.4.2.2. Convergent validity. Convergent validity is
the extent to which varying approaches to construct
measurement yield same results (Campbell and Fiske,
1959). The value for the Bentler–Bonentt coefﬁcient D
(Bentler and Bonentt, 1980) was 0.91, indicating strong
convergent validity.

3.4.2.3. Discriminant validity. Discriminant validity
assesses the extent to which a concept and its indicators
differ from another concept and its indicators (Bagozzi
et al., 1991). To test discriminant validity, we compare
two CFA models: one in which the correlation of a pair
of constructs is constrained to equal 1.0 (model-a), and
another in which the correlation is free to vary (model-
b). The chi-square difference test checks the statistical
signiﬁcance of the statistic (chi-a minus chi-b) at
p < 0.01 (Venkatraman, 1989). A statistically signiﬁ-
cant value of (chi-a minus chi-b), with a threshold of
32.0, demonstrates that
the two constructs under
consideration are distinct. This procedure is repeated
for all pairs of scales in the instrument. For each pair of
constructs,
the chi-square test was statistically sig-
niﬁcant ( p  0.01) providing support for discriminant
validity of constructs in all the measurement models.

3.4.2.4. Criterion validity. Criterion validity is the
extent to which the items predict a set of criteria of
interest. One way to assess this is to estimate the
correlation between items used in the study with other
measures that attempt to capture the same or similar
criteria. As one example to illustrate criterion validity,
we examined the correlation between the performance
measures for delivery speed and delivery reliability with
an objective measure of delivery performance (%
products delivered on time) that was not used in this

study. The correlation coefﬁcients were 0.59 and 0.61
and very highly signiﬁcant ( p < 0.001). Another check
examined the correlation between production lead time
performance and an objective measure of manufactur-
ing lead time in days. Again, the correlation was highly
signiﬁcant with a correlation coefﬁcient of 0.27 and
p < 0.001.

3.4.3. Bias

One of the potential sources of bias in survey
research is common method variance. One of the
procedures used to test for evidence suggesting the
presence, or absence, of common method bias in a data
set
is the Harman’s one-factor test (Podsakoff and
Organ, 1986). An exploratory factor analysis was
performed on the variables of interest. If a single factor
is obtained or if one factor accounts for a majority of the
covariance in the independent and criterion variables,
then the threat of common method bias is high. We
performed such a factor analysis by combining the
independent and dependent variables and did not
observe a single factor
structure that explained
signiﬁcant covariance. This suggests that common
method bias may not be a cause for concern in our
sample.

Another source of potential bias is the use of
subjective data. According to Miller et al. (1997), two
criteria where subjective data may be reliable and valid
are: (a) questions do not require recall from distant past,
and (b) informants are motivated to provide accurate
information. We promised conﬁdentiality of data and
highlighted the usefulness of the project. Further, we
believe that respondents would try to respond as
accurately as possible since we mailed a benchmarking
report after the data were collected. Therefore, we
minimized distortions in subjective data obtained from
key informants.

Given that the constructs employed in the study
demonstrated good statistical properties, we proceeded
to test the hypothesized research model shown in Fig. 1.

4. Results

We present descriptive statistics and the correlation
matrix in Table 3. The correlations and descriptive
statistics refer to the average of the items reﬂecting each
construct. Structural Equation Model (SEM) analysis
has been widely applied in the operations management,
social sciences, and marketing literature. Researchers
have recognized the advantages of SEM as a second-
generation technique (Zhu and Kraemer, 2002; Pﬂugh-
oeft et al., 2003; Carr and Pearson, 1999; Narasimhan


1208

S. Devaraj et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 1199–1216

Table 3
Descriptive statistics and correlations

1. EBUSCUST
2. EBUSPUR
3. EBUSCOLL
4. SUPINTEG
5. CUSINTEG
6. PERFORM

Mean

1.808
2.358
2.469
3.992
3.402
4.925

* Signiﬁcant at 0.10 level.
** Signiﬁcant at the 0.05 level.
*** Signiﬁcant at 0.01 level.

Standard deviation

1

2

3

4

5

6

1.029
1.211
1.222
1.587
1.404
1.219

1.000
0.226**
0.328***
0.080
0.088
 0.028

1.000
0.273***
0.153*
0.193**
 0.049

1.000
0.315***
0.318***
0.081

1.000
0.247***
0.396***

1.000
 0.049

1.000

and Jayaram, 1998). The SEM consists of two parts—
the measurement model and the structural model. The
measurement model (discussed earlier) assesses the
adequacy of the measures used for theoretical con-
structs employed in the study. The structural model, on
the other hand, speciﬁes the relationship between
constructs. Effectively, the SEM methodology incor-
porates these two aspects to ascertain the ﬁt between the
variance–covariance matrix observed in the sample data
and that implied by the theoretical or research model.
This ﬁt is expressed using measures of goodness-of-
ﬁt index (GFI). It is standard practice to report several
measures of GFI. The measures we report are goodness-
of-ﬁt index (GFI) (Bentler and Bonentt, 1980), adjusted
goodness-of-ﬁt index (AGFI) (Bagozzi and Yi, 1988),
comparative ﬁt index (CFI) and normed ﬁt index (NFI)
(Bentler and Bonentt, 1980), and the root mean square
error of approximation (RMSEA)
(Steiger, 1990).
Values higher than 0.90 for GFI, CFI, and NFI are
indicative of a good ﬁt (Gefen et al., 2000), while AGFI
values higher than 0.80 suggest a good ﬁt of the
hypothesized model. For RMSEA, a value less than 0.1
is considered a good ﬁt, and a value less than 0.05 is
considered a very good ﬁt of the data to the research
model (Gefen et al., 2000; Steiger, 1990).

We implemented the structural equation modeling
using LISREL 8.50. The ﬁt indices for each model are
listed in Table 4. Another advantage of the SEM
methodology is that it enables us to test competing
models. We tested the hypothesized model with another

Table 4
Model statistics

Model

Chi-square/d.f. GFI AGFI CFI NFI RMSEA

Hypothesized

1.33

0.95 0.90

0.93 0.88 0.05

model

Direct Effect

2.36

0.94 0.86

0.89 0.82 0.09

model

competing model. According to the discussion of the
resource-based view in Section 2.4, it is plausible that
ﬁrms with eBusiness capabilities might in general have
better performance,
the production
information integration achieved by eBusiness. Thus,
we tested a model with a direct impact of eBusiness
capabilities on performance. We call this model the
Direct Effect model.

regardless of

The results for the hypothesized model indicate a
good ﬁt between the variance–covariance matrix of the
data and that implied by the model. This is indicated by
the measures of ﬁt (GFI, AGFI, CFI, and NFI) all above
the threshold values for a good model. The results in
Table 4 suggest that the hypothesized model ﬁts better
than the Direct Effect model. A more detailed
examination of the additional paths between eBusiness
capabilities and performance in the Direct Effect model
indicates that none of the three dimensions of eBusiness
capability were signiﬁcantly associated with perfor-
mance. Thus, we ﬁnd evidence that there is no direct
impact of eBusiness capabilities on performance. A ﬁrm
that has a high degree of eBusiness capability is not
necessarily experiencing better performance. Our
results indicate that the ways in which these ﬁrms
leverage their eBusiness capabilities is what determines
if they also experience superior performance. This
ﬁnding also responds to the IT literature on the paradox
or the lack of impact of IT investment on performance
(e.g., Hitt and Brynjolfsson, 1996; Porter, 2001; Vickery
et al., 2003; Devaraj and Kohli, 2003).

Next, we examined the relationships between
constructs hypothesized in the earlier section. Fig. 2
presents a graphical representation of the SEM models
with their regression coefﬁcients for each construct. We
observe support for the general idea that eBusiness
capabilities affect the extent to which ﬁrms integrate
production information with their suppliers. Hypotheses
1b and 1c are supported by the data; EBUSPUR and
EBUSCOLL positively inﬂuence the degree of supplier


S. Devaraj et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 1199–1216

1209

Fig. 2. Results of Structural Equation Model. ***Signiﬁcant at 0.01 level; **signiﬁcant at the 0.05 level; NS, not signiﬁcant.

integration. However, there is no support for Hypothesis
1a. Thus we observe support for Hypothesis 1 along two
of the dimensions of eBusiness capabilities—purchas-
ing and collaborative capabilities.

Similar to the above set of relationships, there is
support for the general idea that eBusiness capabilities
affect the extent to which ﬁrms integrate production
information with their customers. Hypotheses 2b and 2c
are supported by the data; EBUSPUR and EBUSCOLL
positively inﬂuence the degree of customer integration.
However, similar to the results for supplier integration,
Hypothesis 2a was not supported. The underlying
dimension of eBusiness capability that
relates to
customer online ordering capability was not linked to
supplier integration or customer integration. We discuss
these results in greater detail in Section 5.1.

The relationship between supplier production
integration and ﬁrm performance was highly sig-
niﬁcant,
lending strong support for Hypothesis 3.
However, an interesting and counter-intuitive result
was that the relationship between customer integra-
tion and performance was not statistically signiﬁcant
(Hypothesis 4). While supplier production informa-
tion integration was viewed as positively affecting
performance, a similar
true for
customer production information integration. We
investigate this phenomenon in greater detail
in
Section 5.2.

result was not

Finally, we included indicator variables to control
for the size of the company as well as the type of
industry. The control variables were not statistically
signiﬁcant, but
lends
credibility to our results that after controlling for the
size and industry type we still observe signiﬁcant
relationships between the constructs employed in the
study.

their inclusion in the model

5. Discussion

This study addresses two important questions about
the role of information technology in supply chain
management: (1) do eBusiness technologies have a
signiﬁcant impact on supply chain performance? (2)
Does production information integration constitute an
important link in the pathway from eBusiness technol-
ogy to supply chain performance? Based on our results,
we can say that eBusiness technologies do impact the
production information integration in a supply chain.
Further, supplier integration affects the operational
performance of the ﬁrm. However, some results were
surprising and need further analysis. In particular, we
did not expect the EBUSCUST variable to drop out of
the model. We also did not expect the lack of an
association between customer integration and opera-
tional performance. Finally, as supplier integration had
such an important effect on operational performance,
we did an analysis to ﬁnd out which performance
measures were the most affected by it. We discuss these
results next.

5.1. eBusiness effects

Our analysis indicated that eBusiness capability,
assessed along the dimensions of customer ordering
capability, purchasing capability, and supply chain
collaboration capability, has no direct effect on
operational performance. This result simply emphasizes
the fact that having any capability is ineffective unless
the ﬁrm also has the systems and processes in place to
leverage the capability (Poirier and Quinn, 2003; Zhu
and Kraemer, 2002). From a supply chain perspective,
the capability for customer integration and supplier
integration are the keys
to achieving improved


1210

S. Devaraj et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 1199–1216

integration, as measured by speciﬁc information ﬂows
and collaborative efforts with customers, does not by
itself relate to performance. While the independent
impact of supplier integration might exist, what might
be even more signiﬁcant is the combined or interactive
effect of supplier and customer integration. To examine
this conjecture, we test the statistical signiﬁcance of the
interaction term in the model. To estimate the
interaction effects, we ﬁrst employ the more established
practice of estimating an ordinary least
squares
regression (OLS) with the interaction term captured
as the product of the two types of integration. Results of
the OLS regression with performance as the dependent
variable are shown in Table 5. As can be observed, the
impact of the interactive effect of supplier and customer
production integration is highly signiﬁcant
lending
support to the notion that ﬁrms that exhibit both forms
of
integration outperform the others signiﬁcantly.
Further evidence of the signiﬁcance of the interaction
term is also observed as the increase in R-square after its
inclusion. The R-square value increased from 18.6% to
26.9% after we included the interaction term.

We assessed multicollinearity issues that pose a threat
to the validity of the analyses. An examination of the
variance inﬂation factors (VIFs) indicated that all VIFs
were less than 2. These are signiﬁcantly less than the
threshold of 10 that is commonly viewed as indicative of
multicollinearity. Further, we also looked at Belsley–
Kuh–Welsch indices (Belsley et al., 1980) to reconﬁrm
that we did not have multicollinearity problems.

Finally, following Ping (1995) we estimated the
interaction term within the context of a structural equation
modeling framework and found statistical support for the
signiﬁcance of the interaction between customer and
supplier information integration. In the interests of
brevity, we did not report the details of this analysis.

Fig. 3 takes this analysis one step further. We
low customer

categorized the ﬁrms into high or

operational performance with eBusiness technologies.
Both types of integration require methods, procedures,
and processes that go far beyond the mere capability to
interact with customers over the Internet. However, it
was unexpected to see that customer ordering capability
(EBUSCUST) was not associated with either of the
integration constructs. There are two possible reasons
for not observing these relationships in our original
sample. First, it is conceivable that this is a transient
phenomenon and a large percentage of the ﬁrms
represented by our sample have not yet incorporated the
customer ordering capability. As ﬁrms mature in the use
of the Internet, we could see many more of them
developing customer ordering capabilities and, if so,
that capability should support the ﬁrm’s production
information integration efforts. Second, it is concei-
vable that the predominance of the target population,
represented by our sample, consists of ﬁrms that do not
use (or need) customer ordering capability. Assessing
which if any of these possibilities for customer ordering
capability is present would be a useful
future
investigation.

5.2. Production information integration

The lack of a relationship between customer
integration and operational performance seems to defy
intuition. Certainly, the practitioner literature would
have us believe that receiving production information
from a customer and collaborating on future schedules
and vendor-managed inventories should have a positive
effect on performance. Nonetheless, our results lead us
to believe otherwise. Frohlich and Westbrook (2002)
showed that ﬁrms integrating both customers and
suppliers perform better than ﬁrms integrating only one
or the other. That concept could also apply here,
in our study is that customer
however

the twist

Table 5
Interactive effect of customer integration and supplier integration

Independent variables

Interaction between

supplier and customer

Supplier
Customer
Size 1
Size 2
Industry
R-square of model
F-statistic

Dependent variable
performance

0.29***

0.39***
 0.11
0.003
 0.05
 0.07
26.9%
6.92***

*** Signiﬁcant at the 0.01 level.

Fig. 3. Interaction effect on performance.


S. Devaraj et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 1199–1216

1211

integration intensity and high or low supplier integra-
tion intensity depending on the ﬁrm’s scores relative to
the median score for each construct. The operational
performance score is the average of the ﬁrms in each
quadrant.

integration and high customer

integration and high customer

Two groupings have statistically signiﬁcant differ-
ences in their operational performance at the 0.05 level
of signiﬁcance: ﬁrms with high supplier integration and
high customer integration (5.29) versus ﬁrms with low
supplier
integration
(4.00); and ﬁrms with high supplier integration and
low customer integration (4.96) versus ﬁrms with low
supplier
integration
(4.00). Firms with low customer integration and high
supplier
integration do not experience operational
performance signiﬁcantly better than ﬁrms that have
low customer integration and low supplier integration.
Apparently, if customer integration is left at a low level,
most of the gains in performance can be achieved with
low levels of supplier integration. The largest beneﬁt
comes when both customer integration and supplier
integration are at high levels. The synergistic effects of
both forms of integration combine to produce the best
outcome. However, why does a ﬁrm with low supplier
integration and high customer integration have such
poor performance? A possible answer resides in the
anticipated beneﬁts of the Internet capability, which has
been shown to be a driver for supply chain integration
(Frohlich and Westbrook, 2002). The level of customer
expectation rises relative to performance once a ﬁrm has
established a capability to interact with customers via
the Internet. Indeed, this level of expectation could
translate to the ﬁrm’s management as they evaluate their
own operational performance; they expect more of the
process because the customer expects more. The actual
performance, nonetheless, could be limited because the
ﬁrm has not established an adequate level of supplier
integration. While we agree that both forms of
production information integration are best, our data

Table 6
One-way ANOVA results

Performance measure

Percent product returned by the customer
Percent defects during production
Delivery speed
Delivery reliability
Production costs
Production lead time
Inventory turns
The ﬂexibility of the process

indicate that developing high levels of customer
integration without ﬁrst establishing supplier integration
can result
in lower levels of perceived operational
performance. This ﬁnding is consistent with a recent
study by Barua et al. (2004) who posit that the supplier-
side ‘‘digitization’’, the online transactions and informa-
tion exchanges, serves as a prerequisite for digitization on
the customer-side. Without
increasing supplier-side
digitization, a ﬁrm may over-promise customers and
then fail to deliver.

5.3. Impact of supplier integration on performance

The structural equation analyses and the OLS
regression analyses outlined above use an aggregate
measure of performance as the dependent variable.
This is due to the statistical properties of the scale for
performance supporting a unidimensional construct.
From a managerial perspective, it would be useful to
discover which measures have the strongest relation-
ship to supplier integration. To address this issue, we
conducted a one-way ANOVA with the
items
comprising the performance scale as the dependent
variables and supplier integration as the independent
variable.

the dimensions

The results of the one-way ANOVA are shown in
Table 6. As can be seen all the dimensions considered
in the performance scale are statistically signiﬁcant (at
the 0.05 level of signiﬁcance). In decreasing order of
signiﬁcance,
that are related to
supplier integration are delivery reliability, delivery
speed, production costs, percent products returned by
customer, production lead time, ﬂexibility of the
process, percent defects during production, and
inventory turns. That is, dimensions of performance
related to aspects of delivery timing, cost, and quality
problems discovered by the customer have a stronger
relationship with supplier integration than the other
dimensions.

F-statistic

Signiﬁcance (F-statistic)

2.851
2.465
3.021
3.247
2.881
2.713
1.733
2.538

0.000
0.001
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.026
0.000


1212

S. Devaraj et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 1199–1216

6. Contributions and future research

6.1. Key ﬁndings and managerial implications

The results of this study provide insights into the
design of effective value chains. A key ﬁnding is that
eBusiness capability supports customer and supplier
integration efforts. Our eBusiness capability construct
focused on speciﬁc supply chain technologies that
supported customer ordering, purchasing, and colla-
boration between customers and suppliers. Firms
should invest in eBusiness capabilities if they want to
enhance
their production information integration
intensity. Nonetheless, ﬁrms should not try to justify
investments in eBusiness technologies on the basis of
their immediate impact on operational performance. To
achieve operational performance advantages, the ﬁrm
must also have the processes and procedures in place to
use those capabilities.

A second key ﬁnding is that operational perfor-
mance, which affects the customer’s perception of the
quality of the business relationship with the ﬁrm, can
best be improved by intensifying the production
information integration with customers and suppliers.
This implies that increased exchanges of information
such as sales forecasts, master production schedules,
and inventory levels should result in better operational
performance. In addition, ﬁrms should increase their
collaboration with customers and suppliers regarding
production requirements and move more toward
vendor-managed inventory arrangements.

A third key ﬁnding relates to the approach that
should be used in designing an effective supply chain.
Often there are budgetary considerations that limit ﬁrms
from doing everything at once. When referring to
production information integration, our study has
indicated that it is best to develop supplier integration
before customer integration, with the goal to have both
in place for maximum operational performance. By ﬁrst
developing supplier integration the ﬁrm establishes the
capability to meet the performance expectations of its
customers before engaging in customer integration.

Finally, while supplier integration positively affects
all dimensions of operational performance, it appears to
have its greatest impact on delivery timing, costs, and
quality.

6.2. Research contributions

The signiﬁcance of these ﬁndings resides in three
research contributions of this study. First, the model we
tested bridges the work of several other studies and

veriﬁes some general ﬁndings. Zhu and Kraemer (2002)
found that aggregate measures of ﬁrm performance such
as total sales and proﬁt margins are too remote to be
signiﬁcantly associated with e-commerce capability. In
our study, we also found that eBusiness capability is not
directly associated with operational performance;
however it
is mediated by production information
integration, which is related to operational perfor-
mance. Rosenzweig et al. (2003) showed that supply
chain integration intensity is associated with competi-
tive capabilities (which we call operational perfor-
mance) and that competitive capabilities are associated
with positive business performance. The present study
has shown that supplier
integration and customer
integration have an interaction effect
is more
highly associated with operational performance than
either taken alone. Finally, Frohlich and Westbrook
(2002) proposed four web-based supply chain integra-
tion strategies that
incorporate different degrees of
demand integration (which we call customer integra-
tion) and supply integration and showed that they are
linked to operational performance. We have also shown
that various combinations of production information
integration lead to varying levels of performance.
However, our study has separated the web capability
from speciﬁc forms of production information integra-
tion to show the role that eBusiness capabilities play in
the integration efforts. Consequently, a major contribu-
tion of the study is that it is the ﬁrst study of supply
chain integration that addresses the effects of eBusiness
capability, production information integration, and
operating performance in one theoretical framework.

that

Second, our ﬁndings indicated that eBusiness
capabilities, by themselves, do not directly impact
operational performance. Firms must develop a
capability for customer and supplier integration to
realize the beneﬁts of the new eBusiness technolo-
gies. In addition, supplier integration should be at a
high level before customer integration is developed
if both capabilities cannot be developed simulta-
neously. Customer
integration by itself does not
directly affect operational performance and must be
implemented with supplier integration to realize its
full potential.

Finally, we developed new supply chain constructs
for eBusiness capability, customer integration, and
integration. Following the suggestions of
supplier
Rosenzweig et al.
include
technology capabilities and speciﬁc tactics for supplier
and customer integration that allow us to better capture
the nature of those constructs and their affect on supply
chain performance.

(2003), our measures


S. Devaraj et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 1199–1216

1213

6.3. Limitations and future research

No empirical study is without limitations. To be
fair, some of these limitations are true for cross-
sectional survey research in general. First, while the
hypothesized model represents our best predictions
based on the arguments articulated in the section on
hypothesis development, no causal claims can be
made from our results due to the cross-sectional nature
of the data employed in the study. Future studies might
examine the relationships proposed here in greater
detail and over time to provide support for a causal
perspective. The second issue relates to our ability to
generalize the results to other industries. Strictly, we
can generalize our results to the automotive, compu-
ters, and electronics industries. In addition, our sample
had 73% of ﬁrms in the small to medium (SME) size
category. While our ‘‘size’’ control variable was not
signiﬁcant, it is conceivable that the results may be
more reﬂective of SMEs. This may have had an
inﬂuence on the results we had for the EBUSCUST
construct, which we found to have no affect on the
integration variables for the complete sample. None-
theless, we believe there are interesting insights for
industries that have similar demographics and supply
chain and technology practices. A third limitation is
that some of our results might be a function of the
timing of the survey. Speciﬁcally, the lack of support
for eBusiness
relating to customer
ordering capabilities might be due to the vast majority
of companies in our sample not having implemented
that technology at this point in time. However, this
might change in the years to come, which implies that
the relationship between customer-oriented eBusiness
technologies and production information integration
and consequently performance might be different than
what we observed. Again, we believe this offers an
opportunity to examine relationships hypothesized in
this study as these technologies mature and ﬁnd
greater acceptance and implementation in organiza-
tions.

technologies

The topic of supply chain integration is still in its
infancy. This study included only ﬁrst tier suppliers to the
respondent ﬁrm. Future research should address the issue
of how deep the integration should go. Information
exchanges and collaborative efforts could extend to
second and third tier suppliers, however we do not know if
those efforts would result in signiﬁcant differences in
operational performance. Further, the role of manufac-
turing process capability remains to be explored. For
example, it is conceivable that manufacturing process
ﬂexibility is another mediating variable for eBusiness

capability. Research could also explore the differences
between SMEs and large ﬁrms in the relationships
between eBusiness capabilities and production informa-
tion integration. There are many opportunities for future
research in this area.

Appendix A. Appendix of survey items (with
factor loadings)

A.1. eBusiness capabilities

Responses range from ‘Not Implemented’ to ‘Fully

Implemented’.

The following items

relate to my company’s

eBusiness capabilities in general:

1. Allow customers to order products online (0.816).
2. Allow customers to conﬁgure or customize products

online (0.740).

3. Allow customers to check the status of their orders

online (0.752).

4. Find and select suppliers online for commodity

components (0.780).

5. Purchasing materials

through online

auctions

(0.839).

6. Support web-based EDI (0.679).
7. Enable collaboration with suppliers or customers on
replenishment online

forecasting, scheduling, or
(0.888).

8. Support advanced planning and scheduling (APS) for

optimizing supply chain performances (0.847).

A.2. Supplier production information integration

Responses ranged on a seven-point Likert scale from

‘Strongly Disagree’ to ‘Strongly Agree’:

1. My company provides the following information

items to the supplier:
a. Sales forecast (0.651).
b. Master production schedule (0.791).
c. The inventory status (0.809).

2. My company collaborates with the supplier to jointly
develop the net requirements of the component that
the supplier will need to deliver (0.723).

3. My company authorizes the supplier to automatically

replenish the inventory of the component (0.747).

A.3. Customer production information integration

Responses ranged on a seven-point Likert scale from

‘Strongly Disagree’ to ‘Strongly Agree’:


1214

S. Devaraj et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 1199–1216

its ﬁnal product

1. The customer provides the following information
to my company (if the
about
customer is a retailer, then the ﬁnal product is the
same as the product you supply):
a. Sales forecast (0.708).
b. Master production schedule (0.788).
c. The inventory status (0.761).

2. The customer collaborates with my company to
jointly develop the net requirements of the product
that my company supplies (0.714).

3. The customer authorizes my company to automati-
cally replenish the inventory of the product my
company supplies (0.678).

A.4. Operational performance

Please rate the performance of the Process along the

following dimensions:

Responses for the above questions ranged on a
seven-point Likert Scale from ‘Not Very Good’ –
‘Average’ – ‘Very Good’:

1. Percent product returned by the customer (0.619).
2. Percent defects during production (0.776).
3. Delivery speed (0.865).
4. Delivery reliability (0.839).
5. Production costs (0.718).
6. Production lead time (0.818).
7. Inventory turns (0.644).
8. The ﬂexibility of

the process to accommodate
changes to shipping schedules within the effective
lead time of the product without the use of safety
stock (0.742).

References

Armistead, C.G., Mapes, J., 1993. The impact of supply chain
integration on operating performance. Logistics Information Man-
agement 6 (4), 9–14.

Aviv, Y., 2001. The effect of collaborative forecasting on supply chain

performance. Management Science 47 (10), 1326–1343.

Bagozzi, R.P., Yi, Y., 1988. On the evaluation of structural equation
models. Journal of Academy of Marketing Science 16 (1),
74–94.

Bagozzi, R.P., Youjae, Y., Philips, L.W., 1991. Assessing construct
validity in organizational research. Administrative Science Quar-
terly 36, 421–458.

Barney, J., 1991. Firm resources and sustained competitive advan-

tages. Journal of Management 17 (1), 99–120.

Barua, A., Whinston, A.B., Yin, F., 2000. Value and productivity in the

Internet economy. IEEE Computer 33 (5), 102–105.

Barua, A., Konana, P., Whinston, A.B., Yin, F., 2004. An empirical
investigation of Net-enabled business value. MIS Quarterly 28 (4),
585–620.

Belsley, D.A., Kuh, E., Welsch, R.E., 1980. Regression Diagnostics.

John Wiley & Sons, USA.

Bentler, P.M., Bonentt, D.G., 1980. Signiﬁcance tests and goodness of
ﬁt in the analysis of covariance structures. Psychological Bulletin
88, 588–606.

Black, T.J., 1999. Doing Quantitative Research in the Social Sciences.

Sage, London.

Boone, T., Ganeshan, R., 2001. The effect of information technology
on learning in professional service organizations. Journal of
Operations Management 19 (4), 485–495.

Brynjolfsson, E., Yang, S., 1996. Information technology and pro-
ductivity: a review of literature. Advances in Computers 43, 179–
214.

Buzzell, R.D., Ortmeyer, G., 1995. Channel partnerships streamlining

distribution. Sloan Management Review 36 (3), 85–96.

Cachon, G.P., Fisher, M., 2000. Supply chain management and the
value of shared information. Management Science 46 (8), 1032–
1048.

Cachon, G.P., Lariviere, M.A., 2001. Contracting to assure supply:
how to share demand forecasts in a supply chain. Management
Science 47 (5), 629–646.

Campbell, D.T., Fiske, D.W., 1959. Convergent and discriminant
validity by the multitrait-multimethod matrix. Psychological Bul-
letin 56, 81–105.

Carr, A.S., Pearson, J.N., 1999. Strategically managed buyer–supplier
relationships and performance outcomes. Journal of Operations
Management 17 (5), 497–519.

Cetinkaya, S., Lee, C.Y., 2000. Stock replenishment and shipment
scheduling for vendor-managed inventory systems. Management
Science 46 (2), 217–232.

Chen, I., Paulraj, A., 2004. Towards a theory of supply chain manage-
ment: the constructs and measurements. Journal of Operations
Management 22 (2), 119–150.

D’Avanzo, R., von Lewinski, H., Van Wassenhove, L.N., 2003. The
link between supply chain and ﬁnancial performance. Supply
Chain Management Review 40–47.

Devaraj, S., Kohli, R., 2003. Performance impacts of information
is actual usage the missing link? Management

technology:
Science 49 (3), 273–289.

Devaraj, S., Hollingworth, D., Schroeder, R., 2004. Generic manu-
facturing strategies and plant performance. Journal of Operations
Management 22 (3), 313–333.

Dell, M.S., 1999. Direct from Dell: Strategies that Revolutionized an

Industry. Harper Collins, New York.

Dyer, J.H., 1996. Specialized supplier networks as a source of
competitive advantage: evidence from the auto industry. Strategic
Management Journal 17 (4), 271–291.

Dyer, J.H., 1997. Effective interﬁrm collaboration: how ﬁrms mini-
mize transaction costs and maximize transaction value. Strategic
Management Journal 18 (7), 535–556.

Dyer, J.H., Singh, H., 1998. The relational view: cooperative strategy
and sources of interorganizational competitive advantage. Acad-
emy of Management Review 23 (4), 660–679.

Fowler, F.J., 1993. Survey Research Methods, 2nd. ed. Sage, London.
Frohlich, M.T., Westbrook, R., 2001. Arcs of integration: an interna-
tional study of supply chain strategies. Journal of Operations
Management 19 (2), 185–200.

Frohlich, M.T., Westbrook, R., 2002. Demand chain management in
manufacturing and services: web-based integration, drivers and
performance. Journal of Operations Management 20 (4), 729–745.
Gavirneni, S., Kapuscinski, R., Tayur, S., 1999. Value of information
in capacitated supply chains. Management Science 45 (1), 16–24.


S. Devaraj et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 1199–1216

1215

Gefen, D., Straub, D., Boudreau, M., 2000. Structural equation
modeling and regression: guidelines for research practice. Com-
munications of AIS 4 (7), 1–76.

Hill, C.A., Scudder, G.D., 2002. The use of electronic data interchange
for supply chain coordination in the food industry. Journal of
Operations Management 20 (4), 375–387.

Hitt, L.M., Brynjolfsson, E., 1996. Productivity, business proﬁtability,
and consumer surplus: three different measures of information
technology value. MIS Quarterly 20 (2), 121–142.

Huber, G.P., Power, D.J., 1985. Retrospective reports of strategic-level
managers: guidelines for increasing their accuracy. Strategic
Management Journal 6, 171–180.

Johnson, J., 1999. Strategic integration in industrial distribution
channels: managing the interﬁrm relationship as a strategic asset.
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 27, 4–18.

Kauffman, R.J., Walden, E., 2001. Economics and electronic ecom-
merce: survey and directions for research. International Journal of
Electronic Commerce 5 (4), 5–116.

Nunnally, J.C., 1978. Psychometric Theory, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill,

New York.

Nunnally, J.C., Bernstain, I.H., 1994. Psychometric Theory, 32nd ed.

McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.

Peteraf, M.A., 1993. The cornerstone of competitive advantage: a
resource-based view. Strategic Management Journal 14 (3), 170–
191.

Pﬂughoeft, K.A., Ramamurthy, K., Sooﬁ, E.S., Yasai-Ardekani, M.,
Zahedi, F., 2003. Multiple conceptualizations of small business
web use and beneﬁt. Decision Sciences 34 (3), 467–512.

Ping, 1995. A pasimonious estimating technique for interaction and
quadratic latent variables. Journal of Marketing Research 32, 336–
347.

Podsakoff, P.M., Organ, D.W., 1986. Self reports in organizational
research: problems and prospects. Journal of Management 12 (4),
531–544.

Poirier, C.C., Quinn, F.J., 2003. A survey of supply chain progress.

Supply Chain Management Review 40–47.

Koloczyc, G., 1998. Retailers, suppliers push joint sales forecasting.

Porter, M., 2001. Strategy and the Internet. Harvard Business Review

Stores (June).

79 (3), 63–78.

Krajewski, L., Wei, J., 2001. The value of production schedule
integration in supply chains. Decision Sciences 32 (4), 601–
634.

Krause, D.R., Hanﬁeld, R.B., Scannel, T.V., 1998. An empirical
investigation of supplier development: reactive and strategic
processes. Journal of Operations Management 17 (1), 39–58.

Kulp, S.C., Lee, H.L., Ofek, E., 2004. Manufacturer beneﬁts from
information integration with retail customers. Management
Science 50 (4), 431–444.

Lancioni, R.A., Smith, M.F., Oliva, T.A., 2000. The role of the Internet
in supply chain management. Industrial Marketing Management
29, 45–56.

Lederer, A.L., Mirchandani, D.A., Sims, K., 2001. The search for
strategic advantage from the World Wide Web. International
Journal of Electronic Commerce 5 (4), 117–133.

Lee, B., Barua, A., 1999. An integrated assessment of productivity and
efﬁciency impacts of information technology investments: old
data, new analysis and evidence. Journal of Productivity Analysis
12 (1), 2143.

Lee, H.L., Padmanabhan, V., Whang, S., 1997. Information distortion
in a supply chain: the bullwhip effect. Management Science 43 (4),
546–558.

Mata, F., Fuerst, W., Barney, J., 1995. Information technology and
sustained competitive advantage: a resource-based analysis. MIS
Quarterly 19 (4), 487–505.

Milgrom, P., Roberts, J., 1988. Communication and inventory as
substitutes in organizing production. Scandinavian Journal of
Economics 90 (3), 275–289.

Miller, C.C., Cardinal, L.B., Glick, W.H., 1997. Retrospective reports
in organizational research: a reexamination of recent evidence.
Academy of Management Journal 40, 189–204.

Miller, J.G., Roth, A.V., 1994. A taxonomy of manufacturing strategy.

Management Science 40 (3), 285–304.

Mukhopadhyay, T., Kekre, S., 2002. Strategic and operational beneﬁts
of electronic integration in B2B procurement processes. Manage-
ment Science 48 (10), 1301–1313.

Narasimhan, R., Jayaram, J., 1998. Casual linkages in supply chain
management: an exploratory study of North American manufac-
turing ﬁrms. Decision Sciences 29 (3), 579–605.

Narasimhan, R., Das, A., 2001. The impact of purchasing integration
and practices on manufacturing performance. Journal of Opera-
tions Management 19 (4), 593–609.

Powell, W.W., Koput, K.W., Smith-Doerr, L., 1996. Inter-organiza-
tional collaboration and the locus of innovation: networks of
learning in biotechnology. Administrative Science Quarterly 41,
116–145.

Radstaak, B.G., Ketelaar, M.H., 1998. Worldwide Logistics: The
Future of Supply Chain Services. Holland International Distribu-
tion Council, Hague, The Netherlands.

Ranganathan, C., Dhaliwal, J.S., Teo, T.S.H., 2004. Assimilation and
diffusion of Web technologies in supply-chain management: an
examination of key drivers and performance impacts. International
Journal of Electronic Commerce 9 (1), 127–161.

Rosenzweig, E.D., Roth, A.V., Dean, J.W., 2003. The inﬂuence of an
integration strategy on competitive capabilities and business
performance: an exploratory study of consumer products manu-
facturers. Journal of Operations Management 21 (4), 437–456.

Schmenner, R.W., Swink, M.L., 1998. On theory in operations
management. Journal of Operations Management 17 (2), 97–113.
Steiger, J.H., 1990. Structural model evaluation and modiﬁcation: an
internal estimation approach. Multivariate Behavioral Research
25, 173–180.

Straub, D., Klein, R., 2001. E-competitive transformations. Business

Horizons 44 (3), 3–12.

Straub, D., Rai, A., Klein, R., 2004. Measuring ﬁrm performance at
the network level: a nomology of the business impact of digital
supply networks. Journal of Management Information Systems 21
(1), 83–114.

Teece, D.J., Pisano, G., Shuen, A., 1997. Dynamic capabilities and
strategic management. Strategic Management Journal 18, 509–
533.

Venkatraman, N., 1989. The concept of ﬁt in strategy research: toward
verbal and statistical correspondence. Academy of Management
Review 14 (3), 423–444.

Verma, R., Goodale, J.C., 1995. Statistical power in operations
management research. Journal of Operations Management 13
(2), 139–152.

Vickery, S.K., Droge, C., Markland, R.E., 1993. Production compe-
tence and business strategy: do they affect business performance?
Decision Sciences 24 (2), 435–455.

Vickery, S.K., Jayaram, J., Droge, C., Calantone, R., 2003. The effect
of an integrative supply chain strategy on customer service and
ﬁnancial performance: an analysis of direct vs. indirect relation-
ships. Journal of Operations Management 21 (5), 523–539.


1216

S. Devaraj et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 1199–1216

Wei, J., Krajewski, L., 2000. A model for comparing supply chain
schedule integration approaches. International Journal of Produc-
tion Research 38 (9), 2099–2123.

Wernerfelt, B., 1984. A resource-based view of the ﬁrm. Strategic

Management Journal 5, 171–180.

Zhu, K., Kraemer, K.L., 2002. E-commerce metrics for net-enhanced
organizations: assessing the value of e-commerce to ﬁrm perfor-
mance in the manufacturing sector. Information Systems Research
13 (3), 275–295.

Zhu, K., Kraemer, K.L., Xu, S., Dedrick, J., 2004. Information
technology payoff in e-business environments: an international
perspective on value creation of e-business in the ﬁnancial
services industry. Journal of Management Information Systems
21 (1), 17–54.

Zhu, K., 2004. The complementarity of information technology
infrastructure and E-commerce capability: a resource-based
assessment of their business value. Journal of Management Infor-
mation Systems 21 (1), 167–202.

