The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/0144-3577.htm

IJOPM
33,4

372

Received 11 October 2010
Revised 12 April 2011
27 January 2012
27 March 2012
14 May 2012
Accepted 17 June 2012

The moderating role

of supply network structure on the

customer integration-efﬁciency

relationship

Pamela Danese

Department of Management and Engineering, University of Padova,

Vicenza, Italy, and
Pietro Romano

Department of Electrical, Managerial and Mechanical Engineering,

University of Udine, Udine, Italy

Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this paper is to study whether a fast supply network structure interacts
with customer integration (CI) by positively moderating the relationship between CI and efﬁciency
performance.
Design/methodology/approach – The authors developed two hypotheses,
incorporating
dimensions of CI, fast supply network structure and efﬁciency performance. The hypotheses are
tested through a hierarchical regression analysis using data from a sample of 200 manufacturing plants.
Findings – CI alone is not enough to guarantee cost reductions because a fast supply network
structure acts as a moderator of the CI-efﬁciency relationship. The role of this moderator is twofold.
On the one hand, it interacts with CI, strengthening the positive impact of CI on efﬁciency through a
positive complementary effect. On the other hand, if the supply network structure is not intended to
support fast lead times, the impact of CI on efﬁciency can be hindered and, in extreme cases, CI can
even make efﬁciency worse.
Practical implications – Efﬁciency maximization requires levering simultaneously on CI and the
supply network structure, rather than investing and acting on CI only. Managers should carefully
weigh up the supply network structural context before embracing a CI program, because adopting CI
in a wrong context could amplify a series of problems (e.g. nervousness of plans) and offset CI beneﬁts
in terms of efﬁciency.
Originality/value – This study provides an original contribution to the literature on the relationship
between CI and efﬁciency by adopting a contingency perspective, namely assuming that the
relationship between supply chain practices and performance is contingent upon how supply
networks have been designed. Accordingly, this research questions the assumption that CI always
improves efﬁciency, by analysing the complementary effect between CI and a fast supply network
structure. This provides a number of original implications for the interpretation of the relationship
between CI, supply network structure and efﬁciency.

Keywords Supply chain management, Collaboration, Logistics, Customer relationship management

Paper type Research paper

International Journal of Operations &
Production Management
Vol. 33 No. 4, 2013
pp. 372-393
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
0144-3577
DOI 10.1108/01443571311307226

Introduction
To improve supply network performance, is it better to focus ﬁrst on lead time reduction,
or instead concentrate on improving the transfer of demand information from

