Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481 – 502

Requisite expertise, firm reputation, and status in

venture capital investment allocation decisions
Dimo Dimov a,⁎, Dean A. Shepherd b, Kathleen M. Sutcliffe c

a School of Business, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269-1041, United States

b Kelley School of Business, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405-1701, United States
c Ross School of Business, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234, United States

Received 1 June 2005; received in revised form 1 May 2006; accepted 1 May 2006

Abstract

Drawing together research in the upper echelon perspective, strategy, and organizational sociology,
this paper examines (1) the relationship between the finance expertise of a venture capital (VC) firm's
management team and investment selection, and (2) the moderation of this relationship by the VC firm's
social position. We find that while finance expertise is associated with a lower proportion of early-stage
investments, this relationship is.weaker for firms with high reputation and.stronger for firms with high
status. We conclude with a discussion of the importance and nuances of external image considerations on
investment decisions as well as insights into the importance of the requisite nature of expertise.
© 2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Venture capital; Investment selection; TMT expertise; Reputation; Status

1. Executive summary

There has been significant scholarly interest in understanding the investment selection
decisions of venture capital (VC) firms, e.g., the selection criteria or cognitive processes
involved in making these decisions. Researchers have made a substantial contribution to the
literature by identifying common elements to the decision making processes across VC firms.

⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 860 486 0914; fax: +1 860 486 6415.

E-mail addresses: Dimo.Dimov@business.uconn.edu (D. Dimov), Shepherd@indiana.edu (D.A. Shepherd),

Ksutclif@bus.umich.edu (K.M. Sutcliffe).

0883-9026/$ - see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2006.05.001


482

D. Dimov et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481–502

With this paper, we seek to understand why these processes lead to different selection results,
i.e., why equally aspiring VC firms make early-stage investments to varying degrees.
Acknowledging the importance of top management team (TMT) composition for decision
making and the inclusion of VC firms in investment and fundraising networks, we
concomitantly consider the effects of finance expertise of the VC firm's management team and
the firm's reputation and status on investment selection.

We find that VC firms with higher

finance expertise select .fewer early-stage
investments. In addition, despite the apparent similarity of the constructs of reputation
and status as representations of how a firm is perceived by its external constituents, this
study allows us to disentangle their distinct facets. We find that both reputation and status
moderate the finance expertise–investment decision relationship but in opposing ways.
Status magnifies this relationship: for higher-status VC firms, higher finance expertise
induces an even stronger avoidance of early-stage investments. Interestingly, reputation
appears to have the opposite, alleviating effect: the negative relationship between finance
expertise and early-stage investments is stronger for less reputable firms than for more
reputable firms. We account for this surprising finding in our discussion by developing a
number of possible explanations around management discretion, affordability of
experimentation, and the role of reputation in increasing the odds of success.

Our study contributes to the entrepreneurship literature by explaining why some VC firms
make more early-stage investments than others and by enhancing the theoretical arsenal for
studying VC decision making. We also contribute to the broader organizational literature in
two important ways. First, our results suggest that researchers need to pay closer attention to
the type rather than simply the amount of management team expertise. Second, although
external image considerations play important roles in management decision making, we tease
out important but heretofore ignored nuances in the concepts of reputation and status.

There are a number of practical implications that emerge from our study. From the VC
firm's perspective, the results provide insight into how their management team expertise and
social standing affect their deal flow and ultimate investment selection. From the perspective
of the recipient of venture capital, our results suggest that entrepreneurs looking for early-stage
financing for their ventures would be well served by an in-depth examination of the man-
agement expertise of their potential VC firms. Given the strong network repercussions of a “no
decision”, it pays to be exposed to the “right” VC firm early on.

2. Introduction

There has been substantial scholarly interest in understanding the investment selection
decisions of venture capital (VC) firms. In particular, researchers have sought to explore the
decision-making process in terms of the selection criteria applied (MacMillan et al., 1985;
Muzyka et al., 1996; Shepherd et al., 2000; Tyebjee and Bruno, 1984; Wright et al., 1997) or
the cognitive processes employed (Hisrich and Jankowicz, 1990; Rosman and O'Neill, 1993;
Zacharakis and Shepherd, 2001). What is common to all these studies is that researchers have
focused on the commonalities across VC firms, thereby identifying a proto-typical decision
making process. As a result, the differences in investment decisions, reflecting individual or
organizational differences in evaluating the opportunities or risks associated with prospective
ventures, have received relatively little attention.


D. Dimov et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481–502

483

It is now well established in organizational research that a firm's strategic choices are
driven by its top management team (TMT), and that differences in such choices can be
explained by TMT demographics (Hambrick and Mason, 1984). Recent application of this
view to the context of VC firm performance has shown that the nature of the VC partners'
expertise indeed affects both the successes and failures in the firm's portfolio (Dimov and
Shepherd, 2005). Yet, in addition to such firm-specific effects, there are also external
influences. Specifically, in order to mitigate the uncertainty they face in selecting potential
investments, VC firms are continuously involved in investment syndicates (Bygrave, 1987;
Lerner, 1994) and are thus part of a broader social network. Their standing in this network
appears to influence their investment decisions (Podolny, 2001; Sorenson and Stuart, 2001).
The purpose of this paper is to examine the degree to which VC firms' investment decisions
are affected by the (requisite) nature of their TMT expertise and their social network standing.
To capture the latter, we use two constructs – reputation and status – used in the fields of
strategy and economic sociology to represent an organization's social standing. Despite the
apparent similarity of these two constructs, as evidenced by the significant overlap in their use
(e.g. Gulati and Higgins, 2003; Podolny, 2001; Shane and Cable, 2002; Stuart, 1998; Stuart
et al., 1999), this study follows recent work that disentangles their distinct facets (Washington
and Zajac, 2005). Specifically, we study the investment allocation decisions of 108 US venture
capital firms over a 6-year period. We highlight the importance of relevant (i.e. requisite)
expertise and also show that reputation and status moderate the expertise–decision
relationship in opposing ways.

Our study contributes to the entrepreneurship literature by enhancing its theoretical arsenal
for the study of VC decision making and by explaining why, among equally aspiring VC firms,
some make more early-stage investments than others. In line with recent arguments presented
by Vogus and Sutcliffe (2003), our results suggest that researchers need to pay closer attention
to the type rather than simply the amount of management team expertise. Our findings
contribute to the upper echelon perspective by highlighting the role of external image
considerations in TMT decision making. And we also contribute to the strategy and economic
sociology literatures by teasing out important, heretofore ignored nuances in the constructs of
reputation and status, representing a firm's external image.

The article proceeds as follows. First, we provide an overview of the concept of requisite
expertise and discuss its specific form in the context of venture capital firms and their
portfolio investments. We then discuss the concepts of reputation and status and provide
specific arguments for their moderating effects on the relationship between TMT requisite
expertise and investment selection. In the remaining sections, we describe our methodology
and results, and then discuss our findings.

3. Theory and hypotheses

Venture capital firms raise funds from various investors and then seek to invest these
funds in private companies with the purpose of achieving superior investment returns.
While some VC firms invest in companies that are in the process of exploring ideas for
which there are not yet developed commercial products or tested markets (i.e. early-stage
companies), others prefer late-stage companies, i.e. those with well-defined market and
product characteristics, seeking to expand or improve their established business. The less


484

D. Dimov et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481–502

developed a prospective company, the higher the uncertainty that a VC firm faces in making
its investment decision (Podolny, 2001).

3.1. Management team expertise and investment choice

The contemplation of any investment essentially entails weighing the opportunities and
threats that it poses to a particular investor. A considerable body of research in organizations
suggests that although top managers within firms perceive environmental
threats and
opportunities similarly, they perceive them differently from top managers in other orga-
nizations, even within the same industry (Milliken, 1990; Sutcliffe and Huber, 1998). And
while a number of factors may account for these inter-organizational differences (Boyd et al.,
1993; Sutcliffe, 1994), the diversity of team members' past work experiences often affects the
team's perspectives and opinions (e.g., Sutcliffe, 1994), actions (McDonald and Westphal,
2003), as well as organizational outcomes (Bunderson and Sutcliffe, 2002). With differences
in the composition of organizations' top management teams (TMTs), there are different
strategic actions towards uncertain markets (Flood et al., 1997).

The relationship between TMT's functional diversity and performance, although widely
studied, has shown mixed results (see Bunderson and Sutcliffe (2002) for a review).
Functional background is a proxy for the information, knowledge, skills, and expertise that
individuals bring to a group (Williams and O'Reilly, 1998). Researchers have generally
focused on the breadth or amount of variety within a team, i.e., whether the different dominant
functional perspectives across team members cover a broad range of functional categories or
are restricted to a subset of categories, thereby overlooking the “relevance” of the variety.
Although studies have assumed that any variety will do, a growing body of work suggests that
variety alone is insufficient to benefit an organization. Rather, as Vogus and Sutcliffe (2003)
argue (and empirically show), it is the content of variety that matters (Cohen, 1986) and the
extent to which a team's variety matches the characteristics of the firm's environment(s). In
other words, performance depends on the appropriateness of the team's specific knowledge
for the organization's environment(s) or strategy. Relevant expertise affects the team's
understanding of the uncertainty that exists and is likely to influence the team's decisions to
enter particular market segments (Van de Ven, 1986).

Although the tasks of the VC firm can be classified in terms of pre- and post-investment
activities,1 in this study we are concerned with the former rather than the latter. Pre-investment
activities involve those tasks up to, and including, the signing of an investment contract, e.g.,
soliciting new venture proposals for submission to the VC firm, determining whether these
proposals meet the firm's broad screening criteria, conducting due diligence (more extensive
research to determine the likely success of the venture), and then negotiating and structuring a
relationship with the entrepreneur. While some of the investment proposals pertain to
companies that are in the process of exploring ideas for which there are not yet fully developed
commercial products or tested markets (i.e. early stage), others involve companies with well
established products and markets, seeking to expand or optimize their business (i.e. late stage).
Decisions to invest in early- versus late-stage ventures are likely to hinge on the extent to

1 Tyebjee and Bruno (1984) proposed a model of the venture capital process with five stages: deal origination,

deal screening, deal evaluation, deal structuring and post-investment.


D. Dimov et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481–502

485

which decision makers perceive the venture to be risky, as well as the extent to which they
expect that there will be a proper risk–return balance. Assessments of these factors will be
shaped by the distinct expertise held by a firm's TMT. On one hand, while early-stage ventures
have higher perceived risk, relevant industry (operations, marketing, general management) or
prior entrepreneurial experience reduce this risk (March and Shapira, 1987). This is driven at
least in part by the expectation of adding value to the particular venture. On the other hand, an
investment decision needs to be an efficient allocation of capital and thus requires a proper
risk–return balance. The estimation of the latter is facilitated by finance experience and is more
robust in the context of more established ventures. Therefore, a VC firm's experience may
help explain the investment allocation diversity among VC firms.

We focus explicitly on the TMT's expertise in finance, what we call .finance capacity,
and explore its implications for the investment allocation decisions by VC capital firms.
Accordingly, we implicitly treat other industry experience as a boundary condition for our
theoretical development.2 As indicated above, finance capacity is important as it ensures
that financial resources are put to their most efficient use based on the criteria established by
capital markets. Research has shown that when capital market considerations permeate an
organization's performance environment,
the number of executives with finance
backgrounds increases (Fligstein, 1987; Thornton and Ocasio, 1999). In this regard, one
of the main responsibilities of VC firms towards their fund investors is ensuring adequate
returns given the risk profile of their portfolio and the opportunity cost for the fund
investors (i.e. alternative investment vehicles such as stocks, bonds or real estate trusts).
The finance capacity of a VC firm specifically refers to its top management team's
expertise in evaluating the return potential as well as in managing the financial resources of a
prospective venture. The value of a team's finance capacity comes from TMT members'
abilities to assess the future payoffs of potential investments and the risks associated with those
payoffs. Teams with greater finance capacity will also be more likely to recognize those
contexts in which assessments of payoff and risk are not possible (or are too costly). Because it
provides the team with greater understanding of the investment potential, finance capacity
improves the managers' comprehension of the requirements for making the potential
investment successful. Furthermore, portfolio companies often look to the VC firm to provide
finance and accounting information (Mitchell et al., 1995).

Later-stage ventures have well-defined product-market characteristics, which allows for a
better estimation of the potential portfolio company's future payoffs and the level of
unsystematic risk. As a consequence, later-stage investments represent a context in which risk
(including agency risk) can be better managed (Amit et al., 1998; Carter and Van Auken, 1994;
Eisenhardt, 1989). Finance capacity is a source of knowledge on how to best manage the risk
of a particular investment, such as determining the most appropriate financial structure (e.g., a
mix of voting and preference shares), as well as on how to improve portfolio firm performance,
such as through introducing more “sophisticated” financial and information systems.
Accordingly, if faced with two potential ventures with similar characteristics but at different
stages of development, a VC firm with high finance capacity would prefer the later- to the
earlier-stage venture.

2 Other experiences are also important. For example, VC firm managers with considerable experience in a

particular industry are more likely to invest in and able to add value to portfolio companies in that industry.


486

D. Dimov et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481–502

Hypothesis 1. There is a negative relationship between a VC firm's finance capacity and
its decision to invest in early-stage ventures.

3.2. Organization's perceived quality, TMT expertise, and investment choice

Entangled in a network of syndication partners and institutional investors who have limited
information to appropriately judge the quality of a VC firm, VC firms strive to project and
maintain signals of their quality (Gompers, 1996). The concept of perceived quality has been
well developed in strategy and economic sociology. In strategy research, firm quality is
captured by the construct of reputation – a “perceptual representation of a company's past
actions and future prospects that describe the firm's overall appeal to all its key constituents
when compared to other leading rivals” (Fombrun, 1996, p. 72). In economic sociology, firm
quality is captured by the construct of status. It pertains to the external perception of the
organization, based on the structural position that it occupies in its wider network of inter-
organizational relationships (Podolny, 1993) and is essentially an “unearned ascription of
social rank” (Washington and Zajac, 2005, p. 282).

A firm's.reputation is established based on its past performance, whereas its.status is the
consequence of its pattern of social relationships and the quality of its network partners.
Despite the high degree of closeness between these two constructs, as evidenced by the
significant overlap in their usage (e.g. Gulati and Higgins, 2003; Podolny, 2001; Shane and
Cable, 2002; Stuart, 1998; Stuart et al., 1999), there might be distinct, heretofore unexplored
facets to them. Indeed, as Washington and Zajac argue, “status is fundamentally a sociological
concept that captures differences in social rank that generate privilege or discrimination (not
performance-based rewards), while reputation is fundamentally an economic concept that
captures differences in perceived or actual quality or merit that generate earned, performance-
based rewards” (Washington and Zajac, 2005, p. 283). Hence, in this section, we will focus on
the particular effects that these two different “channels” to perceived quality may exert on the
relationship between TMT finance expertise and investment allocation decisions.

3.2.1. Reputation and perceived quality

Reputation serves as a signal of future performance based on perceptions of past per-
formance (Fombrun and Shanley, 1990; Podolny, 1994; Roberts and Dowling, 2002; Shane
and Cable, 2002). For example, in their discussion of technological and commercial pro-
minence, Stuart et al. (1999) found that those firms that had successfully exploited tech-
nological innovations or had been successful in evaluating biotechnology companies had built
up reputations that underlay expectations by external parties that these firms would continue to
be successful in the future. In the context of the VC industry, reputation is associated with the
success of a VC firm's previous investments, which in turn affects the VC firm's ability to
raise and invest new funds. For instance, the amount of money available to be invested in
future portfolio companies is dependent, in part, upon VC firms' past performances in terms of
returns on investment and association with initial public offerings (IPOs) (Gompers, 1996). In
addition, VC firms that have made successful investments in the past are more desirable
syndication partners (Lerner, 1994) and thus have access to more deals. Visibility is also an
important aspect of reputation (Lang and Lang, 1988) as it contributes to increasing the inflow
of investments into funds (Siri and Tufano, 1998).


D. Dimov et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481–502

487

In the finance literature, there is a long tradition of examining the effects of reputation on
investment behavior in financial markets. Reputation is often positively linked to the past
performance of an actor. That is, external agents learn about the quality of the focal actor
through observing its past performance over time (Milgrom and Roberts, 1982). In the
context of fund management, there is a positive relationship between the inflow of new
investment into a fund and the fund's past performance (Ippolito, 1992; Siri and Tufano,
1998). Because fund management companies typically receive a fixed percentage of assets
under management as compensation, there is a strong incentive for them to increase the
total assets of the portfolio (Chevalier and Ellison, 1997). But increasing the total assets of
the portfolio creates an additional incentive to alter its overall risk profile (Chevalier and
Ellison, 1997). Specifically, those firms with superior past performance are more likely to
develop a reputation for quality and this reputation represents a valuable asset, one worth
protecting (Diamond, 1989). Reputation is protected by reducing the overall riskiness of the
portfolio by making future investments in “safer” projects (Diamond, 1989).

The above argument suggests that VC firms with high reputation may prefer “safer”, i.e.
later-stage projects. In other words, protecting a VC firm's reputation may move a firm
away from early-stage projects. However, some VC firms may have made their reputation
with investments in early-stage companies and thus be less willing to adjust their invest-
ment strategy away from such companies. As we argued earlier, the investment allocation
into early- vs. late-stage projects depends on the VC firm managers' possessing expertise
that is requisite for the particular type of project. Where such expertise is lacking, there is
lower perceived control over the project's outcomes and thus greater perceived risk for the
project overall (March and Shapira, 1987). This is especially relevant to the VC context
given the direct involvement of VCs in the management of their portfolio companies
(Lerner, 1994, 1995; Sandberg, 1986; Tyebjee and Bruno, 1984) and thus in their ultimate
success or failure (Dimov and Shepherd, 2005). This suggests that expertise–allocation
combinations that give rise to high perceived risk (i.e. when there is requisite mismatch) are
likely to be perceived as less attractive investments, especially by those with high reputation
who perceive that they have more to lose. Hypothesis 1 suggests that the requisite envi-
ronment for a team of high finance capacity is that of later-stage investments. Therefore, for
TMTs with high finance capacity, investing in early-stage companies is likely to be
perceived as a riskier choice. This increased risk would constitute a particularly high
concern for the more reputable VC firms as they strive to preserve their established re-
putations. Thus:

Hypothesis 2. VC firm reputation strengthens the negative relationship between finance
capacity and the decision to invest in early-stage ventures.

3.2.2. Status and perceived quality

The sociological view of markets focuses on the social construction of the positions that
the various organizations occupy (White, 1981). When there is uncertainty over the quality
of organizations involved in a particular market as well as prohibitive costs of carrying out
evaluative search, an organization's status provides a signal of quality (Podolny, 1993). The
status-based nature of market competition creates an uneven distribution of rewards and
cost burdens within markets, such that high status organizations have lower transaction


488

D. Dimov et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481–502

costs in acquiring resources (Podolny, 1993) and are the preferred partners of other high-
status organizations (Podolny, 1994), both of which are positively associated with per-
formance (Stuart et al., 1999).

As Podolny (2001) argues, however, high status is not universally valuable; it is of little
value when there is high uncertainty about the decisions an organization should make to
achieve market success. Put differently, without knowing what market opportunities to
pursue, it is difficult for a firm to leverage its high status due to the possibility that it might
line up resources towards the “wrong” opportunity. To the extent that the “wrong” allo-
cation of resources creates a negative association for the firm, it will have an undermining
effect on it status (Washington and Zajac, 2005). High-status firms thus tend to avoid
projects of high uncertainty. The corollary of this logic for the context of venture capital
investment decisions is that as the status of a VC firm increases, the firm tends to move
away from investments in early-stage companies, i.e., those projects for which there is
greater uncertainty about what it takes to achieve market success (Podolny, 2001).

Yet, as we have argued so far, project uncertainty is not absolute but rather firm specific,
dependent upon the requisite nature of the VC firm's management expertise. For a VC team
with particular finance capacity, some projects will elicit higher uncertainty than others and
thus put more strain on the VC firm's status. A VC firm would utilize better the transaction
cost benefits derived from its status for its less uncertain projects – it could access high
quality exchange partners to sell-off some inventory, factor accounts receivable, or re-
negotiate lease agreements. Lining up similar support for projects it considers more
uncertain creates the anxiety of compromising its status. This implies that, while VC firms
with high finance capacity avoid early-stage investments, those with high status among
them would have an even stronger incentive to do so.

Hypothesis 3. VC firm status strengthens the negative relationship between finance
capacity and the decision to invest in early-stage ventures.

4. Method

4.1. Sample

We designed the study with four factors in mind. First, we required VC firms that faced
decisions to invest in the “same” industry (Wireless Communication), but an industry that
provided considerable choice of portfolio companies at different stages of development.
Second, we required VC firms that have made a sufficient number of investments, so that
enough data would be available to infer the top managers' various investment choices.
Third, since background data were to be collected on current team members, we had to limit
the time period examined so that it would be reasonable to attribute the investment de-
cisions made over the selected period to the identified team members. Finally, we limited
our analysis to independent VC firms since subsidiaries of financial or other corporations
are likely to have goals and/or strategies imposed on its team by the parent company. Thus,
we used Thomson Financial's .VentureXpert database to create a sampling frame of all
independent VC firms in the US that have invested in at least 20 portfolio companies over
the 1997–2002 period, with at least one investment in the Wireless Communication


D. Dimov et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481–502

489

Fig. 1. Proportion of first-time investments in early-stage companies by US VC firms.

industry. From this list of 252 VC firms, we collected information on a random selection of
108 firms.

Because the 1997–2002 period was quite distinct in the development of the US VC
industry, with a rapid increase of investment activity between 1997 and 2000 and a rapid
decline thereafter, we needed to ensure that it would not affect the generalization of our results.
Fig. 1 shows the proportion of first-time early-stage investments by US VC firms over the
period 1980–2002 as well as the proportion of early-stage investments by our sample firms
over the 1997–2002 period. The figure shows that the proportion of first-time early-stage
investments diminishes over time, especially in the latter part of the 1990s. This may be indeed
due to the gradual increase in funds under management, leading to higher deal sizes, as well as
to the large number of new entrants in the VC industry in the 1990s. Nevertheless, for our
particular sample VC firms, given that they tend to be bigger and thus more experienced, the
level of early-stage investing in the 1997–2002 period is more consistent with the earlier
industry development and also follows the overall industry pattern.3

4.2. Measures

4.2.1. Dependent variable

As is commonly done in the VC community, the .VentureXpert database classified
investments into stages, representing an increasing degree of development. We used six

3 A separate analysis for the 1997–1999 sub-period revealed no change in the reported results.


490

D. Dimov et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481–502

main categories to represent a portfolio company's development stage: (1) seed, (2) start-
up, (3) other early stage, (4) expansion, (5) later/acquisition, and (6) other late stage. We
measured the extent to which the VC firm managers chose to invest in early-stage ventures
as the proportion of first-time investments made by the VC firm in companies at the seed,
start-up or other early stage. We focused on the first-time investments (i.e. when a VC firm
invests in a particular company for the first time) in order to exclude from consideration the
repeated investments by a VC firm in the same company (i.e. follow-on investments).

4.2.2. Independent variables

We operationalized.finance capacity as the extent to which team members have worked
in finance industries – commercial, investment, and merchant banking as well as in-
vestment fund management, in both public and private markets. These industries are
especially relevant for the VC context since they represent a major career path for entry into
the VC industry. Because decisions in such industries are often based on sophisticated
modelling of various market processes and their associated risks, there is much reliance on
historical information in estimating various prediction parameters. For example, one of the
most popular parameters reflects the volatility of a particular asset (its.beta) and is typically
derived by regressing the daily returns of the asset on the overall market's daily returns.
This provides validity for our notion of finance capacity as associated with preferences for
more precise estimation of risks and returns.

Data on the experiences of the team were collected from the VC firm's website. Our
operational definition of team was all people holding the title “general partner” or, in the
absence of such a title, the highest ranking title in the firm hierarchy, such as, “partners”,
“managing directors”, “directors”, and “principals”. The total number of team members on
whom data were collected was 731, which represents an average of 6.8 members per team.
We coded each team member for whether he or she had worked in the finance industries
listed above, and then calculated a score representing the proportion of team members that
have worked in these industries. For example, a score of 0.35 indicates that 35% of the team
members have worked in finance-related industries.4

While the above measure does not fully capture the qualitative differences in finance
capacity due to individual team members' different lengths of experience in finance-related
industries, there are several considerations related to the particular ways in which we have
executed our study that attenuate this concern. First, our conception of finance capacity
pertains to how “dominating” the finance experience is for the top management team as a
whole. In this regard, when examined at the group level, i.e. across all general partners, the
effect of the experience of individual people oscillates less. This is reinforced by the fact that
our sample firms tend to be older and larger, and thus have on average more experienced
partners. Second, as the descriptive statistics below suggest, finance experience tends not to be
mixed with other experience. Therefore, by including more experienced partners, our sample
is less susceptible to wide variation in the number of years of finance experience. Our approach

4 Data on years of experience were not available and therefore it was not possible to calculate a “dominant”
experience for each member. However, we did calculate an alternative, more conservative measure of finance
capacity where dominant expertise in finance was attributed only to those team members who had no experience
outside finance-related industries or functions. There was no substantive change in the results when this alternate
measure for finance capacity was used in the analysis (detailed below).


D. Dimov et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481–502

491

here is consistent with recent work that uses a team-level representation of the backgrounds of
the individual TMT members (Higgins and Gulati, 2006).

In measuring.reputation as a reflection of past performance, we captured both evidence
of past investment activity and media visibility. We captured such activity by the following
three items: the total amount of invested capital by the VC firm, the total number of
companies in its portfolio, and its age. This is consistent with other measurements of VC
reputation (Gulati and Higgins, 2003; Gompers, 1996). We measured media visibility by
the number of times the firm had been mentioned in.The Wall Street Journal over the period
of the study (1997–2002).5 Thus, our overall measure of reputation was a composite
variable consisting of the three items for past investment activity and the item for visibility.
The reliability of this measure was within the accepted limits (.α = .72).

We measured a VC firm's .status using Bonacich's (1987) power centrality measure,
which is consistent with recent research on the network positions of VC firms (Podolny,
2001; Sorenson and Stuart, 2001). Based on this measure, the status of a firm is dependent
on the number and status of other firms with which it has participated in financing particular
portfolio companies. In order to produce an unbiased measure of status, we examined the
pattern of co-investment not among the firms in our sample, but within the group of all
active VC firms over the period of the study. We considered a firm an active investor if it
conducted at least five deals per year (Podolny, 2001). Therefore, we calculated the status
measure using the 563 VC firms that had invested in at least 30 portfolio companies during
the 1997–2002 period, to capture all active investors. The measure,.c.i(.α,.β) takes the form:.
c.i(.α,.β) =∑.j(.α +.βc.j)R.ij, where R.ij is an element of a relational matrix R, representing the
number of companies in which firms .i and .j have invested together over the period of the
study. The parameter.α is for arbitrary scaling of the measure, while.β represents the degree
to which the centrality of firm.i is a function of the centralities of other firms in the network.
Following recommendations for setting .β at
less than the reciprocal of the largest
eigenvalue of R (Borgatti et al., 2002), we set .β equal to three-quarters of the largest
eigenvalue (see Podolny, 1993; Sorenson and Stuart, 2001). We calculated Bonacich's
power centrality scores for each VC firm and normalized the scores so that the highest score
was equal to 1 and the lowest to 0. The higher a firm's score the higher its status.

4.2.3. Control variables

In choosing control variables, we sought to eliminate various alternative explanations
based on findings in the economic sociology, upper echelon, and entrepreneurship literatures.
First, consistent with Podolny (2001), we controlled for the informational benefits that an
organization's social network might bestow. In particular, the more.structural holes there are
in an organization's network the broader the range of market opportunities to which an
organization has access (Burt, 1992). We measured structural holes using the method proposed
by Burt (1992), which captures the proportion of an organization's network activity that
involves ties that are not redundant. The higher a score on this measure the more structural
holes in the VC firm's network.

5 As the vast majority of mentions were positive, we did not distinguish between positive and negative

visibility.


492

D. Dimov et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481–502

Second, consistent with the literature on top management team demography, we controlled
for several team factors including a .team'.s functional diversity, .diversity of prior industry
experience, .team size, .founder tenure, and .entrepreneurial experience. The diversity of an
organization's TMT has been identified as having a major influence on important orga-
nizational decisions (Bantel and Jackson, 1989; Hambrick and Mason, 1984). In particular, the
functional diversity of TMT members has been shown to capture important decision making
effects stemming from the team's composition (Hambrick et al., 1996). In measuring TMT
diversity we kept to established conventions in the literature while making allowances for the
unique context of the VC industry. A large number of professionals entering the VC industry
come from the finance industries described above. These industries are unique in that they do
not have the traditional functional separations of other industries (e.g. operations, R&D,
human resources, sales and marketing, etc.). As a consequence, we used a coarser set of
functional areas for categorizing each TMT members' prior functional experience: sales and
marketing, accounting and finance, and operations. These categories broadly reflect the
distinctions made by Hambrick and Mason (1984) between output, throughput, and peripheral
functions. We coded each TMT member on whether he or she had had experience in any of
these functional areas, and then calculated the proportion of TMT members that had had
experience in each functional category. We then measured functional diversity using Blau's
(1977) method, 1−∑.p.i
2, where .p.i is the proportion of TMT members with experience in a
particular functional area. Because our coding allowed for more than one experience per team
member, we rescaled the.p.i scores used in the formula above so that they would add up to 1.
The VC industry is also unique in that TMT members come from a variety of industries.
Therefore, we complemented our measure of functional diversity with a measure of the
diversity of prior industry experience among TMT members. We used the same procedure
described above for functional diversity, with the following industry categories: finance
industries, non-finance industries, consulting, law, and entrepreneurship (having founded a
company). In order to account for the possible effects of TMT size on our diversity
measures, we also controlled for team size, measured as the number of general partners.
The organizational tenure of TMT members can promote or deter an organization in
conducting innovation – longer-tenured teams make strategic choices that adhere to
established decision-making routines that impede innovation (Finkelstein and Hambrick,
1990; Hambrick and Mason, 1984). Controlling for the average tenure of TMT members
accounts for the degree to which decision-making within the TMT is routinized. Because
we lacked detailed information on the tenure of each TMT member, we calculated the
proportion of TMT members that were founders of the VC firm. Because organizational
founders carry the institutional spirit of the organization's initial strive for legitimacy
(Stinchcombe, 1965), they create a lasting imprint on the organization's decision processes
(Boeker, 1989). Therefore, the extent to which founders are still present on the TMT
captures the relative rigidity of decision-making processes within the TMT.6

Last among our control variables on particular characteristics of the TMT was the
proportion of team members with prior entrepreneurial experience. Ventures at the earliest

6 We also note that the proportion of founder decreases as the number of TMT members increases. To the extent
that the number of TMT members increases as a result of the VC firm's growing size, there are more slack
resources and tenure variety, which in turn imply higher decision making discretion.


D. Dimov et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481–502

493

stages of development are often newly founded and led by ambitious entrepreneurs. To the
extent that team members have had such experience in the past, they likely have a better
understanding of the complexities of start-up and emerging environments, and may be more
inclined to invest in these early-stage portfolio companies. In measuring prior entre-
preneurial experience, we coded each TMT member for whether he or she had previously
founded a company and calculated the proportion of team members that have done so.

Finally, we accounted for the differences in investment opportunities available to the VC
firms. On one hand, such differences stem from the VC firm's prior investment activity and
developed expertise – early-stage deals may not be equally accessible by all VC firms. In
order to control for deal flow availability, we included two variables: the number of first-
time deals executed prior to 1997 and the proportion of these deals that were early-stage. On
the other hand, VC firms focusing on different industries may also have different exposure
to early-stage deals. Therefore, in order to account for between-industry differences in
sources and number of opportunities (Klevorick et al., 1995), we controlled for the.industry
of the investments. In particular, we acknowledge that the majority of early-stage invest-
ments tend to be in high-technology industries. Therefore, we used two such industry
groups based on the industry classifications of .VentureXpert database – ICT (including
communications, computer-related, semiconductors and electronics) and Medical/Biotech
(including medical and pharmaceutical, and biotechnology) – and created variables
representing the proportion of investments made in each of these industry categories.

5. Results

Table 1 presents the correlations and descriptive statistics for the variables. To test the
hypotheses, we used OLS regression analysis. Our diagnostic tests indicated that the data did
not violate the assumptions of linearity, normality, homoskedasticity, and independence
necessary for an unbiased and efficient OLS estimation.7 In addition, we identified 4 multi-
variate outliers in the dataset using the method developed by Hadi (1992) and a strict signi-
ficance level (.p b .001). Our examination revealed that these outliers pertained to some of the
largest buyout firms. Given the distinction made between buyout and venture capital investing
(e.g., Wright and Robbie, 1998), we excluded these outliers from further analysis.

The results of the regression analysis are reported in Table 2. In the first estimation, we
entered the control variables for industry, investment activity prior to 1997, TMT charac-
teristics, and structural holes. This base model explained a statistically significant share of the
variance in the proportion of early-stage investments in the VC firms' portfolios (.R2 = .52, .
p b .001). Next, we added the main effects for finance capacity, reputation, and status. The
variables improved the model fit over the base model (Δ.R2 = .04, .p b .05). Hypothesis 1
proposed a negative relationship between finance capacity and early-stage investing. The effect
of finance capacity was negative and significant (.β =−.30,.p b .01) – higher finance capacity
was associated with fewer investments in early-stage companies (and hence more investments

7 Residual plots indicated a linear relationship between independent variables and dependent variables. In
addition, an information matrix test (Cameron and Trivedi, 1990) revealed no evidence for heteroskedasticity
(.p N .45) or non-normal skewness (.p N .24).


Table 1
Descriptive statistics and correlations a

Mean

S.D.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

1. Early-stage investments
2. ICT industries
3. Medical/Biotech industries
4. Number of first-time deals, pre-1997
5. Proportion of early-stage investments pre-1997
6. Functional diversity
7. Industry diversity
8. Team size
9. Founder tenure
10. Entrepreneurial experience
11. Structural holes
12. Finance capacity
13. Reputation
14. Status

.43
.77
.09
74.47
.40
.59
.55
6.65
.18
.19
.03
.56
−.04
.12

.19
.21
.10
92.99
.27
.16
.18
3.03
.22
.20
.02
.32
.67
.11

.43
.01
.11
.53
.27
.30
.11
−.09
.38
−.11
−.52
.15
.22

−.41
−.09
.12
.15
.27
.08
−.09
.21
−.37
−.25
.01
.26

−.32
.04
−.24
−.19
.59
.49
a .n = 104, except for the pre-1997 variables (.n = 103). All correlations with absolute values above 0.19 are significant at.p b .05.

.22
.18
−.08
−.09
−.01
−.04
.01
−.15
−.20
.16
.10

.33
.12
.00
.53
−.16
−.06
−.35
−.30
.88
.71

.23
.11
.18
−.15
.15
−.21
−.40
.38
.33

.56
.30
−.06
.20
−.05
−.44
.10
.14

.28
−.25
.48
−.15
−.23
.05
.15

−.05
.10
.25
−.24
−.10

−.08
−.41
.00
.10

−.25
.35
.45

−.34
−.30

.80

4
9
4

D

.

i

D
m
o
v

e
t

a
l
.

/

J
o
u
r
n
a
l

o
f

B
u
s
i
n
e
s
s

V
e
n
t
u
r
i
n
g

2
2

(
2
0
0
7
)

4
8
1
–
5
0
2


D. Dimov et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481–502

495

Table 2
Results of regression analysis for proportion of early-stage investments a

Base model

Main effects

Full model

Constant
ICT industries
Medical/Biotech industries
Number of first-time deals prior to 1997
Proportion of early stage investments prior to 1997
Functional diversity
Industry diversity
Team size
Founder tenure
Entrepreneurial experience
Structural holes
Finance capacity
Reputation
Status
Finance capacity × Reputation
Finance capacity × Status

.Model
.R2
Adjusted.R2
.F-statistic
Δ.R2
Δ.F
.n

a Standardized coefficients are shown in the table.
⁎ .p b .05.
⁎⁎ .p b .01.
⁎⁎⁎ .p b .001.
⁎⁎⁎⁎ .p b .10.

−.262 ⁎
.474⁎⁎⁎
.146 ⁎⁎⁎⁎
.084
.426 ⁎⁎⁎
.052
.059
−.021
.033
.207 ⁎
.227 ⁎

.517
.465
9.86 ⁎⁎⁎

−.078
.423⁎⁎⁎
.077
.163
.411⁎⁎⁎
−.115
.168
.039
.107
.092
.230 ⁎
−.301⁎⁎
−.134
−.059

.560
.496
8.72 ⁎⁎⁎
.043
2.88 ⁎

−.133
.534⁎⁎⁎
.134
.225
.351⁎⁎⁎
−.104
.193⁎⁎⁎⁎
−.029
.111
.022
.210 ⁎
−.326 ⁎⁎
−.211
−.065
.326 ⁎
−.483⁎⁎⁎

.614
.547
9.22 ⁎⁎⁎
.054
6.04 ⁎⁎

103

103

103

in late-stage companies).8 This provides support for Hypothesis 1. The main effects for
reputation and status were not significant (.β=−.13,.p N .10 and.β =−.06,.p N .10, respectively).
Finally, we estimated the full model by adding the interaction terms for finance capacity
and reputation and for finance capacity and status. In order to reduce the collinearity of the
interaction terms, we computed them by using the mean-centered values of finance
capacity, reputation, and status. We ensured that multicollinearity did not affect the results

8 The other side of this relationship suggests that low finance capacity is associated with more early-stage
investing. As we indicated earlier, in addition to the entrepreneurial experience included in the model, experience
that gives the VC partners extensive marketing or operations knowledge of particular industries may make them
more inclined to invest in these industries at earlier stages. We therefore examined the nature and effect of the
proportion of VC partners with experience in industries other than finance, consulting or law. Including this
variable in the model did not change the pattern or significance of the results presented here. In addition, this
variable was an almost direct opposite of finance capacity – VC partners tend to have experience either in finance
industries or in such non-finance industries, with few incidences of experience in both areas. This suggests that
low finance capacity implies more experience in these alternative industries, thereby explaining the higher degree
of early-stage investing.


496

D. Dimov et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481–502

Fig. 2. The moderating effect of reputation on the relationship between finance capacity and early-stage investing.

by calculating variance inflation factors – the highest value was 8.35, which was well
within the accepted limits (cf. Hair et al., 1998).

As the full model shows, the interactions explained a significant amount of the variance
over and above the main-effects model (Δ.R2 = .05, .p b .01) and further reinforced the
negative effect of finance capacity (.β =−.33, .p b .01). Specifically, the interactions of
finance capacity with both reputation (.β = .33,.p b .05) and status (.β =−.48,.p b .001) were
significant. In order to examine the nature of these interactions, we followed the

Fig. 3. The moderating effect of status on the relationship between finance capacity and early-stage investing.


D. Dimov et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481–502

497

recommendation of Cohen and Cohen (1983) and plotted the effects of finance capacity on
early-stage investments for reputation and status values of one standard deviation above
and below their means. The interaction plots are shown in Figs. 2 and 3. As Fig. 2 shows,
with increasing levels of finance capacity there is a decrease in the proportion of early-stage
investments but this decrease is greater for low-reputation firms than for high-reputation
firms. This suggests that as a VC firm's finance capacity increases, it is more likely to avoid
early-stage investments (i.e. allocate its funds to late-stage investments) if it has a low
reputation. This alleviating effect of reputation is opposite to that offered in Hypothesis 2.
As illustrated in Fig. 3, with increasing levels of finance capacity there is a decrease in
the proportion of early-stage investments and this decrease is greater for high-status firms
than for low-status firms. This suggests that for VC firms with high finance capacity, those
with high status are even more likely to avoid early-stage investments. This enhancing
effect of status provides support for Hypothesis 3.

6. Discussion and conclusion

The results of this paper suggest that investment choices are strongly influenced by the type of
expertise possessed by the VC firm's management team. In addition, this expertise–choice
relationship is moderated by the VC firm's social standing – its dynamics change as the firm's
reputation or status increase. While the current research view of venture capitalists is pre-
dominantly as homogeneous decision makers, the theoretical insights of this paper add important
team- and firm-specific elements to our understanding of the VC decision making process. These
in turn allow us to more rigorously and systematically understand why equally aspiring VC firms
make different investment choices. Such differences arise, in part, from differences in how
management teams interpret and react to the market information brought by prospective
ventures. Interpretation and reaction are thus endogenous to the decision making process – they
are largely dependent on decision makers' expertise and the social standing of their firm. We thus
demonstrate how the inclusion of psychological and sociological constructs can enrich the study
of venture capital decision making, long studied only through the lenses of finance.

More broadly, this work builds on and extends research suggesting that a team's variety must
be “requisite” to the complexities and challenges posed by the sub-environments that the
organization faces (Vogus and Sutcliffe, 2003). In addition, it adds fuel to arguments that
researchers need to move beyond the assumption that the environment is an undifferentiated
whole (Vogus and Sutcliffe, 2003). For example, this sample of VC firms faced the “same”
environment, but there was variance among these firms in terms of the sub-environments
(investment stages) in which they chose to invest. Finance capacity explained a significant
portion of this variance. It better equips VC firms to examine and select late-stage deals and thus,
to the extent that it is not offset by other experiences, steers them away from early-stage deals.
However, our findings also suggest that a main-effects-only relationship is too simplistic; it is
also dependent on the VC firm's status and reputation. We thus contribute to the upper echelon
perspective (Hambrick and Mason, 1984) by highlighting the moderating role of an
organization's external image and social position in top management team decision processes.
As expected, organizational status magnified the negative relationship between the
management team's finance capacity and investing in early-stage ventures. We followed
Podolny (2001) by investigating the VC industry, but while he focused on the effects of within-


498

D. Dimov et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481–502

firm changes in status, we focused on between-firm differences in status. Our contributing
finding is that while some high-status VC firms avoid early-stage ventures (consistent with
Podolny (2001)), others prefer them. The distinguishing factor between the two is the
management team's finance capacity. As status offers privileges that are not based on merit
(Washington and Zajac, 2005), our results suggest that these privileges are not easily extended
in all contexts – firms would not exert such privileges in situations where their expertise
clashes with the particular merit basis. To the extent that being involved in areas where one
lacks expertise could lead to negative outcomes, such an action may also be seen as a way of
avoiding negative association that could ultimately undermine one's status.

Contrary to what we expected, we found that reputation alleviated the relationship between
the finance capacity of the VC firm's management team and early-stage investing. Less
reputable firms with high finance capacity made fewer early-stage investments than their more
reputable counterparts. A possible explanation for this initially surprising finding might
involve the notion of slack resources, generally defined as the pool of resources in excess of
the minimum needed to produce a given level of organizational output (Nohria and Gulati,
1996). As reputation reflects good prior performance (Fombrun and Shanley, 1990), firms
with higher reputation may have higher accumulations of slack resources. These resources
may in turn enable them to engage in experimentation (Cyert and March, 1963) and in
implementation of new strategies (Hambrick and Snow, 1977). Thus, where slack resources
are available top managers have greater discretion to act (Finkelstein and Hambrick, 1990;
Levinthal and March, 1981). In the context of VC firms, the slack resources generated by
reputation may encourage VC firms to make “experimental” investments, i.e., those that fall
outside the scope of their current investment strategy as characterized by their requisite
expertise. The above argument is consistent with findings that reputation lowers the entry
barriers into innovative domains (Carrow, 1999).

Alternatively, the positive moderating effect of reputation may be explained by the VCs'
beliefs that they can influence the success of the portfolio company. Although a VC firm may
not have the requisite expertise for early-stage investments, its high reputation may enable it to
attract the necessary expertise externally. In addition, reputable VC firms may attract better-
quality ventures (Shane and Cable, 2002), which serves as additional alleviation of the lack of
requisite expertise.

The differential effects for status and reputation also raise some interesting possibilities
about the ways in which these two constructs are related to one another. Although they each
represent an aspect of perceived quality, our results suggest that they are tapping into different
facets of this underlying construct. The position in a social network (status) seems to put a
damper on behavior perhaps because it represents TMT's consideration for consistency
between behavior and social position – “we need to protect our position!” On the other hand,
reputation appears to do the opposite and may reflect a TMT's proactive adaptation, as
represented by the notion of experimentation (Cyert and March, 1963). By including both
status and reputation as separate measures, we were able to evaluate the influence of social
position and capture reputation effects.

With this study, we open the door to examining the interaction between intra- and inter-
organizational cognition (reputation and status ordering). This creates several possibilities for
future research into the relationship between an organization's reputation and status and its
perception of various dimensions of the environment. While researchers have shown that some


D. Dimov et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481–502

499

aspects of the environment are commonly perceived within industries, others, such as hostility
and controllability, are not (Sutcliffe and Huber, 1998). The findings of this paper suggest that
there may be reputation and/or status-based clustering in within-industry perceptions that can be
uncovered by future research. This may be particularly relevant to the VC industry where top VC
firms are often associated with the emergence of new technologies. Further, while TMT
composition is currently used as an exogenous predictor of organizations' perceptions and
actions (Hambrick and Mason, 1984), our findings suggest that there may be reputation and/or
status-related considerations affecting the composition of top management teams.

As with all studies there are a number of limitations to our study. First, although theory and
previous longitudinal research have suggested the causal direction hypothesized here, the
cross-sectional nature of our study does not allow us to rule out the possibility of reverse
causality. Second, we have not considered the possible effects of a potential venture's repu-
tation. For ventures started by renowned scientists or entrepreneurs there may be different
dynamics to the investment selection process than those alluded to in the paper. Third, by
taking a single snapshot of the management team, we were not able to consider the effects of
changes in the management team composition prior to our study and within the specified
investment period. Although the VC industry is not a high-turnover one (especially at the
general partner level), there nevertheless remains a possibility that some of the team members
were not involved in all the investments over the study period. Finally, we selected a sample
that reduced possible confounding factors but in doing so limited the generalizability of our
results. For those that do wish to relate the findings to the broader population of VC firms, we
point out that the firms in our sample tend to be older and larger than those in the broader
population, e.g., this sample includes 50% of the top 100 and 40% of the top 200 VC firms.
There are also a number of practical implications that emerge from our study. From the VC
firm's perspective, the results provide insight into how their management team expertise and
social standing affect their deal flow and ultimate investment selection. From the perspective
of the recipient of venture capital, our results suggest that entrepreneurs looking for early-stage
financing for their ventures would be well served by an in-depth examination of the man-
agement expertise of their potential VC firms. Given the strong network repercussion of a “no
decision” it pays to be exposed to the “right” VC firm early on.

In conclusion, there is a long-standing debate in the organizational and management
literatures on the internal versus external determinism of organizational outcomes. Although
there is implicit acceptance of the idea that the two are somehow intertwined in the complex
picture of organizational reality, researchers predominantly focus on one to the exclusion of
the other. We have shown that by combining both sets of considerations our explanatory power
greatly increases. More generally, the integration of complementary perspectives is a fruitful
avenue for advancing organizational research.

References

Amit, R., Brander, J., Zott, C., 1998. Why do venture capital firms exist? Theory and Canadian evidence. J. Bus.

Venturing 13, 441–466.

Bantel, K., Jackson, S.E., 1989. Top management and innovations in banking: does the composition of the top

management team make a difference? Strateg. Manage. J. 10, 107–124.

Blau, P.M., 1977. Inequality and Heterogeneity: a Primitive Theory of Social Structure. Free Press, New York.
Boeker, W., 1989. The development and institutionalization of subunit power in organizations. Adm. Sci. Q. 34, 388–410.


500

D. Dimov et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481–502

Bonacich, P., 1987. Power and centrality: a family of measures. Am. J. Sociol. 92, 1170–1182.
Borgatti, S.P., Everett, M.G., Freeman, L.C., 2002. Ucinet for Windows: Software for Social Network Analysis.

Analytic Technologies, Cambridge, MA.

Boyd, B.K., Dess, G.G., Rasheed, A.M., 1993. Divergence between archival and perceptual measures of the

environment: causes and consequences. Acad. Manage. Rev. 18, 204–226.

Bunderson, J.S., Sutcliffe, K.M., 2002. Comparing alternative conceptualizations of functional diversity in

management teams: process and performance effects. Acad. Manage. J. 45, 875–893.

Burt, R.S., 1992. Structural Holes: the Social Structure of Competition. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Bygrave, W.D., 1987. Syndicated investments by venture capital firms: a networking perspective. J. Bus.

Venturing 2, 139–154.

Cameron, A.C., Trivedi, P.K., 1990. The information matrix test and its implied alternative hypotheses. Papers,

vol. 372. California Davis – Institute of Governmental Affairs.

Carrow, K.A., 1999. Underwriting spreads and reputational capital: an analysis of new corporate securities.

J. Financ. Res. 22, 15–28.

Carter, R.B., Van Auken, H., 1994. Venture capital firms' preferences for projects in particular stages of

development. J. Small Bus. Manage. 32, 60–.

Chevalier, J., Ellison, G., 1997. Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to incentives. J. Polit. Econ. 105,

1167–1200.

Cohen, M.D., 1986. Artificial intelligence and the dynamic performance of organizational designs. In: March, J.G.,
Weissinger-Baylon, R., Ryan, P. (Eds.), Ambiguity and Command: Organizational Perspectives on Military
Decision-Making. Pitman Publishing Inc., New York, pp. 53–71.

Cohen, J., Cohen, P., 1983. Applied Multiple Regression/Correlation Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences.

Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.

Cyert, R.M., March, J.G., 1963. A Behavioral Theory of the Firm. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Diamond, D.W., 1989. Reputation acquisition in debt markets. J. Polit. Econ. 97, 828–862.
Dimov, D.P., Shepherd, D.A., 2005. Human capital theory and venture capital firms: exploring “home runs” and

“strike outs”. J. Bus. Venturing 21, 1–21.

Eisenhardt, K.M., 1989. Agency theory: an assessment and review. Acad. Manage. Rev. 14, 57–74.
Finkelstein, S., Hambrick, D.C., 1990. Top management team tenure and organizational outcomes: the moderating

role of managerial discretion. Adm. Sci. Q. 35, 484–503.

Fligstein, N., 1987. The intraorganizational power struggle: the rise of finance presidents in large corporations,

1919–1979. Am. Sociol. Rev. 52, 44–58.

Flood, P.C., Fong, C., Smith, K.G., O'Regan, P., Moore, S., Morley, M., 1997. Top management teams and

pioneering: a resource-based view. Int. J. Hum. Resour. Manag. 8, 291–306.

Fombrun, C., 1996. Reputation: Realizing Value from the Corporate Image. Harvard Business School Press,

Boston, MA.

Fombrun, C., Shanley, M., 1990. What's in a name? Reputation building and corporate strategy. Acad. Manage. J.

33, 233–258.

Gompers, P.A., 1996. Grandstanding in the venture capital industry. J. Financ. Econ. 43, 133–156.
Gulati, R., Higgins, M.C., 2003. Which ties matter when? The contingent effects of interorganizational

partnerships on IPO success. Strateg. Manage. J. 24, 127–144.

Hadi, A.S., 1992. Identifying multiple outliers in multivariate data. J. R. Stat. Soc., Ser. B 54, 761–771.
Hair, J.F., Anderson, R.E., Tathum, R.L., Black, W.C., 1998. Multivariate Data Analysis with Readings.

Macmillan, New York.

Hambrick, D.C., Mason, P.A., 1984. Upper echelons: the organization as a reflection of its top managers. Acad.

Manage. Rev. 9, 193–206.

Hambrick, D.C., Snow, C., 1977. A contextual model of strategic decision making in organizations. In: Taylor, R.L.,

O'Connell, J.J., Zawacki, R.A., Warick, D.D. (Eds.), Academy of Management Proceedings, pp. 109–112.

Hambrick, D.C., Cho, T., Chen, M., 1996. The influence of top management team heterogeneity on firms'

competitive moves. Adm. Sci. Q. 41, 659–684.

Higgins, M.C., Gulati, R., 2006. Stacking the deck: the effects of top management backgrounds in investor

decisions. Strateg. Manage. J. 27, 1–25.

Hisrich, R.D., Jankowicz, A.D., 1990. Intuition in venture capital decisions: an exploratory study using a new

technique. J. Bus. Venturing 5, 49–62.


D. Dimov et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481–502

501

Ippolito, R.A., 1992. Consumer reaction to measures of poor quality: evidence from the mutual fund industry.

J. Law Econ. 35, 45–70.

Klevorick, A.K., Levin, R.C., Nelson, R.R., Winter, S.G., 1995. On the sources and significance of interindustry

differences in technological opportunities. Res. Policy 24, 185–205.

Lang, G.E., Lang, K., 1988. Recognition and renown: the survival of artistic reputation. Am. J. Sociol. 94, 79–109.
Lerner, J., 1994. Venture capitalists and the decision to go public. J. Financ. Econ. 35, 293–316.
Lerner, J., 1995. Venture capitalists and the oversight of private firms. J. Finance 50, 301–318.
Levinthal, D., March, J.G., 1981. A model of adaptive organizational search. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 2, 307–333.
MacMillan, I., Siegel, R., Subbanarasimha, P.N., 1985. Criteria used by venture capitalists to evaluate new venture

proposals. J. Bus. Venturing 1, 119–128.

March, J.G., Shapira, Z., 1987. Managerial perspectives on risk and risk taking. Manage. Sci. 33, 1404–1418.
McDonald, M.L., Westphal, J.D., 2003. Getting by with the advice of their friends: CEOs' advice networks and

firms' strategic responses to poor performance. Adm. Sci. Q. 48, 1–32.

Milgrom, P., Roberts, J., 1982. Predation, reputation, and entry deterrence. J. Econ. Theory 27, 280–312.
Milliken, F.J., 1990. Perceiving and interpreting environmental change: an examination of college administrators'

interpretation of changing demographics. Acad. Manage. J. 33, 42–63.

Mitchell, F., Reid, G.C., Terry, N.G., 1995. Post investment demand for accounting information by venture

capitalists. Account. Bus. Res. 25, 186–196.

Muzyka, D., Birley, S., Leleux, B., 1996. Trade-offs in the investment decisions of European venture capitalists.

J. Bus. Venturing 11, 273–287.

Nohria, N., Gulati, R., 1996. Is slack good or bad for innovation? Acad. Manage. J. 39, 1245–1264.
Podolny, J.M., 1993. A status-based model of market competition. Am. J. Sociol. 98, 829–872.
Podolny, J.M., 1994. Market uncertainty and the social character of economic exchange. Adm. Sci. Q. 39,

Podolny, J.M., 2001. Networks as the pipes and prisms of the market. Am. J. Sociol. 107, 33–60.
Roberts, P.W., Dowling, G.R., 2002. Corporate reputation and sustained superior financial performance. Strateg.

458–483.

Manage. J. 23, 1077–1093.

Rosman, A., O'Neill, H.M., 1993. Comparing the information acquisition strategies of venture capital and

commercial lenders: a computer-based experiment. J. Bus. Venturing 8, 443–460.

Sandberg, W.R., 1986. New Venture Performance: the Role of Strategy, Industry Structure, and the Entrepreneur.

Lexington Books, Lexington, MA.

Shane, S., Cable, D., 2002. Network ties, reputation, and the financing of new ventures. Manage. Sci. 48, 364–381.
Shepherd, D.A., Ettenson, R., Crouch, A., 2000. New venture strategy and profitability: a venture capitalist's

assessment. J. Bus. Venturing 15, 449–467.

Siri, E.R., Tufano, P., 1998. Costly search and mutual fund flows. J. Finance 53, 1589–1622.
Sorenson, O., Stuart, T.E., 2001. Syndication networks and the spatial distribution of venture capital investments.

Am. J. Sociol. 106, 1546–1588.

Stinchcombe, A., 1965. Social structure and organizations. In: March, J.G. (Ed.), Handbook of Organizations.

Rand McNally & Co., Chicago, IL.

Stuart, T.E., 1998. Network positions and propensities to collaborate: an investigation of strategic alliance

formation in a high-technology industry. Adm. Sci. Q. 43, 668–698.

Stuart, T.E., Hoang, H., Hybels, R.C., 1999. Interorganizational endorsements and the performance of

entrepreneurial ventures. Adm. Sci. Q. 44, 315–349.

Sutcliffe, K.M., 1994. What executives notice: accurate perceptions in top management teams. Acad. Manage. J.

37, 1360–1379.

Sutcliffe, K.M., Huber, G.P., 1998. Firm and industry as determinants of executive perceptions of the environment.

Strateg. Manage. J. 19, 793–807.

Thornton, P.H., Ocasio, W., 1999.

in
organizations: executive succession in the higher education publishing industry, 1958–1990. Am. J.
Sociol. 105, 801–843.

logics and the historical contingency of power

Institutional

Tyebjee, T.T., Bruno, A.V., 1984. A model of venture capitalist investment activity. Manage. Sci. 30, 1051–1066.
Van de Ven, A.H., 1986. Central problems in the management of innovation. Manage. Sci. 32, 591–607.
Vogus, T.J., Sutcliffe, K.M., 2003. Functional diversity versus requisite variety in top management teams. Working

Paper. University of Michigan Business School.


502

D. Dimov et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 481–502

Washington, M., Zajac, E.J., 2005. Status evolution and competition: theory and evidence. Acad. Manage. J. 48,

White, H.C., 1981. Where do markets come from? Am. J. Sociol. 87, 517–547.
Williams, K.Y., O'Reilly, C.A., 1998. Demography and diversity in organizations: a review of 40 years of research. In:
Staw, B.M., Cummings, L.L. (Eds.), Research in Organizational Behaviour. JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 77–140.
Wright, M., Robbie, K., 1998. Venture capital and private equity: a review and synthesis. J. Bus. Finance Account.

281–296.

25, 521–570.

Wright, M., Robbie, K., Ennew, C., 1997. Venture capitalists and serial entrepreneurs. J. Bus. Venturing 12,

227–249.

Zacharakis, A.L., Shepherd, D.A., 2001. The nature of information and overconfidence on venture capitalist's

decision making. J. Bus. Venturing 16, 311–332.

