Journal of Management
2000, Vol. 26, No. 1, 31– 61

A Resource-Based Theory

of Strategic Alliances

T. K. Das

Baruch College, City University of New York

Bing-Sheng Teng

George Washington University

The resource-based view of the ﬁrm has not been systematically
applied to strategic alliances. By examining the role of ﬁrm resources in
strategic alliances, we attempt, in this paper, to put forward a general
resource-based theory of strategic alliances, synthesizing the various
ﬁndings in the literature on alliances from a resource-based view. The
proposed theory covers four major aspects of strategic alliances: ra-
tionale, formation, structural preferences, and performance. The re-
source-based view suggests that the rationale for alliances is the value-
creation potential of ﬁrm resources that are pooled together. We note
that certain resource characteristics, such as imperfect mobility, imita-
bility, and substitutability, promise accentuated value-creation, and
thus facilitate alliance formation. We discuss how the resource proﬁles
of partner ﬁrms would determine their structural preferences in terms of
four major categories of alliances: equity joint ventures, minority equity
alliances, bilateral contract-based alliances, and unilateral contract-
based alliances. As part of the theory, we propose a typology of
inter-partner resource alignment based on the two dimensions of re-
source similarity and resource utilization, yielding four types of align-
ment: supplementary, surplus, complementary, and wasteful. We also
discuss how partner resource alignment directly affects collective
strengths and inter-ﬁrm conﬂicts in alliances, which in turn contribute
to alliance performance. Finally, we develop a number of propositions
to facilitate empirical testing of the theoretical framework, suggest ways
to carry out this testing, indicate future research directions, and list
some of the more signiﬁcant managerial implications of the framework.
© 2000 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.

The resource-based view has recently emerged as an alternative approach to
understanding industrial organizations and their competitive strategies. According

Direct all correspondence to: T. K. Das, Department of Management, Zicklin School of Business, Baruch
College, City University of New York, 17 Lexington Avenue, New York, NY 10010; Phone: (212) 802-6908;
E-mail: TK_Das@baruch.cuny.edu.

Copyright © 2000 by Elsevier Science Inc. 0149-2063

31


32

T.K. DAS AND B. TENG

to this view, a ﬁrm is equivalent to a broad set of resources that it owns.
Wernerfelt (1984: 172) deﬁnes resources as “those (tangible and intangible) assets
which are tied semi-permanently to the ﬁrm.” Unlike traditional industrial orga-
nization economics, which relies heavily on the analysis of the competitive
environment, the resource-based view focuses on the analysis of various resources
possessed by the ﬁrm. Because many resources are ﬁrm-speciﬁc and not perfectly
mobile or imitable, ﬁrms are continuously heterogeneous in terms of their re-
source base. Sustained ﬁrm resource heterogeneity, thus, becomes a possible
source of competitive advantage, which then leads to economic rents, or above-
normal returns.

Traditional strategy research suggests that ﬁrms need to seek a strategic ﬁt
between their internal characteristics (strengths and weaknesses) and their exter-
nal environment (opportunities and threats). Considerable emphasis has usually
been given, however, to a ﬁrm’s competitive environment and its competitive
position. In contradistinction to that external emphasis, the resource-based view
embodies a different approach, which stresses the internal aspects of a ﬁrm.
Barney (1991), for example, points out that strategy models based mainly on
environmental and industrial scrutiny make the unrealistic assumption of ﬁrm
homogeneity. Rather than being deﬁned by the competitive environment, the
parameters of a ﬁrm’s competitive strategy are critically inﬂuenced by its accu-
mulated resources. In other words, what a ﬁrm possesses would determine what
it accomplishes. Accordingly, a ﬁrm should pay more attention to its resources
than to its competitive environment. The contribution of the resource-based view
is that it develops the idea that “a ﬁrm’s competitive position is deﬁned by a
bundle of unique resources and relationships” (Rumelt, 1984: 557), and thus
provides a balance vis-a`-vis environmental models of strategy.

Although some theorists suggest that the resource-based view could be a new
theory of the ﬁrm, it is still part of a developing paradigm in strategy research
(Amit & Schoemaker, 1993; Barney, 1991; Conner, 1991; Conner & Prahalad,
1996; Grant, 1996; Mahoney & Pandian, 1992; Mehra, 1996; Miller & Shamsie,
1996; Roth, 1995). The usefulness and richness of the paradigm need to be
demonstrated in a variety of strategy areas. Indeed, researchers are still in the
phase of accumulating applications of the resource-based view. For example,
Peteraf (1993) shows that sustainable differences in ﬁrm proﬁtability that cannot
be attributed to industrial differences can be better explained by the resource-
based view. Our understanding of diversiﬁcation strategy is also enhanced be-
cause the resource-based view strongly argues for strategic relatedness within a
conglomerate (Chatterjee & Wernerfelt, 1991). Harrison, Hitt, Hoskisson, and
Ireland (1991) examined the performance of mergers and acquisitions through a
resource-based perspective. Global strategy, technological strategy, and strategic
regulation have also been studied by applying the resource-based view (Collis,
1991; Leonard-Barton, 1992; Maijoor & Van Witteloostuijn, 1996).

One area that remains under-explored in the literature is the resource-based
view of strategic alliances, even though such alliances are rapidly increasing in
importance in today’s competitive landscape (Das & Teng, in press; Doz &
Hamel, 1998; Gomes-Casseres, 1996; Yoshino & Rangan, 1995). A resource-

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


THEORY OF STRATEGIC ALLIANCES

33

based view seems particularly appropriate for examining strategic alliances be-
cause ﬁrms essentially use alliances to gain access to other ﬁrms’ valuable
resources. Thus, ﬁrm resources provide a relevant basis for studying alliances.
The few studies that have applied the resource-based perspective to strategic
alliances cover only limited aspects (e.g., Blodgett, 1991; Eisenhardt & Schoon-
hoven, 1996; Kogut, 1988; Mowery, Oxley, & Silverman, 1998; Rouse & Dael-
lenbach, 1999; Tyler & Steensma, 1995, 1998; Varadarajan & Cunningham,
1995). Focusing exclusively on the resource-based view of strategic alliances,
Eisenhardt and Schoonhoven (1996) found essentially that alliances are more
likely to be formed when both ﬁrms are in vulnerable strategic positions (i.e., in
need of resources) or when they are in strong social positions (i.e., possess
valuable resources to share). Other researchers have tackled only selected aspects
of alliances, such as organizational knowledge (Kogut, 1988) and international
business (Blodgett, 1991; Lyles & Salk, 1997). Thus, a general resource-based
theory of strategic alliances has yet to emerge. Our purpose here is to develop a
more encompassing resource-based theory of strategic alliances than is available
in the extant literature.

We divide the article into four parts. First, we examine the rationale for
entering into strategic alliances from a resource perspective, as compared with a
transaction-cost perspective. We then identify the resource characteristics of
individual ﬁrms that are the antecedents of alliance formation. Third, we discuss
structural preferences for alliances, as determined by the resource types of partner
ﬁrms. Finally, we develop a typology of inter-partner resource alignments and
explore the effects of these resource alignments on alliance performance. The four
parts of the article set out the four essential components of a resource-based
theory of strategic alliances: rationale, formation, structure, and performance.
These four components are integral to a general theory of alliances, because they
have been the main focus of alliance research. What has been lacking in the
literature thus far is the fact that none of these aspects has been adequately
examined from the resource-based perspective. Taken together, the four aspects
contribute toward a comprehensive and integrated theory of strategic alliances
from the resource-based viewpoint. To facilitate empirical testing of the resource-
based theory of strategic alliances presented here, we also develop a number of
propositions. We represent in Figure 1 a schematic of our exposition.

Resource-Based Rationale of Alliances

Strategic alliances are voluntary cooperative inter-ﬁrm agreements aimed at
achieving competitive advantage for the partners. The proliferation of strategic

Figure 1. Schematic of Exposition

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


34

T.K. DAS AND B. TENG

alliances in recent years marks a shift in the conception of the intrinsic nature of
competition, which is increasingly characterized by constant technological inno-
vations and speedy entry into new markets. The critical part played by technology
and speed in the new competitive calculus, among other factors, has led to the
contention that the key to success in the coming years lies in the creation of
collaborative advantage through strategic alliances.

To account for the emergence of strategic alliances as well as their operation,
a number of theories and models have been proposed, such as transaction cost
economics (Hennart, 1988; Williamson, 1985), game theory (Parkhe, 1993), the
strategic behavior model (Hagedoorn, 1993; Porter, 1985), the strategic decision-
making model (Das & Teng, 1996a,b, 1997a, 1998a,b, 1999b,c; Tyler &
Steensma, 1995, 1998), social exchange theory (Axelrod, 1984; Blau, 1964), and
power-dependence theory (Chisholm, 1989; Pfeffer & Salancik, 1978; Schmidt &
Kochan, 1977; Van de Ven & Walker, 1984). For brief discussions of these
theories the reader is referred to two recent reviews by Gray and Wood (1991) and
Smith, Carroll, and Ashford (1995). These theories, especially the dominant
transaction cost view, have proven to be useful in understanding the phenomenon
of strategic alliances. They do not, however, assign a signiﬁcant role to partner
ﬁrm resources in theorizing about strategic alliances. In our view, as strategic
alliances are essentially the result of resource integration among ﬁrms, a resource-
based view has the potential for helping us understand alliances better. From a
resource-based perspective, Eisenhardt and Schoonhoven (1996: 137) view alli-
ances as “cooperative relationships driven by a logic of strategic resource needs
and social resource opportunities.” Van de Ven (1976) noted early on that the
process of building inter-organizational relationships can be studied as a ﬂow of
resources among organizations. For example, a joint venture is formed when “two
or more ﬁrms pool a portion of their resources within a common legal organiza-
tion” (Kogut, 1988: 319).

Scholars have often considered strategic alliances an alternative to internal-
ization on the one hand and market exchanges on the other. That is, for a given
factor (product or service), a ﬁrm may choose to: (1) produce it on its own; (2)
purchase it from the spot markets; or (3) make it jointly with partner ﬁrms. We
now compare the transaction cost rationale with the resource-based rationale as
regards this question of ownership decision among internalization, market ex-
changes, and alliances (see Table 1).

Transaction Cost Rationale

In transaction cost economics, a ﬁrm’s ownership decision centers on min-
imizing the sum of transaction costs and production costs (Coase, 1937; William-
son, 1975). While transaction costs refer to costs that are incurred from activities
necessary for an exchange (such as writing and enforcing a contract), production
costs come from coordinating activities in-house, in terms of learning, organizing,
and managing production. Since internalization (e.g., mergers, acquisitions, and
internal development) controls transaction costs effectively, this will be preferred
when transaction costs of an exchange are high. In contrast, market exchanges

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


THEORY OF STRATEGIC ALLIANCES

35

Table 1. Ownership Decisions Based on Transaction Cost and

Resource-Based Rationales

Transaction Cost Rationale

Resource-Based Rationale

Logic behind

the Ownership
Decision

“Minimizing the sum of production
and transaction costs” (Kogut, 1988:
320)

Mergers/

Acquisitions/
Internal
Development

High transaction costs (i.e., high
asset speciﬁcity, uncertainty, and
frequency of the transactions, and
high costs for controlling
opportunistic behavior) and/or low
production costs (i.e., coordinating
and learning) (Kogut, 1988)

Market

Transactions

Low transaction costs and/or high
production costs

Strategic

Alliances

Medium transaction and production
costs, i.e., “when the transaction
costs associated with an exchange
are intermediate and not high enough
to justify vertical integration . . .”
(Gulati, 1995: 87)

“JVs are formed when transactional
hazards suggest that internalization is
efﬁcient . . . , but constraints of
various kinds prohibit full
internalization . . . .”
(Ramanathan et al., 1997: 57)

“The situational characteristics best
suited for a joint venture [rather than
a contract] are high uncertainty over
specifying and monitoring
performance, in addition to a high
degree of asset speciﬁcity.”
(Kogut, 1988: 320).

Maximizing ﬁrm value through
gaining access to other ﬁrms’
valuable resources (Madhok, 1997;
Ramanathan et al., 1997)

“A ﬁrm will favor acquisitions over
joint ventures when the assets it
needs are not commingled with other
unneeded assets within the ﬁrm that
holds them, and hence can be
acquired by buying the ﬁrm or a part
of it.” (Hennart & Reddy, 1997: 1)

“If the market is muniﬁcent or the
ﬁrm is pursuing a strategy for which
it has extensive resource capabilities,
there is much less incentive to
cooperate. Firms are more likely to
continue alone.” (Eisenhardt &
Schoonhoven, 1996: 137)

When “the purchase of the
resource’s service from the ﬁrm that
possesses it” (Chi, 1994: 272) can be
efﬁciently conducted through the
market.

Alliances preferred “when the
critical inputs required to pursue the
opportunity are owned by different
parties and when these inputs are
inseparable from the other assets of
the owner ﬁrms.” (Ramanathan et
al., 1997: 65)

“Collaborations are a useful vehicle
for enhancing knowledge in critical
areas of functioning where the
requisite level of knowledge is
lacking and cannot be developed
within an acceptable timeframe or
cost.” (Madhok, 1997: 43)

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


36

T.K. DAS AND B. TENG

bear transaction costs but avoid production costs, so that they will be used when
transaction costs are low and production costs are high.

Strategic alliances combine the features of internalization and market ex-
changes, because they partially internalize an exchange (e.g., joint ventures).
Contracts will still be needed, but since they are often incomplete, much of the
activities will be left to joint coordination. As a result, researchers suggest that
alliances will be preferred “when the transaction costs associated with an ex-
change are intermediate and not high enough to justify vertical integration . . .”
(Gulati, 1995: 87). If alliances are viewed as reﬂecting semi-internalization, a
slightly different conception would hold that alliances can be justiﬁed when
internalization is more cost efﬁcient “but constraints of various kinds prohibit full
internalization” (Ramanathan, Seth, & Thomas, 1997: 57).

Resource-Based Rationale

In contrast to the transaction cost logic, which emphasizes cost minimization,
the resource-based rationale emphasizes value maximization of a ﬁrm through
pooling and utilizing valuable resources. That is, ﬁrms are viewed as attempting
to ﬁnd the optimal resource boundary through which the value of their resources
is better realized than through other resource combinations. The difference be-
tween the two perspectives is sometimes reﬂected in the competing research
hypotheses derived from the two theories. For example, transaction-cost theorists
suggest that whether or not partner ﬁrms are in the same industry will affect the
choice of joint venture or acquisition (Balakrishnan & Koza, 1993). The resource-
based view, focusing on resource integration, does not imply such a relationship.
The argument is that resource integration can be accomplished regardless of
industry afﬁliation (see Hennart & Reddy, 1997: 5).

According to Barney (1991: 102), “a ﬁrm is said to have a competitive
advantage when it is implementing a value creating strategy not simultaneously
implemented by any current or potential competitors.” The reason such a strategy
is not ordinarily implemented by competitors is that they may not possess the
appropriate resources. The strategy literature has established the close relationship
between resources (or competence) and competitive advantage (Reed & DeFil-
lippi, 1990).

The resource-based view suggests that valuable ﬁrm resources are usually
scarce, imperfectly imitable, and lacking in direct substitutes (Barney, 1991;
Peteraf, 1993). Thus, the trading and accumulation of resources becomes a
strategic necessity. When efﬁcient market exchange of resources is possible,
“ﬁrms are more likely to continue alone” (Eisenhardt & Schoonhoven, 1996) and
rely on the market. However, although market transactions are the default mode,
efﬁcient exchanges are often not possible on the spot market. Certain resources
are not perfectly tradable, as they are either mingled with other resources or
embedded in organizations (Chi, 1994). Hence, mergers, acquisitions, and stra-
tegic alliances are variously employed.

Thus, the resource-based view considers strategic alliances and mergers/
acquisitions as strategies used to access other ﬁrms’ resources, for the purpose of
garnering otherwise unavailable competitive advantages and values to the ﬁrm.

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


THEORY OF STRATEGIC ALLIANCES

37

Although researchers have explored the resource-based view of alliances under
different names—such as the property rights perspective (Ramanathan et al.,
1997) and the organizational capability perspective (Madhok, 1997)—the overall
rationale for entering into a strategic alliance appears fairly simple. It is to
aggregate, share, or exchange valuable resources with other ﬁrms when these
resources cannot be efﬁciently obtained through market exchanges or mergers/
acquisitions (M&As). In sum, it is about creating the most value out of one’s
existing resources by combining these with others’ resources, provided, of course,
that this combination results in optimal returns.

The resource-based view further indicates the conditions under which alli-
ances will be preferred over M&As. These conditions have mainly to do with
obtaining and retaining resources. Kogut’s (1988) organizational learning model,
which is a part of the broad resource-based view, offers a reﬁned view of alliance
formation based on ﬁrm resources such as knowledge and technology. According
to him, there are two possible reasons ﬁrms forge alliances: either to acquire the
other’s organizational know-how, or to maintain one’s own know-how while
beneﬁting from another’s resources. Extending this approach to all types of ﬁrm
resources, we suggest that there are two related, but distinct, motives for ﬁrms to
use strategic alliances or M&As: (1) to obtain others’ resources; and (2) to retain
and develop one’s own resources by combining them with others’ resources.

Obtaining Resources. Firms may use alliances or mergers/acquisitions to
obtain resources possessed by other ﬁrms that are valuable and essential to
achieving competitive advantage. In the international arena, multinational com-
panies may enter foreign markets by acquiring a local company. They may also
seek the resources of their local partners, such as local facilities, knowledge, and
connections, by forming international joint ventures (Beamish, 1987; Yan &
Gray, 1994). In new product development, strategic alliances are used to pool the
technological know-how and expertise of different ﬁrms (Leonard-Barton, 1992;
Teece, 1992). Furthermore, M&As are often used to create economies of scale in
R&D.

While both alliances and mergers/acquisitions can accomplish the objective
of obtaining a selected ﬁrm’s resources, the resource-based view suggests two
conditions that favor alliances over M&As. First, strategic alliances serve as a
more viable option than M&As when not all the resources possessed by the target
ﬁrm are valuable to the acquiring ﬁrm. Second, since a certain degree of asset
speciﬁcity is usually involved, some of the less valuable or redundant resources
in a M&A cannot be easily disposed of without taking a loss (Ramanathan et al.,
1997). Hennart and Reddy (1997) reason that when unwanted assets are mixed
with needed assets, and the two are not readily separable, acquisitions inevitably
result in unneeded assets. When non-desired assets are not easily separable,
strategic alliances allow the partner ﬁrms to access only the assets each desires
while bypassing non-desired ones, thereby augmenting overall value. Thus, the
distinct advantage of strategic alliances is to have access to precisely those
resources that are needed, with minimum superﬂuity. In support of this view,
Hennart and Reddy (1997: 4) found that ﬁrms prefer acquisitions “when the
desired assets are ‘digestible.’”

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


38

T.K. DAS AND B. TENG

Retaining Resources. Whereas the motive of obtaining resources is to
reach others’ resources, the motive of “retaining resources” is to keep one’s own
valuable resources securely in the ﬁrm. Kogut (1988) suggests that ﬁrms may
wish to maintain certain resources but lack the setup to make use of them. For
example, sometimes there may be an excess of research personnel, without
sufﬁcient meaningful work at hand. Rather than laying these individuals off, ﬁrms
out-source them by seeking projects that can be carried out in conjunction with the
resources of other ﬁrms, such as ﬁnancial and physical resources. To that end,
strategic alliances may help retain those resources that are currently under-utilized
internally. Nelson and Winter (1982) maintain that, in order to prevent their
know-how from decaying, ﬁrms sometimes need to engage in alliances, in order
to avail themselves of opportunities to keep using these capabilities— or remem-
bering-by-doing. In this case, the choice between alliances and M&As is about
whether one should relinquish one’s resources permanently (M&A) or for a
speciﬁed period only (alliances). The possible advantage of strategic alliances
over M&As is that the ﬁrm only temporarily relinquishes its resources, which
remain available for future internal deployment. Thus, strategic alliances will be
preferred only when discounted present value of the deployment of its resources
in the future is greater than the realized value of selling its resources in the
present.

The difference between the two motives, gaining access to additional re-
sources possessed by others, and retaining one’s own resources, is that, while
obtaining resources is more about creating competitive advantage in the imme-
diate present, retaining resources is concerned more with securing competitive
advantage later on. Despite this difference, the commonality of the two motives
seems more important: The realized values of those resources contributed to the
alliance must be higher than the value realized either by selling or by utilizing the
resources in-house. Regardless of whether the motive is to use others’ resources
temporarily (i.e., obtaining) or to let others use one’s own resources temporarily
(i.e., retaining), the principal decision criterion should be the opportunity cost of
the resources. Strategic alliances will be forged only when the realized value of
those resources contributed to the alliance is higher than their value as realized
through either internal uses or relinquishment. If more long-term value can be
created by either the internal deployment or the sale of the resources, strategic
alliances should not be used at all.

Resource Characteristics and Alliance Formation

In light of the above discussion on the resource-based rationale of strategic
alliances, we now examine the speciﬁc resource proﬁles of individual ﬁrms that
tend to encourage the formation of strategic alliances (see Figure 2 for the
proposed analytical framework). Existing studies suggest such antecedents to
alliance formation as internationalization (Yoshino & Rangan, 1995), technolog-
ical needs (Hagedoorn, 1993; Tyler & Steensma, 1995), perceived environmental
uncertainty (Dickson & Weaver, 1997), and various other strategic motives
(Glaister & Buckley, 1996). In our theory, ﬁrm resources are important indicators

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


THEORY OF STRATEGIC ALLIANCES

39

Figure 2. Analytical Framework and Proposed Relationships

of the likelihood of ﬁrms entering into strategic alliances. For instance, the
possession of critical resources is a prerequisite for alliance formation. Using an
experimental design, Dollinger, Golden, and Saxton (1997) found that a target
ﬁrm’s reputation, including elements such as product and management reputation,
encourages decision-makers to form a strategic alliance with it. Apparently, some
ﬁrms are less self-reliant than others, and tend to actively seek out partners for
strategic alliances. We submit that such differences can be accounted for by the
ﬁrms’ resource characteristics.

The resource-based view suggests that ﬁrm resource heterogeneity is not a
short-term phenomenon; rather, a degree of heterogeneity tends to be sustained

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


40

T.K. DAS AND B. TENG

over time (Peteraf, 1993). Some resource characteristics that prevent ﬁrms from
moving toward resource homogeneity have been identiﬁed as: imperfect mobility,
imperfect imitability, and imperfect substitutability (Barney, 1991; Chi, 1994;
Dierickx & Cool, 1989; Peteraf, 1993).

Imperfect mobility refers to the difﬁculty, as well as the nontrivial costs, of
moving certain resources from one ﬁrm to another. According to Dierickx and
Cool (1989), factor markets are often incomplete and imperfect, so that many
resources are either not tradable at all or not perfectly tradable. For example,
resources such as ﬁrm reputation and organizational culture are simply not
tradable. Many resources, such as the tacit knowledge of ﬁrms, lose much of their
value if moved from their current organizational context and other resources used
in conjunction.

Whereas imperfect mobility is concerned with barriers to getting the re-
sources from the owners, imperfect imitability and imperfect substitutability refer
to barriers to obtaining similar resources from elsewhere (Barney, 1991; Peteraf,
1993). Lippman and Rumelt (1982) introduced the concept of causal ambiguity,
or the lack of transparency about what resources are responsible for competitive
advantage. Causal ambiguity makes the connection between resources and com-
petitive advantage less clear, and thus constrains a ﬁrm’s ability to imitate its
competitors and/or to employ substitutes. Reed and DeFillippi (1990) identify
three resource characteristics that give rise to causal ambiguity: tacitness, com-
plexity, and speciﬁcity.

Imperfect mobility, imperfect imitability, and imperfect substitutability of
ﬁrm resources are not only essential for sustained resource heterogeneity, but are
also instrumental in the formation of strategic alliances. Imagine a ﬁrm whose
resources are perfectly or easily mobile, imitable, and substitutable. Clearly, other
ﬁrms would be in a position to bid desirable resources away from such a ﬁrm in
factor markets. There would then hardly be a need to form strategic alliances.
Should all desirable resources be available for acquisition in factor markets at fair
prices, it would be foolhardy for ﬁrms to get involved in strategic alliances, which
usually entail high governance costs (Osborn & Baughn, 1990) and some sacriﬁce
of organizational control (Lyles & Reger, 1993). A fairly self-evident premise for
this argument is that resources that are not perfectly mobile, imitable, and
substitutable can be obtained through alliances. For example, although reputation
is not tradable, it can be transferred to a strategic alliance formed by a ﬁrm, as in
the Universal Card case between AT&T and TSYS (Sankar, Boulton, Davidson,
Snyder, & Ussery, 1995).

As our earlier discussion on alliance rationale has shown, only if a ﬁrm
cannot efﬁciently get needed resources from elsewhere— except by a sharing
arrangement with its owners—will it be willing to form a strategic alliance. For
instance, since there is, in most cases, a well-developed—that is, perfectly mobile
and substitutable— capital market for establishing businesses, ﬁrms with only
ﬁnancial resources to share may provide no particular advantage and are usually
not approached for strategic alliances. Nevertheless, in cases where particular
projects are too risky and the capital market fails to provide needed capital, the
ﬁnancial resources available from provider ﬁrms become imperfectly mobile and

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


THEORY OF STRATEGIC ALLIANCES

41

imperfectly substitutable. As a result, these ﬁrms will be wooed by those in need
of capital. The point is that the more imperfect the mobility, imitability, and
substitutability of a ﬁrm’s resources is, the more likely that others will be
interested in forming alliances with it. For instance, in the pharmaceutical indus-
try, small biotechnology ﬁrms often ally with large pharmaceutical companies for
R&D activities. However, the major reason is not just to have access to ﬁnancial
resources, which are quite mobile (otherwise, we would have seen many partners
from other industries also). The key is that, in addition to ﬁnancial resources, large
pharmaceutical companies also provide intangible resources such as marketing
and operations know-how—which are far less mobile, imitable, and substitutable.

P1: The more a ﬁrm’s resources are characterized by imperfect mo-
bility, imperfect imitability, and imperfect substitutability, the more
likely the ﬁrm will get involved in strategic alliances.

Resource Types and Structural Preferences

In this section we examine how different resource types inﬂuence the choice
of alliance structures. To assist us in this examination, we identify two major
types of resources and propose a four-part typology of alliance forms.
Resource Types

Since ﬁrm resources are of various types, it is no surprise that scholars have
proposed a number of resource typologies. The simplest approach differentiates
between tangible and intangible resources (Grant, 1991). Barney (1991) classiﬁes
ﬁrm resources into physical capital resources, human capital resources, and
organizational capital resources. Hofer and Schendel (1978) suggest that a ﬁrm’s
resource proﬁle includes the following: ﬁnancial, physical, managerial, human,
organizational, and technological resources. Das and Teng (1998a) recently
analyzed the different contingent “orientations” that ﬁrms tend to adopt for
managing four speciﬁc kinds of resources—namely, ﬁnancial, technological,
physical, managerial—in the alliance making process. These descriptive typolo-
gies, however, lack adequate theoretical underpinnings. Miller and Shamsie
(1996) suggest that, based on the notion of barriers to imitability, all resources
may be classiﬁed into two broad categories: property-based resources and knowl-
edge-based resources.

Property-based resources are legal properties owned by ﬁrms, including
ﬁnancial capital, physical resources, human resources, etc. Owners enjoy clear
property rights to these resources, or rights to use the resources, so that others
cannot take them away without the owners’ consent. Thus, property-based re-
sources cannot be easily obtained, because they are legally protected through
property rights in such forms as patents, contracts, and deeds of ownership (Miller
& Shamsie, 1996). Because others cannot take property-based resources away,
alliance partners will not be overly concerned about unintended transfers of these
resources.

Different property-based resources may exhibit different resource character-
istics (see Table 2). First, human resources tend to have a high degree of imperfect

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


42

T.K. DAS AND B. TENG

Table 2. Typical Resources Based on Resource Characteristics and Resource Types

Resource

Characteristics

Resource Types

Property-Based Resources

Knowledge-Based Resources

Imperfect Mobility

Human resources

Imperfect Imitability

Patents, contracts,
copyrights, trademarks,
and registered designs

Imperfect Substitutability

Physical resources

Organizational resources
(e.g., culture)

Technological and
managerial resources

Technological and
managerial resources

mobility. Although it is possible to hire away individual personnel from a ﬁrm,
trading an entire workforce of a company or division through the job market is not
possible unless the whole ﬁrm/division is acquired. Since human resources cannot
be traded efﬁciently without being bundled with other resources (such as physical
resources), their mobility is far from perfect.

Second, property-based resources that are particularly inimitable include
patents, contracts, copyrights, trademarks, and registered designs. Hall (1992)
categorizes these intangible resources as assets because they are deemed to have
clear property rights. These resources are difﬁcult to imitate, as they are often
uniquely present in ﬁrms. An example is a single contract for a government
project. Also, once a patent is granted, similar endeavors are prohibited. In such
cases, imitation of these resources is either not possible or not permissible.

Third, as compared to some property-based resources, physical resources are
known for their imperfect substitutability. Whereas the same ﬁnancial resources
can be obtained through different channels—stock market, bond market, com-
mercial lending, and so on—physical resources such as oil ﬁelds and distribution
channels are often speciﬁc to a business and, thus, not easily substitutable. A good
location for a business cannot be substituted either.

Knowledge-based resources refer to a ﬁrm’s intangible know-how and skills.
In contrast to property-based resources, knowledge-based resources are not easily
imitable owing to knowledge and information barriers. Others cannot easily copy
or imitate knowledge-based resources, because they are vague and ambiguous.
Thus, tacit know-how, skills, and technical and managerial systems not protected
by patents, all fall in this category (Hall, 1992). Imitating technological and
managerial resources may be inherently “uncertain,” because knowledge creation
inevitably involves “irreducible ex ante uncertainty” (Lippman & Rumelt, 1982:
418).

Besides imperfect imitability, technological and managerial resources are
also imperfectly substitutable. Satisfactory substitutes and alternatives to superior
technologies and managerial talents are often not available. Nevertheless, these
resources are relatively mobile, because technologies and managerial talents may
be acquired rather efﬁciently through the market. In contrast, organizational

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


THEORY OF STRATEGIC ALLIANCES

43

resources, such as culture and learning capacity, are deeply embedded in a ﬁrm,
and are thus characterized by imperfect mobility.

The key difference between property-based and knowledge-based resources
springs from the fact that “the protection of knowledge barriers is not perfect”
(Miller & Shamsie, 1996). Whereas property-based resources enjoy near-perfect
legal protection, knowledge-based resources are more vulnerable to unintended
transfers. Once others get adequate access to knowledge-based resources, it is
difﬁcult to keep these resources within the conﬁnes of the ﬁrm for long. Conse-
quently, alliance partners will be concerned with losing their knowledge-based
resources through an alliance (Hamel, 1991; Mowery, Oxley, & Silverman, 1996).

A Typology of Alliance Structures

Strategic alliances can take a variety of forms, including, but not limited to,
joint ventures, minority equity alliances, R&D contracts, joint R&D, joint pro-
duction, joint marketing and promotion, enhanced supplier partnership, distribu-
tion agreements, and licensing agreements (Gates, 1993; Yoshino & Rangan,
1995). In an effort to better organize such a large collection of alliance forms,
theorists have proposed several typologies of strategic alliances (Dussauge &
Garrette, 1995; Lorange & Roos, 1990; Oliver, 1990; Pisano & Teece, 1989).

Most studies on alliance structural choice have been based on the dichotomy
of equity alliance vs nonequity alliances (Gulati, 1995; Osborn & Baughn, 1990;
Tallman & Shenkar, 1990). Whereas equity alliances include equity joint ventures
and minority equity alliances, nonequity alliances refer to all other cooperative
arrangements that do not involve equity exchange. Killing (1988) and Yoshino
and Rangan (1995) differentiate equity alliances into three types: nontraditional
contracts (non-equity-based), minority equity alliances, and joint ventures. For
non-equity alliances, Mowery et al. (1996) suggest two types: (1) unilateral
contract-based; and (2) bilateral contract-based. Integrating the above approaches
into the classiﬁcation of alliance structures, we adopt the following four-part
alliance typology: (1) joint ventures; (2) minority equity alliances; (3) bilateral
contract-based alliances; and (4) unilateral contract-based alliances.

Alliances are unilateral contract-based when they embody a well-deﬁned
transfer of property rights, such as the “technology for cash” exchange in
licensing agreements. Licensing, distribution agreements, and R&D contracts are
the main forms of unilateral contract-based alliances. The key feature here is that
individual ﬁrms carry out their obligations independently of others. Such contracts
tend to be complete and speciﬁc, and partners are expected to perform on their
own accordingly, without much coordination or collaboration. Thus, the level of
integration is relatively low in unilateral contract-based alliances (Mowery et al.,
1996).

On the other hand, alliances are called bilateral contract-based when the
partners have sustained production of property rights. These alliances require
partners to put in resources and work together on a continuing basis. Joint R&D,
joint marketing and promotion, joint production, and enhanced supplier partner-
ship are some good examples of bilateral contract-based alliances (Mowery et al.,
1996). These alliances require partners to put in resources and work together

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


44

T.K. DAS AND B. TENG

constantly, so that they are integrated in a tighter manner. As compared to
unilateral contracts, bilateral contracts are usually incomplete and more open-
ended. To some extent, partners of unilateral contract-based alliances have to let
the cooperative relationship unfold itself.

The resource-based view emphasizes that each partner will bring valuable
resources to the alliance. To rely solely on one single type of resource is not likely
to prove effective in today’s environment of intensiﬁed competition. Reed and
DeFillippi (1990) argue that physical assets alone do not help a ﬁrm build
sustainable competitive advantage. It is only natural, therefore, that so many ﬁrms
reach out for a variety of resources.

We argue that the types of resources that ﬁrms could potentially contribute
constitute a key dimension in predicting the partners’ structural preferences in the
prospective alliance. From a resource-based view, ﬁrms are interested not only in
accessing or acquiring their partners’ valuable resources through an alliance, but
also in protecting their own valuable resources during the alliance-making pro-
cess. Thus, the partners’ structural preferences will be based on their consider-
ation of these two issues simultaneously. Essentially, the principle is to ﬁnd the
structure that balances the two issues: being able to procure valuable resources
from another party without losing control of one’s own resources.

We need to note that a single ﬁrm may be able to contribute multiple types
of resources to an alliance. For example, large multinational corporations can
provide ﬁnancial, technological, and managerial resources to their local partners.
Therefore, it is important to identify which types of resources ought to be
committed to the alliance at a signiﬁcant level—that is, which is their primary
resource type. Thus, a prospective partner will expect to contribute either primar-
ily property-based or primarily knowledge-based resources to the alliance. It
would rarely be the case that property-based and knowledge-based resources are
equally signiﬁcant. A partner’s structural preferences will be more inﬂuenced by
its primary resource type (i.e., the type of resource that can be contributed at a
signiﬁcant level to the alliance). Because it is difﬁcult to consider all types of
resources in an alliance, partners will focus on the primary resource type, either
property-based or knowledge-based.

We now discuss partners’ structural preferences in terms of the four major
categories of alliances outlined above: equity joint ventures, minority equity
alliances, bilateral contract-based alliances, and unilateral contract-based alliances
(see Table 3).

Equity Joint Ventures

Equity joint ventures are created to substantially integrate the joint efforts of
partners—separate entities in which the partners literally work together. One key
problem in strategic alliances is that ﬁrms may be opportunistic in maximizing
their own particular interests, to the detriment of their partners. Such opportunistic
behavior tends to be more severe when it involves tacit knowledge and skills that
are not protected by property laws. Scholars suggest a number of knowledge-
based resources that are particularly vulnerable to unintended transfers, such as
subtle technical and creative talents, skills at collaboration and coordination, and

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


THEORY OF STRATEGIC ALLIANCES

45

Table 3. Resource Types and a Firm’s Structural Preferences

Partner Firm (B)

Firm (A)

Property-Based Resources

Knowledge-Based Resources

Property-Based Resources

Unilateral Contract-Based
Alliances

Equity Joint Ventures

Knowledge-Based Resources

Minority Equity Alliances

Bilateral Contract-Based
Alliances

managerial and employee know-how (Black & Boal, 1994; Hall, 1992). When the
partners work shoulder to shoulder in the same entity for an extended period, it
becomes difﬁcult to keep others from accessing one’s tacit know-how (Hamel,
1991). Consequently, equity joint ventures provide the best opportunities to
acquire partners’ tacit knowledge and other knowledge-based resources. Re-
searchers note that partners often use alliances as a cover for appropriating
knowledge-based resources (Inkpen & Beamish, 1997).

Among various alliance forms, equity joint ventures are the most instrumen-
tal in the transfer of tacit knowledge between the partners, because of the
signiﬁcant extent to which partners are exposed to each other (Kogut, 1988).
Alliance forms such as licensing agreements provide much less by way of
learning opportunities. Mowery et al. (1996) found that equity joint ventures
signiﬁcantly facilitated inter-ﬁrm transfer of technologies, resulting in greater
technological similarities between the partners. Hennart and Reddy (1997: 11)
report that “a joint venture is primarily a device to obtain access to resources
which are embedded in other organizations.” Because equity joint ventures enable
a ﬁrm to better appropriate its partner’s knowledge-based resources, they are
preferable to the ﬁrm if knowledge-based resources are its partner’s primary
resource in the alliance. On the other hand, the advantage of a joint venture for a
particular ﬁrm will be limited if its partner contributes mainly property-based
resources.

Furthermore, although ﬁrms will ordinarily want to acquire their partners’
know-how, they are also wary about losing their own knowledge-based resources
in a highly integrated operation characteristic of a joint venture. Thus, they will
prefer equity joint ventures only if knowledge-based resources are not their
primary resource type in the alliance. In other words, only when ﬁrms contribute
mainly property-based resources will they prefer a joint venture structure. This is
so because property-based resources are protected by property rights, minimizing
the likelihood of unintended transfer of resources.

Tallman and Shenker (1990) focus on technological resources and differen-
tiate them as being either explicit technology or implicit organizational knowl-
edge. Clearly, explicit technology is analogous to property-based resources, while
implicit organizational knowledge is akin to knowledge-based resources. They
found that the use of explicit technology led to contract-based alliances, while
equity joint ventures were used to transfer implicit knowledge.

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


46

T.K. DAS AND B. TENG

P2a: A partner ﬁrm will prefer an equity joint venture if, in the
prospective alliance, its primary resources are property-based and its
partner’s primary resources are knowledge-based.

Minority Equity Alliances

In minority equity alliances, one or more partners take an equity position in
others. Das and Teng (1996a) argue that shared ownership helps control oppor-
tunistic behaviors. Since equity arrangements are rather complicated to implement
as well as to get out of, they are usually entered into for longer time horizons,
compared to alliances without equity investments. A long duration for an alliance
provides an incentive to partners to behave honestly and curb opportunistic
behavior.

In the context of the so-called “shadow of the future” effect, ﬁrms that expect
a relatively lasting relationship will be more careful about taking advantage of
their partners (Axelrod, 1984; Heide & Miner, 1992; Joskow, 1987). Should a
partner be found appropriating others’ knowledge-based resources to an undue
extent, its equity stake may be held as hostage. Thus, equity investments provide
some protection against the unintended transfer of partners’ tacit knowledge.

We believe ﬁrms will prefer minority equity alliances when they have
primarily knowledge-based resources to contribute to the alliance and their
partners have primarily property-based resources. Contract-based alliances will be
less attractive in such cases, because they do not offer sufﬁcient safeguards
against opportunistic behavior regarding knowledge-based resources.

In this situation, equity joint ventures will also not be preferred, for two
reasons. First, there are no substantial knowledge-based resources contributed by
the partners available for exploitation. Second, there are altogether too much of
one’s own knowledge-based resources that the partner could potentially appro-
priate, making it too risky to form a joint venture.

P2b: A partner ﬁrm will prefer a minority equity alliance if, in the
prospective alliance, its primary resources are knowledge-based and its
partner’s primary resources are property-based.

Bilateral Contract-Based Alliances

Because equity joint ventures facilitate the process of transferring knowl-
edge-based resources, they can be a disadvantage if both partners have substantial
knowledge-based resources in an alliance. Thus, equity joint ventures may be too
risky a choice in such situations. First, a ﬁrm would be concerned that its own tacit
knowledge could be signiﬁcantly appropriated by its partner ﬁrm. The tacitness
and complexity of these knowledge-based resources, which once constituted the
barriers to imitability, can no longer effectively prevent partners from secretly
capturing these resources. Working closely with each other, ﬁrms are now
exposed to the covetous intentions of their partners. In this sense, equity joint
ventures can amount to too high a price to pay for learning others’ know-how.
Second, when both partners have primarily knowledge-based resources for
an alliance, they will be prepared to see the alliance, whether or not it is a joint

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


THEORY OF STRATEGIC ALLIANCES

47

venture, becoming a learning race (Hamel, 1991). Also, the partners will be likely
to believe in their ability to be the leader in such a learning race. Scholars suggest
that once learning has been accomplished, alliances are likely to be intentionally
terminated (Inkpen & Beamish, 1997). Hence, contract-based alliances, which are
much easier to dissolve, will be preferred over equity joint ventures and minority
equity alliances.

Between the two types of contract-based alliances, the better choice is
bilateral contract-based alliances if the mission is one of learning. In alliances
such as joint production, joint R&D, and joint marketing and promotion, there are
many more opportunities for learning than in unilateral contract-based alliances
such as licensing and subcontracting.

P2c: A partner ﬁrm will prefer a bilateral contract-based alliance if
both partner ﬁrms’ primary resources in the prospective alliance are
knowledge-based.

Unilateral Contract-Based Alliances

Unilateral contract-based alliances include licensing, subcontracting, and
distribution agreements, and so on. As we noted, their distinct characteristic is a
comparatively light engagement of the partners. In alliances such as licensing
agreements, the transfer of tacit knowledge will be difﬁcult “because the very
knowledge that is being transferred is organizationally embedded” (Kogut, 1988:
323). More “engaged” alliance forms are needed if the purpose of entering into an
alliance is to secretly acquire knowledge-based resources.

Following this logic, we argue that unilateral contract-based alliances will be
preferable when both partners intend to contribute primarily property-based
resources to a prospective alliance. Property-based resources refer to capital,
plants, distribution channels, patents, copyrights, and so on. Because both ﬁrms
expect to contribute property-based resources, the alliance is essentially an ex-
change of property rights (e.g., money for a patent). As such, a less engaged
alliance form should serve well. Since neither ﬁrm will be interested in secretly
acquiring the other’s tacit knowledge, there will be little need for a bilateral
contract-based alliance. Unilateral contract-based alliances will provide the req-
uisite clarity for exchange of property rights. For example, if ﬁnancing for
distribution channels is needed, then a distribution agreement will sufﬁce. Sup-
porting this view, Tallman and Shenkar (1990) report that contract-based alliances
are preferred when the aim is one of transferring explicit knowledge, one type of
property-based knowledge.

P2d: A partner ﬁrm will prefer a unilateral contract-based alliance if
both partner ﬁrms’ primary resources regarding the prospective alliance
are property-based.

Inter-Partner Resource Alignment and Alliance Performance

We have, thus far, discussed the impact of individual ﬁrms’ resource proﬁles
on alliance formation and alliance structural preference. The resource-based logic

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


48

T.K. DAS AND B. TENG

suggests that the competitive advantage of alliances is based on the effective
integration of the partner ﬁrms’ valuable resources. Consequently,
the way
resources are aggregated will signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the performance of the
alliance (Hagedoorn, 1993).

Performance of strategic alliances can be measured in several different ways,
such as alliance longevity (Beamish, 1987) and proﬁtability (Reuer & Miller,
1997). Some studies have evaluated alliance performance in terms of meeting the
objectives of individual partner ﬁrms (Dollinger & Golden, 1992; Thomas &
Trevino, 1993). Clearly, then, the performance of an alliance can be evaluated
differently by each partner ﬁrm. To get around this problem, other studies have
used the alliance per se as the unit of analysis for alliance performance, and have
measured alliance goal achievement in terms of new product development (Deeds
& Hill, 1996) and alliance proﬁtability (Cullen, Johnson, & Sakano, 1995). In this
article, we adopt the latter approach and view alliance performance as the degree
to which agreed objectives of an alliance are achieved. We examine how the
performance of alliances may be particularly inﬂuenced by resource alignment
among partner ﬁrms.

Partner Resource Alignment

Research using the strategic behavior model has mostly emphasized the
concept of “strategic ﬁt” among the partners—that is, highly compatible goals and
appropriate competitive positions (Harrigan, 1988a). Medcof (1997: 720) consid-
ers this strategic ﬁt between alliance partners in terms of “a shared understanding
of the business rationale for the alliance.” In contrast, we argue that the critical
test, in terms of the resource-based view, is whether there is a “resource align-
ment” among the ﬁrms. As Seabright, Levinthal, and Fichman note (1992: 124),
the criterion for partner selection is “the ﬁt between one organization’s resource
needs and another’s resource provision, relative to an opportunity set.” They
report that changes in partners’ resource requirements, resource provisions, and sets
of alternative partners increase the chances of dissolution in existing alliances.
Partner resource alignment refers broadly to the pattern, whereby the re-
sources of partner ﬁrms are matched and integrated in an alliance. This pattern
deﬁnes the resource-based relationship between the partners. Although research-
ers discuss resource alignment between partners (Beamish, 1987; Bucklin &
Sengupta, 1993; Lei, 1993), the term “alignment” is often restricted to a supple-
mentary or complementary pattern—that is, bringing in similar or dissimilar
resources.

This approach makes the clear assumption, largely unstated, that only re-
sources related and useful to an alliance should be considered. In this article, we
propose that a comprehensive view of partner resource alignment should also
include an examination of those resources that are not performing. A broader and
more reﬁned interpretation of resource alignment should include the value-
creating aspect of resource integration. That is, not all contributed resources can
be used effectively in an alliance. Similar is not the same as supplementary, and
dissimilar is not the same as complementary. Accordingly, we believe that the

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


THEORY OF STRATEGIC ALLIANCES

49

concept of resource alignment should encompass both resource similarity and
resource utilization.

Resource similarity in alliances is deﬁned as the degree to which two partner
ﬁrms contribute resources “comparable, in terms of both type and amount,” to an
alliance (Chen, 1996: 107). Resource similarity will be high if two partners
contribute comparable amounts of similar types of resources to an alliance. For
example, in joint bidding agreements, both partners contribute their manufactur-
ing capacity. In contrast, in licensing agreements, resource similarity will be low,
as one partner provides money and the other offers patented design or technology.
Resource utilization, on the other hand, is the degree to which the resources
contributed by the partners are utilized for achieving the goals of the alliance. The
resource utilization dimension distinguishes performing resources from non-
performing resources. Performing resources are essential for alliance operation;
they are, by deﬁnition, put to full use. By comparison, non-performing resources
remain idle in the alliance; they are brought into the alliance mainly because they
are not separable from certain other needed resources. For example, ﬁrms often
have joint production agreements, in which both contribute manufacturing facil-
ities to the alliance. Excess capacities associated with those facilities may have to
be wasted, at least for the time being.

In contrast to the two types of alignment (complementary and supplemen-
tary) emphasized in the literature (Harrigan, 1988b; Hill & Hellriegel, 1994), the
two dimensions in Table 4 suggest four types of partner resource alignment:
supplementary, surplus, complementary, and wasteful.

Resource alignment between partners is supplementary when the ﬁrms
contribute similar resources that are performing in the alliance. For example, both
partners may contribute ﬁnancial resources that are essential for the formation of
a joint venture. A supplementary alignment can provide risk sharing (Hill &
Hellriegel, 1994), market power, entry deterrence, and economies of scale and
scope in such areas as R&D activities, production, and marketing. Thus, an
integration of supplementary resources could lead to synergy—that is, create more
value in the integrated condition than the sum of the separate values of the
resources with individual ﬁrms.

When partner ﬁrms contribute similar resources that are not utilized fully in
an alliance, the alignment is called surplus because of slack. Slack has been
deﬁned as “the pool of resources in an organization that is in excess of the
minimum necessary to produce a given level of organizational output” (Nohria &

Table 4. A Typology of Inter-Partner Resource Alignments

Resource
Similarity

Similar Resources

Dissimilar Resources

Resource Utilization

Performing Resources

Nonperforming Resources

Supplementary
[Similar-Performing]
Complementary
[Dissimilar-Performing]

Surplus
[Similar-Nonperforming]
Wasteful
[Dissimilar-Nonperforming]

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


50

T.K. DAS AND B. TENG

Gulati, 1996: 1246). On the one hand, certain resources, such as manufacturing
capacity, are often mingled with other resources, such as physical resources. Thus,
when partners contribute these types of resources, it is possible that a certain
amount is redundant and not needed initially in the alliance. As such, surplus is
often not a positive resource alignment, as useful resources are not being utilized
to their full potential. On the other hand, though, partner ﬁrms may deliberately
have some surplus in an alliance, in order to provide themselves with some
cushion against unforeseen adverse conditions and to engage in some risk taking
(Singh, 1986).

Complementary alignment has been the most widely acknowledged type of
alignment in alliances (Brouthers, Brouthers, & Wilkinson, 1995; Lei, 1993). For
instance, in joint ventures, complementarity has been deﬁned as “the extent to
which the joint venture partners bring non-redundant distinctive competencies to
the partnership” (Hill & Hellriegel, 1994: 595). Complementarity may refer to the
same major resource type (such as technology), as long as the nature of the
resources is different (Helfat, 1997). Doz (1988: 324), for instance, discusses
“technological complementarity” among partners. Researchers argue that synergy
may be created when ﬁrms bring different resources to the table (Harrison et al.,
1991; Medcof, 1997; Stafford, 1994). Implicit in this notion is the belief that
resource dissimilarity is necessarily related to better alliance performance (Hill &
Hellriegel, 1994; Olk, 1997). We argue that complementary alignment is not
equivalent to resource diversity, as dissimilar resources may not be compatible
(Parkhe, 1991). We suggest that complementary alignment exists under two
conditions: the resources have to be dissimilar and also be performing. In other
words, to be complementary, different resources need to be compatible and be
pressed into effective service (i.e., utilized).

When different resources are not compatible or not used fully, we call it a
wasteful resource alignment. One type of wasteful alignment results from incom-
patibility—that is, when different resources of ﬁrms cannot be effectively inte-
grated. For example, managerial knowledge provided by one ﬁrm may fail to be
adopted by its partner because of differences in strategic orientations and orga-
nizational structures. This kind of incompatibility is akin to Type II diversity, as
suggested by Parkhe (1991), in regard to counterproductive differences between
partners. Another form of wastefulness—somewhat like surplus—refers to po-
tentially compatible resources that are not fully utilized in an alliance because
they are surplus to needs.

Resource Alignment and Alliance Performance

Scholars do not seem to agree about the nature of the relationship between
resource alignment and alliance performance. On the one hand, Harrigan (1988b)
suggests that signiﬁcant partner asymmetries—that is, a complementary align-
ment—may have a positive effect on alliance stability, but a negative effect on
alliance performance. The empirical results relating to these effects are limited
and inconsistent. Olk (1997) also hypothesizes a negative relationship between
alliance performance and partner differences (i.e., complementary alignment) in

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


THEORY OF STRATEGIC ALLIANCES

51

terms of technology, research location, industry, etc. Overall, he found no em-
pirical support.

On the other hand, Hill and Hellriegel (1994) hypothesized a positive
relationship between a complementary resource alignment and alliance perfor-
mance but found no empirical support either. We suggest that alliance perfor-
mance should be examined through the proposed four types of partner resource
alignment. Also, we believe that partner resource alignment affects alliance
performance through two critical variables: collective strengths and inter-ﬁrm
conﬂicts.

Collective Strengths. Collective strengths are the amounts of relevant
valuable resources possessed by the alliance. In essence, strategic alliances are
formed to take advantage of the joint power of the partners. Collective strengths
provide opportunities for partners to create value for their resources. Thus,
collective strengths describe the alliance’s overall resource endowments and
capabilities. Sankar et al. (1995), for example, discussed the product strengths and
service strengths of a successful alliance between TSYS and UCS. Indeed,
collective strengths may be reﬂected in all types of resources, such as market
power (Luo, 1997), technology (Blodgett, 1991), and so on.

Partner ﬁrms’ collective strengths, or the overall resources and competencies
of the alliance, contribute to better alliance performance (Beamish, 1987). From
a resource-based point of view, the very objective of forming alliances is to join
forces with partners in order to pursue market opportunities that are otherwise
beyond reach. The advantage of strategic alliances over single-ﬁrm strategies is
the ability to draw upon the strengths of more than one ﬁrm, and therefore, to
ensure that the alliances have better odds for success.

Inter-ﬁrm Conﬂicts. The importance of inter-ﬁrm conﬂicts in strategic
alliances has been widely recognized in the literature (Bucklin & Sengupta, 1993;
Hardy & Phillips, 1998; Kogut, 1988). One type of inter-ﬁrm conﬂict is in terms
of competing interests. Stopford and Wells (1972) discuss the conﬂict between a
multinational ﬁrm and its local partner regarding control. Other issues, such as
incompatible goals, disagreements regarding resource allocation, and opportunis-
tic behavior, can all lead to inter-ﬁrm conﬂicts (Cullen et al., 1995). Kogut (1989)
notes that competitive conﬂict in joint ventures may take place in areas such as
knowledge imitation and competition in downstream markets.

Khanna, Gulati, and Nohria (1998) suggest that there are two types of
beneﬁts in alliances: private beneﬁts and common beneﬁts. Clearly, private
beneﬁts give rise to potential conﬂicts of interest in alliances. One can perhaps
argue that, because partner ﬁrms’ objectives in an alliance are not usually
completely congruent, a certain degree of conﬂict is inevitable. This is why
relational contracting theorists suggest that inter-ﬁrm trust and mutual forbearance
are important for controlling potential conﬂicts in cooperative arrangements
(Buckley & Casson, 1988; Ring & Van de Ven, 1992, 1994).

The other type of inter-ﬁrm conﬂict is in terms of the diversity of the partners
that creates problems for cooperative activities (Olk, 1997; Parkhe, 1991). Ac-
cording to Whetten (1981: 17), coordination costs “increase as a function of
differences between the collaborating organizations.” Firms cannot work together

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


52

T.K. DAS AND B. TENG

very well if they are too different in organizational cultures, managerial practices,
strategic orientations, and technological systems (Harrigan, 1988b; Park & Ung-
son, 1997).

Researchers often suggest that inter-ﬁrm conﬂicts lead to unsatisfactory
alliance performance (Bucklin & Sengupta, 1993; Habib & Burnett, 1989; Zaheer,
McEvily, & Perrone, 1998). Our view is more ﬁne-grained, in the sense that we
have suggested that inter-ﬁrm conﬂicts can be both interest conﬂicts and opera-
tional conﬂicts. Both types are detrimental to alliance performance. First, when
partner ﬁrms have different and competing interests in the alliance, their incentive
and willingness to work together will be reduced. Park and Russo (1996) report
that alliances formed by direct competitors are more likely to fail. When ﬁrms
have competing objectives in alliances, it becomes very difﬁcult for both partners
to achieve their goals. Hatﬁeld and Pearce (1994) found that the satisfaction of
joint venture partners is positively related to their goal overlap. Partners may get
involved in political activities in order to get ahead in conﬂicting situations,
leading to poor cooperation and performance (Pearce, 1997).

Second, operational conﬂicts result from different and incompatible organi-
zational cultures and operational practices of the partners, which reduce the
effectiveness of the alliance (Olk, 1997). Firms have to allocate considerable time
and energy to conﬂict resolution activities. Although conﬂict resolution behaviors
have been found to be helpful (Thomas & Trevino, 1993), they are nevertheless
“non-value-enhancing activities” that make the alliance less competitive (Zaheer
et al., 1998: 146).

Alliance Performance. We now turn to the effects of partner resource
alignment on collective strengths and inter-ﬁrm conﬂicts, which in turn affect
alliance performance. Both supplementary alignment and complementary align-
ment have a positive effect on the collective strengths of the alliance. We noted
earlier that researchers often stress the value of complementary alignment in the
success of alliances (Deeds & Hill, 1996; Harrigan, 1985). The reason is that, in
such an alignment, partners bring in something unique and non-redundant to the
alliance, so that the overall resource base of the alliance becomes stronger (Hill
& Hellriegel, 1994). The beneﬁts of a supplementary alignment are not adequately
recognized in the literature (Olk, 1997). It can be argued that the more individual
ﬁrms contribute supplementary resources to an alliance, the more they accumulate
critical resources that would not, as a result, be easily available for deployment
elsewhere. Since all such resources are of the performing kind (see Table 4), the
employment of these supplementary resources in the alliance suggests the pursuit
of a value-creating strategy. Supplementarity of resources, in this sense, is always
beneﬁcial to effective alliance performance.

Furthermore, supplementary and complementary resources are not signiﬁ-
cantly related to inter-ﬁrm conﬂicts, because additional performing resources do
not necessarily reduce or increase interest conﬂicts between partners. Nor do they
reduce, or increase, operational conﬂicts between the partners.

P3a: Alliance performance is positively related to supplementary
alignment.

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


THEORY OF STRATEGIC ALLIANCES

53

P3b: Alliance performance is positively related to complementary
alignment.

Furthermore, additional surplus and wasteful resources will not contribute to the
collective strengths of an alliance, mainly because these resources by deﬁnition
are not performing. These resources are essentially wasted and do not make the
alliance more competitive. Surplus and wasteful resources may be difﬁcult to
avoid in alliances, since certain physical and technological resources cannot be
easily separated. In any case, the surplus resources do not add to the alliances’
collective strengths.

Nevertheless, we believe that more surplus in an alliance will help reduce
inter-ﬁrm conﬂicts. With more surplus in the alliance, resource constraints will be
less rigid, and the different interests of partners can be better accommodated.
Because the alliance has more resources to spare, there is less need to ﬁght for
favorable resource allocation in the alliance. Researchers have found that orga-
nizations with more surplus are more able to decentralize decision-making (Singh,
1986). Decentralization in alliances means that partners will have more autonomy
in deciding what to do in an alliance, thus reducing conﬂicts in operating the
alliance.

P3c: Alliance performance is positively related to surplus alignment.

Conﬂicts between partner ﬁrms tend to increase with a wasteful alignment,
because wasteful resources often suggest a lack of compatibility in the different
resources contributed by the partners. As we noted earlier, one type of inter-ﬁrm
conﬂict results from differences between partners that are counter-productive to
alliance operations (Park & Ungson, 1997). This diversity includes various types
of strategic orientations, managerial practices, organizational cultures, and so on
(Parkhe, 1991). These dissimilar resources of ﬁrms are an obstacle to smooth
cooperation. Thus, the more this kind of resources and wasteful alignment, the
more inter-ﬁrm conﬂicts will occur in an alliance.

P3d: Alliance performance is negatively related to wasteful alignment.

Implications for Research and Managerial Practice

In this section, we discuss the following: (1) the lines along which empirical
explorations may be carried out to test the various propositions, including obser-
vations on the operationalization of the key variables; (2) future research direc-
tions; and (3) managerial implications of the theory presented here.
Suggestions for Empirical Testing

Several issues need to be considered in order to test empirically the proposed
theory. Given the nature of the data that would be relevant, a survey procedure
with top-level alliance executives seems to be most appropriate. The nature of the
constructs (e.g., resource alignment and alliance structural preferences) makes it
exceedingly difﬁcult to access secondary data with sufﬁcient validity.

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


54

T.K. DAS AND B. TENG

The operationalization of resource-based constructs has been a major prob-
lem in the literature (McGrath, 1996). Almost all published studies on the
resource-based view used proxies from secondary data, such as the data on
constructs like physical resources and intangible resources (Chatterjee & Werner-
felt, 1991) and resource imitability (Maijoor & Van Witteloostuihn, 1996; Miller
& Shamsie, 1996). These proxies are highly industry-speciﬁc, so that most of the
measures developed cannot be used for cross-industry studies. No general survey
measures for the key resource constructs have been established in the literature,
principally because these constructs remain non-codiﬁable (Reed & DeFillippi,
1990).

As such, we suggest that efforts should be focused on developing relevant
resource-based measures suitable for gathering survey data. The process should,
of course, begin with the theoretical deﬁnitions. For example, to test Proposition
1, researchers need to develop descriptions of the nature of resource mobility,
imitability, and substitutability in consonance with the theoretical discussions of
these concepts (e.g., as in Amit & Schoemaker, 1993; Barney, 1991). The other
approach is to use proxies. Referring to Table 2, various resources may be coded
as having different degrees (i.e., high, medium, and low) of mobility, imitability,
and substitutability.

For Proposition 2, the measure for resource types can be several Likert-type
items asking respondents the degree (or amount) to which each partner contributes
the following types of resources: ﬁnancial, physical, human, patents and copy-
rights, technological, managerial, employee skills, and knowledge of business
environment (as in Grant, 1991; Hofer & Schendel, 1978). While the ﬁrst four
types can be classiﬁed as property-based resources, the latter four are knowledge-
based resources. Regarding alliance structural preferences, the survey researchers
can directly ask each partner ﬁrm for their original structural preference in the
alliance, which is not necessarily reﬂected in the current structural status.

Finally, in respect of Proposition 3, which deals with partner resource
alignment and alliance performance, we note that established measures of alliance
performance are abundant
in the literature (e.g., Geringer & Hebert, 1991;
Glaister & Buckley, 1998; Mjoen & Tallman, 1997). Resource alignment is made
up of the dimensions of resource similarity and resource utilization. Resource
similarity can be derived from the previous question on resource type—that is, by
aggregating differences in each type of resource contributed to the alliance by the
partners. The extent of resource utilization can be provided by the partner ﬁrms
in terms of how much of each type of contributed resources is being actively
utilized in the alliance.

Future Research Directions

Although we have attempted to present a fairly comprehensive resource-
based theory of strategic alliances, there are two signiﬁcant issues that researchers
need to address in the future. First, the four principal components of the theory
need to be integrated in a more thorough manner than has been achieved here.
Although these represent separate aspects of strategic alliances, one can argue that
they may share common resource-related factors. Currently, these aspects are

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


THEORY OF STRATEGIC ALLIANCES

55

linked merely through the logic of the resource-based perspective. It is a plausible
expectation that alliance formation may affect alliance structure, which in turn
may affect alliance performance, and so forth. Hence, future research may explore
the arguments for integrating more deﬁnitively the various parts of the theoretical
framework.

Second, although our resource-based theory offers new insights into strategic
alliances, it needs to be synthesized with other views of alliance making, includ-
ing the market-based view and the risk-based view (Das & Teng, 1997b, 1999a).
Empirical research, in a spirit of comparison, needs to be carried out to assess the
relevancy and explanatory power of both approaches. A comprehensive theory of
strategic alliances should, we feel, include both resource and market factors (Das
& Teng, 1999b).

Managerial Implications

The resource-based theory proposed here is a call to alliance managers to
focus on the internal environment of partner ﬁrms. According to the resource-
based view, the competitive advantage of a ﬁrm is built upon their unique
resources and resource combinations. Alliances are formed to achieve superior
resource combinations that single ﬁrms cannot. Thus, alliance managers need to
understand how resources affect alliance formation, structure, and performance.
We have noted that alliance formation is facilitated by several resource
characteristics: imperfect mobility, imitability, and substitutability. Firms with
these resource characteristics will be highly in demand as alliance partners.
Alliance managers should, therefore, examine the degree to which the resources
of their own ﬁrm and of other ﬁrms have these characteristics. This would enable
alliance managers to better understand why other ﬁrms are interested in forming
alliances with them, and also who are the most desirable and likely candidates as
alliance partners (Das & Teng, 1997a).

In determining alliance structure, alliance managers should again examine
the resource proﬁles of their own ﬁrm and of the potential partner ﬁrms. Using our
four-part alliance structural typology, managers should ﬁnd it a relatively simple
process to focus on the evaluation of different property-based and knowledge-
based resources. This part of the exercise should be of particular beneﬁt to alliance
managers because they may not be aware of all the structural options that are
available and may not have a systematic way of selecting the most appropriate
structure under given circumstances.

In addition, our theory informs alliance managers of the importance of
resource alignment for alliance performance. Managers can now systematically
evaluate their options for optimum allocations of ﬁrm resources for potential
alliances to achieve suitable alliance resource alignments. If in an alliance already,
managers can examine the contributed resources in an alliance and explicitly
assess the degree to which the alliance has the four types of resource alignment.
They can also, for instance, take note of the fact that wasteful alignment is
detrimental to alliance performance and decide ways to modify this type of
resource alignment.

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


56

T.K. DAS AND B. TENG

Concluding Remarks

We proposed and discussed here the four essential components of a resource-
based theory of strategic alliances: rationale, formation, structural preferences,
and performance. Existing studies of alliances from a resource-based perspective
have been, at best, limited in scope and divergent in their approaches. Our
proposed theory attempts to synthesize the various fragmented ﬁndings in the
literature.

As compared to other major theories relating to strategic alliances, we
believe the resource-based view can make particularly valuable contributions. We
noted that, whereas transaction cost economics and the resource-based view share
a concern about the characteristics of a ﬁrm’s internal elements, the aim of
transaction cost economics is to minimize the costs involved in inter-ﬁrm trans-
actions. Such a view has been criticized for paying exclusive attention to cost
minimization and neglecting value-creation in strategic alliances. In contrast, the
resource-based view suggests that the rationale for alliances is the value-creation
potential of ﬁrm resources that are pooled together. In accord with this, we noted
that certain resource characteristics—that is, imperfect mobility, imitability, and
substitutability—promise accentuated value-creation and thus facilitate alliance
formation.

In terms of alliance structure, a resource-based view suggests that the
resource proﬁles of partner ﬁrms would determine their structural preferences.
Transaction cost economics (TCE), by comparison, predicts only alliance struc-
tural outcomes. Also, whereas TCE holds that alliance performance is determined
by the nature of transactions performed by the alliance, the resource-based view
proposed here emphasizes the signiﬁcant role of partner resource alignment. We
proposed a new typology of partner resource alignment based on the two dimen-
sions of resource similarity and resource utilization, yielding four types of
alignment: supplementary, surplus, complementary, and wasteful. We discussed
how partner resource alignment directly affects collective strengths and inter-ﬁrm
conﬂicts in alliances, which in turn contribute to alliance performance. These
latter issues are not covered by the TCE approach.

We also noted that in our proposed resource-based theory, as in other
theories, strategic alliances are employed to secure a favorable competitive
position vis-a`-vis rivals. Most other theories, however, such as agency theory,
strategic behavior theory, and game theory, fail to meaningfully distinguish
between cooperative strategies (such as strategic alliances) and other single-ﬁrm
strategies. The advantage of our resource-based theory is that it recognizes and
incorporates this critical difference—that is, in strategic alliances the partners
intend to obtain access to other ﬁrms’ resources rather than employ only their own
resources. In forming strategic alliances, the ﬁrms are complemented or supple-
mented by other ﬁrms’ resources, even when this inevitably attracts some non-
performing surplus and wasteful resources, enabling them to exploit jointly their
combined competitive advantage.

We attempted in this article to provide the argument and the ingredients for
a general resource-based theory of strategic alliances. We also developed prop-

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


THEORY OF STRATEGIC ALLIANCES

57

ositions from the proposed theoretical framework to facilitate empirical testing,
suggested ways to carry out this testing, indicated future research directions, and
listed some of the more signiﬁcant managerial implications of the framework. The
tentative insights from our resource-based theory will, we hope, provide the
impetus for a new way of thinking about strategic alliances.

References

Amit, R., & Schoemaker, P. J. H. 1993. Strategic assets and organizational rent. Strategic Management Journal,

14: 33– 46.

Axelrod, R. 1984. The evolution of cooperation. New York: Basic Books.
Balakrishnan, S., & Koza, M. P. 1993. Information asymmetry, adverse selection and joint-ventures. Journal of

Economic Behavior and Organization, 20: 99 –117.

Barney, J. 1991. Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of Management, 17: 99 –120.
Beamish, P. W. 1987. Joint ventures in LDCs: Partner selection and performance. Management International

Review, 27: 23–37.

Black, J. A., & Boal, K. B. 1994. Strategic resources: Traits, conﬁgurations and paths to sustainable competitive

advantage. Strategic Management Journal, 15 (Summer Special Issue): 131–148.

Blau, P. M. 1964. Exchange and power in social life. New York: Wiley.
Blodgett, L. L. 1991. Partner contributions as predictors of equity share in international joint ventures. Journal

of International Business Studies, 22: 63–78.

Brouthers, K. D., Brouthers, L. E., & Wilkinson, T. J. 1995. Strategic alliances: Choose your partners. Long

Range Planning, 28 (3): 18 –25.

Buckley, P. J., & Casson, M. 1988. A theory of cooperation in international business. In F. J. Contractor & P.
Lorange (Eds.), Cooperative strategies in international business: 31–53. Lexington, MA: Lexington
Books.

Bucklin, L. P., & Sengupta, S. 1993. Organizing successful co-marketing alliances. Journal of Marketing, 57

(April): 32– 46.

Chatterjee, S., & Wernerfelt, B. 1991. The link between resources and type of diversiﬁcation: Theory and

evidence. Strategic Management Journal, 12: 33– 48.

Chen, M. -J. 1996. Competitor analysis and inter-ﬁrm rivalry: Toward a theoretical integration. Academy of

Management Review, 21: 100 –134.

Chi, T. 1994. Trading in strategic resources: Necessary conditions, transaction cost problems, and choice of

exchange structure. Strategic Management Journal, 15: 271–290.

Chisholm, D. 1989. Coordination without hierarchy: Informal structures in multiorganizational systems.

Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Coase, R. H. 1937. The nature of the ﬁrm. Economica, 4 (new series): 385– 405.
Collis, D. J. 1991. A resource-based analysis of global competition: The case of the bearings industry. Strategic

Management Journal, 12 (Summer Special Issue): 49 – 68.

Conner, K. R. 1991. A historical comparison of resource-based theory and ﬁve schools of thought within
industrial organization economics: Do we have a new theory of the ﬁrm? Journal of Management, 17:
124 –154.

Conner, K. R., & Prahalad, C. K. 1996. A resource-based theory of the ﬁrm: Knowledge versus opportunism.

Organization Science, 7: 477–501.

Cullen, J. B., Johnson, J. L., & Sakano, T. 1995. Japanese and local partner commitment to IJVs: Psychological
consequences of outcomes and investments in the IJV relationship. Journal of International Business
Studies, 26: 91–115.

Das, T. K., & Teng, B. 1996a. Risk types and inter-ﬁrm alliance structures. Journal of Management Studies, 33:

827– 843.

Das, T. K., & Teng, B. 1996b. Strategic alliance structuring: A risk perception model. Paper presented at the

annual meeting of the Academy of Management, Cincinnati, OH.

Das, T. K., & Teng, B. 1997a. Sustaining strategic alliances: Options and guidelines. Journal of General

Management, 22 (4): 49 – 64.

Das, T. K., & Teng, B. 1997b. Time and entrepreneurial risk behavior. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,

22 (2): 69 – 88.

Das, T. K., & Teng, B. 1998a. Resource and risk management in the strategic alliance making process. Journal

of Management, 24: 21– 42.

Das, T. K., & Teng, B. 1998b. Between trust and control: Developing conﬁdence in partner cooperation in

alliances. Academy of Management Review, 23: 491–512.

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


58

T.K. DAS AND B. TENG

Das, T. K., & Teng, B. 1999a. Trust, control, and risk in strategic alliances: An integrated framework. Paper

presented at the annual meeting of the Academy of Management, Chicago, IL.

Das, T. K., & Teng, B. 1999b. Partner analysis in strategic alliances: An integrated framework. Paper presented

at the annual international conference of the Strategic Management Society, Berlin, Germany.

Das, T. K., & Teng, B. 1999c. Managing risks in strategic alliances. Academy of Management Executive, 13(4):

50 – 62.

Das, T. K., & Teng, B. in press. Instabilities of strategic alliances: An internal tensions perspective. Organization

Science.

Deeds, D. L., & Hill, C. W. L. 1996. Strategic alliances and the rate of new product development: An empirical

study of entrepreneurial biotechnology ﬁrms. Journal of Business Venturing, 11: 41–55.

Dickson, P. H., & Weaver, K. M. 1997. Environmental determinants and individual-level moderators of alliance

use. Academy of Management Journal, 40: 404 – 425.

Dierickx, I., & Cool, K. 1989. Asset stock accumulation and sustainability of competitive advantage. Manage-

ment Science, 35: 1504 –1511.

Dollinger, M. J., & Golden, P. A. 1992. Interorganizational and collective strategies in small ﬁrms: Environ-

mental effects and performance. Journal of Management, 18: 695–715.

Dollinger, M. J., Golden, P. A., & Saxton, T. 1997. The effect of reputation on the decision to joint venture.

Strategic Management Journal, 18: 127–140.

Doz, Y. L. 1988. Technology partnerships between larger and smaller ﬁrms: Some critical issues. In F. J.
Contractor & P. Lorange (Eds.), Cooperative strategies in international business: 317–338. Lexington,
MA: Lexington Books.

Doz, Y. L., & Hamel, G. 1998. Alliance advantage: The art of creating value through partnering. Boston, MA:

Harvard Business School Press.

Dussauge, P., & Garrette, B. 1995. Determinants of success in international strategic alliances: Evidence from

the global aerospace industry. Journal of International Business Studies, 26: 505–530.

Eisenhardt, K. M., & Schoonhoven, C. B. 1996. Resource-based view of strategic alliance formation: Strategic

and social effects of entrepreneurial ﬁrms. Organization Science, 7: 136 –150.

Gates, S. 1993. Strategic alliances: Guidelines for successful management. New York: Conference Board.
Geringer, J. M., & Hebert, L. 1991. Measuring performance of international joint ventures. Journal of

International Business Studies, 22: 249 –263.

Glaister, K. W., & Buckley, P. J. 1996. Strategic motives for international alliance formation. Journal of

Management Studies, 33: 301–332.

Glaister, K. W., & Buckley, P. J. 1998. Measures of performance in UK international alliances. Organization

Studies, 19: 89 –118.

Gomes-Casseres, B. 1996. The alliance revolution: The new shape of business rivalry. Cambridge, MA: Harvard

University Press.

Grant, R. M. 1991. The resource-based theory of competitive advantage: Implications for strategy formulation.

California Management Review, 33 (3): 114 –135.

Grant, R. M. 1996. Toward a knowledge-based theory of the ﬁrm. Strategic Management Journal, 17 (Winter

Special Issue): 109 –122.

Gray, B., & Wood, D. J. 1991. Collaborative alliances: Moving from practice to theory. Journal of Applied

Behavioral Science, 27: 3–22.

Gulati, R. 1995. Does familiarity breed trust? The implication of repeated ties for contractual choice in alliances.

Academy of Management Journal, 38: 85–112.

Habib, G. M., & Burnett, J. J. 1989. An assessment of channel behaviour in an alternative structural arrangement:

The international joint venture. International Marketing Review, 6 (3): 7–21.

Hagedoorn, J. 1993. Understanding the rationale of strategic technology partnering: Inter-organizational modes

of cooperation and sectoral differences. Strategic Management Journal, 14: 371–385.

Hall, R. 1992. The strategic analysis of intangible resources. Strategic Management Journal, 13: 135–144.
Hamel, G. 1991. Competition for competence and inter-partner learning within international strategic alliances.

Strategic Management Journal, 12 (Summer Special Issue): 83–103.

Hardy, C., & Phillips, N. 1998. Strategies of engagement: Lessons from the critical examination of collaboration

and conﬂict in an interorganizational domain. Organization Science, 9: 217–230.
Harrigan, K. R. 1985. Strategies for joint ventures. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Harrigan, K. R. 1988a. Joint ventures and competitive strategy. Strategic Management Journal, 9: 141–158.
Harrigan, K. R. 1988b. Strategic alliances and partner asymmetries. In F. J. Contractor & P. Lorange (Eds.),

Cooperative strategies in international business: 205–226. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.

Harrison, J. S., Hitt, M. A., Hoskisson, R. E., & Ireland, R. D. 1991. Synergies and post-acquisition performance:

Differences versus similarities in resource allocations. Long Range Planning, 17 (1): 173–190.

Hatﬁeld, L., & Pearce, J. A., II. (1994). Goal achievement and satisfaction of joint venture partners. Journal of

Business Venturing, 9: 423– 440.

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


THEORY OF STRATEGIC ALLIANCES

59

Heide, J. B., & Miner, A. S. 1992. The shadow of the future: Effects of anticipated interaction and frequency

of contact on buyer-seller cooperation. Academy of Management Journal, 35: 265–291.

Helfat, C. E. 1997. Know-how and asset complementarity and dynamic capability accumulation: The case of

R&D. Strategic Management Journal, 18: 339 –360.

Hennart, J.-F. 1988. A transaction cost theory of equity joint ventures. Strategic Management Journal, 9:

361–374.

Hennart, J.-F., & Reddy, S. 1997. The choice between mergers/acquisitions and joint ventures: The case of

Japanese investors in the United States. Strategic Management Journal, 18: 1–12.

Hill, R. C., & Hellriegel, D. 1994. Critical contingencies in joint venture management: Some lessons from

managers. Organization Science, 5: 594 – 607.

Hofer, C. W., & Schendel, D. 1978. Strategy formulation: Analytical concepts. St. Paul, MN: West.
Inkpen, A. C., & Beamish, P. W. 1997. Knowledge, bargaining power, and the instability of international joint

ventures. Academy of Management Review, 22: 177–202.

Joskow, P. L. 1987. Contract duration and relationship-speciﬁc investments: Empirical evidence from coal

markets. American Economic Review, 77: 168 –185.

Khanna, T., Gulati, R., & Nohria, N. 1998. The dynamics of learning alliances: Competition, cooperation, and

relative scope. Strategic Management Journal, 19: 193–210.

Killing, J. P. 1988. Understanding alliances: The role of task and organizational complexity. In F. J. Contractor
& P. Lorange (Eds.), Cooperative strategies in international business: 55– 68. Lexington, MA: Lexington
Books.

Kogut, B. 1988. Joint ventures: Theoretical and empirical perspectives. Strategic Management Journal, 9:

319 –332.

Kogut, B. 1989. The stability of joint ventures: Reciprocity and competitive rivalry. Journal of Industrial

Economics, 38 (2): 183–198.

Lei, D. 1993. Offensive and defensive uses of alliances. Long Range Planning, 26 (4): 32– 41.
Leonard-Barton, D. 1992. Core capabilities and core rigidities: A paradox in managing new product develop-

ment. Strategic Management Journal, 13 (Summer Special Issue): 111–125.

Lippman, S. A., & Rumelt, R. P. 1982. Uncertain imitability: An analysis of interﬁrm differences in efﬁciency

under competition. Bell Journal of Economics, 13: 418 – 438.

Lorange, P., & Roos, J. 1990. Formation of cooperative ventures: Competence mix of the management teams.

Management International Review, 30 (Special issue): 69 – 86.

Luo, Y. 1997. Partner selection and venturing success: The case of joint ventures with ﬁrms in the People’s

Republic of China. Organization Science, 8: 648 – 662.

Lyles, M. A., & Reger, R. K. 1993. Managing for autonomy in joint ventures: A longitudinal study of upward

inﬂuence. Journal of Management Studies, 30: 383– 404.

Lyles, M. A., & Salk, J. E. 1997. Knowledge acquisition from foreign parents in international joint ventures: An
empirical examination in the Hungarian context. In P. W. Beamish & J. P. Killing (Eds.), Cooperative
strategies: Vol. 2. European Perspectives: 325–355. San Francisco: New Lexington Press.

Madhok, A. 1997. Cost, value and foreign market entry mode: The transaction and the ﬁrm. Strategic

Management Journal, 18: 39 – 61.

Mahoney, J. T., & Pandian, J. R. 1992. The resource-based view within the conversation of strategic manage-

ment. Strategic Management Journal, 13: 363–380.

Maijoor, S., & Van Witteloostuijn, A. 1996. An empirical test of the resource-based theory: Strategic regulation

in the Dutch audit industry. Strategic Management Journal, 17: 549 –569.

McGrath, R. G. 1996. The trouble with competence: Opportunities and limitations in the adolescence of the
resource-based view. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Academy of Management, Cincinnati,
OH.

Medcof, J. W. 1997. Why too many alliances end in divorce. Long Range Planning, 30 (5): 718 –732.
Mehra, A. 1996. Resource and market based determinants of performance in the U.S. banking industry. Strategic

Management Journal, 17: 307–322.

Miller, D., & Shamsie, J. 1996. The resource-based view of the ﬁrm in two environments: The Hollywood ﬁlm

studios from 1936 to 1965. Academy of Management Journal, 39: 519 –543.

Mjoen, H., & Tallman, S. 1997. Control and performance in international joint ventures. Organization Science,

8: 257–274.

Mowery, D. C., Oxley, J. E., & Silverman, B. S. 1996. Strategic alliances and interﬁrm knowledge transfer.

Strategic Management Journal, 17 (Winter Special Issue): 77–91.

Mowery, D. C., Oxley, J. E., & Silverman, B. S. 1998. Technological overlap and interﬁrm cooperation:

Implications for the resource-based view of the ﬁrm. Research Policy, 27: 507–523.

Nelson, R., & Winter, S. 1982. An evolutionary theory of economic change. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University

Press.

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


60

T.K. DAS AND B. TENG

Nohria, N., & Gulati, R. 1996. Is slack good or bad for innovation? Academy of Management Journal, 39:

1245–1264.

Oliver, C. 1990. Determinants of interorganizational relationships: Integration and future directions. Academy of

Management Review, 15: 241–265.

Olk, P. 1997. The effect of partner differences on the performance of R&D consortia. In P. W. Beamish & J. P.
Killing (Eds.), Cooperative strategies: Vol. 1. North American perspectives: 133–159. San Francisco, CA:
New Lexington Press.

Osborn, R. N., & Baughn, C. C. 1990. Forms of inter-organizational governance for multinational alliances.

Academy of Management Journal, 33: 503–519.

Park, S. H., & Russo, M. V. 1996. When competition eclipses cooperation: An event history analysis of joint

venture failure. Management Science, 42: 875– 890.

Park, S. H., & Ungson, G. R. 1997. The effect of national culture, organizational complementarity, and economic

motivation on joint venture dissolution. Academy of Management Journal, 40: 270 –307.

Parkhe, A. 1991. Inter-ﬁrm diversity, organizational learning, and longevity in global strategic alliances. Journal

of International Business Studies, 22: 579 – 601.

Parkhe, A. 1993. Strategic alliance structuring: A game theory and transaction cost examination of inter-ﬁrm

cooperation. Academy of Management Journal, 36: 794 – 829.

Pearce, R. J. 1997. Toward understanding joint venture performance and survival: A bargaining and inﬂuence

approach to transaction cost theory. Academy of Management Review, 22: 203–225.

Peteraf, M. A. 1993. The cornerstones of competitive advantage: A resource-based view. Strategic Management

Journal, 14: 179 –191.

Pfeffer, J., & Salancik, G. R. 1978. The external control of organizations: A resource dependence perspective.

New York: Harper & Row.

Pisano, G. P., & Teece, D. J. 1989. Collaborative arrangements and global technology strategy: Some evidence
from the telecommunications equipment industry. Research on Technological Innovation, Management
and Policy, 4: 227–256.

Porter, M. E. 1985. Competitive advantage: Creating and sustaining superior performance. New York: Free

Press.

Ramanathan, K., Seth, A., & Thomas, H. 1997. Explaining joint ventures: Alternative theoretical perspectives.
In P. W. Beamish & J. P. Killing (Eds.), Cooperative Strategies: Vol. 1. North American Perspectives:
51– 85. San Francisco, CA: New Lexington Press.

Reed, R., & DeFillippi, R. J. 1990. Causal ambiguity, barriers to imitation, and sustainable competitive

advantage. Academy of Management Review, 15: 88 –102.

Reuer, J. J., & Miller, K. D. 1997. Agency costs and the performance implications of international joint venture

internalization. Strategic Management Journal, 18: 425– 438.

Ring, P. S., & Van de Ven, A. H. 1992. Structuring cooperative relationships between organizations. Strategic

Management Journal, 13: 483– 498.

Ring, P. S., & Van de Ven, A. H. 1994. Developmental processes of cooperative interorganizational relation-

ships. Academy of Management Review, 19: 90 –118.

Roth, K. 1995. Managing international interdependence: CEO characteristics in a resource-based framework.

Academy of Management Journal, 38: 200 –231.

Rouse, M. J., & Daellenbach, U. S. 1999. Rethinking research methods for the resource-based perspective:

Isolating sources of sustainable competitive advantage. Strategic Management Journal, 20: 487– 494.

Rumelt, R. P. 1984. Towards a strategic theory of the ﬁrm. In R. B. Lamb (Ed.), Competitive strategic

management: 556 –570. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Sankar, C. S., Boulton, W. R., Davidson, N. W., Snyder, C. A., & Ussery, R. W. 1995. Building a world-class

alliance: The Universal Card—TSYS case. Academy of Management Executive, 9 (2): 20 –29.

Schmidt, S. M., & Kochan, T. A. 1977. Inter-organizational relationships: Patterns and motivations. Adminis-

trative Science Quarterly, 22: 220 –234.

Seabright, M. A., Levinthal, D. A., & Fichman, M. 1992. Role of individual attachments in the dissolution of

interorganizational relationships. Academy of Management Journal, 35: 122–160.

Singh, J. 1986. Performance, slack, and risk taking in organizational decision making. Academy of Management

Journal, 29: 562–585.

Smith, K. G., Carroll, S. J., & Ashford, S. J. 1995. Intra- and inter-organizational cooperation: Toward a research

agenda. Academy of Management Journal, 38: 7–23.

Stafford, E. R. 1994. Using co-operative strategies to make alliances work. Long Range Planning, 27 (3): 64 –74.
Stopford, J. M., & Wells, L. T., Jr. 1972. Managing the multinational enterprise. New York: Basic Books.
Tallman, S. B., & Shenkar, O. 1990. International cooperative venture strategies: Outward investment and small

ﬁrms from NICs. Management International Review, 30: 299 –315.

Teece, D. J. 1992. Competition, cooperation, and innovation: Organizational arrangements for regimes of rapid

technological progress. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 18: 1–25.

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000


THEORY OF STRATEGIC ALLIANCES

61

Thomas, J. B., & Trevino, L. K. 1993. Information processing in strategic alliance building: A multiple-case

approach. Journal of Management Studies, 30: 779 – 814.

Tyler, B. B., & Steensma, H. K. 1995. Evaluating technological collaborative opportunities: A cognitive

modeling perspective. Strategic Management Journal, 16 (Summer Special Issue): 43–70.

Tyler, B. B., & Steensma, H. K. 1998. The effects of executives’ experiences and perceptions on their assessment

of potential technological alliances. Strategic Management Journal, 19: 939 –965.

Van de Ven, A. H. 1976. On the nature, formation, and maintenance of relations among organizations. Academy

of Management Review, 1: 24 –36.

Van de Ven, A. H., & Walker, G. 1984. The dynamics of interorganizational coordination. Administrative

Science Quarterly, 29: 598 – 621.

Varadarajan, P. R., & Cunningham, M. H. 1995. Strategic alliances: A synthesis of conceptual foundations.

Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 23: 282–296.

Wernerfelt, B. 1984. A resource-based view of the ﬁrm. Strategic Management Journal, 5: 171–180.
Whetten, D. A. 1981. Inter-organizational relations: A review of the ﬁeld. Journal of Higher Education, 52:

1–28.

Williamson, O. E. 1975. Markets and hierarchies: Analysis and antitrust implications. New York: Free Press.
Williamson, O. E. 1985. The economic institutions of capitalism. New York: Free Press.
Yan, A., & Gray, B. 1994. Bargaining power, management control, and performance in United States-China joint

ventures: A comparative case study. Academy of Management Journal, 37: 1478 –1517.

Yoshino, M. Y., & Rangan, U. S. 1995. Strategic alliances: An entrepreneurial approach to globalization.

Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.

Zaheer, A., McEvily, B., & Perrone, V. 1998. Does trust matter? Exploring the effects of inter-organizational and

interpersonal trust on performance. Organization Science, 9: 141–159.

JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT, VOL. 26, NO. 1, 2000

