 
 
 
 
 
 

ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGES, EMPLOYEE STRESS,  

AND CUSTOMER SATISFACTION: 

EMERGENCE OF THE FLEXIHEALTH CONCEPT 

 
 

Prof. C. Vandenberghe, coordinator 
Université catholique de Louvain 
 
Prof. V. De Keyser 
Université de Liège 
 
Prof. P. Vlerick 
Universiteit Gent 
 
Prof. W. D’hoore  
Université catholique de Louvain 
 


Contents 

Introduction 
1. Theoretical framework 
1.1. Context 
1.2. The Flexihealth model 
1.2.1. Axis 1 – Working conditions 
1.2.1.1. Perception of changes in the work environment as potential 
sources of stress 
1.2.1.2. Flexibility practices 
1.2.2. Axis 2a – Mediating variable 
1.2.2.1. Job insecurity 
1.2.3. Axis 2b – Moderating variables 
1.2.3.1. Negative and positive affectivity 
1.2.3.2. Self-esteem 
1.2.3.3. Locus of control 
1.2.3.4. Control over working conditions 
1.2.3.5. Social support  
1.2.4. Axis 3 – Indicators of well-being 
1.2.4.1. Positive and negative stress  
1.2.4.2. Job satisfaction 
1.3. Health and stress 
1.4. Issues related to relationships with customer satisfaction 
2. Method 
2.1. Measures 
2.1.1. Axis 1 – Working conditions 
2.1.1.1. Perception of changes in work environment 
A. Actual changes 
B. Appraisal of changes 
C. Emotional reactions to changes 
2.1.1.2. Flexibility practices 
2.1.2. Axis 2a – Mediating variable 
2.1.2.1. Job insecurity 
2.1.3. Axis 2b – Moderating variables 
2.1.3.1. Negative and positive affectivity 
2.1.3.2. Self-esteem 

7 
8 
8 
9 
9 

9 
11 
11 
11 
12 
12 
13 
13 
14 
14 
15 
15 
15 
15 
17 
19 
19 
25 
25 
25 
25 
26 
26 
26 
26 
27 
27 
27 


 

2/131 

2.1.3.3. Locus of control 
2.1.3.4. Control at work 
2.1.3.5. Social support 
2.1.4. Axis 3 – Indicators of well-being 
2.1.4.1. Positive and negative stress 
2.1.4.2. Job satisfaction 
2.1.5. Medical section 
Medical status 
Life habits 
Quality of life 
2.1.6. Relationships with customers 
2.1.6.1. Customer satisfaction indicators 
2.1.6.2. Relationships with employee variables 
2.1.6.3. Customer satisfaction in the context of organizational changes 
2.1.6.4. Summary 
2.2. Samples 
2.2.1. Data collection  
2.2.2. Data base 
Step 1: selection of data 
Step 2: selection of variables common to all data sets  
Step 3: correspondence between data base and Belgian population 
Limitations 
2.2.3. Description of population from the Flexihealth data base 
2.2.3.1. Comparison 
2.2.3.2. Demographic description 
2.2.4. Flexibility practices and changes 
2.3. Studies involving customer relationships issues 
2.3.1. Phase 1: preliminary research 
Preliminary study 1 
Preliminary study 2 
Preliminary study 3 
2.3.2. Phase 2: validation  
2.3.3. Customer satisfaction variables 
2.3.3.1. Service and product quality ratings 
2.3.3.2. Satisfaction with services and products 
2.3.3.3. Behavioral intentions 

Flexihealth 

28 
28 
28  
29 
29 
29 
29 
30 
30 
30 
30 
31 
32 
35 
36 
37 
37 
37 
37 
37 
38 
39 
39 
39 
40 
40 
40 
40 
40 
41 
41 
41 
41 
41 
42 
42 


 

3/131 

2.3.3.4. Other information 
2.3.4. Analytical Procedures 
2.3.4.1. Correspondence between employee and customer ratings of customer 
satisfaction 
2.3.4.2. Testing the quality-satisfaction-behavioral intentions model 
2.3.4.3. Examining the relationships between employee variables and customer 
satisfaction indicators 
2.3.4.4. Impact of change 
3. Results 
3.1. Theme 1 – Relationships between flexibility practices, changes, work situations  
and well-being as related to demographic variables 
3.1.1. Hypotheses 
3.1.2. Data analysis 
3.1.3. Results 
Influence of demographic variables 
Influence of flexibility practices  
3.1.4. Influence of changes on attitudes and well-being 
Influence of demographic variables 
Type of change 
3.1.5. Conclusion 
3.2. Theme 2 – Moderating effects of dispositional variables on perception of  
changes 
3.2.1. Hypotheses 
3.2.2. Method 
3.2.2.1. Sample 
3.2.2.2. Measures 
3.2.3. Results 
3.2.3.1. Descriptive statistics and correlations 
3.2.3.2. Tests of moderating effects 
Negative affectivity 
Positive affectivity 
Organization-based self-esteem 
External locus of control 
Perceived organizational support 
Perceived supervisor support 
3.2.4. Conclusion 

42 
43 

43 
43 

44 
44 
45 

45 
45 
47 
47 
47 
49 
50 
50 
52 
53 

53 
53 
54 
54 
54 
55 
55 
55 
59 
59 
60 
60 
61 
62 
62 

Flexihealth 


 

4/131 

3.3. Theme 3 – Relationships between the number of changes, perception of  
changes, and positive and negative stress 
3.3.1. Hypothesis 
3.3.2. Results 
Number of changes and stress 
Perception of challenge and stress 
Perception of threat and stress 
Perception of control and stress 
Perceived organization’s accountability and stress 
3.3.3. Conclusion 
3.4. Theme 4 - Relationships between the number of changes, perception of 
changes, control, and stress 
3.4.1. Hypothesis 
3.4.2. Results 
Number of changes 
Perceived threat 
Perceived organization’s accountability 
3.4.3. Conclusion 
3.5. Theme 5 - Relationships between the number of reported changes, perceived 
stress and physical and mental health of employees  
3.5.1. Descriptive part 
3.5.1.1. Medical history 
a) cardiovascular history  
b) mental history  
c) gastro-intestinal history  
d) musculo-skeletal history  
e) neurological history  
3.5.1.2. Medical complaints 
3.5.1.3. The « aggregate score » of medical complaints 
3.5.1.4. Assessment of lifestyle 
a) Alcohol consumption 
b) Tobacco consumption 
c) Drug use 
3.5.1.5. Assessment of perceived quality of life 
3.5.2. Analytical part 
3.5.3. Conclusion 

Flexihealth 

63 
63 
64 
64 
64 
64 
65 
65 
65 

65 
65 
66 
66 
66 
67 
67 

68 
68 
68 
68 
68 
68 
68 
68 
70 
73 
73 
73 
74 
76 
77 
80 
85 


 

5/131 

3.6. Relationships with customers 
3.6.1. Correspondence between employees’ and customers’ perceptions of customer 
satisfaction 
3.6.2. Descriptive results of data from the validation phase 
3.6.2.1. Sample description 
3.6.2.2. Descriptive customer satisfaction indicators 
3.6.3. Examination of fit of a model specifying the relationships between CSI 
3.6.4. Relationships between CSI, employee characteristics, perceived working 
conditions and well-being 
3.6.4.1. Bivariate initial analyses 
3.6.4.2. Correlations between number of changes, change perceptions and  
perceived customer satisfaction 
3.6.4.3. Correlations between well-being indicators and customer satisfaction 
indicators 
3.6.4.4. Correlations between work conditions and CSI 
3.6.4.5. Correlations between personal characteristics and CSI 
3.6.4.6. Hierarchical regression analyses 
3.6.5. Impact of change on CSI 
3.6.6. Discussion and conclusion 
4. General conclusion 
5. References 
 
 

87 

87 
88 
88 
89 
90 

98 

98 

100 
101 
101 
102 
105 
107 
110 
113 

Flexihealth 


 

6/131 

Introduction 
 
Work organizations have been encountering tremendous changes since the early 1990s. These changes have 
been  diversely  called  organizational  restructuring,  revitalization,  or  reorganization,  and  in  most  cases  have 
been  accompanied  by  significant  reductions  in  the  employment  workforce.  These  dramatic  changes  are 
related  to  the  worldwide  globalization  of  markets and  the  tendency  of  most  companies  to  merge  into  big 
multinational enterprises.  
 
Given  the  pervasiveness  of  these  organizational  changes,  it  is  surprising  how  little  we  know  about  how 
different  groups  of  employees  react  to  these  changes  and  how  employees’  health  and  well-being can be 
affected by them. This is even more astonishing that it is well recognized that the success of organizational 
changes often rests on the motivation and commitment of employees themselves (Armstrong-Stassen, 1998; 
Kozlowski,  Chao,  Smith,  &  Hedlund,  1993).  Moreover,  one  can  assume  that  if  organizational changes 
adversely  impact  employee health and well-being, they may indirectly decrease performance, and ultimately 
lead to reduced customer satisfaction with services and products.  
 
The Flexihealth research project has been developed to identify the effects of flexibility practices and changes 
in work environments on well-being indicators, health and quality of life, and ultimately customer satisfaction 
indicators.  A  major  starting  point  of  the  project  was  the  attempt  to  isolate  the  practical  changes that 
accompany  large-scale  organizational  changes.  We  thought  employees  are  much  more  sensitive  to 
transformations of their work environement than to more distal changes that may be difficult to understand. 
Thus, we were interested to identify most frequent changes (change of supervisor, tasks, etc.) and flexibility 
practices (in terms of labor contract, work time, etc.) encountered by employees and then to assess how they 
affected health-related outcomes and well-being, and customer satisfaction.  
 
Our  research  was  based  on  a  transactional  approach  to  stress,  which  basically  assumes  that  the  stress 
process is activated when stressful demands from the environment combine with a lack of personal resources 
to  cope  with  them.  In  this  process,  perception  is  important.  Environmental  demands  will  generate  stress 
outcomes when they are perceived by the individual as threatening. Consistent with this view, we measured 
not  only  the  objective  changes  encountered  by  employees  but  also  how  they  appraised  them,  in  terms  of 
threat and/or challenge.  
 
Using analyses conducted on a data base built to properly represent the Belgian active population within the 
secondary  and  tertiary  sectors,  we  examined  the  impact  of  changes  and  flexibility  practices,  and  their 
perception, on employee stress, well-being, mental and physical quality of life, and customer satisfaction. 
 
This report includes several sections. The first section is devoted to the presentation of the Flexihealth model. 
All concepts underlying the research will be thoroughly discussed in this section. The second section begins 
with a complete description of the scales included in the Flexihealth instrument, and reports the psychometric 
information  relevant  to  them.  This  section  also  conveys  the  information  concerning  the  creation  of  the 
Flexihealth data base. The third section provides the main results of the Flexihealth research program. This 
section begins with the presentation of findings across demographic groups. Then, the effect of changes and 
flexibility  practices  on  stress,  as  moderated  by  perceptual  mechanisms  (challenge  or  threat)  is  examined. 
Next, the role of positive stress and control at work is determined. The fourth section of the report deals with 
the medical aspects of the survey: (a) medical status (personal antecedents and subjective complaints), (b) life 
habits, and (c) mental and physical quality of life. A key issue there was to determine whether changes and 
flexibility  practices  were  related  to  health  status.  Finally,  the  fifth  section  treats  the  issue  of  customer 
satisfaction  and  its  linkages  with  changes,  flexibility  practices  and  other  work  conditions  variables.  As 
customer satisfaction can be assessed by a variety of indicators, we acknowledged this multidimensionality by 
using the following  satisfaction facets: general service quality, tangibles, responsiveness, assurance, empathy, 
general product quality, satisfaction with  products,  satisfaction  with  services,  and  behavioral  intentions  (cf. 

Flexihealth 


SERVQUAL  instrument  developed  by  Parasuraman,  Zeithaml,  &  Berry,  1991).  A  general  conclusion  is 
offered at the end of the report. 

 

7/131 

Flexihealth 


 

8/131 

1.  Theoretical framework 

1.1.  Context 

 
Many companies are facing major organizational changes that may affect their staff. Some of them concern 
the organization at large (restructurings, mergers, downsizings), others affect some specific units, departments 
or dimensions of the organization (subcontracting, IT projects),  and while still others focus on work groups or 
employees  (job  redesigns,  training  devices,  and  flexible  work  schedules).  All  these  changes  may  have 
implications,  either  positive  or  negative,  on  worker  well-being  in  general  and  on  the  quality  of  work  life  in 
particular. 
 
Although numerous experts pointed out the advantages of flexibility for increasing productivity and enhancing 
the quality of work life through the development of new competencies, one should not neglect the fact that 
another facet of flexibility has been a severe reduction of the workforce, greater employment precarity, and 
higher exposure to physical and psychosocial risks on the part of employees. While it is difficult to estimate 
the  magnitude  of  the  negative  effects  associated  with  the  recent  large-scale organizational changes, some 
authors consider the increase of stress symptoms and burnout among employees as the necessary counterpart 
of the search for economic efficiency (Hansez & De Keyser, 1997).  
 
The  assessment  of  the  effects  of  organizational  changes  on  employees  is  at  the  core  of  the  Flexihealth 
project.  This concept  has been introduced  to emphasize the importance, for all, to reach a balance between 
the  requirements  of  flexibility  and  the  necessity  to  protect  employee  health.  Indeed, current organizational 
changes  necessitate  that  employees  adjust  to  changes  themselves  but  also  adapt  to  the  new  working 
conditions  generated  by  the  search  of  greater  flexibility.  In  reality,  these  changes  whose  objective  is  to 
increase  organizational  performance  may  actually  engender  counterproductive  effects  because  they  may 
indirectly increase employee stress, and ultimately, lower the quality of services and products (Elliot, 1990).  
 
The Flexihealth project, funded by the Department of Scientific, Technical, and Cultural Affairs, builds on the 
1996  law  promoting  worker  well-being,  which  has  been  translated  into  a  collective  agreement  (N°72  of 
March  30,  1999)  stating  that  each  employer  has  to  implement  a  policy  purported  to  collectively prevent 
employees from being exposed to stress and/or to search for collective remedies if needed.  
 
The  Flexihealth  project  permits  to  conduct  a  dynamic  analysis  of  the  work  conditions  that  could 
potentially  lead  to  stress  under  change  conditions. More precisely, it allows to determine which factors 
among  the  consequences  of  restructurings  and  flexibility  practices  represent  a  source  of stress or of well-
being among employees.  
 
This research meets (a) the objectives of most organizations which, under conditions of major organizational 
changes,  are  concerned  with  the  maintenance  of  employee  motivation,  and  (b)  the  goals  of  politicians  and 
unions,  by  suggesting  avenues  for  building  a  legal  environment  that  would  favor  flexibility  while 
respecting worker health and well-being.   
 
More and more organizations are confronted with major organizational changes that affect their employees. 
As  mentioned by  Armenakis and Bedeian (1999), the literature related organizational change deals with this 
issue using four perspectives: the content, context, process and consequences of organizational changes. Most 
studies  that  have  investigated  the  consequences  of  organizational  changes  focused  their  attention  on 
downsizing practices. Indeed, although layoffs do not represent the sole type of organizational change, they 
have often been used as a prototypical example of change. Kozlowski et al. (1993, p. 267) defined downsizing 
as an organizational decision  intended to reduce the number of employees in order to improve organizational 
effectiveness. 
  

Flexihealth 


 

9/131 

The  findings  associated  with  the  studies  conducted  on  the  impact  of  layoffs  display  two  paradoxes.  First, 
layoffs do not contribute to significant improvements in long-term organizational profitability. Moreover, some 
researchers  (Brockner,  1988 ;  Cascio,  1993 ;  Kets de Vries & Balazs, 1997 ; Kozlowski et al., 1993) have 
highlighted the negative consequences of downsizing for both victims and survivors. Indeed, the challenge for 
any downsizing organization is to maintain or even improve its performance using a workforce that is both 
reduced and adversely affected by layoffs.  
As an example,  Armstrong-Stassen (1998) conducted a longitudinal study of the impact of layoffs among civil 
servants  in  Canada  showing  that  they  were  associated  with  poorer  job  performance,  perception  of  more 
employment  insecurity,  and  lower  organizational  commitment,  morale,  and  trust  in  management. In another 
study,  Armstrong-Stassen (1997)  reported that managers designated as being  redundant felt more stressed 
and more generally, this status resulted in negative personal and organizational effects. These findings are in 
line  with  Cascio’s  (1993)  contention  that  more  than  50%  of  survivors  report  an  increase  of  occupational 
stress and of symptoms of burnout following an organizational downsizing. Studying the impact of downsizing 
on employee well-being and health is thus worthwhile. 
Nonetheless,  these  studies  do  not  provide  an  unambiguous  answer  to  the  question  as  to  what  concretely 
happens to employees when they are faced with a major organizational change.  Therefore, the development 
of  the  psychosocial  part  of  the  Flexihealth  project  was  targeted  at  three  objectives.  First,  we  wanted  to 
identify the indicators of changes in workers’ environment. Second, we were concerned with the meaning of 
changes for employees themselves. Finally, we were willing to determine the consequences, either positive or 
negative, of organizational changes in terms of well-being at work.  

1.2.  The Flexihealth model 

We relied on a stress framework in order to assess the consequences of organizational changes. This type of 
framework was felt to be relevant here. Indeed, Cartwright and Cooper (1997) distinguished among six types 
of  occupational  stress  factors,  that  is  job  characteristics  (e.g.,  overload,  type  of  work  schedule,  quality  of 
physical  environment,  etc.),  professional  roles  (e.g.,  level  of  authority,  role  ambiguity  or  conflict,  etc.), 
relationships among colleagues, with the supervisor or subordinates,   factors associated with career progress 
(employment  insecurity,  inter-  and  intra-organizational  mobility,  etc.),  organizational  factors  (work  climate, 
corporate culture,  management style, etc.), and work-life balance. Of interest, these characteristics may be 
directly or indirectly related to major changes encountered by organizations.    
Figure  1  presents  the  theoretical  model  developed  by  the  Flexihealth  research  group.  We provide a brief 
overview of the psychosocial variables hereafter. These can be grouped into three categories. First, one finds 
the indicators designed to capture job conditions and their change over time (appraised changes, perceived 
changes, and flexibility practices). These are followed in the process by mediating variables liable to enlighten 
how organizational changes do affect employees (e.g., employment insecurity) and by moderating variables 
depicting  the  conditions  that  can  enhance,  reduce  or  neutralize  the  effects  of  organizational  changes  on 
employee  well-being  (affectivity,  self-esteem,  external  locus  of  control,  organizational  support,  and  control 
over  job  conditions).  Finally,  the  model  includes  indicators  of  well-being  at  work  (negative  stress, positive 
stress and job satisfaction).   

1.2.1 

Axis 1 – Working conditions 

1.2.1.1. 

Perception of changes in the work environment as potential 

sources of stress 

Numerous studies, due to their methodology, cannot account for the underlying factors that may explain why 
a given event but not another one tends to generate more stress among some categories of employees but not 
among  others.  In  building  the  Flexihealth  instrument,  our  intention  was  to  develop  a  method  to  assess  the 
mechanisms through which changes in the work environment could affect employee well-being.   
 
 

Flexihealth 


Indicators of 
well-being: 

•  Stress 
• 

Job 
satisfaction 

10/131 

 
Employee health 

 

Customer 
satisfaction 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

Perception of 

changes 

 

 

 

Control 

Job insecurity 

Emotional 
reactions 

 

 

 

 

Moderators: 

Affectivity – Self-esteem – Locus of control (External) – 

Organizational support – Support from supervisor 

 

Figure 1. The Flexihealth  model 

According to Terry and Callan (1997), it is necessary to take into account both situational characteristics and 
individual  perceptions  in  order  to  understand  how  people  react  to  organizational  changes.  Payne, Jabri,  and 
Pearson (1988) also argue that identifying the affective meaning of job situations is crucial for understanding 
the  extent  to  which  demands  are  stressful  for  employees.  Indeed,  being  exposed  to  a  demanding  situation 
does not automatically lead to stress. According to Dewe (1992), conceptualizing stressors as situations that 
inherently  possess  a  stressful  nature  and  would  be  straightforwardly  perceived  as  being  stressful  does not 
lead to an accurate depiction of stress levels.  Payne et al. (1988) contend that work environments are more 
or less stressful depending on the meaning attributed to them by individuals. The notion of personal meaning 
refers to what Lazarus and Folkman (1984) define as the appraisal of events in the stress process.  
Therefore, the Flexihealth group adopted a transactional perspective on stress which assumes that individuals’ 
responses, e.g., in terms of personal adjustment efforts, is largely determined by the subjective perception of 
situations and that some personal and situational characteristics may influence both the appraisal process and 
adjustment efforts (Schwartz & Stone, 1993). This approach is both  transactional because stress is viewed 
as  the  result  of  the  interaction  between  individuals  and  their  environments  (Cox  &  Ferguson,  1991), and 
evolving  over  time because the adjustment efforts of individuals may modify their environment and future 
reactions or adjustment efforts (De Keyser & Hansez, 1996 ; Schwartz & Stone, 1993). 
It is quite common to distinguish  primary appraisal from  secondary  appraisal.  According  to Perrewé and 
Zellars  (1999),  any  person  confronted  with  a  given  situation  tries  to  determine  the  extent  to  which  it 
represents  a  threat  for  his/her  well-being  (primary  appraisal).  This  may  result  in  three  types  of  appraisal: 
either  the  situation  is  non  relevant,  positive  (the  situation  is  perceived  to  be  attractive),  or  threatening. 
Afterwards, through secondary appraisal, the individual will examine whether s/he has means to overcome 
the situation or problem and/or to adjust to it properly.    
To  conclude  with,  the  transactional  approach  views  stress  as  «  a  response  from  the  worker  towards  the 
demands of a situation s/he doubts having the necessary resources to cope with  but nonetheless thinks s/he 
has to deal with » (De Keyser & Hansez, 1996, p. 133). In the context of organizational changes, this means 
that events will be perceived as either positive or negative depending on the meaning employees will attribute 
to them and that objective changes will not tell us much about the actual stress reactions among employees. 
Payne  and  Morrison  (1999)  regret  however  that  few  studies  have  independently  assessed  the  situations 

Flexihealth 


individuals are faced with from the meaning they attribute to them. Therefore, the Flexihealth group made a 
distinction between actual changes and how they were perceived.  

 

11/131 

1.2.1.2. 

Flexibility practices 

Everaere  (1997) defines  flexibility  as  «  the  ability  to  adjust  under  the  double  constraint  of  uncertainty  and 
urgency ».  The  introduction  of  flexibility  in  the  management  of  organizations  is  a  response  by  which 
companies adapt their structures, operations, and staff to the demands of international competition. This trend 
towards flexibility is justified by the evolution of markets. Jenkins (1998) also stresses that, concerned by the 
increasing number of bankruptcies, governments have encouraged organizations to use more proactive forms 
of management, notably to avoid layoffs.  
Employment flexibility has  been increasing from the early 1990’s. It would affect a quarter if not one third of 
the workforce. These practices are associated with constant changes that engender side-effects (e.g., more 
stress reactions). Atypical forms of employment contracts do appear  as well (flex-time contracts, fixed-term 
contracts, etc.). These new forms of flexibility practices have been incorporated into Flexihealth surveys. 
Flexibility  practices  affect  the  type  of  labor  contract,  salaries,  work  schedules,  job  descriptions  (workload, 
level  of  authority,  etc.),  appraisal  systems,  control  systems  (number  of  procedures,  automated procedures, 
etc.),  the  social  environment  (telecommuting,  work  climate,  etc.),  professional  skills  (use  of  competencies, 
polyvalence,  etc.),  and  customer-related  behaviors.  Klein  Hesselink  and  Van  Vuuren  (1999)  suggested 
distinguishing between work  flexibility (internal flexibility) and employment flexibility (external flexibility). The 
former affects permanent workers and the adjustment of the characteristics of their jobs to the requirements 
of  organizations  while  the  latter  addresses  flexibility  among  labor  contracts  and  consequently  concerns 
temporary workers more directly.  
These flexibility practices may affect work-related well-being through different ways. First, they contribute to 
the  intensification  of  work.  That  is,  the  trend  is  towards  quantitative  intensification, meaning that there are 
fewer workers for the same global workload. Second, intensification may also be qualitative, such that there is 
both  a  lateral  and  vertical  expansion  of  tasks  that  contributes  to  job  enrichment.  In  other  words, jobs are 
becoming more complex and require more sophisticated competencies for proper completion of tasks.  
Flexibility  practices  may  also  have  a  detrimental  effect  on  work-related  well-being via an increase of job 
insecurity.  However, relationships among flexibility, job insecurity and well-being are complex. According to 
Klein Hesselink  and  Van  Vuuren  (1999),  temporary workers will experience higher levels of job insecurity 
because  they  do  not  benefit  from  long-term labor contracts. On the other hand, these workers have less to 
loose  than  permanent  workers.  So,  their  reactions  may  be  less  severe.  Klein Hesselink  and Van Vuuren 
(1999)  stress the fact that temporary workers do not have the same expectations than permanent workers 
towards  their  employer. Thus, they assert that a large portion of flexible workers prefer a flexible contract 
rather than steady employment.  

1.2.2 

Axis 2a – Mediating variable 

1.2.2.1. 

Job insecurity 

Ashford  (1988)  as well as  Nelson, Cooper, and Jackson (1995) noted that it is essential to examine (cid:129) how 
organizational changes globally affect employees and  (cid:130) what characteristics of work environments mediate 
these effects. According to Nelson et al. (1995), employees’ perceptions of uncertainty are an essential part 
of  that  process.  These  researchers  actually  found  that  during  times  of  organizational  turbulence,  job 
satisfaction and mental and physical health appear to decrease. Although these effects differ across groups of 
employees,  those  at  risk  include  individuals  who  experience  the  greatest uncertainty and  have little control 
over their situation.  
Greenhalgh  and  Rosenblatt  (1984)  suggested  adopting  a  multidimensional  perspective  on  job  insecurity, 
defined  as  the  perceived  inability  to  maintain  employment  within  the  context  of  a  threatening  environment 
(Greenhalgh  &  Rosenblatt,  1984,  p.  438).  Ashford,  Lee  and  Bobko  (1989)  recommend  measuring  the 
insecurity related to losing some valued components of work, the perceived risk of losing one’s job, and the 

Flexihealth 


 

12/131 

feeling of not being able to neutralize the perceived threats. In contrast, Jacobson (1991) suggests limiting the 
measure of job insecurity to uncertainty concerning the maintenance of one’s job. This subjective appraisal 
represents  the  perceived  probability  of  keeping  one’s  job  in  the  future.  According to  Klandermans, Van 
Vuuren, and Jacobson (1991), job insecurity will be proportional to the perceived probability of losing one’s job 
and to the seriousness of the consequences associated with this loss.  
Numerous  empirical  studies  (Ashford  et  al.,  1989 ; De Witte, 1999 ; Ferrie et al., 2001 ; Kinnunen, Mauno, 
Natti,  &  Happonen,  2000 ;  Probst,  2000 ;  Reissman,  Orris,  Lacey,  &  Hartman,  1999 ;  Roskies  &  Louis-
Guérin, 1990 ; Roskies, Louis-Guérin, & Fournier, 1993) have demonstrated the relevance and importance of 
job  insecurity  during  changing  times.  Along this line,  de Vries and Balazs (1997) stated that the long-lasting 
threat of being laid off is potentially the primary source of the worsening of psychological well-being and may 
cause  stress  deseases.  Within  the  Flexihealth  research  project,  this  variable  has  been  considered  as  a 
potential mediator of the effects of changes on employee work-related well-being. 

1.2.3 

Axis 2b – Moderating variables 

Because appraisal plays a central role in the understanding of employee reactions to changes, its origins are 
important  to  identify.  Among  them,  individual  differences  are  potentially  important  and  relevant.  Some 
empirical studies (Armstrong-Stassen, 1998; Judge, Thoresen, Pucik, & Welbourne, 1999) showed indeed that 
these variables are critical. In this research, four dispositional variables were considered, positive and negative 
affectivity, self-esteem, and locus of control.   
Relatedly,  some  organizational  characteristics  are  also  likely  to  influence  individuals’  reactions  towards 
changes  encountered.  We  focused  our  attention  on  perceived  organizational  support,  perceived  supervisor 
support,  and  on  control  over  working  conditions.  These  variables  have  been  included  in  the  Flexihealth 
surveys.  

1.2.3.1. 

Negative and positive affectivity 

The  concept  of  negative  affectivity  has  been  introduced  by  Watson  and  Clark  (1984)  who defined it as a 
personality trait related to mood. According to them, individuals whose affectivity is negative tend to focus on 
the  negative  aspects  of  themselves,  others  and  of  the  world  in  general,  and  are  more  inclined  to  feel 
distressed in most situations.  In contrast, those who are high on positive affectivity feel enthusiastic, full of 
energy, concentrated and determined.   
Several  studies  demonstrated that negative affectivity is associated with measures of psychological tension 
(Brief  et  al.,  1988;  Eysenck,  1991;  Nelson  et  al.,  1995),  management’s  adjustment  efforts  (Armstrong-
Stassen, 1994 ; Judge et al., 1999 ; Roskies et al., 1993), and perceptions of social support (Vinokur, Schul, & 
Caplan, 1987). However, Watson, Pennebaker, and Folger (1987) hypothesized that the correlations reported 
between  stressors  and  tensions  may  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  they  represent  those  sides  of  the  same 
phenomenon, the tendency to respond negatively. According to these authors, negative affectivity may be a 
confounding variable because it correlates with both the perception of environmental characteristics and with 
measures of psychological tension. Watson et al. (1987) predicted that the relation between perceptions of the 
environment and tension would tend to zero when negative affectivity is controlled for.   
In  a  review  of  the  negative  affectivity  literature,  Moyle (1995) examined the links between stressors, well-
being and job satisfaction, and negative affectivity. He contended that the role of the latter may be of four 
different  types.  It  may  have  (a)  a  direct  effect on stress measures, (b) an  indirect effect on tensions via 
perceptions of stressors, (c)  a moderating effect on the relationship between stressors and tensions, or (d) a 
substitution  effect on the relationship between stressors and tensions. The findings can be summarized as 
follows.  
First,  negative  affectivity,  albeit negatively associated  with job satisfaction and well-being, displays stronger 
correlations  with  well-being  than  with  job  satisfaction.  Second,  even  if  negative  affectivity  accounts  for  a 
significant portion of the correlation between perceptions of environment and job satisfaction and well-being 
(a substitution effect), this correlation remains significant after negative affectivity has been controlled for. 
Moreover,  negative  affectivity  does  not  contribute  to  inflate  the  correlation  between  stressors  and  job 

Flexihealth 


 

13/131 

satisfaction.  Third, individuals who report higher negative affectivity also report less perceived control, with 
the latter predicting job satisfaction.  Perceived control mediated the relationship between negative affectivity 
and job satisfaction. In other words, it might be that negative affectivity contributes to modify the perceptions 
of  the  environment  such  that  the  individual  feels  less  in  control  when  s/he  is  high  in  negative  affectivity. 
Fourth, negative affectivity exerted a moderating effect on the relationships between stressors and well-being 
but not between stressors and job satisfaction. In fact, individuals with low negative affectivity reported fewer 
stress symptoms, all else being equal.  
In  contrast to negative affectivity, positive affectivity has not been extensively examined in connection with 
stressors  and  tensions.  One  may  however  argue  that  positive  affectivity  would  correlate  negatively  with 
stress measures. As an example,  Cropanzano, James, and Konovsky (1993) demonstrated that negative and 
positive  affectivity  are  associated  with  a  variety  of  work  attitudes.  However,  Moyle  (1995)  reported non 
significant associations between positive affectivity and tensions. 

1.2.3.2. 

Self-esteem 

Pierce,  Gardner,  Cummings,  and Dunham (1989) stated that many studies that investigated the role of self-
esteem did so with the assumption that the way the individual reacts to work situations varies according to 
his/her  level  of  self-esteem.  Kahn  and  Byosiere (1992)  argued  that  self-esteem  can  be  considered  as  a 
personal resource that can be used to cope  successfully with stressful situations. Self-esteem may affect the 
perception of work situations, the choice of coping strategies or the intensity with which a given individual 
takes action.  
Korman (1976)  predicted that individuals tend  to maintain or preserve their level of self-esteem. Individuals 
with a high self-esteem would develop positive attitudes towards their job and behave so as to maintain their 
level  of  self-esteem,  hence  will  be  effective  at  work  in  order  to  be  consistent  with the feeling of being 
competent. In contrast, those with a low self-esteem will tend to develop negative attitudes towards their job 
and be less productive in order to match their feeling that they are not competent.  
In terms of measurement, several authors recommended that self-esteem be targeted towards the attitude or 
behavior  one  wants  to  predict  (Simpson  &  Boyle,  1975; Song & Hattie, 1985; Tharenou, 1979). Along this 
line, Pierce et al. (1989) developed a scale for measuring organization-based self-esteem which they define as 
a  set  of  beliefs  developed  by  individuals  concerning  them  within  the  context  of  the  organization.  The 
organization-based  self-esteem  is  rooted  on  more  general  personal  beliefs  but  also  includes  some  specific 
beliefs  reflecting  the  feeling  of  personal  fit  with  the  organization  and  one’s  value  as  a  member  of  the 
organization. As mentioned by Pierce et al. (1989), individuals with a high level of self-esteem feel they are 
good fits as members of their organization.  Kahn and Byosiere (1992) reported that among the at-that-time 
eight  studies  published  on  the  links  between  self-esteem and organizational stress, six found a significant  a 
negative effect of self-esteem on tensions.  

1.2.3.3. 

Locus of control 

The  concept  of  locus  of  control  emanates  from  the  work  of  Rotter  on  the  theory  of  social  learning. 
Reinforcers,  either  positive  or  negative,  will  raise  or  reduce  the  probability  of  occurrence  of  the  target 
behavior  only  if  individuals  perceive  that  the  reinforcement  is  contingent  upon  their  own actions.  Locus of 
control is considered as a stable variable across time and situations. However, some studies have shown that 
it can somewhat evolve with age and can change as a result of enduring exposure to some situations (e.g., 
unemployment).  
The locus of control refers to a basic belief that either all what occurs in one’s life is under the control of the 
individual  (internal  locus  of  control)  or  that  all  of  what  is  happening  is  determined  by  some  set  of  external 
forces  (external  locus  of  control).  According to  Hurrell and Murphy (1991), four hypotheses can be drawn 
concerning the links between locus of control and well-being.  
First, it could be that locus of control has both a direct and an indirect effect on stressors, through the choice 
of specific occupational careers. Second, locus of control may interact with subjective or objective demands 
in  predicting  health-related  outcomes.  Empirically,  it  has  been  shown  that  an  external  locus  of  control  is 

Flexihealth 


 

14/131 

associated  with  poor  health  (self-reported)  (Hurrell  et  Murphy,  1991). In work-related settings, an external 
locus  of  control  has  been  shown  to  correlate  with  burnout  (Glogow,  1986;  McIntyre,  1984),  less  job 
satisfaction (Spector, 1982), more stress (Halpin, Harris, & Halpin, 1985; Kyriacou & Sutcliffe, 1979; Lester, 
1982), more alienation (Korman, Wittig-Berman, & Lang, 1981) and a lower self-esteem (Lester, 1986).  
Third,  one  could  argue  that  locus  of  control  moderates  the  relationships  among  objective  and  subjective 
demands,  such  that  depending  on  their  type  and/or  level  of  locus  of  control,  individuals  do  not  perceive 
external  demands  the  same  way.  A number of findings suggest that the effect of stressors on  internals is 
lower  than  on  externals.  Such  a  moderating  effect  has  been  reported  for  relationships between composite 
scales of occupational stress and psychophysical distress (Krause et Stryker, 1984), for relationships between 
role  ambiguity  and  work-related  tensions  (Keenan  &  McBain,  1979),  distress  (Arney,  1988),  and  job 
satisfaction  (Abdel-Halim,  1980),  and  finally  for  relationships  between  role  conflict  and  somatic  complaints 
(Fusilier, Ganster & Mayes, 1987). 

1.2.3.4. 

Control over working conditions 

As mentioned by Frese (1989), the concept of control cannot be separated from that of goal and also cannot 
be limited to the predictability of events. He argues that a person experiences the notion of control when s/he 
has an influence over his/her own actions and over the conditions within which s/he behaves. This approach is 
quite close to the definition put forth by  Smith (1997) who defines control  as the ability to exert an influence 
over the environment such that it becomes more satisfying and less threatening. 
According  to  Frese  (1989),  this  power  of  influence  presumes  that  the  individual  is  able  to  act  upon the 
sequence  of  tasks  on  the  job  (determining  the  order  of  tasks,  and  benefiting  from  feedback  in  order  to 
improve task completion), the flow of tasks (determining when a given task is achieved and how much time 
one needs to devote to it), and on the  content of tasks themselves (including a decision latitude over working 
conditions).  
The  idea  that  work  stress  reflects  the  impossibility  for  the  worker  to  gain  sufficient  control  over  his/her 
environment  is  not  new.  It  does  not  exclude  the  possibility  that  personal  factors  act  as  moderators  in  the 
relationship between the environment and stress but it determines the areas where the organization can act 
primarily  in  terms  of  stress  prevention.  That is, the organization should provide the means and resources to 
employees  to  enable  them  to  deal  effectively  with  the  demands  of  their  work  environment,  through  work 
organization interventions, ergonomics, and training.    
Perceived control is central in the transactional approach to stress because it is directly  related to the way 
individuals  appraise  the  relative  balance  between  external  demands  and  internal  resources.  Scandinavian 
studies conducted over the control of working conditions (Aronsson, 1989, cited by Hansez, 2001) support the 
idea  that,  in  order  to  adjust  successfully  to  work-related  stressors,  the  individual  must  have  the  needed 
resources and the necessary control over events, conditions, and processes.  
In the Flexihealth project, we used the perspective of Wall, Jackson, and Mullarkey (1995) who stressed that 
a major work  characteristic  to  be  assessed  is  the  degree  of  control  over  time  and  methods.  This form of 
control allows the worker to determine the sequence of tasks to be accomplished and the way to achieve it.   

1.2.3.5. 

Social support  

The  concept  of  social  support  evokes  the  possibility  of  helping  relations  (Leavy,  1983).  Quick, Nelson, 
Matuszek,  Wittington,  and  Quick  (1996)  noted  that  it  is  commonly  accepted  that  individuals  need  stable 
relations in order to be protected against the health-related risks of social isolation. 
Numerous  studies  have  highlighted  the  impact  of  social  support  on  health.  In  their  meta-analytic review, 
House, Landis, and Umberson. (1988) have demonstrated that social support is associated with better health 
and  longer  life  expectancy.  Those  who  live  in  social  isolation  do  present  more  health-related problems and 
their  life  expectancy  is  shorter.  Social  support  has  been  considered  in  many  studies  as  a  buffer  in  the 
relationship between stressors and health-related outcomes. Viswesvaran, Sanchez and Fisher (1999), in their 
meta-analysis of the relevant literature,  noted however that more research is needed to clarify the role played 
by social support in the stressors-strain relationship. Indeed, several models can be put forth. 

Flexihealth 


 

15/131 

In  the  Flexihealth  project,  social  support  was  measured  through  two  variables,  perceived  organizational 
support,  and  perceived  supervisor  support.  We  hypothesized  that  employees  who  perceive  that  their 
contribution  is  valued  by  their  organization  and/or  supervisor and feel supported by them should react more 
positively to changes in their environment.  

1.2.4 

Axis 3 – Indicators of well-being 

1.2.4.1. 

Positive and negative stress  

The stress process may engender different consequences at the individual level, which may be grouped into 
three categories: psychological, physical, and behavioral responses. Psychological and behavioral responses 
have been extensively examined in organizational stress research. However, the stress phenomenon has often 
been  studied  from  a  negative  point  of  view,  due  to  its  detrimental  consequences  for  mental  and  physical 
health. 
This  focus  on  negative  outcomes  has  led  researchers  to  neglect  some  positive  aspects  of  the  stress 
phenomenon.  In  fact,  some  argue  that  stress  can  be  either  positive  (eustress)  or  negative  (distress) 
(Doménech,  2001).  Distress  corresponds  to  a  reaction  of  the  individual  in  order  to  adjust  effectively  to 
situations perceived as threatening while eustress suggests that a reaction of the individual is generated when 
faced  with  situations  perceived  as  challenging.  In  the  latter,  the  reaction  ends  up  when  the  challenging 
situation is removed.   
There is currently a debate concerning the relationship between negative and positive stress. It seems that the 
two concepts are correlated  with one another.  Previous work on  positive and negative  emotions (Russell & 
Caroll, 1999; Folkman & Moskowitz, 2000) suggests that these two stress dimensions represent the opposing 
poles of the same continuum. However, our own research within the Flexihealth project and a recent study by 
Schaufeli et al. (2000) support the idea that eustress and distress might be distinguishable.  

1.2.4.2. 

Job satisfaction 

According  to  Cooper,  Dewe  and  O’Driscoll  (2001),  job  satisfaction  has  been  among  the  most  widely 
investigated indicators among the consequences of the stress process in organizations. That’s the reason why 
we thought it was necessary to include it in our surveys.  

 
1.3.     Health and stress 

 
The  Flexihealth  model  highlights  the  importance  of  taking  into  consideration  the  interaction  between 
individuals and their work environment in the study of stress. The model is based on previous work (Bruchon-
Schweitzer  &  Duntzer,  1994,  p.  47;  Kahn  &  Byosière,  1992;  Karasek,  1979;  Karasek  &  Theorell,  1990) 
suggesting that when faced with an obstacle, individuals assess the threat associated with it and the amount of 
resources available to them in order to cope with the situation, and ultimately develop stress responses only if 
the  imbalance  between  demands  and  resources  is  too high.  Karasek  and Theorell (1990)  argued that the 
combination of high demands and little perceived control and support is particularly stressful and may result in 
serious mental and physical health problems. The Flexihealth model predicts that this  form of misfit between 
demands  and  control  is  likely  to  end  up  with  more  physiological  (e.g.,  arterial  tension),  emotional  (e.g., 
depression), cognitive (e.g., reduced creativity, inefficient decisions, concentration problems), and behavioral 
(e.g., addictions) problems.  
 
Following a review of the relevant literature, we noticed the large variety of stress outcomes (e.g., mental and 
physical problems, behavioral changes, feeling of insecurity and vulnerability, concentration problems, increase 
of accident rates, higher absenteeism rates, etc.) (Hemingway et al., 2003; Lee et al., 2003; Metcalfe et al., 
2003; Heslop et al., 2002; de Jonge et al., 2000; Kivimäki et al., 2000; Ramsay, 1999; Marmot et al., 1997; 
Vahtera et al., 1997).  A  number  of  studies  have  reported significant associations between job insecurity  or 
perceived stress and  the  following : dorsolumbar affections  (Vahtera et al., 1997), arterial hypertension and 

Flexihealth 


 

16/131 

cardiovascular diseases  (Ferrie  et  al.,  1998;  Heslop  et  al.,  2002;  Lee  et  al.,  2003),  depression and mental 
health problems (Ferrie et al., 2001),  sleep dysfunctions and fatigue (Ferrie et al., 1998), increase of the body 
mass index (Ferrie et al., 1998), and behaviors injurious to health (Metcalfe et al., 2003).  
 
Aside  from  their  implications  on  work  climate,  organizational  changes  are  demanding  in  terms  of  personal 
flexibility  and  adjustment  for  workers.  The  stress  induced  by  changes  may  affect  employee  mental  and 
physical health  (Ferrie  et  al.,  1998;  Wheelock,  1999).  For  example,  in  contexts  of increased competition, 
workers tend to do extra hours without paying attention to their quality of life and health (Wheelock, 1999). In 
a study conducted in Canada, Mc Donough (2000) underlines this trend and reports that a higher level of job 
insecurity  raises the level of stress among employees and increases drug consumption. In a cross-sectional 
study over the  links between organizational changes and health,  Metcalfe et al. (2003)  observed a positive 
association between the frequency of job changes and the frequency of behaviors injurious to health. Without 
speaking  of  a  causality  phenomenon  between  these  variables,  the  authors  noted  that  workers  having 
experienced more job changes smoked more, drank more alcohol, and did less physical exercice. However, 
the  associations  between  the  frequency  of  job  changes  and  cardiovascular  diseases  (e.g., ischemia, angina 
pectoris)  could  not  be  convincingly  established,  neither  in  this  study  nor  in  that  conducted  by  Heslop et al. 
(2002) who examined the links between job dissatisfaction and mortality rates associated with cardiovascular 
diseases.       
 
In a study conducted among local employees in Raisio (Finland), Kivimäki et al. (2000) found that downsizing 
affected employee behaviors, with absenteeism rate being multiplied by a 2.2 factor and smoking being more 
frequent after changes occurred. However, Cheng et al. (2000) stated that most studies have investigated the 
links between stress indicators and objective measures of diseases through morbidity and/or mortality rates. 
Much less studies have addresed the relationships between stress and  perceived well-being or health quality 
among individuals (e.g., Väänänen et al., 2003).  Nonetheless, self-reported measures of health are consistent 
with measures and data reported in other studies (Heaney et al, 1994), hence are worth using. 
 
The originality of the Flexihealth project is to examine what employees really experience in terms of health 
and  well-being  during  or  after  a  restructuring or major change. Following a prevention logic, we decided to 
determine any stress condition that could be detrimental during changing times. In doing so, we used the term 
health-related quality of life. This concept is multidimensional and incorporates physical, mental, social, and 
functional aspects of health (Wilson & Cleary, 1995; Testa & Simonson, 1996). Measuring perceived quality 
of life has the advantage to take into account the preferences of respondents in terms of health, their hopes, 
expectations and/or fears concerning the future (Grujic et al., 1998 ; Wilson & Cleary, 1995 ). 
 
The  objective  of  the  medical  part  of  the  Flexihealth  survey  was  thus  to  assess  the  global  health  state  of 
employees in organizations undergoing changes, in order to estimate the prevalence  and distribution of some 
health-related  problems  (health  complaints,  perceived  quality  of  life,  life  styles,  drug  consumption),  and  to 
determine which portion among them can be attributed to stress. The project had thus two main objectives:  
 
(1)  Describing the situation at Time 0 (at the moment of survey delivery) in terms of health complaints. As 
illustrated  in  Figure  2,  the  medical  status  of  employees  is  defined  through  data  about subjective health, 
perceived quality of life, and life habits.   

(cid:240)  Subjective health refers to  complaints and symptoms expressed at the moment of the survey. They 
can  be  typical  somatic  complaints,  psychological  complaints,  or  some  general  or  aspecific  somatic 
complaints.   

(cid:240)  The concept of quality of life is related to health in general.   
(cid:240)  Life habits are linked to both personal choices and influences of the environment.   

(2)  Determining  the  portion  of  problems  attributable  to  organizational  stress,  i.e.,  the  development  or 
worsening  of  problems  that  do  not  seem  to  be  related  to  the  medical  status  of  patients  per  se.  The 

 

 

Flexihealth 


 

17/131 

variations of health status will be judged in regard to both the medical history of the patient and  changes 
of his/her life habits.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Health complaints 

Perceived quality of life 

Smoking and alcohol or 

drug consumption 

Health 
status 

Figure 2. Health -related dimensions within the Flexihealth research project 

1.4.     Issues related to relationships with customer satisfaction 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
In  recent  years,  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  there  have  been  a  large  number  of  organizations  that  have 
introduced  some  kind  of  organizational  change,  be  it  a  merging  operation,  acquisition,  downsizing  or 
restructuring of some type. Although these are introduced to improve organizational performance, it is unclear 
to  what  degree  they  may  possibly  have  adverse  effects  on  customer  satisfaction  (CS),  either  by  directly 
influencing customers’ perceptions of organizational performance or through the impact these changes have 
on the well-being of employees confronted with these changes. Larger organizational changes can introduce 
changes in employees’ working environments, which might cause stress and a decrease in employees’ well-
being. These might in turn influence the effectiveness of organizational processes, the quality of services and 
products  delivered  to  the  customer  and  ultimately  customer  satisfaction.  It  seems  logical  to  assume  that 
customer  satisfaction  will  at  least  partly  depend  on  customers’  perceptions  of  employee  behaviors  such  as 
friendliness  and  helpfulness  and  this  has  effectively  been  shown  in  studies  conducted  in  the  service  sector 
(Dant, Lumpkin,  &  Rawwas,  1998;  Parasuraman,  Zeithaml,  &  Berry,  1985). In turn, it can be argued that 
these employees’ behaviors will depend on their attitudes towards their work and the organizations they work 
for  and  their  sense  of  well-being  at  work.  Based  on  this  argument,  the  issue  of  improving  customer 
satisfaction  in  services  has  resulted  in  recent  years  in  a  combination  of  two  fields  of  research  that  were 
traditionally  separated,  namely  research  on  organizational  behavior  and  research  in  marketing.  These  two 
fields  are  combined  in  order  to  assess the effects of certain organizational aspects (either at higher levels, 
such as managerial practices, or at the level of individual employees, such as job satisfaction) on customer 
satisfaction.  Until  now  however,  research  conducted  in  this  particular  area has yielded mixed results whilst 
the relationships discussed above have not yet been examined in the context of organizational changes. 
 
Finally,  the  Flexihealth  study  aims  at  investigating  the  effects  of  organizational  changes  on  customer 
satisfaction in a Belgian context. The main objectives of this part are situated at two levels: firstly at the level 
of  individual  employees  and  secondly  at  the  level  of  the  organizations.  We  want  to  gain  insight  into the 
relationships that might exist between organizational changes, working conditions and stress on one side and 
indicators of customer satisfaction on the other side.  
 

Flexihealth 


 

18/131 

Customer satisfaction can be measured by surveying customers or asking employees about their perceptions 
of  CS.  Given  the  practical  difficulties  we  experienced  in  reaching  actual  clients  of  the  organizations 
participating in this study, we largely used employee perceptions of CS as a proxy measure for CS. In earlier 
research,  it  was  established  that  there  is  a  fairly  strong  correlation  between global quality evaluations from 
customers  and  employees  (Schneider,  Parkington  &  Buxton,  1980;  Schneider  &  Bowen,  1985;  Schmit  & 
Allscheid, 1995; Johnson, 1996). In one of the preliminary Flexihealth studies, this correspondence was also 
examined. 
 
More  specifically,  in  this  final  report  we  will  examine  a  model  conceptualizing  the  relationships  between 
diverse  customer  satisfaction  indicators1  (CSI);  and  the  impact  of  employee  well-being  and  work-related 
attitudes,  perceived  working  conditions  and  changes  in  employees’  working  environment  on  these  CSI  are 
investigated. 
 

                                                                 
1 In the remainder of this report, we will use the general term ‘customer satisfaction indicators’ to refer to the whole range 
of quality, satisfaction and behavioral intentions ratings we will be using.  

Flexihealth 


 

19/131 

2.  Method 

2.1.  Measures 

 
The  Flexihealth  project  included a pilot phase during which measures were developed. During that stage of 
the  research,  the  teams  from  Liege  and  Louvain-la-Neuve  worked  together  in  order  to  develop  their 
measurement instrument concerning the dimensions discussed in the section devoted to the Flexihealth model.   
The final version of this part of the survey (called  psychosocial) included 87 items reflecting 19 dimensions. 
Six sections are included in this part of the survey: 

A.  What changes did you experience? 
B.  How do you perceive your work? 
C.  How do you perceive the work climate? 
D.  How do you react in general? 
E.  How do you feel at work? 
F.  Control at work 

Table 1 provides the items and response scales for the whole survey. The order of presentation of items is the 
same than in the standard Flexihealth survey. 
The  following  sections  describe  the  steps  of  the  development  of  the  psychosocial  part  of  the  Flexihealth 
research program. For this purpose, four sets of data have been collected: 

(cid:252)  Study  1.  The  first  data  collection  has  been  undertaken  using  a  sample  of  Flemish  and  French-
speaking  workers  from  a  variety  of  organizations (N = 774). This represented the opportunity for 
Liege and Louvain-la-Neuve teams to test a first version of the questionnaire. 

(cid:252)  Study  2.  The  second  data  collection  has  been  achieved  within  a  petrochemical  company  (N  = 

134).  

(cid:252)  Study  3.  The  tird  study  involved  data  from  a  sample  of  employees  working  in  a  public 
administration (N = 171). The collection was conducted by the Louvain-la-Neuve team. It allowed 
to  test  a  revised  version  of  the  scales  measuring  actual  changes,  perception  of  changes,  and 
emotional responses to changes.  

(cid:252)  Study  4.  The  final  pilot  study  was  undertaken  within a public administration  (N  =  1551).  Data 
collection  was  directed  by  the  Liege  team  and  permitted  to  develop  a  measure  of  positive  and 
negative occupational stress (PNOS). 

Note that several scales from the pilot studies were removed from the standard  Flexihealth survey. Table 2 
provides an overview of the development of the Flexihealth survey across pilot studies. It includes all scales 
used from the beginning and reports those that have been removed from the final version. Table 2 also reports 
the number of items for each scale and the reliabilities across pilot studies. 
 

Flexihealth 


Table 1. Items for the psychosocial part of the Flexihealth survey 

 

Item 

Response scale 

Name of scale 

 

20/131 

A. WHAT CHANGES DID YOU EXPERIENCE? 

In your job, have you been personally exposed to the following flexibility practices? 

1  Yes, in terms of work schedules (e.g., flexible schedules, etc.) 
2  Yes, in terms of work time (e.g., part-time, shift work, night work, working on week-

Yes vs. No 
Yes vs. No 

ends, etc.) 

3  Yes, in terms of contract (e.g., fixed-term contract, contract as temporary worker, etc.)  Yes vs. No 
Yes vs. No 
4  Yes, in terms of location (e.g., teleworking, work in call centers, etc.) 
5  Yes, in terms of task assignment (e.g., job rotation, job enrichment, job polyvalence, 
Yes vs. No 

etc.) 

Here is a list of changes. Please report whether you experienced any of them during the last six months. 
Yes vs. No 
Yes vs. No 
Yes vs. No 
Yes vs. No 
Yes vs. No 

6  A change of supervisor? 
7  A change in task assignment? 
8  A change among colleagues? 
9  A change in work schedule? 
10  A change in geographic location? 

Think about the changes you experienced during the last six months. How did you react to them: 

11  These changes were as a challenge for me 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

12  These changes did conflict with my objectives and expectations 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

13 

I think my organization was able to make things happen in a different manner 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

14 

I was able to influence the course of events during the change 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

15 

I experienced these changes as a challenge to meet 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

16  These changes did not match my expectations 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

17 

I think my organization was able to manage events in a different manner 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

18 

I was convinced that changes did offer new job opportunities 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

19  Changes boded no good 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

 

 

 
Flexibility practice 
Flexibility practice 

Flexibility practice 
Flexibility practice 
Flexibility practice 

 
Change in work environment 
Change in work environment 
Change in work environment 
Change in work environment 
Change in work environment 
 
Perception of changes - 
Challenge 
Perception of changes - 
Threat 
Perception of changes – 
Organization’s 
accountability 
Perception of changes - 
Control 
Perception of changes - 
Challenge 
Perception of changes - 
Threat 
Perception of changes - 
Organization’s 
accountability 
Perception of changes - 
Challenge 
Perception of changes - 


 

21/131 

20 

I was convinced my organization could have acted differently 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

21 

I could not influence events anyway 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

How did you react to changes identified? Please report the extent to which you experienced the following emotions: 

22  Distressed 

23  Upset 

24  Helpless 

25  Angry 

26  Calm 

27  Enthusiastic 

B. HOW DO YOU PERCEIVE YOUR WORK? 

To what extent do you agree with the following items ? 

1=not at all 
5=at a high intensity 
1=not at all 
5=at a high intensity 
1=not at all 
5=at a high intensity 
1=not at all 
5=at a high intensity 
1=not at all 
5=at a high intensity 
1=not at all 
5=at a high intensity 

I feel that my job is threatened 

28  Overall, I am satisfied with my job 
29 
30  As compared to other jobs, mine is interesting 
31 
32 
33  When we are in search of a good job, « the persons we know » count more than « what 

I feel anxious about the stability of my job 
If you want to make money, you need to know the right persons. 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 
1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 
1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 
1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 
1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 
1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

Threat 
Perception of changes - 
Organization’s 
accountability 
Perception of changes - 
Control 
 
Emotional reaction towards 
events 
Emotional reaction towards 
events 
Emotional reaction towards 
events 
Emotional reaction towards 
events 
Emotional reaction towards 
events 
Emotional reaction towards 
events 

 

 
Job satisfaction 
Job insecurity 
Job satisfaction 
Job insecurity 
External locus of control 
External locus of control 

we know ». 

34  Getting the job one wants is essentially a matter of luck. 
35  For getting a good job, it is necessary to have members of one’s family or friends in 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 
1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

External locus of control 
External locus of control 

good positions. 

C. HOW DO YOU PERCEIVE THE WORK CLIMATE? 

To what extent do you agree with the following climate-related items? 

36 

I count within this organization 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

37  My organization takes pride in my accomplishments at work 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

38  My supervisor tries to extend himself/herself in order to help me perform my job to the  1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

 

 

 
Organization-based self-
esteem 
Perceived organizational 
support 
Perceived supervisor 


 

22/131 

best of my ability 
I am taken seriously by this organization 

39 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

40  My organization values my contribution to its well-being 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

41  My supervisor tries to make my job as interesting as possible 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

42 

I am important for this organization 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

43  My organization really cares about my well-being 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

44  My supervisor cares about my opinions 

45 

I am trusted by this organization 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

46  My organization strongly considers my goals and values 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

47  Help is available from my supervisor when I have a problem 

1=completely disagree; 5=strongly agree 

D. HOW DO YOU REACT IN GENERAL? 

For each emotional state, please report the extent to which it applies to you in general: 

Interested 

48 
49  Nervous 
50  Upset 
51  Determined 
52  Alert 
53  Anxious 
54  Scared 
55  Active 
56  Enthusiastic 
57  Afraid 

E. HOW DO YOU FEEL AT WORK? 

1=Not at all; 5=Completely 
1=Not at all; 5=Completely 
1=Not at all; 5=Completely 
1=Not at all; 5=Completely 
1=Not at all; 5=Completely 
1=Not at all; 5=Completely 
1=Not at all; 5=Completely 
1=Not at all; 5=Completely 
1=Not at all; 5=Completely 
1=Not at all; 5=Completely 

support 
Organization-based self-
esteem 
Perceived organizational 
support 
Perceived supervisor 
support 
Organization-based self-
esteem 
Perceived organizational 
support 
Perceived supervisor 
support 
Organization-based self-
esteem 
Perceived organizational 
support 
Perceived supervisor 
support 

 

 
Positive affectivity 
Negative affectivity 
Negative affectivity 
Positive affectivity 
Positive affectivity 
Negative affectivity 
Negative affectivity 
Positive affectivity 
Positive affectivity 
Negative affectivity 

 

For each item, please determine the extent to which it reflected how you felt during the last 7 days : 

I’m very active at work 
I feel I can’t cope with everything I have to do at work. 

58 
59 
60  Once I’m at work, I feel more focused 
61 
62 

I feel demoralized by my work. 
I work in a rush 

 

 
1=Never or rarely; 4=Always or almost always 
Positive stress 
1=Never or rarely; 4=Always or almost always  Negative stress 
1=Never or rarely; 4=Always or almost always 
Positive stress 
1=Never or rarely; 4=Always or almost always  Negative stress 
1=Never or rarely; 4=Always or almost always  Negative stress 


I have insomnia because of my working life 

I find my work mentally exhausting 
I’m full of energy at work 
I suffer from nausea when I’m at work 
I feel stimulated by my work 
I’m tired at work 

63 
64  My work allows me to excel myself 
65  My work stresses me 
66  Work gives me great satisfaction 
67 
68 
69 
70 
71 
72  My work is fascinating 
73 
74 
75  When I’m working I forget my tiredness 
76 

I’m nervous at work 
I get easily irritated at work 

I’m worried by my working life 
F. CONTROL AT WORK 

 

23/131 

1=Never or rarely; 4=Always or almost always  Negative stress 
1=Never or rarely; 4=Always or almost always 
Positive stress 
1=Never or rarely; 4=Always or almo st always  Negative stress 
1=Never or rarely; 4=Always or almost always 
Positive stress 
1=Never or rarely; 4=Always or almost always  Negative stress 
1=Never or rarely; 4=Always or almost always 
Positive stress 
1=Never or rarely; 4=Always or almost always  Negative stress 
1=Never or rarely; 4=Always or almost always 
Positive stress 
1=Never or rarely; 4=Always or almost always  Negative stress 
1=Never or rarely; 4=Always or almost always 
Positive stress 
1=Never or rarely; 4=Always or almost always  Negative stress 
1=Never or rarely; 4=Always or almost always  Negative stress 
1=Never or rarely; 4=Always or almost always 
Positive stress 
1=Never or rarely; 4=Always or almost always  Negative stress 

For each sentence below, please report the extent to which it applies to your situation 

 

 
77  Do you have a control over the order of doing things? 
78  Do you have a control over when to start a new task at work? 
79  Do you have a control over when to finish a given task? 
80  Do you determine the pace of your work by your own? 
81  Do you have a control over the quantity of what you produce? 
82  Can you change the manner in which you complete your tasks? 
83  Do you have a control over the planning of your work? 
84  Do you have a control over the quality of what your produce? 
85  Can you decide the way of working in order to perform your job effectively? 
86  Can you choose the methods to be used in order to get the job done? 

 
1=Not at all; 5=Absolutely 
1=Not at all; 5=Absolutely 
1=Not at all; 5=Absolutely 
1=Not at all; 5=Absolutely 
1=Not at all; 5=Absolutely 
1=Not at all; 5=Absolutely 
1=Not at all; 5=Absolutely 
1=Not at all; 5=Absolutely 
1=Not at all; 5=Absolutely 
1=Not at all; 5=Absolutely 

 

 

 

 

 
 
Control over time 
Control over time 
Control over time  
Control over time 
Control over methods 
Control over methods 
Control over methods 
Control over methods 
Control over methods 
Control over methods 


 

24/131 

Table 2. Development stages of the Flexihealth survey and reliability coefficients 
 
 

Number of items  

Internal consistency 

Study 1  Study 2  Study 3  Study 4  Final 
version 

Study 1  Study 2  Study 3  Study 4  Other 
studies 

 

Axis 1 – Working conditions 

 
Actual changes 
Perception of changes 1 

Challenge 
Threat 
Control 
Organization’s accountability 
Importance of changes 
Coping 
Destinity 

Emotional reactions 
 
Flexibility practices2 
 
Work intensification 
 

Axis 2a – Mediating variables 

 
Job insecurity 
Information 
Participation to decision making 
Organizational justice 
Possibility to adjust to change 
Uncertainty climate 
Coworker interdependence 
 

Axis 2b – Moderating variables 

 
Positive affectivity 
Negative affectivity 
Organization-based self-esteem 
External locus of control 
Perceived organizational support 
Perceived supervisor support 
Control over time 
Control over methods 
Internal locus of control 
Perceived coworker support 
 

Axis 3 – Indicators of well-being 

 
Negative stress 
Positive stress 
Job satisfaction 
Intention to quit 

 
 
 
2 
7 

Deleted 

 
 
 
6 
 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
2 
6 
 
6 
 

 
 
 
3 
7  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
7 
 
 
 
1 

 
 
 
7 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
 
12 
 
 
 
1 
4 
3 
4 
4 
1 
2 
 
 
 
10  Deleted 
10 
10  Deleted  Deleted 
8 
Deleted  Deleted 
8 
2 
 
 
8 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
3 

Deleted 
Deleted  Deleted 
Deleted 
Deleted  Deleted 
Deleted 
Deleted 

Deleted  Deleted 
Deleted  Deleted 

 
 
 
10 
10 

 
 
 
 
 
2 
3 

 
 
 
 
 
2 

Deleted 

Deleted 

1 
2 
 
 
 

4 
4 
 
 

13 

4 

8 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
5 
 
3 
3 
2 
3 

Deleted 
Deleted 
Deleted 

6 
 
5 
 

Deleted 

 
 
 
2 

Deleted 
Deleted 
Deleted 
Deleted 
Deleted 
Deleted 

 
 
 
5 
5 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
6 

Deleted 
Deleted 

 
 
 
 
 
2 

Deleted 

 
 
 

NA 

 
 
 

NA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

NA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

.803 
.753 
.783 
.743 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.74 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

NA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.67 
 

 
 
 

NA 

 
.81 
.79 
.71 
.93 
 
 
 

NA 

 

NA 

 
 
 
 
 
.91 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

.793 
.793 

 
 
.90 
.90 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.69 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.88 
.83 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

.76 - .86 
.61 - .79 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Note. NA = not applicable. 
1. In Study 1 and 2, items concerning the perception of changes were to be completed for each change separately. In the 
final version, the perception of changes was globally assessed for all changes altogether.  
2. In the final version, flexibility practices were grouped into 5 categories. 
3. Cronbach’s alpha coefficients were computed based on the number of items retained in the final version. 

Flexihealth 


 

25/131 

2.1.1 

Axis 1 – Working conditions 

2.1.1.1. 

Perception of changes in work environment 

In Study  1 and 2, respondents were asked to report if they were confronted to a set of changes in their work 
environment  and  how  they  perceived  these  changes  if  any.  In  these  studies,  perception  of  changes  was 
measured using a 7-item scale from Schwartz and Stone (1993). 
The analysis of data from these studies showed that there was a difference between actual changes and how 
they were perceived. However, our first version of the Flexiheath survey did not permit to have a fine-grained 
assessment of the dimensions used by individuals when appraising changes. For example, in contrast to the 
literature  in  this  area,  no  distinction  was  made  between  primary  and  secondary  appraisal.  Also,  the  first 
version of the survey was a little bit long and did present some psychometric weaknesses. We thus decided to 
revise  the  survey  from  both  a  conceptual  and  methodological  point  of  view.  Two  main  changes were 
introduced.  
First, we asked respondents to provide an  overall rating of the meaning attributed to changes encountered. 
Second,  we  revised  and  improved  measurement  scales  devoted  to  capturing  the  dimensions  used  by 
individuals in their appraisal of changes as well as their emotional reactions to them.  
The final version of the survey included three sections focusing on changes, i.e., actual changes, perception of 
changes, and emotional reactions to changes. We turn now to the description of these subsections.  

A. ACTUAL CHANGES 

ORIGIN 

This  scale  has  been  specifically  developed  for  this  research. Our objective was to get information over the 
actual  changes  employees  were  confronted  with  in  their  environment.  The list of changes was determined 
from a series of in-depth interviews2 (N = 57) conducted with workers pertaining to different occupations and 
organizations where changes occurred. In total, workers represented 7 organizations, either private or public. 

FINAL VERSION 

In the final version, we asked employees to report which changes they have been exposed  to during the last 
six months. In doing so, a list of 5 changes was established. For each change, the respondent reported if s/he 
had been exposed to it or not (cf. items 6-10 from Table 1). 

B. APPRAISAL OF CHANGES 

ORIGIN 

We found no prior study investigating the perception of change events within organizations. Consequently, we 
developed  our  own  scale  based  on  findings  from  the  Flexihealth  pilot  studies  and  on  the  literature3.  Items 
were written so as to take into account the context of this research and its objectives. 

SCALE DEVELOPMENT 

A first validity of the revised version of our survey has been conducted in Study 3. Exploratory factor analysis 
has  been  used  to  determine  the  underlying  structure  of  items. As a result of this procedure, 6 items were 
retained for primary appraisal and 5 others for secondary appraisal (cf. alpha coefficients reported in Table 
2). 

                                                                 
2 These interviews were conducted during the preliminary stage of the Flexihealth project.  
3 Dewe, 1992; Folkman, Lazarus, Dunkel-Schetter, DeLongis, & Gruen, 1986; Frese & Zapf, 1999; Frijda, 1993; Hemenover, 
2001; Lazarus, 1991; Lazarus, 1994; Payne & Morrison, 1999; Perrewé & Zellars, 1999; Schaubroek, 1999; Scherer, 1993; 
Schwartz & Stone, 1993; Smith & Ellsworth, 1985; Smith & Lazarus, 1993. 

Flexihealth 


 

26/131 

FINAL VERSION 

The final scale  thus contains 11 items. Four dimensions are covered by this scale: 3 items tap into perceived 
threat associated with changes, 3 items measure  perceived challenge, 3 items relate to the organization’s 
accountability  for  changes,  and  finally  2  items  deal  with  perceived  control over changes. The first two 
refer to primary appraisal while the latter ones do relate to secondary appraisal. Each item is assessed using a 
5-point Likert-type scale (cf. items 11-21 in Table 1).    

C. EMOTIONAL REACTIONS TO CHANGES 

ORIGIN 

The  literature  concerning  appraisal  processes  indicates  that  appraisal criteria combine to generate discrete 
emotional  reactions.  We  paid  attention  to  specifically  measure  emotions  that  made  sense  for  employees 
confronted with changes. 

SCALE DEVELOPMENT 

Within  this  research,  each  item  is  considered  separately  because  items  refer  to  discrete  emotions.  Hence, 
factor analysis and reliability computation were not used here.  

FINAL VERSION 

Respondents were asked to  report  the  degree  to  which  they  experienced  the  emotions  referred  to  by the 
items. Some emotions were negative in nature (2) while others were positive (4). Among negative emotions, 2 
were more oriented toward the individual (distressed and  upset) while 2 others were more directed towards 
the  situation  (helpless and  angry). Each item is assessed using a 5-point Likert-type scale. Table 1 reports 
these items (22-27).  

2.1.1.2. 

Flexibility practices 

ORIGIN 

In  the  first  pilot  studies,  we  developed  a  scale for measuring flexibility practices.  It was a long list of items 
and  the  respondent  was  invited  to  check  which  practice(s)  s/he  had  been  confronted  with.  However,  we 
noticed  that these practices were so specific to each organization, that any comparison across organizations 
was  rather  difficult  to  make.  Both  the  number  and  the  form  of  flexibility  practices  varied  a  lot  across 
organizations.  We  thus  decided  for  the  remaining  studies  to  define  sets  of  flexibility  practices  grouped  by 
category.  The  categories  were:  flexible  work  schedules,  time-based  flexibility,  atypical  labor  contracts, 
geographic flexibility, and functional flexibility.  

SCALE DEVELOPMENT 

For  purpose  of  this  research,  each  flexibility  practice  category  is  considered  separately. No factor analysis 
was conducted and reliability was not computed for these items.  

FINAL VERSION 

Five  categories  of  flexibility  practices  were  identified  in  the  final  version.  Respondents  had  also  the 
opportunity to check a category called other. Each category contained examples of flexibility practices. Table 
1 reports the categories and examples of flexibility practices (items 1-5).  

2.1.2 

Axis 2a – Mediating variable 

2.1.2.1. 

Job insecurity 

ORIGIN 

The  scale  devoted  to  job  insecurity  has  been  specifically developed for this research. We used  Jacobson’s 
(1991) approach who recommends limiting the construct to uncertainty regarding the continuity of one’s job.  

Flexihealth 


 

27/131 

SCALE DEVELOPMENT 

In  the  first  two  pilot  studies,  job  insecurity  was  measured  through  two  items.  While the first item referred 
explicitly to the fear of losing one’s job, the second reflected more of a perceived uncertainty climate.  We 
thus  decided to change the second item and to rewrite it so as to focus more clearly on the fear of losing 
one’s job. The internal consistency of this scale is now quite good (see table 2). 

FINAL VERSION 

In the final version of the survey, job insecurity was thus measured through two items, assessed by means of 
a 5-point Likert-type scale (see items 29 and 31 reported in Table 1). 

2.1.3 

Axis 2b – Moderating variables 

2.1.3.1. 

Negative and positive affectivity 

ORIGIN 

The scale used for measuring negative and positive affectivity stems from that developed by  Watson, Clark 
and  Tellegen  (1988;  Positive  and  Negative  Affective  Schedule  [PANAS]).  This  scale  contains  20  items 
reflective of emotions dealing with either negative or positive affectivity. Depending on the target question 
(how do you feel now or how do you feel in general), the PANAS can feature either a transient mood or a 
trait. 

SCALE DEVELOPMENT 

In  their  study,  Watson  et  al.  (1988)  indicate  that  their  instrument  displays  good  psychometric  properties. 
Depending on the instructions used, coefficients alphas range from .86 to .90 for positive affectivity, and from 
.84 to .87 for negative affectivity. The stability of measures over two months was also quite good.  
We factor analyzed the data from pilot studies and, for reasons of space in the final version of the survey, we 
retained the best items for each scale. Alpha coefficients for the reduced scales are presented in Table 2. 

FINAL VERSION 

The final version contains 10 items (5 for negative affectivity and 5 for positive affectivity). We intended to 
measure  a  stable  trait,  so  we  asked  respondents  to  describe  their  affective  states  in  general.  Items were 
assessed by means of a 5-point Likert-type scale (see items 48-57 in Table 1). 

2.1.3.2. 

Self-esteem 

ORIGIN 

We relied on the organization-based self-esteem (OBSE) scale developed by  Pierce et al. (1989) (10 items). 
Pierce  et  al.  developed  this  scale  in  order  to  capture  employees’  feeling  of  being  important  in  their 
organization.  

SCALE DEVELOPMENT 

We factor analyzed the data of the OBSE from the pilot studies and retained the highest-loading items. Alpha 
coefficients for the reduced scale are presented in Table 2.   

FINAL VERSION 

The final version contains 5 items.  Each item is assessed by means of a 5-point Likert-type scale (see items 
36, 39, 42, 45 in Table 1). 

Flexihealth 


 

28/131 

2.1.3.3. 

Locus of control 

ORIGIN 

We  relied  on  the  Work  Locus  of  Control scale  developed  by  Spector  (1988),  which  includes  16  items 
measuring either internal locus of control or external locus of control. 

SCALE DEVELOPMENT 

Spector (1988) reports psychometric evidence regarding the properties of the scale. The internal consistency 
of the subscales has been found to range from  .80 to .854. For reasons of space limitation, we chose to focus 
on external locus of control. Subsequent factor and reliability analyses allowed us to select the highest-loading 
items (4). Alpha coefficients are reported in Table 2.  

FINAL VERSION 

The  final  version  contains  4  items,  measured  by  means  of  a  5-point  Likert-type  scale  (see  items  32-35 in 
Table 1). 

2.1.3.4. 

Control at work 

ORIGIN 

The  instrument  for  capturing  control  at  work  has  been  initially developed by  Wall et al. (1995). The scales 
used  here  represent  2  out  of  the  5  developed  by  the  authors  in  order  to  assess  control  in  a  variety  of 
occupations.  In  the  context  of  the  Flexihealth project, we decided to focus on the ability to get control over 
time and planning of activities and over the way to perform the job.  

SCALE DEVELOPMENT 

Wall  et  al.  (1995)  used  confirmatory  factor  analysis.  Several  models  were  tested  on  two  independent 
samples.  Results showed that the two aspects of control (time and planning and  how to complete tasks) 
were  distinguishable,  albeit  related,  constructs.  Internal  consistency  varied  from  .76  to .86  for  time  and 
planning and from .61 to .79 for how to complete tasks. High levels of control on these subscales correlated 
positively with job satisfaction and negatively with anxiety and depression. 

FINAL VERSION 

Control  was  measured  using  10  items  (4 items for  time  and  planning and  6  items for  how  to  complete 
tasks). Items were assessed using a 5-point Likert-type scale (see items 77-86 in Table 1). 

2.1.3.5. 

Social support  

ORIGIN 

The scale used here stemmed from the Survey of Perceived Organizational Support (SPOS; Eisenberger, 
Huntington, Hutchison & Sowa, 1986). 

SCALE DEVELOPMENT 

Initially, Eisenberger et al.’s (1986) SPOS contained 36 items.  They reported an internal consistency of .97. 
For  reasons  of  space  limitation  in  our  final  version,  we  selected  8  high-loading items from the SPOS to be 
used to measure perceived support from organizations. Aspects covered were the feeling of being valued and 
that  the  organization  cares  about  the  employee.  Because we were interested to measure the perception of 
support not only from the organization but also from the supervisor, we changed the target of 4 of these items 
and replace it by the supervisor. The coefficient alphas for the 2 four-item support scales are given in Table 
2. 

                                                                 
4 http://chuma.cas.usf.edu/~spector/scales/wlcsover.html 

Flexihealth 


 

29/131 

FINAL VERSION 

The  final  version  contained  8  items  (2  x  4)  for  measuring  perceived  support  from  organizations and from 
supervisors. The items were assessed using a 5-point Likert-type scale (see items  37, 38, 40, 41, 43, 44, 46, 
and 47 in Table 1). 

2.1.4 

Axis 3 – Indicators of well-being 

2.1.4.1. 

Positive and negative stress 

ORIGIN 

The  negative  and  positive  stress  scale  has  been  developed  in  order  to  capture  the  reactions  of  employees 
towards organizational changes. It comprises items tapping into either positive stress or negative stress. 

SCALE DEVELOPMENT 

A  first  version  of  34  items  of  the  scale  has  been  tested  based  on  data collected from university students. 
Items were reflective of the four aspects of stress identified by  Lemyre and Tessier (1990), that is affective, 
cognitive, behavioral, and somatic aspects. 
An  exploratory  factor  analysis  has  been  conducted  on  31  items  (3  items  were  removed  following  the 
inspection of correlations between items and  the overall  scale. Three factors were extracted from the data.  
Factor 1 reflected the expressions of negative stress (11 items), Factor 2  dealt with positive stress (8 items) 
and  Factor 3 represented job performance aspects (2 items).  The factor solution thus included 21 items. To 
be consistent with the purpose underlying the development of the scale, we retained only Factors 1 and 2. The 
reliability and validity of these scales were tested using data collected within an educational institution. 
Afterwards, the instrument was tested upon a sample of 1551 civil servants. Confirmatory factor analysis of 
the data yielded a good fit for the two-factor solution. 

FINAL VERSION 

The final version thus included  8 items for positive stress and 11 items for negative stress. The items were 
assessed using a 4-point Likert-type scale (see items 58-76 reported in Table 1). 

2.1.4.2. 

Job satisfaction 

ORIGIN 

For measuring job satisfaction, we used  a scale adapted from  Shortell et al. (1991) and Dunham and Smith 
(1979).  

SCALE DEVELOPMENT 

Alpha reliabilities for the scale are shown in Table 2.  

FINAL VERSION 

Two  items  were  used,  each  one  being  assessed  using  a  5-point  Likert-type  scale (see items 28  and 30 in 
Table 1. 
 

2.1.5 

Medical section 

 
The medical section of the survey addressed the health-related consequences of stress. This section includes 
(a) health complaints, (b) quality of life, and (c) change in employees’ behaviors injurious to health. In addition 
to providing an empirical assessment of employees’ health, statistical analyses are intended to show how much 
variance in health problems can be explained by stress. 

Flexihealth 


 

30/131 

 

1) Medical status (21 items) 
 
This subsection deals with health complaints.  It includes two parts: 
 
a)  Personal antecedents, allowing determining the medical history of the individual and their potential effect 
on  current  health  status.    Five  categories  of  antecedents  were  examined:  cardiovascular,  psychic, 
digestive, osteo-articulatory and neurological antecedents. These antecedents were rated as yes or no. 

 
b)  Subjective complaints of a medical nature. This subset of symptoms was assessed using a list of 15 items 

dealing with the following complaints (rated in terms of occurrence and frequency): 

§  cardio-respiratory  affections:  chest-related  pain  or  precordialgies,  palpitations,  raises  of  blood 

 

pressure. 

§  aspecific symptoms: loss of appetite, fatigue. 
§  emotional problems: irritability, depression, distress. 
§  digestive problems: stomac-related pain (gastralgies), pain in abdomen (colic pain). 
§  osteo-articulary affections: back or neck pain.  
§  neurological symptoms : headaches. 
§ 
§  cognitive problems: concentration problems, distraction. 

sleep dysfunctions. 

 
2) Life habits (10 items) 
 
We  examined  smoking  habits,  drug  (antalgic,  anxiolytic,  antidepressive  and  sleeping  drugs)  and  alcohol 
consumption, as well as changes in attitudes (addictions).   
 
3) Quality of life (12 items) 
 
The SF36  is amongst most widely used and validated measures of quality of life (Ware & Sherbourne 1992). 
It has been specifically designed to measure perceived quality of life from the individual’s perspective. The 
SF36 form (Short-Form 36 items Health Scale)  is a self-reported questionnaire allowing determining a profile 
of  quality  of  life  associated  with  health.  It  includes  8  subscales:  physical activity, physical health, mental 
health, energy, emotional well-being, social well-being, absence of pain, and general heath status. It covers all 
dimensions relevant to quality of life. The SF36  is a generic questionnaire not suited for assessing a specific 
disease. A French version has been developed by Alain Leplege (1995). 
 
Due  to  its  length,  the  short  form  of  the  SF-36  (SF-12; Ware et al., 1998) has been used in the Flexihealth 
research program. Two dimensions are included in the questionnaire:  
 

- 
- 

the physical component which assesses the perceived physical quality of life 
the mental component which assesses the perceived mental quality of life. 

 

2.1.6 

Relationships with customers 

 
In this project, the study of the effects of organizational changes is not limited to the impact for each individual 
employee  in  terms  of  stress,  health  and  well-being,  but  we  will  also  examine  the  consequences  on 
organizational  performance.  Customer  satisfaction and quality are considered as indicators of organizational 
performance,  since  satisfied  customers  are  more  likely  to  be  repeat  customers  (Jones  &  Sasser,  1995).  A 
number  of  studies  have  examined  the  link  between  some organizational policies, working climate, individual 
employee attitudes and various indicators of customer satisfaction but the findings are not conclusive at the 

Flexihealth 


 

31/131 

moment (see for instance  Jimmieson, & Griffin ,1998; Leiter, Harvie, & Frizzell, 1998; Schneider & Bowen, 
1985; Hartline, & Ferrell, 1996; Ryan, Schmit, & Johnson, 1996; Schmit, & Allscheid, 1995; Schneider et al., 
1980).    To  examine  these  types  of  relationships,  one  can  use  a  range  of  indicators  to  measure  customer 
satisfaction. 
 
In  this  final  theoretical  section,  we  will  therefore  first  introduce  relevant  concepts  from  the  quality  and 
customer satisfaction literatures, outlining a model of interrelations between the different concepts we suggest 
to  measure  in  this  study,  followed  by  an  overview  of  the  research  literature  linking  organizational  and 
employee variables to diverse CSI. 
 

2.1.6.1. Customer satisfaction indicators (CSI) 

 
Nowadays, many organizations are searching for ways to  measure, manage and ultimately improve customer 
satisfaction with their organization – being forced to do so either by the highly competitive nature of certain 
markets or driven by societal concerns that result in governmental regulations.  
 
There  has  been  an  abundance  of  research  published  on  customer  reactions  (customer  satisfaction  and 
perceived  quality  in  particular)  but  we  also  encountered  a  lack  of  consistency  in  the  conceptualization  and 
measurement of customer satisfaction (Babin & Griffin, 1998; Giese & Cote, 2000). The major problem has 
to  do  with  distinguishing  quality  and  customer  satisfaction. In a service context, quality and satisfaction are 
often treated as synonymous.  
 
A popular model throughout the 80’s and early 90’s was Oliver’s expectancy disconfirmation model (Oliver, 
1980; Woodruff, Cadotte & Jenkins, 1983) where satisfaction or dissatisfaction is supposed to result from a 
comparison  process  in  which  expectations  prior  to  consumption  are  compared  with  actual  experiences.  A 
similar  model  was  proposed  in  a  large  number  of  studies  on  perceived  quality  (Zeithaml,  Berry  & 
Parasureman, 1993), in which service quality is considered as the degree of discrepancy between customers’ 
normative expectations for the service and their perceptions of the service performance (Parasuraman et al., 
1985). Other researchers report distinctions between these two constructs.  In an examination of consumers’ 
understanding of satisfaction and quality, Iacobucci, Ostrom and Grayson (1995) found some differences on a 
number of antecedents that determined these two constructs: for example, satisfaction was influenced more 
by pleasant surroundings and positive tangible response and quality more by expertise. Sometimes, quality is 
perceived as an antecedent of satisfaction (Peyrot, Cooper & Schnapf, 1993; Woodside, Frey, Daly, 1989; 
Gotlieb, Grewal & Brown, 1994; Cronin & Taylor, 1992; Oliver, 1993, Rust & Oliver, 1994), and satisfaction 
is  supposed  to  be  a  subjective  interpretation  of  the  (dis)confirmation  of  expectations  and  is  a  summarized 
affective and cognitive reaction at the overall level.  Others consider satisfaction as an antecedent of quality: 
satisfaction  is  related  to  discrete  transactional  episodes  and  is  an  emotional  state  resulting  from  this 
transaction,  based  on  comparison  with  expectations,  whereas  quality  is  a  higher  order,  abstract  and  more 
stable variable, only implicitly related to internal expectation standards (Henig-Thureau & Klee, 1997; Bitner 
& Hubbert, 1994; Bolton & Drew, 1991, Parasumeran et al, 1985, 1988).  de Ruyter, Bloemer & Peeters 
(1997)  found  that  service  quality  (measured  with  SERVQUAL  adaptation)  preceded  overall  satisfaction 
(combined outcome and process satisfaction), and that quality was influenced by perception.  Satisfaction was 
also  influenced  by  perceptions  directly,  and  indirectly  via  service  quality  and  disconfirmation.  Gotlieb et al. 
(1994)  compared  a  model  in  which  quality  (conceptualized  as  an  attitude)  precedes  satisfaction 
(conceptualized as an emotional response) and one in which satisfaction precedes quality, and found that the 
quality-satisfaction  model  provided  a  better  fit  to  their  data.    Thus,  when  reviewing  the recent literature, it 
seems  that  perceived  quality,  conceptualized  as  an  evaluation  of  attributes,  precedes  satisfaction,  which  is 
defined as a more affective overall response (see de Ruyter et al. 1997, for a chronological overview). 
 
Apart from this affective summary satisfaction response and quality perceptions, there are a number of other 
reactions  customers  can  experience  and  exhibit  upon  choosing,  acquiring,  using  or  evaluating  a  product  or 
service  experience.  A  difference  can  be  made  between  behavioral  and  attitudinal  reactions.    Attitudinal 
reactions  include  satisfaction,  dissatisfaction,  perceived  quality,  commitment  to  the  organization,  perceived 

Flexihealth 


 

32/131 

value,  preference  over  competitors,  identification  with  the  organization,  tolerance  for  dissatisfying 
experiences, price sensitivity and so forth.  Behavioral customer reactions include recommendations, repeat 
purchase  or  use,  additional  or  increased  purchase  or  use,  switching  behavior,  complaining  behavior and 
negative word of mouth for example.  An overview of empirical research that examines these attitudinal or 
behavioral reactions can be found in Allen and Grisaffe (2000). 
 
The diverse indicators we use in this study fit in a model that is based on existing research literature and the 
current psychological framework of attitude  theory (Bagozzi, 1992; Gotlieb et al., 1994). It is suggested that 
the  appraisal  process  involves  the  assessment  of  outcome-desire-conflicts or fulfillment experiences, which 
are followed by either negative or positive emotional responses.  These emotional responses are followed by 
coping intentions to either reduce the conflict or maintain the fulfillment.  Behavior then follows from these 
intentions. 
 
Adapted  to  the  context  of  customer  reactions,  our  model  (see  Figure  3)  proposes  that  cognitive  quality 
evaluations  are  appraisals  made  by  an  individual  which  precede  emotional  responses  such  as  satisfaction, 
which  might  in  turn  influence  behavioral  intentions  and  actual  behaviors  (Cronin,  Brady,  &  Hult,  2000). 
Quality  perceptions  are  defined  as  evaluations  of  the  performance  of  a  product  or  service  on  relevant 
dimensions or attributes. As such, an assessment of quality is considered as an evaluative appraisal process 
(Gotlieb et al., 1994). The SERVQUAL instrument developed by Parasuraman, Zeithaml, and Berry (1991) is 
currently  most  widely  used  to  assess  functional  service  quality.    Satisfaction  with  products  or  services  is 
considered  to  be  a  more  affective  and  global  response  (which  can  nevertheless  contain  certain  cognitive 
elements) which results from a prior evaluative appraisal process.  Satisfaction is presumed to be  a higher 
order construct which results from quality evaluations but is also influenced by other factors as well (Gotlieb 
et  al.,  1994;  de  Ruyter,  Bloemer  &  Peeters,  1997;  Cronin  et  al.,  2000).  Finally,  for  most  organizations, the 
ultimate  goal  is  not  only  to  achieve  high  levels  of  quality  and  customer  satisfaction.  In  order  to  gain 
competitive  advantage,  satisfaction  and  quality  should  ultimately  aid  in  attracting  and  retaining  a  loyal 
customer base. Behavioral intentions, or intentions to re-use/re-purchase from the organization and intentions 
to tell positive things about the organization are indicators of customer satisfaction (in the broad sense) and fit 
in the model we suggest as coping  mechanisms which result from the global affective response (satisfaction) 
and which ultimately lead to behavior  (Gotlieb et al., 1994; Cronin et al., 2000). 
 

2.1.6.2. Relationships with employee variables 

 

 
In this study, we will examine the relationships between customer reactions, working conditions and employee 
well  being  indicators  in  the  context  of  organizational  changes.  Above  we  discussed  models  of  customer 
satisfaction.  Since  it  can  be  assumed  that  – to the extent that these reactions are influenced by employees 
and organizational factors – customer reactions are determined primarily by employees’ behaviors, the factors 
that  would  be  most  important  in  affecting  customer  reactions  are  those  that  influence  directly  employees’ 
behaviors  on  the  job,  such  as  job  satisfaction,  motivation,  role  conflict  and  other  attitudinal  characteristics.   
Prior studies that examined such a relationship between organizational factors, employee attitudes, behaviors 
and  customer  reactions  are  reviewed  in  the  following  section,  although  we  realize  this  overview  is  not 
exhaustive or complete. Before starting an overview of empirical findings however, we wish to emphasize 
two important points in the context of this study and its design. 
 
First,  it  seems  that  there  is  a  strong  correlation  between  overall  quality  or  satisfaction  as  perceived  by 
employees  or  customers  (Schneider  et  al.,  1980,  Schneider  &  Bowen,  1985;  Schmit  &  Allscheid,  1995; 
Johnson,  1996).    Second,  when  choosing  employee  attitudes  or  characteristics  to  examine  in  terms  of  the 
relationship  with  customer  reactions  it  might  seem  obvious  to  choose  those  that  allow  differentiating  in 
behavior  towards  the  customer.  In  order  to  examine  the  relationships  between  employee  attitudes  and 
customer reactions, one would prefer to concentrate primarily on attitudes that have already been shown to 
be associated with work-related behaviors. Similarly, one might choose to examine only employees who have 
high levels of direct contact with customers, assuming that organizational processes invisible to the customer 
and non-contact employees’ attitudes cannot influence customer reactions. However, these assumptions are 

Flexihealth 


 

33/131 

counteracted by the empirical work of Schneider, Hanges, Goldstein and Braverman (1994), who found that 
student  evaluations  of  faculty  in  the  classroom  are  consistent  with  ratings  for  non-teaching facets of the 
faculty role, suggesting that what takes place inside an organization, out of sight of the customer, can actually 
be  reflected  in  customer  perceptions.  Thus,  less  may  be  hidden  from  the  customer than was previously 
thought. 

Flexihealth 


 

34/131 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Behavioral Intention 

intentions to 

recommend and 
reuse/repurchase 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
Actual behavior 
  

 

 

 

Figure 3. Customer satisfaction: An extended attitude -intention-behavior model 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Precursors: 

quality evaluations 
of products and 

services  

 

 

 

 

Appraisal 

 

 

 

 

Appraisal results 

overall service or product 

quality 

 
 

 

Individual characteristics 

 

 

 

Emotional response 

satisfaction 

 

 

Situational characteristics 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Flexihealth 


 

35/131 

Among  the  variables  that  are  supposed  to  have  an  impact  on  customer  reactions  are  job  satisfaction, 
organizational  commitment  and  fairness  perceptions,  linked  with  influences  such  as  role  conflict,  role 
ambiguity,  and  empowerment  and  climate  variables.  What follows  is  an  illustrative  overview  of  –  often-
conflicting – relevant research findings.  
 
Schneider  et  al  (1980)  found  that  bank  employees’  job  satisfaction  was  not  related  to  any of the customer 
variables,  but  organizational  satisfaction  was  related  to  overall  quality,  as  were  other  climate  elements. 
Employees’ own ratings of service quality were related to climate elements and employees’ job satisfaction.  
Schneider et al. (1980) and Shamir (1980) found that employee role stress and dissatisfaction were related to 
the inability to deliver good service; Schlesinger and Zornitsky (1991) showed that satisfied employees believe 
they  are  better  able  to  deliver  quality  service.  In  a  financial  service  environment,  Herrington  and Lomax 
(1999)  found  a  relationship  between  job  satisfaction and repurchase intentions.  There was no relationship 
between job satisfaction and customer quality perception or recommendation intention. Bernhardt, Donthu and 
Kenneth (1994) found an association between job satisfaction and customer satisfaction and Puffer (1987) 
showed a relation between job satisfaction and prosocial behaviors in salespeople. Hartline and Ferrell (1996) 
showed  a  positive  relation  between  job  satisfaction  for  hotel  employees  and  perceived  quality,  and  self-
efficacy and perceived service quality. Bettencourt and Brown (1997) found that job satisfaction had a non-
significant relationship with contact employees’ prosocial behaviors when effects of fairness were partialled 
out.  Overall  fairness  was  related  to  job  satisfaction  and prosocial service behaviors.  Role  prescribed and 
extra-role  behaviors  were significantly related to customer satisfaction,  but  employee cooperation was not 
significantly  related  to  customer  satisfaction.  For  customer  service  behaviors,  the  key  predictors  were 
fairness  of  pay  rules,  pay  administration  and  job  supervision.  In  Bradley  and  Sparks’  (2000)  study, it was 
found  that  service  provider  levels  of  empowerment  were  related  to  higher  customer  satisfaction  ratings, 
moderated by employees’ communication style. 
 
Schmit and Allscheid (1995) examined support in security systems organizations and their relationship with an 
underlying affective variable, which was strongly associated with service intentions. The latter was associated 
with  customer  service.  Johnson  (1996)  examined  the  relationship  between  service  climate  dimensions  in 
financial  services  and  customer  satisfaction,  and  found  that  all  climate  dimensions  were  related to one or 
more of the customer satisfaction dimensions, and eight of the 11 dimensions had significant correlations with 
overall satisfaction, especially information seeking, training, and rewards and recognition. Hoffman and Kelly 
(1994), and Parasuraman et al. (1990) found positive relationships between employee cooperation and service 
quality perceptions.   
 
Wetzels,  de  Ruyter  and Bloemer  (2000)  examined  the  antecedents  and  consequences  of  role  stress,  and 
found a negative relationship between organizational commitment and perceived service quality and a positive 
relationship between commitment to quality  and perceived service quality.  They found no significant relation 
between role conflict or role ambiguity and perceived service quality. Satisfaction was positively associated 
with professional orientation of employees and satisfaction with their organization (Kitzman, 2000) and with 
organizational citizenship behaviors (Adcock, 2000). Quality ratings from customers were positively related to 
employee organizational commitment (Steffen, Nystrom, & O’Connor, 1996).  
 
In Jimmieson and Griffin (1998), it was found that a significant amount of variance in client satisfaction with a 
health care service was accounted for by employees’ role conflict, even when client characteristics and client 
attitudinal  measures  were  taken  into  account.  Atkins  et  al.  (1996)  found  a  relationship  between  nurse  job 
satisfaction and intention to recommend and intention to return.  Satisfaction with services in healthcare was 
significantly  and  negatively  related  to  employee  burnout  (emotional  exhaustion)  and  intentions  to  leave  the 
organization, and positively related to the degree to which employees perceived their job as meaningful (Leiter 
et al., 1998). 
 
Williams  (2000)  found  satisfaction  with  products  and  services  to be  only weakly associated with employee 
ratings  of  supervision,  job  satisfaction,  stress  and  workload.  In  a  study  on  the  relationships  between  job 
conditions and customers’ quality ratings, Dormann and Kaiser (2002) found job satisfaction, task control and 

Flexihealth 


 

36/131 

emotional exhaustion to be related to higher quality ratings (except for the tangibles dimensions which are less 
influenced by employee behaviors than the other four dimensions) while time control, coworker and superior 
support and psychosomatic complaints were associated with lower service quality ratings. High performance 
workers in a liaison position reported lower stress levels than workers whose performance was evaluated less 
positively (Varca, 1999). 
 
A  limited  number  of  longitudinal  studies  have  been  conducted  on  the  subject.  One  of  these was done by 
Schneider,  White  and Paul (1998), who examined antecedents and consequences of a climate for service.  
They  found  that  global  service  climate  was  the  result  of  a complex set of system issues, some foundation 
issues and some more specifically focusing on service policies and practices. In addition, they found that the 
relationship  between  employee  and  customer  perceptions  was  a  reciprocal  one  (via  customer  feedback).  
Interdepartmental service and customer feedback had a strong direct relation to customer perceived quality.  
This indicates that internal cooperation can be strongly related to customer perceived quality. Cooperation can 
also be seen as a mediator of the relationship between shared attitudes and performance, because individual 
satisfaction levels are not strongly related to performance (see meta-analysis by Iaffaldano and Muchinsky, 
1985). Ryan et al. (1996) found that, contrary to common wisdom and the assumptions held by for example 
Burke,  Rupinski,  Dunlap,  and  Davison  (1996),  customers influence employees over time. More specifically, 
customer satisfaction ratings at time one caused ‘morale’ ratings for employees at time two. 
 
Finally,  also  relevant  in  the  context  of  the  Flexihealth  research  project  are  studies  that  have  tried  to  link 
customer satisfaction perceptions from within the organization to employee well-being. Griffith (2001) found 
that  employees’  ratings  of  customer  satisfaction  were  positively related to job satisfaction, teamwork and 
satisfaction with supervision.  Ratings of quality of services made by superiors were not related to employee 
job satisfaction in a call center environment (Todd, Robson & Lomax, 2000). Employees’ perceptions of their 
ability to satisfy customers were directly and positively influenced by other department support, organizational 
commitment and evaluation effectiveness (Sergeant & Frenkel, 2000). 
 
In  summary,  we  can  conclude  that  although  there  exists  a  body  of  research  on  relationships  between 
employee  attitudes,  employee  well-being and customer satisfaction, results are not conclusive and there are 
no studies incorporating organizational changes or changes in employees’ working conditions. Furthermore, 
with  the  exception of Herrington  and  Lomax  (1999)  and  Hagan  (1999),  there  are  virtually  no  studies  that 
simultaneously include behavioral intentions as well as other indicators of customer satisfaction in relationships 
with employee attitudes and well-being. In this study, we will examine the effects of a number of employee 
indicators  on  quality  ratings,  customer  satisfaction  ratings  and  behavioral  intentions.  These  employee 
indicators and the theoretical framework are defined and described in the psychosocial section. Concerning 
the relationships with CSI, we expect that negative job stress, positive stress and job satisfaction as indicators 
of  employee  well-being  will  show  the  strongest  relationships  with  CSI.  We  also  test  for  the  effects  of 
personal and situational moderators. 
 

2.1.6.3. Customer satisfaction in the context of organizational changes 

 

In  the  Flexihealth  project,  one  of  the  main  goals  was  to  examine  the  effects  of  organizational  changes  on 
organizational  performance  in  the  form  of  customer  satisfaction.  Most  studies  concerned  with  effects  of 
organizational changes are limited to investigating the effect of one or more major organizational changes on 
individuals’  responses,  which  makes  it  difficult  to  know  exactly  what  has  changed  for  each  individual 
employee.  In  the  Flexihealth  study,  rather  than  only  examining  the  effects  of  large-scale organizational 
changes,  we  chose  to  obtain  information  on  changes  in  the  working  environment  that  each  individual 
employee was directly confronted with. 
 
According to a  transactional perspective (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984), the appraisal of an event or the way in 
which  an  individual  evaluates  a  situation  may  be  more  important  to  employee  well-being than the actual 
presence of stressors. This evaluation process results in a  certain emotional response (positive or negative) 
which  will  in  turn  lead  to  certain  coping  responses.  Following  this  line  of  reasoning,  Payne  and Morrison 

Flexihealth 


 

37/131 

(1999) argued that it is important to distinguish  among potentially ‘stressful’ or ‘harmful’ situations from the 
‘importance’  or  affective  value  of  these  situations  for  the  individual.  In  a  transactional  perspective,  the 
changes in the environment of employees will have a differential impact on employee well-being according to 
the  way  they  are  evaluated  and  experienced.  Here,  we  examined  not  only  the  ‘objective’  changes  in 
employees’  environment,  but  also  the  degree  to  which  employees  perceived  the  changes as controllable, 
threatening,  challenging  or  involving  the  organization’s  accountability,  and  the  degree  to  which  they 
experienced positive or negative emotional reactions resulting from the changes. It is hypothesized that the 
perception  of  changes  and  emotional  responses  to  these  changes  will  be  more  important  in  determining 
employee well-being than the number of changes actually experienced.  
 
The main question here is to what degree changes in employees’ working environment  exert a direct  effect 
on  perceived  CSI,  or  if  these  effects  are  completely  mediated  by  employee  well-being  and  moderator 
variables. 
 

2.1.6.4. Summary 

 
In summary, we will be guided by the following main research questions: 
 

•  To what degree can we find evidence for  the correspondence between employee and customer 

ratings of satisfaction? 

•  Does  the  model  of  relationships  between  quality  ratings,  satisfaction  ratings  and  estimation  of 
behavioral intentions fit with our data collected from employees in a wide range of organizational 
settings and activities? 

•  What  employee  variables  are  related  (directly  or  indirectly)  to  employees’  perceptions  of 

customer satisfaction? 
Is there evidence for an effect of changes and the perception of changes in employees’ working 
environment  on  CSI  and  if  so,  can  we  find  evidence  for  a  direct  effect  or  are  these  effects 
mediated through working conditions and well-being variables? 

• 

Flexihealth 


 

38/131 

2.2.  Samples 

2.2.1 

Data collection  

After validating scales and instruments pertaining to the Flexihealth survey, a major objective was to develop 
a  data  base.  During  the  last  two  years  of  the  project,  several  surveys  were  conducted  in  the  primary and 
secondary industries in Belgium. These surveys were held by one of the Flexihealth teams, in collaboration 
with the other teams. During years 2002 and 2003, the following surveys5 were conducted (cf. Table 3): 

Table 3. Surveys conducted by the Flexihealth research network. 

 
 

Organization’s business 

Union 
Occupational medicine 
Telecommunications and aerospace 
Energy 
Transportation 
Retailing 
Retailing – headquarters  
Retailing – logistics 
Training 
Hospital 
Paper bag production – site 1 
Paper bag production – site 2 
Printing 
Telecommunications 
Federal public department – site 1 
Federal public department – site 2 
Glass production 
Transportation public department 

2.2.2 

Data base 

Flexihealth 

team involved 

 
 

Nb respondents 

Gent 
Gent 
Liege 
Liege 
Liege 
LLN 
LLN 
LLN 
Liege 
Liege 
Gent 
LLN 
Gent 
LLN 
LLN 
LLN 
LLN 
LLN 

105 
51 
310 
74 
445 
4352 
600 
218 
65 
278 
31 
41 
92 
465 
71 
30 
274 
80 

 
 

Industry 
tertiary 
tertiary 

secondary 
secondary 
secondary 

tertiary 
tertiary 
tertiary 
tertiary 
tertiary 

secondary 
secondary 
secondary 

tertiary 
tertiary 
tertiary 

 
 

Domain 

Private, service 
Private, service 

Private,  production 
Private,  production 
Private,  production 

Private,  service 
Private,  service 
Private,  service 
Private,  service 

health 

Private,  production 
Private,  production 
Private,  production 

Private,  service 

public 
public 

secondary 

Private,  production 

tertiary 

public 

The  data  base  has  been  developed  by  the  Liege  team,  in  an  attempt  to  generalize  the  findings  from  the 
Flexihealth project to the whole Belgian active population.6  

STEP 1: SELECTION OF DATA 

We first cleaned up the sets of collected questionnaires, excluding any questionnaire with less than 100 items 
filled out. Note that the final version of the instrument contained nearly 200 items, including demographics. 

STEP 2: SELECTION OF VARIABLES COMMON TO ALL DATA SETS  

To  avoid  confusion,  we  selected  occupational  and  demographic  characteristics  common  to  all  studies  (cf. 
Table 4). These were gender, civil status, age and tenure. We also created a variable pertaining to occupation 
category. When occupational categories were too sample-specific, they were recoded as other. In the public 
sector,  the  variable  occupation  was  not  used  and  was  replaced  by  that  of  level.7  Finally, we used new 
variables  for  the  data  base  in  order  to  distinguish  among  data  sets  (organization,  language,  industry,  and 
business domain). 

                                                                 
5 Data collected by September 30, 2003. Note that the Gent team also collected data from 8173 respondents within 
Flemmish hospitals and from 202 respondents from a service organization. 
6 This has been possible thanks to an internet website where all data were freely accessible to Flexihealth researchers. 
This website has been developed by the LLN team.    
7 This variable will not be used here because it refers to a single organization. However, it can be used in later studies for 
comparison purposes.  

Flexihealth 


Table 4. Description of demographic variables used in the data base. 

 

39/131 

Categories 

3=tertiary 
2=private, service 

3=health 

2=married                         3=divorced 

Code 

Variable (available data) 

Ech 
Secteur 

Organization (n=4961) 
Industry (n=4961) 

secteur bis   Business domain (n=4961) 

Lg 
Sexe 

Language (n=4961) 
Gender (n=4934) 

etat_civ 

Civil status (n=4863) 

Age 

Age (n=4747) 

Tenure 

Tenure (n=4496) 

Catprof 

Niveau 

Occupational category 
(n=1459) 
Occupational category  for 
public sector (n=97) 

 

From 1 to 18 
2=secondary 
1=private, production 
4=public 
1=francophone 
1=male 
 
1=single  
4=widowed 
1=less than 25 
4=46-55   
1=less than 1 year 
4=11-15   
7=26-30   
1=blue-collar 
4=upper level manager 
1=level 1 
4=level 3 

 
 

2=Flemish 

 
              2=female 
 

              2=26-35    
5=more than 55 
2=1-5 
              5=16-20 
              8=more than 30 
 
2=white-collar 

 
 

2=level 2+ 
5=level 4 

3=36-45 

              3=5-10 
              6=21-25 

 

 

3=manager 

3=level 2 

 
In terms of substantive variables, those included in the data base were from the standard Flexihealth survey. 
In  addition,  we  included  a  set  of  variables  that  were  measured  in  most  (but  not  all)  studies  (e.g.,  work 
intensification).  

STEP 3: CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN DATA BASE AND BELGIAN POPULATION 

The criterion used for achieving the correspondence between the data base and the Belgian active population 
is the industry. To avoid an overrepresentation of the service sector, we randomly deleted 2554 respondents 
from  the  retailing  industry.  This  procedure  allowed  us  to  match  the  25-75  distribution  of  secondary  and 
tertiary  sectors  in  Belgium  as  established  by  the  National  Institute  for  Statistics  in  1999  (published  by  the 
Labor  and  Employment  Ministry).  In  total,  this  reduced  the  data  base  to  a  set  of  4961  respondents, 
representative of the whole Belgian active population from secondary and tertiary sectors (see Table 5).  

Table 5. Description of the data base. 

Organization’s business 

Telecommunications and aerospace 
Energy 
Transportation 
Paper bag production – site 1 
Paper bag production – site 2 
Printing 
Glass production 

Total secondary sector 

Union 
Occupational medicine 
Vente - grande distribution 
Retailing – headquarters 
Retailing – logistics 
Training 
Hospital 
Telecommunications 
Federal public department – site 1 
Federal public department – site 2 
Transportation public department 

Total tertiary sector 

Total 

Flexihealth 

Industry  Business domain 
Secondary  Private, production 
Secondary  Private, production 
Secondary  Private, production 
Secondary  Private, production 
Secondary  Private, production 
Secondary  Private, production 
Secondary  Private, production 

 

Tertiary 
Tertiary 
Tertiary 
Tertiary 
Tertiary 
Tertiary 
Tertiary 
Tertiary 
Tertiary 
Tertiary 
Tertiary 

 
 

 

Private, service 
Private, service 
Private, service 
Private, service 
Private, service 
Private, service 

Health 

Private, service 

Public 
Public 
Public 

 
 

24.6 
5.9 
35.3 
2.4 
3.2 
7.3 
21.4 
100.0 

Nb  %  overall  % industry 
310 
74 
444 
30 
40 
92 
269 
1259 
105 
45 
1755 
599 
215 
65 
276 
464 
69 
30 
79 

6.2 
1.5 
8.9 
0.6 
0.8 
1.9 
5.4 
25.4 
2.1 
0.9 
35.4 
12.1 
4.3 
1.3 
5.6 
9.4 
1.4 
0.6 
1.6 
74.6 
100.0 

2.8 
1.2 
47.4 
16.2 
5.8 
1.8 
7.5 
12.5 
1.9 
0.8 
2.1 

100.0 

 

3702 
4961 


 

40/131 

 

LIMITATIONS 

Some  limitations  concerning  the  value  of  the  data  base  should  be  pointed  out.  First,  the  tertiary  sector  is 
largely  represented  through  data  collected  from  a  large  retailing  company.  Second,  it  would  have  been 
interesting  to  refine  the  data  base  by  using  criteria  such  as  gender,  age,  or  language.  However,  the  more 
criteria we selected, the more difficult it was to retain enough data representing the Belgian active population. 
Thus, we were constrained not to use criteria other than industry. Of course, it will be possible in the future to 
collect  other  data  sets  and  to  refine  the  data  base  by  including  additional  criteria.  Finally,  the  occupation 
criterion  was  difficult  to  use  due  to  the  number  of  specifics  that  occurred  across  organizations.  We  thus 
retained  the  most  common  classification  of  occupations  (see  Table  4).  In  total,  relevant  information  was 
available for 1459 respondents on this criterion. Level was a specific variable used in the federal public sector 
only. Hence, we will not use it in this report. 

2.2.3 

Description of population from the Flexihealth data base 

In this section, we will compare the  demographic characteristics of the  Flexihealth data base to  those of the 
Belgian  active  population (for secondary and tertiary sectors), based on data from the National Institute for 
Statistics (as published by the Labor and Employment Ministry in 1999).    

2.2.3.1. 

Comparison 

There  are  a  little  bit  more  women  in  the  Flexihealth  data  base  than  in  the  general  population.  In terms of 
industry  representation8,  the  health  and  service  industries  are  underrepresented  while  the  private  sector  is 
overrepresented (cf. Table 6).   

Table 6. Comparison of Flexihealth respondents to the Belgian active population. 

 
Secondary 
Tertiary 
Total 

 
Male 
Female 
Total 
Missing 
Total 

Flexihealth 

N 
1259 
3702 
4961 

Flexihealth 

N 
2424 
2510 
4934 
27 
4961 

INDUSTRY 

Belgian active population (NIS, 1999) 

% 
25.4 
74.6 
100.0 

 

Secondary 
Tertiary 
Total 

GENDER 

N 

954 807 
2 807 355 
3 762 162 

% 
25 
75 
100.0 

Belgian active population (NIS, 1999) 

% 
48. 9 
50.6 
99.5 
0.5 
100.0 

 

Male 
Female 
Total 

 
 
BUSINESS DOMAIN 

N 

2 201614 
1 645 938 
3 762 162 

 
 

% 
57 
43 
100.0 

 
 

Flexihealth 

Belgian active population (NIS, 1999) 

 
Private, 
production 
Private, services 
Health 
Public 
Total 

N 
1259 

3248 
276 
178 
4961 

% 
25.4 

65.5 
5.6 
3.6 
100.0 

 

Private, 
production 
Private, services 
Health 
Public 
Total 

N 

954 807 

2 086 346 
412 961 
308 048 
3 762 162 

% 
25 

55 
11 
8 

100.0 

                                                                 
8 The data over business domain are not available from the NIS report because this classification emanates from the 
Flexihealth group itself.  

Flexihealth 


 

41/131 

 

2.2.3.2. 

Demographic description 

The Flexihealth data base includes  4961 workers. Among them,  2424 (48.9 %) are male and  2510 (50.6 %) 
are  female  (missing=27).  Their  mother  language  is  French  (N=2934; 59.1%) or Flemish (N=2027; 40.9%). 
Most  employees  are  married  (68.7%)  while  a  minority  (19%)  are  single.  For  a  majority  (83.7%),  age  is 
between 26 and 55. There are few workers aged over 55 (N=197; 4%). Low-tenured (1-5 years) employees 
represent the largest tenure category (26%). Others approximate 10%, except the youngest (5%). Among the 
1459 workers for whom occupation category was reported, one counts  493 blue-collar workers,  467 white-
collar, 421 managers, and 78 upper-level managers.  

2.2.4 

Flexibility practices and changes 

Most workers do report having encountered flexibility practices and changes during the last six months (see 
Table 7 and 8). 

Table 7. Flexibility practices among Flexihealth respondents. 

Flexibility practice 

Yes (%) 

No (%) 

Missing (%) 

3048 (61.4%) 
2022 (40.8%) 
1463 (29.5%) 

Work schedules 
Task assignments 
Work time 
Geographic location 
Type of contract 
 
Only 279 (14.4%) workers among the 1931 for whom data are  available were not exposed to any flexibility 
practice. A majority of workers were exposed to one or more flexibility practices at the moment of the survey 
(1279 out of 1931; 66.2%). 

1873 (37.8%) 
2939 (59.2%) 
4358 (69.7%) 
4351 (87.7%) 
1920 (38.7%) 

40 (0.8%) 
0 (0%) 
40 (0.8%) 
162 (3.3%) 
2908 (58.6%) 

448 (9%) 
133 (2.7%) 

Table 8. Changes encountered among Flexihealth respondents. 

Change 

Yes (%) 

No (%) 

Colleagues 
Supervisor 
Tasks 
Schedules 
Location 
 
Only  714  (14.9%) of the  4801  workers  of  the  data  base  were  not  exposed to any change. Most workers 
(3356 out of 4801; 69.9%) were exposed to one or more changes at the moment of the survey.  

2760 (55.6%) 
2364 (47.7%) 
2069 (41.7%) 
1287 (25.9%) 
1134 (22.9%) 

1669 (33.6%) 
2105 (42.4%) 
2220 (44.7%) 
2839 (57.2%) 
2993 (60.3%) 

Missing (%) 
532 (10.7%) 
492 (9.9%) 
672 (13.5%) 
835 (16.8%) 
834 (16.8%) 

2.3.  Studies involving customer relationships issues 

 
2.3.1. Phase 1: preliminary research 

 

Preliminary study 1 

 
In  collaboration  with  the  Scientific  Institute  of  Public  Health  (Wetenschappelijk Instituut Volksgezondheid), 
we conducted a survey in 45 Belgian nursing homes. Standardized interviews on quality and satisfaction were 
conducted  by  the  Scientific  Institute  with  nursing  home  residents  (N=2315)  and  we  surveyed  employees 
(N=882) and  residents’  family  members  (N=1481).  This  study  allowed  us  to  examine  the  correspondence 
between  employees’  perceptions  of  customer  satisfaction  and  customer  satisfaction  ratings  as  supplied  by 
residents  and  proxies  of  residents.  Results  on  this  correspondence are presented in the first section of the 
results on customer satisfaction. 
 

Flexihealth 


 

42/131 

 
 

Preliminary study 2 

 
In collaboration with the complete Flexihealth network, a first exploratory study was conducted in a Research 
and  Development  department  of  a  petrochemical  company  that  underwent  several  organizational  changes 
during the past year. The goal was to test a first version of the full Flexihealth questionnaire, including scales 
measuring  employees’  perceptions  of  quality  and  customer  satisfaction.  Since  the  results from this study 
primarily  served  scale  construction  purposes,  the  results  are  reported  in  the  context  of  a description of the 
measures  as  reported  in  the  technical  document  provided  by  the  Flexihealth  team  and  section  2.3.3. on 
customer satisfaction measures. 
 

Preliminary study 3 

 

2.3.2. Phase 2: validation  

We conducted a preliminary study in 17 institutions that are frequented by or accommodate for people with 
mental disabilities in Flanders. Employees (N= 491) and proxies for customers (N= 513) were surveyed in the 
context of a different ongoing research project. The goal here was to examine some properties of customer 
questionnaires  and  the  correspondence  between  employee  and  customer  ratings  of  customer  satisfaction. 
Results on this correspondence are reported in the first section of the results on customer satisfaction. 
 
 
 
REMARK: In general, this is similar for all teams, however: 
For CSI, we used the data sample and split it according to activity and sector for some of our analyses. In 
short,  we constructed Sample 1, regrouping those organizations that are either private production companies 
or  private  service  organizations  who  also  provide  products  (N=4507), Sample 2 which grouped private and 
public  service  organizations  that  do  not  provide  products  (N=454)  and  Sample  3  which  consisted  of  11 
Flemish hospitals (N= 8173). 
 
 
 
The employee questionnaire included a number of indicators for employee perceived customer satisfaction. 
These indicators comprised  evaluations of service and product quality  – if applicable –, perceived customer 
satisfaction with services and products and estimations of customers’ behavioral intentions. 
 
Findings referring to the preliminary research are based on studies conducted with clients (family members) 
from nursing homes in study 1 (N=1481) and employees from a research and development department from a 
petrochemical company in study 2 (N=134). Other reported figures are based on the data that were collected 
within the validation phase. 
 

2.3.3. Customer satisfaction variables 

2.3.3.1. Service and product quality ratings 

 
The 22-item performance scale from the SERVQUAL instrument (see Table 9 for description; Parasuraman 
et al., 1991) was included in the questionnaire, as well as a general service (1 item) and product quality (1 
item)  rating.  SERVQUAL  measures  five  separate  dimensions  of  service  quality:  (cid:129) tangibles (4 items),  (cid:130) 
reliability (5 items), (cid:131) responsiveness (4 items), (cid:132) assurance (4 items) and (cid:133) empathy (5 items).   
Table 9: Description of Servqual dimensions  
 
Tangibles 

the  organization,  physical  facilities,  equipment,  staff  and 

Description 
The  appearance  of 
communication materials. 
Ability to perform the promised service dependably and accurately 
The willingness to help customer and provide prompt service 

Reliability 
Responsiveness 

Flexihealth 


Assurance 

The  knowledge  and  courtesy  of  the  employees  and  their  ability  to  convey  trust  and 
confidence 
The caring, individualized attention the company provides to customers. 

 

43/131 

 -coefficient from the five Servqual scales can be found in 10. 

Empathy 
 
The a
Table 10: Cronbach Alphas for SERVQUAL dimensions  
 

Flexihealth 

 
 

 
 

study 1 
(clients) 

study 2 

(employees) 

Private 

(production 
and services) 

 
 

Flexihealth 

Public services 

.79 
.93 
.87 
.88 
.90 

.70 
.93 
.77 
.81 
.79 

.75 
.89 
.80 
.83 
.81 

.72 
.87 
.80 
.87 
.83 

 
 

Flexihealth 
Hospitals 

.82 
.88 
.77 
.85 
.84 

Tangibles 
Reliability 
Responsiveness 
Assurance 
Empathy 
 

2.3.3.2. Satisfaction with services and products 

 
In  the  preliminary  studies,  we  measured  satisfaction  initially  through  two  scales:  one measuring satisfaction 
with services (5 items) and one measuring diverse aspects of satisfaction with products (7 items). The results 
from the two preliminary studies indicated however that the satisfaction with services scale was measuring a 
single construct (factor analysis yielded a 1-factor solution with eigenvalue 3.33 in study 1 and 2.69 in study 2, 
explaining  respectively  66.74  %  and  53.76  %  of  the  total  variance).  A  factor  analysis  of  the  product-
satisfaction  scale  also  resulted  in  a  singe  factor  solution  with  eigenvalue  4.23,  explaining  60.48  %  of  the 
variance. Apart from the strong  consistency across items, we also found high correlations between the scale 
scores for satisfaction and a single item measure for satisfaction with products and services (r= .84 in study 1 
and r=.63 in study 2 for satisfaction with services and r=.87 in study 2 for satisfaction with products).  

In the final Flexihealth questionnaire, perceived satisfaction with services was measured through two global 
items and perceived satisfaction with products was also measured through two global items. The items were 
chosen  on  the  bases  of  their  performance  in  the  preliminary  studies.  The  a
 coefficient for the Flexihealth 
samples can be found in the Table 11. 
Table 11: Cronbach alphas for satisfaction with services and products 

 

 

Flexihealth 

Private (production and 

services) 

 

Flexihealth 

Public services 

.77 
.83 

.79 
 

 

Flexihealth 
Hospitals 

.82 
 

Satisfaction services 
Satisfaction products 
 

2.3.3.3. Behavioral intentions 

 
Here,  we  measured  two  aspects  of  perceived  behavioral  intentions:  (cid:129)  the  intention  to  say  positive  things 
about  the  organization,  its  products  and  services  and  (cid:130)  the  intention  to  remain  loyal  (adapted  version  of 
Zeithaml, Berry & Parasuraman, 1996). In one of the preliminary studies (study 1), only one item measured 
the  intention  to  remain  loyal  and  one  measured  the  likelihood  of  positive  communication.  The  reliability  for 
these  two  items  was  however  insufficient  (Cronbach’s  a
 = .61). In study 2 we included in total four items 
measuring  behavioral  intentions  and  here  the  reliability  was  much  better,  not  only  between  the  four  items 
(a =.90),  but  even  when  split  in  two  items  measuring  the  intentions  to  say  positive  things  (a =.85) and two 
items probing the perceived intention to remain loyal (a =.82). 

 
2.3.3.4. Other information 

Flexihealth 


 

44/131 

 
Apart from indicators for perceived customer satisfaction, the questionnaire also included indicators for the 
amount of contact employees have with customers.  
Table 12: Cronbach alphas for intention to recommend, intention to return and behavioral 
intentions in general. 

 

 
 

study 2 

(employees) 

Flexihealth 

Private 

(production and 

services) 

 
 

Flexihealth 

Public services 

.85 
.82 
.90 

.87 
.85 
.92 

.90 
.82 
.92 

 
 

Flexihealth 
Hospitals 

.91 
.83 
.92 

Recommend 
Loyal 
Total 
 
 
 

2.3.4. Analytical Procedures 

2.3.4.1. Correspondence between employee and customer ratings of customer satisfaction. 

 
In preliminary study 1, correspondence between ratings from different sources were examined by computing 
mean family and resident satisfaction scores for each nursing home and reporting the correlations between 
these aggregated customer ratings and ratings from individual employees. The resident and family satisfaction 
scores for each organization were aggregated over customers within each organization, since customer 
perceived satisfaction is largely the result of organizational processes as a whole and not attributable to 
individual employees (Wetzels, de Ruyter, & Bloemer, 2000).  Therefore, the individual employee is the unit 
of analysis here, and mean scores for customer perceived satisfaction were assigned to each employee. The 
suitability of this aggregation of customer data within organizations was assessed by computing within-group 
interrater reliabilities (rWG) for each organization (James, Demaree, Wolf, 1984). Average rWG across nursing 
homes for resident satisfaction was .86 and average rWG across organizations for family perceived 
satisfaction ratings was .92. 
 
In preliminary study 3, agreement between employees’ perceptions and customers’ perceptions was 
examined both by analyzing an ANOVA design with source and organization as independent factors and 
further by correlating the satisfaction score for each employee with the aggregated satisfaction score for 
each organization.  Average rWG across organizations for customer perceived satisfaction was .97. 
 

2.3.4.2. Testing the quality-satisfaction-behavioral intentions model 

 
In  this  section,  we  examine  the  extent  to  which  our  theoretical  model  detailing  the  relationships between 
service quality, product quality, satisfaction and behavioral intentions is represented in the data collected with 
individual employees. This will be investigated by testing two alternative structural equation models on three 
separate samples (see results section for more details on samples). Using Lisrel 8.54 we compared the fit of 
the models presented in Figures 18-21. 
 
The  first  model  represents  the  current  viewpoint  that  satisfaction  is  a  more  global  response  based  on 
evaluative  quality  appraisal. The second model predicts that the more affective satisfaction response would 
influence  a  summary  quality  evaluation.  These  models  are  tested  in  three  sets  of  data:  data  from  private 
sector production and services organizations containing product satisfaction and quality measures; private and 
public  sector  services  and  healthcare  data.  For  each  dataset,  model  fit  was  examined  using  a  parceling 
procedure.  Instead  of  using  separate  items  as  indicators,  three  or  two  parcels  of  items  were  created  in  a 
random  fashion  for  several  factors  (SERVQUAL  dimensions,  and  behavioral  intentions)  from  our  initial 
analyses, and these were used as indicators of the latent constructs. According to Marsh, Hau, Balla, and 
Grayson  (1998),  parceling  has  some  advantages  with  respect  to  the  modeling  of  latent  factors.  Parceling 
results  in  a  smaller  number  of  indicators  per  latent  factor,  individual  parcels  are  likely  to  have  a  stronger 

Flexihealth 


 

45/131 

relation to the latent factor, are less likely to be influenced by method effects, and are more likely to meet the 
assumptions of normality. In addition, the reliability of the factors is unaffected by the use of parcels because 
the same items are used to form the latent factor.  
 
Following  Anderson  and  Gerbing’s  (1988)  recommendations,  the  measurement  model  was  first  assessed 
using  confirmatory  factor  analysis  on  the  three  samples  (sample  1:  Nproducts= 1456, sample 2: Nservices = 158 
and sample 3: Nhealthcare = 4821). To evaluate the goodness of fit of the measurement model, the Root Mean 
Squared  Error  of  Approximation  (RMSEA)  and  the  Standardized  Root  Mean  Squared  Residual  were 
selected.  According  to  Hu  and  Bentler  (1999),  the  combined  cut-off values of .06 for RMSEA and .09 for 
SRMR indicate good fit. Initial estimation of the measurement model indicated a good fit in all three samples. 
Although model ?2(76) = 670.68; ?2(56) = 91.59; ?2(56) = 932.84 was significant for each sample, the other fit 
indices met the values for acceptable to good model fit (RMSEA= .07; SRMR = .05;  RMSEA= .06; SRMR 
= .04; RMSEA= .06; SRMR = .02 in respectively Sample 1, 2 and 3). 
 

2.3.4.3.  Examining  the  relationships  between  employee  variables  and  customer  satisfaction 
indicators 

 
In a first step, bivariate analyses are performed to check whether there exist significant differences groups 
within our samples. We will test for differences between gender groups and language groups and correlations 
with tenure and degree of contact with customers. In case of significant differences, we will further control 
for these in our subsequent analyses.  
 
In a second step, zero-order correlations between CSI and employee variables are reported. A third analysis 
consists  of  regressing  CSI  on  employee  variables,  controlling  for  pre-existing group differences. This will 
allow us to see to what degree employee well-being, job conditions and personal characteristics are related to 
CSI. In this section we perform hierarchical multiple regression analyses on the data in the three samples. In 
each sample, customer satisfaction indicators are regressed on ‘control’ variables (language, gender, tenure, 
degree of contact with customers) depending on the results from the bivariate analyses reported above. In a 
following  step,  we  examine  the  extent  to which  personal  characteristics  can  predict  the  ratings employees 
made of CSI. In the following step, work condition variables are added and in the final step, the predictive 
value of employee well-being is examined.  
 

2.3.4.4. Impact of change 

 
Firstly, we examine whether we can find evidence for deteriorated performance (lower CSI) in organizations 
where  employees  experienced  more  change  (irrelevant  from  the  perceptions  and  emotions  employees 
experienced). Although all variables are measured at the individual level of employees, these employees are 
nested within organizations and we primarily wanted to examine the impact of change taking place within the 
organization, conceptualized as a characteristic of organizations. Therefore, we estimate a simple multilevel 
random intercept (variance components) model. In a first step, the variance in CSI at the level of individual 
employees  was  examined  to  estimate  the  degree  to  which  average  CSI  varied  within  and  between 
organizations. In a second step, we estimated a similar model but now including organizational-level average 
changes. These analyses are performed on the total dataset including samples 1, 2 and 3 in order to achieve a 
considerate N at level 2. 
 
Secondly, to examine whether the number of changes experienced or the evaluation and emotions associated 
with these changes had a direct impact on customer satisfaction perceptions, hierarchical regression analyses 
were  conducted.  If  change-related  indicators  allow  a  significant  increase  in  the  predicted  variance  of 
customer satisfaction indictors, we can conclude that a direct effect exists.  
 

Flexihealth 


 

46/131 

3.  Results 
The Liege team has treated three themes during the final stage of the research: 

(cid:252)  The  relationships  between  flexibility  practices  and/or  changes,  and  the  perception  of  work 

situations and employee well-being, in connection with demographic characteristics 

(cid:252)  The relationships between the number of changes, their perception, positive stress, negative stress, 

and mental quality of life 

(cid:252)  The relationships between the number of changes, their perception, control at work, positive stress, 

and negative stress. 

The UCL team has conducted analyses on the  role of personal and organizational variables as moderators of 
the relationships between the number of changes and their perception. 

3.1.  Theme 1 – Relationships between flexibility practices, changes, 

work situations and well-being as related to demographic variables 
As  a  first  step,  we  examined  the  effects  of  flexibility  practices and changes on  their potential outcomes 
measured in the research. We first focused on the effects across demographic categories and then assessed 
the effects attributable to each flexibility practice and/or change. 

3.1.1 

Hypotheses 

The following hypotheses have been drawn: 

(cid:252)  We thought the effect of flexibility practices on work conditions and well-being would differ across 

industries, gender and age groups, and occupations. 

 Flexibility practice(s) 
   
   
   
   
   
   

Demographic variables: 
industry, gender, age,  

 
 
             occupation 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

Work experiences: 
Support, control at work,  
job insecurity, job  
satisfaction, positive stress,  
negative stress, number of  
complaints, physical and  
mental quality of life 

(cid:252)  We also hypothesized that the effects would differ across flexibility practices9. 
 
 

                                                                 
9 The interaction effects between each flexibility practice and age or occupation have been examined. The results of these 
analyses can be found in Hansez, I., Grisard, A., & De Keyser, V. (decemb er 2003). Description de la base de données 
Flexihealth. Contribution de l’équipe ULG au rapport final de la recherche SSTC intitulée Flexihealth. Université de 
Liège. 

Flexihealth 


Flexibility practice(s) 
Flexibility practices: 
Work schedules, 
   
task assignment, 
   
   
work time, 
geographic location, 
   
   
and type of contract 
   

 

47/131 

Work experiences: 
Support, control at work,  
job insecurity, job  
satisfaction, positive stress,  
negative stress, number of  
complaints, physical and  
mental quality of life 

 

 
 

 
 

(cid:252)  Employees’ work experiences and well-being may differ depending on whether they encountered 
changes or not in their environment; and these effects may differ across industries, gender and age 
groups, and occupations.  

 Change(s) 
   
   
   
   
   
   

Demographic variables: 
industry, gender, age,  

 
 
             occupation 

Work experiences: 
Support, control at work,  
job insecurity, job  
satisfaction, positive stress,  
negative stress, number of  
complaints, physical and  
mental quality of life 

 
 

 
 
 

 

(cid:252)  Each category of changes will influence work experiences and well-being in a different manner10. 
 

Changes: 
Supervisors, task 
assignments, 
colleagues, work 
schedules, 
geographic location 

Flexibility practice(s) 
   
   
   
   
   
   

 

 
 

 
 

Work experiences: 
Support, control at work,  
job insecurity, job  
satisfaction, positive stress,  
negative stress, number of  
complaints, physical and  
mental quality of life 

                                                                 
10 The interaction effects between each category of changes and age or occupation have been examined. The results of 
these analyses can be found in Hansez, I., Grisard, A., & De Keyser, V. (decemb er 2003). Description de la base de 
données Flexihealth. Contribution de l’équipe ULG au rapport final de la recherche SSTC intitulée Flexihealth. 
Université de Liège. 

Flexihealth 

 

 

 
 

 
 


 

48/131 

3.1.2 

Data analysis 

Analysis of variance was used to  test the foregoing hypotheses concerning the potential effects of flexibility 
practices and changes on work experiences and well-being. We also tested the interaction effects between 
independent variables and demographic variables using two-way analysis of variance.  

3.1.3 

Results 

We compared the status of workers exposed to at least one flexibility practice to those who were unexposed 
to flexibility. Differences in terms of changes, intensification, social support, control at work, job insecurity, 
and well-being indicators (satisfaction, positive stress, negative stress, mental quality of health, and number of 
medical complaints) are reported in Table 13. 

Table 13. Summary statistics for workers exposed vs. unexposed to flexibility. 

p value 

Exposed M (SD) 

Unexposed M (SD) 

.00 
.01 
NS 
NS 
.01 
NS 
NS 
.01 
NS 
.01 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 

2.21 (1.31) 
3.82 (.80) 
2.66 (.92) 
3.18 (1.13) 
3.28 (1.04) 
3.34 (.87) 
3.32 (.88) 
2.66 (1.31) 
3.69 (.90) 

1.87 (1.33) 
3.59 (.77) 
2.57 (.91)  
3.13 (1.14) 
3.45 (.95) 
3.46 (.80) 
3.46 (.81) 
2.89 (1.22) 
3.60 (.88) 

 
Number of changes 
Work intensification 
Support organization  
Support supervisor  
Control at work 
Control over methods  
Overall control  
Job insecurity 
Job satisfaction 
Positive stress 
Negative stress 
Number of medical complaints 
Physical quality of life  
Mental quality of life 
Note. NS = Non significant at p < .01. 
 
Interestingly,  Table  13  shows  that  workers  experiencing  flexibility  practices are more likely  to encounter 
changes in their work environment (e.g., changes among colleagues, of supervisor, and of task assignments). 
They also experience more work intensification (overload, increasing number of tasks, or more competencies 
to be used).  At the same time, they have less control over task scheduling. Using Karasek’s (1979) model, it 
is obvious that this group of workers are at risk in terms of stress (more constraints, less control). However, 
in terms of consequences, one sees that these workers do not feel as insecure concerning their job, and report 
to be more positively stressed than those who are unexposed to flexibility practices. One could hypothesize 
that a higher job security and more positive stress are achieved at the expense of more work intensification, 
more exposure to flexibility, and more precarious job conditions. 

50.31 (10.11) 
49.34 (10.18) 
9.54 (3.70) 
52.49 (6.39) 
44.33 (11.00) 

9.5 (3.42) 
52.44 (6.31) 
44.12 (11.09) 

48.67 (10.24) 
49.22 (10.16)  

INFLUENCE OF DEMOGRAPHIC VARIABLES 

Workers exposed vs. unexposed to flexibility were compared in terms of changes, work intensification, social 
support, control at work, job insecurity, and well-being indicators for different demographic variables such as 
industry, gender, age and occupation (cf. Tables 14 and 15).  
Several  conclusions  can  be  drawn  from  these  results.  For  industry  comparisons,  the  same  pattern  of 
differences occurs for either category of workers (exposed vs. unexposed). However, for the tertiary sector, 
more  support  from  supervisors,  higher  levels  of  job  satisfaction,  and  less  negative  stress,  were reported 
among workers exposed to flexibility, as compared to the secondary sector. Similarly, control over methods is 
higher within the tertiary sector than in the secondary sector, but only for workers unexposed to flexibility. 
 
 
 

Flexihealth 


Table 14. Results of analyses of variance and Post-Hoc t tests according to industry, gender, age, and occupation, for workers 
exposed to flexibility. 

 

49/131 

- 

- 

- 

-  

- 
- 

+55=less 

26-35>36-45/46-55 

Age group 
Post-Hoc t tests  

Occupational group 
Post-Hoc t tests 

Gender 
p  M 
.011  M>F 
.001  M>F 

 
 
Number of changes 
Work intensification 
Support organization  
Support supervisor  
Control at work 
Control over methods  
Overall control  
Job insecurity 
Job satisfaction 
Positive stress 
Negative stress 
Nb of medical complaints 
Physical quality of life  
Mental quality of life 
Note. NS = non significant at p < .05. S=secondary sector; T=tertiary sector; F=Female; M=Male; The sign ‘-‘ means that 
no difference was found between groups. 
 

Industry 
p 
p  M 
.038 
.000  S>T 
.000 
NS 
.013 
.000  T>S  NS 
.006  F>M 
.000 
.000  T>S 
.004  F>M  NS 
.000  T>S 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
.046  T>S  NS 
.000  M>F 
.000  S>T 
.029 
.033  F>M  NS 
.045  T>S 
.004 
.001  T>S 
.000  F>M 
.016  S>T  NS 
.001 
NS 
NS 
NS 
.000  Decreases with age 
.012  S>T 
.000  M>F 
.042  T>S  NS 
NS 

p 
.033 
NS 
.000  Blue-c.<White-c./Manager 
.000  Blue-c.<White-c./Manager 
.000  Blue-c.<White-c./Manager 
.000  Manager >Blue-c./White-c. 
.000  Blue-c.<White-c.<Manager 
.000  Blue-c.>Manager >White-c. 
NS 
.000  Blue-c.<White-c./Manager 
NS 
NS 
.000  Manager >Blue-c./White-c. 
NS 

+55>-25/26-35  

+55=less 

+55=less 

- 
- 
- 

- 
- 

- 
- 

- 
- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 
- 
- 

- 
- 
- 
- 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

26-35>36-45 

Age group 
Post-Hoc t tests  

Occupational group 
Post-Hoc t tests 

Gender 
p  M 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

Industry 
p  M 
.043  S>T  NS 
NS 
NS 
.000  T>S  NS 
NS 
NS 
.000  T>S  NS 
.000  T>S  NS 
.000  T>S  NS 
.002  S>T  NS 
NS 
NS 
.007  T>S  NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
.029  S>T  NS 
.026  T>S  NS 

p 
p 
.043  White-c.<Cadre- Blue-c. 
NS 
NS 
NS 
.000  Manager>White-c.- Blue-c. 
NS 
.000  Manager >White-c.- Blue-c. 
.013 
.001  Manager >White-c.- Blue-c. 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
.012 
.008  36-45=more stressed  NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 

Table 15. Results of analyses of variance and Post-Hoc t tests according to industry, gender, age, and occupation, for workers 
unexposed to flexibility. 
 
 
Number of changes 
Work intensification 
Support organization  
Support supervisor  
Control at work 
Control over methods  
Overall control  
Job insecurity 
Job satisfaction 
Positive stress 
Negative stress 
Nb of medical complaints 
Physical quality of life  
Mental quality of life 
Note. NS = non significant at p < .05. S=secondary sector; T=tertiary sector; F=Female; M=Male; The sign ‘-‘ means that 
no difference was found between groups. 
 
Gender  differences  occur  for  workers  exposed  to  flexibility.  Men  do  report  more  changes,  perceive  more 
work intensification and less support from their supervisor, have less control over scheduling, and feel more 
job-insecure.  Women  are  more  satisfied  with  their  job,  experience  more  positive  stress,  but  have  a  lower 
physical quality of life. 
There  are  more  age  differences  among  workers  exposed  to  flexibility.  Among  them,  the  55+  age  group 
perceive  less  work  intensification,  feel  less  job-insecure, experience more positive stress but have a lower 
physical quality of life. 
Among occupational groups, and within those exposed to flexibility, blue-collar workers perceive less support 
from the organization and the supervisor, less control over scheduling, less overall control, more job insecurity 
and  less  positive  stress.  Managers  report  more  control  over  methods  and  a  higher  physical  quality  of  life. 
Among those unexposed to flexibility, differences are less prevalent across demographic groups. 
Finally,  blue-collar  workers  and  managers  feel  more  job-insecure  when  they  are  exposed  to  flexibility 
practices while white-collar workers feel less job-insecure when they are exposed to flexibility. 

Blue-c.<Manager 

- 
- 
- 
- 

- 
- 
- 

Flexihealth 


 

50/131 

INFLUENCE OF FLEXIBILITY PRACTICES  

Table  16  displays  the  comparison  across  flexibility  practices  of  mean  scores  on  key  outcomes for workers 
exposed vs. unexposed to flexibility.   

Tableau 16. Mean score on key outcomes across flexibility practices. 

  

 

 

 

Geographical 

Schedules 

Tasks 

Work time 

location 

Type of 
contract 

NS 
- 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 

NS 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
NS 
+ 
+ 
NS 
NS 
+ 
NS 

+ 
NS 
- 
NS 
- 
- 
- 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
+ 
NS 
NS 

+ 
+ 
- 
NS 
+ 
+ 
+ 
NS 
NS 
NS 
+ 
+ 
+ 
- 

NS 
NS 
NS 
+ 
- 
- 
- 
- 
NS 
+ 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 

Number of changes 
Work intensification 
Support organization  
Support supervisor  
Control at work 
Control over methods  
Overall control  
Job insecurity 
Job satisfaction 
Positive stress 
Negative stress 
Nb of medical complaints 
Physical quality of life  
Mental quality of life 
Note. NS = non significant at p < .01. + vs. – report the status of those exposed to flexibility as compared to those 
unexposed to it. 
 
Workers  who  are  exposed  to  flexibility  in  terms  of  work  schedules  do  perceive  less  control  over  task 
scheduling  and  methods  but  feel  more  supported  by  their  supervisor.  They  also  feel  less  job-insecure and 
more positively stressed. However, one should be careful in interpreting these findings, because these positive 
consequences may be somewhat costly in terms of personal involvement at work and work-life balance, and 
could be offset by a loss of control over one’s job situation, which  ultimately may reduce well-being. Also, it 
might be interesting to know whether these flexibility practices have been imposed or freely chosen. It could 
be that if they are freely chosen, they allow a better work-life balance. On the other hand, it might be that 
support from the supervisor is a moderator of the relationship between flexibility in terms of work schedules 
and well-being. This possibility should be examined in future research.  
Task  assignment  flexibility  is  associated  with  more  job-related  changes  and  work  intensification.  Workers 
exposed to this type of flexibility feel less supported by their organization and also report more negative stress 
and medical complaints, and poorer mental quality of life. However, they experience a better physical quality 
of life. This finding is in line with preliminary results from the Flexihealth project (De Zanet, Hansez, Bossut, 
Vandenberghe, & De Keyser, in press). This study showed that workers exposed to changes in workload and 
task  assignment  perceive  them  as  resulting  in  a  worsening  of  their  job  conditions  while  other  changes  are 
sometimes  perceived  more  positively  (e.g.,  changes  in  required  competencies,  responsibilities,  autonomy, 
management  methods,  and  work  site).  The  latter  are  viewed  as  qualitative  work  intensification.  However, 
even if qualitative intensification is higher for workers exposed to flexibility in terms of work schedules, this 
has  detrimental  effects  on  well-being.  Perceived  organizational  support  may  play  a  moderating  role  in  that 
process.  
Flexibility  in  terms  of  work  time  (part-time,  shiftwork,  etc.)  is  associated  with  less  support  from  the 
organization and less control at work. In terms of potential consequences, this category of flexibility practices 
is  only  associated  significantly  with  more  medical  complaints.  Actually,  work  time  flexibility  is  largely 
implemented  in  companies  using  just-time  processes  and,  even  it  is  associated  with  less  support from the 
organization  (fewer  contacts  with  top  management  and/or  other  workers,  difficulties  in  transmitting 
information, etc.), these disadvantages are offset by a better work-life balance.  
Flexibility in terms of work location (e.g., diverse forms of teleworking) is related to more work intensification 
but  also  has  positive  consequences:  higher  perceived  organizational  and  supervisor  support,  more control, 
higher job satisfaction, more positive stress, and better physical quality of life.  Note that only 9% of workers 

Flexihealth 


 

51/131 

are  concerned  by  teleworking.  As  shown  in  Table  17,  all  occupational  groups are affected by teleworking 
(especially white-collar workers).  

Table 2. Flexibility in terms of work location across occupational groups. 

 

Flexibility in terms of geographic location  

Blue-c.  White-c.  Manager  Upper Mgt 

 

Occupational group 

Total 

33 

34 

64 

15 

N 
% within Flexibility/location 
N 
% within Flexibility/location 
N 
% within Flexibility/location 

Yes 
  
Non response 
  
Total  
  
Note. c ² (3) = 103.24, p < .000. 
 
Finally, nearly no difference is found among workers exposed vs. unexposed to flexibility in terms of type of 
labor contract. The single difference is related to work intensification (lower for those exposed to this type of 
flexibility).   

100.0% 
1156 
100.0% 
1302 
100.0% 

10.3% 
351 
30.4% 
366 
28.1% 

43.8% 
376 
32.5% 
440 
33.8% 

23.3% 
384 
33.2% 
418 
32.1% 

45 
3.9% 
78 
6.0% 

22.6% 

146 

3.1.4 

Influence of changes on attitudes and well-being 

We compared workers reporting at least one change to those who did not report any change during the last 
six  months.  Differences  in  terms  of  flexibility practices, social support,  control at work, job insecurity, and 
well-being indicators were then examined (cf. Table 18).  

Table 18. Differences among workers exposed vs. unexposed to changes during the last six months. 

 

Variable 

 

p value 

No change 

M (SD) 

Change 
M (SD) 

.00 
.00 
.00 
.00 
NS 
NS 
NS 
.00 
.00 
.01 
.00 
.00 
NS 
.00 

1.61 (1.10) 
4.2 (.74) 
2.61 (.99) 
3.13 (1.18) 
3.06 (1.18) 
3.16 (1.02) 
3.12 (1.02) 
2.62 (1.34) 
3.67 (.96) 

1.25 (1.00) 
3.66 (.90) 
2.89 (.99) 
3.41 (1.11) 
3.15 (1.21) 
3.26 (1.04) 
3.21 (1.04) 
2.36 (1.27) 
3.81 (.87) 
51.96 (9.96) 

Number of flexibility practices 
Work intensification 
Support organization  
Support supervisor  
Control at work 
Control over methods  
Overall control  
Job insecurity 
Job satisfaction 
Positive stress 
Negative stress 
Nb of medical complaints 
Physical quality of life  
Mental quality of life 
Note. NS = non significant at p < .01.  
 
In  general,  workers  exposed  to  changes  experience  more  flexibility  practices  and  perceive  more  work 
intensification. They feel less supported by their organization and supervisor. They are less satisfied with their 
job, less positively stressed, more negatively stressed and report more medical complaints and a poorer mental 
quality of life. They also feel more job-insecure. These are the negative aspects of changes.  However, it is 
plausible  that  workers  react  to  changes  in  the  long  run  by  using  coping  strategies  to  better adjust to them 
(Buchanan  &  Huczynski,  1997;  Côté,  Bélanger  &  Jacques,  1994).  Nonetheless,  this  possibility  may  be 
ineffective in the case of repeated changes across time. 

50.92 (10.42) 
49.21 (10.4) 
9.21 (3.78) 
51.06 (7.3) 

46 (9.48) 
8.36 (3.91) 
51.07 (6.86) 
47.86 (9.98) 

45.15 (11.01) 

INFLUENCE OF DEMOGRAPHIC VARIABLES 

We considered workers who experienced at least  one change during the last six months as a separate group 
from those who did  not report any change. Differences in terms of flexibility practices, work intensification, 

Flexihealth 


 

52/131 

social support, control at work, job insecurity, and well-being indicators were examined across demographic 
groups (cf. Tables 19 and 20).  
 

Table 19. Results of analyses of variance and Post-Hoc t tests for industry, gender, age, and occupational group, among 
workers exposed to change (s). 

 
 
Number of flexibility 
practices 
Work intensification 
Support organization  
Support supervisor  
Control at work 
Control over methods  
Overall control  
Job insecurity 

Industry 
p  M 
.000  T>S 

Gender 
p  M 
p 
.000  F>M  NS 

- 

- 
- 

NS 
NS 
.000  T>S  NS 
.000  T>S 
NS 
.000  S>T 
.005  S>T 
.000  S>T 

.041  F>M 
.000  M>F 
.000  M>F 
.000  M>F 
.000  M>F 

- 

NS 
.002 
.000 
.000 
.000 
.000 
.000 

Age group 
Post-Hoc t tests 

- 

- 

-25/+55: higher 

46-55: lower 
26-35: higher 
26-35: higher 
26-35: higher 
+55: lower 

Occupational group 
Post-Hoc t tests 
Managers: lower 

p 
.000 

- 

NS 
.000  Increases with hierarch. level 
.000  Increases with hierarch. level 
.000  Increases with hierarch. level 
.000  Increases with hierarch. level 
.000  Increases with hierarch. level 
.000 

Upper Mgt < White c.  
< Managers < Blue-c. 
Upper Mgt: higher 

- 

Job satisfaction 
Positive stress 
Negative stress 
Nb of medical complaints 
Physical quality of life  
Mental quality of life 
Note. NS = non significant at p < .01. S=secondary sector; T=tertiary sector; F=Female; M=Male.  

.006 
.000 
.000 
.000 
.000  Decreases with age 
.000 

NS 
.000  T>S 
.000  S>T 
.000  S>T  NS 
.000  S>T 
.000  T>S  NS 

.000 
.000  Increases with hierarch. level 
.038 
.001 
.000 
.001 

Upper Mgt: lower 
White-c.: higher 

.036  F>M 
.000  F>M 
.000  M>F 

-25; +55: lower 
26-55: higher 

+55: higher 
+55: higher 

Blue-c./White-c.: lower 

Upper Mgt: higher 

26-55: lower 

.000  M>F 

- 

- 

 

Table 20. Results of analyses of variance and Post-Hoc t tests for industry, gender, age, and occupational group, among 
workers unexposed to change (s). 

 
 
Number of flexibility 
practices 
Work intensification 
Support organization  
Support supervisor  
Control at work 

Industry 
p  M 
.000  T>S 

Gender 
p  M 
p 
.012  F>M  NS 

- 

NS 
NS 
.000  T>S  NS 
.003  T>S  NS 
NS 

- 

- 
- 
- 

NS 
NS 
NS 
.022 

.000  M>F 

Control over methods  

.036  S>T 

.000  M>F 

.05 

Age group 
Post-Hoc t tests 

- 

- 
- 
- 

-25: lowest; 36-45: 

highest 

- 

p 
NS 

- 

.003 
.007 
.000 

.000 

Occupational group 
Post-Hoc t tests 

- 

- 

Increases with hierarch. level 
Increases with hierarch. level 
Increases with hierarch. level 

White-c.<Blue-c. 

<Managers<Upper Mgt 

Overall control  

NS 

- 

.000  M>F 

.021 

-25: lowest; 36-45: 

.000 

Increases with hierarch. level 

Job insecurity 
Job satisfaction 

.000  S>T 
NS 

- 

.002  M>F  NS 
NS 
.044 

- 

Positive stress 

.000  T>S 

.008  F>M 

.038 

highest 

- 
- 

- 

.000 
.008  Upper Mgt>Blue-c./White-c. 

Blue-c.: higher 

.000 

/Managers 

Upper Mgt: higher;  

Blue-c.: lower 

- 
- 

- 
- 

- 
- 

.04  M>F 
NS 

.037  S>T  NS 
.007  S>T  NS 
NS 
NS 

NS 
NS 
.000  Decreases with age 
NS 

Negative stress 
Nb of medical complaints 
Physical quality of life  
Mental quality of life 
Note. NS = non significant at p < .01. S=secondary sector; T=tertiary sector; F=Female; M=Male. The sign ‘-‘ means that 
no  difference  was  found  between  groups.  The  sign  ‘-‘  in  p  cells means that there were not enough subjects in each 
group (less than 10) for conducing the analysis of variance. 
 
There  are  a  large  number  of differences between the two sectors for either category of employees (those 
who  were  exposed  vs.  unexposed  to  change  during  the  last  six  months).  In  addition,  among  workers who 

Blue-c./White-c.: lower 

NS 
NS 
.017 
NS 

- 
- 

- 

- 

- 

Flexihealth 


 

53/131 

were exposed to change(s), those working in the secondary sector reported more global control and a better 
physical  quality  of  life  but  a  weaker  mental  quality  of  life. Several differences  also  occurred for gender. 
Specifically, when exposed to  change(s), women felt more supported by their supervisor, were more satisfied 
with their job and were less negatively stressed than men.   
Among workers unexposed to change, there were few differences across age categories. However, workers 
aged  between  46 and 55 and exposed to change(s) perceived less support from their supervisor than those 
from other age categories. In contrast, workers aged 55 or more and exposed to change(s) perceived more 
organizational support. In general, the 55+ age group was rather protected against adverse effects: they were 
more  satisfied  with  their  job  and  more  positively  stressed,  felt  less  job-insecure,  and were less negatively 
stressed (those aged less than 25 were also less negatively stressed). In contrast, those aged between 26 and 
55  reported  more  medical  complaints  and  had  a  poorer  mental  quality  of  life.  The single interaction effect 
detected was between exposure to change(s) and age group for job satisfaction. In general, job satisfaction 
was higher when there was no change, except for those aged less than 25 or more than 55. Job satisfaction 
was higher for these age groups in case of exposure to change(s). 
Several  differences  were  observed  across  occupational  groups.  One  finding  of  interest  was  that  upper 
managers  experienced  less  negative  stress  and  more  mental  quality  of  life  when  exposed  to  change(s)  as 
compared to other occupational groups, while white-collar workers reported more medical complaints. 

TYPE OF CHANGE 

Si on analyse plus en détail les types de changement (table ), d’autres résultats émergent. Le principe de base 
de ces analyses est de comparer les travailleurs ayant vécu tel type de changement à ceux qui ne l’ont pas 
vécu. 
Table 21. Mean score on key outcomes according to type of change . 
 

Job 

 

 

 

Variable 

Colleagues 

Supervisor 

Tasks 

Work 
schedule 

location 

NS 
+ 
+ 
- 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
+ 
- 
- 
+ 
+ 
NS 
- 

+ 
+ 
+ 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
NS 
- 
NS 
NS 
NS 
- 
NS 

NS 
+ 
+ 
- 
- 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
- 
NS 
+ 
+ 
NS 
- 

NS 
+ 
+ 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
+ 
- 
- 
+ 
+ 
- 
- 

+ 
+ 
+ 
- 
- 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
- 
NS 
+ 
+ 
NS 
- 

Number of flexibility practices 
Number of changes 
Work intensification 
Support organization  
Support supervisor  
Control at work 
Control over methods  
Overall control  
Job insecurity 
Job satisfaction 
Positive stress 
Negative stress 
Nb of medical complaints 
Physical quality of life  
Mental quality of life 
Note. NS = non significant at p < .000. + vs. – report the status of those exposed to change as compared to those 
unexposed to it. 
 
In general, a change among colleagues or of work schedule affects employee well-being to a lesser degree 
than a change in task assignments or of supervisor. Change also tends to be associated with decreased well-
being:  higher  work  intensification,  more  flexibility  practices,  less  support  from  the  organization  and the 
supervisor, less control, more job insecurity, lower job satisfaction and positive stress, more negative stress 
and medical complaints and a poorer quality of life.  
In particular, changing supervisors appears to be problematic and is associated with the following: less social 
support, less control, more job insecurity, lower job satisfaction and positive stress, more negative stress and 
medical complaints, and a poorer quality of life.  

Flexihealth 


 

54/131 

Regarding change in task assignment, results are globally the  same, except that perceived control is higher: 
less social support,  less control, more job insecurity, lower job satisfaction and positive stress, more negative 
stress and medical complaints, and a poorer quality of life.  Table 22 shows that change in task assignments 
affects all occupational groups. 
 
 

Table 22. Changes in task assignments across occupational groups. 

 
 

Occupational group 

 

 

 

Upper Mgt 

 
 

Change in task assignment 

Blue-c. 

White-c. 

Managers 

N 
%  
N 
%  
N 
%  

34 
2.7% 
43 
3.4% 
77 
6.2% 

253 
20.3% 
140 
11.2% 
393 
31.5% 

224 
17.9% 
177 
14.2% 
401 
32.1% 

219 
17.5% 
158 
12.7% 
377 
30.2% 

Yes 
  
No 
  
Total  
  
 
As for flexibility practices related to tasks, change in task assignments may have positive implications for the 
work situation itself but detrimental effects on well-being.    
Regarding  change  among  colleagues,  those  who  have  been  exposed  to  it  report  less  support  from  the 
organization and the supervisor, a lower job satisfaction, more negative stress and less positive stress, more 
medical  complaints  and  a  lower  mental  quality  of  life.  Change in work schedule does not affect that much 
well-being except that it is related to less social support and control. Finally, change in work location is mainly 
associated with a reduced well-being. 

Total 
730 
58.5% 
518 
41.5% 
1248 
100.0% 

3.1.5 

Conclusion 

Flexibility practices appear to have few negative effects on worker health since workers exposed to flexibility 
report  more  positive  stress  and  less  job  insecurity.  These  positive  effects  are  accompanied  by  more  work 
intensification  and  less  control  over  scheduling  which  represent  two  main  aspects  of  stress  processes  in 
organizations.  If  one  examines  each  flexibility  practice  in  particular,  the  effects  differ.  Flexibility  practices 
related  to  work  schedules  and  work  time  are  associated with less control at work while flexibility practices 
related  to  task  assignments  are  related  to  more  control  but  have  detrimental  effects  on  stress,  medical 
complaints, and quality of life.  
Regarding  the  effects  of  changes,  they  are  negative  for  worker  well-being.  Perceived  support  and  job 
satisfaction were lower, negative stress was higher, positive stress lower, and mental quality of life poorer, 
and medical complaints more frequent among workers exposed to changes. Change of supervisor is the most 
detrimental to workers in terms of support, control, job insecurity, and well-being. Change among tasks and in 
job location has a negative effect on well-being mainly, while change in work schedules and among colleagues 
has milder negative effects on well-being. 
Blue-collar  workers  and  employees  aged  between  36  and  55  are  more  at  risk  since  they  experience  more 
negative  effects  associated  with  flexibility  and  change.  In contrast, workers aged 55 or more report higher 
levels of well-being than young employees. 

Flexihealth 


 

55/131 

3.2.  Theme 2 – Moderating effects of dispositional variables on 

perception of changes 
3.2.1 

Hypotheses 

The transactional model of stress predicts that the consequences of stressful events for employees are largely 
determined by how they are perceived. Perception is thus a key aspect of the stress process in the evaluation 
of health-related outcomes for employees. 
Consequently, personal and situational factors  susceptible to affect the perception of stressors should thus be 
examined. In this regard, the perception of changes is related to individual differences (De Zanet et al., 2004). 
Indeed, changes may be perceived positively (challenge) or negatively (threat).     
We  thought  that  some  personal  and  situational  variables  played  a  moderating  role  in  the  perception of 
changes. Here are the effects we hypothesized. 
 
Hypothesis 1. As individuals who are high on  negative affectivity tend to view their environment negatively, 
we predict the following: 

a)  Individuals  with  a  high  level  of  negative  affectivity  will  perceive changes more as a threat than 

those who have a low level of negative affectivity 

b)  Individuals with a  low level of negative affectivity will perceive changes more as a challenge than 

those who have a high level of negative affectivity 

Hypothesis  2.  As  individuals who are high on  positive affectivity tend to view their environment positively, 
we predict the following 

c)  Individuals with a low level of positive affectivity will perceive changes more as a threat than those 

who have a high level of positive affectivity 

d)  Individuals  with  a  high  level  of  positive  affectivity  will  perceive  changes  more  as  a  threat than 

those who have a low level of positive affectivity 

Hypothesis  3.  As  self-esteem  may  be  considered  as  a  set  of  resources  that  can  be  used  to  cope  with 
stressful events, we predict the following: 

e)  Individuals with a low level of self-esteem will perceive changes more as a threat than those who 

f) 

have a high level of self-esteem 
Individuals with a high level of self-esteem will perceive changes more as a  challenge than those 
who have a low level of self-esteem 

Hypothesis 4. Consistent with the findings of previous research on  external locus of control, we predict the 
following: 

g)  Individuals  with  a  high  level  of  external  locus  of  control will perceive changes more as a  threat 

than those who have a low level of external locus of control 

h)  Individuals with a low level of  external locus of control will perceive changes more as a challenge 

than those who have a high level of external locus of control 

Hypothesis 5. As individuals who feel  supported and valued by their organization tend to perceive their work 
environment more positively, we predict the following:  

i) 

j) 

Individuals  who  feel  unsupported  by  either  their  organization  or  their  supervisor  will  perceive 
changes  more  as  a  threat  than  those  who  feel  supported  by  either  their  organization  or  their 
supervisor 
Individuals who feel supported by either their organization or their supervisor will perceive changes 
more  as  a  challenge  than  those  who  feel  unsupported  by  either  their  organization  or  their 
supervisor 

Flexihealth 


 

56/131 

3.2.2  Method 

3.2.2.1. 

Sample 

To test the hypotheses, we used  data collected from a survey conducted among employees working in  the 
retailing  stores  of  a  food  company.  In total,  4352  usable  questionnaires  were  collected  from  the  survey. 
Among them, 54.8 % emanated from Flemish-speaking respondents and 74.9 % from women. 

3.2.2.2. 

Measures 

The  independent  variable  pertaining  to  our  hypotheses  was  operationalized  as  the  number  of  changes 
encountered  during  the  last  six  months.  The  dependent  variable  was  either  the  perception  of  threat  or  of 
challenge associated with the changes. Moderators were either personal characteristics (positive and negative 
affectivity,  self-esteem,  organization-based  self-esteem,  and  external  locus  of  control)  or  organizational 
characteristics (perceived organizational support and perceived supervisor support). Psychometric properties 
of  the  scales  used  have  been  presented  in  the  section  devoted  to  the  development  of  the  Flexihealth 
instrument. 

3.2.3 

Results 

3.2.3.1. 

Descriptive statistics and correlations 

Means, standard deviations and correlations for the study variables are shown in Table 23. 

Table 23.  Descriptive statistics and correlations for the study variables. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

ET 

1.35 

1.27 

1.24 

1.09 

1.21 

1.21 

.83 

.75 

M 

1.86 

2.64 

2.53 

2.68 

3.17 

2.78 

1.82 

4.00 

2.98 

 

1. Nb of changes 

2. Challenge 

3. Threat 

4. Support organization 

5. Support supervisor 

6. External LOC 

7. Negative affectivity 

8. Positive affectivity  

9. Org.-b. Self-esteem 

10. Positive stress 

11. Negative stress 

 

 

  .15*** 

 

 

  .10*** 

 -.22*** 

 

 

 

 -.13*** 

  .31*** 

 -.32*** 

 

 

 

 

 -.10*** 

  .26*** 

 -.34*** 

  .67*** 

 

 

 

 

 

  .09*** 

 -.14*** 

  .28*** 

 -.31*** 

 -.30*** 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  .10*** 

 -.12*** 

  .28*** 

 -.32*** 

 -.27*** 

  .23*** 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 -.00 

  .30*** 

 -.26*** 

  .39*** 

  .35*** 

 -.20*** 

 -.27*** 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.13 

 -.11*** 

  .29*** 

 -.31*** 

  .88*** 

  .61*** 

 -.33*** 

 -.33*** 

  .41*** 

51.96 

48.22 

10.33 

10.60 

 -.02 

  .36*** 

 -.29*** 

  .47*** 

  .40*** 

 -.22*** 

 -.25*** 

  .65*** 

  .47*** 

  .16*** 

 -.16*** 

  .36*** 

 -.42*** 

 -.37*** 

  .31*** 

  .70*** 

 -.31*** 

 -.41*** 

 -.32*** 

3.2.3.2. 

Tests of moderating effects 

We tested the moderation hypotheses using moderated multiple regression. As recommended by  Aiken and 
West  (1991),  the independent and moderating variables were centered. Control variables (language, gender, 
and  occupational  group)  were  introduced  in  the  first  block  of  variables.  Then  the  independent  variables  of 
interest  were  entered.  Finally,  the  third  block  contained  the  product  terms  featuring  the  hypothesized 
interaction effects. The results of these analyses are shown in Tables 24-29. 

Flexihealth 


 

57/131 

Table  24.  Results  of  moderated  multiple  regression  for  perceived  threat  and  challenge  using 
negative affectivity and number of changes as predictors . 

Table  25.   Results  of  moderated  multiple  regression  for  perceived  threat  and  challenge  using 
positive affectivity and number of changes as predictors . 

                 Variable 

Perceived threat 

Perceived challenge 

Variable 

Perceived threat 

Perceived challenge 

Block 1 :  

Language 
Gender 
Occupational group 

 R2 

Block 2 : 

Language 
Gender 
Occupational group 
Nb of changes 
Negative affectivity 

 R2 

Block 3 : 

Language 
Gender 
Occupational group 
Nb of changes 
Negative affectivity 
Nb of changes x Negative 

affectivity 
 R2 

R2 

 
-0.01 
-0.03 
 0.04* 

 
 
 0.09*** 
-0.03 
 0.05** 
 0.08*** 
 0.30*** 

 
 
 0.09*** 
-0.03 
 0.05** 
 0.08*** 
 0.30*** 

 0.01 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 

* 
 

 
 

 

* 

 

 

0.00 

0.09**

0.00 
0.09**

 

 

0.04*** 

0.03*** 

 

 

 

 
 0.10*** 
-0.10*** 
-0.14*** 

 
 
 0.07*** 
-0.09*** 
-0.13*** 
 0.15*** 
-0.11*** 

 
 
 0.07*** 
-0.09*** 
-0.13*** 
 0.15*** 
-0.10*** 

-0.04* 

 

0.00* 

0.07*** 

F(6,3113) = 
39.73*** 

 
Note. Entries are standardized regression coefficients. 

 

F(6, 3061) = 52.48*** 

* p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001. 

 

 

 

 

Block 1 :  

Language 
Gender 
Occupational group 

 R2 

Block 2 : 

Language 
Gender 
Occupational group 
Nb of changes 
Positive affectivity 

 R2 

Block 3 : 

Language 
Gender 
Occupational group 
Nb of changes 
Positive affectivity 
Nb of changes x Positive 

affectivity 
 R2 
R2 

0.00 

0.07*** 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
-0.01 
-0.03 
 0.04* 

 
 
-0.01 
-0.02 
 0.03 
 0.10*** 
-0.25*** 

 
 
-0.01 
-0.02 
 0.03 
 0.10*** 
-0.23*** 

-0.08*** 

 

 

 

0.04*** 

0.10*** 

 
 0.11*** 
-0.10*** 
-0.14*** 

 
 
 0.11*** 
-0.09*** 
-0.11*** 
 0.14*** 
 0.29*** 

 
 
 0.11*** 
-0.09*** 
-0.11*** 
 0.14*** 
 0.28*** 

 0.06** 

 

 

 

0.01*** 

0.08*** 

 

 

 
Note. Entries are standardized regression coefficients 

 

F(6, 3058) = 43.85*** 

* p < 0.05 ; ** p < 0.01 ; *** p < 0.001. 

0.00** 

0.15*** 

F(6, 3112) = 
88.94*** 

 
 
 

D
D
D
D
D
D

 

 

 

 

58/131 

 

 

 

Table  26.  Results  of  moderated  multiple  regression  for  perceived  threat  and  challenge  using 
organization-based self-esteem and number of changes as predictors. 

Table 27. Results of moderated multiple regression for perceived threat and challenge using 
external locus of control and number of changes as predictors. 

                 Variable 

Perceived threat 

Perceived challenge 

                                 Variable 

Perceived threat 

Perceived challenge 

Block 1 : 

Language 
Gender 
Occupational group 

 R2 

Block 2 : 

Language 

Gender 
Occupational group 
Nb of changes 
Org.-b. self-esteem 

 R2 

Block 3 : 

Language 
Gender 
Occupational group 
Nb of changes 
Org.-b. self-esteem 
Nb of changes x Org.-b. self-esteem 

 
-0.01 
-0.03 
 0.04 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 

0.00 

 0.07*** 
-

0.05** 

 
 

 0.05** 
 0.07*** 
-0.32*** 

0.10**

* 
 

 
 
 0.06*** 
-0.04* 
 0.05** 
 0.07*** 
-0.29*** 
-0.08*** 

 
 

0.04*** 

0.10*** 

 
 0.11*** 
-0.10*** 
-0.14*** 

 
 
    

0.04** 

 

 

-0.07*** 
-0.13*** 
 0.17*** 
 0.30*** 

 
 
 
 0.05** 
 
-0.07*** 
-0.13*** 
 0.16*** 
 0.28*** 
 0.07*** 

 R2 

R2 

 

 

0.01**

0.11**

* 

* 

 

 

 
Note. Entries are standardized regression coefficients. 
* p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001. 

 

F(6, 3097) = 54.85*** 

0.004*** 

0.15*** 

F(6, 3148) = 
88.64*** 

 

Block 1 :  

Language 
Gender 
Occupational group 

 R2 

Block 2 : 

Language 
Gender 
Occupational group 
Nb of changes 
External locus of control 

 R2 

Block 3 : 

Language 
Gender 
Occupational group 
Nb of changes 
External locus of control 
Nb of changes x External locus of 

control 

 R2 
R2 

 

 

0.00 

0.08*** 

 
-0.01 
-0.03 
 0.03 

 
 
-0.01 
-0.01 
 0.04* 
 0.09*** 
 0.27*** 

 
 
-0.02 
-0.01 
 0.04* 
 0.09*** 
 0.26*** 

 0.03 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

0.00 

0.09*** 

F(6, 3086) = 
49.17*** 

  

  
Note. Entries are standardized regression coefficients. 
* p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001. 
 
 
 

 

 
 0.11*** 
-0.10*** 
-0.14*** 

0.04*** 

 

 
 
 0.12*** 
-0.09*** 
-0.12*** 
 0.15*** 
-0.15*** 

0.04*** 

 

 
 
 0.12*** 
-0.10*** 
-0.13*** 
 0.15*** 
-0.14*** 

-0.07*** 

 

0.01*** 

0.09*** 

 
F(6, 3138) = 
50.67*** 

D
D
D
D
D
D

 

59/131 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 28. Results of moderated multiple regression for perceived threat and challenge using 
perceived organizational support and number of changes as predictors. 

 
 
 
 
 
Table 29. Results of moderated multiple regression for perceived threat and challenge using 
perceived supervisor support and number of changes as predictors. 
 

Variable 

Perceived threat 

Perceived challenge 

                                 Variable 

Perceived threat 

Perceived challenge 

Block 1 :  

Language 
Gender 
Occupational group 

 R2 

Block 2 : 

Language 
Gender 
Occupational group 
Nb of changes 
Org. support 

 R2 

Block 3 : 

Language 
Gender 
Occupational group 
Nb of changes 
Org. support 
Nb of changes x Org. 

support 

 R2 

R2 

  

 

 

 

  

0.04*** 

0.12*** 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 0.11*** 
-0.10*** 
-0.14*** 

 
 
 0.04* 
-0.08*** 
-0.14*** 
 0.17*** 
 0.32*** 

 
 
 0.04* 
-0.08*** 
-0.14*** 
 0.17*** 
 0.31*** 

 0.07*** 

 
-0.01 
-0.03 
 0.04* 

 
 
 0.07*** 
-0.04* 
 0.06** 
 0.07*** 
-0.33*** 

 
 
 0.07*** 
-0.04* 
 0.05** 
 0.07*** 
-0.32*** 

-0.07*** 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 

* 
 

 
 

* 

* 

0.00 

0.12**

0.01**

0.12**

 

 

0.004*** 

0.16*** 

F(6, 3141) = 
100.18*** 

F(6, 3093) = 71.73*** 

Block 1 :  

Language 
Gender 
Occupational group 

 R2 

Block 2 : 

Language 
Gender 
Occupational group 
Nb of changes 
Supervisor support 

 R2 

Block 3 : 

Language 
Gender 
Occupational group 
Nb of changes 
Supervisor support 
Nb of changes x Supervisor 

support 

 R2 
R2 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

0.00 

0.12*** 

 
-0.01 
-0.03 
 0.04* 

 
 
 0.01 
-0.04* 
 0.05** 
 0.08*** 
-0.33*** 

 
 
 0.01 
-0.04* 
 0.05** 
 0.08*** 
-0.31*** 

-0.08*** 

 

0.04*** 
 

0.09*** 
 

 0.11*** 
-0.09*** 
-0.14*** 

 0.10*** 
-0.08*** 
-0.13*** 
 0.16*** 
 0.26*** 

 0.10*** 
-0.08*** 
-0.13*** 
 0.16*** 
 0.24*** 

 0.09*** 

0.01*** 

0.13*** 

F(6, 3098) = 
76.10*** 

 

 

0.01*** 

0.13*** 

F(6, 3150) = 80.20*** 

  
Note. Entries are standardized regression coefficients. 

  

D
D
D
D
D
D

Note. Entries are standardized regression coefficients. 

* p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001. 

 

60/131 

* p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001. 

 


 

61/131 

NEGATIVE AFFECTIVITY 

 

3,7

e
g
n
e

the 

that 

Negative affectivity exerts a significant moderating effect on the relationship between the number of 
changes and  perceived  challenge  but  not  on  the  relationship  between  the  number  of  changes  and 
perceived threat.  
Figure  4  displays  the  interaction  effect  between 
the number of changes and negative affectivity on 
perceived  challenge,  according  to  the  procedure 
recommended by Aiken and West (1991).  
The  post-hoc  t  tests  (Aiken  &  West,  1991) 
indicate 
is 
significantly  different 
the 
subgroup of high negative affectivity individuals [t 
(3113)  = 
regression 
coefficient is also significantly different from zero 
within  the  subgroup  of  low  negative  affectivity 
individuals  [t  (3113)  =  7.35,  p < 0.05].  Finally, 
these  two  coefficients  differ  significantly  from 
each other  [t (3113) =  -2.05, p < 0.05], revealing 
that  changes  are  more  often  perceived  as 
challenging  when  one 
low  on  negative 
affectivity.  

regression  coefficient 
from  zero  within 

challenge  for high vs. low negative affectivity individuals. 

Figure 4. Effect of number of changes on perceived 

4.40, p < 0.05].  The 

Nb of changes

 High negative affectivity

e
c
r
e
P

Low negative affectivity

d
e
v

a
h
c

is 

l
l

2,7

2,9

3,1

3,3

3,5

i

 

 

1

2

3

4

5

POSITIVE AFFECTIVITY 

Positive affectivity exerts a moderating effect on the relationship between the number of changes and 
both perceived challenge and threat. Figures 5 and 6 display the pattern of these relationships for low 
vs. high positive affectivity individuals. 

e
g
n
e
l
l
a
h
c
 

d
e
v
i
e
c
r
e
P

3,8

3,6

3,4

3,2

3

2,8

2,6

2,4

2,2

t
a
e
r
h
t
 
d
e
v
i
e
c
r
e
P

3,2

3,1

3

2,9

2,8

2,7

2,6

2,5

2,4

2,3

2,2

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

Nb of changes

High positive affectivity

Low positive affectivity

 

Figure 5. Effect of number of changes on perceived 

challenge  for high vs. low positive  affectivity individuals. 

Nb of changes

High positive affectivity

Low positive affectivity

 
Figure 6. Effect of number of changes on perceived threat 

for high vs. low positive  affectivity individuals. 

Concerning  the  perception  of  changes  as  a  challenge,  post-hoc  t  tests (Aiken & West, 1991) reveal 
that the regression coefficient  is significantly different from zero within the subgroup of high positive 
affectivity  individuals  [t  (3112)  =  8.28, p < 0.05].  The  regression  coefficient  is  also  significantly 
different  from  zero  within  the  subgroup  of  low  positive  affectivity  individuals  [t  (3112)  =  3.79, 
p < 0.05]. Finally, these two coefficients differ significantly from each other [t (3112) =  3.21, p < 0.05] 
revealing that changes are more often perceived as challenging when one is high on positive affectivity. 
Regarding the perception of changes as a threat, post-hoc t tests (Aiken & West, 1991) reveal that the 
regression coefficient is significantly different from zero within the subgroup of low positive affectivity 
individuals [t (3058) = 6.91, p < 0.05]. In contrast, the regression coefficient is not significantly different 

Flexihealth 


 

62/131 

from zero within the subgroup of high positive affectivity individuals [t (3058) = 1.12, ns]. This means 
that changes are perceived as a threat only when positive affectivity is slow. When positive affectivity 
is high, changes do not affect the perception of threat. 

ORGANIZATION-BASED SELF-ESTEEM 

Organization-based self-esteem exerts a moderating effect on the relationship between the number of 
changes  and  both  perceived  challenge  and  threat.  Figures  7  and  8  display  the  pattern  of  these 
relationships for individuals with high vs. low self-esteem. 

e
g
n
e
l
l
a
h
c
 
d
e
v
i
e
c
r
e
P

4

3,5

3

2,5

t
a
e
r
h
t
 

d
e
v
i
e
c
r
e
P

2,8

2,3

1,8

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

Nb of changes

High org.-b. self-esteem

Low org.-b. self-esteem

 

Figure 7. Effect of number of changes on perceived 

challenge  for individuals with high vs. low self-esteem. 

Nb of changes

High org.-b. self-esteem

Low org.-b. self-esteem

 
Figure 8. Effect of number of changes on perceived threat 

for individuals with high vs. low self-esteem. 

Concerning  the  perception  of  changes  as  a  challenge,  post-hoc  t  tests (Aiken & West, 1991) reveal 
that the regression coefficient is significantly different from zero within the subgroup of individuals with 
high  organization-based  self-esteem  [t (3148)  =  10.02, p < 0.05].  The  regression  coefficient  is  also 
significantly different  from zero within  the subgroup of individuals  with  low  organization-based  self-
esteem [t (3148) = 4.28, p < 0.05]. Finally, these two coefficients differ significantly from each other [t 
(3148) =  3.99, p < 0.05] revealing that changes are more often perceived as challenging when one has 
a high self-esteem. 
Concerning the perception of changes as a  threat, post-hoc t tests (Aiken & West, 1991) reveal that 
the regression coefficient is significantly different from zero within the subgroup of individuals with low 
organization-based self-esteem [t (3097) = 6.06, p < 0.05]. In contrast, the regression coefficient is not 
significantly different  from zero within  the  subgroup  of  individuals  with  high  organization-based self-
esteem  [t  (3097) =  -0.04,  ns].  This means  that  changes  are  perceived  as  a  threat  only  when  self-
esteem is low. When self-esteem is high, changes do not affect the perception of threat. 

EXTERNAL LOCUS OF CONTROL 

External locus of control  exerts a significant moderating effect on the relationship between the number 
of changes and perceived challenge but not on the relationship between the number of changes and 
perceived threat. 

Flexihealth 


 

e
g
n
e
l
l
a
h
c
 

d
e
v
i
e
c
r
e
P

3,7

3,5

3,3

3,1

2,9

2,7

2,5

63/131 

1

2

3

4

5

Nb of changes

High external locus of control

Low external locus of control

 

Figure 9. Effect of number of changes on perceived 

challenge  for individuals with high vs. low external locus 

of control. 

the 

that 

regression  coefficient 
from  zero  within 

Figure  6  displays  the  interaction  effect between 
the  number  of  changes  and  external  locus  of 
control, according to the procedure recommended 
by Aiken and West (1991).  
The  post-hoc  t  tests  (Aiken  &  West,  1991) 
is 
indicate 
significantly  different 
the 
subgroup of individuals  with high external locus of 
control [t (3138) = 3.65, p < 0.05]. The regression 
coefficient is also significantly different from zero 
within  the  subgroup  of  individuals  with  low 
external 
locus  of  control  [t (3138)  =  8.99, 
p < 0.05].  Finally,  these  two  coefficients  differ 
significantly  from  each  other  [t  (3138) =   -3.98, 
p < 0.05], revealing that changes are more often 
perceived  as  challenging  when  one  has  a  low 
external locus of control. 

PERCEIVED ORGANIZATIONAL SUPPORT 

Perceived organizational support exerts a moderating effect on the relationship between the number of 
changes  and  both  perceived  challenge  and  threat.  Figures  10  and  11  display  the  pattern  of  these 
relationships for individuals perceiving high vs. low organizational support. 

e
g
n
e
l
l
a
h
c
 
d
e
v
i
e
c
r
e
P

4,1

3,9

3,7

3,5

3,3

3,1

2,9

2,7

2,5

t
a
e
r
h
t
 
d
e
v
i
e
c
r
e
P

2,9

2,7

2,5

2,3

2,1

1,9

1,7

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

Nb of changes

Nb of changes

High perceived organizational support

Low perceived organizational support

 

High perceived organizational support

Low perceived organizational support

 

Figure 10. Effect of number of changes on perceived 

challenge for individuals perceiving high vs. low 

organizational support. 

Figure 11. Effect of number of changes on perceived 

threat for individuals perceiving high vs. low 

organizational support. 

Concerning  the  perception  of  changes  as  a  challenge,  post-hoc  t  tests (Aiken & West, 1991) reveal 
that  the  regression  coefficient  is  significantly  different  from  zero  within  the  subgroup  of  individuals 
perceiving  high  organizational  support  [t (3141)  =  4.61, p < 0.05].  The  regression  coefficient is also 
significantly different from zero within the subgroup of individuals perceiving low organizational support 
[t (3141)  =  10.32,  p < 0.05].  Finally,  these  two  coefficients  differ  significantly  from  each  other  [t 
(3141) =   3.97,  p < 0.05]  revealing  that  changes  are  more  often  perceived  as  challenging  when  one 
feels supported by the organization. 
Concerning the perception of changes as a  threat, post-hoc t tests (Aiken & West, 1991) reveal that 
the  regression  coefficient  is  significantly  different  from  zero  within  the  subgroup  of  individuals 
perceiving low organizational support [t (3093) = 5.77, p < 0.05]. In contrast, the regression coefficient 
is not significantly different  from zero  within the subgroup of individuals  perceiving high organizational 
support [t (3093) =  -0.06, ns]. This means that changes are perceived as a threat only when perceived 

Flexihealth 


 

64/131 

organizational support is low. When perceived organizational support is high, changes do not affect the 
perception of threat. 

PERCEIVED SUPERVISOR SUPPORT 

Perceived  supervisor  support  exerts  a  moderating  effect  on  the  relationship  between  the  number  of 
changes  and  both  perceived  challenge  and  threat.  Figures  12  and  13  display  the  pattern  of  these 
relationships for individuals perceiving high vs. low supervisor support. 

e
g
n
e
l
l
a
h
c
 

d
e
v
i
e
c
r
e
P

3,8

3,6

3,4

3,2

3

2,8

2,6

2,4

t
a
e
r
h
t
 
d
e
v
i
e
c
r
e
P

3,4

3,2

3

2,8

2,6

2,4

2,2

2

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

Nb of changes

Nb of changes

High perceived supervisor support

Low perceived supervisor support

 

High perceived supervisor support

Low perceived supervisor support

 

Figure 12. Effect of number of changes on perceived 

challenge  for individuals perceiving high vs. low 

supervisor support. 

Figure 13. Effect of number of changes on perceived 

challenge  for individuals perceiving high vs. low 

supervisor support. 

Concerning  the  perception  of  changes  as  a  challenge,  post-hoc  t  tests (Aiken & West, 1991) reveal 
that  the  regression  coefficient  is  significantly  different  from  zero  within  the  subgroup  of individuals 
perceiving  high  supervisor  support  [t (3150)  =  10.33, p < 0.05].  The  regression  coefficient  is  also 
significantly different  from zero within  the subgroup of individuals  perceiving  low  supervisor support 
[t (3150)  =  2.93,  p < 0.05].  Finally,  these  two  coefficients  differ  significantly  from  each  other  [t 
(3150) =   5.17,  p < 0.05]  revealing  that  changes  are  more  often  perceived  as  challenging  when  one 
feels supported by the supervisor. 
Concerning the perception of changes as a  threat, post-hoc t tests (Aiken & West, 1991) reveal that 
the  regression  coefficient  is  significantly  different  from  zero  within  the  subgroup  of  individuals 
perceiving low supervisor support [t (3098) = 6.28, p < 0.05]. In contrast, the regression coefficient is 
not  significantly  different  from  zero  within  the  subgroup  of  individuals  perceiving  high  supervisor 
support [t (3098) = 0.14, ns]. This means that changes are perceived as a threat only when perceived 
supervisor  support  is  low.  When  perceived  supervisor  support  is  high,  changes  do  not  affect  the 
perception of threat. 

3.2.4 

Conclusion 

According  to  the  transactional  approach  to  stress,  negative  events  do  not  explain  by  themselves  the 
array and magnitude of stress reactions among individuals. Rather, stress reactions are due to negative 
transactions  between  a  potentially  stressful  situation  and  the  subjective  cognitive  appraisal  of  that 
situation  by  the  individual.  Previous research  (De  Zanet  et  al.,  2004)  has shown that organizational 
changes  are  often  interpreted  in  a  variety  of  ways  by  employees.  In  fact,  results  presented  here 
indicate that, in general, the more people are confronted with changes, the more they perceive them as 
either a threat or a challenge. To better understand the origin of employees’ perception of changes, we 
tested  a  number  of  hypotheses  involving  moderating  effects  between  changes  and  personal  or 
situational characteristics.   
In  general,  our  moderation  hypotheses  were  supported.  Only  the  moderating  effect  of  negative 
affectivity  and  external  locus  of  control  on  the  relationship  between  the  number  of  changes  and 
perceived threat was not supported. Contrary to expectations, the number of changes did not affect the 

Flexihealth 


 

65/131 

perception of threat differently for individuals high vs. low on  negative affectivity and external locus of 
control. 
In contrast,  changes are more perceived as a threat when the employee is low on positive affectivity 
and self-esteem, and when s/he perceives little support from the organization or the supervisor. It also 
appears from the findings  that individuals who think they are important at work, hence are high on self-
esteem, do not feel threatened by increasing changes in the workplace. The same phenomenon occurs 
for employees who feel supported by the organization or the supervisor. Finally, it is worth noting that 
all moderating effects concerning the perception of challenge are consistent with our hypotheses.  
Although  our  findings  support  the  idea  that  individual  differences  play  a  role  in  the  perception  of 
changes, one should not use these findings to undermine the role of companies in implementing stress 
prevention  programs.  Indeed,  results  show  that  when  the  organization  is  able  to  develop  a  trustful 
relationship  with  its  employees  (cf.  perceived  support  and  organization-based  self-esteem), they will 
react  more  positively  to  changes.  Thus,  organizations  who  do  not  care  about  their  employees  will 
encounter  more  difficulties  during  the  implementation  of  changes.  In  this  regard,  it  is  important  to 
underline that trust must exist before the implementation of change because it is more difficult to built 
trust  during  the  change  program  itself  due  to  the  numerous  efforts  and  sacrifices  expected  from 
employees. 

3.3.  Theme 3 – Relationships between the number of changes, 

perception of changes, and positive and negative stress 

The analyses conducted to date were intended to determine the influence of the number of changes on 
perceived challenge and threat using variables treated as moderators. In the case of positive stress, we 
investigated  a  mediational  approach,  suggesting  that  positive  stress  might  mediate  the  relationship 
between  work  situations  and  stress  outcomes.  As  the  definitions  of  researchers  suggest  (Baron & 
Kenny,  1986;  Rascle  &  Irachabal,  2001),  moderators  generally  are  either  qualitative  (e.g., gender, 
ethnic  group,  etc.)  or  quantitative  (e.g.,  net  revenues,  etc.)  variables  that  affect  the  relationship 
between  a  target  independent  variable  and  a  dependent  variable.  In  contrast,  a  mediator  defines  a 
process  through  which  a  given  independent  variable influences a dependent variable.  The latter was 
thus the approach we used to examine the influence of positive stress. 

3.3.1 

Hypothesis 

We thought that positive stress would partially or fully mediate the effect of the number of changes 
and/or their perception on negative stress.  
   Number of changes 

  

Perception of challenge 

  

Perception of control    

Per ception of threat 

  

Positive stress 

  

Perceived organization’s accountability 

  

  

Negative stress 
 

For mediation to be demonstrated, four conditions must be satisfied: 

1. 
2. 

the independent variable should exert a significant effect on the mediating variable 
the independent variable should exert a significant effect on the dependent variable 

Flexihealth 


 

66/131 

4. 

3. 

the effect of the independent variable on the dependent variable should be significantly 
decreased after the mediating variable is entered in the regression equation 
in case of full mediation, the effect of the independent variable on the dependent variable 
should drop to non significance after the mediating variable is entered in the regression 
equation (this suggests that the mediator should significantly impact the dependent variable)  
Hierarchical multiple regression analysis is used to test mediation. Differences in R-square values and 
values of beta coefficients as well as their level of significance provide the necessary information used 
to check whether the four conditions for mediation are met. 

3.3.2 

Results 

The analyses reported deal with the role of positive stress as a moderator of the relationship between 
the number of changes, the perception of changes, and negative stress. Although longitudinal research 
designs are better suited for testing mediation processes,  concurrent analyses among variables provide 
useful information concerning well-grounded theoretical models.  
In  general,  the  results  of  these  analyses  show  that positive stress mediates some of the relationships 
between the number of changes or the perception of changes and negative stress. Moreover, positive 
stress  fully  mediates  the  effect  of  perceived  challenge  on  negative  stress.  Complete  results  are 
reported below. 

NUMBER OF CHANGES AND STRESS 

The  number  of  changes  significantly  affects  positive  stress  [F(1,  4702)  =  20.975,  p  <  0.000].  The 
number  of  changes  also  affects  significantly  negative  stress  [F(2,  4656)  =  47.553,  p  <  0.000]. 
Moreover,  the  R²  value  is  significantly  increased  when  positive  stress  is  added  to  the  regression 
equation  (Number  of  changes  predicting  negative  stress:  R²=0.020;  Number  of  changes + positive 
stress predicting negative stress: R²=0.109). The R² difference between the two equations is significant 
[?  F(1, 4655) = 464.45, p < 0.000]. Finally, the b
 coefficient associated with the effect of the number 
of changes drops slightly  and non significantly (from 0.049 to 0.042) when positive stress is added to 
the equation, revealing that positive stress is a  partial mediator of the relationship between the number 
of changes and negative stress.  

PERCEPTION OF CHALLENGE AND STRESS 

The perception of challenge significantly affects positive stress [F(1, 3951) = 486.925, p < 0.000] and 
negative  stress  [F(2,  3921)  =  41.724,  p  <  0.000].  Moreover, the  R²  value  is  significantly increased 
when positive stress is added to the regression equation  (Perception of challenge predicting negative 
stress:  R²=0.021;  Perception of challenge + positive stress predicting negative stress: R²=0.105). The 
R² difference between the two equations is significant [?  F(1, 3920) = 366.527, p < 0.000]. Finally, the 
 coefficient associated with the effect of perception of challenge drops to non significance (from -0.06 
to -0.01) when positive stress is added to the equation, revealing that positive stress is a full mediator of 
the relationship between the perception of challenge and negative stress. 

PERCEPTION OF THREAT AND STRESS 

The  perception  of  threat  significantly  affects  positive  stress  [F(1,  3919)  =  374.273,  p  <  0.000] and 
negative  stress  [F(2,  3892)  =  248.069,  p  <  0.000].  Moreover, the  R²  value is significantly increased 
when positive stress is added to the regression equation (Perception of threat predicting negative stress: 
R²=0.113;  Perception  of  threat  +  positive  stress  predicting  negative  stress:  R²=0.166).  The  R² 
difference between the two equations is significant [?  F(1, 3891) = 244.957, p < 0.000]. Finally, the b
 
coefficient associated with the effect of  perception of threat drops slightly and non significantly (from 
0.151 to 0.119) when positive stress is added to the equation, revealing that positive stress is a  partial 
mediator of the relationship between the perception of threat and negative stress. 

Flexihealth 

b

 

67/131 

  

PERCEPTION OF CONTROL AND STRESS 

The perception of  control  significantly  affects  positive  stress  [F(1,  3967)  =  167.785,  p  < 0.000] and 
negative  stress  [F(2,  3937)  =  46.165,  p  <  0.000].  Moreover, the  R²  value  is  significantly increased 
when  positive  stress  is  added  to  the  regression equation  (Perception  of  control  predicting  negative 
stress: R²=0.022; Perception of control + positive stress predicting negative stress: R²=0.109). The R² 
difference between the two equations is significant [?  F(1, 3936) = 382.512, p < 0.000]. Finally, the b
 
coefficient associated with the effect of  perception of control drops slightly and non significantly (from 
-0.064 to  -0.035) when positive stress is added to the equation, revealing that positive stress is a partial 
mediator of the relationship between the perception of control and negative stress. 

PERCEIVED ORGANIZATION’S ACCOUNTABILITY AND STRESS 

The  perception  of  organization’s  accountability  significantly  affects  positive  stress  [F(1,  3928)  = 
261.764, p < 0.000] and negative stress [F(2, 3899) =  205.059, p < 0.000]. Moreover, the R² value is 
significantly  increased  when  positive  stress  is  added  to  the  regression  equation  (Organization’s 
accountability  predicting  negative  stress:  R²=0.095;  Organization’s  accountability  +  positive  stress 
predicting  negative  stress:  R²=0.156). The  R² difference between the two equations is significant [?  
F(1, 3898) = 280.939, p < 0.000]. Finally, the b
 coefficient associated with the effect of organization’s 
accountability drops slightly  and non significantly (from 0.117 to 0.093) when positive stress is added to 
the  equation,  revealing  that  positive  stress  is  a  partial  mediator  of  the  relationship  between  the 
organization’s accountability and negative stress. 

3.3.3 

Conclusion 

The  results  of  these  analyses  suggest that positive stress  plays a role as a mechanism activated by 
changes (the number of changes and their perception) that may potentially result in negative stress. It is 
a  partial  mediator  of  the  relationship  between  number  of  changes,  perceived  threat,  control,  and 
organization’s  accountability  on  one  hand  and  negative  stress  on  the  other  hand.  Relatedly, positive 
stress  appears  to  be  a  full  mediator  of  the  relationship  between  perceived  challenge and negative 
stress.  

3.4.  Theme 4 - Relationships between the number of changes, 

perception of changes, control, and stress 

Control  at work  was  thought  to  moderate  the  relationship  between  the  number  of  changes  or  their 
perception  and  negative  stress.  This  approach  is  consistent  with  Karasek’s  (1979)  demands-control 
model. 

3.4.1 

Hypothesis 

It  is  argued  that  perceived  control  will  moderate  the  relationship  between  the number of changes or 
their perception and negative stress such that the more control the individual perceives the less negative 
stress s/he will experience.  

Flexihealth 


  

Number of changes 

  

Perception of challenge 

Perception de control    

Perception of threat 

  

Perception of organization’s accountability   

 

68/131 

Control at work 

  

  
Negative 

  
stress 

 

To test a moderating effect, one should run a hierarchical regression analysis in which the main effects 
associated  with the independent variable and moderator  (centered) are assessed in the first step,  and 
the product of  the independent variable and moderator in the second step. A significant D R² associated 
with the second step indicates a moderating effect. 

3.4.2 

Results 

Le contrôle de la situation de travail semble jouer un rôle de modérateur dans plusieurs des relations 
entre  les  variables  de  changements  et  le  stress.  Néanmoins,  l’effet  modérateur  du  contrôle  apparaît 
plus clairement entre certaines variables et le stress que pour d’autres. L’effet modérateur du contrôle 
n’apparaît pas ou très faiblement au niveau des relations entre la perception de challenge, la perception 
de contrôle par rapport aux changements et le stress. 

NUMBER OF CHANGES 

Control at work moderates the relationship between the number of changes and negative stress as is 
shown  by  a  significant  increase  in  the  R²  value  associated  with  the  interaction  term  [D F(1, 
4550)=10,806,  p  <  0.001].  As  is  illustrated  by  Figure 14, control at work attenuates the effect of the 
number of changes on negative stress.   

s
s
e
r
t
s
 
e
v
i
t
a
g
e
N

2,5

2

1,5

1

0,5

0

Flexihealth 

0

1

2

3

4

5

Number of changes

High job control

Low job control

 


 

69/131 

Figure 14. Moderating effect of control at work on the relati onship between the number of changes and negative 
stress 

PERCEIVED THREAT 

Control at work moderates the relationship between  perceived threat and negative stress as is shown 
by a significant increase in the R² value associated with the interaction term [D F(1, 3801) = 18.641, p < 
0.000].  As  is  illustrated  by  Figure  15,  control  at  work  attenuates  the  effect  of  perceived  threat  on 
negative stress.   

s
s
e
r
t
s
 
e
v
i
t

a
g
e
N

2,5

2

1,5

1

0,5

0

1

2

3

4

5

Perceived threat

High job control

Low job control

 

Figure 15. Moderating effect of control at work on the relati onship between perceived threat and negative stress 

PERCEIVED ORGANIZATION’S ACCOUNTABILITY 

Control  at  work  moderates  the  relationship  between  perceived  organization’s  accountability  and 
negative  stress  as  is  shown  by  a  significant  increase  in  the  R²  value  associated  with  the  interaction 
term  [D F(1, 3809) = 17.255, p < 0.000]. As is illustrated by  Figure 16, control at work attenuates the 
effect of perceived organization’s accountability on negative stress.   

Flexihealth 


 

70/131 

s
s
e
r
t
s
 
e
v
i
t

a
g
e
N

2,5

2

1,5

1

0,5

0

1

2

3

4

5

Perceived organization's accountability

High job control

Low job control

 

Figure 16. Moderating effect of control at work on the relati onship between perceived organization’s accountability 
and negative stress 

3.4.3 

Conclusion 

To  conclude  with,  control  at  work  appears  to  alleviate  the  effect  of  changes  and  their  negative 
appraisal on negative stress. It thus contributes to improve employees’ resistance to stressful events. 

Flexihealth 


 

71/131 

3.5.  Theme 5 - Relationships between the number of reported 
changes, perceived stress and physical and mental health of 
employees  

3.5.1. Descriptive part 

 

 

3.5.1.1. Medical history 

 
The  analysis  of  medical  history  allowed  to  assess  past  health  disorders  in  order  to  identify  present 
health disorders attributable to organizational stress, i.e. disorders which neither appeared nor worsened 
as a result of basic medical status of the respondent. Medical history of employees in the 18 companies 
of the sample was collected with a self-administered questionnaire. Items were dichotomous (yes-no) 
and related to 5 categories of health disorders possibly linked to stress, directly or indirectly: 
 
a)  Cardiovascular history (chest pain, myocardial infarction, high blood pressure, ...)  
b)  Mental history (depression, anxiety)  
c)  Gastro-intestinal history  
d)  Musculo-skeletal history (low-back pain, neck pain, spasmophilia …). 
e)  Neurological history (vertigo, headache, epilepsy, …). 
 
a)  cardiovascular history  
On  the  average,    21.4%  of  people  participating  in  this  survey  reported  a  history  of  cardiovascular 
disease  (range :  7-91 ;  median=12.3%).  While  13.8%  of  workers  in  the  secondary  sector  report 
previous cardiovascular disease, the proportion is 24% in the tertiary sector (c 2 = 57.4, df=1, p<0.001). 
 
b) mental history  
On  the  average,  23.5%  of  workers  report  past  mental  disorders  (range :  9-89 ;  median=13.9%).  A 
higher  proportion  of  workers  with  a  history  of  mental  disorders  was  observed  in  the  tertiary  sector 
(27%) in comparison with the secondary sector (13%) (c 2 = 101.1, df=1, p<0.001). 
 
c) gastro-intestinal history  
On the average, 23.2% of people participating in this survey reported a history of gastro-intestinal (GI) 
disease  (range :  10-83 ;  median=17.6%).  There  was  a  significant  difference  in  the  proportions of 
workers with a history of GI disease between work sectors : 16.8% in the secondary sector vs 25% in 
the tertiary sector (c 2 = 37.5, df=1, p<0.001). 
 
d) musculo-skeletal history  
On  the  average,  41%  of  respondents  reported  past  low-back and neck  pain  (range :  23-73; median 
=38.5%).  Thirty-four  %  of  workers  in  the  secondary  sector  reported  a  history  of  musculo-skeletal 
disease, a proportion as high as 46.2% in the tertiary sector (c 2 = 54.8, dl=1, p<0.001). 
 
e) neurological history  
On the average, 24.4% of employees reported a neurological history (headache, epilepsy, ...)  (range : 
10-95 ; median=17.2%). In the tertiary sector, the proportion of workers with a history of neurological 
disease  (27.8%)  was  nearly  twice  as  large  as  the  proportion  in  the  secondary sector (14.6%) (c 2 = 
85.1, df=1, p<0.001). 
. 

Flexihealth 


 

72/131 

For each category of medical history, it can be seen that the proportions of people with disorders was 
very variable.  Three  companies  showed  abnormally  high  proportions  of  workers  with  past  medical 
disease  or  condition,  except  for  the  proportion  of  musculo-skeletal disorders, which was identical in 
these  3  companies  in  comparison  with  other  companies.  For  the  4  other  categories  of  medical 
antecedents,  more  than  85%  of  the  employees  of  these  3  companies  reported at least one of the 4 
antecedents,  whereas  in  the  15  other  companies,  less  than  25%  of  employees  reported  the  same   
antecedents.  The  3  companies  belong  to  the  tertiary  sector  which,  in  general,  had  surprisingly  high 
proportions of workers with medical history. 
 
Since  the  prevalence  of  medical  antecedents  was  dramatically  higher  in  the  tertiary  sector  in 
comparison with the secondary sector, we tried to find factors associated with this difference.   
 
In our sample, characteristics of respondents in the secondary sector were as follows :  

-  85% were males, 
-  72.8% were married, others were single (unmarried : 19.6%, divorced or widowed : 7.6%), 
-  41.4%  of  the  sample  were  younger  than  36,  and  24.6%  were  older  than  46,  of  which  0.5% 

was older than 55. 

 
The characteristics of respondents in the tertiary sector of our sample are as follows : 

-  37% were males, 
-  69.2% were married, others were single (unmarried : 19.3%, divorced or widowed : 11.5%), 
-  32.7%  of  the  sample  were  younger  than  36,  32.5%  were  older  than  46  ans, of which 5.2% 

were older than 55. 

 
In  order  to  verify  if  one  or  more  factors  can  explain  the  differences  in  prevalence  of  past  medical 
disorders between the secondary and tertiary sectors, a logistic regression was conducted for each of 
the 5 medical antecedents (Table 30). Dependent variables were marital status, age and gender. 
 
Table  30. Logistic  regressions  on  medical  antecedents  (ATCD)  for  marital  status,  age,  and  gender 

(parameter estimates and their statistial significance) 

 
 

Model 1 : 

cardiovascular 

ATCD  

Marital status 
Age  
Gender 
 
Note. * <0.05; ** <0.001 

- 0.001 
0.03 
- 0.36 

Model 2 : 

mental ATCD 

0.04 

- 0.15** 

0.10 

Model 3 : 
gastro-
intestinal 
ATCD  
- 0.09 
- 0.06 
- 0.14* 

Model 4 : 

musculo-skeletal 

ATCD 

0.11* 
0.29** 
0.17* 

Model 5 : 
neurological 

ATCD  

- 0.017 
- 0.15** 
0.22* 

For  regression  model  1,  –2  log  L  (covariates)  =  24.8  pseudo-R²=.005; for regression model 2,  –2 log L 
(covariates) = 17.7 pseudo-R²=.006 ; for regression model 3, –2 log L (covariates) = 12.6 pseudo-R²=.006 ; 
for  regression  model 4,  –2  log  L  (covariates)  =  126.9  pseudo-R²=.06 ; for regression model 5,  –2 log L 
(covariates) = 28.9 pseudo-R²=.06 

 
If  cardiovascular  history  seemed  not  explainable  by  variables  in  the  regression  equation,  musculo-
skeletal history were more prevalent among older, single, and female workers. Conversely, mental and 
neurological history were more prevalent among younger workers, and as regards neurological history, 
among females. 
 

Flexihealth 


 

73/131 

The differences however were very weak and socio-demographic characteristics did not discriminate 
job  sectors.  We  recall  that  the  tertiary  sector  is  mostly  represented  by  a  large  retailing  company,  in 
which the job content is probably very different (lifting heavy loads, flexibility of posts, contacts with 
customers, …) from other companies. 

3.5.1.2. Medical complaints 

 
The  evaluation  of  medical  complaints  allowed  to  estimate  the  prevalence  and  distribution  of  present 
health  problems  in  the  population  under  study.    It  was  performed  with  a  list  of  15  health  complaints 
directly or indirectly linked to stress. A self-administered questionnaire was used, with items such as : 
« Does it happen to you to experience this kind of health problem ? » Four frequency modalities 
were possible : « never, sometimes a year, sometimes a month, sometimes a week, everyday ». Only 
the latter four modalities are presented in Table 31, which explains why the total of each row does not 
reach 100%. 
 
To interpret the frequency of of medical complaints in the Flexihealth study, we used the results of the 
2001 National Health Interview Survey, in which questions were as follows : « do you have chronic 
disease  or  medical  condition ?» (Enquête de l’Institut Scientifique de la Santé Publique, HIS-ISSP, 
2001).  The  health  interview  survey  was  aimed  to  estimate  the  prevalence and distribution of health 
indicators and to estimate time trends. The survey was conducted in Belgium (by region, province, and 
municipality)  on  a  sample  of  12111  citizens,  without  exclusion  criteria,  on  the  basis  of  the  National 
Registry.  The  survey  included  people  with  of  without  job,  e.g.  students,  jobless  and  retired  people. 
Health-related  questions  were  expressed  as  follows :  « Please indicate the degree with which you 
suffered from the following conditions last week,   including today ».  The answers lied along a 5-
point Likert scale : « not at all », « scarcely », « a little », « a lot », and « yes, extremely ». 
 
According  to  this  survey,  23%  of  Belgians  reported  a  poor  health  (as  perceived  subjectively,  in  the 
physical, social and emotional  dimensions), 52% of Belgians had at least one chronic illness, and 29% 
had  more  than  one  chronic  illnesses  (allergy,  hypertension,  arthritis,…).    The  prevalence  of  active 
chronic illnesses in the last year was the following : 20% had sleep disorders, 12% had hypertension, 
10% had low-back and neck pain, 9% had depressive mood,  9% had headache, 6% had anxiety, 3% 
gastro-duodenal peptic ulcer, and finally 2% had chronic fatigue. 
 
The  Flexihealth  study  investigates  the  same  complaints  but  only  in  a  sample  of  workers, from the 
participating companies. It is then required to keep in mind that employees who filled the questionnaire 
had  a  health  status  good  enough  to  be  notified  « fit  for  service ». This bias, known as the « healthy 
worker effect », is well illustrated in the scientific literature.  We then expected to record less medical 
complaints as in the general population.  To be comparable to the HIS-ISSP, we only took into account 
the  answers  « sometimes  a  week,  everyday »  to  the  question  :  « Does  it  happen  to  you  to 
experience this kind of health problem ? ».  For each kind of medical complaint, the Flexiheath study 
recorded the prevalences presented in Table 31.  
 
For  the  medical  complaints  which  have  a  reference  in  the  HIS-ISSP  2001,  we  noticed  a  very  high 
prevalence,  which  was  higher  than  in  the  general  population  as  regards  fatigue,  anxiety,  musculo-
skeletal disorders, and headaches.  Other complaints, relating to mental health, have a prevalence close 
the figures estimated in the national survey. 
 
This intriguing finding of such a high prevalence in medical complaints prompted us to investigate their 
relationships with characteristics such as gender and professional category, among others (Tables 32-
34). 
 

Flexihealth 


 

74/131 

 
 
 

Flexihealth 


 

75/131 

Table  31. Comparison,  for  each  complaint,  of  the prevalences estimated  in the Flexihealth study and  
the 2001 HIS-ISSP 
 
 

Sometimes a 

Sometimes a 

Sometimes a 

HIS-ISSP 

 

 
 

2% 

2001 

week / everyday 

year 
30% 
37% 
26% 
22% 
32% 
33% 
26% 
49% 
32% 
34% 
34% 
43% 
30% 
40% 
40% 

12% 

Chest pain 
Cardiac palpitations 
Hypertension 
Anorexia 
Fatigue 
Nervousness, tension 
Anxiety 
Depression 
Gastric pain 
Colic pain 
Low-back pain 
Headache 
Sleep disorders 
Concentration difficulties 
Lack of attention 
Note. HIS-ISSP denotes Health Interview Survey-Institut Scientifique de la Santé Publique. Data of the HIS-ISSP 2001 should 
only be compared to the “sometimes a week/everyday” answer category of the Flexihealth study 
 
Table 32. Comparison of the prevalences of medical complaints according to gender (chi-square)  
 

2.4% 
6% 
7% 
5% 
21% 
18% 
9% 
8% 
11% 
6% 
26% 
12% 
17% 
8% 
10% 

10% 
9% 
20% 

6% 
9% 

month 
7% 
11% 
9% 
11% 
24% 
24% 
11% 
16% 
16% 
14% 
22% 
25% 
19% 
16% 
16% 

 
 

 
 

 

Medical complaints 

Males 

(n = 2424 – %) 

Females 

(n = 2510 – %) 

Chi-square (p-value) 

3.6 
7.5 
5.3 
5.7 
19.9 
18.5 
8.7 
8.7 
11.1 
6.1 
21.9 
8.4 
15.3 
9.1 
10.8 

Chest pain 
Cardiac palpitations 
Hypertension 
Anorexia 
Fatigue 
Nervousness, tension 
Anxiety 
Depression 
Gastric pain 
Colic pain 
Low-back pain 
Headache 
Sleep disorders 
Concentration difficulties 
Lack of attention 
 
Fatigue, musculo-skeletal disease, headaches and sleep disorders were more frequent among females, 
whereas  cardiovascular  complaints  (chest  pain,  hypertension),  concentration  difficulties  and  lack  of 
attention were more frequent in males (Table 32). These results do not differ from the HIS-ISSP 2001 
except for hypertension: in the national survey, the prevalence of hypertension was 10% in males and 
13%  in  females  (maybe  a  « screening effect » due to occupational physicians, not necessarily a true 
difference). 

5.15 (0.02) 
5.67 (0.02) 
2.5 (0.11) 
3.37 (0.06) 
33.3 (<0.001) 
0.36 (0.55) 
1.23 (0.27) 
0.24 (0.62) 
1.81 (0.17) 
0.11 (0.74) 
43.04 (<0.001) 
40.28 (<0.001) 
9.0 (0.003) 
9.14 (0.002) 
6.44 (0.01) 

2.5 
5.8 
6.4 
4.5 
21.1 
12.7 
9.6 
8.3 
9.7 
6.3 
30.2 
14.1 
18.5 
6.9 
8.6 

Flexihealth 


 

76/131 

 
Somatic  complaints  were  more  frequent  among  low-status employees (blue and white collars) than 
among  workers  with  a  high  position  in  the  hierarchy  (managers,  upper-level  managers)  (Table  33). 
However, cardiovascular complaints did not differ according to the professional category. This finding 
is  unexpected:  Marmot  et  al.  (1997)  noticed  the  beneficial  effect  of  job  control  (higher  among 
managers) on cardiovascular disease, whereas the Flexihealth study did not show such a gradient. 
 
Table 33. Comparison of prevalence estimates according to the professional category 
 

 
 

Medical complaints 

 

 

 

Blue-collars 
(n = 490 – %) 

White-collars 
(n = 467 – %) 

Managers 

(n = 421 – %) 

 

High-level 
managers 
(n = 78 – %) 

Others 

(n= 3305 – %) 

Chest pain 
Cardiac palpitations 
Hypertension 
Anorexia 
Fatigue 
Nervousness, tension 
Anxiety 
Depression 
Gastric pain 
Colic pain 
Low-back pain 
Headache 
Sleep disorders 
Concentration difficulties 
Lack of attention 
Note.  All  differences  in  proportions  of  medical  complaints  are  statistically  significant  between  professional 

4.1 
7.4 
6.7 
7.8 
23.5 
22.0 
13.5 
14.3 
16.5 
8.6 
28.8 
11.8 
21.4 
9.5 
11.9 

2.8 
9.9 
8.6 
3.6 
22.2 
30.2 
11.6 
8.6 
11.7 
6.7 
25.6 
10.9 
20.0 
11.5 
12.0 

4.0 
5.6 
5.3 
3.1 
17.4 
13.9 
7.2 
6.2 
9.5 
5.7 
15.4 
6.7 
16.4 
9.0 
12.4 

5.1 
7.8 
2.6 
1.3 
12.8 
8.9 
2.6 
5.2 
6.5 
1.3 
12.8 
7.8 
3.8 
1.3 
5.2 

2.6 
6.1 
5.5 
5.3 
20.4 
17.9 
8.4 
8.1 
9.7 
5.8 
27.7 
11.9 
16.1 
7.3 
8.7 

categories (chi-square, df=4, p< 0.001). 

 
As  can  be  seen  from  Table  34,  the  prevalence  of  medical  complaints  was  higher  in  the  « private 
production »  and  « health »  domains.  Musculo-skeletal disorders affected ¼ of workers and seemed 
independent of the business domain. 
 
Table 34. Comparison of prevalence estimates according to the business domain 
 

 

Medical complaints 

Chest pain 
Cardiac palpitations 
Hypertension 
Anorexia 
Fatigue 
Nervousness, tension 
Anxiety 
Depression 
Gastric pain 
Colic pain 
Low-back pain 

Flexihealth 

Private 

Production 
(n=1251 – %) 
3.8 
7.2 
7.9 
5.4 
22.4 
19.7 
11.5 
10.7 
13.3 
7.2 
23.5 

Private 
Service 

(n=3216 – %) 
2.7 
6.3 
5.3 
5.2 
19.8 
17.5 
8.0 
7.7 
9.6 
5.6 
27.2 

 

Health 

(n=274 – %) 
2.2 
4.5 
8.1 
16.6 
23.5 
19.9 
12.2 
7.8 
9.2 
7.7 
27.8 

 

Public sector 
(n=174 – %) 
1.7 
7.0 
4.1 
5.8 
15.7 
13.8 
7.5 
6.9 
8.7 
7.6 
24.7 


 

77/131 

Headache 
Sleep disorders 
Concentration difficulties 
Lack of attention 
Note. All differences in proportions of medical complaints are statistically significant between business domains. 

7.5 
16.1 
8.6 
13.4 

10.2 
19.9 
10.4 
12.4 

12.0 
16.0 
7.1 
8.3 

10.6 
15.3 
7.4 
11.1 

(chi-square, df=3, p< 0.001). 

Finally,  there  were  positive  and  significant  (p<0.001)  correlations  between  the  medical  history  and 
related  present  complaints,  a  result  expected  and  indicating  good  concordance  in  the  answers  of 
respondents: 

- 

cardiovascular history was associated to chest pain (r = 0.16), to palpitations (r = 0.13) and to 
hypertension (r = 0.31); 

-  mental history was associated to anxiety (r = 0.29), depression (r = 0.28) and nervousness (r = 

0.22) ; 

-  gastro-intestinal history was associated to gastric (r = 0.33) and colic (r = 0.22) pain; 
-  musculo-skeletal history was associated to low-back and neck pain (r = 0.42); 
-  neurological history was associated to headache (r = 0.29). 

 

 

3.5.1.3. The « aggregate score » of medical complaints 

 
The  computation  of  an  « aggregate  score » of complaints is another measurement which provides a 
summary of the frequency of complaints. We here defined a score which ranges from 0 for a subject 
with no complaint to 60 for a subject who report experiencing everyday all 15 illnesses. The lower the 
score,  the  better  the  health  status.  In  the  computation,  we  attributed  weights  0,  1,  2,  3,  and  4 
respectively  to  the  frequencies  « never,  sometimes  a  year,  sometimes  a  month,  sometimes  a 
week, everyday ». Please note that scores only reflect the reported prevalence of illnesses, but does 
not provide any information about intensity and variability of complaints. 
 
The mean complaint score was 15 (SD = 10). This mean score is satisfying but its SD indicates a wide 
variability, and thus a substantial proportion of workers with high scores. The 3 companies with high 
proportions  of  workers  having  many  medical  antecedents  had  more  « normal » complaint scores, i.e. 
11.6,  15.5  and  13.7.  Scores  were  higher  in  the  private  production  domain  (m=17.4)  and  the  health 
domain  (m=16.4),  and  lower  in  the  private  service  domain  (m=14.7) et the public business domain 
(m=14.6). 
 
The means scores for groups defined by socio-demographic characteristics showed that: 
-  There was no difference between males (m=15, SD=10) and females (m=15, SD=9),  
-  There was no difference between singles and married (m=15.9 vs m=15.36 ; p=0.08), 
-  Blue collars had a mean complaint score of 18.6 (SD=11.6), i.e. a score higher than the score of 
other professional categories (17.7 in white collars (SD=10.2), 14.8 in managers (SD=8.7) and 12.2 
in  high-level  managers  (SD=7.4)  –  the  category  « others »  having an average of 14.9 (SD=9.5). 
The  heterogeneity  between  « blue  collars »  and  « white  collars » is attributable to differences in 
means, the coefficient of variation remaining approximately constant [CV=0.61 (CV= SD/m)].  

3.5.1.4. Assessment of lifestyle 

 
a) Alcohol consumption 
 
The WHO defines alcohol abuse as drinking at least 6 standard glasses at one occasion, at least once a 
month (ISSP, 2001). 
 
According  to  the  HIS-ISSP 2001 survey, 81% of the Belgian population  aged 15 or more report the 

Flexihealth 


 

78/131 

consumption of at least one alcoholic beverage during the past 12 months; 12% drink alcohol everyday, 
36% usually drink alcohol during the week and 20% drink at least once a month 6 glasses or more at 
the same occasion. 
 
The Flexihealth study did not examine the quantity of alcohol use (number of glasses), nor the kind of 
beverage (wine, beer, aperitive, liqueur, ...), but examined two dimensions of alcohol consumption.  The 
first  was  the  reported  frequency  of  drinking  (never,  occasional,  usual).  The  second  was  the  recent 
change in drinking habits, in terms of increase in use and start in alcohol use. 
 
In  the  absence  of  specific  norms,  we  considered  that  the  proportion  of  workers  drinking 
« occasionally » was similar to the proportion of people having reported the consumption of at least one 
alcoholic beverage during the past 12 months in the HIS-ISSP 2001 survey. The « usual » consumption 
of  alcoholic  beverages  was  assimilated  to  the  proportion  of  people  reporting  a  daily  consumption of 
alcohol, i.e. 12% in the Belgian adult population. 
 
The  Flexihealth  study  shows  that  57%  of  workers  reported  an  occasional  consumption  of  alcohol,  a 
frequency lower than the consumption in the Belgian population (81%).  Fourteen percent of workers 
reported  an  usual  use  of  alcohol,  which  is  slightly  above  the  12%  in  the  Belgian  population.  The 
remaining 29% were abstainers. Recent changes in alcohol consumption were noticeable, since 20% of 
respondents  reported  an  increase  in  the  quantiy  of  alcohol  use, and 20.4% reported a recent start in 
alcohol use. Among « new » drinkers, 7.2% acknowledged an increase in alcohol consumption. 
 
The proportion of workers who recently changed their drinking habits was higher in the tertiary sector. 
In  the  tertiary  sector,  22.8%  of  workers  reported  drinking  more  alcohol  (11.5%  in  the  secondary 
sector) and 25.6% of workers reported having recently started drinking alcohol (7.6% in the secondary 
sector). 
 
The  analysis  showed  large  differences  between  business  domains  (Table  35).  Changes  were 
unfrequent in the health domain and in the private production domain. In the private service domain, 
changes were reported by about ¼ of workers.  In the public business domain, changes were reported 
by 1/3 of workers. 
 
Table  35.  Proportion of workers reporting a change in their drinking habits, according to the business 
domain  
 

Business domains  
Private production    (n=1251) 
Private service          (n=3216) 
Health                        (n=274) 
Public                         (n=174) 

Increase in quantity 

11.5 % 
23 % 
9.4 % 
38.7 % 

Recent start in alcohol use 

7.6 % 
26 % 
9 % 
42.1 % 

 
There were interesting differences between groups defined by socio-demographic characteristics :   
 
-  Males  reported  more  often  than  females  a  recent  increase  in  alcohol  consumption  (22.5%  vs 
16.4% ;  p<0.001),  but  both  genders  similarly  reported  having  recently  started  drinking  alcohol 
(20.2% et 20.8% ; p=0.66). 

-  White collars, managers and « others » reported more frequently a recent increase in alcohol use 
(12.3%, 14.% et 22.3% respectively) than other professional categories (blue collars : 9.8% ; high-
level managers : 7.5%). However, blue collars and « others » reported more often having recently 
started drinking alcohol (15.5% and 25% respectively). 

Flexihealth 


 

79/131 

-  Marital status was linked to changes in drinking habits, since singles exhibited more frequently than 
married  workers  an  increase  in  alcohol  consumption  (22.1%)  or  a  recent  start  in  alcohol  use 
(24.3%).  A  significantly  lower  proportion  of  married  workers  reported  those changes (19% and 
18.8% respectively for the increase in quantity and the recent start). 

 
b)  Tobacco consumption 
 
According to the HIS-ISSP 2001, 28% of Belgians are smokers (24% are daily smokers and 4% are 
occasional smokers). A third of these smokers are regarded as heavy smokers (20 cigarettes or more 
per day). Results of the national survey indicate that during the last two years, 13% of smokers stopped 
tobacco use, 28% reduced their consumption, 39% used the same quantity, and 20% increased their 
consumption. 
 
In the same way than questions regarding alcohol consumption, the Flexihealth survey did not question 
the workers on the quantity of tobacco used nor on the type of tobacco consumption (cigarettes, cigars, 
cigarillos, pipes...), but investigated  two  specific  dimensions.  The  first  was  the  subjective  perception 
about tobacco use (never, occasional, usual). The second was the modification of smoking habits, in 
term of increase in quantity or recent use of tobacco. 
 
For  a  comparison  between  the  two  studies,  the  daily  smokers  who  account  for  24%  of  the  Belgian 
population can be compared to the regular smokers in the Flexihealth investigation, whereas occasional 
smokers  (4%  of  the  Belgian  population)  can  be  compared  to  occasional  smokers  in  the  Flexihealth 
study.   
 
Our  analysis  shows  that  30%  of  the  workers  were  smokers,  24%  of  the  workers  being  usual 
consumers of tobacco and 6% being occasional consumers ; these proportions were similar than those 
observed in the Belgian population.  Nevertheless, 38% of workers increased tobacco use recently and 
17% began smoking recently. This observation is particularly interesting when it is compared with the 
Belgian population, in which 20% of regular smokers recognize to have increased their tobacco use.  
 
Contrary  to  the  alcohol  consumption,  no  significant  difference  arose  from  the  comparison  between 
tertiary  and  secondary  sectors.  A  more  detailed  analysis  by  business  domain  revealed  important 
differences  of  proportions  in  recent  tobacco  use  (Table  36).  As  for  the  alcohol  consumption,  the 
changes  of  behavior  affected  a  small  proportion  of  workers  in  health  sector  and  private  production 
sector, but affected 20 to 30% of workers in private services and in public companies. 
 
Table 36. Proportion of workers having modified their tobacco use, by business domain  
 

Business domains  
Private production         (n=1251) 
Private service               (n=3216) 
Health                            (n=274) 
Public                            (n=174) 

Increase in quantity 

36.3 % 
38.5 % 
34.4 % 
39.1 % 

Recent start in tobacco 

7.6 % 
20.3 % 
8.6 % 
32.2 % 

 
According to socio-demographic variables, the analysis of tobacco use led to the following conclusions: 
 
-  Behavior changes were not different between males and females: 48.8% of males and  51.2% of 
females increased tobacco consumption whereas 18.7% of males and 16% of females were “new” 
smokers.   

-  Blue-collar workers, white-collar workers and “others” were proportionally more likely to increase 
their  tobacco  use  (respectively,  42.3%,  37.2%  and  38.3%)  than  other  professional  categories 

Flexihealth 


 

80/131 

(managers,  23.1%;  upper-level  managers,  13%).  However,  white-collar  workers  and  “others” 
were more prone to start tobacco use (respectively 12.9% and 19.7%). 

-  Marital  status  seemed  to  be  related  to  health  behaviors  changes,  singles  being  more  likely  to 
increase their consumption of tobacco (40.5% vs 36.8%) or to recently smoke (18.5% vs 17.1%) 
than married workers.   

 
Changes in these two health behaviors could consequently be observed in the same people. A 3 by  3 
Table can be drawn to represent the changes in both alcohol and tobacco use.  
 
 
Table 37. Workers having modified their use of tobacco and alcohol 
 

 

 

 

Tobacco 

consumption 

None (n=3442) 

Increase in 
quantities 
Recent start in 
tobacco use 

Alcohol consumption 

 

None  

(n=1401) 

Increase in 

quantity 

Recent start in 

alcohol use 

1034 

163 

39 

485 

193 

141 

471 

171 

159 

 
If 70% of workers were non smokers, 28.5% reported being teetotalers. Globally, 21% of workers did 
not  use  tobacco  or  alcohol.  Health-related  behaviors changes are more difficult to interpret, because 
they can be combined or not. Data in bold represent people who have at the same time increased the 
use of tobacco and the use of alcohol (3.9% of workers), or recently use these two products (3.2% of 
workers).  
 
c) Drug use 
 
According to the HIS-ISSP 2001, one people on four in Belgium presented a “discomfort” associated 
with various mental disorders such as sleep disorders, depressive troubles or anxiety symptoms.  These 
disorders are frequently associated with psychotropic drug use. Table 38 summarizes the proportion of 
Belgian people who use psychotropic drugs. 
 
Table 38. Proportion of Belgian people who use psychotropic drugs (HIS-ISSP 2001 survey) 
 
Proportion of people aged 15 or more who use… 
 
- sleep pills 
- tranquilizers 
- antidepressants 
 
In the Flexihealth study, data collection on drug use was realized with the following question: « Do you 
use  one  or  more  drug  among  the  following  ones:  to  sleep  (sleep  pills),  to  relieve  pain 
(analgesics), to reduce anxiety (antianxiety drugs), antidepressants? » 
 
Three  answers  were  proposed  (almost  never,  sometimes  per  week,  almost  daily).  These  three 
propositions  were  then  grouped:  rare  consumption  (aggregates  the  answers  "almost  never"  and 

8% 
6% 
5% 

Flexihealth 


 

81/131 

ISSP 

"sometimes per week") and regular consumption (daily use).  This last category can be compared with 
the HIS-ISSP 2001 results (Table 39). 
 
Table 39. Comparison of drug users between the Flexihealth study and the HIS-ISSP 2001 survey 
 
 
- analgesics 
- sleep pills 
- tranquilizers 
- antidepressants 
 
The  interpretation  of  this  table  needs  a  lot  of  precaution.  Few  people  know  exactly  in  which 
pharmaceutical  category  belong  their  own  drugs.  Numerous  potential  interpretations  can  lead  to 
consider  one  category  instead  of  another.  Nevertheless,  we  can  conclude  that  proportions  of  people 
using these different drugs are very similar in the two studies. 
 
Table 40. Comparison of drug consumption between business domains 
 

24.8% 
6.5% 
7.8% 
6.4% 

8% 
6% 
5% 

Flexihealth 

 

Domains 
Private production 
(n=1251) 
Private service      
(n=3216) 
Health                  
(n=274) 
Public sector               
(n=174) 

Analgesics 

22.1% 

Sleep pills 

4.9% 

Tranquilizers  Antidepressants 

6.3% 

3.6% 

25.5% 

32.7% 

17.7% 

6.6% 

11.1% 

8.3% 

7.9% 

11.4% 

8.8% 

7.3% 

6.7% 

8.3% 

 
In  the  health  sector,  the  proportion  of  workers  using  analgesics,  sleep  pills  and  tranquilizers  is  the 
highest, even if in this sector, the proportion of workers reporting a medical complaint is similar than in 
the private production sector (Table 40).  Direct accessibility to drugs in health sector and the fact that 
healthcare workers share the vision that drugs are part of the therapeutic arsenal whereas alcohol and 
tobacco have noxious effects to health can probably explain this high proportion of drug consumption.  
 
According to socio-demographic variables, the analysis of drugs use led to the following conclusions: 
-  Female  were  significantly  more  likely  than  male  to  use  each  of  these  drugs:  sleep  pills (8% vs. 
5%),  analgesics  (31.9%  vs.  17.6%),  tranquilizers  (9.1%  vs.  6.4%)  and  antidepressants  (8%  vs. 
4.8%). 

-  Blue-collar  workers,  white-collar  workers  and  “others”  were  significantly  more  prone  than 

managers and upper-level managers to use each of these drugs (Table 41). 

 
Table 41. Comparison of drug consumption between professional categories 
 

Professional categories 

Analgesics  Sleep pills  Tranquilizers  Antidepressant

Blue-collar workers    (n=490) 
White-collar workers  (n=467) 
Others                         (n=3305) 
Managers                    (n=421) 
Upper-level managers (n=78) 

30.7% 
23.4% 
26.3% 
10.3% 
18.4% 

6.4% 
6.4% 
7.1% 
2.4% 
0% 

7.9% 
7.1% 
8.3% 
4.3% 
0% 

 

Flexihealth 

s 
5.1% 
6.4% 
7.4% 
2.1% 
0% 


 

82/131 

This result is in agreement with the report of physical and mental health complaints, since blue-collar 
workers,  white-collar  workers  and  “others”  were  more  likely  to  report  medical  complaints  (fatigue, 
tension, anxiety, depression, low-back pain, headaches, and sleep disorders).  
 
-  Finally,  single  were  more  likely  to  use  antidepressants  than  married  workers  (7.8%  vs.  5.7%, 

p=0.02). But no other significant difference in other drugs use can be mentioned.  

 

3.5.1.5. Assessment of perceived quality of life 

 
The  quality  of  life  of  workers  was  assessed  with  the  SF12  questionnaire.  This  instrument  evaluates 
physical and mental dimensions of quality of life, as perceived by the respondent. A score is attributed 
for each dimension and their integration gives a global measure.  
In  a  general  adult  population,  the  mean  physical  component  score  (PCS)  and  the  mean  mental 
component  are  expected  to  be  equal  to  50  (SD=10).  The  values  are  norms  used  for  comparisons 
(Ware, Kosinski, & Keller, 1998).  They help users to distinguish « low scores » (< 50) for a bad health 
status, and « high scores » (‡ 50) for a better perceived health status. 
 
Globally,  the  mean  score  for  the  physical  component  was  51  (median  =  53  and  SD=7).  The mean 
score for the mental component was 45 (median = 48 and  SD=11). If workers assessed their physical 
health as satisfying, they reported a worse mental health status. 
 
Table 42. Physical (PCS) and mental (MCS) components of quality of life, by business domain (mean, 

median and standard deviation) 

53 

50 

47 

44 

54 

PCS 

Mean 

SD 
11 

SD 
7 

Median 

MCS 
Mean  Median 

 
 
Domains 
Private production                    
52 
(n=1251) 
Private service 
(n=3216) 
Health sector            
(n=274) 
Public sector          
(n=174) 
Global mean 
 
According to socio-demographic variables, observations were following: 
-  Male  scored  higher  than  female  on  physical  component  (51.8  vs.  50.3; p<0.001).  But mental 
component scores were similar among the two genders: mean MCS was 45.7 in males, and 45.5 in 
females (p=0.50) ; 

46 

49 

10 

51 

52 

44 

47 

10 

51 

54 

46 

50 

10 

51 

53 

45 

48 

11 

7 

7 

7 

7 

-  Single  had  significantly  higher  PCS  (51.5)  and  lower  MCS  (44.9)  than their married colleagues 

- 

(PCS=50.9, p<0.05; MCS=45.8, p<0.001). 
If  mean  PCS  declined  with  age  (r=  –0.23,  p<0.001),  mean  MCS  were  not  associated  with  age 
(r=0.01, p=0.24). 

-  Analysis  of  variance  underlined  that  PCS  and  MCS  significantly  differed  between  professional 

categories (Table 43). 

 
Table  43.  Comparison  between  mean  PCS  and  MCS  of  workers  according  to  their  professional 
category (ANOVA) 

Flexihealth 


 

83/131 

Mean PCS 

Mean MCS 

46 
45 
43 
44 
49 
4 

51 
50 
52 
53 
53 
4 

 
Professional category 
Others                         (n=3305) 
Blue-collar workers    (n=490) 
White-collar workers  (n=467) 
Managers                     (n=421) 
Upper-level managers (n=78) 
df 
Sum of squares 
F 
p 
 
Please note that there was no association between workers  perception of their physical quality of life 
and their mental quality of life (r=0.01, p=0.36). 
By  analyzing  associations  between  these  two  scores  and  medical  complaints,  we  observed  that 
complaints  highly  correlated  to  PCS  were  low-back  pain  complaints  (r=  –0.41,  p<0.001),  whereas 
complaints highly correlated to MCS were depression (r= –0.63, p<0.001), tension (r= –0.59, p<0.001), 
anxiety (r=  –0.57,p<0.001), fatigue (r=  –0.53, p<0.001), and sleep disorders (r= –0.45, p<0.001). In the 
same  figures,  analgesics use was more correlated to PCS (r=  –0.41, p<0.001), whereas use of sleep 
pills (r=  –0.21, p<0.001), tranquilizers (r= –0.28, p<0.001), and antidepressants (r= –0.26, p<0.001) was 
more correlated to MCS. These results support the idea that respondents have concordant attitudes and 
behaviors, assessed by a subjective investigation.   
 
Finally, if perceived quality of life is considered as an integration of both PCS and MCS, 4 figures can 
be theoretically drawn: 
 

4722.1 
22.9 
< 0.001 

< 0.001 

4380.6 

9.3 

PCS 

MCS 

high 

low 

high 

low 

Satisfying QOL 

Altered QOL 

Altered QOL 

Altered QOL 

 
Proportions of workers belonging to each of these categories can be reported as below: 
                        

PCS 

MCS 

high 

low 

high 
30.7% 

36.2% 

low 
12% 

21.1% 

 
Less than one-third of workers perceived their quality of life as satisfying or high. If 48% of workers 
felt  an  imbalance  between  physical  quality  of  life,  and  mental  quality  of  life,  21%  assessed  both 
physical and mental QOL as poor or bad.  The analysis by business domain also revealed important 
differences,  since  mental  QOL  was  badly  assessed  by  65.5%  of  health  care  workers,  by  60.6%  of 
workers  in  private  production  sector  and  by  48.7%  of  workers  in  public  sector  (c 2=  54.4,  6  dl, 
p<0.001).  Physical QOL, better estimated by two-thirds of workers was nonetheless badly assessed 
by  29.7%  of  health  care  workers,  25.2%  of  workers  in  private  production  sector,  and  by  32.8%  of 
workers  in  private  service  sector,  and  finally,  by  28.6%  of  workers  in  public  sector  (c 2= 50.4, 6 dl, 
p<0.001).  This result is convergent with the analysis of medical complaints (more frequently reported 
in health care sector and in private production sector) and the analysis of drug use (also higher in both 

Flexihealth 


 

84/131 

 
• 

 
• 

 

 

sectors).    Recall  that  increased  use  of  tobacco  and  alcohol  consumption  or  recent use of these two 
substances  was  more  prevalent  in  the  two  other  sectors  (private  service  sector  and  public  service 
sector). 
 
Some observations can be underlined from the descriptive part of the Flexihealth study, whose aim was 
to obtain a snapshot of workers in 18 Belgian companies (divided into 4 sectors), in the framework of 
job stress.                                                                                                                            
•  Among  the  medical  complaints  assessed  in  the  Flexihealth  investigation,  4  of  them  had  a  higher 
prevalence in our population of workers than in the Belgian population. They were fatigue, anxiety, 
low-back pain and headaches.  

If the proportion of workers in our sample reporting occasionnally drinking alcohol was lower than 
in  the  Belgian  population,  20%  of  respondents  increased  their  consumption  and  20.4%  recently 
began to drink alcohol. These behavioral changes were more important in the tertiary sector than in 
the  secondary  sector  and  were  adopted  by  one-third  of  workers  in  service  sector  and  in  public 
companies.  Identical conclusions can be drawn for tobacco use, since 30% of workers smoked 
(28%  in  the  Belgian  population),  but  38%  of  respondents  reported  having  increased  their  use 
whereas  this  proportion  was  lower  in  the  Belgian  population  (20%).  Recent  use  of  tobacco 
affected 20% of workers in private service companies and 32% of workers in public services. 

If psychotropic drugs and analgesics uses were comparable between our sample and the Belgian 
population, there were really more important in the health care sector.   On the other hand, in the 
private production sector, the use of psychotropic drug was lowest. Among different professional 
categories,  it  was  easy  to  note  that  managers  and  upper-level managers were less prone to use 
drugs.  

 
•  The  workers  from  the  18  companies  had  higher  mean  physical  component  scores  than  norms 
reported  in  the  literature,  but  lower  mean  mental  component  scores.  More  than  half  of  workers 
assessed  their  mental  QOL  as  “low”;  this  proportion  was  as  high  as  65.5%  in  the  health  care 
sector and 60.6% in the private production sector.  Finally, 21% of workers combined an altered 
physical  QOL  and  an  altered  mental  QOL.  It  is  difficult  to  distinguish  voluntarily exaggerated 
answers  of  unfavorable  personal  situations.  Occupational  physicians,  human  resources  directors 
and organizations having in their missions the improvement of working conditions having a specific 
role to play in analyzing individual situations in order to help and support these workers.  

3.5.2. Analytical part 

The objective of this second part of the Flexihealth investigation was to determine the part of problems 
attributable  to  organizational  stress,  in  other  words,  whose  occurrence  or  worsening  did  not  seem  to 
result from the basic medical status of the worker. The variations in health status were then assessed 
according to medical history and potential changes in life habits.  
 
In this part of the report, we try to give an answer to the following questions: 

- 

 
Is  there  a  direct  relationship  between,  on  the  one  hand,  organizational  changes  and  flexibility 
practices and, on the other hand, indicators of job stress and perceived health status? 

 
-  Are  there  relationships  between  indicators  of  job  stress,  well-being in  the workplace and health-

related behaviours, such as smoking, alcohol consumption, and drug use? 

 

Flexihealth 


 

85/131 

1st research  hypothesis:  organizational  changes  and  flexibility  practices  have  an  impact  on 
perceived stress and on (physical and mental) quality of life of workers  
 
Before testing this first research hypothesis,  let us recall that flexibility practices with which workers 
are  confronted  are  changes  on  work  schedules,  working  times,  contract,  geographical  localization  or 
nature of tasks whereas organizational changes affect the level of authority, job descriptions, colleagues 
or work environment. 
 
Changes  experienced by workers can be added to obtain a maximum of 5 flexibility practices and a 
maximum  of  5  organizational  changes.  The  average  number  of  changes  to  which workers of the 18 
Belgian  companies  was confronted  with  varied  according  to  their  business  domain  as  illustrated  in 
Table 44. 
 
Table 44. Average number of changes according to business domain 
 
 

Private production 

Private service 

Health  
(n=274) 

Public  
(n=174) 

(n=1251) 

(n=3216) 

1.5 
1.4 

2.0 
2.1 

1.8 
1.9 

1.3 
2.3 

Flexibility practices 
Organizational changes 
 
On the average, if health care workers were confronted to 2 organizational changes and 2 flexibility 
practices,  private  production  sector  was  submitted  to 2.3 organizational changes.  The other business 
domains  were  confronted  to  a  lower  number  of  organizational  mutations.  In  order  to  test  our  first 
hypothesis, Table 45 presents associations tested between dependent and independent variables.  
 
Table  45.  Correlations  between  organizational  changes,  flexibility  practices  and  health  indicators 
(coefficients and statistical significance) 
 
 

Organizational 

Complaints 

Stress 

PCS 

Flexibility 
practices 

scores 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

0.01 

-0.33** 
-0.65** 

 
0.05* 
0.04 
-0.02 
-0.02 

 
 
0.67** 
-0.20** 
-0.62** 

Flexibility practices 
Stress 
Complaints score 
PCS 
MCS 
*p<0.05; ** p<0.001 
 
Low correlations observed between organizational changes, flexibility practices, on the one hand, and 
stress, complaints scores and quality of life scores, on the other hand, underscored the low association 
between  these  variables.  Organizational  evolutions  (which  practically  are  minor  changes)  to  which 
workers were confronted seemed to have no impact on physical quality of life. Moreover, associations 
between  organizational  changes,  flexibility  practices  and  the  aggregate  score  of  complaints,  even 
significant, did not exceed 0.11-0.13, a very low. 
 
Significant correlations between stress and mental component  score and between stress and physical 
health  indicators  (complaint  scores  and  PCS)  confirmed  our  theoretical  assumptions:  the  potential 
effects  of  stress  in  work  situation  can  be  multiple  and  varied  (deterioration  of  physical  and/or 
psychological health) and can induce behavioral changes among employees. More exactly, stress was 
significantly and positively correlated to medical complaints (p<0.001): 
 

changes 
0.12** 
0.13** 
0.12** 
-0.01 
-0.13** 

 

r 

Flexihealth 


 

86/131 

Tension 
Anxiety 
Depression 
Fatigue 
Sleep disorders 
Gastric pain 
Cardiac palpitations 
Low-back pain 
Colic pain 
Chest pain 
Anorexia 
Headaches 
Hypertension 

0.66 
0.59 
0.55 
0.55 
0.48 
0.39 
0.38 
0.33 
0.32 
0.32 
0.32 
0.31 
0.31 

 
t 
38.5 
-1.89 
-1.2 
-0.38 
0.99 
5.08 

 
These  correlations  were  not  unexpected  since  a  lot  of  these  medical  complaints  are  also  stress 
symptoms.  Nevertheless,  any  interpretation  has  to  be  done  with  precaution  according  to  the  cross-
sectional design of the Flexihealth study. A longitudinal investigation should probably be successful to 
pursue this objective, but was not possible according to the budget and the timetable  assigned to the 
Flexihealth project.  
 
Since socio-demographic variables (sex, age, and marital status) seemed to confound effects presented 
in the descriptive part, these variables will be systematically integrated in regression analyses.  
Table  46.  Multiple linear regressions of organizational changes on workers stress, adjusted for socio-
demographic variables (parameter estimates and statistical significance)  
 
 

Standardized b
coefficient 

 

 
-0.05 
-0.03 
-0.01 
0.02 
0.12 

Constant 
Sex (male=1; female=2) 
Age 
Marital status (single=1; married=2) 
Flexibility practices 
Organizational changes  
Note: R2 =0.14 (df=5, F=7.3, p<0.001) 
 
Table  46  well  illustrates  the  impact  of  organizational  changes  on  perceived  stress  among  workers, 
socio-demographic variables having no additional effect.  
 
To  explain  mental  quality  of  life  of  workers  by  occurrence  of  organizational  changes,  including 
confounding  variables,  a  multiple  regression  analysis  was  conducted.  The  more  a  worker  was 
confronted  to  a  lot  of  organizational  changes, the  more  his/her  mental  quality  of  life  was  altered.   
Workers  marital  status  also  explained  a  part  of  this  result  since  married  workers  had  a  better 
perception of their mental quality of life (Table 47). 
 
Table 47. Multiple linear regressions of organizational changes on workers MCS, adjusted for socio-
demographic variables (parameter estimates and statistical significance)  
 
 

Standardized b
coefficient 

 

 
t 
28.5 

 
p 
0.001 

Constant 

Flexihealth 

 

 
p 
0.001 
0.06 
0.23 
0.70 
0.32 
0.001 


 

87/131 

  

Standardized b

0.75 
0.58 
0.03 
0.47 
0.001 

-0.317 
0.55 
2.19 
0.72 
-6.43 

-0.008 
0.01 
0.06 
0.02 
-0.16 

t 
47.4 
-1.98 
-0.06 
2.73 
1.75 
-4.3 
-31.1 

 
-0.04 
-0.001 
0.06 
0.03 
-0.08 
-0.61 

p 
0.001 
0.05 
0.95 
0.006 
0.08 
0.001 
0.001 

Sex (male=1 ; female=2) 
Age 
Marital status (single=1 ; married=2) 
Flexibility practices 
Organizational changes  
Note: R2 =0.03 (df=5, F=9.7, p<0.001). 
 
If we add to this model the perceived stress score as independent variable, the mental health quality of 
life seemed to be highly affected by organizational changes, but also and almost by the stress in work 
situation (which can be a consequence of changes occurrence). This result is illustrated by the multiple 
linear  regressions  of  organizational  changes  and  stress  on  workers  MCS,  adjusted  for  socio-
demographic variables (Table 48). Independent variables explained 40% of the MCS variance. 
 
Table 48. Multiple linear regressions of organizational changes and stress on workers MCS, adjusted 
for socio-demographic variables (parameter estimates and statistical significance) 
 
 
Constant 
Sex (male=1 ; female=2) 
Age 
Marital status (single=1 ; married=2) 
Flexibility practices 
Organizational changes  
Perceived stress 
Note: R2 =0.40 (df=6, F=173.7, p<0.001). 
The  physical  quality  of  life  was  better explained by  gender, age and stress than by the organizational 
changes  introduced  into  the  company  (Table  49).  Females,  older  workers  and  workers  living  a  high 
stress in work situation perceived their physical quality of life as altered.  
 
Table 49. Multiple linear regressions of organizational changes and stress on workers PCS, adjusted for 
socio-demographic variables (parameter estimates and statistical significance) 
 
 
Constant 
Sex (male=1; female=2) 
Age 
Marital status (single=1 ; married=2) 
Flexibility practices 
Organizational changes  
Perceived stress 
Note: R2 du modèle=0.08 (df=6, F=22.1, p<0.001). 
 
2d  research  hypothesis:  organizational  changes  and  flexibility  practices  have  an  impact  on 
perceived stress and health-related behaviors (tobacco, alcohol and drugs use) 
 
Complementary  analyses  were  led  in  order  to  test  the  impact  of  organizational  changes  on  workers 
stress and health-related behaviors (tobacco, alcohol and drugs use). 
 
Table 50. Correlations between organizational changes, flexibility practices and health-related behaviors 
(coefficients and statistical significance) 

p 
0.001 
0.001 
0.001 
0.37 
0.40 
0.61 
0.001 

t 
57.9 
-4.24 
-6.89 
-0.89 
-0.84 
-0.51 
-7.6 

 
-0.10 
-0.18 
-0.02 
-0.02 
-0.01 
-0.18 

Standardized b

  

Flexihealth 


 

88/131 

Flexibility 
practices 

 

Stress 

Complaints 

scores 

 

Alcohol use 

 
 

Organizational 

changes 
0.12** 
0.13** 
0.12** 

 
 

 
 
 
 

0.07** 

0.08** 

0.04** 

0.67** 

      0.01 

         0.01 
         0.03* 

 
 
 
     0.01 

 
  0.05* 
0.04 
-0.02 
0.06* 

Flexibility practices 
Stress 
Complaints scores 
Alcohol use 
Tobacco use 
Note: *p<0.05, ** p<0.001. 
 
Even  if  associations  between  organizational  changes  and  tobacco  use  (occasional  or  regular)  were 
significant,  they  were  particularly  low,  and  we  can  not  confirm  that  these  events  are  linked.  In  the 
same  way,  organizational  changes  introduced  in  a  company  were  not  associated  to  alcohol  use 
(occasional or regular).  
 
Beyond  this  occasional  or  regular  use  of  alcohol  and  tobacco,  it  is  more  important  to  investigate 
behaviors  changes  in  consumption  (increase  in  quantity  and  recent  start  of  use).  Four behaviors 
changes were then analyzed by logistic regression.  Independent variables introduced in the regression 
equation were number of organizational changes, perceived stress, physical and mental quality of life 
(Table 51). 
 
If most of medical complaints considered in the Flexihealth study were linked to medical antecedents, 
health-related behaviors changes, in the form of tobacco or alcohol use in increased quantities, were 
principally  associated  with  workers  age,  younger  workers being more likely to change health-related 
behaviors. 
 
Table 51. Logistic regressions of socio-demographic variables, organizational variables, stress and QOL 
(predictor  variables)  for  health-related behaviors changes (dependent variables) (parameter estimates 
and their statistical significance) 
 
 

Alcohol increase in 

Tobacco increase 

Recent start in 

Age 
Sex 
Single 
Organizational 
changes 
Stress 
PCS 
MCS 
Note. * <0.05; ** <0.001 

quantity 
-0.33** 
-0.40** 
-0.02 
0.03 

-0.003 
0.007 
-0.03** 

alcohol use 

in quantity 

-0.48** 
-0.01 
-0.04 
-0.02 

-0.01* 
-0.02* 
-0.02* 

-0.18* 
0.03 
0.01 
0.15** 

0.02** 
-0.02* 
-0.03** 

Recent start in 
tobacco use 
-0.54** 
 -0.32* 
0.18 
-0.03 

0.007 
0.02 
-0.01 

For regression model 1, –2 log L (covariates) = 123.4 pseudo-R² = .04; For regression model 2, –2 log L 
(covariates) = 112.3 pseudo-R² = .04 ; For regression model 3, –2 log L (covariates) = 146.9 pseudo-R² = 
.09 ; For regression model 4, –2 log L (covariates) = 71.0 pseudo-R² = .05  

 
The increase in alcohol intake and the recent start of tobacco use were more often observed among 
male workers. Let us underline an interesting observation: the tobacco use in increased quantity was 
principally  explained  by  workers  age  and  by  the  occurrence  of  organizational  changes  into  the 
company. These results were corroborated by literature (Metcalfe et al, 2003; Kivimäki et al, 2000). 
 

Flexihealth 


 

89/131 

In  the  same  vein,  multiple  regression  analyses  were  conducted  to  appreciate  the  impact  of 
organizational changes and stress on drugs use (Table 52).  
 
Table  52. Multiple  regression analyses of socio-demographic variables, organizational changes, stress, 
and  QOL  (predictor  variables)  on  drugs  use  (parameter  estimates  and  their  statistical 
significance) 

 
 

Age 
Sex 
Single 
Organizational 
changes 
Stress 
PCS 
MCS 
Note. * <0.05; ** <0.001 

Model 1 : 
Sleep pills 
0.11** 
0.06** 
-0.04* 
-0.003 

0.10** 
-0.12** 
-0.14** 

Model 2 : 
Analgesics 

Model 3 : 
Anxiolytics 

Model 4 : 

Antidepressants 

0.03* 
0.11** 
-0.01 
-0.02 

0.10** 
-0.37** 
-0.19** 

0.07** 
0.03 
-0.04* 
-0.002 

0.10** 
-0.16** 
-0.22** 

0.04* 
0.06** 
-0.04* 
-0.02 

0.06* 
-0.10** 
-0.23** 

For model 1, F(df = 7/3946, N = 4215) = 57.6, R² = .09; For model 2, F(df = 7/4007, N = 4280) = 183.3, R² = .25; 
for model 3, F (df = 7/3946, N = 4212) = 82.2, R² = .13;  for model 4, F (df = 7/3924, N = 4192) = 56.5, R² = .09; 
p < .001. 

 
It  is  clear  that  organizational  changes  do  not  explain  psychotropic  drugs  and  analgesics  use.  The 
consumptions of these two medicines are better explained by stress and quality of life, in its physical 
and mental dimensions.  On the other hand, the older worker will be more likely to use drugs belonging 
to the 4 pharmaceutical groups.  
  
 

3.5.3. Conclusion 

 
This  survey  intended  to  draw  a  reliable  snapshot  picture  of  health  status  of  workers  in  18  Belgian 
companies,  belonging  to  4  business  domains,  through  data  collection  about  medical  history,  medical 
complaints,  and  health-related  behaviours, all possibly linked to stress. This study allowed to estimate 
the  prevalence  of  several  health  problems  and  conditions  in  an  ad  hoc  sample  of  workers  and  to 
compare  these  estimates  to  the  situation  of  the  Belgian  population.  Moreover,  the  study  intended  to 
explore the association between organisational changes, job stress and perceived health. 
 
Medical  antecedents  were  correlated  to  related  medical  complaints,  which  show a reasonably good 
concordance  of  data.  As  regards  medical  complaints,  we  observed  prevalence as high as or even 
higher  than  those  reported  in  the  HIS-ISSP  2001  survey  for  fatigue,  anxiety,  low-back  pain  and 
headache.  Mental  complaints had  prevalence  close  to  what  was  seen  in  the  national  survey.  This 
finding is surprising since we expected a better health status in this selected population of workers in 
comparison  with  a  representative  sample  of  the  Belgian  adult  population,  because  of  the  « healthy 
worker effect ». 
 
The analysis of medical complaints according to socio-demographic characteristics, such as gender and 
professional status showed results similar to the results of the national HIS-ISSP 2001 survey: females 
were more likely to report headache, low-back pain, and sleep disorders, while males were more likely 
to report cardiovascular complaints. 
 

Flexihealth 


 

90/131 

As  reported  previously  by  Vahtera  et  al.  (1997),  blue-  and  white  collars  were  more  likely  to  report 
somatic  complaints  than  managers  and  high-level  managers.  This  was  confirmed  by  the  aggregate 
score  of  complaints,  which  was  much  higher  in  blue-collars  than  in  other  professional  categories.   
Cardiovascular  complaints  are  an  exception  to  this  finding  since  they  were  equally  prevalent across 
professional  categories.  We  did  not  observe  the  gradient  reported  by  Marmot  et  al.  (1997),  who 
showed the beneficial influence of job control, higher in managers, on the prevalence of cardiovascular 
disease. 
 
The evaluation of lifestyle in the Flexihealth study showed results somewhat different from the results 
of  the  HIS-ISSP  2001  survey.  Alcohol  consumption  was  lower  in  our  sample  than  in  the  Belgian 
population. However, recent changes in alcohol consumption were noticeable, with 20% of respondents 
reporting  increase  in  alcohol  use.  As  in  the  HIS-ISSP 2001 survey, males were more likely to report 
increase  in  drinking  than  females.  White  collars,  managers  and  « others » reported a higher level of 
alcohol  intake  than  blue-collars  and  high-level  managers.  Marital  status  was  also  associated  with 
drinking habits: singles were heavier users than married workers. 
 
As regard tobacco use, the proportions of occasional and usual smokers are close to the proportions in 
the Belgian population.  However, 38% of workers report an increase in smoking (vs. 20% in the HIS-
ISSP survey), and 17% report a recent start in tobacco use.  Contrarily to alcohol use, there was no 
difference between the secondary and tertiary sectors. Changes in smoking habits affected  especially 
workers  of  the  service  and  public  domains.    There  was  no  difference  in  changes  in  smoking  habits 
according to marital status.   
 
Thirty % of workers reported smoking and 57% reported occasional use of alcohol. Both  behaviours 
may be associated but a minority of workers reported an increase in both alcohol and tobacco use or a 
recent  start  in  both  alcohol  and  tobacco  consumption.  We  did  not  collect  information  about  workers 
who  adopted  healthy  lifestyle  (e.g.  smoking  cessation),  but  we  believe  that  health-related behaviours 
did  not  improve.  We  would  like  to  emphasize  the  fact  that  workplace  should  be  a  place  for  health 
promotion. 
 
Drug  use  was  close  in  the  HIS-ISSP  2001  survey  and  the  Flexihealth  survey.  However,  caution  is 
required  because  it  is  unclear  whether  people  exactly  know  to  which  therapeutic  family  belong  the 
drug(s) they take. 
 
Analgesics sleep pills, and tranquilizers use was higher in the health sector, whereas this sector was 
comparable to other sectors as regard medical history and complaints. Accessibility of drugs in health 
facilities could explain this phenomenon, as well as the culture of health services, according to which 
drugs are therapeutic means whereas tobacco and alcohol are harmful to health.  Females were more 
likely than  males  to  use  drugs,  blue- and white collars were more likely to use drugs than managers, 
singles were more likely to use drugs than married workers. 
 
In the Flexihealth study, the mean physical component of quality of life was 51 (SD =7) and the mean 
mental  component  was  45  (SD=11)  (norms  are  50  with  SD=10  in  a  general  adult  population).  
Perceived physical health was better than perceived mental health. Males had a better physical quality 
of  life  than  females  but  there  was  no  difference  between  genders  in  the  mental  quality  of  life.  As 
expected,  marital  status  was  associated  to  quality  of  life:  singles  had  a  better  physical  health  than 
married workers, but a worse mental health. Physical component score decreased with age and mental 
component  score  remained  stable,  a  finding  difficult  to  interpret  in  a  cross-sectional survey (is  this 
consequence of the selection of more « robust » workers?). 
 
Correlations of quality of life scores, medical complaints and drug use allow, once again,  asserting that 

Flexihealth 


 

91/131 

data  have  a good internal consistency. Physical quality of life was negatively associated to musculo-
skeletal  complaints  and  with  analgesic  use.    Mental  quality  of  life  was  negatively  associated  to 
depression, nervousness, anxiety, fatigue and sleep disorders and the use of sleep pills, tranquilizers and 
antidepressants. 
 
We observed that only 31% of workers had a satisfactory quality of life on both dimensions, 48% had a 
bad  score  on  one  dimension  and  a  good  score  on  the  other,  and  21%  had  a  poor  quality  of  life. 
Substantial differences were present between business  domains: mental quality of life was low in 65% 
of workers in the health sector, 60.6% of the workers in the private production sector, 52.2% of the 
workers in the private service sector, and 48.7% of workers in the public sector.  Physical quality of 
life was better.  However, physical quality of life was poor for 29,7% of workers in the health sector, 
25,2% of workers in the private production sector, 32,8% of workers in the private service sector, and 
28,6%  of  workers  in  the  pblic  sector.    These  results  are  concordant  with  medical  complaints,  more 
frequently reported in the same sectors, and drug use, which follows the same trends.  Discrepancies in 
perceived  physical  and  mental  health  could  reflect  the  selection made by occupational physicians or 
difficulties of workers in ther present job context. 
 
The  second  part  of  the  Flexihealth  study  consisted  in  the  identification  of  health  problems,  including 
health-related  behaviours,  attributable  to  stress  and  organisational  changes.    Only  weak  correlations 
were  observed  between  organisational  changes  and  flexibility  practices,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the 
aggregate score of medical complaints and quality of life, on the other hand. Conversely, we observed 
a high and  significant correlation between stress, on the one hand, and the aggregate score of medical 
complaints and the mental dimension of quality of life, on the other hand. As in the study by Metcalfe et 
al. (2003), the interpretation of these relationships should be done with caution, given the nature of data 
in this cross-sectional study, which prevents to conclude to causal links. 
 
In multivariate analyses, organisational changes and stress, but not flexibility practices, influenced the 
mental component of quality of life, which was observed by Kivimäki et al. (2001), Tennant (2001) and 
Ferrie et al. (1998).   
 
When stress and quality of life are taken into account, there was no association between organisational 
changes and changes in alcohol use.  Alcohol use may be viewed as a generic self-treatment used to 
deal  with  disease  (feeling  bad).  Conversely,  organisational  changes  were  associated  to  changes  in 
tobacco consumption, a central stimulant which increases vigilance. As regards drug use, organisational 
changes  did  not  explain  the  use  of  psychotropic  drugs  and  analgesics,  whereas  stress  and  both 
dimensions  of  quality  of  life  were  associated  to  drug  use.  Please  note  that  changes  in  health-related 
behaviours (increase in use and recent start in alcohol and tobacco use) were inversely related to age, 
which  may  reflect,  in  younger  subjects,  more  impulsive  reactions,  immature  coping  mechanisms,  or 
even a more acute perception of distress situations.  The opposite was observed for drug consumption, 
as if older workers sought medical answers to their suffering. 
 
Our study corroborates former results about tobacco consumption, but more surprisingly, no relationship 
was  found  between  organisational  changes  and  changes  in  alcohol  intake  (Metcalfe  et  al.,  2003; 
Kivimäki  et al., 2000). It is possible that the high proportion of females, less prone than males to use 
alcohol, in most exposed sectors (health and retailing) and jobs explains the absence of the expected 
response. 
 
In  conclusion,  the  subjective  evaluation  of  health  and  of  physical  and  mental  quality  of  life  provides 
interesting information with regard to workers well-being in the companies confronted to organizational 
changes.  Compared to objective approaches used in numerous studies, the subjective evaluation helps 
to  consider  how  workers  perceived  their  own  health  status;  these  results  could  be  useful  in  health 

Flexihealth 


 

92/131 

promotion  programs  in  companies.  Nevertheless,  caution  is  required  with  self-reported data. We can 
not exclude that some bias due to exaggeration or desire to conceal some “touchy” information were 
introduced. The lack of major or spectacular associations between organizational changes and flexibility 
practices on the one hand, and health status on the other hand, could result from the situation of our 
sample companies being confronted only to minor changes. 
 
In  accordance  with  the  literature,  the  Flexihealth  study  suggests  a  relation  between  medical 
antecedents  of  workers  and  medical  complaints  and  quality  of  life  scores.  Moreover,  some  links 
between organizational changes, workers perceptions towards their health and health-related behaviors 
changes  have  been  underlined.  We  also  observed  the  impact  of  socio-demographic variables, which 
indicates an intricacy between working situation and private life, which makes the analysis very difficult 
(Danna  et  Griffin,  1999).  Given  its  cross-sectional  design,  this  study  needs  a  lot  of  precautions  in 
interpreting associations, for which it is impossible to define the causal nature. 
 

3.6.  Relationships with customers 

 
3.6.1. Correspondence between employees’ and customers’ perceptions of customer satisfaction 
 
In preliminary study 1 and preliminary study 3, we were able to assess the degree of correspondence 
between employee and (proxy) customer ratings for customer satisfaction. 
 
In  study  1,  we  examined  rank  order  correlations  between  overall  mean  satisfactions with services 
scores for nursing homes from the three different sources. The ratings from the three different sources 
seem to be moderately associated. The strongest association exists between ratings from residents and 
family, but this might be because these are both aggregated ratings. 
Table 53. Zero order correlations between individual employee and aggregated family and resident satisfaction 
scores 
 
SCS 
RCS 
FCS 
Note: SCS = staff perceived customer satisfaction; RCS= resident satisfaction; FCS= family perceived customer 
satisfaction. 
 
In  order  to  examine  the  agreement  between  employees’  perceptions  and  customers’  perceptions in 
preliminary  study  3,  an  ANOVA  design  with  source  and  organization  as  independent  factors  was 
applied. Due to large inequalities in cell sizes, data from 6 small organizations were removed from the 
analysis,  and  a  2(source:  employee  vs.  customer)*11(organization) ANOVA design was  examined, 
which  showed  main  effects  for  both  source  [F(1,  843)=167.12,  p<.000]  and  organization  [F(10, 
843)=7.90, p<.000], as well as an interaction effect between source and organization [F(10, 843)=2.86, 
p<.002]. As can be seen from Figure 17, employees in general score much lower than customers do in 
general- apart from this, there are organizational differences both within customer ratings as well as 
employee  ratings,  and  these  organizational  differences  seem  to  follow  the  same patterns with only a 
few exceptions. The correlation between employees’ perceptions and customers perceived satisfaction 
is small but significant (r=.18, p<.000). 

SCS 
 
.16*** 
.24*** 

RCS 
 
 
.39*** 

FCS 
 
 
 

Flexihealth 


 

93/131 

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

l

e
a
c
s
T
A
S

 
n
a
e
M

SOURCE

       Employees

       Customers

34.00

38.00

40.00

42.00

45.00

47.00

36.00

39.00

41.00

43.00

46.00

ORGANISATION

 

Figure 17. Mean satisfaction scores of employees and customers by organization. 

 
3.6.2. Descriptive results of data from the validation phase 

 
3.6.2.1. Sample description. 

Table 54. Number of questionnaires received in each language per sector 
Total 

French 

Dutch 

% 

  
Secondary sector 
Tertiary sector 
Total 

1136 
1798 
2934 

% 
38.72%
61.28%
100.00%

123 
1904 
2027 

 

6.07%
93.93%
100.00%

% 
1259 
25.38%
3702 
74.62%
4961  100.00%

Table 55. Number of questionnaires received in each language per activity 

% 

% 

Total 

French 

Dutch  % 

1259 
3248 
8449 
178 

1136 
1392 
276 
130 
2934 

123 
1856 
8173 
48 
10200 

1.21%
18.20%
80.13%
0.47%
100.00%

38.72%
47.44%
9.41%
4.43%
100.00%

9.59%
24.73%
64.33%
1.36%
13134  100.00%

  
Private production 
Private services 
Healthcare 
Public services 
Total 
 
In  the  variety  of  organizations  surveyed  in  the  course  of  the  Flexihealth  study,  we did not include 
product  quality  and  satisfaction  measures  in  the  context of (public) services and healthcare. For this 
reason,  we  analyzed  separately  the  data  that  contained  quality  and  satisfaction  ratings  for  products 
when examining models detailing interrelations between quality, satisfaction and behavioral intentions.  
 
Secondly,  a  large  sample  of  Flexihealth  data  was  collected  within  hospitals,  especially  in  the  Dutch-
speaking  population.  Since  this  constitutes  an  interesting  and  large  dataset  with  properties that are 
probably not generalizable to other sectors, we provide separate analyses of these data (Sample 3).  
 

3.6.2.2. Descriptive customer satisfaction indicators 

 
In  Table  56,  means  and  standard  deviations  for  all  customer  satisfaction  ratings are reported for the 
private and public production and services organizations (N=4961), and in  Table 57 similar results are 
provided for the healthcare sample (only Dutch speaking, N=8173). 
 

Flexihealth 


 

94/131 

Total 

Average 

Table 56. Means and SD for all CSI in Sample 1 and Sample 2 
  
  
service quality-general 
Tangibles 
Reliability 
responsiveness 
Assurance 
Empathy 
product quality-general 
Satisfaction with services 
Satisfaction with products 
behavioral intentions 

 
French 
SD  Average 
1,48 
1.08 
1.23 
1.17 
1.07 
1.06 
1.26 
1.03 
0.98 
1.11 

4,57 
4.91 
4.13 
4.44 
4.95 
4.84 
5.34 
4.76 
4.97 
4.61 

4.51 
4.72 
3.98 
4.34 
4.87 
4.76 
5.18 
4.76 
4.84 
4.55 

Dutch 
 
SD  Average 
1.48 
1.10 
1.23 
1.14 
1.08 
1.06 
1.33 
1.04 
1.00 
1.15 

4.65 
5.17 
4.34 
4.58 
5.06 
4.95 
5.56 
4.75 
5.15 
4.69 

 
SD 
1.47 
0.99 
1.19 
1.20 
1.04 
1.05 
1.10 
1.01 
0.91 
1.06 

Average 

5.72 
4.92 
5.16 
5.27 
5.75 
5.58 
5.59 
5.48 

SD 
1.03 
1.26 
1.04 
0.94 
0.83 
0.92 
0.75 
0.92 

Table 57. Means and SD for all CSI  in Sample 3 
  
service quality-general 
Tangibles 
Reliability 
responsiveness 
Assurance 
Empathy 
Satisfaction with services 
behavioral intentions 
 
In  Table  58,  average  customer  satisfaction  ratings  are  provided  per  sector  (excluding  the  Dutch-
language  healthcare  sample)  and  in  Table  59  average  customer  satisfaction  ratings  are  provided 
separately per activity (including the Dutch-language healthcare sample). 
Table 58. Means and SD per sector 
  
  
service quality-general 
Tangibles 
Reliability 
Responsiveness 
Assurance 
Empathy 
product quality-general 
Satisfaction with services 
Satisfaction with products 
behavioral intentions 

SD  Average  SD 
1.37 
1.12 
1.22 
0.99 
0.92 
0.97 
1.33 
0.91 
1.01 
1.09 

Average 
4.92 
4.50 
4.02 
4.53 
5.11 
4.92 
5.29 
4.98 
5.00 
4.76 

4.57 
4.91 
4.13 
4.44 
4.95 
4.84 
5.34 
4.76 
4.97 
4.61 

1.48 
1.08 
1.23 
1.17 
1.07 
1.06 
1.26 
1.03 
0.98 
1.11 

4.45 
5.03 
4.17 
4.41 
4.91 
4.81 
5.36 
4.69 
4.96 
4.56 

1.49 
1.04 
1.23 
1.22 
1.10 
1.09 
1.23 
1.05 
0.96 
1.12 

Average  SD 

Secondary 

Tertiary    

Total 

 

Flexihealth 


 

95/131 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.15 

0.99 

Total 

5.10  0.87  4.63 

5.19  0.79  4.88 

Average SD  Average 

1.51 
1.04 
1.24 
1.23 
1.11 
1.09 
1.22 
1.06 
0.96 
1.12 

4.38 
5.02 
4.17 
4.40 
4.89 
4.82 
5.36 
4.63 
4.96 
4.51 

4.92 
4.50 
4.02 
4.53 
5.11 
4.92 
5.29 
4.98 
5.00 
4.76 

5.09  1.08  4.77 
5.29  0.88  4.69 
4.05  0.96  4.34 
4.34  0.99  4.75 
5.04  1.04  5.09 
4.72  0.97  4.80 

4.57  1.48 
4.91  1.08 
4.13  1.23 
4.44  1.17 
4.95  1.07 
4.84  1.06 
5.34  1.26 
4.76  1.03 
4.97  0.98 
4.61  1.11 

  private production  private services  healthcare  public services 
SD  Average SD  Average SD  Average  SD 
1.37 
1.39 
1.02 
1.12 
1.37 
1.22 
0.99 
1.16 
1.12 
0.92 
0.97 
1.19 
1.33 
0.91 
1.01 
1.09 

Table 59. Means and SD for all CSI per activity 
  
  
service quality-general 
Tangibles 
Reliability 
Responsiveness 
Assurance 
Empathy 
product quality-general 
Satisfaction with services 
Satisfaction with products 
behavioral intentions 
 
3.6.3. Examination of fit of a model specifying the relationships between CSI 
 
In this first part, we wanted to examine whether our proposed model for service quality (extended to 
product  quality  in  the  private  sector  sample),  satisfaction  and  behavioral  intentions  hold  for  the 
employee perception data that were collected in the Flexihealth research.  
 
In Table 60, model fit indicators are presented for the two models (see Figures 18-21) for each sample. 
An alternative model with both quality and satisfaction equally predicting behavioral intentions failed to 
fit. Although ?2 , which is based on a comparison of the theoretical covariance matrix with the observed 
covariance matrix, is often used to assess model fit, it can lead to the rejection of good models that give 
a  significant  value  in  large  samples  (Bentler  &  Bonett,  1980).  The  Root  Mean  Square  Error  of 
Approximation is a fit index that is not influenced by sample size and which takes the complexity of the 
model into account. Values smaller than .05 indicate good model fit, values smaller than .08 indicate an 
adequate yet not optimal model (Hu & Bentler, 1999). The Non Normed Fit Index (NNFI) of ‘Tucker 
Lewis  index’  gives  an  indication  as  to  what  degree  a  proposed  model  is  an  improvement  of  fit 
compared to  a null-model, taking into account the complexity of the model and sample size. Values of 
.90 or more indicate an acceptable to good fit. The Akaike Information criterion is a measure based on 
information  theory  and  is  used  primarily  to  compare  competing  models,  taking  into  account  the 
complexity of the models. When comparing values, the model with the lowest AIC value provides the 
best fit. 
Table 60. Fit indices for model 1 and 2 in each sample 
 
Sample private 
 
Model 1 
Model 2 
 
Sample public 
 
Model 1 
Model 2 
 
Sample healthcare 
 
Model 1 

 
 
.99 
.99 
 
 
 
.92 
.98 
 
 
 
.99 

 
 
.98 
.98 
 
 
 
.90 
.98 
 
 
 
.98 

 
 
 
73 
68 
 
 
 
73 

1012.87 
966.69 

886.87 
830.45 

203.82 
108.28 

297.82 
212.28 

.070 
.070 

.107 
.061 

RMSEA 

108 
103 

1532.21 

1605.76 

df 
 
 

?2 
 
 

NNFI 

AIC 

.064 

CFI 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

Flexihealth 


 

96/131 

Model 2 
 

1147.93 

68 

.057 

.99 

.99 

1251.93 

Flexihealth 


 

SQUALITY

97/131 

TANG1

TANG2

RELIAB1

RELIAB2

PRESP1

PRESP2

ASSU1

ASSU2

EMPA1

EMPA2

PQUALITY

tang

reliab

resp

assu

empathy

sq

ssat

behav

pq

psat

SSAT1

SSAT2

BEH1

BEH2

PSAT1

PSAT2

Figure 18. Model 1, Sample 1 

 

Flexihealth 


 

98/131 

SQUALITY

BEH1

BEH2

sq

behav

tang

reliab

resp

assu

empathy

ssat

pq

psat

PQUALITY

 

TANG1

TANG2

RELIAB1

RELIAB2

PRESP1

PRESP2

ASSU1

ASSU2

EMPA1

EMPA2

SSAT1

SSAT2

PSAT1

PSAT2

Figure 19. Model 2, Sample 1 
 

Flexihealth 


 

SQUALITY

99/131 

sq

ssat

behav

BEH1

BEH2

SSAT1

SSAT2

 

TANG1

TANG2

RELIAB1

RELIAB2

PRESP1

PRESP2

ASSU1

ASSU2

EMPA1

EMPA2

tang

reliab

resp

assu

empathy

Figure 20. Model 1, Sample 2 and Sample 3. 
 

Flexihealth 


 

100/131 

SQUALITY

BEH1

BEH2

sq

behav

TANG1

TANG2

RELIAB1

RELIAB2

PRESP1

PRESP2

ASSU1

ASSU2

EMPA1

EMPA2

SSAT1

SSAT2

tang

reliab

resp

assu

empathy

ssat

Figure 21. Model 2, Sample 2 and Sample 3 

 

Flexihealth 


 

101/131 

Figure 22. Standardized coefficients for Model 2 in Sample 1. 
 

 

Flexihealth 


 

102/131 

Figure 23. Standardized coefficients for Model 2 in Sample 2 
 

 

Flexihealth 


 

103/131 

Figure 24. Standardized coefficients for Model 2 in Sample 3. 

 

Flexihealth 


 

104/131 

In  samples  1  and  3,  we  found  acceptable  fit for model 1. Although ?2 was significant, RMSEA was 
below the cut-off value of .08 for acceptable fit and both CFI and NNFI are above .95, indicating good 
fit.  In  sample  2  however,  we  found  values  indicating  a  less  than  optimal  fit.  Model  2,  proposing  an 
influence  from  Servqual  latent  factors  and  satisfaction  on  general  perceived  quality  that  in  turn 
influences behavioral intention perceptions, provided an acceptable to good fit in all three samples. AIC 
values, which allow comparisons between models, indicated a superior fit for model 2 in all samples. 
 
In  Figure  22, standardized coefficients are presented for sample 1. The path from Responsiveness to 
Service Quality in general was non-significant, as well as the path from Assurance to Service Quality 
and  from Empathy to Service Quality. The relationship from overall Service Quality with Behavioral 
Intentions  seems  stronger  than  between  overall  Product  Quality  and  Behavioral  Intentions,  but 
constraining these parameters to be equal did not lead to a significant increase in Chi-square ( ? ?2(1) = 
1.13, ns).  
 
Standardized  coefficients  for  model  2  in  sample  2  are  presented  in  Figure  23.  Despite  substantial 
coefficients,  overall  Service  Quality  was  only  significantly  related  to  Assurance  and  Behavioral 
Intentions. 
 
In  the  healthcare  sample (sample 3, see Figure 24) we found significant paths from Satisfaction with 
Services to overall Service Quality and from all Servqual dimensions except Responsiveness to overall 
Service  Quality.  Satisfaction  had  the  strongest  association  with  Service  Quality and this loading was 
significantly  higher  than  the  weight  from  Empathy  on  Service  Quality  (constraining  these  two 
parameters to be equal resulted in a significant increase of Chi-square, ? ?2 (1) = 60.65, p<.001). 
 
3.6.4.  Relationships  between  CSI,  employee  characteristics,  perceived  working  conditions  and  well-
being. 

3.6.4.1. Bivariate initial analyses 

to  Service  quality 

 
In  sample  1  (private  production  organizations  and  service  organization  also  providing products), there 
are significant differences for all CSI between Dutch and French speaking respondents, with French 
language  questionnaires  having  on  average  a  slightly  lower  score  for  all  indicators.  There  is  no 
significant  difference  between  male  and  female  respondents.  Employee  tenure  is  weakly  but 
significantly  related 
in  general  (r=-.12);  Reliability  of  service  (r=-.09), 
Responsiveness  (r=-.10),  Assurance  (r=-.10),  Empathy  (r=-.10),  Satisfaction  with  services  (r=-.13), 
Product  satisfaction  (r=-.06)  and  behavioral  intentions  (r=-.12). Amount of contact with customers is 
weakly  but  significantly  related  to  the  SERVQUAL  dimensions  Responsiveness  (r=.12),  Assurance 
(r=.14) and Empathy (r=.15). 
 
In  sample  2-  public  and  private  services-,  there  are  also  significant  language  differences  with  again 
French speaking respondents scoring lower on all CSI. There are no significant differences between 
gender  groups.  Tenure  is  related  significantly  and  negatively  to  behavioral  intentions  (r=-.22)  while 
customer contact was not significantly related to CSI. 
 
In sample 3 (Dutch speaking healthcare sample) we found slight differences between male and female 
respondents.  Male  respondents  scored  slightly  but  significantly  lower  on  all  CSI  than  their  female 
colleagues. Tenure was virtually unrelated to customer satisfaction perceptions. Degree of contact with 
clients  was  significantly  related  to  Service  Quality  in  general  (r=  .11),  Assurance  (r=.12),  Empathy 
(r=.17), Satisfaction with services (r= .14) and behavioral intentions (r= .18). 
 

3.6.4.2.  Correlations  between  number  of  changes,  change  perceptions  and  perceived 
customer satisfaction. 

Flexihealth 


 

105/131 

 
In  Table  61, correlations are reported between the number of changes experienced, the appraisal of 
these changes (as  a challenge, something over which the employee felt control, a  threat or something 
that  was  the  responsibility  of  the  organization,  for  more  details  check  the  psychosocial section), the 
emotions experienced following these changes and CSI are reported. Only the correlations significant 
at the .001 level are reported since the sample size was quite large and this allows even small and not 
very informative correlations to reach less conservative significance levels. Correlations higher than .15 
are put in bold and correlations above .20 are bold and underlined for visual clarity purposes.  
 
The mere number of changes experienced is virtually unrelated to CSI. Positive appraisal of changes is 
positively  but  weakly  related  to  all  CSI,  while  negative  appraisal  of  the  changes  as  a  threat and 
organization’s  accountability  is  linked  to  less  positive  customer  satisfaction  perceptions,  especially 
relating to the tangible and reliability aspects of service and lower estimation of customer’s intention to 
return or recommend. Negative emotions related to changes tend to be weakly and negatively related 
to  customer  satisfaction  ratings  whereas  positive  emotions  are  positively  but  weakly  linked  with 
perceived customer satisfaction. 
Table 61. Correlations between change -related variables and employee perceived CSI in sample 1 

BI 
 

SQ 
 

PQ 
 

SSAT 
 

E-SQ 
 

A-SQ 
 

PSAT 
 

Re-SQ 
 

0.148 
0.124 
-0.164 
-0.193 

0.101 
0.057 
-0.137 
-0.156 

0.098 
0.105 
-0.146 
-0.173 

0.110 
0.081 
-0.145 
-0.169 

0.074 
0.101 
-0.107 
-0.146 

0.094 
0.066 
-0.132 
-0.177 

0.050 
0.071 
-0.110 
-0.136 

0.072 
0.067 
-0.108 
-0.145 

-0.113 
-0.082 
-0.137 
-0.127 
0.077 
0.113 

-0.118 
-0.093 
-0.124 
-0.117 
0.073 
0.075 

-0.109 
-0.080 
-0.128 
-0.115 
0.063 
0.088 

-0.167 
-0.147 
-0.189 
-0.196 
0.128 
0.149 

-0.103 
-0.095 
-0.124 
-0.142 
0.114 
0.142 

R-SQ 
-0.058 
0.125 
0.115 
-0.192 
-0.247 

T-SQ 
-0.062 
0.096 
0.063 
-0.154 
-0.157 

 
# CHANGES 
CHALLENGE 
CONTROL 
THREAT 
ACCOUNTABILIT
Y 
STRESSED 
-0.134 
UNBALANCED 
-0.116 
POWERLESS 
-0.160 
ANGRY 
-0.154 
SEREEN 
0.126 
ENTHUSIASTIC 
0.152 
Note:  T-SQ=  SERVQUAL-Tangibles;  R-SQ=  SERVQUAL-Reliability;  Re-SQ=  SERVQUAL-Responsiveness;  A-
SQ=  SERVQUAL-Assurance;  E-SQ=  SERVQUAL-Empathy;  SSAT=  Satisfaction  with  services;  PSAT: 
Satisfaction with products; SQ= general Service Quality; PQ= general Product Quality; BI= Behavioral intentions.  
 
Correlations  from  the  much  smaller  sample  2  are  reported  in  Table 62. Here, we report correlations 
significant  at  the  .05  level  to  allow  for  this  smaller  sample  size.  Here,  the  number  of  changes 
experienced was weakly and negatively related to reliability and responsiveness perceptions of service 
quality.  Moderate  and  positive  relations  can  be  observed  between  the  appraisal  of  change  as  a 
challenge  and  higher  reliability,  responsiveness,  assurance  and  empathy  scores  for  service  quality, 
satisfaction with services and behavioral intentions. Negative appraisal seems  to be related to service 
quality ratings in general and reliability perceptions. There is no clear pattern of relationships with the 
emotions experienced as a result of the changes and customer satisfaction ratings. 
Table 62. Correlations between change -related variables and employee perceived CSI in sample 2 

-0.108 
-0.079 
-0.123 
-0.113 
0.082 
0.092 

-0.118 
-0.117 
-0.133 
-0.158 
0.136 
0.140 

-0.111 
-0.091 
-0.122 
-0.135 
0.088 
0.116 

-0.122 
-0.101 
-0.122 
-0.146 
0.138 
0.120 

T-SQ 
 
 

0.121 

 
 

 

 
 

0.128 

R-SQ 

Re-SQ 

-0.141 
0.270 
0.152 

-0.100 
0.188 
0.182 
-0.106 
-0.106 

 
 

 
 

A-SQ 
 

E-SQ 
 

SSAT 
 

0.152 

0.209 

0.136 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

-0.117 

 
 

 
 

SQ 
 
 
 

 
 

-0.156 
-0.182 

0.138 
0.128 

-0.113 

BI 
 

 

 
 

 
# CHANGES 
CHALLENGE 
CONTROL 
THREAT 
ACCOUNTABILIT
Y 
STRESSED 
UNBALANCED 

Flexihealth 


 

106/131 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

0.122 

-0.121 

0.106 
0.141 

POWERLESS 
ANGRY 
SEREEN 
ENTHUSIASTIC 
 
In  the  third  sample  (healthcare),  we  had  again  a  large  number  of  respondents,  resulting  in  small 
correlations reaching significance levels. Therefore, only correlations significant at the .001 level are 
reported in  Table  63. Here we found that again the mere number of changes was only very weakly 
related  to  perceptions  of  customer  satisfaction  and  quality.  The  negative appraisal of the changes in 
terms  of  threat  and  the  organization’s  accountability  were  negatively  related  to  CSI,  and  these 
correlations were the largest observed here.  
Table 63. Correlations between change -related variables and employee perceived CSI in sample 3 

0.135 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
# CHANGES 
CHALLENGE 
CONTROL 
THREAT 
ACCOUNTABILITY 
STRESSED 
UNBALANCED 
POWERLESS 
ANGRY 
SEREEN 
ENTHUSIASTIC 
 

T-SQ 
 

0.086 
0.060 
-0.113 
-0.125 
-0.058 
-0.058 
-0.096 
-0.098 

R-SQ 

Re-SQ 

A-SQ 

E-SQ 

SSAT 

-0.072 
0.145 
0.111 
-0.208 
-0.236 
-0.133 
-0.122 
-0.181 
-0.189 

-0.076 
0.118 
0.075 
-0.168 
-0.194 
-0.125 
-0.100 
-0.153 
-0.145 

-0.064 
0.090 
0.072 
-0.164 
-0.174 
-0.104 
-0.109 
-0.142 
-0.144 

-0.065 
0.112 
0.071 
-0.177 
-0.181 
-0.122 
-0.101 
-0.143 
-0.144 

-0.048 
0.079 
0.057 
-0.152 
-0.164 
-0.094 
-0.100 
-0.129 
-0.129 

SQ 
 

BI 

-0.056 
0.099 
0.063 
-0.142 
-0.164 
-0.102 
-0.085 
-0.126 
-0.129 

0.102 
0.072 
-0.156 
-0.154 
-0.077 
-0.107 
-0.128 
-0.133 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.119 

0.163 

0.138 

0.132 

0.138 

0.124 

0.112 

0.131 

3.6.4.3. Correlations between well-being indicators and customer satisfaction indicators 

 
In  Table  64,  correlations  between  three  indicators  of  employee  well-being and customer satisfaction 
ratings are reported for sample 1. Compared to the values reported above, the relations between job 
satisfaction, negative stress and positive stress are distinctly stronger. As expected, positive stress and 
especially job satisfaction are moderately and positively related to CSI, while negative stress shows a 
similar but negative link. Especially, the ratings for the reliability dimensions of service quality seem to 
be influenced by employee well-being. 
Table 64. Correlations between well-being indicators and employee perceived CSI in Sample 1 

 
JOB SATISFACTION 
POSITIVE STRESS 
NEGATIVE STRESS 

T-SQ 
0.207 
0.191 
-
0.221 

R-SQ 

Re-SQ 

0.251 
0.248 
-0.284 

0.170 
0.165 
-0.215 

A-SQ 
0.167 
0.155 
-
0.214 

E-SQ 
0.219 
0.219 
-
0.207 

SSAT 
0.186 
0.173 
-0.194 

PSAT 

SQ 

PQ 

0.205 
0.218 
-0.234 

0.210 
0.157 
-0.199 

0.219 
0.220 
-0.221 

BI 
0.259 
0.235 
-
0.243 

 
Correlations  in  sample  2  are  reported  in  Table  65.  Compared to the private production sector and 
private service with products supplied sector, in this sample it seems that customer satisfaction ratings 
made  by  employees  are  slightly  less  influenced  by  negative  stress  and  more  by  job  satisfaction  and 
positive stress. 
Table 65. Correlations between well-being indicators and employee perceived CSI in Sample 2 

T-SQ 

R-SQ 

Re-SQ 

A-SQ 

E-SQ 

SSAT 

SQ 

0.208 
0.213 
-0.102 

0.204 
0.195 
-0.233 

0.166 
0.245 
-0.197 

 

0.180 
0.211 

0.197 
0.211 
-0.108 

0.261 
0.273 
-0.132 

0.195 
0.278 
-0.200 

BI 

0.239 
0.277 
-0.150 

 
JOB SATISFACTION 
POSITIVE STRESS 
NEGATIVE STRESS 
 

Flexihealth 


 

107/131 

Similar results can be seen in Table 66 for sample 3. Although all correlations are moderate, those with 
job satisfaction and positive stress are slightly higher than with negative stress. 
 
 
Table 66. Correlations between well-being indicators and employee perceived CSI in Sample 3 

 
JOB SATISFACTION 
POSITIVE STRESS 
NEGATIVE STRESS 
 

T-SQ 

R-SQ 

Re-SQ 

A-SQ 

E-SQ 

SSAT 

SQ 

BI 

0.191 
0.206 
-0.155 

0.265 
0.291 
-0.253 

0.273 
0.276 
-0.249 

0.255 
0.275 
-0.206 

0.272 
0.292 
-0.195 

0.259 
0.281 
-0.184 

0.269 
0.271 
-0.175 

0.287 
0.315 
-0.176 

3.6.4.4. Correlations between work conditions and CSI 

 
Correlations  between  perceptions  of  the  working  environment  and  customer  satisfaction  ratings  are 
provided in  Table  67  for  sample  1.  Job  insecurity  is  negatively  but  weakly  related  to  all  customer 
satisfaction  indictors.  Perceived  organizational  and  supervisor support are moderately and positively 
related to all indicators of customer satisfaction. Control over methods is weakly and positively related 
to satisfaction ratings while control over timing of one’s work is unrelated to employees’ perception of 
customer satisfaction. 
Table 67. Correlations between perceived working conditions and employee perceived C SI in Sample 1 

 

 

T-SQ 
-0.144 
0.299 
0.210 

E-SQ 
-0.112 
0.372 
0.268 

A-SQ 
-0.079 
0.295 
0.201 

Re-SQ 
-0.090 
0.318 
0.209 

SSAT 
-0.091 
0.302 
0.225 
0.044 
0.126 

R-SQ 
-0.158 
0.421 
0.314 
0.077 
0.138 

 
JOB INSECURITY 
ORANIZATION SUPPORT  
SUPERVISOR SUPPORT  
CONTROL TIMING 
CONTROL METHODS 
 
In Table 68  similar results are reported for sample 2. Here, job insecurity was only significantly related 
to ratings of tangible aspects, service quality and behavioral intentions. Again perceived organizational 
(and  to  a  slightly  lesser  extent  supervisor)  support  was  positively  and  moderately  related  to  all 
satisfaction indicators. Control over timing as well as methods was here positively related to perceived 
customer satisfaction. 
Table 68. Correlations between perceived working conditions and employee perceived CSI in Sample 2 

PSAT 
-0.164 
0.298 
0.239 
0.052 
0.121 

SQ 
-0.093 
0.300 
0.214 
0.055 
0.134 

BI 
-0.136 
0.379 
0.277 
0.069 
0.156 

PQ 
-0.134 
0.273 
0.211 

0.061 

0.056 

0.039 

0.091 

0.080 

 

 

 

SQ 

T-SQ 

SSAT 
 

E-SQ 
 

A-SQ 
 

R-SQ 
 

Re-SQ 
 

-0.159 
0.172 
0.183 
0.123 

 
JOB INSECURITY 
ORGANIZATIONAL SUPPORT  
SUPERVISOR SUPPORT  
CONTROL TIMING 
CONTROL METHODS 
 
Finally, in  Table 69, correlations are reported for the health care sample. Although all reported figures 
are  significant,  it  is  clear  that  the  strongest  relationships  exist  with  perceived  organizational  and 
supervisor support. 
Table 69. Correlations between perceived working conditions and employee perceived CSI in Sample 3 

-0.145 
0.286 
0.233 
0.230 
0.237 

-0.100 
0.305 
0.283 
0.244 
0.222 

0.411 
0.248 
0.196 
0.211 

0.333 
0.186 
0.127 
0.170 

0.237 
0.193 
0.101 
0.132 

0.319 
0.204 
0.205 
0.188 

0.315 
0.280 
0.162 
0.177 

BI 

 

 
JOB INSECURITY 
ORGANIZATIONAL SUPPORT  
SUPERVISOR SUPPORT  
CONTROL TIMING 
CONTROL METHODS 

T-SQ 

R-SQ 

Re-SQ 

A-SQ 

E-SQ 

SSAT 

SQ 

BI 

-0.102 
0.206 
0.217 
0.043 
0.088 

-0.085 
0.440 
0.416 
0.152 
0.182 

-0.078 
0.353 
0.298 
0.120 
0.161 

-0.085 
0.362 
0.298 
0.110 
0.141 

-0.092 
0.355 
0.308 
0.151 
0.181 

-0.098 
0.333 
0.266 
0.130 
0.162 

-0.106 
0.308 
0.270 
0.129 
0.163 

-0.094 
0.370 
0.300 
0.130 
0.172 

Flexihealth 


 

108/131 

 

3.6.4.5. Correlations between personal characteristics and CSI 

 
The  correlations  between  employee  characteristics  and  CSI  for  sample  1  are  reported  in  Table  70.  
External  locus  of  control  and  negative  affectivity  is  related  weakly  and  negatively  to  all  CSI  while 
positive  affectivity is weakly related to all satisfaction measures. Reliability with services and overall 
product quality perceptions show strongest consistent relationships with personality variables. 
Table 70. Correlations between employee characteristics and empl oyee perceived CSI in Sample 1  

-0.116 

-0.182 

-0.153 

PSAT 
-0.143 

A-SQ 
-0.121 

Re-SQ 
-0.110 

R-SQ 
-0.192 

T-SQ 
-0.108 

SQ 
-0.108 

SSAT 
-0.122 

E-SQ 
-0.157 

 
EXTERNAL LOCUS OF 
CONTROL 
NEGATIVE 
AFFECTIVITY 
POSITIVE 
AFFECIVITY 
 
In sample 2 (Table 71), positive affectivity was related to four out of the five SERVQUAL dimensions 
while  external  locus  of  control  and  negative  affectivity  show the strongest correlations with Tangible 
aspects of service quality ratings. 
Table 71. Correlations between employee characteristics and employee perceived CSI in Sample 2 

PQ 
-0.154 

-0.135 

-0.117 

-0.087 

-0.162 

-0.078 

-0.162 

0.153 

0.186 

0.125 

0.136 

0.192 

0.135 

0.172 

0.115 

0.196 

-0.124 

0.189 

Bi 
-0.147 

 
EXTERNAL LOCUS OF CONTROL 

R-SQ 

-0.130 

Re-SQ 
 

A-SQ 
 

E-SQ 
 

SSAT 

SQ 

BI 

-0.139 

-0.134 

-0.098 

T-SQ 
-
0.165 
0.209 
 

 

 

-0.160 
0.338 

-0.134 
0.296 

NEGATIVE AFFECTIVITY 
POSITIVE AFFECIVITY 
 
Negative  and  small  but  significant  correlations  can  be  observed  between  customer  satisfaction 
perceptions and employees’ external locus of control and negative affectivity for sample 3. However, 
moderate  positive  correlations  exist  between  all  customer  satisfaction  measures  (except  tangible 
aspects) and positive affectivity (Table 72). 
Table 72. Correlations between employee characteristics and employee perceived CSI in Sample 3 

0.200 

0.231 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
EXTERNAL LOCUS OF CONTROL 

NEGATIVE AFFECTIVITY 

POSITIVE AFFECIVITY 
 

T-SQ 
-
0.130 
-
0.078 
0.132 

R-SQ 

Re-SQ 

A-SQ 

E-SQ 

SSAT 

SQ 

BI 

-0.197 

-0.145 

-0.141 

-0.153 

-0.142 

-0.141 

-0.131 

-0.141 
0.230 

-0.147 
0.236 

-0.146 
0.248 

-0.129 
0.235 

-0.123 
0.230 

-0.115 
0.199 

-0.130 
0.259 

3.6.4.6. Hierarchical regression analyses 

 
For  each  hierarchical  regression  analysis,  we  provide  a  table  with  standardized  coefficients  and 
significance levels from the final step and the total amount of explained variance for each CSI, as well 
as the amount of variance explained by each subsequent step in the analysis. 
 
In sample 1 (see  Table 73), on average about 13% of the variance in CSI rated by employees could be 
explained  by  control  variables,  personal  characteristics,  working  conditions  and  employee  well-being 
indicators.  The  largest  amount  of  explained  variance  was  found  for  Reliability  of  services  (21%). 
Looking at the added amount of variance explained by each subsequent step, we can see that although 
each additional step explains a significant part of the variance in CSI, in absolute terms the third step 
(working  conditions)  explains  the  largest  amount  of  variance  except  for  Tangible  aspects  of  service 
quality, perceived Satisfaction with products and perceived Product Quality.  
 

Flexihealth 


 

109/131 

Looking  more  in  detail  at  the  individual predictors, we see that Perceived Organizational Support and 
Negative  Stress  consistently  show  the  highest  standardized  coefficients  for  virtually  all  indicators  of 
customer  satisfaction.  Language  of  the  respondent  was  also  a  significant  predictor  for  Tangible 
aspects,  Reliability  of  services,  perceived  Satisfaction  with  services,  perceived  satisfaction  with 
products and Product quality, reflecting the fact that French-speaking respondents had in general a less 
positive  perception  of  these  aspects  of  customer  satisfaction.  Tenure  had  a  negative  impact  on 
employees’  ratings  of  all  service  quality  aspects  except  Tangibles,  as  well  as  on  satisfaction  with 
services, service quality in general and perceived behavioral intentions. Higher degree of contact with 
customer  was  a  positive  predictor  of  Responsiveness  aspect  of  service  quality,  Assurance  and 
Empathy. Perceived control over timing was also a consistent predictor but was negatively associated 
to nearly all customer satisfaction indicators (non-significant relationship with Reliability). 
Table 73. Standardized beta weights and significance levels for sample 1 

PQ   

.12   

   

*** 

-
0.10 
   

   

Bi 

.17 

 

-
0.02 
-
0.08 
 

 

 

 

 

*** 

 

.12 

 

-
0.02 
-
0.09 
 

 

 

 

*** 

 

R-SQ   

Re-SQ 

  

A-SQ  

E-SQ   

PSAT    

SQ 

  

 

Total R2 

Step 1  

T-SQ 

.13 

 

 

 

 

Language 

-0.17  *** 

-0.07 *** 

-0.02 

0.05 

** 

-0.11  *** 

.21  

  

.14 

 

 

 

 

.12 

 

-0.02 

.17  

  

0.00  

SSA
T 
.12 

 

 

 

 

.12   

   

 

 

-0.05 ** 

-0.07  *** 

-0.07 *** 

-0.06 *** 

-0.09  *** 

-0.03   

  

0.08  *** 

0.10 *** 

0.11 *** 

 

 

   

Tenure 

-0.01 

Contact  
D R2 
Step2 

 

 

 

 

  

0.05 * 

Negative aff. 

0.04 

Positive aff. 

0.06  ** 

-0.01  

Locus control 

0.02 

 

-0.02  

0.06  *** 

0.04 *** 

0.04  *** 

0.04 *** 

0.04 *** 

0.02  *** 

0.03  *** 

0.02  *** 

0.03  *** 

0.03  *** 

 

 

0.07  ** 

-0.01 

0.02 

 

 

 

0.03 

0.02 

0.00 

  

0.07 ** 

0.03  

-0.02  

 

 

0.08  *** 

-0.01 

0.02 

 

 

   

0.04   

0.01   

-0.01   

 

 

   

 

 

0.10  *** 

0.02   

0.09  *** 

-
0.02 
0.03 

 

 

0.07  ** 

** 

-
0.05 

0.01 

0.01 

 

 

D R2 
Step3 

0.03  *** 

0.06 *** 

0.02  *** 

0.02 *** 

0.04 *** 

0.02  *** 

0.04  *** 

0.02  *** 

0.05  *** 

0.04  *** 

 

 

  

Job insecurity 

-0.04  * 

-0.01  

 

0.01 

 

 

 

0.02 

  

0.01  

 

-0.01 

 

 

   

-0.05  ** 

 

0.00 

 

 

Org. support 

0.17  *** 

0.31 *** 

0.27  *** 

0.23 *** 

0.29 *** 

0.25  *** 

0.15  *** 

0.24  *** 

Sup. support 

0.03 

 

0.05 ** 

0.02 

 

0.03 

0.03  

0.01 

 

0.04  * 

0.00 

 

0.03   

Control time  

-0.06  ** 

-0.04  

-0.13  *** 

-0.08 ** 

-0.11 *** 

-0.12  *** 

-0.09  *** 

0.02 

 

0.01  

0.04 

 

-0.02 

0.04  

0.08 

** 

0.08  ** 

0.04  *** 

0.10 *** 

0.07  *** 

0.05 *** 

0.08 *** 

0.07  *** 

0.04  *** 

0.07  *** 

0.03  *** 

0.09  *** 

 

 

Satisfaction 

0.06  ** 

Positive stress 

-0.02 

 

  

0.01  

0.03  

 

0.00 

0.00 

 

 

 

 

0.00 

0.00 

  

0.01  

0.01  

 

0.02 

0.02 

 

 

 

   

0.01   

0.05   

 

 

   

0.07  ** 

0.05  ** 

 

0.02   

 

 

0.05  * 

0.02 

 

-0.10  *** 

-0.15 *** 

-0.16  *** 

-0.14 *** 

-0.12 *** 

-0.14  *** 

-0.12  *** 

   

 

-
0.03 
0.13  *** 

 

 

 

-
0.02 
0.28  *** 

0.01 

 

*** 

-
0.10 
0.09  *** 

*** 

-
0.11 
0.11  *** 

*** 

-
0.11 
0.05   

-
0.01 
-
0.13 

*** 

*** 

-
0.09 

*** 

-
0.13 

Control meth. 
D R2 
Step4 

Stress 

D R2 

0.01  *** 

0.01 *** 

0.01  *** 

0.01 *** 

0.01 *** 

0.01  *** 

0.01  *** 

0.01  *** 

0.01  *** 

0.01  *** 

 
In  sample  2  (see  Table  74),  we  could  explain  on  average  19%  of  the  variance  in  CSI  with  the 
employee  variables  included  in  the  regression.  For  Reliability  of  services  and  Behavioral  intentions, 
23% of the variance could be explained while the smallest proportion of explained variance was found 
for  Tangible  aspects of Service quality. Since the sample here is considerably smaller than Sample 1, 
less significant standardized weights appear here.  
 
Language  of  respondents  was  a  significant  predictor  of  virtually  all  indicators  of  perceived  customer 
satisfaction,  meaning  the  French-speaking  employees  tend  to give lower ratings than Dutch-speaking 
employees  except  for  the  Tangible  aspects of service quality and Service Quality in general. Tenure 
had a negative impact on employees’ perception of Behavioral Intentions. 
 

Flexihealth 


 

110/131 

Perceived  Organizational  Support  had  a  consistent  positive  effect  on  employees’  ratings  for  all 
indicators  except  Tangibles  and  Behavioral  Intentions.  Employee  well-being  (Step  4)  added  only  a 
limited amount of explanatory value for Tangibles, Satisfaction with services, Service Quality in general 
and Behavioral Intentions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 74. Standardized beta weights and significance levels for sample 2 

 

Total R2 

Step 1  

Language 

Tenure 
D R2 
Step2 

Negative aff. 

Positive aff. 

Locus 
control 
D R2 
Step3 

Job 
insecurity 
Org. support 

Sup. Support 

Control time  

Control meth 
D R2 
Step4 

Satisfaction 

T-SQ 

.14 

 

 

0.02 

0.01 
 

0.20 

-0.12 

-0.08 

0.06 
 

-0.05 

0.10 

0.01 

0.05 

-0.06 

0.04 
 

0.10 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

** 

* 

 

*** 
 

 

 

 

 

 

** 
 

 

R-SQ 

.23 

 

 

 

 

 

Re-SQ 

.22 

 

 

 

 

 

-0.16 

** 

 

-0.14 

** 

 

0.05 
 

*** 
 

0.05 
 

*** 
 

-0.01 

 

-0.03 

 

0.15 

** 

-0.08 

 

0.17 

0.02 

** 

 

0.09 
 

0.03 

0.24 

0.04 

0.10 

-0.01 

0.09 
 

0.04 

*** 
 

 

*** 

 

 

 

*** 
 

 

0.09 
 

0.09 

0.18 

0.02 

0.00 

0.04 

0.06 
 

*** 
 

 

** 

 

 

 

*** 
 

-0.01 

 

A-SQ 

.12 

 

 

-0.12 

0.02 
 

0.08 

0.13 

0.04 

0.05 
 

0.01 

0.12 

0.08 

-0.06 

0.06 

0.04 
 

0.05 

 

 

 

* 

 

** 
 

 

* 

 

*** 
 

 

* 

 

 

 

** 
 

 

 

 

 

E-SQ 

.17 

 

 

-0.16 

** 

 

*** 
 

 

 

 

*** 
 

 

*** 

 

 

 

*** 
 

 

0.04 
 

0.03 

0.09 

0.00 

0.05 
 

0.06 

0.21 

0.04 

0.14 

-0.02 

0.08 
 

0.08 

SSAT 

.21 

 

 

 

 

 

-0.17 

** 

 

** 
 

* 

* 

 

** 
 

 

** 

 

 

 

*** 
 

** 

0.02 
 

0.12 

-0.12 

-0.04 

0.04 
 

0.06 

0.19 

0.11 

0.00 

0.05 

0.12 
 

0.15 

SQ 

.16 

 

 

-0.09 

0.01 
 

0.01 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

-0.13 

* 

-0.01 

0.02 
 

-0.02 

0.13 

0.07 

0.05 

0.09 

0.10 
 

0.01 

 

 
 

 

* 

 

 

 

*** 
 

 

Bi 

.23 

 

 

 

 

-0.17 

** 

-0.13 

* 

0.06 
 

0.09 

0.01 

0.03 

0.03 
 

0.01 

0.12 

0.15 

0.01 

0.09 

0.11 
 

0.14 

*** 
 

 

 

 

* 
 

 

 

* 

 

 

*** 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

* 

** 

** 

*** 

*** 

0.03 

0.03 

0.04 

0.01 

0.01 

0.01 

0.00 

0.03 

0.03 

0.07 

0.20 

0.11 

0.03 

0.07 

0.12 

0.10 

-0.07 

-0.06 

-0.05 

-0.02 

-0.07 

-0.06 

-0.10 

-0.01 

Positive 
stress 
Stress 
D R2 
 
In  Sample  3  (see  Table  75)  we  found  the  largest  amount  of  explained  variance  for  Reliability  of 
Services (24%) while only 8% of the variance in Tangible aspects of service quality could be explained 
by control variables, employee characteristics, work conditions and employee well-being. On average, 
about 17% of the variance in CSI could be explained by employee variables in the regression analysis. 
Employee characteristics (Step 2) and Work conditions (Step 3) had the largest explanatory value. 
 
Being a male rather than female employee working in a healthcare setting had a small negative impact 
on all CSI except Tangibles and Reliability. Having a higher degree of contact with customers had a 
positive  effect  on  employees’  ratings  of  Assurance,  Empathy,  Satisfaction  with  services,  Service 
Quality in general and Behavioral Intentions. 
 
Positive  affectivity  had  a  positive  effect  on  all  indicators  except  Tangibles,  Reliability  and  Service 
Quality in general, while the former two were predicted more by a lower external locus of control. 

Flexihealth 


 

111/131 

 
Perceived  Organizational  support was positively and moderately related to higher ratings for all CSI, 
and similar but to slightly smaller effects were observed for Perceived Supervisor Support.  
 
Finally, employee well-being indicators were virtually all related consistently to CSI: job satisfaction and 
positive stress had positive effects while negative stress had a negative impact on employees’ ratings. 
 
 
 
 

Flexihealth 


 

112/131 

Table 75.  Standardized beta weights and significance levels for sample 3 
 
 

Re-SQ 

R-SQ 

A-SQ 

E-SQ 

T-SQ 

 

 

 

 

.08 

 

 

0.01 

0.00 

 

0.01 

-0.01 

-0.04 

0.03 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

*** 

*** 

 

 

-0.05 

*** 

0.04 

0.10 

* 

*** 

-0.05 

** 

.24 

 

 

-0.02 

0.00 

 

0.00 

0.02 

-0.05 

0.08 

 

0.01 

0.23 

0.17 

0.04 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

*** 

*** 

 

 

*** 

*** 

* 

 

0.02 

0.03 

 

-0.01 

*** 

0.14 

*** 

Total R2 

Step 1  

Gender 

Contact 
D R2 
Step2 

Negative aff. 

Positive aff. 

Locus control 
D R2 
Step3 

Job insecurity 

Org. support 

Sup. Support 

Control time  

Control meth 
D R2 
Step4 

Satisfaction 

Positive stress 

.17 

 

 

 

 

.18 

 

-0.04 

*** 

-0.06 

 

0.00 

*** 

 

-0.01 

 

 

0.09 

0.02 

 

-0.02 

 

 

*** 

*** 

*** 

 

 

.19 

 

-0.06 

0.14 

0.04 

 

-0.01 

 

 

*** 

*** 

*** 

 

 

SSAT 

.16 

 

 

 

 

SQ 

.14 

 

 

 

 

Bi 

.20 

 

 

 

 

-0.02 

* 

-0.03 

* 

-0.02 

* 

0.10 

0.02 

 

-0.01 

*** 

*** 

 

 

0.08 

0.01 

 

-0.01 

0.02 

-0.02 

*** 

*** 

 

 

 

 

0.05 

*** 

0.08 

*** 

0.05 

*** 

0.06 

*** 

-0.02 

 

-0.01 

 

-0.02 

 

-0.02 

 

0.07 

*** 

0.07 

*** 

0.07 

*** 

0.06 

*** 

0.05 

*** 

 

0.00 

0.19 

0.05 

0.00 

0.02 

0.07 

 

 

*** 

*** 

 

 

 

-0.01 

0.22 

0.05 

0.02 

-0.01 

 

 

*** 

** 

 

 

*** 

0.07 

*** 

 

-0.01 

 

 

 

-0.02 

 

 

 

 

-0.03 

** 

-0.02 

0.17 

0.08 

0.04 

0.02 

0.08 

*** 

*** 

** 

 

*** 

0.19 

0.03 

0.03 

0.01 

0.06 

*** 

 

 

 

*** 

0.13 

0.06 

0.02 

0.02 

0.06 

*** 

*** 

 

 

*** 

0.20 

0.05 

0.02 

0.01 

0.08 

0.14 

0.04 

 

-0.02 

0.07 

0.00 

0.08 

 

*** 

*** 

 

 

*** 

 

*** 

 

 

*** 

** 

 

 

*** 

 

 

0.05 

0.11 

** 

*** 

 

0.00 

0.07 

 

 

*** 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.06 

0.07 

*** 

*** 

0.04 

0.07 

** 

*** 

0.06 

0.08 

*** 

*** 

0.06 

0.09 

*** 

*** 

0.09 

0.09 

*** 

*** 

0.06 

0.11 

*** 

*** 

*** 

*** 

*** 

*** 

*** 

*** 

*** 

*** 

*** 

0.01 

0.02 

0.01 

0.01 

-0.05 

-0.06 

-0.07 

-0.12 

-0.11 

-0.06 

Stress 
D R2 
 
3.6.5. Impact of change on CSI 
 
First,  a  simple  multilevel  random  intercept  model  is  estimated  for  each  CSI.  In  Table  76 we report 
parameter  estimates  and  variances  for  step  1  (null  model  including  only  a  constant)  and  step  2 
(including a constant and average change per organization as predictor variables). 
Table 76. Parameter estimates and variances for whole sample 

-0.04 

-0.03 

0.01 

0.01 

0.02 

0.01 

*** 

*** 

*** 

*** 

*** 

** 

 

 
N  
Step 1 

T-SQ 
11987 
 

Intercept  4.97** 

Level 2 variance 

(.08) 
.21** 
(.06) 

Level 1 variance  1.37** 

autocorrelation 

Step 2 

(.02) 
.14 
 

Intercept  4.95** 

Changes 

Level 2 variance 

(.08) 
-.17 
(.14) 
.20** 
(.05) 

Level 1 variance  1.37** 

autocorrelation 

(.02) 
.13 

R-SQ 
11965 
 
4.77** 
(.09) 
.28** 
(.07) 
1.29** 
(.02) 
.18 
 
4.79** 
(.07) 
-.65** 
(.13) 
.17** 
(.04) 
1.29** 
(.02) 
.12 

Re-SQ 
11811 
 
5.12** 
(.08) 
.20** 
(.05) 
1.09** 
(.01) 
.16 
 
5.13** 
(.07) 
-.44** 
(.13) 
.16** 
(.04) 
1.10** 
(.01) 
.12 

A-SQ 
11870 
 
5.55** 
(.07) 
.16** 
(.04) 
.88** 
(.01) 
.15 
 
5.55** 
(.06) 
-.33* 
(.11) 
.12** 
(.03) 
.88** 
(.01) 
.12 

E-SQ 
11728 
 
5.55** 
(.07) 
.16** 
(.04) 
.88** 
(.01) 
.15 
 
5.32** 
(.06) 
-.37* 
(.12) 
.13** 
(.04) 
.99** 
(.01) 
.12 

SSAT 
11855 
 
5.45** 
(.06) 
.14** 
(.04) 
.72** 
(.01) 
.16 
 
5,46** 
(.06) 
-.27* 
(.11) 
.12** 
(.03) 
.73** 
(.01) 
.14 

PSAT 
4039 
 
5.28** 
(.08) 
.07* 
(.03) 
.94 
(.02) 
.07 
 
5.09** 
(.12) 
.22 
(.17) 
.03 
(.02) 
.95** 
(.02) 
.03 

SQ 
11967 
 
5.09** 
(.09) 
.23** 
(.06) 
1.84** 
(.04) 
.11 
 
5.08** 
(.08) 
-.29 
(.15) 
.20** 
(.06) 
1.85** 
(.04) 
.10 

PQ 
4063 
 
5.43** 
(.10) 
.10 
(.05) 
1.52** 
(.03) 
.06 
 
5.33** 
(.18) 
.09 
(.26) 
.08 
(.04) 
1.53** 
(.03) 
.05 

Bi 
11684 
 
5.28** 
(.07) 
.18** 
(.05) 
.99** 
(.01) 
.15 
 
5.23** 
(.07) 
-.31* 
(.12) 
.14** 
(.04) 
.99 
(.01) 
.12 

Note. Standard errors of parameter estimates between parentheses, **: parameter >3 x SE; *: parameter > 2 x SE; 
autocorrelation function= level 2 variance/total variance 
 

Flexihealth 


 

113/131 

For each indicator, level 2 variance indicates the degree of variation between organizations, while level 
1 variance indicates the variation between employees within organizations. From the table it is obvious 
that level 1 variance is substantially larger than level 2 variance, indicating differences at the level  of 
individual  employees  within  organizations  rather  than  between  organizations.  Notwithstanding  this 
difference, we still found evidence for significant level two variation for nearly all CSI except Product 
Quality and Product Satisfaction. When organizational level changes were added in Step 2, we found in 
general a slight decrease in level 2 variance and parameter estimates show that the average number of 
changes encountered in an organization had a negative impact on Reliability, Responsiveness and to a 
smaller degree on Assurance, Empathy, Satisfaction with services and Behavioral intentions. 
 
The autocorrelation function gives an indication of the amount of variance that remains to be accounted 
for at the higher level. For all Servqual dimensions, about 15% of the variance exists at  the between 
organization-level. On average about 3% of these between-organization differences can be accounted 
for by including the average number of changes at the organizational level. Similar results are found for 
Satisfaction with services and Behavioral intentions. For Satisfaction with products and overall Product 
Quality, level 2 variance is not or marginally significant, indicating no systematic between-organization 
differences. For these indicators, average change was a non significant predictor when added to the 
model in step 2. 
 
Finally, we wished to examine the degree to which the number of changes employees experienced, the 
appraisal  of  these  changes  and  emotional  reactions to the changes  could have a DIRECT impact on 
perceived CSI or whether the effects occurred primarily through the effects of changes and associated 
appraisal  and  emotional  reactions  on  employee  well-being or on perceived working conditions. From 
correlational  analyses  performed  in  the  previous  section,  we  already  know  that  the  mere  number  of 
changes in the working environment experienced by employees was not or only weakly related to CSI. 
We  simplified  the  following  analysis  by  a-priori grouping positive emotions (feeling enthusiastic and 
serene) into ‘positive emotional reaction’ following changes and grouping the four negative emotional 
reactions  (feeling  stressed,  unbalanced,  powerless  and  angry)  into  a  ‘negative  emotional  reaction’ 
following changes.  
 
In  Table  77, the additional variance explained by the inclusion of changes and both the appraisal and 
emotional  reactions  to  the regression equations from the previous section is provided. For Sample 1, 
including the number of changes experienced had no additional explanatory value for any of the CSI. 
Adding  employees’  appraisal  and  emotional  reactions  allowed  a  very  small  (1%)  but  significant 
increase  in  explained  variance.  This  was  due  to  the  effect  of  perceived  responsiveness  of  the 
organization  concerning  the  changes,  which  had  a  negative  effect  on  the  majority  of  CSI  except 
Tangibles, Product quality and perceived Behavioral Intentions. 
Table 77. Change in R2 by including change -related variables in the analyses for Sample 1 

 

T-SQ 

 

R-SQ 

  

Re-SQ 

  

  

E-SQ 

  

  

  

SQ 

  

PQ 

  

Bi 

A-
SQ 
.00 

SSA
T 
.00 

PSA
T 
.00 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

* 

** 

.01 

.01 

.00 

.00 

.00 

.00 

.00 

.00 

.01  * 

.01  ** 

Changes 
Appraisal  & 
Emotions 
 
In Sample 2, a similar pattern was observed  (see Table 78)  but here the additional variance explained 
by  the  appraisal  and  emotional  reactions  to  changes  did  not  reach  statistical  significance  except  for 
Tangibles.  Employees  who  report  more  negative  emotional  reactions  following  changes  have  lower 
ratings of Tangible aspects of the service. 
 
 
 

.00 

.01 

.01 

.01 

.00 

** 

* 

* 

 

 

 

.00 

.00 

 

 

 

Flexihealth 


Table 78. Change in R2 by including change -related variables in the analyses for Sample 2 

 

114/131 

 

 

 

 

T-
SQ 
.00 

R-
SQ 
.00 

Re-
SQ 
.00 

A-
SQ 
.01 

SSA
T 
.01 

 

 

 

E-SQ 

 

 

SQ 

 

Bi 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

.04 

.03 

.05 

.00 

*** 

Changes 
Appraisal  & 
Emotions 
 
In Sample 3, the addition of the number of changes experienced did not explain any additional variance 
in  CSI,  but  the  inclusion  of  appraisal  and  emotional  reactions  explained  a  very  small  but  significant 
additional proportion of the variance in CSI (see Table 79). Again, this was due largely to the negative 
impact of responsibility appraisals on service quality dimensions (except Tangibles). 
Table 79. Change in R2 by including change -related variables in the analyses for Sample 3 

.01 

.00 

.05 

.02 

.02 

.04 

.02 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  E-SQ 

 

 

SQ 

 

Bi 

 

T-
SQ 
.00 

R-
SQ 
.00 

Re-
SQ 
.00 

A-
SQ 
.00 

SSA
T 
.00 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

.00 

.00 

.00 

.01 

.00 

.01 

.01 

.00 

.00 

.00 

.00 

 
*
* 

 
**
* 

 
**
* 

Changes 
Appraisal  & 
Emotions 
 
3.6.6. Discussion and conclusion 
 
Our  main  research  question  focused  on  the  effect  or  impact  of  organizational  changes  on  the 
organizations’ ability to deliver high-quality products and services and satisfy its customers. This main 
point  was  elaborated  to  investigate  the  correspondence  between  employee  perceptions  of  customer 
satisfaction  and  actual  customer  satisfaction  ratings,  the  structure  and  internal  relationships  between 
employees’  perceptions  of  diverse  CSI  and  the  linkages  of  CSI  with  employee  characteristics, 
perceived working conditions and employee well-being. 
 
First, we found a moderate correspondence between indicators of customer satisfaction provided by 
customers (or proxy customers) and the ratings given by employees. In general, however, when using 
the  same  scale,  employees  tend  to  rate  all  aspects  of  satisfaction  slightly  lower  than  customers  in 
general do. 
 
We  tested  a  model  that  conceptualized  the  current  views  on  satisfaction,  quality  and  behavioral 
intentions in an appraisal- emotional reaction- intentions framework similar to that proposed by Bagozzi 
(1992)  and  applied  to  the  context  of  CSI  by  Gotlieb  et  al.  (1994).  Overall,  although  we  found 
acceptable  to  good  fit  in  two  out  of  the  three  samples,  a  model  where  satisfaction  ratings  were 
considered  as  antecedents  of  overall  service  and  product  quality  ratings  provided  a  superior  fit  in  all 
three  samples.  At  this  point  it  is  not  possible  to  discern  whether  this  means  that  satisfaction  ratings 
should  be  considered  more evaluative judgments along the lines of the evaluations made in Servqual 
which  precede  the  more  affective  overall  service  and  product  quality  assessments,  or  whether  this 
means  that  we  should  reconsider  the  evaluation-first  framework  and  move  towards  a model where 
affective satisfaction and service quality experiences are antecedents of evaluative overall service and 
product quality ratings.  
 
In  organizations  which  are  either  mainly  production-based  or  which  provide  products  as  well  as 
services,  Tangibles aspects and Reliability of services had the largest impact on employee perceived 
overall service quality and indirectly on employees’ estimates of customer recommendation and loyalty. 
In  service-based  organizations  employees  perceived  only  the  Servqual  dimension  Assurance,  or  the 
knowledge  and  courtesy  of  the  employees  and  their  ability  to  convey  trust  and  confidence,  and 
satisfaction  with  service  to  be  important  in  overall  service  quality  judgments.  Finally,  in  healthcare 
settings,  we  found  that  all  Servqual  dimensions  predicted  overall  perceived  service  quality  except 
responsiveness,  indicating  that  employees  perceived  the  willingness  to  help  customers  and  provide 

Flexihealth 


 

115/131 

prompt service less important in overall service quality. 
 
Considering  the  relationships  between  employee  characteristics,  work  conditions  and  well-being, we 
found that on average these explained only a limited amount of the variance in employees’ perceptions 
of CSI in sample 1 (13%), sample 2 (19%) and sample 3 (17%). 
 
Overall we found  Perceived Organizational Support to be consistently associated with CSI. Employees 
who  report  experiencing  more  support  from  their  organization  tend  to  rate  quality  and  satisfaction 
higher  and  estimate  a  greater  intention  on  the  part  of  the  customers  to  return,  repurchase  or 
recommend.  Negative  stress  was  a  consistent  predictor  in  samples  1  and  3.  Employees  who have 
higher levels of stress tend to give lower ratings for quality, satisfaction and behavioral intentions and 
the  relationships  remain  even  when  controlling  for  employee  characteristics  such  as  the  degree  of 
negative affectivity.  
 
Further,  there  were  differences  between  language  samples  for  nearly  all  CSI.  Given  that  these 
differences often are parallel with different organizations, it is difficult at the moment to interpret these 
as stemming either from differences in meaning assigned to individual items (psychometric problems) 
or to actual existing differences in perceived customer satisfaction. Employee characteristics such as 
positive or negative affectivity and external locus of control could only explain a very small amount of 
variance in CSI, indicating that aspects related to the emotional state of employees as they estimated 
customer satisfaction was at least not a highly important determinant of  their perceptions of customer 
satisfaction.  Job  insecurity,  often  associated  with  organizational  changes  and  its  negative  impact  on 
employee  well-being  and  potentially  organizational  performance,  was  not  consistently  related  to 
employees’ perceptions of customer satisfaction. This could possibly be explained due to the fact that 
job insecurity is an extremely important issue before or during change processes, whereas the negative 
impact of changes on a slightly longer time perspective emerges at the moment most Flexihealth studies 
were conducting, i.e. after changes had taken place. 
 
Control  over  the  work  situation  included  both  control  over  timing  aspects  and  control  over  methods. 
Control over methods was virtually not related or only weakly to CSI, whereas we found some contra- 
intuitive  results  for  control  over  timing.  For  several  CSI,  we  found  significant  negative  effects  of 
perceived control over timing aspects, especially in Sample 1 where we found particularly pronounced 
effects for Responsiveness and  perceived Satisfaction with services. This mirrors results reported by 
Dormann and Kaiser (2002), who found that time control lead to lower (customer reported) customer 
satisfaction.  They  argued  that  control  over  time  on  the  side  of  the  employees  makes  service less 
predictable  and  reliable  for  time-related  aspects  and  promptness  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
customer. Given that the strongest relationship was found with Responsiveness of service, which gives 
an indication of “the willingness to help customers and provide prompt service”, we might argue for a 
similar explanation here. 
 
Employee  well-being  was  conceptualized  as  job  satisfaction,  positive  stress and the lack of negative 
stress.  In  sample  1,  we  found  the  strongest  effects  of  negative  stress,  which negatively impacted 
perceived CSI as expected. The lack of effects for satisfaction and  positive stress might be due to the 
fact that these effects are already incorporated in the effects from work conditions that are predictive 
of satisfaction and  positive stress. In sample 2, there was only a very limited effect of employee well-
being when including employee characteristics and work conditions. In sample 3 we found again the 
strongest effect of negative stress. 
 
To  answer  the  question  as to  whether  changes  in  organizations  impact  customer  satisfaction, we 
examined  the degree  to which  differences  between  organizations in CSI could  – at least partly  – be 
explained  by  the  number  of  changes  experienced.  As  was  described  in  the  results,  the  variation  in 

Flexihealth 


 

116/131 

perceived  customer  satisfaction  between  organizations  was  considerably  smaller  than  the  variation 
between  employees  within  organizations.  Nevertheless,  a  small  fraction  of  this  variation  could  be 
explained  by  the  number  of  changes  encountered  on  average  in  each  organization.  This  was 
particularly  true  for  the  more  interaction-related aspects of customer satisfaction and service quality, 
and  less  for  tangible  aspects  and  product  quality.  These  latter  findings  seem  to  indicate  than  the 
negative  effects  of  changes  on  organizational  performance  are  perceived  to  be  more  influential on 
customer  relations  and  less  so  on  issues  related  to  more  external  characteristics  of  the  service and 
production-related  problems.  The  number  of  changes  in  the  working  environment  encountered by 
employees had no direct impact on any of the CSI- its effects were shown to be mediated fully through 
its  impact  on  perceived  working  conditions  or  employee  well-being. The appraisal of changes as the 
responsibility of the organization did have a  significant negative impact on several CSI in sample 1 and 
sample 3. 
 
In summary, we found only very limited evidence for effects of organizational changes on perceptions 
of customer satisfaction and to the extent we found effects, these were indirect and  worked through 
the  impact  of  changes  and  the  appraisal  and  emotional  reactions  associated  with  changes  on 
perceptions  of  working  conditions  and  employee  well-being.  In  this  context  however,  support  as 
perceived  by  the  employees  seems  a  central  determinant  for  customer  satisfaction,  at  least  as 
perceived  through  the  eyes  of  the  employees.  Especially  in  turbulent  times  when  organizations  are 
restructuring, merging or otherwise changing, maintaining good internal communication, conveying trust 
and  care  and  making  employees  feel  appreciated  by  the  organization  seem  the  key  in  ensuring  to 
maintain a competitively high level of quality and customer satisfaction. 

 

Flexihealth 


 

117/131 

4.  General conclusion 
The Flexihealth research project was intended to identify the effects of flexibility practices and changes 
in  work  environments  on  well-being  indicators,  health  and  quality  of  life,  and  ultimately  customer 
satisfaction  indicators.  Based  on  analyses  conducted  on  a  data  base  built  to  properly  represent  the 
Belgian  active  population  within  the  secondary  and  tertiary  sectors,  we  found  that  changes  and 
flexibility negatively affect employee well-being, in particular when they are interpreted as a source of 
threat  by  employees.  These  practices  also  affect  health  and  quality  of  life  but  are  generally  less 
strongly related to customer satisfaction indicators, although there are some exceptions.  
In general, flexibility practices exert some positive effects on worker well-being since workers exposed 
to  flexibility  report  more  positive  stress  and  less  job  insecurity.  However,  these  effects  are 
counterbalanced  by  negative  ones,  such  as  less  control  at  work,  more  negative  stress, more medical 
complaints, and  poorer quality of life. Differences were found however across flexibility practices, with 
flexibility in task assignments having the most detrimental effects. 
The effects of changes on employee well-being are generally  negative. In particular, more changes is 
associated  with  lower  perceived  support  and  job  satisfaction,  higher  negative stress,  lower  positive 
stress,  poorer  mental quality of life, and  more frequent medical complaints. Changing supervisors and 
task assignments has the most deleterious effects on well-being.   
A look at differences across demographic groups reveals that blue-collar workers and employees aged 
between 36 and 55 are more at risk  in terms of well-being worsening while  workers aged 55 or more 
report higher levels of well-being than young employees. 
Our  research  program  also  yielded  interesting  findings  with  respect  to  the  effect  of  potential 
moderators. We found that the number of changes increases the perception of threat when employees 
are  low  on  positive  affectivity  and  self-esteem, or perceive little support from the organization or the 
supervisor.  It  also  appears  from  the  findings  that  individuals  who  think  they  are  important  at  work, 
hence  are  high  on  self-esteem,  do  not  feel  threatened  by  increasing  changes  in  the  workplace.  The 
same phenomenon occurs for employees who feel supported by the organization or the supervisor. Our 
findings  also  suggest  that  the  number  of  changes  increases  the  perception of  challenge  when  (a) 
positive  affectivity  and  self-esteem are high,  (b) negative affectivity  and external locus of control are 
low, and (c) perceived support from the organization or the supervisor is high. A final set of moderation 
analyses revealed that control at work  alleviates the effect of changes and their negative appraisal on 
negative stress. It thus contributes to improve employees’ resistance to stressful events. 
A  number  of  mediation  processes  were  tested  as  well.  It  appears  from  these  analyses  that  positive 
stress plays a role as a mechanism activated by changes (the number of changes and their perception) 
that may potentially result in negative stress. It is a partial mediator of the relationship between number 
of changes, perceived threat, control, and organization’s accountability on one hand and negative stress 
on  the  other  hand.  Similarly, positive stress  is  a  full  mediator  of  the  relationship  between  perceived 
challenge and negative stress. 
The  medical  section  of  the  Flexihealth  survey  addressed  the  medical  antecedents  and  complaints  of 
employees, and their quality of life and health-related behaviors. Of primary interest, we found that the 
prevalence of medical complaints such as fatigue, distress, dorsolumbar pain, and headaches was quite 
high  among  Flexihealth  respondents  as  compared  to  national  norms (ISSP, 2001).  This is surprising 
since our sample was supposed to be in a more healthy condition than the general population, due to the 
well-known  healthy  worker  effect  (those  who  work  are  supposed  to  be  healthier  than the general 
population). However, the prevalence of other medical complaints (e.g., mental health affections) was 
quite close to the norms for the general population.  A gender comparison reveals that  women tend to 
report more headaches, dorsolumbar pain, and sleeping problems while men report more cardiovascular 
complaints. The prevalence of somatic complaints is significantly higher among blue-collar and white-

Flexihealth 


 

118/131 

collar  workers  than  among  managers  and  upper-level  management,  except  for  cardiovascular 
complaints which are reported in equal proportions across occupational groups.  
 
One interesting finding regarding work-life habits is that 20% of Flexihealth respondents report having 
recently increased their level of alcohol consumption and 20.4% having recently begun to drink alcohol. 
These proportions are significantly higher than the norms for the general population (ISSP, 2001). This 
trend affects significantly more men and isolated individuals (e.g., widowed, divorced, single, etc.) than 
women or married people. If one looks at smoking habits among respondents, data show that 38% of 
them report having increased their level of smoking recently while 17% report having begun to smoke 
recently. These proportions are also higher than in the general population (ISSP, 2001).  
 
The  mean  score  of  the Flexihealth  respondents  on  the  physical  component  of  quality  of  life  was  51 
(SD=7)  while  it was  45  (SD=11)  for  the  mental  component.  In  other  words,  they  perceived  their 
physical quality of life as reasonably good but were less positive about their mental quality of life. When 
the two components are combined, one notes that 31% of respondents perceive their quality  of life as 
good or high, 48% report a poor score on either of the two scales, and 21% rate their quality of life 
negatively on both scales. A comparison across industries shows that the  quality of life is particularly 
low in the  health care industry  (65%  of  employees  report  a  poor  mental  quality  of  life  and  29.75% 
report a poor physical quality of life).  
 
The  correlations  between  changes  and  flexibility  practices  on  one  hand, and medical complaints and 
quality  of  life  on  the  other  hand  are  generally  low.  However, there was a high association between 
perceived  stress  and  the  scores  for  medical  complaints  and  quality  of  life.  Multivariate analyses 
conducted  on  the  data  showed  that  the mental  component of  quality  of  life,  but  not  the  physical 
component, was affected by changes and stress, which confirms earlier work in this area (Ferrie et al., 
1998;  Kivimäki  et  al.,  2001;  Tennant,  2001). When stress and quality of life are accounted for in the 
analyses,  changes  do  not  appear  to  affect  alcohol  consumption, nor is there an effect of changes on 
recent increases in alcohol consumption, which contradicts previous research findings (Metcalfe et al., 
2003; Kivimäki et al., 2000).  However, the number of changes is associated with recent increases of 
smoking. 
 
The  main  research question  addressed within the customer section of the Flexihealth project focused 
on the effects  of changes on the organizations’ ability to deliver high-quality products and services and 
satisfy  its  customers.  First,  we  found  a  moderate  correspondence  between  indicators  of  customer 
satisfaction provided by customers and the ratings given by employees. In general, employees tend to 
rate all aspects of satisfaction slightly lower than customers do.  
 
We  tested  a  model  that  conceptualized  the  current  views  on  satisfaction,  quality  and  behavioral 
intentions in an appraisal–emotional reaction–intentions framework similar to that proposed by Bagozzi 
(1992). Overall, a model where satisfaction ratings were considered as antecedents of overall service 
and product quality ratings provided a superior fit in three data sets.  
 
In  organizations  which  are  either  mainly  production-based  or  which  provide  products  as  well  as 
services, Tangibles aspects and Reliability of services had the largest impact on employee  perceived 
overall service quality and indirectly on employees’ estimates of customer recommendation and loyalty. 
In  service-based  organizations,  employees  perceived  only  the  Servqual  dimension  Assurance and 
Satisfaction  with  service  to  be  important  in  overall  service  quality  judgments.  Finally,  in  healthcare 
settings,  we  found  that  all  Servqual  dimensions  predicted  overall  perceived  service  quality  except 
Responsiveness,  indicating  that  employees  perceived  the  willingness  to  help  customers  and  provide 
prompt service less important in overall service quality. 
 

Flexihealth 


 

119/131 

Considering  the  relationships  between  employee  characteristics,  work  conditions  and  well-being, we 
found that on average these explained only a limited amount of the variance in employees’ perceptions 
of CSI in sample 1 (13%), sample 2 (19%) and sample 3 (17%). However,  Perceived Organizational 
Support was consistently associated with CSI. Negative stress was  also a consistent predictor  of CSI 
in  samples  1  and  3,  even  after employee characteristics such  as negative affectivity were controlled 
for.  
 
Further, there were differences between language samples for nearly all CSI. However, it is difficult to 
interpret  these  as  stemming  either  from  differences  in  meaning  assigned  to  individual  items 
(psychometric problems) or to actual existing differences in perceived customer satisfaction. Employee 
characteristics  such  as  positive  or  negative  affectivity  and  external  locus  of  control  explained only a 
small amount of variance in CSI, indicating that aspects related to the emotional state of employees as 
they  estimated  customer  satisfaction  was  not  a  critical  determinant  of  their  perceptions  of  customer 
satisfaction.  Job  insecurity  was  not  consistently  related  to  employees’  perceptions  of  customer 
satisfaction.  This  could possibly be explained by the fact that job insecurity is an extremely important 
issue before or  during  change  processes,  while  most  Flexihealth  studies  were  being conducted after 
changes had taken place. 
 
Control over the work situation included both control over scheduling and control over methods. Control 
over methods was only weakly to CSI, whereas we found some contra-intuitive results for control over 
scheduling. For several CSI, we found significant negative effects of perceived control over scheduling, 
especially  in  Sample  1  where  we  found  particularly  pronounced  effects  for  Responsiveness  and 
perceived Satisfaction with services. This mirrors results reported by Dormann and Kaiser (2002), who 
found that employee time control led to lower (customer reported) customer satisfaction. They argued 
that control over time on the side of the employees makes service less predictable and reliable for time-
related  aspects  and  promptness  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  customer.  Given  that  the  strongest 
relationship was found with Responsiveness of service, which gives an indication of “the willingness to 
help customers and provide prompt service”, we might argue for a similar explanation here. 
 
Employee  well-being  was  conceptualized  as  job  satisfaction,  positive  stress  and  the  lack  of negative 
stress. In sample 1, the strongest effect was attributable to negative stress, which negatively impacted 
perceived CSI as expected. In sample 2, there was  a small effect of employee well-being, controlling 
for  employee  characteristics  and  work  conditions.  In  sample  3,  the  strongest  effect  was  again 
attributable to negative stress. 
 
To  answer  the  question  as  to  whether  changes  in  organizations  impacted customer satisfaction, we 
examined  the  degree  to  which  differences  between organizations in CSI could  – at least partly  – be 
explained  by  the  number  of  changes  experienced.  The variation in perceived customer satisfaction 
between  organizations  was  considerably  smaller  than  the  variation  between  employees  within 
organizations.  Nevertheless,  a  small  portion  of  this  variance  was  due  to  the  number  of  changes 
encountered  in  organizations.  This  was  particularly  true  for  the  more  interaction-related aspects of 
customer satisfaction and service quality, and less for tangible aspects and product quality. The number 
of changes in the working environment encountered by employees had no  direct impact on any of the 
CSI – its effects were mediated through its impact on perceived working conditions or employee well-
being.  The  organization’s  perceived  accountability  for  changes did have a significant negative impact 
on several CSI in sample 1 and sample 3. 
 
In summary,  though  the  direct  effects  of  changes  on  CSI  were  limited  in  magnitude,  their  indirect 
effects  through  perceptions  of  support  and work conditions were  more important. In fact, support as 
perceived by  employees seems a central determinant of customer satisfaction.  During turbulent times, 
when  organizations  are  restructuring,  merging  or  otherwise  changing,  maintaining  good  internal 

Flexihealth 


 

120/131 

communication, conveying trust and care and making employees feel appreciated  by the organization 
are central to the maintenance of enduring customer satisfaction. 
 
 

Flexihealth 


 

121/131 

5.  References 
Abdel-Halim,  A.A.  (1980).  Effects  of  person-job  compatibility  on  managerial  reactions  to  role 

ambiguity. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 26, 193-211. 

Adcock, B.P. (2000).  The role of organizational citizinship behavior in the linkage of employee and 

customer satisfaction. Dissertation Abstracts International, Section B: The sciences and 
engineering, 

60, 4281. 

Aiken, L.S., & West, S.G. (1991).  Multiple regression: Testing and interpreting interactions. 

Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Allen, N., & Grisaffe, D. (2001). Employee commitment to the organization and customer reactions: 

Mapping the linkages. Human Resource Management Review, 11, 209-236. 

Anderson,  J.C.,  &  Gerbing,  D.W.  (1988).  Structural  equation modeling in practice: A review and 

 

recommended 2-step approach. Psychological Bulletin, 103, 411-423. 

Armenakis, A.A., & Bedeian, A.G. (1999). Organizational change: A review of theory and research 

in the 1990s. Journal of Management, 25, 293-315. 

Armstrong-Stassen,  M.  (1994).  Coping  with  transition:  A  study  of  layoff  survivors.  Journal  of 

Organizational Behavior, 15, 597-621. 

Armstrong-Stassen,  M.  (1997).  The  effect  of  repeated  management  downsizing  and  surplus 
designation on remaining managers: An exploratory study. Anxiety, Stress and Coping, 10, 377-
384. 

Armstrong-Stassen,  M.  (1998).  Downsizing  the  Federal  Government:  A  longitudinal  study  of 

managers' reactions. Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences, 15, 310-321. 

Arney,  L.K.  (1988).  Effects  of  personality-environment  fit  on  job  stress.  Educational  and 

Psychological Research, 8, 1-18. 

Aronsson,  G.  (1989).  Swedish  research  on  job  control,  stress  and  health.  In  S.L.  Sauter,  J.J. 
Hurrell, JR, & C.L. Cooper (Eds.),  Job  control  and  worker  health (pp. 75-90). Chichester: 
Wiley 

Ashford, S., Lee, C., & Bobko, P. (1989). Content, causes, and consequences of job insecurity: A 

theory-based measure and substantive test. Academy of Management Journal, 32, 803-829. 

Ashford,  S.J.  (1988).  Individual  strategies  for  coping  with  stress  during  organizational  transitions. 

Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 24, 19-36. 

Babin B.J., & Griffin M. (1998). The nature of satisfaction: An updated examination and analysis. 

Journal of Business Research, 41, 127-136. 

Bagozzi, R.P. (1992).  The self-regulation of attitudes, intentions and behavior.  Social Psychology 

Quarterly, 55, 178-204. 

Baron,  R.  M.,  &  Kenny,  D.  A.  (1986).  The  moderator-mediator  variable  distinction in  social 
psychological  research:  Conceptual,  strategic,  and  statistical  considerations.  Journal  of 
Personnality and Social Psychology, 51, 1173-1182. 

Bentler, P.M., & Bonett, D.G. (1980). Significance tests and goodness of fit in the analysis of 

covariance   structures. Psychological Bulletin, 88, 588-606. 

Bernhardt,  K.L.,  Donthu,  N.,  &  Kennett,  P.A. (2000). A longitudinal analysis of satisfaction and 

profitability. Journal of Business Research, 4, 161-171. 

Flexihealth 


 

122/131 

Bettencourt, L.A., & Brown, S.W. (1997). Contact employees: Relationships among workplace 

fairness, job satisfaction and prosocial service behaviors. Journal of Retailing, 73, 39-61. 
Bitner, M.J., & Hubbert, A.R.(1994). Encounter satisfaction versus overall satisfaction versus 

quality: The customer’s voice. In R.T.Rust, & R.L.Oliver (Eds), Service quality: New directions 
in theory and practice.  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Bolton, R.N., & Drew, J.H. (1991). A multistage model of customers’ assessments of service 

quality and   value. Journal of Consumer Research, 17, 375-384. 

Bradley, G.L., & Sparks, B.A. (2000). Customer reactions to staff empowerment: Mediators and 

moderators. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 30, 991-1012. 

Brief, A.P., Burke, M.J., George, J.M., & Robinson, B.S. (1988). Should negative affectivity remain 
an unmeasured variable in the study of job stress?  Journal of Applied Psychology, 73, 193-
198. 

Brockner,  J.  (1988).  The  effect  of  work  layoffs  on  survivors:  Research,  theory,  and  practice. In 
B.M.  Staw  &  L.L.  Cummings  (Eds.),  Research  in  organizational  behavior  (Vol.  10). 
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press. 

Bruchon-Schweitzer, M., & Duntzer, R. (1994). Introduction à la psychologie de la santé. Paris: 

Presses Universitaires de France. Collection « Psychologie d’aujourd’hui ». 

Buchanan,  D.,  &  Huczynski  A.  (1997).  Part  4:  Organizational  change  and  development.  In 

Organizational behavior: An introductory text (pp. 455-587). Prentice Hall Europe. 

Burke, M.J., Rupinski M.T., Dunlap W.P. & Davison H.K. (1996). Do situational variables act as 
substantive causes of relationships between individual difference variables? Two large-scale tests 
of ''common cause'' models. Personnel Psychology, 49, 573-598. 

Cartwright, S., & Cooper, C.L. (1997). Managing workplace stress. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 

Publications. 

Cascio, W.F. (1993).  Downsizing:  What do we know?  Academy of Management Executive, 7, 

95-104. 

Cheng, Y., Kawachi, I., Coakley, E.H., Schwartz, J., & Colditz, G. (2000). Association between 
psychosocial work characteristics and health  functioning in American women: Prospective study. 
British Medical Journal, 320, 1432-36. 

Cooper,  C.L.,  Dewe,  P.J.,  &  O'Driscoll,  M.P.  (2001).  Organizational  stress:  A  review  and 

critique of theory, research, and applications. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 

Coté, N., Bélanger, L., & Jacques, J. (1994). La dimension humaine des organisations. Québec: 

Gaëtan Morin. 

Cox, T., & Fergusson, E. (1991).  Individual differences, stress and coping. In C.L. Cooper & R. 
Payne (Eds.), Personality and stress: Individual differences in the stress process (pp. 7-32). 
Chichester, England: John Wiley & Sons. 

Cronin, J.J., Brady, M.K. & Hult, G.T.M. (2000). Assessing the effects of quality, value, and 
customer satisfaction on consumer behavioral intentions in service environments. Journal of 
Retailing, 76, 193-218. 

Cronin, J.J., & Taylor, S.A. (1994). Servperf versus servqual: Reconciling performance based and 
perceptions minus expectations measurement of service quality. Journal of Marketing, 58, 125-
131. 

Cropanzano, R., James, K.,  & Konovsky, M.A. (1993). Dispositional affectivity as a predictor of 

work attitudes and job performance. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 14, 595-606. 

Flexihealth 


 

123/131 

Danna, K., & Griffin, R.W. (1999). Health and well-being in the workplace: A review and synthesis 

of the literature. Journal of Management 25, 357-384. 

Dant, R.P., Lumpkin, J.R.& Rawwas, M.Y.A. (1998). Sources of generalized versus issue specific 
dissatisfaction in service channels of distribution: A review and comparative investigation. Journal 
of Business Research, 42, 7-23. 

De Jonghe, J., Bosma, H., Peter, R., & Siegrist, J. (2000). Job strain, effort-reward imbalance and 
employee  well-being:  A  large-scale  cross-sectional  study.  Social  Science  and  Medicine,  50, 
1317-1327. 

De  Keyser,  V.,  &  Hansez,  I.  (1996).  Vers  une  perspective  transactionnelle du stress au travail: 

Pistes d'évaluations méthodologiques. Cahiers de Médecine du Travail, 28, 133-144. 

de Ruyter, K., Bloemer, J., & Peeters, P.(1997). Merging service quality and service satisfaction: 

An empirical test of an integrative model.  Journal of Economic Psychology, 18, 387-406. 

Dewe, P.J. (1992). Applying the concept of appraisal to work stressors: Some exploratory analysis. 

Human Relations, 45, 143-164. 

De Witte, H. (1999). Job Insecurity and psychological well-being: Review of the literature and 
exploration of some unresolved issues in “job insecurity”. European Journal of Work and 
Organizational Psychology, 8, 155-177. 

De Zanet, F., Hansez, I.,  Bossut, M., Vandenberghe, C., & De Keyser, V. (2004).  Analyse du 
discours  de  travailleurs  confrontés  à  des  changements  organisationnels:  Une  perspective 
transactionnelle. Le Travail Humain. 

Doménech,  M.  (Site  consulté  le  23/03/01).  Thèmes  connus  et  moins  connus: Le Eustress  - 1e 

partie. http://www.hemofiliacat.org/francaise/publica/Estres.htm  

Dormann, C., & Kaiser, D.M. (2002). Job conditions and customer satisfaction. European Journal 

of Work and Organizational Psychology, 11, 257-283. 

Dunham, R.B., & Smith, F.J. (1979). Organizational surveys. Glenview; IL: Scott-Foresman. 
Elliot, R.D. (1990). The challenge of managing change. Personnel Journal, 69, 40-49.  
Eisenberger, R., Huntington, R., Hutchison, S., & Sowa, D. (1986). Perceived organizational 

support and employee diligence, commitment, and innovation. Journal of Applied Psychology, 
71, 500-507. 

Everaere, C. (1997). Management de la flexibilité. Paris: Economica 
Ferrie, J.E., Shipley, M.J., Marmot, M.G., Stansfeld, S., & Davez Smith, G. (1998). The health 
effect of major organisational change and job insecurity. Social Science and Medicine, 46(2), 
243-254. 

Ferrie, J.E., Shipley, M.J., Marmot, M.G., Martikainen, P., Stansfeld, S.A., & Smith, G.D. (2001). 
Job insecurity in white-collar workers: Toward an explanation of association with health. Journal 
of Occupational Health Psychology, 6, 26-42. 

Folkman, S., & Moskowitz, J.T. (2000). Stress, positive emotion, and coping. Current Directions 

in Psychological Science. 9, 115-118 

Folkman, S., Lazarus, R.S., Dunkel-Schetter, C., DeLongis, A., & Gruen, R. (1986). The dynamics 
of  a  stressful  encounter:  Cognitive  appraisals,  coping,  and  encounter  outcomes.  Journal  of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 50, 992-1003. 

Flexihealth 


 

124/131 

Frese,  M.,  &  Zapf,  D.  (1999).  On  the  importance  of  the  objective  environment  in  stress  and 
attribution theory. Counterpoint to Perrewé and Zellars.  Journal of Organizational Behavior, 
21, 761-765. 

Frijda, N.H. (1993). Appraisal and beyond. Cognition and Emotion, 7, 225-231. 
Fusilier, M.R., Ganster, D.C., & Mays, B.T. (1987). Effects of social support, role stress, and locus 

of control on health. Journal of Management, 13, 517-528. 

Giese, J.L.,& Cote, J.A. (2000), Defining consumer satisfaction. Academy of Marketing Science 

Review [online]. 

Glogow, E. (1986). Research note: Burnout and locus of control. Public Personnel Management, 

15, 79-83. 

Gotlieb, G.B., Grewal, D. & Brown, S.W. (1994). Consumer satisfaction and perceived quality: 

Complimentary or divergent constructs? Journal of Applied Psychology, 79, 875-885. 

Greenhalgh,  L.,  &  Rosenblatt,  Z.  (1984).  Job  insecurity:  Toward conceptual clarity.  Academy of 

Management Review, 9, 438-448. 

Griffith, J. (2001). Do satisfied employees satisfy customers? Support services staff morale and 

satisfaction among public school administrators, students and parents. Journal of Applied Social 
Psychology, 31, 1627-1658. 

Grujic, V., Legetic, B., & Hacko, B. (1998). Quality of life and its measurements (abstract).  Med 

Pregl., 51, 1-2. 

Hagan, C.M.(1999). The relationship between employee job satisfaction and key customer 

outcomes: A study among temporary workers. Dissertation Abstracts International, Section 
A: Humanities and social sciences, 60, 2122. 

Halpin, G., Harris, K., & Halpin, G. (1985). Teacher stress as related to locus of control, sex, and 

age. Journal of Experimental Education, 53, 136-140. 

Hansez,  I.  (2001).  La  validation  du  WOCCQ  :  Vers  un  modèle  structural  du  stress  et  du 
contrôle  de  l’activité  de  travail.  Thèse  de  doctorat  en  Psychologie,  publiée,  Université  de 
Liège. 

Hansez,  I.,  &  De  Keyser,  V.  (1997).  Stress  at  work:  A  methodology  for  diagnosis  and 
pathways for collective intervention - The case of public services workers. Paper presented 
at  the  Vth  European  Conference  on  Organizational  Psychology  and  Health  Care,  Utrecht, 
Netherlands. 

Hartline, M.D., Ferrell, O.C., (1996). The management of customer-contact service employees: An 

empirical investigation. Journal of Marketing, 60, 52-70. 

Heaney,  C.A.,  Israel,  B.A.,  &  House,  J.S.  (1994).  Chronic  job  insecurity  among  automobile 

workers: Effects on job satisfaction and health, Social Science and Medicine, 38, 1431-1437. 

Hemenover,  S.H. (2001).  Self-reported  processing  bias  and  naturally  occurring  mood:  Mediators 
between  personality  and  stress  appraisals.  Personality  and  Social  Psychology  Bulletin,  27, 
387-394. 

Hemingway, H., Shipley, M., Mullen, M.J., Kumari, M., Brunner, E., Taylor, M., Donald, A.E., 
Deanfield,  J.E.,  &  Marmot,  M.  (2003).  Social  and  psychosocial  influences  on  inflammatory 
markers and vascular function  in civil servants (The Whitehall II Study), The American Journal 
of Cardiology, 92, 984-987. 

Flexihealth 


 

125/131 

Hennig-Thurau, T., & Klee, A. (1997). The impact of customer satisfaction and relationship quality 

on customer retention: A critical reassessment and model development. Psychology and 
Marketing, 14, 737-764.  

Herrington, G., & Lomax, W. (1999). Do satisfied employees make customers satisfied? An 

investigation into the relationship between service employee job satisfaction and customer 
perceived service quality.  Paper presented at the 28th European Marketing Academy 
Conference. 

Heslop, P., Smith, G.D., Metcalfe, C., Macleod, J., & Hart, C. (2002). Change in job satisfaction, 
and  its  association  with  self-reported  stress,  cardiovascular  risk  factors  and  mortality,  Social  
Science and Medicine, 54, 1589-1599. 

House, J.S., Landis, K.R., & Umberson, D. (1988). Social relationships and health. Science, 241, 

540-545. 

Hu, L., & Bentler, P.M. (1999). Cutoff Criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure analysis: 

conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling, 6, 1-55. 

Hurrell,  Jr.,  J.J.,  &  Murphy,  L.R.  (1991).  Locus  of  control,  job  demands,  and  health.  In  C.L. 
Cooper  &  R.  Payne  (Eds.),  Personality  and  stress:  Individual  differences  in  the  stress 
process (pp. 133-150). Chichester, England, UK: John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 

Iacobucci, D.I. , Ostrom, A., & Grayson, K. (1995). Distinguishing service quality and customer 

satisfaction: The voice of the customer. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 4, 277-303. 
Iaffaldano, M.T., & Muchinsky, P.M.(1985). Job satisfaction and job performance: A meta- 

analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 97, 193-200. 

Jacobson,  D.  (1991).  The  conceptual  approach  to  job  insecurity.  In J. Harley, D. Jacobson, B. 
Klandermans,  &  T.  Van  Vuuren.  Job  insecurity:  Coping  with  jobs  at  risk  (pp.  23–39). 
London: Sage Publications. 

James, L. R., Demaree, & R.G., Wolf, G. (1984). Estimating within-group interrater reliability with 

and without response bias. Journal Of Applied Psychology, 69, 85-98. 

Jenkins,  A.  (1998).  Flexibility,  individualization,  and  employment  insecurity  in  France.  European 

Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 7, pp. 23-38. 

Jimmieson N.L., & Griffin M.A. (1998). Linking client and employee perceptions of the organization: 

A study of client satisfaction with health care services. Journal of Occupational and 
Organizational Psychology, 71, 81-96. 

Johnson, J.W. (1996).  Linking employee perceptions of service climate to customer satisfaction.  

Personnel Psychology, 49, 853-882. 

Jones, T.O.,  & Sasser, W.E. (1995). Why satisfied customers defect. Harvard Business Review, 

73, 88. 

Judge,  T.A.,  Thoresen,  C.J.,  Pucik,  V.,  &  Welbourne,  T.M.  (1999).  Managerial  coping  with 
organizational  change:  A dispositional perspective.  Journal  of  Applied  Psychology,  84,  107-
122. 

Kahn,  R.L.,  &  Byosiere,  P.  (1992).  Stress  in  organizations.  In  M.D.  Dunnette  &  L.M.  Hough 
(Eds.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (pp. 571-650). Palo Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Karasek,  R.  (1979).  Job  demands,  job  decision  latitude,  and  mental  strain:  Implications  for  job 

redesign. Administrative Science Quarterly, 24, 285-308. 

Flexihealth 


 

126/131 

Karasek, R., & Theorell, T. (1990).  Healthy work: Stress, productivity and the reconstruction 

of working life. New York: Basic Books. 

Keenan, A., & McBain, G.D.M. (1979). Effects of Type A behavior, intolerance to ambiguity and 
locus  of  control  on  relationship  between  role  stress  outcomes.  Journal  of  Occupational 
Psychology, 52, 277-285. 

Kets de Vries, M.F.R., & Balazs, K. (1997). The downside of downsizing. Human Relations, 50, 

11-50. 

Kinnunen,  U.,  Mauno,  S.,  Natti,  J.,  &  Happonen,  M.  (2000).  Organizational  antecedents  and 
outcomes  of  job  insecurity:  A  longitudinal  study  in  three  organizations  in  Finland.  Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, 21, 443-459. 

Kitzman, B.C. (2000). The effects of the type of service interaction on the relationship between 

employee and customer attitudes. Dissertation Abstracts International, Section B: The 
sciences and engineering, 60, 4944. 

Kivimäki,  M.,  Vahtera,  J.,  Pentti,  J.,  &  Ferrie,  J.E.  (2000).  Factors  underlying  the  effect  of 
organisational  downsizing  on  health  of  employees:  Longitudinal  cohort  study.  British Medical 
Journal, 320, 971-975. 

Klandermans,  B.,  Van  Vuuren,  T.,  &  Jacobson,  D.  (1991).  Employees and job insecurity.  In J. 
Hartley, D. Jacobson, B. Klandermans, & T. van Vuuren. Job insecurity: Coping with jobs at 
risk (pp. 40–64). London: Sage Publications. 

Klein Hesselink, D.J., & Van Vuuren, T. (1999). Job flexibility and job insecurity: The Dutch case. 

European Journal of Work and Organisational Psychology, 8, 273-293. 

Korman,  A.K.  (1976).  Hypothesis  of  work  behavior  revisited  and  an  extension.  Academy  of 

Management Review, 1, 50-63. 

Korman,  A.K.,  Wittig-Berman,  U.,  &  Lang,  D.  (1981).  Career  success  and  personal  failure: 

Alienation in professionals and managers. Academy of Management Journal, 24, 342-360. 

Kozlowski,  S.W.J.,  Chao,  G.T.,  Smith,  E.M.,  &  Hedlund,  J.  (1993). Organizational downsizing: 
Strategies,  interventions,  and  research  implications.  In  C.L.  Cooper  &  I.T.  Robertson  (Eds.), 
International  Review  of  Industrial  and  Organizational  Psychology,  8 (pp. 263-332). New 
York: John Wiley & Sons. 

Krause,  N.,  &  Stryker,  S.  (1984).  Stress  and  well-being:  The buffering role of locus  of control 

beliefs. Social Science and Medicine, 18, 783-790. 

Kyriacou,  C.,  &  Sutcliffe,  J.  (1979).  A note on teacher stress and locus of control.  Journal of 

Occupational Psychology, 52, 227-228. 

Lazarus, R.S. (1991). Progress on a cognitive-motivational-relational theory of emotion. American 

Psychologist, 46, 819-834. 

Lazarus, R.S. (1994). From psychological stress to the emotions: A history of changing outlooks. 

Annual Review of Psychology, 44, 1-21. 

Lazarus, R.S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal and coping. New York: Springer. 
Leavy, R.L. (1983). Social support and psychological disorder: A review. Journal of Community 

Psychology, 11, 3-21. 

Lee, S., Graham, A., Colditz, G.A., Berkman, L.F., & Kawachi, I. (2003). Prospective study of job 

insecurity and coronary heart disease in US women. Annals of Epidemiology, 13, 1-7. 

Flexihealth 


 

127/131 

Leiter, M.P., Harvie, P. & Frizzell, C. (1998). The correspondence of patient satisfaction and nurse 

burnout.  Social Science and Medicine, 47, 1611-1617. 

Lemyre, L., Tessier, R., &  Fillion, M. (1990). Mesure de Stress Psychologique (MSP): Manuel 

d'utilisation. 

Leplège,  A.,  Mesbah,  M.,  &  Marquis,  P.  (1995).  Analyse  préliminaire  des  propriétés 
psychométriques de la version française d'un questionnaire international de qualité de vie: le MOS 
SF36 (version 1.1). Revue Epidémiologique de Santé Publique, 43, 311-379. 

Lester,  D.  (1982).  Perceived  stress  in  police  officers  and  beliefs  in  locus  of  control.  Journal of 

Applied Psychology, 107, 157-158. 

Lester,  D.  (1986).  Subjective  stress  and  self-esteem  of  police  officers.  Perceptual  and  Motor 

Skills, 63, 1334. 

Marmot, M.G., Bosma, H., Hemingway, H., Brunner, E., & Stansfeld, S. (1997). Contribution of 
job control and other risk factors to social variations in coronary heart disease incidence. Lancet, 
350, 235-239. 

Marsh, H. W., Hau, K. T., Balla, J. R., & Grayson, D. (1998). Is more ever too much? The number 
of indicators per factor in confirmatory factor analysis.  Multivariate Behavioral Research, 33, 
181-220. 

McDonough, P. (2000). Job insecurity and health. International Journal of Health Service, 30(3), 

453-76. 

McIntyre,  T.C.  (1984).  The  relationship  between  teacher  locus  of  control  and  burnout.  British 

Journal of Educational Psychology, 54, 235-238. 

Metcalfe, C., Smith, G.D., Sterne, J.A.C.,  Heslop, P., Macleod, J., & Hart, C. (2003). Frequent 

job change and associated health. Social Science and Medicine, 56, 1-15. 

Moyle, P.J. (1995).  The  role  negative  affectivity in the stress process: Tests of alternative models. 

Journal of Organizational Behavior, 16, 647-668. 

Nelson,  A.,  Cooper,  C.L.,  &  Jackson,  P.R.  (1995).  Uncertainty  amidst  change:  The impact of 
privatization  on  employee  job  satisfaction  and  well-being.  Journal  of  Occupational  and 
Organizational Psychology, 68, 57-71. 

Oliver, R.L. (1993).  Cognitive, affective, and attribute bases of the satisfaction response. Journal 

of Consumer Research, 20, 418-430. 

Oliver, R.L. (1980). A cognitive model of the antecedents and consequences of satisfaction 

decisions. Journal of Marketing Research, 17, 460-469. 

Parasuraman, A., Berry, L.L., & Zeithaml, V.A., (1991). Refinement and reassessment of the 

Servqual scale. Journal of Retailing, 67, 420-450. 

Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V.A., & Berry, L.L., (1985). A conceptual model of service quality and 

its implications for future research. Journal of Marketing, 49, 41-50. 

Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V.A., & Berry, L.L., (1988). Servqual: A multi-item scale for measuring 

consumer perceptions of service quality. Journal of Retailing, 64, 12-37. 

Payne, R.L.,  Jabri,  M.M., & Pearson, A.W. (1988). On the importance of knowing the affective 

meaning of job demands. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 9, 149-158. 

Payne,  R.L.  &  Morrison,  D.  (1999).  The  importance  of  knowing  the  affective  meaning  of  job 

demands revisited. Work and Stress, 13, 208-288. 

Flexihealth 


 

128/131 

Perrewé,  P.L.,  &  Zellars,  K.L.  (1999).  An  examination  of  attributions  and  emotions  in  the 
transactional  approach  to  the  organizational  stress  process.  Journal  of  Organizational 
Behavior, 20, 739-752. 

Peyrot, M.F., Cooper, P.D., & Schnapf, D.J. (1993). Consumer satisfaction and perceived quality 

of outpatient health services. Journal of Health Care Marketing, 12, 24-33. 

Pierce,  J.L.,  Gardner,  D.G.,  Cummings, L.L., & Dunham, R.B. (1989).  Organization-based  self-
esteem:  Construct  definition, measurement, and validation.  Academy of Management Journal, 
32, 622-648. 

Probst,  T.M.  (2000).  Wedded  to  the  job:  Moderating  effects  of  job  involvement  on  the 

consequences of job insecurity. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 5, 63-73. 

Puffer,  S.M.  (1987).  Pro-social  behavior, noncompliant behavior,  and  work performance among 

commission salespeople. Journal of Applied Psychology, 72, 615-621. 

Quick,  J.D.,  Nelson,  D.L.,  Matuszek,  P.A.A.,  Wittington,  J.L.,  &  Quick,  J.C.  (1996).  Social 
support, secure attachments, and health. In C.L. Cooper (Ed.), Handbook of stress, medicine, 
and health (pp. 269-290). New York: CRC Press. 

Ramsay, A. (1999). “Downsizing” takes its toll on UK professionals’ health. The Lancet, 843. 
Rascle,  N.,  &  Irachabal,  S.  (2001).  Médiateurs  et  Modérateurs:  Implications  théoriques  et 
méthodologiques dans le domaine du stress et de la psychologie de la santé. Le Travail Humain, 
64, 97-118. 

Reissman, D.B., Orris, P., Lacey, R., & Hartman, D.E. (1999). Downsizing, role demands, and job 

stress. Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 41, 289-293. 

Roskies,  E.,  &  Louis-Guérin,  C.  (1990).  Job  insecurity  in  managers:  Antecedents  and 

consequences. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 11, 345-359. 

Roskies,  E.,  Louis-Guérin,  C.,  &  Fournier,  C.  (1993).  Coping  with  job  insecurity:  How  does 

personality make a difference? Journal of Organizational Behavior, 14, 617-630. 

Rotter, J.B. (1966).  Generalized expectancies for internal versus external control of reinforcement. 

Psychological Monographs, 80, 1-28. 

Russell, J., & Carroll, J. (1999). On the bipolarity of positive and negative affect.  Psychological 

Bulletin, 125, 3-30. 

Rust, R.T., & Oliver, R.L. (1994). Service quality: New directions in theory and practice. 

Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Ryan, A.M., Schmit, M.J., & Johnson, R. (1996).  Attitudes and effectiveness: Examining relations 

at an organizational level. Personnel Psychology, 49, 853-881. 

Schaubroeck,  J.  (1999).  Should  the  subjective  be  the  objective?  On  studying  mental  processes, 
in  organizational  stress  research.  Journal  of 

coping  behavior,  and  actual  exposures 
Organizational Behavior, 20, 753-760. 

Scherer,  K.R.  (1993).  Studying  the  emotion-antecedent  appraisal  process:  An  expert  system 

approach. Cognition and Emotion, 7, 325-355. 

Schlesinger, L.A., & Zornitsky, J. (1991). Job satisfaction, service capability and customer 
satisfaction: An examination of linkages and management implications. Human Resource 
Planning, 14, 141-150. 

Schmit, M.J., & Allscheid, S.P. (1995). Employee attitudes and customer satisfaction: Making 

theoretical and empirical connections. Personnel Psychology, 48, 521-536. 

Flexihealth 


 

129/131 

Schneider, B., Hanges, P.J., Goldstein, H.W., & Braverman, E.P. (1994). Do customer service 

perceptions generalize: The case of student and chair ratings of faculty effectiveness. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 79, 685-690.  

Schneider, B., &  Bowen, D.E. (1985). Employee and customer perceptions of service in banks: 

Replication and extension. Journal of Applied Psychology, 70, 423-433. 

Schneider, B., Parkington, J.J., & Buxton, V.M. (1980). Employee and customer perceptions of 

service in banks. Administrative Science Quarterly, 25, 252-267.  

Schneider, B., White, S.S., & Paul, M.C. (1998). Linking service climate and customer perceptions 

of service quality: Test of a causal model. Journal of Applied Psychology, 83, 150-163. 

Schwartz, J.E., & Stone, A.A. (1993). Coping with daily work problems: Contributions of problem 

content, appraisals, and person factors. Work and Stress, 7, 47-62. 

Sergeant, A., & Frenkel, S. (2000). When do customer contact employees satisfy customers? 

Journal of  Service Research, 3, 18-34. 

Shamir, B. (1980). Between service and servility: Role conflict in subordinate service roles. Human 

Relations, 33, 741-756. 

Shortell, S.M., Rousseau, D.M., Gillies, R.R., Devers, K.J., & Simons, T.L. (1991). Organizational 
assessment in intensive care units (ICUs): Construct development, and validity of the UCU nurse-
physical questionnaire. Medical Care, 29, 709-726. 

Simpson,  C.K.,  &  Boyle,  D.  (1975).  Esteem  construct  generality  and  academic  performance. 

Educational and Psychological Measurement, 35, 897-904. 

Smith,  C.A.,  &  Ellsworth,  PC.C  (1985).  Patterns  of  cognitive  appraisal  in  emotion.  Journal  of 

Personality and Social Psychology, 48, 813-838. 

Smith,  C.A.,  &  Lazarus,  R.S.  (1993).  Appraisal  components,  core  relational  themes,  and  the 

emotions. Cognition and Emotion, 7, 233-269. 

Smith, V. (1997). New forms of work organization. Annual Review of Sociology, 23, 315-335.  
Song, I.S., & Hattie, J. (1985). Relationships between self-concept affect and perception at work: 

Myth or significant problem? Journal of Research in Personality, 19, 362-372. 

Spector,  P.E.  (1982).  Behavior  in  organizations  as  a  function  of  employee’s  locus  of  control. 

Psychological Bulletin, 91, 482-497. 

Spector, P.E. (1988). Development of the work locus of control scale.  Journal of Occupational 

Psychology, 61, 335-340. 

Steffen, T.M., Nystrom, P.C., & O'Connor, S.J. (1996).  Satisfaction with nursing homes.  Journal 

of Health Care Marketing, 16, 34-38. 

Tennant,  C.  (2001).    Work-related stress and depressive disorders.  Journal of Psychosomatic 

Research, 51, 697-704. 

Terry,  D.J.,  &  Callan,  V.J.  (1997).  Employee  adjustment  to  large-scale  organizational  change. 

Australian Psychologist, 32, 203-210. 

Testa,  M.A.,  &  Simonson,  D.  (1996).  Assessment  of  quality-of-life  outcomes.  New England 

Journal of Medicine, 334(13), 835-40. 

Tharenou,  P.  (1979).  Employee  self-esteem:  A  review  of  the  literature.  Journal  of  Vocational 

Behavior, 15, 1-29. 

Todd, S., Robson, A., & Lomax, W. (2000).  Evaluating the link between job satisfaction and 
external  service  quality.  Paper  presented  at  the  29th  European  Marketing  Academy 

Flexihealth 


 

130/131 

Conference, Rotterdam. 

Väänänen,  A.,  Pahkin,  K.,  Kalimo,  R.,  &  Buunk,  B.P.  (2003).  Maintenance  of  subjective health 
during a merger: The role of experienced change and pre-merger social support at work in white- 
and blue-collar workers. Social Science and Medicine, 1-13. 

Vahtera,  J.,  Kivimäki,  M.,  &  Pentti,  J.  (1997).  Effect  of  organisational downsizing on health of 

employees, Lancet, 350, 1124-28. 

Varca, P.E. (1999). Work stress and customer service delivery. Journal of Services Marketing, 

13, 229-241. 

Vinokur,  A.,  Schul,  Y.,  &  Caplan,  R.D.  (1987).  Determinants  of  perceived  social  support: 
Interpersonal  transactions,  personal  outlook,  and  transient  affective  states.  Journal  of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 1137-1145. 

Viswesvaran, C., Sanchez, J.I., & Fisher, J. (1999). The role of social support in the process of 

work stress: A meta-analysis. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 54, 314-334. 

Wall, T.D., Jackson, P.R., & Mullarkey, S. (1995). Further evidence on some new measures of job 
control, cognitive demand and production responsibility.  Journal of organizational behavior, 
16, 431-455.  

Ware, J.E., Kosinski, M., & Keller, S.D. (1998). SF-12: How to score the SF-12: Physical and 

Mental Health Summary Scales. Lincoln, RI: Quality metric Incorporated, Third Edition. 

Ware, J.E., & Sherbourne, D. (1992). The MOS 36-items short-form health (SF36): Conceptual 

framework and item selection. Medical Care, 30, 473-483. 

Watson,  D.C.,  &  Clark,  L.A.  (1984). Negative affectivity: The disposition to experience aversive 

emotional states. Psychological Bulletin, 96, 465-490. 

Watson, D.C., Clark, L.A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of 
positive  and  negative  affect:  The  PANAS  scales.  Journal  of  Personality  and  Social 
Psychology, 54, 1063-1070. 

Watson, D., Pennebaker, J.W., & Folger, R. (1987). Beyond negative affectivity: Measuring stress 
and satisfaction in the workplace.  Journal of Organizational Behavior Management, 8, 141-
157. 

Wetzels, M.G.M., de Ruyter J.C.,  &  Bloemer, J.M.M.(2000).  Antecedents and consequences of 

role stress of retail sales persons. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 7, 65-75. 

Wheelock, J. (1999). Fear or opportunity? Insecurity in employment. In J. Vail, J. Wheelock, & M. 
Hill  (Eds).  Insecure  times.  Living  with  insecurity  in  contemporary  society.  London: 
Routledge. 

Wilson,  I.B.,  &  Cleary,  P.D.  (1995).  Linking  clinical  variables  with  health-related quality of life, 

JAMA, 273(1), 59 

Williams, K.L., (2000). The relationship between shared employee perceptions, attitudes and quality 

outcomes and customer satisfaction. Dissertation Abstracts International, Section B: The 
sciences and engineering, 61, 3314. 

Woodruff, R.B., Cadotte, E.R., & Jenkins, R.J. (1983). Modeling consumer satisfaction using 

experience based norms. Journal of Marketing Research, 20, 296-304. 

Woodside, A.G., Frey; L.L., & Daly, R.T. (1989). Linking service quality, customer satisfaction and 

behavioral intention. Journal of Health Care Marketing, 9, 5-17. 

Zeithaml, V.A. , Berry, L.L. , & Parasuraman, A. (1993). The nature and determinants of customer 

expectations of service. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 21, 1-12. 

Flexihealth 


 

131/131 

Zeithaml, V.A., Berry, L.L., & Parasuraman, A. (1996). The behavioral consequences of service 

quality. Journal of Marketing, 60, 31-46. 

 

Flexihealth 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D/2004/1191/9 
 
Published by the 
Belgian Science Policy 
 
 
For more informations: 
 
Madame E. Bourgeois 
Belgian Science Policy 
rue de la science 8 Wetenschapstraat 
Bruxelles 1000 Brussel 
Tel.: +32-2-238.34.94 
Fax.: +32-2-230.59.12 
E-mail: boug@belspo.be 
Internet: http://www.belspo.be 
 
 
LEGAL NOTICE 
 
Neither the Belgian Science Policy nor any person acting on behalf of the Belgian Science 
Policy is responsible for the use which might be made of the following information. No part 
of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any 
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
without indicating the reference. 

