Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology (2010), 83, 139–165
q 2010 The British Psychological Society

139

The
British
Psychological
Society

www.bpsjournals.co.uk

Assessing the impact of healthy work organization
intervention

David M. DeJoy1*, Mark G. Wilson1, Robert J. Vandenberg2,
Allison L. McGrath-Higgins3 and C. Shannon Grifﬁn-Blake4
1Workplace Health Group, Department of Health Promotion and Behavior, College
of Public Health, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
2Workplace Health Group, Management Department, Terry College of Business,
University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
3Raytheon Company, Waltham, MA, USA
4US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA

This research evaluates a healthy work organization intervention implemented in a
retail setting. Using a participatory process, employee teams in 11 intervention stores
developed customized plans for improving work organization at their sites. Ten
comparable stores served as controls. Employee surveys were administered prior to
the intervention and twice again at 12-month intervals. Business results were compiled
monthly for each store. The baseline data were used by the teams to identify needs and
establish action priorities for their stores. Most study outcomes declined across time
for all stores, due primarily to internal corporate events and a generally adverse
economic environment. However, the intervention process appeared to buffer some of
these declines;
intervention stores fared better in terms of selected aspects of
organizational climate and psychological work adjustment. Intervention stores also
performed better than controls on general indices of perceived health and safety and
two of the four business outcomes: employee turnover and sales per labour hour.
These results are discussed in terms of the challenges involved in evaluating
organizational-level interventions in work settings.

The organization of work in modern economies has been dramatically transformed
during the past two decades in response to a complex array of economic, technological,
legal, political, and sociocultural forces. Many organizations have restructured and/or
downsized their workforces, outsourced or off-shored business functions or entire
operations, and altered work and hiring policies to enhance ﬂexibility and lower costs.
Leaner and ﬂatter organizational structures have been instituted, accompanied by
various ‘high performance’ or ‘lean production’ strategies designed to boost

* Correspondence should be addressed to Dr David M. DeJoy, Workplace Health Group, Department of Health Promotion and
Behavior, College of Public Health, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602-6522, USA (e-mail: dmdejoy@uga.edu).

DOI:10.1348/096317908X398773


140 David M. DeJoy et al.

productivity. For most advanced industrial countries, these changes have occurred as
workforces have become substantially older and more diverse. Employees are now
asked to assume greater personal responsibility for managing their jobs and careers,
including decisions about health beneﬁts, retirement planning, and maximizing future
employability. The scope and magnitude of
these changes have outpaced our
understanding of their implications for quality of work life and occupational safety and
health (Aronsson, 1999; Landsbergis, 2003; National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health [NIOSH], 2002).

Work organization is a broad term that refers to the way work processes are
structured and managed, such as job design, scheduling, management, organizational
characteristics, and policies and procedures. The term ‘healthy work organization’ is a
logical extension of work organization and assumes that it should be possible to
distinguish healthy from unhealthy work systems (e.g. Cooper & Williams, 1994; Cox,
1988; Danna & Grifﬁn, 1999; Jaffe, 1995; Landsbergis, 2003; Lowe, Schellenberg, &
Shannon, 2003; Smith, Kaminstein, & Makadok, 1995; Sparks, Faragher, & Cooper,
2001). Presumably, creating healthier organizations should be good for both employees
and bottom-line business performance

A number of conceptual models of healthy work organization have been proposed.
Cox, Leather, and Cox (1990) argued that the study of work and health should be
expanded to include the organizational context. They identiﬁed three primary sources
of work demands: the work itself, the tools and technologies used in the work, and the
social/organizational and physical environments in which the work is performed. Smith
et al. (1995) examined ﬁve organizational
factors: organization–person balance,
treatment, discrimination, decision-making climate, and quality of
organizational
supervision. Sauter, Lim, and Murphy (1996)
identiﬁed management practices,
organizational culture/climate, and organizational values as key organizational factors.
Danna and Grifﬁn (1999) proposed an antecedents–consequences a model featuring
three sets of antecedent factors: work setting (primarily safety and health risks),
personality traits, and occupational stress factors. In this model, occupational stress
factors encompass both job demands and broader organizational characteristics such as
climate and career development opportunities. NIOSH has adopted a multi-level or
ecological approach that features three interacting tiers (Landsbergis, 2003; NIOSH,
2002): the external context (economics, political trends, etc.), the organizational
context (management structures, etc.), and work content (job characteristics, work-
roles, etc.). DeJoy, Wilson, and colleagues (DeJoy & Wilson, 2003; Wilson, DeJoy,
Vandenberg, Richardson, & McGrath, 2004) focused on three domains of work life: job
design, organizational climate, and job future and their relationships to the leadership
and cultural resources of the organization.

While some of these models have been tested in cross-sectional studies (e.g. Sauter
et al., 1996; Smith et al., 1995; Wilson et al., 2004), the published literature contains
very few controlled longitudinal
tests of comprehensive work reorganization
interventions (Aust & Ducki, 2004; Petterson & Arnetz, 1998). More common are
intervention studies evaluating speciﬁc elements of work reorganization such as job
control (e.g. Bond & Bunce, 2001); the introduction of speciﬁc operational systems such
as team-based work-groups (e.g. Morgeson, Johnson, Campion, Medsker, & Mumford,
2006); the implementation of various structural changes such as downsizing (e.g. Parker,
Chimiel, & Wall, 1997); or speciﬁc types or categories of outcomes such as
musculoskeletal injuries (e.g. Carayon, Haims, Hoonakker, & Swanson, 2006). A number
of studies in this literature would fall under the category of organizational job stress


Impact of a healthy work organization

141

interventions (Cox, Karanika, Grifﬁths, & Houdmont, 2007; Parkes & Sparkes, 1998).
This body of research makes it clear that conducting intervention studies in real world
work organizations presents a number of challenges to the researcher (Cox et al., 2007;
Goldenhar, LaMontange, Katz, Heaney, & Landbergis, 2001; NIOSH, 2002; Parkes &
Sparkes, 1998).

The present study
The cooperation of a large national retailer in the USA provided the opportunity to test a
healthy work organization intervention process. This publicly held corporation operates
approximately 2,000 large warehouse-type stores, mostly in the USA;
it employs
approximately 300,000 people and has net sales in excess of 70 billion dollars per year.
Four goals were established for this study: (1) to conduct a longitudinal assessment of
intervention effectiveness with a follow-up period of at least 1 year; (2) to compare
treatment and control work sites using both employee health and well-being and business
performance outcomes; (3) to use the work site as the unit of analysis; and (4) to deploy an
intervention process derived from relevant organizational and behavioural theory that
could be sustainable and potentially generalizable to other organizations.

Healthy work organization intervention process
Stokols (1992) uses the term ‘health promotive capacity’ to describe the potential of an
environment for promoting and maintaining improved levels of health over time.
Extrapolating this to organizations, DeJoy and Wilson (2003) proposed an intervention
process intended to help organizations expand their capacity to create healthier work
organizations. This focus on capacity building, widely applied in community settings
(Crisp, Swerissen, & Duckett, 2000; Goodman et al., 1998) can also be applied to work
organizations. At its core, the process of creating healthier work organizations is about
capacity building, or expanding the organization’s ability to identify, mobilize, and
address important and relevant problems.

Figure 1 expands the process proposed by DeJoy and Wilson (2003). This process
draws from total quality management (e.g. Waldman, 1994), organizational learning
(e.g. Senge, 1990), and high involvement work processes (e.g. Lawler, 1992). All three
approaches emphasize information exchange, problem solving, and employee
involvement as central to organizational change. A participatory, problem-solving
process, in which diagnostic data are assessed and used to identify problems, set goals,
and evaluate progress,
is at the centre of Figure 1. The research literature on
participation and worker involvement shows a wide range of effects in the ﬁelds
of management, organizational behaviour, industrial psychology, and communications
(e.g. Cotton et al., 1988; Lawler, 1986, 1992; Miller & Monge, 1986). Participation
can enhance employees’ sense of understanding, control
(self-efﬁcacy), and
communication. Participation almost automatically increases communication, but
it can also increase perceptions of control over events, the upward sharing of
information, and knowledge about the organizational context and the individual’s role in
the organization. Participation can also increase opportunities for both informational
and emotional social support (Marks, Mirvis, Hackett, & Grady, 1986). From an
organizational design – organizational development perspective, broad-based parti-
cipation is important
learning
(cf. Senge, 1990).

to continuous improvement and organizational


142 David M. DeJoy et al.

Figure 1. Model of the healthy work organization intervention process.

However, a successful process begins with the will to implement it, and accordingly,
Figure 1 highlights the critical importance of leadership or management support in
underwriting the capacity-building process by sharing relevant
information with
employees, providing opportunities for meaningful participation, and allocating necessary
resources for making structural and operational changes. Information, involvement, and
resources are the basic inputs into the problem-solving process. Also, as seen in Figure 1,
actions to improve work organization typically involve changes to one or more of
three broad work domains: job design, organizational climate, or job future. Job design
includes the demands and characteristics of individual
jobs. Organizational climate
emphasizes communication, participation, and the general social environment at
work. Job future addresses job security, equity, and other career development issues.
Acknowledging the importance of subjective evaluation and individual meaning in
understanding the effects of various job and organizational factors (e.g. Lindstrom, 1994),
improvements in work organization should eventually translate into improvement in job
satisfaction and other elements of psychological work adjustment. Organizational
effectiveness outcomes are the principal long-term (distal) outcomes of the intervention
process, but an expanded view of organizational effectiveness is assumed, one that includes
both employee health and well-being and business performance (e.g. Danna & Grifﬁn,
1999; DeJoy & Wilson, 2003; Jaffe, 1995). This conceptualization of outcomes follows
from previous research on participatory strategies, team-based work, and job redesign
(Beal, Cohen, Burke, & McLendon, 2003; Black & Gregersen, 1997; Morgeson et al., 2006).

Three hypotheses guided the current study:

Hypothesis 1: Relative to control worksites, worksites engaging in the intervention process will
show positive changes in targeted aspects of job design, organizational climate, or job future
(these are referred to as proximal outcomes). Moreover, the participatory nature of the
intervention suggests that aspects of organizational climate, such as employee involvement and
communication, should be particularly sensitive to the intervention process.

Hypothesis 2: Relative to control worksites, worksites engaging in the intervention process will
show improvements in psychological work adjustment as reﬂected in measures of
job


Impact of a healthy work organization

143

satisfaction, organizational commitment, and related indices (these are referred to as
intermediate outcomes).

Hypothesis 3: Relative to control worksites, worksites engaging in the intervention process
should show improvements in employee health and well-being and ﬁnancial performance (these
are referred to as distal outcomes).

Research design and methods
Study design
A total of 21 stores (four operational districts within the Southern US region) agreed to
participate in the study. Two districts (11 stores) were assigned to the intervention
group and two districts (10 stores) served as control sites. The stores within this
company tend to be very similar in basic operations, physical layout, and overall product
mix, and range in size from about 150 to over 300 employees.

Assignment

to intervention and control conditions was conducted to make
worksites in the two conditions as comparable as possible in location, demographics,
employee characteristics, and sales volume. Baseline surveys (organizational audits)
were conducted at all 21 worksites 6 months prior to the start of the intervention.
This same survey with minor modiﬁcations was then readministered approximately
12 months later (post-test 1), and again 24 months later (post-test 2). Summary results
from the baseline survey were given to the employee problem-solving team at each
intervention store. Store-level ﬁnancial and human resources data for each store were
collected from the company on a monthly basis throughout the study. This information
was also summarized and made available to the intervention teams.

Participants
In each store, completion of the surveys was entirely voluntary and anonymous. The
ﬁnal sample consisted of 2,207 employees at pre-test; 1,723 at post-test 1; and 1,510 at
post-test 2, representing 53, 44, and 35%, respectively, of employees at each time frame.
Participation rates in the intervention and control sites were similar (56, 43, and 36% for
intervention sites; 49, 45, and 35 for control sites).

Research team members coordinated on-site distribution and collection of surveys
during all phases of the study. Surveys were distributed during two consecutive
weekdays at each location and, to the extent possible, data were collected on the same
days of the week. Completed questionnaires were deposited into locked storage boxes
to reinforce conﬁdentiality. Employees were given time on the clock to complete
surveys and participate in intervention activities. In accordance with company policy,
completed surveys contained no identifying information that would allow tracking of
individual responses across time. Company policy also prohibited the use of participant
incentives.

Intervention: Data-driven problem-solving teams
The intervention was designed to build capacity for employee participation and
problem solving and create a healthier work organization. An employee problem-solving
team, called the ‘ACTion team’, was organized within each intervention store. ACTion
team members (8–12 per team) came from all departments and levels and were broadly


144 David M. DeJoy et al.

representative of the employee mix at each location. The teams were charged with
developing, implementing, and evaluating tailored plans of action for addressing the
issues or problems identiﬁed within their stores. Assisted by trained facilitators, the
ACTion teams developed action plans using a ﬁve phase problem-solving process:
familiarization, skill building, prioritization, action, and reaction. An intervention
manual provided guidance and resource materials for the teams as they worked through
the successive stages of the intervention process.

In the familiarization phase, the roles and responsibilities of the team were explained
and discussed. In addition, the timeline for the project was presented, and the
entire intervention process was described. In the skill-building phase, certain roles were
determined (e.g. team captain, recorder, project liaison), ground rules for the team
were established, and a regular weekly meeting time was set. A variety of structured
activities were used by the facilitators, directed at improving team communication and
cohesiveness (e.g. team mapping, mirroring), as well as developing problem solving
(e.g. weighing pros and cons), time management (e.g. prioritizing tasks), and conﬂict
resolution skills (e.g. anger control).

The baseline survey results provided the starting-point for problem identiﬁcation
and action planning. The facilitator helped the team move through a systematic set
of activities to identify priority problems and issues. During the action phase, the
ACTion team developed a detailed action plan to meet team goals and address
the identiﬁed priorities. Action plans were shared and discussed at
regularly
scheduled store-wide meetings (which all employees were required to attend) and
posted in the employee break room. Finally,
the team
reviewed its action plan, monitored progress, and communicated with each other
and the rest of the employees about the steps being taken to reﬁne and adjust the
overall plan.

in the reaction phase,

As the teams became established, the level of facilitation was gradually reduced
to help the teams become more independent and self-sustaining. Although all
intervention stores used the same ﬁve-stage intervention process and intervention
manual, the speciﬁc activities and initiatives undertaken varied from site to site
based on identiﬁed needs and speciﬁc action strategies adopted by the teams. In
control stores, teams were not formed and no organized activities or consultations
were provided.

Measures
Intervention effectiveness was assessed using three levels of outcomes. The proximal
outcomes included three set of measures assessing job design, organizational climate,
and job future, respectively (see Figure 1). The intermediate outcomes included ﬁve
measures of psychological work adjustment, and the distal outcomes consisted of two
sets of measures assessing employee health and well-being, and store business
performance, respectively. All measures, with the exception of business performance,
were collected as part of the employee surveys. Table 1 provides summary information
for the measures included on the instrument.

Job design
The seven job design dimensions were derived largely from the job stress literature
(Cooper & Cartwright, 1994; Lindstrom, 1994; Sauter, Murphy, & Hurrell, 1990) and
included: workload, control/autonomy,
job content, role clarity, environmental
conditions, physical work demands, and work scheduling.


Impact of a healthy work organization

145

Table 1. Summary information for the outcome measures included on the organizational audit

Measure

Source

of items Reliability Sample item

No.

Job design
Workload

Klitzman, House,
Israel, and Mero
(1990)

Control/autonomy Hackman and Oldham

(1975)

Job content

House, McMichael,

Wells, Kaplan, and
Landerman (1979)

Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzman (1970)

Johansson, Johnson,

and Hall (1991)

Johansson et al. (1991)

Role clarity

Environmental

conditions

Physical work

demands

Work scheduling

Morrow, McElroy, and

Elliot (1994)

Organizational climate
Organizational

support

Eisenberger, Hunting-
ton, Hutchison, and
Sowa (1986)

Coworker support Ribisl and Reischi

Participation

w/supervisors

(1993)

Vroom (1959)

4

3

6

4

7

5

5

9

7

3

.78

‘I am asked to do an excessive

amount of work’

.77

‘My job permits me to decide on
my own how to go about doing
the work’

.80

‘I have an opportunity to develop

.82

.84

my own special skills and
abilities’

‘There are clear, planned goals

and objectives for my job’
‘How often do each of these

situations or conditions occur
in your current job (high levels
of noise, etc.)?’

.82

‘How often do each of these

.84

situations or conditions occur
in your current job (heavy
lifting, etc.)?’

‘My work hours are unpredic-
table from one week to the
next’

.91

‘The organization really cares

about my well-being’

.92

.77

‘My coworkers care about me as

a person’

‘Do you feel you can inﬂuence
decisions of your immediate
supervisor regarding things
about which you are
concerned?’

Participation with

Caplan, Cobb, French,

3

.88

I take part with others at my

others

Harrison, and
Pinneau (1975)

Involvement work

Jamieson and O’Marra

10

.93

practices

(1991)

workplace in making decisions
that affect me’

‘To what extent does your
company or organization
have speciﬁc policies and/or
programs in place for incor-
porating changes/innovations
suggested by employees or
employee groups?’

Communication

Vandenberg et al.

8

.86

‘Management gives enough

(1999)

notice to employees before
making changes in policies and
procedures’


146 David M. DeJoy et al.

Table 1. (Continued)

Measure

Source

of items Reliability Sample item

No.

Safety and health

DeJoy, Murphy, and

climate

Gershon (1995)

Job future
Job security

Kuhnert Sims, and

Lahey (1989)

Procedural equity

Greenberg (1986)

Distributive equity

Bavendam, Boyer, and

Learning

Sorensen (1986)

Vandenberg et al.

opportunities

(1999)

Flexible work

arrangements

Bohen and

Viveros-Long (1981)

Psychological work adjustment
Job satisfaction

Hackman and Oldham

(1975)

Organizational
commitment

Mowday, Steers, and

Porter (1979)

Job stress

Cohen, Kamarck, and
Mermelstein (1983)

Work self-efﬁcacy

Spreitzer (1995)

Work impact

Spreitzer (1995)

Employee health and well-being
Perceived Health Ware and Sherbourne

Perceived safety at

Original to Study

(1992)

work

Alcohol use

CDC (1998)

7

5

6

4

5

6

5

9

6

3

3

1

1

2

.90

‘There are no signiﬁcant

shortcuts taken when work-
place safety and health are at
stake’

.79

.95

.95

.90

‘I am afraid of losing my job’

‘When pay and promotion

decisions are made, all sides
affected by the decisions have a
say’

‘I am fairly rewarded considering

my responsibilities’

‘I am given a real opportunity to

improve my knowledge and
skills’

.87

‘How easy or difﬁcult is it to

arrange time to do each of the
following (e.g. attend a
doctor’s appointment) on a
typical workday?’

.81

.92

‘Generally speaking, I am very

satisﬁed with my job’

‘I am willing to put in a great
deal of effort beyond that
normally expected in order
to help this organization be
successful’

.88

‘In the last month, how often

.81

.88

–

–

–

have you been upset because
of something that happened
unexpectedly at work?’

‘I am conﬁdent in my ability to do

my job’

‘My impact on what happens in

my work-group is large’

‘In general, would you say your

health is (Excellent–Poor)?’

‘All in all, how would you rate

your work situation in terms of
your personal exposure to
safety and health hazards?’

‘How many days per month do

you drink and what is the
typical number of drinks
consumed on those days?’


Impact of a healthy work organization

147

Table 1. (Continued)

Measure

Source

of items Reliability Sample item

No.

High risk health

CDC (1998)

4

.71

behaviours

Preventive health

CDC (1998)

5–7

.94/.95

behaviours

‘Have you ever been told by a
doctor or health professional
that your cholesterol is high?’
‘How long has it been since you
had your blood pressure taken
by a doctor or other health
professional?’

Note. The number of items comprising the preventive health behaviours measure and the speciﬁc items
included were different for males and females. The ﬁrst reliability is for females and the second for males.

Organizational climate
The organizational climate domain emphasized the perceptions employees form about
their overall work environment, particularly the climate for support, communication
and involvement. Seven dimensions were included in this component: organizational
support, co-worker support, participation with supervisors, participation with others,
involvement work practices, communication, and safety and health climate.

Job future
Reﬂecting ongoing trends and changes in the basic employer–employee relationship
(i.e. Rousseau, 1997), this domain included ﬁve scales: job security, procedural equity,
distributive equity, learning opportunities, and ﬂexible work arrangements.

Psychological work adjustment
Five measures were included here: job satisfaction, organizational commitment, job
stress, work self-efﬁcacy, and work impact.

Employee health and well-being
This component included ﬁve measures: perceived overall health, perceived safety at
work, alcohol use, engagement
in health risk behaviours, and participation in
preventive health behaviours. The alcohol use, health risk, and preventive behaviour
measures were adopted from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s
Behavioral Risk Surveillance System (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC],
1998). There was no separate measure of tobacco use because it was included in the risk
behaviour index. Overall, health and perceived safety at work were single item
measures.

Business performance
Business performance data for each store came directly from the company each month
throughout the project. Four measures were tracked and supplied to the teams:
employee turnover, comparable sales, sales per labour hour, and average ticket. The last
three of these measures are widely used metrics in the retail sector of the American
economy. These measures are described in Table 2.


148 David M. DeJoy et al.

Table 2. Descriptions of the store-level business performance measures

Measure

Deﬁnition

Calculation

Employee turnover

Fraction of employees leaving at the

Number of employees quitting the

end of a given month

Comparable sales

Percentage increase or decrease in

sales at the end of the month
relative to the same month in the
previous year

organization by the end of the
month divided by the number of
employees at the start of the
month

Sales for the month subtracted from
the sales of the same month in the
previous year, and divided by sales
of the same month in the previous
year

Sales per labour hour Dollar amount representing the

Sales for the month divided by the

average sales in a given month for
each labour hour expended in that
month

total number of labour hours used
during that month

Average ticket

Dollar amount representing the

Dollar value of total cash register

average receipt in a given month
for the store

receipts for the month divided by
the number of receipts

Analytic procedures

Preliminary analyses
Preliminary analyses were conducted to determine whether the intervention and
control store samples differed according to age, race, gender, job tenure, and education.
For race and gender, Mann–Whitney tests of differences were conducted for each of the
three periods. For age, job tenure, and education, analyses of variance were conducted
for each time period.

Tests for intervention effectiveness
Given the nested structure of the data, intervention effectiveness was examined with
multi-level random coefﬁcients modelling (Hox, 2002; Raudenbush & Bryk, 2001) using
the HLM 6.02 statistical package (Raudenbush, Bryk, Cheong, & Congdon, 2004). The
general goal of the analyses was to test the statistical signiﬁcance of the treatment
(control vs. intervention) by Time (Times 1, 2, and 3 assessments) interaction across
each of the outcome variables. Additionally, given that Time 1 was the pre-intervention
period, the analyses also needed to examine whether there were differences between
the control and intervention units in their initial status on the variables, and control for
those differences if present. With respect to the analyses of the self-report variables,
codes representing the SPI initiative and store proﬁts were entered as control variables
in all analyses. The SPI initiative was a customer service initiative introduced by new
corporate management midway through our project. Controlling for proﬁtability is a
common practice in the organizational sciences when analyzing variables representing
employee perceptions of various workplace attributes that have been aggregated to the
higher unit level (e.g. Vandenberg, Richardson, & Eastman, 1999).

The analyses across all criterion variables were conducted in an identical fashion.
As with all random coefﬁcients analyses, both a Level 1 model (individual level) and a
Level 2 model (between-unit level) are speciﬁed and simultaneously estimated. With


Impact of a healthy work organization

149

respect to the Level 1 model, only one predictor, Time, was incorporated. Time was a
dummy coded variable whereby individual responses from Time 1 were assigned a code
of 0, and individuals at Times 2 and 3 were assigned codes of 1 and 2, respectively. Using
0 to represent Time 1 responses meant that those responses were the initial status or
baseline values. The Level 1 analyses represent the control of individual level responses
as it generates the 21 random intercepts and regression coefﬁcients. The random
intercepts represented the means on the dependent variables for the units when the
Time variable was at 0 (the initial status). The random regression coefﬁcients were
21 vectors representing the across time differences (repeated measures) on each of the
criterion variables. Both sets of random variables were utilized in the Level 2 model as
dependent variables. Treatment (0, control; 1, intervention units) was entered as a
predictor variable of the 21 intercepts and regression coefﬁcients, and per the
discussion above, unit proﬁtability and whether a unit was part of the SPI programme
were entered as control variables. Assigning a zero to the control units meant that they
were the baseline condition. Examining the impact of treatment on the intercepts
addressed whether there were statistically signiﬁcant differences between control and
intervention units on the initial status (Time 1 assessment) of each criterion variable.
Due to space constraints, we will mention here that none of the effects of treatment on
the intercepts were statistically signiﬁcant. Thus, intervention and control units were
statistically equivalent at Time 1 – pre-intervention.

Of greatest interpretive use for present purposes was the effect of treatment on the
21 regression coefﬁcients. These are referred to as treatment-by-change interactions.
Speciﬁcally, a statistically signiﬁcant effect meant that the coefﬁcients (representing
vectors of change in the dependent variables across time) of the intervention units
differed from the coefﬁcients of the control units. That is, this test examined whether
the rate of change in a dependent variable was a function of belonging to either the
control or intervention conditions. Given that there were only two conditions, one may
assume the group with the steeper rate of change differed from the other group in the
presence of a statistically signiﬁcant ﬁnding. If there had been more than one group,
than tests of simple slopes (i.e. the vectors of change across time) would have been
required to search out which coefﬁcient from which group was contributing the most to
the statistical signiﬁcance.
interaction
represented a difference in effectiveness between intervention and control units were
based on the plot of the interactions.

Interpretations of whether a signiﬁcant

For the ﬁnancial measures, we used data from the third month after each time of
survey data collection. Repeated measures analyses of variance were applied to the
store-level business performance measures. Two by three repeated measures of analyses
of variance were computed with the ﬁrst factor representing the three measurement
periods, and the two-level factor representing codes for intervention and control stores.
Proﬁtability was not used as a control variable for the objective ﬁnancial measures.

Process evaluation
Evaluation of the intervention process consisted of (1) detailed notes kept by the
intervention facilitators throughout the process, (2) surveys of the intervention team
members conducted at the end of the facilitated portion of the intervention, and
(3) interviews of randomly selected team members and employees 3 months after the
intervention. Intervention facilitators completed a detailed summary of each session
immediately following the conducted session. In addition, the facilitators met as a group


150 David M. DeJoy et al.

with the project coordinator on a weekly basis to discuss the intervention
implementation and revise their notes as needed. Interviews were conducted with
store management (two) and randomly selected employees (from two to ﬁve) at nine of
the treatment stores. A focus group was also conducted with the ACTion team to obtain
feedback speciﬁcally on the intervention process. Interviews were conducted, taped,
transcribed, and summarized by project staff trained in interview techniques and
qualitative analysis, but who had not been associated with the intervention. The
constant comparative method of analysis was used to examine data and develop themes.
The constant comparative method is an analytic technique used to systematically extract
and reﬁne categories and themes from interviews and other sources of qualitative data
(Charmaz, 2006).

Results
Comparability of treatment and control samples
The intervention and control samples were quite similar in terms of demographic
characteristics (see Table 3). There were no statistically signiﬁcant sample differences
between the two groups for age, race, gender, or job tenure at any of the three time
intervals. Signiﬁcant differences were found for educational level at each time period.
The educational level among employees was lower in the treatment than in the control
stores. However, the R2 values indicated that in two out of three instances, less than
1% of the variance in education was being accounted for in the tests of differences

Table 3. Demographic characteristics of employee samples at intervention and control stores

Demographic
characteristics

Age

# 39
^ 40

Gender
Male
Female

Race

White
African-American
Hispanic
Other
Job tenure

# 2 years
2–5 years
^ 5 years

Education

High school or less
Some college/tech
College graduate

Intervention stores (%)

Control stores (%)

Pre-test

Post-test 1

Post-test 2

Pre-test

Post-test 1

Post-test 2

60
40

65
35

80
6
7
7

72
20
8

34
55
11

54
46

66
34

76
6
7
11

61
30
9

31
56
13

56
44

70
30

74
8
8
10

66
23
10

29
59
12

59
41

64
36

80
10
4
6

64
26
10

25
59
16

56
44

65
35

81
7
5
7

59
30
10

24
60
16

57
43

70
30

83
8
5
4

61
30
9

22
61
17

Note. Percentages may not equal 100% due to rounding.


Impact of a healthy work organization

151

between individuals in the intervention and control groups. Given the need to conserve
degrees of freedom, we concluded that there was little to be achieved by controlling for
any of the demographic variables in conducting the assessments of intervention
effectiveness. The study samples were generally similar to the overall employee
population of the company. Data provided by the company at the beginning of the
project showed an average age of 34 for the total workforce. Approximately, 35% of all
employees were female, 77% were White, and 11% African-American.

Baseline results
Table 4 presents group means for the three categories of proximal measures: job design,
organizational climate, and job future. Table 5 contains similar data for the intermediate
and distal outcomes.

Table 4. Group means for the proximal outcomes

Measure

Pre-test Post-test 1 Post-test 2 Pre-test Post-test 1 Post-test 2

Intervention stores

Control stores

Job design
Workload
Control/autonomy
Job content
Role clarity
Environmental conditions
Physical work demands
Work scheduling

Organizational climate
Organizational support
Co-worker support
Participation – supervisors
Participation – others
Involvement work practices
Communication
Safety and health climate

Job future
Job security
Procedural equity
Distributive equity
Learning opportunities
Flexible work arrangements

2.99
3.61
4.08
3.95
2.13
3.45
3.12

3.52
3.39
3.32
3.23
3.68
3.44
4.09

3.78
3.25
3.23
3.72
3.11

2.93
3.50
4.00
3.93
2.24
3.52
3.18

3.46
3.38
3.26
3.11
3.64
3.39
4.09

3.59
3.12
3.10
3.66
3.05

2.86
3.40
3.93
3.92
2.34
3.58
3.24

3.40
3.36
3.20
2.99
3.59
3.33
4.08

3.39
3.00
2.96
3.60
2.99

2.75
3.61
4.08
3.92
2.23
3.56
3.16

3.53
3.38
3.32
3.31
3.76
3.48
4.16

3.73
3.24
3.22
3.77
3.06

2.87
3.46
3.93
3.86
2.43
3.62
3.13

3.39
3.33
3.24
3.12
3.63
3.38
4.12

3.53
3.03
3.02
3.60
2.96

2.99
3.31
3.77
3.80
2.62
3.69
3.10

3.25
3.27
3.15
2.93
3.49
3.28
4.08

3.32
2.83
2.83
3.42
2.87

Note. Adjusted Bayesian Means. Higher values represent more positive responses, except for physical
demands and environmental demands.

At baseline, most employees were quite satisﬁed with their work situations, and the
proﬁle of responses across the three work domains (i.e. job design, organizational
climate, and job future) was consistent with our initial observations and preliminary
interactions with both management and employees. Looking at the individual job design
dimensions, employees gave the most positive ratings to role clarity and job content.
The least positive scores were for physical demands and scheduling, which is not
surprising. Many jobs in the stores involve standing for long periods and/or frequent


152 David M. DeJoy et al.

Table 5. Group means for the intermediate and distal outcomes

Intervention stores

Control stores

Measure

Pre-test Post-test 1 Post-test 2 Pre-test Post-test 1 Post-test 2

Work adjustment
Job satisfaction
Organization commitment
Job stress
Work self-efﬁcacy
Work impact

Employee health and well-being
Perceived health
Perceived safety at work
Alcohol use
High risk health behaviours
Preventive health behaviours

3.69
3.84
2.56
4.31
3.54

3.65
3.99
19.30
0.29
3.10

3.57
3.64
2.56
4.26
3.45

3.66
4.02
18.25
0.30
3.10

3.45
3.44
2.55
4.22
3.36

3.67
4.05
17.21
0.30
3.11

3.68
3.85
2.61
4.34
3.63

3.67
4.08
18.39
0.30
3.03

3.50
3.57
2.66
4.29
3.47

3.62
4.04
18.16
0.29
3.09

3.32
3.29
2.71
4.24
3.31

3.57
4.01
17.92
0.29
3.15

Business outcomes
Employee turnover
Comparable sales
Sales/labour hour
Average ticket

0.11
0.10
134.51
51.02

0.13
2 0.01
151.82
50.72

0.12
2 0.03
160.95
51.14

0.10
0.06
138.01
47.22

0.09
0.03
155.21
46.47

0.14
2 0.02
154.83
47.76

Note. Adjusted Bayesian Means. Higher values represent more positive responses, except for job stress,
alcohol use, high risk health behaviours, preventive health behaviours, and employee turnover.

lifting and handling of materials (stocking, etc.). All of the stores are open 7 days per
week from about 7 a.m. to 10 p.m.; the busiest times are typically weekends and
holidays, and most employees are scheduled to work at these times. For organizational
climate, the most positive baseline ratings were given to safety and health climate,
followed by involvement policies, and organizational support. For job future, the most
positive baseline scores occurred for job security and learning opportunities, with lower
scores given to the two equity measures and ﬂexible work arrangements.

This particular company took considerable pride in having well-designed jobs, a
positive safety and health climate, and highly regarded employee training and customer
service programs. The company, having been in a sustained expansion mode for a
number of years, also offered good job security and opportunities for advancement.
Consistent with this assessment, the baseline scores for job satisfaction, organizational
commitment, and work self-efﬁcacy were also quite positive (means of 3.5, 3.8, and 4.3,
respectively; see Table 5). Comparing one store to another, there was also a high degree
of consistency in terms of the speciﬁc dimensions receiving the highest and lowest rated
scores. In terms of priorities identiﬁed by the ACTion teams, communication, work
schedule, and co-worker support were identiﬁed as key issues across multiple sites.
Other issues identiﬁed less frequently included: participation, pay and promotion
equity, safety, working conditions, management support, and employee recognition.

Intervention effectiveness: Proximal outcomes
As is apparent from Table 4, scores on almost all of the proximal outcomes declined
across time within both treatment and control stores. This was largely the result of the
changes that were taking place within the company (over which we had no control)


Impact of a healthy work organization

153

during the study, along with external events. Soon after study initiation, the company
was jarred by a series of signiﬁcant events, including an abrupt transition in top
corporate leadership, severe competitive pressures, a recessionary American economy,
and a series of unsettling world events, including the ‘9-11’ terrorist attack on the World
Trade Center and the war in Afghanistan.

Speciﬁc to the intervention process, we expected that

the dimensions of
organizational climate most closely related to employee involvement and capacity
building would be most sensitive to the intervention process. In line with this
prediction, signiﬁcant treatment-by-change interactions favouring the treatment stores
were obtained for involvement practices (t½17(cid:9) ¼ 3:01, p , :008, h2 ¼ :03), and
(t½17(cid:9) ¼ 2:86, p , :01, h2 ¼ :02). Trends favouring the
organizational support
intervention group were evident for communication (t½17(cid:9) ¼1 :85, p , :06, h2 ¼ :04)
and participation with others (t½17(cid:9) ¼ 1:63, p , :10, h2 ¼ :01). The interactions for
co-worker support, workplace safety and health, and participation with supervision
were not statistically signiﬁcant. Looking at the plots for involvement practices and
organizational support presented in Figure 2a and 2b, respectively, the downward vector
of change across time was considerably steeper in the control than intervention stores.
Of the seven work design variables, signiﬁcant treatment-by-change interactions
favouring the intervention stores were obtained for job content (t½17(cid:9) ¼3 :35, p , :001,
h2 ¼ :02), role clarity (t½17(cid:9) ¼ 2:69, p , :008, h2 ¼ :02), and environmental conditions
(t [17] ¼ 2 2.28, p , .04, h2 ¼ .01). Similar effects approaching signiﬁcance were
for autonomy (t½17(cid:9) ¼ 1:66, p , :09, h2 ¼ :03), and work scheduling
evident

Figure 2. Plots of group means for (a) involvement practices and (b) perceived organizational support.


154 David M. DeJoy et al.
(t½17(cid:9) ¼1 :82, p , :08, h2 ¼ :01). Plots for the three signiﬁcant interactions are
presented in Figure 3a–3c. Role clarity remained relatively stable for the intervention
stores while it declined steadily over time for the control stores. The vectors of change
for job content were generally declining for both groups, but the decline was much
more pronounced in the control stores. Environmental demands increased (an
undesirable outcome) in both conditions, but once again, the increase in environmental
demands was steeper in the control sites. Although the effect for work scheduling did
not reach statistical signiﬁcance, scheduling was a priority issue for many of the store
teams. Referring to the means in Table 4, it is worth noting that the intervention stores
actually improved somewhat across time periods on this measure, while the control

Figure 3. Plots of group means for (a) job content, (b) role clarity, and (c) environmental conditions.


Impact of a healthy work organization

155

sites declined. By the end of the study, employees in the intervention stores perceived
greater work schedule ﬂexibility than they did at study start.
Turning to job future, the treatment-by-change interactions for learning oppor-
tunities (t½17(cid:9) ¼2 :78, p , :01, h2 ¼ :02) and procedural equity (t½17(cid:9) ¼ 2:28,
p , :04, h2 ¼ :03) were signiﬁcant while the interaction for distributive equity
(t½17(cid:9) ¼1 :73, p , :08, h2 ¼ :02) approached signiﬁcance. The interactions were not
statistically signiﬁcant for job security or ﬂexible work arrangements. Referring to
Figure 4a and 4b, learning opportunities were a relative strength at baseline, and
although this dimension changed negatively across time for both treatment and
control conditions, the change was substantially less severe in the intervention
condition. The interaction effect for procedural equity shows negative change across
time in both conditions, but
than for
intervention sites. The pattern for distributive equity was similar but statistically
not signiﬁcant.

the change was

for control

steeper

In summary, the results for the three sets of proximal outcomes provide partial
support for Hypothesis 1 and suggest that the intervention did have beneﬁcial effects in
at least two respects. First, several of the work dimensions targeted for improvement at
baseline did improve in the treatment stores relative to the control stores. Second, the
intervention stores were more able to retain their strengths during turbulent times.
Indeed, the extent of negative change in many of the job-domain dimensions was less
precipitous in the sites receiving the intervention.

Figure 4. Plots of group means for (a) learning opportunities and (b) procedural equity.


156 David M. DeJoy et al.

Intervention effectiveness: Intermediate outcomes
Hypothesis 2 predicted that the intervention process would produce positive change on
psychological work adjustment. Among the ﬁve variables in this group, the treatment-
by-change interactions for job satisfaction (t½17(cid:9) ¼2 :19, p , :03, h2 ¼ :03), organiz-
ational commitment (t½17(cid:9) ¼3 :58, p , :003, h2 ¼ :02), and job stress (t½17(cid:9) ¼ 2 1:83,
p , :05, h2 ¼ :02) were each statistically signiﬁcant (see Table 5). The negative change
across time for job satisfaction and organizational commitment was greater (see
Figure 5a and 5c) for control than for intervention stores. Regardless of the differences

Figure 5. Plots of group means for (a) job satisfaction, (b) organizational commitment, and (c) job
stress.


Impact of a healthy work organization

157

in the vectors of change between conditions, one cannot ignore the general observation
that employees in stores of both conditions were experiencing an overall decline in
morale. In contrast, the results for job stress showed that the level of stress within the
intervention stores remained relatively low and unchanging across time, whereas stress
within the control stores increased steadily over the same time period. Non-signiﬁcant
effects were obtained for work self-efﬁcacy and personal impact on the work-group.
In sum, partial support was obtained for Hypothesis 2.

Intervention effectiveness: Distal outcomes
Among the ﬁve measures of employee health and well-being (Table 5), signiﬁcant
treatment-by-change interactions were obtained for overall perceived health
(t½17(cid:9) ¼2 :07, p , :04, h2 ¼ :01) and perceived safety at work (t½17(cid:9) ¼ 2:43, p , :02,
h2 ¼ :05). In contrast to the intervention stores, which experienced slight positive
change on both variables during the duration of this study (see Figure 6a and 6b), the
vectors of change for the control stores were negative for both health and safety.
The interactions for alcohol use, engaging in high risk health behaviours, and
undertaking preventive health measures were not statistically signiﬁcant.

The results for the ﬁnancial measures are also presented in Table 5. Signiﬁcant
treatment-by-change interactions were obtained for both sales per labour hour
(F½2; 36(cid:9) ¼3 :64, p , :04, h2 ¼ :03) and employee turnover (F½2; 36(cid:9) ¼4 :10, p , :03,
h2 ¼ :02). In both instances, the outcomes favoured those stores receiving the

Figure 6. Plots of group means for (a) perceived health and (b) perceived safety at work.


158 David M. DeJoy et al.

intervention. Looking at the trends from Time 2 (which represents the survey
administration closest to the intervention process) to Time 3, the intervention stores
experienced a positive change in sales per labour hour (see Figure 7a) and a levelling of
employee turnover (Figure 7b). In contrast, the vector of change for sales was slightly
negative while turnover changed positively (increased) in the Control stores.

Thus,
support.

it seems reasonable to conclude that Hypothesis 3 also received partial

Process evaluation
Notes kept by the facilitators during the intervention process showed that the problems
addressed by the teams generally coincided with the survey results speciﬁc to a
worksite. Each site chose at least three different issues to work on and proposed three or
four different strategies for dealing with the identiﬁed issues.

Action team members were surveyed at the end of the facilitated portion of the
intervention process to assess their perceptions of the process and its overall success.
Most team members rated the team-based intervention process positively in terms of
participation and communication. When asked what the ACTion team ‘had done a good
job of doing’, 92% of team members indicated their team has done a good job of
identifying problem areas, 82% indicated good performance in setting priorities, and
76% thought their team had devised effective solutions. There was less satisfaction

Figure 7. Plots of group means for (a) sales per labour hour and (b) employee turnover.


Impact of a healthy work organization

159

about being able to make actual changes in their store. Approximately, 50% of team
members thought that the team had ‘improved things at the store’ or had ‘made their
store a better place to work’. When Team members were asked what they personally
had gained by participating on the ACTion team, the most frequent responses were
having a chance to express views (84%) and learning more about the company (68%).
Analysis of the interview and focus group data revealed several themes. First, the
ACTion teams identiﬁed communication as a key issue and worked to improve
communication with top management, but were not very successful in facilitating
communication horizontally among fellow employees. Second, the team members felt
that they had the skills, knowledge, and training necessary to impact the store.
However, a lack of ‘power’ (i.e. sufﬁcient time and ﬂexible scheduling to meet and
brainstorm about worksite issues and make decisions) inhibited their abilities to create a
healthier worksite. Third, issues regarding trust were evident in views expressed about
the surveys used in the project. Some employees felt coerced into completing them.
Some focus group members indicated fear of retaliation and distrust in the store. Fourth,
the focus groups emphasized the importance of recognition on an individual level.
Teams expressed how they would have appreciated receiving some type of recognition
for their efforts. Fifth, attrition of team members became a serious issue over time, with
some teams losing the majority of their original members due to scheduling conﬂicts,
job changes, turnover, and other factors. Sixth, management support was a real key to
intervention success, with the critical support coming from the overall site-level (store
managers rather than at the regional or corporate levels). Finally, stafﬁng and scheduling
issues became more problematic over time and served to limit the overall effectiveness
of the ACTion teams.

Discussion
The primary purpose of this research was to evaluate the effectiveness of a participatory,
problem-solving intervention designed to promote healthy work organization. Overall,
the worksites receiving the intervention fared better than control worksites during the
duration of the study, which included a period of corporate transition and difﬁcult
business conditions. Although most of the outcome measures declined across time in
both the treatment and control conditions, the intervention process appeared to buffer
some of the declines. Stores receiving the intervention were better able to preserve
some of the strong aspects of their work organization during this turbulent period.
Intervention-related effects were evident for several of the work dimensions targeted by
the teams, as well as in some of the organizational climate dimensions considered to be
focal points for this type of participatory intervention.

Job satisfaction and organizational commitment declined across time for treatment
and control stores alike, but these declines were more pronounced in stores that did not
receive the intervention. Stress levels within the intervention stores remained relatively
low and stable across time, while those in the control sites increased noticeably. The
intervention was less successful in inﬂuencing the two empowerment-related measures:
work self-efﬁcacy and impact. The lack of effects for these particular dimensions may
reﬂect the difﬁculties some of the teams had in effectively implementing their action
plans and producing change in their stores. Tangible results from the problem-solving
process would be expected to boost perceptions of empowerment (Ashforth, 1989;
Spreitzer, Kizilos, & Nason, 1997).


160 David M. DeJoy et al.

The results for the health and business outcomes were not as robust as anticipated.
Still, employees at the intervention stores perceived themselves to be healthier and safer
at work than those at the control sites. Intervention stores also returned stronger
performance in terms of employee turnover and sales per labour hour. Sales per labour
hour increased between the pre-test and the ﬁrst post-test for all stores. Some of this
increase was most likely attributable to cuts in stafﬁng and reduced work hours for
employees. The improvement in sales per labour hour was sustained in the treatment
stores, whereas it levelled off and began to decline in control stores between the ﬁrst
and second follow-up periods.

Looking at the pattern of effects across time, most of the differentiation between
control and treatment stores occurred between the ﬁrst and second follow-up periods,
that is, between 6 and 18 months after the beginning of the intervention. Parkes and
Sparkes (1998), in their review of organizational stress interventions, recommended that
studies should include more than a single post-test and have a follow-up duration of at
least 2 years. We tried to follow these recommendations but found it difﬁcult to sustain
the attention of the stores for the 24 months that elapsed between baseline data
collection and the second follow-up survey. Notwithstanding, the results from this study
do suggest that such durations may be needed to realize the longer-term effects of work
organization interventions.

The process evaluation indicated that the team process was effectively implemented
and well-received, and that participants on the teams considered the experience to be
useful and beneﬁcial. The initial phases of the intervention process appeared to be
effective in building capacity and behavioural capability. On the negative side,
difﬁculties were encountered in sustaining and fully integrating the team process, as
well as in executing the action plans. Some teams also because noticeably less active
once active facilitation was withdrawn. To some extent, these difﬁculties were
attributable to ongoing changes and challenges that were occurring within the
company. As several informants commented, ‘there were often just too many plays
being called at the same time’. Questions have been raised about the overall ‘intensity’ of
many organizational interventions, and the ability of such intervention to ‘compete’ and
be sustained in the face of other organizational realities and priorities that demand the
attention of managers and rank and ﬁle workers alike (e.g. Cox et al., 2007). Maintaining
sufﬁcient intensity across many months is particularly difﬁcult in the retail sector where
business follows wide seasonal variations, employee turnover is high, competition is
intense, and work scheduling is variable and often unpredictable.

Our model of the intervention process portrays management support as a key
driving force for creating healthy work organizations. In short, management controls the
agenda, sets the policies, provides the resources, and establishes accountabilities for
results. The attention span of management, however, is often limited by the need to
show results on a quarterly basis. From our experiences with this study, management
support, per se, may not be enough to sustain the level of intensity needed for this type
of intervention to succeed. While the teams were allowed to operate and supported to
some degree, process results show that the ACTion teams were more a novelty than a
real priority for store management. The participatory process used in this study was not
directly linked to core business operations,
it was non-speciﬁc in focus, and the
company itself had not committed signiﬁcant time or resources in bringing it about.
Such direct connections may be pivotal to achieving sustainability and institutionaliza-
tion. Besides, the intensity issue, another limiting factor was that each store was free to
identify its own priority problems and to devise its own solutions. This basic approach


Impact of a healthy work organization

161

this clearly makes it more difﬁcult

makes logical sense, in that, each store presents its own unique environment and socio-
organizational context. But
to demonstrate
intervention effectiveness in the conventional manner. Not all sites addressed the exact
same problems, and even when the same issues were chosen, the identiﬁed solutions
were not identical either in terms of potential efﬁcacy or quality of follow-through.
Creating teams fully representative of the store employees and limiting the direct
involvement of management personnel may have also hampered the effectiveness of the
teams. Employee readiness and willingness to participate have been mentioned
frequently as limiting factors in the organizational development literature (e.g. Pasmore
& Fagans, 1992).

The challenges associated with evaluating participatory interventions are not limited
to workplace studies. These same issues have been noted with respect to healthy city
initiatives (e.g. Kegler, Twiss, & Look, 2000). One approach used in these studies is to
select outcomes that cut across multiple issues or topical areas and that are reﬂective of
improved capacity. In the present study, the organization climate domain was expected
to be most sensitive to the overall intervention process. Signiﬁcant intervention effects
were obtained for involvement practices and organizational support, but not for
participation with supervisors or co-workers. Data collected during the process
evaluation indicated that the teams were more successful in improving interactions with
senior store management
than with facilitating communication among fellow
employees. This may partially explain the failure to ﬁnd differences for these other
organizational climate measures.

The results from the team member surveys show that participation was a positive
experience from the participants’ point of view and was perceived to be a useful
professional development experience. The pattern of results for the various work
organization dimensions suggest that there was some diffusion of beneﬁcial effects
beyond those directly involved in the team process. For example, employees in the
intervention stores perceived the climate for involvement and communication more
positively than did employees in the control stores. Similar results were evident for
learning opportunities, pay and promotion equity, and job content. Trends in the data
favouring the intervention stores could be detected in several of the other job design
and organizational climate dimensions. Although these results may not be as strong as
we would like, it does appear that the beneﬁcial effects of the intervention were not
conﬁned to those who directly participated on the teams.

The response rates in this study were somewhat lower than expected and declined
across data collection intervals for both intervention and control sites. Part of the
decline was due to events occurring within the company and the economy and world at
large. The baselines survey was administered during a stable period for the company,
but the ﬁrst and second follow-up surveys were administered in the midst of signiﬁcant
and largely unanticipated challenges for this company. All data collection had to occur
on the less busy weekdays and we only had access for a 2-day period. As a result, we
were not able to reach every employee in any given store. Some part-time employees
only work weekends or evenings. Moreover, evenings tend to be busy times for the
stores, and although we remained onsite into the evenings, it was sometimes difﬁcult to
get access to employees in certain parts of the stores. Still, our employee samples were
generally representative of the overall employee proﬁle for the company, and we were
able to sample the majority of full-time employees in each of the stores.

The process evaluation revealed that some employees had misgivings about
completing the surveys or felt coerced into completing them. These issues probably


162 David M. DeJoy et al.

this project was externally funded and that

contributed to the decline in response rates across time. Despite efforts to inform
employees that
the research team
retained custody of all data, there were a few employees who still believed that we
were working for the company. The coercion issue is easier to explain. Some
members of
the intervention
process, and encouraged their fellow workers to complete surveys or otherwise help
the team in achieving its goals. Most teams announced or publicized the surveys in
some manner, and tried to get the best participation rates for their store. Any
perceptions of mistrust most likely stemmed from the general decline in store morale
during the study.

the ACTion teams were quite enthusiastic about

Conclusions
When taken together, the results of this study suggest that participatory, capacity-
building interventions hold some promise for improving work organization as reﬂected
in the three sets of outcomes examined in this research. The intervention did build skills
and foster the motivation necessary to take action. The intervention teams were
generally effective in utilizing the survey and business data in identifying problems and
devising action plans for making improvements in their stores. The participatory,
problem-solving process did impact job satisfaction, organizational commitment, and
work stress. The teams also were successful
in modifying some aspects of store
operation and work processes. Problems occurred in sustaining the team-based process
over the long-term and being able to fully translate actions plans into meaningful
improvements. The teams suffered from attrition due to scheduling problems, work
reassignments, and employee turnover. These problems increased from the middle to
the end of the intervention period and, undoubtedly, had some adverse impact on action
plan implementation and evaluation.
Interference during the latter phases of a
implementation and evaluation) can be particularly
participatory process (i.e.
problematic in realizing the long-terms effects (Black & Gregersen, 1997). Future
users of this type of intervention should include additional training and programme
features that focus on anticipating and overcoming obstacles in realizing agreed upon
objectives. Bringing site management into the process earlier and more directly may also
be beneﬁcial. This could be accomplished by using short-term or proximal results to
engender leadership buy-in and active engagement.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported in part by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
(NIOSH) and the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). However, this manuscript
is the sole responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the ofﬁcial views of
NIOSH or CDC.

References
Ashforth, B. E. (1989). The experience of powerlessness in organizations. Organizational

Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 43, 207–242.

Aronsson, G. (1999). The inﬂuence of worklife on public health. Scandinavian Journal of Work

and Environmental Health, 25, 597–604.


Impact of a healthy work organization

163

Aust, B., & Ducki, A. (2004). Comprehensive health promotion interventions at the workplace:
Experiences with health circles in Germany. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 9,
258–270.

Bavendam, J. M., Boyer, M., & Sorensen, W. B. (1986). Distributive justice. In J. L. Price & C. W. Mueller

(Eds.), Handbook of organizational measurement (pp. 122–127). Marshﬁeld, MA: Pitman.

Beal, D. J., Cohen, R. R., Burke, M. J., & McLendon, C. L. (2003). Cohesion and performance in
groups: A meta-analytic clariﬁcation of construct relations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88,
989–1004.

Black, J. S., & Gregersen, H. B. (1997). Participative decision-making: An integration of multiple

dimensions. Human Relations, 50, 859–878.

Bohen, H., & Viveros-Long, A. (1981). Balancing jobs and family life. Philadelphia, PA: Temple

University Press.

Bond, F. W., & Bunce, D. (2001). Job control mediates change in a work reorganization

intervention for stress reduction. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 6, 290–302.

Caplan, R. D., Cobb, S., French, T. R. P., Harrison, R. V., & Pinneau, S. R. (1975). Job demands and

worker health. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Ofﬁce.

Carayon, P., Haims, M. C., Hoonakker, P. L. T., & Swanson, N. G. (2006). Teamwork and
musculoskeletal health in the context of work organization interventions in ofﬁce and
computer work. Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science, 7, 39–69.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC] (1998). Behavioral risk factor surveillance
system survey questionnaire. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative

analysis. London: Sage.

Cohen, S., Kamarck, T., & Mermelstein, R. (1983). A global measure of perceived stress. Journal of

Health and Social Behavior, 24, 385–396.

Cooper, C. L., & Cartwright, S. (1994). Healthy mind; healthy organization: A proactive approach

to occupational stress. Human Relations, 47(4), 455–471.

Cooper, C. L., & Williams, S. (1994). Creating healthy work organizations. Chichester, England:

Wiley.

Cotton, J., Vollrath, D., Froggatt, K. L., Lengnick-Hall, M., & Jennings, K. R. (1988). Employee
participation: Diverse forms and different outcomes. Academy of Management Review, 13(1),
8–22.

Cox, T. (1988). Editorial: Organizational health. Work & Stress, 2(1), 1–2.
Cox, T., Karanika, M., Grifﬁths, A., & Houdmont, J. (2007). Evaluating organizational-level work

stress interventions: Beyond traditional methods. Work & Stress, 21, 348–362.

Cox, T., Leather, P., & Cox, S. (1990, February/March). Stress, health and organisations. Occupational

Health Review, 13–18.

Crisp, B. R., Swerissen, H., & Duckett, S. J. (2000). Four approaches to capacity building in health:
Consequences for measurement and accountability. Health Promotion International, 15,
99–107.

Danna, K., & Grifﬁn, R. W. (1999). Health and well-being in the workplace: A review and synthesis

of the literature. Journal of Management, 25(3), 357–384.

DeJoy, D. M., Murphy, L., & Gershon, R. M. (1995). The inﬂuence of employee, job/task, and
organizational factors on adherence to universal precautions among nurses. International
Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 16, 43–55.

DeJoy, D. M., & Wilson, M. G. (2003). Organizational health promotion: Broadening the horizon of

workplace health promotion. American Journal of Health Promotion, 17, 337–341.

Eisenberger, R., Huntington, R., Hutchison, S., & Sowa, D. (1986). Perceived organizational

support. Journal of Applied Psychology, 71(3), 500–507.

Goldenhar, L. M., LaMontagne, A. D., Katz, T., Heaney, C., & Landsbergis, P. (2001). The
intervention research process in occupational safety and health: An overview from the


164 David M. DeJoy et al.

National Occupational Agenda Intervention Effectiveness Team. Journal of Occupational and
Environmental Medicine, 43, 616–622.

Goodman, R., Speers, M., McLeroy, K., Fawcett, S., Kegler, M., Parker, E., et al. (1998). An initial
attempt at identifying and deﬁning the dimensions of community capacity to provide a basis
for measurement. Health Education and Behavior, 25, 258–278.

Greenberg, J. (1986). Determinants of perceived fairness of performance evaluations. Journal of

Applied Psychology, 71(2), 340–342.

Hackman, J. R., & Oldham, G. R. (1975). Development of the job diagnostic survey. Journal of

Applied Psychology, 60(2), 159–170.

House, J. S., McMichael, A. J., Wells, J. A., Kaplan, B. H., & Landerman, L. R. (1979). Occupational stress

and health among factory workers. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 20, 139–160.

Hox, J. J. (2002). Multilevel analysis: Techniques & applications. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Jaffe, D. T. (1995). The healthy company: Research paradigms for personal and organizational
health. In S. L. Sauter & L. R. Murphy (Eds.), Organizational risk factors for job stress
(pp. 13–39). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Jamieson, D., & O’Marra, J. (1991). Managing workforce 2000: Gaining the diversity advantage.

San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Johansson, G., Johnson, J. V., & Hall, E. M. (1991). Smoking and sedentary behavior as related to

work organization. Social Science and Medicine, 32(7), 837–846.

Klitzman, S., House, J. S., Israel, B. A., & Mero, R. P. (1990). Work stress, nonwork stress, and

health. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 13(3), 221–243.

Kuhnert, K., Sims, R. R., & Lahey, M. A. (1989). The relationship between job security and

employee health. Group & Organization Studies, 14(4), 399–410.

Kegler, M. C., Twiss, J. M., & Look, V. (2000). Assessing community change at multiple levels: The
genesis of an evaluation framework for the California Healthy Cities Project. Health Education
and Behavior, 27, 760–779.

Landsbergis, P. A. (2003). The changing organization of work and the safety and health of working
people: A commentary. Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 45, 61–72.

Lawler, E. E., III (1986). High involvement management. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Lawler, E. E., III (1992). The Ultimate advantage: Creating the high involvement organization.

San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Lindstrom, K. (1994). Psychosocial criteria for good work organization. Scandanavian Journal of

Work Environmental Health, 20, 123–133.

Lowe, G. S., Schellenberg, G., & Shannon, H. S. (2003). Correlates of employees’ perceptions of a

healthy work environment. American Journal of Health Promotion, 17, 390–399.

Marks, M. L., Mirvis, P. H., Hackett, E. J., & Grady, J. F. (1986). Employee participation in a quality
circle program: Impact on quality of work life, productivity, and absenteeism. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 71(1), 61–69.

McDowall, D., McCleary, R., Meidinger, E. E., & Hay, R. A., Jr. (1980). Interrupted time series

analysis. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

Miller, K., & Monge, P. R. (1986). Participation, satisfaction, and productivity: A meta-analytic

review. Academy of Management Journal, 29, 727–753.

Morgeson, F. P., Johnson, M. D., Campion, M. A., Medsker, G. J., & Mumford, T. V. (2006).
Understanding reactions to job redesign: A quasi-experimental investigation of the moderating
effects of organizational context on perceptions of performance behavior. Personnel
Psychology, 59, 333–363.

Morrow, P. C., McElroy, J. C., & Elliot, S. M. (1994). The effect of preference for work status,
schedule, and shift on work-related attitudes. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 45, 202–222.
Mowday, R. T., Steers, R. M., & Porter, L. W. (1979). The measurement of organizational

commitment. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 14, 224–247.

National

Institute for Occupational Safety and Health [NIOSH]

(2002). The changing
organization of work and the safety and health of working people (DHHS/NIOSH
Publication No. 2002-116). Washington, DC: Author.


Impact of a healthy work organization

165

Parker, S. K., Chmiel, N., & Wall, T. D. (1997). Work characteristics and employee well-being within a

context of strategic downsizing. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 2, 289–303.

Parkes, K. R., & Sparkes, T. J. (1998). Organizational interventions to reduce work stress: Are
they effective? A review of the literature. Oxford: University of Qxford, Health and Safety
Executive, Contract Research Report No. 193/198.

Pasmore, W. A., & Fagans, M. R. (1992). Participation, individual development, and organizational

change: A review and synthesis. Journal of Management, 18, 375–397.

Petterson, I. L., & Arnetz, B. B. (1998). Psychosocial stressors and well-being in health care workers.

The impact of an intervention program. Social Science and Medicine, 47, 1763–1772.

Raudenbush, S. W., & Bryk, A. S. (2001). Hierarchical linear models: Applications & data

analysis methods (Vol. 1). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Raudenbush, S. W., Bryk, A. S., Cheong, Y. F., & Congdon, R. T. (2004). HLM 6: Hierarchical linear

and nonlinear modeling. Lincolnwood, IL: Scientiﬁc Software International.

Rousseau, D. M. (1997). Organizational behavior in the new organizational era. Annual Review of

Psychology, 48, 515–546.

Ribisl, K. M., & Reischl, T. M. (1993). Measuring the climate for health at organizations:
Development of the worksite health climate scales. Journal of Occupational Medicine, 35(8),
812–824.

Rizzo, J. R., House, R. J., & Lirtzman, S. I. (1970). Role conﬂict and ambiguity in complex

organizations. Administrative Science Quarterly, not stated, 15, 150–163.

Sauter, S. L., Lim, S., & Murphy, L. R. (1996). Organizational health: A new paradigm for

occupational stress research at NIOSH. Occupational Mental Health, 4(4), 248–254.

Sauter, S. L., Murphy, L. R., & Hurrell, J. J., Jr. (1990). Prevention of work-related psychological
disorders: A national strategy proposed by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health (NIOSH). American Psychologist, 45(10), 1146–1158.

Senge, P. (1990). The ﬁfth discipline. New York: Doubleday Currency.
Smith, K. K., Kaminstein, D. S., & Makadok, R. J. (1995). The health of the corporate body: Illness

and organizational dynamics. Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 31(3), 328–351.

Sparks, K., Faragher, B., & Cooper, C. L. (2001). Well-being and occupational health in the 21st
century workplace. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 74, 489–509.
in the workplace: Dimensions,

(1995). Psychological empowerment

Spreitzer, G. M.

measurement, and validation. Academy of Management Journal, 38(5), 1442–1465.

Spreitzer, G. M., Kizilos, M. A., & Nason, S. W. (1997). A dimensional analysis of the relationship
between psychological empowerment and effectiveness, satisfaction, and strain. Journal of
Management, 23, 679–704.

Stokols, D. (1992). Establishing and maintaining healthy environments: Toward a social ecology of

health promotion. American Psychologist, 47, 6–22.

Vandenberg, R. J., Richardson, H., & Eastman, L. (1999). High involvement organizations: Their

antecedents and consequences. Groups & Organizations Management, 24, 300–339.

Vroom, V. H. (1959). Some personality determinants of the effects of participation. Journal of

Abnormal and Social Psychology, 59, 322–327.

Ware, J. E., & Sherbourne, C. D. (1992). The MOS 36-item short-form health survey (SF-36).

Medical Care, 30(6), 473–481.

Waldman, D. (1994). The contributions of total quality management to a theory of work

performance. Academy of Management Review, 19, 510–536.

Wilson, M. G., DeJoy, D. M., Vandenberg, R. J., Richardson, H., & McGrath, A. L. (2004). Work
characteristics and employee health and well-being: Test of a model of healthy work
organization. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 77, 565–588.

Received 3 October 2006; revised version received 5 November 2008

The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.
The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.

