 Corporate reputation and perceived risk in
professional engineering services 
 

Ewing, Michael T; Caruana, Albert; Ernest Rinson Loy . Corporate Communications ; Bradford 4.3 (1999):
121-128.
 
 

ProQuest document link

 
  
ABSTRACT
 
   
The importance of corporate reputation is widely acknowledged in both contemporary and academic business
writings. While reputation is a difficult concept to measure, managers frequently assume a positive relationship
between business performance and corporate reputation. The literature avers that from a client's perspective, a
healthy reputation may act as a risk suppressor. In this empirical study, the nature of corporate reputation and risk
aversion in professional engineering consultancies is examined. Findings support a three-dimensional reputation
construct, but there is no evidence to suggest that a good corporate reputation reduces clients' perceived risk.
Implications are drawn, limitations noted and directions offered for ongoing research.  
 
 
FULL TEXT
 
  
Michael T. Ewing: Michael T. Ewing is Senior Lecturer at the School of Marketing, Curtin University of Technology,
Perth, Western Australia.  
Albert Caruana: Albert Caruana is Senior Lecturer in the Department of Marketing, University of Malta, Malta.  
Ernest Rinson Loy: Ernest Rinson Loy is Professional Director (Training &Consultancy Services), Pro Dynamics
Consultants Pte Ltd, Singapore.  
Introduction  
The professional engineering environment has changed considerably over the past decade. The number of clients
has increased and more of them today are corporate or committee in nature. This means that the selection of
consulting engineers becomes a group decision based on analytical processes, rather than individual patronage
(Coxe, 1983). Moreover, clients are becoming increasingly demanding and quality conscious and this is further
stimulating demand for professional systems designing and planning services. Thus, professional engineers have
more incentive than ever before to embrace the process of new business development.  
Although some professional engineers' boards impose strict regulations on the marketing practices of their
members, they are not restricted from promulgating their firms' names through the reputation management
process to enhance their corporate images and raise clients' awareness of their services. A positive corporate
reputation is an important driver of successful organisational relationships with clients, which can have a
significant impact on the business performance of a firm.  
Although the demand for quality M&E (mechanical and electrical) systems designing and planning services has
never been greater, it is becoming increasingly difficult for engineers to attract the attention of prospective clients
long enough to present a sales message. Firms that have earned a well-respected reputation over the years are
getting much larger in size, while new entrants often struggle to gain awareness in the marketplace. Clients, who
are most often property developers, face myriad financial uncertainties and considerable risk due to the
substantial sums of money typically being invested. A mechanical and electrical engineering consultancy's
reputation can potentially reduce the client's perceived risk.  


In this study, we identify suitable measures for both corporate reputation and risk in professional consulting
services. We administered a self-completion mail survey to a sample of property developers in Singapore.
Implications are drawn, limitations noted and directions for future research offered.  
Corporate reputation  
A planned and well-managed corporate reputation is a most promising marketing prescription for conquering the
current attitudes audiences have towards today's marketing communications efforts (Davidson, 1990; Fombrun
and Shanley, 1996). There is no better nor more powerful than a marketing panacea as an organisation that
understands itself, knows where it is headed, has dedicated, committed and enthusiastic employees, and that
relishes two-way communications with its key audiences (Dollinger et al., 1997; Howard, 1998). Everything an
organisation does, and does not do, has a direct impact on its reputation (Greyser, 1995). A respected reputation
will separate and distinguish the organisation from both its competitors and from others operating within the
same geographic region (Howard, 1998). The reputation of a firm will grow gradually depending upon how the
organisation deals with the public, its distributors, the media, employees, shareholders and everyone else in an
open, honest way (Howard, 1998; Herbig and Milewicz, 1995; Young, 1996). Greyser (1995) and Howard (1998)
both acknowledge that corporate reputation is a very fragile thing and, once damaged, is extremely hard to repair.
A well-respected reputation communicates the firm's mission, the professionalism of its leadership, the calibre of
its employees, and its roles within the marketing environment (Dowling, 1994; Fombrun, 1996).  
A firm with a good reputation is more likely to stand out in the marketplace as a beacon drawing both repeat
customers and trial users (Connor and Davidson, 1997). The more respected a company's reputation, the more
likely the purchasing public will assume that the products produced and the services tendered by that company
are better, of higher quality and worth more in actual price (Dowling, 1994). Similarly, the more respected a firm's
reputation, the more likely negative elements or negative stories about the company will be edited or filtered out of
the customer's consciousness (Howard, 1998). In general, a respected reputation should enhance the wellbeing of
any firm. Howard (1998) advocates using the corporate reputation management process as a philosophy of doing
business to develop client relationships at the organisational level through consistent experiences and
interactions. This is both an outward and an inward approach, which takes into greater consideration the need for
an organisation to develop a unifying corporate culture and an agreed set of corporate behaviour patterns that
allow for the seamless execution of the desired corporate image. With the corporate reputation management
process, employees, business partners and suppliers become as important target audiences as customers,
shareholders and other "outside" audiences (Connor and Davidson, 1997; Shenson and Nicholas, 1997).  
Risk  
Howard (1998) cautions that the integration of marketing communications tools and efforts will be to no avail if
the organisation is projecting more powerful and contradictory messages through its actions. Such contradictory
messages not only make integrated marketing communications efforts fruitless, but they result in negative
consequences for the organisation as it gains a reputation for being (at best) inconsistent or (at worst) dishonest
(Evans and Riyait, 1993). First and foremost, prospective clients always have a keen self-interest - they are
concerned with protecting their own or someone else's money (Shenson and Nicholas, 1997). Thus, they are very
likely to concentrate on "mundane" aspects like cost controls, timetables, fees, and the like. Second, they are
greatly influenced by how they think the choice of professional will be judged by others - people are becoming
over-conscious of making the "right" decisions (Connor and Davidson, 1997). Thus, there is a great deal of risk
involved in appointing a professional consultant. Sitkin and Pablo (1992) define risk as "a characteristic of
decisions . . . to which there is uncertainty about whether potentially significant and/or disappointing outcomes
will be realised". The strength of the definition is that risk is most frequently associated with outcome uncertainty
(West and Berthon, 1997). Uncertainty is generally defined in terms of the variability of outcomes (Libby and
Fishburn, 1977), lack of knowledge of the outcomes (March, 1988), and the uncontrollability of outcomes (Vlek and
Stallen, 1980).  
Corporate reputation and risk aversion  


A firm's reputation is generally viewed as a significant factor that contributes to successful client relationship
building (Hebson, 1989; Connor and Davidson, 1997; Dollinger et al., 1997). Reputation has been effectively used
as a strategic weapon in recent years for improving the performances of consulting practices in Singapore (Han
and Leong, 1996; Wee, 1997). A more positive perception of the firm's reputation can be anticipated if the client
has a strong relationship with the company (Crosby et al., 1990; Connor and Davidson, 1997; Howard, 1998). Client
loyalty and retention are much easier to establish if the firm is well-known for its service excellence in the industry
(Cooper, 1978; Coxe, 1983; Hebson, 1989; Buchanan and Grilles, 1990; Dowling; 1994; Shenson and Nicholas,
1997). A positive corporate reputation is an important catalyst for attracting prospective clients to start a future
relationship with the consulting firm for the trial of its professional services (Hayes, 1992; Howard, 1997). The
stronger and longer the relationship a client has with a firm, the greater is the likelihood of that client to award
future service contracts to the same firm (Wee, 1997; Shenson and Nicholas, 1997). The strength of a relationship
with a particular consultant would also provide the motivation to the client to retain the firm's services, particularly
for large-scale projects, which require unique expertise (Hayes, 1992; Hinton and Schaeffer, 1994; Connor and
Davidson, 1997). Accordingly, we hypothesise that:  
() H1: The higher the corporate reputation of a professional engineering consultancy, the lower the perceived risk
by clients.  
Measures  
A successful track record of the consulting firm in terms of the size and prestige of projects undertaken by the
company over the years would serve as an important evaluative criterion for securing new contracts (Cooper,
1978; Coxe, 1980; Hebson, 1989; Yoon et al., 1993; Shenson and Nicholas, 1997). The better the firm's track record,
the higher will be the propensity of its clients to continue using similar services of the company for projects related
to its past experiences (Hebson, 1989; Connor and Davidson, 1997). In many cases, prospective clients are less
willing to try out new firms with no track record, particularly for large-scale projects, because they fear negative
consequences that may have an adverse effect on their businesses (Hebson, 1989). It also means that potential
clients are likely to shop for the more established firms, which are able to provide efficient and reliable services
(Han and Leong, 1996). Based on qualitative research and a review of the literature, we develop and employ eight
measures to capture reputation and later eliminate one due to its low (< 0.35) item-total correlation. Consulting
firms that have strong international links are usually made up of a foreign partnership (Cooper, 1978; Coxe, 1983).
Globalisation has encouraged many businesses to expand beyond the Singapore market. Several large developers
in Singapore prefer to use international consulting firms with foreign expertise. The bigger the consulting firm with
international expertise, the better the chance it has to secure service contracts for overseas projects (Viney, 1992).
Potential clients are prepared to pay premium fees to international consulting firms that offer overseas services
from Singapore. To capture international links we develop four measures and later eliminate one. To capture risk,
we employ Mitchell's (1991) instrument, which he developed specifically to assess risk in purchasing professional
consultancy services. All variables are operationalised using a seven-point interval-scaled scenario statement.  
Data collection  
The population frame is a combination of various data sources. First, we obtained a list of all firms in the CIDB
(Construction Industry Development Board) Register. Next we acquired the list of contractors and developers that
have ongoing projects in Singapore from the Ministry of National Development, of which the Building Control
Division is the main approval authority. For overseas projects beyond the control of the local authority, we
acquired information from the Economic Development Board, the Ministry of Trade and Industry, and the
Association of Consulting Engineers. A three-page questionnaire was administered to a representative,
convenience sample of 150 building developers and other relevant companies. Each of the sampling firms was
first contacted telephonically to determine the name and title of the appropriate person (who was likely to be in a
senior position) to whom to send the questionnaire. The identity of the researcher was not disguised because this
was not a study or an investigation conducted by a private commercial enterprise. The response rate was an
impressive 65.3 per cent, or 98 companies.  


Findings  
When well-validated measures are used, it is always a good idea to check for the inter-item consistency reliability
of the independent and dependent variables. Mean scores for all variables in the instrument were first computed.
This was followed by separate computations of the reliability coefficients (Cronbach, 1951) to check the
reliabilities of the various variables in Section A (corporate reputation) and Section B (risk). The results indicate
that the Cronbach's alpha for the ten corporate reputation items is 0.7881 and the nine risk items 0.7424 (see
Tables I and II). Reliabilities which are less than 0.60 are generally considered to be poor, those in the 0.7 range to
be acceptable, and those over 0.8 to be good (Sekaran, 1992).  
A factor analysis on the ten reliable corporate reputation items from Table I provided a three-factor solution (Table
III). Factor 1 reflects an Excellent Reputation dimension, factor 2 reflects No Reputation, and factor 3 reflects
International Links. For risk, the nine reliable items were used to generate a single composite risk index. However,
before that, another factor analysis was conducted to check that risk and reputation are indeed separate
constructs - and the factor loading in Table IV confirms that they are. The main findings of the study are reported
in Table V. The three reputation factors are correlated with each other, but more importantly, factor two (firm with
no reputation) is positively correlated with item Y3 (the number of people involved in decision making for selecting
a consultant). Factor 3 (firm with international links) is positively correlated with item Y1 (client's knowledge of or
client's familiarity with consultants). Items Y1 and Y2 (client's satisfaction of the core and ancillary services
provided by the consultant) are also positively correlated, but Y2 is negatively correlated with Y3.  
Discussion  
Most of the client-respondents lacked confidence in appointing "new" consultants to handle large-scale and
"reputation-sensitive" projects until these consulting firms had successfully proved their competency in managing
the smaller or less significant projects. Most of the successful consultants in this category had strong
international links with overseas counterparts that offered joint consulting services to major clients who were
willing to pay above-market rates for sophisticated services. Respondents viewed corporate reputation as a
strategic asset that was highly critical for successful project developments in new markets. A strategic asset is
judged to be of high importance if an improvement is likely to yield a strong, positive customer response for a
given scenario and segment (Day et al., 1997). Smaller firms and opportunists like low-cost residential developers
were likely to use less reputable consultants if they faced budget constraints because such professionals were
deemed to charge lower fees. Experienced consultants are usually more guarded about providing free guidance
(Bisk, 1997).  
This study also reveals that clients were more satisfied with the performance of their consultants when a problem
had been identified and a consultant solved the problem. They were less satisfied with the performance of a
consultant when they were cold canvassed and solicited. Two conclusions can be drawn from this anecdote. First,
if the client does not think or recognise that they have a problem, they will be suspicious of an outsider who tells
them that they do have a problem. Second, they become more cautious of unsolicited advice. A majority of the
clients who engaged the services of reputable firms expected to receive more benefits from their consultants than
those who sought the services of the lesser-known firms. Several clients had examined and gauged the
consultant's reputation in terms of its profile, capabilities, history, personality, and the availability of a preferred
engineer before using the services of a professional practice. Some clients had even gone to a greater length to
consider the firm's culture, their personal preferences, the time they and their staff could make available, the cost
of the project, and their own mind-sets before they finally settled down with the most desired firm.  
Conclusion  
It would appear as if clients prefer to use a consulting firm with an excellent reputation because it is helpful for
enhancing the marketability of their projects. In decision making, this study also shows that the client is likely to
get more people involved in the selection process if either the consulting firm has no reputation or the company is
totally unfamiliar to him or her. Clients are particularly more careful in the scanning and selection process if the
consulting firm is a one-man operation which has no track record or is unheard of in the marketplace. Consulting


firms with international links are favoured not only by clients who have interests in overseas projects but also by
those who actually participate in large domestic projects. Such firms that have foreign partnership are preferred
over the local ones because they are deemed to have the international expertise to offer clients better services in
the long run. This study also reveals that reputation is not a measure of risk as both factors are separate
constructs altogether. Hence, it might be inferred that a firm, which has no reputation, could also be a comfortable
company to work with. On the contrary, that also means that the client who uses a reputed firm may not
necessarily be able to escape from any risk at all. There is always an element of risk involved in appointing a
consultant regardless of the consulting firm's reputation. Using a more respectable consultant may only give the
client the "psychological benefit" of not worrying about risk avoidance. Restless and demanding clients can keep a
professional service firm on its toes. Uncertainty, challenge, surprises, failures and competitive losses should be
accepted as facts of organisational life. In response, all staff members within the company need to be encouraged
to establish whatever relationships inside and outside the corporate network to learn and respond appropriately.  
Limitations and directions for future research  
Although the study shows that a strong reputation would help a firm to attract more clients, it does not confirm
that an excellent reputation would definitely guarantee a positive return on the financial performance of a
consulting firm. In ensuring financial success, a firm's reputation may be only one of the contributing factors.
However, managing corporate reputation should be given top priority for a company's marketing communications
programme if the consulting firm wants to attract more clients to use its professional services.  
As the battlefield for consulting success is shifting from the minds of the clients (where their perceptions are
formed from projected corporate imagery) to the emotions, hearts and souls of clients (where relationships with
the firm are formed and maintained from both projected corporate imagery and experienced corporate behavioural
patterns), there is no greater communications issue facing senior managers in today's increasingly competitive
markets than the issue of corporate reputation management. It is hoped that more studies will be carried out in the
future to assess the impact of corporate reputation on the financial performance of professional practices. Several
variables were used in the research instrument to define an appropriate measure for corporate reputation, but
some of the items proved to be unreliable and therefore were discarded. This confirms the inappropriateness of
using all the identifiable variables to measure corporate reputation (Caruana, 1996).  
References  
1. Bisk, L. (1997), Guide to Professional Services, John Wiley &Sons, New York, NY.  
2. Buchanan, R.W.T. and Grilles, C.S. (1990), "Value managed relationships: the key to customer retention and
profitability", European Management Journal, Vol. 8 No. 4, pp. 523-6.  
3. Caruana, A. (1996), "Corporate reputation: concept, measurement and implications for theory", Working Paper
Series 9602, Curtin University of Technology, November.  
4. Connor, D. and Davidson, J. (1997), Marketing Your Consulting and Professional Services, 3rd ed., John Wiley
&Sons, New York, NY, pp. 3-37.  
5. Cooper, D.G. (1978), Architectural and Engineering Salesmanship, John Wiley &Sons, New York, NY, pp. 83-91.  
6. Crosby, L.A., Evans, K.R. and Cowles, D. (1990), "Relationship quality in services selling: an interpersonal
influence perspective", Journal of Marketing, Vol. 54, pp. 68-81.  
7. Coxe, W. (1980), Managing Architectural and Engineering Practice, John Wiley &Sons, New York, NY, pp. 204-35.  
8. Coxe, W. (1983), Marketing Architectural and Engineering Services, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, NY, pp. 15-
33.  
9. Cronbach, L. J. (1951), "Coefficient alpha and internal structure of tests", Psychometrika, Vol. 16, pp. 297-334.  
10. Davidson, D. K. (1990), "On corporate reputation: a reply to Dobson", Business and Society, Spring.  
11. Dollinger, M. J., Golden, P. A., and Saxto, T. (1997), "The effect of reputation on the decision to joint venture",
Strategic Management Journal, February.  
12. Dowling, G.R. (1994), Corporate Reputation, Longman Publishing, New York, NY, pp. 12-20.  
13. Evans, I. and Riyait, S. (1993), "Is the message being received? Benetton analysed", International Journal of


Advertising, Vol. 12.  
14. Fombrun, C.J. (1996), "Reputation: realising value from the corporate image", Harvard Business School, Boston,
MA.  
15. Fombrun, C.J. and Shanley, M. (1996), "What's in a name? Reputation building and corporate strategy",
Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 33, pp. 210-50.  
16. Greyser, S.A. (1995), "Corporate reputation: aid to growth and shield", Inside PR and Reputation Management,
January-February.  
17. Han, F. and Leong, D. (1996), Productivity and Service Quality for Service Providers, Prentice-Hall, Singapore.  
18. Hayes, B.E. (1992), Measuring Customer Satisfaction, ASQC Quality Press, Milwaukee, WI.  
19. Hebson, R. (1989), Become a Successful Consultant, Foulsham, Berkshire.  
20. Herbig, P. and Milewicz, J. (1995), "To be or not to be . . . credible that is: a model of reputation and credibility
among competing firms", Marketing Intelligence &Planning, Vol. 13 No. 6, pp. 20-38.  
21. Hinton, T. and Schaeffer, W. (1994), Customer-Focused Quality, Prentice-Hall, New York, NY.  
22. Howard, S. (1998), Corporate Image Management, Butterworth-Heinemann, Singapore, pp. 41-53.  
23. Libby, R. and Fishburn, P.C. (1977), "Behavioural models of risk-taking in business decisions: a survey and
evaluation", Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 15, pp. 272-92.  
24. March, J.G. (1988), "Variable risk preferences and adaptive aspirations", Journal of Economic Behaviour and
Organizations, Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 5-24.  
25. Mitchell, V-M. (1991), "An empirical investigation of perceived risk in the purchase of planning consultancy by
local authorities", unpublished PhD thesis, UMIST, Manchester.  
26. Sekaran, U. (1992), Research Methods for Business: A Skill Building Approach, 2nd ed., John Wiley &Sons,
Canada.  
27. Shenson, H. and Nicholas, T. (1997), Consulting Success, Dearborn Publishing Group, New York, NY.  
28. Sitkin, S.B. and Pablo, A.L. (1992), "Reconceptualizing the determinants of risk behavior", Academy of
Management Review, Vol. 17 No. 1, pp. 9-38.  
29. Viney, N. (1992), All about Consultancy Business, Ravett, Sussex, pp. 7-18.  
30. Vlek, C. and Stallen, P.J. (1980), "Rational and personal aspects of risk", Acta Psychologica, Vol. 45, pp. 273-
300.  
31. Wee, C.H. (1997), Practical Marketing: An Asian Perspective, Addison-Wesley, Singapore, pp. 233-4.  
32. West, D. and Berthon, P. (1997), "Antecedents of risk-taking behaviour by advertisers: empirical evidence and
management implications", Journal of Advertising Research, Vol. 37 No. 5, pp. 27-40.  
33. Yoon, E., Guffey, H.J. and Kijewski, V. (1993), "The effects of information and company reputations on
intentions to buy a business service", Journal of Business Research, Vol. 27, pp. 216-28.  
34. Young, D. (1996), "Building your company's good name: how to create and protect the reputation your
organisation wants and deserves", AMACOM.  
Further reading  
35. Brassington, F. and Pettitt, S. (1997), Principles of Marketing, Pitman Publishing, London.  
36. Hart, C. (1988), "The power of unconditional service guarantees", Harvard Business Review, July-August.  
37. Hart, N. (1983), Business to Business Advertising, Associated Business Press, London.  
38. Shimp, T.A. (1997), Advertising, Promotion, and Supplemental Aspects of Integrated Marketing
Communications, The Dryden Press.  
39. Weigelt, K. and Camerer, C. (1988), "Reputation and corporate strategy: a review of recent theory and
applications", Strategic Management Journal.  
Illustration 
  
Caption: Table I; Reliability analysis - corporate reputation (item total statistics); Table II; Reliability analysis -
corporate reputation (item total statistics); Table III; Principal components factor analysis - corporate reputation


(rotated component matrix); Table IV; Factor analysis to confirm that reputation and risk are separate constructs;
Table V; Bivariate correlation  
 
 
DETAILS
 

Subject:

Location:

Classification:

Studies; Risk assessment; Engineering firms; Consultants; Corporate image

Singapore

9130: Experimental/theoretical; 2400: Public relations; 8370: Construction
&engineering industry; 9179: Asia &the Pacific

Publication title:

Corporate Communications; Bradford

Volume:

Issue:

Pages:

Number of pages:

Publication year:

Publication date:

4

3

121-128

0

1999

1999

Publisher:

Emerald Group Publishing Limited

Place of publication:

Bradford

Country of publication:

United Kingdom

Publication subject:

Communications, Business And Economics--Management

ISSN:

13563289

Source type:

Scholarly Journals

Language of publication:

English

Document type:

Feature

ProQuest document ID:

214193894

Document URL:

http://proxy.cc.uic.edu/login?url=https://search.proquest.com/docview/214193894?
accountid=14552

Copyright:

Copyright MCB UP Limited (MCB) 1999

Last updated:

2014-05-25


ABI/INFORM Global

Database:

 
LINKS
Find It @ UIC
  

 
Copyright (cid:211) 2017 ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved.
 
Terms and Conditions   Contact ProQuest

