 
 
Gaining Comparative Advantage Through Discretionary Expenditures: The Returns to R&D
and Advertising
Author(s): Gary Erickson and  Robert Jacobson
Source: Management Science, Vol. 38, No. 9 (Sep., 1992), pp. 1264-1279
Published by: INFORMS
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2632633
Accessed: 02-08-2017 20:41 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms

INFORMS is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Management
Science

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:41:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
 Vol. 38, No. 9, September 1992

 Printted itn U.S.A.

 GAINING COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE THROUGH
 DISCRETIONARY EXPENDITURES: THE RETURNS

 TO R&D AND ADVERTISING*

 School of Business Administration, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195

 GARY ERICKSON AND ROBERT JACOBSON

 We explore the extent to which R&D and advertising expenditures generate a comparative
 advantage that allows firms to earn supranormal profits, After controlling for unobserved firm-
 specific factors and the feedback between discretionary expenditures and profitability, our results
 suggest substantially lower accounting and stock market returns to R&D and advertising than
 indicated in previous research. Isolating mechanisms, which prevent imitation, do not appear
 sufficient for either R&D or advertising expenditures to generate, on the average, a long-run
 comparative advantage.
 (R&D; ADVERTISING; COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE; STOCK MARKET RETURN; AC-
 COUNTING RETURN; DISCRETIONARY EXPENDITURES)

 1. Introduction

 Contemporary strategic thinking posits that achieving superior performance requires
 a business to possess a comparative advantage. Indeed, Rumelt ( 1979) argues that "a
 strategy that does not either create or exploit an asymmetry constituting an advantage
 must be rejected." How a business might obtain an advantage over its competition, for
 example, by increasing its R&D and advertising expenditures, is a central focus of strategy
 research. R&D-based strategies attempt to generate knowledge assets that allow the firm
 to develop either superior products or more efficient production techniques. Advertising
 seeks to differentiate the firm's product from those of competitors. Despite the postulated
 importance of these expenditures, U.S. firms have been criticized for failing to commit
 to expenditures in both R&D and advertising.

 Particularly because of its successful use by Japanese firms, increased attention is being
 focused on the role of R&D in creating a comparative advantage. Hayes and Abernathy
 ( 1980) state that "our experience suggests that, to an unprecedented degree, success in
 most industries today requires an organizational commitment to compete in the mar-
 ketplace on technological grounds-that is, to compete over the long run by offering
 superior products." Yet, they and others contend that U.S. managers, motivated by a
 desire for immediate results, have directed their attention elsewhere. This short-run ori-
 entation often precludes firms from making the necessary investment in R&D required
 for the sustained viability of their products and markets.

 While R&D is crucial in many industries, comparative advantage can also be attained
 through a differentiation strategy based on advertising. Advertising can enhance brand
 name recognition. It can also create a reputation premium so that the brand commands
 a higher price relative to competing products that may be identical in terms of physical
 features. Further, potential competitors may be discouraged from entering an advertising
 intensive market because of the amount of money that must be spent on advertising to
 overcome the established brand loyalty of existing competitors. Yet, many analysts note
 that the same lack of commitment shown to R&D expenditures exists with respect to
 advertising expenditures. Many of the benefits of advertising are long term in nature.

 * Accepted by Vijay Mahajan; received October 12, 1990. This paper has been with the authors 6 2 months

 for 3 revisions.

 1264

 0025- 1909/92/3809/1 264$0 1.25

 Copyright (C 1992, The Institute of Management Sciences

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:41:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 GAINING COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE 1265

 Advertising is often viewed as a "luxury item" with no clear association with firm success.
 As such, it is frequently targeted as a vehicle for reducing current expenses.

 The failure to commit to expenditures, which may hurt current-term earnings but are
 necessary for long-term competitive success (if not survival), is often blamed on the
 myopic orientation of stock market participants and the pressures they place on managers.
 The concern is that stock market participants (especially institutional investors) place
 too great an emphasis on current-term results and have demonstrated a preoccupation
 with current year (or even quarter) profits. Studies of decision rules of when to sell stock
 highlight "sell when 12-month earnings decline" as one of the best performing rules-of-
 thumb. The implication for managers is either get current-term earnings up or lose investor
 confidence. Rappaport (1987) states that "managers who ignore the important signals
 from stock price-particularly in today's environment of corporate takeovers and re-
 structurings-do so at their peril." Managers are posited to adopt a current year/current
 quarter style of management in response to the incentives in the stock market. As ad-
 vertising and R&D often adversely affect current period earnings, this can explain firms'
 reluctance to make these expenditures.

 However, empirical evidence from a variety of scholars contradicts the position that
 the market does not reward R&D and advertising expenditures. Studies, though differing
 somewhat in their assessment of the extent of the effect, consistently conclude that stock
 prices react favorably, and rather dramatically, to increases in these discretionary expen-
 ditures.' For example, Griliches (1981) finds based on his analysis of the effect of R&D
 on Tobin's q, which measures the market value of the firm divided by the replacement
 value of tangible assets, that "the long-run effect of a dollar of R&D is to add about $2
 to the market value of the firm." Pakes (1985) reports that "a $ 100 unexpected increase
 in R&D is associated with research and patent activity that have increased the value of
 the firm by $1,870." Jaffe (1986) estimates that "the market apparently places more than
 three times as much value on a dollar of R&D stock as on a dollar of capital stock." The
 estimated main effects of advertising on Tobin's q in Salinger (1984) range from 1.32 to
 2.72. Connolly and Hirschey (1984) indicate that advertising, like R&D, has a large
 positive and statistically significant effect on increasing the spread between the market
 value and the book value of assets.

 This creates a paradox. Despite the high estimated return on investment and the fa-
 vorable market reaction, the share of industrial resources allocated to R&D and advertising
 have not increased commensurately. Why have not more funds been directed towards
 R&D and advertising if the rate of return to these expenditures is so high? Do advertising
 and R&D expenditures tend to generate a comparative advantage? What signals does
 the stock market send to managers with respect to discretionary spending? This paper
 addresses these issues.

 2. A Market Signaling Interpretation of the Stock Market's

 Reaction to Discretionary Expenditures

 Wensley (1982), Barney (1986), and others argue that easily implementable strategies,
 e.g., increasing expenditure levels, will already have been acted upon by market partic-
 ipants. As such, these types of strategies should not provide abnormal returns. Wensley
 (1982) suggests that the possibility of misinterpretation be considered thoroughly before
 interpreting empirical results as implying market inefficiency. We hypothesize that the
 positive association of stock return with discretionary expenditures reported in previous

 ' This favorable stock market reaction is consistent with empirical work reporting that these expenditures
 generate positive accounting returns. Capon, Farley, and Hoenig ( 1990) conclude, based on a meta analysis of
 320 profitability studies, that "Dollars spent on R&D have an especially strong relationship to increased prof-
 itability. Investment in advertising is also worthwhile."

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:41:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1266 GARY ERICKSON AND ROBERT JACOBSON

 studies does not necessarily imply supranormal returns for these expenditures, but rather
 may result from a joint association of stock return and discretionary spending with a
 firm's profitability. The stock market reacts favorably to higher discretionary expenditures
 not because of their impact on profitability but rather because the market interprets them
 as signals of higher firm profitability.2

 A number of researchers, e.g., Grabowski and Mueller (1978), Ben-Zion (1984),
 Switzer ( 1984), have posited that internal funding, i.e., profitability, is crucial in deter-
 mining the level of discretionary expenditures. R&D and advertising expenditure decisions
 should be based on the same economic considerations as other investments, i.e., the
 present discounted value of the future stream of earnings. However, important differences
 exist between the types of investments. The earnings streams associated with R&D and
 advertising are subject to more uncertainty than other investments, e.g., plant and equip-
 ment. The uncertainty about an R&D project, as well as business secrets involved in
 details of the project, may require the firm to rely more on internal financing rather than
 using the financial markets for borrowing. Thus, a firm's current earnings are crucial for
 financing discretionary expenditures. Further, many firms regard these expenditures not
 as necessary but rather as luxury items that are justified more readily in a period of
 comparable prosperity. Discretionary expenditures are likely to be higher when a firm
 has a higher ROI or when it has greater access to funds. Conversely, expenditures decrease
 when firms are constrained by low earnings/low ROI, or are subject to more immediate
 pressures on funds, e.g., substantial interest payments due to the assumption of debt.

 As such, firms increasing their advertising or R&D expenditures provide a signal to
 the market that they have the enhanced discretionary funds (profits) required to undertake
 these activities. Stock prices should be expected to react favorably to this signal. Therefore,
 a favorable market reaction to increases in discretionary expenditure does not necessarily
 attest to these expenditures generating abnormal returns. In order to discriminate between
 discretionary expenditures generating abnormal returns versus discretionary expenditures
 resulting from abnormal returns, i.e., a market signaling phenomenon, the effect of firm
 profitability needs to be considered. However, previous studies of market reaction, whether
 based on stock return or Tobin's q, to discretionary expenditures have not controlled
 for firm profitability. The results from these studies, therefore, must be viewed cautiously
 because of the risk of omitted variable bias.

 3. Stock Market Reaction to Discretionary Expenditures

 In order to assess the extent of this bias we first look at the stock market's reaction to
 discretionary expenditures not controlling for differences in firm profitability and then
 assess the reaction when controlling for firm profitability.

 Data

 The data used in the study come from Standard and Poor's 1986 Compustat database,
 which provides annual accounting and stock market information for 20-year periods for
 industrial companies listed on the New York, American, and OTC stock exchanges.3
 The sample of companies used in the analysis consists of those firms reporting their
 advertising, which includes both media and promotional expenses, and R&D expenditures
 continuously for the period 1972 through 1986. Our sample period begins in 1972 as
 prior to this time relatively few firms reported their expenditures on advertising and
 R&D. We impose the additional requirement that the companies have a December fiscal
 year to ensure a correspondence between the accounting information and stock price,

 2 This market signaling argument is analogous to discussions of why the market reacts favorably to dividend

 announcements (Miller and Rock 1985).

 3 The description of each variable used in our analysis is contained in the Appendix.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:41:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 GAINING COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE 1267

 which is reported at year end. Ninety-nine firms meet these criteria and are utilized in
 the analysis.4

 Empirical Analysis

 The efficient markets hypothesis posits that stock return will be uncorrelated with any
 information observed in an earlier time period, i.e., stock prices are a random walk.
 Market participants incorporate all available information influencing stock prices into
 the current price of the stock. As such, onlv unanticipated changes in variables should
 be associated with stock return. An extensive literature in this area has concluded that
 the manner in which stock prices react to information is in close correspondence with
 this hypothesis. Whether it be, for example, earnings, money supply, inflation, or trade
 deficit announcements, the key consideration as to its effect on stock prices is the extent
 of its deviation from market expectations.

 Two basic approaches have been used in obtaining measures of the unanticipated
 components of series. One approach uses survey data of market expectations. Unan-
 ticipated measures are defined as the difference between the actual value and the survey
 measure. In the absence of survey measures, or because of problems associated with
 obtaining accurate estimates of market participants' expectations, the other widely used
 approach is based on forecasts from regression or time series models as a proxy for
 expectations. The difference between the actual value and the predicted value, i.e., the
 regression residual, is used as an estimate of the unanticipated component. As survey
 measures are unavailable, we utilize this latter approach. Following Griliches ( 1981 ),
 we use the residuals from a second-order vector autoregression as estimates of our
 unanticipated measures. We calculate estimates of unanticipated R&D and advertising
 expenditures as deviations from the amount predictable based on the lagged one- and
 two-year past values of R&D, advertising, and an accounting profitability measure, i.e.,
 the ratio of operating income gross of expenditures on advertising and R&D to assets
 (labeled ROI +).5

 Equation ( 1.1 ) of Table 1 reports the results of regressing stock return on unanticipated

 R&D and advertising expenditures, and on annual dummy variables that control for
 yearly differences. Both types of expenditures have statistically significant positive effects
 on stock return. The estimated coefficients, 4.649 and 3.317, suggest substantial positive
 market reaction to these expenditures. These estimated effects are consistent with con-
 clusions reached in other studies.

 Despite the widespread acceptance of these empirical results, we view them cautiously.
 Equation ( 1. 1 ) does not take into account the discretionary nature of these expenditures.
 As discussed previously, we postulate that firms with higher profits spend more on both
 advertising and R&D. Firms with higher profits will also have higher stock returns. As
 such, the correlation of stock return with advertising and R&D, or at least part of it,
 might be a spurious association reflecting a joint association with firm profit performance.
 To determine the effects of R&D and advertising on stock return it is necessary to control
 for the effects of firm profits.

 4 We require as long as possible a time period for a firm to be included in the data base, because the empirical
 methods used can be sensitive to a small number of time periods (Anderson and Hsiao 1982). The selection
 process reduces the generality of the results. The sample is not representative of all firms as, for instance, it does
 not include young firms, firms that have failed, nor those not included in the Compustat Industrial data base.
 However, firms in the sample are of importance in their own right (the sample is comprised heavily of firms
 from the S&P 400 Industrials Index and includes some of the most visible companies in the U.S., e.g., General
 Electric, Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing, Polaroid, Ford, Colgate-Palmolive) and some universality can
 be expected.

 5 We also deflate the R&D and advertising series by the level of assets at the beginning of the period to adjust

 for size effects.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:41:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1268 GARY ERICKSON AND ROBERT JACOBSON

 Stock Market Reaction to R&D and Advertising Expendituresa

 TABLE 1

 (#obs= 1287b)

 Equation

 Association of Stock Return with R&D and Advertising

 (1.1) StkRi, = 4.649r&di, + 3.317advi, + i

 (1.265)C (.492)

 Mean (Std Dev) of Dependent Variable = 0.213 (0.489)
 Mean Square Error = 0.191
 Adj R 2 = 0.200

 Association of Stock Return with R&D and Advertising Controlling for Accounting Return

 (1.2) StkRi, = 2.918roi+ - 2.488r&di - 2.357advi, + i

 (0.189) (1.250) (0.582)

 Mean (Std Dev) of Dependent Variable = 0.213 (0.489)
 Mean Square Root = 0.161
 Adj R 2 = 0.327

 a Each equation also includes annual dummy variables.
 b The analysis is based on 13 of the 15 years of available data because of the use of the residuals

 from a second-order vector autoregression as estimates of the unanticipated measures.

 c Standard errors in parentheses.

 Equation ( 1.2) provides the results of regressing stock return on the unanticipated
 values of ROI +, advertising, and R&D, i.e., roi+, adv, and r&d, respectively, and the
 yearly dummy variables. Unanticipated ROI+, as well as unanticipated R&D and ad-
 vertising, are significantly related to stock return. Consistent with the stream of literature
 on the information content of accounting information, e.g., Ball and Brown ( 1968),
 Jacobson (1987), the results indicate that accounting return reflects information that
 stock market participants deem important as to profit performance. When the effect of
 ROI + is taken into account, the explanatory power of the model increases and the esti-
 mated effects of R&D and advertising differ dramatically from that reported in equation
 ( 1.1 ). While unanticipated ROI + has a positive effect (2.918), unanticipated R&D and
 advertising have negative effects (-2.488 and -2.357, respectively). Indeed, we cannot
 reject the hypothesis that the coefficients for the discretionary expenditures are of the
 same magnitude but of the opposite sign from ROI +. This supports the practice of ag-
 gregating these components of operating income together to form a more conventional
 ROI measure, i.e., ROI = ROI+ - R&D - Adv.6

 Replication

 In order to assess the generalizability of our findings, we undertook additional analysis
 on a different data base. This replication involves assessing for Japanese firms the impact
 of R&D and advertising expenditures, controlling for current-term accounting profits,
 on stock return. The accounting and stock return data for Japanese companies come

 6 Analysis undertaken on a larger number of firms, those NYSE and AMEX companies reporting R&D and

 advertising expenditures in Compustat for all or any part of the period 1972-1986, generates these same con-
 clusions. Based on 3891 total observations, unanticipated ROI+ had a significant positive effect on stock return
 while the unanticipated components of R&D and advertising had significant negative effects. We could not
 reject the hypothesis that the coefficients for the discretionary expenditures were of the same magnitude but of
 the opposite sign from ROI+. Other sensitivity tests also failed to alter this conclusion. For example, analysis
 of different time periods and separation of firms primarily involved in consumer goods from those marketing
 industrial products generated these same results.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:41:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 GAINING COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE 1269

 from two sources. The annual balance sheet and income statement items come from the
 Japan Development Bank. Firms with a March fiscal year, the most common for Japanese
 companies, were selected for the analysis if they reported their advertising and R&D
 expenditures continuously for the period April 1972 through March 1987. Annual stock
 return information for these April-March years was calculated based on monthly return
 data compiled by the Japan Securities Research Institute of firms listed on the First
 Section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange. The sample consists of those firms covered by
 both the Japan Development Bank and the Japan Securities Research Institute tapes. A
 total of 2,115 observations ( 141 firms for 15 years) were available for analysis.

 Analogous to the analysis of the U.S. data, for these Japanese firms we regressed their
 stock return on the unanticipated components of R&D, advertising, and ROI , i.e., the
 residuals from a second-order vector autoregression. The results from this analysis of
 Japanese are in close correspondence to those reported for the U.S.7 ROI+ has a significant
 positive (3.93) effect on stock return; R&D and advertising have significant negative
 effects, -5.14 and -3.80, respectively. The hypothesis that the coefficients for the dis-
 cretionary expenditures are of the same magnitude but of the opposite sign from ROI+
 cannot be rejected. The results presented in equation ( 1.2) are not unique to our particular
 sample of firms, or for that matter, the U.S. financial markets.

 Interpretation

 The negative coefficients suggest that to the extent they do not influence current-term
 profits, the stock market reacts adversely to R&D and advertising expenditures. The
 positive correlations found in equation ( 1.1 ) reflect not the impact of the discretionary
 expenditures but rather the joint impact of firm profitability on both stock return and
 spending levels. Failure to take into account the effect of profit performance generates
 substantial bias in the estimates of the market reaction to discretionary expenditures.

 These results indicate that the stock market does not reward, in and of itself, spending
 on advertising and R&D. In fact, the market views these activities as expenses reducing
 the profitability of the firm. This is not to say that these discretionary expenditures have
 no, or a negative, influence on stock return. Rather, the results indicate that the market
 only rewards these expenditures to the extent that they influence ROI, i.e., generate
 current-period operating income. The notion that the market rewards activities to the
 extent they influence profitability is hardly unexpected.

 What is unexpected is that the effects of advertising and R&D are reflected completely
 in information contained in current-term accounting ROI. Given the widely discussed
 limitations and deficiencies of accounting ROI, this is surprising. Indeed, Benston ( 1985)
 feels that one of the primary limitations of ROI is that it does not take into account the
 long-term benefits generated by expenditures on R&D and advertising. The long-term
 benefits of advertising and R&D will not be reflected in current-term ROI. Therefore,
 they should have an autonomous positive effect on stock return.

 One explanation for the lack of an autonomous impact of R&D and advertising is

 that their effects occur primarily in the current year. Most studies of the carryover effects
 of advertising conclude that the primary effects do not last beyond a year. While advertising
 expenditures can yield very long-term effects to the extent that they establish a brand
 name, considerable uncertainty surrounds these effects. Many firms have decided it is in
 their best interests to buy firms with established brand name products (and pay a premium
 well above the value of the tangible assets) instead of attempting to develop a new brand

 7The estimated equation for the Japanese data is:

 StkRl R 3.933roi-it - 5.1388r&dkii- 3.8O4adviv ? ci.

 std. err. (0.267) (1.6 14) (0.664)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:41:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1270 GARY ERICKSON AND ROBERT JACOBSON

 name. Given the uncertainty of the long-term effects, market participants may discount
 advertising expenditures that do not yield current-term profits.

 Few, if any, plausible scenarios limit R&D to only a contemporaneous effect. Estimates
 of the mean lag time (including gestation and application lags) between the outlay of
 R&D expenditures and the beginning of the associated revenue range between 1.2 and
 2.5 years (Pakes and Schankerman 1984). Certainly, lag times less than one year do
 exist. In fact, one of the explanations that the Financial Accounting Standard Boards
 (FASB) offers for the "generally accepted accounting principle" of expensing R&D ex-
 penditures is that the returns to R&D are, in fact, short term. The FASB code cites a
 study by Gellein and Newman ( 1973) indicating that over 90 percent of the respondents
 in a survey reported that their company's philosophy is that R&D expenditures are in-
 tended to be recovered through current-period revenues. However, it is inconceivable
 that R&D activities do not generate returns realized in later periods. Perhaps, like ad-
 vertising, the uncertainty associated with the possible longer-term returns to R&D causes
 stock market participants to discount R&D expenditures not resulting in improvements
 in current-term ROI.

 The findings of a positive reaction of market participants to R&D and advertising
 expenditures have been widely used to support the traditional rational expectations/
 efficient markets conceptualization of the financial markets. Investors are posited to
 accurately value the financial impact of long-term expenditures. Our findings exhibit a
 greater consistency with the recent literature on market signaling in the presence of
 asymmetric information, e.g., Greenwald and Stiglitz (1990), Miller and Rock (1985).
 Investors are not fully aware of the long-term implications of a given strategy. As such,
 they rely on a variety of imperfect indicators (signals) of long-term business performance,
 in particular, current-term performance measures. In the presence of asymmetric infor-
 mation, stock market participants may react negatively to strategies designed to enhance
 long-term performance, but which diminish current-term earnings. Our findings of a
 negative reaction to R&D and advertising expenditures not influencing current-term
 results highlight the need for better communication between managers and investors
 relating to the long-term impact of strategic decisions and the importance of a financial
 disclosure strategy.8

 4. Estimating the Returns to Advertising and R&D Expenditures

 Equation ( 1.2) provides estimates of the direct effects of R&D and advertising on
 stock return. The total effect of these discretionary expenditures includes both this direct
 effect and the indirect effect arising from the impact of the discretionary expenditures
 on ROI +, which in turn influences stock return. Therefore, investigating the total stock
 market reaction to advertising and R&D also requires investigating the effect of discre-
 tionary spending on ROI.

 Our investigation of the effects of R&D and advertising expenditures on accounting

 profits differs from previous research in that we both (i) allow for possible feedback effects
 between discretionary expenditures and profitability and (ii) use panel data and statistical
 methods designed to control for the effects of firm-specific latent factors.9 Potentially

 8 See Lev ( 1991 ) for an excellent discussion of financial disclosure strategy.
 9 Hausman and Taylor ( 1981 ), Hsiao ( 1986), and others note that the ability to control for firm-specific,
 and possibly unobservable, factors is an important benefit from using panel (pooled time-series and cross
 sectional) data. Analysis of cross sectional data can neither identify nor control for the effects of such factors.
 As unobservable factors may be correlated with the explanatory variables included in the postulated specification,
 their omission can generate bias in the estimated coefficients. Empirical studies, e.g., Jacobson ( 1990), Boulding
 and Staelin ( 1990), document the existence of autocorrelated unobservable factors influencing business per-
 formance and provide evidence illustrating that failure to control for these effects can generate substantial bias
 in coefficient estimates (to the extent of reversing signs).

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:41:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 GAINING COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE 1271

 severe bias may be present in estimates of the effect of R&D and advertising on accounting
 profits reported in previous research that does not jointly account for both of these
 considerations.

 Estimation Model

 Following Anderson and Hsiao ( 1982), we make use of the fixed effects-serial corre-

 lation model, i.e., yi, = f3xi + ai + ci, with cil = p i,,-I + qil, to control for the effect of
 unobservable factors. This specification depicts a structural model where the dependent
 variable (yi) is influenced by the observable factors (xi,) and time-invariant (axi) and
 time-varying ( Ei,) unobservable factors. The fact that the time-varying unobservable factors
 are autocorrelated induces serially correlated residuals in the structural equation. The
 lagged value yi ,-i is informative in the structural equation's reduced form solution, i.e.,
 Yii PYi=t-l + p 3xi, - pxi,,- + ai - pai + qil, because it helps predict the effect of the
 autocorrelated unobservable factors. Through the serial correlation adjustment, the au-
 tocorrelated firm specific effect Ei 1 is captured, leaving the contemporaneous shock qi,
 and the fixed effect (ai - pacxi). The fixed effect is removed by taking first differences,
 leaving

 (Yi- Yi,i-1) = P(y'i,,l - Yi,,-2) + 3(Xil - Xi,t,-) - Pp(Xi,-l - Xi,1-2) + (niit,i-i)

 Instrumental variable estimation, making use of variables observed in periods prior to
 t - 1 as instruments to remove the correlation of the right-hand side variables with the
 moving average error term (Thil-7Ti-), is then used to obtain consistent estimates of
 the parameters d and p.

 Our profitability equation depicts ROI + to depend on current and the previous year's

 advertising, current and the previous six year's R&D, and industry growth.10 We specify
 R&D to be influenced by concentration, current profitability, and level of debt at the
 beginning of the period. Advertising is depicted to depend on debt, profitability, and
 nonlinearly on concentration. Each equation also includes a time-invariant unobservable
 factor and, to allow for the possibility of correlated, firm-specific latent factors, an au-
 tocorrelated error term. Finally, to control for yearly differences in economy-wide effects,
 we include annual dummy variables D,1 where D,, = 1 if year t = t' and 0 otherwise, in
 each equation. As such, our system of equations is of the form:

 T 1 6

 ROI+ = E 61,Dl, + Z 31ljAdv 1,j + Z 3l2jR&Di,l_j+ + 13Growit + a Ii + lii,

 j=0 j=0

 (lit Pleli,t-l + V71i,

 T

 Advil = 62,1Dl, + 321ROIt+ +322Debti,t + /23Concil + 024ConcSqil + a?i + e2ii,

 (2i, = P2(2i,i-l + 772ii,

 T

 R&Di = E 631 D + 31ROIt + 032Debti,t11 + 033Concit + a3i + f3il,

 i 1=

 f3i= P3E3i,i-l + rV3i/.

 While our concern centers primarily on the effects of advertising and R&D on ROI+,

 the nature of discretionary expenditure financing and the lack of influence of concentration

 10 Growth is posited to influence profitability to the extent it depicts a disequilibrium situation. Firms are

 unlikely to react immediately to changing market conditions. Excess (insufficient) capacity may exist during
 periods of low (high) growth. This imbalance between supply and demand creates a disequilibrium situation
 where firms earn infra or supra normal returns until they adjust to the new market conditions.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:41:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1272 GARY ERICKSON AND ROBERT JACOBSON

 on profitability also warrant attention because of their role in model identification.11
 Both R&D and advertising are specified to be influenced by contemporaneous ROI +
 and by the level of debt at the beginning of the period. Firms adjust discretionary ex-
 penditures within the period depending on performance. Higher ROI gives firms more
 leeway in their spending. We posit that debt influences discretionary expenditures based
 on two considerations. First, a firm with higher debt is faced with pressures to pay its
 interest expense. To meet this expense, it may be forced to cut back on less pressing
 expenditures, e.g., advertising and R&D. Since operating income, the numerator in the
 ROI+ measure, is gross of interest expense, the coefficient for debt will reflect this effect.
 Second, a higher debt position reduces a firm's ability to borrow. As such, it will be less
 likely to obtain capital from the financial markets to pay for advertising and R&D ex-
 penditures.

 While our specifications linking the observed variables are consistent with previous
 research, we are sympathetic to the view that the zero-order restrictions necessary for
 identification are often arbitrary choices among reasonable alternatives and should be
 scrutinized. The widely held view that the decision to change discretionary spending
 takes less time than that required for its effect on profitability to dissipate completely
 allows for identification of the R&D and advertising equations. The higher order lags for
 the discretionary expenditures in the profitability equation can serve as instruments, as
 can growth, for ROI+ in the R&D and advertising equations.

 The identification of the ROI + equation is subject to greater concern. The fact that
 ROI + is gross of interest expense allows for the use of debt as one instrument. However,
 identification of the equation also rests on the zero-order restriction for concentration.
 The effect, or lack thereof, of concentration on profitability is one of the most extensively
 discussed and researched relationships in industrial organization. However, even former
 adherents to the concentration hypothesis, e.g., Scherer et al. ( 1987), now tend to agree
 that empirical evidence supports the Demsetz ( 1973) hypothesis that, once efficiency
 differences among firms are taken into account, industry concentration does not influence
 profitability. We find this theoretical and empirical evidence persuasive and, therefore,
 depict no effect of concentration on profitability.

 The high autocorrelation of both advertising and R&D, the extent of explanatory
 power captured through the serial correlation correction, and the use of an instrumental
 variable estimation procedure to account for the simultaneity in the system, reduces our
 ability to isolate the specific effects of advertising and R&D for a given lag. While consistent
 estimates of the coefficients and their standard errors can be achieved, the standard errors
 are likely to be large. As such, the power in our tests is likely to be low. In light of this
 fact, we impose specific lag distributions on the coefficients depicting the effects of ad-
 vertising and R&D on ROI + and concentrate on estimating the total effects (II 10 + i lI )
 and (0120 + 0121 + 0122 + 0123 + 0124 + 0125 + 0126), respectively.12 The lag distribution

 l Concentration is depicted to affect R&D and advertising. While industry concentration is viewed as an
 important determinant of R&D intensity, there are a host of conflicting theories such that the direction of the
 effect is unclear (Scherer 1980). Based on previous empirical research, e.g. Martin (1979), we allow for an
 "inverted-U" relationship between advertising and concentration. Advertising has two possible roles: to induce
 brand switching, and to increase total industry demand. Firms in low concentrated industries benefit primarily
 from the brand switching induced by advertising. The benefits brought about from advertising increasing total
 industry demand are dispersed among the many firms in the industry. As industry concentration increases,
 firms begin to benefit both from advertising increasing industry demand and from inducing brand switching.
 As such, advertising expenditures should increase. Increased advertising should also arise with increases in the
 amount of perceived rivalry. However, at extreme concentration (a monopoly) the firm will benefit primarily
 from advertising increasing total industry demand and advertising expenditures will decrease.

 12 We tested various alternative lag distributions for R&D and advertising to assess the sensitivity of the
 results. The substantive results regarding the total effects of advertising and R&D were found not to be sensitive
 to different assumed lag distributions.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:41:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 GAINING COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE 1273

 weights chosen for advertising are wl0 = 0.7, and w11 = 0.3, a pattern consistent with
 past empirical research concerning direct lag effects of advertising. Studies by Erickson
 (1981), Helmer and Johansson (1977), and Clarke and McCann (1973) estimate direct
 lag models, and each finds significant advertising effects that end with the first lagged
 year; the average weights from these studies are wl0 = 0.706 (with a narrow range of
 0.684 to 0.720) and w, I = 0.294. There is less empirical evidence regarding an appropriate
 lag distribution for R&D. We chose distribution weights w20 = 0.25, w21 = 0.21,
 W22 = 0.18, W23 = 0.14, w24 = 0.11, w25 = 0.07, and w26 = 0.04, to be consistent with
 previous studies that assume a slowly depreciating effect over time, e.g. Jaffe (1986),
 Grabowski and Mueller (1978).

 Empirical Analysis

 To serve as a basis for comparison, for our sample of 99 U.S. firms we present the
 results from three estimation procedures, i.e., instrumental variable (IV) estimation,
 instrumental variable combined with serial correlation (IV/SC) estimation, and instru-
 mental variable combined with serial correlation and fixed effects (IV/SC/FX) esti-
 mation.13 The first estimation technique does not control for either autocorrelated or
 time-invariant unobservables; the second technique controls for autocorrelated but not
 time-invariant unobservables; the third technique controls for both time-varying and
 time-invariant unobservables. Under the null hypothesis of the unobservable factors being
 uncorrelated with the observed explanatory factors, the three estimation approaches (while
 differing in efficiency) should yield statistically indistinguishable coefficient estimates.
 Specification tests (Hausman 1978) can assess the extent that either type of unobservable
 is present and induces bias in the coefficient estimates for the models not controlling for
 their potential effect.14

 Table 2 presents the analysis of the advertising and R&D equations. 15 The specification

 tests indicate that the advertising equation is best modeled by the IV / SC / FX model,
 i.e., the test statistics of 14.7 is greater than the 0.01 x2 critical value of 13.3. The R&D
 equation appears to be best modeled by the IV/SC model, i.e., the specification tests
 indicate that while the coefficients of the IV/SC differ from those of the IV model they
 are not statistically different from the IV/SC/FX model. (The 0.05 X93 critical value is
 7.8.) The size and significance of the estimated values of p attest to the importance of
 controlling for time-varying unobservables. The difference in the coefficient estimates
 for ROI + and Debt in the advertising equation estimated without control for unobservable
 factors indicates the possible consequences of ignoring unobservable factors. The estimated
 effect of ROI + in the IV model is approximately four times that of the other two models
 and the coefficient for Debt is of the opposite sign.

 Table 2 reports that profitability significantly influences both advertising and R&D

 expenditures. The significant effect of ROI + indicates that the amount of profits (internal
 resources) available to the firm influences the level of discretionary spending.'6 The

 13 Lack of access to data required for construction of necessary variables prevents our conducting this second

 phase of the analysis with the Japanese data base.

 14 Specification tests were also performed to detect whether the various instruments are correlated with error

 terms. No test was significant.

 15 We have not modeled the moving average error inherent in fixed effects models. The estimated coefficients

 for the fixed effects models reported in Tables 2 and 3 are consistent, although bias may be present in the
 estimated standard errors. Following the approach suggested by Phillips ( 1978), analysis that incorporates a
 moving average error term does not alter any of the conclusions of the study.

 16 Another interpretation of the association is that higher profitability is an indicator of higher future profits.
 Since firms will invest in areas that yield higher returns, this would generate a positive association of current
 profits with discretionary spending.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:41:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1274 GARY ERICKSON AND ROBERT JACOBSON

 The Effect qfAccounting Retuirn on Advertising and R&D a

 TABLE 2

 Estimated Effect IV IV/SC IV/SC/FX

 Dependent Variable: Advertising Expenditures

 ROI + 0.697 0.171 0.166

 (0.012)c (0.020) (0.023)
 Debti,,_1 0.210 -0.041 -0.026
 (0.013) (0.018) (0.019)

 Conci, 0.181 0.286 0.264

 (0.076) (0.306) (0.380)
 ConsSqi, -0.081 -0.174 -0.075
 (0.051) (0.205) (0.260)

 - 0.965 0.818

 (0.009) (0.022)

 #obsb 891 792 693
 MSE 0.00175 0.00098 0.00201
 Specification Test x 2 = 28.5 x 2= 21.6

 Dependent Variable: R&D Expenditures

 ROI + 0.065 0.045 0.044

 (0.009) (0.007) (0.008)
 Debti,,- 1 -0.010 -0.034 -0.030
 (0.010) (0.005) (0.006)
 Conci, -0.042 -0.043 -0.052
 (0.006) (0.015) (0.017)

 p - 0.961 0.601

 (0.010) (0.261)

 #obs 891 792 693
 MSE 0.00094 0.00010 0.00017
 Specification Test x 2 = 18.3 x 2= 2.8

 a Each equation also includes annual dummy variables.
 b The number of observations differs among the models because of

 the taking of first differences and/or the use of a serial correlation ad-
 justment.

 c Standard errors in parentheses.

 negative effect of debt strengthens the conclusion that firms' spending levels are influenced
 by their access to funds. Firms with a greater access to funds, either through internal
 resources (ROI+) or having greater availability to external financing because of a low
 level of debt, are more likely to undertake discretionary expenditures.

 Multiple interpretations can explain the smaller estimated effect of ROI + on R&D

 than on advertising, 0.045 versus 0. 17. One interpretation is that advertising expenditures
 are "more discretionary." Firms see a greater need to continue R&D than advertising if
 profits are down. Another interpretation is that while higher ROI may give the firm more
 resources to spend on R&D, the presence of higher profits may reduce the perceived
 incentive to engage in R&D. Katz and Shapiro ( 1987) suggest that firms with higher
 profits are less likely than less profitable firms to engage in R&D activities that would
 result in significant product innovation when strong, and effective, patent protection is
 not present.

 The effects of ROI + on discretionary spending indicate the need to adopt a simultaneous

 equations approach in order to obtain consistent estimates of the impact of advertising
 and R&D on profitability. Table 3 reports the results of the simultaneous equations

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:41:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 GAINING COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE 1275

 The Effect ofAdvertising and R&D on Accouinting Return a

 TABLE 3

 Estimated Effect IV IV/SC IV/SC/FX

 Dependent Variable: ROI+

 E Advi,,-j 1.341 1.230 1.174
 p=0 (0.043)c (0.095) (0.476)
 6

 E R&Di,t-j 1.176 0.765 1.384
 j=o (0.125) (0.280) (5.771)
 Growi, 0.143 0.140 0.165

 (0.029) (0.026) (0.026)

 - 0.601 0.702

 (0.028) (0.155)

 #obsb 891 792 693
 MSE 0.01332 0.00992 0.02347
 Specification Test X3 = 31.0 X3 = 14.7

 a Each equation also includes dummy variables.
 b The number of observations differs among the models because of

 the taking of first differences and/or the use of a serial correlation ad-
 justment.

 b Standard errors in parentheses.

 estimation for the three estimation techniques. As in Table 2, the estimates for p attest
 to the importance of time-varying unobservable factors. Specification tests suggest the
 presence of fixed effects and, therefore, the applicability of the IV/ SC/ FX model.17 The
 point estimates for the effects of advertising and R&D, 1.174 and 1.384, suggest market
 (competitive) returns on these expenditures. Sensitivity analysis, e.g., splitting the sample
 based on time periods, types of firms (i.e., industrial versus consumer), and expenditure
 levels, does not change this conclusion.

 The estimated effects of advertising are greater than 1.00, the point where revenue
 generated equals expenditures, for all three models. The estimated return for advertising
 expenditures is lower for the IV/ SC/ FX model (0.17) than for either the IV/ SC model
 (0.23) or the IV model (0.341) . As this estimated return is slightly less than the estimated
 mean ROI+ for the period (0.302), we cannot reject the hypothesis that advertising
 expenditures generate market returns. That is, a dollar spent on advertising does not
 yield a return higher than that of other expenditures.

 The same conclusion applies to the estimated effect of R&D, although a large standard
 error in the IV/SC/FX model prevents a firm conclusion for this model. None of the
 point estimates of the return to R&D expenditures for the three models, i.e., 0.176 for
 the IV model, -0.235 for the IV/SC model, and 0.384 for the IV/SC/FX model, implies
 supranormal returns, i.e., a return substantially greater than the mean ROI+ for the
 period. However, the standard error of the IV/SC/FX estimate is so large that caution
 is required in interpreting the point estimate for this model. (The difficulty in isolating
 the effect of R&D expenditures in the IV / SC / FX model is that the variance of the R&D
 measure in the model, after taking the pth difference of the first difference, is extremely
 small. Its variance is approximately 100 times smaller than that of the advertising measure.)
 Still, our results provide no indication that either advertising or R&D expenditures gen-
 erate supranormal accounting profits.

 17 See Jacobson ( 1990) for a discussion of concerns regarding including a fixed effect in a profitability equation.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:41:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1276 GARY ERICKSON AND ROBERT JACOBSON

 5. The Competitive Process and Isolating Mechanisms

 The competitive process dictates that firms will continue to invest in activities or follow
 strategies that generate supranormal profits until the return premium is exhausted. Prof-
 itability, or the lack thereof, is a signal that directs the flow of resources. The adjustment
 of resources and output into areas earning excess profits and away from areas earning
 below average returns will, in time, bring returns back to competitive levels. The com-
 petitive process explains the competitive returns to R&D and advertising expenditures.
 Firms increase types of discretionary expenditures that yield above average returns and
 decrease types of expenditures yielding below average returns. This process continues
 until the returns equilibrate.

 For an expenditure to generate supranormal returns it must, in addition to providing
 incremental value over pre-existing activities, technologies, or products, resist imitation
 by competitors. Although laws, e.g., patents, provide property rights for some activities,
 few statues protect the majority of business activities from imitation. Obtaining supra-
 normal returns requires barriers to imitation, which Rumelt (1987) labels "isolating
 mechanisms." Whether it be, for example, response lags, switching costs, or information
 impactedness, some impediments to imitation need to exist to allow R&D or advertising
 expenditures to generate supranormal returns. Our results suggest that the isolating
 mechanisms necessary for these expenditures to generate a comparative advantage are,
 on the average, insufficient.

 The inability of advertising expenditures to generate supranormal profits is consistent
 with the stream of literature reporting that very often sales fail to respond to even dramatic
 shifts in advertising expenditure levels. We should note that our results do not indicate
 that advertising is not a means for creating comparative advantage through, for example,
 product differentiation. Rather, our results pertain just to the effect of advertising ex-
 penditure levels. Expenditure levels are easily imitated and, as such, should not be expected
 to generate excess profits. It is the creative content of the advertisement, which possesses
 greater impediments to imitation by competition, that is more likely to create a com-
 parative advantage. Eastlack and Rao ( 1986) note that their research indicates that "the
 creative component of advertising has been found to befar more important than the actual
 spending rates or patterns." They emphasize the importance of advertising copy and
 media selection and timing rather than expenditure levels. While changes in expenditure
 levels may be ineffectual, good copy in the right media has been shown to have dramatic
 effects.

 We also wish to note that our results do not question the benefits of R&D. The benefits
 to R&D are not limited to a specific firm; they create societal advantages. A number of
 scholars (Solow 1957) have documented that R&D (technological change) is a, if not
 the, primary determinant of economic growth. However, the ability of a given firm to
 exploit profitably its own technological innovations is subject to question. Isolating
 mechanisms that allow innovators to reap the rewards of their innovations may be in-
 sufficient. Previous estimates of substantial returns to R&D make it difficult to argue for
 changes in public policy that would give greater incentives to engage in R&D. Firms are
 depicted as already being more than adequately compensated. Our lower estimates of
 the return to R&D suggest that additional incentives may well be warranted.

 Teece (1987) comments that quite often imitators profit more from an innovation
 than does the firm first to commercialize it. He feels that many science and engineering-
 driven firms labor under the illusion that developing new products that meet customer
 needs will ensure fabulous success not only for the product but also for the innovating
 firm. There is a long list of companies, e.g., EMI (CAT scanner), Xerox (office computer),
 and Ampex (VCR), that failed to profit from their innovations. Mansfield, Schwartz,

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:41:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 GAINING COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE 1277

 and Wagner ( 1981 ) report about 60 percent of patented successful innovations were
 imitated within four years. In addition, the development costs incurred by the imitator
 were approximately 35 percent lower than those of the innovator. In their survey of
 R&D managers, Levin et al. ( 1987) found that approximately 65% of "typical" unpatented
 innovations could be imitated in less than one year. These considerations suggest that
 high expenditures on R&D, even if they lead to innovation, may not give a firm unique
 advantages that lead to the realization of profits.

 6. Conclusions

 Limitations in our analysis suggest the need for further study. For example, research
 making use of survey data of stock market participants' expectations of R&D and ad-
 vertising expenditures would test the validity of our use of time series residuals as estimates
 of unanticipated discretionary expenditures. Data for more firms or years of observation
 would reduce the estimated standard errors and, therefore, allow for more power in
 hypothesis testing. Further tests of the appropriateness of our zero-order restrictions would
 also be valuable. Exploring different conditions that might lead to greater returns to
 discretionary expenditures, for example, Winter ( 1987) posits that process R&D may
 allow for a longer-lasting advantage than product R&D since lack of observability delays
 competitor imitation, would be another direction for future research.

 With these limitations in mind, our results suggest that, once the effects of firm-specific
 factors and the influence of profitability on discretionary spending are taken into account,
 neither R&D nor advertising expenditures increase the market value of the firm more
 than other types of investments or expenditures. The isolating mechanisms necessary to
 prevent imitation by competitors appear, on the average, insufficient for these expenditures
 to generate a comparative advantage allowing for supranormal returns. The positive
 correlation between these expenditures and stock market performance reported in previous
 research reflects the joint effect of firm profitability on stock return and on the level of
 discretionary spending. Not controlling for the influence of profitability on discretionary
 expenditure levels induces substantial bias, i.e., omitted variable bias in studies of the
 effect of discretionary spending on stock market return and simultaneous equation bias
 in studies of their effect on accounting return. Our results highlight that obtaining a
 comparative advantage through R&D or advertising (or, for that matter, any strategic
 action) depends crucially on the specific nature of the expenditure and how it interacts
 with the firm's asset and skill base so as to prevent imitation by competitors.

 Appendix. Variable Definitions

 Variable Definition

 Stkr Stock Return: ((Market Value of Stock, + Dividends,)/Market Value

 of Stock_1) - 1

 R&D Research and Development Expenditures,/Assets,-
 r&d Unanticipated R&D
 Adv Advertising Expenditures,/Assets,-
 adv Unanticipated Adv
 ROI+ (Operating Income + R&D + Adv)/Assets_1
 roi+ Unanticipated ROI+
 Debt Debt(Short-term and Long-term), -/Assets,-l
 Grow Industry sales growth*
 Conc Four-firm industry concentration ratio*
 ConcSq The square of Conc

 * Industry is defined as the group of firms reported on by Compustat having the

 same 4-digit SIC code.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:41:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1278 GARY ERICKSON AND ROBERT JACOBSON

 References

 ANDERSON, T. W. AND CHENG HSIAO, "Formulation and Estimation of Dynamic Models Using Panel Data,"

 J. Econometrics, 18 (January 1982), 47-82.

 BALL, RAY AND PHILLIP BROWN, "An Empirical Evaluation of Accounting Income Numbers," J. Accounting

 Res., 6 (Autumn 1968), 159-178.

 BARNEY, JAY, "Strategic Factor Markets: Expectations, Luck and Business Strategy," Management Sci., 32

 (October 1986), 1231-1241.

 BENSTON, GEORGE J., "The Validity of Profits-Structure. Studies with Particular Reference to the FTC's Line

 of Business Data," Amer. Economic Rev., 75 (March 1985), 37-67.

 BEN-ZION, URI, "The R&D and Investment Decision and Its Relationship to the Firm's Market Value: Some
 Preliminary Results," in R&D, Patents, and Produictivity, Zvi Griliches (Ed.), University of Chicago
 Press, Chicago, 1984, 299-312.

 BOULDING, WILLIAM AND RICHARD STAELIN, "Environment, Market Share, and Market Power," Management

 Sci., 36 (October 1990), 1160-1178.

 CAPON, NOEL, JOHN U. FARLEY AND SCOTT HOENIG, "Determinants of Firm Performance," Managemnent

 Sci., 36 (October 1990), 1143-1159.

 CLARKE, DARRAL G. AND JOHN M. MCCANN, "Measuring the Cumulative Effects of Advertising: A Reappraisal,"

 1973 Combined Proc., American Marketing Association, 135-139.

 CONNOLLY, ROBERT A. AND MARK HIRSCHEY, "R&D, Market Structure and Profits: A Value-Based Approach,"

 Rev. Economics and Statist., 66 (November 1984), 682-686.

 DEMSETZ, HAROLD, "Industry Structure, Market Rivalry, and Public Policy," J. Law and Economics, 16 (April

 1973), 1-10.

 EASTLACK, JOSEPH 0. AND AMBAR G. RAO, "Modeling Response to Advertising and Pricing Changes for "V-

 8" Cocktail Vegetable Juice," Marketing Sci., 5 (Summer 1986), 245-259.

 ERICKSON, GARY M., "Using Ridge Regression to Estimate Directly Lagged Effects in Marketing," J. Amer.

 Statis. Assoc., 76 (December 1981), 766-773.

 GELLEIN, OSCAR S. AND MAURICE A. NEWMAN, "Accounting for Research and Development Expenditures,"

 Accouinting Research Stuldy No. 14, AICPA, New York, 1973, 100 pp.

 GRABOWSKI, HENRY G. AND DENNIS C. MUELLER, "Industrial Research and Development, Intangible Capital

 Stocks, and Firm Profit Rates," Bell J. Economics, 9 (Autumn 1978), 328-343.

 GREENWALD, BRUCE C. AND JOSEPH E. STIGLITZ, "Asymmetric Information and the New Theory of the Firm:

 Financial Constraints and Risk Behavior," Amer. Economic Rev., 80 (May 1990), 160-165.

 GRILICHES, Zvi, "Market Value, R&D, and Patents," Economic Lett., 7 (1981), 183-187.
 HAUSMAN, JERRY A., "Specification Tests in Econometrics," Econometrica, 46 (November 1978), 1251-1271.
 AND WILLIAM E. TAYLOR, "Panel Data and Unobservable Individual Effects," Econometrica, 49 (No-
 vember 1981), 1377-1398.

 HAYES, ROBERT H. AND WILLIAM J. ABERNATHY, "Managing Our Way to Economic Decline," Har-vard

 Butsiness Rev., (July-August 1980), 67-77.

 HELMER, RICHARD M. AND JOHNY K. JOHANSSON, "An Exposition of the Box-Jenkins Transfer Function
 Analysis with an Application to the Advertising-Sales Relationship," J. Marketing Res., 14 (May 1977),
 227-239.

 HSIAO, CHENG, Analysis of Panel Data, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1986.
 JACOBSON, ROBERT, "The Validity of ROI as a Measure of Measure Performance," Amer. Economic Rev., 77

 (June 1987), 470-478.

 "Unobservable Effects and Business Performance," Marketing Sci. 9 (Winter 1990), 74-85, 92-95.

 JAFFE, ADAM B., "Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms' Patents, Profits,

 and Market Value," Amer. Economic Rev., 76 (December 1986), 984-1001.

 KATZ, MICHAEL L. AND CARL SHAPIRO, "R&D Rivalry with Licensing or Imitation," Amer. Economic Rev.,

 77 (June 1987), 402-420.

 LEV, BARUCH, Investor Relations in AModern Capital Markets, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1991.
 LEVIN, RICHARD C., ALVIN K. KLEVORICK, RICHARD R. NELSON AND SIDNEY G. WINTER, "Appropriating
 the Returns from Industrial Research and Development," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 3,
 1987, 783-820.

 MANSFIELD, EDWIN, MARK SCHWARTZ AND SAMUEL WAGNER, "Imitation Costs and Patents: An Empirical

 Study," Economic J., 91 (December 1981), 907-918.

 MARTIN, STEPHEN, "Advertising, Concentration, and Profitability: The Simultaneity Problem," Bell J. Eco-

 noinics, 10 (Autumn 1979), 639-647.

 MILLER, MERTON H. AND KEVIN ROCK, "Dividend Policy under Asymetric Information," J. Finance, 60

 (September 1985), 1031-1051.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:41:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 GAINING COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE 1279

 PAKES, ARIEL, "On Patents, R&D, and the Stock Market Rate of Return," J. Political Economyv, 93 (April

 1985), 390-409.
 AND MARK SCHANKERMAN, "An Exploration into the Determinants of Research Intensity," in R&D,
 Patents, and Productivity, Zvi Griliches (Ed.), University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1984, 209-232.

 PHILLIPS, A. W., "Estimation of Systems of Difference Equations with Moving Average Disturbances," in

 Stability and Inflation, A. R. Bergstrom et al. (Ed.), John Wiley, New York, 1978, 181-200.

 RAPPAPORT, ALFRED, "Stock Market Signals to Managers," Harvard Butsiness Rev., (November-December

 1987), 57-62.

 RUMELT, RICHARD P., "Evaluation of Strategy: Theory and Models," in Strategic Management.: A Newv Viewv

 oJ Biusiness Policy and Planning, D. E. Schendel and C. Hofer (Ed.), Little, Brown and Company,
 Boston, 1979, 196-212.

 "Theory, Strategy, and Entrepreneurship," in David Teece (Ed.), The Competitive Challenge: Strategies
 Jbr Induistrial Innovation and Renewval, Ballinger Publishing Company, Cambridge, 1987, 137-159.
 SALINGER, MICHAEL A., "Tobin's q, Unionization, and the Concentration-Profits Relationship," Rand J. Eco-

 nomics, 15 (Summer 1984), 159-170.

 SCHERER, F. M., Industrial Mark-et Stulictiure and Economic Perbrinatance, (2nd Ed.), Houghton Mifflin Company,

 Boston, 1980.
 , WILLIAM F. LONG, STEPHEN MARTIN, DENNIS C. MUELLER, GEORGE PASCOE, DAVID J. RAVENSCRAFT,
 JOHN T. SCOTT AND L. W. WEISS, "The Validity of Studies with Line of Business Data: Comment,"
 Amer. Economnics Rev., 77 (March 1987), 205-2 17.

 SOLOW, ROBERT, "Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function," Rev. Economics and Statist.,

 39 (August 1957), 312-320.

 SWITZER, LORNE, "The Determinants of Industrial R&D: A Funds Flow Simultaneous Equation Approach,"

 Rev. Economics and Statist., 66 (February 1984), 163-168.

 TEECE, DAVID, "Profiting for Technological Innovation: Implications for Integration, Collaboration, Licensing,

 and Public Policy," in David Teece (Ed.), The Competitive Clhallenge: Strategies for Indulstrial Innovation
 and Renewval, Ballinger Publishing Company, Cambridge, 1987, 185-220.

 WENSLEY, ROBIN, "PIMS and BCG: New Horizons or False Dawn," Strategic M1anagement J., 3 (April-June

 1982), 147-158.

 WINTER, SIDNEY G., "Knowledge and Competence as Strategic Assets," in David Teece, (Ed.), The Com0petitive

 Clhallenge: Strategies for Indutstrial Innovation ancd Renewval, Ballinger Publishing Company, Cambridge,
 1987, 159-184.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:41:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

