Strategic Management Journal
Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)
Published online 28 October 2004 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI: 10.1002/smj.433

WHERE DO CAPABILITIES COME FROM AND HOW
DO THEY MATTER? A STUDY IN THE SOFTWARE
SERVICES INDUSTRY
SENDIL K. ETHIRAJ,1 PRASHANT KALE,1* M. S. KRISHNAN1 and
JITENDRA V. SINGH2
1 UniversityofMichiganBusinessSchool,AnnArbor,Michigan,U.S.A.
2 The Wharton School of Business, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania,U.S.A.

Recent years have witnessed a surge of interest in the notion of capabilities as an important
source of competitive advantage. This recognition has, in turn, placed emphasis on the question
of where and how these capabilities emerge and how they inﬂuence ﬁrm performance. The present
paper is an attempt to address this question. Using a large sample of detailed project-level data
from a leading ﬁrm in the global software services industry, we attempt to empirically study the
importance of capabilities. We ﬁnd that two broad classes of capabilities are signiﬁcant. The
ﬁrst class, which we label client-speciﬁc capabilities, is a function of repeated interactions with
clients over time and across different projects. This learning from repeated interactions with a
given client reduces project execution costs and helps improve project contribution. The second
class, termed project management capabilities, is acquired through deliberate and persistent
investments in infrastructure and systems to improve the ﬁrm’s software development process.
Our empirical results suggest that the marginal returns to acquiring different capabilities may be
different and an understanding of such trade-offs can improve ﬁrm decisions to improve and/or
acquire such capabilities. We discuss the key contributions of our paper and the implications for
future research on capabilities. Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

INTRODUCTION

In recent years strategy scholars have increasingly
agreed that non-imitable and non-substitutable or-
ganizational capabilities (and resources) are a
key source of inter-ﬁrm performance differences
(Barney, 1991; Dosi, Nelson, and Winter, 2000;

Keywords: organizational capabilities; ﬁrm performance;
software services
*Correspondence to: Prashant Kale, University of Michigan
Business School, 701 Tappan Street, Room D4209, Ann Arbor,
MI 48109, U.S.A. E-mail: kale@umich.edu

Nelson, 1991; Rumelt, 1984; Wernerfelt, 1984).
This recognition has, in turn, placed emphasis on
the question of where and how these capabili-
ties emerge and how they inﬂuence ﬁrm perfor-
mance. Although there are a number of theoretical
arguments about the characteristics of resources
or capabilities that yield competitive advantage
(Barney, 1991) and what prevents their imitation
(Dierickx and Cool, 1989; Peteraf, 1993), we have
limited understanding of where capabilities come
from or what kinds of investment in money, time,
and managerial effort is required in building them.

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Received 10 December 2002
Final revision received 4 June 2004


26

S. K. Ethiraj et al.

it becomes important

if the development of capabilities
Furthermore,
requires deliberate and sustained investment of
ﬁnancial and managerial resources, both of which
have alternative uses,
to
understand the costs and beneﬁts of such invest-
ments. In other words, different capabilities may
entail different ﬁnancial and managerial costs and
yield dissimilar performance beneﬁts. The system-
atic understanding of such trade-offs promises to
enrich the theory and practice of strategy. This
paper makes a modest attempt to systematically
address some of these questions.

This paper investigates two interrelated research
questions: one, where do capabilities come from,
and two, how do capabilities affect ﬁrm perfor-
mance? We combine in-depth interview data with
detailed, large sample, project-level data spanning
a 6-year period from one ﬁrm in the Indian soft-
ware services industry to carefully address both
questions. In contrast with prior research, the rich,
disaggregated project-level data about resource
inputs, project characteristics, capability metrics,
and proﬁtability that we collected allow us to delve
deeper into the capabilities–performance link.

Several reasons make the Indian software indus-
try an attractive context for the study of ﬁrm
capabilities. First, there is a widely shared view
that much of the Indian software industry’s explo-
sive growth over the last decade is accounted for
by factor cost differences between India and the
developed country markets (Arora et al., 2001;
Nasscom, 2001). The implication is that perfor-
mance differences are driven not by ﬁrm capabil-
ity differences, but by country-level comparative
cost advantages. While factor cost differences def-
initely exist, even a cursory examination of the
data suggests that ﬁrm-level explanations cannot
be discounted. The Indian software services indus-
try accounted for $6.2 billion of export revenues
in 2000–01 (Nasscom, 2001). A telling statistic is
that 0.8 percent (25 ﬁrms) of the ﬁrms in the indus-
try (nearly 3000 ﬁrms) accounted for 60 percent of
export revenues. Therefore, a relatively small set
of ﬁrms growing at a compounded average annual
rate of about 45–65 percent over the last decade
accounts for much of the activity in the Indian
software services industry. Our premise is that a
detailed examination of the economics of one or
more of these 25 ﬁrms can afford useful insight
into the micro-foundations of the capabilities that
underlie such sustained and robust growth in a
competitive industry.

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Building on research on ﬁrm capabilities in
general and on our detailed ﬁeldwork and inter-
views with the project managers of several ﬁrms in
the software services industry, we argue that two
sets of capabilities are important in the software
services industry: client-speciﬁc capabilities and
project management capabilities. Client-speciﬁc
capabilities are a function of repeated interac-
tion with a given client across multiple projects
over time. They largely reﬂect tacit knowledge of
the client’s business domain and operating rou-
tines acquired through repeated interaction with
the client. In contrast, project management capa-
bilities are acquired through deliberate and per-
sistent investments in infrastructure (systems and
processes) and training to improve the ﬁrms’ soft-
ware development processes. They reﬂect techni-
cal capabilities in software design, development,
and execution. The development of these capabil-
ities rests not only on implicit learning-by-doing
processes but also on deliberate, proactive invest-
ments in building them. For example, drawing on
industry experience, some scholars derived eco-
nomic models to show that it makes economic
sense for software vendors to initiate the ﬁrst
project with a client at
low prices even if it
amounts to a modest loss on the project. The ﬁrst
project serves as a platform for the development
of client-speciﬁc and project management capa-
bilities that help signiﬁcantly reduce costs in the
long run and ultimately generate positive returns
(Whang, 1995). In our empirical analyses, we esti-
mate the marginal contribution, cross-sectionally
and temporally, of the two capabilities to project
proﬁtability.

The study makes two principal contributions to
the extant literature on capabilities. First, we argue,
and empirically demonstrate, that ﬁrm capabili-
ties are often context-speciﬁc and fruitful research
in this area might emanate from enjoining an
in-depth study of the capabilities speciﬁc to a
context and careful empirical estimation of their
signiﬁcance and value. The distinguishing feature
of our work is that we conceptualize the notion
of capabilities at a more micro-level within the
ﬁrm, namely the project(s) which the ﬁrm exe-
cutes for its clients, develop appropriate measures
for these capabilities, and examine their evolution
and impact on ﬁnancial performance. Second, we
argue, and show, that not all capabilities provide
the same marginal contribution to performance.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)


Where Do Capabilities Come From and How Do They Matter?

27

This is signiﬁcant because it suggests that if dif-
ferent capabilities have different costs and beneﬁts
associated with their development or acquisition,
managers should pay attention to understanding
these trade-offs in making investments in capabil-
ity development. More broadly, our study advo-
cates a shift in the debate from whether or not
capabilities matter to ‘what’ capabilities matter and
‘how.’

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In
the next section, we brieﬂy outline the research lit-
erature on capabilities and how capabilities drive
performance differences. We then describe the
Indian software industry context in some detail and
develop our hypotheses. In the following section
we describe the data, the measures, and empiri-
cal estimation procedures. Finally, we present the
results and discuss their implications for research
on capabilities.

THEORY

What are capabilities and why are they
important?
The notion of capabilities can be traced back to
Penrose (1959) and Andrews (1971), among oth-
ers (see also Selznick, 1957). Penrose (1959: 25)
suggested that resources consist of a bundle of
potential services. While these resources or factor
inputs are available to all ﬁrms, the ‘capability’
to deploy them productively is not uniformly dis-
tributed. Analogously, Andrews (1971) argued that
the ‘distinctive competence’ of an organization is
more than what it can do; it is what it can do
particularly well. Building upon this earlier work,
recent literature on the resource-based view con-
ceptualizes resources and capabilities along two
lines. One set of authors (see, for example, Barney,
1991; Peteraf, 1993) tend to deﬁne resources rather
broadly so as to ‘include all assets, capabilities,
organizational processes, ﬁrm attributes, informa-
tion, knowledge, etc.’ (Barney, 1991: 101). Other
authors, however, have sought to clearly delin-
eate between resources and capabilities (Amit and
Schoemaker, 1993; Grant, 1991) by arguing that
‘resources consist . . . of know-how that can be
traded, ﬁnancial or physical assets, human capital
etc. . . . [whereas] capabilities . . . refer to a ﬁrm’s
capacity to deploy resources’ (Amit and Schoe-
maker, 1993: 35). In this paper, we adopt the latter
conceptualization of ﬁrm capabilities in developing

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

our arguments about where they come from and
how they matter.

These deﬁnitional and conceptual differences
notwithstanding, strategy researchers agree that
both resources and capabilities are essentially
assets with rent-generating potential. The resource-
based view literature largely emphasizes two kinds
of rents1 they can generate. The ﬁrst parallels the
textbook notion of (Ricardian) rents from scarce
resources. Ownership of a scarce resource (say
land in Manhattan) enables the owner to enjoy
superior rents relative to competitors who do not
own the resource (they lease the land). The scarcity
rents here are rooted in the inelastic supply curve
for the resource. In addition, there is the implicit
condition that, all else being equal, the cost of own-
ership is less than the lease cost. This means that
at the time the scarce resource was acquired its
price was less than its (future) marginal product
(Peteraf, 1993).

A second type of rent

is quasi-rents (Klein,
Crawford, and Alchian, 1978). Quasi-rents ‘are the
excess of an asset’s value over its salvage value or
its value in its next best use’ (Peteraf, 1993: 184).
Quasi-rents are often associated with capabilities.
The primary reason for this is that they are con-
sidered to be a product of specialized assets that
are embedded within the organizational context
(Rumelt, 1987) such that their optimal deployment
is contingent on the presence of other complemen-
tary assets (e.g., managers, culture, technology) or
even learning how to deploy the bundle of assets
efﬁciently. Additionally, there is a cost involved in
transferring this asset along with the complemen-
tary assets to another ﬁrm, thereby reducing its
productive value (Langlois, 1992). This difference
in value is the quasi-rent accruing to the owner of
the asset. Usually, quasi-rents are a function of the
uncertainty about the production function underly-
ing the deployment of resources (Rumelt, 1984). In
this paper, our notion of capabilities reﬂects assets
that can generate quasi-rents.

Where do capabilities come from?
Traditionally, strategy research has devoted lit-
tle attention to the issue of where capabilities

1 Note that Winter (1995) refers also to Schumpeterian rents—
entrepreneurial rents or rents from innovation—and monopoly
rents—rents from output restriction under inelastic demand.
Since neither of these rents is associated with resources or
capabilities we do not discuss them here.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)


28

S. K. Ethiraj et al.

come from. Nelson and Winter (1982) made one
of the early theoretical attempts to understand
this question. They viewed the ﬁrm as bundles
of path-dependent knowledge bases. Over time,
ﬁrms’ knowledge, accumulated through ‘learning
by doing,’ is embedded in bundles of ‘routines’
that are likened to the genetic material of the ﬁrm.
Routines, a central concept in evolutionary the-
ory, involve repetitive patterns of activity, require
investment in routine-speciﬁc human and physical
capital, and are easily recognized as belonging to a
class (Winter, 1990). An important element of their
theory is the description of the ﬁrm as a historical
entity, with productive knowledge being a result of
endogenous, learning-by-doing processes. Conse-
quently, this perspective sees ﬁrms as entities that
possess heterogeneous capabilities as a function of
their routines and search processes. These capabil-
ities are rooted in the organizational skills and rou-
tines that serve as organizational memory to repeti-
tively execute the sequence of productive activities
without trouble. At their core, these organizational
skills and routines embody knowledge and compe-
tence in carrying out the productive activities that
the ﬁrm is engaged in. Building on the basic idea
that history matters and that capabilities are rooted
in contextually embedded knowledge underlying
the production function, others have emphasized
the signiﬁcance of absorptive capacity (Cohen and
Levinthal, 1990) and asset stocks and ﬂows (Dier-
ickx and Cool, 1989) in driving capabilities-based
competition.

Some researchers have also suggested that capa-
bilities are not merely the result of tacit accu-
mulation of experience embedded in routines and
learning by doing. They are also the result of
deliberate investments in organizational structure
and systems to make constant improvements in
those routines and practices (Zollo and Winter,
2002). Organizations strive to adapt their oper-
ating processes through proactive actions dedi-
cated to process improvements. These may include
explicit efforts to continuously learn and capture
the lessons from prior experience of self or oth-
ers (Collis, 1996; Zollo and Winter, 2002) and
incorporate those lessons to make improvements in
prevalent practices, or create formal mechanisms
to coordinate and institutionalize the improvement
efforts (Kale et al., 2002). Although the notion
of making deliberate investments to improve ﬁrm
capabilities may be understood uniformly by most
ﬁrms, there are idiosyncratic ﬁrm-level differences

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

in the timing of this effort, the nature and amount
of the investment and effort they undertake, and
the internal organizational mind-set that supports
this process. These differences may get reﬂected in
signiﬁcant heterogeneity across ﬁrms with respect
to the capabilities that result from this effort.

is important

In sum, it appears that in operationalizing the
notion of capabilities it
to show
that: (1) capabilities involve the deployment of
resources and there are strong theoretical reasons
that undergird how and why they generate rents;
(2) capabilities tend to evolve over time to reﬂect
the joint effects of passive learning-by-doing and
deliberate ﬁrm-level investments in learning and
making improvements; and (3) capabilities are
hard to imitate or easily acquire in factor markets
and this forms the basis for rent generation.

How do capabilities matter?
The question ‘How do capabilities matter?’ is
one that derives from the question posed earlier,
‘Where do capabilities come from’? We argued
above that capabilities reﬂect the evolutionary pro-
cess of deliberate ﬁrm-speciﬁc investments and the
largely tacit ‘learning-by-doing’ that ﬁrms engage
in. This in turn results in heterogeneity of ﬁrms and
the consequent differences in their performance.
If we assume for the moment that ‘learning-by-
doing’ is distributed uniformly2 among ﬁrms, then
most of the ex post ﬁrm performance heterogeneity
is in fact a function of differences in the delib-
erate, ﬁrm-speciﬁc investments made (see Helfat,
1994, for an excellent account of how differential
R&D investments by a sample of petroleum ﬁrms
led to ﬁrm heterogeneity). Differences in the ex
post productive value of ﬁrm-speciﬁc investments
suggest that ﬁrms face signiﬁcant ex ante trade-
offs in their choices of ﬁrm-speciﬁc investments
made to acquire certain capabilities. In the main,
we expect that the trade-offs themselves are likely
to vary between ﬁrms as well as within ﬁrms over
time.

Each ﬁrm needs to make a set of strategic
choices that ﬁt together as a system (Porter, 1991).
In making these choices, ﬁrms face signiﬁcant
trade-offs, and the nature of the trade-offs can vary

2 The assumption of uniformity in learning-by-doing is unrealis-
tic simply because it is likely to be endogenous with the choices
of ﬁrm-speciﬁc investments. In effect, this assumption is plau-
sible only if we can separate out learning-by-doing from the
choices about ﬁrm-speciﬁc investments.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)


Where Do Capabilities Come From and How Do They Matter?

29

over time as well. The trade-offs are primarily a
function of the interdependencies between the var-
ious strategic choices of the ﬁrm (Levinthal, 1997).
When the choice to invest in acquiring a capabil-
ity shares positive interactions with other choices
within the ﬁrm, the marginal beneﬁt of acquiring
the capability is likely to be higher than in the
case when the choice shares negative interactions
with other choices made by the ﬁrm. Simply put,
different capabilities are likely to yield different
marginal beneﬁts to the ﬁrms making the invest-
ments in such capabilities. If indeed money and
managerial time and effort are scarce and ﬁrms
need to allocate these scarce resources among com-
peting initiatives to acquire relevant capabilities,
then it is of signiﬁcant theoretical and practical
importance to understand the trade-offs they face
in doing so. Theoretically speaking, the answer to
this puzzle is rather obvious—managers should
invest in acquiring capabilities that yield the great-
est marginal returns to the investment. In prac-
tice, however, such a cost–beneﬁt calculus is far
from simple. We face formidable theoretical and
empirical challenges because the interdependen-
cies between the various strategic choices that a
ﬁrm makes are often unknown and the impact on
the ﬁrm of altering one choice can be unpredictable
(Ethiraj and Levinthal, 2004). Moreover, as a ﬁrm
attains critical
its
marginal returns to investing in the same capability
might decline. Alternatively, the marginal returns
to building other complementary capabilities might
increase. In this paper, we make a modest attempt
to examine the marginal returns to different capa-
bilities, both cross-sectionally and temporally.

levels on a given capability,

Empirical research on capabilities

The empirical
literature on capabilities is fast
growing and we can partition this body of work
along two broad lines. The ﬁrst stream of work
includes detailed historical accounts that
track
alternative choices made by ﬁrms and their perfor-
mance outcomes. Several excellent papers in this
tradition provide useful insight into the historical
development and evolution of capabilities (e.g.,
Iansiti and Khanna, 1995; Rosenbloom, 2000).
Unfortunately, such methods do not permit the
estimation of the signiﬁcance and value of capabil-
ities. The second stream of research that includes
large-sample empirical work has attempted to do

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

this. Even in this tradition, however, few stud-
ies have managed to adequately capture the spirit
of the idea. They usually fall short either in the
choice of the independent variables employed to
measure capabilities or the dependent variable used
to measure performance. Many studies have mea-
sured capabilities using aggregate indicators such
as R&D intensity (e.g., Silverman, 1999) at the
ﬁrm level. But if capabilities critically reside at the
operational level within ﬁrms, aggregate ﬁrm-level
measures may tend to mask much of the variance
within ﬁrms.

Some recent studies have identiﬁed and mea-
sured more disaggregated capabilities to address
this limitation. For instance, Henderson and Cock-
burn (1994), using survey data attempted to get
at more disaggregated measures of R&D capabil-
ity at the program level. They measured archi-
tectural competence (ability to integrate knowl-
edge within the ﬁrm) and component competence
(locally embedded knowledge) at the R&D pro-
gram level to predict patenting productivity. Sim-
ilarly, McGrath, MacMillan, and Venkataraman
(1995) measured ﬁrm competence at pursuing new
initiatives and identiﬁed that deftness and com-
prehensiveness are important precursors to compe-
tence acquisition and ultimately to the emergence
of competitive advantage. These studies and others
in this tradition (e.g., Schroeder, Bates, and Junt-
tila, 2002), however, have been limited to assess-
ing ﬁrm performance with disaggregated, non-
ﬁnancial measures of performance such as patent-
ing or survey-based self-reports of performance.
This is not surprising given that it is extremely
difﬁcult to relate disaggregated measures of capa-
bilities to aggregate, ﬁnancial measures of ﬁrm
performance. Makadok and Walker (2000), in a
notable exception, examine the ﬁnancial returns
to forecasting ability in the money fund industry.
Along similar lines, Brush and Artz (1999) explore
the trade-offs in various services offered by differ-
ent ﬁrms and their impact on revenue per transac-
tion in the veterinary medicine industry.

Our study adopts an approach that is similar to
this latter set of studies. We construct disaggre-
gated, context-speciﬁc capability measures that are
as close to the operational level as is practically
possible and we construct disaggregated ﬁnancial
measures of performance at the same operational
level. We also track the evolution of these capa-
bility measures over time. Most importantly, our
study is distinctive from these prior studies in that

Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)


30

S. K. Ethiraj et al.

we examine the choices made by a single ﬁrm over
time and evaluate the performance trade-offs or
the marginal returns to different capabilities that it
sought to build over a 6-year period. The follow-
ing section develops the key hypotheses advanced
in this study.

OVERVIEW OF THE INDIAN
SOFTWARE SERVICES INDUSTRY

In this section we provide a brief overview of
the Indian software services industry. We focus
on the demand- and supply-side economics of the
industry and attempt to draw out the nature and
type of capabilities that might have the potential
to generate rents.

that

The Indian software services industry is rela-
tively young, with many of its most mature com-
panies incorporated in the late-1970s and early
1980s. The domestic market for IT services was
always small and continues, even today, to account
for only about 25–30 percent of the industry’s
sales (Nasscom, 2001). The Indian industry re-
ceived a big boost
in the early 1990s when
the demand for IT services in the developed
world outstripped the available supply of skilled
labor. India, which at
time was graduat-
ing 150,000 English-speaking engineers a year
with only a limited demand for their services
within the country, was well placed to take advan-
tage of this opportunity. Companies in the devel-
oped world began focusing on India to lever-
age its low-cost, English-speaking IT manpower.
The low levels of initial investment required to
enter the software services business and the min-
imal regulatory intervention from the Indian gov-
ernment, created few,
if any, entry barriers or
constraints in these early years. Several hun-
dred Indian ﬁrms were founded to exploit
this
opportunity and the industry witnessed very rapid
growth. Overall, there was a general consensus
that macro factors such as the access to large,
low-cost, English-speaking technical manpower in
India and improvements in IT-related infrastruc-
ture (e.g., high-bandwidth communication lines)
set up by private and state-owned enterprises pos-
itively inﬂuenced the competitive advantage and
growth of Indian companies (Arora et al., 2001;
Nasscom, 2001).

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Demand for Indian software services

Faced with a small and undeveloped domestic
software services market, Indian software ﬁrms
focused primarily on the export market. Their early
work, however, was neither technologically very
sophisticated nor critical
to clients’ businesses.
Clients usually did the high-end work such as
requirement analysis and top-level design either
in-house or through U.S.-based consultants. They
outsourced the low-end, labor-intensive work such
as low-level design, coding, testing, support and
maintenance to Indian companies to leverage their
low-cost activity base. Clients retained the high-
end work in the early years either because their
Indian vendors did not possess the requisite skills
to undertake these activities or, even if they did,
clients did not have sufﬁcient conﬁdence to entrust
such activities to them. Thus, the origin of the
Indian software industry was ﬁrmly rooted in
performing low-end, technically less demanding
and labor-intensive work for the global IT indus-
try and exploiting labor cost arbitrage opportuni-
ties between India and developed country markets
(Nasscom, 2001).

Over time, however, there was a change in this
trend. The low entry barriers in the Indian software
services industry triggered abnormally high levels
of entry by new ﬁrms. Between 1989 and 1998,
over 3000 software services ﬁrms were founded
that aspired to serve export markets. Consequently,
domestic competition in the labor market (i.e., for
trained engineers) shot up. It was not enough any
more to just possess low-cost labor resources and
exploit arbitrage opportunities. Firms also needed
to improve the productivity of labor to compete
effectively in the market. Thus, some ﬁrms began
a systematic push to build high-end software capa-
bilities, move up the value chain, and improve rev-
enue per employee ﬁgures. Consequently, the lead-
ing Indian ﬁrms today are also the leading ﬁrms
in the global market (see Market-Guide, 2002).

Since the mid-1990s there has been a distinct
shift in the nature of software projects executed by
the leading Indian software ﬁrms. They gradually
shifted their role from that of merely implement-
ing a design provided by their overseas clients to
becoming active participants in the design of the
complete application product. As a consequence,
they now span the full spectrum of jobs from
highly labor-intensive code migration work such
as the integration of old mainframe-based systems

Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)


Where Do Capabilities Come From and How Do They Matter?

31

into new e-commerce platforms, or developing
new code for pre-designed applications and soft-
ware tools, to projects that involve both conceptual
design and implementation of customer relation-
ship applications and supply-chain management
systems. The capacity to execute such a range of
jobs enabled these ﬁrms to deliver end-to-end solu-
tions and, thereby, lay claim to a larger share of
the client’s IT budget and compete for it with lead-
ing ﬁrms in the United States such as IBM and
Accenture.

Overall, while comparative cost advantages do
exist for Indian software ﬁrms, they are by no
means sufﬁcient or even sustainable. First,
the
nature of services provided by these ﬁrms involves
specialized work (e.g., designing supply chain
management systems or setting up trading ex-
changes) that requires not only technical knowl-
edge of software design but also an in-depth under-
standing of the client’s industry and business pro-
cess. Second, even ﬁrms such as IBM, Sapient, and
Accenture have set up subsidiaries in India exploit-
ing the same cost advantages. These subsidiaries
undertake software projects involving both design
and development on latest-technology platforms
and business applications. This development not
only supports the argument that Indian software
teams are capable of executing these high-value
projects but also erodes much of the Indian ﬁrms’
traditional cost advantages.

Supply of Indian software services3

Two aspects of the Indian software services indus-
try are critical
to understanding its supply-side
economics: (a) where and how the software devel-
opment process is managed and organized; and
(b) what type of contracts are used to provide the
services. We elaborate below.

Indian software ﬁrms have traditionally executed
two types of projects: onsite and offshore. In onsite
projects the Indian ﬁrm supplies software profes-
sionals who possess the requisite technical skills
that the clients demand. The entire project is then
developed and executed at the clients’ site. In off-
shore projects, in contrast, the Indian ﬁrm typically
sends a few software professionals to the client

3 The material here draws heavily from an excellent article on
the Indian software industry by Arora et al. (2001).

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

site to understand its requirements and speciﬁca-
tions, but thereafter the entire software is devel-
oped in India. The post-development support and
maintenance of the software is also carried out
largely from India. In some cases, a hybrid of the
two types is also observed. Obviously, the offshore
development model is more cost effective due to
labor market arbitrage. From a cost standpoint, the
greater the proportion of work completed offshore,
the lower the cost of project execution (Gopal
et al., 2003). This is primarily because in onsite
projects employees need to be paid in accordance
with host country norms,4 which erodes a signiﬁ-
cant proportion of the cost-based advantages that
Indian ﬁrms enjoy.

In the early days of the Indian software indus-
try, Indian companies executed a majority of the
projects onsite. This happened because, ﬁrst, the
overseas clients had limited conﬁdence in the
Indian ﬁrms’ ability to execute projects in confor-
mance to their needs. Second, the Indian ﬁrms also
had only a limited understanding of clients’ needs
and often required close and regular interaction
with the client. But, over time, as overseas clients
developed conﬁdence in the software capabilities
of their Indian vendors and the vendors, in turn,
developed a better understanding of clients’ needs,
it was possible to relocate the bulk of the project
development activities to India to take full advan-
tage of its low-cost development base. Improve-
ments in the infrastructure for long-distance com-
munication and data transfer facilitated this process
as well.

The second signiﬁcant feature of software ser-
vices, both in India and worldwide, involves the
type of contract adopted in software outsourcing
arrangements. Contracts can be broadly classiﬁed
into two categories: ﬁxed price and time & mate-
rial (Banerjee and Duﬂo, 2000). In ﬁxed price
contracts the vendor charges a ﬁxed fee for its
services, which is usually negotiated before the
start of the project. Although the vendor bears
most of the risk in this case, efﬁcient project man-
agement can yield potentially higher margins. In a

4 In the United States, issue of H1B visas to overseas software
professionals requires the sponsoring ﬁrm to certify that the pro-
fessionals are being paid wages commensurate with what a U.S.-
based employee with similar qualiﬁcations would obtain. This
provision was introduced to discourage ﬁrms from substituting
domestic labor with low-cost foreign labor, while allowing them
to access specialized labor not easily available domestically.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)


32

S. K. Ethiraj et al.

time & material (T&M) contract, the vendor pro-
vides services at a pre-negotiated rate for every
person-hour of effort expended on the project and
receives payment either at the end of the project or
at periodic intervals when project milestones are
reached. Here, although a vendor is usually pro-
tected against any cost and schedule overruns that
may arise due to changes in client speciﬁcations,
there is a concomitant reduction in incentives for
the vendor to execute more efﬁciently.

In the early years, most Indian software ﬁrms
preferred T&M contracts. Since these contracts
were behavioral, the client needed a safeguard that
the Indian ﬁrm was not billing them more person-
hours than was necessary to execute the project. So
clients typically reduced their risk by negotiating
hard on the price per person-hour. From the Indian
vendor’s standpoint, reduced risk came at the cost
of reduced margins. Therefore, for ﬁrms that had
the capability to manage their projects efﬁciently
and assume the risks,
it made economic sense
to move to a ﬁxed-price contract that potentially
yielded higher margins. In ﬁxed-price contracts,
clients often agreed to higher prices because such
contracts reduced the need for behavioral monitor-
ing and had strong penalties associated with delays
or defects in project completion. Thus a combina-
tion of improved project execution and manage-
ment capabilities and the Indian ﬁrms’ impetus to
improve proﬁt margins led to an increasing pref-
erence for ﬁxed-price contracts.

Overall, on the supply side the steady transition
from onsite to offshore projects and from T&M
to ﬁxed-price contracts meant that an increasing
share of project management risk had to be borne
by the Indian ﬁrms. This meant that
the ﬁrms
had to acquire the requisite capabilities to compete
effectively. The following section elaborates what
these capabilities were and how they played a
critical role in Indian ﬁrms’ successful evolution.

Capabilities of Indian software services ﬁrms

Against the backdrop of the demand- and supply-
side economics of the Indian software services
industry, two broad sets of capabilities are critical.
The ﬁrst is what we term client-speciﬁc capabil-
ities. As software ﬁrms work with their clients
over time they develop several client-speciﬁc pat-
terns of interaction that become cost-effective over
repeated interactions. For instance, one of the ﬁrms
we interviewed mentioned that clients tend to have

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

fairly idiosyncratic ways of doing things and it
takes some time to understand and appreciate this.
One of this ﬁrm’s clients wanted a team of its
employees to be stationed at the client site for
3 months after completion of the project. Initially
the Indian ﬁrm resisted such a demand since it
led to increased costs. However, over a period of
time, the ﬁrm was able to convince the client that
it could provide the same quality of after-sales ser-
vice with the support team based in India. This was
possible because with repeated interaction with the
same client over time software vendors not only
develop a better understanding of the information
infrastructure at the client site but also develop
better clarity of how the software relates to the
client’s business environment. Such knowledge is
acquired through repeated interactions with the
client over various stages of the development cycle
such as requirements speciﬁcation, business pro-
cess design, data preparation, software installation,
debugging, and testing. Hence long-term relation-
ships and repeated interactions with clients resulted
in client-speciﬁc learning that had a positive effect
on both revenues and costs.

On the revenue side, clients were more will-
ing to agree to higher prices on repeat projects
as they developed conﬁdence in the capability of
the Indian ﬁrm to execute projects per their speci-
ﬁcations. We reckon that Indian ﬁrms were able to
capture at least some of the switching costs faced
by the client in ﬁnding a new vendor and build-
ing a new working relationship. On the cost side,
there was tangible cost reduction associated with
working with a client over time. For instance, one
of our interviewees pointed to a client who never
speciﬁed requirements very clearly at the outset
and tended to repeatedly come back and ask for
new features after the project was delivered. While
this tended to be disruptive initially and created
problems for the Indian ﬁrm, over time it learned
to work around this. Rather than deliver very ﬁn-
ished projects, the vendor ﬁrm began to involve
the client ﬁrm at the prototype stage itself and
then started building in the client ﬁrm’s needs as
the project went along. In this manner, they were
able to avoid the post-delivery negotiations and
completion delays and the associated costs. Such
client-speciﬁc tailoring of projects also enhances
the software ﬁrm’s understanding of the client’s
business domain. Thus, repeat projects for clients
helped develop important client-speciﬁc capabili-
ties that contributed to higher proﬁts by reducing

Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)


Where Do Capabilities Come From and How Do They Matter?

33

costs. Therefore, we hypothesize:

Hypothesis 1: Development of client-speciﬁc
capabilities based on repeated interaction with
clients is positively related to project perfor-
mance.

and

project management

A second capability that is more fungible across
clients and industry domains is the software devel-
opment
capability
(Humphrey, 1989; Jalote, 1997). The following
three capabilities are particularly important. (i)
Software design and building capabilities: First,
vendors must have the capability to understand the
requirements of the client and design an appropri-
ate system or architecture to address them. Second,
they must possess the capability to efﬁciently and
effectively build the code in conformance to the
design and coordinate the entire code development
process that
is usually distributed across many
teams and/or sites. These capabilities are usually
reﬂected in the defects identiﬁed in the prod-
uct/software during the design and development
process. (ii) Effort estimation and management
capabilities: Vendors have to be skilled not only in
accurately assessing the requirements of the client
but also in assessing the resource inputs or effort
required to build and execute the project. They
need to be able to identify appropriate resources
(for instance, people with the necessary skill, expe-
rience, availability, etc.) and create and use prior
experience/data to arrive at accurate estimates of
the resource/effort requirements. Further, they also
require skills to ensure the effective management
and deployment of the required resources. Poor
capabilities in effort estimation and management
are usually reﬂected in increased manpower cost
and/or effort overrun. (iii) Schedule estimation and
management capabilities: Once companies have
a tentative idea of the resource inputs necessary
to build and implement the project, they must be
able to correctly estimate the duration and sched-
ule for completing the project. They also need to
possess the management skills to ensure that the
project resources are garnered, deployed and man-
aged to complete the project within the planned
schedule. Again, poor capabilities on this dimen-
sion are reﬂected in project completion delays and
schedule slippages.

Given the importance of the above capabili-
in recent years ﬁrms have placed a great
ties,
deal of emphasis on software engineering and

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

project management and have been making invest-
ments in improving their processes and capabili-
ties. The Capability Maturity Model (CMM) devel-
oped by the Software Engineering Institute (SEI)
at Carnegie Mellon University is a widely adopted
framework to improve software capabilities. Built
on theories of quality and continuous process
improvement, the CMM was ﬁrst initiated to pro-
vide the Department of Defense a standard means
for measuring contractor capability via its deﬁni-
tion of process maturity (Humphrey, 1989). As the
CMM became widely adopted as a standard quality
process model in the defense sector, commercial
organizations also began to investigate whether
they could beneﬁt from the approach to software
process improvement expressed in the CMM. In
the last few years software process improvement
based on the CMM has emerged as an integrated
solution to the software problems in various cor-
porations and empirical evidence in support of the
same has been reported (Herbsleb et al., 1997;
Krishnan, 1996).

Recognizing the importance of project man-
agement capabilities, several Indian ﬁrms have
been the leaders in adopting CMM guidelines
to improve their software development processes.
According to SEI, in 2001, of the 42 companies
worldwide certiﬁed as having attained a level-5
capability, 25 are based out of India. Meeting
these guidelines is not a trivial task. Firms need
to make substantial
investments in ﬁrm infras-
tructure, systems, and human capital. The CMM
speciﬁes ﬁve maturity levels, each consisting of
several key process areas (KPAs), to assess an
organization’s process capability by measuring the
degree to which processes are deﬁned and man-
aged (see Paulk et al., 1993: Figure 1). Firms ﬁrst
need to do a detailed comparison of their devel-
opment and project management processes with
the CMM process quality framework and identify
speciﬁc aspects that need to be improved. After
making these organizational and process changes,
software ﬁrms need to set up a rigorous metrics
program to collect data to assess various aspects of
their development process and institute audit sys-
tems to track non-conformance of best practices,
process deviations, and exceptions. Measurement-
based feedback to improve process capability is
achieved through monitoring and review forums
to track improvements and make required changes
on a regular basis.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)


34

S. K. Ethiraj et al.

In addition, software ﬁrms need to invest in
training programs to improve their process matu-
rity under the CMM framework. The training
activities mandated by CMM include ongoing
training in both new technology and software pro-
cess and project management skills for software
developers and managers. To achieve higher lev-
els of process maturity, ﬁrms need to organize
rigorous training of all their employees not only
with a view to improve their development/project
management practices but also to institutionalize
the entire capability improvement initiative (Paulk
et al., 1993).

The CMM framework offers generic guidelines
for institutionalizing disciplined practices across
various activities in software development. Since
the nature of software development is such that
software teams can quickly turn to ad hoc prac-
tices, institutionalization of disciplined practices
and continuous feedback-based improvements can
evolve as a core project management capability
of the ﬁrm. Overall, ﬁrms can eventually develop
their software development and project manage-
ment capabilities as a result of cumulative and
integrated effort across the many process areas
of CMM as described above. Eventually the pos-
session of these capabilities should lead to bet-
ter project-level performance for the ﬁrm. Past
studies document the relationship between soft-
ware and project management capabilities and pro-
cesses and the quality of the products/services pro-
vided as well as the efﬁciency in providing them
(Herbsleb et al., 1997; Krishnan, 1996). Eventu-
ally, we believe that these beneﬁts should result
in improved project performance in terms of prof-
itability. Therefore, we hypothesize:

Hypothesis 2: Higher levels of project manage-
ment capabilities will lead to higher levels of
project performance

While client-speciﬁc capabilities and project
management capabilities are both positively related
to project performance, they might differ in the
marginal returns they generate. Even within the
set of project management capabilities, it is possi-
ble to observe some differences in their marginal
returns. As argued earlier, differences in marginal
returns may arise due to differences in the costs
associated with developing these respective capa-
bilities. Our empirical analysis can help shed light
on whether that is indeed the case in our setting.

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

To summarize the paper so far: We have sought
to understand the origin, signiﬁcance, and value of
ﬁrm capabilities. We ﬁrst argued that capabilities
reﬂect the distinctive deployment of resources and
also that they are contextually grounded. We then
elaborated the speciﬁc capabilities that are impor-
tant
in the software services industry, namely,
client-speciﬁc capabilities that arise in the con-
text of repeated interactions with clients over time
and project management capabilities that develop
through deliberate and persistent investments in
the effort and infrastructure to create them. While
client-speciﬁc capabilities help reduce project exe-
cution costs, project management capabilities help
maintain low cost and high quality all along
the software development and management value
chain. These capabilities, in turn, provide oppor-
tunities for rent generation for ﬁrms. We next turn
our attention to the signiﬁcance and value of these
capabilities as a matter for empirical investigation.

METHODS

Data

We obtained detailed quantitative data at the pro-
ject
level from a leading world-class software
services ﬁrm headquartered in India.5 Over
90 percent of its revenues are export-based, of
which more than 60 percent comes from North
American clients. The dataset includes information
on revenues,
capability
measures, and various project characteristics such
as size, client industry, development platform, etc.,
measured at the project level.

inputs,

factor

cost,

We have data on 227 projects executed by the
ﬁrm over a 6-year period from 1996 to 2001. How-
ever, after dropping single projects and projects
with missing data, our sample was reduced to 138
projects.6 The ﬁrm has executed these 138 projects
for 57 different clients over the study period. Our
dataset has 22 new clients for whom the ﬁrm exe-
cuted its ﬁrst project during the study period and

5 Since the dataset reveals the economics of the ﬁrm and has
competitive implications, we are unable to reveal the identity of
the ﬁrm.
6 We found no statistically signiﬁcant differences between pro-
jects with complete data and those with missing data for those
variables for which we had complete information. This increased
our conﬁdence that the analyzed data were not systematically
different from the data on all the projects. The results reported
in the paper are estimated using the sample of 138 projects.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)


Where Do Capabilities Come From and How Do They Matter?

35

35 repeat clients for whom the ﬁrst project was
executed prior to the study period. The average
number of projects executed per client is 2.385;
the range is from a minimum of 2 to a maximum
of 12 projects. Thus, our dataset comprises a panel
of 57 clients for whom the ﬁrm has executed two
or more projects during the study period.

Model speciﬁcation and estimation

We assume that the ﬁrm produces a single out-
put, software services, using skilled labor. Since
the software services business is highly labor-
intensive, the scale of the ﬁrm’s operations and
its costs depend almost exclusively on manpower.
The ﬁrm’s proﬁt function from each project
is
given by

= F (P , C(δ, κ))

πij t

where, πij t are the proﬁts from project i for client
j in year t. This recognizes that proﬁtability can
vary as a function of time, client characteristics,
and project characteristics. P are the prices and C
are the costs respectively of project i for client j
in year t. Both prices and costs depend on project-
speciﬁc characteristics, δ, such as size, complexity,
duration, and type of contract. The last term in
the equation, κ, captures the capabilities measures,
which vary with client and time and also depend
on project-speciﬁc characteristics δ.

This reﬂects our hypotheses that capabilities
tend to inﬂuence both the prices and costs of soft-
ware services. As argued in the previous section,
capabilities allow the ﬁrm to command a price pre-
mium (shift the demand curve), and also reduce
costs (shift the supply curve).

We estimated the following equation using pro-

ject-level data:

log(πij t ) = β log(wij t ) + χ zij t

+ γ κij t

+ ε

where the dependent variable, πij t, is project-level
contribution (revenue minus cost), wij t is the vec-
tor of input characteristics that determine costs,
is a vector of project speciﬁc controls, and
zij t
κij t reﬂect the capability measures. The coefﬁcients
on the logged variables are directly interpreted as
elasticities, while the coefﬁcients on variables mea-
sured in levels vary with the magnitude of the

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

variables.7 We only logged independent variables
that did not have zero values and retained vari-
ables with zero values as levels to avoid estimation
difﬁculties.

The equation above cannot be estimated using
simple OLS since there are multiple projects
per client. Any unobserved relationships among
projects for a given client and the consequent
heterogeneity across clients can contribute to het-
eroskedasticity and bias the standard errors of the
coefﬁcient estimates. The standard solution to this
problem is either to use a GLS estimator and cor-
rect for panel heteroskedasticity or employ OLS
and account for the correlations within each panel
(Wooldridge, 2002). In using OLS to estimate
equations with panel data such as that employed
in this paper,
the usual practice is to employ
a ﬁxed-effects speciﬁcation8 (Greene, 1997). The
ﬁxed-effects model
involves parameterizing the
client-speciﬁc effects by including dummies for
each client. We report the results of the estima-
tion using, primarily, a ﬁxed-effects speciﬁcation.
As a robustness check, we also report GLS with
panel heteroskedasticity-corrected standard errors.
In the ﬁxed-effects models the coefﬁcient esti-
mates are interpreted as the amount of within-panel
variation in the dependent variable (project per-
formance) that is explained by the within-panel
variation in the independent variables. Thus, the
regression analysis relates changes in project con-
tribution across different projects for a given client
to changes in the independent variables after con-
trolling for unobserved time-invariant effects, and
the included controls.

Measures

Dependent variable

Project contribution. The dependent variable is
project contribution (revenues minus costs) mea-
sured in Indian rupees (INR) recognized on the
date of completion of the project. We chose to

7 We explain our rationale for logging the dependent variable in
the following section. Entering the variables in levels does not
change the results. We report the results on the logged variables
for ease of interpretation.
8 We performed a Hausman test to choose between the random-
effects and ﬁxed-effects models. The Hausman test on the
full model yielded a chi-squared test statistic equal to 36.22
(p ≤ 0.03), suggesting that the ﬁxed-effects model is preferred
over the random-effects model.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)


36

S. K. Ethiraj et al.

focus on the project level because the ﬁrm capa-
bilities that we study primarily exist and evolve
at the project level within ﬁrms. However, ﬁrm
proﬁtability is essentially an aggregate of project-
level contribution so we expect
the correspon-
dence between project and ﬁrm proﬁtability to be
high. Project proﬁtability is an imperfect indica-
tor of ﬁrm proﬁtability to the extent that it does
not account for ﬁrm-level cost overheads. To be
able to use this measure meaningfully we need
to adjust the INR values both for inﬂation and
INR–USD (U.S. dollar) exchange rate deprecia-
tion over time.9 As we discovered, this is a far
from simple problem, since identifying an appro-
priate price index speciﬁc to an export-based soft-
ware services ﬁrm is quite difﬁcult. Fortunately,
we found that a simple solution is to take logs of
the dependent variable and include year dummies
in the regression estimation. This helps remove the
effect of the adjustment factor from the parameters
being estimated.10

Independent variables

a

are

capabilities

Client-speciﬁc capabilities. As outlined earlier,
client-speciﬁc
function of
repeated interactions with a given client. These
repeated interactions may be a function of time
(on a long project) or spread over several projects.
We measured it in two ways. For each project in
our dataset, we have information on whether the
client is new (i.e., the ﬁrst project executed for that
client) or a repeat client (i.e., the ﬁrm has executed
projects for that client
in the past). For each
project in the dataset, we have a dummy variable,
customer type, coded 0 if the ﬁrm has executed
projects for the client in the past and coded 1 if it
is the ﬁrst project executed for the client. Repeat
clients are a proxy for client-speciﬁc capabilities
the sign on
developed by the ﬁrm. We expect

9 The exchange rate depreciation over time is important since
the ﬁrm incurs most of its costs (e.g., wages) in Indian rupees
whereas its revenues are in U.S. dollars. Therefore, changes in
the rupee–dollar exchange rates will also change the coefﬁcient
estimates in the ﬁrm proﬁt function.
10 For example, C2000 (contribution in year 2000) needs to be
adjusted to the same units as C1996 (contribution in 1996). Usu-
ally, C2000 is adjusted as C2000/P1996, where the denominator
(P1996) is the appropriate index for adjustment. Taking logs,
we obtain log(C2000)—log(P1996). Thus if we take logs on the
dependent variable and include year dummies, the parameters
are free of the adjustment factor. The year dummies absorb the
adjustment factor, and since the year dummies are only controls
the main results and our interpretation remain unaffected.

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

this coefﬁcient will be negative. Since we also
have panel data on each client in our sample (i.e.,
data on multiple projects done for each client), we
used it to estimate a client ﬁxed effect by including
a dummy variable for each client. Though both
measures are largely substitutes, the ﬁrst measure
captures some information about past projects not
included in our dataset, and the second produces a
within-sample estimate of the client-speciﬁc effect.
Since we cannot estimate a single parameter for the
client ﬁxed effects, we only examine whether they
are jointly signiﬁcant after controlling for input and
project characteristics and time.

Project management capabilities. Project capa-
bilities are not client-speciﬁc. They are capabil-
ities that can, by deﬁnition, be leveraged across
clients, industry domains, and development plat-
forms. We used three metric variables to measure
project management capabilities. The ﬁrst variable
measures the number of in-process defects iden-
tiﬁed during the project execution phase. Since
in-process defects can vary by size of the project,
we normalized it by a project size measure (FP)
described below.11 In-process defects, which mea-
sure the defects detected in the product, reﬂect
a ﬁrm’s software development and management
capabilities. Further, there is evidence that the cost
of ﬁxing defects in the early phases of software
development can be substantially lower than the
cost of ﬁxing them in the ﬁnal stages of software
development (Jones, 1997). Hence we expect that
lower in-process defects will lead to higher project
contribution.

A second variable measures effort overrun, i.e.,
difference between actual person-months required
to complete the project and person-months that
were initially estimated. Effort overrun can affect
project proﬁtability since project costs go up
as effort
increases. This measure reﬂects effort
estimation and management capability. Effective
project management
involves minimizing such
overruns. Since effort overrun is likely to vary
directly with budgeted person-months, we normal-
ized effort overrun by the budgeted person-months
to estimate its main effect. The expected sign on
this coefﬁcient is negative, i.e., higher effort over-
run will lead to lower project contribution. It was

11 The measure of project size, called function points (FP), is
a composite measure of project size and complexity and is
described in greater detail in the subsection below on the control
variables included in the estimation.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)


Where Do Capabilities Come From and How Do They Matter?

37

entered as levels (rather than logs) since zero or
negative values are possible.

A third variable measures the extent of schedule
slippage, i.e., delay in project completion date. It
reﬂects schedule estimation and management capa-
bility. Delays in project completion can adversely
affect proﬁtability since the ﬁrm can incur contrac-
tual penalties for delays and also bear increased
labor costs. We expect the magnitude of sched-
ule slippage to vary directly with expected project
duration. To control for this, we normalized sched-
ule slippage measured in days by project duration
(also measured in days). The expected sign on this
coefﬁcient is negative, i.e., higher schedule slip-
page will lead to lower project contribution.

In sum,

the capabilities measures employed
here reﬂect our view that capabilities are dis-
tinct from either inputs or resources. While inputs
or resources such as capital or labor are acces-
sible by all ﬁrms at prevailing factor prices,
capabilities reﬂect
the deployment of resources
(Makadok, 2001). Therefore, capability differences
between ﬁrms are reﬂected in productivity differ-
ences between them, and within ﬁrms in produc-
tivity improvement over time. Thus, changes in the
capability measures reﬂect changes in the produc-
tivity of resources over time.

Control variables

We controlled for a variety of other variables
that might impact project proﬁtability. We brieﬂy
describe these variables below.

Contract type. There are two types of contracts
commonly used in the Indian software services
industry: time & material (T&M) and ﬁxed price.
As explained earlier, the role of project manage-
ment capabilities may differ in the two types of
contracts. Also, these contracts may vary in terms
of their inﬂuence on project proﬁtability. To con-
trol for the obvious effect of contract
type on
proﬁtability we included a dummy variable, where
T&M contract was coded 0 and ﬁxed price was
coded 1. In terms of the risk–return trade-off ﬁxed
price projects are expected to yield superior project
proﬁtability, suggesting an expectation of a posi-
tive sign on the coefﬁcient.

Project size and complexity. We expect project
size to affect proﬁtability. Though we have no
priors on this, we might reasonably expect that the

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

size–proﬁtability relationship might be increasing
below the minimum efﬁcient scale and decreasing
above the maximum efﬁcient scale. We employed
a measure of project size, called function points
(FP), to reﬂect a composite measure of project size
and complexity.12 We logged the FP measure in
our estimation and, as a result, the coefﬁcient can
be interpreted as elasticity with respect to project
proﬁtability.

Team size. We also expect team size to have an
effect on project proﬁtability. As above, we expect
project proﬁtability will increase with team size
when the team is too small and overworked and
decrease when the team size is large enough to
create coordination problems. Team size is logged
in our model and can be interpreted as elasticity
with respect to proﬁtability.

Person-months. The team size measure is imper-
fect since there may be attrition13 during the project
or some members may work only part-time. This
will cause the team size measure to be overstated.
A more precise measure of project size is person-
months of labor. This accounts for both team
member attrition and part-time manpower usage.
Person-months are entered as logs and can be inter-
preted as elasticity with respect to proﬁtability.

Project duration. Duration is an important con-
trol variable since longer projects are more prone
to cost overruns, either due to forecasting difﬁ-
culties or employee attrition. We measure project
duration as the actual months taken for project
completion. This measure is entered in logs and
can also be interpreted as elasticity with respect to
project proﬁtability.

Industry domains. The vendor ﬁrm we studied
executed projects for clients in multiple industries.
Since competition and appropriability conditions
can vary by industry and the vendor’s capabili-
ties may not be entirely fungible across industry

12 Earlier measures of size and complexity tended to just count
the number of lines of code in software and use it as a proxy. The
problem with this measure is that the number of lines of code
for a given application varies directly by software platform. For
example, for a given application, the number of lines of code
in Cobol is several times greater than the number of lines of
code in Java. The FP measure is designed to be independent of
programming language (see Albrecht and Gaffney, 1983).
13 Employee attrition is historically very high in this industry,
ranging from 10 to 30 percent per year.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)


38

S. K. Ethiraj et al.

domains, we include industry dummies to con-
trol for industry-speciﬁc differences. We included
three dummy variables for ﬁnancial services, man-
ufacturing, and marketing industries. The omitted
category was ‘other.’

Development platforms. Proﬁtability can also
depend on the software platform on which the
software is coded. The vendor is likely to face
lower costs on platforms on which it has executed
a number of prior projects and is likely to incur
substantial learning and start-up costs on newer
platforms. To account for this, we included four
dummy variables to distinguish between Windows
NT, Mainframe, Unix, and Web-based platforms.
The omitted category was ‘other.’

Time. We control for time in all our models using
year dummies. The year dummies reﬂect the par-
ticular year in which each project was started.
(We also tested models using year dummies based
on project completion year and found that
the
results did not change substantively.) This control
is necessary to capture the variance in the depen-
dent variable due to exchange rate ﬂuctuations and
inﬂation. The time dummies are also important
to account for any variation in the proportion of
onsite and offshore projects that the ﬁrm has done
over time. No projects in our dataset were exclu-
sively onsite or offshore. Unfortunately, the ﬁrm
did not have data at the project level on the pro-
portion of work done onsite and offshore. The ﬁrm
conﬁrmed that there were no dramatic differences
across projects on the mix of onsite and offshore
work. However, there has been some change in this
mix over time. Thus including the year dummies
also helps control for the change in the proportion
of onsite and offshore work over time.

RESULTS

Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics and cor-
relation matrix of the variables employed in the
estimation. From the correlation matrix it is clear
that all the control variables are signiﬁcantly pos-
itively related to project contribution. We also
note that the relationship between the capability
measures and project contribution is negative as
expected, though only the process defects variable
is statistically signiﬁcant.

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Table 2 presents the coefﬁcient estimates from
the ﬁxed-effects panel regression analysis. The sec-
ond column lists the predicted sign on the key
independent variables in the model. The column
labeled Model 1 presents results with just the con-
trol variables in the model. The R2 for this model is
highly signiﬁcant and the control variables account
for about 66 percent of the variance in the data.14
The model also includes the client ﬁxed effects.
As expected, the client ﬁxed effect is strongly sig-
niﬁcant, providing some prima facie evidence for
client-speciﬁc learning and/or switching cost asso-
ciated with repeat projects for a given client.15

In Model 2A we added the customer type vari-
able to the analysis. The model is again highly
signiﬁcant and its adjusted R2 increases to about
0.67. The customer type measure sought to cap-
ture aspects of client-speciﬁc capabilities, such as
specialized investments and learning from repeated
interactions with the client.16 Though the sign on
the coefﬁcient was in the expected direction, it was
not statistically signiﬁcant. Note, however, that the
client ﬁxed effect continues to be highly signiﬁcant
even in Model 2A.

To investigate the possibility that the client ﬁxed
effect might be capturing variance in the cus-
tomer type variable, we re-estimated the model
by dropping the client ﬁxed effect. Since drop-
ping the ﬁxed effect can bias the estimates, we
employed a generalized least squares (GLS) model
that allowed us to correct for heteroskedasticity
within projects executed for a given client. These
results, presented in Model 2B, conﬁrm our conjec-
ture. The coefﬁcient on the customer type variable
is negative and statistically signiﬁcant, suggesting
that project contribution, on average, is lower for
new clients as compared with repeat clients. This
provides some conﬁdence that client-speciﬁc capa-
bilities are related to project contribution.

14 We tested for decreasing returns to project and team size
by introducing their quadratic powers. The coefﬁcients were
non-signiﬁcant, suggesting that
the constant returns to scale
assumption might be reasonable for this dataset.
15 To check for multicollinearity, we computed the variance inﬂa-
tion factor (VIF) indices and found that the person–months
variable had a VIF of 4.42, followed by team size (2.97), size
FP (2.46), and duration (2.36). The mean VIF for all indepen-
dent variables was 2.51, alleviating multicollinearity concerns
(Chatterjee, Hadi, and Price, 2000).
16 In the dataset used for empirical estimation there is no evi-
dence that revenues from repeat clients were systematically
higher than that of ﬁrst-time projects after controlling for project
characteristics. Revenues tended to remain constant after adjust-
ing for inﬂation and exchange rate changes.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)


Where Do Capabilities Come From and How Do They Matter?

39

2
1

1
1

0
1

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

.

D
S

.

n
a
e

M

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
V

)
8
3
1
=
N

(

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v

f
o

x
i
r
t
a
m
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
c

d
n
a

s
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

e
v
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
D

.

1

e
l
b
a
T

6
0
0
0

.

∗

6
5
2
3
0
2
0
0
−
−

.

.

3
5
0
8
8
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
−
−
−

.

.

.

∗

3
4
0
0

.

4
4
5
0

.

2
5
0
0

.

8
3
1
0
−

.

∗

∗

∗

2
0
2
5
4
4
0
9
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
−
−
−
−

.

.

.

.

3
5
3
0

.

6
0
0
0

.

5
1
1
0

.

3
1
1
0

.

7
0
0

.

0

4
3
0
0

.

8
2
0
0
−

.

∗

∗

∗

7
1
1

.

7
8
0

.

0

8
4
1
0

.

5
7
3

3
2
0
0
0
−

.

.

8
2
0

.

0

6
3
1
0

.

0
−

∗

∗

∗

5
9
1

6
7
2

.

.

5
4
0

2
0
0

.

.

8
3
0

9
4
2

.

.

0
0
0
0
0
0
−
−
−
−
−

1
3
0

1
3
0

.

.

0
0
−

∗

∗

∗

∗

9
3
6

5
3
2

1
1
4

.

.

.

2
5
0

3
4
0

9
5
0

6
5
1

.

.

.

.

0

0
0
0
−
−

0
0
0
−
−

1
8
0

7
7
0

.

.

0

0

∗

∗

∗

∗

1
4
7

0
7
4

7
7
1

2
0
3

.

.

.

.

0

0

0
0
−

4
3
0
0

.

3
3
0

7
1
1

3
1
0

.

0

.

.

0
0
−

6
0
0

6
5
0
0
0
−

.

.

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

9
7
6

0
7
6

6
3
5

9
6
1

8
3
6

6
2
0

7
3
0

0
8
0

1
8
0

.

.

.

0

0

0

.

.

.

.

.

.

0
0
−

0
0
0
0
−
−
−

9
0
0

4
4
0

.

.

0
0
−

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

9
8
4
0

.

9
0
6
0

.

5
7
6
0

.

9
5
4
0

.

9
0
7
4
8
1
0
7
5
3
3
1
0
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
−
−
−
−

.

.

.

.

.

0
2
1
0

.

9
8
0
0

.

7
2
0
0

.

4
1
3

1
9
4

.

1

.

1

8
6
6
0

.

1
4
0
1

.

1
0
6

7
6
3

0
8
9

3
9
0

4
7
1

0
9
4

9
7
4

.

0

.

.

0

1

.

.

.

.

0

1

0

1

—

—

5
7
8

.

4

8
5
4
6

.

7
1
1
2

.

7
7
0

.

3

4
8
8
4

.

9
5
1
0

.

0
3
6
0

.

8
1
0
0

.

0
5
0
0

.

9
0
6
0

.

.

0
5
0
9
9
9
1

—

—

)
s
h
t
n
o
m
-
n
o
s
r
e
P
(

)
e
z
i
s
m
a
e
T
(

)
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
C

(

)
e
z
i
S
(

g
o
L

g
o
L

g
o
L

g
o
L

g
o
L

e
g
a
p
p
i
l
s

e
l
u
d
e
h
c
S

n
u
r
r
e
v
o

t
r
o
f
f
E

e
p
y
t

t
c
a
r
t
n
o
C

)
n
o
i
t
a
r
u
D

(

e
p
y
t

r
e
m
o
t
s
u
C

s
t
c
e
f
e
d

s
s
e
c
o
r
P

6
9
9
1
1
Y
0
0
2
∗
Y
∗

e
g
a
p
p
i
l
s

e
l
u
d
e
h
c
S

n
u
r
r
e
v
o

t
r
o
f
f
E

r
a
e
Y

.
r
e
w
o
l

r
o

l
e
v
e
l

5
0

.

0

t
a

t
n
a
c
ﬁ
i
n
g
i
s

s
t
n
e
i
c
ﬁ
f
e
o
c

e
t
a
c
i
d
n
i

s
k
s
i
r
e
t
s
A

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)


S. K. Ethiraj et al.

40
Table 2. Regression estimates (N = 138)

Independent variables

Customer type

Process defects

Schedule slippage

Effort overrun
Schedule slippage ∗ Y1996
Effort overrun ∗ Y2001

Pred.
sign

—

—

—

—

—
+

Controls
Contract type

Project size (FP)a

Team sizea

Person monthsa

Durationa

Domain controls
Platform controls
Year effects
Constant

Adjusted R2
N
F -value
Wald Chi-Sq.
F -test for client ﬁxed effects

Dependent variable: log (Contribution)

Model 1 Model 2A Model 2B Model 3A Model 3B

Model 4

−0.841
(0.538)

−0.154∗∗ −0.687
(0.531)
(0.055)
−0.037
(−0.046)
−3.493∗
(1.582)
−0.197∗
(0.087)

−0.309
(0.202)
0.108
(0.096)
0.057
(0.272)
0.675∗∗∗
(0.175)
0.233
(0.23)
Sig.
Sig.
Sig.
1.459
(1.063)
0.66
138
11.04∗∗∗
—
2.06∗∗∗

−0.289
(0.201)
0.103
(0.095)
0.074
(0.282)
0.602∗∗∗
(0.179)
0.258
(0.228)
Sig.
Sig.
Sig.
1.033
(0.982)
0.672
138
10.51∗∗∗
—
1.82∗∗∗

−0.463∗∗∗ −0.321†
(0.193)
(0.071)
0.059
0.092
(0.111)
(0.037)
0.055
0.041
(0.088)
(0.281)
0.517∗∗∗
0.731∗∗∗
(0.071)
(0.179)
0.198∗
0.363†
(0.099)
(0.221)
Sig.
Sig.
Sig.
1.985∗∗∗
(0.366)
—

Sig.
Sig.
Sig.
0.976
(0.981)
0.704
9.50∗∗∗
—
1.78∗∗

138

138
1641.72∗∗∗

—

—

−0.118† −0.108
(0.191)
(0.07)
−0.049∗∗ −0.038
(−0.014)
(−0.042)
−2.734∗∗ −4.790∗∗∗
(0.486) −0.823
−0.166∗ −0.422∗∗∗
(0.094)
(0.037)
7.355∗∗∗
(1.873)
0.297∗∗
(0.118)
−0.538∗∗∗ −0.512∗∗∗
(0.071)
0.012
(0.037)
0.237
(0.085)
0.598∗∗∗
(0.062)
0.250∗∗
(0.079)
Sig.
Sig.
Sig.
1.712∗∗∗
(0.291)
—

(0.14)
0.119
(0.083)
0.118
(0.189)
0.477∗∗∗
(0.137)
0.278†
(0.167)
Sig.
Sig.
Sig.
1.550∗
(0.728)
0.719
8.82∗∗∗
—
1.72∗∗

138

—

138
2062.54∗∗∗

—

a Variables are logged.

∗∗∗

p ≤ 0.001;

∗∗

p ≤ 0.01;

∗

p ≤ 0.05; † p ≤ 0.10. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.

In Model 3A, we included variables for the
three project management capabilities. The over-
all model continues to be signiﬁcant and accounts
for about 70 percent of variance in the data.
We ﬁnd that schedule slippage and effort over-
run respectively are signiﬁcantly negatively related
to project contribution, suggesting that improve-
ment in project management capabilities is rent-
generating at
level. The coefﬁcient
for in-process defects is not statistically signiﬁ-
cant though its sign is in the expected direction.17
We explored this result in discussions with project

the project

17 One reviewer suggested that we enter in-process defects as a
binary variable given that the modal value is zero. When entered
as a binary (1 or 0) variable, in-process defects was marginally
signiﬁcant (at the 10% level).

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

managers. They reasoned that the identiﬁcation of
defects during project execution is indeed a capa-
bility since defects can be ﬁxed at
lower cost
during execution than if they were to be ﬁxed
after the project was completed. In other words,
higher values on the in-process defects measure
might indicate better project management skills.
On the ﬂip side, they also pointed out that an
increase in the number of in-process defects tends
to disrupt delivery schedules and negatively impact
project proﬁtability. In sum, it seems that while in-
process defects do reﬂect detection capability, they
also expose some weakness in software design and
execution capabilities; namely why these defects
arose in the ﬁrst place. In the long run, we expect
that defect detection capability might be positively

Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)


Where Do Capabilities Come From and How Do They Matter?

41

related to project contribution, especially with
repeat projects. However, the need to ﬁx defects
during project execution can disrupt project sched-
ules and increase project costs,
leading to the
observed result.

In Model 3A, we also ﬁnd that the customer type
variable remains non-signiﬁcant when the project
management capabilities measures are included
along with the client ﬁxed effects. Therefore, we
again re-estimated the model by dropping the client
ﬁxed effects. Model 3B reports the results of the
GLS estimation with the correction for panel het-
eroskedasticity. Not surprisingly, customer type
though only marginally (p ≤
turns signiﬁcant,
0.09). The project management capabilities vari-
ables, however, continue to be robustly signiﬁ-
cant in the predicted direction. This result seems
to suggest that the project management capabili-
ties variables share some common variance with
the client-speciﬁc capabilities measure. This runs
counter to our hypothesis that they are each dis-
tinct sets of capabilities. We discussed this result
with industry experts, who suggested that by work-
ing with a given client over time (i.e., repeat
projects) the vendor ﬁrm gains a better understand-
ing of the client’s needs and expectations. This, in
turn, can help reduce effort overrun and sched-
ule slippage accounting for the observed result.
The managers in the software ﬁrm we studied
tended to agree with this possible interpretation.
Finally, we also performed a joint signiﬁcance test
of the project management capabilities. We found
that
the three variables were jointly signiﬁcant
(F = 3.23; p ≤ 0.01), reconﬁrming the indepen-
dent, additional signiﬁcance of these variables in
inﬂuencing project contribution.

Models 3A and 3B suggest that decreases in
schedule slippage and effort overrun respectively
contribute to increases in project contribution. We
further analyzed whether and how project man-
agement capabilities evolved over time and how
that affects contribution.18 We included an interac-
tion term of schedule slippage with 1996 (the ﬁrst
year of data) and effort overrun with 2001 (the
last year of data).19 These results are reported in
Model 4. The overall model continues to be highly

18 Ideally we would have liked to examine the evolution of
client-speciﬁc capability over time. It was not possible since
client-speciﬁc capability is measured as a dummy variable, thus
precluding an interaction term with time.
19 We did not include an interaction term with capabilities and
time as a continuous measure since this implies the assumption

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

signiﬁcant, accounting for about 72 percent of the
variance in the data. As expected, we ﬁnd that
the extent of effort overrun on projects is declin-
ing over the 1996–2001 period and this decline
is positively related to project performance. Con-
trary to expectation, we found that schedule slip-
page increased marginally during the 1996–2001
period, which adversely affected project contribu-
tion in the later years.

To understand this result, we examined the data
more closely and found three possible reasons
that might explain it. First, the vendor steadily
increased the number of ﬁxed price projects over
the years and did not manage this transition well.
As observed in our data, ﬁxed price projects
exhibit greater schedule slippage than T&M pro-
jects. This is also corroborated in the regres-
sion results, where we ﬁnd T&M projects, con-
trary to expectations, to be more proﬁtable than
ﬁxed price projects. Second,
in the ﬁxed price
projects we found a greater difference between
the team size and person-months measures. While
team size reﬂects the maximum number of per-
sons who worked on a given project, the person-
months measure captures actual labor input in the
project. At one extreme, if all members of the
team worked full
the
team size and person-months would be identical.
The divergence in the two measures appears when
there is high turnover in the project teams. We
found that the difference between the two mea-
sures increased over the years, suggesting that an
increase in project team turnover might account
for the increase in schedule slippage. During the
1996–2001 period, the attrition due to employee
resignations ﬂuctuated between 9 and 16 percent.
Increase in turnover directly contributes to sched-
ule slippages since there is a set-up cost when
new employees enter a project mid-way. Our
discussions with company executives revealed a
third reason for increase in schedule slippage:

time on a given project

that capabilities change linearly over time. We found no theo-
retical or empirical basis for such an assumption. Our results,
however, are robust to including year as a continuous variable.
However, we were unable to include both interactions in the
same model. The high correlations between the two interac-
tion terms created estimation difﬁculties. Similarly, including
an interaction effect of both capability measures with the same
year (i.e., 1996 or 2001) created estimation problems since they
were highly correlated. We switched the years to avoid this prob-
lem. For completeness, an interaction of schedule slippage with
2001 is negative and signiﬁcant, which is consistent with our
interpretation.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)


42

S. K. Ethiraj et al.

an increase in e-commerce-related projects in the
post-1996 period. The e-commerce clients, in their
effort to speedily set up their Web infrastructure,
set aggressive project completion schedules that
were difﬁcult for the company to meet. One or
more of these three explanations account for the
observed increase in schedule slippage that in turn
contributed to reduced project proﬁtability.

DISCUSSION

We sought to examine two interrelated research
questions in this paper: Where do capabilities
come from and how do they affect ﬁrm perfor-
mance? We made three main arguments in address-
ing these questions. First, we suggested that capa-
bilities involve the deployment of resources and
they evolve over time through the joint effects
of deliberate, persistent ﬁrm-speciﬁc investments
and learning-by-doing. Second, we proposed that
capabilities are context-speciﬁc and, therefore, we
need to conceptualize and study them accordingly.
In this paper, we looked at the software services
industry and identiﬁed two important capabili-
ties at the project level: client-speciﬁc capabilities
and project management capabilities. Third, we
argued that improvement in capabilities will result
in improved project proﬁtability and that different
capabilities yield different marginal beneﬁts.

Our results are broadly supportive of our hy-
potheses. In the software services industry we ﬁnd
that capabilities contribute positively to project
performance. The empirical evidence for the im-
portance of client-speciﬁc capabilities was only
modest. In models that included client ﬁxed effects
we did not ﬁnd support for the effect of client-
speciﬁc capabilities on contribution. However, in
models that did not include the client ﬁxed effect,
we found that projects for new clients, on aver-
age, yield approximately 2 percent lower contri-
bution than projects for repeat clients. In models
including the client ﬁxed effect, it appears that the
dummy variable capturing repeat or new clients is
too coarse a measure to adequately reﬂect client-
speciﬁc capabilities. An ideal measure of client-
speciﬁc capabilities is a historical count of all the
projects executed for a client (not just a count
of projects within the sample period). Unfortu-
nately, the ﬁrm was unable to provide these data.
Nevertheless, the signiﬁcance of the client-speciﬁc

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

capabilities measure in the GLS model is indica-
tive and might be useful to examine carefully in
future research. In addition, we believe that the
client ﬁxed effect might be also picking up some
variance in the learning associated with repeated
interaction with clients (Anand and Khanna, 2000).
Project management capabilities were gener-
ally predictive of higher project contribution.
Two of the three measures of project manage-
ment capabilities were statistically signiﬁcant. A
1 percent increase in schedule slippage resulted
in a 0.6 percent decline in project contribution.20
A 1 percent
increase in effort overrun causes
a 0.1 percent decline in project contribution. It
seems that
the effect of effort overruns just
increases labor cost and causes less damage to
project contribution, whereas increases in sched-
ule slippage triggers two independent and addi-
tive increases in cost: labor costs and contractual
penalties for late completion. Our results suggest
that although both types of capabilities, namely
schedule estimation and management, and effort
estimation are signiﬁcantly related to performance,
the former makes a higher marginal contribution
to performance. Therefore, our results suggest that
ﬁrms may be better off erring on the side of cau-
tion and overstafﬁng their project teams rather than
facing the prospect of a schedule slippage.

Finally, we found some evidence for the evo-
lution of capabilities over time and its impact on
project contribution. We found that a tighter con-
trol of effort overrun in projects in 2001 resulted
in better project contribution as compared with
projects in 1996–2000. On the other hand, we
found that an increase in schedule slippage from
1997 to 2001 has had a signiﬁcant negative effect
on project contribution.21 This raises the value of
improving the capability to better forecast sched-
ules and stick to them.

We believe our study of ﬁrm capabilities and
their effects on performance in the software
services industry raises several important issues.
First, our study has sought to make the case that
identifying the capabilities that are the sources of
performance differences need to be contextually

20 The semi-elasticities for the coefﬁcients on the capabilities
= ∂F (X, β)/∂Xi βi with all the
measures were computed as mi
variables ﬁxed at their means.
21 We avoid calculating semi-elasticities for the interaction terms.
The typically high correlations between the main effect and the
interaction effect result in imprecisely estimated coefﬁcients.
As a result, computing accurate economic signiﬁcance of these
coefﬁcients becomes difﬁcult.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)


Where Do Capabilities Come From and How Do They Matter?

43

It

that

seems

grounded. Each industry is driven by its own
demand- and supply-side economics, which also
changes over time. It is important
to take this
into account while identifying and measuring
capabilities.
there are indeed
signiﬁcant differences in the way the same ﬁrm
deploys its resources, both across projects and over
time. Holding project
inputs and characteristics
constant we found that an improvement in project
management capabilities
resulted in increases
in project contribution. Put simply, our results
demonstrate that project proﬁtability differences
could be a function of differences in the way the
same resources are deployed by the ﬁrm. Also,
we found some evidence that an improvement
in the productive deployment of resources over
time yielded increases in project proﬁtability. This
provides reason to take more seriously Penrose’s
(1959) key insight that differential ﬁrm capabilities
in productively deploying resources lie at the heart
of ﬁrm performance differences.

Second, it appears that measuring capabilities at
more micro levels within a ﬁrm is quite promis-
ing. It not only helps better estimate their eco-
nomic signiﬁcance but also provides clear guide-
lines to the ﬁrm on where and how it needs
to improve its capabilities. Measures of capabil-
ities at the aggregate ﬁrm level, while useful in
identifying between-ﬁrm differences, provide lit-
tle understanding of the micro-foundations of such
inter-ﬁrm differences. As our study demonstrates,
measurement of ﬁrm capabilities at
the micro-
level holds promise of enhancing our understand-
ing ‘how’ and ‘why’ some ﬁrms perform better
than others.

Lastly, our analyses also show that the marginal
returns to different capabilities are not uniform.
Given scarce managerial resources, it is useful for
ﬁrms ﬁrst to identify the capabilities that provide
the highest marginal returns to performance and
then direct the bulk of its resources to acquir-
ing them. Building capabilities requires signiﬁ-
cant and, often, irreversible commitment of real
resources, both ﬁnancial and managerial. Deci-
sions about which capabilities to acquire or build
require due diligence in the analysis of costs and
beneﬁts. Moreover, it is likely that different ﬁrms
will face different costs and beneﬁts of acquiring
the same capabilities given the interdependencies
with various other organizational choices (Ethi-
raj and Levinthal, 2004). For instance, for a ﬁrm
that engages in relatively few repeat projects, the

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

marginal beneﬁt of client-speciﬁc capabilities is
likely to be signiﬁcantly less than the marginal
beneﬁt of project management capabilities (this
would generally be the case for smaller or newer
ﬁrms who are likely to have fewer repeat clients
in their early years). The converse is likely to be
true in the case of a ﬁrm that engages in a large
number of repeat projects. In fact, the latter set of
ﬁrms could also explore the feasibility of investing
in creating deliberate and institutionalized mecha-
nisms to build their client-speciﬁc capabilities than
leaving it to tacit
learning-by-doing. Our inter-
views seem to support this contention. Finally, in
our dataset, if we assume that the marginal cost
of acquiring different project management capa-
bilities is the same, our results suggest that the
ﬁrm would be well advised to expend resources
to improve schedule estimation and management
capabilities so as to tightly manage schedule slip-
pages. Improvements in this capability promise to
yield higher marginal improvement in project con-
tribution performance.

LIMITATIONS AND DIRECTIONS FOR
FUTURE RESEARCH

In this paper we attempted to uncover the micro-
foundations of capabilities and how they affect per-
formance. Our study, like any study, suffers from
some limitations. First, it is based on a single ser-
vice industry with its own peculiar characteristics.
It is not clear to what extent the substantive results
of this paper are generalizable across industries. At
the same time, as we have asserted above, capa-
bilities are usually context-speciﬁc, i.e., industry-
speciﬁc, and capabilities that are generalizable
across industries are likely to be overly abstract
and less useful as a guide to managerial action. A
second limitation is that our study is based on data
from a single ﬁrm. Ideally, we would have liked
to include data from a few more ﬁrms. However,
getting access to such detailed data of great com-
petitive signiﬁcance is a difﬁcult challenge. In our
case, this involved several years of data collection,
ongoing negotiations with the ﬁrm concerned, and
the signing of non-disclosure agreements. Third,
since our analysis is based on data from only one
ﬁrm we could not make any explicit inter-ﬁrm
comparisons of competitive advantage. However,
since the ﬁrm is among the top ﬁve ﬁrms in the
industry on several dimensions such as growth

Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)


44

S. K. Ethiraj et al.

and total revenues it gives us some conﬁdence for
drawing the capabilities–performance link.

In spite of some of the data limitations out-
lined above, some of the unique aspects of our
dataset outweigh some of these disadvantages.
One, the data on resource inputs (team size, experi-
ence, etc.) and capabilities allow us to empirically
measure Penrose’s (1959) key distinction between
available resources (factor inputs such as labor)
and how they are deployed (i.e., productivity of
resources). Two, the data on project-level contri-
bution suffer from relatively fewer problems asso-
ciated with aggregate accounting data. Finally, our
design allowed us to combine the depth and rich-
ness of longitudinal, single-ﬁrm case studies with
the rigor of large-sample empirical estimation.

In conclusion, the paper attempted to take an
initial step in teasing out the importance of capabil-
ities and estimating their impact on performance.
We hope that the spirit of this paper in advocating
the importance of contextually grounded studies
of ﬁrm capabilities will spur further research along
these lines in other industries. The shift in research
focus from whether or not capabilities matter to
‘what’ capabilities matter and ‘how’ they matter
promises to enrich our understanding of ﬁrm prof-
itability differences.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Rich Makadok, Phanish Puranam, and
an anonymous referee for helpful comments on
an earlier version of this paper. Errors and omis-
sions remain our responsibility. Research funding
for this project from the Mack Center for Tech-
nological Innovation at the Wharton School and
the William Davidson Institute and Mike and Mary
Kay Hallman Fellowship at the Michigan Business
School is gratefully acknowledged.

REFERENCES

Albrecht AJ, Gaffney JE. 1983. Software function, source
lines of code, and development effort prediction: a
software science validation. IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering SE-9(6): 639–648.

Amit R, Schoemaker PJH. 1993. Strategic assets and
organizational rent. Strategic Management Journal
14(1): 33–46.

Anand BN, Khanna T. 2000. Do ﬁrms learn to create
value? The case of alliances. Strategic Management
Journal 21(3): 295–315.

Andrews K. 1971. The concept of Corporate Strategy.

Richard D. Irwin: Homewood, IL.

Arora A, Arunachalam VS, Asundi J, Fernandes R.
2001. The Indian software services industry. Research
Policy 30(8): 1267–1287.

Banerjee AV, Duﬂo E. 2000. Reputation effects and the
limits of contracting: a study of the Indian software
industry. Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(3):
989–1017.

Barney J. 1991. Firm resources and sustained competitive

advantage. Journal of Management 17(1): 99–120.

Brush TH, Artz KW. 1999. Toward a
the impact of

contingent
resource-based theory:
information
asymmetry on the value of capabilities in veterinary
20(3):
medicine. Strategic Management Journal
223–250.

Chatterjee S, Hadi AS, Price B.

2000. Regression

Analysis by Example (3rd edn). Wiley: New York.

Cohen WM, Levinthal DA. 1990. Absorptive capacity:
a new perspective on learning and innovation.
Administrative Science Quarterly 35(1): 128–152.

Collis DJ. 1996. Organizational capability as a source
of proﬁt. In Organizational Learning and Competitive
Advantage, Moingeon B, Edmondson A (eds). Sage:
London; 139–163.

Dierickx I, Cool K. 1989. Asset stock accumulation and
sustainability of competitive advantage. Management
Science 35(12): 1504–1512.

Dosi G, Nelson RR, Winter SG. 2000.

Introduction.
In The Nature and Dynamics of Organizational
Capabilities, Dosi G, Nelson RR, Winter SG (eds).
Oxford University Press: New York; 1–22.

Ethiraj S, Levinthal DA. 2004. Modularity and innova-
tion in complex systems. Management Science 50(2):
159–173.

Gopal A, Sivaramakrishnan K, Krishnan MS, Mukhopad-
hyay T. 2003. Determinants of contract choice in
offshore software development. Management Science
49(12): 1671–1683.

Grant RM. 1991. The resource-based theory of competi-
tive advantage: implications for strategy formulation.
California Management Review 33(3): 114–135.

Greene WH. 1997. Econometric Analysis

(3rd edn).

Prentice-Hall: Upper Saddle River, NJ.

Helfat CE. 1994. Evolutionary trajectories in petroleum
ﬁrm R&D. Management Science 40(12): 1720–1747.
Henderson RM, Cockburn I. 1994. Measuring com-
petence? Exploring ﬁrm effects in pharmaceutical
research. Strategic Management Journal, Winter Spe-
cial Issue 15: 63–84.

Herbsleb J, Zubrow D, Goldenson D, Hayes W, Paulk M.
1997. Software quality and the capability maturity
model. Communications of the ACM 40(6): 30–40.

Humphrey WS. 1989. Managing the Software Process.

Addison-Wesley: Cambridge, MA.

Iansiti M, Khanna T. 1995. Technological evolution,
system architecture and the obsolescence of ﬁrm
capabilities. Industrial and Corporate Change 4(2):
333–361.

Jalote P. 1997. An Integrated Approach to Software

Engineering. Springer-Verlag: New York.

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)


Where Do Capabilities Come From and How Do They Matter?

45

Jones C. 1997. Software Quality: Analysis and Guidelines
for Success. International Thomson Computer Press:
Boston, MA.

Kale P, Dyer JH, Singh H. 2002. Alliance capability,
stock market returns and long-term alliance function:
the role of the alliance function. Strategic Management
Journal 23(8): 747–767.

Klein B, Crawford RG, Alchian AA. 1978. Vertical
integration, appropriable rents, and the competitive
contracting process. Journal of Law and Economics
21(2): 297–326.

Krishnan MS. 1996. Cost and quality considerations
in software product management. Doctoral disserta-
tion, Graduate School of Industrial Administration,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.

Langlois RN. 1992. Transaction cost economics in real
time. Industrial and Corporate Change 1(1): 99–127.
Levinthal DA. 1997. Adaptation on rugged landscapes.

Management Science 43(7): 934–950.

Makadok R. 2001. Toward a synthesis of the resource-
based and dynamic-capability views of rent creation.
Strategic Management Journal 22(5): 387–401.

Makadok R, Walker G. 2000. Identifying a distinctive
competence:
the money
fund industry. Strategic Management Journal 21(8):
853–864.

forecasting

ability

in

Market-Guide. 2002. Software and programming compa-

nies list. http://biz.yahoo.com/p/softwrttmd.html.

McGrath RG, MacMillan IC, Venkataraman S. 1995.
Deﬁning and developing a competence: a strategic
process paradigm. Strategic Management Journal
16(4): 251–275.

Nasscom. 2001. The Indian Software Industry Report.

Nasscom: New Delhi.

Nelson RR. 1991. Why do ﬁrms differ, and how does
it matter? Strategic Management Journal, Winter
Special Issue 12: 61–74.

Nelson RR, Winter S. 1982. An Evolutionary Theory of

Economic Change. Belknap Press: Cambridge, MA.

Paulk MC, Curtis B, Chrissin MB, Weber CV. 1993.
IEEE

Capability Maturity Model, Version 1.1.
Software 10(4): 18–27.

Penrose ET. 1959. The Theory of the Growth of the Firm.

Wiley: New York.

Peteraf MA. 1993. The cornerstones of competitive
advantage: a resource-based view. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal 14(3): 179–191.

Porter ME. 1991. Towards a dynamic theory of strategy.
Strategic Management Journal, Winter Special Issue
12: 95–117.

Rosenbloom RS. 2000. Leadership, capabilities, and
technological change:
the transformation of NCR
in the electronic era. Strategic Management Journal
21(10–11): 1083–1103.

Rumelt RP. 1984. Toward a strategic theory of

the
ﬁrm. In Competitive Strategic Management, Lamb RB
(ed.). Prentice-Hall: Englewood Cliffs, NJ; 556–570.
Rumelt RP. 1987. Theory, strategy, and entrepreneurship.
In The Competitive Challenge, Teece D (ed.).
Ballinger: Cambridge, MA; 137–158.

Schroeder RG, Bates KA, Junttila MA. 2002. A resource-
based view of manufacturing strategy and the
relationship to manufacturing performance. Strategic
Management Journal 23(2): 105–117.

Selznick P. 1957. Leadership in Administration: A
Sociological Interpretation. Harper & Row: New
York.

Silverman BS.

1999. Technological

and
toward
the direction of corporate diversiﬁcation:
an integration of
the resource-based view and
transaction cost economics. Management Science
45(8): 1109–1124.

resources

Wernerfelt B. 1984. The resource-based view of the ﬁrm.

Strategic Management Journal 5(2): 171–180.

Whang S. 1995. Market provision of custom software:
learning effects and low balling. Management Science
41(8): 1343–1352.

Winter S. 1990. Survival, selection, and inheritance in
evolutionary theories of organization.
In Organi-
zational Evolution: New Directions, Singh JV (ed).
Sage: New York; 269–297.

Winter SG. 1995. The four Rs of proﬁtability: rents,
resources, routines, and replication. In Resource-Based
and Evolutionary Theories of the Firm: Towards a
Synthesis, Montgomery CA (ed). Kluwer Academic:
Boston, MA; 147–178.

Wooldridge JM. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Panel

Data. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.

Zollo M, Winter S. 2002. Deliberate

learning and
the evolution of dynamic capabilities. Organization
Science 13(3): 339–351.

Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 26: 25–45 (2005)

