 

 

THE WILLIAM DAVIDSON INSTITUTE 

AT THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN  

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Does Better Environmental Performance 

Affect Revenues, Cost, or Both?  

Evidence From a Transition Economy 

By: Dietrich Earnhart and Lubomir Lizal 

 
 
 
 
 
 

William Davidson Institute Working Paper Number 856 

February 2007 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 


Does Better Environmental Performance

Affect Revenues, Costs, or Both?

Evidence from a Transition Economy *

Dietrich Earnhart #

Lubomir Lizal ##

Contact Information: Dietrich Earnhart

Department of Economics
213 Summerfield Hall
University of Kansas
Lawrence, KS 66045
785-864-2866 (phone)
785-864-5270 (fax)
Earnhart@ku.edu

December 19, 2006

* We acknowledge the financial support of a COBASE grant from the National Research Council.
Dietrich Earnhart acknowledges the financial support of the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences
at the University of Kansas in the form of General Research Fund grant # 2301467.

# University of Kansas and William Davidson Institute (WDI).
## Holds Citicorp Professorship at CERGE-EI, a joint workplace of Charles University and the
    Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, and Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR).

1


Does Better Environmental Performance

Affect Revenues, Costs, or Both?

Evidence from a Transition Economy

Abstract:  This  study  analyzes  the effect  of  corporate  environmental  performance  on  financial

performance  in  a  transition  economy.    In  particular,  it  assesses  whether  good  environmental

performance  affects  revenues,  costs,  or  both,  and  if  so,  in  which  directions.    As  environmental

performance improves, do revenues rise and costs fall so that profits unambiguously increase?  Or

vice versa?  If both revenues and costs rise (or fall), does better environmental performance improve

or  undermine  profitability?    To  answer  these  questions,  our  study  analyzes  the  links  from

environmental performance to revenues, costs, and profits using an unbalanced panel of Czech firms

from the years 1996 to 1998.  The analytical results indicate strongly that better environmental

performance  improves  profitability by driving  down  costs  more  than  it  drives  down  revenues,

consistent with the substantial regulatory scrutiny exerted by environmental agencies and the primary

pollution control approach implemented by firms during the sample period.

JEL codes: D21, G39, Q53

Keywords: Czech Republic, environmental protection, pollution, financial performance

2


Non-Technical Summary

This  paper  analyzes  the  effect  of  corporate  environmental performance  on  financial

performance  in  a  transition  economy.    Theoretical insight  on  this  topic  posits  either  a  positive

relationship  or  a  negative  relationship.    The traditional  perspective  views  environmental

expenditures, whether on end-of-pipe treatment or pollution prevention efforts, as a drain on firms’

resources.  On the other hand, more recent theoretical insight posits that pollution prevention and

the associated re-evaluation of firms’ production processes engenders opportunities for firms to

innovate by modifying their production “strategically”, such as recycling by-products that would

otherwise be discharged into the natural environment.

Several studies analyze empirically the effect of corporate environmental performance on

financial performance but only in mature market economies.  In contrast, our study examines the

effect  of  environmental  performance,  as  measured  by  air  pollutant  emissions,  on  financial

performance in the transition economy of the Czech Republic between 1996 and 1998.  The context

of a transition economy is highly interesting for an assessment of financial performance for obvious

reasons.  Firms in transition economies are struggling to restructure themselves within a new market-

based  system. De  novo  private  firms  struggle  to  establish themselves  as  the  economic  system

evolves.  State-owned firms struggle to compete against potentially more nimble private competitors.

Privatized  firms  (i.e.,  previously  state-owned)  face  the  extra  challenge  of  reformulating  their

corporate management practices to fit a new economic paradigm.  The importance of corporate

restructuring and financial management is even greater in most of the transition economies in Central

and Eastern Europe, including the Czech Republic, given the desire to enter the European Union.

As with many of other countries in Central and Eastern Europe, the context of the Czech

3


transition  economy  is  also  highly  interesting  for  an  assessment  of  environmental  performance.

During and following the collapse of communism in the Czech Republic, environmental protection

issues were prominent.  In addition to domestic concerns, the Czech government needed to reduce

industrial air pollutant emissions to qualify for membership in the EU.  Between 1991 and 1998, the

country’s government tightened air protection with a new Clean Air Act and steadily increased

emission  charge  rates  on  all  stationary  emission  sources.    Thus,  Czech  firms  simultaneously

struggled to control their air pollutant emissions and re-organize their financial matters.

Overall, our study of the Czech Republic may be viewed as representative of other countries

in the Central and Eastern European region during their transition periods towards EU accession.

Within  the  context  of  a  transition  economy,  our  study  focuses  on  a  particular  research

question.  It assesses whether good environmental performance affects revenues, costs, or both,  and

if so, in which directions.  As environmental performance improves, do revenues rise or fall?  Do

costs rise or fall?  Do revenues rise and costs fall so that profits unambiguously increase?  Or do

revenues fall and costs rise so that profits unambiguously decrease?  If both revenues and costs rise

(or fall), does better environmental performance improve or undermine profitability?  To answer

these questions, this study analyzes the links from environmental performance to revenues, costs,

and profits using an unbalanced panel of Czech firms from the years 1996 to 1998.  The analytical

results indicate strongly and robustly that better environmental performance improves profitability

by driving down costs more than it drives down revenues, consistent with the substantial regulatory

scrutiny  exerted  by  Czech  environmental  agencies  and  the  primary  pollution  control  approach

implemented by Czech firms during the sample period.

4


1. Introduction

Much recent economic analysis, including empirical studies, examines the effect of corporate

environmental performance on financial performance (e.g., Konar and Cohen, 2001; Khanna and

Damon, 1999).  Theoretical insight on this topic posits either a positive relationship or a negative

relationship.  The traditional perspective views environmental expenditures, whether on end-of-pipe

treatment or pollution prevention efforts, as a drain on firms’ resources (Palmer et al., 1995; Filbeck

and  Gorman,  2004).    Certainly,  firms  spend billions  of  dollars  annually  when  applying  for

environmental  permits,  installing mandatory  technologies  or  at  least  technologies  necessary  to

achieve compliance with pollution limits, and reporting their environmental impacts (Portney and

Stavins, 2000).    For example, in 1994, U.S. firms spent more than $ 120 billion to comply with

environmental

laws,  in  addition  to  several  more  billions  spent  on  associated  research  and

development (Konar and Cohen, 2001).

On the other hand, more recent theoretical insight posits that pollution prevention and the

associated re-evaluation of firms’ production processes engenders opportunities for firms to innovate

by modifying their production “strategically”, such as recycling by-products that would otherwise

be discharged into the natural environment (Filbeck and Gorman, 2004).  Moreover, this innovation

may translate into a competitive advantage for a firm (Porter and van der Linde, 1995).  Consistent

with  this  perspective,  some  firms  are  moving  beyond  compliance by  voluntarily  reducing  their

pollution to levels below legal limits (Konar and Cohen, 2001).  In some cases, this overcompliance

is associated with a government-sponsored voluntary program. For example, more than 1,200 firms

participated in the EPA’s 33/50 program, agreeing to reduce voluntarily their emissions of certain

chemicals by 33 % by 1988 and by 50 % by 1995 (Arora and Cason, 1995).  Similar to voluntary

5


overcompliance or as part of these efforts to overcomply, some firms are adopting riskier proactive

environmental management practices that attempt to modify production processes in order to prevent

pollution rather than treat it. While riskier, these pollution prevention programs may effectively

reduce pollution, while also lowering costs. For example, by implementing a rigorous pollution

prevention program, 3M reported reducing its air pollutant emissions by 125,000 tons between 1975-

1990, while saving more than $ 1 billion in costs (McCloskey, 1993).

Several studies analyze empirically the effect of corporate environmental performance on

financial  performance  (e.g.,  Khanna  and  Damon,  1999).    To  the  authors’  best  knowledge,  no

previous study examines this relationship outside of the US and Canada, with only two studies of

Canada (Laplante and Lanoie, 1994; Lanoie et al., 1998).  Thus, previous empirical studies examine

only  mature  market  economies.    In  contrast,  our  study  examines  the  effect  of  environmental

performance, as measured by air pollutant emissions, on financial performance in the transition

economy of the Czech Republic during the years 1996 and 1998.

The  context  of  a  transition  economy  is  highly  interesting  for  an  assessment  of  financial

performance  for  obvious  reasons.    Firms  in transition  economies  are  struggling  to  restructure

themselves  within  a  new  market-based system. De  novo  private  firms  struggle  to  establish

themselves  as  the  economic  system  evolves.    State-owned  firms  struggle  to  compete  against

potentially more nimble private competitors.  Privatized firms (i.e., previously state-owned firms)

face the extra challenge of reformulating their corporate management practices to fit an entirely new

economic paradigm. The importance of corporate restructuring and financial management is even

greater in most of the transition economies in Central and Eastern Europe, including the Czech

Republic, given the desire to enter the European Union (EU). [While the Czech Republic entered

6


the EU in 2004, the accession process began in the mid-1990s.]

As with other countries in Central and Eastern Europe, the context of the Czech transition

economy is also highly interesting for an assessment of environmental performance.  During and

following the collapse of communism in the Czech Republic, environmental protection issues were

prominent.    The  Czech  Republic  had  a  substantially  degraded  environment  in  the  1990s;  in

particular, poor ambient air quality and air pollution were large environmental problems of public

concern (World Bank, 1992). In addition to this domestic public concern, the Czech government

needed to reduce industrial air pollutant emissions in order to qualify for membership in the EU.

(For both of these reasons, our focus on air-related environmental performance seems quite valid.)

In response to public concern and in anticipation of the Czech Republic’s entrance into the EU,

between 1991 and 1998, the country’s government was tightening air protection with a new Clean

Air Act and its subsequent clarifying decrees. The Czech government was requiring new stationary

emission  sources  to  meet  stringent  emission  limits  based  on  the  installation  of  state-of-the-art

treatment technologies and forcing existing stationary emission sources initially to meet “currently

attainable” emission limits and eventually to meet new source limits (by the end of 1998), all while

steadily increasing emission charge rates on all stationary emission sources.  In addition to more

stringent air protection policies, Czech firms moved into export markets that may have offered new,

albeit limited, opportunities to market “green” goods.  Consistent with the escalating protection

policies and new marketing opportunities, investment in environmental protection as a percent of

gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  rose  dramatically  after  1991,  peaking  in  1996,  and  declined

substantially after 1998, returning to pre-transition levels by 2000.  In keeping with this increased

investment, throughout this same period, aggregate air pollutant emissions declined dramatically.

7


Thus,  Czech  firms  substantially  increased  their  investment  into  environmental  protection  and

produced dramatic pollution reductions.1

Consequently, Czech firms simultaneously struggled to control their air pollutant emissions

and re-organize their financial matters.  In this context of major changes, we anticipate that our study

is well-positioned to capture any meaningful relationship that might exist between environmental

and financial performance.  This context contrasts with a mature market economy, where most firms

may only marginally modify their environmental management practices with only limited effects on

their  financial  performance. Of  course,  many  prominent  cases  of  substantial  change  to

environmental management do exist in mature market economies; however, these cases need not

represent a substantial portion of the overall economy.2

For this reason, the results from this study of a transition economy need not generalize to

economies that are neither in transition or developing in general. Nevertheless, the results should

generalize  to  other  similar  transition economies.    The  Czech  experience  with  poor  ambient  air

quality, initially high air pollutant emission levels, tightened air protection laws, substantial emission

reductions, and pending entry into the EU is highly similar to other countries in Central and Eastern

Europe, such as Hungary and Poland.   Thus, our study of the Czech Republic may be viewed as

3

representative of other countries in the Central and Eastern European region during its transition

1

During this period, the Czech government offered limited financial assistance from  the  State
Environmental Fund for environmental investment.  For example, this source represented only 4 % and 9 %
of  overall  financing  into  air-related investment  in  1996 and 1997,  respectively  (Czech Ministry  of  the
Environment, 1997, 1998).

2

While greater variation in the financial and environmental performance factors help to facilitate
our analysis, this greater variation may stem (at least partially) from a stronger prevalence of “noise”, which
reduces our analytical ability to identify a meaningful “signal”.

3

  Details on this comparison are available upon request.

8


period towards EU accession.  In sum, this study cannot serve as the definitive study on the link from

environmental  performance  to  financial  performance  and  may  not  generalize  beyond  transition

economies; still, it represents a useful contribution to a literature packed with studies of mature

market economies.

Within  the  context  of  a  transition  economy,  our  study  focuses  on  a  particular  research

question.  It assesses whether good environmental performance affects revenues, costs, or both,  and

if so, in which directions. As environmental performance improves, do revenues rise or fall?  Do

costs rise or fall?  Do revenues rise and costs fall so that profits unambiguously increase?  Or do

revenues fall and costs rise so that profits unambiguously decrease? If both revenues and costs rise

(or fall), does better environmental performance improve or undermine profitability?  To answer

these questions, this study analyzes the links from environmental performance to revenues, costs,

and profits using a panel of Czech firms. The analytical results indicate strongly and robustly that

better environmental performance improves profitability by driving down costs more than revenues.

This paper explores the effect of environmental performance within the following format.

The next section summarizes the related literature.  Section 3 describes the database on corporate

financial performance and air pollutant emissions.  Section 4 estimates and interprets the effect of

corporate environmental performance on financial performance. The final section concludes.

2. Related Literature and Theoretical Insight

2.1. Literature of the Link from Environmental Performance to Financial Success

Recent economic analysis explores the link from corporate environmental performance to

financial performance.  All of these studies analyze firms in mature market economies.  Four studies

employ  regression  analysis  to  examine  a  sample of  firms  from  the  Standard  &  Poor  500  using

9


environmental  data  from  the  Investor  Responsibility  Research  Center  (IRRC)  Corporate

Environmental Profiles Directory.  First, Konar and Cohen (2001) find a significantly positive effect

of good environmental performance, as measured by toxic emissions, on firms’ intangible asset

values.    Similarly,  Austin  et  al.  (1999)  demonstrate  that  good  environmental  performance,  as

captured  by  certain  measures  (e.g.,  toxic  emissions  and  hazardous  waste  corrective  actions),

positively affect financial rates of return.  Consistent with the two noted studies, Hart and Ahuja

(1996)  show  that  emission  reductions  prompt  better  financial  performance,  based  on

accounting-based measures, within a two-year window.  Filbeck and Gorman (2004) also find a

positive relationship between financial and environmental performance; to demonstrate this point,

they regress three-year holding period returns against environmental penalty magnitudes.

Three additional studies generate similar conclusions in general by also employing regression

analysis  to  examine financial  performance.    Russo  and  Fouts  (1997)  demonstrate  that  good

environmental  ratings,  as  assigned  by  the  Franklin  Research  and  Development  Corporation,

positively impact a firm’s return on assets (ROA).  Khanna and Damon (1999) generate a similar

conclusion  by  examining  participants  in  the  EPA’s  33/50  program  and  revealing  that  better

environmental performance, at least measured by the number of Superfund sites, improves return

on  investment  and  sales-adjusted  excess  market  value.     In  addition,  the  authors  show  that

4

participation in the 33/50 program improves sales-adjusted excess market value.  Similar to Khanna

and Damon (1999), Arora and Cason (1996) demonstrate that participation in the EPA’s 33/50

program slightly increases profits.

In addition to regression analysis, which our study employs, three studies use sample means

4

  Sales-adjusted excess market value equals actual market value less the book value of assets.

10


tests to examine the effect of environmental performance on financial performance.  First, Cohen

et al. (1995) examine both  accounting-based measures of financial performance (e.g., return on

assets) and market-based measures of financial performance (e.g., risk-adjusted shareholder total

return).  Their study divides a sample of US firms into two “portfolios” according to whether each

firm is above or below its industry median for one of nine environmental performance measures.

Then they test the differences in financial performance mean values across the two sub-samples.

Similarly, Austin et al. (1999) divide firms into “green” and “brown” categories according to their

lagged environmental performance.  Consistent with these two studies, Gottsman and Kessler (1998)

compare the financial returns to the S&P 500 against three sub-samples based on four measures of

environmental performance.  In particular, they divide firms into the top 75%, top 50%, and top 25%

of environmental performers across all industries.5

Our study draws upon this empirical literature to guide our analysis. Since all of the noted

5

Additional studies use event-study analysis to examine the effect of environmental events on stock
value.  Laplante and Lanoie (1994) use the CAPM version of event-study analysis.  Bosch et al. (1998) use
Dodd and Warner’s (1983) version of event-study analysis to explore the effect of federal environmental
enforcement on stockholder wealth. They show that the stock market reacts negatively upon learning that
a given firm has been targeted for enforcement. Muoghalu et al. (1990) also use Dodd and Warner’s (1983)
version of event-study analysis.  Lanoie et al. (1998) use a method akin to event-study analysis to analyze
how investors react to the release of public information regarding the environmental performance of specific
facilities, including the deliberate release by regulators, as measured by fluctuations on the stock market.
Klassen and McLaughlin (1996) use the Efficient Market Theory version of event-study analysis to show
that  signals  of  strong  environmental  management, as  measured  by  environmental  performance awards,
increase firms’  equity  returns, and signals  of  weak  environmental  management, as  measured  by
environmental “crises”, lower equity returns. Hamilton (1995) uses Dodd and Warner’s (1983) version of
event-study analysis to examine firms listed in the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)’s Toxic Release
Inventory (TRI) database to determine the effect of that data’s release on stock returns for those firms.  His
results indicate that stockholders in firms reporting TRI pollution figures experienced negatively abnormal
returns upon the first release of the information. In addition to their event-study analysis, both Klassen and
McLaughlin  (1996) and Hamilton  (1995) perform  regression analysis.   In  particular, Hamilton  (1995)
performs cross-section analysis of the abnormal returns, measured in dollars, on the day of TRI data release.
Konar and Cohen (1997) also use event-study analysis to examine investors’ reactions to the release of TRI
data.  Then they expand on Hamilton (1995) by showing that the abnormal returns generated by the TRI data
release were important enough to affect future corporate environmental performance.

11


studies examine mature market economies, our study contributes to the literature by examining the

link from corporate environmental performance to financial performance in a transition economy.

As a second contribution, our study examines a panel of firms over a multi-year period using

an econometric estimator that relies upon intra-firm variation rather than cross-sectional variation.

Use of this estimator avoids the concern that more financially successful firms are the same ones

who effectively control their pollution levels.  Several of the previous studies fail to address this

concern  (e.g.,  Russo  and  Fouts,  1997;  Hart  and  Ahuja,  1996;  Arora  and  Cason,  1996).

Consequently, these studies may be incorrectly attributing influence to environmental performance

that is based on correlation rather than causation.  In other words, these cross-sectional analyses are

unable to identify properly the important heterogeneity across firms, while our panel data analysis

controls for individual firm characteristics in more detail.

Beyond the empirical guidance displayed above, the cited studies, along with additional

studies, provide insight into the theoretical effect of environmental performance on  financial

performance.  Collectively, this insight suggests that good environmental performance may improve

or degrade financial success and that this improvement or degradation may stem from an alteration

to revenues, costs, or both.

First, environmental performance may affect revenues. Customers may be willing to pay

more for or buy more of environmentally friendly products ( “green” products).  Thus, a firm is able

to  increase  its  revenues  by  reducing  its environmental  impact  in  order  to  sell  “green”  products

(Klassen and McLaughlin, 1996).  Conversely, firms may experience lower revenues when their

products are deemed “brown” because the firms’ environmental record is poor.  Within the realm

of  “green”  marketing,  a  firm  may  sell  green  products  to  customers  who  would  otherwise  be

12


indifferent to the firm’s environmentally responsible efforts (Konar and Cohen, 2001). In addition,

environmentally responsible behavior may improve a firm’s overall reputation among customers

(McGuire  et  al.,  1988).  Lastly,  a  firm  may  be  able  to  increase  its  revenues  by  using  an

environmentally friendly technology to establish an industry standard; this establishment provides

the firm with an “early-mover advantage” and status as an “industry leader” (Hart and Ahuja, 1996;

Klassen and McLaughlin, 1996; Porter and van der Linde, 1995).  All of these noted effects are

causal, in that better environmental performance directly leads to higher revenues, given a sufficient

lag.  For example, customers need time to assess the “green” nature of a product before modifying

their willingness to pay for it.

Second, environmental performance may affect costs.  When firms invest in more efficient

production processes, frequently these new technologies are also environmentally friendly: the new

production processes require less energy, generate less waste, demand fewer toxic inputs, etc.  In

addition, better environmental performance may lower the costs of regulatory scrutiny, such as lost

productivity  due  to  inspections.    Similarly, it  may  lower  the  costs  associated  with  regulatory

sanctions and third-party lawsuits (Klassen and McLaughlin, 1996).  Similar to regulatory scrutiny,

better environmental performance may lower the costs imposed by local community pressure, e.g.,

increased  zoning  restrictions  (Earnhart,  2004;  Konar and Cohen,  2001).    Related  to  regulatory

sanctions and third-party lawsuits, better environmental performance may reduce financing costs

because  lenders associate lower financial risk with better environmental management (McGuire et

al.,  1988).    These  environmental  effects  on  costs  are  causal:  better  environmental  performance

directly leads to less regulatory scrutiny, fewer sanctions, less community pressure, etc, given a

13


sufficient lag.   For example, regulators needs time to respond to poor environmental performance

6

with inspections and sanctions; consistent with this separation in time, improved environmental

performance will lower a firm’s future regulatory costs.

Better  environmental  performance  may also  reduce  labor  costs.    Pollution-reduction

investments  may  lower  three  types of emissions:  (1)  “external  emissions”,  which  are  directly

discharged  from  the  factory  into the  external  environment,  (2)  “internal  emissions”,  which  are

created and remain within a factory’s working environment, and (3) “internal/external emissions”,

which are created within a factory’s working environmental but are eventually discharged into the

external environment.  (These internal/external emissions are important when a facility’s primary

emission sources are diffuse within the factory; wood chip dust represents a good example of these

so called “fugitive emissions”.)  Often, if a factory wishes to lower its overall discharges into the

external environment, it must reduce internal/external emissions.  Reductions in internal/external

emissions improve working conditions, which increases labor productivity (lowering labor costs)

and decreases worker’s compensation claims and litigation costs (Porter and van der Linde, 1995).

Thus,  efforts  to  improve  environmental  performance  –  lower  discharges  into  the  external

environment – directly lead to lower costs, due to better working conditions.  Still, this causal link

exists with a lag since the human body does not respond immediately to improved indoor ambient

air quality and the compensation claims process is time-consuming.

6

The installation of a newly efficient process may be a notable exception since installation generates
two outcomes: (1) lower costs, and (2) better environmental performance.  In this case, better environmental
performance need not cause lower costs. Instead, a link may simply exist between the two elements because
they stem from the same underlying cause.  However, the effect of environmental performance on lower costs
may be viewed as causal when a firm chooses to improve its environmental performance by installing a
newly efficient production process.  In this case, the choice to improve environmental performance leads to
lower costs.

14


In contrast to these enhancements to cost minimization, complex pollution-reducing devices

and processes may reduce overall productive efficiency, thus, raising production costs (Bosch et al.,

1998). This effect is causal and consistent with the traditional perspective on pollution control,

which views efforts to reduce emissions, whether with end-of-pipe treatment or pollution prevention

methods, as a real drain on firm resources (Palmer et al., 1995; Filbeck and Gorman, 2004).

Third, environmental performance may affect both revenues and costs.  From a more general

perspective,  investments  in  environmentally  responsible  behavior  may  drag down  financial

performance because resources are being committed to an ostensibly non-productive use (Cohen et

al., 1995).  More specifically, environmentally responsible business decisions may limit a firm’s

strategic alternatives, thus, driving down revenues and driving up costs. For example, a firm may

decide not to pursue certain product lines or avoid plant relocations and investment opportunities

in certain locations (McGuire et al., 1988).

Consistent  with  this  classification,  several  studies  in  the  literature  take  great  pains  to

distinguish conceptually the two relevant pathways from environmental performance to financial

performance: (1) the pathway of revenues and (2) the pathway of costs.  For example, Figure 2 of

Klassen  and McLaughlin  (1996,  p.  1202)  represents  an  excellent  schematic  for  distinguishing

between “market gains” and “cost savings”. Despite these efforts, no previous empirical  study

evaluates the two pathways, to the authors’ best knowledge.  Instead, the previous empirical studies

examine either market-based financial performance measures, which cannot discern revenues from

costs, or profit-based accounting measures, which evaluate only the difference between revenues and

costs.    Thus,  the  present  study contributes  to  the  literature  by  evaluating  both  profit  and  its

constituent components in order to assess effectively the two noted pathways.

15


Lastly, we draw upon the noted theoretical insight to interpret our empirical results.

2.2. Literature of Financial Performance in Central and Eastern Europe

We  also draw upon  recent  economic  studies  of  corporate  financial  and  operational

performance in the transition economies of Central and Eastern Europe.  None of these studies

consider environmental performance as an explanatory variable.  Moreover, the prominent economic

studies use a surprisingly narrow set of measures to capture corporate financial performance.  In

particular, they consider only accounting-based measures of financial performance. In contrast to

studies of financial performance in the US and Canada, few studies of the Central and Eastern

European  region  consider  market-based  measures  for  examining  corporate-level  financial

performance across a variety of firms; this limited use is not surprising given the weakly developed

state of most of the stock markets in this region during the 1990s.

We describe the use of financial and operating performance measures by a few of the more

prominent studies.  Frydman et al. (1999) use revenues and the ratio of labor and material costs to

revenues.  Both Kocenda and Svejnar (2002) and Pohl et al. (1997) use profitability.  Similarly,

Claessens and Djankov (1999) use profitability defined as operating profits relative to the sum of

fixed assets and inventory. Weiss and Nikitin (2002) use operating profit and value added on either

a  per  worker  basis  or  a  per  capital  unit  basis.    We  utilize  these  studies  to  identify  meaningful

measures of corporate financial performance in the context of a transition economy.

We also utilize these studies to identify control factors in the context of a transition economy.

All  of  these  cited  studies  include  only  three  types  of  control factors:  ownership  structure,  year

indicators, and industrial sector indicators.  Claessens and Djankov (1999) include a dummy variable

for the first phase of privatization in the Czech Republic, which does not relate to air pollution

16


controls.  Multi-country studies also include country-specific indicators (e.g., Frydman et al., 1999).

We include the same relevant control factors as these cited studies, in addition to other factors.

3. Data on Financial and Environmental Performance

3.1. Czech Republic as Study Site

To examine the effect of corporate environmental performance on financial performance, we

exploit data on firms in the Czech Republic between 1996 and 1998, which is an excellent site and

time period for our study.  First, poor ambient air quality was a prominent environmental problem.

In response to public concern, Czech government authorities took substantial and effective steps to

decrease air emissions dramatically during the period 1991 to 1998 (Czech Ministry of Environment,

1998).  Figure 1 displays the trend of economy-wide air emissions over this period.  Perhaps, the

post-communist decline in economic activity partially explains the drop in the early 1990s.  This

output  decline  notwithstanding,  firms’  pollution  control  efforts,  such  as  the  installation  of

electrostatic precipitators (“scrubbers”) and fuel switching may also explain much of the reduction

in air pollutant emissions (World Bank, 1999).  Second, consistent with this focus on pollution

control  efforts,  investment  in  environmental  protection  was  most  important  during  the  period

between 1992 and 1998, as shown in Figure 2.  As a percentage of Czech gross domestic product

(GDP), investment rose dramatically after 1991 from a level of 1.3 % to a peak of 2.5 % in 1997 and

tailed off after 1998 back to a pre-transition level of 1.1 % by 2000; in 1990, investment was 1.1. %

of GDP.   Third, the Czech Republic was attempting to enter the EU during this period and was

required to reduce its industrial emissions in order to qualify for membership.7

7

  Further details on country-wide emissions, Czech air regulations, and environmental issues related

to EU accession are available upon request.

17


3.2. Panel Data from Financial Statements, Ownership Files, and Emissions Register

To examine accounting-based financial performance at Czech enterprises, we gather data

from  three  segments  of  a  database  provided  by  the  private  data  vendor  Aspekt.  Two  segments

provide information drawn from firms’ balance sheets, such as assets, and information taken from

firms’ income statements, such as profits.   The third segment provides information on ownership

8

structure, which we use as a control variable in our multivariate regression analysis.  We gather

balance sheet and income statement data and ownership data for the years 1996 to 1998.  The Aspekt

database includes all firms traded on the primary market – Prague Stock Exchange – or secondary

market [e.g., “Registra
ní místo system” (RMS)] and a majority of the remaining large Czech firms

(plus their key trading partners).  This comprehensive database has been used by previous studies

of financial and operational performance in the Czech Republic (e.g., Claessens and Djankov, 1999;

Weiss and Nikitin, 2002; Kocenda and Svejnar, 2002; Djankov, 1999).

As an indicator of corporate environmental performance, we choose air pollutants emitted

by facilities located in the Czech Republic during the years 1995 and 1998. The included pollutants

are carbon monoxide (CO), sulfur dioxide (SO ), particulate matter, and nitrous oxides (NO ), which

2

x

represent the main and most heavily regulated pollutants in the Czech Republic, similar to other

industrialized nations. The Czech Hydrometeorological Institute maintains the REZZO-1 database,

which  records  emissions  for  large,  stationary  sources.    While  the  REZZO-1  database  records

emissions  at  individual  units  of individual  facilities,  the  Czech  Hydrometeorological  Institute

aggregates the air emissions to the level of each facility before public release of the data. We further

8

  These financial data are not adjusted for inflation. Instead, our analysis includes year indicators

as regressors in the regression analysis.

18


aggregate air emissions across all facilities associated with a single firm, especially since no other

facility-level data are available to us.  Thus, the analysis links emissions data aggregated to the firm

9

level  with  other  firm-level  data,  consistent  with  previous  studies  of  firm-level  environmental

performance (Konar and Cohen, 1997; Konar and Cohen, 2001; Earnhart and Lizal, 2006; Khanna

and Damon, 1999; Khanna et al., 1998; Arora and Cason, 1995). Finally, we add the four pollutants

into  one composite measure of air emissions,  similar  to  previous studies  of  environmental

performance (Konar and Cohen, 1997; Konar and Cohen, 2001; Khanna and Damon, 1999; Khanna

et al., 1998; Arora and Cason, 1995; Arora and Cason, 1996).

To  examine  the  effect  of  environmental  performance  on  financial  performance,  while

controlling for ownership structure, we merge the financial, emission, and ownership data sets.  In

order to generate the largest sample possible and to avoid a sample selection bias due to attrition, we

create an unbalanced panel of firm-year observations for the time period 1996 to 1998. In this

merger and creation, we screen for meaningful financial data by applying the following criteria:

positive  production,  positive  total  assets,  and  positive  fixed  assets.    (Other  important  financial

measures, such as profits, are difficult to screen because they can truthfully take zero or negative

values.)  We also restrict our sample to those observations with non-missing data for the financial,

ownership, and emission variables used in our analysis.

10

  We consider three financial performance

measures; each retained observation must possess non-missing data for all three measures.  (We

choose  not  to  examine  a  variety  of samples  based  on  the  availability  of  data  for  each  financial

9

  While the Czech Hydrometeorological Institute gathers additional information on some facilities,

these data are not systematically recorded.

10

  In the case of emissions, non-missing data are available for either all four pollutants or none.

19


performance measure; by considering a single sample, we avoid sample compositional biases when

comparing results across the various financial performance measures. The same concern applies to

our use of various measures of firm size; again, we avoid compositional biases by considering a

single sample.) This merger, screening, and set of restrictions generates a combined unbalanced

panel of 429 firms with 1,044 observations for the years 1996 to 1998.  (In this process, missing

values, not inconsistent values, cause most of the reduction in sample size.)11

3.3. Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 presents a statistical summary of the relevant firm data. As shown in Table 1.a, our

data are sufficiently spread across the three years of our time frame.  Table 1.b. summarizes our data

on air emissions. Our data set contains much variation for emissions, which facilitates our analysis.

Table 1.b also summarizes the ownership shares held by certain types of investors: (1) state, (2)

investment funds, (3) citizens, (4) portfolio companies, (5) bank: direct ownership, (6) strategic

investors (e.g., other companies), (7) foreign investors, and (8) dispersed private investors, which

11

  Two features of this merger deserve elaboration.  First, the overlap between the financial data set
and the air emissions data set is limited.  Yet, the limited overlap does not indicate a problem with the data.
Instead, it may simply indicate that firms included in the Aspekt database do not own large stationary air
emission  sources.  In this  way,  the Aspekt  database need  not  completely  represent  large stationary  air
polluters. Therefore, our results may not generalize to all or most large stationary air polluters. The opposite
concern is not relevant. The REZZO-1 database is fully comprehensive of all large polluters.

Second, the restriction of non-missing data binds strongly for ownership data because we lack these
data for many firm-year observations.  (Ownership data for years prior to 1996 are especially scarce, which
explains our focus on the period 1996 to 1998. In addition, data on ownership prior to 1996 mostly exist for
firms that were privatized under the Czech citizen voucher program; thus, use of these data most likely would
introduce sample selection bias.)  The incomplete recording of ownership data during the chosen sample
period raises a concern about selection bias. We address this concern by implementing a Heckman two-step
sample selection procedure (Heckman, 1979). Based on the first stage of this procedure, we generate an
inverse  Mills  ratio for  each firm  in  each time  period.   By  including  this  variable as  a  regressor in  the
estimation of financial performance, we control for any potential sample selection bias. (Complete details
are available upon request.)

20


are  not  included  in  the  table.

12

    We  also  incorporate a variable  to  capture  the  concentration  of

ownership as measured by the stockholding share of the single largest shareholder (Kocenda and

Svejnar, 2002).

Table  1.d  indicates  the  distribution  of  firms  by  industrial  classification,  while  Table  1.c

summarizes  the  key  financial  variables  used  in  our  study: profits,  operating  profits,  sales  (or

revenues), costs, total assets, and equity. As demonstrated by the standard deviation measures, our

data set contains much variation in these financial measures.

Profits, operating profits, sales, and costs represent measures of accounting-based financial

performance.  In particular, profits and operating profits represent two measures of profitability.

Operating profits equal the difference between sales and the combination of costs of goods sold and

operating expenses, such as depreciation.  Profits equal the difference between operating profits and

other income and expenses, such as interest payments, extraordinary gains, and taxes.  Interestingly,

profits and operating profits are not extremely correlated given a correlation coefficient (D) equal to

0.709, which is statistically significant (p=0.0001). Since the two profitability measures are similar

but sufficiently different, as a robustness check, we examine both profits and operating profits.  For

the purposes of this study, costs represent the difference between sales and profits.  Consequently,

they do not capture full costs but full costs net of other income; i.e., [cost of goods sold + operating

costs + other costs] - other income.

12

  Two of these ownership forms deserve elaboration. First, portfolio companies are similar to
strategic investors in that another company invests in the identified company; however, the rationale for the
investment ranges widely.  Second, the category of dispersed investors includes investors who hold less than
10% of a given company and never publicly announced their holdings.  Since data on these shares are not
available, we cannot measure the presence of dispersed investors directly. Instead, we establish it as the
omitted category in our regression analysis.  As a benchmark, these investors clearly represent less interested,
non-strategic investors since they hold such a small share of the particular company.

21


Total assets and equity represent measures of firm size.  While total assets and equity capture

distinctively different aspects of a firm’s financial structure, the two measures are strongly correlated

(D = 0.939) and significantly correlated (p=0.0001).  Thus, both measures are most likely capturing

similar information about a firm’s size. Yet, as a check for robustness, we consider both measures.

4. Statistical Analysis of Financial Performance

4.1. Econometric Framework

In this section, we use the described data to explore the link from environmental to financial

performance at Czech firms in 1996 to 1998.  We estimate the relationship between environmental

performance, as measured by the absolute level of air pollutant emissions, and financial performance,

as measured by sales, costs, and profits. Consistent with several previous studies (Konar and Cohen,

2001; Filbeck and Gorman, 2004; Cohen et al., 1995; Austin et al., 1999; Hart and Ahuja, 1996), we

use  lagged  environmental  performance  as  the  proper  regressor.    The  lagging  of  environmental

performance  is  appropriate  since  economic  agents  need  to  time  to  translate  any  reduction  in

emissions into an alteration of revenues and/or costs, as noted in sub-section 2.1.  For example,

consumers need time to view a product as “green”; as another example, lenders need time to adjust

their  calculations  of  environmental  risk.    Thus,  environmental  performance  and  financial

performance are separated in time.  Given this separation, lagged environmental performance is

clearly  predetermined  with  respect  to  current financial  performance.    In  essence,  the  analysis

estimates the effect of environmental performance on future financial performance.

To estimate the influence of environmental performance on financial performance, we regress

each type of financial performance on lagged air pollutant emissions plus other control factors.  To

construct the econometric models associated with financial performance, we define the following

22


notation. We consider three dependent variables. As the first dependent variable, s  denotes the sales

it

generated by firm i in time period t. As the second dependent variable, c  denotes the costs born by

it

firm i in time period t.  Finally, B  denotes the profits generated by firm i in time period t.  Unless

it

otherwise indicated, B  denotes overall profits as opposed to operating profits.

it

The analysis seeks to decompose the effect of each explanatory factor on profits into the

factor’s separate effect on revenues and separate effect on costs.  Estimation of profits unto itself

does  not  provide  this  decomposition.    Estimating  revenues  and  costs  separately,  along  with

estimation of profits, would generate this decomposition. Fortunately, we do not need to estimate

all three dependent variables. By definition, profits equal the difference between revenues and costs.

Thus, we only need to estimate two of the three dependent variables in order to generate the desired

decomposition.  Each coefficient that could be generated by estimation of the omitted dependent

variable is recoverable as a simple linear combination of the coefficients generated for the two

estimated dependent variables.  Arbitrarily, we choose to estimate costs and profits.  Based on the

coefficients generated by the estimation of costs and profits, we recover the estimated coefficients

for revenues.  For each regressor, the sales-related coefficient equals the difference between the

profit-related coefficient and the cost-related coefficient; we elaborate below.

We incorporate various explanatory variables into our estimation of costs and profits.  As the

primary explanatory variable, p

i,t-1

denotes the amount of pollution emitted by firm i in the preceding

time period t-1 (i.e., lagged emissions).  We also include financially-related factors as explanatory

variables.  Costs and profits most likely depend on the level of production, which is denoted as y .
it

As production rises, one would expect costs to rise. Since production is clearly expected to affect

23


costs, by extension, production is expected to affect profits.

13

   Costs and profits may also depend

on firm size, denoted as a . Unless otherwise indicated, firm size is captured by total assets.  This

it

set  of  financially-related  regressors  may  seem  limited  relative  to  the  regressor  sets  used  by

comparable studies of environmental and financial performance in mature market economies.  These

studies include additional regressors, such as advertising expenditures and research and development

expenditures.  We do not include these types of factors as regressors for two reasons.  First, as noted

in Section 2, previous studies of corporate financial performance in transition economies do not

include these types of factors.  Second, data on these factors are not recorded systematically, if at all,

in our database.

Our analysis incorporates additional regressors.  Specifically, we include various regressors

that  capture  ownership  structure.    First,  we include  a  regressor  for  each  ownership  type  except

“dispersed investors”.  Collectively, we denote these ownership variables as W .  Second, we include

it

a measure of concentration, as captured by the ownership share held by the single largest shareholder

and  denoted  as L .    By  including  these  ownership-related  regressors,  we  control  for  ownership

t

structure, consistent with most studies of transition economies.  However, we neither report nor

13

  Two aspects surrounding production deserve elaboration. First, production is measured in value
terms, which allows the analysis to compare across firms and across time within a given firm. As noted
below, our analysis incorporates both industry-specific indicators (or firm-specific indicators in the fixed
effects model) and year indicators.  This incorporation sufficiently controls for any variation in prices across
firms and/or time that may otherwise complicate the use of production value as a regressor.  Second, for our
analysis, we assume that production is pre-determined with respect to costs and profits.  Consistent with this
general assumption, we specifically assume that the firm is a price-taker, even in those cases when it markets
a product of higher environmental quality. Similarly, we assume that the firm is demand-constrained in each
separate product, with a clear distinction between a product of higher environmental quality and one of lower
environmental quality.  Fortunately, identifying the relationship between production and costs and profits
does not prove critical for the task at hand.  The reported results regarding the effect of environmental
performance on financial performance are fully robust to the exclusion of the production factor and a one-
year lagging of the production factor.

24


interpret the associated estimation results since ownership is not the focus of our study and the

coefficients prove insignificant.  To control for variation over time with respect to economy-wide

trends and the legal framework controlling air emissions, we also include individual year indicators,

collectively denoted as vector T . To control for sector-specific variation, we also include industry

t

indicator variables, collectively denoted as vector X .  (The omitted industrial category includes

i

“manufacturing: other” and “other: overall” sectors, which are both listed in Table 1.d.)  The fixed

effects model, described below, subsumes these sectoral effects into its firm-specific fixed effects

since sector does not vary over time for a specific firm.

Given this notation, we formulate the following regression system:

c  = "  + $  p  + (  y  + 6  a  + T  W  + 0  L  + Q  T  + H  X  + <  ,

c

c

c

c

c

c

c

c

i,t-1

it

it

it

it

it

it

it

B  = "  + $  p  + (  y  + 6  a  + T  W  + 0  L  + Q  T  + H  X  + L  ,

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

i,t-1

it

it

it

it

it

it

it

it

it

where <  and L denote the error terms associated with costs and profits, respectively.

it

it

(1)

(2)

14

  Please note

the use of superscripts to distinguish the coefficients shown in the two equations: “c” denotes costs

and “B” denotes profits.  We estimate each equation separately; joint estimation of the two equations

within  a  seemingly  unrelated  regresssion  framework  generates  identical  results  since  the  two

regressor sets are the same.

To control properly for firm-specific effects, we estimate equations (1) and (2) using standard

panel methods: pooled OLS, fixed effects method, and random effects method.  We use standard

tests to assess these methods. When the F-test indicates significant firm-specific effects, the fixed

effects estimator dominates pooled OLS. Since this dominance always holds, we do not report the

14

  We consider neither a semilog nor log-linear specification because profits (and operating profits)

cannot be log-transformed since they take zero values.

25


pooled OLS estimates; instead, we only report the F-test statistics, as shown in Tables 2 and 3.  We

use  the  Hausman  test  of  random  effects  to  evaluate  whether  the  random  effects  estimates  are

consistent.  Since the random effects estimates are always inconsistent based on the Hausman test

statistics,  we  do  not  report these estimates.

15

    The  fixed  effects  estimates  are  consistent  by

assumption of the model.

Use of a fixed effects estimator has an additional advantage. By including firm-specific

intercept  terms,  the  fixed effects  estimator  controls  comprehensively  for  time-invariant  factors

associated with specific firms.  Thus, the estimator controls for the possibility that companies who

are better in terms of both environmental and financial matters due to some common (time-invariant)

factor, such as a highly effective corporate governance structure. Rather than using cross-sectional

variation, which is vulnerable to this concern, the fixed effects estimator utilizes intra-firm variation.

4.2. Estimation Results

Table 2.a presents the regression results.  First, production strongly and positively affects

costs and profits.  Firm size does not significantly affect either costs or profits.

Second, we examine the estimated coefficients for lagged environmental performance.  To

recover  the sales-related  coefficient  for  environmental  performance  (i.e.,  effect  of  lagged

environmental performance on sales), we subtract the cost-related coefficient for environmental

performance ($ ) from the profit-related coefficient for environmental performance ($ ):

B

c

s

$  = $  - $  ,

B

c

(3)

where “s” denotes sales.  The resulting coefficient is shown in Table 2.b.

In  this  sub-section,  we  report  and  interpret  briefly  the  estimation  results  relating  to

15

  Hausman test statistics are available upon request.

26


environmental performance, while interpreting them more deeply in the subsequent sub-section.  As

shown in Table 2.b, higher lagged air pollutant emissions significantly raise sales (p=0.062).  Thus,

better environmental performance appears to reduce revenues.  Perhaps, environmentally responsible

business  decisions  limit  firms’  strategic  alternatives,  forcing  firms  to  forego  revenue-boosting

products.  In contrast, better environmental performance appears linked with reduced costs.  As

shown in the first column of Table 2.a, higher lagged air pollutant emissions significantly raise costs.

Many reasons potentially explain this outcome, such as diminished regulatory scrutiny.  In the next

sub-section, we assess which of these reasons seems the most plausible.  Both reported conclusions

are fully robust to the use of equity as the firm size measure in lieu of total assets and to the inclusion

of a squared production term.16

If better environmental performance lowers revenues and costs, one question remains: does

better environmental performance raise or lower the difference between revenues and costs, i.e.,

profits?    As  shown  in  the  second  column  of  Table  2.a,  higher  lagged  air  pollutant  emissions

significantly lower profits.  Thus, better environmental performance appears linked with improved

profitability.    While  more  responsible  environmental  management  may  limit  firms’  abilities  to

exploit  revenue-enhancing  projects,    apparently  better  environmental  management  more  than

compensates for these missed opportunities by driving down costs via reduced regulatory scrutiny,

dampened  community  pressure,  etc.    The  next  sub-section  interprets  the  full  set  of  results;  this

interpretation helps to assess which reason (or reasons) most likely drives (or drive) these results.

We  demonstrate  the  robustness  of  this  last  conclusion  by  examining  the  effect  of

environmental performance on profitability using alternative econometric specifications.  We focus

16

 Details on these results are available upon request.

27


on profitability because it is the most comprehensive financial performance measure from the set of

three: sales, costs, and profits.  In all cases, the estimated effect of environmental performance on

profitability is highly robust to the alternative specifications and does not differ qualitatively across

the  alternative  specifications.    While  we  estimate  several  alternative  specifications, which  are

described below, for the sake of space and the reader’s burden, we report the full regression results

for  only  three  alternative  specifications,  which  are  shown  in  Table  3. For  the  remaining

specifications, we merely  report  the  p-value  of  the  coefficient  associated  with  environmental

performance.  First, we modify the effect of firm size on financial performance.  To capture any

nonlinearities associated with firm size, we add a squared term of firm size (a ). As shown in the

2

it

first  column  of  Table  3,  this  alternative  specification  generates  an  environmental  performance

coefficient  that  is  very  similar  in  terms  of  sign,  magnitude,  and  significance  as  the  coefficient

reported in Table 2.

Inclusion of the squared firm size measure causes both the linear and  the

squared firm size coefficients to become statistically significant. Specifically, profits rise with firm

size but at a declining rate.  As an additional specification, we replace total assets with equity, as the

measure  of  firm  size.    This  change  in  firm  size measure  does  not  meaningfully  alter  the  sign,

magnitude ($  = -13.32), and significance (p=0.0001) of the estimated environmental performance

B

coefficient.    The  addition  of  squared  equity  as  a  regressor  does  not  change  this  preceding

conclusion.

17

  Two previous studies of financial performance in Central and Eastern Europe use

alternative measures of firm size.  Claessens and Djankov (1999) use the sum of fixed assets and

inventory as a replacement for total assets. Similarly, Weiss and Nikitin (2002) replace total assets

17

Estimation of the environmental performance coefficient is also robust to the inclusion of a debt

to equity regressor, which does not prove to be statistically significant.

28


with depreciation, which serves as a proxy for units of capital.  Use of these alternative firm size

measures  again  generate  highly  similar  coefficient  estimates  in  terms  of  sign,  magnitude,  and

significance (p=0.0001 in both cases).

Second, we assess the robustness of the profits-related result by modifying the production

regressor.  In one alternative specification, we simply drop this regressor; in a second specification,

we lag the regressor; in a third specification, we add a squared term of production (y ).  Regardless,

2

it

the  estimated  effect of  environmental  performance  remains  strongly  and  significantly  negative

(p=0.0001 in all cases).  Results for the third specification are displayed in the second column of

Table 3.  As shown, profits rise in production but at a declining rate since the coefficient on the

squared production term is significantly negative.

Third, we modify the measure of profitability by replacing overall profits with operating

profits.    This  replacement  generates  a  highly  significant  negative coefficient  for  lagged

environmental performance: $ = - 10.92 and p = 0.0001.  Thus, better environmental performance

B

improves operating profitability, as well as overall profitability.  This conclusion is strongly robust

to the particular measure of firm size included as a regressor. As shown in the third column of Table

3, use  of  equity  as  the  firm  size  measure  also  generates  a  highly  significant  negative  effect

(p=0.0001)  for  lagged  environmental performance  on  operating  profits.    (We  report  the  full

regression results for this particular specification since the use of equity as a firm size measure

generates a significant coefficient for firm size as opposed to the use of total assets, which generates

an  insignificant  coefficient  for  firm  size.)    Use  of  the  sum  of  fixed  assets  and  inventory  or

depreciation as the firm size measure generates highly similar coefficient estimates in terms of sign,

magnitude, and significance (p=0.0001 in both cases).

29


4.3. Interpretation of Results and Implications

Lastly, we interpret these results in light of the preceding literature, while attempting to

identify important implications.  First, the results of our study indicate that better environmental

performance appears to lower revenues.  This finding provides support for the conjecture that the

implementation  of  better  environmental  management  practices  limit  firms’  abilities  to  pursue

revenue-enhancing projects.  More specifically, tighter air emission limits and/or higher emission

charge rates may have possibly constrained Czech firms’ abilities to produce higher quality products.

Conversely, the noted finding rejects the conjectures that better environmental management (1)

allows firms to sell “green” goods at a higher price or in greater quantity, (2) prompts customers who

are otherwise indifferent to environmentally responsible efforts to buy “green” goods, (3) improves

a  firm’s  overall  reputation  among  customers,  and  (4)  provides  the  firm with  an  “early-mover”

advantage and status as an “industry leader” (given that the better management practice establishes

an industry standard).  This apparent rejection need not surprise us given that Czech firms were

probably  not  well  situated  during  the  sample  period  to  deliver  “green”  products  or  establish

themselves as “industry leaders”.18

Overall,  this  finding  implies  that  Czech  firms  should  cautiously  improve  environmental

management practices if corporate management keys on any decline in revenues, independent of any

change in profits (which seem to benefit from better environmental management), as an indicator

18

    According  to  Czech Ministry  of  Environment  (2004), while the  Czech Ministry  of  the
Environment established the National Eco-Labeling Program in 1994, this program operated at a low level
prior to 2000.  Starting in 2000, the Czech government began to support the sale of eco-labeled products by
granting  them  preference in  the  purchasing  orders  from  the state  administration.    In  the  same  year, the
national program entered the Global Eco-Labeling Network. By 2004, the program had awarded the eco-
label  to  310  products,  involving  169  licenses  for  82  companies; moreover, the  Czech government  had
integrated its national program into the multinational programs of the OECD and EU.

30


of  the  need  to  cut  costs.    In  other  words, management  may  observe  weakened  revenues  in  the

preceding period and attempt to address this issue by cutting costs in the current period.  In this case,

management would be over-reacting because the diminished revenues are associated with an even

stronger reduction in costs so that profits actually rise.

Second, the results of our study indicate that better environmental performance appears to

lower costs.  This finding is consistent with several conjectures, which are described in sub-section

2.1.  First, this finding supports the conjecture that implementation of a more efficient production

technology, which reduces air pollutant emissions, also lowers production costs.

19

  Alternatively, this

finding supports the conjecture that reduced air emissions lead to lower regulatory scrutiny, which

reduces the costs stemming from the distraction of inspectors and lawyers.  Yet again, this finding

supports  the  conjecture  that  better  environmental  performance  lowers  the  costs  associated  with

regulatory sanctions, third-party suits, and community pressure.

All of these interpretations are plausible for the Czech transition economy and consistent with

other available evidence.  Certainly, Czech firms invested into new production technologies over this

period (Lizal and Svejnar, 2002b). However, pollution prevention stemming from the installation

of better and cleaner production processes was not prevalent during the sample period.  Instead, most

Czech facilities reportedly reduced emissions in the old-fashioned way: they installed end-of-pipe

treatment technologies. Thus, the role of new production technologies appears limited.  In contrast,

the role of regulatory scrutiny seems larger.  Unlike in Communist times, the Czech Inspection,

19

    Use  of  the  fixed effects  estimator  clarifies  our  interpretation  of  the  estimated  effect  of
environmental performance on costs.  Given the examination of intra-firm variation, the estimated coefficient
captures the connection between a change in a firm’s emissions relative to the firm’s average emission level
and a change in the firm’s costs relative to the firm’s average cost level.  This connection helps the analysis
to focus on the installation of new technologies.

31


which is responsible for monitoring for and enforcing against non-compliance with air protection

laws, performed many inspections and imposed many fines during the sample period.  For example,

in 1997, the Czech Inspection performed 13,455 inspections and imposed 1,952 fines, in addition

to closing 36 facilities due to noncompliance, as reported in the agency’s annual yearbook.  Similar

to the cost of regulatory scrutiny and regulatory sanctions, local community pressure was tangible

in this period, as expressed through numerous citizen complaints, which are filed with the Czech

Inspection (Earnhart, 2000).  For example, in 1997, the Czech Inspection received over 700 citizen

complaints.  Unlike regulatory and commmunity pressure, the threat of third-party lawsuits was

trivial in the Czech Republic during this period (Earnhart, 1998).

As yet another interpretation of the negative effect on costs, the noted finding supports the

conjecture  that  better  environmental  performance  lowers  financing  costs.    While  possible,  this

interpretation is not plausible for the Czech Republic during the sample period given the lack of any

corroborating evidence.  Lastly, the noted finding supports the conjecture that better environmental

performance lowers labor costs by improving work conditions with reductions in internal/external

or fugitive emissions.  As explained in sub-section 2.1, improved work conditions increase labor

productivity and/or decrease workers’ compensation claims and litigation costs.  Given the rather

filthy conditions in some Czech firms during the sample period, a meaningful increase in labor

productivity  seems  quite  plausible.    Consistent  with  this  claim,  labor  productivity  improved

dramatically over the sample period (Kocenda and Svejnar, 2002). However, we are aware of no

study that connects reductions in fugitive emissions to improved labor productivity in the Czech

Republic.  Thus, this claimed connection remains unsubstantiated.  Unlike the potential importance

of labor productivity increases, any reduction in workers’ compensation claims and litigation costs

32


was most likely mitigated by the government’s comprehensive coverage of medical services and the

general absence of litigation over “environmental” matters (Earnhart, 1998).

Based  on  this  discussion,  of  the  supported  conjectures  (i.e.,  interpretations),  the  most

plausible is the combination  of regulatory and community pressure: reductions in air emissions

lowered Czech firms’ costs by removing regulatory scrutiny and community pressure and eliminating

the imposition of regulatory sanctions.

In contrast, the noted finding rejects the conjecture that complex pollution-reducing devices

and processes reduce overall productive efficiency, which implies an increase in costs.

Third, the results of our study indicate that better environmental performance appears to

improve  profitability  by  driving  costs  down  more  than  revenues.    Profits  represent  the  simple

difference between revenues and costs. Above we interpret the findings for revenues and costs

separately.  Thus, the remaining issue concerns the relative magnitudes of the effects on these two

profit components.  The decline in costs exceeds the decline in revenues.  A greater decrease in costs

is consistent with the meaningful benefits of reducing the otherwise substantial regulatory scrutiny

or at least reducing the uncertainty associated with possible regulatory scrutiny.  As evidence of this

substantial regulatory scrutiny, several facilities were actually shut down in the Czech Republic due

to noncompliance.  The benefits of reduced community pressure further substantiate the greater

decrease in costs, relative to the decline in revenues.

On the other side of the ledger, a lesser decrease in revenues is consistent with the traditional

end-of-pipe approach to pollution control taken by most Czech firms.  Use of these end-of-pipe

treatment technologies most likely did not constrain the production of revenue-enhancing production

to a great extent. This point notwithstanding, better environmental management, in some form, not

33


necessarily  end-of-pipe  treatment,  apparently  constrained  revenue  enhancement to  a  significant

extent.

In sum, better environmental management appears linked to improved profitability and the

most likely cause is reduced regulatory and community pressure.

5. Summary

This  paper  examines the  link  from  corporate  environmental  performance  to  financial

performance.    In particular,  we  assess  whether  better  environmental  performance  alters  sales,

revenues, or both.  Based on our analysis of Czech firms in the years 1996 to 1998, we conclude that

good environmental performance, in the form of lower air pollutant emissions, appears to undermine

future revenues,  while  lowering  costs  to  a  greater  extent,  thus,  improving  profitability.    This

conclusion is highly robust to many alternative specifications.

As noted in the introduction, given the transitional nature of the Czech economy, the results

of this study need not generalize to other economies, especially mature market economies.  To assess

this  point,  as  ongoing  research,  we  are examining  the  latter  period  of  the  Czech  transition,

specifically, the period between 1999 and 2004, when the country entered the EU.  By examining

the expanded period from 1996 to 2004 and comparing the two sub-periods, we will be able to assess

whether  the  evolution  towards  a  market-based  economy  alters  the  relationship  between

environmental and financial performance.

34


Table 1

Descriptive Statistics

Table 1.a.  Year Distribution

Year
1996
1997
1998
Total

Frequency

Percent

372
357
315
1,044

35.63
34.20
30.17
100.00

Table 1.b.  Means and Standard Deviations of Production, Ownership, and Emission Variables

Variable

Mean

Std. Deviation

Production Value (000s CZK)

1,201,078

2,646,672

Emissions Total (tons)

State Ownership share (%)

Strategic Investor Ownership share (%)

Individual Citizens Ownership share (%)

Bank Ownership share (%)

Portfolio Company Ownership share (%)

Investment Funds Ownership share (%)

Foreign Ownership share (%)

Concentration: Single Largest Shareholder (%)

Note: CZK = Czech Crowns

866

5.69

28.40

4.92

1.00

1.97

13.51

7.16

44.76

3,728

15.73

30.33

15.22

5.62

8.44

20.51

19.84

21.62

1.c.  Means and Standard Deviations: Financial Performance and Firm Size

Variable

Profits (000s CZK)

Operating Profits (000s CZK)

Costs (000s CZK)

Sales (000s CZK)

Total Assets (000s CZK)

Equity (000s CZK)

Note: CZK = Czech Crowns

Mean

Std. Deviation

194,909

249,785

2,717,239

2,553,454

3,183,106

1,659,270

- 6,914

60,751

1,238,092

1,231,178

1,546,258

776,521

35


Table 1.d.   Distribution According To Industrial Classification

Industry

Agriculture, Hunting, Forestry, Fisheries

Mining and Quarrying

Manufacturing of Food Products, Beverages, and Tobacco

Manufacturing of Textiles, Textile Products, Leather, and Leather Products

Manufacturing of Wood, Wood Products, Pulp, Paper, and Paper Products
     and Publishing and Printing

Manufacturing of Coke and Refined Petroleum

Manufacturing of Chemicals, Chemical Products, and Synthetic Fibers

Manufacturing of Rubber and Plastic Products

Manufacturing of Other Non-Metallic Mineral Products

Manufacturing of Basic Metals and Fabricated Metal Products

Manufacturing of Machinery and Equipment n.e.c.

Manufacturing of Electrical and Optical Equipment

Manufacturing of Transport Equipment

Manufacturing: Other

Electricity, Gas, and Water Supply

Construction

Wholesale and Retail Trade and Repair of Motor Vehicles

Hotels and Restaurants

Transport, Postal Service, Storage, and Telecommunications

Finance, Real Estate, Rentals, Business, Research, Public Administration

Education, Health, and Veterinary Services

Other Public and Social Services

Other: Overall

Total

Obs.

Percent

8

13

0.79

1.23

165

15.76

85

36

4

46

18

80

8.10

3.43

0.35

4.40

1.76

7.66

135

141

12.94

13.53

41

73

32

53

49

3

8

1

30

11

5

7

3.96

7.04

3.08

5.11

4.67

0.26

0.79

0.09

2.90

1.06

0.44

0.65

1,044

100.00

36


Table 2

Fixed Effects Estimation of Financial Performance Measures

Table 2.a. Estimation of Costs and Profits

 a
Variable

Costs

Profits

Lagged Pollutant Emissions

Production Value (000 CZK)

Total Assets (000 CZK)

1997

1998

No. of Firms / No. of Obs

F-Test for Fixed Effects
  [significance level]

Adjusted R

2

***

***

***

***

23.609
(6.008)
0.8381
(0.0286)
0.0439
(0.0273)
- 4,383,064
(1,050,596)
- 4,182,951
(1,007,084)

429 / 1044

21.47
[0.0001]

0.9957

***

***

***

***

- 15.146
(3.713)
0.0717
(0.0177)
0.0048
(0.0169)
1,620,403
(649,367)
1,547,097
(622,473)

429 / 1044

3.90
[0.0001]

0.7170

Standard errors are noted inside parentheses; p-values are noted inside square brackets.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % levels, respectively.
a
  Each regression also includes 429 firm-specific indicators, seven ownership share factors, an

ownership concentration factor, and an inverse Mills ratio for ownership data reporting.

Table 2.b. Effect of Lagged Pollutant Emissions on Sales:

Coefficient Recovered from Estimation Results for Costs and Profits

Variable

Sales

Lagged Pollutant Emissions

8.463
(4.532)

*

Standard errors are noted inside parentheses.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % levels, respectively.

37


Table 3

Fixed Effects Estimation of Profitability: Alternative Specifications

Variable a

Add

Firm Size 2

Add

Production 2

Lagged Pollutant Emissions

Production (000 CZK)

Production  (000,000 CZK)

2

Total Assets (000 CZK)

Total Assets  (000,000 CZK)

2

Equity (000 CZK)

***

***

***

***

- 14.630
(3.593)
0.1185
(0.0185)
N/A

0.0914
(0.0209)
- 3.73 E-9
(0.56 E-9)
N/A

***

***

***

*

- 15.122
(3.653)
0.1571
(0.0254)
- 3.42 E-9
(0.74 E-9)
0.0307
(0.0175)
N/A

N/A

 Dependent =

Operating Profits,
Firm Size = Equity

***

***

- 9.735
(2.643)
0.1105
(0.0106)
N/A

N/A

N/A

0.2105
(0.0228)

***

No. of Firms / No. of Obs

429 / 1044

429 / 1044

429 / 1044

F-Test for Fixed Effects
  [significance level]

Adjusted R

2

4.18
[0.0001]

0.7365

4.06
[0.0001]

0.7267

10.63
[0.0001]

0.9134

Standard errors are noted inside parentheses; p-values are noted inside square brackets.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % levels, respectively.
a
  Each regression also includes 429 firm-specific indicators, two year-specific indicators, seven
ownership share factors, an ownership concentration factor, and an inverse Mills ratio for
ownership data reporting.

38


REFERENCES

Arora,  Seema  and  Timothy  Cason (1995),  “An Experiment  in  Voluntary  Environmental  Regulation:

Participation in EPA’s 33/50 Program,” J. of Environmental Econ. and Mgt., 28(3), pg. 271-286.

Arora, Seema and Timothy Cason (1996), “Why Do Firms Volunteer to Exceed Environmental Regulations?

Understanding Participation in EPA’s 33/50 Program,” Land Economics, 72(4), pg. 413-432.

Austin, David, Anna Alberini, and Julio Videras (1999), “Is There a Link between a Firm’s Environmental

and Financial Performance?” presented at NBER Summer Institute Public Economics Workshop:

Public Policy and the Environment, Cambridge, MA, August 2, 1999.

Bluffstone, Randy (1999), “Are the Costs of Pollution Abatement Lower in Central and Eastern Europe?

Evidence from Lithuania,” Environment and Development Economics, 44, pg. 449-470.

Bosch, Jean, E. Woodrow, and I. Lee (1998), “EPA Enforcement, Firm Response Strategies, and Stockholder

Wealth: An Empirical Examination,” Managerial and Decision Economics, 19(3), pg. 167-177.

Claessens, Stijn and Simeon Djankov (1999), “Ownership Concentration and Corporate Performance in the

Czech Republic,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 27(3), pg. 498-513.

Cohen, Mark, Scott A. Fenn, and Jonathan Naimon (1995), “Environmental and Financial Performance: Are

They Related?” Investor Responsibility Research Center monograph.

Czech Ministry of Environment (1997), Statistical Environmental Yearbook of the Czech Republic, Prague:

Czech Ministry of the Environment.

Czech Ministry of Environment (1998), Statistical Environmental Yearbook of the Czech Republic, Prague:

Czech Ministry of the Environment.

Czech Ministry of Environment (2004), Report on the Environment in the Czech Republic in 2003, Prague:

Czech Ministry of the Environment, November 2004.

Djankov, Simeon (1999), “Ownership Structure and Enterprise Restructuring in Six Newly Independent

States,” Comparative Economic Studies, 41(1), pg. 75-95.

39


Dodd, Peter and Jerold Warner (1983), “On Corporate Governance: A Study of Proxy Contests,” Journal

of Financial Economics, 11(1-4) [April], pg. 401-438.

Earnhart, Dietrich (2004), “The Effects of Community Characteristics on Polluter Compliance Levels,” Land

Economics, 80(3), pg. 408-432.

Earnhart, Dietrich (2000), “Environmental ‘Citizen Suits’ in the Czech Republic,” European Journal of Law

and Economics, 10(1), pg. 43-68.

Earnhart, Dietrich (1998), "Civil Litigation, Access to Government-Held Information, and Coordination of

Public and Private Enforcement in the Czech Republic,” European Journal of Law and Economics,

6(3), pg. 113-141.

Filbeck, Greg and Raymond Gorman (2004), “The Relationship between the Environmental and Financial

Performance of Public Utilities,” Environmental and Resource Economics, 29, pg. 137-154.

Frydman, Roman, Cheryl Gray, Marek Hessel, and Andrzej Rapaczynski (1999), “When Does Privatization

Work? The Impact of Private Ownership on Corporate Performance in the Transition Economies,”

Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(4), pg. 1153-1191.

Gottsman, Laura and Jon Kessler (1998), “Smart Screened Investments: Environmentally-Screened Equity

Funds that Perform Like Conventional Funds,” Journal of Investing, 7(3), pg. 15-24.

Greene, William (1997), Econometrics, 2nd edition, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Hamilton, James  (1995),  “Pollution as  News: Media  and  Stock  Market  Reactions  to  the  Toxic Release

Inventory Data,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 28(1), pg. 98-113.

Hart, Stuart L. and Gautam Ahuja (1996), “Does it Pay to be Green? An Empirical Examination of the

Relationship  between  Emission Reduction and Firm  Performance,” Business  Strategy and the

Environment, 5(1) [March], pg. 30-37.

Heckman, James (1979), “Sample Selection Bias as Specification Error,” Econometrica, 47, pg. 153-161.

Khanna, Madhu, Wilma Rose Quimio, and Dora Bojilova (1998), “Toxics Release Information: A Policy

40


Tool for Environmental Protection,” J. of Environmental Economics and Mgt., 36, pg. 243-266.

Khanna, Madhu and Lisa Damon (1999), “EPA’s Voluntary 33/50 Program: Impact on Toxic Releases and

Economic Performance of Firms,” J. of Environmental Economics and Management, 37(1), pg. 1-25.

Klassen,  Robert  and  Curtis McLaughlin  (1996),  “The  Impact  of Environmental  Management  on Firm

Performance,” Management Science, 42(8), pg. 1199-1214.

Kocenda, Evzen and Jan Svejnar (2002), “The Effects of Ownership Forms and Concentration on Firm

Performance after Large-Scale Privatization,” William Davidson Institute work paper No. 471, May.

Konar, Shameek and Mark Cohen (1997), “Information as Regulation: The Effect of Community Right to

Know Laws on Toxic Emissions,” J. of Environmental Econ. and Mgt., 32, pp. 109-124.

Konar, Shameek and Mark Cohen (2001), “Does the Market Value Environmental Performance?” Review

of Economics and Statistics, 83(2), pp. 281-289.

Lanoie, Paul, Benoit Laplante, Maite Roy (1998), “Can Capital Markets Create Incentives for Pollution

Control?” Ecological Economics, 26, pg. 31-41.

Laplante, Benoit and Paul Lanoie (1994), “The Market Response to Environmental Incidents in Canada: A

Theoretical and Empirical Analysis,” Southern Economic Journal, 60(3) [Jan], pg. 657-672.

Lizal, Lubomir and Jan Svejnar (2002a), “Investment, Credit Rationing, and the Soft Budget Constraint:

Evidence from Czech Panel Data,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(2), pp. 353-370.

Lizal,  Lubomir  and  Jan  Svejnar  (2002b),  “Financial  Conditions  and  Investment  during  the  Transition:

Evidence from Czech Firms,” Chapter 11 in Anna Meyendorff and Anjan Thakor, editors: Designing

Financial Systems in Transition Economies: Strategies for Reform in Central and Eastern Europe,

MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2002, pp. 215-260.

McCloskey, P.F. (1993), Published remarks to a conference held by the Microelectronics and Computer

Technology Corporation titled “Electronics and the Environment: Developing a Roadmap for Green

Enterprise into the 21  Century” in Washington, DC, on Nov. 10, 1993.

st

41


McGuire, Jean B., Alison Sundgren, and Thomas Schneeweis (1988), “Corporate Social Responsibility and

Firm Financial Performance, The Academy of Management Journal, 31(4) [December], pg. 854-872.

Muoghalu,  Michael I., H.  David  Robison,  and John L. Glascock  (1990),  “Hazardous  Waste  Lawsuits,

Stockholder Returns, and Deterrence,” Southern Economic Journal, 57(2) [October], pg. 357-370.

Palmer, Karen, Wallace Oates, and Paul Portney (1995), “Tightening Environmental Standards: The Benefit-

Cost or the No-Cost Paradigm?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9(4), pg. 119-132.

Pohl,  Gerhard,  Robert Anderson,  Stijn  Claessens, and Simeon Djankov  (1997),  “Privatization and

Restructuring in Central and Eastern Europe: Evidence and Policy Options,” World Bank Technical

Paper No. 368.

Porter,  Michael  E. and Claas van  der  Linde  (1995),  “Toward  a  New  Conception  of 

the

Environment-Competitiveness Relationship,” J. of Economic Perspectives, 9(4), pg. 97-118.

Portney, Paul and Robert Stavins (eds.) (2000), Public Policies for Environmental Protection, 2  edition,

nd

Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.

Russo, Michael V. and Paul A. Fouts (1997), “A Resource-Based Perspective on Corporate Environmental

Performance and Responsibility,” The Academy of Management Journal, 40(3) [June], pg. 534-559.

Weiss, Andrew and Georgiy  Nikitin  (2002),  “Effects  of  Ownership by  Investment  Funds  on  The

Performance of  Czech Firms,” Chapter  10  in  Anna  Meyendorff  and  Anjan  Thakor, editors:

Designing Financial Systems in Transition Economies: Strategies for Reform in Central and Eastern

Europe, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2002, pg. 187-214.

World Bank (1992), “Czech and Slovak Federal Republic Joint Environmental Study,” Report No. 9623-CS.

World Bank (1999), Country Economic Memorandum – Czech Republic, report prepared by Julia Bucknall,

Rita Cestiti, and Gordon Hughes; World Bank: Washington, DC.

42


43


44


 
 

DAVIDSON INSTITUTE WORKING PAPER SERIES - Most Recent Papers 

The entire Working Paper Series may be downloaded free of charge at: www.wdi.umich.edu 

 
CURRENT AS OF  2/22/07 
 
Publication 
No. 856: Does Better Environmental Performance Affect Revenues, 
Costs, or Both? Evidence From a Transition Economy 
No. 855: Media Coverage & Charitable Giving After the 2004 Tsunami 

No. 854: Default Rates in the Loan Market for SMEs: Evidence from 
Slovakia 
No. 853: Monetary Policy before Euro Adoption: Challenges for EU 
New Members 
No. 852: Private-Sector Credit in Central & Eastern Europe: New 
(Over) Shooting Stars? 
No. 851: Interest Rate Pass-Through in Central & Eastern Europe: 
Reborn from Ashes Merely to Pass Away? 
No. 850: Monetary Transmission Mechanism in Central & Eastern 
Europe: Gliding on a Wind of Change 
No. 849: Crime Distribution & Victim behavior During a Crime Wave 

Authors 
Dietrich Earnhart and Lubomir 
Lizal 
Philip Brown and Jessica Minty 

Jarko Fidrmuc, Christa Hainz and  
Anton Maleisch 
Jan Filáček, Roman Horváth and 
Michal Skorepa 
Balázs Égert, Peter Backé and 
Tina Zumer 
Balázs Égert,Jesus Crespo-
Cuaresma and Thomas Reininger 
Fabrizio Coricelli, Balázs Égert 
and Ronald MacDonald 
Rafael Di Tella, Sebastian Galiani 
and Ernesto Schargrodsky 
Roman Horváth 

No. 848: Real-Time Time-Varying Equilibrium Interest Rates: Evidence 
on the Czech Republic 
No. 847: Financial Accelerator Effects in the Balance Sheets of Czech 
Firms 
No. 846: Central Bank Interventions, Communication & Interest Rate 
Policy in Emerging European Economies 
No. 845: On the Role of Absorptive Capacity: FDI Matters to 
Growth 
No. 844: Current Account Sustainability in Selected Transition Countries  Aleksander Aristovnik 

Roman Horváth 

Balázs Égert 

Yuko Kinishita and Chia-Hui Lu 

No. 843: Policy, Economic Federalism & Product Market Entry: The 
Indian Experience 

No. 842: Price Mobility of Locations 

Sumon Bhaumik, Shubhashis 
Gangopadhyay and Shagun 
Krishnan 
Konstantin Gluschenko 

No. 841: The Role of Foreign Direct Investment in the Firm Selection 
Process in a Host Country: Evidence from Slovenia 
No. 840: Family Ownership and Control in Large Firms: The Good, The 
Bad, The Irrelevant – and Why? 
No. 839: Price Linkages of Russian Regional Markets 

Katja Zajc Kejzar 

Mike Peng and Yi Jiang 

Konstantin Gluschenko 

No. 838: The Effect of Pre-Primary Education on Primary School 
Performance 
No. 837: Do Investors Value Insider Trading Laws? International 
Evidence 
No. 836:  How corruption Hits People When They Are Down 

No.  835: Mirage at the Bottom of the Pyramid 

No. 834: Ownership concentration and firm performance: Evidence from 
an emerging market 
No. 833:  Institutions, Networks and Entrepreneurship Development in 
Russia: An Exploration 
 

Samuel Berlinski, Sebastian 
Galiani and Paul Gertler 
Laura Beny 

Jennifer Hunt 

Aneel Karnani 

Irena Grosfeld 

Date 

Feb 2007 

Dec 2006 

Nov 2006 

Nov 2006 

Nov 2006 

Nov 2006 

Nov 2006 

Nov 2006 

Oct 2006 

Nov 2006 

Nov 2006 

Nov 2006 

Nov 2006 

Nov 2006 

Oct 2006 

Sept 2006 

Oct 2006 

Sept 2006 

July 2006 

Aug 2006 

Aug 2006 

Aug 2006 

June 2006 

Ruta Aidis and Saul Estrin 

June 2006 

