CJBS 37-4  9/26/05  1:11 PM  Page 250

Organizational Injustice and Psychological Strain

LORI FRANCIS, Saint Mary’s University
JULIAN BARLING, Queen’s University

Abstract

Characterizing perceived injustice as a form of stress,

we examined the main and interactive relationships
among interactional, procedural, and distributive injus-
tice and psychological strain while controlling for job
insecurity. Using moderated multiple regression analysis
with a sample of 1,083 government employees, we show
that interactional, procedural, and distributive injustice
are all unique predictors of psychological strain that
account for significant unique variance beyond that
explained by job insecurity. Those individuals who per-
ceive more interactional, procedural, or distributive injus-
tice at work reported a higher degree of strain. However,
there were no significant interactive effects, suggesting
that these three categories of perceived injustice do not
interact to predict symptoms of psychological strain. 

Résumé

Tout en considérant l’injustice perçue comme une forme
de stress et en tenant compte de la variable de l’insécurité
d’emploi, nous avons examiné les relations principales et
interactives propres aux injustices en matière d’interac-
tion, de procédure et de catégorie, et la fatigue psy-
chologique. Une analyse de régression multiple soumise
à un échantillon de 1 083 employés du gouvernement
nous a permis de démontrer que les injustices en matière
d’interaction, de procédure et de catégorie sont toutes des
variables indépendantes de la fatigue psychologique qui
peuvent expliquer une variance unique significative dif-
férente de celle de l’insécurité d’emploi. Les personnes
qui perçoivent, dans leur milieu de travail, un plus grand
nombre d’injustices en matière d’interaction, de procé-
dure et de catégorie rapportent une fatigue plus intense.
Cependant, aucun effet interactif significatif n’a été
observé, ce qui donne à penser que ces trois catégories
d’injustice perçue n’interviennent pas dans la prédiction
des symptômes de fatigue psychologique. 

A substantial body of organizational research sup-
ports  the  claim  that  perceived  injustice  in  the  work
place leads to undesirable reactions (for comprehen-

sive  reviews,  see  Cohen-Charash  &  Spector,  2001;
Colquitt,  Conlon,  Wesson,  Porter,  &  Ng,  2001).  For
instance,  experiencing  injustice  contributes  to  such
negative  outcomes  as  decreased  work  performance
(e.g.,  Pfeffer  &  Langton,  1993)  and  increased  with-
drawal  behaviour  (e.g.,  Hulin,  1991). Although  the
violation  of  organizational  justice  principles  has
received considerable research attention, the relation-
ships most frequently considered by researchers have
involved  outcome  variables  that  are  attitudinal  or
behavioural  in  nature,  for  example,  organizational
commitment  (Alexander,  Sinclair,  &  Tetrick,  1995),
theft (Greenberg, 1990), and trust in the organization
(Konovsky  &  Pugh,  1994).  Until  recently,  the  role  of
injustice in questions pertaining to employee health,
in  particular  work-related  strain,  had  not  been
broached  in  organizational  research.  However,  of
late, organizational researchers have recognized that
organizational  injustice  may  play  a  role  in  the  very
real  problem  of  strain  at  work.  In  particular,
researchers  have  begun  to  demonstrate  that  percep-
tions  of  organizational  injustice  are  associated  with
stress-related  outcomes,  including  psychological
strain  (e.g.,  Elovainio,  Kivimaki,  &  Helkama,  2001),
depression  (Tepper,  2001),  and  counterproductive
behaviour  at  work  (Fox,  Spector,  &  Miles,  2001).  In
doing so, they acknowledge injustice as an emerging
issue  in  the  occupational  stress  literature  (e.g.,
Kelloway, Francis, & Montgomery, 2005).

In  the  current  research,  we  investigate  relation-
ships  among  the  experience  of  injustice  and  one
stress-related  outcome,  namely,  psychological  strain.
This  work  contributes  to  the  existing  literature  in
three main ways. First of all, we concurrently exam-
ine the relationships among three different categories
of  perceived  injustice  and  strain. Although  previous
studies have examined procedural, interactional, and
distributive  injustice  and  reports  of  strain,  few  have
considered  such  relationships  in  a  single  study  (for
exceptions see Judge & Colquitt, 2004; Tepper, 2000). 
Second, we examine the relationship between per-
ceived  injustice  and  strain  in  concert  with  another
variable known to be involved in the stress process,

Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 2005, 37:4, 250-261


CJBS 37-4  9/26/05  1:11 PM  Page 251

Injustice and Strain 251

namely,  job  insecurity. A number  of  other  studies
addressing  the  relationship  between  injustice  and
strain have not examined the relationship in the pres-
ence of other stress-related factors (e.g., Tepper, 2001).
We believe that an examination of how injustice pre-
dicts strain over and above another organizationally
relevant factor will result in a more complete under-
standing of the relationship between perceived injus-
tice and strain. 

As  our  third  contribution,  we  examine  potential
interactive  patterns  among  three  types  of  perceived
injustice in the prediction of strain. Three-way inter-
actions  among  procedural,  distributive,  and  interac-
tional justice perceptions have been demonstrated in
the  justice  literature  (e.g.,  Skarlicki  &  Folger,  1997).
However,  existing  research  has  not  considered  the
potential  for  a  three-way  interaction  among  interac-
tional,  procedural,  and  distributive  justice  percep-
tions  with  psychological  strain  as  the  outcome  of
interest. Previous considerations of two-way interac-
tions between procedural and distributive justice per-
ceptions  when  predicting  psychological  strain  yield
mixed results. One study shows that procedural and
distributive  justice  perceptions  interact  to  predict
multiple  variables  related  to  psychological  strain,
including  depression,  emotional  exhaustion,  and
anxiety  (Tepper,  2001),  but  another  fails  to  detect  a
two-way interaction between procedural and distrib-
utive  justice  when  predicting  psychological  strain
(Francis, 2003). With such mixed results and a lack of
research  considering  the  role  of  interactional  justice
in justice interactions when predicting strain, the cur-
rent study will elucidate an understudied area in the
literature. Before detailing the current study, we first
review  relevant  research  to  illustrate  the  relevance
and potential impact of the current study.

Occupational  stress  is  a  common  and  severe  con-
dition of major concern to both individuals and orga-
nizations. Stress is linked to such deleterious individ-
ual  outcomes  as  depression,  heart  disease,  and
increased  alcohol  use  (Quick,  Quick,  Nelson,  &
Hurrell,  1997).  The  organizational  consequences  of
stress  are  also  severe.  For  example,  work-related
stress  has  been  linked  to  such  negative  outcomes  as
decreased organizational commitment, decreased job
performance,  increased  workers’  compensation
claims, and increased sick time (Jex & Crossley, 2005).
Given  the  damaging  outcomes  associated  with  job-
related stress, it is not surprising that organizational
researchers  have  endeavoured  to  gain  an  improved
understanding of this phenomenon. 

One way that stress researchers have attempted to
advance research in this area is by clarifying the ter-
minology  used  to  describe  various  aspects  of  the

stress process (Pratt & Barling, 1988). In its common
usage,  stress  is  a  term  simultaneously  used  to
describe something people feel as well as something
to  which  individuals  are  exposed  in  their  environ-
ments.  However,  most  researchers  now  agree  on  a
general  stress  model  that  distinguishes  three  closely
related  terms:  stressors,  stress,  and  strain  (Pratt  &
Barling, 1988). Stressors are external, objectively veri-
fiable events such as a heavy workload or poor inter-
personal relations in the workplace that contribute to
the  experience  of  stress  (e.g.,  Sauter,  Murphy,  &
Hurrell,  1990).  Stress is  an  individual’s  internal
response to stressors and is characterized by arousal
and  displeasure.  Finally,  strain  describes  the  conse-
quences of long-term exposure to stress and includes
such physiological outcomes as cancer, gastrointesti-
nal  illness,  and  cardiovascular  disease  (Kristensen,
1996;  Quick  et  al.,  1997)  and  psychological  symp-
toms, including anxiety (e.g., Billings & Moos, 1982),
depression (e.g., Tepper 2001; Zohar, 1995), and cog-
nitive failure (Kivimaki & Lusa, 1994). 

In  this  study,  we  treat  perceived  injustice  as  a
reflection of stress, that is, an internal state character-
ized by arousal and displeasure, and examine its rela-
tionship  to  a  prevalent  stress-related  outcome,  psy-
chological  strain.  We  characterize  injustice  as  stress,
rather than as a stressor, because it is the individual’s
internal perception of a situation that results in judg-
ments of injustice. Via our framework, the verifiable
external event that contributed to perceived injustice,
for instance, being denied a raise, would be the stres-
sor.  Therefore,  we  investigate  further  the  issue  of
occupational  stress  by  considering  organizational
injustice as a form of work-related stress and examin-
ing its ability to predict psychological strain.

The study of organizational injustice is concerned
with people’s perceptions of fairness violations in the
workplace. However, injustice is not considered as a
uni-dimensional  construct  and  many  studies  have
focused on three dimensions of injustice: distributive,
procedural,  and  interactional  (Cohen-Charash  &
Spector, 2001). Questions about distributive injustice
focus  on  people’s  perception  of  the  fairness  of  out-
comes (Greenberg, 1987). Research in the area of pro-
cedural injustice is concerned with the extent of per-
ceived fairness for the procedures by which organiza-
tional decisions are made (Cropanzano & Greenberg,
1997).  Interactional  injustice  addresses  the  degree  of
perceived fairness in the interpersonal treatment that
a person receives (Bies & Moag, 1986). 

Research  interest  in  the  relationship  between
injustice  and  strain  has  recently  grown.  Procedural,
interactional, and distributive injustice have all been
linked  with  increased  reports  of  strain  (Elovainio,


CJBS 37-4  9/26/05  1:11 PM  Page 252

252 Francis and Barling

Kivimaki, & Vahtera, 2002; Elovanio et al., 2001; Fox
et  al.,  2001;  Francis,  2003;  Judge  &  Colquitt,  2004;
Kivimaki, Elovainio, Vahtera, & Ferrie, 2003; Tepper,
2000, 2001; Wager, Fieldman, & Hussey, 2003; Zohar,
1995).  For  example,  in  a  study  focused  on  interper-
sonal treatment, Zohar (1995) found that nurses who
perceived  that  their  supervisor  reacted  to  their  con-
cerns  in  an  unfair  manner,  reported  increased  psy-
chological  strain.  Wager  et  al.  (2003)  reported  nega-
tive  changes  in  blood  pressure,  a  manifestiation  of
physiological  strain,  among  a  sample  of  health-care
workers  when  they  were  working  under  an  unfair
leader  relative  to  when  the  same  individuals  com-
pleted a shift with a supervisor they perceived as fair.
Elovainio and colleagues (Elovanio et al., 2001, 2002;
Kivimaki et al., 2003) have reported a consistent rela-
tionship between perceptions of both procedural and
interactional injustice and elevated levels of psycho-
logical  strain,  increased  illness-related  work
absences,  and  decreased  self-reported  health  status.
Fox et al. (2001) found that perceptions of procedural
and  distributive  injustice  were  associated  with
increased  reports  of  negative  affect  and  counterpro-
ductive behaviour in the workplace, such as arriving
late, avoiding work, and criticizing the organization.
Similarly,  Tepper  (2001)  found  that  perceptions  of
distributive and procedural injustice were associated
with  increased  psychological  strain  symptoms,
including  depression,  emotional  exhaustion,  and
anxiety.

In the current study, we extend previous investiga-
tions on this matter in a number of ways. One exten-
sion is the simultaneous examination of relationships
among  three  common  categories  of  perceived  injus-
tice,  namely,  interactional,  procedural,  and  distribu-
tive and strain. Most existing studies on injustice and
strain have examined a subset of justice-related per-
ceptions.  For  instance,  Tepper  (2001)  included  only
procedural and distributive injustice in his work and
found that both types of justice perceptions predicted
psychological  strain.  Elovainio  et  al.  (2001)  on  the
other  hand  focused  on  procedural  and  interactional
injustice.  They  reported  that  both  of  these  types  of
justice judgments had significant relationships with a
measure of psychological strain.

Two exceptions to the trend of including a subset
of  injustice  categories  that  we  have  identified  in
stress-related  research  are  Tepper  (2000)  and  Judge
and Colquitt (2004). Tepper (2000) found that proce-
dural,  interactional,  and  distributive  injustice  were
all  linked  with  psychological  indicators  of  strain.
Judge  and  Colquitt  (2004)  also  considered  multiple
categories of injustice perceptions. In addition to pro-
cedural  and  distributive  injustice,  they  separately

examined two aspects of interactional injustice, infor-
mational  and  interpersonal.  Judgements  of  interper-
sonal  injustice  involve  assessments  of  sincerity  and
respect  in  interpersonal  interactions.  Perceptions  of
informational  injustice  consider  the  extent  to  which
individuals  are  given  honest  and  adequate  explana-
tions  in  the  workplace  (Bies  &  Moag,  1986;
Greenberg,  1993).  Judge  and  Colquitt  found  that,
although procedural and interpersonal injustice pre-
dicted a measure of stress, distributive and informa-
tional  injustice  did  not  emerge  as  significant  predic-
tors.  It  is  possible  that  these  mixed  results  are  a
reflection  of  measurement  or  sampling  issues  pecu-
liar to the particular studies or the different treatment
of  interactional  justice  in  each  case.  Whatever  the
case,  the  existence  of  such  mixed  results  regarding
the  relationship  between  distributive  injustice  and
other  stress-related  variables  warrants  additional
research,  particularly  those  involving  multiple  cate-
gories  of  injustice  perceptions.  We  do  so  in  the  cur-
rent study and hypothesize that:

Hypothesis 1: Perceptions of a procedural, interactional,
and distributive injustice will all significantly predict
strain. Those who perceive a high degree of procedural,
interactional or distributive injustice in their workplace
will report higher levels of psychological strain.

Our prediction that distributive injustice will pre-
dict strain is contrary to some recent findings (Judge
& Colquitt, 2004). However, we note that the majority
of  studies  examining  the  relationship  between  dis-
tributive injustice and strain have found a significant
relationship (e.g., Fox et al., 2001; Tepper, 2000, 2001).
Additionally,  the  theoretical  foundation  for  the  cur-
rent conception of distributive injustice, equity theo-
ry (Adams, 1965) purports that exposure to perceived
inequity  contributes  to  feelings  of  tension. As  such,
we propose that distributive injustice will be associ-
ated with reports of strain.

A second way in which the current study extends
existing  research  is  by  considering  perceptions  of
injustice along with job insecurity, another acknowl-
edged variable in the stress process. An examination
of how injustice operates in concert with other orga-
nizationally  relevant  factors  in  the  prediction  of
strain  will  result  in  a  more  complete  understanding
of  the  relationship  between  perceptions  of  injustice
and strain, and offer insight into the amount of addi-
tional  variance  that  perceptions  of  injustice  may
explain in psychological strain.

Certainly,  the  workplace  is  replete  with  factors
that  contribute  to  stress  among  employees.  For
instance, in the 2003 General Social Survey, Canadian


CJBS 37-4  9/26/05  1:11 PM  Page 253

Injustice and Strain 253

workers reported that work overload and poor inter-
personal  relations  at  work  were  major  sources  of
stress  (Williams,  2003).  Some  studies  pertaining  to
organizational  injustice  and  strain  have  included
such additional factors. For instance, Elovainio et al.
(2001)  reported  that  procedural  injustice  fully  medi-
ates  the  relationship  between  job  control  and  strain,
and Francis (2003) found that justice evaluations par-
tially  mediate  that  relationship.  Examining  the  rela-
tionships  among  justice  perceptions,  work-family
conflict, and stress, Judge and Colquitt (2004) deter-
mined  that  work-family  conflict  mediates  the  rela-
tionship  between  perceived  injustice  and  measure
that appears to tap psychological strain. Job insecuri-
ty is another often considered stress-related variable
(Barling & Kelloway, 1996; Sonnentag & Frese, 2003).
Those who report a high degree of insecurity in their
work  also  report  more  strain.  However,  no  studies
have  examined  the  incremental  predictive  ability  of
justice perceptions when controlling for job insecuri-
ty in the prediction of strain. Further, job insecurity is
a  particularly  important  variable  to  consider  in  the
context of the current study. These data were collect-
ed  from  employees  at  a  government  organization
involved in a substantial organizational transition. As
such, employees in this organization may have been
particularly concerned about the security of their jobs
following  the  change.  In  this  study,  we  examine  the
extent  to  which  organizational  justice  perceptions
contribute  to  the  prediction  of  psychological  strain
beyond the variance accounted for by job insecurity.
The importance of injustice can be demonstrated fur-
ther  if  it  accounts  for  a  significant  proportion  of  the
variance in individual strain beyond that of job inse-
curity. We offer the following hypothesis:

Hypothesis 2: Perceptions of injustice will account for
unique variance in psychological strain beyond that
explained by job insecurity.

The third way that the current study extends exist-
ing  work  is  by  considering  the  potential  for  interac-
tive  relationships  among  the  different  types  of  per-
ceived injustice in the prediction of strain. Certainly,
it  seems  intuitive  that  the  ability  of  perceived  injus-
tice  to  predict  strain  would  be  exacerbated  under
conditions  where  one  perceives  that  injustice  has
been  violated  along  multiple  dimensions  and  miti-
gated  when  an  injustice  that  occurs  along  a  single
dimension (e.g., distributive) and is accompanied by
fair treatment on another dimension (e.g., procedur-
al).  Previous  research  has  demonstrated  three-way
interactions among procedural, interactional and dis-
tributive  justice  in  the  prediction  of  organizational

outcomes.  For  instance,  Skarlicki  and  Folger  (1997)
reported  a  significant  three-way  interaction  among
interactional,  distributive,  and  procedural  justice
when predicting organizational retaliatory behaviour.
In that case, the relationship between organizational
retaliatory  behaviour  and  distributive  justice  only
emerged when both procedural and interactional jus-
tice  were  perceived  to  be  low.  Existing  research  has
not,  however,  considered  the  potential  for  a  three-
way interaction among interactional, procedural, and
distributive  justice  perceptions  with  psychological
strain  as  the  outcome  of  interest.  Previous  studies
that tested two-way interactions between procedural
and  distributive  justice  perceptions  when  predicting
psychological  strain  yield  mixed  results.  Tepper
(2001) reported that procedural and distributive jus-
tice perceptions interact to predict multiple variables
related to psychological strain, including depression,
emotional  exhaustion,  and  anxiety  such  that  strain
was  highest  when  both  procedural  and  distributive
justice  were  perceived  to  be  low.  Francis  (2003),  on
the other hand, did not detect a two-way interaction
between  procedural  and  distributive  justice  when
predicting  psychological  strain  across  three  separate
studies, although significant main effects emerged in
each case. 

One potential reason for the mixed findings when
considering  the  two-way  interaction  between  proce-
dural  and  distributive  injustice  perceptions  when
predicting strain is the way in which distributive and
procedural  justice  were  measured  in  the  separate
studies. Francis (2003), who failed to find an interac-
tion,  assessed  fairness  perceptions  at  an  event-  or
issue-specific level. For example, in one case, student
respondents  were  asked  to  evaluate  the  procedural
and distributive fairness of a university exam. Tepper
(2001),  who  did  uncover  a  significant  interaction,
asked  participants  to  provide  more  global  assess-
ments about fairness in their organizations. It may be
that the event-specific approach to assessing injustice
is  not  the  most  appropriate  when  strain  is  the  out-
come of interest. As we defined earlier, psychological
strain  manifests  after  a  longer  term  exposure  to
stress. As  such,  unless  the  episode  in  question  is  a
major one, injustices surrounding a single event may
not, on their own, result in strain. Whereas the accu-
mulation  of  many  incidences  of  perceived  injustice
may  constitute  a  persistent  state  of  stress,  and  ulti-
mately  result  in  strain  (Tepper,  2001).  In  the  current
study, we, like Tepper (2001), use global assessments
of fairness, asking participants to provide general jus-
tice evaluations in their workplace. 

The contradictory nature of existing findings per-
taining  to  justice  interactions  illustrate  that  a  clear


CJBS 37-4  9/26/05  1:11 PM  Page 254

254 Francis and Barling

understanding of the manner in which various cate-
gories of perceived injustice relate in the prediction of
strain  has  not  been  achieved. Additionally,  interac-
tions  involving  interactional  injustice,  including  a
three-way  interaction  of  interactional,  procedural,
and distributive injustice, as predictors of strain, have
not been explored in the literature. The current study
considers  these  possible  interactions.  However,
because  of  the  equivocal  findings  regarding  interac-
tions  among  the  categories  of  perceived  injustice,
specific hypotheses are not offered.

Method

Participants

Employee  opinion  surveys  were  distributed  to
4,591  employees  of  a  Canadian  government  organi-
zation.  Completed  surveys  were  returned  by  1,378
individuals  for  a  30%  response  rate.  Respondents
worked  for  various  ministries  (e.g.,  transportation,
health,  and  education). Age  was  assessed  using  a
series  of  age  intervals,  and  most  participants  (68%)
were between the ages 30 and 50.

Procedure and Measures

All  employees  of  the  government  organization
were  invited  to  complete  an  anonymous  employee
opinion survey. Surveys were delivered to employees
via payroll distribution and completed surveys were
returned separately to the labour relations division of
the government. 

Psychological  strain  was  measured  using  the  12-
item  version  of  the  General  Health  Questionnaire
(GHQ;  Banks  et  al.,  1980).  The  GHQ includes  items
pertaining to such factors as depression and self-con-
fidence.  The  respondents  were  asked  to  consider
their psychological strain symptoms over the past six
months. The items were rated on a 4-point response
scale  ranging  from  1  (better  than  usual)  to  4  (much
worse than usual). Due to a printing error, one item
from  the  GHQ 12  was  missing  in  this  survey  (been
able to face up to your problems). Thus, the psycho-
logical  strain  score  was  computed  using  11  items.
This  variable  was  computed  such  that  higher  scores
are  indicative  of  more  strain.  Prior  research  has
shown high internal consistency for this measure (α’s
ranging  from  .82  to  .90;  Banks  et  al.,  1980).  Internal
consistency for the GHQ was high in this study (α =
0.92).

Procedural  injustice was  measured  using  seven
items  developed  by  Moorman  (1991).  Responses
were  given  based  on  a  5-point  scale  ranging  from  1
(strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). An example

TABLE 1
Descriptive Statistics and Intercorrelations for All Study Variables

5

4

3

2

M SD 1

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Variable
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1. Procedural Injustice
2. Distributive Injustice
3. Interactional Injustice
4. Insecurity
5. Strain 
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Listwise N = 1,083 
All correlations significant at p < .001

.86 —
1.0
.88
.93
.53

.38 —
.56
.22
.34

.33 —
.17
.36

.16 —
.33

2.5
3.1
2.3
3.0
2.2

.26 —

χ2

TABLE 2
Fit Indices for the Models
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
GFI AGFI CFI NFI RMSEA
Model
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
3 Factor 
2 Factor 
1 Factor 
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Note. N = 1,219; *p < .01.

995.13*  116 
4,320.20*  118 
8,745.05*  119 

.08  
.20  
.29  

.91 
.63 
.45 

.88 
.52 
.30 

.96 
.79 
.56 

.95 
.78 
.56 

df

item  is,  “If  someone  laid  a  complaint,  my  organiza-
tion  would  collect  all  the  information  necessary  for
decision  making.” Higher  scores  indicate  a  high
degree  of  perceived  injustice.  This  scale  showed
acceptable internal consistency (α  = .95).

Interactional  injustice was  measured  using  five
items  developed  by  Moorman  (1991).  Responses
were  given  based  on  a  5  point  scale  ranging  from  1
(strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). An example
item is, “If I were to speak to my supervisor about a
complaint, my supervisor would treat me with kind-
ness  and  consideration.” Higher  scores  indicate  a
high  degree  of  perceived  injustice.  This  scale  had
acceptable internal consistency (α  = .93).

Distributive  injustice was  measured  using  five
items  described  by  Price  and  Mueller  (1986).
Responses were given based on a 5-point scale rang-
ing  from  1  (strongly  disagree)  to  5  (strongly  agree).
An  example  item  is,  “In  my  workplace  I  am  fairly
rewarded  considering  my  responsibilities.” Higher
scores  indicate  a  high  degree  of  perceived  injustice.
This scale was internally consistent (α = .94). 

Job insecurity was assessed using five items devel-
oped  for  the  current  study.  Responses  were  given
based on a 5 point scale ranging from 1 (strongly dis-
agree) to 5 (strongly agree). The items are presented
in  the Appendix.  Higher  scores  indicate  a  high
degree  of  insecurity.  This  measure  was  internally
consistent (α = .81).


CJBS 37-4  9/26/05  1:11 PM  Page 255

TABLE 3
Standardized Parameter Estimates and Squared Multiple Correlations for the Three-Factor Model

Injustice and Strain 255

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Item
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
I am fairly rewarded…
…considering my responsibilities.
…in view of the amount of experience I have.
…for the amount of effort I put forth.
…for the work I have done well.
…for the stresses and strains of my job.

Interactional  Procedural 

.70
.67
.87
.83
.67

.83
.82
.93
.91
.82

Distributive

Justice

Justice

Justice

R2

If I were to speak to my supervisor about a complaint, my supervisor would… 
…consider my viewpoint.
…consider the situation objectively.
…provide me with timely feedback about any decision.
…treat me with kindness and consideration.
… show concerns for my rights as an employee.

.86
.87
.78
.88
.90

.75
.76
.60
.77
.80

If someone in my workplace laid a complaint my organization would…
…collect all the information necessary for decision making.
…provide opportunities to appeal or challenge the decision.
…follow standards or policies so that decision could be made consistently.
… hear the concerns of all those affected by the decision.
…provide useful information regarding the decision and its implementation.
…allow requests for clarification about the decision.
…ensure the privacy of all those involved.
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––

.73
.70
.77
.81
.82
.82
.53

.86
.83
.88
.90
.91
.90
.73

Results

Variables  were  computed  using  listwise  deletion
of missing data at the item level. Prior to testing the
stated  hypotheses,  we  examined  the  data  for  viola-
tions  of  the  assumptions  of  normality,  linearity,
homoskedasticity,  and  multicollinearity  using  SPSS
for  Windows  Version  10.1.  The  distributions  for
strain, interactional injustice, and procedural injustice
were  somewhat  positively  skewed.  However,  as  the
proposed  analysis  is  robust  to  violations  of  the
assumption  of  normality,  transformations  were  not
performed. No univariate (greater than four standard
deviations  from  the  mean)  or  multivariate  outliers
were  detected.  No  other  violations  of  assumptions
were detected. Descriptive statistics and intercorrela-
tions for all study variables are presented in Table 1.

As there is some debate in the literature regarding
the  number  of  dimensions  of  organizational  justice,
before  testing  the  hypotheses  pertaining  to  a  three-
dimensional model of organizational justice, we veri-
fied  the  factor  structure  using  Confirmatory  Factor
Analysis. We compared the fit of three separate mod-
els. The first model contained three factors in which
distributive,  interactional,  and  procedural  justice
loaded  on  separate  factors.  The  second  was  a  two-
factor model, in which distributive justice loaded on
one  factor,  and  procedural  and  interactional  justice
loaded on a second factor. The third model was one
in  which  all  three  categories  of  justice  perceptions

TABLE 4
Beta Weights and Multiple Correlation for Psychological Strain
Following Step 4 of the Hierarchical Moderated Multiple
Regression

R

β

R2

.475*

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Variable
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Job Insecurity
.225*
Interactional Injustice
Procedural Injustice
Distributive Injustice
Interactional x Procedural
Interactional x Distributive
Procedural x Distributive
Interactional x Procedural x Distributive
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
Note. * p < .01; Listwise N = 1,083.

.17*
.18*
.13*
.24*
.003
-.06
.06
- .05

loaded  on  a  single  factor.  Unfortunately,  due  to  the
nature  of  the  interactional  justice  items,  we  were
unable to test a four-factor model (Colquitt, 2001) in
which  interactional  justice  was  separated  into  infor-
mational and interpersonal components. 

All  model  tests  were  conducted  using  maximum
likelihood  estimate  in  LISREL 8.51  (Joreskog  &
Sorbom,  2001)  and  were  based  on  the  covariance
matrix. Fit indices for the three models are presented
in  Table  2. An  inspection  of  the  fit  indices  suggests
that the three-factor model provides the best fit to the
data. In particular, the three factor model provides a
better fit to the data than does the model hypothesiz-
ing two factors, χ2
difference (2) = 3,325.97, p < .01, and


CJBS 37-4  9/26/05  1:11 PM  Page 256

256 Francis and Barling

the model proposing a one-factor solution, χ2
difference
(3)  =  7,749.92,  p  <  .01.  Standardized  parameter  esti-
mates  and  squared  multiple  correlations  for  the
three-factor model are presented in Table 3. All para-
meter  estimates  were  significant  and  explained  sub-
stantial amount of item variance.

To test our hypotheses, we conducted a moderated
multiple regression. According to the procedure rec-
ommended  by Aiken  and  West  (1991),  those  predic-
tors  involved  in  the  interaction  were  standardized
before  the  interaction  terms  were  computed.  With
strain  as  the  criterion  measure,  job  insecurity  was
entered  on  the  first  step.  Interactional,  procedural,
and distributive injustice were all entered on Step 2.
The  3  two-way  interactions  between  the  injustice
terms  were  entered  on  Step  3,  and  the  three-way
injustice interaction term was included on the fourth
and final step of the regression.

Listwise  deletion  of  missing  data  resulted  in  a
sample size of 1,083 for this analysis.  R2 was signifi-
cantly different from zero for all steps. With all vari-
ables  entered  in  the  equation,  R2 =  .23,  F(8,  1074)  =
39.06, p < .001. Following Step 1, with job insecurity
entered  as  the  lone  predictor,  R2 =  .07,  F(1,  1081)  =
79.34, p < .001. 

As  predicted,  the  addition  of  the  three  injustice
variables  on  Step  2  accounted  for  significant  incre-
mental  variance  in  psychological  strain, Δ R2 =  .152,
Fchange (3, 1,078) = 70.14, p < .001. Thus perceptions of
injustice  accounted  for  an  additional  15.2%  of  the
variance  in  psychological  strain  beyond  that
explained  by  job  insecurity.  Therefore,  Hypothesis  2
is supported. The addition of the two-way interaction
terms on the third step did not account for additional
variance  in  the  psychological  strain  reported  by  the
government employees (Δ R2 = .003, p > .15). Similarly,
the three-way interaction term introduced on Step 4
did  not  significantly  contribute  to  the  variance
accounted for in the criterion measure (Δ R2 = .001, p >
.15).  Thus,  in  the  present  study,  procedural,  interac-
tional,  and  distributive  injustice  do  not  appear  to
interact  in  any  manner  to  predict  incremental  vari-
ance in psychological strain.

The beta weights for each predictor following Step
4  of  the  hierarchical  moderated  multiple  regression
are  presented  in  Table  4.  Examination  of  these  beta
weights indicates that job insecurity was a significant
predictor  of  reported  psychological  strain, β  =  .17,  t
(1,074)  =  6.09,  p <  .001.  Not  surprisingly,  those  who
felt higher levels of job insecurity also reported more
strain. All three types of perceived injustice emerged
as  significant  predictors  of  psychological  strain.  For
interactional injustice, β =.18, t(1,074) = 5.07, p < .001;
for  procedural  injustice, β =.13,  t(1,074)  =  3.56,  p <

.001;  and  for  distributive  injustice, β =.24,  t(1,074)  =
7.65,  p <  .001. As  predicted  in  Hypothesis  1,  those
who  feel  that  their  workplaces  are  interactionally,
procedurally,  or  distributively  unfair  report  more
psychological strain. 

Discussion

The current investigation provides additional sup-
port for the proposition that exposure to injustice is a
stressful experience. Individuals who perceived high-
er degrees of procedural, interactional, or distributive
injustice tended to report higher incidence of psycho-
logical  strain  symptoms.  Certainly,  these  results  are
in  keeping  with  those  of  a  number  of  other  recent
studies that show perceived injustice as an important
predictor  of  stress-related  outcomes  (Elovanio  et  al.,
2001;  Elovainio  et  al.,  2002;  Fox  et  al.,  2001;  Francis,
2003;  Judge  &  Colquitt,  2004;  Kivimaki  et  al.,  2003;
Tepper,  2000,  2001;  Wager  et  al.,  2003;  Zohar,  1995).
These  results  are  similar  to  those  found  in  Tepper’s
(2000)  investigation  treating  procedural,  interaction-
al, and distributive justice as predictors of psycholog-
ical strain. However, the results of the current study
differ  somewhat  from  another  recent  study.  Judge
and Colquitt (2004) reported that procedural injustice
and  one  component  of  interactional  injustice,  inter-
personal  injustice,  were  significant  predictors  of  a
measure  of  perceived  stress.  However,  distributive
injustice and an additional component of interaction-
al injustice, informational injustice, did not emerge as
significant predictors. 

It is possible that a number of differences between
the current study and Judge and Colquitt (2004) may
account  for  the  discrepant  results.  First  of  all,  Judge
and  Colquitt  examined  work-family  conflict  as  a
mediator of justice perceptions and a measure of per-
ceived  stress.  Therefore,  this  study  considered  indi-
rect,  rather  than  direct,  relationships  between  per-
ceived  injustice  and  stress. Additionally,  Judge  and
Colquitt  considered  four,  rather  than  a  categories  of
organizational  justice.  Their  treatment  separately
considered  interpersonal  and  informational  justice
perceptions,  which  they  viewed  as  components  of
interactional  injustice.  Future  research  should
address these discrepancies in an effort to more clear-
ly ascertain the roles of distributive and interactional
injustice. Clearly, additional research should consider
the  components  of  interpersonal  and  informational
injustice  to  see  if  informational  injustice  arises  as  a
predictor  of  strain  under  other  circumstances.
Similarly, additional work should be done to identify
the  role  of  other  potential  mediators  in  the  relation-
ship between injustice and strain.

Another interesting finding of the current investi-


CJBS 37-4  9/26/05  1:11 PM  Page 257

Injustice and Strain 257

gation  is  that  perceived  injustice  accounted  for  con-
siderable  incremental  variance  in  psychological
strain.  Perceptions  of  procedural,  interactional,  and
distributive  injustice  explained  an  additional  15.2%
of the variance in stress beyond that accounted for by
job  insecurity  alone.  The  results  lend  support  to  the
notion that injustice is, in and of itself, an important
aspect  of  organizational  stress.  We  note  that  per-
ceived  injustice  explaining  variance  above  and
beyond job insecurity may take on particular impor-
tance given the current sample. The data for the pre-
sent study were collected at a time when the govern-
ment  organization  in  question  was  undergoing  sub-
stantial change, and individuals may have been con-
cerned  about  their  job  security  in  the  postchange
environment. 

One  of  our  goals  in  the  current  study  was  to
examine  potential  interactive  relationships  among
procedural, interactional, and distributive injustice in
the  prediction  of  strain.  There  were  no  significant
interactions,  even  though  with  such  a  large  sample
size there was sufficient power to detect such effects
if they were present. This is the only study of which
we are aware that examines the potential interactions
involving  interactional,  procedural,  and  distributive
injustice when predicting a measure of psychological
strain. Thus, the lack of a three-way interaction, and
the failure to detect any two-way interactions involv-
ing interactional injustice, is a unique contribution to
the literature. 

Other  studies  have  examined  the  interactive
effects of perceived procedural and distributive injus-
tice  in  the  prediction  of  strain.  The  lack  of  a  signifi-
cant interaction between procedural and distributive
injustice in the current study is in keeping with some
previous research. For instance, Francis (2003) failed
to detect such an interaction in three separate studies
examining the relationship between perceived injus-
tice and strain. However, the current results are con-
trary to those reported by Tepper (2001), who found
that procedural and distributive injustice consistently
interact to predict outcomes related to psychological
strain, such as exhaustion and depression. Such con-
flicting results suggest that procedural and distribu-
tive  injustice  can  interact  to  predict  psychological
strain,  but  that  the  presence  of  such  an  interaction
may  be  dependent  upon  the  context  and  conditions
of the study. Earlier, we suggested that the reason for
the conflicting findings of Tepper (2001) and Francis
(2003)  was  that  the  former  relied  on  global  assess-
ments  of  fairness  and  the  latter  on  more  event-
focused justice evaluations. We addressed this possi-
bility  in  the  current  study  by  using  general  assess-
ments  of  procedural,  interactional,  and  distributive

justice.  Given  that  significant  interactions  did  not
emerge  in  the  current  study,  the  level  at  which  the
justice  variables  are  measured  does  not  explain  the
inconsistent  results.  However,  other  differences
between  Tepper  (2001)  and  the  current  study  may
account for the seemingly incompatible results.

One difference between Tepper (2001) and the cur-
rent study is the degree of relationship between dis-
tributive  and  procedural  justice.  In  two  separate
studies, Tepper (2001) reported correlations between
distributive  and  procedural  justice  that  were  above
.6, whereas in the current study the same correlation
was .38. This difference is somewhat surprising given
that both studies appear to have used similar opera-
tionalizations  of  procedural  and  distributive  injus-
tice. It is possible, especially noting that Tepper’s sig-
nificant  interactions  accounted  for  between  1%  and
4% of the variance in strain, that the differences in the
extent  to  which  the  two  justice  variables  are  related
affects the emergence of an interaction when they are
used to predict strain. 

Another pertinent factor that distinguishes Tepper
(2001) and the current study is that the former used
longitudinal investigations to assess the relationship
between injustice and strain. As strain manifests as a
result of longer-term exposure to stress, it is possible
that  a  longitudinal  approach,  which  would  permit
longer time frames for the individuals to experience
the  injustice  they  initially  reported  at  Time  1,  may
increase  the  likelihood  of  detecting  a  justice  interac-
tion when strain is the outcome of interest. 

The final difference between Tepper (2001) and the
current study that we will consider as a potential rea-
son  for  the  contradictory  results  between  the  two
investigations  is  the  nature  of  the  samples.  Tepper
(2001) sampled respondents from a large public orga-
nization in one study and residents of a large city in
another. In the current study, we also sampled from a
public  organization;  however,  the  organization  con-
sidered in the current study was undergoing a major
transition.  It  is  possible  that  the  respondents  in  our
study  were  experiencing  strain  as  a  result  of  stress
stemming from multiple stressors associated with the
change. Other than job insecurity, we were unable to
control  for  these  types  of  stress.  In  this  case,  such
multiply  determined  symptoms  of  strain  may  have
masked justice interactions that actually exist.

Whatever  the  reason  for  the  contradictory  nature
of the current findings and those reported by Tepper
(2001), the mixed results appear to reflect the state of
the  existing  literature  on  justice  interactions.
Previously  published  results  on  the  relationship
between  procedural  and  distributive  injustice  in  the
prediction of varied outcomes, beyond those pertain-


CJBS 37-4  9/26/05  1:11 PM  Page 258

258 Francis and Barling

ing  to  strain,  are  also  mixed  (see  Cropanzano  &
Greenberg, 1997). Folger and Cropanzano (1998) note
that when interactions between justice categories do
arise, they can take on different forms. One possible
form is that the negative outcomes associated with a
perceived  distributive  unfairness  only  arise  when
procedural and interactional fairness evaluations are
also  low. Alternatively,  it  is  also  possible  that  the
interaction  is  such  that  high  distributive  justice  can
mitigate the effects of unfair processes, be they proce-
dural or interactional. 

It is obvious that, as of yet, a clear understanding
of  the  manner  in  which  the  various  types  of  per-
ceived  injustice  relate  in  the  prediction  of  outcomes
has  not  been  achieved.  Researchers  should  continue
to entertain the potential for and nature of interactive
relationships  among  procedural,  interactional,  and
distributive  injustice  in  the  prediction  of  organiza-
tionally  relevant  outcomes.  For  instance,  future
research should look for interactive patterns in stud-
ies that explicitly compare event-specific versus glob-
al  assessments  of  fairness. A similar  comparison  of
longitudinal  versus  cross-sectional  designs  would
also  be  valuable.  In  doing  such  research,  investiga-
tors  would  provide  a  necessary  exploration  of  the
boundaries of the conditions under which an interac-
tive relationship emerges and what form such inter-
actions  might  take,  as  well  as  identify  the  circum-
stances under which the categories of injustice oper-
ate independently. Understanding the impact of con-
text  and  research  design  on  the  interactive  patterns
among the different types justice variables would be
valuable to organizational practice, as there are work-
place situations in which management has more con-
trol  over  the  fairness  of  procedures  or  interpersonal
treatment  than  they  do  the  outcome,  for  example,
during a layoff decision. 

Like all research, the present study is not without
limitations.  Our  reliance  on  self-reported  measures
for  justice,  job  insecurity,  and  stress  is  not  ideal.
Although  we  acknowledge  the  potential  limitations
associated with self-report measures, we nonetheless
believe  that  the  current  research  makes  a  valuable
contribution  to  the  literature.  The  literature  pertain-
ing  to  injustice  and  strain  is  in  its  infancy. At  this
point, when little is known about the nuances of the
relationship  between  perceived  injustice  and  strain,
valuable  information  can  be  obtained  from  self-
report  data. Additionally,  with  respect  to  the  mea-
sures  of  organizational  injustice  in  work  environ-
ments,  it  is  often  not  desirable  to  move  away  from
self-reported information as it is the individuals’ per-
ceptions  regarding  the  fairness  of  their  workplaces,
rather  then  objective  assessments  of  fairness,  that

relate to important outcomes (Fox et al., 2001). 

We do, however, agree that future research efforts
should  involve  objective  measures  of  strain.  Stress
researchers  and  consumers  of  the  organizational
stress  literature  have  expressed  a  great  deal  of  con-
cern  regarding  the  widespread  use  of  self-report
measures  (e.g.,  Kahn  &  Byosiere,  1992)  and  have
encouraged the increased use of physiological indices
of strain (Sonnentag & Frese, 2003). Certainly, physio-
logical  indicators  of  strain,  such  as  blood  pressure,
are  now  increasingly  incorporated  in  occupational
stress research (e.g., Wager et al., 2003). In the future,
investigators  should  include  such  measures  in
research that explores further the complexities of the
relationships among justice perceptions and strain. In
doing so, these researchers will move away from the
focus on psychological outcomes and into a broader
conceptualization of strain. 

Nonresponse bias is often a concern in large, sur-
vey-based  investigations  such  as  this  one.  The  cur-
rent response rate of 30% is not particularly low for
an organizational survey of this type. However, it is
possible that those who are most highly vulnerable to
stress  and  strain  were  more  likely  to  complete  the
survey  than  were  other  individuals.  This  may  be  of
particular  concern  when  response  rates  are  low.
However,  fears  regarding  nonresponse  bias  are
allayed  by  research  conducted  by  Schalm  and
Kelloway  (2002),  who  show  that  low  response  rates
do not necessarily bias study results. Their premise is
that  nonresponse  is  only  a  concern  if  it  distorts  the
effects  under  consideration.  That  is,  response  bias  is
problematic if low response rates are associated with
increased effect sizes. Their investigation of previous-
ly published work resulted in a nonsignificant corre-
lation  between  response  rate  and  effect  size.
Additionally,  given  that  the  data  for  the  present
study were drawn from a much larger organizational
survey, there is no reason to believe that individuals
who were particularly sensitive to issues of injustice
or  strain  per  se  would  be  more  likely  to  respond  to
the survey.

Although  demonstrations  that  the  experience  of
injustice  contributes  to  strain  are  becoming  more
commonplace,  very  little  is  known  about  the  actual
mechanisms that govern the relationship among per-
ceived injustice, stress, and strain (Judge & Colquitt,
2004), and there is no agreement regarding the partic-
ular  role  that  perceived  injustice  plays  in  the  stress
process. For instance, we treat perceived injustice as a
reflection of stress that occurs in response to an exter-
nal stressor. That is, perceived injustice is an internal
state that develops in response to an external event,
for  instance,  a  promotion  decision-making  process.


CJBS 37-4  9/26/05  1:11 PM  Page 259

Injustice and Strain 259

According  to  our  treatment,  perceived  injustice  con-
tributes to the experience of strain. Elovainio and col-
leagues  (Elovanio  et  al.,  2001;  Elovainio  et  al.,  2002;
Kivimaki  et  al.,  2003)  take  a  similar  approach  and
discuss how justice evaluations predict indicators of
various  indicators  of  strain.  Other  researchers,  how-
ever, appear to treat perceived injustice as a stressor
and  examine  its  relationship  to  stress  (e.g.,  Judge  &
Colquitt,  2004).  To  that  extent,  considerable  work  in
articulating, describing, and dissecting this process is
needed. 

The results of the present study carry a number of
important  practical  implications  for  Human
Resources  practice  with  respect  to  the  management
of the costly problem of occupational stress (Karasek
& Theorell, 1990). The clear demonstration that injus-
tice  contributes  to  psychological  manifestations  of
strain  should  direct  attention  toward  injustice  as  a
potential  component  of  stress  management  initia-
tives. One approach to managing stress in the work-
place is Preventive Stress Management (Quick et al.,
1997).  Preventive  Stress  Management  emphasizes
that  the  well-being  of  an  organization  and  its
employees  are  interdependent.  As  such,  this
approach notes that stress-related interventions ideal-
ly include both organizational and individual efforts.
It also highlights both the reduction of stressors in the
workplace and the management of existing stress and
strain.  The  recognition  that  perceived  injustice  is
stressful  might  guide  program  development  under
the principles of Preventive Stress Management. 

Given the goal of reducing the number of stresses
in the workplace, acknowledging that a state of per-
ceived injustice is stressful is a starting point for the
design of preventative interventions. For instance, if
perceived  injustice  is  recognized  as  a  type  of  stress,
Human  Resources  experts  might  include  organiza-
tional justice principles in curricula for management
training programs. Those managers who are aware of
the damaging effects of injustice may be more mind-
ful to enact fair procedures, treatment, and outcomes
when  dealing  with  employees,  thus  reducing  the
incidence of unfair scenarios in the workplace. 

With respect to the goal of improved management
of existing employee stress and strain, the characteri-
zation  of  injustice  as  a  type  of  stress  may  benefit
counselling  and  employee  assistance  initiatives.  For
instance, these programs may help employees recog-
nize situations that lead to perceptions of unfairness
as  a  contributing  factor  in  their  experience  of  stress
and strain. As such, employees may be able to learn
to  cope  with  their  feelings  about  the  perceived
unfairness  or  manage  the  source  of  the  perceived
injustice. 

This research was supported by funding from the
Nova Scotia Health Research Foundation to the first
author and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council of Canada to the second author. The authors
thank Noel Keeley for his assistance with data collection.
Portions of this study were presented at the Work, Stress
and Health Conference, Toronto, ON, March 2003.

Correspondence should be addressed to Lori Francis,

Department of Psychology, Saint Mary’s University,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada B3H 3C3 (E-mail:
Lori.Francis@ SMU.ca). 

References

Adams, J. S. (1965). Inequity in social exchange. In L.

Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychol-
ogy (Vol. 2, pp. 267-299). New York: Academic Press. 

Aiken, L.S., & West, S.G. (1991). Multiple regression: Testing

and interpreting interactions. Newbury Park, CA: Sage
Publications.

Alexander, S., Sinclair, R. R., & Tetrick, L. E. (1995). The

role of organizational justice in defining and maintain-
ing the employment relationship. In L. E. Tetrick & J.
Barling (Eds.), Changing employment relations:
Behavioral and social perspectives (pp. 61-89).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 

Banks, M. H., Clegg, C. W., Jackson, P. R., Kemp, N. J.,
Stafford, E. M., & Wall, T. D. (1980). The use of the
General Health Questionnaire as an indicator of men-
tal health in occupational studies. Journal of
Occupational Psychology, 53, 187-194.

Barling J., & Kelloway, E. K. (1996). Job insecurity and
health: The moderating role of workplace control.
Stress Medicine, 12, 253-260.

Bies, R. J., & Moag, J. S. (1986). Interactional justice:

Communication criteria of fairness. In R. J. Lewicki, B.
H. Sheppard, & M. Bazerman (Eds.), Research on nego-
tiation in organizations, (Vol. 1; pp. 43-55). Greenwich,
CT: JAI Press.

Billings, A. G., & Moos, R. H. (1982). Stressful life events

and symptoms: A longitudinal model. Health
Psychology, 1, 99-117.

Cohen-Charash, Y., & Spector, P. E. (2001). The role of jus-

tice in organizations: A meta-analysis. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 86, 278-321.

Colquitt, J. A. (2001). On the dimensionality of organiza-

tional justice: A construct validation of a measure.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 386-400.

Colquitt, J. A., Conlon, D. E., Wesson, M .J., Porter, C. O.,
& Ng, K. Y. (2001). Justice at the millennium: A meta-
analytic review of 25 years of organizational justice
research. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 425-445.

Cropanzano, R., & Greenberg, J. (1997). Progress in orga-
nizational justice: Tunneling through the maze. In C.
L. Cooper & I. T. Robertson (Eds.), International review


CJBS 37-4  9/26/05  1:11 PM  Page 260

260 Francis and Barling

of industrial and organizational psychology, (Vol. 12;
pp. 317- 372). London: John Wiley & Sons.

Elovainio, M., Kivimaki, M., & Helkama, K. (2001).

Organizational justice evaluations, job control, and
occupational strain. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86,
418-424.

Elovainio, M., Kivimaki, M., & Vahtera, J. (2002).

Organizational justice: Evidence of a new psychosocial
predictor of health. American Journal of Public Health,
92, 105-108.

Folger, R., & Cropanzano, R. (1998). Organizational justice
and human resource management. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications.

Fox, S., Spector, P. E., & Miles, D. (2001).

Counterproductive work behaviour (CWB) in
response to job stressors and organizational justice:
Some mediator and moderator tests for autonomy and
emotions. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 59, 291-309.
Francis, L. (2003). Organizational justice, sensitivity to

injustice and the experience of stress. (Doctoral disser-
tation, University of Guelph, 2003). Dissertation
Abstracts International, 64(1-B), 451.

Greenberg, J. (1987). A taxonomy of organizational justice

theories. Academy of Management Review, 12, 9-22.
Greenberg, J. (1990). Employee theft as a reaction to

underpayment inequity. Journal of Applied Psychology,
75, 561-568.

Greenberg, J. (1993). The social side of fairness:

Interpersonal and informational causes of organiza-
tional justice. In R. Cropanzano (Ed.), Justice in the
workplace: Approaching fairness in human resource man-
agement (pp. 79-103). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Hulin, C. L. (1991). Adaptation, persistence and commit-

ment in organizations. In M. D. Dunnette & L. M.
Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial and organizational
psychology (2nd ed.; Vol. 2; pp. 445-506). Palo Alto, CA:
Consulting Psychologists Press.

Jex, S. M., & Crossley, C. D. (2005). Organizational conse-

quences. In J. Baring, E. K. Kelloway, & M. Frone
(Eds.), Handbook of work stress (pp. 575-599). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Joreskog, K. G., & Sorbom, D. (2001). LISREL 8.51 user’s
guide. Chicago, IL: Scientific Software International.
Judge, T. A., & Colquitt, J. A. (2004). Organizational jus-

tice and stress: The mediating role of work-family con-
flict. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89, 395-404. 

Kahn, R. L., & Byosiere, P. (1992). Stress in organizations.
In M. D. Dunnette & L. M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of
industrial and organizational psychology (Vol. 3, pp. 571-
650). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

Karasek, R., & Theorell, T. (1990). Healthy work: Stress, pro-

ductivity, and the reconstruction of working life. New
York: Basic Books.

Kelloway, E. K., Francis, L., & Montgomery, J. (2005).

Management of occupational health and safety, (3rd ed).
Scarborough, ON: Nelson.

Kivimaki, M., Elovainio, M., Vahtera, J., & Ferrie, J. E.

(2003). Organizational justice and the health of
employees: Prospective cohort study. Occupational and
Environmental Medicine, 60, 27-34.

Kivimaki, M., & Lusa, S. (1994). Stress and cognitive per-
formance of fire fighters during smoke diving. Stress
Medicine, 10, 63-68.

Konovsky, M. A., & Pugh, S. D. (1994). Citizenship behav-

iour and social exchange. Academy of Management
Journal, 37, 656-669.

Kristensen, T. S. (1996). Job stress and cardiovascular dis-

ease: A theoretical critical review. Journal of
Occupational Health Psychology, 3, 246-260.

Moorman, R. H. (1991). Relationship between organiza-
tional justice and organizational citizenship behavior.
Do fairness perceptions influence employee citizen-
ship? Journal of Applied Psychology, 76, 845-855. 

Pfeffer, J., & Langton, N. (1993). The effects of wage dis-

persion on satisfaction, productivity, and working col-
laboratively: Evidence from college and university fac-
ulty. Administrative Science Quarterly, 38, 382-407. 

Pratt, L. I., & Barling, J. (1988). Differentiating between

daily events, acute and chronic stressors: A framework
and its implications. In J. J. Hurrell, Jr., L. R. Murphy,
S. L. Sauter, & Cooper (Eds.), Occupational stress: Issues
and developments in research (pp. 41-53). New York:
Taylor & Francis.

Price, J. L., & Mueller, C. W. (1986). Handbook of organiza-

tional measurement. Marshfield, MA: Pittman. 

Quick, J. C., Quick, J. D., Nelson, D. L., & Hurrell, Jr., J. J.

(1997). Preventive stress management in organizations.
Washington, DC: APA Books.

Sauter, S. L., Murphy, L. R., & Hurrell, Jr., J. J. (1990).

Prevention of work-related psychological disorders: A
national strategy proposed by the National Institute
for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH).
American Psychologist, 45, 1146-1158.

Schalm, R. L., & Kelloway, E. K. (2002). The relationship
between response rate and effect size in occupational
health psychology research. Journal of Occupational
Health Psychology, 6, 160-163.

Skarlicki, D. P., & Folger, R. (1997). Retaliation in the

workplace: The roles of distributive, procedural and
interactional justice. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82,
434-443.

Sonnentag, S., & Frese, M. (2003). Stress in organizations.

In W. C. Borman, D. R. Ilgen, & R. J. Klimoski (Eds.),
Handbook of psychology, Vol. 12: Industrial and
Organizational Psychology (pp. 453-491). Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley.

Tepper, B. J. (2000). Consequences of abusive supervision.

Academy of Management Journal, 43, 176-190.


CJBS 37-4  9/26/05  1:11 PM  Page 261

Tepper, B. J. (2001). Health consequences of organization-

Perspectives on Labour and Income, 4(6), 5-12.

Injustice and Strain 261

al injustice: Tests of main and interactive effects.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
86, 197-215.

Wager, N., Fieldman, G., & Hussey, T. (2003). The effect

on ambulatory blood pressure of working under
favourably and unfavourably perceived supervisors.
Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 60, 468-474.

Williams, C. (2003). Sources of workplace stress.

Zohar, D. (1995). The justice perspective of job stress.

Journal of Organizational Behavior, 16, 487-495.

Received May 15, 2004
Revised January 6, 2005

Revised June, 2005

Accepted June 26, 2005

Items Used to Measure Job Insecurity

Appendix

Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with each of the following statements where:

Strongly Disagree

1

Disagree

2

Neither Agree Nor Disagree 

3

Agree

4

Strongly Agree

5

1. I can keep my current job for as long as I want it. (R)
2. This job has retirement security. (R)
3. I can be sure of my present job as long as I do good work. (R)
4. I am not really sure how long my present job will last.
5. I am afraid of losing my present job. 

View publication stats
View publication stats

