J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2008) 36:322–336
DOI 10.1007/s11747-007-0082-9

ORIGINAL EMPIRICAL RESEARCH

Influence of customer participation on creating
and sharing of new product value

Eric Fang & Robert W. Palmatier & Kenneth R. Evans

Received: 11 December 2006 / Accepted: 5 December 2007 / Published online: 8 April 2008
# Academy of Marketing Science 2007

Abstract This research applies an institutional arrange-
ment perspective to develop an end-to-end model for the
interaction between customers and upstream suppliers to
develop a new product to understand how new product
value is created and shared. The model is empirically tested
by collecting primary data from 188 manufacturers across
different
industries. The research demonstrates that cus-
tomer participation affects new product value creation by
improving the effectiveness of the new product develop-
ment process by enhancing information sharing and
customer–supplier coordination and by increasing the level
of customer and supplier specific investments in the
product development effort. In addition,
increasing the
formalization of the customer participation process enhan-
ces both customer and supplier relationship-specific invest-
ments in the new product development process. The impact
of customer participation on the customer's share of the new
product value pie is more complex then is first apparent.
Based on the dependence and equity perspectives the
results suggest
that exchange partners' power (relative
dependence) positively influences a partner's ability to

E. Fang (*)
College of Business, University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign, USA
e-mail: fange@lerner.udel.edu

R. W. Palmatier
University of Washington,
P.O. Box 353200, Seattle, WA 98195-3200, USA
e-mail: palmatrw@u.washington.edu

K. R. Evans
College of Business, University of Oklahoma,
307 W. Brooks, Room 207,
Norman, OK 73019-4007, USA
e-mail: evansk@OU.edu

capture new product value, but this power is offset by a
desire of exchange partners to ensure the distribution of
value is “fair” and reflects each party's contribution to the
value creation.

Keywords New product development . Dependence .
Equity . Customer participation . Relationship marketing .
Institutional arrangement . Innovation

Utilizing new product development and innovation strate-
gies to generate competitive advantage and superior
financial performance have become widespread in the past
decade, but many of these new products fail
to meet
expectations (Henard and Szymanski 2001). One common-
ly identified cause is that the information regarding the
“need” resides within the customer, while the information
regarding “the solution” is in the seller's domain (Henard
and Szymanski 2001; Zipkin 2001). For example,
the
failure of Corning's optical fiber new product development
in early 2000 was attributed largely to its failure to match
their product to the customer needs (BusinessWeek 2006).
Thus, closely linking the customer to the seller during the
development process is argued to be a key success factor in
new product development (Terwiesch and Loch 1999).
Traditionally,
the impetus is for
upstream suppliers to ask their customers to participate in
the new product development (NPD) process, but more
recently, customers are recognizing that
they need to
proactively become involved in their supplier's product
development efforts to reduce costs and improve their
product performance. For example, instead of being merely
a passive buyer of components, Dell is a close participant in
its vendors' development of new materials and parts.
Prahalad and Ramaswamy (2000: 80) have called attention
to this emerging trend, “customers are fundamentally

in business markets,


J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2008) 36:322–336

323323

changing the dynamics of the marketplace. The market has
become a forum in which consumers play an active role in
creating and competing for value.” Thus, both suppliers and
customers are recognizing the advantage of and are pushing
for close customer participation in suppliers' NPD process
to create valuable new products, but along with this new
awareness, customers are now demanding their share of the
created value. Understanding the role of customer partici-
pation in the creation and sharing of new product value and
the ultimate new product value obtained by the customer is
the key focus of this paper; more specifically, we address
three research questions:
& How does customer participation in the NPD process

affect the size of the new product value pie?

& How does implementation of customer participation

affect new product value creation?

& How is the customer's share of the new product value

pie determined?

With regard to the first research questions, managerial
practice supports the notion that customer participation
improves suppliers' NPD performance but
leaves the
mechanisms of value creation unclear. This research
demonstrates that customer participation affects new prod-
uct value creation by improving the effectiveness of the
NPD process by enhancing information sharing and
customer–supplier coordination and by increasing the level
of customer and supplier specific investments in the
product development effort. Thus, the research contributes
by explicating the mediating mechanisms by which
customer participation drives new product value creation
providing a foundation for
research aimed at
improving the success of NPD.

further

We investigate how formalization of

the customer
process leverages the effects of customer participation on
the drivers of new product value creation to inform the
second question. Results suggest
increasing the
formalization of the customer participation process enhan-
ces both customer and supplier relationship-specific invest-
ments in the NPD process. Moreover,
it provides
managerial direction on how the process of customer
participation can be implemented to increase its impact.

that

The impact of customer participation on the customer's
share of the new product value pie is more complex than is
first apparent. Based on the dependence and equity
perspectives the results suggest
that exchange partners'
power (relative dependence) positively influences a part-
ner's ability to capture new product value, but this power is
offset by a desire of exchange partners to ensure the
distribution of value is “fair” and reflects each party's
contribution to the value creation. In addition, we find
customers face a tradeoff, where making specific invest-
ments in the NPD increases the overall size of the new

product pie, but also increases the customer's dependence
lowering their share of the pie ceteris paribus.

This research applies an institutional arrangement per-
spective (Carson et al. 1999) to develop an end-to-end
model for the interaction between a customer participating
with an upstream supplier to develop a new product to
understand how new product value is created and shared.
This model is empirically tested by collecting primary data
from 188 OEMs across different industries. In the following
sections, we first develop our conceptual model and present
individual hypotheses. Second,
the empirical context of
the research, data collection procedures, measurements, and
the analysis of the model are discussed. Finally, we present the
results and discuss the theoretical and managerial implica-
tions, research limitations, and future research directions.

Customer participation: an institutional arrangement
perspective

The perspective of institutional arrangement is a theoretical
framework that focuses on understanding why and how
firms engage with other firms. Institutional arrangements
include any type of contracting, ownership, or engagement
in which firms seek to build or maintain an exchange and/or
relationship (Davis and North 1971). Specifically,
this
perspective suggests that businesses will engage in value
creating institutional relationships only when the exchange
supports the allocation of benefits such that the joint benefit
maximization is aligned with the maximization of firm-
owned benefits (Carson et al. 1999). As Ghosh and John
(1999: 133) argue, firms “will
the activities
associated with larger joint value if, and only if, their own
share of the joint value also exceeds their previous profits.”
Two key elements in institutional arrangements contrib-
ute to the firm-owned benefit maximization (Carson et al.
1999). First, the new set of joint activities implemented by
the partners' creates value, which affects the size of the
value pie. Second, the joint benefits are shared between
relevant partners to compensate for engagement in these
activities such that each partner receives a share of the
value pie. The institutional arrangement offers a valuable
perspective to understand the value obtained by a customer
from participating in a supplier's NPD process, since it
integrates both value creation and sharing.

implement

More specifically, applying the institutional arrangement
perspective to an interaction between a customer partici-
pating with an upstream supplier to develop a new product
suggests that both the size of the new product value pie and
the customer's share of
to
understanding how much value will be obtained by the
customer and their willingness to participate. Thus, while

the pie will be critical


324

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2008) 36:322–336

(NPD)

the research on new product development
is
consistent in promoting the benefit to suppliers in having
customers participate in the product development process
little research has focused on understanding this phenom-
ena from the customers perspective (Srivastava et al. 1999).
This is critical since only by understanding the ultimate
value obtained by the customer will suppliers understand
how to gain their support in the NPD process and maximize
the impact of their participation.

Understanding how customer participation influences the
size of the new product value pie and the customer's share
is more complex in the NPD context than is first apparent
since some of the drivers of pie size may also affect the
share received. Thus, participants must evaluate the tradeoff
in expanding the size of the new product pie against
potentially reducing their share of the value captured. In
essence, customers are both collaborators and competitors
when participating in a supplier's NPD project (Prahalad
and Ramaswamy 2000). As a collaborator, the customer
shares pertinent information with the supplier, coordinates
activities, and integrates and adapts engineering and
manufacturing processes to those of the supplier, thereby
significantly improving the value of the product (Lengnick-
Hall 1996; Dyer and Singh 1998). As a competitor, due to
the self-interest nature of the parties seeking to maximize
their individual benefits, the customer negotiates with the
supplier over the pricing, delivery, and other terms of the
new products,
thus affecting how the created value is
shared (Lengnick-Hall 1996; Jap 2001; Wernerfelt 2005).
For example, a customer's investment
in a supplier's
product development effort may results in a more valuable
new product, but these same investments may increase the
customer's dependence on the supplier, reducing their

ultimate share of the new product value (due to less
negotiation power).

Next, we develop a conceptual model for the impact of
customer participation in the NPD process on the ultimate
value obtained by the customer
(Fig. 1). First, we
investigate how customer participation influences the
drivers of new product value creation (NPD processes and
NPD investments) and explore how these effects may be
leveraged. Second, consistent with the institutional arrange-
ment perspective we investigate how the drivers of new
product value creation impact the size of the new product
value pie and the customer's share of
this pie, and
ultimately, the new product value obtained by the customer.

Effect of customer participation on drivers of new product
value creation

Customer participation refers to both the breadth and depth
of the customer's involvement in the NPD process. Breadth
captures the scope of participation across the product
development process, where a customer could be involved
in just one activity (e.g., product testing) or in a wide range
of activities from new concept generation, prototyping, up
to and including product
testing. Depth represents the
customer level of involvement in a phase of the product
development process, where some customers may only be
superficially involved and other may be deeply involved.
The level of customer participation can play a role in the
key drivers to new product value creation,
the NPD
process, and the level of resources invested in the NPD
(Dyer and Singh 1998; Sobrero and Roberts 2001).

Researchers have proposed that customer participation
affects a supplier's NPD process by increasing the level of

Customer participation 

formality

H3

Customer 

participation in 

NPD

Drivers of New Product 

Value Creation

NPD Processes

Information sharing

H4

Coordination 
effectiveness

H5

H6

NPD Investments

Customer relationship-

specific investment

Supplier relationship-

specific investment

H1

H2

Size of New Product 

Value Pie

New product 

value

Determinants of 

Customer Share of New 

Product Value Pie

Customer dependence

Supplier dependence

Customer perception 

of "fair share"

H7

H8

New product 
value obtained 

by customer

Notes: NPD = new product development.

Figure 1 Influence of customer participation on creating and sharing new product value.


J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2008) 36:322–336

325325

information shared during the NPD process, and by
improving how well
two firms coordinate their actions
during the NPD process or coordination effectiveness (Dyer
and Singh 1998; Larson 1992). Information-sharing refers
to the extent to which two partners effectively exchange
critical
information about the product idea, market, and
competition, among other issues, during the NPD process,
and coordination effectiveness is the extent to which the
two partners effectively work together in order to accom-
plish a collective set of tasks during the NPD process (Jap
1999; Van de Ven et al. 1976).

Customer participation enhances both parties' ability to
identify what information needs to be shared and how to
work more cooperatively. When a customer participates in a
supplier's NPD process, each party knows the pertinent
knowledge possessed by the other, which helps them
evaluate and recognize what
information to share and
increases the efficiency of their coordination effort (Dyer
and Singh 1998; Larson 1992). Researchers have found that
in the NPD process and
customers' early involvement
higher levels of social
interaction between the parties
improve the information intensity, frequency, and breadth
(Celly and Frazier 1996). Most research argues for the
positive effects of customer participation on NPD, but is
possible that if the interaction is dysfunctional or leads to
conflict
involvement could be
detrimental and offset some of the expected benefits. In
aggregate, we expect
levels of customer
participation improves communication, and helps both the
customer and supplier specify the behaviors desirable in the
relationship, which enhances the effectiveness of coordina-
tion efforts (Kogut and Zander 1996;Vli-Renko et al. 2001).
Thus, we hypothesize that:

then higher

that higher

levels of

H1:
In aggregate, customer participation in NPD
positively affects (a) information sharing and (b)
coordination effectiveness.

Customer participation in the NPD process will posi-
tively affect customer and supplier's relationship specific
investments since the higher levels of interaction associated
with customer participation provide more opportunity for
uncovering high return opportunities motivating invest-
ments. In addition, closer interaction between suppliers and
customers enhance relational bonds and provides more
opportunity to monitor behaviors, both of which decrease
the risk associated with making specific investments.
Relationship-specific investments are non-fungible invest-
ments that uniquely support the customer–supplier relation-
ship (Williamson 1985); these investments can be physical
assets, such as specialized design tools and engineering
processes for a customized new product, or human assets,
such as task-specific training relevant to customer prefer-
ences or manufacturing competencies. Lai (1990) suggests

that close interactions enhance both parties ability to
uncover investment opportunities and increases confidence
to make investments by suppressing opportunistic behav-
iors associated with specific investments. It must also be
recognized that closer interactions may uncover information
that could undermine a partner's desire to make invest-
ments. Overall, this negative effect may offset some of the
benefits of
increased customer participation. Customer
participation provides both parties with opportunities to
closely monitor each other's behavior and performance
during various stages of the NPD process, which serves as a
mechanism to safeguard past
investments and promotes
additional investments (Heide and John 1990). Therefore,
we expect that:

H2:
In aggregate, customer participation in NPD
positively affects relationship specific investments by
the (a) customer and (b) supplier.

Leveraging the effect of customer participation

We expect customer participation to have an overall
positive impact on NPD process and the level of new
product focused specific investments, but how a manage-
ment team implements the customer participation process
may enhance these effects. Customer participation formal-
ity represents the extent to which the customer participation
in the NPD process follows specific rules and procedures
(Zaltman et al. 1973). Formalization of decision-making
processes enhances the likelihood that the partners will act
cooperatively and not opportunistically since roles and
responsibilities are more clearly defined (Das and Teng
1998), and thus, promotes risk-taking behaviors. Griffin
(1997) suggests that a formalized development process
involving the customer is more likely to improve the
effectiveness of the NPD process. Therefore, more formal-
ized customer participation should facilitate information
sharing and resource investment and higher
levels of
cooperation among customers and suppliers. In sum, we
hypothesize that:

H3: In aggregate, the affect of customer participation
on (a) information sharing, (b) coordination effective-
ness, (c) customer relationship specific investment,
and (d) supplier relationship specific investment are
greater under high customer participation formality
than under low customer participation formality.

Effects of NPD processes and investments on the size
of new product value pie

Cooper and Kleinschmidt (1995) have identified commu-
nication between the supplier and customer
regarding


326

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2008) 36:322–336

customer preferences as a key prerequisite for new product
value creation. Research on the formation of customers'
new product preferences suggest that these preferences and
needs evolve through the customer's engagement with
specific new product ideas, concepts, and prototypes across
the NPD stages (Hamel and Prahalad 1994; Huber 1991;
Prahalad and Hamel 1990). Constant information sharing
helps suppliers to probe and learn how customer needs
evolve and emerge during the NPD process. Moreover,
information shared by the supplier with the customer about
the cost structure and production and engineering options
help customers realize constraints and,
thereby, make
appropriate adjustments in their preferences for new
products (Joshi and Sharma 2004). Due to information
sharing, customers and supplier are better able to discover
unique competencies and value creating opportunities.
Thus, information sharing between supplier and customer
should increase the size the of the new product value pie.
In order to take advantage of each parties individual
competencies, suppliers and customers must coordinate their
efforts (through a regular pattern of similar or complemen-
tary actions) to increase the effectiveness of their interactions
across the different stages in the NPD process (Anderson and
Narus 1990). For example,
in the product specification
stage, suppliers and customers must develop product
specifications of the new product to both fit customers'
needs and control development costs (Iyer et al. 2005).

Customer-focused new product develop typically
requires unique adaptation by both the supplier and
customer, these adaptations are often reflected as relation-
ship-specific investments where specific changes are only
usable with a specific partner. Empirically, a manufacturer's
physical asset specificity has been found to enhance new
product improvements in engineering efficiency, fit with
customer needs, and product quality (Nishiguchi 1994). A
customer's physical investments, such as specific product
line engineering modifications, are expected to improve the
new product
integration with the production line and
potentially enhance the quality and reduce the engineering
and manufacturing costs of the product (Walter 2003).
Moreover, human asset specificity allows suppliers and
customers to speak the same “language” and reduce
communication errors,
thereby enhancing the product's
speed to market (Dyer 1996). Consistent with the literature,
relationship specific investment by both customers and
suppliers are expected to increase the ultimate value of a
new product. Thus, we hypothesize that:

H4: New product value is positively affected by (a)
information sharing and (b) coordination effectiveness.

H5: New product value is positively affected by (a)
customer
relationship specific investment and (b)
supplier relationship specific investment.

Determinants of customer share of new product value pie

It is in the best interest of both the supplier and the customer
to maximize the overall value of the new product, but only to
the degree that they are able to capture a share of this value
(Carson et al. 1999). For example, if the supplier increases
the price of the new product to match the “value created”
then the customer may actual receive no return on their
participation in the NPD process. Thus, a key question is
what determines the customer's share of the new product
value pie?

Researchers have utilized dependence and equity per-
spectives to understand how jointly created value will be
shared (Ghosh and John 1999). The dependence of a firm in
a business relationship is the firm's need to maintain a
relationship with a partner (Emerson 1962; Frazier 1983)
and is determined, to a large extent, by how difficult it
would be to replace that partner (Heide and John 1988).
Thus, the difference in dependence between the two firms
determines the power each partner has in the negotiation
process and will impact their share of the new product
value (Ganesan 1994; Heide and John 1988). In interorga-
nizational relationships, based on the equity principle, the
use of power is often mitigate by a desire to ensure the
distribution of value is “fair” and reflects each party's
contribution to the value creation (Bolton 1991; Corsten
and Kumar 2003). For example, a supplier wants to ensure
the customer perceives their share as fair to maintain good
relationship quality and continuity in the relationship.
Customer perception of their “fair share” is the customer's
evaluation of the share they would judge as fair when
comparing their ratio of inputs and outputs to the ratio of
the supplier's inputs and outputs (Adams 1965). Research
supports that both of these mechanisms operate to deter-
mine the ultimate share received by each partner, where
power drives the pursuit of more absolute value, and
fairness drives the value allocation toward equity (but not
necessarily equality) between the two bargainers (Iyer and
Villas-Boas 2003; Kagel et al. 1996).

While dependence is often modeled as an endogenous
factor,
researchers have shown that a party's specific
investments in a relationship can increase their dependence
on that relationship (Heide and John 1988; Palmatier et al.
2007). Because all or a large portion of the specific
investments will be lost if the relationship is terminated,
both parties' investments increase their dependence on each
other (Ganesan 1994). This dependence occurs because a
firm can no longer rely on the threat of switching to another
relationship partner to reduce opportunistic behaviors. This
switching cost, or the lack of replaceability, is a direct
consequence of the immobility of a firm's assets (Heide and
John 1988). In particular, Thompson (1967) suggests that if
a firm's outcome is contingent on the input and resources of


J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2008) 36:322–336

327327

its relationship partner,
then the firm is more likely to
depend on that partner. Thus, we expect a partner's
relationship specific investments to not only increase the
size of the new product value pie, but to also increase their
dependence (reducing their power), which lowers their
share of the pie ceteris paribus.

Moreover, since customers determine their “fair share”
by comparing the ratio of their inputs and outputs to the
supplier's ratio of inputs and outputs, as customer's increase
their relationship specific investments (or suppliers de-
crease their investments) they will require a higher portion
of the new product value to be considered fair. Conversely,
according to the equity perspective (Emerson 1962), if the
supplier contributes more tangible or intangible resources to
customer specific new product development
then the
customer would expect the supplier to capture more share
of the new product value.

It is worth noting that, given the nature of NPD, its
outcomes are often wrought with uncertainty (e.g., new
product value is difficult to predict ex ante) and agreements
over value sharing often evolve ex post (after the NPD
process is completed) (Myerson and Satterthwaite 1983;
Jap 2001). Hence, the negotiation process regarding value
creation and sharing are endogenous in our model, and are
hypothesized to be affected by customer NPD participation
activities. Thus:

H6: Customer relationship specific investment posi-
tively affects (a) customer dependence and (b) cus-
tomer perception of
fair share, while supplier
relationship specific investment (c) positively affects
supplier dependence and (d) negatively affects cus-
tomer perception of fair share.

Effects of size and share of new product value pie on value
obtained by customer

As discussed previously, based on an institutional arrange-
ment perspective (Carson et al. 1999), the size and the share
of
the new product value pie are two key elements
contributing to the benefits obtained by a firm. The new
product value obtained by the customer captures the overall
value or benefits that the customer receives from partici-
pating in the new product development process. All else
being equal, we expect that the larger the new product value
pie then the more value the customer will receive. In
addition, the determinants of the customer share will affect
the overall value obtained by the customer.

The determinants of the customer share derived from the
equity and power perspectives can be viewed though a
motivation–ability paradigm (Merton 1957). Fairness
affects how much value the customer believes they deserve
based on their and the supplier's contributions to the NPD

process and thus affects the customers motivation to
negotiate, while the power/dependence of both parties
affect
their ability to negotiate for greater benefits. As
customer perception of their fair share increases, we expect
them to be more motivated to negotiate with the supplier
for a higher share; thus, the customer is more likely to
obtain more value of the new product. Further, when the
supplier's dependence on the customer increases or cus-
tomer's dependence decreases, customers have a greater
ability to negotiate, so they are more likely to obtain more
value of the new product. Therefore:

H7: New product value, the size of the new product
value pie, positively affects the new product value
obtained by the customer.

H8: Determinants of customer share of
the new
product value pie affect
the new product value
obtained by the customer, or more specifically (a)
customer dependence negatively affects, and (b)
supplier dependence and (c) customer perception of
fair share positively affect new product value obtained
by the customer.

Methodology

The structural model in Fig. 1 was tested by surveying
purchasing and procurement executives from OEMs.
Consistent with previous studies on business-to-business
relationships (e.g. Heide 2003), this research focused on
OEMs in three two-digit SIC major groups: 35 (general
machinery), 36 (electrical and electronic machinery), and
37 (transportation equipment). This context is appropriate
for testing our model since customers (OEMS) in these
industries often participate in their suppliers' new product
development process.

Data collection

For the survey portion of this study, we procured a mailing
list from a commercial list broker, removed all incomplete
addresses, and came up with an initial sample of 976 firms.
For
the first stage of data collection, we mailed a
prescreening survey to the potential respondents assessing
their appropriateness and willingness to participate in the
study. We determined whether
respondents had been
involved in their supplier's NPD process in the last 2 years.
Information was collected as to the respondents'
title,
number of years with the firm, and percentage of time
spent on supplier-related activities. Of the 976 firms, we
received prescreening responses from 387. We eliminated
20 respondents due to non-involvement in their suppliers'


328

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2008) 36:322–336

NPD process in the previous 2 years, having less than
2 years in the position, spending less than 50% of their time
with suppliers, or bearing titles that reflected a low-level
position. The remaining 367 respondents held positions
such as Vice President of Purchasing, Purchasing Manager,
Procurement Manager, and Production Manager.

Questionnaire packets were then mailed to these 367
managers. Survey instructions requested respondents to
reflect on the most recent NPD project
they had been
involved in and to complete the questionnaire with that
project in mind. We sent a follow-up mailing 2 weeks later.
In addition to the survey, each mailing included a prepaid
return envelope and a cover letter. We used multiple mail
contacts, first-class postage, prepaid return envelopes, and
informative cover letters to increase survey response. This
two-wave sampling effort generated 195 responses. Three
responses were removed due to too many missing values
(>5%). Early and later responses were compared and no
indication of response bias was found.

The survey instrument included post hoc checks on the
informants' knowledge and involvement in the suppliers'
NPD processes. On a seven-point scale, the mean of their
knowledge in their firm's purchasing decisions was 6.35,
involvement was 6.13. Four
and the mean of
responses that showed inadequate levels of
informant
knowledge or involvement were eliminated (less than 4
on a seven-point scale). Thus, 188 responses were included
overall for further data analysis (51% effective response
rate).

their

To further validate the measures and reduce concern of
alternative explanations (e.g., common method variance),
all
the respondents were asked to indicate the contact
information of the manager at the supplier who coordinated
their participation in the NPD process. Questionnaires were
sent to the 135 managers of supplier firms based on contact
information provided by their customer. After a two-wave
mailing, 64 responses were received. The supplier reported
their dependence on the customer and their
level of
relationship-specific investments. As a supplementary test
a reduced model was tested including all hypothesized
paths involving these two supplier reported constructs using
dyadic data (N=64). Reported results are consistent with
the findings from the reduced model1.

Measurement

Our measurement of customer participation was based on
academic and practitioner literature as well as our field

1 A summary of the results from these supplementary tests are
available upon request.

interviews. We conducted nine extensive interviews with
executives from different firms across the three industries
listed above. The objective was to understand the phenom-
enon of customer participation in a supplier's NPD process
and to develop a measure of customer participation. After
introducing the objectives of our research, we conducted
the interview, which lasted about 90 min. To minimize
interviewer bias and broaden our understanding beyond our
preconceived framework, we asked open-ended questions
about the key underlying factors determining the levels of
participation in the supplier's NPD process and the causal
linkages between participation and the value obtained by
customers (McCracken 1988; Zaltman 1997). Based on
these interviews two aspects of customer participation
emerged. Breadth and depth captured the level or extent
of customer participation. More specifically, breadth refers
to how broadly customers are involved in a supplier's NPD
process. The scope of participation can range from one or a
few NPD activities, such as new concept generation and
prototyping, up to and including all NPD activities. The
depth of customer participation represents how far custom-
ers are involved in the NPD process, which in some cases is
very superficial with limited influence, and in other cases
customer can be deeply involved or may even control the
outcome of certain NPD activities. Overall, the extent or
level of customer participation is reflected by the breadth
and depth of the involvement in the supplier's NPD. It
should be noted we are only capturing the breadth and
depth of customer participation, but these measures do not
indicate if this participation adds to or distracts from the
overall NPD process.

Based on the NPD literature and our interviews with
customers, we identified ten activities central to the NPD
process (see Table 4 of the Appendix for all measures). For
each one, we asked if the customer was involved (0=“not
involved” and 1=“involved”) in this activity, the sum of the
number of activities the customer checked was used to
represent the breadth of customer participation. If custom-
ers were involved in the activity, then we asked about the
depth of their involvement using a seven-point Likert scale.
We determined the overall depth of participation across the
activities they were involved in by calculating the mean of
the completed items. Thus, the level of customer participa-
tion is treated as a latent variable with two items: customer
participation depth and customer participation breadth.
Since breadth is determined as an additive measure (0 to
10), it was converted into a seven-point scale to correspond
to the depth measure (Homburg et al. 2002).

Customer participation formality was measured using
the average of three items developed for this study, which
assessed the extent
to which the customer participation
process was formalized into structured rules and activities.
For
the other constructs in the proposed framework,


J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2008) 36:322–336

329329

existing measures were used wherever possible. All the
items used to measure the constructs were closed-ended,
with seven-point Likert-type scales anchored at strongly
disagree and strongly agree, except where otherwise noted.
New product value is reflected in (1) the direct benefits
of the new product (or component) and (2) how the new
product (or component) improves the engineering, produc-
tion, and delivery of the final end-product. Three items
were developed to measure direct new product benefits, and
three items were used to measure the indirect aspects.
Information sharing is the extent to which the supplier and
customer effectively exchange critical
information about
the market, product, and competition. Four items, based
on the work of Heide and John (1990), were used to evaluate
the extent
information and knowledge
were shared between the two partners. Coordination
effectiveness describes the extent to which suppliers and
customers effectively work together
to accomplish a
collective set of tasks in the NPD process. Four items were
adapted from Jap (1999).

to which critical

Customer (supplier) dependence is defined as the need
to maintain a relationship with the other party. Three items
were adopted from Kumar et al. (1995) to evaluate each
type of dependence. Specifically, respondents were asked to
evaluate their dependence on their supplier as well as the
perceived dependence of the supplier on them. Customer
perception of “fair share” involves the extent to which the
customer feels they deserve a larger portion of value of the
new product
than does the supplier. Two items were
developed specifically for this study.

The scales to measure relationship-specific investments
from the customer (supplier) described the investments
made by the customer (supplier) dedicated to the relation-
ship with a particular supplier (customer) for the develop-
ment of a new product. These investments are difficult to
redeploy in another relationship, except at a loss in value.
Four items were used based on the work of Heide and John
(1990) to measure this construct.

With regard to new product value obtained by the
customer, most scholars agree that value is a construct that
involves a trade-off between benefits and costs (e.g.,
Hauser and Urban 1986; Zeithaml 1988). New product
value obtained by the customer is the trade-off between
benefits of
the new product versus the costs (price)
incurred by customers in order to obtain the product.
Three items were developed to measure this construct. A
number of control variables were included in the model.
Customer share of new product development cost could be
expected to affect the customer's perception of their fair
share and thus, is included as a control variable. The age
of the supplier–customer relationship is also included as a
control variable for new product value obtained by the
customer.

Analytical approach

the proposed model.

A two-stage approach was employed to analyze the data
and test
In the first stage, a
confirmatory factor analysis measurement model was
assessed using AMOS. Once a suitable measurement model
was obtained, a path model was identified using the
maximum likelihood criterion in AMOS. According to
Anderson and Gerbing (1988), the two-stage approach to
model fitting has two main advantages. First,
it is less
demanding on the sample size owing to the reduced model
at each stage. Second,
the potential confounding effect
between the structural model and the measurement model
can be avoided.

Assessment of the measurement model

Confirmatory factor analysis was used to estimate a
measurement model to evaluate construct reliability and
convergent and discriminant validity. All latent constructs
were estimated in one measurement model with each scale
item loaded on its a priori specified factor, and correlation
among factors was allowed (Gerbing and Anderson 1988).
Maximum likelihood estimates of the measurement models
were obtained using AMOS. The measurement model
exhibited acceptable fit indices: χ2
(645)=1,874.05 (p<.01),
goodness of fit
index
(CFI)=.89, normed fit index (NFI)=.87, and root mean
square of approximation (RSMEA)=.07 (90% confidence
interval of.06 to.08). Each factor loading was positive and
significant at the .01 level (see Table 4 of the Appendix).
The coefficient alpha also provided satisfactory evidence of
reliability.

index (GFI)=.88, comparative fit

Next, a series of nested confirmatory factor model
comparisons between any two constructs in the model
assessed whether significant chi-square differences existed
between the models when correlation between the latent
variables were set free versus when it was constrained to
1.0. The various chi-square difference tests were all
significant and provided evidence of discriminant validity
(Bagozzi et al. 1991). The more stringent test suggested by
Fornell and Larcker
(1981) was used. The average
variances extracted of the constructs were greater than the
square of the correlation between any pair of constructs,
further supporting the discriminant validity of the con-
structs. The descriptive statistics, extracted variances,
reliabilities, and correlation matrix of all the constructs in
the model are shown in Table 1.

Tests of the hypotheses

Path analysis was used to assess the hypothesized model
relationships. Data were analyzed using AMOS. Path


330

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2008) 36:322–336

Table 1 Descriptive statistics and correlations

Constructs

Mean SD Ave. Correlation coefficients

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

4.32
1. Customer participation
5.24
2. New product value
5.23
3. Information sharing
4.84
4. Coordination effectiveness
4.12
5. Customer dependence
4.00
6. Supplier dependence
7. Customer perception of “fair share”
3.46
3.41
8. Customer relationship-specific investment
9. Seller relationship-specific investment
4.09
10. New product value obtained by customer 5.65
11. Customer share of new product
3.25
development cost
12. Customer participation formality
13. Age of the relationship

4.23
5.35

1.32 .49
0.97 .48
0.93 .54
1.32 .63
1.67 .62
1.49 .57
1.13 .56
1.40 .55
1.58 .58
1.36 .60
1.23 n/a

.84
.11
.35

.62
.18 .93
.54 .33 .83
.34 .47 .53
.05 .10 .06
.29 .32 .33
.01 .04 −.11 −.22 −.05 .02 .67
.13 .08 −.06 −.19 .32
.16 .24
.53 −.09 .35 .82
.29
.30 .27 .25
−.17 .13 .21
.13 .22 .01
.22 .07 .11
.20
.20 .34

.45
.16
.32

.73
.34

.75

.80

.02 .10 .75
.13 .14 .08 n/a

1.03 .59
4.98 n/a

.41 .07 .12
.16 .07 .07

.10
.17

−.08 .02 .11
.17
.14 .01

.19 .06 .12 .01
.15 .16 .13 −.10 −.11 n/a

.78

Coefficient alphas are reported along the diagonal; p<.05 if r>.17 or r<−.17.
Ave.: average variance extracted, n/a: single-item manifest variable

analysis, using structural equation modeling methodology,
made it possible to test simultaneously all the hypothesized
relationships among the focal constructs. Item factor scores
were averaged to derive the factor scores for path analysis
(Jap 1999).

Common method and acquiescence bias

Because we used a cross-sectional survey, it was necessary
to control for two sources of potential bias: (1) common
method bias due to a single instrument of data collection,
and (2) acquiescence bias due to a person's tendency to
agree with items (Agustin and Singh 2005). To control for
common method bias, based on procedures recommended
by Lindell and Whitney (2001) and Agustin and Singh
(2005), we included a construct (supervisor's trust toward
the respondents measured by three items adapted from
Ramaswami and Singh (2003)) that is theoretically unre-
lated to the constructs in the model, and related it to all the
endogenous constructs in the tested model to partial out the
effects of common instrument bias. To control for acquies-
cence bias, we followed Baumgartner and Steenkamp's
(2001) recommendation to identify three matched sets of
positively and negatively worded items. We then computed
a difference score between these items and included it as an
exogenous factor in the model and linked it to all constructs
in the structural models to partial out
the effect of
acquiescence bias2.

2 Items used in constructing common method and acquiescence
factors are available from the authors upon request.

Results: hypothesized main effects

The structural model indicated good fit indices: χ2
(43)=
135.11 (p<.01), goodness of fit index (GFI)=.92, compar-
ative fit index (CFI)=.91, normed fit index (NFI)=.90, and
root mean square of approximation (RSMEA)=.06 (90%
confidence interval of .05 to.07). The results pertaining to
the individual hypotheses are detailed below and summa-
rized in Tables 2 (main effects) and 3 (moderation effects).
Customer participation positively influenced both infor-
mation sharing (β=.41, p<.01) and coordination effective-
ness (β=.29, p<.01) supporting H1a and H1b. Both H2a and
H2b were supported because the impact of customer
participation on relationship specific investment from the
customer (β=.17, p<.05) and from the supplier (β=.31,
p<.01) were both significant and positive.

Information sharing (β=.14, p<.05) and coordination
effectiveness (β=.38, p<.01) positively affected new
product value supporting H4a and H4b.
In addition,
customer relationship specific investment positively affect-
ed new product value (β=.22, p<.05) supporting H5a, but
H5b was not supported as supplier relationship specific
investment was not significantly related to new product
value (β=.03, ns.).

Customer

relationship specific investment positively
influenced customer dependence (β=.16, p<.05) and
customer perception of fair share (β=.22, p<.01) support-
ing H6a and H6b. Supplier relationship specific investment
did not significantly influence supplier dependence (β=.12,
ns.), but as hypothesized, did negatively influenced
customer perception of fair share (β=−.27, p<.01). Thus,
H6c was rejected and H6d was supported. The control


J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2008) 36:322–336

Table 2 Results: hypothesized
main effects

Hypothesized path

331331

Path coefficient
unstandardized

t value

Hypothesis

Effects of customer participation→drivers of new product value creation
Customer participation→information sharing
Customer participation→coordination effectiveness
Customer participation→customer relationship-specific
investment
Customer participation→supplier relationship-specific
investment

.41
.29
.17

.31

4.02*
3.12*
1.73**

2.82*

H1a
H1b
H2a

H2b

.14
.38
.22

R2 (coordination effectiveness)=.11; R2 (information sharing)=.22;
R2 (customer relationship-specific investment)=.03; R2 (supplier relationship-specific investment)=.06
Effects of drivers of new product value creation→size and share of new product value pie
Information sharing→new product value
1.75**
Coordination effectiveness→new product value
3.87*
Customer relationship-specific investment→new
1.89**
product value
Supplier relationship-specific investment→new product
value
Customer relationship-specific investment→customer
dependence
Customer relationship-specific investment→customer
perception of “fair share”
Supplier relationship-specific investment→supplier
dependence
Supplier relationship-specific investment→customer
perception of “fair share”
Customer share of new product develop cost→customer
perception of “fair share”

H4a
H4b
H5a

control

1.95**

−.27

−.03

2.74*

2.36*

2.44*

1.01

1.11

H6b

H5b

H6d

H6c

H6a

.22

.12

.23

.16

.30

R2 (new product value)=.21; R2 (supplier dependence)=.02; R2 (customer perception of “fair share”)=.20
Effects of size and share of new product value pie→new product value obtained by customer
New product value→new product value obtained by
customer
Customer dependence→new product value obtained by
customer
Supplier dependence→new product value obtained by
customer
Customer perception of “fair share”→new product
value obtained by customer
Age of relationship→new product value obtained by
customer
R2 (new product value obtained by customer)=.14

1.36*** H8a

Control

2.01**

−.15

2.74*

2.34*

0.96

H8b

H8c

.21

.19

.11

H7

*p<.01; **p<.05; ***p<.10
(one-sided)

variable of customer share of new product development
cost positively influenced customer perception of fair share
(β=.23, p<.01).

New product value positively influenced new product
(β=.30, p<.01), supporting H7.
obtained by customer
Supplier dependence (β=.21, p<.05) and customer percep-
tion of fair share (β=.19, p<.05) both positively affected
new product value obtained by customer supporting H8b
and H8c. The proposed negative effect of customer
dependence on new product value obtained by customer
(H8a) was only marginally significant (β=−.15, p<.10). The
control variable of age of relationship was not significantly
related to new product value obtained by customer.

Results: hypothesized moderating effects

To test the moderating effects, the sample was median-split
based on the moderator variable and two-group path
analyses were conducted. The comparison was based on
the chi-square difference between the two models, in which
one model constrained all the hypothesized path coeffi-
cients to be equal across the two groups and the other
permitted the hypothesized moderated path to be uncon-
strained. If the chi-square difference between the two
models was found to be significant and the effects were in
the proposed direction then the hypothesis is supported.
The results are presented in Table 3. Customer participation


332

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2008) 36:322–336

Table 3 Results: moderation effects of customer participation
formality

Hypothesized path

β high β low Δχ2 (1 df) Hypotheses

Customer participation→
information sharing
Customer participation→
coordination
effectiveness
Customer participation→
customer relationship-
specific investment
Customer participation→
supplier relationship-
specific investment

.26**

.37**

0.57

.32**

.28**

1.11

.26*

.05

5.11*

.37**

.16

4.55*

H3a

H3b

H3c

H3d

β represents the unstandardized path coefficient for that group; Δχ2
represents the difference in χ2 between the constrained and free
models for the path being tested with 1 degree of freedom.
*p<.05; **p<.01

had a significantly higher effect on both customer ($χ2
1ð Þ =
5.11, p<.05) and supplier's ($χ2
1ð Þ =4.55, p<.05) relation-
ship specific investments when the customer participation
process was more formalized supporting H3c and H3d, but
had no effect on either information sharing or coordination
effectiveness. Thus, H3a and H3b were rejected.3

Discussion

Both customers and suppliers are recognizing the benefits
from working together to develop new products as a path to
sustainable competitive advantage and superior financial
performance (Prahalad and Ramaswamy 2000). Extant
research has proposed that suppliers should seek customer
participation in their new product development (NPD)
process to improve product performance and reduce costs
(Dyer and Singh 1998; Terwiesch and Loch 1999), but
offered little insight into how this value is created, shared
between the customer and supplier, or how it should be
implemented. Providing theoretical and managerial insight
into these three questions is the primary focus of this
research and the thus, the discussion is structured around
these questions.

More specifically, we apply an institutional arrangement
perspective, a theoretical framework that argues that value
creation and value sharing are the critical explanatory
elements for why and how firms engage with other firms to
maximize captured value (Carson et al. 1999; Davis and

3 As a further test, we evaluated each hypothesized interaction using
multiple regression analyses. The results were identical
to the
multigroup method. Details are available upon request.

North 1971), to interactions between customers participat-
ing with suppliers to develop new products. Consistent with
this theoretical foundation our conceptual model
inves-
tigates two key determinants, size of the new product value
pie and share of the new product value pie, for the influence
of customer participation in the NPD process (Fig. 1). This
theoretical perspective is well suited to this context since
the results suggest that the effects of customer participation
involve tradeoffs between creating new product value and
the sharing of this value. Only by understanding both
mechanisms can the true impact of customer participation
on the value obtained by the customer be understood. For
example, customer participation increases the size of the
new product pie by increasing customer specific invest-
ments while these same investments can reduce the
customer's share by decreasing their power to negotiate
for a larger share.

How does customer participation affect the size of the new
product value pie?

Utilizing a new measure of customer participation, captur-
ing both the breadth of participation across NPD activities
(i.e., idea generation, concept testing, etc.) as well as the
depth of involvement in these activities, our results support
the premise that customer participation creates new product
value by improving the supplier's NPD processes (infor-
mation sharing and coordination) and by increasing
relationship specific investments focused on NPD. Cus-
tomer participation improves suppliers' NPD process by
increasing information sharing and coordination effective-
ness between suppliers and customers, which has the
potential
to prevent costly mistakes, redirect efforts to
higher return features, and optimize the numerous product
versus cost tradeoffs required during NPD.

In addition, to improving the NPD process customer
participation also increases the level of specific investment
in the NPD by both the customer and supplier. This
suggests that closer
interaction allows both parties to
uncover high return value-creating opportunities and
possibly reduce each parties perceived risk via increased
monitoring and stronger relational bonds, thus leading to
higher levels of new product specific investments. It is
especially interesting to note that
the magnitude of the
effect of customer participation on investment was approx-
imately twice as large for suppliers as for customers. This
suggests that customers who want suppliers to increase
their investments in new products that are specific to them
should increase the depth and breadth of their participation
in a supplier's NPD process. Similarly, suppliers may want
to request customers to participate in the product develop-
ment process as a precursor to direct requests to increase
investment levels.


J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2008) 36:322–336

333333

How does implementation of customer participation affect
new product value creation?

Assessment of the impact of formalization of the customer
process on the effects of customer participation on the
drivers of value creation (NPD processes and investments)
suggests that
the effects are mixed. The premise that
customer participation has a larger impact on specific
investments was fully supported for increased levels of
participation formality. Thus, customers and suppliers alike
should recognize that customer participations effect on the
level of investment into the NPD process is contingent on
the structure of the participation process itself. For example,
the strong support for the leveraging effect of participation
formality gives suppliers a strategy for increasing the
effectiveness of customers existing level of participation.
This may be especially importance in situations where
customers are hesitant or not prone to participate in
suppliers' NPD.

Contrary to our expectations, the level of formalized did
not moderate the impact of customer participation on NPD
processes (information sharing and coordination effective-
ness). These findings suggest that the impact of customer
participation on NPD processes is relative stable and not
affected by the structure in the participation process. More
research is required to determine if
these effects are
homogenous across contexts or if this in an anomaly of
our sample or measures. Since the impact of participation
on NPD processes is stable while its impact on NPD
investments is moderated, our findings suggests that the
impact of customer participation on new product value
creation mediated by NPD investments will
increase
relative to the impact of NPD processes as product
development decisions becomes more formalized.

How is the customer's share of the new product
value pie determined?

Turning to the third research questions, our finding suggest
that for business-to-business relational exchanges two key
mechanisms determine a customer's share of the new
product value. Both dependence and equity perspectives
influenced the division of the new product value between
suppliers and customers. Suppliers that were more depen-
dent had less power to negotiate resulting in the customers
receiving a larger share of the new product pie. Similarly,
marginal support (p<.10) was received for the premise that
customers that are more dependent would obtain less value
from new products.

While dependence reduces a customers' ability to extract
value from the exchange, this effect is somewhat offset by
the equity perspective, which suggests that as customers'
perceive they deserve a larger portion of the value pie they

will be more motivated to negotiate for
their share.
Consistent with this argument, we found that customers
who felt they deserved a larger portion of the new product
value actually obtained more new product value.

Understanding the overall effects of customer participa-
tion on value obtained by the customer is complex, since
relationship specific investments (RSI) influence both the
size and share of the new product value pie. For example,
customer RSI positively affects the overall product value,
while simultaneously affecting the customer's share
obtained via its impact on perception of fair share and
customer dependence. Similarly, as supplier's increases
their RSI customer's expectation of the value they should
received decreases, which subsequently reduces their new
product value received.

Overall, our research supports the institutional arrange-
ment where customer participation's influence on new
product value obtained by an exchange partner is driven
by both value creation and value sharing, and value sharing
can be understood within a dependence-equity framework.
All three pathways, to different degrees, contribute to how
customer participation affects new product value obtained
by the customer. From a value creation perspective the
overall effect of customer participation on customer value
obtained is positive via both improvements in the NPD
process as well as increases in customer specific invest-
ments. Thus, customer participation increases the size of the
pie, but the share obtained by the customer is reduced by
the overall negative effect of customer dependence (via
customer RSI), and by the overall negative effect of the
customer's perception of fair share (via both customer and
supplier RSIs). For this sample, the impact of value creation
on value obtained was reduced by approximately 4% due to
customer dependence and 20% due to perceived equity, but
overall, the net effect of customer participation on the value
obtained by the customer is positive.

to extract

Possibly, due to the relational nature of business-to-
business exchanges, average relationship age in this sample
was 5.4 years, exchange partners do not fully utilized their
power
the maximum value from a jointly
developed new product since coercing a partner would
undermine the exchange. Rather our
results suggest
exchange partners' value sharing is driven more by a desire
to share created value equitable. This finding suggests some
managerial strategies for exchange partners to increase their
share of the pie. For example, managers should ensure they
are communicating their level of effort and investment in
the value creation process so that when partners are
evaluating the relative ratio of inputs and outputs they are
given full “credit” for their efforts. In addition, it would
seem that for relational based exchanges, partners do not
need to be overly concerned with the loss of power caused
by RSIs decreasing their ultimate share of
the value


334

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2008) 36:322–336

creation. In summary, these results suggest that customer
participation in NPD affects the value obtained by a
customer mainly by creating a bigger “pie” rather than by
its affect on the share of the “pie.”

Limitations and future research directions

This research breaks new ground in addressing the
complicated phenomenon of customer participation in
NPD. As such, the study is subject to several limitations.
Measurement of many constructs is limited by single-
source data, which relies on customer reports. Even though
we validated the measurements using additional data
collected from suppliers, a dyadic study collected from
both parties is warranted to examine this issue further. More
specifically, research might measure both customer's and
supplier's perceptions of fair share during the participation
process, as well as their dependence on each other. This
perspective would generate additional insights into how the
process of customer NPD participation leads to value
creation and sharing.

In addition, the dynamic nature of customer participation
invites future research into how it evolves over time. It is
possible that success in past NPD efforts or perceptions of
potential success during the participation process will
influence its effect. Moreover, as customers make invest-
ment focused towards a specific new product, they may
increase their level of participation in order to safeguard
these investments. We do not model this potential feedback
process from investments to participation. Obtaining longi-
tudinal data across multiple NPD projects would help shed
light on the dynamic nature of customer participation,
actual causal ordering among constructs, and may be a
fruitful research direction.

The research finds that in aggregate customer participa-
tion improves the NPD process, but
there could be
situations where participation leads to conflict, uncovers
damaging information, or
is actually dysfunctional.
Researchers should attempt
to identify the contextual
factors or participation quality indicators that would
provide insight
into when customer participation may
negatively affect NPD. For example, while formality
positively leveraged the impact of participation on specific
investments in this sample, increased formality may also
add to the cost of the interaction. Thus, in some situations
this cost may overcome any benefits. Overall, this study
investigates the overall positive impact of breadth and
depth of customer participation, but future research should
also investigate the conditions when customer participation
negatively affects performance.

Overall,

this research focused on understanding the
phenomena of customer participation in NPD from the
little researched customers' perspective (Srivastava et al.

1999), our findings should be integrated into future models
for the impact of participation on supplier performance.

Appendix

Table 4 Measurement items and factor loadings

Constructs

Factor
loadings

Customer participation in new product development
For each of the following activities in the new product
development process, we would like you to identify
whether you participated in this activity (0=“no”,
1=“yes”). If you participated, how deeply were you
involved? (7-point Likert scale with anchors 1=“very
superficial” and 7=“very deeply”)
(1) Idea generation; (2) concept screening; (3) product

specification; (4) business evaluation; (5) product design;
(6) product engineering; (7) prototyping; (8) product
testing; (9) formation of cross-functional new product
development team; and (10) controlling and monitoring
of the development process

New product value
The component provided by this supplier is produced at

low cost.

The component provided by this supplier is highly

innovative.

.66

.63

.59

.67

The component provided by this supplier is of high quality.
The component provided by this supplier complies very

.74
.74

well with our assembly processes.

The component provided by this supplier improves the

engineering process of our end product.

The component provided by this supplier improves the

overall functioning of the end product.

Information sharing
During the NPD process
Both partners expect that significant knowledge will be

shared in the relationship.

Both partners are expected to keep the other partner

informed about changes that could affect that partner.

.77

.69

.81

.73

Exchange of information and knowledge between partners

.80

takes place frequently.

It is expected that both partners will share proprietary

.55

information and knowledge if it can enhance the quality
of the NPD process and our relationship.

Coordination effectiveness
During the NPD process:
This supplier and my firm work together very effectively

.77

to exploit unique opportunities.

Both companies are always looking for synergistic ways to

.80

do business together.

We work effectively on joint projects tailored to our joint

.76

needs.

The supplier and my firm coordinate our business activities

.84

very effectively.


J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2008) 36:322–336

335335

Table 4 (continued)

Constructs

Factor
loadings

Customer's dependence on seller
It would be difficult to replace this supplier.
If this relationship ended, we would face a significant loss.
We are quite dependent on this supplier.
Seller's dependence on customer
It would be difficult for our supplier to replace us.
This supplier is quite dependent on us.
If this relationship ended, this supplier would face a

.66
.90
.84

.66
.90
.73

significant loss.

Customer's perception of fair share
We feel that we deserve more of the value of the component

.70

purchased from this supplier than our supplier.

It is reasonable that we take away more value created in the

.67

purchased component from this supplier than our
supplier.

Customer specific investments in new product development
During the NPD process
We have made significant investments in tooling and

equipment dedicated to our relationship with this
supplier.

Our production system has been tailored to meet the

requirements of dealing with this supplier.

Our production system has been tailored to use the
particular components bought from this supplier.

Gearing up to deal with this supplier requires highly

specialized tools and equipment.

Seller specific investments in new product development
During the NPD process
This supplier has made significant investments in tools and
equipment dedicated to the relationship with our company.
This supplier's production system has been tailored to meet

the requirements of dealing with our company.

This supplier has made extensive adaptations in physical

plant and equipment in order to deal effectively with our
company.

The procedures and routines developed by this supplier as
part of their relationship with our company are tailored
to our particular situation.

New product value obtained by customer
For the involvements and efforts you input in the

component, I would say the component is of great value

For the price and efforts, I am very satisfied with the

functioning of the product.

I would think of the component as providing great value.
Customer participation formality
We are ___ involved in the NPD process of this
component. (1=“informally” to 7=“formally”)
There is ___ imposed regarding our involvement in this
supplier's NPD process of the component. (1=“no formal
rule” to 7=“a system of formal rules”)
We follow ___ in our participation activities of the NPD
process. (1=“no formal procedure” to 7=“formal written
procedures”)

.76

.88

.64

.60

.68

.70

.82

.63

.77

.84

.68

.80

.77

.84

All items were measured using seven-point scales anchored by 1=“strongly
disagree” and 7=“strongly agree” unless otherwise indicated.

References

Adams, J. S. (1965). Inequity in social exchange. Advances in

Experimental Social Psychology, 2, 267–299.

Agustin, C., & Singh, J. (2005). Curvilinear effects of consumer
loyalty determinants in relational exchanges. Journal of Market-
ing Research, 42(1), 96–108.

Anderson, J. C., & Gerbing, D. W. (1988). Structural equation
modeling in practice: A review and recommended two-step
approach. Psychological Bulletin, 103(3), 411–425.

Anderson, J., & Narus, J. (1990). A model of distributor firm and
manufacturer firm working partnerships. Journal of Marketing,
54, 42–58 January.

Bagozzi, R. P., Yi, Y., & Phillips, L. W. (1991). Assessing construct
validity in organizational research. Administrative Science Quar-
terly, 36, 421–458 September.

Baumgartner, H., & Steenkamp, J. -B. E. M. (2001). Response styles
in marketing research: A cross-national investigation. Journal of
Marketing Research, 38, 143–156 May.

Bolton, G. E. (1991). A comparative model of bargaining theory and

evidence. The American Economic Review, 81(5), 1096–1136.

BusinessWeek (2006). How failure breeds success. July, 21–27.
Carson, S. J., Devinney, T. M., Dowling, G. R., & John, G. (1999).
Understanding institutional designs within a marketing value
system. Journal of Marketing, 63, 115–130 Special Issue.

Celly, S. K., & Frazier, G. L. (1996). Outcome-based and behavior-
based coordination efforts in channel relationships. Journal of
Marketing Research, 18(2), 200–210.

Cooper, R. G., & Kleinschmidt, E. J. (1995). Benchmarking the firm's
critical success factors in new product development. Journal of
Product Innovation Management, 12(5), 374–391.

Corsten, D., & Kumar, N. (2003). Profits in the pie of the beholder.

Harvard Business Review, 81(5), 22–23.

Das, T. K., & Teng, B. -S. (1998). Between trust and control:
Developing confidence in partner cooperation in alliances.
Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 491–512.

Davis, L., & North, D. C. (1971). Institutional change and American

economic growth. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Dyer, J. H. (1996). Specialized supplier networks as a source of
competitive advantage: Evidence from the auto industry. Strate-
gic Management Journal, 17, 271–292.

Dyer, J. H., & Singh, H. (1998). The relational view: Cooperative
strategy and sources of interorganizational competitive advantage.
Academy of Management Review, 23(4), 660–679.

Emerson, R. M.

(1962). Power–dependence relations. American

Sociological Review, 27, 31–41 February.

Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. F. (1981). Evaluating structural equation
models with unobservable variables and measurement error.
Journal of Marketing Research, 28, 39–50 February.

Frazier, G. L. (1983). On the measurement of interfirm power in
channels of distribution. Journal of Marketing Research, 20,
158–166 May.

Ganesan, S. (1994). Determinants of long-term orientation of buyer–

seller relationships. Journal of Marketing, 58(2), 1–19.

Gerbing, D. W., & Anderson, J. C. (1988). An updated paradigm for
scale development
incorporating unidimensionality and its
assessment. Journal of Marketing Research, 25, 186–192 May.
Ghosh, M., & John, G. (1999). Governance value analysis and
marketing strategy. Journal of Marketing, 63, 131–145 Special
Issue.

Griffin, A. (1997). The effect of project and process characteristics on
product development cycle time. Journal of Marketing Research,
34(1), 24–35.

Hamel, G., & Prahalad, C. K. (1994). Competing for the future.

Boston: Harvard Business School Press.


336

J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2008) 36:322–336

Hauser, J. R., & Urban, G. (1986). The value priority hypotheses for
consumer budget plans. Journal of Consumer Research, 12, 446–
462 March.

Heide, J. B. (2003). Plural governance in industrial purchasing.

Journal of Marketing, 67(3), 18–29.

Heide, J., & John, G. (1988). The role of dependence balancing in
safeguarding transaction-specific assets in conventional channels.
Journal of Marketing, 52(1), 20–35.

Heide, J. B., & John, G. (1990). Alliances in industrial purchasing:
The determinants of joint action in buyer–supplier relationships.
Journal of Marketing Research, 27, 24–36 February.

Henard, D. H., & Szymanski, D. M. (2001). Why some new products
are more successful than others. Journal of Marketing Research,
38(3), 362–375.

Homburg, C., Hoyer, W. D., & Fassnacht, M.

(2002). Service
orientation of a retailer's business strategy: Dimensions, ante-
cedents, and performance outcomes. Journal of Marketing, 66(4),
86–101.
Huber, G. P.

learning: The contributing

(1991). Organizational

processes and literatures. Organization Science, 2(1), 88–115.

Iyer, A. V., Schwarz, L. B., & Zenios, S. A. (2005). A principal–agent
model for product specification and production. Management
Science, 51(1), 106–119.

Iyer, G., & Villas-Boas, J. M. (2003). A bargaining theory of distribution

channels. Journal of Marketing Research, 40(1), 80–100.

Jap, S. D. (1999). Pie expansion efforts: Collaboration processes in
buyer–supplier relationships. Journal of Marketing Research, 36
(4), 461–475.

Jap, S. D. (2001). Pie sharing' in complex collaboration contexts.

Journal of Marketing Research, 38, 86–99 February.

Joshi, A. W., & Sharma, S. (2004). Customer knowledge develop-
ment: Antecedents and impact on new product performance.
Journal of Marketing, 68(3), 47–59.

Kagel, J., Kim, C., & Moser, D. (1996). Fairness in ultimatum games
with asymmetric information and asymmetric payoffs. Games
and Economic Behavior, 13(1), 100–110.

Kogut, B., & Zander, U. (1996). What firms do? Coordination,

identity, and learning. Organizational Science, 7, 502–518.

Kumar, N., Scheer, L., & Steenkamp, J. -B. (1995). The effects of
perceived interdependence on dealer attitudes. Journal of
Marketing Research, 32, 348–356 August.

Lai, R. (1990). Improving channel coordination through franchising.

Marketing Science, 9(4), 299–318.

Larson, A. (1992). Network dyads in entrepreneurial settings: A study
of the governance of exchange relationships. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 37(1), 76–104.

Lengnick-Hall, C. A. (1996). Customer contribution to quality: A
the customer oriented firm. Academy of

different view of
Management Review, 21(3), 791–824.

Lindell, M. K., & Whitney, D. J. (2001). Accounting for common
method variance in cross-sectional research designs. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 86, 114–121.

McCracken, G. (1988). The long interview. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Merton, R. K. (1957). Social theory and social structure. Glencoe, IL:

Free Press.

Myerson, R. B., & Satterthwaite, M. A. (1983). Efficient mechanisms
for bilateral trading. Journal of Economic Theory, 29(2), 265–281.
Nishiguchi, T. (1994). Strategic industrial sourcing. New York:

Oxford University Press.

Palmatier, R. W., Dant, R. P., & Grewal, D. (2007). A comparative
longitudinal analysis of theoretical perspectives of interorganiza-
tional relationship performance. Journal of Marketing, 71, 172–
194 October.

Prahalad, C. K., & Hamel, G. (1990). The core competency of the

corporation. Harvard Business Review, 68, 79–91 May–June.

Prahalad, C. K., & Ramaswamy, V. (2000). Co-opting customer
competence. Harvard Business Review, 78, 78–87 January–
February.

Ramaswami, S. N., & Singh, J. (2003). Antecedents and consequences
of merit pay fairness for industrial salespeople. Journal of
Marketing, 67(4), 46–66.

Sobrero, M., & Roberts, E. B.

(2001). The trade-off between
efficiency and learning in interorganizational relationships for
product development. Management Science, 47(4), 493–511.

Srivastava, R. K., Shervani, T. A., & Fahey, L. (1999). Marketing,
business processes and shareholder value: An organizationally
embedded view of marketing activities and the discipline of
marketing. Journal of Marketing, 63, 168–179 Special Issue.

Terwiesch, C., & Loch, C. H. (1999). Measuring the effectiveness of
overlapping development activities. Management Science, 45(4),
455–465.

Thompson, J. D.
McGraw-Hill.

(1967). Organizations in action. New York:

Van de Ven, A. H., Delbecq, A. L., & Koenig, R. J. (1976).
Determinants of coordination modes within organizations. Amer-
ican Sociological Review, 41, 322–338.

Vli-Renko, H., Autio, E., & Sapienza, H. J. (2001). Social capital,
knowledge acquisition, and knowledge exploitation in young
technology-based firms. Strategic Management Journal, 22,
587–613.

Walter, A. (2003). Relationship-specific factors influencing supplier
involvement in customer new product development. Journal of
Business Research, 56(9), 721–734.

Wernerfelt, B. (2005). Product development resource and the scope of

the firm. Journal of Marketing, 69, 35–48 April.

Williamson, O. E. (1985). The economic institutions of capitalism.

New York: Free Press.

Zaltman, G. (1997). Rethinking market research: Putting people back

in. Journal of Marketing Research, 34(4), 424–437.

Zaltman, G., Duncan, R., & Holbek, J. (1973). Innovations and

organizations. New York: Wiley.

Zeithaml, V. (1988). Consumer perceptions of price, quality, and
value: A means–end model and synthesis of evidence. Journal of
Marketing, 52, 2–22 July.

Zipkin, P. (2001). The limits of mass customization. Sloan Management

Review, 42(3), 81–87.

