DDOOEESS  IIMMPPRROOVVIINNGG  AA  FFIIRRMM(cid:146)(cid:146)SS  EENNVVIIRROONNMMEENNTTAALL  MMAANNAAGGEEMMEENNTT
SSYYSSTTEEMM  AANNDD  EENNVVIIRROONNMMEENNTTAALL  PPEERRFFOORRMMAANNCCEE  RREESSUULLTT  IINN  AA

HHIIGGHHEERR  SSTTOOCCKK  PPRRIICCEE??

Stanley J. Feldman, Peter A. Soyka, and Paul Ameer

ICF Kaiser International, Inc.

SSUUMMMMAARRYY

Some believe that improved environmen-
tal management practices and perfor-
mance are good for the firm as well as for
society, while others believe that environ-
mental improvements and their costs are a
drag on the bottom line and should be
minimized.  So who is right?  Both sides
provide theory and facts in their favor, but
neither has delivered a compelling answer.

We believe that sound environmental
management leads to reduced risk to the
firm, and that this risk reduction is valued
by financial markets.  Investments in envi-
ronmental management lead to better
short-term environmental performance as
well as the prospect of further improve-
ments in the future.  These improvements
confer a reduction in the firm’s risk,
which is the key factor that investors con-
sider when deciding upon the return that
they will require for making a particular
investment.  Lower risks mean lower
required returns, and therefore, lower
costs for financing the activities of the
firm.

We have developed a conceptual model
that links together the environmental
activities and performance of the firm, the
ways in which these are communicated to
investors and others, the firm’s riskiness,
and its cost of equity capital.  This model
provides a framework for understanding
how corporate environmental activities
ultimately are translated into changes in
the market value of the firm.

We have just completed a thorough evalu-
ation of our ideas using real-world data on
more than 300 of the largest public com-
panies in the U.S., and have produced
results that validate our hypothesis.  As
suggested by financial theory, we have
computed changes in systematic risk for
each firm over two time periods, and
related these to a number of financial and
environmental variables using multiple
regression analysis.  We constructed our
analysis to explain as much of the vari-
ability in observed systematic risk as pos-
sible using factors suggested by finance
theory and empirical observation.  Using
this approach, we were able to isolate and

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.


Investments in environmental manage-
ment and performance may be costly.
Nonetheless, when appropriately evaluat-
ed, many of these investments may be
shown to provide substantial, positive
returns and lasting value to the firm.

quantify the effects of several environ-
mental management and environmental
performance measures that have both
practical and statistical significance.

Our work suggests that environmental
improvements such as those we have eval-
uated might lead to a substantial reduction
in the perceived risk of a firm, with an
accompanying increase in a public compa-
ny’s stock price, of perhaps five percent.  

These findings suggest that investments in
environmental management and improved
performance can be justified, in many
cases, on purely financial grounds, and
that the net financial impact of prospec-
tive environmental investments can now
be evaluated more fully than before.  Our
results show that firms will increase
shareholder value if they make environ-
mental investments that go beyond strict
regulatory compliance.  How much further
they should go will vary by company,
though this question also may be
addressed empirically.

Companies can capture more opportuni-
ties to improve both their environmental
and financial performance by performing
a strategic assessment of their operations,
building or upgrading an explicit environ-
mental management system, further devel-
oping their environmental infrastructure
(i.e., tools, methods, and procedures),
undertaking knowledge and skill building
within their workforce, and enhancing
their information management
capabilities.

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.


DDOOEESS  IIMMPPRROOVVIINNGG  AA  FFIIRRMM(cid:146)(cid:146)SS  EENNVVIIRROONNMMEENNTTAALL  MMAANNAAGGEEMMEENNTT
SSYYSSTTEEMM  AANNDD  EENNVVIIRROONNMMEENNTTAALL  PPEERRFFOORRMMAANNCCEE  RREESSUULLTT  IINN  AA

HHIIGGHHEERR  SSTTOOCCKK  PPRRIICCEE??

by

Stanley J. Feldman, Peter A. Soyka, and Paul Ameer

November, 1996

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.


II..    IInnttrroodduuccttiioonn

A vigorous debate1 is now occurring

around the question of whether initiatives to
improve the environmental performance of
corporations, either compliance-driven or vol-
untary, have consistent impacts on the finan-
cial performance of these firms.  

The traditional view holds that expendi-
tures on environmental improvement repre-
sent costs that (generally) confer no
corresponding benefits to the firm, such as
improved product quality, productivity, ease
of manufacturing, distribution, or use, or
other desirable attributes.  If this is true, then
the rational behavior on the part of corporate
managers is to minimize and delay environ-
mental costs as much as possible, so as to
reduce their impact on the bottom line.  From
the perspective of the corporate shareholder
(i.e., owner), managers should uphold their
fiduciary duty by seeking to maximize share-
holder wealth.  This means, among other
things, minimizing discretionary costs, which
in the minds of some, includes environmental
expenditures that are not explicitly required
by law.  In other words, managers are expect-
ed to make investments in environmental
activities only to the extent that their benefits
(pecuniary and non-pecuniary) exceed their
costs.  The evidence (i.e., deeds rather than
words) suggests that the senior managers of
most American corporations currently sub-
scribe to this view.

This is not surprising.  Notwithstanding

the arguments that have strenuously been
advanced by a number of influential members
of industry and academia, the traditional
view of environmental activities and their

costs continues to reflect a rational (albeit
limited) perspective in many corporations.  

Adherents of the major opposing school
of thought maintain that environmental per-
formance is fully compatible with superior
financial performance, and that emerging
environmental controls often provide a stimu-
lus for process enhancements, product refor-
mulations, and other improvements in the
cost-effective manufacture and delivery of the
firm’s products and services.  A large number
of case studies support the existence of this
phenomenon.  Nonetheless, proponents of the
idea that well-crafted environmental control
regulations help to spur innovation and thus,
competitiveness in the global marketplace,
have yet to demonstrate that the well-publi-
cized examples that they cite represent a sub-
stantial or even meaningful proportion of the
range of outcomes that occur when firms are
confronted by new environmental regulatory
controls or market expectations.

Indeed, a brief review2 and analysis of the
past 25 years of development of and reaction
to laws designed to protect human health and
the environment produces incomplete and
somewhat ambiguous results.  On the one
hand, the process of internalizing (through
regulation) the environmental impacts of cor-
porate activities almost necessarily imposes
short-term costs on the affected entity;
longer-term regulatory effects, on the other
hand, are strongly influenced by numerous
factors, many of which are under the control
of the people managing the affected firms.
A sampling of the literature, for example,
reveals large numbers of success stories asso-
ciated with individual pollution prevention
initiatives, product life cycle analyses, recy-
cling programs, and other forward-looking

1 This debate involves a number of academicians, consultants, regulators, and executives from private industry.
Many of the key arguments and supporting facts are articulated in several recent articles by Michael Porter and
Claas van der Linde, and on the opposing side, by Paul Portney and colleagues (see the accompanying
Bibliography for examples).

2 The literature in this regard is well summarized in a recent report entitled “Do Environmental Regulations Impair
Competitiveness?  A Critical Review of Economic Studies” prepared for U.S. EPA by ICF Kaiser and the
Economics Research Group.

Page 1

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.


environmental management activities.  These
examples suggest that additional “low hang-
ing fruit” remains to be harvested within
many corporations. In a few instances,
companies have taken their activities in this
regard to their logical conclusion by estimat-
ing the total costs, savings, avoided costs, and
revenues associated with their corporate envi-
ronmental programs, and some have shown
that their programs serve to improve the net
bottom line of the firm.  Because the owners
of the firm gain from these activities and the
increases in earnings that they may confer,
shareholder wealth and corporate environ-
mental objectives need not be viewed as
mutually exclusive.

Despite these noteworthy success stories,
at a larger, more general level, there has been
little empirical evidence or analysis regard-
ing the overall impacts of corporate environ-
mental activities on the business success of
the firm as a whole, and virtually no mean-
ingful theory or evidence linking wide-spec-
trum environmental improvement initiatives
to either expected or actual enhancements in
the firm’s sales, earnings, competitive posi-
tion, investment risk profile, or market value.3

Until now.

In this paper, we articulate a conceptual

model that establishes some of these linkages,
and provide the results of a quantitative appli-
cation of this model to a large and representa-
tive sample of the most prominent public
companies in the U.S. (more than 300 of the
500 companies within the Standard & Poor’s
index).  Our results suggest that adopting a
more environmentally proactive posture has,
in addition to any direct environmental and
cost reduction benefits, a significant and
favorable impact on the firm’s perceived

riskiness to investors and, accordingly, its
cost of equity capital and value in the mar-
ket place.

To test these posited relationships and our

conceptual approach, we developed and
applied an empirical model. Our results,
which are discussed in the sections that fol-
low, strongly suggest that firms that improve
both their environmental management system
and environmental performance can increase
their stock price by as much as five percent.
That is, if a firm’s stock price is currently
$100 per share, improvements in both envi-
ronmental management activities and perfor-
mance can boost the firm’s stock price to as
much as $105 per share.  If the initial capi-
talization of the company were $1 billion
prior to the environmental improvement,
after such improvement, stockholder wealth
could increase by as much as $50 million.

Naturally, these values are intended to be

illustrative rather than definitive.  The ulti-
mate gain accruing to any individual firm
depends on many factors, including what
activities are actually performed, the amount,
distribution, and timing of investments in the
environmental management function, and the
mode and quality of communications to the
investor community. The importance of these
issues, and how they may be addressed, are
discussed in greater depth at the conclusion of
this paper. 

The remainder of the paper presents a
general description of the substance of our
work.  Section II provides an overview of the
model framework.  Section III defines what is
meant by improved environmental manage-
ment practice and improved environmental
performance.  Section IV describes the con-
cept of signaling and the importance of this

3 Nonetheless, several studies have been performed using event methodologies that generally show discernible
short-term changes in the market value of publicly traded companies as a function of disclosure of particular envi-
ronmentally-related phenomena, such as emissions of toxic chemicals, large oil or chemical spills, or receipt of
environmental awards.  Recent examples of such studies are provided in the Bibliography.

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.

Page 2


activity in articulating the extent to which a
firm’s environmental risk profile is improv-
ing.  Section V addresses how firm risk is
measured while section VI discusses the rela-
tionship between a firm’s risk, its cost of cap-
ital, and its share price.  Section VII
summarizes the empirical results that strongly
support our contention that firms that improve
their environmental management system and
their environmental performance will be
rewarded with a lower cost of capital and a
higher share price.  Finally, a summary, con-
clusions, and implications for decision mak-
ers are presented in Section VIII.  Further
information on our empirical model is provid-
ed in an attached appendix.

We believe that our work provides a radi-
cally new and different position from which
to join the debate on the financial implica-
tions of corporate investments in environ-
mental performance, and for that matter, on
the implications of new environmental regula-
tory initiatives.  Perhaps most importantly, we
hope that this work will stimulate further dis-
cussion, debate, and analysis on this topic
within academia, government, the financial
markets, and the board room.

IIII..    CCoonncceeppttuuaall  FFrraammeewwoorrkk  

Our model links the evaluation of corpo-
rate environmental management systems and
environmental performance to the market
value of publicly traded corporations.  The
model consists of five causally linked compo-
nents:

• Corporate Environmental 

Management Systems 

• Environmental Performance
• Environmental Signaling
• Firm Risk, including 
Environmental Risk

• Firm Value, including 

Shareholder Wealth Gains 
(or Losses) Resulting from 
Changes in Environmental Risk 

The schematic below shows how the vari-

ous components are related and the various
elements that comprise each individual com-
ponent.  The model framework indicates that
in order to obtain the benefits of greater
shareholder wealth gains, the firm must
improve its environmental management sys-
tem and/or performance.  Improvements are

Conceptual Model Linking Corporate Environmental 

Management and Performance with Firm Value

Page 3

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.


then made public through a series of carefully
targeted environmental communications to all
stakeholders, but specifically to the financial
community.  This information becomes the
basis for the financial community to assess
the extent to which the firm’s environmental
risk profile has improved.  If the assessment
is positive, then the firm will be accorded a
lower cost of capital because it is now less
risky overall.  Because a lower cost of capital
means that investors are willing to pay more
for the firm’s future cash flows, its stock
price will rise and shareholder wealth will
increase.  How much the firm’s stock price
actually rises will depend on the size of the
investment necessary to improve the firm’s
perceived environmental risk, and the magni-
tude of the resulting risk reduction.

In addition to the benefit produced when
an improvement in environmental manage-
ment and/or performance is clearly signaled
to the investment community, shareholders
also benefit when the firm’s environmental
performance continues to improve over time
because of the upgrades to its environmental
management system.  Again, once this out-
come is clearly signaled to the investment
community, another increase in share price
will result because there is clear evidence that
the firm’s environmental risk (i.e., probability
of one or more adverse outcomes) has been
further reduced.

IIIIII..    CCoorrppoorraattee  EEnnvviirroonnmmeennttaall  
MMaannaaggeemmeenntt  SSyysstteemmss  aanndd
PPeerrffoorrmmaannccee

What is corporate environmental man-
agement/performance? The term environ-
mental management as used in this paper
extends far beyond the traditional focus on
compliance with environmental control law.
Instead, the elements of a state-of-the-art
environmental management program are
inextricably linked with fundamental corpo-
rate activities, such as product design,
process engineering, marketing, and supply
chain management.  The adjacent schematic
lists several key elements of this type of com-
prehensive environmental management
system.

First and foremost is whether the compa-
ny has developed a corporate environmental
policy and demonstrated a commitment to
carrying out the policy.  Evidence of the
extent of this commitment can take the form
of several key indicators: a senior corporate
official has been assigned to implement the
policy; lines of responsibility and account-
ability have been identified; goals have been
defined that are measurable; and adequate
resources have been allocated to implement
the program.  A related key program element
is whether the corporation has developed sys-
tems to assist in implementing the program
and measuring performance, such as environ-
mental accounting systems and monitoring
systems that track emissions and discharges
of pollution as well as the usage of raw mate-
rials, energy, and other inputs to production.

Implementation of the environmental

management system requires a range of activ-
ities: training to ensure that workers operate
equipment and production processes correctly

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.

Page 4


and are proactive with respect to addressing
environmental risks; product design and
development approaches (e.g., Design for
Environment or DfE) that reduce the usage of
raw materials, generation of hazardous waste,
and environmental risks throughout the prod-
uct life cycle; monitoring to ensure that man-
ufacturing operations are in compliance with
pollutant emission standards and other regula-
tory requirements; and the creation of a cor-
porate culture in which awareness of and
performance related to environmental issues
is valued and rewarded.

The quality of a corporation’s environ-
mental management system matters.  Our
research on corporate disclosures of environ-
mental management systems and their effec-
tiveness indicates that companies that attained
relatively high scores using ICF Kaiser’s pro-
prietary rating system obtain greater benefits
in terms of lower investment risk, as com-
pared to corporations that appear to have
designed and implemented programs primari-
ly to obtain public relations benefits.  Our
environmental rating system methodology
takes into account a wide range of factors,
such as how the environmental policy is
structured, the level of detail provided by the
implementation plan, including lines of
responsibility and accountability, the range of
activities undertaken to achieve improve-
ments in environmental performance, the
level of resources committed to the program,
and the extent to which environmental perfor-
mance is measured and analyzed.  We devel-
oped the scoring methodology based on our
many years of consulting experience on
behalf of corporations, government agencies,
and international organizations on a range of
complex environmental issues.

Even though corporations may have

developed superior environmental manage-
ment systems, ultimately, it is critical that
these efforts lead to improvements in

environmental performance.  Firms must be
able to demonstrate that they are making
progress toward reducing pollutant generation
and releases and minimizing liability expo-
sure.  At a general level, producing data doc-
umenting waste generation, effluent
discharges, spills of hazardous substances,
and the like is both analytically tractable and,
increasingly, required by regulatory agencies
and company stakeholders.  The best firms in
this regard set and achieve goals that are
more stringent than those explicitly required
by law.  In an interesting parallel with corpo-
rate financial reporting, some firms have even
moved toward obtaining independent audits
to enhance the credibility of their stated envi-
ronmental performance.  

Finally, both improved environmental
management and improved environmental
performance need to be clearly articulated to
the investment community.  This brings us to
the next important component of our model
— environmental signaling.
IIVV..    EEnnvviirroonnmmeennttaall  

SSiiggnnaalliinngg

A vital link between a corporation’s envi-
ronmental management activities and perfor-
mance and its investment risk, which is
determined by the capital markets, is what we
term “environmental signaling.”  When con-
ducted most effectively, such communication
constitutes strategic environmental commu-
nications, because it is performed deliberate-
ly in support of well defined corporate
objectives, rather than randomly or as part of
general public relations activities.  Indeed,
although companies may have implemented
robust environmental management programs
and are achieving significant and sustained
reductions in pollution levels and liability
exposure, these efforts may not be fully
accounted for in terms of lower perceived risk

Page 5

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.


because they are not widely known among
participants in the capital markets, such as
institutional investors and equity analysts. 

It is well accepted that capital markets

operate more efficiently as the level and relia-
bility of information available to investors
increases.  When there is significant uncer-
tainty in the markets, such as the prospect of
future increases in inflation, investors demand
additional compensation as a result of this
uncertainty.  As new information becomes
available to market participants that reduces
this uncertainty, such as an unemployment or
price report, investors are able adjust their
expectations appropriately and the effects of
this uncertainty on the firm’s value are
reduced.

As with industry or macroeconomic data,
the availability of information about the envi-
ronmental management/performance of a
company also will affect an investor’s percep-
tion of the firm’s risk.  Our research indicates
that firms that communicate relevant and
comprehensive information about both their
environmental management programs and
performance are generally perceived by
investors as having a lower risk compared to
similar firms that provide no information in
this area.  

How do firms engage in strategic environ-
mental communications?  Firms have a range
of options for communicating environmental
management activities and performance to the
capital markets, including but not limited to
the following:  periodic press releases, sum-
maries in annual SEC filings, stand-alone
environmental reports, television commercials
and newsprint advertisements, and participa-
tion in industry-wide programs.

As with financial reporting, the quality of
the information that is communicated by the
firm will affect investors’ perceptions of its
credibility and overall usefulness for assess-
ing firm risk.  Corporations that provide rele-
vant, detailed, and reliable information on
their environmental programs and perfor-
mance on an on-going basis are more likely
to be rewarded with a perceived lower risk as
compared to corporations that provide only
qualitative information on a few aspects of
their program.

How do the investment markets evaluate

these strategic communications, and more
specifically, how do they incorporate this
information into their assessment of the risk
profile of the firm?  These are questions to
which we now turn.
VV..    WWhhaatt  iiss  MMeeaanntt  BByy  FFiirrmm    

IInnvveessttmmeenntt  RRiisskk  aanndd  HHooww  
iiss  iitt  MMeeaassuurreedd??

A firm’s risk profile can be divided into

two components.  The first is termed system-
atic risk and the second specific risk, or risk
that is unique to the firm.  Financial portfolio
theory concludes that investors require a
return for accepting systematic risk4 (and only
systematic risk) because firm-specific risk can
be diversified away.  This means that firms
that reduce their systematic risk are rewarded
with a lower cost of financial capital, and for
a given cash flow, a higher stock price.  

A firm’s systematic risk is measured by

its “Beta.”  Beta is a measure of a given
stock’s volatility relative to the overall mar-
ket, with the market’s Beta being assigned a
value of 1.  The higher a firm’s Beta, the
greater its systematic risk; stocks with a Beta
greater than 1 are more volatile than the 

4 Systematic, or market, risk reflects factors that affect all firms in the market simultaneously.  These factors
include inflation, changes in interest rates, recessions, wars, and the like.  Because all firms participating in the
market are affected by these factors, the risks that they pose cannot be eliminated by investing in a more diversi-
fied portfolio.

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.

Page 6


market, while those with a Beta of less than 1
are less volatile.5 Both theoretical develop-
ments and empirical evidence (i.e., historical
market returns) suggest that Beta is not con-
stant, but changes over time.  These changes
are related to a number of factors, including
changes in the firm’s debt to asset ratio
(financial leverage), fixed cost base of opera-
tion (operating leverage), customer markets
served, and product lines, as well as mergers
and acquisitions, to name a few.  Our empiri-
cal model adds to this list another set of vari-
ables, described briefly below, designed to
measure environmental risk.  Thus, as a
firm’s environmental risk declines (increases)
for example,  we should expect its Beta, all
else equal, to decline (increase).
VVII..    TThhee  RReellaattiioonnsshhiipp  

BBeettwweeeenn  tthhee  CChhaannggee  iinn  
EEnnvviirroonnmmeennttaall RRiisskk,,  
CChhaannggee  iinn  tthhee  CCoosstt  ooff  
CCaappiittaall,,  aanndd  tthhee  FFiirrmm(cid:146)(cid:146)ss  
SSttoocckk  PPrriiccee  (cid:151)(cid:151)  AAnn  
IIlllluussttrraattiioonn  

To demonstrate the linkages between

changes in environmental risk and a firm’s
stock price, let us consider the case of a
nationally known beer company.  The compa-
ny has a market capitalization of one billion
dollars and earns a steady annual profit
stream of $100 million which is available to
shareholders.  The firm has publicly aligned
its overall business mission with a set of envi-
ronmental objectives and publicly acknow-
ledges that its excellent business reputation is
in part due to its environmental performance.
To further enhance its national reputation as a
good environmental citizen, the firm has
decided to upgrade its environmental

management system with the intention of
significantly reducing toxic chemical releases
into ambient air and water.  

To publicly acknowledge the importance

of these environmental activities, the CEO
has created a senior environmental officer
position.  The person filling this position
reports to him and also is a member of the
Board of Directors.  In addition to conducting
an audit of the firm’s current environmental
management system, the senior officer is
charged with both creating a set of environ-
mental principles that will broadly define an
upgraded environmental management system
and, once approved, disseminating this new
environmental information to customers, sup-
pliers, employees, and investors.  

The senior management team understands
that signaling that the corporation has allocat-
ed resources to improve its environmental
management and environmental performance
is critical to the success of the firm’s new
environmental strategy.  As such, the CEO
instructs the firm’s investment relations offi-
cer to prepare a series of announcements
along with several press briefings to articulate
what the firm plans to do and how these
activities are intended to significantly
improve its future environmental perfor-
mance.  Environmental performance will be
measured by reductions in hazardous waste
generation, and regulated emissions of air and
water pollutants.

Prior to these announcements, the firm’s
cost of equity capital as measured by its cor-
porate finance department using the well
known Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)
was 10 percent.  As information about the
firm’s new environmental policies is dissemi-
nated to various stakeholders and the public

5 In practice, company-specific Beta values are computed from a regression line relating total historic returns (divi-
dend yield plus market gain or loss) of the company’s stock to the returns of the overall market.  The slope of the
line of best fit (regression parameter value using least squares techniques) is defined as the Beta.  Beta also may be
calculated as the covariance between the returns of the company’s stock and the market divided by the variance of
market returns.

Page 7

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.


generally, the financial markets begin to
process this new information.  More specifi-
cally, investors  conclude that the firm’s new
environmental policies will likely result in the
firm being less prone to environmental acci-
dents, and that it is well positioned to be in
compliance with any new and more stringent
environmental regulations.  As a result, the
financial markets accord the firm a lower per-
ceived risk in the form of a reduced Beta.  

When the firm’s corporate finance depart-

ment inputs this lower Beta into the CAPM,
a new lower cost of equity capital of nine per-
cent results.  The beer firm’s CFO estimates
that it will cost about $50 million annually to
achieve the desired environmental results.
Given this cost and the new lower cost of
capital, the CFO informs the CEO that the
value of the firm will increase by $61 million
or $6.10 per share.6

The CFO notes further that this may be

only the initial gain in increasing shareholder
wealth.  If the new environmental manage-
ment system is as successful as expected,  the
firm’s future environmental performance will
meet and perhaps exceed the objectives artic-
ulated in the firm’s environmental policy.  If
this occurs, shareholders may be rewarded
again as it becomes more clear to investors
that the new environmental management sys-
tem has indeed created a far less risky firm.
That is, as evidence begins to build that the
firm’s upgraded environmental management
system is in fact creating the benefits that
were initially envisioned, the investment mar-
kets will be more certain that the firm’s new
environmental management system works as
planned and further reductions in the firm’s
Beta and its cost of capital can be expected.
More importantly, these reductions will result
in an additional share price increase in the
future.

VVIIII..    DDooeess  IImmpprroovviinngg
EEnnvviirroonnmmeennttaall  
MMaannaaggeemmeenntt  aanndd  
EEnnvviirroonnmmeennttaall  
PPeerrffoorrmmaannccee  RReeaallllyy  PPaayy??

It is one thing to develop the logic of how

improved environmental management sys-
tems and improved environmental perfor-
mance affect shareholder wealth and to
provide an illustration such as the foregoing,
but it is clearly another to actually measure
these impacts.  Because we believe that the
internal logic of our argument is persuasive,
we decided to attempt to measure the impacts
directly.  What we report below are the results
of a preliminary but detailed and rigorous
analytical application.  Our results support the
basic tenets of our model.  A description of
the research design and a summary of the
empirical results are presented in the
Appendix.  

To illustrate the likely impact on Beta and

stock price arising from a reduction in envi-
ronmental risk, we simulate below our empir-
ical model.  The simulation shows the
magnitude of the Beta decline and the share
price increase that result from a 50 percent
improvement in a firm’s environmental man-
agement system and a 50 percent improve-
ment in a firm’s environmental performance.
The table on the next page reflects three sepa-
rate impacts--the independent impact of each
indicator on Beta and the cost of equity capi-
tal, and then their combined influence.  This
combined effect assumes that the firm’s envi-
ronmental performance registers a 50 percent
improvement two years after the firm
improves its environmental management sys-
tem rating by 50 percent.

6 The $61 million is calculated by first capitalizing the firm’s $100 million profit stream by the new lower cost of
capital ($100 million/.09 = $1.111 billion) and subtracting the $50 million cost of the investment.  Because there
are 10 million shares outstanding, the share price improvement is $6.10 ($61 million/10 million shares ).

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.

Page 8


IMPACT ON BETA AND COST OF CAPITAL RESULTING FROM A

50% IMPROVEMENT IN A FIRM’S ENVIRONMENTAL
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM AND ITS ENVIRONMENTAL

PERFORMANCE

50% 

IMPROVEMENT

IN VARIABLE

NAMED AT LEFT
WILL RESULT IN
A BETA DECLINE

OF

INITIAL

BETA

BETA AFTER

CHANGE

INITIAL
COST OF
CAPITAL

COST OF
CAPITAL
AFTER
CHANGE

-8.5%

-6.5%

-13.2%

1.0

1.0

1.0

.915

13%

12.57%

.935

.868

13%

13%

12.67%

12.34%

VARIABLE NAME

ENVIRONMENTAL

MANAGEMENT

SYSTEM

ENVIRONMENTAL
PERFORMANCE

COMBINED 
EFFECT(a)

(a) In this example, we have assumed that the significant improvements in environmental performance occur in
year 2.  Accordingly, the combined effect on Beta is computed by discounting using the cost of capital (12.57%)
that results from the initial improvement in environmental management in year 0. 

As the table illustrates, both an improved

environmental management system and
improved environmental performance result
in significant reductions in a firm’s Beta.  The
combined effect indicates that systematic risk
can be reduced by a significant amount, about
13 percent, resulting in a reduction in the
firm’s cost of capital from 13 percent to 12.34
percent. 

The table on page 10 demonstrates how
declines in the cost of capital may result in a
higher stock price and an increase in share-
holder wealth.  Prior to any improvement in
the firm’s environmental management system
rating or improvement in its environmental
performance, the firm has a $10 million annu-
al cash flow, 10 million shares of common
stock outstanding, and a cost of capital of 13

percent.  The value of the firm, assuming that
the $10 million annual cash flow can be gen-
erated in perpetuity, is $76.9 million and its
share price is $7.69 ($76.9 million/10 million
shares). 

Let us now consider the combined effect

on the firm’s share price as a result of a 50
percent improvement in its environmental
management system followed two years later
by a 50 percent improvement in its environ-
mental performance.  Under these conditions,
we should expect the value of the firm prior
to any investment costs to increase by 5.3
percent.  This means that if investment costs
associated with making the indicated
improvements are small relative to cash
flows, the stock price should increase from
$7.69 to $8.10.  

Page 9

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.


IMPACT ON FIRM VALUE AND SHARE PRICE RESULTING FROM

A FIRM IMPROVING ITS ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT 

SYSTEM AND ITS ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE

Maximum Firm
Value (Millions)

Maximum
Stock Price
(Value per

share)

Percent
Increase

from Initial

Position

Initial Position
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

# of shares = 10 million
Annual Revenue = $100 million/year
Cash flow = $10 million/year
Risk Free Rate = 8%
Risk Premium = 5%
Beta = 1.0
Cost of capital = 8% + 1.0 (5%) =13%

Independent Effect of a 50% Improvement in
Environmental Management System
•
•

New Beta = .915
New Cost of Capital = 12.57

Independent Effect of a 50% Improvement
in Environmental Performance
•
•

New Beta = .935
New Cost of Capital = 12.67

Combined Effect
•
•

New Beta = .868
Cost of Capital = 12.34%

$76.9 

$7.69 

0% 

$79.6 

$7.96 

3.5% 

$78.9

$7.89

2.6%

$81.0

$8.10

5.3%

It is unlikely, however, that the cost of

the required environmental upgrades will be
small.  To the contrary, they may well be
quite large.  To see how this will affect the
stock price, let us assume for the moment that
environmental investment costs are two per-
cent of annual revenue, or $2.0 million per
year. This is equivalent to what many manu-
facturing firms have historically spent annual-
ly on “pollution abatement capital
expenditures,” according to U.S. Department

of Commerce data.  Thus, if the investment is
$2.0 million annually, the share price would
rise from $7.69 to $7.90 {$7.69 +[($4.1mil-
lion- $2.0)/10 million shares]}.  It is worthy
of note that this increase in share price does
not reflect any additional revenue that might
accrue to the firm as a result of any incremen-
tal goodwill that its improved environmental
reputation might confer.  Moreover, this cal-
culation does not reflect any additional com-
petitive advantage that would accrue from

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.

Page 10


allowing the firm to make additional non-
environmental strategic investments that
might not be possible if its cost of capital
were higher, nor does it capture any operating
cost savings (increases in earnings) that might
result from its investments in improved envi-
ronmental performance.
VVIIIIII..    SSuummmmaarryy,,  CCoonncclluussiioonnss,,  

aanndd  IImmpplliiccaattiioonnss  

This paper sets out a conceptual frame-
work that can guide senior managers as they
grapple with decisions regarding whether and
how best to deploy corporate resources to
upgrade their environmental management sys-
tems, with the objective of improving the
firm’s environmental performance.  While
others have presented anecdotal evidence that
may suggest that efforts to improve environ-
mental performance are likely to yield a vari-
ety of secondary, even unexpected, benefits
(e.g., new products and more efficient pro-
duction processes), one cannot reasonably
expect senior managers to commit sizable
corporate resources to improved environmen-
tal performance based simply on the hope that
they may encounter such serendipity.

Although many have asserted that corpo-
rate environmental activism makes good busi-
ness sense and/or that a positive
environmental image provides a certain
cachet in terms of improving public
perceptions and stockholder relations, the
empirical evidence supporting these ideas has

largely been absent.  We believe that corpora-
tions that are environmentally sound create
additional value for stockholders through
being less risky business entities and there-
fore, being accorded a lower cost of capital.
In this paper, we have explained and mea-
sured this phenomenon and shown that firms
that improve their environmental management
system and their future environmental perfor-
mance will be able to increase shareholder
wealth by perhaps as much as five percent.
In short, improving corporate environmental
performance pays. 

Our findings also lead to the question of
how best to seek out, identify, evaluate, and
implement the enhancements to the firm’s
environmental management system that will
produce better environmental performance
while optimizing use of company resources.
Each firm confronts a unique set of environ-
mental and business management challenges,
and possesses its own specific complement of
technological, financial, human, and other
capital.  Nonetheless, there are a number of
general activities that may be employed to
good effect by virtually any organization.
These are briefly highlighted below.

An important implication of our research
that is reflected in numerous ongoing initia-
tives7 to improve environmental performance
is that environmental management should be
approached systematically.  That is, defining
what one wishes to accomplish and how
objectives will be attained, through a formal
strategy development exercise, is necessary to

7 Efforts to bring consistency of approach, terms, and practice to the discipline of environmental management may
be seen in the form of industry codes of conduct (e.g., the Chemical Manufacturers Association’s Responsible Care
Program and the American Forest and Paper Association’s Sustainable Forestry Initiative).  In addition, several
noteworthy domestic and international consortia have been formed that cut across industries, such as the Global
Environmental Management Initiative, and the International Chamber of Commerce’s Business Council for
Sustainable Development, respectively.  Many of these organizations and programs not only promote the develop-
ment and dissemination of standardized approaches to environmental management, they also embrace the concepts
of sustainability and eco-efficiency, in which industrial activities are critically examined in terms of raw material,
water, energy, and non-renewable resource use, as well as relative to more conventional aspects such as toxic pol-
lutant emissions and waste generation.  Finally, the nascent ISO 14000 series of environmental management stan-
dards represents a serious attempt to promote global consistency and adherence to a set of forward-looking
principles, such as preventing pollution and continual improvement.

Page 11

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.


clearly, and credibly to all interested stake-
holders. 

The corporate financial and other

resources needed to undertake these activities
and enhancements to the environmental man-
agement function are likely to be non-trivial
for most corporations.  As we have shown
above, however, the expected return on
investment for deploying these resources in
this way can be positive and substantial, par-
ticularly if financial returns and impacts on
shareholder (owner) wealth are evaluated in
an appropriate and suitably broad manner. 

lay the groundwork for any successful EMS.
Because, however, it is difficult to define a
strategy and measure progress toward goals in
the absence of a clear baseline, a strategic
assessment of key environmental issues is an
appropriate place to start for many organiza-
tions.  

In most companies, a thorough strategic

assessment of environmental issues will iden-
tify areas of weakness in the environmental
management function, which can be
addressed through targeted EMS development/
improvement initiatives.  These initiatives are
by their nature firm- and context-specific, but
often include an assessment and analysis
phase and a development and improvement
phase, the latter of which is focused on for-
mulating missing elements (e.g., policies, pro-
cedures), integrating important EMS
principles and tools, and establishing strate-
gies for achieving desired patterns of internal
and external information flow.

During the course of EMS development
or improvement, several distinct and impor-
tant EMS functions that are not being per-
formed well or at all may be identified.
These deficiencies may be addressed through
specific environmental infrastructure
enhancements, or through investments in the
capabilities of the organization’s human or
information management resources.
Conducting a purposeful knowledge/skill
building initiative is often a critical activity
on the path toward improved environmental
and business performance.  Similarly, effec-
tive environmental management systems
require timely and high quality information,
so information management analysis/
improvement activities can play a pivotal role
in helping the organization to meet its envi-
ronmental improvement goals, and
communicate its accomplishments efficiently,

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.

Page 12


AAPPPPEENNDDIIXX

RReesseeaarrcchh  DDeessiiggnn  

We developed an empirical model designed to
estimate whether both environmental management
and environmental performance influence a firm’s
financial risk.  This was done in two separate
stages.  In the first stage, we estimated the Beta
for about 330 firms that are included in the S&P
500 stock index.  This was done for two separate
time periods, 1980-1987 and 1988-1994.  The
choice of time frames reflected the need to have
sufficiently long subperiods to both measure tem-
poral changes in Beta and to accommodate vary-
ing availability of corporate financial data for a
large number of firms across a broad cross-section
of industries.  The distinction between the two
periods also reflects the emergence of corporate
environmental management as a distinct activity,

TTHHEE  RREEGGRREESSSSIIOONN  MMOODDEELL

as well as a pronounced increase in the quantity
and quality of available data on the environmental
performance of corporations (e.g., through report-
ing under the U.S. EPA’s Toxics Release
Inventory (TRI) program).

The Betas were estimated by regressing continu-
ally compounded daily returns over quarter-year
periods against like returns on a stock index made
up of all companies trading on the New York and
American Stock exchanges.  In the second stage,
the change in Beta between the two subperiods
was calculated for each company and these obser-
vations were then regressed against indicators of
environmental management, environmental per-
formance, and non-environmental variables.
These non-environmental variables included mea-
sures of firm financial and operating leverage,
variability in operating income, variability in pro-
ductivity, and other firm performance variables
that are designed to capture all known and

Change in Beta for firm(s) =  c1* change in financial leverage(s) + 

c2* change in operating leverage(s) + c3 * change in productivity (s) +

c4*change in coefficient of variation of firm revenue(s) +

c5* change in coefficient of variation of firm operating income(s) +

c6* change in standard deviation of operating leverage(s) +

c7* change in correlation between the return on the market portfolio and firm costs (s) +

c8* change in change in operating income(s) +

c9*B(s) [ Beta for firm “s” during 1980-87 period ] + cis*D(is)  + 

c10 * environmental performance(s) + c11* environmental management system rating(s)  +
c0(s) + e(s)

where:

c0(s) = regression constant term for firm “s”

D(is) = industry dummy which equals unity if firm(s)’s primary business is in a particular
two digit SIC code and zero otherwise.

e(s) = error from regression for firm(s) 

Page 13

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.


quantifiable factors of firm risk unrelated to the
environment.

The environmental variables are of two types.
The first is a qualitative environmental variable
designed to measure the presence and quality of
the firm’s environmental management system.
This variable was developed by ICF Kaiser staff
and was based on a detailed review of each firm’s
environmental management practices and philoso-
phy as articulated in the firm’s annual environ-
mental reports and other public environmental
communications.  Each company reviewed was
given a score from 1 (poor environmental man-
agement system) to 35 (best environmental man-
agement system).  The second environmental
variable was designed to measure actual firm
environmental performance.  This variable is
defined as the average annual change in TRI
releases per unit of firm capital (value of property,
plant, and equipment).  These variables along
with the others noted below were included in the
regression model.

The coefficients of the above model were estimat-
ed using multiple regression techniques.  A sum-
mary of the results of this exercise are shown
below.8

The coefficients of the model suggest that the
changes are in the hypothesized direction, and are
clearly material in a financial sense.  Statistically,
the results indicate that the regression model has
significant explanatory power as indicated by the
size of the adjusted R-squared and the signifi-
cance of the equation’s F statistic.  The environ-
mental coefficients have the correct signs and also
are significantly different from zero.  The envi-
ronmental management rating variable indicates
that as the firm improves its environmental man-
agement system, the firm’s financial risk declines.
Also, as actual environmental performance
improves, as measured by the decline in TRI per
unit of capital, firm risk declines.

SSUUMMMMAARRYY  SSTTAATTIISSTTIICCSS  FFOORR  RREEGGRREESSSSIIOONN  MMOODDEELL
• R-squared = 28%

• Adjusted R-squared =  24%

• Coefficient Name

t statistic

Equals Zero @ 99% Confidence Level

Probability that Coefficient 

1) Environmental

Management

-2.86

2) Environmental 

Performance 

2.62

0

0

• Most non-environmental coefficients were statistically significant, although several of the

industry dummy variables were not.

• F-statistic = 6.73 ; Probability that the coefficients of the model are zero = 0

• Durbin-Watson Statistic = 1.87

•

Probability of Heteroskedasticity Using White’s Test = 2%

8 Because the model is proprietary to ICF Kaiser, the coefficients are not shown, though the t -statistics of the envi-
ronmental coefficients are provided.  For further information on the model, please contact ICF Kaiser.

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.

Page 14


BBIIBBLLIIOOGGRRAAPPHHYY

Bailey, Paul E. and Peter A. Soyka.

“Environmental Accounting—Making
It Work for Your Company.” Total
Quality Environmental Management.
Vol. 5, No. 4 Summer 1996. 13-30. 

Barth, Mary E. and Maureen F. McNichols.
“Estimation and Market Valuation of
Environmental Liabilities Relating to
Superfund Sites.”  Journal of
Accounting Research.  Vol. 32,
Supplement 1994.  177-209.

Beirman, Harold, Jr. and George S. Oldfield,

Jr.  “Corporate Debt and Corporate
Taxes.”  The Journal of Finance. Vol.
34, September 1979.  951-6.

Birchard, Bill. “Making Environmental

Reports Relevant.”  CFO.  June 1996.
79-80.

Blacconiere, Walter G. and Dennis M. Patten.

“Environmental Disclosures,
Regulatory Costs, and Changes in
Firm Value.”  Journal of Accounting
and Economics.  Vol. 18, no. 3,
November 1994.  357-77.

Blacconiere, Walter G. and W. Dana

Northcut.  “Environmental
Information and Market Reactions to
Environmental Legislation.”  Version
2.5.  August 29, 1995.

Blume, Marshall.  “Betas and Their

Regression Tendencies.”  Journal of
Finance.  Vol. 30, no. 3, June 1975.
785-95.

Bowen, Robert M., Richard P. Castanias, and

Lane A. Daley.  “Intra-Industry
Effects of the Accident at Three Mile
Island.”  Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis.  Vol. 18, no. 1,
1983.  87-106.

Bowman, E.H. and M. Haire.  “A Strategic

Posture Toward Corporate Social
Responsibility.”  California
Management Review.  Vol. 18, no. 2,
1975.  49-58.

Brenner, and Seymour Smidt.  “Asset

Characteristics and Systematic Risk.”
Journal of Financial Management.
Winter 1978.  33-9.

Callahan, Carolyn M. and Rosanne M. Mohr.

“The Determinants of Systematic
Risk:  A Synthesis.”  The Financial
Review.  Vol. 24, no. 2, May 1989.
157-81.

Chen, K.H. and R.W. Metcalf.  “The

Relationship Between Pollution
Control Records and Financial
Indicators Revisited.”  Accounting
Review.  Vol. 55, January 1980.
168-77.

Cohen, Mark A., Scott A. Fenn, and Jonathan

S. Naimon.  “Environmental and
Financial Performance:  Are They
Related?”  Investor Responsibility
Research Center:  Environmental
Information Service.  April 1995.

Conine, Thomas E., Jr.  “Corporate Debt and
Corporate Taxes:  An Extension.”  The
Journal of Finance.  Vol. 35, no. 4,
September 1980.  1033-7.

Page 15

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.


Dirks, H. John.  “Accounting for the Costs of

Fuller, Russell J., George W. Hinman and

Environmental Cleanup - Where
Things Stand Today.”  Environmental
Finance.  Spring 1991.  89-92.

Dominy, Garrett L.  “Accounting for

Environmental Contingencies and
Losses.”  Environmental Finance.
Spring 1991.  45-51.

Dowdell, Thomas D., Suresh Govindaraj and
Prem C. Jain.  “The Tylenol Incident,
Ensuing Regulation, and Stock
Prices.”  Journal of Finance and
Quantitative Analysis.  Vol. 27, no. 2,
June 1992.  283-301.

Duvel, William A., Jr.  “How to Use

Engineering Estimates of
Environmental Contingencies and
Liabilities.”  Environmental Finance.
Spring 1991.  53-63.

Felton, James, Douglas Hearth, and Pu Liu.

“The Information Content of Security
Analyses:  Evidence from Standard &
Poor’s Common Stock Quality
Ranking Changes.”  Journal of
Business Finance & Accounting.  Vol.
22, no. 7, October 1995.  975-89.

Fisher, Anne B.  “Corporate Reputations:
Comebacks and Comeuppances.”
Fortune.  March 4, 1996.  90-8.

Freedman, Martin and Charles Wasley.  “The
Association Between Environmental
Performance and Environmental
Disclosure in Annual Reports and
10Ks.”  Advances in Public Interest
Accounting:  A Research Annual.
Vol. 3, 1990.  183-93.

Thomas C. Lowinger.  “The Impact of
Nuclear Power on the Systematic Risk
and Market Value of Electric Utility
Common Stock.”  The Energy
Journal.  Vol.  11, no. 2, April 1990.
117-33.

Gahlon, James M. and James A. Gentry.  “On
the Relationship Between Systematic
Risk and the Degrees of Operating
and Financial Leverage.”  Journal of
Financial Management.  Summer
1982.  15-23.

Garber, Steven and James Hammit.  “Does

Superfund Liability Increase the Cost
of Capital?” September 1996.

Global Environmental Management Initiative

(GEMI).  “Environmental Reporting
in a Total Quality Management
Framework: A Primer.”  1994.
Washington, D.C.

Guthrie, James and Lee D. Parker.

“Corporate Social Disclosure Practice:
A Comparative International
Analysis.”  Advances in Public
Interest Accounting:  A Research
Annual. Vol. 3, 1990.  159-752.

Hamilton, James T.  “Pollution as News:

Media and Stock Market Reactions to
the Toxic Release Inventory Data.”
Journal of Environmental Economics
and Management.  Vol. 28, 1995.  98-
113.

Harris, Trevor S. and James A. Ohlson.
“Accounting Disclosures and the
Market’s Valuation of Oil and Gas
Properties.”  The Accounting Review.
Vol. 62, no. 4, October 1987.  651-70.

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.

Page 16


Healy, Paul M. and Krishna G. Palepu.  “The
Effect of Firms’ Financial Disclosure
Strategies on Stock Prices.”
Accounting Horizons.  Vol. 7, no. 1,
March 1993.  1-11.

Hill, Joanne and Thomas Schneeweis.  “The

Effect of Three Mile Island on
Electric Utility Stock Prices:  A
Note.”  The Journal of Finance.  Vol.
38, no. 4, September 1983.  1285-92.

Ingram, Robert W. and Katherine Beal

Frazier.  “Environmental Performance
and Corporate Disclosure.”  Journal
of Accounting Research.  Vol. 18, no.
2, Autumn 1980.  614-22.

Investor Responsibility Research Center

(IRRC).  “Corporate Environmental
Profiles Directory 1995.” 1995.
Washington, D.C.

Johnson, Scott David.  “An Analysis of the

Koutmos, Gregory and Reza Saidi.  “The

Leverage Effect in Individual Stocks
and the Debt to Equity Ratio.”
Journal of Business Finance and
Accounting.  Vol. 22, no. 7, October
1995.  1063-75.

Lambson, Val Eugene and Farrell E. Jensen.

“Sunk Costs and the Variability of
Firm Value Over Time.”  The Review
of Economics and Statistics.  1995.
535-44.

Lang, Mark and Russell Lundholm, “Cross-

Sectional Determinants of Analyst
Ratings of Corporate Disclosures.”
Journal of Accounting Research.  Vol.
31, no. 2, Autumn 1993.  246-71.

Lev, Baruch.  “On the Association Between

Operating Leverage and Risk.”
Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis.  September 1974.  627-41.

Relationship Between Corporate
Environmental and Economic
Performance at the Level of the
Firm.”  Doctoral Dissertation 1995.
University of California, Irvine.

Mahapatra, S.  “Investor Reaction to

Corporate Social Accounting.”
Journal of Business Finance and
Accounting.  Vol. 11, no. 1, Spring
1984.  29-40.

Karpoff, J.M. and J.R. Lott, Jr.  “The

Mandelker, Gershon N. and S. Ghon Rhee.

Reputational Penalty Firms Bear from
Committing Criminal Fraud.”  Journal
of Law and Economics.  Vol. 36,
1993.  757.

Klassen, Robert D. and Curtis P. Mclaughlin.

“The Impact of Environmental
Management on Firm Performance.”
Management Science. Vol. 42, No. 8,
August 1996. 1199-1214.

“The Impact of the Degrees of
Operating and Financial Leverage on
Systematic Risk of Common Stock.”
Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis.  Vol. 19, no. 1, March 1984.
45-57.

McGuire, J., A. Sundgren and T. Schneeweis.
“Corporate Social Responsibility and
Firm Financial Performance.”
Academy of Management Journal.
Vol. 31, December 1988.  854-72.

Page 17

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.


Muoghalu, Michael I., H. David Robison, and
John L. Glascock.  “Hazardous Waste
Lawsuits, Stockholder Returns, and
Deterrence.”  Southern Economic
Journal.  October 1990.  357-70.

Palmer, Karen, Wallace E. Oates, and Paul R.
Portney.  “Tightening Environmental
Standards:  The Benefit-Cost or the
No-Cost Paradigm?”  Journal of
Economic Perspectives. Vol. 9, no. 4,
1995.  119-132.

Patten, Dennis M.  “Exposure, Legitimacy,
and Social Disclosure.”  Journal of
Accounting and Public Policy.  Vol.
10, no. 4, Winter 1991.  297-308.

Porter, Michael E.  “America’s Green

Strategy.”  Scientific American.  April,
1995. 168.

Porter, Michael E. and Claas van der Linde.
“Green and Competitive.”  Harvard
Business Review.  September-October
1995.  120-34.

Porter, Michael E. and Claas van der Linde.

“Toward a New Conception of the
Environment-Competitiveness
Relationship.”   Journal of Economic
Perspectives.  Vol. 9, no. 4, 1995.
97-118.

Price Waterhouse.  “A Survey of Corporate

America’s Accounting for
Environmental Costs.”  Environmental
Accounting:  The Issues, The
Developing Solutions.  1995.

Rabinowitz, Daniel L. and Margaret Murphy.
“Environmental Disclosure:  What the
SEC Requires.”  Environmental
Finance.  Spring 1991.  31-43.

Rosenberg, Barr and James Guy.  “Prediction

of Beta from Investment
Fundamentals.”  Financial Analysts
Journal.  Vol. 32, no. 3, May-June
1976,  60-72,  and no. 4, July-August
1976.   62-70.

Rosenberg, Barr.  “Prediction of Common
Stock Betas.”  Journal of Portfolio
Management.  Vol. 11, no. 2, Winter
1985.  5-14.

Rosenberg, Barr.  “Prediction of Common
Stock Investment Risk.”  Journal of
Portfolio Management.  Vol. 11, no. 1,
Fall 1984.  44-53.

Rubinstein, Mark E.  “A Mean-Variance
Synthesis of Corporate Financial
Theory.”  The Journal of Finance.
Vol. 28, March 1973.  167-80.

Sandoval, Ricardo.  “How Green are the

Green Funds?:  Fiscal and
Philosophical Ups and Downs of
Environmental Investing.”  The
Amicus Journal.  Spring 1995.  29-33.

Statman, Meir.  “Betas Compared:  Merrill
Lynch vs. Value Line.”  Journal of
Portfolio Management.  Vol. 7, no. 2,
Winter 1981.  41-44.

Spicer, B.H.  “Investors, Corporate Social

Performance and Informational
Disclosure:  An Empirical Study.”
Accounting Review.  Vol. 53, no. 1,
1978.  94-111

Sullivan, Timothy G.  “The Cost of Capital

and the Market Power of Firms.”  The
Review of Economics and Statistics.
Vol. 60, no. 2, May 1978.  209-217.

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.

Page 18


Surma, John P. and Albert A. Vondra.

“Accounting for Environmental Costs:
A Hazardous Subject.”  Journal of
Accountancy.  March 1992.  51-5.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.  “Do

Environmental Regulations Impair
Competitiveness?  A Critical Review
of Economic Studies.”  Prepared by
Economics Research Group, Inc. and
ICF Kaiser Consulting Group for
Office of Policy Analysis and Review,
Office of Air and Radiation.
September 1995.

Vance, Stanley.  “Are Socially Responsible

Corporations Good Investment
Risks?”  Management Review.  No.
64, 1975.  18-24.

Verrecchia, Robert E.  “Discretionary

Disclosure.”  Journal of Accounting
and Economics.  Vol. 5, no. 3,
September 1983.  179-94.

Warner, Langdon S.  “Making Money on the

Environment.”  B&E Review.
October-December 1995.  3-8.

Young, P.J.  “Environmental Influences on

Company Valuations.”  Journal of the
Chartered Institute of Water and
Environmental Management. Vol. 10,
no. 1, February 1996. 41-46.

Zuber, George R. and Charles G. Berry.
“Assessing Environmental Risk.”
Journal of Accountancy.  March 1992.
43-8.

Page 19

© 1996 ICF Kaiser International, Inc.  All rights reserved.


Staff and Resources 
 
The research described in this paper was performed by staff within and under contract with ICF 
Kaiser Consulting Group, now an independent company known as ICF Consulting.   
 
ICF Consulting is a leading management, technology, and policy consulting firm.  We draw on 
extensive industry knowledge, credentialed professionals, and innovative analytics to develop 
solutions to complex energy, environment, emergency management, community development, 
and transportation challenges.  ICF Consulting successfully implements strategies and analyses 
in these areas through our expertise in information technology, organizational improvement, and 
communications.  Since 1969, ICF Consulting has been serving major corporations, government 
at all levels, and multinational institutions from key business centers in North America, Europe, 
and the Pacific Rim. 
 
For more information, please contact: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Telephone: 703.934.3225 
Fax: 703.934.3740 
E-mail: PBailey@ICFConsulting.com 
www.icfconsulting.com 

Paul Bailey 
ICF Consulting 
9300 Lee Highway 
Fairfax, VA 22031 
USA 

