KATHOLIEKE 
UNIVERSITEIT 
LEUVEN 

DEPARTEMENT TOEGEPASTE 
ECONOMISCHE WETENSCHAPPEN 

RESEARCH  REPORT  0331 

THE  EFFECT  OF  INDIVIDUAL HR  DOMAINS ON 
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE:  EVIDENCE  FROM 

BELGIAN  SMALL BUSINESSES 

by 

D.  FAEMS 

S.  DE  WINNE 

J. MAES 
l. SELS 

0/2003/2376/31 


THE EFFECT OF INDIVIDUAL HR DOMAINS ON FINANCIAL 

PERFORMANCE: EVIDENCE FROM BELGIAN SMALL 

BUSINESSES 

DriesFAEMS 

Organization Studies, Department of Applied Economics 

Katholieke Universiteit Leuven 

Sophie DE WINNE 

Organization Studies, Department of Applied Economics 

Katholieke Universiteit Leuven 

JohanMAES 

Organization Studies, Department of Applied Economics 

Katholieke Universiteit Leuven 

LucSELS1 

Organization Studies, Department of Applied Economics 

Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (Belgium) 

1  Corresponding author: Professor Luc Sels, Organization Studies, Department of Applied 
Economics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Naamsestraat 69, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. +32 
16 32.68.72. luc.sels@econ.kuleuven.ac.be 


THE EFFECT OF INDIVIDUAL HR DOMAINS ON FINANCIAL 

PERFORMANCE: EVIDENCE FROM BELGIAN SMALL 

BUSINESSES 

Abstract 

The  contribution  of  this  study,  which  assesses  the  influence  of  HRM  on 
financial  performance,  is  fourfold.  (1)  We  assess  the  relative  contribution  of 
different  HR  domains  to  organizational  performance.  By  controlling  for  the 
overall HRM intensity in all analyses we try to meet one of the most striking 
shortcomings  of  'single  HR  practice  research',  namely  the  neglect  of  the 
potential simultaneity that might exist with other HR practices. (2) By studying 
small  Belgian  companies,  we  focus  on  the  importance  of  HRM  for  small 
business  management.  (3)  Relying  on  bankruptcy  prediction  models,  we 
optimize the conceptualization of financial  performance.  (4)  Using structural 
equation  modeling,  we  try  to  capture  the  mediating  effect  of  operational 
performance on the relationship between HRM and financial performance. The 
analyses indicate mixed results for  different HR domains with regard to their 
impact on operational and financial performance. 

Key words: HR domains, operational performance, financial performance 

2 


1. Introduction 

Interest  in  the  link between HRM  and  organizational  performance  has  risen 
sharply  over  the  past  decade.  The  status  quaestionis  formulated  in  various 
critical  overviews  shows  that,  despite  a  rich  research  tradition,  many 
conceptual flaws,  black boxes  and empirical  gaps remain.  We  quote some of 
these points. 

Looking  at  existing  research,  we  see  that  two  options  are  widely  used  to 
study  the  relationship  between HRM  and  performance  on an organizational 
level  (Wright  &  Boswelt  2002).  Some  researchers  study  the  link between an 
extended  set  of  HR  practices  and  performance.  In  this  type  of  research  so 
called 'good practices' are integrated into one index. A well-known example is 
Huselid's  (1995)  'HR  Sophistication  Index'.  Other  researchers  have  tried  to 
focus  on the added value of individual practices, such as performance-related 
pay  (e.g.  Gerhart  &  Milkovich,  1992)  or  staffing  practices  (e.g.  Terpstra  & 
Rozelle,  1993).  However,  the  empirical  robustness  of both  options  has  been 
questioned.  The  former  option  has  been  criticized  because  of  a  lack  of 
consistency  between  different  studies  with  regard  to  the  choice  of  best 
practices  (Becker  & Gerhart, 1996).  The empirical validity of studies using the 
latter option has been questioned because they have not taken into account the 
potential  simultaneity  that  might  exist  with  other  HR  practices  (Wright  & 
Boswelt 2002).  Therefore,  explicit efforts  to  improve the validity of empirical 
research into the HRM-performance link seem to be necessary. 

Most  research  into  the  HRM-performance  link  is 

limited  to  larger 
organizations  while  small  businesses  receive  little  attention.  Given  their 
statistical predominance - firms with less than 50 employees count for 98.9% of 
all  firms  in  the  European  Union  (ENSR  1997) -
the  exclusion  of  small 
businesses poses a  serious  threat on the generalizability of research findings. 
Moreover,  small  companies  represent  an  ideal  field  for  studying  the 
relationship  between  the  implementation  of  specific  management  practices 
and  organizational  performance,  precisely because  of  their  more  transparent 
nature (Aldrich &  Auster, 1986). 

in  HRM-performance 

Finally,  the  operationalization  of  organizational  performance  can  be 
questioned.  The  selection  of  performance  measures  is  rarely  adequately 
substantiated 
studies.  The  appropriateness  of 
performance measures will vary with the level of analysis, but in each case the 
focus  should  be  on  measures  that  have  inherent  meaning  for  a  particular 
context  or  research  setting  (Becker  &  Gerhart,  1996).  Shareholder  value  for 
instance may very well be an appropriate measure for larger companies with a 
notation  on  the  stock  exchange.  But  one  can  doubt  its  appropriateness  for 
smalt family owned businesses. 

3 


In this paper we aim at furthering research on the link between HRM and firm 
performance by providing an answer to these shortcomings. First, by making a 
theoretically  sound  selection  of  HR  domains  and  by  controlling  for  the 
presence of other HR domains within the different models, we try to conduct a 
robust  assessment  of  the  relative  contribution  of  different  HR  domains  to 
organizational  performance.  Second,  considering  Belgian  small  enterprises 
(defined  as  organizations  with  at  most  100  employees),  we  are  aiming  at  a 
research population that has been neglected to a large extent. Thirdly, we want 
to develop performance measures suitable for studying the HRM-performance 
link in small businesses. 

The  further  outline of this paper is  as  follows.  First,  we  review  the  HRM 
performance and the small business literature in order to develop a conceptual 
framework linking the different HR domains to financial performance. Second, 
research hypotheses are formulated.  We then clarify our method, sample and 
measures  and  elucidate  the  results.  We  close  with  a  discussion  of  the 
contribution  of  the  different  HR domains  to  the  success  of small  businesses 
and with some suggestions for future research. 

2. Linking HRM and performance: theoretical issues 

2.1. Focus of research 

Individual  practices  are  classified 

Wright and Boswell (2002) distinguish between HRM research that uses sets of 
HR practices versus research that focuses  on individual practices.  During the 
past  decade  research  has  started  to  focus  on  sets  of  HR  practices.  In  this 
tradition it is believed that, to truly examine the impact of HR practices on any 
variable  of  interest,  one  must  examine  the  entire  system  of  HR  practices 
(Delery,  1998). 
into  conceptual 
categorizations, using statistical techniques such as factor and cluster analysis 
(Wright  &  Boswell,  2002).  Aggregate  measures  are  constructed  for  each 
category  that  can  be  used  to  assess  the  influence  of  different  HR  bundles 
(MacDuffie,  1995)  on  firm  performance.  This  type  of  research  has  been 
criticized because of the lack of consensus with regard  to  the choice  of good 
practices that have to be included into such an index (Becker & Gerhart, 1996). 
Huselid  (1995)  and  MacDuffie  (1995),  for  example,  see  performance-based 
compensation  as  an  important  feature  of  'high  performance  employment 
systems', while Arthur (1994) links the absence of performance-based pay with 
'high commitment HR systems'. 

The  impact  of  an  individual  practice  independently  of  any  other  HR 
practices  that  might  exist  has  been  examined  in  a  large  number  of  studies. 
These  studies  have  attempted  to  demonstrate  the  organizational  impact  of 
particular  practices  such  as  performance-related  pay  (Banker  et  al.,  1996; 

4 


Gerhart  &  Milkovich,  1992),  financial  participation  (Lawler  III,  1999), 
participation  in  self-managing  teams  (Batt,  1999)  and  sophisticated  staffing 
practices  (Terpstra  &  Rozelle,  1993;  Koch  &  McGrath,  1996).  Wright  and 
Boswell (2002)  criticize these studies because they do not take into account the 
potential simultaneity that might exist with other practices. Disregarding this 
simultaneity increases  the risk  of getting spurious relationships  between the 
studied  HR  practice  and  organizational  performance  or  overestimating  the 
effect  of  the  focal  variable  (Milgrom  &  Roberts,  1995;  Portales,  2002).  To 
improve the  validity of this  type  of research,  other  HR practices  need  to  be 
controlled for (Wright & Boswell, 2002). 

The purpose of this paper is to  conduct a robust assessment of the relative 
contribution  of  different  HR  domains 
to  organizational  performance. 
Therefore, the use of one aggregated HR index was not an option in this study. 
After  all,  such an index only allows assessments  of the overall HR intensity. 
Instead we focus on different HR domains. The Harvard model of HRM (Beer 
et al., 1984) guided our selection of the HR domains. We confined ourselves to 
six domains, each representing one of the central 'Harvard policy areas'. More 
specifically, we chose  (1)  selection, (2)  training and (3)  career management as 
HR domains representing the 'HR Flow' policy area; (4) compensation and (5) 
performance management as domains representing 'Reward Systems' and (6) 
participation as the HR domain indicating the 'Employee Influence'  policies. 
In contrast to single practice research, we decided to select three strategic HR 
practices  for  each  of  the  six  domains  identified.  Strategic  HR  practices  are 
those 
to  organizational 
performance (Delery &  Doty, 1996).  Separate analyses are conducted for  each 
of the six HR domains. In order to  control for  the potential simultaneity that 
might exist with some of the other HR domains (Wright & Boswell, 2002), the 
overall HR intensity is controlled for in each of these analyses. 

theoretically  or  empirically  related 

that  are 

2.2. Performance measures 

Three  regularly  recurring  themes  of  debate  in  small  business  performance 
research  are:  (1)  the  choice  between  either  operational  (e.g.  productivity, 
employee turnover) or financial performance (e.g. sales amount per employee, 
profits, shareholder value)  measures  (Harel  &  Tzafrir,  1999;  Holloway et al., 
1995;  Miller  & Lee,  2001),  (2)  the  advantages  and drawbacks of static versus 
dynamic measures and (3)  the context-sensitivity of the most frequently used 
financial  performance  indicators.  We  elaborate  on  each  of  these  important 
themes. 
Operational versus financial performance. Most small business performance 
studies  limit  themselves  to  measures  of  either  operational  or  financial 
performance.  We  plead  for  an integration  of both types  of measures.  When 
comparing the ways in which different HR domains influence performance, it 

5 


is  important  to  pay attention  not  only  to  traditional  financial  outcomes,  but 
also to intermediate operational criteria that indicate how financial results are 
achieved  (Fey et al.,  2000).  We depart from the assumption that HR practices 
have no direct impact on corporate financial results. Rather they influence firm 
resources, such as the human capital, or employee behavior. It is  through the 
creation of a  skilled, motivated and empowered work force  that HR practices 
influence operational performance (Delaney & Huselid, 1996; Delery & Shaw, 
2001).  And it is through improved operational performance that higher levels 
of skill, motivation and empowerment influence financial results. 
Static versus dynamic measures. Several authors plead for a dynamic view of 
performance, using growth related measures (Lee & Tsang, 2001; Wijewardena 
&  Tibbits,  1999).  We  prefer a  static measure of performance for  two  reasons. 
First, dynamic measures such as growth rates are difficult to develop. Choices 
have  to  be  made  regarding  the  indicator  to  be  used  (number  of employees, 
revenue  ... ),  the  relative  or  the  absolute  measurement,  and  the  time  span 
(Delmar,  1997).  Second, even if growth was  easy  to  measure it  could still  be 
misleading. Not every small company has the ambition or the desire to  grow. 
Additional  financing  and/or  staff  is  needed  for  growing.  Problems  with  or 
fear  for  not finding  the necessary  time  and/or people  are  important reasons 
why a  considerable number of small businesses choose not to  pursue growth 
(Binks & Ennew, 1996). 
Context-sensitivity.  In identifying  valid  financial  performance  measures  the 
focus  should  be  on measures  that  have  inherent  meaning  for  the  particular 
small  business  context.  Given  the  high  failure  rates,  survival  is  the  primary 
concern for most small businesses, both for those that pursue growth as well as 
for  the  ones  that  do  not.  Therefore  we  decide  to  deduct  our  financial 
performance measures from bankruptcy prediction models (Maes et al., 2001). 
These models assume that the progress of the following three parameters must 
be monitored in order to  obtain a  sufficiently sound state of financial  health: 
profitability, liquidity and solvency. Profitability reflects financial performance 
in the narrow sense, in particular the ability of the company to yield a  return 
on  investment.  Liquidity  relates  to  the  settlement  of  short-term  debts.  A 
company will face  financial problems if the funds  are not available to  payoff 
these debts. In the case of small businesses struggling to survive liquidity is  a 
very important indicator of the state of financial health.  Solvency indicates the 
financial  strength  of  the  company  in  the  longer  term  ('buffer'  for  difficult 
times)  and  says  something  about  the  extent  to  which  the  organization  is 
equipped to face business risks. 

6 


3. Research hypotheses 

To  summarize  the  previous  discussions,  we  will  use  indicators  of  both 
operational and financial performance that are adapted as much as possible to 
the specificity of small businesses. We integrate two operational performance 
indicators  in our  model:  productivity  and  voluntary  turnover.  The  financial 
performance  indicators  - profitability,  liquidity  and  solvency - are  deducted 
from bankruptcy prediction models. 

H2a,  H2b, H2c, H2d, H2e H2f 

Voluntary Turnover 

IU~." 

HRM-domains: 

(a) Selection 
(b) Training 
(c) Career 
management 
(d) Compensation 
(e) Performance 
management 
(~ Participation 

Hla, Hlb, Hlc, 
Htd, Hle, H1f 

-----'----'----'-_.  Produclivity  - - -_  

(V AlErnployee) 

VA = Value Added 
PC = Personnel Cost 

PCNA 

_ 

Solvency 

Lp_," 

Figure 1 Illustration of research hypotheses 

Our theoretical model is  depicted in Figure 1.  We elaborate on this model in 
two consecutive steps. First, we develop  our research hypotheses concerning 
the effect of the respective HR domains on operational performance. Second, 
we explain the link between productivity and financial performance. 

3.1. HRM and operational performance 

In our theoretical model, we used productivity  (value added per employee) as 
the central measure for  operational performance. We assume that several sets 
of  HR  practices  can 
influence  productivity  by  changing  employee 
competencies, levels of motivation and empowerment (Delery &  Shaw, 2001). 
Past research indicated that the implementation of strategic oriented training 

7 


plans  (Bartel,  1994),  employee involvement techniques  (Huang,  1997;  Lawler 
III,  1999),  performance  reviews  (Gerhart  &  Milkovich,  1992),  financial 
participation (Kaufman, 1992),  performance-related pay  (Delaney  &  Huselid, 
1996;  Huang,  2001)  and  selection  techniques  with  high  predictive  validity 
(Holzer,  1987)  are  all related  to  increased  productivity.  Thus,  our  first  list  of 
hypotheses can be stated as follows: 

H1a:  The  use  of  a  comprehensive  set  of  selection  practices  has  a  positive  impact  on 
productivity. 
H1 b: A comprehensive approach to training has a positive impact on productivity. 
H1c:  The  use  of a  varied  set  of career  management  practices  has  a positive  impact  on 
productivity. 
H1d:  The  use  of a comprehensive set of compensation  practices  has a positive  impact  on 
productivity. 
H1e:  An  intensive  use  of performance  management  practices  has  a positive  impact  on 
productivity. 
H1f: The use of a varied set of participation practices has a positive impact on productivity. 

As  becomes  clear  from  the  theoretical  model,  we  assume  that  certain  HR 
domains can affect productivity through reduced voluntary employee turnover as 
well (Arthur, 1994;  d'Arcimoles, 1997;  Dess and Shaw, 2001).  Research on the 
determining factors  of voluntary turnover indicates  that specific HR practices 
can strengthen retention, e.g.  the pay level (Lawler & Jenkins, 1992; Kaufman, 
1992), employee participation (Huang, 1997,2001; Wagner, 1994), career (Shaw 
et al.,  1998)  and training opportunities  (Harel  &  Tzafrir,  1999).  Therefore, we 
expect  that  the  intensive  development  of  the  HR  domains  compensation, 
participation,  career  management  and  training  can  push  down  voluntary 
turnover. Huang (2001) found that performance management practices such as 
360 0  appraisal  and  long-term  oriented  appraisal  have  a  significant  positive 
influence  on  employee  morale.  In  this  way,  we  can  expect  that  a  more 
intensive  use  of  performance  management  practices  will  decrease  the 
voluntary turnover rate. The use of a  comprehensive set of selection practices 
can have a similar effect, especially if the potential 'person-organization fit'  is 
taken  into  account  in  selection  procedures  (Cheng  &  Brown,  1998;  Lado  & 
Wilson, 1994; Pfeffer, 1994). 

This brief overview indicates that all the HR domains studied are expected 
to  lower  voluntary  turnover  levels.  Building  on  studies  indicating  that  a 
decrease  in  voluntary  turnover  can  stimulate  productivity  (Sheehan,  1993; 
Staw, 1980), we formulate the following hypotheses: 

H2a:  The  use of a comprehensive set of selection practices has an  indirect positive impact 
on productivity by lowering the voluntary employee turnover rate. 

8 


H2b:  The  implementation  of a comprehensive  approach  to  training has an  indirect positive 
impact on productivity by lowering the voluntary employee turnover rate. 
H2c:  The  use of a varied set of career management practices has an indirect positive impact 
on productivity by lowering the voluntary employee turnover rate. 
H2d:  The  use  of a comprehensive  set  of compensation  practices  has  an  indirect  positive 
impact on productivity by lowering the voluntary employee turnover rate. 
H2e: An intensive use of performance management practices has an indirect positive impact 
on productivity by lowering the voluntary employee turnover rate. 
H2f:  The  use  of a varied  set  of participation  practices  has  an  indirect  positive  impact  on 
productivity by lowering the voluntary employee turnover rate. 

3.2.  Linking operational and financial  performance: the concept of 'value added' 

In  modeling  the  link between productivity and  financial  performance  value 
added plays a central role. This accounting concept, as opposed to the Anglo 
Saxon system, is  very familiar  in the  Belgian  accounting  system.  It indicates 
what has  been  added in  terms  of value within  the  company itself,  using  its 
own production factors.  This value added must be sufficient to  pay staff and 
leave  some  resources  over  for  investments,  interest,  taxes,  other  financial 
obligations and return for the owners (Maes et al., 2001). 

Value added plays a key role in our line of argumentation since it is directly 
linked to productivity and serves as a mediator between productivity and the 
indicators  of  financial  performance  (profitability,  liquidity  and  solvency). 
Higher productivity means that more value is added with the same number of 
employees.  Since  the  personnel  costs  remain  more  or  less  constant  if  the 
number of employees is not changed, an increase in productivity wi1llead to a 
decrease in the share of personnel costs in the value added. The part of value 
added  remaining  after  subtracting  the  personnel  costs  is  to  be  used  to 
compensate the other factors  in the company. The higher this remaining part 
(or  the  lower  the  share  of  personnel  costs  in  value  added),  the  higher  the 
margin that can be used to safeguard liquidity and solvency and the more that 
can be paid out to the owners (profitability). 

3.3. HRM and financial performance 

To  summarize,  we  assume  that  several  sets  of  HR  practices  (the  six  HR 
domains) can influence productivity (expressed as value added per employee) 
by changing employee competencies, levels of motivation and empowerment. 
Implementation  of  these  HR  practices  also  can  affect  productivity  through 
reduced voluntary employee turnover. The higher the productivity, the lower 
the  share  of  personnel  costs  in  the  value  added.  The  lower  the  share  of 

9 


personnel costs in the value added, the higher the margin that can be used to 
safeguard the company's liquidity, solvency and profitability. 

H3:  Each  of the  selected HR  domains  has a positive  total  effect on  profitability,  liquidity and 
solvency.  These  effects are mediated by the  operational performance scores and the  share  of 
personnel costs in  value added. 

4. Sample and procedure 

The database we use was constructed originally to support the VIONA project 
"Personnel policy in Belgian SMEs:  a  study of  the  characteristics  of effective 
SME  personnel  policy".  The  focal  point  of  this  study  was  a  survey  of 
organizations  with  10  to  100  employees.  Companies  were  selected  from  the 
Belfirst database. This database also contains information on certified financial 
statements. This enabled the survey results to be enhanced using financial and 
operational data. 

A  disproportionally stratified random sample was used,  with age and size 
as stratification variables. As  far  as age is  concerned, a  distinction was drawn 
between companies in existence for  between 1 and 5 years, 6-10  years and  11 
years or longer. Three strata of company size were identified: 10-19,20-49 and 
50-99  employees.  This  was  a  multiple-sector  survey  including  four  sectors 
(construction, service companies, trade companies and industrial companies). 

Most HRM studies use  the HR manager as the respondent.  In this  survey, 
the business  manager  was  targeted  as  respondent.  The  simple  management 
structure of most small businesses implies that this manager often has a clear 
view  of  the  various  management  practices  in  the  organization.  This  partly 
explains  the  low  item  non-response  in  this  study.  The  questionnaires  were 
distributed by post, with intensive telephone follow-up.  This produced a total 
of 416 units (28%  response), with a sufficiently high item response. In order to 
investigate  any  problems  involving  self-selection  and  sample  bias,  the 
response  and  non-response  were  compared  at  various  ratios  in  conjunction 
with  value  added,  profitability,  solvency  and  liquidity.  No  significant 
differences were noted between the two groups for any of these ratios. 

10 


5. Measures 

5.1. HR domains and practices 

We used three HR practices for each of the six HR domains. These practices are 
represented  in  Error!  Reference  source  not  found..  For  a  more  extensive 
description  we  refer  to  the  research  of  Sels  et  al.  (2002).  Scores  can  be 
calculated  per  domain,  on a  scale  of  0  to  3.  A  score  of 0  indicates  that the 
organization  does not apply any of the  domain practices;  while  a  score  of  3 
means that the organization applies all three practices. 

5.2. Measures of Financial Performance 

The  ratio  for  profitability  used  here  is  the  net  return  on  equity.  This  ratio 
compares  profit  (after  interest  payment)  with  the  capital  and  reserves  and 
therefore  illustrates the profitability for  shareholders or owners.  We  selected 
the  acid  test  or  quick  ratio  as  an  indicator  of  liquidity.  This  ratio  illustrates 
liquidity  in  the  narrow  sense,  excluding  the  value  of  stocks  (which  is 
important in a multiple sector setting)  (Elliott &  Elliott, 20m). Only the assets 
which can be most quickly converted into cash are expressed with respect to 
debts  of  at most  one year.  In this  sense,  the  ratio  produces  a  picture  of the 
extent to  which a  company can redeem short-term debts, using immediately 
available  funds,  without  having  to  make  use  of  external  funds  (loans)  or 
reserves. A ratio that functions as a "warning light" with regard to solvency is 
the  degree  of  auto-financing.  This  ratio  illustrates  the  relationship  between 
reserves  and results carried over on the one hand (the  numerator)  and total 
assets  on  the  other  hand  (the  denominator).  A  sufficient  degree  of  auto 
financing can be considered as vital for small businesses (Maes et al.,2001). 

5.3. Measures of operational performance 

The  voluntary  turnover  rate  is  measured  by  the  number  of  departures  at 
employees' initiative in 1999  in proportion to  the average number of  staff in 
1999.  The  value  added  per  member  of  staff  is  used  as  an  indicator  for 
productivity. The value added is the difference between total operating results 
and the  cost price  of goods  and services  provided by third parties  (external 
costs), which are necessary to achieve these results. 

11 


Table 1 Summary of HR practices used to construct HR domains 

HRdomains 

Indicator 1 

Indicator 2 

Indicator 3 

Selection 

Training 

Personnel planning 
Examination of how many 
and what types of 
recruitment are needed in 
the medium term (approx. 
1 year). 
No =O;Yes= 1 

Types of selection technique  Evaluation of recruitment 
Predictors with high 
predictive validity are used 
(work sample tests, 
assessment centre, 
biographical questionnaire). 
No = 0; Yes = 1 

and selection process 
The recruitment and 
selection activities of the 
company are 
systematically evaluated 
No =O;Yes = 1 

Provision of training 
In 1999 the company 
provided training for its 
operational staff 
No =O;Yes = 1 

Dedication to  training plan 
The company has a strategic 
training plan 
No =O;Yes= 1 

Evaluation of training 
effects 
Extent to which reactions, 
learning, behavioral and 
performance effects after 
company training are 
measured 
lO-point scale 
(=< 4) = 0;  (> 4) = 1 
(median) 

Careers 

Internal labor market 
The company offers 
operational staff the 
possibility of attaining a 
higher hierarchical level 
No=O;Yes=l 

Compensation  Benefits 

Number of extra benefits 
which the company offers 
its employees 
o to 4 = 0; 5 or more = 1 
(median) 

Potential reviews 
Appraisal system related to 
succession planning, 
concerned with what an 
individual will be capable of 
doing in the fu lure 
No =O;Yes= 1 

Horizontal mobility 
The company offers 
operational staff the 
possibility of becoming 
active in other functional 
domains at the same level 
No = 0; Yes =1 

Occasional bonus 
Performance-related pay 
Employees receive an 
Part of the wage of blue 
and/ or white-collar workers  occasional bonus, e.g. 
depends on individual 
performances or merit 
No=O;Yes=l 

following an improvement 
in results 
No = 0; Yes = 1 

Performance 
management 

Reward reviews 
Appraisal procedure that 
relates to the allocation and 
attribution of awards, 
rewards and benefits 
No =O;Yes = 1 

Evaluation system 
Use of a system which 
specifies procedure and 
criteria for the appraisal 
process 
No=O;Yes=l 

Participation 

Financial participation 

Indirect participation 
Trade union representation  Blue and/ or white-collar 
present (whether or not in 
the form of a trade union 
delegation) 
No = 0; Yes = 1 

workers share in the profits 
or can participate financially 
in the company 
No =O;Yes = 1 

Performance reviews 
Appraisal procedure 
aimed at the development 
and motivation of staff by 
looking at how well he or 
she is doing 
No=O;Yes=l 

Direct participation 
Extent to which, e.g. via 
consultation, consideration 
is given to employees' 
opinions 
lO-point scale 
«  7) = 0; (>= 7) = 1 
(median) 

12 


5.4.  Control variables 

Wright  and  Boswell  (2002)  criticize  studies  that  focus  on  the  impact  of 
individual  HR practices  because  they  do not  take  into  account  the  potential 
simultaneity 
that  might  exist  with  other  practices.  Disregarding  this 
simultaneity  increases  the  risk  of  overestimating  the  effect  of  the  focal  HR 
practice. To improve the validity of single HR practice or HR domain research, 
other  HR  practices  or  domains  need  to  be  controlled  for.  That  is  why  we 
include  a  dummy  variable  controlling  for  the  overall  HRM  intensity  in the 
organization.  First,  we  added  up  the  binary  scores  on  each  of  the  18  HR 
practices. The mean value of this aggregate HRM variable turned out to be 7.24 
on a  maximum of 18.  We  then constructed a  dummy variable, named 'HRM 
intensity'.  All  organizations  scoring  lower  than  7.24  on  the  aggregate  HRM 
variable received a value of 0, while the other businesses received a value of l. 
Because of potential industry differences in the use of HR practices (Sels  et 
al.,  2002)  and  in  productivity,  analyses  in  this  study  controlled  for  sector. 
Dummy codes representing four  industries were created: construction sector, 
industrial  sectors,  service  sectors,  trade  sectors.  Dummy coding  is  necessary 
when  bringing  in  nominal  variables  in  path  analysis  (Hatcher,  1994).  The 
construction sector was used as  our point of reference.  Firm size (number of 
employees)  was included as  a  control because it  may be associated  with the 
use  of  HRM  practices  as  well  as  with  turnover  and  productivity.  Larger 
organizations may be more likely to use sophisticated HRM practices and may 
. experience lower levels of employee turnover owing to greater internal labor 
market opportunities (Guthrie, 2001).  The age (number of years since start-up) 
was included to control for  any advantages associated with increased time for 
the evolution or  adoption of HRM practices or learning curve advantages in 
productivity (Guthrie, 2001; Harel and Tzafrir, 1999). 

6. Analyses 

We  begin with  a  summary  of  some  descriptive  statistics,  namely  the  means 
and standard deviation of the principal variables,  as  well as  the correlations 
between these variables (see appendix 1). The mean scores for the HR domains 
vary between 0.99  (compensation) and 1.48 (training) on a maximum of 3. The 
high  correlations  between 
the 
importance  of  controlling  for  the  overall  HRM  intensity  in  single  practice 
analyses.  The  correlation  matrix  gives  a  partial  confirmation  of  our 
hypotheses.  For  example,  while  compensation,  performance  management, 
career  management  and  training  are  positively  related  to  productivity,  the 
correlations with selection and participation do not prove significant. 

the  respective  HR  domains  underline 

13 


In order to  test the hypotheses, we used structural equation modeling with 
manifest variables (path analysis). Assessment of the correlation, the fit indices 
and  the  modification  indices  of  the  different  models  indicated  that  paths 
between liquidity and solvency and between solvency and profitability had to 
be added. After adding these paths, only the hypothesized models for  the HR 
domains  compensation  and  career  management  were  still  not  satisfactory 
(Table  2).  However, a  profound analysis  of the  residual values allowed us  to 
improve both models considerably. More specifically, we added two paths in 
the  compensation  model,  namely  (1)  between  compensation  and  share  of 
personnel  costs  in  the  value  added  and  (2)  between  compensation  and 
profitability.  In  the  career  management  model  we  added  one  path,  namely 
between career management and solvency. 

Table 2  Goodness of fit indices of different models 

Chi-square 
(p-value - Ho: 
datasupport the 
causal model) 

Selection 
Training 

Career Management (1) 
Career Management (2) 

Compensation (1) 
Compensation (2) 

Performance 
Management 
Participation 

0.84 

0.73 
0.19 
0.62 
0.33 
0.64 
0.52 

0.71 

Bentler's 

Comparative 

Bentler & 
Bonnett's 

Bentler & 
Bonnet's 

Fit Index 

Non-normed  NormedFit 

1.00 
1.00 
0.99 
1.00 
0.99 
1.00 
1.00 

1.00 

Index 
1.04 
1.02 
0.97 
1.02 
0.99 
1.02 
1.00 

Index 
0.99 
0.99 
0.98 
0.99 
0.98 
0.99 
0.99 

1.02 

0.99 

The final  models contain no residual values that significantly differ from zero. 
This  implies  that  the  tested  models  successfully  reflect  the  actual  causal 
relationships between the different variables (Hatcher, 1994). The standardized 
path coefficients of the different models are listed in appendix 2. In the results 
section we interpret and explain the effects. 

7_  Results 

7.1.  The impact of HRM on operational performance 

Table  3  shows  the  total  effects  of  the  different  HR domains  on  productivity 
and voluntary turnover. These total effects have to be interpreted as the sum of 

14 


both direct and indirect effects of the different HR domains on the operational 
performance variables. 

Table 3 Total effects of different HR domains on operational performance 

Total effect on productivity 

Total effect on voluntary 

Selection 
Training 
Career Management 
Compensation 
Performance Management 
Participation 

0.02 
0.18 
0.16 
0.34 
0.15 
-0.09 

turnover 

-0.07 
0.04 
-0.04 
-0.01 
0.03 
-0.17 

(0.19),  compensation 

(0.34),  career  management 

The standardized path coefficients representing the link between the different 
HR domains and productivity (see Table 7 - Table 12 in appendix 2) show that 
(0.15)  and 
training 
performance  management  (0.15)  have  a  significant  positive  impact  on 
productivity. Hence, hypotheses Hlb, Hlc, HId and HIe are confirmed.  The 
development of a more intensive approach to these four HR domains seems to 
translate into improved productivity (Delery &  Shaw, 2001).  Hypotheses Hla 
and  Hlf  have  to  be  rejected.  The  use  of  a  comprehensive  set  of  selection 
practices (0.02)  and the use of a varied set of participation practices (-0.11)  do 
not seem to influence productivity significantly. 

Except for participation, none of the HR domains has a significant lowering 
impact on voluntary turnover.  Therefore,  we  have  to  reject  hypotheses  H2a, 
H2b,  H2c,  H2d,  and H2e.  This  result  can partially be explained by the  labor 
market situation at the  time of the  survey. The  extreme shortage of qualified 
staff gave rise  to  high labor  mobility.  It is  possible  that this  shortage was  so 
extreme  that retention efforts  produced  hardly any  results,  especially  not in 
smaller  companies  which  cannot  compete  with  the  labor  conditions  of  the 
major players (Sels et al., 2000).  Only the investment in participation practices 
seems  to  boost commitment to  a  level high enough  to  generate a  decreasing 
effect on voluntary turnover. 

We  expected  that  higher  voluntary  turnover  levels  would  translate  into 
lower  productivity.  However,  the  relationship  between  voluntary  turnover 
and  productivity  does  prove  significant  in  none  of  the  models.  Hence,  the 
indirect effect of participation on productivity  (via  voluntary turnover)  turns 
out to be rather low (0.015).  This means that hypothesis H2f has to be rejected 
as  well.  A  possible  explanation for  the  absence  of a  significant  relationship 
between voluntary turnover and productivity is that this relationship might be 
curvilinear rather than linear. In the innovation literature different researchers 
have proven that a moderate level of turnover maximizes product and process 

15 


innovation compared to low or high levels of turnover (Brown &  Eisenhardt, 
1995; Ancona &  Caldwell, 1992;  March, 1991).  It is likely that the relationship 
between  voluntary  turnover  and  productivity  has  a  similar  non-linear 
function.  Moreover,  Guthrie  (2001)  found  that  employee  turnover  was 
associated  with  decreased  productivity  when  the  use  of  high-involvement 
work  practices  was  high  and  with  increased  productivity  when  the  use  of 
these practices was low. Hence, the hypothesized linear relationship between 
voluntary turnover and productivity might be a too simplistic abstraction. 

7.2.  The impact of HRM on value added 

Higher  productivity  implies  that  more  value  added  is  generated  using  the 
same  number  of  employees.  Since  personnel  costs  remain  (approximately) 
constant for the same number of employees, a  rise in productivity will lead to 
a  fall  in personnel  costs/value  added.  This  explains  the  significant  negative 
link between the two variables shown in all models (see Table 7 - Table 12 in 
appendix 2). 

In  our  conceptual  framework  we  assumed  that  high  HR  intensity  has  a 
positive impact on productivity and that higher productivity leads to  a lower 
share of personnel costs in the value added. This means that the development 
of  a  comprehensive  set  of HR  practices  will  ultimately  lead  to  a  decreased 
share of the personnel costs in the value added. Table 4,  which illustrates the 
total  effects  of  different  HR  domains  on  personnel  costs/value  added, 
confirms  this  assumption  for  the  HR  domains  training,  career  management, 
compensation  and  performance  management.  This  result  is  not  surprising 
given the positive impact of these domains on productivity (efr. supra). 

Table 4 Total effects of different HR domains on personnel cost/value added 

Total effect on personnel cost/value added 

Selection 
Training 
Career Management 
Compensation 
Performance Management 
Participation 

-0.01 
-0.11 
-0.10 
-0.13 
-0.10 
0.06 

We  remind  that,  with  regard  to  the  compensation  model,  we  had  to  add  a 
direct  path  between  compensation  and  personnel  costs/value  added.  The 
coefficient  of  this  path  turns  out  to  be  positive  and  significant  (0.09).  This 
means  that,  in  addition  to  the  indirect  negative  effect  (via  productivity)  on 
personnel costs/value added, the elaboration of a varied set of compensation 
practices also has a direct positive effect on personnel costs/value added. An 

16 


explanation for  this direct relationship is that the introduction of performance 
related  pay  or  non-statutory  benefits  can  directly  increase  the  share  of 
personnel  costs  in  the  value  added.  After  all,  these  costs  constitute  part  of 
personnel costs for  accounting purposes. Notwithstanding this direct effect of 
compensation  on  the  personnel  costs/value  added-ratio,  the  total  effect 
remains substantially negative.  This  means that the indirect negative effect is 
considerably larger than the direct positive impact. 

7.3.  The impact of HRM on liquidity, solvency and profitability 

In combination, the three factors profitability, solvency and liquidity form a set 
of  indicators  of  the  health  and  chances  of  survival  of  a  company.  In  our 
conceptual  framework  we  assumed  that  different  HR  domains  do  impact 
financial  health  since  (1)  the  further  development  of  these  HR  domains 
stimulates  productivity,  (2) 
increased  productivity  lowers  the  share  of 
personnel  costs  in  the  value  added  and  (3)  this  reduction  in  personnel 
costs/value  added  boosts  profitability,  solvency  and  liquidity  (d.  the 
significant  relationships  in  all  models between personnel  costs/value added 
on the one hand, liquidity, solvency and profitability on the other hand; for  an 
extensive  theoretical  explanation of these relationships,  see  Sels  et al.,  2002). 
Table 5 lists the total effects of HR intensity on these financial parameters. 

Table 5 Total effects of different HR domains on financial health of the organization 

Liquidity 

Solvency 

Profitability 

Selection 
Training 
Career Management 
Compensation 
Performance Management 
Participation 

0.00 
0.02 
0.02 
0.03 
0.02 
-0.01 

0.00 
0.03 
-0.12 
0.03 
0.03 
-0.01 

0.00 
0.03 
0.00 

0.15 
0.02 
-0.02 

Since the HR domains 'selection' and 'participation' have no significant impact 
on productivity (d. supra) it is not surprising that the selection domain has no 
effect  and  participation  even  has  a  minor  negative  effect  on  the  financial 
health.  The impact of the  other HR domains  on the  financial  health of small 
businesses  is  rather limited  as  well.  The hypothesized  mediated  relationship 
between HRM intensity and financial  performance remains absent for  all  the 
different  HR  domains.  Although  the  development  of  HR  domains  such  as 
training,  compensation,  career  and  performance  management  has  a  positive 
and significant impact on productivity, this effect does not seem large enough 
to substantially influence the financial health of small businesses. 

17 


We do find two substantive total effects:  (1)  a positive effect of the use of an 
elaborate  set  of  compensation  practices  on  profitability  (0.12;  Table  9  in 
appendix  2)  and  (2)  a  negative  effect  of  using  a  varied  set  of  career 
management practices  on solvency (-0.15;  Table  10  in appendix 2).  However, 
these effects  are not caused by  the hypothesized paths  (via productivity and 
personnel  costs/value  added).  The  models  point  at  the  existence  of  direct 
relationships between the respective variables. 

The  direct effect of the compensation practices  on profitability means  that 
these  practices work not only by increasing productivity.  The  deployment of 
these  compensation practices also  affects  profitability in other ways.  We  can 
assume that this  direct relationship  is  a combined representation of all  HRM 
effects  that  are  not  expressed  via  productivity  or,  in  other  words,  that  are 
produced through non-measured operational performance outcomes. After all, 
productivity  is  only  one  operational  performance  outcome  that  can  be 
influenced by the introduction of a  broader range of compensation practices. 
Other operational outcomes include, for  example, the innovation rhythm, the 
quality of the product or service obtained, customer satisfaction, lead time, on 
time delivery. In this sense, the explanatory model remains incomplete. It is a 
complex process to develop criteria for a cross-sector survey which enable the 
standardized measurement of all operational performance measures relevant. 
We learn from Table 5 that if we integrate both the direct and indirect effects 
(via productivity and personnel costs/value added) on profitability we end up 
with a strong and positive total effect of the use of the compensation practices 
on profitability (0.15). 

As mentioned before, the career practices model shows a direct relationship 
between the intensive use of career management practices and solvency.  The 
standardized path coefficient of this relationship turns out to be significant and 
negative  (-0.15).  A  possible  explanation  is  that,  by  investing  in  career 
management,  an  organization  actually  chooses  to  optimize  its  long-term 
internal human capital, instead of enhancing its long-term financial stocks (Le. 
reserves).  Hence,  the  further  development  of  an  organization's  career 
management practices can indeed cause a significant decrease of its solvency 
position. 

7.4.  Impact of control variables 

As  mentioned before, we controlled for  age, size, industry and overall HRM 
intensity  in  all  the  models.  The  impact  of  these  control  variables  on  the 
manifest variables is shown in Table 7 - 12 in appendix 2. The most interesting 
control variable in our current study is the overall HRM  intensity.  Given the 
strong correlations between the different HR domains, it is not surprising that 
we also find strong relations between the intensity of the total HR system and 

18 


the intensity of individual HR domains. More interesting is the systematically 
recurring  strong  positive  effect  of  overall  HRM  intensity  on  profitability 
(except  for  the  compensation  model).  This  strong  effect  of  overall  HRM 
intensity  is  in  strong  contrast  with  the  limited  impact  of  individual  HR 
tendency  in  more  recent  HRM 
domains.  This  finding  supports  the 
performance  research  studies  to  treat  multiple  HR  practices  as  a  system 
(Wright &  Boswell, 2002). The shared assumption is that multiple, rather than 
isolated, practices must be examined (Delery & Shaw, 2001). 

8. Discussion 

The  purpose  of  this  paper  was  to  assess  the  contribution  of  different  HR 
domains to organizational performance in Belgian small businesses. We  used 
structural equation analysis  to  find  out whether or not investing in selection, 
training,  career  management,  compensation,  participation  and  performance 
management  has  a  substantial  impact  on  the  financial  health  of  small 
businesses.  The  analyses show significant positive effects  on productivity for 
several  HRM  domains,  but  these  effects  seem  not  strong  enough  to  work 
through in higher profitability levels.  Hence, the results show that the effects 
of  the  deployment  of  single  practices  or  HR  domains  on  the  company's 
financial health are rather limited. 

These findings are in contrast with most 'single practice' studies. However, 
. most of these studies do not take into account the potential simultaneity that 
might exist with other HR practices.  Disregarding this simultaneity increases 
the risk of overestimating the effect of single HRM practices or domains.  The 
surplus value  of  our study (and  the  main difference  with mainstream single 
practice research) is that we controlled for  the overall HRM intensity in all the 
single  HR  domain  analyses.  Our  finding  that  single  HR practice  or  domain 
effects on profitability are poor when overall HRM intensity is  controlled for, 
supports  the  intuition  that  earlier  positive  results  on  the  contribution  of 
individual HR practices have to be interpreted with caution. 

Several  limitations  are  pertinent  to  our  study.  The  limitations,  in  turn, 
suggest some interesting avenues for future research. The main purpose of this 
study was to illustrate that different HR domains can influence performance in 
different ways. Therefore, we have chosen to assess  the impact of each of the 
individual HRM domains separately. This implies that we could not take into 
account  the  occurrence  of  interaction  effects  between  the  different  HR 
domains. We can expect that these interaction effects are of major importance 
if one  wants  to  fully  understand  the  HRM-performance  link.  Rynes  et  al. 
(2002), for example, emphasize that participation in decision-making will only 
bring along higher performance when performance management strategies are 

19 


that  stress  objective 

targets  and  supra-individual  goals. 
incorporated 
Moreover, more 'configurational' oriented research (Arthur, 1994; Bjorkman & 
Xiucheng,  2002;  Ichniowski  et  al.,  1997;  MacDuffie,  1995;  Osterman,  1987) 
illustrates  that  the  implementation  of  internally  consistent  bundles  of  HR 
practices  from  different  HR  domains  will  have  a  positive  impact  on 
organizational  performance.  Therefore,  we  believe  that  the  construction of a 
configurational  design,  in  which  the  possible  occurrence  of 
'powerful 
connections'  or  'deadly  combinations'  between  different  HR  domains  is 
accounted  for,  can  give  more  accurate  information  on  the  contribution  of 
different HR domains. 

indicate 

Second, we neglected  the potential occurrence of time-lags. We focused  on 
the  short-term effects  on operational  and financial  performance  (using  ratios 
for  the  year  in  which  the  survey  was  held).  We  can  illustrate  the  potential 
drawback  of  this  option  by  taking  the  career  management  domain  as  an 
example.  Our  results 
that  the  deployment  of  several  career 
management practices has  a positive 'short-term'  effect  on productivity. It is 
reasonable to  expect that the decision to  invest in career management in one 
particular year will also act upon productivity levels in later years. This neglect 
of  potential  time  lags  might  also  explain  why  the  effects  on  the  financial 
parameters  are  rather  limited.  The  use  of  statistical  techniques  such  as 
distributed lag analysis (Judge et al., 1988; Ahuja, 2000) can be helpful in future 
research once financial data of more recent years are available. 

In conclusion,  this study shows  that more empirical scrutiny is  essential in 
HRM-performance research. The  results strengthen the supposition that what 
seemed to be rather straightforward in earlier single practice research studies 
can be questioned to a  large extent when one tries  to be attentive  to  specific 
empirical shortcomings of these studies, more specifically the need to  control 
for  potential  simultaneity  with  other  HR  practices  and  the  use  of  context 
specific performance measures. 

20 


References 

Ahuja, G.  (2000)  The  duality of collaboration: inducements and opportunities 
in the formation of interfirm linkages. Strategic Management Journal, 21: 
317-343 

Aldrich, H. and Auster, E.R.  (1986)  Even dwarfs started small: liabilities of age 
and  size  and  their  strategic  implications.  In Staw  B.M.  and  Cummings 
L.L.  (eds.),  Research in organizational behaviour.  Greenwich, Conn.: JAI 
Press. 

Ancona, D.  G.  and Caldwell, D. F.  (1992)  Demography and design: predictors 

of new product team performance. Organization Science, 3 (3): 321-34l. 

Arthur,  J.B.  (1994)  Effects  of  human  resource  systems  on  manufacturing 
performance  and  turnover.  Academy  of  Management  Journal,  37:  670-
687. 

Banker, RD., Lee, S., Potter, G. and Srinivasan, D. (1996) Contextual analysis of 
incentive  compensation. 

performance 
impacts  of  outcome-based 
Academy of Management Journal, 39: 920-948. 

Bartel,  A.P.  (1994)  Productivity  gains  from  the  implementation  of  employee 

training programs. Industrial Relations, 33: 411-425. 

Batt,  R.  (1999)  Work organization, technology,  and performance in customer 

service and sales. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 52: 539-564. 

Becker, B.  and Gerhart, B.  (1996)  The impact of human resource management 
on  organizational  performance:  progress  and  prospects.  Academy  of 
Management Journal, 30: 779-80l. 

Becker, B.  and Huselid, M.A.  (1998)  High performance work systems and firm 
performance:  a  synthesis  of  research  and  managerial  implications. 
Research in Personnel and Human Resource Management, 16: 53-10l. 

Beer, M., Spector, B., Lawrence, P., Mills, D.  and Walton, R.E.  (1984) Managing 

human assets. New York: Free Press. 

Binks,  M.R.  and Ennew,  C.T.  (1996)  Growing firms  and the credit constraint. 

Small Business Economics, 8:  17-25. 

Bjorkman,  I.  and  Xiucheng,  F.  (2002)  Human resource  management and  the 
performance of Western firms  in China.  International Journal of Human 
Resource Management, 13: 853-864. 

Brown, S. L. and Eisenhardt, K. M.  (1995)  Product development: past research, 
present  findings,  and  future  directions.  Academy  of  Management 
Review, 20 (2): 343-378. 

21 


Cheng,  A  and  Brown, A.  (1998)  HRM  strategies  and labour  turnover  in the 
hotel  industry:  a  comparative  study  of  Australia  and  Singapore. 
International Journal of Human Resource Management, 9:136-154. 

D' Arcimoles, C.  (1997) Human resource policies and company performance: a 
quantitative approach using longitudinal data.  Organization Studies, 18: 
857-874. 

Delaney,  J.T.  and  Huselid,  M.A.  (1996)  The  impact  of  human  resource 
management  practices  on  perceptions  of  organizational  performance. 
Academy of Management Journal, 39: 949-969. 

Delery,  J.E.  (1998)  Issues  of  fit  in  strategic  human  resource  management: 
implications for research. Human Research Management Review, 8:  289-
309. 

Delery,  J.E.  and  Doty,  H.D.  (1996)  Modes  of  theorizing  in  strategic  human 
resource  management:  Tests  of  universalistic,  contingency  and 
configurational  performance  predictions.  Academy  of  Management 
Journal, 39: 802-835. 

Delery, J.E. and Shaw, J.D.  (2001) The strategic management of people in work 
organizations:  review,  synthesis,  and  extension.  Research  in  Personnel 
and Human Resource Management, 20: 165-197. 

Delmar,  F.  (1997)  Measuring  growth:  methodological  considerations  and 
empirical 
(eds.), 
Entrepreneurship and 5MB research: on its way to  the next millennium. 
Ashgate: Aldershot. 

and  Miettinen,  A. 

In  Donckels,  R. 

results. 

Dess,  G.G.  and  Shaw,  J.D.  (2001)  Voluntary  turnover,  social  capital  and 
organizational performance.  Academy of Management Review,  26:  446-
456. 

Elliott,  B.  and  Elliott,  J.  (2002)  Financial  accounting  and  reporting.  Harlow: 

Pearson Education. 

ENSR  (European  Network  for  5MB  Research) 
Observatory for SMEs. Zoetermeer, ENSR-EIM. 

(1997)  The  European 

Fey,  c.F.;  Bjorkman,  I.  and  Pavlovskaya,  A.  (2000)  The  effect  of  human 
in  Russia. 

resource  management  practices  on  firm  performance 
International Journal of Human Resource Management, 11: 1-18. 

Gerhart, B.  and Milkovich, G.T.  (1992)  Employee compensation: research and 
practice.  In Dunnette,  M.D.  and  Hough,  L.M.,  Handbook  of industrial 
and organizational psychology, vol. 3: 481-569, Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 
Psychologists Press. 

Guest, D.  (1997) Human resource management and performance: a review and 
research agenda. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 
8: 263-276. 

22 


Guest,  D.  (2001)  Human  resource  management:  when  research  confronts 
theory. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 12:  1092-
1106 

Harel, G.H.  and Tzafrir, S.S.  (1999)  The effect of human resource practices  on 
the  perceptions  of  organizational  and  market  performance  of  the  firm. 
Human Resource Management, 38: 185-199. 

Hatcher, L.  (1994)  A step-by-step  approach to  using the SAS  system for  factor 

analysis and structural equation modeling. Cary, NC: SAS Institute. 

Holzer, H.J.  (1987)  Hiring procedures in the firm:  their economic determinants 
and  outcomes.  In  M.M.  Kleiner,  RN.  Block,  M.  Roornkin  and  S.W. 
Salsbury  (Eds.),  Human  resources  and  the  performance  of  the  firm. 
Washington D.c.: BNA Press. 

Huang, T-C.  (1997)  The  effect of participative management on organizational 
performance:  the  case  of  Taiwan.  International  Journal  of  Human 
Resource Management, 8: 677-689. 

Huang,  T-C.  (2001)  The  effects  of  linkage  between  business  and  human 

resource management strategies. Personnel Review, 30: 132-15l. 

Huselid, M.A.  (1995) The impact of human resource management practices on 
turnover, productivity, and corporate financial performance. Academy of 
Management Journal, 38: 635-672. 

Ichniowski c., Shaw K. and Prennushi G.  (1997) The effects of human resource 
management  practices  on productivity:  a  study of  steel  finishing  lines. 
The American Economic Review, 87: 291-313 

Judge,  G.G.,  Griffiths,  W.E.,  Hill,  RC.,  Lutkepohl,  H.  and  Lee,  I.-c.  (1988) 
Introduction  to  the  theory  and  practice  of  econometrics.  Wiley:  New 
York. 

Kaufman, T.R (1992) The effects of improshare on productivity. Industrial and 

Labor Relations Review, 45: 311-322. 

Koch,  M.J.  and  McGrath,  RG.  (1996)  Improving  labor  productivity:  human 
resource management policies do matter. Strategic Management Journal, 
17: 335-354. 

Lado,  A.A.  and Wilson,  C.M.  (1994)  Human resource  systems  and sustained 
competitive  advantage:  a  competency-based  perspective.  Academy  of 
Management Review, 19: 699-727. 

Lawler,  E.E.  and Jenkins,  G.D.  (1992)  Strategic  reward  systems.  In:  Dunnete, 
D.M.  and  Hough,  M.L.  Handbook  of 
industrial  organizational 
psychology, Vo1.3.  Palo  Alto, CA:  Consulting Psychologists Press.:  1009-
1055. 

Lawler  III,  E.E.  (1999)  Rewarding  excellence.  Pay  strategies  for  the  new 

economy. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

23 


Lee, D.Y.  and Tsang, E.W.K.  (2001)  The effects of entrepreneurial personality, 
background  and  network  activities  on  venture  growth.  Journal  of 
Management Studies, 38: 583-602. 

MacDuffie,  J.P. 

(1995)  Human  resource  bundles  and  manufacturing 
performance: organizational logic and flexible production systems in the 
world auto industry, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 48: 197-22l. 
Maes,  J.,  Sels,  L.  and  Roodhooft,  F.  (2001)  Small  business  performance: 
exploring  the  link  between  management  practices  and  the  financial 
performance of small and medium sized Belgian construction companies. 
Conference  proceedings:  RENT  XV  Research  in  Entrepreneurship  and 
Small Business. Turku (Finland), November 22nd-23rd  200l. 

March,  J.  G.  (1991)  Exploration  and  exploitation  in  organizational  learning. 

Organization Science, 2 (1). 

Milgrom,  P.  and  Roberts,  J.  (1995)  Complementarities  and  fit:  strategy, 
in  manufacturing.  Journal  of 

structure,  and  organizational  change 
Accounting and Economics, 19: 179-208. 

Miller,  D.  and  Lee,  J.  (2001)  The  people  make  the  process:  commitment  to 
employees, decision making, and performance. Journal of Management, 27: 
163-189. 

Osterman, P.  (1987)  Choice  of employment systems in internal labor  market 

systems. Industrial Relations, 26 (1):46-67. 

Osterman,  P.  (1994)  How  common  is  workplace  transformation  and  who 

adopts it? Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 47: 173-188. 

Pfeffer, J.  (1994) Competitive advantage through people: unleashing the power 

of the work force, Harvard Business School Press, Boston. 

Portales,  C.  (2001)  Business  Strategy  and  Employment  Systems  in Spain:  an 
empirical analysis. In: Gual, Jordi and Ricart, Joan E. Strategy, Organization 
and the Changing Nature of Work. Northampton/ /Massachusetts: Edward 
Elgar: 124-168. 

Rynes,  S.L.;  Brown,  K.G.  and  Colbert,  A.E. 

(2002)  Seven  common 
misconceptions  about human  resource  practices:  research findings  versus 
practitioner beliefs. Academy of Management Executive, 16: 92-103 

Sels,  L.;  Overlaet,  B.;  and  Welkenhuysen-Gybels,  J.  (2000)  Who  earns  more 
(and  why)?  The  relative  importance  of  individual,  job-related  and 
organisational characteristics in explaining differences in earnings. Research 
report  0038,  Department  of  Applied  Economics,  Katholieke  Universiteit 
Leuven. 

24 


Sels, L.; De Winne, S.;  Maes, J.;  Delmotte, J.;  Faems, D.;  and Forrier, A.  (2002) 
How HRM affects  corporate financial  performance:  evidence from Belgian 
SMEs.  Paper  presented  at  the  annual  Academy  of Management meeting, 
Denver, Colorado, August 9th-14th 2002. 

Shaw, J.D.,  Delery, J.E.,  Jenkins,  D.G.  and Gupta, N.  (1998)  An organization 
level  analysis  of  voluntary  and  involuntary  turnover.  Academy  of 
Management Journal, 41: 511-525. 

Sheehan, E.P.  (1993)  The effects of turnover on the productivity of those who 

stay. Journal of Social Psychology, 133: 699-706. 

Staw,  B.  (1980)  The  consequences  of  turnover.  Journal  of  Occupational 

Behavior, 1: 253-273. 

Terpstra, D.E.  and Rozelle, E.J.  (1993)  The relationship of staffing practices to 
organizational level measures of performance. Personnel Psychology, 46: 27-
48. 

Wagner, A.J.  (1994)  Participation's  effects  on performance and satisfaction:  a 
reconsideration of research evidence. Academy of Management Review, 19: 
312-330. 

Wijewardena, H.  and Tibbits, E.  (1999)  Factors contributing to the  growth of 
small manufacturing firms:  data from Australia.  Journal of Small Business 
Management, 37: 88-95. 

Wright,  P.M.  and  Boswell,  W.R.  (2002)  Desegregating  HRM:  a  review  and 
synthesis  of  micro  and  macro  human  resource  management  research. 
Journal of Management, 28 (3): 247-276. 

25 


APPENDIX 1 

Table 6: Descrirtive Statistics 

(1)  Selection 

(2)  Training 

(3)  Career Management 

(4)  Compensation 

(5)  Performance 
Management 

(6)  Participation 

(7)  Voluntary Turnover 

(8)  Value added per 
member of staff 

Mean 

1.32 

1.48 

1.23 

0.99 

1.15 

1.05 

11.6% 

s.d. 

0.95 

1.09 

0.96 

0.90 

1.09 

0.76 

15.6 

2230.6 

1315.6 

(1) 

1.00 

0.39*** 

0.31 *** 

0.22*** 

0.25*** 

0.31 *** 

-0.04 

0.06 

(9)  Personnel costs over 

72.6% 

19.9 

0.00 

value added 

(10) Acid ratio test (liquidity 

1.1 

0.8 

-0.02 

indicator) 

(11) Degree of auto-

financing (solvency) 

(12) Net profitability over 

capital and reserves 

14.7 

21.4 

-0.04 

8.9 

53.3 

0.01 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

1.00 

0.38*** 

0.32*** 

0.39*** 

0.28*** 

0.03 

0.15** 

-0.04 

-0.03 

-0.02 

0.10 

1.00 

0.35*** 

0.53*** 

0.29*** 

-0.03 

0.14** 

0.01 

-0.03 

-0.16** 

1.00 

0.35*** 

0.35*** 

-0.01 

0.28*** 

-0.08 

0.02 

-0.07 

1.00 

0.29*** 

0.02 

0.15** 

-0.02 

-0.00 

-0.09 

0.06 

0.14** 

0.14** 

1.00 

-0.15** 

-0.01 

0.05 

-0.01 

-0.09 

0.02 

* p  < 0.05; **  P < 0.01; *** P < 0.001 

26 


Mean 

s.d. 

11.6% 

15.6 

(7) 

1.00 

DescriEtive Statistics (continued) 

(8) 

(9) 

(10) 

(11) 

(12) 

2230.6 

1315.6 

-0.08 

1.00 

(7)  Voluntary 
Turnover 

(8)  Value added per 
member of staff 

(9)  Personnel costs 

72.6% 

19.9 

0.03 

-0.63*** 

1.00 

over value added 

(10) Acid ratio test 

1.1 

0.8 

-0.05 

0.17** 

-0.17** 

1.00 

(liquidity 
indicator) 

(11) Degree of auto-

14.7 

21.4 

-0.07 

0.13* 

-0.20*** 

0.50*** 

1.00 

financing 
(solvency 
indicator) 

(12) Net profitability 
over capital and 
reserves 

8.9 

53.3 

0.02 

0.15** 

-0.23*** 

0.11* 

0.16** 

1.00 

27 


Table 7: Standardized path coefficients for selection model (+ p  < 0.10; * P  < 0.05; ** P  < 0.01; *** P  < 0.001) 

Path from/to 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

APPENDIX 2 

Selection 

(1) SEL 

Operational performance 

(2) VET 
(3) PRD 

Financial performance 

(4)PC/VAD 
(5)  LIQ 
(6) SOL 
(7) PRF 

Control variables 

(8) age 
(9) size 
(10) service sector 
(11) trade sector 
(12) 
sector 
(12) HRM intensity 

industrial 

0.03 
0.08 
0.08 
-0.03 

-0.02 

0.47 *** 

SEL = selection 
VET = voluntary employee turnover 
PRO = productivity 
PC/VAO = personnel costs/value added 
LIQ = liquidity 
SOL = solvency 
PRF = profitability 

-0.07 

0.01 

-0.06 

-0.06 
-0.06 
0.11 
-0.08 

-0.10 

0.06 

0.03 
0.03 
0.20 ** 
0.27 *** 

0.15 * 

0.03 

-0.61 *** 

-0.04 
0.08 + 
-0.03 
-0.13 * 

-0.13 * 

0.07 

-0.21 *** 

0.01 
-0.02 
-0.09 

-0.27 *** 
-0.20 ** 

-0.01 

-0.13 ** 
0.47 *** 

0.26 *** 
-0.07 
-0.10 
-0.12 * 

-0.16 * 

0.03 

-0.20 *** 

0.14 *** 

-0.03 
-0.05 
-0.06 
-0.02 

0.00 

0.13 * 

28 


Table 8: Standardized path coefficients for performance management model (+ p < 0.10; * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01; *** P < 0.001) 

Path froml to 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

Perfonnance 
management 
(1) PER 

Operational perfonnance 

(2) VET 
(3) PRD 

Financial perfonnance 

(4) PC/VAD 
(5) LlQ 
(6) SOL 
(7) PRF 

Control variables 

(8) age 
(9) size 
(10) service sector 
(11) trade sector 
(12) 
sector 
(12) HRM intensity 

industrial 

-0.11 * 
-0.06 
0.01 
0.10+ 

0.08 

0.62 _.* 

SEL = performance management 
VET = voluntary employee turnover 
PRD = productivity 
PC/V AD = personnel costs/value added 
LIQ = liquidity 
SOL = solvency 
PRF = profitability 

0.03 

0.15 * 

-0.09 

-0.08 
-0.07 
0.12 
-0.07 

-0.08 

-0,01 

0.04 
0.06 
0.14 -
0.27 -** 

0.11 

0.00 

-0.64 *** 

-0.04 
0.08+ 
-0.03 
-0.09 

-0.10 + 

0.04 

-0.24 *** 

-0.16 *** 
0.45 *--

0.03 
-0.04 
-0.10 

-0.30 *** 
-0.21 ** 

0.04 

0.28 *--
-0.08 
0.12 
-0.15 -

-0.17 ** 

-0.02 

-0.20 **-

0.16 --

-0.05 
-0.04 
-0.08 
-0.02 

0.00 

0.14 ** 

29 


Table 9: Standardized path coefficients for compensation model (+ p  < 0.10; * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01; *** P < 0.001) 

Path from I to 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

Compensation 
(1)  COM 

Operational performance 

(2) VET 
(3) PRD 

Financial performance 

(4) PC/VAD 
(5) LIQ 
(6) SOL 
(7) PRF 

Control variables 

(8) age 
(9) size 
(10) service sector 
(11) trade sector 
(12) 
sector 
(12) HRM intensity 

industrial 

0.04 
-0.02 
0.09 
0.10 

0.09 

0.49 *** 

COM = compensation 
VET = voluntary employee turnover 
PRD = productivity 
PC/V AD = personnel costs/value added 
LIQ = liquidity 
SOL = solvency 
PRF = profitability 

-0.01 

0.34 *** 

0.09+ 

-0.07 

0.64 ** * 

-0.22 *** 

-0.15 *** 
0.46 *** 

-0.06 
-0.07 
0.11 
-0.06 

-0.09 

0.02 

0.01 
0.04 
0.17 ** 
0.24 *** 

0.11 

-0.12 ** 

-0.04 
0.08 
-0.03 
-0.12 * 

-0.13  * 

0.02 

0.01 
-0.02 
-0.09 

-0.28 *** 
-0.20 ** 

-0.01 

0.26 *** 
-0.07 
-0.10 + 
-0.14 * 

-0.16 * 

-0.01 

0.12* 

-0.19 *** 

0.16 ** 

-0.04 
-0.04 
-0.03 
0.00 

0.05 

0.05 

30 


Table 10: Standardized path coefficients for career management model (+ p < 0.10; * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01; *** P < 0.001) 

Path from/to 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

Career Management 

(1) CAM 

Operational performance 

(2) VET 
(3) PRD 

Financial performance 

(4)PC/VAD 
(5) LIQ 
(6) SOL 
(7) PRF 

Control variables 

industrial 

-0.05 
0.08 
0.03 
0.07 

(8) age 
(9) size 
(10) service sector 
(11) trade sector 
(12) 
sector 
(12) HRM intensity 
CAM = career management 
VET = voluntary employee turnover 
PRD = productivity 
PC/V AD = personnel costs/value added 
LlQ = liquidity 
SOL = solvency 
PRF = profitability 

0.06 

0.59 ••• 

-0.04 

0.15 -

-0.07 

-0.15·-

-0.61 ---

-0.04 
0.08 
-0.03 
-0.11 -

-0.12 • 

0.06 

-0.22 _ •• 

-0.15 ._. 
0.46 •• -

0.01 
-0.02 
-0.09 
-0.28 _.-
-0.20 --

-0.01 

0.25 _.-
-0.06 
-0.10 
-0.12 • 

-0.15 -

0.08 

-0.22 ._-

0.15 •• 

-0.03 
-0.05 
-0.06 
-0.03 

0.00 

0.13 • 

-0.07 
-0.07 
0.11 
-0.06 

-0.09 

0.04 

0.04 
0.02 
0.19 --
0.26 ---

0.14+ 

-0.05 

31 


Table 11: Standardized path coefficients for training model (+ p  < 0.10; * P  < 0.05; ** P  < 0.01; *** P  < 0.001) 

Path from/to 

(1) 

Training 

(1) TRA 

Operational performance 

(2) VET 
(3) PRD 

Financial performance 

(4) PC/VAD 
(5) LIQ 
(6) SOL 
(7) PRF 

Control variables 

(8) age 
(9) size 
(10) service sector 
(11)  trade sector 
(12) 
sector 
(12) HRM intensity 

industrial 

0.01 
0.09 + 
0.04 
-0.05 

0.01 

0.55 ••• 

TRA = training 
VET = voluntary employee turnover 
PRD = productivity 
PC/V AD = personnel costs/value added 
LIQ = liquidity 
SOL = solvency 
PRF = profitability 

(2) 

0.04 

-0.06 
-0.08 
0.10 
-0.06 

-0.09 

-0.01 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

-0.22 *** 

-0.15 *** 
0.46 *** 

0.01 
-0.02 
-0.09 

-0.28 ••• 
-0.20 •• 

-0.01 

0.26 *** 
-0.07 
-0.10 + 
-0.14 • 

-0.16 • 

-0.01 

-0.22 *** 

0.15 ** 

-0.03 
-0.05 
-0.06 
-0.03 

0.00 

0.13 • 

0.18 ** 

-0.08 

0.02 
0.01 
0.19 ** 
0.28 ••• 

0.14 * 

-0.06 

-0.61  *** 

-0.04 
0.08 
-0.03 
-0.11  • 

-0.12 * 

0.06 

32 


Table 12: Standardized path coefficients for participation model (+ p  < 0.10; * P  < 0.05; ** P  < 0.01; *** P  < 0.001) 

Path from/to 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

Participation 

(1) PAR 

Operational perfonnance 

(2) VET 
(3) PRD 

Financial perfonnance 

(4)PC/VAD 
(5) LIQ 
(6) SOL 
(7) PRF 

Control variables 

(8) age 
(9) size 
(10) service sector 
(11) trade sector 
(12) 
sector 
{12) HRM intensity 

industrial 

0.03 

0.30 *** 

0.03 
-0.01 

0.09 

0.41 *** 

PAR = participation 
VET = voluntary employee turnover 
PRD = productivity 
PC/V AD = personnel costs/value added 
LIQ = liquidity 
SOL = solvency 
PRF = profitability 

-0.17 ** 

-0.11 

-0.08 

-0.06 
-0.02 
0.11 
-0.07 

-0.08 

0.09 

0.03 
0.06 
0.20 ** 
0.27 *** 

0.15 * 

0.09 

-0.61 *** 

-0.04 
0.08 
-0.03 
-0.11 * 

-0.12 * 

0.06 

-0.22 *** 

-0.15 *** 
0.46 *** 

0.01 
-0.02 
-0.09 

-0.28 *** 
-0.20 ** 

-0.01 

0.26 *** 
-0.07 
-0.10 + 
-0.14 * 

-0.16 * 

-0.01 

-0.22 *** 

0.15 ** 

-0.03 
-0.05 
-0.06 
-0.03 

0.00 

0.14 * 

33 


