Feature article

The adoption of environment-related
management accounting: an
analysis of corporate environmental
sensitivity
GeoffreyR.FrostandTrevorD.Wilmshurst

Abstract
This paper examines environmental sensitivity of the industry as a factor
associated with the adoption of
environment-related management
accounting and control procedures. The results indicate that although
environmental reporting is more likely to occur in environmentally sensi-
tive ﬁrms, the adoption of environment-related management accounting
procedures does not appear to be driven solely by the environmental sensi-
tivity of the industry. The paper concludes that further research is needed
to identify what causes organisations to adopt environment-related man-
agement accounting procedures.

speciﬁc

accounting practices dealing with:

Introduction
A growing body of literature has explored environment-related manage-
ment accounting issues. This literature can broadly be classiﬁed as
investigating
issues
(Rubenstein 1990; 1991; 1992); entities (Bennett and James 1998b;
Porter and van der Linde 1995; Schroeder and Winter 1997); or
prescribing models or concepts that ﬁrms may consider in the introduc-
tion of environment-related management accounting systems or pro-
cedures (Azzone et al. 1996; Bennett and James 1997; Burritt 1997;
Epstein and Roy 1997; Krueze and Newell 1994; Parker 1996; Russell
et al. 1994; Smith and Lambell 1997). Signiﬁcantly, there is now also
a growing body of literature that discusses the triple bottom line con-
cept. This approach requires the ﬁrm to address not only the
ﬁnancial/economic and environmental but also the social aspects of per-
formance, to recognise their interdependence, and to integrate them into
the reporting process (see, for example, Brayshaw 1999; Deegan 1999a;
1999b; Elkington 1999; 2000; Jeurissen 2000). The evolution of the
environmental management agenda therefore has implications for man-
agement accounting, and accounting in general as accountants seek to

Address for correspondence: Geoff Frost, Discipline of Accounting & Business
Law, School of Business, Merewether Building, H04, The University of Sydney,
NSW 2006, Australia. Phone: +61 2 9351 3778; Fax: +61 2 9351 6638; Email:
g.frostKecon.usyd.edu.au

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 1JF, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden,
MA 02148, USA.


Accounting Forum Vol 24 No 4 December 2000

345

identify appropriate measures for each of these performance dimen-
sions.

Despite changing expectations, research on factors inﬂuencing environ-
mental accounting has been limited to investigating general issues that
motivate ﬁrms to undertake environment-related external reporting
(see, for example, Deegan and Gordon 1996; Deegan and Rankin 1996;
Patten 1992). Prior research has found that industry environmental sen-
sitivity does motivate ﬁrms to undertake corporate environmental
reporting (Deegan and Gordon 1996; Patten 1992). The current study
contributes to the body of knowledge through an analysis of the adop-
tion of environment-related management accounting practices. In this
study it is hypothesised that ﬁrms operating in the more environmen-
tally sensitive industries will have developed more comprehensive
environment-related management accounting practices than ﬁrms in less
environmentally sensitive industries. Exploring this notion, this paper
is set out as follows: First, a review of environment-related management
accounting is undertaken. Second, hypotheses are stated with respect
to the relationship between the development of accounting practices
and the environmental-sensitivity of the ﬁrm. Third, the data collection
process is described. Finally, the results are reported and conclusions
are drawn from the analysis.

Environment-related management
accounting
The adoption of environment-related management accounting by com-
panies has been widely documented (see, for example, Bennett and
James 1998a; Ditz et al. 1995; Epstein 1996). A number of studies have
observed that such practices have resulted in cost savings (Schroeder
and Winter 1997) and competitive advantage (Porter and van der Linde
1995). Such research has corresponded with discussion on the develop-
ment of appropriate accounting systems and the advantages of such
processes, and increased attention on triple bottom line reporting; both
by reporting entities (see, for example, Dow Chemicals Public Report
1999; and Shell Report 1998; 1999; 2000 for the progression of this
concept in a business entity), and in the literature (Atkinson 2000;
Bennett and James 1997; Ranganathan 1998; Ranganathan and Willis
1999; Sharma 1999; Whittaker 1999).

There has also been considerable discussion of the role of the account-
ant and accounting in environmental management (see, for example,
Barbera 1994; Burritt and Gibson 1993; Kestigian 1991; Milne 1996;
Willits and Giuntini 1994). The emphasis has been upon activities
where accounting can assist in improving environmental management;
for example, the identiﬁcation and allocation of environment-related

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000


346

Frost and Wilmshurst

costs (Burritt 1997; Krueze and Newell 1994), the accountants’ role in
strategic management (Smith and Lambell 1997), in capital investment
decisions (Epstein and Roy 1997), or as an extension of the traditional
audit function (Label and Tandy 1998).

Bennett and James (1997) identiﬁed six areas of environment-related
management accounting (see Appendix 1). They suggest that in practice
environment-related management accounting has primarily been con-
cerned with environment-related ﬁnancial management and the gener-
ation of ﬁnancial data. The objective has predominantly been to provide
information for better management decision-making. However, this
perspective limits the type of information considered to be relevant for
decision making. Bennett and James (1997) argue that environment-
related management accounting can be effective in improving manage-
ment efﬁciency by:
O Identifying income statement and balance sheet impact.
O Identifying cost reductions and improvements.
O Prioritising environmental actions.
O Guiding product pricing, mix and development decisions.
O Enhancing customer value.
O Future-prooﬁng investment and other decisions with long-term

consequences.

O Assessing the eco-efﬁciency and/or sustainability of a company’s

activities.

At the core of environment-related management accounting should be
the development of appropriate mechanisms for identifying and allocat-
ing costs associated with environmental activities and in the develop-
ment of environmental performance indicators that provides manage-
ment with both ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial information relevant to
decision-making. These measures are important, for as suggested by
Juchau (2000, 48) “measurement is at the heart of the organisational
process and that which is measured becomes visible and what is
rewarded gets done”. It is these measures of performance that deﬁne
the success or otherwise of the ﬁrm.

The debate surrounding the triple bottom line and sustainable develop-
ment is a part of an evolving discussion of the importance of the ﬁrm in
achieving a more holistic level of accountability. There is also a growing
recognition that traditional accounting practices are not able to provide
this accountability. The measurement of the three aspects of the triple
bottom line (ﬁnancial/economic, environmental and social), and their
integration has ramiﬁcations for the management accountant, and
reported
accounting

in general. Many ﬁrms have previously

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000


Accounting Forum Vol 24 No 4 December 2000

347

ﬁnancial/economic, environmental and social information, although the
quality of information reported in some areas has varied greatly, with
measurement processes relatively underdeveloped. However, ﬁrms
rarely showed recognition of the interrelationships between the per-
formance dimensions, as Jeurissen (2000, 1), discussing Elkington’s
book, comments:

%the three bottom lines are interrelated, interdependent, and partly in
conﬂict. Delivering against the triple bottom line requires of business a
revolution of thinking and acting in no less than seven dimensions
(“thinking in 7D”) markets, values, transparency,
life cycle tech-
nology, partnerships, time perspective and corporate governance.

The triple bottom line is not a new concept in that the issues have often
been recognised but, by providing a new way to view the relationships,
offers the opportunity for the ﬁrm to seek the key indicators to oper-
ationalise the concept and to consider the long-term in both their own
and the society’s interests.

As the evolving agenda adds new dimensions to measurement, it is sug-
gested the ‘quality of measurements’ will also evolve to adequately meet
the performance data needs of stakeholders. Highlighting this issue, Elk-
ington (1999, 18) argued, “we must ﬁnd accurate, useful and credible
indicators of progress in terms of economic prosperity, environmental
quality and social justice”. Bennett and James (1997) considered this
issue when discussing the work undertaken by Ontario Hydro. They
identiﬁed four questions that needed to be answered: ﬁrst, understand-
ing the ﬁrm performance issues (such as emissions); second, understand-
ing and modeling the impacts; third, identifying the physical impacts;
and ﬁnally, consider monetising the impacts. Accounting for the
environment, and management accounting procedures adopted are a
part of this larger picture.

These arguments have been evidenced in prior research which has sug-
gested that traditional cost accounting has generally failed to assign
environmental costs to the speciﬁc products and processes that generate
them (see, for example, Burritt 1997; Burritt and Gibson 1993; Green-
berg and Unger 1992). Environmental costs may then be aggregated
into cost pools and allocated to products on the basis of measures of
production volume such as machine or labour hours, or alternatively,
they may be subtracted in a lump sum from operating income (Russell
et al. 1994). The accounting system is therefore likely to underestimate
the cost of producing an item that generates a signiﬁcant amount of
waste, or overestimate the cost of an item that generates little waste.
Also, potential ﬁnancial
liabilities and legal costs for violations of
environmental regulations often are not accounted for (CMA 1996, 10).
The development and adoption of environment-related accounting pro-
cedures, together with ﬁnancial and social indicators, will help to ident-

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000


348

Frost and Wilmshurst

ify speciﬁc issues signiﬁcant to the individual ﬁrm, and better position
such ﬁrms to manage their impact upon the environment, and to report
the results of their performance in each of the dimensions—ﬁnancial,
environmental and social. Hence, although management accounting
could provide valuable information on environmental costs, such costs
appear typically to have been neglected by traditional management
accounting.

With respect to the adoption of environmental auditing, there has been
similar debate as to the role of the accountant. Label and Tandy (1998)
argue that the introduction of ISO 14001 will necessitate involvement
by the internal auditor. However, Tozer and Mathews (1994) in a sur-
vey of New Zealand organisations providing environmental audit ser-
vices observed that only a limited number of those involved in the audit
had accounting qualiﬁcations. A survey of Fortune 500 companies also
found that of those that undertook environmental audits, the majority
did not use their internal audit department, in many cases using their
environment departments (Akers and Klos 1995). While the team
approach is most likely to be the appropriate direction, prior research
suggests the accountant is likely to be left behind if they are not more
proactive in responding to changing expectations.

Hypotheses
The increased focus on environmental issues has fallen more heavily
on those industries identiﬁed as more environmentally sensitive such as
companies within the mineral and resource, petroleum, and the chemi-
cal industries (see Deegan and Gordon 1996). As a result the industry
in which the ﬁrm operates has been identiﬁed as a factor inﬂuencing
the level of corporate social disclosure, although the justiﬁcation for
such inﬂuence has been shown to be varied (see, for example, Azzone
et al. 1996; Cowen et al. 1987; Deegan and Gordon 1996; Dierkes
and Preston 1977; Hackston and Milne 1996; Kelly 1981; Patten 1991;
Roberts 1992). Observed variations in the level of social responsibility
reporting is possibly due to a number of inﬂuences; for example, differ-
ent regulative environments, community perceptions and expectations
of performance (Elkington et al. 1991), or industry membership as a
major source of a ﬁrm’s public exposure, or political visibility (Kelly
1981; Panchapakesan and McKinnon 1992; Patten 1991; Roberts
1992). It can be anticipated, therefore, that a ﬁrm within the retail
industry will have different environmental management procedures and
policies than a similar sized ﬁrm in the extractive or chemical industry.
In other words, the activities undertaken increase the scrutiny of the
ﬁrm by a diverse group of interested stakeholders. To counter this
increased scrutiny, it is argued that management increases the level of

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000


Accounting Forum Vol 24 No 4 December 2000

349

environmental reporting,
(Deegan and Gordon 1996; Patten 1992).

thereby legitimising current performance

Arguably there are two dimensions of legitimising performance: actions
and presentation. The ﬁrst dimension involves a congruence between
activities and society’s expectations, the second dimension whether
activities appear to be congruent with social values (Buhr 1998; Dow-
ling and Pfeffer 1975). Research about external reporting practices has
not explored the internal corporate practices necessary to support such
reporting practices. Arguably ﬁrms operating in the more environmen-
tally sensitive industries are faced with increased pressure to improve
environmental performance. Management in these industry groups are
more likely to identify the environment as important, and to divert
resources to improve environment-related performance. In these ﬁrms
it would be expected to ﬁnd a more formal environmental management
system, thereby placing the ﬁrm in a better position to assess environ-
mental information for the external reporting process. Observation of
increased reporting by ﬁrms operating in environmentally sensitive
industries may then be a function of both increased demand for environ-
ment-related information, and a corresponding increased sophistication
of an environmental management system that generates such infor-
mation.

The above discussion leads to the development of the following hypoth-
eses for testing:

H1 Firms in environmentally sensitive industries are more likely to
develop environment-related management accounting procedures
than ﬁrms in less environmentally sensitive industries.

H2 Firms in environmentally sensitive industries are more likely to
externally disclose environmental information than ﬁrms in less
environmentally sensitive industries.

Research methods

The determination of environmentally sensitivity
industries
Environmentally sensitive industries may be determined by a variety
of methods. For example, in the study by Deegan and Gordon (1996)
environmental
lobby groups were surveyed, the respondents being
asked to rank industries on a scale of 1–5 (5 being most sensitive).
The top 10 speciﬁc industries ranked as environmentally sensitive were;
uranium mining, chemicals, coal, transport, oil/gas explorers, plastics
manufacturing, oil/gas producers, gas distributors, paper merchants and
timber products.

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000


350

Frost and Wilmshurst

A less direct method is a review of the literature to provide guidance
as to what industries are identiﬁed as sensitive (see, for example, Hack-
ston and Milne 1996; Kelly 1981; Patten 1991). For example, Elkington
et al. (1991, 15) provided a tabulation of industries that have come
into ‘the ﬁring line’ of an increasingly concerned community and
government over the last three decades. The determination of environ-
mental sensitivity in this study is based upon this indirect method,
which is based upon literature sources that have identiﬁed environmen-
tally sensitive industries (Deegan and Gordon 1996; Kent et al. 1997).
From these sources the environmentally sensitive industries were
determined to be mining and resources, chemical and petroleum
(gas/oil).1

The identiﬁcation of the questions to be asked
The study considers the adoption of environment-related management
accounting procedures by the ﬁrms, hypothesizing that ﬁrms in the
more environmentally sensitive industry groups are more likely to have
adopted such procedures. The study starts from the premise that the
primary role of environment-related management accounting is to
ensure the provision of both ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial information
relevant to decision making. For most ﬁrms the primary focus of infor-
mation generation has emphasised ﬁnancial information as this reﬂects
on the ﬁnancial performance of the ﬁrm—historically the focus of
accounting. However, there is evidence that expectations are changing
and alternative measurements need to be investigated. Non-ﬁnancial
information does play a signiﬁcant role in meeting the social objectives
and legal requirements of the ﬁrm, and this is evidenced by disclosure
in annual reports, and in the provision of environmental reports by an
increasing number of ﬁrms. Arguably this is also evidenced by the cur-
rent attention and efforts to put into practice triple bottom line
reporting. For example, the monitoring of emissions from industrial
sites may be both desirable in appeasing local community concerns and
in meeting legislative requirements. Five perspectives of environmental
accounting are to be considered for analysis:

1. The ﬁrm includes environmental information within the formal
management accounting information system. This would be ideal
in that the ﬁrm gives formal recognition to environmental account-
ing issues.

2. The ﬁrm undertakes formal accounting procedures for a number
of speciﬁc environmental issues. These issues are dealt with within
the accounting information system.

1 A limitation of this study is that this is a limited list environmentally sensitive industries.

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000


Accounting Forum Vol 24 No 4 December 2000

351

3. The ﬁrm undertakes cost-beneﬁt analysis to determine the viability
of various actions which includes the consideration of environmen-
tal issues.

4. The ﬁrm undertakes audits of the environmental issues impacting

on the ﬁrm as a result of the ﬁrm’s activities.

5. The ﬁrm reports environmental

information to external stake-

holders.

The analysis reports the descriptive results of the survey, with an inde-
pendent samples chi-square test undertaken to identify whether the
adoption of environment-related management accounting procedures
was signiﬁcantly higher for ﬁrms classiﬁed as operating in environmen-
tally sensitive industry groups.

The survey process
Data collection was via a survey instrument posted to the Chief Finan-
cial Ofﬁcers (CFOs) of Australian Top 500 listed companies. The CFOs
were selected as the target of this study as they are responsible for over
seeing the accounting function within the ﬁrm. It was felt that they
would have knowledge of
the environmental accounting issues
addressed by their ﬁrm, and the manner in which these environmental
issues were incorporated within the accounting information system.

In total, 398 survey instruments were delivered in 1995.2 From the sur-
vey, 121 useable responses were returned.3 Those companies that
undertake diverse activities were eliminated from the sample since it
was not possible to associate them with a particular industry classi-
ﬁcation, leaving a ﬁnal sample of 88 respondents. Companies involved
in the mining and resources, chemical and petroleum industries were
categorised as more sensitive, all other respondents to the survey were
categorised as less environmentally sensitive. It must be noted that all
companies have some level of impact upon the environment. For
example the ﬁnance sector through their lending policies impact upon
the environment. However, it was felt that the chemical, mining and
petroleum industries would be considered as the most sensitive of indus-
tries in regard to environmental issues. The utilities industry, while
sensitive to environmental issues, is generally controlled in Australia by
government bodies, and therefore not included in the survey sample.
The ﬁnal sample included 42 ﬁrms identiﬁed as being involved in

2 A total of 420 surveys were posted with 22 surveys returned undelivered.
3 The sample excluded companies which had not been listed for 2 consecutive years or which

had their head ofﬁce offshore.

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000


352

Frost and Wilmshurst

environmentally sensitive industries4, and 46 in less environmentally
sensitive industries.

A test for non-response bias was undertaken, by applying the early-late
hypothesis technique that suggests late returns are often similar to non-
responses. A Mann Whitney U test was used to assess whether bias
might exist in the responses on the adoption of environment-related
management accounting procedures. In all cases, the null hypothesis
that the sample came from the same population distribution could not
be rejected at the .05 level of signiﬁcance.

Results
The results discussed below indicate that there are differences between
the more and the less environmentally sensitive ﬁrms. However, while
the descriptive data identiﬁes numerical differences they are often not
statistically signiﬁcant.

Inclusion of environmental information within
existing management systems
An initial step in the development of environment-related management
accounting is the inclusion of information generated on environmental
issues within existing accounting information systems designed to assist
the management decision process. The CMA (1995) recognise that the
types of changes required to fully incorporate environmental accounting
procedures imply a change in the culture of the organisation. Such infor-
mation systems, as identiﬁed from a review of the literature (see, for
example, Bebbington et al. 1994; CMA 1995; 1996; Gray et al. 1993),
may include budgeting, costing,
investment appraisal, performance
evaluation, internal reporting and risk assessment.

The motivation for the inclusion of environmental information is poss-
ibly a reﬂection of risk and ﬁnancial
implications associated with
decision-making. It may increasingly be a response to changing societal
expectations of ﬁrms by society. For example, in the evaluation of a
purchase of an industrial site it would be necessary to ascertain existing
contamination, for restoration costs may be a signiﬁcant consideration
at the end of the facility’s useful life. With respect to the costing system,
the misallocation of environmental costs to overhead accounts rather
than speciﬁc products may unduly bias resource allocations and product
mix. The inclusion of environmental information within the perform-
ance evaluation criteria may be part of a move toward a ‘balanced

4 The sample included 30 ﬁrms in the mining and resources sector, 6 in each of the chemical

and petroleum sectors.

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000


Accounting Forum Vol 24 No 4 December 2000

353

score-card’ approach to management evaluation. Table 1 identiﬁes the
speciﬁc areas within the management information system of the respon-
dents’ ﬁrms where environmental issues are incorporated based on the
results from the survey.5

Table 1 – The inclusion of environmental information in existing systems

Sensitive
(N = 42)

Less-sensitive
(N = 46)

The costing system
The budgeting system
Capital budgeting and expenditure
Investment appraisal
Performance measurement and appraisal
Internal reporting mechanisms
Risk assessment

20*
24
26
27
20
26
26

10
25
25
21
16
22
27

*Signiﬁcant adoption by sensitive industries at the 0.01 level.

Table 1 indicates that although a greater proportion of sensitive organ-
isations include environmental information within all identiﬁed existing
systems, only for the costing system is this difference signiﬁcant at the
0.01 level. It is of interest to note that approximately half of the sur-
veyed companies were not including environmental information within
their existing accounting systems, which supports prior observations
that environmental costs are not being appropriately identiﬁed and allo-
cated by the accounting system (Burritt 1997; Burritt and Gibson 1993;
Greenberg and Unger 1992).

Stand alone environmental accounting procedures
A signiﬁcant step in the development of environment-related manage-
ment accounting is the identiﬁcation and analysis of speciﬁc environ-
mental issues. The speciﬁc issues identiﬁed from a review of the litera-
ture (see, Bebbington et al. 1994; CMA 1995; 1996; Gray et al. 1993)6
for analysis
returnable
packaging/containers, pollution, accounting for rehabilitation, environ-
mental contingent liabilities, life cycle cost analysis in product develop-
ment, environmental costs in production costs and addressing legal
regulations.

include; waste, energy usage,

recycling,

The objective is the identiﬁcation and isolation of a speciﬁc environmen-
tal issue for analysis of the implications to the entity. For example,

5 Respondents where no response was made in regard to these issues were classiﬁed as not

having such systems in place.

6 Accounting for rehabilitation was included as an issue for analysis as it is identiﬁed by

AASB 1022 ‘Accounting for the Extractive Industries’.

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000


354

Frost and Wilmshurst

accounting for energy usage would entail the “tracking and analysis of
all ﬂows of energy% into, through and out of an organisation” (Bennett
and James 1997, 34). Such an analysis would provide information on
usage, thereby identifying areas of possible cost savings. The identiﬁ-
cation of waste and pollution, combined with analysis of recycling
possibilities are pro-active measures in approaching the management of
by-products that may not traditionally have ﬁnancially viable markets.
However, given the decreased ﬂexibility in waste disposal, and conse-
quently an increase in associated costs, an analysis of such by-products
may be economically viable (see, for example, Epstein 1996).

Respondents were asked to identify if speciﬁc environmental issues were
analysed by their ﬁrm’s accounting information system. The data from
sensitive and less-sensitive industries was analysed, and is summarised
in Table 2.

Table 2 – Speciﬁc environmental accounting procedures undertaken

Sensitive
(N = 42)

Less-sensitive
(N = 46)

Waste
Energy usage
Recycling
Returnable packaging/containers
Pollution
Accounting for rehabilitation
Environmental contingent liabilities
Life cycle cost analysis in product
development
Environmental costs in production costs
Addressing legal regulations

10
15
7
7
7
26*
11
3

19*
10

12
15
9
12
10
10
9
4

9
11

*Signiﬁcant adoption by sensitive industries at the 0.01 level.

As reported, the adoption of accounting procedures by the more
environmentally sensitive industries for rehabilitation and product cost-
ing was signiﬁcantly greater than for the less environmentally sensitive
industries (at the 0.01 level of signiﬁcance). Accounting for rehabili-
tation can be explained due to this being an issue of importance to the
extractive industry, as it is covered by the accounting standard AASB
1022 ‘Accounting for the Extractive Industry’. This standard requires
those companies involved in the extractive industry to consider rehabili-
tation issues. Accounting for product costing may indicate the gener-
ation of signiﬁcant environment related expenditure, thereby justifying
the need for management recognition of these individual categories of
expenses.

It is reported in Table 2 that there is no statistical difference in the
adoption of accounting for waste, energy, recycling, returnable packag-

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000


Accounting Forum Vol 24 No 4 December 2000

355

ing and pollution. These issues deal primarily with efﬁciency in the pro-
duction process, which may be considered as a signiﬁcant objective of
both the manufacturing and primary industries (such as the extractive
industry). Once again there is some support for the ﬁrst hypothesis,
though statistically signiﬁcant only for rehabilitation, and the inclusion
of environmental costs as a part of production costs.

Cost beneﬁt analysis
Cost beneﬁt analysis may be undertaken on issues such as energy
efﬁciency, by-product use, recyclable containers/packaging, waste
management, pollution minimisation, site contamination and site cle-
anup. These categories were based upon issues identiﬁed within the
literature (see, Bebbington et al. 1994; CMA 1995; Gray et al. 1993).
The analysis of such issues would be suggestive that the entity is reco-
gnising the signiﬁcance of environmental issues within the decision
process.

Respondents were asked to identify areas of cost beneﬁt analysis in
which environmental concerns had been included. The data and results
of analysis are summarised in Table 3.

Table 3 – Cost beneﬁt analysis undertaken for environmental concerns

Sensitive
(N = 42)

Less-sensitive
(N = 46)

Energy efﬁciency
By product use
Recyclable containers/packaging
Waste management
Pollution minimisation
Site contamination
Site cleanup

24
16
15
15
18
23**
23*

18
14
18
18
12
12
14

**Signiﬁcant adoption by sensitive industries at the 0.01 level.
*Signiﬁcant adoption by sensitive industries at the 0.05 level.

The results reported in Table 3 indicate that there was a signiﬁcant
difference for the adoption of cost beneﬁt analysis of site contamination
(0.01) and site cleanup (0.05). The management of sites is an important
consideration for the extractive (including oil and gas producers) and
chemical industries, however it is interesting to note that a large number
of respondents’ organisations had yet to incorporate such procedures
for site management. For processes that directly related to production,
such as by-product use, recyclable containers/packaging and waste man-
agement, there was no signiﬁcant difference observed.

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000


356

Frost and Wilmshurst

Environmental audits
Bennett and James (1997) identiﬁed environmental impact assessment
as the ﬁfth aspect of environment-related management accounting. A
management tool utilised in the analysis of environmental impact is the
environmental audit. As the term ‘environmental audit’ has been
attached to many processes, the primary objective of an environmental
audit will vary based on the differing circumstances of the individual
audit. The scope of what is an environmental audit is therefore quite
broad, with the focus of individual audits being determined by manage-
ment’s desired focus of attention. The International Chamber of Com-
merce (1991, 3) provided the following deﬁnition of an environmen-
tal audit:

A management tool comprising a systematic, documented, periodic
and objective evaluation of how well environmental organisation,
management and equipment are performing with the aim of helping
to safeguard the environment by: (i) facilitating management control
of environmental practices; and (ii) assessing compliance with com-
pany policies, which would include meeting regulatory requirements.

The types of environmental audits that may be undertaken include: gen-
eral audit (usually focusing upon compliance), waste audit and energy
audit. Compliance audits are usually undertaken to examine corporate
activities against regulative requirements. This may ﬁrst entail an inven-
tory of regulative requirements, then testing activities against standards
set in the regulations. Waste and energy audits focus upon the tracking
and documentation of ﬂows of energy and the identiﬁcation of waste.

Respondents were asked to identify whether the speciﬁc environmental
audits had been utilised by their organisation. The data on the adoption
of environmental audit procedures and the analysis of industries is sum-
marised in Table 4.

Table 4 – Conduct environmental audits

Type of audit

Sensitive
(N = 42)

Less-sensitive
(N = 46)

General environmental audits
Waste audit
Energy audit

38*
14
20

23
13
19

*Signiﬁcant adoption by sensitive industries at the 0.01 level.

Table 4 indicates that a signiﬁcantly greater proportion of ﬁrms in the
more environmentally sensitive industries conducted general environ-
mental audits. It is interesting to note that a similar number of respon-
dents from both groups conducted waste and energy audits, high-
lighting that speciﬁc aspects of what is classiﬁed as environmental

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000


Accounting Forum Vol 24 No 4 December 2000

357

management can be considered as a good management practice, regard-
less of the operations of the company.7

With respect to the general environmental audit, this type of audit may
traditionally be concerned with the regulatory compliance of ﬁrm oper-
ations. It would be expected that those ﬁrms operating in environmen-
tally sensitive industries would be faced with a greater number of regu-
latory guidelines in regard to their operations. As such, compliance
audits would be considered an appropriate management practice.

Environmental reporting
Previous research has shown that environmentally sensitivity is an
inﬂuential factor associated with external environmental reporting. To
test that the sample examined in this study could be considered compa-
rable to prior research that investigated industry environmental sensi-
tivity on reporting practices, respondents were asked to indicate
whether their organisation disclosed environmental information either
in the annual report or other external sources.8 The data and analysis
are summarised in Table 5.

Table 5 – External reporting of environmental information

Sensitive
(N = 42)

Less-sensitive
(N = 46)

Reporting in the Annual Report
Other than the Annual Report

29**
23*

14
14

**Signiﬁcant adoption by sensitive industries at the 0.01 level.
*Signiﬁcant adoption by sensitive industries at the 0.05 level.

Table 5 indicates that there was a signiﬁcantly higher adoption of
environmental reporting practices by ﬁrms in the more environmentally
sensitive industries. This correlates with prior research on environmen-
tal reporting practices (Kelly 1981; Roberts 1992). These results are
signiﬁcant for both reporting within the annual report, and disclosure
through avenues other than the annual report. Deegan and Gordon
(1996) in an analysis of actual disclosures within the annual report
found a signiﬁcantly greater amount of environmental disclosure by
ﬁrms operating within the sensitive industries. This supports the conten-
tion that environmentally sensitive ﬁrms are more likely to attempt to

7 However, in both examples of speciﬁc environmental audits, a large proportion of the total

sample had not as yet adopted such procedures.

8 These may include company announcements, web pages, brochures on sites/facilities or a

stand-alone environmental report.

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000


358

Frost and Wilmshurst

legitimise their actions via the reporting of environmental information
to the broader community.

Conclusions
The objective of this study was to examine whether the environmental-
sensitivity of the industry would inﬂuence the ﬁrm’s development of
environment-related management accounting. It was therefore hypoth-
esised that ﬁrms in more environmentally sensitive industries would
adopt environment-related management accounting procedures more
frequently than the less environmentally sensitive industry group.

The results of the analysis conﬁrmed that for the study sample a signiﬁ-
cantly greater number of ﬁrms in environmentally sensitive industries
reported environmental information (Table 5), which is consistent with
prior research on reporting practices. However, the analysis of environ-
ment-related management accounting failed to provide conclusive evi-
dence of a similar association.

The analysis did observe signiﬁcant differences between the two samples
for speciﬁc activities, however these primarily related to actions associa-
ted with the sensitive industries, such as site contamination and cleanup
(Table 3) and rehabilitation (Table 2). These observations may be more
a reﬂection of ﬁrms being active in areas that are peculiar to their indus-
try,9 in which regulations are imposed, rather than a general increased
commitment to environment-related management accounting.

An issue of note is that a signiﬁcant difference was observed on issues
relating to environmental costs included in production costs (Table 2),
and the costing system (Table 1). Firms classiﬁed as environmentally
sensitive would have a greater impact upon the environment, hence it
would be expected that they incurred greater costs associated with the
environment. It is therefore not surprising to ﬁnd that they are more
likely to be aware of environment-related costs.

With respect to general environmental audits, which would include
compliance audits,10 it is not surprising to again observed a signiﬁcant
difference due to the greater regulatory restrictions imposed upon these
ﬁrms. The results on speciﬁc audits relating to waste and energy did
not show a signiﬁcantly higher level of adoption by environmentally

9 For example, rehabilitation and site management are signiﬁcant issues for both the extrac-
tive and chemical industries. The signiﬁcance is associated with legislative requirements
imposed upon the ﬁrms.

10 One of the primary functions of a general environmental audit is to monitor compliance
of operations, such a function is of greater concern to those ﬁrms within environmentally
sensitive industries, for they are more likely to be faced with a greater range of environmen-
tal regulations and legislation.

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000


Accounting Forum Vol 24 No 4 December 2000

359

sensitive industries. This may be because waste and energy usage is a
signiﬁcant source of cost to ﬁrms whatever their industry activities.

The analysis found that for environmental issues of a general nature,
there was no signiﬁcant difference in the level of adoption of environ-
ment-related management accounting procedures. For example, no sig-
niﬁcant difference was observed in the adoption of accounting for
waste, energy usage or recycling. Such issues may be considered relevant
to a ﬁrm regardless of the industry in which it operates. This obser-
vation may also highlight a limitation in the dichotomous generalisation
of industries that does not account for speciﬁc environmental issues.
Hence, the signiﬁcant observation for rehabilitation (which is an issue
of concern primarily for the mining industry) would be expected, but
also it is not surprising to observe no signiﬁcant difference in the adop-
tion of accounting for recycling. Such a limitation does present itself as
an area for further research using a more reﬁned means of classifying
industry, and matching with issues that are relevant to the industry.

It is noted that there was a signiﬁcant difference observed in the adop-
tion of environmental reporting, which is consistent with prior research.
The failure then to observe a signiﬁcant difference in the adoption of
environment-related management accounting practices may suggest
alternate factors motivating the adoption of reporting and management
systems. Additionally it may suggest that there are not clear links
between the generation of accounting information and the disclosure
of environmental information within the annual report. This is certainly
an area where further research is justiﬁed.

The analysis has highlighted that the level of adoption for many activi-
ties was limited. This may not be unexpected for ﬁrms operating in the
less environmentally sensitive industries, but certainly raises questions
of those ﬁrms in the environmentally sensitive industries. Such obser-
vations provide some support for prior discussion that has been critical
of traditional management accounting in its inability to adequately
monitor and allocate costs associated with environmental activities.
There does however need to be further research as to why ﬁrms have
not identiﬁed the adoption of accounting for certain activities. For
example, although 30 ﬁrms were identiﬁed as operating in the mining
and resources sector, not all of these ﬁrms were accounting for rehabili-
tation despite directives from AASB 1022 and legislative requirements
to consider such activities.

Finally a word of caution, the limitations of this form of research utilis-
ing a mail survey should not be ignored in the interpretation of the
results. As Alreck and Settle (1995, 6–7) comment, “surveys almost
always involve asking questions and obtaining self reports by respon-
dents. Unfortunately, survey respondents are notoriously bad at

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000


360

Frost and Wilmshurst

assessing causality, either because they actually don’t know why they
or others behave in a certain way or because they won’t say why”. A
careful reading of the tables shows that the difference between the two
groups is at best marginal. There are a number of reasons this may be
the case: for example, there may be little difference between the groups
in reality; or it may be that there are a number of ﬁrms within each
group that have acted in an unexpected way and have introduced some
bias into the analysis that is not clear. This study was not able to reﬁne
results into narrower industry groups due to the size of the survey sam-
ple, and this may ‘hide’ the fact that speciﬁc industry groups may
approach environmental
issues differently. This reﬂects a perpetual
problem that the study populations within the Australian context are
typically small. But this is not a reason to suppose that very useful
information cannot be gleaned from the approach followed in this
study. It highlights an area where case study research would shed
further light, and could be triangulated with the current or a future
mail survey.
In conclusion, the argument that ‘environmentally sensitive’ ﬁrms are
more likely to develop environment-related management accounting
procedures is only supported for activities that are associated with sig-
niﬁcant environment-related issues for the speciﬁc industries. Where
issues are of a general nature it appears that these ﬁrms are no more
likely to develop such accounting processes. Hence, this study provides
no conclusive evidence that the environmental-sensitivity of the ﬁrm’s
operations will necessarily result in increased likelihood of the develop-
ment of environment-related management accounting procedures on
general environmental issues. Such a result suggests that observations
as to what motivates the external reporting process may not hold true
for the development of internal management practices, indicating the
need for further research as to what motivates ﬁrms to develop environ-
ment-related management accounting. The results of this study high-
light a concern as ﬁrms move toward triple bottom line reporting—that
is, what is the motivation and will the performance measurement form
a part of the accounting information system. If so, how will the tra-
ditional accounting information system be adapted to meet the change
in the nature of the reporting framework that will be required, and
how readily can the culture of the organisation assimilate the change
in perspective.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the helpful comments made by
participants at a seminar held at the University of Newcastle, the British
Accounting Association Annual Conference, Birmingham, March 24–
26 1997, two anonymous reviewers and Glen Lehman.

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000


Accounting Forum Vol 24 No 4 December 2000

361

Appendix 1: Environment-Related
Management Accounting

O Energy and materials accounting: the tracking and analysis of all
ﬂows of energy and substances into, through and out of an organis-
ation

O Environment-related ﬁnancial management: the generation, analysis
and use of monetised information in order to improve corporate
environmental and economic performance

O Lifecycle assessment: a holistic approach to identifying the environ-
mental consequences of a product or service through its entire
lifecycle and identifying opportunities for achieving environmental
improvements

O Lifecycle cost assessment: a systematic process for evaluating the
lifecycle costs of a product or service by identifying environmental
consequences and assigning measures of monetary value to those
consequences

O Environmental impact assessment: a systematic process for ident-
ifying all environmental consequences of an organisation, site or
project’s activities

O Environmental externalities costing: the generation, analysis and
use of monetised estimates of environmental damage (and beneﬁts)
created by an organisation, site or project’s activities

Adapted from: Bennett and James (1997, 34).

References
Akers, M.D. and Klos, M.A. (1995). Environmental auditing: Internal

auditor involvement. Internal Auditing (Spring): 24–31.

Alreck, P.L. and Settle, R.B. (1995). The survey research handbook (2nd ed.).

Chicago: Irwin.

Atkinson, G. (2000). Measuring corporate sustainability. Journal of

Environmental Planning and Management 43 (2): 235–252.

Australian Accounting Standard Board (AASB) 1022. (1989). Accounting for

the extractive industries. Melbourne: Australian Accounting Research
Foundation.

Azzone, G., Manzini, R. and Noci, G. (1996). Evolutionary trends in

environmental reporting. Business Strategy and the Environment 5: 219–
230.

Barbera, M. (1994). Environmental issues: A challenge for management

accountants. Melbourne: Australian Society of Certiﬁed Practising
Accountants, Management Accounting Centre of Excellence.

Bebbington, J., Gray, R., Thomson, I. and Walters, D. (1994). Accountants’

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000


362

Frost and Wilmshurst

attitudes and environmentally-sensitive accounting. Accounting and
Business Research 24 (94): 109–120.

Bennett, M. and James, P. (1997). Environment-related management

accounting: Current practice and future trends. Greener Management
International 17 (Spring): 32–51.

Bennett, M. and James, P. (eds) (1998a). The Green Bottom Line:

Environmental Accounting for Management. Shefﬁeld, UK: Greenleaf
Publishing.

Bennett, M. and James, P. (1998b). Life-cycle costing and packaging at

Xerox Ltd, in Bennett, M. and James, P. (eds) The Green Bottom Line:
Environmental Accounting for Management. Shefﬁeld, UK: Greenleaf
Publishing. 347–361.

Brayshaw, G. (1999). Triple bottom line reporting: The professions

challenge. Charter 70 (7): 36–38.

Buhr, N. (1998). Environmental performance, legislation and annual report

disclosure: The case of acid rain and Falconbridge. Accounting, Auditing
and Accountability Journal 11 (2): 163–190.

Burritt, R.L. (1997). Corporate environmental performance indicators: Cost

allocation—boon or bane? Greener Management International 17
(Spring): 89–100.

Burritt, R.L. and Gibson, K. (1993). Accounting for the environment.

Australian Accountant July: pp. 17–21.

Certiﬁed Management Accountant (CMA). (1995). Implementing corporate

environmental strategies, Management accounting guideline 37. Ontario:
The Society of Management Accountants of Canada.

Certiﬁed Management Accountant (CMA). (1996). Tools and techniques of

environmental accounting for business decisions, Management
accounting guideline 40. Ontario: The Society of Management
Accountants of Canada.

Cowen, S.S., Ferreri, L.B. and Parker, L.D. (1987). The impact of corporate

characteristics on social responsibility disclosure: A typology and
frequency-based analysis. Accounting, Organizations and Society 12 (2):
111–122.

Deegan, C. (1999a). Triple bottom line reporting—A new reporting

approach for the sustainable organisation. Charter 70 (3): 38–40.
Deegan, C. (1999b). Implementing triple bottom line performance and

reporting mechanisms—Further considerations. Charter 70 (4): 40–42.

Deegan, C. and Gordon, B. (1996). A study of the environmental disclosure
practices of Australian corporations. Accounting and Business Research
26 (3): 187–199.

Deegan, C. and Rankin, M. (1996). Do Australian companies report

environmental news objectively? An analysis of environmental
disclosures by ﬁrms prosecuted successfully by the Environmental
Protection Authority. Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal 9
(2): 50–67.

Dierkes, M. and Preston, L.E. (1977). Corporate social accounting reporting

for the physical environment: A critical review and implementation
proposal. Accounting, Organisations and Society 2 (1): 3–22.

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000


Accounting Forum Vol 24 No 4 December 2000

363

Ditz, D., Ranganathan, J. and Banks, R.D. (eds) (1995). Green ledgers: Case
studies in corporate environmental accounting. Washington DC: World
Resources Institute.

Dow Chemicals. (1999). Public Report.
Dowling, J. and Pfeffer, J. (1975). Organizational legitimacy: Social values

and organizational behavior. Paciﬁc Sociological Review (January): 122–
36.

Elkington, J. (1999). Triple bottom line reporting: Looking for balance.

Australian CPA (March): 18–21.

Elkington, J. (2000). Sustainable proﬁts: Triple bottom line strategies for

business and markets. Charter 71 (3): 36–37.

Elkington, J. Knight, P. and Hailes, J. (1991). The green business guide.

London: Victor Gollancz.

Epstein, M.J. (1996). Measuring corporate environmental performance.

Chicago: Irwin.

Epstein, M.J. and Roy, M. (1997). Integrating environmental impacts into

capital investment decisions. Greener Management International 17
(Spring): 69–87.

Gray, R., Bebbington, J. and Walters, D. (1993). Accounting for the

environment. London: Paul Chapman Publishing.

Greenberg, R. and Unger, C. (1992). TQM and the cost of environmental

quality. Total Quality Environmental Management (Winter).

Hackston, D. and Milne, M.J. (1996). Some determinants of social and
environmental disclosures in New Zealand companies. Accounting,
Auditing & Accountability Journal 9 (1): 77–108.

http://www.shell.com. (1998). The Shell Report.
http://www.shell.com. (1999). The Shell Report.
http://www.shell.com. (2000). The Shell Report.
International Chamber of Commerce. (1991). ICC Guide to Effective

Environmental Auditing. Paris: ICC Publishing.

Jeurissen, R. (2000). Cannibals With Forks: The triple bottom line of 21st

century business. Journal of Business Ethics (January): 229–231.

Juchau, R. (2000). Non-ﬁnancial performance measures: An Australian

survey. Management: 48–50.

Kelly, G.J. (1981). Australian social responsibility disclosure: Some insights
into contemporary measurement. Accounting and Finance 21 (2): 97–
104.

Kent, P., Kwong, E. and Marshall, B. (1997). Social responsibility and

environmental disclosures: Evidence from Australian chemical
companies. Accountability & Performance 3 (2): 21–39.

Kestigian, M. (1991). The greening of accountancy. Australian Accountant

(September): 20–28.

Kreuze, J.G. and Newell, G.E. (1994). ABC and life-cycle costing for

environmental expenditures. Management Accounting 65 (8): 38–42.

Label, W.A. and Tandy, P.R. (1998). ISO 14000 Environmental

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000


364

Frost and Wilmshurst

Management Systems: New opportunities and responsibilities for
internal auditors. Internal Auditing 14 (4): 3–8.

Milne, M.J. (1996). On sustainability: The environment and management

accounting. Management Accounting Research 7: 135–161.

Panchapakesan, S. and McKinnon, J.L. (1992). Proxies for political visibility:

A preliminary examination of the relation among some potential
proxies. Accounting Research Journal (Spring): 71–80.

Parker, L.D. (1996). Towards accounting for environmental management

and performance. Accountability & Performance 2 (1): 1–20.

Patten, D.M. (1991). Exposure, legitimacy and social disclosure. Journal of

Accounting and Public Policy 10: 297–308.

Patten, D.M. 1992. Intra-industry environmental disclosures in response to

the Alaskan oil spill: A note on legitimacy theory. Accounting,
Organizations and Society 17(5): 471–475.

Porter, M.E. and van der Linde, C. (1995). Green and competitive: Ending

the stalemate. Harvard Business Review (September-October): 120–134.

Ranganathan, J. (1998). Sustainability rulers: Measuring corporate
environmental and social performance. Sustainable Enterprise
Perspectives. World Resources Institute.

Ranganathan, J. and Willis, A. (1999). The Global Reporting Initiative—An

emerging tool for corporate accountability. Sustainable Enterprise
Perspectives. World Resources Institute. September.

Roberts, R.W. (1992). Determinants of corporate social responsibility

disclosure: An application of stakeholder theory. Accounting,
Organizations and Society 17 (6): 595–612.

Rubenstein, D.B. (1990). There’s no accounting for the Exxon Valdez. CPA

Journal (July): 40–45.

Rubenstein, D.B. (1991). Lessons of love. CA Magazine (March): 34–41.
Rubenstein, D.B. (1992). Bridging the gap between green accounting and

black ink. Accounting, Organisations and Society 17 (5): 501–508.
Russell, W., Skalak, S.L. and Miller, G. (1994). Environmental costing

accounting: The bottom line for environmental quality management.
Total Quality Environmental Management (Spring): 255–268.

Schroeder, G. and Winter, M. (1997). Environmental accounting at Sulzer

Technology Corporation. Greener Management International 17
(Spring): 141–155.

Sharma, R. (1999). Reporting on sustainable development. Australian CPA

(October): 52–53.

Smith, R. and Lambell, J. (1997). Accounting for the environment: The role

of strategic management accounting. Management Accounting
(February): 34–35.

Tozer, L. and Mathews, R. (1994). Environmental auditing. Chartered

Accountants Journal (October): 42–46.

Whittaker, M. (1999). Emerging ‘triple bottom line’ model for industry

weighs environmental, economic and social considerations. Oil and Gas
Journal (December): 23–26.

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000


Accounting Forum Vol 24 No 4 December 2000

365

Willits, S.D. and Giuntini, R. (1994). Helping your company ‘Go Green’.

Management Accountant (February): 43–47.

(cid:211) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.
The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.

