INFORMATION TO USERS

This  manuscript has  been reproduced from the  microfilm  master.  UMI  films 
the text directly from  the original or copy  submitted.  Thus,  some thesis and 
dissertation copies are in typewriter face, while others may be from any type of 
computer printer.

The  quality  of  this  reproduction  is  dependent  upon  the  quality  of  the 
copy submitted.  Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations 
and  photographs,  print  bleedthrough,  substandard  margins,  and  improper 
alignment can adversely affect reproduction.

In the unlikely event that the author did not send UMI  a  complete manuscript 
and  there  are  missing  pages,  these  will  be  noted.  Also,  if  unauthorized 
copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.

Oversize  materials  (e.g.,  maps,  drawings,  charts)  are  reproduced  by 
sectioning the original, beginning at the upper left-hand comer and continuing 
from left to right in equal sections with small overlaps.

Photographs  included  in  the  original  manuscript  have  been  reproduced 
xerographically  in  this  copy.  Higher  quality  6"  x  9a  black  and  white 
photographic prints are available for any photographs or illustrations appearing 
in this copy for an additional charge.  Contact UMI directly to order.

Bell & Howell Information and Learning 

300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, Ml  46106-1346 USA 

800-521-0600

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


The  Role of Procedural Justice in the Relationship between Demographic Diversity,

Dissimilarity, W ork-Related Affective Outcomes, and Creative Performance

A Thesis 

Presented to 

The Academic Faculty

by

Lucy L. Gilson

In Partial Fulfillment 

of the Requirements for the Degree 
Doctor of Philosophy in Management

Georgia Institute of Technology 

July 2000

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


UMI  Number: 9978382

UMI

UMI  Microform9978382 

Copyright 2000  by Bell & Howell  Information and  Learning Company. 

All rights reserved. This microform edition  is protected against 

unauthorized  copying  under Title  17,  United States Code.

Bell  &  Howell  Information  and Learning Company 

300 North Zeeb Road 

P.O.  Box  1346 

Ann Arbor,  Ml 48106-1346

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


The Role of Procedural Justice in the Relationship between Demographic Diversity,

Dissimilarity, Work-Related Affective Outcomes, and Creative Performance

Approved:

Terry C. B$bm, Co-chair

Donald B. Fedor

Date Approved dm

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Acknowledgements

1 would like to thank Christina Shalley and Terry Blum for serving as my dissenation 

thesis advisors and mentors throughout the Ph.D. Program.  In addition, I would like to 

thank the rest of my committee Donald Fedor, Charles Parsons, and Usha Nair for their 

help, comments, and availability on July 3, 2000.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

iii


TABLE OF CONTENTS

S U M M A R Y ........................................................................................................................................................ vi

C H A P T E R  I:  IN T R O D U C T IO N ................................................................................................................. 1

C H A P T E R  0 :  P R O C E D U R A L  JU S T IC E .............................................................................................1 1
Procedural Justice and Creative Performance..............................................................................................17

C H A P T E R  HI:  D E M O G R A P H IC  D IV E R S IT Y   A N D  D IS S IM IL A R IT Y ............................ 22
Positive Association Between Group Diversity and Work-Related Affective Outcomes...................... 24
Negative Association Between Group Diversity and Work-Related Affective Outcomes..................... 26
Positive Association Between Group Diversity and Individual Creative Performance.......................... 29
Negative Association Between Group Diversity and Individual Creative Performance........................ 31
Dissimilarity and Outcomes..........................................................................................................................33
Multiple Measures of Dissimilarity..............................................................................................................35
The Effects of Dissimilarity on Traditional Minorities..............................................................................37
The Effects of Dissimilarity on Non-Traditional  Minorities..................................................................... 38

C H A P T E R  IV:  P R IO R   "BLA CK  BO X "  R E S E A R C H .................................................................. 41
Mediators in the Diversity Outcome Relationship...................................................................................... 42
Moderators in the Diversity Outcome Relationship................................................................................... 45

C H A P T E R  V:  P R O C E D U R A L  JU S T IC E  A S  A   K EY  T O  O P E N IN G  T H E  "B L A C K  
B O X "  B E T W E E N  D E M O G R A P H IC  D IV E R S IT Y /D IS S IM IL A R IT Y   AN D  
O U T C O M E S ..................................................................................................................................................... 48
Procedural Justice as a Moderator in the Diversity Outcomes Equation..................................................54

C H A P T E R  VI: C O N T R O L  V A R IA B L E S ...........................................................................................58

C H A P T E R  VII:  M E T H O D S   A N D  A N A L Y S IS ............................................................................... 66

C H A P T E R   VIII:  R E S U L T S .......................................................................................................................79

C H A P T E R   VIII:  D IS C U S S IO N ...............................................................................................................93

R E F E R E N C E S ................................................................................................................................................106

Appendix  1........................................................................................................................................................ 125

T A B L E S ...........................................................................................................................................................127

V ila ...................................................................................................................................................................... 146

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

iv


LIST OF TABLES

Table 

Page

1  Occupational categories:  Study data as compared to  1977 US Census data 

127

2  Percentages of males and whites by U.S. occupational categories:  Study

Data vs.  1998 U.S. Census data 

3  Demographic group compositions 

4  Factor loadings 

128

129

130

5  Correlations between control  variables and dependent measures 

131-132

6  Regression results for creative performance and work-related affective 

133

outcomes on controls variables and procedural justice

7  Correlations between independent and dependent variables 

8  Means of workgroup sex and race/ethnic composition on work-related

affective outcomes and creative performance 

9  ANCOVA results of the effects of workgroup composition on work-

related affective outcomes and creative performance 

10  Contrasts between workgroup sex composition on affective outcomes

and creati ve performance 

11  Contrasts between workgroup race/ethnic composition on affective

outcomes and creati ve performance 

12  Regression results for creative performance and work-related affective 

outcomes on individual dissimilarity and aggregate dissimilarity 

134

135

136

137-138

139-140

141-142

13  b weights for the effects of dissimilarity by sex and race/ethnicity 

143

14  Overview of Hypotheses and results 

144-145

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

V


SUMMARY

Procedural justice research has focused on what can be gained by individuals, 

groups, and organizations when people are treated fairly. In organizations, the fairness of 

policies and procedures has been described as influencing an individual’s life on an 

almost daily basis (Cropanzano, Greenberg & Schminke,  1998). Furthermore, 

perceptions of fair treatment have consistently been found to influence a large number of 

individual  level organizationally relevant outcomes (Alexander & Ruderman.  1988). 

However, while procedural justice has been used to explain a large number of 

organizational relationships it has not been considered in the diversity or dissimilarity 

literature nor has it been  linked to procedural justice.

The composition of the U.S. workforce has changed dramatically over the last 

decade (Judy & D’Amico,  1997). Increasingly, organizations are becoming more 

heterogeneous (diversity) and individuals who are demographically different from one 

another (dissimilarity) are working together. The effects of workforce composition have 

been examined from several different perspectives. Further, the relationship between 

workgroup demographic composition and outcomes has generated a great deal of 

conflicting theoretical and empirical work.

Using social contact theories (Blau,  1977:  Kanter,  1977) it has been proposed and 

found that diversity leads to increased social interaction amongst those who are different 

resulting in positive outcomes. In addition, information and decision-making theories 

argue that diversity should result in better quality and more creative decisions being 

reached (Hoffman & Maier,  1961; Jackson, May & Whitney,  1995). In contrast, research

vi

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


grounded in the similarity-attraction (Bryne,  1971) and social identity (Tajfel & Turner, 

1936) theories has suggested and found that individuals working in diverse groups 

(diversity) and individuals who are more different from the majority of their workgroup 

(dissimilarity) experience negative outcomes (i.e., Tsui. Egan & O ’Reilly,  1992).

Recently, it has been suggested that the mixed results found in the literature may 

be attributable to a "black box" between diversity/dissimilarity and outcomes that needs 

to be considered if the associations are to be understood (Lawrence,  1997). Consequently, 

this research will develop and test hypotheses suggesting that procedural justice may be a 

key construct that can help explain these relationships.

In addition, dissimilarity research has predominantly focused on single 

dimensions of dissimilarity and has not considered the effects of multiple characteristics 

(Williams & O'Reilly,  1998). Therefore, this research will examine the effects of being in 

different on both sex and race/ethnicity combined. These two demographic characteristics 

were chosen because they are highly visible and prior research suggests they are used 

most frequently in labeling and self-categorization (Stangor, Lynch, Duan & Glass,

1992).

Finally, employee creative performance has been described as critical for 

organizational competitiveness, innovation, and survival (Ancona & Caldwell,  1992; Van 

de Ven,  1986). While theoretical work at the group level has described diversity as a key 

component of creativity, at the individual level, the relationship remains untested. 

Therefore, this research in addition to examining work-related affective outcomes will 

also examine the relationships between diversity, dissimilarity, procedural justice, and 

creative performance.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

vii


CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

That organizations are becoming more diverse is now, pretty much indisputable 

(Friedman & DiTomaso,  1996; Judy & D’Amico,  1997). Current projections suggest that, 

by the year 2020, white males will no longer comprise the majority of new job entrants to 

the U.S.  labor force (Exeter,  1992; Judy & DAmico,  1997)1. Interestingly, at the same 

time as the demographic composition of organizations is changing, the structure of many 

organizations is also undergoing a redesign2. More and more, organizations are moving 

towards flattened structures that rely on groups of individuals working together rather 

than highly individualistic hierarchical management structures (Manz & Sims,  1993). In 

addition, organizations are paying more attention to creativity that has been defined as the 

development of novel, original, or useful products, and ideas or processes (Oldham & 

Cummings,  1996; Shalley,  1991,  1995; Woodman, Sawyer & Griffin,  1993). Creative 

performance is an integral part of overall performance and deemed necessary for firm 

competitiveness and organizational innovation Van de Ven,  1986; West & Farr,  1990).

With regard to the composition of workgroups, increasingly individuals who are 

demographically different from one another are working together, often for the first time, 

and often in groups or teams (Friedman & DiTomaso,  1996). Specifically, women and 

racial/ethnic minorities now account for large proportions of the workforce. This change 

in the composition of the workforce raises several issues of interest to academics and 

practitioners. One of these is that of diversity that means that many individuals are now

1 Between  1990 and 2005 it is projected that white males will comprise 32.2% of new entrants to the U.S. 
workforce and 47.6% of the leavers. The percentage of women in the U.S. workforce has continued to 
increase. Numbers from the  1997 U.S. Bureau of the Census project that between 1990-2005 42.7% of all 
new workforce entrants will be women.
2 According to Training Magazine (10/95) 78% of U.S. organizations have employees who work in groups.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

1


working in heterogeneous groups -  groups comprised of equal or almost equal numbers 

of individuals with different demographic characteristics. Secondly, a number of 

individuals are now working in groups with coworkers who are all predominantly 

different from themselves - dissimilarity. The effects of demographic diversity and 

dissimilarity are of particular interest because they have been found to influence an 

individual’s affective state, intention's, behavior's, and performance (Williams & 

O’Reilly,  1998). Finally, because of their perceptual prominence and salience across 

situations, sex and race/ethnicity have been found to be the demographic characteristics 

that are used most frequently in categorization (Brewer &  Miller,  1984; Brewer & 

Kramer,  1983;  Stangor, Lynch, Duan & Glass,  1992).

Recently, two comprehensive reviews of the diversity and dissimilarity literatures 

have been conducted. Milliken and Martins (1996) concluded that diversity appears to be 

a "double-edged sword" that increases the opportunity for creative performance, but also 

increases the likelihood that dissimilar group members will  be dissatisfied and fail to 

identify with others in their workgroup. Similarly, Williams and O'Reilly (1998) 

concluded, "diversity is more likely to have a negative than a positive effect on group 

performance. Simply having more diversity in a group is no guarantee that the group will

make better decisions or function effectively 

diversity is a mixed blessing and

requires careful and sustained attention to be a positive force" (p.  120). Additionally, the 

authors noted that much of the dissimilarity literature has no: distinguished between 

multiple dimensions of dissimilarity such that, we don't know whether being a minority 

member on more than one characteristic (i.e., African-American female) is different from 

being a minority on only one characteristic (i.e., female). Taken together, these 

conclusions leave researchers and practitioners with an interesting dilemma. Diversity 

and dissimilarity are a reality in today's organizations and yet. the outcomes associated

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

2


with working in these environments and thus, how to manage them so as to benefit from 

them or reduce negative consequences remains unclear.

Grounded in sociology, there is a great deal of theoretical work suggesting that 

diversity should be associated with positive outcomes. The social contact and information 

and decision making theories (Blau,  1977; Hoffman & Maier,  1961; Kanter,  1977) 

propose that diversity should result in beneficial outcomes to both groups and 

organizations. The social contact hypothesis also referred to as the theory of 

heterogeneity (Blau,  1977) suggests that individual’s live/work in social associations and 

thus engage in relationships that are constrained by the demographic composition of their 

groups. As such, group proportions influence the salience of perceived individual 

differences. Working in diverse groups should be associated with positive outcomes 

because social ties are formed between individuals who are different from one another 

which in turn, decreases the salience of individual differences, resulting in  less 

stereotyping, and negative attributes being assigned to those who are different.  Research 

on the consequences of contact with different individuals suggests that with frequent 

contact individuals’  focus less on demographic differences (Brewer & Miller,  1984; 

Brewer & Kramer,  1983). Given this, individuals who work in more diverse groups, 

where neither sex nor race/ethnic group is in the majority or minority, should express 

positive attitudes towards their jobs and organization.

Likewise, at the group-level of analysis, the information and decision making 

theories argue that diversity should result in beneficial outcomes because individuals are 

exposed to more approaches to problem solving along with different ideas and 

perspectives (Hoffman & Maier,  1961; Jackson et al.,  199S; Nemeth,  1986). In addition, 

several group creativity models has argued that diversity is a necessary prerequisite for 

creative performance (Hoffman,  19S9; Jackson, 1996; West & Anderson,  1996).

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

3


In contrast to the above theories that propose a positive association between 

diversity and affective and performance outcomes, social identity theory (Tajfel & 

Turner,  1986) and the similarity-attraction paradigm (Bryne,  1971) both suggest negative 

relationships. Social identity theory posits that individuals use demographic 

characteristics to categorize themselves and others into "in-groups" and "out-groups." 

Individuals are positively disposed towards members of their own group. Therefore, the 

group in which the self is a member is given positive attributes in order to maintain a 

positive self and group identity. Research has supported this hypothesis. Using this 

framework it has been found that individuals prefer to work and associate with others like 

themselves. Further, interactions with similar others are easier and because individuals 

want to maintain high levels of self-esteem, identifying with like others results in positive 

self-relevant information being generated (Pelted et al.,  1999; Tsui et al.,  1992).

Likewise, similarity-attraction suggests that individuals are more interpersonally 

attracted or drawn to others who are demographically similar and less to those who are 

different. This attraction results in the generation of feedback affirming the positive 

characteristics associated with similar others. Based on these theories researchers have 

found lower levels of commitment and satisfaction and higher levels of absenteeism and 

turnover reported by individuals working in diverse groups and in particular, by those 

individuals who are different from the majority of their coworkers (Jackson et al.,  1991; 

Pfeffer, Wagner & O’Reilly,  1984). With regards to creative performance, if individuals 

assign negative attributes to those who are different then the ideas and perspectives put 

forth by these individuals may not be considered and consequently, diversity may not 

result in increased creative performance. In addition, the consideration of only the views 

of similar others may result in the development of a "groupthink" (Janis,  1972) type of

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

4


mindset and thus, creative performance may be negatively impacted by working in more 

heterogeneous groups.

With diversity/dissimilarity researchers continuing to find a range of often 

conflicting results, Milliken and Martins (1996) suggested that “the context within which 

the group is interacting is a critical, and understudied variable likely to affect how the 

diversity or heterogeneity of a group affects outcomes”(p. 419). To date, much of the 

literature has either ignored the role of context or controlled for it in analysis (Milliken & 

Martins,  1996). In part, context has been difficult to examine because it either requires 

multiple locations or individuals from different organizations to be included in a single 

study. However, the context within which an individual works has been described as that 

which surrounds them and influences their everyday experiences (Cappelli & Sherer, 

1991). Further, Cappelli and Sherer (1991) argued that while organizational context plays 

a key role in understanding the attitudes and behaviors of individuals it is often neglected 

in Organizational Behavior research.

Another argument advanced to explain the inconsistent results between 

diversity/dissimilarity and outcomes is that the association may not be direct, but rather 

mediated or moderated by a set of intervening mechanisms, processes, or organizational 

contextual conditions (Chatman, Polzer & Neale,  1998; Lawrence,  1997; Milliken & 

Martins,  1996; Pelled et al.,  1999; Pfeffer,  1997). Interestingly, this argument fits with 

much of the early work on groups where it was theorized that effectiveness and 

performance were dependent upon group processes (Hackman's,  1987; Steiner,  1972). To 

this effect, Lawrence (1997) noted that while process variables are often used as 

explanations, they are rarely included in up-front theorizing and thus, they remain a 

"black box" or an area that still requires more theoretical development and empirical 

testing.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

5


To date, examination of the "black box" has incorporated internal task processes 

and external communication (Ancona & Caldwell,  1992), social integration, internal 

communication, and communication frequency (Smith et al.,  1994) and, task and 

emotional conflict (Pelled,  1996; Pelledet al.,  1999). All of the previously mentioned 

group processes have been considered as mediators at the group level-of-analysis between 

demographic diversity and outcomes. In all of the studies the researchers found some 

associations between diversity and processes and between the process measures and 

outcomes. However, the overall conclusions reached suggest that the relationships 

between diversity and outcomes are complex and not fully mediated by any of the 

proposed intervening mechanisms.

A recent study by Chattopadhyay (1999) investigated the role of peer attraction, 

organizational based self-esteem, and trust as mediators between demographic diversity 

and organizational citizenship behaviors (i.e., altruism and courtesy).  Unlike prior 

studies, this research was conducted at the individual level-of-analysis, but the results 

were essentially the same in that a clear pattern of relationships did not emerge. Based on 

his findings, Chattopadhyay concluded that "more development is needed to establish the 

boundary conditions under which demographic dissimilarity may have a positive or 

negative effects on employee attitudes" (p. 286).

Finally, an organizational simulation by Chatman, Polzer and Neale (1998) found 

that in some instances, organizational culture moderated the relationship between 

diversity and a number of outcome measures. Specifically, the authors found that the 

salience of self-categorization was influenced by whether the culture of the organization 

emphasized individualism or collectivism. In the more collective cultures, diversity 

resulted in more positive outcomes than it did in the more individually oriented cultures.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

6


Therefore, they concluded that demographic diversity needs to be studied as a part of a 

broader set on interrelated processes and contextual measures.

In reviewing the above research on mediation and moderation, it is noteworthy 

that almost all of the work has been conducted at the group level-of-analysis and, with the 

exception of the work by Chattopadhyay (1999), not at the individual  level-of-analysis. 

However, many of the theories used to explain the negative and inconsistent relationships 

between demographic diversity/dissimilarity and outcomes are individual and not group 

level theories (i.e., attraction-selection, social-identity). Additionally, all of the research 

with the exception of the work by Chatman and colleagues (1998) has tested for 

mediation and not moderation. However, given the inconsistent and often weak 

relationships found between demographic diversity/dissimilarity and outcomes, including 

moderators in the equation may offer better predictive validity than including mediators. 

This is because, mediators have been methodologically described as best suited to strong 

relationships between independent and dependent variables (Baron & Kenny,  1986). 

Furthermore, given the results of Chatman and colleagues (1998), including moderators 

that are more detached from the inner functioning of the group or are more contextual in 

scope, but have a strong relationship with individuals’ perceptions of their self-identity 

may be an important next step.

In contrast to the diversity/dissimilarity literature that has generated a plethora of 

often-divergent results. Justice researchers have consistently found that when individuals 

believe they are fairly treated, they exhibit higher levels of desirable behaviors (i.e., 

Niehoff & Moorman,  1992; Skarlicki and Latham,  1997). For example, procedural 

fairness has been linked to higher levels of self-esteem (Lind & Tyler,  1988), satisfaction 

and attachment to groups and organizations (i.e., Folger & Konovsky,  1989; Lind & 

Tyler,  1988; McFarlin & Sweeney,  1992), and increased performance of extra-role

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

7


behaviors (Niehoff & Moorman,  1993). Given the robust and broad ranging implications 

associated with procedural justice, researchers have labeled it "the mortar of social 

cohesion" (Cropanzano et al.,  1998) and the "key to understanding social behavior" (Van 

den Bos, Bruins, Wilke & Dronkert,  1999; p324).

Perceptions of procedural justice have been described as important in 

organizational settings due to more than just the positive outcomes associated with them. 

For instance, fair processes signal that employees are respected, trusted, that decisions are 

made in a consistent and unbiased manner and thus, that the organization is a desirable 

place to work (Cohen,  1985; Greenberg,  1985).  With the changing workforce and 

structure of organizations, procedural  fairness has proven to be critical in maintaining 

employee loyalty especially during and turmoltrous events such as layoffs (Brockner, 

1990; Brockner et al.,  1994). One reason given for why procedural justice is so critical is 

that it is both a process and a contextual variable. Meaning that, procedural justice is a 

process through which decisions are made and resources allocated. Therefore, it impacts 

how individuals view themselves, their workgroups and organizations. Additionally, 

justice researchers have argued that procedural justice is an impoiiant component of 

organizational climate (Mossholder, Bennett & Martin,  1998; Naumann & Bennett,

1998). Fairness has been described as a boundary conditions because it influences the 

context within which individual, group, and organizational evaluations occur (Lawler, 

1996).  Viewed in these terms, fairness is the context within which individuals and groups 

operate and its procedures specify the boundary conditions regarding how individuals 

should and will be treated. For example, when individuals believe that fair procedures are 

used their self-worth may increase because they understand how the decision was made, 

their input was taken into consideration, or because they know what to expect regarding 

how they will be treated in the future.

Reproduced with permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

8


While diversity/dissimilarity theorists and empirical researchers have sought to 

find process or contextual variables that might help explain the range of results, none 

have incorporated perceptions of procedural justice into the equation. Therefore, this 

research will propose that procedural justice may be an important construct that may shed 

some light on the “black box.” For instance, procedural fairness has been linked to 

individual’s perceptions of themselves and subsequent affective outcomes. Thus, when 

individuals work in what they perceive to be a fair environment, the composition of their 

workgroup or their dissimilarity to others coworkers should be relied upon less to 

generate positive self-relevant information. Consequently, procedural justice should 

moderate the relationship between diversity/dissimilarity and outcomes such that high 

perceptions of justice should result in positive associations regardless of demographic 

diversity or dissimilarity.  However, when procedural justice is low the effects of diversity 

and dissimilarity will continue to directly influence the outcomes.

A second argument for why procedural justice might influence these relationships 

is that several of the theoretical underpinnings used in diversity/dissimilarity research are 

constructs influenced by perceptions of fairness. For example, being treated fairly has 

been found to positively influence an individual's self-identity, and group attachment 

(Lind & Tyler,  1988). The diversity and dissimilarity literatures argue that either group 

proportions or being different from one's coworkers influence outcomes through their 

association with self-worth. Furthermore, the group-value model of justice (Lind & Tyler, 

1988) is based on the belief that individuals value group membership and that being 

treated fairly is "one of the major vehicles through which self-relevant information is 

imparted to group members" (Brockner & Siegel,  1995; p. 7). Therefore, individuals 

value group membership because it gives them an identity through which they can 

validate the appropriateness of their beliefs and behaviors (Lind & Earley,  1992).

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

9


In conclusion, the face of today’s organizations is rapidly changing. To better 

understand the effects of diversity and dissimilarity, it has been suggested that the context 

within which individuals interact and the processes used between coworkers need further 

examination. Therefore, the aim of this research is as follows; first, the procedural justice 

literature will  be examined and in  replication, hypotheses suggesting a positive 

association between procedural justice and desirable affective outcomes will be proposed. 

In addition, arguments will  be developed suggesting a positive association between 

procedural justice and creative performance. Following this, the diversity literatures will 

be reviewed and competing hypotheses offered on the relationship between working in 

diverse groups on work-related affective outcomes and creative performance. In addition, 

dissimilarity research will also be reviewed and hypotheses offered on the effects of being 

dissimilar along a single demographic characteristic (sex and race/ethnicity) and on an 

aggregate dissimilarity measure. In doing so, whether the effects are the same or additive 

if one is more different from one’s coworkers on one or more characteristics (i.e., white 

female in a mostly white male group versus African-American female in a mostly white 

male group) will be examined.  Finally, given the call for more theoretical development 

and empirical testing of the "black box" between diversity/dissimilarity and outcomes, 

this research will argue that perceptions of one’s organization as a fair place to work (i.e., 

procedural justice) may, at the individual level-of-analysis, moderate the relationship 

between demographic diversity/dissimilarity and a number of outcomes.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

10


CHAPTER II 

PROCEDURAL JUSTICE

What is Procedural Justice?

Justice research encompasses the fairness of outcomes received (distributive 

justice) and the fairness of the means or processes used to make a decision or reach an 

outcome (procedural justice). Research in the justice realm has moved back and forth 

between emphasizing distributive fairness, procedural  fairness, and comparing both forms 

of justice and examining how they interact as well as how they are related to different 

outcomes (i.e., Alexander & Ruderman,  1987; McFarlin & Sweeney,  1992). In addition, 

the fair treatment of employees usually defined as the clarity and quality of explanations 

given, and the respect and courtesy accorded employees, has also received attention under 

the heading of interactional justice (Bies & Moag,  1986). However, it has been argued 

that interactional justice is a component of procedural justice because fair processes can 

not exist on their own. Therefore, procedural justice is a process through which 

procedures are enacted (Greenberg,  1990). Finally, recent work has focused on fairness as 

a contextual variable and described characteristics of a fair organizational or group 

climate (Mossholder et al.,  1998; Naumann & Bennett,  1998). Here it has been argued 

that working in an environment described as fair can result in positive outcomes above 

and beyond those associated with the fair treatment of individuals (Mossholder et al., 

1998).

While the fairness construct has generated many robust results, most of the early 

work focused on the theory of distributive justice and thus, the fairness of a specific 

incident or decision and its subsequent outcomes. That how an outcome was determined 

would also influence fairness evaluations was the basis for the theory of procedural

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

ll


justice (Folger & Greenberg,  1985; Thibaut & Walker,  1978). Research on procedural 

justice evolved from the early work of Thibaut and Walker (1975) on legal dispute 

resolution. Thibaut and Walker (1975) examined the use of third parties to resolve 

conflict as well as disputant preferences with regards to control over the procedures and 

outcomes. Their findings suggested that regardless of whether individuals won or lost 

their dispute, they were satisfied when they perceived the procedures and processes used 

were fair (1975;  1978). Further, they concluded that individuals perceived they had been 

treated fairly when non-biased third parties were given outcome control, but the disputant 

maintained control over procedural issues (1975;  1978). Process control, defined as the 

ability to identify and present relative information has been labeled voice in 

organizational settings (Folger,  1977).

In contrast to the work of Thibaut and Walker, Leventhal (1976;  1980) sought to 

define the structural aspects of justice and was broader and more general in scope. 

Leventhal argued that fairness determinations were based on a cognitive process whereby 

individuals compared the procedures used in a specific decision to a set of fairness 

standards or rules. By developing a set of fairness standards Leventhal tried to make 

fairness into a more objective construct. However, research has continued to find that 

fairness is not purely objective (Barrett-Howard & Tyler,  1986; Tyler,  1989) and more 

attention, of late, has been given to the subjective or social side of the construct (Tyler, 

Boeckmann, Smith & Huo,  1997). Nevertheless, when studying procedural justice the 

standards set forth by Leventhal need to be considered because they are components used 

to measure procedural fairness and are the key criteria used when judging decision 

making and conflict resolution as fair. Furthermore, research has found statistical support 

for the importance of these criteria in fairness evaluations (Tyler,  1989). The six 

standards that were identified as necessary to ensure decision fairness were:

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

12


1.  Consistency  -  procedures  are  applied consistently  across  individuals  and  over 

time.

2. Bias suppression - those making the decision have either no vested interest in a 

specific outcome and are not influenced by prior beliefs.

3. Accuracy o f information  - decisions  are formed based on  accurate  information 

and decision makers are well informed.

4.  Error  correctability  -  bad  decisions  can  be  corrected  (i.e.,  grievance  and 

appeals procedures are available).

5.  Representatives  o f  relevant  parties  -  concerns,  values,  and  outlooks  of  all 

affected individuals are represented in the decision making process.

6.  Ethicality  -  standards  of  ethics  and  morality  are  used  in  decision  making 

procedures (i.e., no bribery, deception, spying, or invasion of privacy).

Justice and Positive Outcomes

The theory of procedural justice developed by Thibaut and Walker (1975) 

proposed that the fairness of procedures were as or more important than the outcomes 

received. In the legal environment Tyler and Caine (1981) found that procedural fairness 

went beyond a single decision and influenced evaluations of both leaders and institutions. 

Further, that fairness should have wider ranging implications was proposed by Lawler 

(1977) who stated that the perceived fairness should be important for employee attitudes, 

quality of work life, and organizational effectiveness. Building on these arguments and 

using a survey of 2800 federal government employees, Alexander and Ruderman (1987) 

investigated the relationship between fairness and organizational outcomes. Specifically, 

job satisfaction, evaluations of supervisors, conflict and harmony, trust in upper-level 

management, and turnover intentions. Methodologically separating the effects of

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

13


distributive and procedural justice, they found that procedural justice was related to all of 

the outcomes except intentions to turnover that was associated with perceptions of 

distributive fairness. These findings led the authors to conclude that distributive justice 

influenced more individually oriented outcomes whereas, procedural justice judgments 

were more strongly associated with interpersonal and social outcomes.

Based on the findings of Alexander and Ruderman (1987) and those of Lissak. 

Mendes and Lind (1983) examining job satisfaction in the Canadian Armed Forces, and 

experimental studies on supervisor fairness ratings (Greenberg,  1987; Kanfer, Sawyer, 

Earley & Lind,  1987), Lind and Tyler (1988) noted that;

"procedural  justice 
is  a  remarkably  potent  determinant  of  affective 
reactions  to  decision  making  and  that  procedural  justice  has  especially 
strong effects on  attitudes about institutions and authorities,  as opposed to 
attitudes about  the  specific outcomes."  Furthermore,  "fair procedures,  we 
hypothesize,  are  a critical  aspect  of the quality  of work  life  and are  well- 
nigh essential to good employer-employee relationships"  (p  179).

Since this assertion, a number of studies have sought to empirically  test that fair

procedures are strongly related to important individuals work-related affective outcomes

such as organizational commitment, job satisfaction, and intentions to turnover.

Using survey data from employees at a manufacturing plant, Folger and

Konovsky (1989) hypothesized and found that distributive justice was related to

satisfaction with an individual’s pay. In contrast, procedural justice evaluations predicted

organizational commitment, trust in one’s supervisor, and overall pay satisfaction. These

findings led them to conclude that fair procedures were critically important to "higher-

order issues" (p.  126). To examine the relationship between procedural justice and

employee behaviors and attitudes, Konovsky and Cropanzano (1991) studied an

organization that had recently implemented a comprehensive drug-testing policy. Here

they found that trust in management and affective commitment was maintained when

employees believed that fair procedures had been used to implement the policy. In

14

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


addition, procedural fairness was also related to turnover intentions and performance. 

Together, the results of these two studies suggest that even when an organization 

implements a potentially controversial or unpopular policy, when employees believe that 

the procedures used were fair, their loyalty to the organization along with a number of 

other desirable attitudes and behaviors can be maintained.

While the previously mentioned studies took a main-effect approach, the work of 

McFarlin and Sweeney (1992) proposed and tested interaction effects. On the basis of the 

experimental findings of Greenberg (1986) that pay levels and how pay was distributed 

interacted with each other, McFarlin and Sweeney conducted a survey of Bank workers to 

see whether the results replicated in a field setting. They found that distributive justice 

predicted pay and job satisfaction whereas, procedural justice was more strongly related 

to organizational commitment and evaluations of supervisors. Furthermore, they found an 

interaction between distributive and procedural justice for their two organizational 

outcomes, but not the personal outcomes. Specifically, when procedural justice was low, 

organizational commitment varied as a function of distributive justice. However, when 

procedures were perceived as fair, distributive justice had a much smaller effect on the 

organizational outcomes. Their interpretation was that fair "procedures define the 

organization’s capacity to treat employees fairly" (p. 634). Meaning that, regardless of the 

perceived fairness of an individual outcome, the belief that an organization can be fair in 

determining outcomes is more important for organizational attachment.

Finally, using LISREL analysis, Sweeney and McFarlin (1993) tested four 

different models of the relationship between distributive justice, procedural justice, pay 

satisfaction, and organizational commitment. They found a two-factor model with 

distributive justice predicting personal-level outcomes and procedural justice predicting 

organizational-level outcomes had the best fit to the data. The above results were

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

is


incorporated into a model examining whether procedural justice mediated the relationship 

between leader monitoring and organizational citizenship behavior (Niehoff & Moorman,

1993). In this research, Niehoff and Moorman found that procedural justice mediated the 

relationships between management behaviors that are typically perceived as negative (i.e., 

employee monitoring) and positive outcomes (i.e., OCB). Therefore, monitoring was 

positively related to OCB when employees understood the need for monitoring and 

perceived it to be fair.

In addition to being a process, procedural justice has also be described as a 

contextual variable or as a component of an organization’s climate (Mossholder et al., 

1998; Naumann & Bennett,  1998). This argument is in part, based upon the work of 

Schneider (1990) who defined climate as a set of share perceptions regarding policies, 

practices, procedures, rewards, support, and social interaction. The rationale here is that 

because individuals operate within the larger context of their group or organization, the 

shared perceptions on issues such as how information is collected prior to decision­

making, who has input, or how decisions are challenged also influences relationships 

amongst coworkers. Fairness as a contextual variable has been described as the 

operationalization of the group value model of justice because, groups provide the 

context within which shared perceptions are developed and maintained (Naumann & 

Bennett,  1998). An empirical study by Mossholder and colleagues (1998) found support 

for a procedural justice climate. The group-level fairness climate was significantly 

positively associated with individual levels of job satisfaction. Therefore, above and 

beyond individual perceptions of fair treatment, perceptions of how the organization 

treated its employees also influenced individual attitudes and behaviors. These results 

continue to support the positive association between procedural justice and affective 

outcomes.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

16


In conclusion, this review has focused on the relationship between fairness and 

individual work-related affective outcomes. What the preceding literature review 

highlights is that there exists an extensive body of work, cutting across a multitude of 

research settings, using a number of different methodologies and subjects that has 

consistently found that perceptions of procedural fairness are significantly related to 

positive attitudes. Therefore, in replication, it is hypothesized that:

Hypothesis  1:  Perceptions  of  procedural  justice  will  be  positively 

associated  with  desirable  work-related  attitudes.  Specifically,  individuals 

who  perceive  higher  levels  of  procedural  justice  will  be  more  satisfied 

with  their jobs,  more  committed  to  their organizations,  and  less  likely  to 

leave their organizations.

Procedural Justice and Creative Performance

While the relationships between procedural justice and work-related affective 

outcomes are well established in the extant literature, much less has been written about 

the relationship between fairness and performance. An exception being a study by 

Baldwin, Majuka and Loher (1991) where procedural justice (in particular voice) was 

found to positively impact training performance. In pan, performance may not have been 

included because a substantial body of literature exists linking work-related affective 

outcomes to performance. For example, procedural justice has been found to positively 

influence organizational citizenship behaviors (Niehoff & Moorman,  1993). Organ and 

colleagues (1988) have consistently found that increased extra-role behaviors are 

positively related to performance effectiveness. Furthermore, in her review of the

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

17


satisfaction performance debate, Ostroff (1992) concluded that individual  level 

satisfaction was positively related to performance. Therefore, the relationship between 

procedural fairness and performance are alluded to or implicitly implied in much of the 

research.

That procedural justtee should influence employee creative performance has not, 

to date, been considered in either the justice or creativity literatures.  In today’s fast paced 

changing work environment, creativity has been deemed as critical for group and 

organizational competitiveness (Van de Ven,  1986; West & Farr,  1990). Individual 

creativity is the development of novel, original, or useful products, ideas or processes 

(Oldham & Cummings,  1996; Shalley,  1991,  1995; Woodman et al.,  1993). Therefore, 

for organizations, having employee's who perform creatively has been described as 

important in and of itself and because creativity is a necessary prerequisite for group and 

organizational innovation.  In turn, organizational innovation has been described as 

critical if firms want to achieve competitive advantage and succeed in today’s fast paced 

changing environment (Amabile,  1988; Kanter,  1988; Shalley,  1995; Van de Ven,  1986).

Most early research on creativity focused on individual personality characteristics 

hypothesized to be associated with creative performance (i.e., Amabile,  1988; Gough, 

1979). Recently however, theoretical models have been developed and empirical studies 

conducted to examine the importance of the work environment and group processes on 

creativity (Oldham & Cummings,  1996; Scott & Bruce,  1994; Shalley, Gilson & Blum, 

2000; Woodman et al.,  1993). In this body of work, it has been suggested that the 

environment within which individuals work plays a key role in their ability to both 

perform creatively and meet the creative requirements of their jobs. At the organizational

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

18


level it has been suggested that policies, structure, and climate all influence R & D 

innovation (Tushman & Nelson,  1990). Woodman and colleagues (1993) developed an 

interactive model describing facets of the individual, group processes, and organization as 

all being necessary for creative performance. Likewise, West (1990), in his development 

of a.group model of innovation, proposed participation as a process necessary for 

innovation. West further defined participation in terms of participative safety; the ability 

to give input into decisions without being criticized or ridiculed. Together, these models 

suggest that the processes used by individuals and the context within which  individuals 

work should have an impact on their creative performance.

Empirically, Oldham and Cummings (1996) found that job complexity influenced 

creativity and that personality characteristics interacted with contextual factors to explain 

more variance. Scott and Bruce (1994) found that positive relationship’s with one’s 

supervisor (LMX), support for innovation, and resources all impacted innovative 

behavior. West and Anderson (1996) in a longitudinal study on top management team 

creativity found participation in decision making was one of the strongest predictors of 

overall innovation. Finally, Shalley and colleagues (2000) found that when individuals 

had autonomy, viewed their work as important, challenging and urgent, and did not have 

to follow strict operating procedures they were more likely to have jobs requiring high 

levels of creativity. Furthermore, they found that a match between the level of creativity 

required by a job and the work environment resulted in higher levels of satisfaction and 

intentions to remain with their organizations.

While procedural fairness has not specifically been included in any of the 

aforementioned models or studies, many of the components of procedural justice have

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

19


been incorporated. For instance, being able to participate in decision making was found to 

be a key process in enhancing innovation (West & Anderson,  1996). Participation (voice) 

is an  integral part of procedural justice. Participative safety (West,  1990) that is described 

as being able to give input without being judged or ridiculed is akin  to Leventhal’s (1976) 

bias suppression dimension. Similarly, Amabile and Gryskiewicz (19S9) describe being 

free from extraneous concerns as important for creativity. Again, procedural justice is a 

process that should allow individuals to be “free from extraneous concerns,” because 

consistency, accuracy of information, error correctability, and ethicality all ensure that 

individuals know how decisions are made, resources allocated, and individuals will be 

treated. Additionally, if procedural justice is described as a context, it could be argued 

that a fair context is one where individuals can focus on their work "free from extraneous 

concerns" because they do not need to worry about how decisions will be made or 

individuals treated. Finally, at the organizational  level it has been found that more 

hierarchical authoritarian organizations are less innovative (Hage &  Aiken,  1967). 

Likewise, Schminke (1996) found that organizations described by employees as 

authoritarian were also perceived to have lower levels of procedural  fairness.

Therefore, it is hypothesized that individuals who perceive their organization as 

procedurally just should be more likely to try new and original ways of doing their work 

and thus, have higher levels of creative performance.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

20


Hypothesis  2:  Perceptions  of  procedural  justice  will  be  positively 

associated  with  individual  creative  performance.  Specifically,  individuals 

who perceive higher levels of procedural justice will  have higher levels of 

creative performance.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

21


CHAPTER III 

DEMOGRAPHIC DIVERSITY AND DISSIMILARITY 

Organizational researchers have for a long time been interested in the relationship 

between  individual and group demographic characteristics and employee’s attitudes, 

intentions, behaviors, and performance. The work of Blau (1977), Kanter (1977), and 

Pfeffer (1983) on group proportions and social contact all considered the effects of group 

composition on outcomes and in general, posited that diversity should result in a number 

of positive outcomes. In contrast, relational demography considers an individual’s 

demographic attributes as they relate to those of relevant others (i.e., OReilly, Caldwell 

& Barnett,  1989; Tsui et al.,  1992; Tsui & OReilly,  1989)3. This stream of research has 

been primarily grounded in the theories of similarity-attraction (Bryne,  1971) and social- 

identity (Tajfel & Turner,  1986) both of which propose (through somewhat different 

mechanisms) that individuals who are more similar to the others they work with will 

experience more positive outcomes. In contrast, those who are more dissimilar will 

experience more negative outcomes. Given that organizations are becoming more diverse, 

and that diversity has been labeled a socially desirable characteristic (Cox, Lobel & 

McLeod,  1991), these conclusions are troubling to managers who want to harness the 

benefits associated with having a diverse workforce and in particular, having diverse 

individuals work together in groups.

With so much written and so many studies conducted on the effects of diversity 

and dissimilarity, one would expect that a clear pattern of results would have emerged. 

However, this is not the case. One potential reason for the mixed results is that multiple 

theoretical  models have been used often resulting in the generation and testing of 

competing hypotheses. Given this, empirical results can be found supporting the benefits

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

22


associated with working in both diverse and homogeneous groups. Therefore, a goal of 

this research is to lay out the different theoretical models and review the empirical 

findings associated with them. Following this, a series of competing hypotheses will be 

generated and tested. To date, the only work that has considered competing hypotheses is 

that of Riordan and Wayne (1998) who examined the effects of workgroup sex 

composition on satisfaction with performance appraisal, training, recognition, and 

advancement. While the findings of this study will be described in more detail further in 

this paper, the overall conclusion drawn by the authors was that the effects of workgroup 

composition appear to be different for males and females.

While there are a number of variables upon which diversity can be measured (e.g., 

sex, race, age, tenure, education, functional background, individual  values), this research 

will focus solely on the directly observable characteristics of race/ethnicity and sex. The 

rationale behind this choice is partly that these characteristics have generated the most 

research  interest and conflicting results (Milliken & Martins,  1996; Williams & O ’Reilly, 

1998). Secondly, both of these characteristics are highly visible making them easily 

accessible and salient across situations (Pelted,  1996; Tsui et al.,  1992) and researchers 

have found that sex and race/ethnicity are used most frequently in self-categorization 

(Stangor et al.,  1992). Thirdly, these two individual categories are likely to invoke the 

strongest stereotypes which in turn, negatively bias attitudes and behaviors towards those 

who are different from oneself (Elsass & Graves,  1997). In addition, sex and 

race/ethnicity remain key segregating variables not only because they are readily 

detectable, but also because of the less readily observable social differentiation associated 

with them (Blau,  1977; Milliken & Martin,  1996). Finally, these characteristics are 

currently of particular interest because women and racial minorities are starting to 

comprise large proportions of the workforce (Judy & D'Amico,  1997).

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

23


Recently, it has been argued that work-related diversity measures (i.e., education, 

functional background) may be better predictors of organizational outcomes (Pelled, 

1996). However, researchers have found that demographic variables are related to an 

individual’s belief structure which, in turn, influences their perceptions of their 

coworkers, work, and organization (Pelled et al.,  1999). For example, the sex composition 

of an individual’s workgroup has been found to influence social relations among group 

members and the quality of an individual’s work experience (Ely,  1994;  1995; Martin, 

1985; Perry, Davis-Blake & Kulik,  1995).  In addition, because individuals have limited 

information and resources upon which to base their decisions, they often rely on what is 

most observable and interpretable (Hambrick & Mason,  1984), thus demographic 

categorization becomes almost automatic (Elsass & Graves,  1997). Therefore, while sex 

and race/ethnicity may not always be the most work-related attributes, due to their 

perceptual prominence, their relationship with individual affective outcomes, and the 

diverse composition of the incoming labor pool and existing workforce, furthering our 

understanding of the effects of demographic diversity remains a critical issue.

Positive Association Between Group Diversity and Work-Related Affective Outcomes 

Blau’s (1977) theoretical work on group proportions proposed that when diversity 

is based on characteristics that are not compoundable such that more is better, diversity 

can result in increased inter-group interaction and improved inter-group relationships. In 

other words, diversity promotes interactions among individuals who are different 

resulting in less stereotyping and more positive outcomes (Blau, Blum & Schwartz,

1982). However, when diversity occurs along a dimension that is compoundable, negative 

relationships may result. For example, tenure diversity may result in negative outcomes 

because some individuals will have more and others less. Tenure is compoundable in that

Reproduced with permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

24


more can also be associated with greater amounts of power, knowledge, and/or income 

and therefore, increased interaction between those who are different may not occur. In 

their study on technical communication within teams, Zenger and Lawrence (1989) found 

that tenure homogeneity was positively related to communication. However, in contrast 

to tenure, sex and race/ethnicity are not categories of which an individual can have or 

gain more or less of either attribute.

Based on a case study conducted at a large industrial organization, the early work 

of Kanter (1977) also suggested that when no one group is in the minority, positive 

outcomes should ensue. Work by Brewer and Kramer (1985) examining the mechanisms 

through which group diversity may influence positive outcomes reported that in diverse 

groups, individual attitude formation shifted from abstract and unfamiliar to interpersonal 

and familiar thus, more positive intergroup attitudes and social acceptance followed. 

Using data from 71  groups, Harrison, Price and Bell (1998) found that in diverse groups, 

demographic characteristics (age, sex, and race/ethnicity) became less important and 

deep-level differences (commitment and satisfaction) became more important over time. 

In examining the effects of sex and race/ethnic group proportions on member interaction 

Cox, Lobel and McLeod (1991) found that members of more racially diverse groups 

demonstrated higher levels of cooperative behaviors. With regard to individual attitudes, 

Riordan and Shore (1998) found no effects for sex, but differences based on race/ethnic 

composition. Specifically, they found that Hispanics exhibited the highest work-related 

affective outcomes when they worked in racially balanced groups. In addition, White 

participants had the highest levels of both perceived job advancement opportunities and 

commitment when they were in the majority or working in balanced groups (i.e., 

described as 50/50). Wharton and Barron (1991) found that women in diverse groups had 

higher levels of satisfaction than did women in groups that predominantly homogeneous.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

25


Likewise, Fields and Blum (1997) used a national sample of 1634 employees and found 

that both men and women who working in diverse groups reported the highest levels of 

job satisfaction. Finally, Gilson and Blum (1998) found that the sex composition of an 

individual's work group influenced whether they perceived their organization as a fair 

place to work. Specifically, individuals in diverse groups evaluated their organizations 

more favorably.

In conclusion, this body of research suggests that working in diverse groups 

should result in a range of positive affective attitudes. This is because, diversity allows 

for the increased opportunities for individuals who are different from one another to 

interact, get to know each other, and break down stereotypical barriers. Therefore, the 

various facets of satisfaction such as work and coworker satisfaction should all be 

positively affected as should individual attitudes towards their jobs and organization. 

Given this, it is proposed that individuals who work in diverse groups should have higher 

levels of job-related affective outcomes than will  individuals in more homogeneous 

groups.

Negative Association Between Group Diversity and Work-Related Affective Outcomes

While the aforementioned theories and empirical studies support a positive 

relationship between diversity and outcomes, research grounded in the psychological 

theories of social-categorization and similarity-attraction suggests the opposite. Social 

categorization (Tajfel & Turner,  1986) is based on the work of Tajfel (1978) on social- 

identity and Turner (1982,1984) on self-categorization. The basic argument advanced by 

this theory is that individuals want to maintain high levels of self-esteem and do so by 

belonging to a group through which a positive identity is conferred. Therefore, to increase 

one’s self-worth, the group in which the self is a member is assigned positive attributes.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

26


Following this, one’s own group (in-group) is compared (favorably) to other groups (out­

group). Frequently, the basis for the formation of “in” and “out” groups are demographic 

characteristics because they are highly visible and salient across situations (Elsass & 

Graves,  1997; Stangoret al.,  1991). Thus, individuals who are demographically similar 

are classified as in-group members to whom positive attributes are conveyed. Conversely, 

those who are different become out-group members and negative attributes such as less 

trustworthy, less honest, and less cooperative are ascribed to them (Tajfel,  1982). Tsui 

and colleagues (1992) noted that "groups that contain the self are more likely to be 

considered special and regarded positively" (p.  552). Consequently, when individuals 

work with others like themselves (i.e., same race or sex) the group is regarded as 

attractive and membership is desirable which results in positive psychosocial outcomes. 

However, when individuals work in diverse groups, negative individual affective 

outcomes often ensue because individuals do not identify with other group members or 

develop bonds that help enhance an individual’s self-identity (i.e., Ely,  1994; Pelled,

1997; Riordan & Shore,  1997; Smith et al.,  1994; Tsui et al.,  1992).

Consistent yet different, the similarity-attraction theory (Bryne,  1971) argues that 

individuals are attracted to and want to associate with others like themselves. The 

underlying premise here is that like others will share similar values that should make 

communication easier, increase trust, reciprocity, and emotional support (Ely,  1994). 

Therefore, working with others similar to oneself allows individuals to believe that they 

know how others will behave and consequently, uncertainty is reduced and trust in one's 

peers can ensue (McAllister,  1995). Pfeffer (1983) argued that cohesiveness, 

communications, and integration among group members would be, in part, dependent 

upon how similar individuals were to others in their group. Schneider's (1987) attraction- 

selection-attrition (ASA) model proposed that individuals hire and work more closely

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

27


with similar others. This model also suggests that those who are different are more likely 

to leave a group or organizations thus promoting a homogenizing cycle.

The idea that individuals prefer to work with and accordingly ascribing more 

favorable characteristics to similar others has also been used as the basis for other areas of 

inquiry such as leader member exchange (LMX) (Liden, Sparrowe & Wayne,  1997). For 

example, using the LMX framework researchers have found that similar others are rated 

more favorably by supervisors and consequently assigned more interesting and 

challenging work and thus, tend to perform better (Liden et al.,  1997). In a study on 

conflict, friendliness, and interpersonal tension, Alagna, Reddy and Collins (1982) found 

that individuals in diverse groups were worse off than were individuals in male 

dominated groups. Likewise, Wharton and Barron (1987) found that men in diverse 

groups reported lower levels of job satisfaction, and self-esteem and higher levels of job- 

related depression. Finally, justice research has also incorporated similarity-attraction. 

Here it has been found that in allocating rewards, when it is believed that other is similar 

to oneself, the equality (rather than equity or need) heuristic is most frequently applied 

(Greenberg,  1978). In addition, the distribution of outcomes which are beneficial to 

others like oneself are often rated fairly even if the rater is not going to directly benefit 

from the outcome (Grover,  1991).

In conclusion, empirical work on diversity grounded in social-categorization and 

similarity-attraction has consistently found that when individuals work with similar 

others they have increased levels of communication, satisfaction, and identification with 

their group (i.e., Ancona & Caldwell,  1992; O'Reilly et al.,  1989; Smith et al.,  1994; 

Zenger & Lawrence,  1989). For example, Hoffman (1985) found that as the percentage of 

blacks increased in a group communication frequency between group members 

decreased. The rationale given is that individuals working with similar others are able to

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

28


develop strong “in-groups” thus, their self-esteem and self-image are enhanced also 

resulting in positive affective outcomes. Therefore, in contrast to the hypothesis proposed 

above, individuals working in more homogeneous groups should have higher levels of 

positive work-related affective outcomes than will  individuals in diverse groups.

Hypothesis  3a: 

Individual’s  working 

in 

groups that 

are  more

demographically  diverse  with  regards  to  sex  and  race/ethnicity  will  have 

higher  levels  of  commitment and  satisfaction  and 

lower 

levels  of

intentions  to  turnover  than  will  individuals  in  groups  that  are  more 

homogeneous.

Hypothesis  3b: 

Individual's  working 

in 

groups that 

are  more

demographically  homogeneous  with  regards to sex  and race/ethnicity  will

have  higher  levels  of  commitment  and  satisfaction  and  lower  levels  of 

intentions to turnover than will  individuals in groups that are more diverse.

Positive Association Between Group Diversity and Individual Creative Performance 

Frequently referred to as the "value-in-diversity" hypotheses, the theories of 

information and decision making propose that diversity should result in different 

perspectives being generated, better quality decisions being made, and improved problem 

solving and performance (i.e., Ancona & Caldwell,  1992; Hoffman,  1959; Hoffman & 

Maier,  1961; Hoffman et al.,  1962; Jackson et al.,  1995; Nemeth,  1986). Likewise, the 

range of knowledge and skills available within a diverse group should also be associated 

with increased creativity (Ancona & Caldwell,  1992; McLeod & Lobel,  1992; Pelled et

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

29


al.,  1999). Higher levels of creativity should be achieved by working in diverse groups 

because different views should stimulate the consideration of non-obvious alternatives 

(Cox et al.,  1991; McLeod & Lobel,  1992). For example, in a brainstorming study 

McLeod and colleagues found that ethnically diverse groups produced higher quality 

ideas.  In a longitudinal study of culturally diverse groups conducted by Watson, Kumar 

and Michaelson (1993) the authors found that early in the study, homogeneous groups 

performed better than did the diverse groups.  However, by the end of the  17 weeks study 

period there were no differences in performance, but the heterogeneous groups succeeded 

in generating more alternatives. Research by Hoffman and colleagues found that sexually 

diverse groups had higher levels of creative problem solving. The improved creativity 

associated with diverse groups was attributed increased conflict over ideas which 

stimulated groups to search for different answers (Hoffman,  1959; Hoffman et al.,  1962; 

Hoffman & Maier,  1961).

However, most empirical work grounded in information and decision-making 

theories has been conducted at the group level-of-analysis and on group outcomes. 

Therefore, the question remains as to whether the proposed positive relationship between 

diversity and creativity would also hold for individual creative performance. Specifically, 

will individuals working in diverse groups have higher levels of creative performance 

than individuals in more homogeneous groups?

Examining the creativity literature, at the individual level it has been suggested 

that an individual's creativity is enhanced by their level of relevant skills and knowledge 

(Amabile,  1996). Therefore, working with others who are different (i.e., in a diverse 

group) may enhance an individual’s creative performance as they are potentially exposed

Reproduced with permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

30


to a broader range of skills, knowledge, and experience. In addition, creativity researchers 

have argued that interacting with individuals different from oneself is an important factor 

needed for creative performance (Jackson,  1996). Another argument given is that 

homogeneous groups may be more prone to “groupthink” (Janis,  1972) and thus, may not 

be able to break out of a cognitive mind-set.

Finally, task conflict has been found to be positively related to creative 

performance and found most frequently when diverse individuals work together (Jehn, 

1995; Pelled,  1996). O ’Reilly, Williams and Barsdale (1997) in a study of 32 groups from 

one organization found that tenure diversity was positively related to conflict, but race 

diversity was positively associated with creativity. Likewise, Bantel and Jackson (1989) 

found that diverse top management teams were more innovative. Therefore, individuals 

working in diverse groups should have higher levels of creative performance because 

they have greater exposure to different perspectives, ideas, and ways of doing things that 

in turn, should be able to apply to their own work.

Negative Association Between Group Diversity and Individual Creative Performance

In contrast to the information and decision making theories that would posit a 

positive association between diversity and individual creative performance, the theories 

of social-categorization and attraction-similarity would argue that individuals in diverse 

groups may not perform as creatively as those in more homogeneous groups. These 

theories would suggest that individuals who work in diverse groups may not benefit from 

the range of knowledge and perspectives available because ideas proposed by those who 

are different will be dismissed. For example, prior research on social categorizations has

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

31


found that members of “out-groups” are assigned negative attributes such as lazy and 

untrustworthy (Tajfel,  1982). Given this, an alternative proposed by someone who is 

perceived negatively would not receive much consideration.

Similarly, the creativity literature suggests that groups where individuals’ 

perceive that they can voice their opinions without being judged or ridiculed are more 

likely to be creative (West,  1990). Working with similar others should make the group 

appear to be a safer place because individuals know what to expect of one another 

(McAllister,  1995). Thus, in less diverse groups individuals may be more likely to voice 

different opinions or ideas and therefore, higher levels of creative performance may be 

attained.  In addition, it is argued that frequent interaction and participation are important 

components of having norms that encourage and support creativity (Abbey & Dickson, 

1983; Mumford & Gustafson,  1988). However, if individuals in diverse groups do not 

interact with each other, developing or maintaining such norms may be difficult.

Research examining group composition and interaction has found that diversity is 

associated with decreased levels of interaction among group members (Chatman et al., 

1998). One argument put forth is that individuals who are different from one another are 

less attracted to each other (similarity-attraction) and therefore, interact less frequently 

(Zenger & Lawrence,  1989). In a study on heterogeneity of attitudes and abilities, 

Triandis, Hall and Ewen (1965) found that lower levels of interpersonal attraction were 

associated with decreased creativity.

Finally, Nystrom (1979) argued that group cohesiveness was an important 

prerequisite for innovation. He argued that in cohesive groups individuals’  were more 

likely to achieve higher levels of self-actualization and feel a sense of psychological 

safely thus allowing them to try new things. With individual’s workings in diverse groups 

reporting lower levels of cohesiveness (Ancona & Caldwell,  1992; Good & Nelson,

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

32


1971; Tsui et al.,  1992) the benefits of self-actualization and psychological safety 

necessary for creativity may not be attained. Therefore, it is proposed that individuals 

working in more homogeneous should have higher levels of creative performance than 

individuals working in diverse groups. The underlying mechanisms for this is that in 

more homogeneous groups individuals will be more attracted to fellow group members, 

interact more with others, feel more able to safely  voice different ideas and perspectives, 

and be more attentive to the suggestions put forth by coworkers. Therefore, individual 

creative performance will be enhanced.

Hypothesis  4a:  Individual’s  working  in  demographically  diverse  groups 

with  regards  to  sex  and  race/ethnicity  will  have  higher  levels  creative 

performance than will individuals in predominantly homogeneous groups.

Hypothesis 4b:  Individual’s working in  homogeneous groups  with  regards 

to sex and race/ethnicity will have higher levels creative performance than 

will individuals in diverse groups.

Dissimilarity and Outcomes

In contrast to diversity, which considers the effects of group proportions on 

individual outcomes, dissimilarity refers to how different an individual is to his or her 

coworkers. Relational demography theory posits that individuals compare their own 

demographic characteristics to those of the other members of their group and determine if 

they are similar or dissimilar to them  (Tsui & O ’Reilly,  1989; Tsui et al.,  1992). The 

greater the similarity the more positive the affect on an individual's attitudes and 

behaviors.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

33


Similarly, Kanter’s (1977) theory of tokenism proposed that when an individual is 

a minority group member (i.e., a token), in particular, on a highly visible salient 

demographic characteristic, they are easily identified by others, singled out as different, 

and often ascribed negative characteristics stereotypically associated with their 

demographic group. As such, tokens often experience social isolation with their 

differences to other group members being exaggerated thereby making assimilation into 

the majority group difficult. Consequently, those who are different from others they work 

with are perceived less favorably and are more likely to be absent or leave (i.e., McCain, 

O’Reilly & Pfeffer,  1983; Tsui et al.,  1992).

Results from the study of demographic dissimilarity have tended to support the 

predictions made by social-categorization and attraction-selection theories that 

dissimilarity will be associated with negative outcomes. Therefore, individual’s who are 

dissimilar from their coworkers have been found to be less committed to their 

organizations and more likely to be absent or turnover (Tsui et al.,  1992). Dissimilar 

individuals have been found to be more subject to extreme and less favorable evaluations 

(Linville & Jones,  1980; Tsui & O’Reilly,  1989). Similarly, Nieva and Gutek (1989) 

found that women who were dissimilar from their coworkers received negative 

evaluations and Sacket and colleagues (1991) found that being dissimilar was associated 

with lower performance ratings. In a large study of managers from 3 organizations 

Greenhaus and colleagues found that the African-American managers perceived that they 

were less accepted by their organizations and were therefore, less satisfied with their 

careers (Greenhaus, Parasuraman & Wormley,  1990).

Therefore, it is hypothesized that whether one considers the demographic 

characteristics of either sex or race/ethnicity, individuals who are more dissimilar from

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

34


the majority of their coworkers will be less committed, less satisfied, more likely to leave 

their organizations, and have lower levels of creative performance

Hypothesis  5:  Individual’s  who  are  dissimilar  to  the  majority  of  their 

coworkcrs  along 

the  demographic  dimensions  of  either  sex  or 

race/ethnicity  will  exhibit  more  negative  psychosocial  outcomes  (i.e., job 

satisfaction,  organizational  commitment,  and  intentions  to  remain)  and 

lower levels of creative performance than  will  individuals  who are similar 

to their coworkers.

Multiple Measures of Dissimilarity

That individuals belong to more than one group or category at any given time was 

central  to the arguments  put forth by Ashforth  and Mael (1989)  in  their seminal  piece on 

social  identity in organizations.  However,  while the demography and diversity  literatures 

have  considered  many  different  dimensions, 

they  have  usually  been  examined 

independently  of  one  another  (Williams  &  O ’Reilly,  1998).  In  other  words,  while 

race/ethnicity and sex  have  been  included  in  many studies  they  have  not been combined 

to test  whether the effects are additive.  For example,  are there differences between  being 

an African-American female or a white female in a mostly white male group?

While this area of inquiry has not yet generated much research, a recent study was 

conducted on the effects of multiple dimensions of diversity on teamwork. In this 

research, O’Reilly, Williams and Barsade (1999) calculated a cumulative measure of 

diversity and found that the more different an individual was from the majority of their 

coworkers the lower their perceptions of teamwork (a measure of the team’s ability to 

function effectively). Further, they found that the effects were different depending on the 

dimensions of interest. For example, being different in age had a greater impact on white

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

35


females than white males. Likewise, sex diversity was negatively related to teamwork for 

white females but positively related to teamwork for white males, but these opposite 

effects were not found for African-American men and women. These results led the 

authors to conclude that the effects of diversity are "complicated."  Therefore, in keeping 

with the conclusions of their earlier review article (Williams & O ’Reilly,  1998) they 

stated once again that more attention needs to be given to the effects of multiple 

dimensions of diversity.

Given the results cited above and the predictions that can be extrapolated from 

attraction-similarity and social categorization, one would expect that individuals’ who 

perceive themselves as more dissimilar from their coworkers would have lower levels of 

desirable affective outcomes than would individuals who are more similar. In addition, 

these theories would also suggest that individuals who are more dissimilar should have 

lower levels of creative performance. For instance, the idea of participative safety put 

forward by West (1990) suggests that individuals need to feel comfortable expressing 

their opinions. Individuals who are dissimilar on one characteristic have been found to 

experience negative stereotyping and are ascribed negative attributes. Therefore, 

individuals who are dissimilar on multiple attributes may be worse off and thus, feel even 

less inclined to expressing their opinions and participate in decision making. Finally, 

Pelled (1996) argued that when individuals were dissimilar on demographic characteristic 

emotional rather than task conflict would ensue. Task conflict has been positively linked 

to creative performance (Jehn,  1996) but emotional conflict has not. Therefore, increased 

dissimilarity should be negatively associated with individual creative performance. 

Finally, although the individuals dissimilarity scores provide useful information they do 

not capture how different an individual is on multiple characteristics therefore, the

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

36


relationship between an aggregate dissimilarity measure and a number of outcomes will 

be explored.

Hypothesis  6:  Individuals  who  are  more  dissimilar  from  the  majority  of 

their workgroup along  the combined dimensions  of sex  and  race/ethnicity 

will  experience  more negative  psychosocial  outcomes  and  lower levels  of 

creative  performance  than  will  those  individuals  who  are  less  dissimilar 

from their coworkers.

The Effects of Dissimilarity on Traditional Minorities

While the results of dissimilarity are predominantly negative, they also appear to 

be somewhat asymmetrical with regards to whom is worse off when in a minority 

position. For example, Wharton and Baron (1991) found that women in predominately 

male groups expressed higher levels of overall job satisfaction than did women in 

balanced or mostly female groups. This finding suggests that sometimes dissimilarity can 

be associated with positive outcomes. Tsui and colleagues (1992) found that men in the 

minority experienced more negative affect than did women in the minority. In fact, they 

found that women who were dissimilar had higher levels of organizational attachment. 

Likewise, Chattopadhyay (1992) found dissimilarity based on sex to have a negative 

association with self-esteem, peer-relations, and altruism for males in female dominated 

groups but not for females in male dominated groups. Additionally, white employees in 

minority dominated groups experienced lower levels of self-esteem, peer relations and 

altruism. However, he did not find the same pattern of effects when minorities worked in 

groups which were predominantly white.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

37


One explanation frequently proffered for the above results is that individuals from 

traditional minority groups (i.e., women and minorities) may have a less negative 

experience, when they are in the minority, because they are more used to being in this 

position. In addition, being a minority member in a high status group (i.e., a woman in a 

traditionally male group) may be regarded more positively than being a majority  member 

in a low status group. Thus, women or racial minorities in mostly male/white or diverse 

groups may perceived that they had reached a higher status that may also be associated 

with higher recognition or pay. However, individuals who have traditionally been in the 

majority or perceived themselves as “in-group” members may experience lower levels of 

desirable attitudes when they are in the minority. Finally, research has also found that 

racial minorities are more likely to have their own social networks and choose friends 

who are of the same race (Ibarra,  1992,  1995; Mehra, Kiduff & Brass,  1998). Therefore, 

individuals from traditional  majority groups feel excluded when they are dissimilar from 

their coworkers resulting in negative affective outcomes.

The Effects of Dissimilarity on Non-Traditional Minorities

Empirical research can also be found to support the argument that individuals 

from traditional minority groups are worse-off when they are in the minority  than are 

individuals from traditional majority groups. Konrad and colleagues (1992) found that 

women working in male-dominated groups experienced more sexist stereotyping than did 

males in token roles.  Women in the minority have also been found to receive more 

negative evaluations, be excluded, and given lower performance ratings (Holahan,  1979; 

Nieva & Gutek,  1989; Sacket et al.,  1991). In addition, Ibarra (1994) found that women 

were excluded from male communication networks and that minorities form their own 

networks. In a study by Flodge and Merrill (1986), men in the minority (male nurses)

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

38


experienced positive outcomes such as supervisor’s trust and perceived opportunities for 

promotion. Finally, Schreiber (1979) reported that males in female dominated jobs 

experienced no hostility

In their study of insurance company employees, Riordan and Shore (1998) found 

that the attitudes of African-American participants regarding job advancement 

opportunities were consistent regardless of the demographic composition of their 

workgroup. However, when  African-Americans were in the minority, they were less 

committed than when they were in the majority. Additionally, they found that when 

individuals worked in a group where the majority of participants were either Hispanic or 

African-American (i.e., traditionally minority groups), all participants had lower levels of 

commitment and perceptions of advancement opportunities. The work of Riordan and 

Shore is unique and insightful in that their sample had a large percentage of African- 

American and Hispanic workers thus allowing the authors to conduct a more fine-grained 

analysis than is usually possible.

One conclusion frequently drawn from these results is that the effects are 

asymmetrical  for men and women such that women in the minority are considered lower 

status tokens, whereas males in the minority are accorded higher status and thus, their 

position is not associated with negative outcomes.  A second argument used to explain 

these results is based on group performance research that has consistently found that 

groups that are predominantly male are more task focused, whereas predominantly female 

groups attend more to group processes issues (Wood,  1987). Therefore, individuals, 

regardless of their sex are more satisfied in groups with greater proportions of women 

because group process issues are attended to. In support of this line of argument, using a 

sample of 2304 individuals cutting across jobs and organizations, Gilson and Blum 

(1998) found that individuals in diverse (i.e., gender balanced) and mostly female groups

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

39


perceived their organizations to be more procedurally just than did individuals working in 

mostly male groups.  In addition, they found that the sex of respondent was not related to 

fairness evaluations thus, both men and women in the mostly male groups rated their 

organizations as less fair than did those in the groups that had 50% or more women 

members. William and O'Reilly (1998) concluded that "women in the majority showed 

the most egalitarian attitudes toward the other sex...men in the minority are socially 

integrated and treated fairly by the other group members" (p.  105). Therefore, individuals 

from traditional minority groups are proposed to experience more negative outcomes than 

individuals from traditional majority groups.

Hypothesis 7a:  Individual’s from traditional  majority groups (i.e., men  and 

whites)  will  experience  more  negative  psychosocial  outcomes  and  lower 

levels  of  creative  performance  when  they  are  in  the  minority  than  will 

individuals from more traditional minority groups.

Hypothesis  7b:  Individual’s from  traditional  minority  groups  (i.e.,  women 

and non-whites) will experience more negative psychosocial outcomes and 

lower  levels  of creative  performance  when  they  are  in  the  minority  than 

will individuals from more traditional majority groups.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

40


CHAPTER IV 

PRIOR "BLACK BOX"  RESEARCH 

Early diversity and relational demography (dissimilarity) research have been 

described as "black box" studies in that they infrequently accounted for intervening 

process mechanisms or contextual  variables that might have been driving the results 

(Lawrence,  1997; Pfeffer,  1997). As stated by Lawrence (1997), "despite the important, 

sometimes critical, role of such additional theoretical concepts, researchers often  leave 

them loosely specified and unmeasured, creating a "black box" filled with vague untested 

theories"  (p.2). Carroll and Harrison (1998) describe the relationship as follows; "the 

operational framework used in empirical research on organizational demography is 

theoretically stark (p. 639).... one major problem with the research program concerns the 

empirical standing of the explanations that have been offered" (p. 643). Further, Pfeffer 

(1997) proposed that the asymmetrical findings for men and women in majority and 

minority roles, and the mixed findings reported for individuals in diverse groups may be, 

in part, attributable to the context within which individuals work. Theorists in the groups 

literature have posited that group processes are critical if groups are to be successful (i.e., 

Hackman,  1987; Steiner,  1972). Based on this assertion, the dominant model for 

understanding group performance can be described as an input-process-output model 

where it has been proposed that processes are necessary for groups to get work done and 

to be able to survive over time (Hackman,  1987; Schein,  1988). To date, only a few 

studies have including either process or contextual variables as either mediators or 

moderators in the diversity dissimilarity equation.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

41


Mediators in the Diversity Outcome Relationship

In a recent study on the relationship between length of service (tenure) and 

turnover, Carroll and Harrison (1998) noted that they could only find three empirical 

studies where social processes as intervening mechanisms were actually tested. The first 

study they found was that by O’Reilly, Caldwell and Barnett (1989) that examined the 

mediating effects of social integration (defined as a measure of cohesiveness) on 

satisfaction with coworkers, and socializing with coworkers. In this study, the authors 

found that group homogeneity in tenure was positively associated with group social 

integration and negatively associated with individual intentions to turnover. Interestingly, 

social integration was found to mediate the relationship between tenure diversity and 

turnover intentions at the group level-of-analysis; however, no association was found at 

the individual level-of-analysis.  In addition, the authors found that for age diversity the 

relationship was not mediated, but rather age heterogeneity had a direct negative effect on 

turnover intentions.

A study by Glick, Miller and Huber (1993) proposed that top management 

cognitive diversity, described as preference for diversity and belief in diversity, would 

mediate the relationship between demographic diversity and organizational outcomes. 

However, in this research, the authors found no significant relationships between length 

of service and either cognitive diversity measure. Another study conducted on senior 

management teams was by Smith and colleagues (1994) who examined the relationship 

between diversity and organizational performance testing three different models. Model  1 

was a demographic model where team size, team tenure, and heterogeneity (industry 

experience, company experience, functional background, and education) were 

hypothesized to directly influence outcomes (company return on investment (ROI) and 

one year growth in sales). Model 2 proposed that both heterogeneity and processes (social

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

42


integration, informal communication and communication frequency) would directly 

influence the outcomes. Finally, Model 3 was an intervening model whereby group 

processes mediated the relationship between heterogeneity and outcomes. Using data 

from 53 top-management teams Smith et al, found that both demography and team 

process directly influenced ROI and that group process, but not demography directly 

influenced sales growth. Although the hypothesized fully mediated model was not 

supported, a more complex model emerged. In this model, team size and heterogeneity of 

experience were negatively related to informal communication. In turn, informal 

communication was positively related to social integration that was negatively related to 

sales growth.

A study that incorporated group processes in both up-front model development 

and empirical testing was that by Ancona and Caldwell (1992). Again, conducted at the 

group level-of-analysis, this study used 45 new product teams in high-technology 

companies. Here, the authors examined the effects of both internal and external process 

variables on team performance. They found that in the groups that paid more attention to 

internal task processes (i.e., setting priorities and goals), group members rated their 

group's performance more highly than did members of groups that paid less attention to 

internal process issues. However, groups that had higher levels of external 

communication had higher performance ratings by management. With regard to diversity, 

they found that internal task processes were positively associated with tenure diversity, 

but tenure diversity had a negative direct effect on performance. For functional diversity, 

they found a positive association with external communication, but a negative effect on 

performance. These mixed results led the authors to conclude that diversity alone would 

not improve performance. Further, they speculated that the relationship between diversity 

and outcomes may be a  "statistical artifact resulting from a missing mediating variable"

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

43


(p. 338). Finally, they suggested that either higher levels of conflict or lower levels of 

social integration might offer possible explanations.

Chattopadhyay (1999) posited that employees’ attraction to and trust in their peers 

along with their organizational-based self-esteem should mediate the relationship 

between diversity and organizational citizenship behavior (OCB). As previously noted, 

this research is somewhat unique in that the analysis was conducted at the individual 

level of analysis with 401 employees from 42 groups across four organizations. 

Chattopadhyay found that his mediated model held for some portions of the sample, but 

not others. For example, self-esteem and peer relations for whit.; employees mediated the 

effects of race dissimilarity, but not for minorities. The relationship between sex 

dissimilarity and OCB was not mediated by either self-esteem or peer relations. 

Interestingly, Chattopadhyay controlled for justice perceptions in his analysis. An 

examination of his results shows that justice was negatively correlated with sex 

dissimilarity, but positively correlated to peer-relations, self-esteem, and OCB. The 

correlation and regression results suggest that individuals who were more dissimilar from 

their coworkers (along the dimension of sex) perceived their organizations as less 

procedurally just. Further, individuals who perceived their organizations as more 

procedurally just had higher levels of peer relations, self-esteem, and performed more 

desirable extra-role behaviors.

Finally, conflict as an intervening mechanism has received the most theoretical 

and empirical attention (i.e., Bantel & Jackson,  1989, McCain et al.,  1983; Pelled,  1996; 

Wagner, Pfeffer & O’Reilly,  1984). In  1996 Pelled developed a group level model 

proposing that conflict may be a key intervening mechanism that should mediate the 

relationship between diversity and outcomes. Further, she argued that both the type of 

diversity (visible versus job-related) and the type of conflict (task versus emotional)

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

44


would influence the associations. For example, visible demographic diversity was 

proposed to be associated with emotional conflict that would be negatively related to 

performance. In contrast, job-related diversity was posited to influence task conflict that 

should be positively associated with performance. Pelled, Eisenhardt and Xin (1999) 

tested the model with data from 45 teams from three different corporations. In their study 

they found that functional background diversity influenced task conflict, while race and 

tenure diversity influenced emotional conflict. In addition, task conflict was positively 

associated with performance suggesting that individuals from different functional areas 

(work-related diversity) represented divergent opinions about how work was to be done 

resulting in improved performance. In contrast, for the demographic diversity variables 

(race and age), they found high levels of emotional conflict between group members 

based on stereotypes and feelings rather than work-related issues; however, emotional 

conflict was found to be unrelated to group performance. Overall, these findings support 

the half of the model suggesting that job-related diversity would influence task conflict 

that would be positively associated with performance. The half of the model representing 

demographic diversity and emotional conflict was only partially supported. Thus, while 

shedding some light on the "black box," the empirical results only partially supported 

Pelled’s model leading the authors to conclude that additional factors need to be 

considered especially, in the demographic half of the model.

Moderators in the Diversity Outcome Relationship

While the number of studies that have included mediators in the diversity 

outcome relationship is not vast, it is much greater than the number of published studies 

that have included moderators. Chatman, Polzer, Barsade and Neale (1998) proposed that 

whether an organization emphasized individualistic or collectivist values should moderate

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

45


the effect of demographic dissimilarity on the salience of social categories, interaction 

among coworkers, conflict, and performance. Specifically, they argued that in more 

individualistic organization’s in-group and out-group categorization would be based on 

demographic similarity because there would be no context or organizational boundary 

conditions encouraging those who are different from one another to work together. What 

they found was that social categorization was influenced by an individual’s dissimilarity 

from his/her workgroup and the culture of the organization. They found no differences in 

the levels of conflict between more homogeneous and heterogeneous workgroups; 

however, culture moderated the extent to which individuals perceived conflict as 

beneficial. Surprisingly, for their performance outcomes, they found that culture had a 

greater impact on individuals who were more similar to their coworkers. Individuals who 

were similar to their coworkers performed better in the more individualistic 

organizations, but culture had no effect on the performance of those individuals who were 

more dissimilar from their coworkers. In addition, a strong collectivist culture appeared to 

mitigate the effects of social categorization. Finally, these researchers concluded that the 

culture of an organization influenced the diversity-outcome relationship however, other 

contextual factors needed to be included in future research.

In conclusion, that the relationship between diversity and outcomes is not direct 

has received a fair amount of theoretical attention. However, few studies have empirically 

tested many of these relationships. Furthermore, researchers have been unable to identify 

a set of processes or contextual variables that consistently mediated or moderated the 

relationships. Consequently, additional research is needed to try and shed more light on 

the so called "black box" between demographic diversity/dissimilarity and affective and 

performance outcomes. Given this, the remainder of this paper will introduce procedural

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

46


justice as a construct that could potentially help in furthering our understanding of the 

diversity-outcome association.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

47


CHAPTER V

PROCEDURAL JUSTICE AS A KEY TO OPENING THE "BLACK BOX" BETWEEN 

DEMOGRAPHIC DIVERSITY/DISSIMILARITY AND OUTCOMES

Group processes have been defined as interactions among group members, 

communication exchanges, and patterns of information exchanged influenced by the 

knowledge, skills, abilities and composition of the group (Hackman,  1987). In contrast, 

context is defined as a set of boundary conditions that result in individuals sharing similar 

norms and values (Cappelli & Sherer,  1991; Lawler,  1996; Schneider,  1990). Therefore, 

while group processes and context both impact group members affect and performance, 

one (group process) is directly influenced by group functioning, while the other (context) 

is more of an external condition surrounding and influencing group members. However, 

both group process and contextual factors have been shown to influence performance and 

effectiveness (Ancona & Caldwell,  1992; Campion et al..  1993,  1996; Guzzo & Dickson, 

1996; Wageman,  1995).  In addition, Hackman (1987) and Gladstein (1984) both 

proposed that group processes and context interact with one another to influence 

effectiveness. Janz, Colquitt and Noe (1997) found that in teams of knowledge workers, 

group processes (autonomy and interdependence) interacted with contextual support 

variables to influence overall effectiveness. Therefore, when examining the relationship 

between group composition and outcomes, it may be helpful to consider both process and 

contextual variables. Here, procedural justice may be a unique construct in that it can be 

defined as both a process and a contextual characteristic.

Procedural justice can and has been defined as a process in that it considers the 

policies used to ensure unbiased decisions are made, decisions can be challenged, 

employee input is taken into consideration, and accurate and complete information can be 

collected prior to decision making. However, procedural justice can and has also been

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

48


defined as a contextual variable in that fair procedures can define a workplace such that 

employees know how  decisions are made, and how  they  will be treated. Combining the 

two definitions, procedural justice can be regarded as process that is somew hat removed 

from a group’s functioning an thus, is more contextual in nature, but impacts individuals 

on  an ongoing basis  Therefore, procedural fairness may offer more explanatory power 

than a process that is directly linked to the functioning of the group or a context that is 

completely removed from the group. While the relationship between justice and positive 

outcomes is important, if procedural justice is to be considered as a moderator between 

demographic diversity/dissimilarity and outcomes, it is critical that the construct be 

related to the outcomes. In addition, it is critical that procedural justice also be influences 

individual perceptions of self-worth that are usually given as the core reasons why 

diversity and dissimilarity can result in both negative and positive outcomes.

The Importance of Justice to Individuals in Groups

As mentioned previously, research on procedural justice has evolved from the 

work of Thibaut and Walker (1975) on legal dispute resolution and Leventhal (1976) on 

resource allocation. The early work of Thibaut and Walker (1975) examined the use of 

third parties to resolve conflict as well as disputant preferences with regard to control 

over procedures and outcomes. Their findings suggested that regardless of whether 

individuals won or lost their disputes, they were satisfied when they perceived the 

procedures or processes used were fair (1975;  1978). Further, they concluded that 

individuals perceived they had been treated fairly when third parties were given outcome 

control, but control over the process was maintained by the disputant(s) (1975;  1978). 

Accordingly, process control was defined as the ability to identify and present relevant 

information and arguments to a third-party and has been labeled as voice in

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

49


organizational settings (Folger,  1977; Hirschman,  1970). Finally, the theory of procedural 

justice as proposed by Thibaut and Walker, states that with regard to conflict resolution, 

there is no single best procedure; however, the use of procedures which are deemed to be 

fair should result in increased satisfaction with outcomes.

On the basis of these early works, two theories have been developed in the 

literature explaining why procedural justice is important to individuals, groups of 

individuals, management, and organizations. First, there is the rational theory or control 

model that most closely resembles the propositions of Thibaut and Walker. In its most 

simplistic  form, their argument stated that fair procedures are important because they are 

instrumental in obtaining desired and/or favorable outcomes. Key components of this 

theory are that fair procedures allow individuals some input (i.e., voice) or control over 

the decision making process which is ultimately handled by an unbiased third-party. This 

model is particularly applicable in traditional hierarchical organizations where managers 

seek employee input and then make the final decision. In a hierarchical organizational 

structure, employees work is not as interdependent as it is in flattened structures and 

therefore, employee's are mainly concerned with their own self-interest. Thus, in flatter 

organizational structures this model fits less well. For example, if the outcome is best for 

me, how does that affect my coworkers? If I work in an autonomous workgroup, who is 

the third-party making the decision?

The second theory advanced in the procedural justice literature is a relational 

theory, also referred to as the value-expressive or group-value model (Lind & Tyler, 

1988). In this framework, the fair treatment of individuals is an important concept in and 

of itself. The group-value model proposes that individuals value both being treated fairly 

and group membership therefore, fairness is a critical process in maintaining long term 

relationships. To this effect, Banett-Howard and Tyler (1986) found that procedural

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

50


justice helped ensure harmony and working relationships were maintained in 

relationships. Specifically, their research found that procedural justice was most 

important in situations involving formal social relationships and informal task 

relationships, because both of these types of associations are subject to conflict, but the 

outcomes are valued to all parties.

The relational model of procedural justice was, in part, based on social identity 

theory (Tajfel,  1978; Tajfel & Turner,  1986). As previously reviewed, social-identity 

theory proposes that individuals need to protect and enhance their self-esteem or self- 

image. To do so, individuals categorize themselves into groups with others who are 

similar and form an “in-group” to whom positive attributes are conferred. The justice 

literature argues that when a member of a group is fairly treated, the status of the 

individual and group are enhanced because fair treatment signals respect, trust, and good 

standing to others in one's workgroup and organization (Tyler,  1989). Therefore, the 

various components of procedural fairness (i.e.,  voice, bias suppression, grievance 

procedures) are valued by individuals not solely because of their relationship to 

outcomes, but because of the message they send to others, their effect on individual self- 

image, and because they help in building a group identity.

The social dynamic of justice judgments was also addressed by Folger and 

colleagues in answer to the question  "how do people know they have been treated fairly" 

(Folger, Rosenfield, Grove & Corckran,  1979; p. 2253) and by Folger's work on referent 

cognition theory (1986). In experiments using female high-school and college students, 

Folger et al, found that knowledge about whether a coworker thought an outcome 

received was fair influenced fairness judgments. Their results suggested that the social 

component was so strong that the impact of "voice" on fairness judgments was 

neutralized when coworkers agreed with the opinions of the subject. Further, studies

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

51


testing the effects of referent cognition theory have consistently found that if individuals 

are aware of alternate procedures that would result in a more favorable outcome, they are 

more likely to rate the procedures used as less fair (Cropanzano & Folger,  1989; Folger & 

Martin,  1986).

Using both referent cognition theory and social comparison theory (Festinger, 

1954) Ambrose, Harland and Kulik (1991) tested whether social comparisons would 

influence organizational fairness evaluations.  In a laboratory study, the researchers found 

that when individuals had high levels of control over the task, they relied heavily on their 

own experience when making fairness judgments (procedural and distributive).  However, 

in situations of low control, subjects used social comparisons in their fairness 

determinations. These results suggest that in making fairness evaluations, cues from 

others are used as a source of information prior to making a final assessment. Thus, 

fairness evaluations are not purely objective.

While many of the early studies on "voice" were not explicitly comparing the 

rational versus relational theories, in many ways they were. For example, the consistent 

finding that "voice" influenced fairness judgments even when  it did not have a direct 

influence over the outcome received implies that it was not control that was valued, but 

rather the act of giving input (Earley & Lind,  1987; Folger,  1977; Tyler, Rasinski & 

Spodick,  1985). Using structural equation modeling, Earley and Lind (1987) found 

procedural justice judgments were not mediated by perceived control. Likewise, Baldwin, 

Madjuka and Loher (1991) found that when individuals had "voice" in the selection of 

training courses, even when they did not receive their choice, those with a "say" in the 

process were more satisfied with the training they received and ultimately performed 

better. These findings suggest that while individuals might want control, they appear to

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

52


realize that in some instances having it might not be possible, but the value of being able 

to having voice is enough to rate the decision making process as fair.

Empirical work testing the group-value model of fairness has found that 

individuals rate procedural fairness as important to both social and task relationships. 

Miller, Jackson, Mueller and Schersching (1987) found that decisions representing the 

interests of the group were rated more fairly than  were those that solely represented the 

interests of the individual. Similarly, Lind, Kray and Thompson (1998) found that in 

addition to the fair treatment accorded by supervisors, fairness evaluations were based on 

the collective experience of others. Finally, Barrett-Howard and Tyler (1986) concluded 

that fair processes were important because they provided guidelines for the avoidance of 

conflict and the maintenance of a long-term harmonious relationship. Taken together, 

these results suggest that there is a social aspect to procedural justice that goes beyond 

self-interest and that fair procedures are important to individuals, but in particular, to 

individuals working in groups. Therefore, as more and more individuals begin to work in 

teams with others different from themselves, procedural justice should be a key 

consideration if harmonious and effective workgroups are to be fostered.

Finally, in their development of the group-value model, Lind and Tyler (1988) 

proposed that when deciding how loyal to be to one’s group, individuals consider both 

similarity criteria and fairness issues. While similarity often refers to whether others share 

like demographic characteristics, the fairness criteria is more elusive and is frequently 

based on Leventhal’s fairness rules surrounding how decisions are made and applied as 

well as how individuals are treated. Therefore, strength of in-group biases and ultimately 

individual self-esteem and self-worth can be based on both demographic 

diversity/dissimilarity and fairness. When individuals work in a group and decisions are 

made in a manner that is perceived to be fair, increased commitment and loyalty should

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

53


follow. Therefore, procedural justice can be seen as a process or boundary condition that 

helps maintain group harmony, relationships between group members, and ensure that 

decisions are made in a fashion that protects the individual members' interests and the 

interests of the group. Together, the work of Lind and Tyler (1988) and Tyler and Lind 

(1992) suggest that fairness issues are important to group members’perceptions of 

themselves, their group, and to the effective functioning of groups. Finally, the group- 

value model argues that individuals are aware that they are not always able to have full 

control over decision-making procedures, particularly in groups and organizational 

settings; therefore, procedural fairness become the mechanisms that ensures an 

individual’s interests are upheld.

In conclusion, procedural justice has for many years been shown to positively 

influence a large number of affective and behavioral outcomes. However, the relational or 

group-value model suggests that being treated fairly is an important component in how 

individuals perceive themselves and their workgroups. Prior research has found that 

procedural justice judgments have a strong social component and thus, fair procedures are 

important because they go beyond self-interest and can help promote a positive self- 

identity for both individuals and groups. Given this, procedural justice might be a process 

or contextual boundary condition that enables individuals to achieve a positive self-image 

regardless of the composition of their workgroup or whether they are demographically 

similar to the rest of their workgroup.

Procedural Justice as a Moderator in the Diversity Outcomes Equation

Perceptions of fairness are positively associated with desirable work-related 

affective outcomes linked to performance measures and are important components in 

individual self-identity. Given this, justice may have an explanatory role in the diversity-

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

54


outcome equation. Justice should also be an interesting variable to be included in this 

equation because it is an individual  level perception that influences both  individual and 

group level evaluations. The groups literature has argued that individual  level analysis 

needs to be conducted because at their core, groups are collections of individuals (i.e., 

Hackman,  1987; Jackson,  1992; Jackson et al.,  1995). Justice may also help in better 

understanding the relationship between diversity/dissimilarity and outcomes because 

unlike other variables considered, it is both a process and a contextual variable. Meaning, 

fair procedures are how decisions are made and the conditions that ensure fair treatment 

and thus, influence interactions, affective states, behaviors, and performance. Finally, 

because the relationship between demographic diversity/dissimilarity and outcomes has 

not been consistent, a moderator may be able to offer greater explanation of the 

association than a mediator (Barron & Kenny,  1986).

The inconsistent results found in the diversity and dissimilarity literatures 

suggests that an individual's self-esteem or self-worth may be influenced by factors other 

than demographic characteristics. In other words, when individuals believe that the 

context within which they work is fair and individual group members know what to 

expect from others in their group and organization, self-evaluations may not be based 

solely on the demographic composition of their workgroup or their dissimilarity to their 

coworkers. In other words, an individual's self-identity and status in the group is 

maintained by how they are and how they expect to be treated, regardless of their 

demographic characteristics. What this means is that perceptions of procedural justice 

should moderate the relationship such that when individuals believe that they are/will be 

fairly treated, the negative association between either working in diverse groups or being 

dissimilar from he majority of one's coworkers will be lessened. In contrast, when 

perceptions of procedural justice are low, negative associations are excepted.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

55


Finally, justice may be an important moderator in the diversity outcome equation 

because its theoretical basis is very similar to that used in diversity research. Both 

literatures suggest that how individuals see themselves is critical for positive affective 

outcomes and performance and that individuals seek external sources to validate their 

self-worth. The demography literature argues that demographic similarity leads to 

perceived similarity in attitudes that results in increased interpersonal attraction. 

Additionally, the argument is made that diversity increases intergroup interaction and 

bonding between members. In either case, by being a member of an  "in-group" 

individuals are able to maintain high levels of self-esteem and self-worth. The creation of 

in-groups provides a context within which individuals believe they know what to expect 

from others regarding how they will be treated. In other words, in-group status based 

upon demographic characteristics can become a proxy for the expectation of fair 

treatment and the subsequent belief that fair procedures will be used in decision making.

Argued from a justice perspective, the group-value or relational model of justice 

proposes that individuals want to maintain high levels of self-esteem and value group 

membership. Fair procedures are important because the treatment one receives is a key 

source of self-relevant information used to judge one’s self-worth, workgroup standing, 

and ultimately group attachment (Lind & Tyler,  1988; Tyler,  1989). In other words, when 

a member of a group is treated fairly, the individual’s status is enhanced as fair treatment 

signals respect and trust (Lind & Tyler,  1988). Therefore, perceptions of high self-esteem 

and self-worth can be maintained through fair procedures. Consequently, an individual’s 

dissimilarity or working in diverse groups should have a lesser effect on work-related 

outcomes because, individual self-evaluations are determined based up perceptions of fair 

decision making and fair treatment accorded individuals.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

56


Hypothesis  8:  Procedural  justice  will  moderate  the  relationship  between 

diversity, 

individual 

affective 

and  performance  outcomes 

(i.e., 

commitment, 

satisfaction, 

intentions 

to 

turnover, 

and 

creative 

performance).

Hypothesis  9:  Procedural  justice  will  moderate  the  relationship  between 

dissimilarity  and  individual  affective  and  performance  outcomes  (i.e., 

commitment, 

satisfaction, 

intentions 

to 

turnover, 

and 

creative 

performance).

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

57


CHAPTER VI 

CONTROL VARIABLES 

Up until now, this paper has discussed several of the issues surrounding the 

relationship between demographic diversity and psychosocial outcomes. The preceding 

literature reviewed and hypotheses generated have all suggested that the relationship is 

not direct, but rather influenced by other processes, intervening mechanisms, or 

organizational contextual characteristics. Specifically, it has been argued that perceptions 

of procedural justice should help in furthering our understanding of the diversity outcome 

relationship. However, the components of this equation (i.e., demographic diversity, 

dissimilarity, psychosocial outcomes, creative performance, and procedural justice) might 

also be influenced by characteristics of the individual employee, their workgroup, job, 

and organization. Therefore, to test the hypotheses proposed, a number of control 

variables will need to be included in the analysis.

In the following section negative affect, socializing with workgroup members, 

workgroup cohesiveness, workgroup size, the complexity of an individual’s job, and 

organizational size will all be briefly reviewed. All of the previously mentioned variables 

will be included in the model developed in this paper because prior research has found 

them to be significantly related to either a number of psychosocial outcome*, procedural 

justice, or workgroup demographic composition. For example, dissimilar individuals who 

socialize more with coworkers have been found to be less likely to want to leave their 

organizations (O’Reilly et al.,  1989). Likewise, employees of larger organizations have 

been found to report lower levels of procedural justice because their are less opportunity 

for their voice to be heard or for them to be treated as individuals (Schminke,  1996). 

Finally, individuals working in cohesive groups have been found to be more satisfied and 

committed, in part, because they are members of groups that are supportive and

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

38


consequently often perform better than groups whose members are less cohesive (Mullen 

& Copper,  1994). Therefore, in order to ensure that these variables are neither accounting 

for nor suppressing the relationship between the composition of an individuals 

workgroup, affective outcomes, or the role of procedural justice in these relationships 

they will be entered into the model as controls.

Negative Affect:

Negative affect has been described as a general dimension of distress which 

includes such mood states as anger, contempt, guilt, fear, and nervousness (Watson, Clark 

& Tellegen  ,  1988). Prior research has consistently found that an individual’s affective 

state can influence cognitive performance, decision making, various behaviors, and 

judgments (Schwartz & Bless,  1991). Consequently, understanding and controlling for 

the mood of an individual can be important as someone who describes themselves as 

"angry"  may perceive their work situation very differently from as an  individuals who is 

less "angry."  Therefore, when affective outcomes such as satisfaction, commitment, and 

intentions to turnover and perceptual measure of fairness are being considered, an 

individuals affective state should be controlled for in the analysis.

Socializing with coworkers

An integral component of the theory of heterogeneity (Blau,  1977) is that as 

diversity increases, individual’s who are different from one another have a greater 

opportunity to interact with each other. The theory of tokenism (Kanter,  1977) also 

suggests that once the proportion of minority group members reaches a critical mass, 

more interaction among different group members will take place. One form of interaction 

and a proxy for liking each other is time spent together off the job. Socializing with

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

59


fellow group members is important to individuals working in groups because it allows 

individuals to get to know one another better and may help in the breaking down some 

previously held prejudices.  In addition, socialization with coworkers can be viewed as a 

form of informal communication, which has been shown to be positively associated with 

cooperation and satisfaction in project, teams (Pinto, Pinto & Prescott,  1993).

Socializing with coworkers is a key component of social integration that has been 

found to mediate the relationship between workgroup composition and intentions to 

turnover (O’Reilly et al.,  1989) and performance (Smith et al.,  1994). Furthermore, 

socializing can result in positive relationships among coworkers which in turn leads to 

higher levels of satisfaction, commitment, and less bumout and stress (Glanman, Jones,

& Rozelle,  1996). Therefore, since socializing has been found to, in some instances, 

influenced the relationships between dissimilar individuals working together, if it is not 

the variable of interest in a study, it should be methodologically controlled for in analysis. 

Furthermore, if the relationship between procedural justice, demographic diversity, and 

outcomes is to be finely examined, socializing among coworkers should be controlled for 

so as to ensure that it is not impacting the specific associations of interest.

Cohesiveness

Of the numerous group process variable described in the groups literature (i.e., 

Hackman,  1987; Steiner,  1972; Zander,  1982), the one that has received the most 

attention in the workgroup composition and demography literatures is social integration, 

most frequently referred to as cohesiveness (O’Reilly et al.,  1989). Workgroup 

cohesiveness refers to the extent to which group members are attracted to one another. In 

other words, cohesiveness captures such dimensions as whether members of a group trust 

one another, are supportive of each other, openly communicate ideas, and are helpful to

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

60


each other. Research has found that members of cohesive workgroups are happier and 

more satisfied with their jobs (Zander,  1982). Cohesiveness is also important because in 

the groups literature, it has been found to have a small positive association with 

performance (Cohen & Bailey,  1997; Mullen & Copper,  1994).

In the diversity literature, it has been hypothesized that workgroup diversity on 

readily detectable characteristics will result in less interaction, communication, and 

attraction among group members, thus resulting in lower levels of cohesiveness (i.e., 

Jackson et al.,  1995; Milliken & Martins,  1996; O ’Reilly et al.,  1989; Smith et al.,  1994). 

O'Reilly and colleagues (1989) found that increased tenure diversity resulted in less 

social integration and increase levels of turnover. However, the empirical results have 

been mixed.  Blau, Blum and Schwartz (1982) found that race heterogeneity was 

positively related to inter-group contact, whereas Sampson (1984) found a negative 

association between diversity and improved inter-group relations and Harrison and 

colleagues (1998) found no effects for age, sex, or race diversity on cohesiveness. Finally, 

a recent meta-analysis on workgroup diversity and group processes found a small 

significant relationship between readily detectable diversity and cohesiveness and a small 

positive relationship between diversity and cohesiveness when diversity was based on 

less observable characteristics (Webber and Donahue,  1999). Given the range of results 

found between demographic diversity and cohesiveness, when cohesiveness is not the 

group process variable if interest, it should to be controlled for in all analysis.

Group Size

Both group and demography researchers have consistently found that the size of 

an individual’s workgroup is related to group dynamics and individual and group level 

outcomes (i.e., Jackson et al.,  1991; Steiner,  1972). Early groups research (i.e., Steiner,

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

61


1972) proposed that the relationship between group size, effectiveness, and performance 

would be curvilinear. The argument put forth was that groups which were too small 

would not enjoy the benefits associated with working in teams, whereas those which were 

too large would become dysfunctional due to coordination and communication problems. 

Specifically, it has been argued that larger groups, while having the potential for more 

diversity, also have the potential for increased difficulty in developing group processes 

and thus, can suffer from increased process losses (Bantel & Jackson,  1989; Jackson et 

al.,  1991; Steiner,  1972).  Smith and colleagues (1994) found group size to be negatively 

associated with informal communication however, they found formal communication to 

be positively related to performance.

With regards to workgroup demographic composition, one would expect that the 

larger the team, the greater the probability that there will be demographically diverse 

members. However, if larger teams are diverse, there might also be a greater likelihood 

that sub-groups based on demographic characteristics, will be formed and therefore, 

members will be less integrated. In contrast, smaller diverse groups may be more 

integrated as there are fewer "like" others with whom to form alliances. For perceptions 

of procedural justice, the effects of group size remains untested. However, intuitively it 

would appear that the relationship between group size and fairness may be curvilinear.

For instance, in small groups there may not be the necessary processes and procedures in 

place to ensure that individuals are treated fairly likewise, one individual may dominated 

and others may be unable to speak, thus not having any voice. However, if groups get too 

large, individuals may perceive that they have less opportunity to have their voice heurd 

and that while policies and procedures may exist, they may not be flexible. Therefore, 

given the nature of the research questions addressed in this paper, group size will be 

controlled for in all analysis.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

62


Substantive Complexity

Substantive complexity is a variable defined by the Dictionary of Occupational 

Titles (Roos & Treiman,  1980) as the level of complexity at which an individual must 

work. This term is a combination of how much control over "people, data, and things" are 

required by a specific job. For example, a complex job with regards to people would 

encompass such tasks as mentioning and negotiating whereas a simple job would entail 

taking instructions. For data, a complex job is one where synthesizing and coordinating is 

required as contrasted with copying or comparing. Finally, "things" are defined as 

inanimate objects such as tools or products where a complex job involves setting-up or 

precision work while a relatively simple job requires handling or feeding. The substantive 

complexity component of a job has been described a very similar to the Job Diagnostic 

Score (JDS Hackman & Oldham,  1980) in that both are assessments of the level of skill 

variety and autonomy in an individuals job. However, the DOT rating also takes into 

account functional requirements of the job, the worker trait requirements and is a more 

general index that can be applied across entire occupations (Xie & Johns,  1995).

In the present study job complexity may be important because the people 

component assess how much an individual has to work with others. Therefore, if an 

individual has a highly complex job on the components of data and things but not people 

the diversity of their coworkers or their dissimilarity from their coworkers may not be 

important.  In addition, similar to the rationale used by Wharton and Barron (1991) as to 

why women mostly male groups had higher levels of satisfaction than did women in 

mostly female groups, highly complex jobs may also be regarded as more prestigious. 

Therefore, individuals from traditional minority groups working in highly complex jobs 

may not report such negative affective outcomes as they may have achieved a higher 

status in their career. Given this, controlling for the effects of substantive complexity and

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

63


maybe examining post-hoc the differences between individuals in low versus high 

occupations may be of interest.

Organizational Size

The size of the organization within which individuals work has been found to be 

associated with a large number of outcomes (Scott,  1987). Researchers have found that 

larger organizations tend to have more standardized procedures, formalized reporting 

structures and thus allow individual employees to have less autonomy on the job resulting 

in lower levels of satisfaction and commitment and higher levels absenteeism (Kallneberg 

& Van Buren,  1996; Scott,  1987). Organizational  size has also been found to be 

negatively associated with perceptions of procedural, interactional, and distributive 

justice (Schminke,  1996). Schminke (1996) proposed that organizational size would 

negatively influence perceptions of fairness because it would be harder, in large 

organizations, to treat individuals with respect and dignity, to ensure that their voice was 

heard, and to demonstrate the importance of the individual to the organization. Therefore, 

when considering procedural justice as a process or contextual variable which should 

influence the relationship between working in diverse groups, individual dissimilarity 

from coworkers, and affective outcomes, organizational size should be controlled for 

because it has been found to be associated with many of the components of the equation.

Distributive Justice

Distributive justice is concerned with the fairness of outcomes received. Much of 

the early work focused on the mathematical formulation put forth by equity theory 

(Adams,  1965). Here, it was argued that individuals calculate an equation to determine 

the fairness of an outcome received. Inputs and the outcomes received by others are used

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

64


to determine fairness. While procedural justice research has argued that how a decision is 

made is as or more important than the outcomes there is still a great deal of research that 

argues that favorable outcomes influence how individuals see themselves, others, and 

their organizations (Greenberg,  1985). In addition, given that procedural justice and 

distributive justice have been found to interact and that they are highly correlated with 

each other, distributive justice should be controlled for in research examining procedural 

justice (Greenberg,  1987; McFarlin & Sweeney,  1992).

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

65


CHAPTER VII 

METHODS AND ANALYSIS

Study Sample

The data for this study are from a National Employee Survey (NES) conducted in 

1998 at the Survey Research Center and the Center for Research on Deviance Behavior 

and Behavioral  Health at the University of Georgia in collaboration with the DuPree 

College of Management at the Georgia Institute of Technology. Using a probability 

sampling procedure, telephone interviews were conducted with  1465 individuals with a 

response rate of 61.4%. For this study, eligible participants were those individuals who 

were at least  18 years of age, worked for pay at least 30 hours per week, and were not 

self-employed or sole-proprietors. The structured survey asked participants  179 questions 

ranging from demographics, to questions on the respondent’s job, work environment, 

supervisor, coworkers, and psychological well-being. An earlier version of the survey 

was piloted to ascertain the respondent comprehension of the questions and scale 

validation. This was needed because many of our established scales were developed for 

paper and pencil methodologies and therefore their validity in the translation to telephone 

questions needed to be tested. Of the respondents, 686 (47%) were male and  1121 

(83.4%) were white.

Because the nature of survey data is perceptual and because the data were 

collected at one point in time using a single method, it is important to objectively validate 

where ever possible, participant responses. For this purpose, every individual respondent 

was asked the following question "What is your main occupation."  Based on the 

participant’s response, job codes developed by the U.S. Census were manually entered 

into the database. This information was used to match the individual's response to the

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

66


closest job title in the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT). Job analysts at the United 

States Department of labor developed the DOT job classification system. Each job is 

assigned a number of occupational measures that describe the typical functions performed 

by an individual in that job along the functional requirements of the job, worker trait 

requirements, and vocational preferences. While the DOT data is somewhat general in 

scope, in test-re-test reliability studies it has been found to be a valid and respected 

measure of different jobs (Xie & Johns,  1995). Therefore, the DOT was used to compare 

the occupations of our respondents to those of the population in general. Results depicted 

in table  1  show that the occupations represented by participants in this survey are very 

similar to the proportions of employed individuals in the U.S. (See Table  1). In addition, 

the proportions of individuals by sex and race/ethnicity within occupations in the study 

sample were compared to the DOT census data information (See Table 2).  Again, Table 2 

shows that the breakdowns in the study data are very similar to those of the general 

population. These results lend confidence to the generalizability associated with the 

conclusions drawn based upon the sample used in this research. Finally, the DOT 

occupational data was used to determine the measure of substantive complexity 

associated with an individual’s job.

Level-of analysis

Earlier it was mentioned that level-of-analysis is an important issue in diversity 

and dissimilarity research that needs to be addressed right from the start. In her work on 

the "black box," Lawrence (1997) clearly details the importance and need to specify the 

demographic unit of interest, the domain, and measures. Accordingly, this research was 

conducted at the individual level-of-analysis. The workgroup diversity data were 

collected using perceptual measures, whereby individuals were asked to describe the

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

67


demographic composition of their coworkers. Research on age composition has found 

that perceptions of coworker age were as or more important than the actual ages of 

coworkers (Cleveland & Shore,  1992). Riordan (1997) compared the use of actual and 

perceived measures of demographic similarity and Lawrence (1996) suggested that 

perceptions are important because demographic characteristics are a social phenomenon. 

Finally, a recent paper by Riordan and Weatherly ( 1999) found that a number of 

perceived dissimilarity measures (age, sex, race, education, tenure) were significantly 

correlated with the outcome measures (satisfaction, organizational commitment, group 

performance) whereas, the actual measures of demographic dissimilarity were not. 

Finally, because this research is interested in individual level outcomes, individual 

perceptions of workgroup diversity, dissimilarity, group processes, and fair treatment will 

be used.  In other words, the domain of interest is that of the individual. This research will 

not attempt to generalize to the group or organizational  level. Specifically, the focus of 

this research is on whether perceptions of fair procedures (procedural justice) are 

associated with individual-level affective outcomes and creative performance. Given the 

range of research findings, this study, using a large survey data set that cuts across 

organizations, jobs, group compositions, and individual demographic characteristics to 

examine the relationship between diversity/dissimilarity and affective outcomes and 

creative performance. Finally, does procedural justice moderate the relationship between 

the sex and race/ethnic diversity and dissimilarity?

Outcome Measures

Job satisfaction and organizational commitment have been referred to as the most 

investigated components of employee affect (Clegg,  1983). However, the two constructs 

while related, are very different in scope. Job satisfaction has a more narrow focus in that

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

68


it deals specifically with an individual’s job and job components. In contrast, 

organizational commitment is a more global evaluation regarding an individual’s 

connectedness or bonds to their organization (Williams & Hazer,  1986). Commitment has 

received a great deal of empirical attention because it has been found that committed 

employees enhance organizational effectiveness. This is based on the fact that they are 

more likely to give to their organization above and beyond what is called for by their job 

(Smith, Organ & Near,  1983; Mowday, Porter & Steers,  1982). Further, it has been 

argued that fostering organizational commitment is important due to its negative 

association with tardiness, absenteeism, and intentions to turnover (Mowday et al„  1979; 

O'Reilly & Chatman,  1986; Williams & Hazer,  1986) and its positive association with 

loyalty (Kanter,  1972; O'Reilly & Caldwell,  1980), motivation, and organizational 

involvement (Mowday et al.,  1982). Likewise, job satisfaction has been found to be an 

important construct that has been shown to be associated with organizational citizenship 

behavior and performance (e.g., O ’Reilly et al.,  1991; Ostroff,  1992).

Organizational Commitment: For purposes of this study, organizational 

commitment was defined as the strength of an individual's identification with and 

involvement in his/her organization (Mowday et al.,  1982). Nine items developed by 

Mowday, Steers and Porter (1979) were asked of all respondents. All items were recorded 

along a four point scale ranging from “ 1  = strongly disagree” to “4 = strongly agree.”

This scale has a reliability coefficient alpha of .87, a mean of 3.33, median of 3.44, and 

standard deviation of .57. A list of the specific questions is given in Appendix  1.

Job Satisfaction: Overall job satisfaction was measured with 3 items (alpha = .72) 

developed and tested by Quinn & Staines (In Price & Mueller,  1986). All items were 

recorded along a four point scale ranging from “ 1  = strongly disagree” to ”4 = strongly

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

69


agree.”  The scale has a mean of 3.32, median of 3.33, and standard deviation of .63. The 

specific items are given in Appendix  1.

Intentions to Turnover: Intentions to turnover was measured with a single item 

that asked participants how strongly they agreed with the following statement; “I 

frequently think of quitting my job” Possible responses ranged from “1  = strongly 

disagree” to ”4 = strongly agree.”  The average response to this item was  1.81, the

median was  1.0, and standard deviation was  1.04.

Creative Performance: How creative an individual perceived their work was 

measured with two items developed by Oldham and Cummings (1996). The items asked 

individuals to rate the level of creativity and originality of their work. These items were 

correlated with each other at .64. The specific items are given in Appendix  1.

Moderating Measure

Procedural Justice: Procedural justice was measured using six items developed 

by Niehoff and Moorman (1993). This scale has a reliability coefficient alpha of .88. 

Specifically,  the items asked; whether complete and accurate information was collected 

prior to decision making, decisions were made in an unbiased manner, all employee 

concerns were heard before decisions were made, decisions were clarified and additional 

information provided upon request, decisions are applied consistently across affected 

employees, and whether employees are allowed to challenge decisions. Possible 

responses ranged from “ 1 = strongly disagree” to “4 = strongly agree.”  This scale has a 

mean of 3.0, median of 3.0 and standard deviation of .74. All items are listed in Appendix 

1.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

70


Diversity and Dissimilarity Measures

Prior to obtaining any diversity information it was ascertained whether the 

individual respondents worked closely with a group of coworkers. Therefore, all 

respondents were asked whether they worked as a part of a group using the following 

question:  "Not counting supervisors or people you supervise, is there a group of people 

that you think of as your coworkers?  That is, people with whom you work closely on the 

job?"  If the respondent answered "no" to this question, the subsequent questions 

pertaining to their workgroup were skipped and the individual was not included in this 

research. Of the original  1465 respondents,  1240 (84.7%) replied that they did (i.e., "yes") 

work with others whom they considered to be their coworkers. Following this, 

respondents were asked a series of 15 questions pertaining to this group of coworkers.

The first question asked them for the size of their workgroup. Responses to group size 

ranged from 2 to 99.  However, because this research is interested in diversity and 

dissimilarity only individuals who reported working in groups of three or more were 

retained for further analysis. Therefore, the final sample used retained for analysis was 

comprised of 1136 individuals. See Table 3 for breakdowns on group composition.

Sex Diversity: In order to obtain a diversity measure using survey methodology, 

we asked respondents to describe the sex composition of their workgroup. Specifically, 

we asked the following question, "Among your coworkers, would you say that," followed 

by the possible responses of; "all are men (AM)" n =  169 (18%), "most are men (MM)" n 

= 255 (21%), "all are women (AW)" n =  142 (14%), "most are women (MW) n = 268 

(23%), and "about equal numbers of men and women (DIV)" n = 259 (24%).

Sex Dissimilarity: Most prior research calculates an individual’s dissimilarity 

using algebraic differences. However, because of our survey methodology we have no 

information on an individual’s coworkers making it impossible to calculate a traditional

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

71


Euclidean distance measure. Therefore, every individual was assigned a dissimilarity 

score based on their sex and how they perceived their coworkers.  For instance, for a man 

working in an all-male group his dissimilarity would be low so he was assigned a score of 

1. In contrast, a man who perceived that his coworkers were all female (i.e., all-female 

group) would be the most dissimilar and therefore assigned a score of 54. Given the 

workgroup composition choices given to respondents, the range of dissimilarity scores 

for a male ranged from, AM =  1, MM = 2, DIV = 3, MW = 4, and AW = 5. The greater 

the dissimilarity score the more dissimilar the individual respondent would be from the 

majority of their workgroup.

Race/Ethnicity Diversity: Race/Ethnicity diversity was ascertained in a similar 

fashion to sex composition.  Individuals who reported that they worked as members of 

groups were asked to describe the race/ethnic diversity of their workgroup. Specifically, 

participants were asked, "In your workgroup, would you say that"  "all are white (AW)" n 

= 352 (35%), "most are white (MW)" n = 425 (37%), "all are non-white (ANW)" n =  16 

(2%), "most are non-white (MNW) n = 71  (6%), and "about equal numbers of whites and 

non-whites (DIV)" n = 207 (20%). While there are many more racial/ethnic categories 

than simply white/non-white these two were used based on the small numbers associated 

with non-white individuals racial/ethnic categories. One of the problems frequently cited 

with examining race/ethnic diversity and dissimilarity is that given the large percentage 

of white Caucasians in the US workforce, true heterogeneity is rarely achieved and white 

employees are seldom in the minority (Judy & D ’Amico,  1997; Williams & O’Reilly, 

1998). In this manner, the study by Riordan and Shore (1997) was unusual in that their

4 That a male could work in an all-female group and vice-a-versa presents an interesting dilemma. Based on 
the question asked “would you say that most of your coworkers are" a male working in a group with five 
women could reply that they were “all-women” or “mostly-women." In part, the answer given may be 
dependent upon how dissimilar the respondent feels from his coworkers. For instance, a male who perceives 
his group as all-female is distancing himself more from the group. In contrast, a male who perceives the 
group as mostly-female is including himself in the group when describing the composition and therefore 
may not feel as dissimilar.

72

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


population had higher percentages of Asian, Hispanic, and African-American participants 

than white participants. Consequently, the authors were able to conduct a fine-grained 

analysis on the effects of various different group compositions. However, given that the 

sample used in this study is highly reflective of the US population in general, in order to 

ascertain race/ethnic diversity non-white participants were grouped together into one 

category. Finally, this grouping is acknowledged as a limitation of this study.

Race/Ethnic Dissimilarity: Similarly to sex dissimilarity we had no information 

on anyone else in an individuals groups. Therefore dissimilarity scores were assigned 

based on how different an individuals was to their perceived workgroup. For example, if 

the respondent was white, working in an AW =  1, MW = 2, DIV = 3, MNW = 4, and 

ANW =5. Again, larger scores signify that the individual respondent was more dissimilar 

from the majority of their coworkers. Footnote 4 on sex dissimilarity would also be 

relevant here to race/ethnic dissimilarity.

Aggregate Dissimilarity Score: For every individual who worked as a member of 

a group, a dissimilarity score based on their combined sex and race/ethnic dissimilarity 

was assigned. Further, the two scores were combined allowing us to consider how 

dissimilar an individual was in aggregate along the two demographic dimensions. For 

example, a male in a mostly-male group or a female in a mostly-female group would have 

a score of'T " on sex dissimilarity. Using a summated aggregation, an African-American 

male working in a mostly-white mostly-male group would have a sex dissimilarity score 

of 2 and a race/ethnic dissimilarity score of 4. Therefore, this individual would have a 

combined dissimilarity score of 6. Therefore, possible scores ranged from 2 (white male 

in an all-male, all-white group) to 10 (white female in an all-male, all-minority group). 

Following the suggestions put forth by Edwards (1994) aggregation was calculated using 

both a summated measure (described above) and a multiplicative measure. For the

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

73


multiplicative measure the sex dissimilarity score was multiplied with the race/ethnic 

dissimilarity score and thus, possible scores ranged from  1  (similar on both race/ethnicity 

and sex) to 25 (dissimilar on both sex and race/ethnicity). These combined measure allow 

for a more thorough examination of dissimilarity along multiple demographic 

dimensions.

Controls

Negative Affectivity:  Negative affect was used as a control to ensure that 

individual an affective state could not be used as an alternative explanation for our results 

(Brief, Burke, Robinson & Webster,  1988;  Harris & Mossholder,  1996). This scale was 

measured with a 7 item (alpha = .94) summated scale from the items on the short form of 

the Center for Epidemiological Studies of Depression (CES-D) scale (Mirowsky & Ross, 

1989). The CES-D scale asks respondents to report whether in the last 7 days they have 

experienced any of a number of affective states (e.g., sad, lonely* blue). The short form 

has been shown to correlate .92 with the long 20 item form (Mirowsky & Ross,  1990).

All items are listed in Appendix  1.

Workgroup Cohesiveness: Cohesiveness was measured using five items from 

Price and Mueller (1981;  1986). This scale asked whether there was open communication 

among group members, members trusted and supported one another, and were helpful to 

each other. Responses were scored from “ 1  = strongly disagree” to “4 = strongly agree.” 

The items had a coefficient alpha of .81, a mean of 3.46, median of 3.50, and standard 

deviation on .56. All items are listed in Appendix  1.

Socializing with coworkers: Frequency of socializing with coworkers was 

measured with a single item that asked participants how often they went out with people

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

74


they had met through work. Responses ranged from "1  = never" (23%), "2 = rarely" 

(42%), "3 = sometimes" (27%) and "4 = often" (8%).

Substantive Complexity: Substantive complexity is an aggregate measure of the 

level with which an individual has to work with people, data, and things (Roos & 

Treinman,  1980). Each component of the scale has a score with higher numbers 

representing more complexity (i.e., for people, 8 = mentoring and 0 = taking instructions) 

therefore, higher scores represent more complex jobs.

Group size: While some diversity research has examined dyadic relationships 

(i.e., Tsui  & O’Reilly,  1989), this research is interested in individuals working in groups 

rather than dyads. Therefore, all individuals were asked to report the size of their 

workgroups and those with 2 or fewer members were excluded from our analysis. Given 

this cut-off, workgroup sizes ranged from 3 to 99 with a mean of 15, a of median 9, and 

standard deviation of 18.42.

Organizational Size: Organizational size ranged from 2 to 9999. Sole 

proprietorships, an organizational size of one, were excluded from this analysis. The 

average sized organization was 870, the median was  100, and standard deviation was 209.

Distributive Justice: Distributive justice was measured using 3 items (alpha = .76) 

developed by Niehoff & Moorman,  1993. Using the response choices of "1 = strongly 

disagree" to "4 = strongly agree" respondents were asked whether the rewards and 

benefits they received at their organization were fair.

Demographic characteristics: An individual’s demographic profile was controlled 

for in all analysis. The specific demographic data we collected were sex, race/ethnicity, 

age, education levels, organizational tenure, income, and occupational category. The sex 

of all respondents was ascertained at the conclusion of the survey instrument. In our 

sample 48% of the sample was male our sample is slightly skewed on the female side.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

75


However, as the majority of demography research has been conducted on samples that are 

predominantly male, having a greater representation of female participants allows us to 

look at a wider audience. Furthermore, recent work has found that when considering 

groups with more minority representation, traditional results do not always hold (i.e., 

Riordan & Shore,  1997); therefore, more diverse sampling has been called for (Williams 

& O ’Reilly,  1998).

All respondents were asked of what race/ethnic group did they consider 

themselves. Of the sample  included in our analysis, 84% was white, 9% was African- 

American, 2% were Asian, 4% Hispanic, and  1% other. This percentage is in keeping 

with the  1990 census data figures (Judy & D’Amico,  1997). Respondent’s age was 

ascertained by asking participants how old they were in years. In our sample, ages ranged 

from  18 to 70 with the mean age of respondents being 42 and the median being 39 with a 

standard deviation of 16.87.  Asking participants what was the highest level of schooling 

they had achieved attained education level. Possible responses ranged from  1-8 years 

0.5%, 9 - 1 1   years 3%, completed high school 22.5%,  13-15 years 32%, completed 

college 22%, some graduate work 7%, and advanced degree  13%. The number of years 

that a respondent had worked for their current employer was controlled for and labeled 

tenure. Organizational tenure ranged from less than a year to 47 years. The mean for 

tenure was 8 years, the median was 5 years, and standard deviation was 8.69.

Finally, all participants were asked what their occupation was. This information 

was then matched to the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT) occupational listing. 

Collecting this data allowed us to control for the type of work that individuals performed. 

The DOT data was collapsed to create a dichotomous variable whereby blue collar 

workers were coded as “ 1” and white collar workers were coded as “0." In addition.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

76


having the DOT information allowed the sample used in this study to be compared to the 

US census population employment data.

Analysis

Hypotheses  1  and 2 were examined using ordinary least squared regression 

(OLS).  Using this procedure all of the control  variables are entered into the regression 

equation in step  1. Following this the independent measures of interest were entered into 

the equation in step 2. A significant change in R: with the addition of the independent 

variable in step 2 is needed to support the hypotheses.

To test the competing hypotheses offered in H3a and H3b and H4a and H4b, both 

regression and analysis of covariance were conducted. The two different methodologies 

were used to test the competing hypothesis because literature exists in support of both 

methods. Therefore, it was determined that since one of the goals of this research was to 

thoroughly examine the multiple diversity/dissimilarity hypotheses, multiple methods 

would also be appropriate. First of all regression analysis was used. To test the hypothesis 

using regression, it was first necessary to re-code the perceived group composition 

measures that were currently not linear and therefore, not suitable for regression analysis 

(Cohen & Cohen,  1987). For each demographic characteristic working in groups 

described as "all" be they all-male or all-female or all-white or all-minority were 

combined and coded as "1." Likewise, the "mostly" groups were combined and coded as 

"2" while the "diverse" group was coded as "3." This coding scheme gave us a measure 

such that higher scores represented greater levels of diversity. Next, the control variables 

were entered into the regression equation followed by the diversity measure in step 2. A 

significant change in R2 along with the sign and significance of the b weight would

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

77


indicate that a relationship existed between the perceived diversity of an individual’s 

workgroup and individual affective outcomes.

Because the combine measure of diversity truncates the variance associated with 

the measure and does not consider differences between all the various groups, analysis of 

covariance (ANCOVA) was also conducted (Cohen & Cohen,  1983; Neter, Wasserman & 

Kutner,  1989). This analysis is often recommended because it first examines the overall 

differences and can then  be followed by specific planned comparison t-tests to examine 

specific differences between the groups. A significant overall F statistics would indicate 

that there were pair-wise differences between the groups. However, because the 

hypotheses proposed in this research are not proposing pair-wise differences, but rather 

differences between groups of means, contrast coding was used to test the hypotheses 

(Myers & Well,  1991).

Hypotheses 8 and 9 were tested using the moderated multiple regression analysis 

procedure outlined by James and Brett (1994). Here, moderation is supported when the 

addition of the moderation  variable (i.e., procedural justice) makes a significant 

contribution to the overall R - after the control and main effect variables have been 

entered into the equation. Additionally, a significant overall F for the interaction term 

allowed us to proceeded with planned t-tests to perform more fine-grained analysis and 

examine the specific differences within demographic groups. In addition, in accordance 

with the regression procedures used by Tsui and colleagues (1992) an analysis was also 

be conducted where the independent variables were entered first, followed by the 

moderator and then the controls. This method allows for the stability of the independent 

variables to be assessed as each of the control variables is entered into the regression 

model.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

78


CHAPTER VIII 

RESULTS

Factor Structure

An initial factor analysis using principal component extraction and varimax 

rotation was conducted to ensure that all  the perceptual dependent measures (satisfaction, 

commitment, intentions to turnover, creative performance) and procedural justice loaded 

onto separate factors (Podsakoff & Organ,  1986). The factor analysis procedure extracted 

five factors with eigen values greater than  1.0 accounting for 63.55% of the variance. All 

items loaded on the separate dimensions at  .543 or higher (See Table 4).

Prior to hypothesis testing, the correlations between dependent and control 

variables were examined. Amongst the control variables, the bivariate associations 

showed, as expected, significant associations between tenure and age (r = .557, g < .001), 

tenure and income (r = .237, g < .001), and income and education (r = .292, g < .001). For 

the team and organizational control there were significant associations between 

socializing with coworkers and cohesiveness (r = .153, g < .001), socializing with 

coworkers and cohesiveness were both significantly correlated with distributive and 

procedural justice. Of the occupation substantive complexity was negatively associated 

with the dichotomous occupation code such that blue collar jobs were negatively related 

to having complex work (r_= -.490, g_< .001). Satisfaction was significantly positively 

associated with age, socializing with coworkers, cohesiveness, distributive justice, and 

procedural justice. Commitment was positively related to age, group size, socializing 

with coworkers, and both justice measures. Both satisfaction and commitment were

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

79


negatively associated with negative affect; however, for intentions to turnover the 

association was positive. Intentions to turnover were negatively associated with age, 

cohesiveness, socializing with coworkers, distributive and procedural justice. For creative 

performance, age, education, tenure, socializing, cohesiveness, and both justice measures 

were significant and positive. Finally, the affective outcomes were, as expected, 

significantly correlated with one another. Satisfaction was negatively related to intentions 

to turnover (r = -.562, p < .001) as was commitment (r_= -.552, p < .001), and creative 

performance (r.= - 324, p < .001). Satisfaction was positively associated with 

commitment (r = .680, p <.001) and creative performance (r = .291, p <.001) (See Table 

5)

Hypotheses Testing

Hypothesis  1  and 2 were tested using regression analysis. In step  1  all of the

control variables were entered into the equation. In step 2 procedural justice was entered 

to ascertain whether individuals who perceived their organizations to be more 

procedurally just had higher levels of desirable work-related affective outcomes, lower 

intentions to turnover, and higher creative performance.  A significant change in R: would 

indicate that procedural justice influenced the dependent measures (Cohen & Cohen, 

1985). Hypotheses  1  and 2 were both supported (See Table 6). For the affective 

outcomes, procedural justice accounted for the following changes in R2; job satisfaction 

R2A = .07  (FA =  129.01, p < .001) (b = .28), organizational commitment R2A = .14  (FA = 

296.05, p < .001) (b = .36), intentions to turnover R2A = .04 (FA = 50.96, p < .001) (b = - 

.315), and for creative performance RZA = .02 (FA = 28.28, p < .001) (b = .20). Therefore,

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

80


individuals’  who perceived higher levels of procedural justice had higher levels of job 

satisfaction, organizational commitment, and were less likely to be thinking of looking 

for another job. In addition, perceptions of procedural justice were positively associated 

with higher levels of individual creative performance.

For the demographic control variables, being older and more educated were 

positively related to creative performance. Being female was positively associated with 

higher levels of job satisfaction and organizational commitment. Negative affectivity was 

related to all the affective outcomes in the expected direction, but was not associated with 

creative performance. Finally, distributive justice was significantly related to all 

dependent measures. Given this, and prior research on the interactions between 

distributive and procedural justice, post-hoc analysis was conducted to test for any 

interactive effects (McFarlin & Sweeney,  1992). For satisfaction, commitment, and 

creative performance, both of the main effects were significant, but the interaction 

(procedural justice X distributive justice) was not. However, a significant interaction was 

found between procedural and distributive justice for intentions to turnover. This finding 

is interesting in that justice researchers have suggested that procedural justice was more 

strongly related to overall evaluations and distributive to specific intentions (Folger & 

Konovsky,  1989). The results suggest that distributive justice is a stronger predictor of 

intentions to turnover. Further, individuals were more likely to remain in their jobs when 

they perceive the rewards they receive are fair and most likely to intend to leave when 

both the rewards they receive and procedures used to reach decisions or allocate rewards 

are judged to be less fair.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

81


Hypothesis 3a proposed that diversity would be positively associated with 

desirable work-related affective outcomes and negatively associated with  intentions to 

turnover. The opposite was proposed by Hypothesis 3b. The two methodologies 

discussed in the analysis section  were employed to test these hypotheses. First, the 

hypotheses were tested using regression analysis. Here the re-coded perceived group 

diversity measure was used.  However, prior to testing the hypothesis in the multivariate 

space, the bivariate correlations were examined (See Table 7). Both sex and race/ethnic 

diversity were significantly positively correlated with satisfaction and commitment. Sex 

diversity, but not race/ethnic diversity, was negatively associated with turnover 

intentions.

Using the same procedures used to test Hypotheses  1  and 2, the control variables 

were entered into the equation in step  1  and the diversity measure (either sex or 

race/ethnicity) was entered in step 2. For job satisfaction, sex diversity contributed to a 

significant change in R: = .04  (FA = 4.316, g < .038) and the association was positive (b 

= .05  ). Therefore, individuals who perceived their workgroups as more diverse also 

reported higher levels of satisfaction. For organizational commitment, the R2 A was = .03 

(FA = 2.951, p < .086) and the relationship was also positive (b = .04). Thus, while only 

marginally significant, organizational commitment was also higher for individuals 

working in diverse groups. Finally, sex diversity was negatively associated with 

intentions to turnover such that individuals in more diverse groups reported higher 

intentions to remain with their current organizations (b = -.08) R2A = .03 (F A = 3.934, g 

< .048). For sex diversity, these results support Hypothesis 3a and not 3b. For race/ethnic 

diversity, working in more diverse groups was associated with higher levels of 

satisfaction (b = .05) R2A = .04 (FA = 4.315, g < .038) and commitment (b = .06) R2A = 

.04 (FA = 5.344, g < .021), but was not associated with intentions to turnover. Therefore,

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

82


for race/ethnic diversity the results also appear to support Hypothesis 3a and not H3b 

(See Table 8).

Following the regression analysis, analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was 

conducted to test for differences between the various groups (Cohen & Cohen,  1983; 

Neter, Wasserman &  Kutner,  1989). As discussed in the analysis section, this test is often 

recommended because it first examines the overall differences and can then be followed 

by planned comparison t-tests to examine specific differences between the groups. 

Therefore, none of the groups are combined in the initial analysis, but all the various 

groups can be compared with one another or in a variety of different combinations in 

subsequent analyses.  Again, a significant overall F statistics would indicate that there 

were pair-wise differences between the groups. However, because the hypotheses 

proposed in this research are not proposing pair-wise differences, but rather differences 

between groups of means, contrast coding was used to test the hypotheses (Myers &

Well,  1991).

For the perceived sex composition of an individuals workgroup, the omnibus F- 

test reported significant pair-wise differences on commitment (F = 3.04, g = .017) and 

intentions to turnover (F = 2.38, g = .030) and a marginally significant difference for 

satisfaction (F = 2.09, g = .080). For perceived race/ethic composition, there were 

marginally significant differences on individual levels of satisfaction (F = 2.20, g = .067) 

and commitment (F = 2.05, g = .085), but not on intentions to turnover (F =  1.304, g = 

.267).

To reiterate, Hypotheses 3a proposed that individuals who work in diverse groups 

would have higher levels of satisfaction and commitment and be less likely to plan to 

leave their organizations. Hypothesis 3b proposed the opposite, working in more 

homogeneous groups would have a positive effect on desirable work-related affective

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

83


outcomes and a negative effect on intentions to leave. Using contrast coding, the results 

suggest that individuals in diverse groups with regards to sex composition, when 

compared to individuals in all other groups, had higher levels of job satisfaction (t = - 

2.075, g = .038) and organizational commitment (t = -2.633, g = .009) (See Table  10). 

Individuals working in groups that were perceived as diverse on race/ethnicity also 

reported higher levels of job satisfaction (t = -2.457, g = .018) and organizational 

commitment (t = -2.423, g = .017) than did individuals working in groups perceived as 

more racially homogeneous (See Table  11). Together, these finding offer support for 

hypothesis 3a and not hypothesis 3b for all the positive work-related affective outcomes.

Interestingly, however, using the analysis of variance methodology, no support 

was found for either hypothesis with regards to intentions to turnover. A limitation 

discussed in the regression literature is that using a combined measure does not allow for 

more fine-tuned examination of the means (Cohen & Cohen,  1983; Neter et al.,  1989). 

Therefore, contrasts were conducted to test for differences between the all-male and all­

female groups and mostly-male and mostly-female groups on intentions to turnover. 

These analysis revealed that there were no differences between the two mostly groups, 

but individuals working in all-male groups had higher intentions to leave than did 

individuals working in the all-female groups (t = 2.099, g = .037). Therefore, the 

combining of the two “all” groups may not offer an adequate test of the hypothesis.

Based on the aforementioned results, a more detailed decomposition of the 

various means was conducted. First off, comparisons were conducted for all of the 

different groups to ascertain where there were differences and where there were not (See 

Table  10 and 11). For satisfaction and commitment, only individuals in groups that were 

perceived as either all-male or mostly-female groups were different from individuals in 

the diverse group. For race/ethnic diversity, individuals in the all-white and mostly-white

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

84


groups were different from individuals in the diverse groups on satisfaction and 

commitment. Finally, an additional analysis was conducted to examine whether 

individuals in the combined all-male and mostly-male (predominantly male) groups and 

all-white and mostly-white (predominantly white) groups were significantly different 

from individuals working in groups that they perceived to be diverse. For satisfaction, the 

data showed that individuals working in groups that were predominantly male had lower 

levels of job satisfaction (t = 2.392, p = .017) and organizational commitment (t = 2.568,

P =  .010) and were more likely to intend to leave their organizations (t =   1.924, p =  .055). 

Likewise, individuals working in groups that were perceived to be predominantly white 

reported lower levels of satisfaction (t = -2.464, p = .014) and commitment (t = -2.667, p 

= .008), but were not different from individuals working in diverse groups on intentions 

to leave (t = .147, p = .883) (Table  11).

Comparing individuals in the predominantly female or predominantly minority 

groups with individuals in diverse groups, the following results emerged. For sex 

composition, the only significant difference was on organizational commitment with 

individuals in diverse groups reporting higher levels of commitment than individuals in 

the predominantly female groups (t = -2.056, p = .040). For race/ethnic diversity, 

individuals in diverse groups were more satisfied (t = -1.932, p = .065) more committed (t 

= -1.791, p = .084), and were less likely to intend to leave (t =  1.713, p = .096). Together, 

these results add additional support to the heterogeneity hypothesis developed by Blau 

(1977) and Kanter (1977) proposing that working in diverse groups should be associated 

with positive attitudes. Further, these results appear to refute the claims made by social- 

categorization and attraction-similarity in that working in groups that were either 

completely or predominantly homogeneous was not associated with positive work-related 

affective outcomes or lower intentions to turnover.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

85


Hypotheses 4a and 4b offered competing predictions regarding whether working 

in a group perceived to be diverse would positively or negatively influence the creative 

performance of an individual. Specifically, H4a proposed that individuals working in 

diverse groups would have higher levels of creative performance whereas, H4b proposed 

that those individuals in more homogeneous groups would have higher levels of creative 

performance. Given that hypotheses 4a and 4b are similar to 3a and 3b (different 

dependent measure) the same analysis procedures were used to test these hypotheses.

Regression analysis (using the combined diversity measure) revealed that the 

perceived sex diversity of an individual’s workgroup was positively associated with 

individual creative performance (b = .05) R:A = .02 (F = 3.772, g < .048). However, 

perceived race/ethnic diversity was not associated with individual level creative 

performance (b = .05) R:A = .002 (FA = 2.46, g < .117). Following this procedure, 

analysis of covariance and planned comparisons were conducted. Here, the initial 

omnibus F test showed no significant pair-wise differences between individuals working 

in groups of different gender proportions (F =  1.259, g = .284). However, for 

race/ethnicity the overall F test showed that there were differences between the creative 

performance of individuals working in groups of different race/ethnic compositions (F = 

2.471, g = .043) (See Table  11). Once again, to test the specific hypotheses the means 

were examined using planned comparison contrast coding. The results found were 

essentially the same as those found using regression analysis. Specifically, for race/ethnic 

diversity, the creative performance of individuals in the combined “all” and “mostly” 

groups were not significantly different from that of individuals in the diverse groups (t = 

1.372, g = .173). However, for sex composition individuals in the combined “all” and 

“mostly” groups had significantly lower levels of creative performance than did 

individuals in the diverse groups (t = -2.019, g = .044). Together the result offers partial

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

86


support for Hypothesis 4a. Perceived sex diversity appears to have a positive effect on 

individual level creative performance.  No support was found using either methodology or 

demographic characteristic that diversity would be negatively associated with creative 

performance (Hypothesis 4b).

Once again, to more thoroughly examine the differences on creative performance 

between individuals working in groups of different sex and race/ethnic compositions, a 

number of post-hoc planned comparisons were conducted. In this analysis, it was 

revealed that when comparing individuals in the all-male and all-female groups to 

individuals in the diverse groups, the individuals in the diverse groups had higher levels 

of creative performance (t = -2.108, p = .036) (Table  10). However, this result did not 

hold when individuals in the diverse groups were compared to those in the all-white and 

all-minority groups (Table  10). Interestingly, the opposite pattern emerges when the 

comparative group is the combined “mostly’' groups. Here there were significant 

differences on race/ethnicity (t = -1.855, p = .065), but not on sex composition. Finally, 

on both demographic characteristics, individuals in the "all" traditional majority groups 

(all-male and all-white) had significantly lower levels of creative performance than did 

individuals in diverse groups. Again, it is noteworthy that this effect did not replicate 

when the "all"  group used in the comparisons were either all-female or all-minority (See 

Tables  10 and  11). This result parallels those found in the group performance literature 

where it has been found that groups that have 50% or more women attend more to group 

process issues. The creativity literature has suggested that group processes are critical for 

creative performance. Therefore, these results suggest that individuals in groups that are 

either diverse or predominantly female have higher levels of creative performance. 

Interestingly, this results is also replicated for race/ethnic diversity suggesting that 

individuals in groups that are diverse or minority dominated may also pay greater

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

87


attention to group process issues resulting in higher levels of individual creative 

performance.

Hypothesis 5 predicted that being more dissimilar from one’s coworkers (along 

the single dimensions of either sex or race/ethnicity) would be associated with  lower 

levels of desirable psychosocial outcomes and creative performance. Prior to testing 

Hypothesis 5 it was necessary to assign a dissimilarity score to each individual 

respondent. Here, the measure used was determined based upon the respondent’s sex (or 

race/ethnicity) and the perceived demographic composition of their workgroup. Hence, 

individuals who were more dissimilar from their coworkers were assigned a higher score 

than were those individuals who were more similar to the others they worked with. The 

hypothesis itself was then tested using regression analysis where the control variables 

were entered into the equation in step  1  and the dissimilarity measure in step 2.

For sex dissimilarity, individuals who were more dissimilar from their coworkers 

had lower levels of satisfaction (b = -.04, g = .003), and commitment (b = -.03, g = .023), 

higher intentions to leave their organizations (b = .06, g = .025) and lower levels of 

creative performance (b = -.08, g = .042) (See table  12). For race/ethnicity, the only 

dependent variable significantly influenced by the inclusion of the dissimilarity measure 

in the regression equation was individual creative performance (b = -.04, g = .049). Thus, 

race/ethnic dissimilarity was not significantly associated with any of the affective 

outcomes. Therefore, Hypothesis 5 was fully supported for the performance outcome 

measure and only partially supported for the affective measures. Or, put another way, 

Hypothesis 5 was fully supported for sex dissimilarity, but only partially supported for 

race/ethnic dissimilarity. Specifically, for sex dissimilarity, individuals who were more 

dissimilar from their coworkers had lower levels of satisfaction, commitment, and 

intentions to remain with their organizations. In addition, being more dissimilar from

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

88


one’s coworkers on either the demographic characteristics of sex or race/ethnicity resulted 

in lower levels of individual creative performance.

That the effects of dissimilarity may be cumulative was posited-by Hypothesis 6. 

Specifically, this hypothesis proposed that being more different along the combined 

demographic characteristics of sex and race/ethnicity would influence an individual’s 

affective outcomes and creative performance. Given the issues surrounding algebraic 

differences and aggregation on multiple perceptual measures (Edwards,  1994), two 

aggregate dissimilarity measures were calculated. However, because of how these data 

were collected and the perceived measure of workgroup composition recorded algebraic 

differences (i.e., euclidean difference scores) could not be calculated. Therefore, many of 

the problems associated with difference scores are not applicable. Additionally, because 

both measure were collected at the individual  level the aggregation is not cross-level and 

should therefore also not be problematic (Ostroff,  1993). The first aggregate measure was 

derived using an additive method; an individual’s sex dissimilarity score was summed 

with their race dissimilarity score to arrive at a combined score. This procedure is similar 

to that conducted by Williams and colleagues (1999) in that they summed together an 

individual’s euclidean distance score on multiple demographic dimensions. The second 

method used a multiplicative measure where an individual’s sex and race/ethnic 

dissimilarity scores were multiplied with one another. Both measures were used 

individually in separate analysis, but the results were essentially the same. Therefore, the 

results for the additive measure are reported since this measure is more similar to that 

used in prior research (Williams et al.,  1998). Hypothesis 6 was fully supported for the 

affective outcomes and creative performance (See Table  12). Individuals who perceived 

themselves to be more dissimilar from their coworkers had lower levels of job 

satisfaction (b = -.019, p = .024), lower levels of organizational commitment (b = -.01, p

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

89


= .069), higher levels of intentions to turnover (b = .046, g = .020), and lower levels of 

creative performance (b = -.038, g = .034) (See Table  12).

Hypotheses 7a and 7b offered competing predictions about the effects of being in 

a minority/token position. Specifically, H7a argued that individuals from traditional 

majority groups (i.e., males and whites) would experience negative outcomes when they 

were in the minority, but that women and non-whites would not.  In contrast, H7b 

proposed that women and non-whites; individuals from traditional minority groups, 

would experience negative outcomes when in the minority and individuals from 

traditional  majority groups would not. Examining the effects of dissimilarity on different 

portions of the study sample tested these hypotheses. For this analysis, regression was 

once again used with the control  variables being entered into the equations at step  1, and 

the dissimilarity measure in step 2. Overall, the results broken down by respondent’s sex 

appear to support Hypothesis 7a and not Hypothesis 7b. When men are more dissimilar 

from their coworkers, they had lower levels of satisfaction, commitment, and creative 

performance and higher turnover intentions. Interestingly, for women, dissimilarity was 

positively associated with creative performance and not related to any of the affective 

outcomes.

When the analysis was conducted based on respondent’s race/ethnic 

characteristics, only creative performance was influenced by dissimilarity. Here white 

employees had higher levels of creative performance when they were more dissimilar 

from their coworkers and the opposite was true for non-white employees. Interestingly 

however, both white males and white females had lower levels of satisfaction and 

commitment when they were more dissimilar suggesting that the dissimilarity effects 

associated with sex and race/ethnicity are not simple effects (See Table  13).

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

90


That procedural justice would play an explanatory role in the relationships 

between diversity, dissimilarity, affective outcomes, and creative performance was 

proposed by Hypotheses  8 and 9. Hypothesis 8 predicted an interaction between diversity 

and procedural justice whereas Hypothesis 9 predicted an interaction between 

dissimilarity and procedural justice. To test Hypothesis 8, the diversity measures used to 

test Hypotheses 3 and 4 were first used. Here, at step  1  the control variables were entered 

into the regression equations. In step 2 the main effects for diversity and procedural 

justice were entered followed by the product term in step 3. Using this analysis, no 

significant moderating effects for procedural justice were found for either sex or 

race/ethnic diversity on any of the outcomes (satisfaction, commitment, intentions to 

turnover, creative performance).

Finally, Hypothesis 9 predicted that procedural justice would moderate the effect 

of dissimilarity on affective outcomes and creative performance. Hypothesis 9 was 

partially supported. For individuals who perceived themselves to be more dissimilar from 

their coworkers on the demographic characteristic of sex, procedural justice moderated 

the effect on intentions to turnover and creative performance (See Table  12). For 

intentions to turnover, the main effect for sex dissimilarity was not significant in the final 

model (b = .066, g = .296), but procedural justice (b = -.287, g = .001), and the interaction 

between the procedural justice and sex dissimilarity were marginally significant (b = -.04, 

g =  .077). However, for creative performance, both the main effects for sex dissimilarity 

(b = -.178, g = .001) and procedural justice (b = .464, g = .000) along with the product 

term (b = -.066, g = .000) (sex dissimilarity X procedural justice) were significant in the 

final model. No significant interactions were found between procedural justice and 

perceived sex dissimilarity for either satisfaction or commitment. For race/ethnic 

dissimilarity, procedural justice was found to moderate the effect on creative performance

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

91


only (See Table  12). In the final model, the main effect for procedural justice (b = .240, g 

= .000) and the interaction term were both significant (b = .04, g = .017). As with sex 

dissimilarity, procedural justice was not found to moderate the effects of race/ethnic 

dissimilarity on affective outcomes.

Although not hypothesized, a post-hoc analysis was conducted to examine 

whether procedural justice played a moderating role in the relationship between the 

aggregate dissimilarity measure and any of the affective outcomes or creative 

performance. The results found for the aggregate measure of dissimilarity were similar to 

those found for the individual measures of dissimilarity. Specifically, procedural justice 

moderated the relationship between dissimilarity and intentions to turnover and creative 

performance. For intentions to turnover, procedural justice (b = -.241, g = .007) and the 

interaction term (b = .07, g = .022) were significant in the final model. However, for 

creative performance, both main effects, the aggregate dissimilarity measure (b = -.07, g 

= .018), procedural justice (b = .363, g = .000), and the interaction term (b = -.02, g = 

.042) were significant in the final model. Combine these results offer some support for 

the use of procedural justice as a moderator in the dissimilarity outcome relationships. 

Specifically, it appears that procedural justice moderates the effects of performance and 

intentions to behave in a certain manner, but not affective outcomes.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

92


CHAPTER VIII

DISCUSSION

This research had three goals. Firstly, it sought to test competing hypotheses 

regarding the effects of working in demographically diverse workgroups, the effects of 

multiple measure of dissimilarity, and the effects of dissimilarity on individuals from 

different groups. A second goal of this work was to investigate the relationship between 

procedural justice, diversity, and dissimilarity, with individual creative performance. 

Finally, this research sought to integrate procedural justice into the 

diversity/dissimilarity-outcome equations.  Table  14 outlines the various hypotheses 

developed and tested and outline, in table form, the specific results found for each 

hypothesis.

Hypothesis  1  was offered in replication. Specifically it proposed that procedural 

justice would be positively associated with desirable work-related affective outcomes. 

This hypothesis was fully supported. Individuals who perceived their organizations as fair 

places to work were also more satisfied and committed, and less likely to be thinking 

about looking for a new job.

Using different samples and different methodologies, researchers have continued 

to find that treating employees fairly results in higher levels of desirable work-related 

affective outcomes. With so many changes transpiring in the work environment (i.e., 

merges, acquisitions, downsizing, companies going public, outsourcing employees), the 

robustness of this finding is critical. For instance, Brockner and colleagues (1994) found 

that when organizations downsize and layoff employees, the fairness of the procedures 

used in the layoff influence the relationship that survivors have with their organization, 

especially with regard to commitment. Likewise, Bies (1987) and Bies and Shapiro

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

93


(1988) found that whether justifications provided by managers were perceived as fair 

influenced whether unfavorable outcomes were rated positively or negatively.

That procedural justice is linked to positive affective outcomes is important. 

However, the fact that it is a multifaceted construct in that it can be viewed as both a 

process and component of context is probably more important. Finally, unlike many other 

group processes or contextual variables, perceptions of procedural justice, while 

subjective, have been found to be manageable. For example, Skarlicki and Latham (1997) 

found that when union leaders received training on managing fairly, union members 

perceived their leaders as more fair and exhibited higher levels of organizational 

citizenship behaviors (OCB). Likewise, Brockner (1990; Brockner et al„  1994) found that 

employees who were laid-off, remained committed to their organizations when they 

perceived that the explanations they received were fair. The first example demonstrates 

that after a short training period (3,4 hour sessions over a 3 week period), perceptions of 

fair treatment can be influenced resulting in employee’s exhibiting desirable extra-role 

behaviors, which have been found to influence organizational effectiveness (Organ,

1988).  In the second example, even when the most negative of information is imparted to 

employees ("you have lost your job"), their commitment to the organization was 

maintained when the information was given in what was perceived to be a fair manner. 

Finally, with regards to diversity, research on race/ethnic diversity that has incorporated 

justice evaluations has found that the perceived fairness of hiring procedures and the 

rationale behind hiring a diverse workforce can positively influence the attitudes of 

minority employees (Richard & Kochan,  1999).

The second hypothesis proposed by this research was that procedural justice 

would be positively associated with individual creative performance. This hypothesis was 

supported. Given the importance of creativity for firm competitiveness and innovation

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

94


(Shalley,  1995; Van de Ven,  1986) understanding the antecedents to individual creative 

performance has been deemed as critical (Oldham & Cummings,  1996; Woodman et al, 

1993). While a great deal of theoretical work has proposed a number of processes and 

contextual characteristics that should facilitate creative performance, to date, procedural 

justice has not been included in any models. However, many of the components of 

procedural justice appear to be directly  linked to the process and contextual facets 

described in the literature. For instance, many of the theoretical  models developed on 

group creativity have incorporated participation, the ability to challenge decisions, and 

norms that support and reward creativity (Abbey & Dickson,  1983; Mumford & 

Gustafson,  1988; West,  1990). However, while many of these processes are components 

of procedural justice, procedural justice per say has not been included. Therefore, the 

inclusion of procedural justice into models of creativity may offer a more complete 

picture.

This finding suggests that future research examining creativity and factors needed 

to foster creative performance should take into consideration  how decisions are made, 

resources allocated, and how employees treated. Creativity researchers have traditionally 

focused a great deal of attention on individual characteristics and have only recently 

started to shift their focus toward the work environment. This body of work has found 

that more proximal factors such as components of an individual’s job (i.e., autonomy, 

complexity, supervision) are important for creativity (Oldham & Cummings,  1996; 

Shalley et al., 2000). Finally, that procedural justice should be positively related to 

creative performance makes inherent sense. For example, employees should be more 

willing to try new things, take risks, and think outside of the box if they expect to be 

treated fairly (e.g., performance appraisals will be handled in a just manner). In part, this 

is because with creativity comes an increased chance of failure (i.e., not all new

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

95


approaches will work). However, if individuals believe that they will only be judged on 

the outcome and not on the process they may be less likely to try new things. If in 

contrast, employee’s believe that managers will collect complete and accurate 

information, that they will be asked to give input, or allowed to challenge a decision, then 

the likelihood of being creative and trying new approaches should increase.

Following the review of procedural justice and the inclusion of procedural justice 

as an antecedent to individual creative performance this research took a different path and 

examined the diversity and dissimilarity literatures. Understanding diversity has been 

described as a critical issue for American organizations over the next decade (Williams & 

O’Reilly,  1998). In trying to decipher the relationships between diversity, dissimilarity, 

and outcomes, researchers have used a number of different theoretical models grounded 

in both sociology and psychology. The results of this extensive body of research are 

interesting in their complexity and lack of consistent findings. Overall, a somewhat 

worrying picture emerges in that it appears that empirical results have been found in 

support of the theory used for generating the hypotheses. Therefore, it has been argued 

that diversity is both positively and negatively associated with affective outcomes and 

performance. In addition, it has been found that being dissimilar from one’s coworkers is 

associated with positive and negative psychosocial outcomes for individuals who come 

from both traditional majority groups (men and white employees) and traditional minority 

groups (women and non-white employees). Given this, one of the aims of this research 

was to develop and test the various competing models.

Testing multiple competing hypotheses is a somewhat unique approach in that it 

requires a sample that is large enough in size (N) and that cut across organizations and 

occupations so that the effects of organizational composition and job status or prestige are 

not driving the results. For instance, Hrebiniak and Alutto (1972) found that women

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

96


expressed higher level of organizational commitment than did men; however, the sample 

they used was predominantly female. In contrast, two studies whose subjects were drawn 

from accounting firms, samples that were mostly male, reported that women had lower 

levels of commitment than did men (Aranya, Kushnir & Valency,  1986; Dodd-McCue & 

Wright,  1996). When Tsui and colleagues (1992) examined the relationship between sex 

composition and commitment in three different organizations, they found that in the 

organization that was predominantly male, men in all male groups, reported the highest 

levels of commitment. Finally, a recent study by Martins and colleagues found that the 

effects of race/ethnic diversity were influenced by the context of the environment. 

Specifically, being a member of a diverse group or being dissimilar from others had less 

of an influence on individual outcomes in more heterogeneous than the homogeneous 

environments (Martins, Milliken, Wiesenfeld, Salgado,  1999).

In the current research, hypotheses 3a and 4a proposed that working in diverse 

groups would be positively associated with affective outcomes and creative performance. 

These hypotheses were developed based on the theory of heterogeneity developed by 

Blau (1977) and the information and decision making theories developed by Hoffman and 

colleagues (1959; Hoffman et al.,  1962; Hoffman & Maier, 1961). These works suggest 

that individuals benefit from working with others different from themselves as 

stereotypes are broken down, interaction amongst those who are different increases and 

finally, individuals are exposed to different ideas and perspectives. In contrast, 

hypotheses 3b and 4b proposed a negative relationship between working in diverse 

groups and affective outcomes and creative performance. The theories of similarity 

attraction (Bryne,  1961) and social-categorization (Tajfel & Turner,  1986) were used as 

the basis for these hypotheses. In these instances, it was argued that working with others

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

97


different from oneself results in lower levels of self-esteem and self-worth because it is 

harder to form in-groups and find others to whom one is attracted.

In this study it was found that individual's who perceived that their workgroups as 

diverse along either of the demographic characteristics of sex or race/ethnicity were more 

satisfied with their jobs, committed to their organizations, and had higher levels of 

creative performance. Further, sex diversity was negatively related to intentions to leave 

one’s organization. No support was found for any of the hypotheses predicting a negative 

relationship between diversity and outcomes. Therefore, these findings, at the individual 

level-of-analysis, offer support for the more sociological theories developed based upon 

group proportions, heterogeneity, social contact, and information and decision making.

Interaction with diverse others has consistently been referred to in the creativity 

literature as a necessary precondition for creative performance (Amabile,  1988; Kanter, 

1988; Woodman et al.,  1993). However, only limited empirical research has been 

conducted to test this proposition. In a study of top-management teams. West and 

Anderson (1990) found no effects for diversity, but their sample was predominantly 

homogeneous. In this study, respondents were almost equally distributed between males 

and females and the percentages of racial minorities also matched the larger U.S. 

workforce proportions (Judy & D’Amico,  1997). Therefore, given that sex diversity is 

more prevalent than racial/ethnic diversity, it is interesting that sex diversity influenced 

creative performance and race/ethnic diversity did not. It could be that diverse race/ethnic 

groups were so few that they were not statistically significant or that individuals are still 

not used to working in racially diverse group and thus, the interaction, cohesiveness, and 

participative safety necessary for creativity have not yet been fostered.

Unlike diversity that has generated an extensive, yet inconclusive body of 

research, being dissimilar from one’s coworkers has predominantly been found to result

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

98


in negative outcomes. In replication, this hypothesis was offered as number five. In 

addition however, researchers have started to question whether dissimilarity is a simple or 

multifaceted dimension such that multiple characteristics can be aggregated to create 

higher levels of dissimilarity. This research proposed (H6) that being more different 

along the combined measures of sex and race/ethnicity would be associated with negative 

psychosocial outcomes and creative performance. Results supported that being dissimilar 

on sex was associated with  lower levels of satisfaction, commitment, creative 

performance and intentions to remain. For dissimilarity based on race/ethnicity, only 

creative performance was negatively impacted. However, when sex and race/ethnicity 

were combined individuals who were more dissimilar expressed more negative affective 

outcomes, intentions, and creative performance. These results appear to support the 

psychological theories of attraction-similarity and social-categorizations in that 

individuals who are different from others that they work with may feel more excluded 

and not a part of the in-group which results in negative affective outcomes.

In this study, dissimilarity on combined sex and race/ethnicity resulted in lower 

levels of creativity performance. This finding also lends support to the theories 

suggesting that those individuals who are different who are not attracted to, or do not 

identify with others in their workgroups express more negative outcomes. While these 

theories have been consistently applied to affective outcomes, it appears that the 

association also holds for creative performance. Dissimilarity on single demographic 

characteristics has received a great deal of attention whereas, research aggregating 

dissimilarity measures has not. However, individuals are made up of more than one single 

demographic characteristic. Lau and Mumighan (1998) argued that compositional 

differences should matter more than simple demographic characteristics. To this effect, 

understanding the effects on multiple characteristics is an important next step in

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

99


dissimilarity research. In this study the results suggest that while sex dissimilarity, on it’s 

own has more of an effect than race/ethnic dissimilarity the combined measure has a 

consistent negative effect on all the work-related affective outcomes and creative 

performance.

Finally on dissimilarity, prior research has found asymmetrical result concerning 

who fs in the minority.  Similar to the diversity literature, theoretical and empirical work 

can be found in support of negative effects for traditional majority and minority group 

members. Therefore, hypotheses 7a and 7b offered competing predictions. Specifically, 

hypothesis 7a proposed that individuals from traditional minority groups often experience 

positive outcomes when in the minority because they have often reached higher status 

positions or more prestigious jobs. However, the opposite has been found when 

individuals from traditional majority groups are in the minority.  In contrast, researchers 

have also proposed and found that individuals from traditional minority groups are 

regarded as “low status tokens” when dissimilar and consequently experience negative 

outcomes. Using this rationale, individuals from traditional majority groups are perceived 

as “high status tokens” and experience positive outcomes.

In this study it was found that for men (traditional majority group members) being 

in the minority was associated with lower levels of satisfaction, commitment and creative 

performance. However, for white employee’s being in the minority was not associated 

with any of the affective outcomes, but was positively related to creative performance. 

Therefore, Hypothesis 7a was only partially supported. Hypothesis 7b received no 

support for any of the affective outcomes, but some mixed support for creative 

performance. Similar to white employees, women in the minority had higher levels of 

creative performance. However, non-white employees, like males, had lower levels of 

creative performance when in the minority.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

100


At first glance, these results appear somewhat puzzling. The most straightforward 

component appears to be that for men, being in the minority is not perceived favorably. 

This is somewhat surprising in that a body of work exists suggesting that groups that are 

female are more process focused and treat outside members more fairly (Gilson,  1998; 

Williams & O’Reilly,  1998; Wood,  1987). Given that the US workforce is still 

predominantly white for white employees, being in the minority is still somewhat of a 

rare occurrence. Specifically, creative performance may be enhanced as these individuals 

truly are exposed to different perspectives, one of which is not being in the majority.

Overall, dissimilarity was negatively associated with creative performance for 

men, non-whites, white males, non-white males, and non-white females. Put another way, 

dissimilarity was positively associated with the creative performance of women and white 

employees who were dissimilar from their coworkers. The results for women might be 

explained in that women who are more dissimilar may have attained higher status, more 

complex jobs, or more prestigious jobs. In these situations, creative performance may be 

required for success. Therefore, these women are and need to be performing creatively 

regardless of their demographic (dis)similarity to others that they work with.  In addition, 

that being white and more dissimilar from one's coworkers was positively associated 

with creative performance is in keeping with the work of Cox and colleagues (1991) who 

found that minority dominated groups were more cooperative. Hoffman (1985) also 

found that increasing the proportions of minorities in a group resulted in greater 

communication with those outside of the group. Therefore, creative performance may be 

enhanced as other views are brought in via outside communication and by working in a 

group that is more focused on cooperation amongst members. It appears that even though 

much has been written about the changing composition of the workforce for males, being 

dissimilar is still associated with negative outcomes. However, in this study, the same did

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

101


not hold for white employees. One reason could be that while males now find themselves 

more often in the minority than was previously the case; however, white employees are 

still rarely in the minority.

Finally, this research sought to integrate procedural justice into the 

diversity/dissimilarity-outcome equations. Hypothesis 8 predicted that procedural justice 

would moderate the effects of diversity on outcomes. Whereas, hypothesis 9 proposed 

that procedural justice would moderate the effects of dissimilarity. The arguments given 

for why justice should moderate these relationships were, in part, based upon the group- 

value model of justice. This model argues that fair treatment is important because it is the 

mechanism that ensures individuals’  interests are upheld (Lind & Tyler,  1988). As such, 

perceptions of procedural justice may result in one’s workgroup becoming the "in group" 

to whom others are compared rather than groups of demographically similar others. 

Therefore, when individuals believe they are, have been, or will be treated fairly, they are 

more likely to have higher levels of self-worth, identify more strongly with other group 

members, and be more loyal and committed to their organization.

No support was found for hypothesis 8 procedural justice was not a significant 

moderator in any of the dissimilarity-outcome equations. That there was no moderating 

effect between dissimilarity and the affective outcomes or creative performance in this 

study can potentially be explained using the results from the earlier hypotheses. In 

investigating the effects of diversity on individual outcomes, overwhelming support was 

found for Blau’s theory of heterogeneity and the group-level theories of information and 

decision-making. However, the arguments put forth for moderation presumed a negative 

association between diversity and outcomes and that procedural justice thus be a factor 

that could help individuals achieved positive self-evaluations.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

102


In contrast to the lack of results for diversity, procedural justice did moderate 

several of the dissimilarity equations. For dissimilarity and procedural justice, the results 

found were both surprising and interesting. Given the strong associations between 

procedural justice and affective outcomes and the theoretical psychological 

underpinnings used in both the dissimilarity and procedural justice literatures, it was 

surprising that no association was found. However, the interesting results were that 

procedural fairness moderated the effects of both sex and race/ethnic dissimilarity on 

creative performance and sex dissimilarity on intentions to turnover. These results 

suggest that creative performance and intentions to turnover may have different 

underlying mechanisms than do satisfaction and commitment.

The social psychology literature has argued that affective outcomes, emotions, 

behaviors, and intentions are often grouped together and labeled as psychosocial 

outcomes.  However, this body of work proposes that they are in fact very different 

constructs and that how someone feels towards something and whether they intend to 

actually do something or take action are influenced by different things (Jones & Davis, 

196S). These arguments further suggest that employees who may be dissatisfied with 

their jobs, but because of economic conditions, benefits associated with the organization, 

or the ease of finding another job do not intend to leave (Lease,  1998). In contrast, an 

employee may intend to leave their job even when they are satisfied because they believe 

there is a better offer available or that there are no growth opportunities within the current 

organization (O’Quin & LoTempio,  1998).  In this study, it appears that while 

dissimilarity influences affects, intentions, and performance, the inclusion of procedural 

fairness in the model moderates the effects of dissimilarity on intentions to turnover and 

creative performance.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

103


Even though all the analysis conducted in this study was at the individual  level, it 

appears that cross-level evaluations may be taking place. Thus, the predictions made by 

the sociological theories are supported for group composition, whereasthe predictions 

made by the psychological theories are supported for dissimilarity. For instance, when 

individuals evaluate the composition of their coworkers, the individual is not separate 

from the group, but rather within the group. In their article on  level issues theory 

development, data collection, and analysis,  Klein, Dansereau, and Hall (1994) discussed 

scenarios where individuals are within the group. Described as frog pond effects by 

Firebaugh (1980) and part effects by Dansereau (1984), these theories state that 

individual perceptions are context specific and based on a comparative process. This 

would explain why there were a number of males who reported working in all-female 

groups, females in all-male groups, minorities in all-white groups, whites in all-minority 

groups. Therefore, while the contrast effect (dissimilarity) was found to be negatively 

associated with work-related affective outcomes and creative performance, the 

compositional effect (diversity) was positively associated with the outcomes.

In conclusion, procedural justice, workgroup diversity, individual dissimilarity, 

and creativity are all topics that have been generating a great deal of academic and 

practitioner interest of late. In part, this is because the demographic composition of the 

workforce is changing, the nature of work is changing, organizations are changing, and 

throughout all of this, treating employees fairly has consistently been associated with 

positive outcomes. In addition, work-related affective outcomes continue to be linked 

with performance and extra-role behaviors (OCB) and creativity or individual creative 

performance has been described as a critical component necessary for group and 

organizational competitiveness and ultimately success (i.e., Amabile,  1988; Woodman et 

al.,  1993; Van de Ven,  1985).

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

104


This research sought to integrate these various constructs.  In particular, this study 

examined the effects of procedural justice on affective outcomes and extended the current 

literature on both justice and creativity by finding a positive association between 

perceived procedural fairness and individual creative performance. This research also 

adds to the diversity literature in that at the individual  level-of-analysis, support was 

found for the more group/macro level theories of heterogeneity and information and 

decision making. In all instances individuals who worked in groups that they perceived as 

diverse were more satisfied with their jobs, committed to their organizations, and had 

higher levels of creative performance. Finally, the large and highly representative (of the 

U.S. workforce) sample used for this study offered a unique opportunity to test competing 

hypothesis and generate results that should be somewhat stable and generalizable.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

105


REFERENCES

Adams, J. S.  1965. Inequity in social exchange. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances 

in experimental social psychology. 267-299. New York: Academic Press.

Alagna, S.. Reddy, D., & Collins, D.  1992. Perceptions of functioning in  mixed- 

sex and male medical training group. Journal of Medical Education. 51. 801-803.

Alexander, S., & Ruderman, M.  1987. The role of procedural and distributive 

justice in organizational  behavior. Social Justice Research.  1.  177-198.

Amabile, T. M.  1996. Creativity in context. Boulder, CO:  Westview Press.

Amabile, T. M.  1988. A model of creativity and innovation in organizations. In B. 

M.  Staw, & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, vol.  10,  123- 
167.

Amabile, T. M., & Gryskiewicz, S.  1987. Creativity in the R & D laboratory. 

Technical report no. 30, Center for Creative Leadership, Greensboro, NC.

Ambrose, M. L., Harland, L.  K., & Kulik, C. T.  1991. Influence of social 

comparison on perceptions of organizational fairness. Journal of Applied Psychology. 76. 
239-246.

Ancona, D. G„ & Caldwell, D. F.  1992. Demography and design:  Predictors of 

new product team performance. Organizational Science. 3. 321-341.

Aranya, N„ Kushnir, T., & Valency, A.  1986. Organizational commitment in a 

male-dominated profession. Human Relations, 39.433-448.

Ashforth, B. E., & Mael, F.  1989. Social identity theory and the organization. 

Academy of Management Review.  14. 20-39.

Baldwin, T. T., Magjuka, R. J„ & Loher, B. T.  1991. The perils of participation: 
Effects of choice of training on trainees motivation and learning.  Personnel Psychology. 
44, 51-65.

Bantel, K.A., & Jackson, S.E.  1989. Top management and innovations in 

banking: Does the composition of the top team make a difference? Strategic Management 
Journal.  10.107-124.

Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D.A.  1986. The moderator-mediator variable distinction 

is social psychology research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 51.1173-1183.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

106


Barrrtt-riow-arc  E.  ts T ' i=r:  T  R 

PToasaura.'  tusntr as i. r t t r a r   rr 

iiliucatiyr  CErcisnmi  3;>u~na  u’  Erv.ir.aiirx  and SncaL  Psvmtnorx  2  E^+r-Bix-

Bin  E  .'  A.  Moag 

r  - uBr  Intrrartitma  justice  Cnmmunicatirir  cncrru. ,v 

'.in'Tirs:  k   R J  Ix u iek .  EEL  Snrpparc.  A.  MEl  Bzurrmar 
Nrgouaii'um  ir  'Lrnan:2aacrn>  pr  -5-55  Grecrwier..  CT  .'. Ai Press

.Eo.'.  .  Rcseatcr  at 

B;au  r  M  .V 

irtruuanrx  anc netgrogcneirx  New  f or k  rrer Press

B:ac  r  M .  Biurr.  7  7  &.  Scrw-irtc.  E  -95.2.  rieierogmesTx  anc 

tmrrmar-iagt  Arac-icar  Su.’toiugica. Renew  -~  - 5~rC

Brewer  M  . 9”*9  ir  group noises it. me tnmnim.  miergmur situation  A 

cvgnrave-roouxaucma.  anu'y.sis  P’sv rnctic’gicu  Bulietrr.  sr.. 3i’~-?2-

Brewer.  M  B  <k  Kramer  R  M  1955  The psycnoiogx  o’  mirrcrour anr.uae> 

anc oerrdvrjr  Annual Renew  of Psx rncxmrx  5b. 21 4-2-3

Brewer. M  B  .  A:  MUier.  N  i954  Beyone ’.n r comar. rx-pomesis  Tneorraoa 

pes.pcr.jxes  or desegregation  Ir  N  Milter L   M B  Brewer  .Eds  i. Groans sr.  contact  The 
osxcnok'p  or.  desegregation  251-502  Orlande. FL  Academic Press

Bnef. A . Burke. M . Rcomsor. B..  6i Webster. J.  1958. Should negaux-e 

affectmtx  remain an  unmeasured x ananie tn me stuax  of job stress. Journal  of Applied 
Psvchoiogx. ~3.  195-195

Brockner. J  1990  Scope of justice m the w orkplace:  How  sumx ors re a r to co- 

worker laxoffs  Joumai  of Sociai  issues. 46. 95-106

Brockner. J.. A:  Siegel. P  1995  Understanding the interaction betw een procedural 
and distributee jusuce.  The role of trust. In R.M  Kramer. & T.R. Txler  (Eds.). Trust in 
organizations  Newburx  Park. CA:  Sage Publicauons.

Brockner. J.. Konoxskx. M.. Cooper-Schneider. R.. Foleer. R.. Martin. C.. &
Bies. R. J.  1994. Interactixe effects of procedural jusuce and outcome neeauvitv on 
x ictims and survivors of job loss. Academy of Management Joumai. 37. 397-409.

Brvne. D. E.  1971. The attracuon paradigm. New  York:  Academic Press.

Campion, M.A., G J. Medsker. & A.C. Higgs.  1993. Relations between work 

group characteristics and effectiveness:  implications for designing effective work Groups. 
Personnel Psychology. 46. 823-855.

Cappelli, P., & Sherer, P. D.  1991. The missing role of context in OB: The need 

for a meso-level approach. Research in Organizational Behavior.  13. 55-110.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

107


Carroll, G. R., & Harrison, J. R.  1998. Organizational demography and culture: 

Insights from a formal model and simulation. Administrative Science Quarterly. 43.637- 
667.

Chatman, J. A., Polzer, J. T., Barsade, S. G., & Neale, M. A.  1998. Being 

different yet feeling similar: The influence of demographic composition an organizational 
culture in work processes and outcomes. Administrative Science Quarterly. 43. 749-780.

Chattopadhvay. P.  1999. Beyond direct and symmetrical effects: The influence of 

demographic dissimilarity on organizational citizenship behavior. Academy of 
Management Joumai. 42. 273-287.

Clegg, C. W.  1983. Psychology of employee lateness, absence, and turnover:  A 
methodological critique and an empirical study. Joumai of Applied Psychology. 68. 88- 
101.

Cohen, R. L.  1985.  Procedural justice and participation. Human Relations. 38. 

643-663.

Cohen, J., & Cohen, P.  1983. Applied multiple regression/correlation analysis for 

the behavioral sciences. Hillsdale, NJ:  Erlbaum.

Cohen, S. G., Bailey, D. E.  1997. What makes teams work: Group effectiveness 
research from the shop floor to the executive suite. Joumai of Management. 23. 239-290.

Cox, T., Lobel, S., & McLeod, P.  1991. Effects of ethnic group cultural 
differences on cooperative and competitive behavior on a group task. Joumai of 
Organizational Behavior.  1.419-431.

creativity and productivity. Academy of Management Joumai. 38: 483-503.

Cropanzano, R., & Folger, R.  1989.  Referent cognition and task decision 

autonomy: Beyond equity theory. Joumai of Applied Psychology. 74. 293-299.

Cropanzano, R., Greenberg, J., & Schminke, M.  1998. Justice as a mortar of 

social cohesion. In M. Turner  (Ed.), Groups at work:  Advances in theory and research. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Cummings, A., Zhou, J., & Oldham, G.  1993. Demographic differences and 

employee work outcomes:  Effects of multiple comparison groups. Paper presented at the 
Annual Meeting of the Academy of management, Atlanta, GA.

Earley, P. C., & Lind, E. A.  1987. Procedural justice and participation in task 

selection: The role of control in mediating justice judgments. Joumai of Personality and 
Social Psychology. 52.  1148-1160.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

108


Edwards, J. R.  1994. The study of congruence in organizational  behavior 

research: critique and a proposed alternative. Organizational  Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes. 58. 51-100.

Elsass, P. M., & Graves, L. M.  1997. Demographic diversity in decision-making 

groups: The experiences of women and people of color. Academy of Management 
Review. 22. 946-973.

Ely, R. J.  1994. The effects of organizational  demography and social  identity on 
relationships among professional  women. Administrative Science Quarterly. 39, 203-238.

Ely, R. J.  1995. The power in demography:  Women’s Social Construction of 

gender identity at work. Academy of Management Joumai. 38, 589-634.

Exeter, T.G.  1992. In and out of work. American Demographics. 63.

Festinger, L.  1954. A theory of social comparison process. Human Relations. 7. 

117-140.

Fields, D. L., & Blum, T C.  1997. Employee satisfaction in work groups with 

different gender composition. Joumai of Organizational Behavior.  18:  181-196.

Fields, J., & Wolff, E. N.  1991. The decline of sex segregation and the wage gap 

1970-80, Joumai of Human Resources. 26.608-622.

Floge, L., & Merrill, D. M.  1986. Tokenism reconsidered: Male nurses and female 

physicians in a hospital setting. Social Forces. 64.925-947.

Folger, R.  1977. Distributive and procedural justice: Combined impact of "voice" 
and improvement on experienced inequity. Joumai of Personality and Social Psychology. 
35,  108-119.

Folger, R., & Greenberg, J.  1985. Procedural justice:  An interpretative analysis of 

personnel systems. Research in Personnel and Human Resource Management. 3,  141- 
183.

Folger, R., & Konovsky, M. A.  1989. Effects of procedural and distributive 

justice on reactions to pay raise decisions. Academy of Management Joumai. 3 2 ,1 15-
BO.

Folger, R., & Martin, C.  1986. Relative deprivation and referent cognitions: 

Distributive and procedural justice effects. Joumai of Experimental Social Psychology.
22, 531-546.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

109


Folger, R., Rosenfield, D., Grove, J., & Corkran, L.  1979. Effects of "voice" and 
peer opinions on responses to inequity. Joumai of Personality and Social Psychology. 35, 
2253-2261.

Friedman, J. & DiTomaso, N.  1996. Myths about diversity: What managers need 
to know about changes in the U.S.  labor force. California Management Review. 38. 54- 
77.

Fryxell, G. E., & Gordon M. E.  1989. Workplace justice and job satisfaction as 

predictors of satisfaction with union and management.  Academy of Management Joumai. 
32, 851-866.

Gilson, L. L., & Blum, T.C.  1998. Social context and fairness: The relationship 

Between gender and workgroup composition and perceptions of fairness. Paper presented 
at the Academy of Management Meetings, San Diego, CA.

Gladstein, D.  1984. A model of task group effectiveness. Administrative Science 

Quarterly. 29.499-517.

Glanman, M. J., Jones, A. P., & Rozelle, R M.  1996. The effects of co-worker 

similarity on the emergence of affect in work teams. Groups & Organization 
Management. 21.  192-215.

Glick, W. H., Miller, C. C., & Huber, G. P.  1993. The impact of upper echelon 

diversity on organizational performance. In G.P. Huber & W. H. Glick  (Eds.), 
Organizational change and re-design:  Ideas and insights for improving performance  pp. 
176-224. New York: Oxford University Press.

Good, L„ & Nelson, D.  1971. Effects of person-group and intra-group similarity 
on perceived group attractiveness and cohesiveness. Psvchonomic Science. 25. 215-217.

Graen, G., & Cashman, J.  1975. A role-making model of leadership in formal 
organizations. A developmental approach. In J. Hunt & L. Larson  (Eds.), Leadership 
frontiers  pp. 309-357. Kent, OH: Kent State University Press.

Graves, L. M., & Powell, G. N.  1995. The effect of sex similarity on recruiters’ 
evaluations of actual applicants: A test of the similarity-attraction paradigm. Personnel 
Psychology, 48.85-98.

Greenberg, J.  1990. Looking fair vs. Being fair: Managing impressions of 

organizational justice. In B. M. Staw & L. L. Cummings  (Eds.), Research in 
organizational behavior.  111-157. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Greenberg, J.  1990. Organizational justice: Yesterday, today, and tomorrow. 

Joumai of Management.  16, 399-432.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

110


Greenberg, J.  1987. A taxonomy of organizational justice theories.  Academy of 

Management Review. 9-22.

Greenberg, J.  1986. Determinants of perceived fairness of performance 

evaluations. Joumai of Applied Psychology. 71, 340-342.

Greenberg, J.  1978. Effects of reward value and retaliative power on allocation 

decisions: Justice, generosity of greed? Joumai of Personality and Social Psychology. 36. 
367-379.

Greenberg, J., & Folger, R.  1983.  Procedural justice, participation, and the fair 

process effect in groups and organizations. In P. B. Paulus  (Ed.), Basic Group Processes. 
New York: Springer-Verlag.

Greenhaus, J.  H., Parasuraman, S., & Wormley, W. M.  1990. Effects of race on 

organizational experiences, job performance evaluations, and career outcomes. Academy 
of Management Joumai. 33.64-86.

Grover, S. L.  1991. Predicting the perceived fairness of parental leave policies. 

Joumai of Applied Psychology. 76, 247-255.

Guzzo, R. A., & G.P. Shea.  1992. Group performance and intergroup relations in 

organizations. In M.D. Dunnette & L.M. Hough (Eds.),  Handbook of industrial and 
organizational psychology. 269-313. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

Hackman, J.  1987. The design of work teams. In J. Lorsch  (Ed.), Handbook of 

organizational behavior  pp. 315-342. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Hackman, J. R., & Oldham, G. R.  1975. Development of the job diagnostic 

survey. Joumai of Applied Psychology. 60.159-170.

Hage, J., & M. Aiken.  1967. Program change and organizational properties: A 

comparative analysis. American Joumai of Sociology. 72, 503-519.

Hambrick, D. C., & Mason, P.  1984. Upper echelons: The organization as a 

reflection of its top management. Academy of Management Review. 9.  193-206.

Harris, S. G., & Mossholder, K. W.  1996. The affective implications of perceived 

congruence with culture dimensions during organizational transformation. Joumai of 
Management. 22. 527-547.

Harrison, D. A., Price, K. H., & Bell, M. P.  1998. Beyond relational demography: 

Time and the effects of surface and deep-level diversity on work group cohesion. 
Academy of Management Joumai. 41. 86-107.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

I l l


Hirschman, A. O.  1970. Exit, voice and lovaltv: Responses to declines in firms, 

organizations, and states. Cambridge, MA:  Harvard University Press.

Hoffman, L.  1959. Homogeneity and member personality and its effect on group 

problem solving. Joumai of Abnormal Psychology. 58. 206-214.

Hoffman, L., & Maier, N.  1961. Quality and acceptance of problem solutions by 

members of homogeneous and heterogeneous groups. Joumai of Abnormal and Social 
Psychology. 62.401-407.

Hoffman, L., Harburg, E., & Maier, N.  1962. Differences and disagreements as 
factors in creative group problem solving. Joumai of Abnormal and Social  Psychology. 
64, 206-214.

Holahan, C.  1979. Stress experienced by women doctoral students, need for 
support and occupational sex typing: An interactional view. Sex Roles. 5.425-436.

Hrebiniak, L.G., & Alutto, J.A.  1972. Personal and role-related factors in the 

development of organizational commitment. Administrative Science Quarterly.  17. 555- 
573.

Ibarra, H.  1992. Homophily and differential returns: Sex differences in network 
structure and access in an advertising firm. Administrative Science Quarterly. 37.422- 
447.

Ibarra, H.  1995.  Race, opportunity, and diversity of social circles in managerial 

networks. Academy of Management Joumai. 38.673-703.

Jackson, S.  1992. Team composition in organizational settings: Issues in 

managing a diverse work force. In S. Worchel., W. Wood., & J. Simpson  (Eds.), Group 
processes and productivity. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

Jackson, S. E., & Schuler, R. S.  1995. Understanding human resource 

management in the context of organizations and their environments. Annual Review of 
Psychology. 46,237-2644.

Jackson, S. E., Brett, J. F., Sessa, V. I., Cooper, D. M., Julin, J. A., & Peyronnin. 

1991. Some differences make a difference: Individuals dissimilarity and group 
heterogeneity as correlates of recruitment, promotions and turnover. Joumai of Applied 
Psychology. 76.675-689.

Jackson, S. E., May, K. E., & Whitney, K.  1995. Understanding the dynamics of 

diversity in decision-making groups. In Guzzo, R.A., Salas, E., & Associates (Eds.), 
Team effectiveness and decision-making in organizations. 204-261. San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass Inc.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

112


James, K.  1993. The social context of organizational justice:  Cultural, intergroup, 

and structural effects on justice behaviors and perceptions.  In R. Cropanzano  (Ed.), 
Justice in the workplace:  Approaching fairness in human resource management.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

James, L. R., & Brett, J. M.  1984. Mediators, moderators, and tests for mediation. 

Joumai of Applied Psychology. 69: 307-321.

Janis, I. L.  1972.  Victims of groupthink:  A psychological study of foreign-policv 

decisions and fiascoes. Houghton Mifflin: Boston, MA.

Janz, B. D., Colquitt, J. A., & Noe, R. A.  1997.  Knowledge worker team 

effectiveness: The role of autonomy, interdependence, team development, and contextual 
support variables. Personnel Psychology. 50. 877-904.

Jehn,  K.  A.  1995.  A  multimethod  examination  of the  benefits  and  detriments  of 

intragroup conflict. Administrative Science Quarterly. 40. 256-282.

Jones, E.E., & Davis, K.E.  1965. From acts to dispositions: The attributional 

process in person perceptions. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social 
psychology, vol. 2:  219-266. New York:  Academic Press.

Joreskog, K. G., & Sorbom, D.  1993. LISREL 8:  Structural equation modeling 
with the S1MPLIS command language. Chicago, IL: Scientific Software International.

Judy, R. W., & D’Amico, C.  1997. Workforce 2020:  Work and workers in the 21st 

century. Indianapolis, IN:  Hudson Institute.

Kallenberg, A. L., & Van Buren, M. E.  1996. Is bigger better? Explaining the 

relationship between organizational size and job rewards. American Sociological Review. 
6 i, 47-66.

Kanfer, R., Sawyer, J., Earley, P. C., & Lind, E. A.  1987. Participation in task 
evaluation procedures: The effect of influential opinion expression and knowledge of 
evaluation criteria on attitudes and performance. Social Justice Research.  1. 235-249.

Kanter, R.  1988. When a thousand flowers bloom: Structural, collective, and 

social conditions for innovation in organizations. In B. Staw & L.L. Cummings (Eds.), 
Research in organizational behavior, vol  10:  169-211. Greenwich CT, JAI Press.

Kanter, R. M.  1972. Commitment and community. Cambridge, New Harvard 

University Press.

Kanter, R. M.  1977. Some effects of proportions on group life: Skewed sex ratios 

and responses to token women. American Joumai of Sociology. 8 2 .965-990.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

113


Kanter, R. M.1977. Men and women of the corporation. New York: Basic Books.

Kelman, H.C.  1958. Compliance, identification, and internalization: Three 

processes of attitude change. Joumai of Conflict Resolution. 51-60.

Kent, R., & McGrath, J.  1969. Task and group characteristics as factors affecting 

group performance. Joumai of Experimental Social Psychology. 5 .429-440.

King, N„ & Anderson.  1990. Innovation and creativity in working groups.  In M. 
A. West & J. L. Farr (Eds.), Innovation and creativity at work. New York: John Wiley & 
Sons.

Konovsky, M. A., & Cropanzano, R.  1991. Perceptions of fairness of employee 

drug testing as a s predictor of employee attitudes and job performance. Joumai of 
Applied Psychology. 76. 698-707.

Konovsky, M.  A., & Pugh, S. D.  1994. Citizenship behavior and social exchange. 

Academy of Management Joumai. 37,656-669.

Konrad, A., Winter, S., & Gutek, B.  1992. Diversity in work group sex 

composition. Research in the Sociology of Organizations.  10.  115-140.

Korsgaard, M. A., Schweiger, D. M., & Sapienza, H. J.  1995. Building 

commitment, attachment, and trust in strategic decision-making teams. The role of 
procedural justice. Academy of Management Joumai. 38.60-84.

Lau, D., & Mumighan, J.  1998. Demographic diversity and faultiness: The 

compositional dynamics of organizational groups. Academy of Management Review. 23. 
325-340.

Lawler, E. E., III.  1996. From the ground up: Six principles for building the new 

logic corporation. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Lawrence. B. S.  1996. Interests and indifference: The role of age in organizational 

sciences. Research in Personnel and Human Resource Management,  14,  1-59.

Lawrence. B. S.  1997. The black box of organizational demography. Organization 

Science. 8.  1-22.

Lease, S. H.  1998. Annual review,  1993-1997. Work attitudes and outcomes. 

Joumai of Vocational Behavior. 53.154-183.

Lefkowitz, J.  1994. Sex-related differences in job attitudes and dispositional 

variables: Now you see them. Academy of Management Joumai. 37, 323-349.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

114


Leventhal, G.  S.  1976. The distribution of rewards and resources in groups and 
organizations.  In L. Berkowitz & W.  Walster (Eds.), Advances in experimental social 
psychology  pp. 91-131.  New  York:  Academic Press.

Leventhal, G.  S.  1980. What should be done with equity theory?  New approaches 
to the study of fairness in social  relationships. In K. J. Gergen, M. S. Greenberg, &  R.  H. 
Willis (Eds.), Social  Exchange:  Advances in Theory and Research  pp.  27-55. New  York: 
Plenum.

Leventhal, G.  S.,  Karuza, J., & Fry, W.  R.  1980.  Beyond fairness:  A theory of 
allocation preferences.  In G.  Mikula (Ed.), Justice and social  interaction  pp.  167-218. 
New  York: Springer-Verlag.

Li, F., Harmer, P.. Duncan, T. E., Duncan, S. S., Acock, A., & Boles, S.  1998. 

Approaches to testing interaction effects using structural equation modeling 
methodology. Multivariate Behavioral  Research. 33,  1-39.

Liden, R. C., Sparrowe, R.T., & Wayne, S. J.  1997.  Lcadcr-mcmber exchange 
theory: The past and potential  for future. In G.R. Ferris (Ed.), Reset in personnel and 
human resource management. Vol  15. Greenwich, CT: JAI  Press.

Lind, E.  A., & Earley, P. C.  1992. Procedural justice and culture.  International 

Joumai of Psychology. 27. 227-242.

Lind, E. A., & Tyler, T.  R  1988  The Social Psychology of Procedural Justice. 

New  York:  Plenum Press.

Lind, E. A., Kanfer, R., & Earley, P. C.  1990.  Voice, control, and procedural 
justice:  Instrumental and non instrumental concerns in fairness judgments. Joumai of 
Personality and Social  Psychology. 59,952-959.

Linville, P., & Jones, E.  1980. Polarized appraisals of outgroup members. Joumai 

of Personality and Social  Psychology. 38.689-703.

Lissak, R. I., Mendes, H., & Lind, E. A.  1983. Organizational and non- 

organizational  influence on attitudes towards work. Unpublished Manuscript, University 
of Illinois, Champaign.

Manz, C. & Sims, H.  1993.  Business without bosses:  How self-managing teams 

are building high-performing companies. New York: Wiley.

Martin, P. Y.  1985. Group sex composition in work organizations: A structural- 
normative model. In S. B. Bacharach & S. M. Mitchell (Eds.), Research in the sociology 
of organizations. Vol. 4: 311-349. Greenwich , CT: JAI Press.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

115


Mathieu, J.E., & Zajac, D.M.  1990.  A review and meta-analysis of the 

antecedents, correlates, and consequences of organizational commitment. Psychological 
Bulletin.  108,  171-194.

McAllister, D.  1995. Affect- and cognition-based trust as foundations for 

interpersonal cooperation in organizations. Academy of Management Journal. 38. 24-59.

McCain, B. R., O ’Reilly, C. C.,III & Pfeffer, J.  1983. The effects of departmental 

demography on turnover. Academy of Management Journal. 26. 626-641.

McFarlin, D. B. & Sweeney, P. D.  1992. Distributive and procedural justice as 

predictors of satisfaction with personal and organizational outcomes. Academy of 
Management Journal. 35: 626--637.

McLeod, P. L., & Lobel, S. A.  1992. The effects of ethnic diversity on idea 

generation in small groups. Academy of Management Best paper Proceedings. 227-231.

Mehra, A., Kilduff, M., & Brass, D. J.  1998. At the margins: A distinctiveness 

approach to the social identity and social networks of underrepresented groups. Academy 
of Management Journal. 4.441- 452

Miller, C. E., Jackson, P., Mueller, J., & Schersching, C.  1987. Some social 

psychological effects of group decision rules. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology. 52. 325-332.

Milliken, F.J., & Martins, L.L.  1996. Searching for common threads: 

Understanding the multiple effects of diversity in organizational groups. Academy of 
Management Review. 21,402-433.

Mirowsky, J., & Ross, C. E.  1989. Social Causes of Psychological Distress. 

Hawthorne, N.Y: Aldine de Gruyter.

Mirowsky, J., & Ross, C. E.  1990. Control or defense? Depression and the sense 
of control over good and bad outcomes. Journal of Health and Social Behavior.31. 71-86.

Mossholder, K. W., Bennett, N., & Martin, C. L.  1998. A multilevel analysis of 

procedural justice context. Journal of Organizational Behavior.  19.  131-141.

Mowday, R., Porter, L.W., & Steers, R.M.  1982. Organizational linkage: The 
psychology of commitment, absenteeism, and turnover. New York: Academic Press.

Mowday, R., Steers, R.M., & Porter, L.W.  1979. The measurement of 

organizational commitment. Journal of Vocational Behavior.  14, 224-247.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

116


Mullen, B., & Copper, C.  1994. The relation between group cohesiveness and 
performance: An integration. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,  115, 210- 
227.

Mumford, M. D., & Gustafson, S. B.  1988. Creativity syndrome:  Integration, 

application, and innovation. Psychological Bulletin.  103. 27-43.

Naumann, S. E., & Bennett, N.  1998. Contextual factors associated with the 

development of procedural justice climate. Paper presented at the Academy of 
Management Meetings, San Diego, CA.

Nemeth, C.  1986. Differential contributions of majority and minority influence. 

Psychological Review. 93.  1-10.

Neter, J., Wasserman, W., & Kutner, M. H.  1989. Applied linear statistical 

models:  Regression, analysis of variance, and experimental designs. Homewood, IL: 
Irwin.

Niehoff, B. P., & Moorman, R. H.  1993. Justice as a mediator of the relationship 

between methods of monitoring and organizational citizenship behavior. Academy of 
Management Journal, 36:  527-556.

Nieva, V., & Gutek, B.  1990. Sex effects on evaluation. Academy of Management 

Review. 5. 267-276.

Nystrom, H.  1979. Creativity and innovation. New York: John Wiley.

O'Farrell, B., & Harlan, S.  1982. Craft workers and clerks: The effects of male 

coworker hostility on women’s satisfaction with nontraditional jobs. Social Problems. 29: 
252-264.

Oldham, G. R., & Cummings, A.  1996. Employee creativity:  Personal and 

contextual factors at work. Academy of Management Journal. 39: 607-634.

O ’Quin, K., & LoTempio, Sandra,  1998. Job satisfaction and intentions to 

turnover in human services agencies perceived as stable and nonstable. Perceptual Motor 
Skills. 86.339-344.

O'Reilly, C. A., Williams, K. Y., & Barsade, S.  1999. The impact of relational 
demography on teamwork: When differences make a difference. Paper presented at the 
Academy of Management Meetings, Chicago, IL.

O'Reilly, C.A., & Caldwell, D. F.  1980. Job choice: The impact of intrinsic and 

extrinsic factors on subsequent satisfaction and commitment. Journal of Applied 
Psychology. 65,559-565.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

117


O’Reilly, C.A., & Chatman, J.  1986. Organizational commitment and 

psychological attachment: The effects of compliance, identification, and internalization 
on prosocial behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology. 71,492-499.

O’Reilly, C.A., Caldwell, D. F., & Barnett, W. P.  1989. Work group demography, 

social integration, and turnover. Administrative Science Quarterly. 34: 21-37.

Organ, D. W.  1988. Organizational citizenship behavior: The good soldier 

syndrome. Lexington,  MA: Lexington Books.

Ostroff, C.  1992. The relationship between satisfaction, attitudes, and 

organizational research:  An organizational  level analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology. 
T L  963-974.

Pelled, L.  1996. Demographic diversity, conflict, and work group outcomes: An 

intervening process theory. Organizational Science. 7 .615-631.

Pelled, L.  1997. Relational demography and perceptions of group conflict and 

performance:  A field investigation. International Journal of Conflict Resolution.

Pelled, L.H., Eisenhardt, K. M., & Xin, K.R.  1999. Exploring the black box: An 

analysis of work group diversity, conflict, and performance.  Administrative Science 
Quarterly. 44,  1-28.

Perry, E. L., Davis-Blake, A., & Kulik, C. T.  1994. Explaining gender-based 
selection decisions: A synthesis of contextual and cognitive approaches.  Academy of 
Management Review.  19.786-820.

Pfeffer, J.  1983. Organizational demography. In B.M.  Staw & L.L. Cummings 
(Eds.), Research in Organizational Behavior. Vol. 5  pp. 299-357. Greenwich, CT: JAI 
Press.

Pfeffer, J.  1997. New directions for organization theory:  Problems and prospects. 

New York. Oxford University Press.

Pfeffer, J., & Davis-Blake, A.  1987. The effect of the proportion of women on 

salaries:  The case of college administrators. Administrative Science Quarterly. 32:  1-24.

Pinto, M. B.,  Peinto, J. K., & Prescott, J. E.  1993. Antecedents and consequences 

of project team cross-functional cooperation. Management Science. 39.  1281-1297.

Podsakoff, P., & Organ, D.  1986. Self-reports in organizational research: 

Problems and prospects. Journal of Management.  12. 531-544.

Price, J. L., & Mueller, C. W.  1986. Handbook of organizational measurement. 

Marshfield, MA: Pilman Publishing.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

118


Richards, O. C., & Kochan, T. A.  1999. The impact of cultural diversity on 

organizational effectiveness: An integrative theory of process and content. Working Paper 
Louisiana Institute of Technology.

Riordan, C. M.  1997. Advancing relational demography theory: A construct 

validity study if three measures of demographic similarity. Paper presented at the 
Academy of Management meetings in Boston, MA.

Riordan, C. M„ & Wayne, J. H.  1998. Work group gender composition and 
employee attitudes:  A test of competing hypotheses. Paper presented at the Southern 
Academy of Management Meetings in New Orleans, LA.

Riordan, C. M., & Weatherly, E. W.  1999. Relational demography within groups: 
An empirical test of a theoretical model. Paper presented at the Academy of Management 
meetings, Chicago, IL.

Riordan, C.M., & Shore, L. M.  1997. Demographic diversity and employee 

attitudes: An empirical examination of relational demography within work units. Journal 
of Applied Psychology. 82. 342-358.

Roos, P. A., & Treiman, D. J.  1980. DOT scales for the  1970 census 

classification. In A.R. Miller, D.J. Treinman, P.S. Cain, & P.A. Roos (Eds.). Work,  jobs, 
and occupations: A critical review of the dictionary of occupational titles:  336-389. 
Washington, DC: National  Academy Press.

Sackett, P., DuBoisi, C., & Noe, A.  1991. Tokenism in performance evaluations: 

The effects of work representation on male-female and black-white differences in 
performance ratings. Journal of Applied Psychology. 76. 263-267.

Sampson, R. J.  1984. Group size, heterogeneity, and intergroup conflict: A test of 

Blau’s inequality and heterogeneity. Social Forces. 62.618-639.

Schein, E. H.  1988.  Process consultation: Its role in organizational development. 

Vol  1, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Schminke, M.  1996. The effects of organizational structure on perceptions of 
fairness. Paper presented at the Academy of Management Meetings, Cincinnati, OH.

Schneider, B.  1987. The people make the place. Personnel  Psychology. 40.437-

453.

Schneider, B.  1990. The climate for service: An application of the climate 
construct. In B. Schneider (Ed.), Organizational climate and culture. 383-412. San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

119


Schreiber, C.  1979. Changing places:  Men and women in transitional occupations. 

Cambridge, MA:  MIT Press.

Schwarz, N., &  Bless, H.  1991.  Happy and mindless, but sad and smart? The 

impact of affective states on analytical reasoning.  In J Forgas & P Dress (Eds.),  Emotion 
and social  judgments.

Scott, S. G., &  Bruce, R.  A.,  1994. Determinants of innovative behavior:  A path 
model of individual innovation in the workplace. Academy of Management Journal. 37. 
580-607.

Scott, W.  R.  1987. Organizations:  Rational, natural, and open systems.

Englewood Cliffs, NJ:  Prentice Hall.

Shalley, C.  E.  1991. Effects of productivity goals, creativity goals, and personal 

discretion on individual creativity. Journal of Applied Psychology. 76:  179-185.

Shalley, C. E.  1995. Effects of coaction, expected evaluation, and goal setting on 

creativity and productivity. Academy of Management Journal. 38.483-503.

Shalley, C. E., Gilson, L.  L., & Blum, T. C. 2000. Matching creativity 

requirements and the work environment:  Effects on satisfaction and intent to turnover. 
Academy of Management Journal. 43, 215-224.

Shapiro, D.  L., &  Brett, J. M.  1991. Comparing the instrumental and value- 
expressive models of procedural  justice under conditions of high and low decision 
control. Paper presented at the national Academy of Management Meeting, Miami, FL.

Skarlicki, D. P., & Latham, G.  P.  1997. Leadership training in organizational 
justice to increase citizenship behavior within a labor union:  A replication. Personnel 
Psychology. 50.617-633.

Smith, C.A., Organ, D., & Near, J.  1983. Organizational citizenship behavior:  Its 

nature and antecedents. Journal of Applied Psychology. 68,653-663.

Smith, K. G., Smith, K. A., Olian, J.  D., Sims, H. P., O B an non, Jr., D. P., & 

Scully, J. A.  1994. Top management team demography and process: The role of social 
integration and communication. Administrative Science Quarterly. 39.412-438.

South, S. J., Bonjean, C. M., W. T., & Corder, J.  1982. Social structure and 

intergroup interaction:  Men and women of the federal bureaucracy. American 
Sociological Review. 47. 587-599.

Spangler, E., Gordon, M., & Pipkin R.  1978. Token women: An empirical test of 

Ranter’s hypotheses. American Journal of Sociology. 85.  160-170.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

120


Stangor, C., Lynch, L., Duan, C., & Glass, B.  1992. Categorization of individuals 
on the basis of multiple social features. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 62. 
207-218.

Steers, R.  1977. Antecedents and outcomes of organizational commitment. 

Administrative Science Quarterly. 22.46-56.

Steiner, I. D.  1972. Group process and productivity. New York:  Academic Press.

Sweeney, P. D., & McFarlin, D. B.  1993. Workers’evaluations of the "ends" and 

"means": An examination of four models of distributive and procedural justice. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision  Processes. 34.470-493.

Tajfel, H.  1978. The achievement of group differentiation.  In H. Tajfel (Ed.), 
Differentiation between social  groups: Studies in the social psychology of intergroup 
relations  pp. 483-507. London: Academic Press.

Tajfel, H.  1982. Social identity and intergroup relations. Cambridge: Cambridge 

University Press.

Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C.  1986. The social identity theory of intergroup behavior. 

In S. Worchel & W. G. Austin (Eds.), Psychology of intergroup relations  2nd edition, 
pp. 7-24. Chicago: Nelson Hall.

Thibaut, J., & Walker, L.  1975. Procedural Justice:  A psychological analysis. 

Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Thibaut, J., & Walker, L.  1978. A theory of procedure. California Law Review. 

66, 541-566.

Thornburg, T.  1991. Group size and member diversity influence on creative 

performance. Journal of Creative Behavior. 25. 324-333.

Tolbert, P. S., & Andrews, A.  1994. The effects of group proportions on group 
dynamics. Presented at the Conference on Productivity and Interpersonal Relations in 
Work, October,  1994, Greensboro, NC.

Triandis, H., Hall, E., & Ewen, R.  1965. Member heterogeneity and dyadic 

creativity. Human Relations.  18. 33-55.

Tsui, A. S., & O’Reilly, C. A.  1989. Beyond simple demographic effects: The 

importance of relational demography in superior-subordinate dyads. Academy of 
Management Journal. 32,402-423.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

121


Tsui, A. S., Egan, T. D., & O’Reilly, C. A.  1992. Being different:  Relational 

demography  and organizational attachment. Administrative Science Quarterly. 37, 549 
579.

Turner, J. C.  1982. Towards a cognitive redefinition of the social group. In H. 
Tajfel  (Ed.). Social identity and intereroup relations  pp.  15-40. Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press.

Turner, J. C.  1984. Social identification and psychological group formation. In H. 
Tajfel (Ed.), The social dimensions: European developments in social psychology. 518- 
540, Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Turner, J. C.  1987. Rediscovering the social  group:  A self-categorization theory. 

Oxford, England: Basil Blackwell.

Tushman, M. L., & Nelson, R. R.  1990. Introduction: Technology, organizations 

and innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly. 35.  1- 8.

Tyler. T. R.  1989. The psychology of procedural justice:  A test of the group-value 

model. Journal of Personality and Social Psvcholoev. 57. 830-838.

Tyler. T. R.  1987. Conditions leading to value expressive effects in judgments of 
procedural justice: A test of four models. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 
52, 333-344.

Tyler, T. R., Boeckmann, R. J., Smith H. J., & Huo, Y. J.  1997. Social  justice in a 

diverse society. Westview Press: Oxford England.

Tyler, T. R., & Lind, E. A.  1992. A relational model of authority in groups. 

Advances in Experimental Social Psychology. 25. New York:  Academic Press.

Tyler, T. R., Rasinski, K., & Spodick, N.  1985. The influence of voice on 

satisfaction with leaders: Exploring the meaning of process control. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology. 48.700-725.

Tyler. T.  R., & Caine, A.  1981. The role of distributive and procedural fairness in 
the  endorsement  of  formal  leaders.  Journal  of  Personality  and  Social  Psychology.  41, 
6642-655.

Van de Ven, A. H.  1986. Central problems in the management of innovation. 

Management Science. 32, 590-607.

Van den Bos, K., Bruins, J., Wilke, H. A. M., & Dronkert, E.  1999. Sometimes 

unfair procedures have nice aspects: On the psychology of the fair process effect. Journal 
Personality and Social Psvcholoev. 7 7 .324-336.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

122


Wageman, R.  1995. Interdependence and group effectiveness.  Administrative 

Science Quarterly. 40.  145-180.

Wagner, W. G., Pfeffer, J., & O’Reilly, C.A.  1984. Organizational demography 
and turnover in top management groups. Administrative Science Quarterly. 29. 74-92.

Walker, L., LaTour. S., Lind, E. A., & Thibaut, J.  1974. Reactions of participants 

and observers to modes of adjudication. Journal of Applied Social Psychology. 4, 295- 
310.

Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A.  1988. Development and validation of 

brief measures of positive and negative affect: The PANAS scales. Journal of Personality 
and Social  Psychology. 54.  1063-1070.

Watson, W. E., Kumar, K., & Michaelson, L. K.  1993. Cultural diversity’s impact 

on interaction process and performance: Comparing homogeneous and diverse task 
groups.  Academy of Management Journal. 36, 590-602.

Wayne, S., Shore, L., & Liden, R.  1997.  Perceived organizational support and 

leader-member exchange:  A social exchange perspective. Academy of Management 
Journal. 40. 574-587.

Webber, S. S., & Donahue, L. M.  1999. Examining the "double-edged sword" of 

diversity in work groups: A meta-analvsis. Paper presented at the Society for 
Industrial/Organizational Psychology Conference, Atlanta, GA.

West, M, A., & N.R. Anderson.  1996. Innovation in top management teams. 

Journal of Applied Psychology. 81.680-693.

West, M. A., & J.L. Farr.  1990. Innovation and creativity at work:  Psychological 

and organizational strategies. Chichester, England: Wiley.

West, M.A.  1990. The social psychology of innovation in groups. In . M.A. West 

& J.L. Farr, (Eds.), Innovation and creativity a work: Psychological and organizational 
strategies. 555-576. Chichester, England: Wiley.

Wharton, A. S., & Baron, J. N.  1987. So happy together? The impact of gender 

segregation on men at work. American Sociological Review. 52, 574-587.

Wharton, A. S., & Baron, J. N.  1991. Satisfaction? The psychological impact of 

gender segregation on women at work. Sociological Quarterly. 32.365-387.

Wiersema, M. F., & Bird, A.  1993. Organizational demography in Japanese firms: 

Group heterogeneity, individual dissimilarity, and top management team turnover. 
Academy of Management Journal. 36.996-1025.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

123


Wiersema, M.F., & Bantel, K.  1992. Top management team demography and 

corporate strategic change. Academy of Management Journal. 35.91-121.

Williams, K. Y., & O ’Reilly, C. A.  1998. Demography and diversity in 

organizations:  A review of 40 years of research. In Research in organizational behavior. 
20, 77-140.

Williams, L. J., & Hazer, J. T.  1986. Antecedents and consequences of 

satisfaction and commitment in turnover models:  A rcanalysis using latent variable 
structural equation models. Journal of Applied Psychology. 71. 219-231.

Woddman, R. W„ Sawyer, J. E., & Griffin, W. W.  1993. Toward a theory of 

organizational creativity. Academy of Management Review.  18. 293-321.

Wood, W.  1987. Meta-analytic review of sex differences in group performance. 

Psychological  Bulletin.  102. 53-71.

Xie, J. L., & Johns, G.  1995. Job scope and stress: Can job scope be too high? 

Academy of Management Journal. 38.  1288-1309.

Zander, A.  1982. Making groups effective. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Zenger, T. R., & Lawrence, B. S.  1989. Organizational demography: The 

differential effects of age and tenure distribution on technical communication. Academy 
of Management Journal. 32. 353-376.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

124


APPENDIX  1

Organizational Commitment  (alpha -  .87)

1.  You  are  willing  to  put  in  a  great  deal  of effort  beyond  that  normally  expected  in

order to help this organization be successful.

2.  You say "good things" to your friends about the organization you work for.
3.  You would accept  almost any type  of job assignment in  order to keep working  for

this organization.

4. Your values and the values of the organization are very similar.
5. You are proud to tell others that you work for this organization.
6. This organization really inspires you to perform at your best.
7.  You  are  extremely  glad  that  you  chose  this  organization  to  work  for over  others

you were considering.

8.  You really care about whether this organization succeeds or fails.
9.  For you, this is the best of all possible organizations to work for.

Job Satisfaction  (alpha -  .72)

1. Generally speaking, I am very satisfied with this job.
2 .1 am generally satisfied with the kind of work I do in this job.
3. Most people at my workplace, who have jobs like mine, are satisfied with their jobs.

Intentions to Turnover

1 .1 frequently think of quitting my job.

Creative Performance  fr = .64)

1. The work I produce is creative
2. The work I produce is original

Procedural Justice  (alpha = .88)

I. In your organization, decisions are made by managers in an unbiased manner.
1. Employees are allowed to challenge or appeal decisions that are made by managers.
3. Managers collect accurate and complete information before making decisions.
4.  At the place where you work, managers clarify decisions and provide additional

information when requested by employees.

5. Managers make sure that all employee concerns are heard before decisions are

made.

6. In your organization, decisions are applied consistently across employees

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

125


Group Cohesiveness  (alpha = .81 >

trust my coworkers

1.  My coworkers are helpful to me in getting my job done
2 .1 
3.  My coworkers openly communicate their ideas
4.  My coworkers are generally supportive of one another
5. There is very little conflict among my co-workers

Socializing With Coworkers

I.  Thinking of the people you have met at work. How often do you get together 

socially with people you have met through work?

Negative Affectivitv  (alpha = .94)

Over the last week, on how many days did you experience each of the following 

feelings;

1.  felt sad
2.  had trouble getting to sleep or staying asleep
3.  felt everything was an effort
4.  felt you just couldn't get going
5. felt lonely
6.  felt you just couldn't shake the blues
7. had trouble keeping our mind on what you were doing

Distributive Justice  (alpha = .76)

1.  Where you work the amount of pay employees receive is fairly distributed
2.  Employees receive an amount of fringe benefits that is fair
3.  Where you work, the overall rewards received by employees are fairly distributed

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

126


Occupational Categories: Study Data as Compared to  1997 US Census Data.

TABLE  1

Executive/Administrative*

Professional Specialty *

Technical Support

Sales Occupations*

Administrative Support*

Service except household & Protective

Mechanics/Precision craft

Machine Operators

Transportation

Laborers

Protective Service

Private Household**

Farming**

* Coded as “white” collar workers
** Not included in analyzed sample

Sample Data 
15.7%

21.6%

6.1%

7.9%

16.2%

7.2%

8.7%

7.4%

2.3%

1.4%

3.0%

.2%

2.3%

U.S. Census

14.5%

15.1%

r

3.2%

12.1%

14.0%

11.1%

11.0%

5.9%

4.1%

3.9%

1.8%

.6%

2.7%

<

Reproduced with permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

127


Percentages of Males and Whites by U.S. Occupational Categories: 

Study Data vs.  1998 US Census Data.

TABLE 2

MEN

Sample

Census

W HITE

Census

Sample

16.0%

20.0%

4.0%

10.0%

18.0%

8.0%

9.9%

8.0%

2.5%

2.5%

1.0%

.1%

0%

15.2%

15.2%

3.2%

12.4%

13.7%

10.1%

11.5%

5.9%

3.9%

3.7%

1.7%

.6%

2.9%

V
t
Executi ve/Administrati ve

Professional Specialty

Technical  Support

Sales Occupations

Administrative Support

Service except household 
& Protective

16.0%

18.0%

4.0%

10.0%

14.0%

7.0%

15.0%

13.1%

2.8%

11.1%

5.6%

7.3%

Mechanics/Precision craft

14.9%

18.7%

'Machine Operators

Transportation

Laborers

Protective Service

Private Household

Farming

8.0%

3.0%

3.0%

2.0%

.1%

0%

6.9%

6.8%

5.8%

2.8%

.1%

4.0%

128

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


TABLE 3 

Demographic Group Composition

Male
Female
Total

All Male

151
18
169

All White

White
Black
Asian
Hispanic
Other
Total

337
6
2
5
2
352

Mostly
Male
194
61
255

Mostly
White
376
26
7
9
7
425

All Female

16
126
142

Mostly
Female

51
217
268

All

Minority

7
3
1
4
1
16

Mostly
Minority

29
28
4
7
3
71

Diverse

123
136
259

Diverse
Group
144
31
5
14
13
207

Total

535
558
1093

Total

893
94
19
39
26
1071

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

129


R
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
e
d

 

wi
h

t

 

i

p
e
r
m
s
s
o
n

i

 

of

 

t

h
e 

c
o
p
y
r
i
g
h

t
 

o
w
n
e
r
.
 

F
u
r
t

h
e
r
 

r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i

o
n
 

i

p
r
o
h
b
i
t
e
d
 

w

i
t
h
o
u
t
 

i

p
e
r
m
s
s
o
n

i

.

T A B L E 4 

Factor Loadings

Satisfaction
1.  Generally speaking,  I am very satisfied  with this job.
2.  1 am  generally satisfied with the kind o f work  1 do in this job.
3.  M ost people at my workplace, w ho have jobs like mine, are satisfied with their jobs. 
Comm itm ent
1.  You are w illing to put in a great deal o f effort beyond that

normally expected in order to help this organization be successful.

2.  You say "good things" to your friends about the organization you work  for.
3.  You would accept alm ost any type o f job assignm ent in order

to keep working for this organization.

4.  Your values and the  values o f the organization are very similar.
5.  Y ou are proud to tell others that you work for this organization.
6.  This organization really  inspires you to perform at your best.
7.  You are extrem ely glad that you chose this organization to

work  for over others you were considering.

I frequently think o f  quitting my job. 

8.  You really care about whether this organization succeeds or fails.
9.  For you, this is the best o f all possible organizations to work  for. 
Intentions to Turnover
1. 
Creative performance
1.  The work 1 produce  is creative
2.  The work I produce is original 
Procedural Justice
1. 
2.  Em ployees are allow ed to challenge or appeal decisions that are made by managers.
3.  M anagers collect accurate and com plete information before making decisions.
4.  A t the place where you work, managers clarify decisions and provide

In your organization, decisions are made by manager's in an unbiased manner.

additional information when requested by em ployees.

S.  M anagers make sure that all em ployee concerns are heard before decisions are  made.
6.  In your organization, decisions are applied consistently across em ployees.

1

.24
.40
.14

.13
.33

.31
.41

.25

.29
.35
.14

-.21

.04
-.02

.76
.76
.82

.77
.76
.55

2

.29
.09
.29

.71
.54

.54
.58

.59

.65
.64
.55

-.30

.04
-.12

.09
.24
.22

.25
.04
.23

3

-.08
-.13
-.08

-.06
.01

-.12
.06

-.08

.08
-.03
-.06

.60

.28
.35

.05
-.04
-.07

.09
-.03
-.07

4

.76
•54
69

.08
.33

.01
.31

.30

.34
.37
.33

.15

-.04
-.03

.14
.06
.08

.11
.16
.21

5

-.04
-.05
.09

.02
-.28

.05
-.15

-.08

-.18
.02
-.07

.06

.83
.77

-.05
.01
-.02

.05
-.03
.04


R
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
e
d

 

wi
h

t

 

i

p
e
r
m
s
s
o
n

i

 

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

10
11
12
13

14
IS

16
17
18
19

20

of

 

t

h
e 

c
o
p
y
r
i
g
h

t
 

o
w
n
e
r
.
 

F
u
r
t

h
e
r
 

r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
 

i

p
r
o
h
b
i
t
e
d
 

w

i
t
h
o
u
t
 

p
e
r
m
s
s

i

i

o
n

.

C orrelation  betw een  C ontrol  V ariables and  D ependent  M easures

T A B L E  5

Mean
39.00
1.33
I.SI
4.46
2.32
3.90
8.18
7.23
559.6

16.99
3.46
2.21
4.35

.60
3.07

3.00
3.32
3.33
1.79

Sd
10.7
.88
.50
1.35
1.78
1.81
8.30
8.61

1193
19.60
.56
.88
.89

.49
.78

.73
.63
.57
1.03

1

-

-.157**
.047
.081**
-.312**
.201**
.557**
-.191**
.046

.071*
.070*
-.073*
.016

.032
.066*

2

-

.004
-.029
.107**
-.045
-.123**
.048
.016

.036
-.080**
-.042
-.059

3

-

-.008
.042
-.193**
-.052
.112**
-.138**

.030
-.028
.001
-.005

.006
-.063*

.060*
-.042

.002
.127**
.077*
-.109**

-.005
-.052
-.051
.059

.041
.046
.039
.026

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

-

-.104**
.292**
.018
-.153**
.092**

.047
.024
.081**
-.030

.041
.048

-.064*
-.004
-.033
-.052

-

-.134**
-.188**
.149**
-.033

-.012
-.097**
.055
.010

-.009
-.035

-

.237**
-.176**
.174**

-.014
-.038
.046
.003

-

- I I 0 ‘ *
.123**

.109**
.056
.035
.019

-

-.068*

-.048
-.162**
-.094**
.006

-

.120**
.010
-.009
-.019

.023
.113**

.027
.029

-.005
-.228**

.036
-.002

-

J0

-.028 ©'
.012
-.076**
-.007
-.056
-.057
.082**

0* -.050
.071*
.021
-.046

-.155**
-.253*
-.243**
.353**

-.073*
-.065*
-.006
.013

-

.006
-.016
.023

Oil
.075*

.129**
.102**
.127**
-.033

-

.153**
-.025

-.017
.245**

.316**
.350**
.252**
-.225**

3.00

.82

.120**

.001

-.024

.102**

-.055

.051

.072*

-.090**

-.057

.071*

.157**

Variable

Age
Race
Sex

Education
Married
Income
Tenure

Negative Affect
Organizational

Size

Group Size
Cohesiveness
Socializing
Substantive
Complexity
Occupation
Distributive

Justice

Satisfaction
Commitment
Intentions to 
Turnover
Creative

Performance

Procedural Justice


R
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
e
d

 

wi
h

t

 

i

p
e
r
m
s
s
o
n

i

 

of

 

t

h
e 

c
o
p
y
r
i
g
h

t
 

o
w
n
e
r
.
 

F
u
r
t

h
e
r
 

r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
 

i

p
r
o
h
b
i
t
e
d
 

w

i
t
h
o
u
t
 

p
e
r
m
s
s

i

i

o
n

.

TABLE 5 (Continued)

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

v-r»
-
.013

-

-.044
.107**

-.490**
.027

.078*
.124**
111**
-.111**

.038
.034
.012
-.030

.113**

.018

-
-.002

-.045
-.052
-.042
.023

-.025

4

-

.497**
.475**
.522**
-.375**

-

.537**
.644**
-.379**

-

.680**
-.562**

-

-.552**

-

.196**

.253**

.324**

.291**

-.209**

-

Mean
39.00
1.33
1.51
4.46
2.32
3.90
8.18
7.23
559.63

16.99
3.46
2.21
4.35

.60
3.07

3.00
3.32
3.33
1.79

3.00

Sd
10.7
.88
.50
1.35
1.78
1.81
8.30
8.61
1193

19.60
.56
.88
.89

.49
.78

.73
.63
.57
1.03

.82

Variable

Age
Race
Sex

Education
Married
Income
Tenure

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Negative Affect
Organizational

Size

10
Group Size
ll« i  Cohesiveness
Socializing
12
Substantive
13
Complexity
Occupation
Distributive

14
IS

Justice

16
17
18
19

20

Procedural Justice

Satisfaction
Commitment
Intentions to 
Turnover
Creative

Performance


R
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
e
d

 

wi
h

t

 

i

p
e
r
m
s
s
o
n

i

 

of

 

t

h
e 

c
o
p
y
r
i
g
h

t
 

o
w
n
e
r
.
 

F
u
r
t

h
e
r
 

r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
 

i

p
r
o
h
b
i
t
e
d
 

w

i
t
h
o
u
t
 

p
e
r
m
s
s

i

i

o
n

.

Regression Results for Creative Performance and W ork-Related A ffective O utcom es on 

Control  Variables and Procedural Justice

TABLE 6

Job 
Satisfaction 

Organizational 
Commitment 

Intentions to 
Turnover 

Creative
Performance

Step 1: Control Variables

A ge
Race
Sex
Education
Marital Status
Incom e
Tenure
N egative A ffect
Organizational Size
Group Size
C ohesiveness
Socializing
Job Com plexity
Occupation
Distributive Justice

.003+
-.003
.064*
-.011
-.003
.000
.002
-.008***
.000*
.001
.171***
.030+
-.002
-.045
.185***
.30

R2
M odel F
d f
Step 2: Procedural Justice
Change R2
F fo r R 2
Overall R2
Overall M odel F
d f
+ =  .10,  * = .05,  ** =  .01, *** =  .001

29.61***
(16,  1142)
.28***
.07

129.01***

.37

38.62***
(17,  1142)

.002
-.015
.048+
-.016
-.004
-.003
-.000
-.007***
.001 +
.021
.022
.025+
-.020
-.043
.183***
.30

29.90***

.36***
.14

296.05***

.44

52.93***

-.005
.022
.023
-.009
.009
.000
.000
.030***
.000
.001
- III*
-.054*
-.018
.010
-.343***
.21

19.72***

-.315***
.04

50.96***

.25

22.38***

.008**
.033
-.069
.058**
-.002
.004
.017
.000
-.000*
.001
.090*
.075**
.003
-.023
.066*
.08

6.13***

.201***
.02

28.28***

.10
7.58***


R
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
e
d

 

wi
h

t

 

i

p
e
r
m
s
s
o
n

i

 

of

 

t

h
e 

c
o
p
y
r
i
g
h

t
 

o
w
n
e
r
.
 

F
u
r
t

h
e
r
 

r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
 

i

p
r
o
h
b
i
t
e
d
 

w

i
t
h
o
u
t
 

p
e
r
m
s
s

i

i

o
n

.

C orrelations  B etw een   Independent  (D iv ersity  &  D issim ilarity) 

and D ependent  V ariables

T A B L E  7

1

1

S atisfaction

1

-

C om m itm ent

.680**

2

"

Intentions to 

-.562**

-.552**

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

3

-

.324**

.291**

-.209**

.537**

.644**

-.379**

.062*

.061*

-.059*

.065*

.123**

-

.043

.101**

.227**

-

.064*

.071*

-.054*

-.056*

-.027

-.030

.025

.014

.034

-.063*

-.064*

-.071*

-.075*

.072*

.072*

.056

.031

.051

.501**

.108**

-

.091**

.527**

.056

-

.364**

.477**

.631**

.810**

-

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

T urnover
C reative

Perform ance
Procedural

Justice

S ex   D iv ersity

R ace/E thnic

D iv ersity

S e x

D issim ila rity
R ace/E thnic
D issim ila rity

A ggregate

D issim ilarity


Means of Workgroup Sex and Race Composition on Work-Related

Affective Outcomes and Creative Performance

TABLES

Satisfaction 

GrouD
Diverse

All

Women
Most
Men
Most
Women
All Men

Mean
3.39
3.36

3.32

3.29

3.22

Satisfaction 

Grouo
Diverse

All
White

Most
Non-
White
Most
White

All Non- 
White

Mean
3.42

3.31

3.31

3.30

3.06

Commitment 

Grouu
Diverse

All

Women
Most
Men
Most
Women
All Men

Mean
3.41
3.37

3.33

3.26

3.23

Commitment 

Gtoud
Diverse

Most
Non-
White
Most
White

All
White

All Non- 
White

Mean
3.42

3.33

3.31

3.31

3.15

Intentions to Turnover

Creative Performance

GrouD
Diverse

All

Women
Most
Men
Most
Women
All Men

Mean
1.73
1.75

1.75

1.82

2.01

GrouD
Diverse
Most
Men
Most
Women

All

Women
All Men

Mean
3.08
3.00

3.00

2.97

2.90

Intentions to Turnover

Creative Performance

Grouo
Most
White
Diverse

Mean
1.76

1.78

Group
All Non- 
White
Diverse

Mean
3.13

3.10

All
White

Most
Non-
White
All Non- 
White

1.83

1.93

2.23

Most
Non-
White
All
White

Most
White

3.06

3.00

2.93

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

135


ANCOVA Results of the Effects of Workgroup Composition on Work-Related

Affective Outcomes and Creative Performance

TABLE 9

SEX COMPOSITION

Satisfaction

Commitment

Intent to Turnover

Creative Performance

RACE COMPOSITION

Satisfaction

Commitment

Intent to Turnover

Creative Performance

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

Sum of 
Squares
3.357
424.681
428.038

4.013
351.090
355.103

10.137
1173.498
1183.636

3.382
720.866
724.248

Sum of 
Squares

3.518
419.576
423.093

2.685
345.443
348.129

5.595
1170.620
1176.215

6.568
706.431
712.999

df

4
1059
1063

4
1064
1068

4
1101
1105

4
1073
1077

df

4
1051
1055

4
1055
1059

4
1091
1095

4
1063
1067

Mean
Square
.839
.401

F

2.093

(p-value)

Sig.

.080

1.003
.330

2.534
1.066

.846
.672

3.041

.017

2.378

.050

1.259

.284

Mean
Square

F

Sig.

(p-value)

.879
.399

.671
.327

1.399
1.073

1.642
.665

2.203

.067

2.050

.085

1.304

.267

2.471

.043

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


TABLE  10

Contrasts Between Workgroup Sex Composition on 

Affective Outcomes and Creative Performance

All + Mostly Groups vs. Equal
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

All Male + All Female vs. Equal
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

Mostly Male + Mostly Female vs. Equal 
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

.

All Male + Mostly Male vs. Equal
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

All Female + Mostly Female vs. Equal
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

All Male vs. Equal
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

* = significant in 1-tailed test

1

■2.075
-2.633
1.494
■2.019

t

-1.900
-1.978
1.806
-2.108

t

-1.735
-2.706
.768
-1.410

t

-2.392
-2.567
1.924
-2.047

t

-1.261
-2.056
.718
-1.520

t

-2.620
-2.550
2.731
-2.140

p*value 2-tailed

.038
.009
.136
.044

p-value 2-tailed

.058*
.048
.071*
.036

p-value 2-tailed

.083*
.007
.443
.159

p-value 2-tailed

.017
.010
.055*
.041

p-value 2-tailed

.208
.040
.473
.129

p-value 2-tailed

.009
.011
.007
.033

Reproduced with permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

137


Mostly Male vs. Equal
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

All Female vs. Equal
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

Mostly Female vs. Equal
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

All Male vs. Mostly Male
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

All Female vs. Mostly Female
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

All Male vs. All Female
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

Mostly Male vs. Mostly Female
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

TABLE  10 (continued)

t

-1.220
-1.633
.271
-1.213

t

-.490
-.637
.250
-1.307

t

1.755
-2.946
-1.044
1.205

t

-1.641
-1.268
2.493
-1.133

t

.860
1.794
-.594
-.296

t

-1.732
-1.648
2.099
1.644

t
.564
1.425
-.772
.052

p-value 2-tailed

.223
.103
.787
.226

p-value 2-tailed

.625
.525
.803
.192

p>value 2-tailed

.080*
.003
.297
.229

p-value 2-tailed

.102
.206
.013
.258

p-value 2-tailed

.390
.074*
.553
.767

p-value 2-tailed

.084*
.100*
.037
.520

p-value 2-tailed

.573
.155
.440
.958

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

138


TABLE  11

Contrasts Between Workgroup Race/Ethnic Composition on 

Affective Outcomes and Creative Performance

All + Mostly Groups vs. Equal
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

All White + All Minority vs. Equal
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

Mostly White + Mostly Minority vs. Equal
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

All White + Mostly White vs. Equal
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

All Minority + Mostly Minority vs. Equal
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

All White vs. Equal
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

* = significant in  1-tailed test

t

■2.457
■2.423
1.429
-1.372

t

■2.039
■1.994
1.517
-.652

t

-1.959
■1.952
.624
■1.855

t

■2.464
■2.667
.147
-2.765

t

•1.932
-1.791
1.713
-.372

t

■2.131
■2.395
.515
-1.943

p-value 2-tailed

.018
.017
.157
.173

p-value 2-tailed

.054*
.058*
.141
.519

p-value 2-tailed

.051*
.052*
.533
.065*

p-value 2-tailed

.014
.008
.883
.006

p-value 2-tailed

.065*
.084*
.096*
.712

p-value 2-tailed

.034
.017
.607
.053*

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

139


Table  11 (continued)

Mostly White vs. Equal
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

All Minoritv vs. Equal
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

Mostly Minority vs. Equal
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

All White vs. Mostly White
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

All Minority vs. Mostly Minority
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

All White vs. All Minority
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

Mostly White vs. Mostly Minority
Satisfaction
Commitment
Intent  to Turnover
Creative Performance

t

-2.330
-2.378
-.261
-3.065

t

-1.646
-1.499
1.512
-.073

t

1.250
1.207
.976
.676

t

.183
-.166
.962
1.213

t

-1.094
-.938
.942
.379

t

1.125
.860
-1.375
-.592

t

-.163
-.219
-1.201
-1.208

p-value 2-tailed

.020
.018
.794
.002

p-value 2-tailed

.119
.152
.148
.943

p-value 2-tailed

.214
.230
.331
.500

p-value 2-tailed

.855
.868
.336
.226

p-value 2-tailed

.288
.359
.356
.783

p-value 2-tailed

.277
.401
.187
.561

p-value 2-tailed

.871
.827
.233
.230

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

140


R
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
e
d

 

wi
h

t

 

i

p
e
r
m
s
s
o
n

i

 

of

 

t

h
e 

c
o
p
y
r
i
g
h

t
 

o
w
n
e
r
.
 

F
u
r
t

h
e
r
 

r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
 

i

p
r
o
h
b
i
t
e
d
 

w

i
t
h
o
u
t
 

i

p
e
r
m
s
s
o
n

i

.

Regression Results for Creative Performance and W ork-Related A ffective O utcom es on 

Individual Dissim ilarity on Sex and Race/Ethnicity and an Aggregate measure o f Dissim ilarity

TABLE  12

Job 

Satisfaction 
FA

R* 

Organizational 
Commitment 
FA
R' 

Intentions to 
Turnover 
RJ 

FA

Creative 
Performance 
R2 
FA

Sex Dissim ilarity

Control Variables 
Dissim ilarity 

Overall M odel F

Race/Ethnic Dissim ilarity 

Control  Variables 
Dissim ilarity 

Overall M odel F

.175
.181 
16.638***

8.73**

.121
.125 
10.755***

5.19*

.153
.156 
13.922***

5.06*

.062
.069 
5.35***

11.12*

.178
.179 
16.334***

.302

.124
.124 
10.621***

.256

.152
.152 
13.480***

.000

.062
.065 
5.227***

3.82*

A ggregate Sex Race/Ethnic Dissim ilarity 

Control Variables 
A ggregate Dissim ilarity 

Overall M odel F 

. 175
.179 
17.523***

5.15*

.121
.123 
11.319***

3.31 +

.153
.157 
13.072***

5.44*

.062
066 
5.277***

4.51*

+ =  .10,  * = .05,  ** =  .01,  *** = .001


R
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
e
d

 

wi
h

t

 

i

p
e
r
m
s
s
o
n

i

 

of

 

t

h
e 

c
o
p
y
r
i
g
h

t
 

o
w
n
e
r
.
 

F
u
r
t

h
e
r
 

r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i

o
n
 

i

p
r
o
h
b
i
t
e
d
 

w

i
t
h
o
u
t
 

p
e
r
m
s
s

i

i

o
n

.

Regression Results for Creative Performance and W ork-Related A ffective Outcom es on 

Individual  Dissim ilarity on Sex and Race/Ethnicity and an Aggregate measure o f Dissim ilarity

TABLE  12 (com .)

Job

Satisfaction

R3 

FA

Organizational
Commitment
R3

FA

Intentions to 
Turnover
R3

FA

Creative
Performance
FA
R3

Interaction Sex Dissim ilarity  * Procedural Justice

Control Variables
M ain Effects
Interaction
Overall M odel F

.175
.332 
.332 
32.893***

.121
131.99*** .399
.399
.637
43.898***

259.97***
.005

Interaction Race/Ethnic Dissim ilarity * Procedural Justice

Control Variables
M ain Effects
Interaction
Overall M odel F

ro

.178
.331 
.331 
32.780***

.124
128.07*** .398
1.07
.398
43.824***

257.06***
.071

Interaction A ggregate Sex Race/Ethnic Dissim ilarity

.153
.231
.233
20.104***

.152
.229
.230
19.770***

57.34***
3.13+

55.91***
1.91

.062
.099
.109
8.089***

.062
.101
.105
7.442***

22.65***
13.12***

24.52***
5.32***

Control Variables
Main Effects
23.57***
Interaction
4.15*

.175
.330 

.330 

130.03***

.287

.121
.397

.397

258.51***

.016

.153
.231

.234

57.15***

5.27*

.062
.099

.102

Overall M odel F

34.624***

46.367***

8.25***

19.110***

+ = .10,  * =  .05,  ** = .01,  *** = .001


R
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
e
d

 

wi
h

t

 

i

p
e
r
m
s
s
o
n

i

 

of

 

t

h
e 

c
o
p
y
r
i
g
h

t
 

o
w
n
e
r
.
 

F
u
r
t

h
e
r
 

r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
 

i

p
r
o
h
b
i
t
e
d
 

w

i
t
h
o
u
t
 

i

p
e
r
m
s
s
o
n

i

.

b Weights for the Effects of Dissimilarity by Sex and Race

TABLE  13

Job 
Satisfaction 

Organizational 
Commitment 

Intentions to 
Turnover 

Creative
Performance

Full Sam ple

(N  =  1094)

M en
W om en

W hile
Non-w hite

W hite M ale
N on-W hite M ale

W hite Female
Non-W hite Female

(N   = 537)
(N  = 557)

(N  = 897)
(N  =  179)

(N  = 447)
(N  = 77)

(N = 433)
(N  =  101)

-.02*

-.04*
.02

.01
-.01

-.07*
.00

-.01*
-.03

-.01+

-.02
.01

.03
-.02

-.08*
-.00

-.09*
.03

.05*

.128**
.02

.01
.03

.03*
-.00

-.06
-0 4

-.04*

-.04*
.09*

.05*
-.119**

-.10*
-.02+

.02*
-.02


R
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
e
d

 

wi
h

t

 

i

p
e
r
m
s
s
o
n

i

 

of

 

t

h
e 

c
o
p
y
r
i
g
h

t
 

o
w
n
e
r
.
 

F
u
r
t

h
e
r
 

r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i

o
n
 

i

p
r
o
h
b
i
t
e
d
 

w

i
t
h
o
u
t
 

p
e
r
m
s
s

i

i

o
n

.

TABLE  14 

O verview o f Hypotheses and  Results

Hypotheses

2

1

3a

4a

3b

Procedural Justice w ill be positively 
associated with affective outcom es
Procedural Justice positively associated with 
Creative Performance
Sex  Diversity will  be positively associated 
with affective outcom es
Race/Ethnic Diversity w ill be positively 
associated with affective outcom es
Sex Diversity will be negatively associated 
with affective outcom es
Race/Ethnic Diversity w ill be negatively 
associated with affective outcom es
Sex Diversity will be positively associated 
with Creative Performance
Race/Ethnic Diversity will be positively 
associated with Creative Performance
Sex Diversity w ill be negatively associated 
with Creative Performance
Race/Ethnic Diversity w ill be negatively 
associated with Creative Performance
Sex Dissim ilarity w ill be negatively 
associated with all outcom es
Race/Ethnic Dissim ilarity w ill be negatively 
associated with all outcom es
Aggregate Dissim ilarity based on  both Sex 
and Race/Ethnicilv w ill be negatively 
associated with all outcom es
X =  Relationship not hypothesized or tested 
N S = Not significant

4b

6

5

Satisfaction

C om m itm ent

Intentions to 

C reative

Supported

Supported

R em ain
Supported

Perform ance

X

X

X

X

Supported

Supported

Supported (+)

Supported

Supported

Supported

NS

NS

X

X

X

X

NS

NS

X

X

X

X

NS

NS

NS

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Supported

NS

NS

NS

Supported

Supported

Supported

Supported

NS

NS

NS

Supported

Supported

Supported (+)

Supported

Supported

(+) = Marginally supported p < . 10


R
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
e
d

 

wi
h

t

 

i

p
e
r
m
s
s
o
n

i

 

of

 

t

h
e 

c
o
p
y
r
i
g
h

t
 

o
w
n
e
r
.
 

F
u
r
t

h
e
r
 

r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
 

i

p
r
o
h
b
i
t
e
d
 

w

i
t
h
o
u
t
 

p
e
r
m
s
s

i

i

o
n

.

Hypotheses

Satisfaction

C om m itm ent

Intentions to 

C reative

TABLE  14 (com.) 

Overview o f Hypotheses and Results

7a

7b

8

9

Men w ill experience more negative outcom es 
than wom en when they are Dissim ilar to 
coworkers
White em ployees will experience more 
negative outcom es than non-whites when they 
are Dissim ilar
Women will experience more negative 
outcom es than men when they are Dissim ilar 
to coworkers
Non-While em ployees w ill experience more 
negative outcom es than w ill  white em ployees 
when they are Dissim ilar
Procedural Justice w ill moderate the 
relationship between Sex  Diversity and 
outcom es
Procedural Justice w ill moderate the 
relationship between Race/Ethnic  Diversity 
and outcom es
Procedural Justice w ill moderate the 
relationship between Sex Dissim ilarity and 
outcom es
Procedural Justice w ill moderate the 
relationship between Race/Ethnic 
Dissim ilarity and outcom es

Supported

NS

N S

NS

NS

NS

NS

NS

X  = Relationship not  hypothesized or tested
N S  = Not significant
(+ ) = M arginally supported p < . 10

NS

NS

NS

NS

NS

NS

NS

NS

R em ain
Supported

P erform ance

Supported

N S

NS

NS

N S

NS

Significant 
BUT Positive

Significant 
BUT Positive

Supported

NS

NS

Supported

Supported

NS

Supported


Vita

Lucy Gilson was bom in Lisbon Portugal on January 5,  1966. She received her 

undergraduate degree from Georgetown University, School of Foreign Service in May 

1987 and her Masters in Management from Georgia Tech in December 1994.  Prior to 

Graduate school she worked for a division of the Mars Group in London England. Her 

research interests focus on fairness in workgroups, creativity in teams, and issues 

surrounding diversity and dissimilarity.  While pursuing her Ph.D. she co-authored a 

paper with Christina Shalley and Terry Blum that was published in the Academy of 

Management Journal.  In addition, her second Doctoral paper was awarded the Best 

Student Paper award for the Conflict Division of the Academy of Management. In the 

Fall of 2000 she will be assuming the position of Assistant Professor at the University of 

Connecticut.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

146

