INFORMATION TO USERS

This manuscript has been reproduced from the microfilm master.  UMI films the 
text  directly  from  the  original  or  copy  submitted.  Thus,  some  thesis  and 
dissertation copies are in typewriter face, while others may be from any type of 
computer printer.

The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy 
submitted.  Broken  or indistinct print,  colored or poor quality  illustrations and 
photographs,  print bieedthrough,  substandard  margins,  and  improper alignment 
can adversely affect reproduction.

In the unlikely event that the author did not send UMI a complete manuscript and 
there  are  missing  pages,  these will  be  noted.  Also,  if  unauthorized  copyright 
material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.

Oversize materials  (e.g.,  maps,  drawings,  charts) are reproduced  by sectioning 
the original,  beginning at the upper left-hand comer and continuing from left to 
right in equal sections with small overlaps.

included 

Photographs 
in  the  original  manuscript  have  been  reproduced 
xerographically in this copy.  Higher quality 6" x 9" black and white photographic 
prints are available for any photographs or illustrations appearing in this copy for 
an additional charge.  Contact UMI directly to order.

Bell & Howell Information and Learning 

300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, Ml  48106-1346 USA

UlVLf

800-521-0600

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


THE EFFECT OF MARKET ORIENTATION ON CUSTOMER

SATISFACTION AND EMPLOYEE SATISFACTION ON

SERVICE QUALITY.

By

Michael M Galer

A DISSERTATION

Submitted to 

Wayne Huizenga Graduate School  of Business 

And Entrepreneurship 

Nova Southeastern University

in partial  fulfillment of the requirements 

for the degree of

DOCTOR OF BUSINESS

2000

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


UMI Number. 9963644

Copyright 2000  by 
Galer, Michael M.

All rights reserved.

UMI*

UMI Microform9963644 

Copyright 2000  by Bell & Howell Information and Learning Company. 

All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against 

unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code.

Bell & Howell Information and Learning Company 

300 North Zeeb Road 

P.O. Box 1346 

Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


A Dissertation 

entitled

THE EFFECT OF MARKET ORIENTATION ON CUSTOMER
SATISFACTION AND EMPLOYEE SATISFACTION ON

SERVICE QUALITY.

By

Michael M.  Galer

We  hereby certify  that  this  Dissertation  submitted by Michael 
M .  Galer  conforms  to  acceptable  standards,  and  as  such  as 
fully adequate in scope and quality.  It is therefore approved 
as  the  fulfillment  of  the  Dissertation  requirements  for  the 
degree of Doctor of Business Administration.

Approved:

William 
Chairperson
lairperson
 fU  
(LLJ f
Richard Plank,  Ph.D. 
Committee Member

 

unn,  Ph

tih£°
9-1-ao

CS.

Les,  D.B.A. 
l,  School of Business 

and Entrepreneurship

Nova Southeastern University 

2000

Date

Date

Date

Date

Date

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


CERTIFICATION STATEMENT 

I hereby certify that this paper constitutes my own 
product,  that where the language of others  is set forth, 
quotation marks  so indicate,  and that appropriate credit is 
given where I have used the language,  ideas,  expressions or 
writings of another.

Signed ______________________________

Michael M.  Galer

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


ABSTRACT

THE EFFECT OF MARKET ORIENTATION ON CUSTOMER

SATISFACTION AND EMPLOYEE SATISFACTION ON

SERVICE QUALITY.

By

Michael M.  Galer

The telecommunications industry today is in a state of 

technological and organizational change.  During this time 
employees,  managers and customers of these organizations are 
experiencing the turmoil of acquisition and consolidation,  as 
well as the introduction of new and exciting services, 
delivered by these recently merged companies.  This  study 
examines the effects of market orientation on customer 
satisfaction and the effect of employees'  and managers' 
satisfaction on service quality.

This  study asks whether there is a relationship between 
customer-focused employees and satisfied employees.  The study 
also asks whether employee satisfaction and service quality 
have any relationship.  It also  looks at the relationship 
between managers'  and employees'  perceptions of these issues.
The author surveyed 158 employees and 58 managers  from 
five Cablevision Systems Corporation systems in the greater 
Boston area.  Surveys were also mailed to over

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Michael M Galer

2,000 customers in the same areas. Although the employees are 
trained in market-oriented concepts and attempt to create 
customer satisfaction,  the results of this study imply that 
the relationship between market orientation and employee 
satisfaction is negligible.

This study shows that Cablevision managers are more 

market oriented than are their employees,  and the managers 
need to be more aware of their employees'  satisfaction levels. 
Cablevision Systems employees would be more satisfied if 
managers would show more involvement with the day-to-day 
issues.  It would also be beneficial  to employees and customers 
if employees were empowered  (more self-management)  to solve 
customer problems.  All Cablevision employees would benefit 
from additional training.  Employees would perform better if 
they had more to say in daily operations.

This study demonstrates that the adoption of market 

orientation and service quality methods  in the new 
telecommunications organizations would be beneficial to both 
employees and customers.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT S

My sincere gratitude to Doctors William Johnson,  Richard Plank 
and Dan Dunn.  I hope that their guidance and their commitment 
are reflected in the scholarship of this dissertation.  To my 
colleague Dr.  Richard Caldarola,  you listened,  and you shared, 
thank you for being there.  I value your friendship.  I also 
want to acknowledge John Hauenstein,  a cable marketer whose 
generosity made this study feasible.

To my children,  Lisa,  Gary,  Bill,  Darren,  Dean,  and Dylan 
who always encouraged their dad,  thank you for the support and 
the love.  I want to thank Marilyn,  Mel,  Larry and Ginny,  my 
sisters and brothers,  who never failed to be my cheerleaders. 
Rachel and Mathew,  you light up my life.  To all my friends who 
tolerated my absences and crazy schedule,  thank you.  And to 
Rebecca and Michael,  thanks  for the gift of your mom.  And to 
Joani,  my beloved wife who never let a day go by without her 
total,  unconditional praise,  acknowledgement,  and love,  what 
if having it all is just the beginning?

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


TABLE OF CONTENTS

List of Tables 
List of Figures 
Chapter
I.  INTRODUCTION

Background 
Purpose of the Study 
Statement of the Problem 
Definition of Terms 
Scope and Limitations 
Organization of the Study 
Summary 

II.  REVIEW OF LITERATURE 
Market Orientation 
Marketing Orientation 
Marketing Concept 
Employee  Satisfaction 
History 
Employee  Turnover 
Customer Satisfaction 
Service Quality 
Value 
Summary 

III.  METHODOLOGY 

Research Questions and Hypotheses 
Hypothesis Testing 
Conceptual Framework 
Research Design 
Data Collection 
Measurement and Operationalization 
Of Variables 
Data Analysis 

vii

Page
ix
x

1
5
6
9
12
12
13
15
16
24
25
29
29
45
48
54
58
62
66
67
69
70
70
72
73
7 6

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


IV.  PRESENTATION OF FINDINGS

Research Data Base 
Hypothesis One 
Hypothesis Two 
Hypothesis Three 
Hypothesis  Four 
Summary 

V.  SUMMARY and CONCLUSIONS 

Hypothesis One 
Hypothesis Two 
Hypothesis Three 
Hypothesis Four 
Assumptions 
Limitations 
Implications 
Future Research 
Summary 

References Cited 
Bibliography 
Appendix

A.  Employee Satisfaction Scale 
B.  Market Orientation Scale 
C.  Service Quality Scale 
D.  Description of Market Orientation 

Survey Instrument Variables

E.  Description of Employee Satisfaction

Survey Instrument Variables 
F.  Description of Service Quality
Survey Instrument Variables 
viii

79
81
82
83
84
85
87
88
88
90
91
92
92
93
94
88
95
98
121

128
129
130
131

133

134

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


LIST OF TABLES 

Table 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 

Scale Reliability 
Hypothesis One Correlation 
Hypothesis Two Regression Analysis 
Hypothesis Three Analysis of Variance 
Hypothesis Four Analysis of Variance 
Summary of Hypotheses Tests 

Page
7 5
82
84
85
86
87

ix

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Figure 
1.  Research Model 

LIST OF FIGURES 

Page
78

x

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION

"  I've never seen a company that was able to  satisfy its 
customers which did not also satisfy its employees.  Your 
employees will treat your customers no better than you 
treat your employees."

Larry Bossidy,  CEO Allied Signal  Inc.

Background

In a constantly changing global marketplace,  firms 

must steadfastly pursue a competitive advantage.  To 
maintain that competitive advantage  firms must train, 
motivate,  and support their employees.  In addition to 
ensuring service quality and customer satisfaction,  they 
must continually examine the roles of their managers  and 
employees and the effectiveness of their policies and 
procedures.

Such an attitude is  known as market orientation.  The 

behaviors of the firm's managers and employees put into 
action the firm's marketing concept.  This leads  to defining 
a distinct organizational culture,  a shared set of beliefs 
and values  that put the customer in the center of the 
firm's thinking about strategy and operations.

Kohli and Jaworski  (1990)  use the term,  market 

orientation,  to mean the implementation of the marketing 
concept.  They refer to this construct as market rather than 
marketing,  even though they define the construct in terms

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


2

that refer to the implementation of the marketing concept. 
The phrases,  market orientation and marketing orientation, 
have been used to describe the execution of the marketing 
concept.  The marketing concept is considered a philosophy, 
which can be the essence of a corporate culture;  a market 
orientation is  the implementation of the marketing concept. 
Kohli and Jaworski  (1990)  say,  .  .  .  "the marketing 
concept is  a cornerstone of the marketing discipline"  (p.
11).  If the marketing concept is considered the consummate 
philosophy of operating a business today,  then a market 
orientation is the company executing what it says.

This  study examines the role of managers  in employee 
satisfaction.  It also examines what happens when managers 
and line employees commit to customers,  customer 
satisfaction,  and service quality.  The researcher will look 
at the customers'  actual perceptions of satisfaction and 
quality.  This study should help managers examine their own 
perceptions of market orientation and service quality and 
compare them with the perceptions of the employees.

Considerable research has  focused on the creation of 
customer value.  Slater and Narver  (1994,  1995)  find that 
market oriented firms are systematically committed to 
creating customer value and their employees'  shared vision 
of the company's goals.  Kohli and Jaworski  (1993)  have

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


3

considered the role of employees  in customer satisfaction 
and designed ways to measure the construct.  This study will 
build on these research efforts as well as on that of 
Deshpande and Farley  (1996)  who created a test  for market 
orientation that is more parsimonious and manageable.

Moreover,  much research has been conducted on employee 

satisfaction.  Lashbrook  (1997)  examines the role of 
leadership on employee satisfaction and performance across 
several industries,  and Hallowell,  Schlesinger,  and 
Zornitsky  (1996)  study how managers can improve customer 
satisfaction by making jobs more satisfying.  Firms 
committed to market orientation aim at service quality. 
Parasuraman,  Berry and Zeithaml  (1991b,  1994),  having 
studied customer perceptions of service quality,  assert 
that it helps retain customers.  Finally,  Cronin and Taylor 
(1992)  extend the service quality theory by indicating that 
service quality comes before customer satisfaction.

This study will serve as a tool  for managers to 

examine their own perceptions of market orientation and 
those of their employees.  It will also enable a  firm to 
compare its own perceptions of customer satisfaction and 
quality service with its customers'  perceptions.  In today's 
globally competitive atmosphere,  it is  imperative that 
management have a clear strategy for success. A vital

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


4

component of the strategy is the commitment of employees to 
market orientation.  This research will examine the 
satisfaction of employees  and their contributions  to the 
firm.  It will also investigate the relationship between 
managers'  perceptions of market orientation and employees' 
perceptions.  By examining these questions  a firm will be 
better equipped to operationalize its strategy.

Many cable TV companies believe that marketing is 

important and that they must continually sell more services 
to more subscribers  to increase profitability.  The cable 
television networks  such as HBO and ESPN spend vast sums of 
money to acquire additional  subscribers.  Most networks 
promote direct mail  campaigns tied to expensive television 
commercials and promotions.

Cable companies market their potential customers 

within their assigned franchise areas with direct door-to- 
door sales efforts,  telemarketing sales,  constant direct 
mail campaigns and radio ads.  Many networks  institute 
promotions  (training,  contests,  and premiums)  to the 
salespeople and customer service representatives.  All this 
is done in a fevered pitch while operating a virtual 
monopoly.  However,  now that cable TV companies are facing 
serious competition from phone companies,  satellite 
companies,  and even local utility companies,  cable

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


5

operators need to consider more than simply improving sales 
tactics.

This study will examine the  levels of employee 

satisfaction and market orientation and their effect on 
service quality.  To compete effectively in a constantly 
changing competitive environment,  managers at Cablevision 
Systems Corporation want to know if their perceptions of 
market orientation are consistent with those of the 
employees.  Theodore Levitt  (1960),  a researcher whose work 
is still highly respected and quoted,  says that selling is 
not marketing.  Selling involves motivating customers to 
exchange cash for products or services.  Marketing, 
according to Berkowitz et al.  (1997),  is a much broader 
process;  it involves planning and executing the conception, 
pricing,  promotion and distribution of ideas,  goods,  and 
services to create exchanges that satisfy individual and 
organizational objectives.

Purpose of the Study

The purpose of this study is two-fold.  It is to 

investigate the relationships between market orientation 
and customer satisfaction,  and between employee 
satisfaction and service quality.  To date,  little research 
has been done on customer satisfaction and service quality

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


6

in the telecommunications  industry.  Until recently the 
cable television companies have had exclusive franchise 
agreements  and monopolies,  with municipalities and 
counties.  The Telecommunication Act of 1994 opened up 
competition between the telephone companies,  the cable 
companies,  and the direct broadcast satellite  (DBS) 
companies,  leading to dramatic changes.  Now many of these 
companies want to provide customers with a full range of 
services.  They also need to provide excellent service 
quality.  Thus,  the industry,  for the first time,  is  facing 
entirely new competition from new technology and powerful 
new market entrants.

Statement of the Problem

For over 30 years,  marketing practitioners and 

researchers have been studying company performance.  They 
have looked at what drives overall performance and what 
drives employees to perform well.  They have also examined 
market orientation,  customer satisfaction,  and service 
quality and their effects on profit. Market orientation has 
been tested by researchers and has shown a marked effect on 
business performance  (Narver & Slater,  1990). A business is 
market oriented when a culture is  systematically and 
entirely committed to the continuous creation of customer

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


value  (Slater & Narver,  1994,  1995) .  To promote  this 
culture,  a firm must continually examine its continued 
commitment to the premise of customer satisfaction and 
service quality.  Employee satisfaction is a precursor to 
service quality.

Jaworski and Kohli  (1993)  investigate esprit de corps 

and the organizational commitment of employees as a 
component of job satisfaction.  Studies using judgmental 
measures show that market orientation contributes  to 
overall job performance.

Kohli and Jaworski  (1990)  affirm that a market 

orientation affords a number of psychological and social 
benefits to employees.  Specifically,  they argue that a 
market orientation leads to a sense of pride in belonging 
to an organization in which all departments  and individuals 
work toward the common goal of satisfying customers, 
resulting in employees  feeling worthwhile,  and exhibiting 
higher levels of job satisfaction.  This study will 
determine whether the stated commitment to market 
orientation by Cablevision Systems has a positive 
relationship to employee satisfaction.

The customer,  both internal and external,  is best 

served by employees who feel a part of the organization, 
are empowered to do their jobs,  make decisions,  and are

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


8

compensated fairly.  In order to create a more positive 
relationship with customers,  employees must work in a 
climate that acknowledges their efforts and rewards 
loyalty,  which then leads  to higher levels of service 
quality.

The goal of a market oriented company is to be 

customer focused,  which should result in higher customer 
satisfaction and increased profitability;  employee 
satisfaction should,  in turn,  produce higher service 
quality.  Zeithaml,  Berry and Parasuraman  (1988)  find that 
in most services,  quality occurs during service delivery, 
usually in the interaction between the customer and the 
customer contact person.  Parasuraman,  Berry,  Zeithaml and 
Adsit  (1994)  examine service quality,  customer service 
potential and organizational barriers to delivering high 
quality service as measured by customer perceptions and 
expectations.  Do satisfied employees produce higher levels 
of service quality?

This study will examine the managers'  perceptions of 

market orientation and service quality.  The research 
questions below will be answered in this study.

(1) 

Are market orientation and employee satisfaction 

positively related?

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


9

(2)  Are employee satisfaction and service quality 

positively related?

(3)  Axe managers'  perceptions of service quality 

different than the perceptions of other employees  in the 
same organization?

(4)  Are managers'  perceptions of market orientation 

greater than those of other employees  in the same 
organization?

(5)  Are managers'  perceptions of customer satisfaction 
greater than the perceptions of other employees  in the same 
organizations?
Definition of Terms

Basic definitions and elements of the research design 

are listed below.  They are derived mostly from Deshpande 
and Webster  (1989),  Franklin S.  Houston  (1986);  Hallowell, 
Schlesinger and Zornitsky  (1996) ;  Kohli and Jaworski 
(1990);  Narver and Slater  (1990),  Webster  (1988),  and 
Zeithaml,  Berry,  and Parasuraman  (1988,  1996).

Marketing concept is the manager's prescription 

showing how the firm can achieve its goals most 
efficiently.  It requires a thorough understanding of 
potential exchange partners and their needs and wants,  and 
of the costs associated with satisfying those needs and 
wants.  Three pillars of the marketing concept are customer

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


10

focus,  coordinated marketing,  and profit.  The  firm must 
then design,  produce and offer products in light of this 
understanding.

Market orientation is the implementation of the 

marketing concept.  In a market oriented organization,  all 
actions are consistent with the marketing concept. Market 
orientation positively affects customer satisfaction and 
the organizational commitment of employees.  It originates 
with top management,  (Kohli  & Jaworski,  1990). Market 
orientation values  focus employees on creating greater 
value for the  firm's customers,  thereby creating 
considerable advantage and superior performance.

Customer orientation means a focus on customers.  It is 

a central element in market orientation.  The firm obtains 
information from customers about their needs and 
preferences,  both current and future.  It must also 
understand competition and regulation.  The  firm must 
continuously create value for its customers,  both internal 
and external.

Employee satisfaction occurs when employees are 

empowered and paid appropriately,  based upon performance 
and work output.  Employee attitude reflects management and 
leadership  (Tornow & Wiley,  1991).  Employee attitude 
contributes significantly to business performance,  and

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


11

leaders'  actions may be the primary determinant of employee 
satisfaction  (Lashbrook,  1997).

Customer value is the emotional bond created between a 

customer and a producer after the customer has used a 
salient product or service. Value involves a tradeoff 
between customers'  perceived preferences  for a specific 
outcome and the actual experience.  Customers evaluate and 
prefer various product attributes,  attribute performances, 
and consequences  that help them achieve their goals and 
purposes.  Value is dynamic;  the value that consumers place 
on a product or service changes over time  (Woodruff,  1997) . 
Thus,  a firm's  focus on customer value is  a means to 
strategic advantage.

Service quality has  five dimensions.  Service quality 

must be tangible,  reliable,  responsive,  assured,  and 
empathic,  (Zeithaml,  Berry & Parasuraman,  1988).  Zeithaml 
et al.  state that consumer quality perceptions are 
influenced by a series of four distinct gaps occurring in 
organizations and define service quality as the difference 
between consumer expectations and perceptions.  A method can 
be used to measure these gaps,  by subtracting the subjects' 
expectations of the service they receive from their 
perceptions of the service they actually received with 
respect to specific criteria.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


12

Scope and Limitations

This study will  focus on a sample of 15 cable 

television systems in Eastern Massachusetts. All the 
systems are owned and operated by Cablevision Systems 
Corporation. Although each system operates under a separate 
franchise agreement with a specific city or town,  the 
management operates under similar guidelines and 
regulations.  Each of the geographic areas  is well defined, 
and each has a unique demographic composition.  The 
employees are assigned to these areas,  and the customers 
have contact with them within their own communities.
Perhaps the most crucial  limitation of this  study is the 
focus on one corporation instead of several cable TV 
companies.

Organization of the Study

This study will consist of five chapters.  Chapter One, 

the introduction,  is the first.  Chapter Two reviews the 
relevant literature,  and Chapter Three presents the 
research methodology.  Chapter Four examines the results of 
the study,  and finally,  Chapter Five,  will discuss a 
summary of findings,  conclusions,  recommendations,  and 
suggestions for further research.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


13

Summary

This chapter has provided the background and purpose 

for this study.  Cable television companies today have begun 
to  face a new business environment. Most companies have 
evolved from a monopoly status as the only cable television 
provider into a provider of local telephone service,  local 
high speed Internet access,  local high-speed data provider, 
and of course,  cable television provider.

All these changes come with new and enormously capable 
competition from new cable companies,  telephone companies, 
and well  financed local utilities. Many of the new and 
existing companies are talking about market orientation and 
service quality.  The question is:  In how much oratory do 
the  firms engage? Are employee satisfaction and service 
quality really important enough to commit time,  money,  and 
limited resources,  too? This study will examine the current 
attitude and understanding of employees  toward market 
orientation and job satisfaction.  It will also examine the 
current status of service quality provided by Cablevision 
Systems Corporation.

The following chapter reviews the literature on market 
orientation,  employee satisfaction,  customer satisfaction, 
and service quality and relates the literature to the

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


telecommunications  industry,  with specific focus on the 
cable television industry.

14

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


15

CHAPTER II 

LITERATURE REVIEW

How can business retain customers and build their 

loyalty?  In order to answer this question this  study 
focuses on three bodies of literature.  The first is market 
orientation.  This literature addresses  two questions:  (a) 
What is a market-driven company? and  (b)  what is the effect 
of a market oriented company on employees  and the company 
performance?

The second body of literature discusses questions of 
employee satisfaction:  (a)  What do workers want  from their
jobs?  (b)  what is  the work environment  like?  and  (c)  what 
motivates employees?

The third body of literature reviews  questions of 
customer satisfaction:  (a)  What effect does an employee
have on the customer? and  (b)  what are customers'  wants and 
needs?

The literature on these three topics makes it clear 

that all three are required in order to understand customer 
retention in a market-place that values  the customer,  and 
that a model of customer retention-customer loyalty must be 
inter-relational.  A successful organization must address 
all three concerns.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


16

Market Orientation

An organization that has a market orientation focuses 

its efforts on:  (a)  continuously collecting information
about customers'  needs and competitors'  capabilities,
(b)sharing this information across departments,  and  (c) 
using the information to create customer value. A key 
aspect of market orientation is that understanding 
consumers and competitors requires  the involvement of 
managers and employees throughout the firm.

In his  seminal book,  The Practice of Management,  Peter 
Drucker  (1954)  says  that there is only one valid definition 
of business purpose:  .  .  .  "To create a customer"  (p.  37). 
The American Marketing Association  (1985)  defines marketing 
as
.  .  .  "the process of planning and executing the 
conception,  pricing,  promotion,  and distribution of ideas, 
goods,  and services to create exchanges that satisfy 
individual and organizational objectives"  (p.18).  According 
to Theodore Levitt  (I960),  the point of marketing is simply 
to create and keep a customer.

Robert W.  Lear  (1963)  says that there is no easy road 
to a market orientation.  He states that a clear definition 
of a market,  an attentive attitude toward distribution,  a 
vigilant eye on competition,  and an understanding of role

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


17

responsibility must all be present to succeed in the market 
orientation stratagem.  Bruce Wrenn  (1997)  says that market 
orientation being market driven involves a concern with 
both customers and competitors.  Hunt and Morgan  (1995) 
propose that a market orientation is  (a)  the systematic 
gathering of information on customers and competitors,  both 
present and potential;(b)  the systematic analysis of the 
information for the purpose of developing market knowledge; 
and  (c)  the systematic use of such knowledge to guide 
strategy recognition,  understanding,  creation,  selection, 
implementation,  and modification.

Many researchers try to clarify various aspects of 

market oriented companies.  Ruekert and Walker  (1987) 
consider the role of marketing personnel and their 
interaction with personnel in other  functional areas  in 
planning,  implementing and assessing marketing activities. 
Marketing personnel play an important role in linking the 
demands  from outside the organization with the functional 
departments inside the firm that can satisfy those demands. 
Jaworski and Merchant  (1988)  discuss controlling the 
marketing system and the marketing environment,  and 
Frederick Webster  (1988)  spoke about barriers  to market 
orientation and the inherent conflict between long-term and

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


18

short-term sales and profit goals as they affect management 
values concerning the importance of customers.

Kohli  and Jaworski  (1990)  refer to the construct, 

market,  rather than marketing even though they define the 
construct in terms referring to the implementation of the 
marketing concept.  They say that a market oriented 
organization is one whose actions are consistent with the 
marketing concept,  and one that has  the three pillars of 
the marketing concept  (customer  focus,  coordinated 
marketing,  profitability)  procedurally clear.  They argue 
that there should be a positive relationship between a 
firm's market orientation and customer satisfaction.

Again and again theorists  and researchers confirm that 

customer focus  is the central  element of a market 
orientation.  They find that market orientation is 
facilitated by the amount of emphasis top managers place on 
market orientation through constant reminders to employees 
to be sensitive and responsive to market conditions.  Kohli 
and Jaworski  (1990)  also find that senior management must 
take a certain level of risk and that employees need 
training and reward systems to stay committed to customer 
satisfaction and cross-functional relating.  They also note 
that employee commitment is tied to empowerment and the

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


19

ability to make decisions at lower levels of the 
organi zation.

Market orientation affects all aspects of the firm. 
Established researchers and theorists have considered many 
attributes of the construct.  Narver and Slater  (1990)  look 
at the effect of market orientation on business 
profitability.  Using a sample of 140 business units 
consisting of commodity products businesses and non­
commodity businesses,  they find a substantial positive 
effect.  They advise that market orientation is  the 
organizational culture that most effectively and 
efficiently creates the behaviors needed to create superior 
value  for buyers,  and therefore,  continuous superior 
performance for the business.

Philip Kotler  (1992)  advises that to retain customers 
and to prevent their defection,  companies should know the 
customers'  expectations.  Siguaw and Widing  (1994)  find that 
a market oriented firm significantly influences the 
customer orientation of a salesperson.

Alfred Pelham's  (1997)  study shows a very strong 

relationship between market orientation and firm 
effectiveness. A market oriented firm,  with a heightened 
understanding of customer needs  and a superior ability to

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


20

implement that strategy,  will be more effective and 
profitable than the competition.

Sinkula,  Baker,  and Noordwier  (1997)  suggest that 

market-based learning organizations will be better equipped 
to make marketing strategy changes to enhance profits.  This 
is also true for small businesses.  Appiah-Adu  (1997)  finds 
market orientation has a positive impact on small business 
performance.  Garg and Chan  (1997)  add that many more small 
businesses are beginning to adopt a strong service 
orientation in their marketing efforts.

How to become,  how to enhance,  and how to sustain a 

market-driven company is a wide and varied topic of 
research. Arie DeGeus  (1988)  of Shell Company speaks 
clearly about  senior managers  in market-driven companies.
All companies  learn,  he states,  but the crucial element for 
success is  to be able to  learn fast enough to  sustain a 
competitive advantage.

Benson Shapiro  (1988)  sees three characteristics of 

market driven companies,  which he also calls  customer- 
oriented companies.  First,  the company must completely 
understand its markets,  and this customer information 
should permeate every corporate function.  Second,  all 
strategic and tactical decisions are essentially made 
inter-functionally and they should be inter-divisional.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


21

Third,  divisions and functions must coordinate their 
decisions and execute them with a sense of commitment.  Ray 
Stata  (1989)  and Peter Senge  (1990)  also discuss the need 
in a market oriented company for organizational learning 
through shared insights,  knowledge,  mental models,  systems 
thinking,  and building on past knowledge and experience.

Slater and Narver  (1994,  1995)  indicate that a 

business  is market oriented when its culture is 
systematically and entirely committed to the continuous 
creation of customer value.  They see three major components 
of market orientation:  (a)  customer orientation,  (b)
competitor focus,  and  (c)  cross-functional coordination.
They propose that a market oriented company complemented by 
an entrepreneurial drive provides the cultural  foundation 
for a learning organization,  where internal and external 
customers are a primary focus and the employees have a 
shared vision of the company's goals.  A  company with a 
market orientation creates superior customer value,  based 
on knowledge derived from customer and competitor analysis. 
Day  (1994)  talks about market sensing and customer linking 
capabilities.  It is  important,  he says,  to understand how a 
market-driven organization can be achieved and sustained; 
customers are not aware of,  or interested in,  the

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


22

underlying processes that yield the superior values they 
receive.

An organizational culture that values thoroughness 

and customer responsiveness guides employees on how to 
provide excellent customer service.  Day also points out 
that many firms have tried to create market driven cultures 
and have failed because of the difficulty in the process, 
managerial  commitment,  and resistance to decentralization. 
Jaworski and Kohli  (1993)  posit that a market orientation 
will  lead to greater customer satisfaction and 
organizational commitment from employees.  They also say 
that these relationships warrant the empirical testing this 
study proposes.  Kohli,  Jaworski and Kumar  (1993)  define 
market orientation as the organization-wide generation of 
market intelligence pertaining to current and future needs 
of customers,  dissemination of intelligence horizontally 
and vertically within the organization,  and organization- 
wide action or responsiveness to market intelligence.  They 
developed a procedure called MAKKOR,  which is designed to 
develop a measure of the construct.

Hauser,  Simester and Wernerfelt  (1996)  declare that 

many organizations are pushing market orientation deep into 
the firm by adopting systems of internal customers and 
suppliers.  Sussan and Johnson  (1997)  discuss the impact of

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


23

market-quality orientation on business performance.  George 
Day  (1998)  proposes that most companies tell their 
employees to get closer to their customers.  Though many 
fall into traps of customer compulsion,  skepticism,  and 
self-centeredness,  most firms that adopt a market driven 
strategy are more profitable than their rivals.  John Graham 
(1998)  talks about the mission of a firm that is  focused on 
market orientation as giving the company a strong hold on 
the marketplace and being a vital  force in customer 
retention.

Market orientation focuses on behaviors,  and its 
characteristics are collecting,  analyzing,  and using 
information to attain new customers,  retain existing 
customers,  and to understand competitors. According to 
Kohli and Jaworski  (1990),  the distinction of market 
orientation,  which is sometimes called market driven,  is 
that of the entire company generating market intelligence 
regarding current and future customer needs,  circulating 
that intelligence across departments,  and responding to the 
information organization wide.  The marketing concept is 
considered a philosophy that can be a core part of a 
corporate culture.  Deshpande and Farley  (1996)  synthesize 
existing measurements of market orientation,  (Deshpande & 
Webster,  1989;  Kohli & Jaworski  1990;  Slater & Narver,

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


24

1994)  to provide a more parsimonious and predictive tool 
with which to measure this important construct.  Because of 
the development of this scale they are able to define 
market orientation as  the set of cross-functional processes 
and activities directed at creating and satisfying 
customers through continuous needs assessment.

Marketing Orientation

The marketing orientation concept recommends  that 

there be an understanding of exchange partners where 
products can be tailored to those needs.  In this work, 
information must be assembled to develop the combination 
that Neil Borden  (1964)  calls  the marketing mix;  each mix 
is  unique.  E.  Jerome McCarthy  (1960)  created a shorthand 
reference to marketing elements,  which he calls  the 4Ps. 
These are:  (a)  product,  a good,  service or idea to satisfy
the customer's needs;  (b)  price,  what is  exchanged for the 
product;  (c)  promotion,  a means of communication between 
the seller and buyer;  and  (d)  place,  a means of getting the 
product into the customer's hands.  To summarize,  the 
marketing concept focuses on customer attitudes and its 
attributes are customer philosophy,  goal  attainment,  and 
the integration of effort. Marketing orientation is a 
description of the activities of the marketing department

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


25

of a firm.  The marketing orientation construct centers 
around the activities of marketing.

Marketing Concept

In exploring the literature it was ascertained that 

market orientation and marketing orientation have been used 
in describing the execution of the marketing concept.  The 
marketing concept is considered a philosophy,  which can be 
the essence of a corporate culture,  (McCarthy &  Perreault, 
1990).  Kohli and Jaworski  (1990)  affirm that the marketing 
concept is a cornerstone of the marketing discipline.  The 
marketing concept era became more popular with the writings 
of J.B. McKitterick of General Electric  (1957).  He says 
that since 1940,  business has become so impressed with the 
results of focusing on what would be better for the 
customer,  rather than merely cheaper,  that it invented a 
new phrase,  the marketing concept,  to describe this triumph 
of innovation over productive capacity.

Robert J.  Keith  (1960) ,  executive vice president of 

consumer affairs  at Pillsbury,  reviews  four eras  in 
marketing.  First,  in the production era,  production was the 
focal point of the business.  Second,  in the sales oriented 
era,  a first-rate sales organization had to be able to 
dispose of the products  it made.  Third,  in the marketing

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


26

oriented era,  a marketing department was established and 
the best products were made and sold to satisfy the needs 
and desires of the public.  In the fourth,  the marketing 
control era,  the company is moving from a company with a 
marketing concept to a marketing company.  Now consumer 
research is vital and all the energies of the company,  from 
finance to production,  are  focused on satisfying the 
customers'  needs and desires.

During the same period,  Wendell Smith  (1956),  using 
the marketing concept,  proposes that a market should be 
segmented and that marketers need to work out a marketing 
mix for each individual segment in order to match the 
specific needs of that group.  Ted Levitt  (1960)  cautions 
managers not to get caught up in thinking only of the 
product or services offered,  but rather they should learn 
to transact the things that make people want to do business 
with that company.  To succeed,  a vigorous leader must have 
a vision that others will follow.  The entire corporation 
must be viewed as a customer-creating and customer- 
satisfying organism.

There has been a great deal written about the 

marketing concept.  Each researcher and theorist has added 
to the body of work generally defined as marketing 
orientation.  The main theme of much of the writing is  for a

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


27

company to be successful customers should be the governing 
incentive and impetus.  Webster  (1981)  declares that many 
companies,  especially smaller ones and those in technology, 
have not completely accepted the marketing concept.  With 
many sales personnel in a firm,  marketing tends to generate 
into a sales orientation with a high level of concern for 
marketing communication.  Paul Anderson  (1982)  advises that 
a constituency-based theory of the firm model views the 
major functional areas as specialists  in providing 
particular resources  for the  firm.  From this perspective, 
the chief responsibility of the marketing area is to 
satisfy the needs of the customer coalition and strive to 
implement the marketing concept.

A broader paradigm is suggested by Day and Wensley

(1983),  who assert that implicit in the marketing concept 
is  an acceptance of the neoclassical economic theory that 
views  firms solely as profit-maximizing units.  They also 
declare that it is unwise to focus exclusively on 
customers,  denying the existence of competitors.  The need 
is  for managers to  support employee efforts at all levels 
to have a successful and consistent marketing strategy. 
Managers must pay attention to the environment,  government 
regulations,  and technology.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


28

Wind and Robertson  (1983)  push hard for managers to 

put forth effort for a market oriented approach to 
strategic planning to blunt the continual criticism that US 
firms have only a short-term focus.  Hambrick and Mason
(1984)  suggest that organizational outcomes - strategic 
choices and performance levels - are partially predicted by 
managerial background characteristics.  They posit that 
firms  can be comprised up of homogeneous teams of managers 
who will make strategic decisions quickly and who will 
focus on the  long- term rewards of a marketing concept.

Franklin Houston  (1986)  describes  the marketing 
concept well,  "It consists not only of advertising, 
selling,  and promotion,  but includes  a willingness to 
recognize and understand the consumer's needs and wants, 
and to adjust any of the marketing mix elements,  including 
product,  to satisfy those needs and wants"  (p.  83).
Deshpande and Webster  (1989)  suggest that the marketing 
concept defines a distinct organizational culture,  a 
fundamental shared set of beliefs and values,  that put the 
customer in the center of the firm's  thinking about 
strategy and operations.  Lusch and Laczniak  (1987)  talk 
about the marketing concept and the stakeholder concept. 
Stakeholders are all the publics of the firm including 
customers,  employees,  suppliers,  and the community.  They

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


29

note that in the future,  more emphasis will be placed on 
this extended marketing concept.

Employee Satisfaction

It is a common sentiment that employee satisfaction is 

necessary for organizational performance.  People often 
confuse their jobs with their identity.  When asked what 
they do,  employees often describe their tasks rather than 
their purpose in a larger endeavor. Most see themselves  in 
a system in which they have  little control i.e.,  they often 
perform their everyday tasks,  deal with other employees or 
customers,  and go home.  When people in organizations  focus 
only on their own position,  they have little sense of 
responsibility to the results produced when all positions 
are functioning.  In this section the researcher will look 
at the early history of job satisfaction research and 
examine the current view that employee work attitudes have 
a major impact on customer satisfaction,  customer loyalty 
and profitability.

History

Edwin Locke  (1969)  states that a job is not an entity 

but an abstraction;  he is referring to an individual 
performing a combination of tasks  in a certain physical and

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


30

social context for financial  (and other)  remuneration. 
Overall job satisfaction is the sum of the evaluations of 
the discriminable elements of which the job is composed. 
Industrial psychologists have been concerned with 
measuring,  interpreting,  and determining the implications 
of job attitudes ever since the Western Electric Studies 
(Roethlisberger & Dickson,  1939). Unfortunately most 
studies that attempt to demonstrate a link between job 
satisfaction and performance fall short  (Iaffaldano  & 
Muchinsky,  1985).

Brayfield and Crocket  (1955)  analyz the relationship 

between satisfaction and performance,  and conclude that the 
two are not related.  This contradicts Hertzberg,  Mausner, 
and Snyderman(1959)  who conclude that satisfaction is,  in 
fact,  related to performance.

Vroom  (197 6),  in his expectancy theory of motivation, 
says  that job factors can influence the degree to which an 
employee is involved with his job.  What are these job 
factors?  First,  in an effort or perceived effort- 
performance probability,  what are the chances of getting 
the job done if the employee makes the necessary effort?
In performance,  or perceived performance-reward 
probability,  what are the chances of getting the rewards if 
the employee does the job satisfactorily? In reward or

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


31

perceived value of rewards,  what rewards are valued? How do 
they affect an employee? Vroom investigates these and many 
other questions.

Porter and Lawler  (1968),  building on Vroom,  suggest 

that job design factors,  as well as job performance, 
influence job satisfaction.  In other words,  an employee 
will be more satisfied when the job allows him or her some 
control,  some levels of autonomy,  and a challenge.  Of 
course,  under certain conditions satisfaction may be 
related to performance,  but this does not mean that it is 
the cause of performance  (Lawler,  1970).  Today's manager 
correctly works toward a satisfied,  fulfilled,  and 
empowered work force.  Because employees need collaboration, 
shared responsibility,  and participative work groups,  this 
goal is becoming more critical daily.

Job satisfaction is the influential  feeling an 

individual has towards a job or position.  Bardwick  (1991) 
said that a focus on employee comfort has created feelings 
of entitlement within organizations,  and feelings of 
entitlement do not create high performance.  Yet,  without 
satisfied employees,  the company will be at a distinct 
disadvantage in the marketplace.  Peter Drucker  (1967)  cites 
McGregor  (1967)  and Taylor  (1911)  regarding employees' 
attitudes towards work as the basis for sound employee

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


32

satisfaction theories.  The implications of these studies 
are that positive employee attitudes will lead to greater 
organizational effectiveness.

In looking at job satisfaction,  it is important to 

distinguish between satisfaction,  involvement,  and 
intrinsic motivation  (Lawler & Hall,  1970).  Vroom  (197 6) 
reports that studies he reviewed show a consistent negative 
relationship between job satisfaction and the propensity to 
leave.  Furthermore,  poor job satisfaction leading to 
withdrawal is consistent with an expectancy-valance theory 
of motivation;  that is,  .  .  .  "workers who are highly 
attracted to their jobs are presumed to be subject to 
motivational forces  to remain in them,  with such forces 
manifesting themselves  in increased tenure and higher rates 
of attendance"(p.  1529).  The job-involved person is 
personally affected by his whole job situation,  probably 
because he perceives his job as an important part of his 
self-concept,  and perhaps as a place to satisfy his 
important needs e.g.,  self-esteem.  The amount of higher- 
order needs satisfaction a person experiences on the job 
also depends on the degree to which his or her job actually 
provides the autonomy and growth experiences he or she 
feels it should  (Lawler & Hall,  1970).  What is job 
satisfaction? What are the related factors and associations

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


33

that aid in the considerations of the issue?

Schneider and Alderfer  (1973)  attempt to achieve 

convergence between two different measures,  which they call 
ERG  (existence,  relatedness and growth)  and JDI  (Job 
descriptive index),  with A.H. Maslow's  (1954)  needs 
measures.  They fail to show that Maslow's need categories 
are relevant in organizational settings because Maslow's 
theory is not aimed toward the organization.  Hackman and 
Lawler  (1971)  use Maslow's need theory;  Steers  (1975)  gets 
similar results using Murray's  (1938)  theory of need 
achievement. Maslow's hierarchy of needs  theory is taught 
on most college campuses.  It focuses on individuals,  not 
corporations.  Yet Maslow's theory of human motivation has 
had an impact on many organizational theorists such as 
McGregor  (1967)  and Argyris  (1990)  and on empirical work by 
Porter and Lawler  (1968).

J.  Richard Hackman and Edward Lawler III  (1971) 

predict and prove that when jobs are high on their four 
core dimensions  (achievement,  recognition,  responsibility, 
advancement),  employees who desire higher-order needs 
satisfaction tend to have high motivation,  and high job 
satisfaction.  They are rarely absent from work,  and 
supervisors rate them as doing high quality work.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


34

In the job satisfaction construct there are many 
variables that researchers  and theorists continue  to 
examine and interpret.  Not all of the commonly used 
interpretations of job satisfaction yield empirically 
comparable measures of satisfaction  (Wanous  & Lawler,
1972).  In their studies of attitude measures,  Porter and 
Stone  (1973)  find that job satisfaction fails to predict 
turnover,  while organizational commitment measures prove  to 
be a better measure over time.

Jaworski and Kohli  (1993)  talk about esprit de corps 

and the organizational commitment of employees as  a 
component of job satisfaction.  Studies using judgmental 
measures  show that market orientation is a big factor in 
business and overall job performance.  Job scope lists 
(e.g.,  variety and autonomy)  are positively related to 
satisfaction with the work itself.  Job satisfaction is 
closely related to tasks,  goals and employee performance.
Steers and Porter  (1974)  find that performance under 

goal-setting conditions is a function of at least three 
important variables:  (a)  The nature of the task goals,  (b)
additional-situational environmental  factors,  and  (c) 
individual difference.

Edward Lawler  (1974)  suggests ways to make employment 
more rewarding,  and organizations more effective,  by using

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


35

approaches in organizations designed to treat employees as 
individuals.  Job satisfaction is not considered to cause 
employees  to work harder,  but rather is a consequence of 
performance.

In looking at sales performance,  Oliver  (1974)  uses 
Vroom's expectancy theory to show which of many possible 
outcomes  in a sales situation are effective motivators and 
which are unrelated to performance. What motivates workers 
is not a new question.  What keeps employees happy is as 
complex as any question dealing with people.

Researchers must place more emphasis on the psychology 

of the withdrawal process and expectation levels  at the 
time the employee joins  the organization.  By looking at 
motivation of employees when they start working,  a better 
sense of their performance,  as well as  longevity on the 
job,  might be predicted according to Porter and Steers 
(1973) . Absenteeism and employee turnover can be matched to 
job dissatisfaction and prevented with promotional 
opportunities and improved pay.

Schneider and Snyder  (1975)  state that a  logical and 

empirical distinction can be made possible between the 
concepts of organizational climate and job satisfaction,  if 
job satisfaction is conceptualized as an effective response 
of individuals.  It is then reflected in the evaluations

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


36

employees make of all the individually salient aspects of 
their job and the organization for which they work.
Latham and Yukl  (1976)  study a few of the many 

variables related to job satisfaction,  especially the 
effects of goal setting,  whether assigned or chosen.  Their 
findings suggest a decline in job satisfaction due to the 
quality of the goal setting itself.  Clearly,  job 
satisfaction is  tied to a process of goal setting that is 
well thought out.

Stone,  Mowday,  and Porter  (1977),  in examining higher 

order needs strength as moderators of the job scope-job 
satisfaction relationship,  relate that although need for 
achievement may not have much practical importance as a 
moderator,  it has  substantial utility as an independent 
predictor of job satisfaction.  This  finding corroborates 
the ideas of Hackman and Lawler  (1971). Mirvis and Lawler 
(1977)  show direct cost savings in absenteeism,  turnover 
and performance with just a small increase in job 
satisfaction.  This  is one of the main goals of employee 
satisfaction.

Spencer and Steers  (1981)  see an interaction affect 
between performance and job satisfaction with respect to 
turnover.  Parkington and Schneider  (1979)  find that 
employee satisfaction with the organization is the only

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


37

strong indicator of employee outcomes and customers' 
perceptions of service quality.  Service quality is a highly 
desirable outcome of employee satisfaction.  When 
performance is  taken into consideration,  the difference in 
job satisfaction between those who stay and those who leave 
is extended for high performers and augmented for low 
performers.

Stephen Motowidlo  (1982)  indicates that examining the 
correlation between job satisfaction,  performance,  and pay 
satisfaction shows  that people who think more highly of 
themselves in general,  may for that reason believe, 
inaccurately,  that they are high performers,  and are 
likely,  therefore,  to  feel less satisfied with their pay. 
Employees often have  faulty perceptions of their own job 
performance,  giving them a false sense of their value to 
the firm.  This  ego-driven perception of self-worth can 
affect employee relationships with customers.

Schneider and Bowen  (1985)  state the simultaneous 

delivery and receipt of services in the face-to-face,  for 
profit service  sector brings employees and customers 
physically,  organizationally,  and psychologically close, 
blurring the boundary between the employee and customer.
This does not deny the importance of inside customers. 
According to Walton  (1985),  in a commitment-based approach

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


38

to the work force,  jobs are designed broader than before, 
and teams,  not individuals,  are often the organizational 
units accountable for performance.

James  and Tetrick  (1986)  say that job perceptions and 
job satisfaction are related.  The meaning and significance 
of job attributes such as perceived autonomy,  challenge, 
and importance,  have a significant effect on job 
satisfaction.  Employees tend to think about the job in such 
a way that the causal relation between job perceptions and 
job satisfaction is reciprocal.  Glisson and Durick  (1988) 
posit that skill variety and role ambiguity are the best 
predictors of satisfaction,  while two organization 
characteristics,  leadership and the organization's age,  are 
the best predictors of commitment.

Brief and Motowidlo  (1986)  suggest that it might be 
expected that happy or satisfied employees should want to 
share and extend these emotions with customers.  It is often 
said that the culture or climate has a great deal to do 
with job satisfaction.  Schneider  (1987)  declares that 
climate and culture are complementary topics.  Climate 
focuses on how the organization functions  (what it rewards, 
supports,  and expects),  while culture addresses the 
assumptions  and values attributed to why particular 
activities  and behaviors are rewarded,  supported,  and

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


39

expected.  George  (1990)  states that it is the members of 
the organization who transmit climate and culture through 
their behavior.

Garvin  (1987)  and Zemke  (1988)  discuss  internal 

service quality and its affect on employee and customer 
satisfaction.  There are ongoing discussions and continuous 
research conducted to understand the role of compensation 
on job satisfaction.  George,  Brief,  Webster and Burke 
(1989)  examine incentive compensation as an injurious 
condition of work.  They say that the competition creates 
adversarial and negative situations.

Parasuraman,  Berry,  and Zeithaml  (1991b)  talk about 
internal  service quality as it relates to their model of 
service quality.  Hallowell,  Schlesinger,  and Zornitsky 
(1996)  propose that internal service quality is important 
because  it relates  to both customer satisfaction and job 
satisfaction.  If employees are empowered,  and paid 
appropriately based upon performance and work output,  they 
will focus on pleasing the customer.

Gronroos  (1990)  maintains that the focus of internal 

marketing is to get and retain customer-conscious 
employees.  Tornow and Wiley  (1991)  declare that customer 
satisfaction is  related to organizational effectiveness and 
to employee attitudes and perceptions regarding the

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


40

organization,  its values,  and its management practices.
They also propose that both employee attitude and customer 
satisfaction reflect on management effectiveness  and 
leadership.

Schlesinger and Heskett  (1991)  declare that a major 

source of frustration for employees  is that management may 
publicly proclaim that it wants to serve its customers,  but 
will actually impede its employees,  or fail to provide them 
with the necessary resources.  It will even penalize them 
for attempting to do so.  Employee empowerment is  one 
possible solution that will benefit job satisfaction and 
help to eliminate high employee turnover.

Grewal and Sharma  (1991)  declare that customer 
satisfaction is fundamental to marketing success.  It 
determines whether customers make additional purchases and 
recommend the product and the company to others.  Claes 
Fornell  (1992)  created a national customer satisfaction 
barometer  (CSB)  in Sweden that uses  30 different 
industries.  Over a period of three years the CSB was used 
to measure change and customer satisfaction.

Ostroff  (1992)  empirically investigates the 
relationship between satisfaction,  attitudes and 
performance at the organizational level of analysis.  The 
strongest results are found for employee satisfaction;

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


organizations with, more satisfied employees tend to be more 
effective than organizations with less satisfied employees. 
Schneider and Bowen  (1993)  report that their studies show a 
positive relationship between what employees report about 
their experience as employees and what customers  report 
about their experiences  as service consumers.  The authors 
say that a positive work experience for employees should be 
reflected in a positive service experience for customers.

Schlesinger and Zornitsky  (1990)  offer a more complex 

analysis.  They say that allowing employees to think they 
are serving customers well in the absence of direct, 
supporting customer feedback runs the risk of negatively 
affecting job satisfaction and the development of service 
capability.  Employees  should get direct feedback from 
customers to maintain good customer service.

Schmit and Allscheid  (1995)  submit that upper 

management plays a major role in the organizational climate 
of well-being and employee appraisal of their work 
situations. Robert Vecchio  (1995)  examines the impact of 
referral sources on employee satisfaction.  Hui,  Yee,  and 
Eastman  (1995)  explore the relationship between 
individualism-collectivism and job satisfaction. 
Collectivists report higher satisfaction with their work, 
pay,  promotion,  supervision,  and co-workers than do

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


42

individualists.  Their research adds to the growing body of 
evidence supporting the links between employee attitudinal 
variables and customer satisfaction.

Schneider,  Ashworth,  Higgs and Carr  (1996)  propose 

that employee attitude surveys  (reports)  of their 
experiences can be very useful as diagnoses  for achievement 
of strategic goals,  customer satisfaction,  and job 
satisfaction.  In another study,  McFarlin and Sweeney  (1996) 
suggest that having a voice in daily decision making is 
very important to employees,  and that process control may 
lead to decision control which may affect procedural 
justice.

Butler and Cantrell  (1997)  show that the perceived 

behavior of leaders can influence both productivity and job 
satisfaction.  They use a direct measure of productivity on 
outcomes during a specific production period.

Cohen,  Chang,  and Ledford  (1997)  argue that self- 

managing leadership behaviors are strongly associated with 
employee satisfaction.  Dail Fields and Terry Blum  (1997) 
assessed the effects of gender homogeneity on the 
performance of work groups and employee satisfaction.  They 
show that higher group gender homogeneity decreases job 
satisfaction,  with employees working in gender-balanced 
work groups showing high satisfaction scores.  Homogeneous

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


43

male groups show lowest levels of job satisfaction,  while 
homogeneous  female groups show moderate levels of 
satisfaction.  Elaine McShulskis  (1997)  studies employee 
loyalty in America.  The amount of loyalty workers  feel is 
directly related to the amount of compensation they 
receive.  The survey shows that 80% of employees surveyed 
would recommend their companies as the best place to work, 
but 40% would leave their current employers  for only 
slightly higher pay.

Recently William Lashbrook  (1997)  of the Wilson 

Learning Corporation reported the results of 14 separate 
studies across  three broad industry groups:  (a)  financial
services  (banking,  savings and loan,  insurance),  (b)
manufacturing  (computers and automotive) ,  and  (c)  service 
(transportation,  hospitality).  The studies asked teams from 
organizations to define business success.  They examine 
group satisfaction and performance,  and the role of 
leadership in improving employee satisfaction and business 
performance.

The results of the studies clearly indicate a 

significant and meaningful relationship between business 
performance and employee satisfaction as defined by work- 
unit satisfaction.  Performance measures are defined at the 
work unit level  (the manager's shift,  branch,  or

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


44

department)  and include financial performance  (revenue, 
profit margins,  and sales volume),  customer satisfaction, 
and quality control measures.  Employee satisfaction 
contributes  significantly to business performance and the 
leaders'  actions may be the primary determinant of employee 
satisfaction.  These results show strong empirical evidence 
of what many organizations have been suggesting for quite a 
while.

The concept of self-managed teams  encompasses  and 

complements other moves to increase organizational 
efficiency while  increasing job satisfaction.  Scott and 
Harrison  (1997)  find that in companies with a system of 
customer service teams,  productivity has  increased by half, 
sickness absence has  fallen by 75%,  and overtime is down to 
zero.  Decisions are  made collectively in these self­
managed teams.  Where empowerment is not present employees 
feel differently.

In a recent Gallup poll,  Filipczak,  Ganzel,  Stamps and 

Zemke  (1997)  find that over 25% of the employees want to 
fire their bosses.  Even among the 86% who are satisfied 
with their jobs,  one in five still want a new manager.  The 
poll reveals two problems:  Employees want more say in day- 
to-day operations and they want more training. Managers who 
empower and train their employees have different results.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


45

Gardner and Pierce  (1998)  report that organizations that 
create opportunities for employees to experience success 
and then help them to make personal attributions  for this 
success will enhance the organization.

Employee Turnover

Employee turnover is not a new or unique problem for 

the organization.  The causes of employee turnover have been 
the subject of researchers  for decades.  The more an 
organization can limit turnover,  the stronger the employee 
satisfaction will be.  Elaine McShulskis  (1997)  finds that 
there is often a considerable gap between the employees' 
expectations and the reality of the job.  This gap causes 
more turnover than does a desire for more money,  although 
many employees are less willing to say this during an exit 
interview.

The turnover of sales employees is often 

misunderstood.  Chad Kaydo  (1997)  suggests that increasing 
the amount of incentive-based pay can create an opportunity 
for turnover.  Employees who do not meet their quotas get 
discouraged and often feel the need to change jobs.
Managers should monitor a delicate balance of base pay and 
incentive pay.  Factors  like trust,  client quality, 
management quality,  and opportunities  for growth are big

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


46

factors in career decisions. A pay plan based mostly on 
commission diminishes the effects of those factors by 
forcing sales representatives to look outside of their 
company for motivation.

Another factor in employee turnover and level of 

satisfaction is what Aryee,  Luk,  Stone and Stone  (1998) 
call the family-responsive variable.  They find that there 
is often a gap between company policy and practice and 
suggest organizations must commit to training and be 
responsive to  family-work issues.  Issues like child-care 
must be understood by men as well as women,  and supervisors 
need training in flexibility with and sensitivity to work- 
family issues.

There are many issues that vary because of gender.

Babin and Boles  (1998)  say that employee satisfaction is 
different for men than for women and has different affects 
on the intent to quit among female and male service 
providers.  Women quit due to stress more often than men in 
similar roles.  Thus,  to promote employee satisfaction and 
success and reduce turnover,  management must help create a 
supportive,  less stressful work environment.

Harris and Arendt  (1998)  suggest that managers create 
and use well designed systems or processes  for training and 
performance appraisal,  for employees involved in

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


47

scheduling,  planning,  decision-making,  and implementation 
to  lower levels of stress and turnover.  Judith Oliver 
(1998)  says that high turnover is usually a function of 
negative job attitudes and low job satisfaction.  It is 
necessary to frequently examine company pay structure,  as 
well as recruitment practices.

Louisa Wah  (1998)  suggests that employees  are taking 
more responsibility in their jobs,  and are more optimistic 
about their continued employment.  Employees are  looking 
less at survival and more at work-related concerns such as 
skill improvement,  advancement,  and management 
effectiveness.  They are also looking for additional rewards 
for their contribution.  According to Vincola and Mobley 
(1998),  companies can create a more equitable and 
productive workplace with more satisfied employees by 
incorporating the concepts of work and life balance and 
performance management into their mission statements.
Kohli and Jaworski  (1990)  affirm that a market 

orientation affords a number of psychological and social 
benefits  to employees.  Specifically,  a market orientation 
is  argued to lead to a sense of pride in belonging to an 
organization in which all departments and individuals work 
toward the common goal of satisfying customers. 
Accomplishment of this objective results in employees

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


48

sharing a feeling of worthwhile contribution and higher 
levels of job satisfaction.  There is a definite correlation 
between market orientation and employee satisfaction

The customer,  both internal and external,  is best 

served by employees who  feel a part of the organization, 
who are empowered to do their jobs and make decisions,  and 
who are compensated fairly.  To create a relationship with a 
customer,  employees must work in a climate that  fosters 
acknowledgement,  reward,  and loyalty,  which then will 
establish an atmosphere that is  favorable to good customer 
service and customer delight.

Customer Satisfaction

"It will not suffice to have customers who are merely 

satisfied," wrote W.  Edwards Deming in 1986  (p.23).
Benjamin Schneider  (1973)  builds on this:  He proposes  that 
if employee behavior toward customers  is  the result of the 
climate created for employees,  and if customer behavior is 
the result of the climate created by employees,  one can 
identify the chain of events resulting in some customer 
loyalty switching.  There are many interpretations of the 
term customer satisfaction,  and researchers are still 
arguing the fine points of what the term means.  What

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


49

follows are a few of the more significant mainstream 
perspectives.

According to Oliver  (1980,  1981),  customer 

satisfaction is an emotional and affective response,  a 
reaction to the dis-confirmation of expectations.  Churchill 
and Suprenant  (1982)  define customer satisfaction as a 
comparison of expectations to performance for products or 
services.

Bonoma and Shapiro  (1984)  caution managers to 

implement their marketing strategies with clarity of theme 
and vision.  Customer concern must be an ingrained part of 
the  culture.  The say that the best implementers continually 
appeal  to the customer,  including the retailer and 
distributors,  treating the distributors as customers. 
According to Cadotte,  Woodruff and Jenkins  (1987),  the 
process by which consumers develop feelings of satisfaction 
or dissatisfaction is part of the confirmation- 
disconfirmation paradigm.

Many studies have looked at a plethora of customer 

satisfaction issues,  because the questions are so important 
to organizations that want to maximize their short-term and 
long-term profits through greater customer satisfaction. 
Bowen,  Siehl,  and Schneider  (1989)  propose a  framework for

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


50

clarifying customer service orientations in manufacturing, 
emphasizing a customer service strategy.

Beer,  Eisenstaf,  and Spector  (1990)  propose a six-step 

process to change customer service orientation efforts, 
claiming that most efforts fail.  Bolton and Drew  (1991)  say 
that change in individual customers'  ratings of service 
quality over time are sensitive to the affect of a service 
change. Mano and Oliver  (1993)  see considerable overlap in 
the processes that underlie consumption emotion and 
satisfaction.  Churchill and Suprenant  (1982),  in 
investigating the determinants of customer satisfaction, 
find that customers'  satisfaction is  determined solely by 
the performance of a durable good,  but that in a non­
durable good expectations  and performance have a direct 
impact on satisfaction.

Roland Rust and Anthony Zahorik  (1993)  provide a 

mathematical framework for assessing the value of customer 
satisfaction so managers can determine which customer 
satisfaction elements have the greatest impact.  Studies on 
understanding value and satisfaction from the customer's 
point of view conducted by Woodruff,  Schumann,  and Gardial
(1993),  show that customer satisfaction drives loyalty.

Successful companies use service as a marketing tool 

or profit center rather than to minimize service costs.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


51

Investments  in customer satisfaction and retention can and 
should be subjected to the same rigorous cost-benefit 
analysis used in capital decisions according to Daniel 
Finkelman  (1993).  Frederick Reichheld  (1994)  asserts  that 
the loyal employee learns how to serve the customer,  and 
the loyal customer learns how to access the business  system 
in a way that makes it easier to be well served.

Cohen  (1994)  states  that customer satisfaction has not 

been the variable primarily measured by firms in order to 
pay incentives to employees.  Adhering to the basic notion 
that salespeople will do what they are paid to do,  many 
companies are now linking a portion of salespeople's 
compensation to customer satisfaction. Arun Sharma  (1997) 
suggests  that although managers emphasize the relationships 
between customers and salespeople,  there is little evidence 
to support the wide use of customer satisfaction-based 
incentives.

Schmit and Allscheid  (1995)  report a strong 

relationship between employee attitudes and customer 
satisfaction,  but say that top management must take an 
active role in establishing a service climate by showing 
direct support for customer service policies and concern 
for employee welfare.  Susan Keaveney  (1995)  maintains that 
customer defections caused by unsatisfactory employee-

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


52

customer interactions might be reduced by teaching 
employees to listen to customers,  return telephone calls 
promptly,  keep customers informed,  and explain procedures, 
and by training employees in technical state-of-the-art 
knowledge.
Anderson,  Fornell,  and Lehman  (1994)  find that economic 
returns  from improving customer satisfaction are not 
immediately realized,  and that customer satisfaction may 
fall as market share increases.  However,  in the long run, 
customer satisfaction and market share may go together.
When quality and expectations increase,  they improve 
customer satisfaction.

Christian Gronroos  (1994)  suggests that it may be 

time to examine the dominant marketing paradigm of today, 
the marketing mix,  and to examine relationship marketing as 
a more current and responsive paradigm.  In relationship 
marketing the customer interface is much broader,  and 
customer satisfaction is easier to monitor.  Tax,  Brown,  and 
Chardrashekaran  (1998)  say that customer satisfaction with 
complaint handling has a direct impact on customer trust 
and commitment.  Storbacka,  Strandvik,  and Gronroos  (1994), 
in assessing the recent customer service paradigm,  say the 
paradigm is based on three assumptions.  These assumptions 
are that customers'  actions are grounded on their

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


53

perception of quality and satisfaction,  that they are free 
to choose,  and that a loyal customer is more profitable.

Customer satisfaction - relative to competitors - is a 

critical success  factor.  There is strong evidence that 
superior quality drives the bottom line and shareholder 
value.  The Profit Impact of Marketing Strategy  (PIMS) 
contains  information enabling many companies to measure 
whether quality and profitability are correlated  (Gale,
1994).  Jones and Sasser  (1995)  state that complete customer 
satisfaction is the  key to securing customer loyalty and 
generating long-term financial performance.

As the marketplace continues to change,  quality 

customer service,  zero defects,  and total quality represent 
persistent and pervasive unyielding elements of most 
companies'  business propositions.  In a market oriented 
company,  the elements to insure a competitive advantage 
continue to be contented employees working with fulfilled 
and loyal customers.  Jeff Johnson  (1996)  asserts  that the 
key management practices to facilitate customer 
satisfaction are information seeking,  training,  and rewards 
and recognition.  These service climate themes best predict 
specific facets of customer satisfaction.  Humphreys and 
Williams  (1996)  affirm that it is important for customer 
contact personnel to exhibit an overall consideration for

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


54

individual buyer needs and circumstances,  and that the 
salesperson plays a vital role in determining customer 
satisfaction.

Service Quality

According to Tse and Wilton  (1988),  the most commonly 

used pre-consumption comparison standard in customer 
satisfaction-dissatisfaction research is derived from 
expectancy theory  (Tolman,  1932).  Operationalized in the 
SERVQUAL instrument,  it measures customer attitudes. 
Zeithaml,  Berry and Parasuraman,  (1988)  suggest that 
service quality has  five dimensions:  (a)  tangibility,  (b)
reliability,  (c)  responsiveness,  (d)  assurance,  and  (e) 
empathy.  They assert that service quality and customer 
satisfaction are separate constructs,  exhibiting high 
collinearity,  where causality is not clearly defined.

Zeithaml,  Berry,  and Parasuraman  (1988)  assert that in 

most services,  quality occurs during service delivery, 
usually in the interaction between the customer and the 
customer contact person.  Customers'  quality perceptions are 
influenced by a series of four distinct gaps on the service 
providers'  side,  which affect the high quality of service 
the customer expects.  Zeithaml et al.  say that customer

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


55

satisfaction is transaction specific and is a function of 
service quality,  product quality,  and price.

To measure customer satisfaction,  it is important to 

measure the difference between customer service 
expectations,  and the perception of the quality of service 
that is  received by the customer.  This measurement may be 
achieved by measuring the gaps,  the expanse between what is 
expected and what is actually perceived as achieved.  The 
gaps are:  (a)  the difference between consumer expectations
and management perceptions of consumer expectations,  (b) 
the difference between management perceptions of consumer 
expectations and service quality specifications,  (c)  the 
difference between service quality specifications and 
service actually delivered,  and  (d)  the difference between 
service delivery and what is communicated about the service 
to the consumer.

Brown,  Churchill,  and Peter  (1993)  find that the 

SERVQUAL instrument has serious shortcomings because of its 
measurement as a difference scoring process.  Parasuraman, 
Berry and Zeithaml  (1991b)  examine service quality, 
customer service potential and organizational barriers  to 
delivering high quality service performance as measured by 
customer perceptions and expectations.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


56

Measuring customer satisfaction is problematic because 
it is  an effort to measure state of mind,  when behavior is 
what really counts.  Berry,  Parasuraman,  Zeithaml and Adsit
(1994)  say that quality service helps a company maximize 
benefits and minimize non-price burdens  for its customers. 
The customer defines quality.

Zeithaml,  Berry and Parasuraman  (1996)  assert that 
service quality relates  to retention of customers at the 
firm level.  The evidence of its  impact on customer 
behavioral responses should be detectable.

Bitner  (1990)  presents a model  for understanding 
service encounter evaluation that synthesizes consumer 
satisfaction,  services marketing,  and attribution theories. 
Bitner believes it is important to manage and control every 
individual service encounter to enhance overall perceptions 
of service quality.  Cronin and Taylor  (1992)  extend the 
service quality theory by indicating that service quality 
comes before customer satisfaction.  Moreover,  both service 
quality and customer satisfaction help determine whether a 
customer buys.  Taylor and Baker  (1994)  posit that the 
interaction between service quality and customer 
satisfaction will explain more of the variance in 
consumers*  stated purchase intentions than will the direct 
influences of either service quality or satisfaction alone.

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


57

Conformance to company specifications is not quality; 
conformance to the customer's specifications  is.  Cronin and 
Taylor  (1992)  find that expectations might not have a 
significant influence on consumers'  short-term judgments in 
the purchase of health services.  Gotlieb,  Grewel,  and Brown 
indicate that there  is a relationship among disconfirmation 
of expectations,  perceived quality,  satisfaction,  perceived 
situational control and behavioral intentions.  They 
recommend that Baggozi's  (1992)  expectancy-value theory 
provides a valuable theoretical framework for research that 
attempts to model  the relationship among the antecedents 
and effects of perceived quality or satisfaction or both.

Hallowell,  Schlesinger,  and Zornitsky  (1996)  say that 

managers seeking to deliver customer satisfaction by 
improving internal  service quality could also make jobs 
more satisfying.  Fornell et al.  (1996)  maintain that 
customer satisfaction is  found to be greater for goods than 
for services and,  in turn,  greater for services than for 
government.

Ryan,  Schmit,  and Johnson  (1996)  believe that customer 
satisfaction is related to attitudes.  If customers  can not 
pay their bills they express low customer satisfaction.
When this occurs,  the customer service person is put into 
an antagonistic position without knowing the cause.  Kevin

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


58

Higgins  (1997)  reports that satisfaction is an attitude, 
loyalty is a behavior. A customer may express an attitude 
of satisfaction,  but will not necessarily be a loyal 
consumer.  The goal of an organization is customer loyalty 
and retention.

Value

In the current environment most organizations  are 

paying more than a little attention to customers.  It has 
become an imperative to recognize the need to retain 
existing customers.  Their value far exceeds the cost of 
acquisition of new customers.  Butz and Goldstein  (1996) 
declare that customer value,  the emotional bond between a 
customer and a producer after the customer has used a 
salient product or service,  is a means to strategic 
advantage.  Robert Woodruff  (1997)  defines customer value as 
a customer's perceived preference  for and evaluation of 
those product attributes,  attribute performances,  and 
consequences arising from use that facilitate  (or block) 
achieving the customer's goals and purposes  in use 
situations.

Although relative impact of value may vary between 

industries,  relative quality and relative price are 
determinants of relative value.  Churchill and Suprenant

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


59

(1982)  state that received value might lead directly to the 
formation of overall satisfaction feelings.  Customer 
satisfaction is  about attitudes,  while customer value is 
about behavior.

Robert Woodruff and Sarah Gardial  (1996)  note that it 
is important  for organizations to know both what they need 
to do  (value)  and how they are doing  (satisfaction).
Customer satisfaction is a reaction to value received.  They 
report that satisfaction measures the relationship between 
a product's actual performance and a performance standard, 
while value creation is a process  for continually aligning 
an organization's product offerings with a customer's use 
situation,  desired consequences,  and end-state 
requirements.

Frederick Reichheld  (1996)  proposes that the key to 
customer loyalty is the creation of value,  which is based 
on organizational learning.  Hartline and Ferrell  (1996) 
maintain that the employee-customer interface is the most 
important determinant of customers'  perception of service 
quality. Adrian Slywotzky  (1996)  proposes that creating and 
delivering superior customer value to high-value customers 
will increase the value of the organization.  Bulent Menguc
(1996)  states that market orientation in a firm provides 
customer orientation,  competitor orientation,  and

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


60

interfunctional coordination.  This provides a  framework in 
which to create superior value for customers relative to 
competitors.

Robert Woodruff  (1997)  discusses operational 

capabilities  for organizations wanting to  improve at 
competing on superior customer value.  He proposes a 
customer value oriented marketing information system 
(CVOMIS)  for integrating research into a strategy.
Parasuraman  (1997)  sees a need to study the 

relationship between customer value and value  from the 
organization's perspective,  that is,  stockholder value.  He 
also adds  to the customer value commentary by pointing out 
a critical aspect of the customer value theory that needs 
to be developed.  What are the sources  from which customers 
may derive value? Oliver,  Rust,  and Varki  (1997)  examine 
what they call customer delight,  proposing that it is a 
strong function of positive affect.  Delight and 
satisfaction are separate,  but correlated.  Satisfaction, 
acting parallel with delight,  is  strongly related to 
pleasure and confirmation and has a clear effect on 
behavioral intention.

Joan Fredericks and James Salter  (1995)  state that 

there are five factors that make up customer value:  (a)
price,  (b)  product quality,  (c)  innovation,  (d)  service

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


61

quality,  and  (e)  company image relative to the competition. 
This combination of factors adds value to the firm's 
customer relationship.

Michael Seely  (1997)  declares that a commitment to 
customer service and to workforce training will enhance 
shareholder value.  An organization must work with equal 
intensity to build value for customers and for shareholders 
if it hopes to deliver superior results to both.  Cleland 
and Bruno  (1997)  suggest that the building blocks are the 
quality the customer receives with a purchase compared to 
the purchase price.  The building blocks of shareholder 
value are revenue growth and profit margin.  Smart and Smart
(1997)  propose that in order to build shareholder value, 
organizations have to create a talent advantage.  They must 
top-grade or employ the best people for every job,  at every 
level.  Organizations  that do so can drive improvements or 
changes  in such strategic value drivers  as productivity, 
innovation,  quality,  and customer service.

Stanley Slater  (1997),  in his proposal for a customer 

value-based theory of the firm,  states  that a market 
orientation is the culture that places  the highest priority 
on the profitable creation and maintenance of superior 
customer value while considering the interests of other key 
stakeholders.  It is  important to continually learn about

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


6 2

customers,  not just from them. He says  that in the 
neoclassical theory of perfect competition,  the firm exists 
to combine labor and capital to produce an end product. 
Demand is  assumed to be homogeneous,  and consumers have 
perfect and cost-less information.  The firm also has 
perfect information,  and industry resources are homogeneous 
and completely mobile,  thus flowing quickly to their 
highest value use.

Summary

In this  study the researcher looks at the level of 
employee satisfaction from the distinct perspective of a 
self-proclaimed market oriented company.  Is quality service 
a slogan or a commitment?

Many organizations continue to subscribe to the 

concept of market orientation and recognize the need for 
employee satisfaction,  customer satisfaction,  new customer 
acquisition,  customer retention,  and service quality.  This 
study looks at the perceptions of managers and employees 
toward customer satisfaction and examines their attitudes 
toward market orientation.  If there is employee 
satisfaction within the scope of a market oriented company, 
will there be a higher incidence of service quality?

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


63

This chapter examined employee satisfaction and looked 

at customer satisfaction.  Aspects examined include 
compensation,  environment,  training,  and supervisor 
relations with employees,  as well as with customers. 
Researchers continue to examine the affect of employee 
satisfaction on customers.  The chapter also considered the 
marketing concept,  as well as market orientation.

The literature clearly states that a company with a 
market orientation focuses  its efforts on customer needs 
and satisfaction  (Hunt & Morgan,  1995;  Kohli & Jaworski, 
1993;  Lear,  1963;  Leavitt,  1983;  Slater & Narver,  1994,
1995;  Wrenn,  1997). According to Ruekert and Walker  (1987) 
marketing personnel and other employees play a major role 
in efforts to satisfy customers.  Managers must learn 
quickly to satisfy customers  in order to sustain a 
competitive advantage.  (DeGeus,  1988).

The literature indicates that satisfied employees 
share their emotions with customers and that internal 
service quality has a positive affect on employee 
satisfaction and customer satisfaction  (Brief & Motowidlo, 
1986;  Garvin 1987;  Zemke,  1988).

This  study applies the market orientation framework of 

Deshpande and Farley  (1996)  by showing the level of 
employee satisfaction in a cable television company as a

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


64

consequence of market orientation.  The study then measures 
customer satisfaction and examines its relationship to 
employee satisfaction.  In examining the preceding 
literature,  several major attributes are clearly 
emphasized.  How well does the company treat its  customers 
(subscribers) ?  Is employee satisfaction a moderating factor 
in customer satisfaction?  In a market oriented 
environment,  the firm values the customer,  and all aspects 
of the business;  every department is operated to support 
and enhance the service and the product as it benefits the 
customers.  In a market oriented organization management 
supports,  trains,  and empowers the employees who deal 
either directly or indirectly with the customers.  The 
marketing strategy of most cable TV companies  emphasizes 
customer retention.  Their plans work toward creating 
ongoing customer service,  quality service,  loyalty,  and 
value.  This study will  further the proposition that in 
today's competitive environment,  it is  important to listen 
to,  train,  and empower employees in order to consistently 
serve the customer,  provide quality service,  and retain 
their loyalty.

Finally,  this study contributes to the literature 
additional facets of employee satisfaction and customer 
satisfaction in a market orientation.  Does a satisfied

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


employee lead to a satisfied customer?  Is quality service 
an outcome of contented employees? The study also examines 
whether a manager*s perceptions of market orientation are 
different than an employee's perceptions,  and how the 
manager's perceptions of customer satisfaction vary from 
the employee's perception.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


66

CHAPTER III 

METHODOLOGY

Overview

The purpose of this study is to examine the 

relationship between market orientation and employee 
satisfaction,  and the relationship between employee 
satisfaction and service quality.  This chapter presents 
research questions and hypotheses,  the conceptual 
framework,  the sampling frame and methodology,  data 
collection procedures,  operationalization of the variables, 
measurement or instrumentation,  validity and reliability 
issues,  data analysis method,  and a chapter summary.
Many of the research questions that this study 

addresses are suggested by prior empirical research.  The 
researcher will contribute to the understanding of employee 
satisfaction as it relates to employees and managers in a 
constantly growing and changing telecommunication 
environment.  Narver and Slater  (1990)  look at the effect of 
market orientation on business profitability.  Kohli and 
Jaworski  (1990)  suggest that market orientation affords 
benefits to employees and that there is a positive 
relationship between a firm's market orientation and 
customer satisfaction.  Jaworski and Kohli  (1993)  find that

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


67

the market orientation of a business  is an important 
determinant of its performance.  They also find that when 
managers emphasize market orientation,  the organization 
tends to exhibit market orientation behavior,  which in turn 
leads to more committed employees.

In examining employee satisfaction literature,  it is 

found that Hallowell,  Schlesinger,  and Zornitsky  (1996) 
determine that service organizations rarely have satisfied 
customers without having satisfied employees,  and that 
managers must frequently remind employees of the company's 
commitment to customer satisfaction.

Research Questions and Hypotheses

This study continues the research in market 

orientation,  service quality,  and employee satisfaction.  It 
looks at the cable television business and examines  the 
relationship between market orientation and employee 
satisfaction.  The research also examines the customers' 
perception of service quality.

Are market orientation and employee satisfaction 

(1) 
positively related?
(2) 
positively related?
(3) 

Are employee satisfaction and service quality 

Are managers'  perceptions of service quality

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


68

different than the perceptions of other employees  in the 
same organization?
(4) 
greater than those of other employees  in the same 
organization?

Are managers'  perceptions of market orientation 

The hypotheses derived from these four research 

questions are suggested below.  For each hypothesis  listed 
below,  the null hypothesis  is  stated first,  followed by the 
statement of the research hypothesis.
Hoi  Market orientation and employee satisfaction are 
negatively or not correlated.
Hal  Market orientation and employee satisfaction are 
positively correlated.
Ho2  Employee satisfaction and service quality are 
negatively or not correlated.
Ha2  Employee satisfaction is positively correlated to 
service quality.
Ho3  Managers'  perceptions of market orientation are lower 
than or the same as the perceptions of market orientation 
of other employees in the same organization.
Ha3  Managers'  perceptions of market orientation are higher 
than the perceptions of market orientation of other 
employees in the same organization.
Ho4  Managers'  perceptions of their employee satisfaction

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


69

is  lower than or the same as those of the employees  in the 
same organization.
Ha4  Managers'  perceptions of their employees'  satisfaction 
are higher than those of the employees in the same 
organization.

Hypothesis Testing

Hypothesis  1  in the null form states,  "Market 

orientation and employee satisfaction are negatively or not 
correlated." To test this hypothesis,  a Pearson product- 
moment correlation analysis was run with summed scores  for 
market orientation and employee satisfaction as the 
variables.

Hypothesis 2  in the null  form states,  "Employee 

satisfaction and service quality are negatively or not 
correlated." This hypothesis was tested by a regression 
analysis,  with summed scores  for employee satisfaction 
(empsatsum)  and service quality  (servqualsum)  as the test 
variables.

Hypothesis  3 in the null form states  " Managers' 

perceptions of market orientation are lower than or the 
same as the perceptions of market orientation of other 
employees in the same organization." To examine the 
strength of managers'  perceptions of market orientation as

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


70

compared to other employees,  a one tailed test analysis of 
variance  (ANOVA)  was conducted with the summed scores of 
market orientation as the dependent variable,  and employee 
position level  (employee,  manager)  as the grouping 
variable.

Hypothesis  4  in the null form states  " Managers' 

perceptions of their employee satisfaction is lower than or 
the same as those of the employees  in the same 
organization." To test this hypothesis,  researchers 
measured the managers'  perceptions of the strength of their 
employees'  satisfaction  an ANOVA with the summed factor 
score of employee satisfaction as the dependent variable, 
and employee position as the grouping variable.

Conceptual Framework

Deshpande and Farley  (1996)  define market orientation 

as the set of cross-functional processes and activities 
directed at creating and satisfying customers through 
continuous needs assessment.  This  inductively derived 
definition helps move us  forward toward the next stage of 
assessment of efforts devoted to implementing market 
orientation as part of the strategic intent of the firm.
The scale used by Deshpande Farley and Webster  (1996)  does 
not deal with market orientation as a culture  (i.e.,  a set

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


71

of shared values and beliefs about the central importance 
of the customer) ,  but rather focuses on activities  (a set 
of behaviors and processes related to continuous assessing 
and serving customer needs) .  Employee satisfaction and 
service quality were measured to examine the relationship 
between them and market orientation.

Research Design

The sampling was performed at Cablevision Systems New 
England cable television systems.  These systems are located 
in Boston's five surrounding communities.  Each system's 
employees completed an employee satisfaction survey 
(Appendix A)  (approximately 475 employees  in total) ,  which 
included managers'  responses coded for later 
identification. All employees and managers were assessed 
for market orientation.

The researcher distributed 2,034 service quality 

surveys,  approximately 400 in each of the  five 
geographically distinct communities.  The implicit purpose 
of all research designs is to impose controlled 
restrictions on observations of natural phenomena.  In this 
study,  a quasi-experimental research design was used.  This 
design was most appropriate in order to properly 
investigate the relationships of service quality and

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


72

customer satisfaction.  This research design is the plan and 
structure of investigation so conceived as to obtain 
answers to research questions Kerlinger  (1986). 
The 
design of this  study enabled the researcher to test the 
stated hypothesis.

Data Collection

The employee surveys  for market orientation,  and 

employee satisfaction,  were distributed to all employees by 
the human resource managers in each of the five cable 
systems in the Boston and suburban systems of Cablevisions 
Systems Corporation.  The human resource managers collected 
the completed surveys  in three to  five days.  A reminder 
letter,  sent  for late returns,  was distributed by the human 
resource managers.  The final collection took place over ten 
days.  The human resource managers made a final collection 
effort one week later.

The author mailed the service quality surveys and a 

cover letter first class to current customers of the above 
mentioned cable television systems.  Included was a postage 
paid envelope addressed to a blind post office box.  The 
returned data was logged by date received and entered into 
SPSS.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


73

Measurement and Operationalization of Variables

This research measured the constructs of market 

orientation,  employee satisfaction,  and customer service 
quality.  The first section,  which measures market 
orientation,  used the Deshpande and Farley  (1996)  10-item 
market orientation scale.  The Deshpande & Farley scale 
questions  (Appendix B)  previously used a sample of 82 
marketing executives from 27 companies.

The Employee Satisfaction Scale consists of an eight 

question,  six point Likert-type summated ratings scale 
measuring the degree of satisfaction a salesperson 
expresses having with his or her work.  The researcher used 
the Hafer and Sirgy  (1983)  scale,  which is a modified 
version of the scale from Pruden and Reese  (1972)  employee 
satisfaction scale.  The scale was modified by Hafer and 
Sirgy  (1983)  by using the first  four questions of the 
Pruden and Reese  (1972)  scale,  and the last four questions 
that were designed by Bagozzi  (1976).  Hafer and Sirgy
(1983)  collected the data from 350 insurance salespeople in 
Oone company.

The SERVQUAL scale designed by Parasuraman,  Berry,  and 
Zeithaml,  1991c),  as modified by Cronin and Taylor  (1992), 
was used to measure five dimensions of service quality.  The

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


74

SERVQUAL scale is composed of five different sub-scales, 
measuring five separate dimensions of service quality.  The 
Cronin and Taylor scale treats all the items as one 
summated scale.  They say that the items can be treated as 
uni-dimensional.  Their findings suggest that service 
quality should be measured as an attitude rather than 
satisfaction.  Table  1  illustrates a comparison of the 
reliability of the scales  this research used along with and 
several other scales.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


75

Table 1
Scale Reliability

Instrument
Market
Orientation
Market
Orientation
Employee
Satisfaction
Employee
Satisfaction
Employee
Satisfaction

Service Quality

Service Quality 

Researcher(s)
Deshpande & Farley  (1996)

Cronbach's
.72

Kohli,  Jaworski,  & Kumar  (1993)

Boulding,  Kalra,  Staelin, 
Zeithaml  (1993)
Baggozi  (1976)

- modification of Baggozi 

Hafer & Sirgy  (1983)
(1976)
Cronin & Taylor  (1992)  - 
modification of 
Parasuraman,  Berry,  Zeithaml  & 
(1991c)
Carmen  (1990)

,51

60

,78

67

93

,71

The  final  instruments used in this study appear in:

Figure 1 
Appendix A 
Appendix B 
Appendix C 
Appendix D

Appendix E

Research Model
Employee Satisfaction Scale
Market Orientation Scale
Service Quality Scale
Description of Variables  for 
Market Orientation
Description of Variables  for 
Employee Satisfaction

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


Appendix F 

Description of Variables for
Service Quality

76

Data Analysis

Data entry was verified by reviewing frequency 

distributions,  and afterwards mean and standard deviations 
were run. A Pearson product-moment correlation was used for 
the market orientation questions;  a regression analysis was 
used for the employee satisfaction questions and the 
service quality questions using the summed scores. A one 
tailed test ANOVA was also conducted.  The summed scores 
will be retained for further analysis.

A reliability analysis using Chronbach's alpha test of 

three scales was used on the  following three scales.
The ten-item market orientation scale,  designed by 
Deshpande and Farley  (1996),  uses a response range format 
of one  for strongly disagree to Strongly agree,  to five for 
strongly agree  (Appendix B).

The seven-item Employee Satisfaction scale,  designed 
by Hafer and Sirgy  (1983),  has a response range of one for 
definitely no to six for definitely yes.  (Appendix A).

The 21  item Service Quality scale,  designed by Cronin 
and Taylor  (1992),  has a response range of one for strongly 
disagree  to six for strongly agree,  (Appendix C) .  This

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


analysis was conducted to affirm the reliability of the 
instruments  for the underlying construct.  The alpha 
coefficient values were compared to the prior tests as a 
verification of scale reliability.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Figure 1 illustrates the research model,

78

Figure 1 

Research Model

Employee
Satisfaction

ratings scale 

Hafer and Sirgy eight- 
question six point 
Likert-type summated 
measuring the degree 
of satisfaction,  which 
is a modified version 
Pruden £ Reese  (1972), 
employee satisfaction 

of the scale from 

scale.

Market

Orientation

Deshpande £ Farley 
(1996)  10-item market 
orientation scale. 
This is a synthesized 
scale developed from 
the Narver and Slater 
(1990)  15 item scale 
Jaworski,  and Kumar 
(1993)  20 item scale.

and the Kohli, 

Service Quality

The SERVQUAL scale designed by 
Parasuraman,  Zeithaml,  and 
Berry  ( 1991c),  as modified by 
Cronin and Taylor (1992)  was 
used to measure five 
dimensions of service quality. 
The SERVQUAL scale is composed 
of five different sub-scales, 
measuring five separate 
dimensions of service quality. 
The Cronin and Taylor scale, 
treats all the items as one 
summated scale and all the 
items can be treated as uni- 
dimensional.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


79

CHAPTER IV 
FINDINGS

This chapter reports the results of the study based on 

questionnaires distributed to customers and employees of 
Cablevision Systems of Greater Boston.  The research 
findings are presented in the order in which the hypotheses 
were stated in Chapter Three and parallel the following 
research questions.

(1)  Are market orientation and employee satisfaction 

positively related?

(2)  Are employee satisfaction and service quality 

positively related?

(3)  Are managers'  perceptions of service quality 

different than the perceptions of other employees in 
the same organization?

(4)  Are managers'  perceptions of market orientation 
greater than those of other employees  in the same 
organization?

Data Collection

The study population consisted of managers,  employees 

and customers of Cablevision Systems Corporation in the 
greater Boston area.  Employee and manager surveys were 
distributed and collected by human resource employees in 
each of the five locations,  Brookline,  Allston,  Beacon

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


80

Hill,  Fenway,  and Dorchester/Roxbury,  where the service 
quality survey was also conducted. All service quality 
surveys were mailed by first class mail and returned to a 
blind post office box in Boston.

Returned questionnaires were logged in by return dates 
and reviewed for completeness.  Each questionnaire was coded 
for data entry purposes and entered into the SPSS data 
editor.  Data from customers  (subscribers)  were entered for 
the 21 service quality questions.  Data for the market 
orientation survey and the employee satisfaction survey 
were entered for the managers and for the employees' 
responses. A frequency distribution analysis was conducted 
to  identify key entry errors.

The market orientation variables,  the service quality 

variables and the employee satisfaction variables were 
summed. A list of variables that specify the survey 
questions,  the variable description,  and the variable name 
used in the databases are shown in Appendixes D,  E,  and F. 
Thirty-one questionnaires were less then half complete; 
these were not entered into the database. A description of 
the variables and the variable name used in the database is 
shown in Appendix D.  Twenty-three questionnaires were less 
than half complete;  these were not entered into the 
database.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


81

Research Data Base

The data collection process involved three surveys.  A 
service quality survey was mailed to  a population universe 
of 2,034 customers.  Fourteen letters were returned.  A 
usable universe of 203 or 10% response rate was obtained. 
Human resource employees distributed an employee 
satisfaction and a market orientation survey to 466 
employees and managers,  to which 158  employees and 53 
managers responded for a 45% response rate.

The employee surveys  for market orientation and 

employee satisfaction were distributed to all employees by 
the human resource managers in each of the five cable 
systems  in the Boston and suburban systems of Cablevisions 
Systems Corporation.  The human resource managers collected 
the completed surveys in three to  five days. A reminder 
letter,  sent for late returns,  was  also distributed by the 
human resource managers.  The final collection took place 
over ten days.  The human resource managers made a final 
collection effort one week later.

The author mailed service quality surveys,  first 

class,  to current customers of the above mentioned cable 
television systems with a cover letter and a postage paid 
envelope to be returned to a blind post office box.  When 
the surveys were returned,  each survey was logged in by

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


82

date received and entered into SPSS.
Tests of the Research Hypotheses

The tests of the research hypotheses are presented in 

this section.  The research findings are presented in the 
order in which the hypotheses were presented.
Hypothesis One

Hlo: Market orientation and employee satisfaction 

are negatively or not correlated.

Hla:  Market orientation and employee satisfaction 

are positively correlated.

Hypothesis One was  tested by a Pearson product-moment 

correlation analysis,  with summed scores  for market 
orientation and employee satisfaction as the test 
variables,  as  shown in Table 2.

Table 2

Hypothesis One
Correlation Between Market Orientation  (Mkorsums)and 
Employee Satisfaction  (Mpsatsums)
MKORSUMS

MPSATSUMS

MKORSUMS

Pearson Correlation
Sig.  (1- tailed)
N

1.000
211

-.255**
.000
211

MPSATSUM

Pearson Correlation
Sig.  (1- tailed)
N
**  Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level  (1 -tailed)

-.255**
211

1.000
.000
211

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


The correlation was significant at p <  .05.  The correlation
coefficient  (r)  scores  for employee satisfaction  (variable
name is empsatsum)  and the market orientation  (variable
name is mkorsums)  was -.255.  The Pearson correlation
indicates  that employee satisfaction and market orientation
are negatively related.  Therefore,  the null hypothesis
fails to be rejected.
Hypothesis Two

Ho2 Employee satisfaction and service quality are

negatively or not correlated.

Ha2 Employee satisfaction is positively correlated to

service quality.
Hypothesis Two was tested by a regression analysis,  with 
summed scores for employee satisfaction  (Empsatsum)  and 
Service Quality  (Servqualsum)  as the test variables,  as 
shown in Table 3.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Hypothesis 2
Service Quality  (Servqualsum)

Table 3

84

.002 
-.003

R2 
Adjusted R2 
Analysis of Variance

DF 
1 

Sum of Sq.
.493

Model 
Regression Equation:  Empsatsum = 
(Servqualsum)
Significance:  =  .520

Mean Sq. 
.493 

F Value
.416

3.5569 +  2.674

The correlation, coefficient,  adjusted R is  .045 and the R2 
is  .002.  The F =  .416 and a significance level of  P <  .520 
indicates that there is little or no  relationship between 
service quality and employee satisfaction.  Therefore,  the 
null hypothesis  fails to be rejected.

Hypothesis Three

Ho3 Managers'  perceptions of market orientation are

lower than or the same as  the perceptions of market
orientation of other employees in the same organization.
Ha3  Managers'  perceptions of market orientation are
higher than the perceptions of market orientation of other
employees in the same organization.

To examine the strength of managers'  perceptions of 
market orientation as compared to other employees,  a one 
tailed test ANOVA was conducted using summed scores of

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


85

market orientation as the dependent variable,  and employee 
position level  (1.00 = employee,  and 2.00 = manager)  as the 
grouping variable.

Hypothesis  3
Analysis of Variance Results Market Orientation  (Mkorsums)
of Employees and Managers

Table 4

Source 

DF

Sum of Sq

Mean Sq F

Ratio

Between Groups  1 
Within Groups  209 
Total 
210

2819.103
6830.423
9649.526

2819.103
32.681

86.260

Sig.

.000

As indicated in Table 4,  employees'  (1.00)  summed score has 
a mean of 3.3930 and the managers'  (2.00)  summed score has 
a mean of 4.2358.  The ANOVA shows an F value of 86.260.  The 
difference in the means  is significant at P <  .05. 
Therefore,  the null hypothesis is rejected.  Managers' 
perceptions of market orientation are higher than the 
perceptions of other employee in the same organization.

Hypothesis Four

Ho4  Managers'  perceptions of their employee

satisfaction is lower than or the same as  those of the
employees in the same organization.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


86

Ha4  Managers'  perceptions of their employees' 

satisfaction is higher than those of the employees  in the 
same organization.

This hypothesis was tested with a one-tailed test 

ANOVA,  with the summed score of employee satisfaction as 
the dependent variable,  and employee position as the 
grouping variable.  Table 5 shows that employees  (1.00) 
summed score had a mean of 2.7658 and a Managers  (2.00) 
summed score had a mean of 2.3208.

Table 5

Hypothesis  4
Analysis of Variance Results Employee Satisfaction 
(Empsatsum)for Employees  (1.00)  and Managers  (2.00)
F Ratio
Source

Sum of Sq

Mean Sq 

DF

Sig.

Between Groups
Within Groups
Total

1
209
210

385.212
1840.248
2225.460

43.749

.000

385.212 
8.805

The ANOVA showed an F value of 43.749.  The difference in 
the means  is  significant at P<  .05.  Therefore the null 
hypothesis is rejected. Managers'  perception of their 
employee satisfaction is lower than the perceptions of 
other employees in the same organization.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


87

Summary

This chapter discussed the results of the statistical 

methods used to evaluate the data in these surveys. A 
summary of the findings is shown in Table 6.

Table 6

Summary of Hypotheses Tests

Hlo 

H2o 

H3o 

H4o 

Null Hypotheses
Market orientation and
employee satisfaction are 
negatively or not correlated.
Employee satisfaction and 
service quality are 
negatively or not 
correlated.
Managers'  perceptions of
market orientation are lower 
than or the same as the 
perception of other employees 
in the same organization.
Managers'  perceptions of
their employees satisfaction 
is lower than or the same 
as those of the employees 
in the same organization.

Results
The null hypothesis 
failed to be 
rejected.
The null hypothesis 
failed to be 
rejected.

The null hypothesis 
was rejected.

The null hypothesis 
was rejected.

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


CHAPTER V 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

88

This chapter presents conclusions drawn from the 

statistical tests,  discusses implications of the findings, 
reviews assumptions and limitations related to the study, 
and makes recommendations  for future research.  The 
conclusions,  discussions,  and implications  are presented 
together for each hypothesis in the order in which each 
hypothesis was  stated.

Conclusions,  Discussion,  and Implications

Hypothesis One

Hypothesis  one stated that market orientation and 
employee satisfaction are positively correlated.  This 
hypothesis was not supported,  rather the results showed an 
inverse relationship between employee satisfaction and 
market orientation.  Earlier research concerning market 
orientation  (Deshpande & Webster,  1994;  Kohli  & Jaworski, 
1990,  1993;  Narver & Slater,  1990;)  time and again supports 
that market orientation originates with top management and 
leads to greater customer satisfaction and organizational 
commitment of employees.  Table 3 shows  that more than one

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


89

third of Cablevision Systems employees or over 40% of its 
managers are committed to market orientation.

What keeps employees happy is as complex as any 

question dealing with people.  Various aspects of employee 
satisfaction,  esprit de corps,  environmental climate, 
managerial commitment,  and culture play a crucial role in 
the relationship between employees and customer 
involvement,  Grewal & Sharma,  1991;  Kohli & Jaworski,  1993; 
McFarlin & Sweeney,  1996,  Schelsinger and Zornitsky 1990, 
Schneider & Bowen,  1993).

The Cablevision Systems surveys were conducted at a 

time of great industry upheaval,  which has  lead to an 
enormous  consolidation of systems within the New England 
area and in the country in general.  There was a very recent 
announcement that these Boston area systems were for sale. 
AT&T became a minority shareholder of the company and 
uncertainty is a dominant concern of all employees.
However,  the results also highlight the high degree of 
pressure,  felt by many of the employees and managers,  from 
dealing with customer complaints on a daily basis.

The frustration of cable TV subscribers is often 

played out on the employees who have limited power to solve 
power outage problems and program content issues. Although 
the employees are trained in market oriented concepts and

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


90

attempt to create customer satisfaction,  the results of 
this study imply that the relationship between market 
orientation and employee satisfaction is negligible.  In 
the current volatile environment,  continuous training and 
management involvement may alter the outcomes in the 
future,  and foster a higher degree of employee satisfaction 
leading to higher levels of service quality.

Hypothesis Two

Hypothesis two stated that employee satisfaction is 

positively related to service quality.  This hypothesis was 
not supported,  rather the results showed an inverse 
relationship between employee satisfaction and service 
quality.  The SERVQUAL instrument was used to assess the 
level of service quality.  Customers of Cablevision do not 
rate the service highly,  and employees of Cablevision 
express a relatively low level of satisfaction. According 
to Brief and Motowidlo  (1986),  Cronin and Taylor  (1992), 
Lashbrook  (1997),  Schmit and Allscheid  (1994),  Ryan,
Schmit,  and Johnson  (1996),  and Zeithaml,  Berry and 
Parasuraman  (1988),  service quality occurs during service 
delivery with a customer contact person,  and that satisfied 
employees extend their emotions to customers.  Employees who 
are not satisfied extend their non-positive emotions.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


91

Hallowell,  Schlesinger and Zornitsky  (1996)  say that 

managers seeking to deliver customer satisfaction by 
improving internal service quality could also make jobs 
more satisfying.  Stanley Slater  (1997),  in his proposal 
for a customer value-based theory of the  firm,  states that 
a market orientation is the culture that places the highest 
priority on the profitable creation and maintenance of 
superior customer value while considering the interests of 
other key stakeholders.  It is important to continually 
learn about customers,  not just from them.

Hypothesis Three

Hypothesis three states that managers'  perceptions of 
market orientation are higher than the perception of market 
orientation of other employees  in the same organization. 
This hypothesis was supported.

The results of this  study align with the proposition 

that market orientation begins with the top management, 
(Kohli  & Jaworski,  1990;  Schmit & Allsheid 1995).  This 
study implies that Cablevision Systems managers are market 
oriented,  however they could empower employees and 
encourage self-managing behaviors as suggested by the 
research of Cohen,  Chang,  and Ledford,  1997.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


92

Hypothesis  Four

Hypothesis four stated that managers'  perceptions of 
their own employee's satisfaction are higher than those of 
the employees  in the same organization.  This hypothesis was 
supported.  However,  managers have not done enough to stay 
abreast of their employees'  satisfaction and situations.
They could make performance more rewarding and more 
effective by treating employees as individuals and by being 
more goal oriented  (Lawler,  1974;  Oliver,  Steers and 
Porter,  1974).  Cablevision Systems employees'  would be more 
satisfied if managers would show more involvement with the 
day-to-day issues.  It would also be beneficial to employees 
and customers if employees were empowered  (more self­
management)  to solve customer problems.  Cablevision would 
benefit from additional training.  Employees would perform 
better if they had more to say in daily operations.

Assumptions and Limitations of the Study 
Assumptions

There are three assumptions  for this  study.  They are 

as  follows:

(1)  The data gathering methodology and the data analysis 
methods were appropriate and sufficient  for the purpose 
of the study.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


(2)  The reliability and validity of the survey 
instruments,  based on the use of prior research 
questionnaires and the use of appropriate statistical 
methods and procedures,  were satisfactory for this study.
(3)  The respondents  in each of the categories of 
managers and employees were knowledgeable and responded 
to the questionnaires honestly and to the best of their 
ability.  The customers were selected at random and 
received no special reward for their participation in the 
survey.
Limitations

(1)  This study was restricted to employees and customers 
of five of the communities served by Cablevision 
Systems.  Cablevision Systems serves hundreds of 
communities nationally.
(2)  This study questioned only customer service and 
Sales employees and managers in those departments.
(3)  This study did not include other cable companies or 
other telecommunication industries.
(4)  The sample size of managers was adequate but near 
the low end of the range considered acceptable for the 
statistical methods utilized.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


94

Implications

The results of this study lead the researcher to the 

conclusion that at Cablevision Systems  in the Greater 
Boston area,  market orientation and employee satisfaction 
are not positively related.  This  implies that more 
attention needs  to be applied to training of employees  in 
each of the city systems. Although managers are more market 
oriented,  more customer-focused guidance directed at 
employees could boost their satisfaction.  This  study also 
implies  that there is a strong need for more managers who 
are committed to satisfied employees.  This commitment 
could,  in turn,  facilitate better service quality.  This 
study points out the need for educating managers who must 
succeed in the unpredictable telecommunications industry of 
the 21st century.

Future Research

This survey was conducted in one metropolitan area 

with one cable company.  It would be  important to apply this 
or similar research methodology to see if these findings 
hold true for multiple systems across  the country,  as well 
as across several multiple system operators  (MSO) .

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


95

Deshpande,  Farley and Webster  (1996)  designed a market 
orientation scale by synthesizing work by Narver and Slater 
(1990)  and Kohli,  Jaworski,  and Kumar  (1993).

A study of many of the cable industry employees across 
regions,  including several MSOs  like AT&T and Time/Warner, 
may lead to similar findings of job insecurity or that more 
training,  better compensation,  and a higher degree of 
management involvement is required. Additional research 
would prove useful by examining employee satisfaction based 
upon geographic location within various cable systems 
countrywide.

Research on how other oligopolies i.e.,  the Baby 

Bells,  have upgraded service quality and enhanced employee 
satisfaction may benefit the cable industry.  This process 
may enable the cable companies to improve service quality 
and promote employee involvement.  It might also be 
beneficial to examine the customer service models of the 
AT&T  long distance phone divisions  in relationship to the 
constantly evolving cable companies now adding telephony to 
their offerings.

Summary

This study set out to examine the role of managers in 

employee satisfaction.  It also examined what happens when

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


96

managers and line employees commit to customers,  customer 
satisfaction,  and service quality.  The researcher looked at 
the customers'  actual perceptions of satisfaction and 
quality.  This study also examined managers'  perceptions of 
market orientation and service quality and compared them 
with the perceptions of the employees.

A major finding was that service quality is not highly 

correlated with employee satisfaction.  However,  those 
managers and employees with higher levels of satisfaction 
work in cities where there  is a corresponding level of 
service quality.  It was also found that  (a)  managers have a 
higher level of market orientation than employees; (b) 
managers'  perceptions of employee satisfaction is  lower 
than the employees;  and  (c)  employee satisfaction may not 
be related to market orientation.  These findings have 
important implications  for management and employee 
training.  The need for managers to make the commitment to 
train employees in product knowledge,  customer 
appreciation,  and service enhancement skills is clear.
There is a very real threat of competition from satellite 
and direct broadcast companies. Management,  beginning with 
the chair,  must be willing to make the investment necessary 
to compete in the  future.  These

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


findings may also assist organizations  in understanding the 
goals that must be set for service quality and customer 
satisfaction.

97

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


98

REFERENCES

Anderson,  E.  W.,  Fornell,  C.,  Lehmann,  D.  R.  (1994). 

Customer satisfaction,  market share,  and profitability: 
Findings  from Sweden.  Journal of Marketing,  58  (3),  53-66.
Anderson,  P.  F.  (1982). Marketing,  strategic planning 
and the theory of the  firm.  Journal of Marketing,  46  (2) , 
15-26.

Appiah-Adu,  K.  (1997). Market orientation and 

performance:  Do the  findings established in large  firms 
hold in the small business  sector? Journal of Euro- 
marketing,  6  (3),  1-26.

Argyris,  C.,  (1990)  Overcoming Organizational

Defenses. New York:  Prentice-Hall.

Aryee,  S.,  L.  Stone,  V.  & Stone,  R.  (1998).  Family- 

responsive variables and retention-relevant outcomes among 
employed parents.  Human Relations 51  (1)  73-87.

Baggozi,  R.  P.  (1976).  Toward a general theory for the 
explanation of the performance of sales people.  Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation,  Northwestern University Chicago.

Baggozi,  R.  P.  (1992).  The self-regulation of 

attitudes intentions,  and behavior.  Social Psychology 
Quarterly,
55  (2),  178-204.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


99

Bardwick,  J.M.,(1991).  Stemming the entitlement tide 

in American business.  Management Review.80  (10)  54-59

Berry,  L.  L.,  Parasuraman,  A.,  Zeithaml,  V.,  Adsit,
D.,  et al.  (1994) .  Improving Service quality in America: 
Lessons learned;  Executive commentary. Academy of 
Management Executive,  8  (2),  32-52.

Bitner,  M.  J.  (1990).  Evaluating service encounters:

The effects of physical surroundings and employee 
responses.  Journal of Marketing,  54  (2),  69-82.

Bolton,  R.N.  & Drew,  J.H.  (1991). A longitudinal 
analysis of the  impact of service changes on customer 
attitudes.  Journal of Marketing,  55  (5),  1-9.

Borden,  N.  H.  (1964).  The concept of the marketing mix 

Journal of Advertising Research,  4  (6),  297-208.

Boulding,  W.,  Kalra,  A.,  Staelin,  R.,  & Zeithaml,  V.

A.  (1993).  A dynamic process model of service quality:  From 
expectations to behavioral intentions,  Journal of Marketing 
Research,  30  (1)  7-27.

Brayfield,  A.H.  & Crocket,  W.  H.  (1955).  Employee 

attitudes and employer performance.  Psychological Bulletin,
(5),  396-424.

Brief,  A.  P.,  & Motowidlo,  S.  J.  (1986).  Pro-social 

organizational behaviors.  Academy of Management Review,  11
(4),  710-725.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


100

Brown,  T.  J.,  Churchill,  G. A.,  Jr.,  & Peter,  J.P.

(1993),  Research note:  Improving the measurement of service 
quality.  Journal of Retailing,  69  (1),  127 -139.

Butler,  J.K.,  & Cantrell,  S.  (1997)  Effects of 

perceived leadership behaviors on job satisfaction and 
productivity.  Psychological Reports  80,  976-978.

Butz,  H.  E.,  Jr.,  &  Goodstein,  L. D.  (1996). Measuring

customer value:  Gaining  the strategic advantage.
Organizational Dynamics,  24  (3),  63-77.

Cadotte,  E.  R.,  Woodruff,  R.  B.,  & Jenkins,  R.  L.
(1987).  Expectations and norms in models of consumer 
satisfaction.  Journal of Marketing Research,  24  (3),  305- 
314.

Carmen,  J. M.  (1990) .  Consumer perceptions of service 
quality:  An assessment of the SERVQUAL dimensions,  Journal 
of Retailing,  66  (1)  33-55.

Churchill,  G. A.,  &  Suprenant,  C. (1982,),  An

investigation into the determinants  of customer
satisfaction.  Journal of Marketing Research,  22 491—504.

Cleland,  A.  S.,  & Bruno,  A.  V.  (1997).  Balancing 
customer and shareholder value.  Financial Executive,  13
(2),  16-17.

Cohen,  A.  (1994).  Right on target.  Sales & Marketing 

Management,  146  (14),  59-61

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


101

Cohen,  S.G.,  Chang,  L.,  & Ledford,  G.E.,  (1997)  A

hierarchical  construct of self-management leadership and 
its  relationship to quality of work life and perceived work 
group effectiveness.  Personal Psychology 50  (2),  275-314.
Cronin,  J.  J.,  Jr.,  & Taylor,  S.  (1992) .  Measuring 

service quality: A re-examination and extension.  Journal of 
Marketing,  56  (3),  55-68.

Day,  G.  S.  (1994).  The capabilities of market-driven 

Organizations.  Journal of Marketing,  58  (4),  37-52.

Day,  G.  S.  (1998) .  What does it mean to be market- 

driven? Business Strategy Review,  9  (1),  1-14.

Day,  G.  S.,  & Wensley,  R.  (1983). Marketing theory 

with a Strategic orientation.  Journal of Marketing,  47  (4), 
79-89.

DeGeus,  A.  P.  (1988) .  Planning as learning.

Harvard Business Review,  66  (2),  70-74.

Deming,  W.  E.,  (1987).  Transformation of today's

management.  Executive Excellence,  4  (12),  8-9.

Deshpande,  R.,  & Farley,  J.U.  (1996,  December). 

Understanding market orientation:  a prospectively designed 
meta-analysis of three market orientation scales.,  (Report 
96-125)  Cambridge,  Ma:  Marketing Science Institute

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


102

Deshpande,  R.,  & Webster,  F.  E.,  Jr.  (1989). 

Organizational culture and marketing:  Defining the research 
agenda.  Journal of Marketing,  53,  (1)  3-15.

Drucker,  P.  (1967).  The Shame of Marketing. Marketing/ 

Communications, 297  (8)  60-64

Fields,  D.,  & Blum,  T.C.  (1997).  Employee satisfaction 

in work groups and different gender composition.  Journal 
of Organizational Behavior.  18  (2)  181-197.

Filipczak,  B.  G.,  Stamps,  R.,  &  Zemke,  D.  (1997)

Love job;  hate boss.  What else is new?  Training 34  (11)
16.

Finkelman,  D.  P.  (1993).  Crossing the  zone of 
indifference.  Marketing  Management,  2  (3),  22-30.

Fornell,  C.  (1992).  A national customer satisfaction 

barometer:  The Swedish experience.  Journal of Marketing,  56 
(1),  6-21.

Fornell,  C.,  Johnson,  M.  D.,  Anderson,  E.  W.,  Cha,  J.

B.,  & Everitt,  B.  (1996).  The American customer 
satisfaction index:  Nature,  purpose and findings.  Journal 
of Marketing,  60  (4),  7-18.

Fredericks,  J.  O.,  & Salter,  J.  M.,  II.  (1995).  Beyond 

customer satisfaction. Management Review,  84  (5),  29-32.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


103

Gale,  B.  T.  (1994).  Customer satisfaction - relative 

to competitors is where it's at. Marketing & Research 
Today,  22  (1),  39-53.

Gardner,  D.  G.,  & Pierce,  J.  L.  (1998,  March).  Self­

esteem and self-efficacy within the organizational context: 
An empirical examination.  Group & Organizational 
Management,  23  (1),  48-70.

Garg,  R.  K.,  & Chan,  K.  K.  (1997).  Service orientation 

and small business marketing.  Journal of Professional 
Services Marketing,  15  (2),  131-143.

Garvin,  David A.  (1987).  Competing on the eight 

dimensions of quality.  Harvard Business Review,  65  (6), 
101-108.

George,  W.  R.  (1990).  Internal marketing and 

organizational behavior: A partnership in developing 
customer-conscious employees at every level.  Journal of 
Business Research,  20  (1),  63-70.

George,  J. M.,  Brief,  A.  P.  Webster, J.,  & Burke, M.J. 
(1989) .  Incentive compensation as an injurious condition at 
work:  a study of labeling.  Journal of organizational 
behavior,  10  (2),  155-167.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


104

Glisson,  C.,  & Durick,  M.  (1988).  Predictors of job 

satisfaction and organizational commitment in human service 
organizations. Administrative Science Quarterly/  33  (1) , 
61-81.

Gotlieb,  J.  B.,  Grewal,  D.,  & Brown,  S.  W.  (1994). 

Consumer satisfaction and perceived quality:  Complementary 
or divergent constructs? Journal of Applied Psychology,  79
(6),  875-885.

Graham,  J.  R.  (1998).  Put your marketing to the test: 

Making sure you have what you need to grow.  Direct 
Marketing,  60  (11),  34-36.

Grewal,  D.,  & Sharma,  A.  (1991).  The effect of sales 

force behavior on customer satisfaction:  An interactive 
framework.  Journal of Personal  Selling &  Sales Management,
11  (3),  13-23.

Gronroos,  C.  (1990).  Relationship approach to 

marketing in service contexts:  The marketing and 
organizational behavior interface.  Journal of Business 
Research,  20  (1),  3-11.

Gronroos,  C.  (1994).  From marketing mix to 

relationship marketing:  Towards a paradigm shift in 
marketing. Management Decision,  32  (2),  4-20.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


105

Hackman,  R.J.,  & Lawler,  E.E.,  III.  (1971).  Employee 

reactions  to job characteristics.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology,  55  (3),  259-285

Hafer,  J.,  Sirgy,  J. M.  (1983).  Professional growth 
versus personal growth of sales people: A general system 
model.  Journal of Personal Selling and Sales Management,  3
(2),  22-30.

Hallowell,  R.  S.,  Schlesinger,  L.  A.,  & Zornitsky,  J. 

(1996).  Internal service quality,  customer and job 
satisfaction:  Linkages and implications  for management.
Human Resource Planning,  19  (2),  20-31.

Hambrick,  D.  C.,  & Mason,  P.  (1984).  Upper echelons:

The organization as a reflection of its top managers. 
Academy of Management Review,  9  (2) ,  193-206.

Harris,  J.  H.,  & Arendt,  L.  A.  (1998) .  Stress 

reduction and the small business:  Increasing employee and 
customer satisfaction.  SAM Advanced Management Journal,  63 
(1),  27-34.

Hartline,  M.  D.,  & Ferrell,  O.  C.  (1996).  The 

management of customer-contact  service employees:  An 
empirical  investigation.  Journal of Marketing,  60  (4) ,  52- 
70.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


106

Higgins,  K.  T.  (1997).  Coming of age. Marketing News,

3JL  (22),  1,  12.

Houston,  F.  S.  (1986).  The marketing concept:  What it 
is and what it is not.  Journal of Marketing,  50  (2),  81-87.

Hui,  C.  H.,  & Yee,  C.,  & Eastman,  K.L.  (1995).  The 
relationship between individualism-collectivism and job 
satisfaction.  Applied Psychology:  an international review. 
44  (3),  276-282.

Humphreys,  M. A.,  & Williams,  M.R.  (1996).  Exploring 
the relative effects of salesperson interpersonal process 
attributes  and technical product attributes on customer 
satisfaction.  Journal of Personal Selling &  Sales 
Management,  16  (3),  47-57.

Hunt,  S.  D.  & Morgan,  R. M.,  (  1995).  The comparative

advantage theory of competition. Journal of Marketing 2 
(59)1-15.

Iaffaldano,  M.T.,  & Muchinsky,  P.M.,  (1985) .  Job

satisfaction and job performance: A meta-analysis. 
Psychological Bulletin  (97)  251-273.

James,  L.  R.,  & Tetrick,  L.  E.  (1986).  Confirmatory 

analytic tests of three causal models relating job 
perceptions to job satisfaction.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology,  71  (1),  77-82.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


107

Jaworski,  B.  J.,  & Kohli,  A.  K.  (1993) . Market 

orientation:  Antecedents and consequences.  Journal of 
Marketing,  57  (3),  53-70.

Johnson,  J.W.  (1996).  Linking employee perceptions of 

service climate to customer satisfaction.  Personnel 
Psychology,  49  (4),  831-851.

Jones,  T.  O.,  & Sasser,  W.  E.,  Jr.  (1995).  Why 

satisfied customers defect.  Harvard Business Review.  73 
(6),  88-100.

Kaydo,  C.  (1997).  Overturning turnover.  Sales & 

Marketing Management,149  (12),  50-60.

Keaveney,  S. M.  (1995).  Customer switching behavior in 

service industries:  An exploratory study.  Journal of 
Marketing,  59  (2),  71-82.

Keith,  R.  J.  (1960).  The marketing revolution.  Journal 

of Marketing,  24  (1),  35-38.

Kerlinger,  F.  N.  (1986).  Foundations of behavioral 

research. New York:  N.Y.  Holt,  Rinehart and Winston.
Kohli,  A.  K.,  & Jaworski,  B.  J.  (1990). Market 

orientation:  The construct,  research propositions,  and 
managerial implications.  Journal of Marketing,  54  (2),  1- 
18.

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


108

Kohli,  A.  K.,  Jaworski,  B.  J.,  & Kumar,  A.  (1993). 

MARKOR:  Ameasure of market orientation.  Journal of 
Marketing Research,  3  (4),  467-477.

Kotler,  P.  (1992)  Marketing Management.  Englewood 

Cliffs,  NJ:  Prentice Hall.

Lashbrook,  W.  B.  (1997).  Business performance, 

employee satisfaction,  and leadership practices.
Performance  Improvement,  36  (5),  29-33.

Latham,  G.  P.,  & Yukl,  G. A.  (1976).  Effects of 

assigned and participative goal setting on performance and 
job satisfaction.  Journal of Applied Psychology,  61  (2) , 
166-171.

Lawler,  E.  E.  (1970).  Job attitudes and employee 
motivation:  Theory,  research,  and practice.  Personnel 
Psychology,  23  (2),  223-237.

Lawler,  E.  E.  (197 4).  For a more effective 

organization - match the job to the man.  Organizational 
Dynamics,  3  (1),  19-29.

Lawler,  E.  E.,  & Hall,  D.  T.  (1970).  Relationships of 
job characteristics to job involvement,  satisfaction,  and 
intrinsic motivation.  Journal of Applied Psychology,  54
(4),  305-312.

Lear,  R.  W.  (1963).  No easy road to market 

orientation.  Harvard Business Review,  41  (5),  53-60

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


109

Levitt,  T.  (1975). Marketing myopia.  Harvard Business 

Review 53  (5).  26

Leavitt,  Theodore.  (1983).  The globalization of 

markets.
Harvard Business Review,  61  (3),  92-102.

Locke,  E. A.  (1969).  What is job satisfaction? 

Organizational Behavior & Human Performance,  4  (4),  309- 
336.

Lusch,  R.  F.,  & Laczniak,  G.  R.  (1987).  The evolving 

marketing concept,  competitive intensity and organizational 
performance.  Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
15  (3),  1-11.

Mano,  H.,  & Oliver,  R.L.,  (1993).  Assessing the

dimensionality and structure of the consumption experience: 
Evaluation,  feeling and satisfaction.  Journal of Consumer 
Research,  20  (3),  451-466.

Maslow,  A.  H.  (1954). Motivation and personality.  New 

York:  Harper & Row.

McCarthy,  E.  J.  (1960).  Basic marketing,  a managerial 

approach.  Homewood,  IL:  Richard D.  Irwin,  Inc.

McCarthy,  E.  J.  & Perreault,  W.  Jr.  (1990).  Basic 

Marketing,  (10th ed.  IL:  Richard D.  Irwin,  Inc.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


110

McFarlin,  D.  B.;  & Sweeney,  P.  D.  (1996).  Does having 

a say matter only if you get your way? Basic & Applied 
Social Psychology 18.  (3),  289-303.

McGregor,  Douglas  (1967).  The human side of 

enterprise.  New York: McGraw-Hill.

McKitterick,  J.B.  (1957).  What is the marketing 

management concept? American Marketing Association,  71-82.
McShulskis,  E.  (1997).  Well-paid employees are loyal 

employees.  HRM Magazine,  42  (11),  22.

Menguc,  B.  (1996).  The influence of the market 
orientation of the firm on sales  force behavior and 
attitudes:  Further empirical results.  International Journal 
of Research in Marketing,  13 277-291.

Mirvis,  P.  H.,  & Lawler,  E.  E.  (1977). Measuring the 
financial  impact of employee attitudes.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology,  62  (1),  1-8.

Motowidlo,  S.  J.  (1982).  Relationship between self- 

rated performance and pay satisfaction among sales 
representatives.  Journal of Applied Psychology,  67  (2), 
209-213.

Murray,  H.A.  (1938). Motivation and Personality.  New 

York:  Oxford University Press.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Ill

Narver,  J.  C.,  & Slater,  S.  F.  (1990).  The effect of a 

market orientation on business profitability.  Journal of 
Marketing,  54  (4),  (October),  20-35.

Oliver,  J.,  (1998),  High staff turnover-find out why

your staff are leaving.  Management Today,  (1)  84-85

Oliver,  R.  L.,  (1974).  Expectancy theory predictions
of salesmen's performance.  Journal of Marketing Research,
11  (3),  243A-253A.

Oliver,  R.  L.,  Rust,  R.  T.,  & Varki,  S.  (1997).

Customer delight:  Foundations,  findings,  and managerial 
insight.  Journal of Retailing,  73  (3),  (Fall)  311-336.

Parasuraman,  A.  (1997) .  Reflections on gaining 

competitive advantage through customer value.  Journal of 
the Academy of Marketing Science,  25  (2),  154-161.

Parasuraman,  A.,  Berry,  L.  L.,  & Zeithaml,  V.  A.

(1991b).  Perceived service quality as a customer-based 
performance measure:  An empirical examination of 
organization barriers using an extended service quality 
model.  Human Resource Management,  30  (3),  335-364.

Parasuraman,  A.,  Berry,  L.  L.,  & Zeithaml,  V.  A.

(1991c) .  Refinement and reassessment of the SERVQUAL Scale. 
Journal of Retailing,  67  (4),  (Winter)  420-450.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


112

Parkington,  J.  J.,  & Schneider,  B.  (1979).  Some 
correlates of experienced job stress:  A boundary role 
study.  Academy of Management Journal,  22  (2),  270-281.
Pelham,  A.  M.  (1997) . Mediating influences on the 

relationship between market orientation and profitability 
in small industrial  firms.  Journal of Marketing Theory & 
Practice,  5  (3),  55-7 6.

Porter,  L.W.,  & Lawler,  E.E.,  III.  (1968)  Managerial 

Attitudes  and Performances.  Homewood,  IL:  Irwin.

Porter,  L.  W.,  & Steers,  R. M.  (1973).  Organizational, 

work,  and personal  factors in employee turnover and 
absenteeism.  Psychological Bulletin,  80  (2),  151-176.

Porter,  L.  W.,  & Stone,  E.  F.  (1973).  Job 

characteristics and job attitudes: A multivariate study. 
California University,  Irvine:  Graduate School of 
Administration.  (Clearinghouse No.  CE000937)

Pruden,  H.O.,  & Reese,  R.M.,  (1972).

Interorganizational role-set relations and the performance 
and satisfaction of industrial salesmen.  Administrative 
Science Quarterly 17  (12),  601-609.

Reichheld,  F.  F.  (1996) .  Learning from customer 

defections.  Harvard Business Review,  74  (2),  56-61.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


113

Roethlisberger,  F.  J.  & Dickson,  W.J.,  (1939).
Management and the worker.  Cambridge,  Ma.  Harvard 
University Press.

Ruekert,  R.  W.,  & Walker,  0.  C.,  Jr.  (1987).

Marketing's  interaction with other functional units: A 
conceptual framework and empirical evidence.  Journal of 
Marketing,  51  (1),  1-19.

Rust,  R.  T.,  & Zahorik,  A.  J.  (1993).  Customer 

satisfaction,  customer retention,  and market share.  Journal 
of Retailing,  69  (2),  193-215.

Ryan,  A.  M.,  Schmit,  M.  J.,  & Johnson,  R.  (1996). 
Attitudes and effectiveness:  Examining relations at an 
organizational level.  Personnel Psychology,  49  (4),  853- 
882.

Schlesinger,  L. A.,  & Heskett,  J.  L.  (1991a).  Breaking 

the cycle of failure in services.  Sloan Management Review,
32  (3),  17-28.

Schlesinger,  L. A.,  & Zornitsky,  J.  (1990).  Job 

satisfaction,  service capability,  and customer 
satisfaction:  An examination of linkages and management 
implications.  Human Resource Planning,  14  (2),  141-149.

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


114

Schmit,  M.  J.,  & Allscheid,  S.  P.  (1995).  Employee 

attitudes and customer satisfaction:  Making theoretical and 
empirical connections.  Personnel Psychology,  48  (3),  521-
536.

Schneider,  B.  (1973).  The perception of organizational 

climate:  The customer's view.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology,  57  (3),  248-256.

Schneider,  B.  (1987) .  The people make the place. 

Personnel Psychology 40  (3),  437-453.

Schneider,  B.,  Ashworth,  S.  D.,  Higgs,  A.  C.,  & Carr, 

L.  (1996).  Design,  validity,  and use of strategically 
focused employee attitude surveys.  Personnel Psychology,  49 
(3),  695-705.

Schneider,  B.,  & Bowen,  D.  E.  (1985).  Employee and 

customer perceptions  of service in banks:  Replication and 
extension.  Journal of Applied Psychology,  70  (3),  (August) 
423-433.

Schneider,  B.,  & Bowen,  D.  E.  (1993).  The service 

organization:  Human resources management is crucial.
Organizational Dynamics 21  (4),  39-52

Schneider,  B.,  and Snyder,  R. A.  (1975).  Some 

relationships between job satisfaction and organization 
climate.  Journal of Applied Psychology,  60  (3),  318-328.
Scott,  W.,  & Harrison,  H.,  (1997)  Full team ahead.

People Management,  3  (20),  48-50.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


115

Seely,  M.  W.  (1997) .  Shareholder value and me.

Directors and Boards,  21  (3),  51-53.

Senge,  P.  (1990).  The fifth discipline.  New York: 

Currency Doubleday,  7.

Shapiro,  B.  P.  (1988).  What the hell is market- 

oriented? Harvard Business Review,  66  (6),  119-125.

Sharma,  A.,  & Lambert,  D. M.  (1994).  Segmentation of 
markets  based on customer service.  International Journal 
of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management,  24  (4), 
50-58.

Siguaw,  J.  A.  B.,  & Widing,  G.R.  E.,  II.  (1994).  The 
influence of the market orientation of the firm on sales 
force behavior and attitudes.  Journal of Marketing 
Research,  31  (1) ,  106-116.

Sinkula,  J.  M.,  Baker,  W.  E.,  & Noordewier,  T.  (1997). 

A framework for market-based organizational learning:
Linking values,  knowledge,  and behavior.  Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science,  25  (4),  305-318.

Slater,  S.  F.  (1997).  Developing a customer value- 

based theory of the  firm.  Journal of the Academy of 
Marketing Science,  25  (2),  162-167.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


116

Slater,  S.  F.,  & Narver,  J.  C.  (1994).  Does 

competitive environment moderate the market orientation- 
performance relationship? Journal of Marketing,  58  (1),  4 6- 
55.

Slater,  S.  F.,  & Narver,  J.  C.  (1995). Market 

orientation and the learning organization.  Journal of 
Marketing,  59  (3),  63-74.

Slywotzky,  A.  J.  (1996).  Taking the low road.  Sales 

and Marketing Management,  148  (1),  53-61.

Smart,  B.  D.,  & Smart,  G.  H.  (1997).  Top grading the 

organization.  Directors  & Boards,  21  (3),  22-28.

Smith,  W.  R.  (1956).  Product differentiation and 

market segmentation as alternative marketing strategies, 
Journal of Marketing, 21  (7),  3-8.

Spencer,  D.  G.,  & Steers,  R.  M.  (1981).  Performance as 
a moderator of the job satisfaction-turnover relationship. 
Journal of Applied Psychology,  66  (4),  511-514.

Stata,  R.  (1989).  Organizational learning - the key to 
management innovation.  Sloan Management Review,  30  (3),  63- 
74.

Steers,  R.  M.  (1975).  Effects of need for achievement 
on the job performance - job attitude relationship.  Journal 
of Applied Psychology,  60  (6),  678-682.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


117

Steers,  R.  M.,  & Porter,  L.  W.  (1974).  The role of 
task goal attributes  in employee performance.  California 
University,  Irvine:  Graduate School of Administration. 
(Clearinghouse No.  CE001610).

Stone,  E.  F.,  Mowday,  R.  T.,  & Porter,  L.  W.  (1977). 

Higher order need strengths as moderators of the job scope- 
job satisfaction relationship.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology,  62  (4),  466-471.

Storbacka,  K.,  Strandvik,  T.,  & Gronroos,  C.  (1994). 

Managing customer relationships  for profit:  The dynamics of 
relationship quality.  International Journal of Service 
Industry Management,  5  (5),  21-38.

Sussan,  A.  P.,  & Johnson,  W.  C.  (1997).  The impact of 

market/quality orientation on business performance.
Computers and Industrial Engineering,  33  (1,  2),  161-165.

Tax,  S.  S.,  Brown,  S.W.,  & Chandrashekaran,  M.,

(1998).  Customer evaluations of service complaint 
experiences:  Implications  for relationship marketing.
Journal of Marketing,  60  (2)  60-76.

Taylor,  Frederick W.  (1911).  The principals of 
scientific management.  New York:  Harper & Brothers.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


118

Taylor,  S. A.  & Baker,  T.  L.  (1994). An assessment of 

the relationship between service quality and customer 
satisfaction in the formation of consumer's purchase 
intentions.  Journal of Retailing,  70  (2),  163-178.

Tolman,  E.C.  (1932).  Purposive behavior in animals and 

men.  New York:  Appelton-Century.

Tornow,  W.  W.,  & Wiley,  J.  W.  (1991).  Service quality 

and management practices:  A look at employee attitudes, 
customer satisfaction,  and bottom-line consequences.  Human 
Resource Planning,  14  (2) ,  105-115.

Tse,  D.  K.,  & Wilton,  P.  C.  (1988). Models of consumer 
satisfaction formation:  An extension.  Journal of Marketing 
Research,  25  (2),  204-212.

Vecchio,  R.  P.  (1995).  The impact of referral sources 

on employee attitudes:  evidence  from a national sample. 
Journal of Management,  21  (5),  953-965.

Vincola,  A.,  & N.,  (1998) .  Performance management

through a work/life lens.  HR Focus  75  (2),  9-11.

Wah,  L.,  (1998).  The new workplace paradox. Management

Review,  87  (1),  7.

Walton,  R.  E.  (1985).  From control to commitment  in 

the workplace.  Harvard Business Review,  63  (2),  76-84.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


119

Wanous,  J.  P.,  & Lawler,  E.  E.  (1972).  Measurement and 
meaning of job satisfaction.  Journal of Applied Psychology, 
56  (2),  95-105.

Webster,  C.  (1988) .  The rediscovery of the marketing 

concept.  Business Horizons, '31  (3),  29-39.

Webster,  C.  (1989).  Can consumers be segmented on the 

basis of their service quality expectations? Journal of 
Sciences Marketing,  3  (2),  18-23.

Wind,  Y.,  & Robertson,  T.  S.  (1983). Marketing 

strategy:  New directions  for theory and research.  Journal 
of Marketing,  47  (2),  12-25.

Woodruff,  R.  B.  (1997).  Customer value:  The next 
source for competitive advantage. Academy of Marketing 
Science Journal,  25  (2),  139-153.

Woodruff,  R.  B.,  & Gardial,  S.  F.  (1997).  Customer 

value change in industrial marketing relationships:  A call 
for new strategies and research.  Industrial Marketing 
Management,  26  (2),  163-175.

Woodruff,  R.B.,  Gardial,  S.F.  (1996).  Know Your 
Customer.  Cambridge,  MA.,  Blackwell Publishers,  Ltd.

Woodruff,  R.  B.,  Schumann,  D. W.,  & Gardial,  S.  F.
(1993).  Understanding value and satisfaction from the 
customer's point of view.  Survey of Business,  29  (1),  33- 
40.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


120

Wrenn,  B.  (1997).  The market orientation construct: 

measurement and scaling issues.  Journal of Marketing Theory 
& Practice,  5  (3),  31-54.

Zeithaml,  V. A.,  Berry,  L.  L.,  & Parasuraman,  A.

(1988).
Communication and control processes in the delivery of 
service quality.  Journal of Marketing,  52  (2),  35-48.
Zeithaml,  V. A.,  Berry,  L.  L.,  & Parasuraman,  A.

(1996).  The behavioral consequences of service quality. 
Journal of Marketing,  60  (2),  31-46.

Zemke,  R.,  (1988).  Supervising service workers.

Training,  25,  (10),  62-66.

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


121

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bauer,  H.  H.,  Hermann,  A.,  & Huber,  F.  (1997).

Customer orientation of non-profit-making enterprises 
taking a public theatre company as an example.  Journal of 
International Marketing & Marketing Research,  22  (1) ,  35-
46.

Babin,  B.,  Boles,  J.S.,  (1998)  Employee behavior in a

service environment:  A model and test of potential 
differences between men and women.  Journal of Marketing,  62 
(2),  77-79.

Baggozi,  R.  P.,  Davis,  F.  D.,  & Warshaw,  P.  R.  (1992). 
Development and test of a theory of technological learning 
and usage.  Human Relations,  45  (7),  659-686.

Beer,  M.,  Eisenstat,  R.  A.,  & Spector,  B.  (1990).  Why 

change programs don't produce change.  Harvard Business 
Review,  68  (6),  158 -  166.

Berkowitz,  E.N.,  Kerin,  R.A.,  Hartley,  S.W.,  & 

Rudelius,W.,  (1998)  Marketing  (6th ed.). New York:  Irwin 
Mcgraw-Hill,  21.

Berry,  L.  L.  (1997) .  The service nightmare:  Can we 

sustain success?  Marketing Management,  6  (3),  10-13.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


122

Berry,  L.  L.,  Conant,  J.S.,& Parasuraman,  A.

(1991).  A framework for conducting a services marketing 
audit,  Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 19,  (3)
255-268.

Bonoma,  T.,  & Shapiro,  B.  (1984).  Evaluating market 
Segmentation approaches.  Industrial Marketing Management,
13  (4),  257-269.

Bowen,  D.  E.,  Siehl,  C.,  & Schneider,  B.  (1989).  A 
framework for analyzing customer service orientations  in 
manufacturing.  Academy of Management Review,  14  (1),  75-95.
Clemson University,  Department of Management.  (1997). 

Effects of perceived leadership behaviors on job 
satisfaction and productivity.  Psychological Reports,  80 
(3,  Pt  1),  976-978.

Deshpande,  R.,  &  Parasuraman,  A.  (1986).  Linking 

corporate Culture to strategic planning.  Business Horizons, 
29  (3),  28-37.

Dickson,  P.  R.  (1996).  The static and dynamic 

mechanics of competition:  A comment on Hunt and Morgan's 
comparative advantage theory.  Journal of Marketing,  60  (4) , 
102-106.

Drucker,  Peter  (1954).  The Practice of Management,  New 

York:  Harper & Row Inc.  37.

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


123

Gale,  B.  (1997).  Satisfaction is not enough. Marketing 

News,  31  (22),  18.

Hackman,  J.  R.,  & Lawler,  E.  E.  (1971).  Employee 
reactions to job characteristics.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology,  55  (3),  259-286.

Hart,  C.  W.  L.,  Heskett,  J.  L.,  & Sasser,  W.  E.,  Jr. 
(1991).  Surviving a customer's rage.  Successful Meetings,
40  (5),  68-79.

Hauser,  J.  R.,  Simester,  D.  I.,  & Wernerfelt,  B.

(1996).  Internal customers and internal  suppliers.  Journal 
of Marketing Research,  33  (3),  268-280.

Herzberg,  F.,  Mausner,  B.,  & Snyderman,  B.  (1959).

The Motivation to Work.  New York:  Wiley,  Publishing.

Jaworski,  B.  J.,  & Merchant,  K.  A.  (1988).  Toward a 

theory of marketing control environmental context,  control 
types,  and consequences;  a comment.  Journal of Marketing,
52  (3),  23-44.

Koch,  J.  L.,  & Steers,  R.  M.  (1978).  Job attachment, 
satisfaction,  and -turnover among public sector employees. 
Journal of Vocational Behavior,  12  (1),  119-127.

Levitt,  T.  (1980). Marketing success through 

differentiation - of anything.  Harvard Business Review,  58 
(1),  83-91.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


124

Levitt,  T.  (1981). Marketing intangible products\and 
product intangibles.  Harvard Business Review,  59  (3),  94- 
102.

Liswood,  L. A.  (1987).  Once you’ve got  'em,  never let 

'em go.  Sales & Marketing Management,  13  (7),  73-77.

Mayo,  Elton  (1933) .  The human problems of industrial 

civilization. New York:  MacMillan Company.

Oliver,  R.  L.  (1980).  A cognitive model of the 

antecedents and consequences of satisfaction decisions. 
Journal of Marketing Research,  17  (4),  460-469.

Oliver,  R.  L.  (1981a).  What  is customer satisfaction? 

Wharton Magazine,  5  (3),  36-41.

Oliver,  R.  L.  (1981b).  Measurement and evaluation of 

satisfaction processes in retail  settings.  Journal of 
Retailing,5  (3),  36-41.

Oliver,  R.  L.,  & Winer,  R.  S.  (1987). A framework for 

the  formation and structure of consumer expectations:
Review and propositions.  Journal of Economic Psychology,  8, 
469-499.

Ostroff,  C.  (1992).  The relationship between 

satisfaction,  attitudes,  and performance:  An organizational 
level analysis.  Journal of Applied Psychology,  77  (6),  963- 
974.

Parasuraman,  A.,  Berry,  L.,  L.,  & Zeithaml,  V. A.

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


125

(1994).  Reassessment of expectations as  a comparison 
standard in measuring service quality:  Implications for 
further research.  Journal of Marketing,  58  (1),  111-124.

Parasuraman,  A.,  Berry,  L.  L.,  & Zeithaml,  V. A.

(1991a).  Understanding customer expectations of service. 
Sloan Management Review,  32  (3),  39-48.

Porter,  L.  W.;  Steers,  R. M.,  (1974).  Organizational

commitment,  job satisfaction and turnover among psychiatric 
technicians.  Journal of Applied Psychology 5,  (59),  603-
614 .

Reichheld,  F.  F.  (1993).  Loyalty-based management. 

Harvard Business Review,71  (2),  64-73.

Reichheld,  F.  F.  (1994).  Loyalty and the renaissance 

of marketing.  Marketing Management,  2  (4),  10-21.

Riordan,  E. A.,  Oliver,  R.  L.,  & Donnelly,  J.  H.,  Jr. 

(1977).  The unsold prospect:  Dyadic and attitudinal 
determinants.  Journal of Marketing Research,  14  (4),  530-
537.

Schlesinger,  L.  A.,  & Heskett,  J.  L.  (1991). 

Enfranchisement of service workers.  California Management 
Review,  33  (4),  83-100.

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


126

Schlesinger,  L. A.,  & Heskett,  J.  L.  (1991),  The 

service-drive service company.  Harvard Business Review,  69
(5),  71-81.

Schlesinger,  L. A.,  & Oshry,  B.  (1984).  Quality of 

work life and the manager:  Muddle in the middle. 
Organizational Dynamics,  13  (1),  5-19.

Schlossberg,  H.  (1993,  April 26).  Departing exec says 

customer satisfaction is a continuous process. Marketing 
News,  27  (9),8.

Schneider,  B.  & Alderfer,  C.  (1973).  Three studies 

of measures of need satisfaction in organizations. 
Administrative Science Quarterly 18  (4),  489-505

Sharma,  A.  (1997).  Customer satisfaction-based 
incentive systems:  Some managerial and salesperson 
considerations.  Journal of Personal Selling & Sales 
Management,  17  (2),  61-70.

Singh,  J.,  Goolsby,  J.  R.,  & Rhoads,  G.  K.  (1994). 

Behavioral and psychological consequences of boundary 
spanning burnout for customer service representatives. 
Journal of Marketing Research,  31  (4),  558-569.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


127

Stone,  E.  F.,  & Porter,  L.  W.  (1973).  Job scope and 

job satisfaction:  A study of urban workers.  California 
University,  Irvine:  Graduate School of Administration. 
(Scientific Report 22,  Clearinghouse No.  CE000937)

Taylor,  S. A.,  & Cronin,  J.  J-,  Jr.  (1994).  Modeling 

patient satisfaction and service quality.  Journal of Health 
Care Marketing,  14  (1),  34-44.

Tucker,  G.,  & Shearer,  B.  (1996).  Winning over Main 

Street and Wall Street. Across  the Board,  33  (9),  33-3

Webster,  F.  E.,  Jr.  (1981).  Top management's  concerns 

about marketing:  Issues  for the 1980's.  Journal of 
Marketing,  45  (3),  9-16.

Vroom,  V.  H.  (1976).  Leader/Handbook of industrial and 
organizational psychology.  Chicago:  Rand Mcnally,  P.  1527- 
1551.

Zaltman,  G.,  & Moorman,  C.  (1988).  The importance of 

personal trust in the use of research.  Journal of 
Advertising Research,  28  (5),  16-24.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


Appendix A 

Employee Satisfaction Scale

128

The statements below describe norms that operate in businesses 
Please  indicate your extent of agreement about how well the 
statements describe the actual norms in your business.  Please 
answer in the context of your strategic business unit.

Definitely 

Yes 
6 

Probably 
Yes 
5 

Maybe 
Yes 
4 

Maybe 

No 
3 

Probably 

No 
2 

Definately 

No
1

1. Do you feel promotion opportunities are wider in jobs other than 

yours?

2. Do you feel  it is easy to demonstrate ability and initiative in 
3. Would you advise a friend looking for a new job to take one 
4. Do you think that there is as much of a feeling of security in 

your job as  in others?
similar to yours?
your job as  in others?

5. Do you feel  your pay is as high in comparison with  what others get

6. Do you find  your work challenging and exciting, giving  you  a

for similar  work in other companies?
sense of
accomplishment?

7. How satisfied are you with your general work situation?
8. How much control do you feel you have over your work 
activities such as number of calls required in a week?

Instructions:  Please answer in the context of your strategic 
business unit.  Please list your answer as  6 for definitely yes 
and 1  for definitely no,  in each of the following categories.
You may also choose a score of 5 to 2 depending on your level of 
agreement.  Just list your choice next to the question.  Your 
answers are completely anonymous and the information will be 
tabulated ONLY by this research organization.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


129

Appendix B 

Market Orientation Scale

Definitely 

Yes 
6 

Probably 

Yes 
5 

Maybe  Maybe 
Yes 
4 

No 
3 

Probably  Definately 

No 
2 

No
1

Instructions:  Please answer in the context of your 
strategic business unit.  Please list your answer as  6 
for definitely yes and 1 for definitely no,  in each of 
the following categories.  You may also choose a score 
of 5 to 2 depending on your level of agreement.  Just 
list your choice next to the question.  Your answers 
are completely anonymous and the information will be 
tabulated ONLY by this research organization.

l.Our business objectives are driven primarily by 

customer satisfaction.

2.  We constantly monitor our level of commitment and orientation 

to serving customer needs.

3.  We freely communicate information about our successful and 

unsuccessful customer experiences across all business  functions

4.  Our strategy for competitive advantage is based on our 

understanding of customers'  needs.

5.  We measure customer satisfaction systematically and 
frequently.
6.  We have routine or regular measures of customer service.
7.  We are more customer focused than our competitors.
8.  I believe this business exists primarily to serve 
customers.
9. We poll end-users  at least once a year to assess the quality 

of our products  and services.

10.  Data on customer satisfaction are disseminated at all 
levels in this business unit on a regular basis.

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Appendix C 

Service Quality Scale

130

Strongly Disagree 

Strongly  Agree

1. Cablevision has  up to  date equipment.
2. Cablevision's physical  facilities  are visually appealing.
3. Cablevision*s  employees  are well dressed  and  appear  neat.
4. The  appearance  of the physical  facilities  of Cablevision is  in 

keeping with the  type of services provided.

5. When cablevision promises  to  do  something by a certain time,  it 

6. When you have problems,  Cablevision is  sympathetic and 

does  so.

reassuring.

performed.

customers.

7. Cablevision is  dependable.
8. Cablevision provides  its  services  at  the  time  it promises to do so.
9. Cablevision  keeps  its  records  accurately.
10. Cablevision does  not  tell customers  exactly when  services will be 

11.You do  not  receive prompt  service  from Cablevision.
12.Employees  of Cablevision are not always willing  to help 

13.Employees  of Cablevision are too busy to  respond  to 

customers promptly.

14.  You can trust  employees of Cablevision.
15.  You  feel  safe  in your transactions with Cablevision.
16.  Employees  of Cablevision are polite.
17.  Employees  get adequate support  from Cablevision to  do  their 

18.  Cablevision does  not give you individual 

19.  Employees  of Cablevision do not  know what your  needs 

20.  Cablevision does  not  have your best  interests  at 

jobs well.

attention.

are.

heart.

21.  Cablevision does  not have ODeratina  hours convenient to all their

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


Appendix D

Description of Market Orientation
Survey Instrument Variables

131

Scored 1-5 strongly agree to strongly disagree

Variable or 
Description

Description 

Emp 1.00 
Mgr 2.00 
City 222 
City/Area333 
City/Area444 
City/Area555 
City 666 
BusObj

Monitor

Comunict

Stratgy

Satsfctn

Service

Focus
Customer

Employee
Manager
Brookline
Allston
Beacon Hill
Fenway
Roxbury/Dorchester
Primarily customer satisfaction drives our business 
objectives.
We constantly monitor our level of commitment and 
orientation to serving customer needs.
We freely communicate information about our 
successful and unsuccessful customer experiences 
across all business  functions.
Our strategy for competitive advantage is based 
on our understanding of customers'  needs.
We measure customer satisfaction systematically 
and frequently.
We have routine or regular measures of customer 
service.
We are more customer focused than our competitors.
I believe that this business exists primarily to 
serve customers.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Quality

Data

We poll end-users at least once a year to assess 
the quality of our product and services.
Data on customer satisfaction are disseminated at 
all levels in this business unit on a regular basis.

132

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Appendix E

133

Description of Employee Satisfaction
Survey Instrument Variables
Scored 1-6 definitely yes to definitely no 

Description

Variable or 
Description
Emp  1.00 
Mgr 2.00 
City 222 
City/Area333 
City/Area444 
City/Area555 
City 666 
Promotn

Ability

Newjob

Security

Payok

chalngng 

Satisfid 

Control

Employee
Manager
Brookline
Allston
Beacon Hill
Fenway
Roxbury/Dorchester
Do you feel promotion opportunities are wider 
in jobs other than yours?
Do you feel it is easy to demonstrate ability 
and initiative in your job as  in others?
Would you advise a friend looking for a new 
job to take one similar to yours?
Do you think there is as much of a feeling of 
security in your job as in others?
Do you feel your pay is as high in comparison 
with what others get for similar work in other 
companies?
Do you find your work challenging,  exciting, 
and giving you a sense of accomplishment?
How satisfied are you with your general work 
situation?
How much control do you feel you have over 
your work activities such as number of calls 
required in a week?

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Appendix F

Description of  Service Quality
Survey Instrument Variables

134

Variable/Description
Emp  1.00
Mgr  2.00
City 222
City/Area333
City/Area444
City/Area555
City  666
Equipmen
Facility

Empdress

apearanc

promises
Sympathy

Depndble
ontime

accurate
nottell

prompt

empnohlp

toobusy

Description
Employee
Manager
Brookline
Allston
Beacon  Hill
Fenway
Roxbury/Dorchester
Cablevision has  up  to  date equipment.
Cablevision's physical  facilities  are 
visually appealing.
Cablevision's employees  are well dressed 
and  appear neat.
The physical appearance  of Cablevision is 
in  keeping with the  type of services provided.
When Cablevision promises  to  do  something by 
a certain time,  it  does  so.
When you have problems,  Cablevision is 
sympathetic and  reassuring.
Cablevision is  dependable.
Cablevision provides  its  services  at the 
time  it promises  to  do  so.
Cablevision keeps  its  records  accurately.
Cablevision does  not  tell  customers  exactly 
when services will be performed.
You do  not  receive prompt  service  from 
Cablevision.
Employees  of Cablevision are  not always 
willing to  help  customers.
Employees  of Cablevision are  too busy to 
respond to  customers promptly.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


trust 
Safe 

polite
support

atention
needs

intrests 
hours 

135

You can trust employees  of Cablevision.
You feel  safe  in your transactions with
Cablevision.
Employees of Cablevision are polite.
Employees get adequate  support  from Cablevision 
to do their job well.
Cablevision gives  you individual attention.
Employees  of Cablevision  know what your needs 
are.
Cablevision has  your best  interests  at heart.
Cablevision has  operating hours  convenient  to
all their customers.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

