HIGH PERFORMANCE AND

THE TRANSFORMATION OF WORK?

THE IMPLICATIONS OF ALTERNATIVE WORK PRACTICES

FOR THE EXPERIENCE AND OUTCOMES OF WORK

JOHN GODARD*

Using data from a 1997 telephone survey of 508 employed Canadians,
the  author  explores  the  implications  for  workers  of  alternative  work
practices (AWPs) associated with the high-performance model.  There
are three main findings.  First, moderate levels of AWP adoption were
associated with increased “belongingness,” empowerment, task involve-
ment, and ultimately job satisfaction, esteem, commitment, and citizen-
ship behavior.  At higher levels of adoption, however, these associations
declined in magnitude and even became negative.  AWP adoption was
also associated with more stressful work.  Second, whereas traditional
(that  is,  supervised)  group  or  team  systems  represented  a  substantial
improvement over individualized work arrangements, “lean” and “team”
forms of work organization associated with the high-performance model
did not.  Third, although team-based work and information sharing had
positive  effects,  team  autonomy  and  responsibility  for  a  good  or  ser-
vice—both associated with the high-performance model—had negative
effects,  as  did  “Just-in-Time”  (JIT)  systems  and  re-engineering  pro-
grams.

C

onsiderable attention has been paid to
alternative work practices (AWPs) as-
sociated  with  the  “high-performance”
model  of  organizations.    These  practices

*John Godard is Professor at the I. H. Asper School
of  Business,  the  University  of  Manitoba.    This  re-
search  was  supported  by  a  grant  from  the  Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada.
Toni Ostroman, Krista Jensen, and Kelly Dineen pro-
vided research assistance.  The author thanks John
Delaney, Stephen Vallas, and Celeste Brotheridge for
their comments on an earlier version.

have  also  variously  been  referred  to  as
innovations, flexible work practices, work
reforms, and new work practices.  They
are generally viewed as representing al-
ternatives to the individualized work ar-
rangements  commonly  associated  with
work  organizations  in  the  postwar  era,
arrangements that are believed by many
to have negative consequences for both

Copies of the research instrument, raw data, and

data analysis are available from the author.

Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 54, No. 4 (July 2001).  © by Cornell University.

0019-7939/00/5404 $01.00

776


HIGH PERFORMANCE AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF WORK?

777

the quality of working life and employee
behaviors.  Many AWPs are not particu-
larly  new    (Godard  and  Delaney  2000).
But  a  considerable  literature  has  sug-
gested that they have become more wide-
spread  (Osterman  2000),  potentially
transforming both how employees expe-
rience their work and various social and
psychological  outcomes  associated  with
this experience.

The  high-performance  thesis  under-
pinning the adoption of these AWPs has
been developed at a time when unions in
the United States are severely weakened
and there is little prospect for labor law
reforms that could reverse this weakness.
In  the  field  of  industrial  relations,  this
has  meant  that  scholars  have  searched
for  an  alternative  trajectory  through
which both “equity” and “efficiency” can
be achieved.  According to the high-per-
formance thesis, AWPs may offer such a
trajectory, improving the quality of work-
ing life for employees while yielding per-
formance  gains  for  employers.    What
seems to make them attractive to propo-
nents is the belief that they represent a
largely  voluntaristic  solution,  requiring
few  institutional  changes  beyond  those
necessary  to  eliminate  barriers  to  their
adoption  (for  example,  Cappelli  and
Rogovsky 1998).  Yet although there has
been considerable research assessing the
implications of AWPs for employer out-
comes,  proponents  have  only  recently
begun  to  address  their  implications  for
workers—despite  a  belief  among  more
critical scholars that these are often nega-
tive (see Godard and Delaney 2000).

In  this  paper  I  analyze  data  from  a
1997 telephone survey of 508 employed
Canadians to address these implications.
I seek to establish whether AWPs’ impli-
cations  for  workers  are  mainly  negative
or,  as  proponents  appear  to  assume,
mainly  positive.    Though  implemented
in a variety of forms and often not clearly
defined  (Wood  1999;  Godard  and
Delaney  2000),  these  alternative  work
practices  are  for  present  purposes  con-
sidered to generally include1 some com-
bination of work re-organization (for ex-

ample, autonomous work teams, job ro-
tation, and multi-skilling) and formal par-
ticipatory  mechanisms  (for  example,
quality circles and town hall meetings),
often  implemented  in  the  context  of  a
quality  management,  work  re-engineer-
ing,  or  lean  production  program,  and
supported  by  performance-based  pay
systems.

Under  the  high-performance  model,
AWPs are complemented by a variety of
human resource management practices—
among them, sophisticated selection pro-
cedures,  intensive  training,  a  no-layoff
policy, and reductions in pay and status
differentials  (for  example,  Pfeffer
1998:64–98).  These practices may mod-
erate the implications of AWPs.  For ex-
ample,  intensive  training  may  enhance
workers’  ability  to  solve  problems,  thus
reducing  stress  that  might  arise  from
enhanced responsibilities associated with
AWPs.  However, this paper is concerned
only  with  the  implications  of  AWPs  for
workers  given  the  way  AWPs  have  been
implemented, not with how AWPs should
be implemented.  Whether and how AWPs
can be complemented so as to maximize
their positive effects for workers is a sepa-
rate  issue  addressed  in  subsequent  re-
search (Godard 2001a).

AWPs and the High-Performance

Model:  Issues and Debates

Proponents of AWPs generally seem to
assume that, where properly implemented,
AWPs have positive implications for work-
ers  (for  example,  Ichniowski  et  al.  1996;
Kochan and Osterman 1994; Pfeffer 1998;

1Although AWPs are typically assumed to operate
in part through task enrichment and enhanced par-
ticipation,  this  paper  is  specifically  focused  on  the
implications of AWPs and does not attempt to address
the  broader  and  more  complex  literature  on  job
redesign or participatory decision-making.


778

INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

Kochan  2000).    The  reasons  for  this  are
often not clearly stated, but the literature
on  work  design  has  long  suggested  that
employees  are  likely  to  be  more  highly
motivated and committed to their work to
the extent that social-psychological needs
are  fulfilled,  and  proponents  appear  to
assume that this represents a major conse-
quence of AWPs (see Cappelli and Rogovsky
1998).    Extending  this  argument,  Adler
(1993) has argued that even where AWPs
do  not  change  the  content  of  work  itself
(for example, as under Japanese-style lean
production), they engender team partici-
pation, and this in turn helps foster respon-
sibility and commitment, ostensibly because
employees have a greater sense of belong-
ing  and  identification.    Moreover,  AWPs
are believed to complement one another.
Thus, they are more effective to the extent
that  they  are  adopted  in  combination
(Ichniowski et al. 1997).

The arguments and assumptions of pro-
ponents have not gone unchallenged.  Criti-
cal scholars have maintained that any posi-
tive effects of AWPs are typically limited to
managerial outcomes and obtained at the
expense of employees, through an intensi-
fication of the work process and “manage-
ment by stress” (for example, Turnbull 1988;
Parker and Slaughter 1995; Delbridge and
Turnbull 1992; Wells 1993).  Others, how-
ever, have argued that much depends on
how AWPs are adopted, particularly whether
employers  adopt  the  “commitment”  or
“socio-technical”  approach  they  associate
with  “team”  organization  rather  than  the
“control” or “low cost” approach they asso-
ciate with “lean” organization (for example,
Berggren 1992; Matthews 1994; Boreham,
Hall, and Harley 1996; Shaiken, Lopez, and
Mankita  1997).    The  former  is  typically
portrayed  as  relying  extensively  on  truly
autonomous  teams  performing  enriched
tasks  and  on  various  employee  participa-
tion mechanisms; the latter, as having few
changes  in  authority  relations  or  in  the
actual content of work, instead focusing on
cost-cutting and intensification of the work
process.  Thus, while the former has posi-
tive implications for workers, the latter has
negative ones.

Research findings have been mixed.  On
the one hand, a number of qualitative stud-
ies suggest that some of the concerns about
AWPs  may  be  supported.    For  example,
Barker (1993:434) concluded that autono-
mous work teams, considered central to the
high-performance model, give rise to what
he  labels  as  “concertive”  control,  under
which  peer  pressure  and  group  perfor-
mance norms create “a new iron cage whose
bars are almost invisible to the workers it
incarcerates.”    In  a  study  of  a  Japanese
transplant, Graham (1993) found that work
was fragmented and intensified, with little
empowerment, and that it also engendered
considerable  individual  and  collective  re-
sistance from workers.  Taplin (1996) found
evidence that new forms of work organiza-
tion in the U.S. apparel industry are predi-
cated on routinization and work intensifi-
cation.  A number of quantitative studies
also  lend  support  for  these  and  related
concerns, finding that AWPs are associated
with high work intensity, stress, and fatigue
(Fucini and Fucini 1990; Lewchuck et al.
1997; Rinehart et al. 1997; Landsbergis et
al.  1999),  and  that  workplaces  with  AWP
programs  are  more  likely  to  have  layoffs
(Osterman 2000).

On the other hand, there is an extensive
body of research claiming positive implica-
tions for job enrichment and for participa-
tory  decision  processes  (see  Miller  and
Monge  1986;  Ganster  and  Fusilier  1989),
two mechanisms through which proponents
typically believe AWPs operate.  A number
of studies have also found positive effects
for  specific  AWPs  (for  example,  quality
circles).  Specific AWPs have been found to
be positively associated with commitment
(Cordery et al. 1991), satisfaction (Kemp et
al.  1983),  and  organizational  citizenship
behavior  (Cappelli  and  Rogovsky  1998),
and  negatively  associated  with  absentee-
ism, minor accidents, grievances, and quits
(Havlovic 1991).  However, the findings of
these latter studies have tended to be weak.
In addition, a number of studies have found
either  mixed  or  limited  effects  (Batt  and
Appelbaum  1995;  Berg  et  al.  1996).    In
some cases, observed effects appear to re-
flect job characteristics often associated


HIGH PERFORMANCE AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF WORK?

779

with AWPs but that can vary considerably
independently  of  them  (Wall  et  al.  1986;
Appelbaum et al. 2000).2  The findings of
the broader literature on participative de-
cision-making  have  also  been  called  into
question,  with  critics  arguing  that  it  has
failed  to  demonstrate  noteworthy  effects
(Wagner  1994;  Locke,  Alavi,  and  Wagner
1997).

There  are  three  possible  explanations
for the unevenness of these findings.  First,
individual studies have commonly been lim-
ited  to  one  or  a  few  workplaces  (for  ex-
ample, Brockner and Hess 1986; Havlovic
1991; Tesluk and Vance 1996; Rinehart et
al. 1997), so their findings may reflect cir-
cumstances  unique  to  these  workplaces.
Second, numerous studies have addressed
the  effects  of  one  or  a  few  specific  AWPs
(usually  autonomous  teams  or  quality
circles) without controlling for other AWPs,
thereby potentially “contaminating” their
results (Brockner and Hess 1986; Wall et al.
1986).    These  studies  have  also  not  ad-
dressed the effects of entire systems of AWPs
on  workers,  even  though  the  combined
effects of AWPs have been the main focus of

2Perhaps most noteworthy is the Appelbaum et al.
(2000)  study  of  4,400  workers  from  44  plants  in  3
industries:    steel,  apparel,  and  medical  electronic
instruments  and  imaging.    The  authors  concluded
that  the  AWPs  included  in  their  study  on  balance
appeared to have positive implications for trust, com-
mitment,  and  satisfaction,  and  no  implications  for
stress  levels.    Yet  the  results  varied  considerably  by
industry  and  dependent  variable,  and  the  authors
included only four measures of reforms:  autonomy in
decision-making, communication with others outside
one’s work area, membership in a self-directed team,
and membership in an off-line team.  The first two of
these  measures  have  always  varied  considerably  in
workplaces, and high levels can occur in the absence
of  a  high-performance  work  program.    Thus,  the
results for these measures cannot be interpreted as
reflecting the effects of high-performance practices
per se.  This is especially so given that their effects are
explored after controlling for the two team measures.
Yet autonomy in decision-making had by far the stron-
gest observed effects.  The team measures, which may
be the only true measures of reforms, made very little
difference, and where they did, their signs were nega-
tive almost as often as they were positive.

the  high-performance  literature  (for  ex-
ample,  Appelbaum  et  al.  2000).    Third,
those studies that have focused on the ef-
fects of an entire system of AWPs have been
unable to establish whether and how these
effects vary depending on program charac-
teristics  or  the  configuration  of  AWPs
adopted (Berg et al. 1996; Lewchuk et al.
1997).  In some cases, they have only estab-
lished what it is like to work in workplaces
with AWP programs, lacking a comparison
workplace without these programs (for ex-
ample, Babson 1993; Rinehart et al. 1997).
A further problem has been a tendency
for much of the relevant research to focus
on outcomes considered important to or-
ganizational  performance  and  hence  of
concern to management.  Such outcomes
include job satisfaction, commitment, and,
more  recently,  organizational  citizenship
behavior  (for  example,  Griffin  1991;
Cappelli and Rogovsky 1998).  These out-
comes are no doubt relevant to understand-
ing  how  AWPs  affect  workers.    But  they
provide only limited insight into the impli-
cations of AWPs for the actual experience
of work or for extra-work outcomes.

Researchers have shown little interest in
the possible implications of AWPs for worker
alienation  and  mental  health,  despite  an
extensive tradition addressing these topics
in sociology.  Blauner (1964), for example,
identified  four  dimensions  of  alienation:
“isolatedness,” meaninglessness, estrange-
ment, and powerlessness.  He argued that
these  dimensions  had  increased  with  the
growth  of  individualized  or  mass  produc-
tion work, but that they could be expected
to decline as more advanced technologies
became  more  pervasive—in  part  because
work  is  more  complex,  is  done  in  teams,
and  entails  problem-solving.    This  argu-
ment was essentially replicated in the work
of Joan Woodward (1965), who found that
more  advanced  technologies  require  “or-
ganic” rather than “mechanistic” forms of
organization.  In effect, both authors sug-
gested  that  work  would  be  transformed
along the lines of a “post-industrial” model,
giving rise to an improved quality of work-
ing life (more recently, see Zuboff 1988).
Although initial research attempting to


780

INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

establish the implications of work for alien-
ation  found  only  weak  results  (Seeman
1967), subsequent research found job de-
sign to have important implications for well-
being, particularly self-esteem and mental
functioning (Kohn and Schooler 1983:2),
sense of control (Ross and Wright 1998),
and alcohol consumption (see Martin and
Roman 1996:6–7).  In a recent study using
data coded from 86 ethnographies, Hodson
(1996) also found that “participative” work
organization was associated with lower alien-
ation than its individualized counterpart,
but  not  when  compared  to  its  traditional
“craft” counterpart.

Concern  about  work  alienation  was  to
become  an  important  underpinning  for
the “quality of working life” movement in
the 1970s, which advocated widespread job
redesign  and  enrichment  in  order  to  en-
hance employee well-being (O’Toole et al.
1974).  AWPs may in turn be seen as partly
an outgrowth of this movement.  Advocates
have generally theorized that AWPs enhance
an  employee’s  sense  of  belongingness,
meaningfulness,  task  involvement,  and
empowerment—the converse of Blauner’s
dimensions.    In  this  respect,  debate  over
their implications may in part be viewed as
an  extension  of  debates  over  the  Wood-
ward/Blauner  thesis.    Yet  there  has  been
little  research  exploring  the  nature  and
extent  of  these  linkages  or  their  implica-
tions for the experience and consequences
of work.3

The  strategy  of  the  present  study  is  to
address these limitations using data from a
random  telephone  survey  of  individuals,
with multiple measures of AWPs and of the
experience and outcomes of work.  Thus, I
am able to address the implications of AWPs
across  a  wide  array  of  jobs,  occupations,

3One exception is Tesluk and Vance (1996), who
included measures of “work-life balance,” psychologi-
cal well-being, and work meaningfulness in their analy-
sis  of  the  mechanisms  through  which  participatory
climates  and  team  orientations  affect  behavior  and
outcomes.  Their study did not, however, address the
implications of specific AWPs.

and industries, and to do so in a way that
allows for more comprehensive analysis of
how AWPs specifically affect workers.  Be-
low, I develop a model and set of hypoth-
eses for analyzing these data.

Model Development:

Exploring the Implications of AWPs

Variables

For the present, it is useful to distinguish
between the experience of work itself and
the outcomes of this experience.  Two sets
of variables are relevant to the former.  The
first set, which may be referred to as “psycho-
social”  variables,  includes  measures  indi-
cating  whether  employees  are  able  to
achieve  a  sense  of  belongingness,  of  task
involvement, and of empowerment at work.
These dimensions parallel Blauner’s dimen-
sions of isolatedness, meaninglessness, es-
trangement,  and  powerlessness,  respec-
tively,  although  factor  analysis  indicated
that  meaninglessness  and  estrangement
represented  a  single  dimension  (see  Ap-
pendix), and descriptive results indicated
generally positive experiences on these di-
mensions, thus requiring their relabeling
(and recoding) for purposes of this study.
The two experience variables in the sec-
ond set, which may be referred to as “work
intensification” variables, are workload and
work  stressfulness.    High  values  of  the
former  indicate  an  excessive  quantity  of
work; high values of the latter, conflicting
demands and problems that are beyond an
individual’s  capacity  to  solve.    Both  are
assumed by critics to be negatively affected
by AWPs.

Three  sets  of  outcomes  can  be  consid-
ered relevant:  extra-work, attitudinal, and
behavioral.    In  this  study,  each  is  repre-
sented by two variables.  The “extra-work”
variables  are  extra-work  fatigue  and  self-
esteem.  Fatigue may vary with a number of
factors, but all else equal, it should be higher
if  the  employee  has  a  high  workload  or
stressful work, as critics of AWPs have ar-
gued to be the case.  Research by Kohn and
Schooler (1983) has demonstrated that self-
esteem is associated with the work experi-


HIGH PERFORMANCE AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF WORK?

781

ence, and it is consistent with the optimistic
view of AWPs to expect that, by empower-
ing workers and allowing them greater con-
trol over their work, AWPs are conducive to
the  development  of  higher  levels  of  self-
esteem.

The attitudinal variables are job satisfac-
tion and commitment.  Although the litera-
ture  for  these  two  variables  suggests  they
have  somewhat  different  sets  of  anteced-
ents  (for  example,  Ganster  and  Fusilier
1989),  AWPs  should  be  positively  associ-
ated  with  each  if  they  have  the  positive
implications assumed by proponents.

The behavioral variables are motivation,
or  the  extent  to  which  individuals  report
effort in the performance of their job above
that which is required, and organizational
citizenship behavior, or the extent to which
employees  engage  in  desirable  behavior
not required by their job and not directly
rewarded  (for  example,  Cappelli  and
Rogovsky 1998).  Proponents generally as-
sume that AWPs operate “voluntaristically,”
through both of these variables, rather than
“coercively,”  through  increased  workload
and stress.  Thus, although these variables
may be argued to represent employer out-
comes  as  much  as  or  more  than  they  do
worker outcomes per se (as does commit-
ment), they are included because they shed
light on this issue.

AWPs  can  be  considered  at  two  levels.
The first is the programmatic level, or the
extent to which specific programs of AWPs
are established.  I identify three such pro-
grams:    (1)  a  quality  improvement  pro-
gram, (2) a just-in-time (JIT) system, and
(3) a re-engineering program.  These pro-
grams  are  not  mutually  antithetical  and
may be jointly implemented.  Nonetheless,
they can represent distinctive programs and
may  thus  be  expected  to  have  distinctive
implications.

A problem that arises with the identifica-
tion of AWP programs is that they are typi-
cally  assumed  to  operate  through  the  ef-
fects of specific AWPs associated with them
(for example, autonomous teams).  If so,
any observed implications may be attribut-
able to these AWPs rather than to the pro-
grams themselves, and may vary if the AWPs

associated with them vary.  It is necessary to
separate  out  broad  programmatic  effects
(for example, an emphasis on quality) from
the effects of specific AWPs (for example,
autonomous teams).  Thus specific AWPs
represent  the  second  level  at  which  AWP
programs can be studied.

In  considering  specific  AWPs,  a  useful
distinction  is  between  “on-line”  and  “off-
line” AWPs (for example, Appelbaum and
Batt  1994;  Levine  1995).    On-line  AWPs
involve innovations having to do with the
actual  design  of  work.    Five  appear  to  be
most prominent in the literature:  (1) team-
based  work  systems,  (2)  team  autonomy,
(3) team responsibility for a good or ser-
vice,  (4)  multi-skilling,  and  (5)  job  rota-
tion.    Off-line  AWPs  involve  innovations
having to do with employee participation.  I
include four:  (1) informational meetings
or briefings, such as town hall meetings or
team briefings, (2) quality circles or “prob-
lem-solving” groups, in which workers meet
to  specifically  discuss  quality  or  workflow
issues,  (3)  a  committee  system,  in  which
permanently  established  committees  (for
example,  gain-sharing  committees,  em-
ployee assistance committees) meet to ad-
dress specific issues, and (4) joint steering
committees, which address broad policies
and overall changes to the workplace.

Finally,  alternative  economic  practices
have been closely associated with AWPs.  I
include two economic AWPs:  group bonus
plans, and profit- or gain-sharing.
Hypotheses

The primary concern of this paper is to
establish the implications of AWPs for the
experience  and  outcomes  of  work  in  gen-
eral.    To  attempt  to  establish  or  explore
individual hypotheses as to the specific as-
sociations  between  each  AWP  and  each
dependent variable may be of some theo-
retical value, but it is beyond the scope of
this paper and has limited bearing on the
general research issue at hand.  Rather, I
am concerned to explore overall patterns
across  the  dependent  variables.    Accord-
ingly, I develop only general hypotheses to
guide the analysis, beginning with the ex-
pected effects of the overall level of AWP


782

INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

adoption, then of alternative forms of work
organization, then of individual AWPs and
AWP programs.  Because of limitations of
existing  research,  I  develop  these  largely
on an a priori basis, based on assumptions
and arguments appearing in the literature
on  AWPs.    Ideally,  however,  the  present
paper  will  serve  as  an  impetus  for  more
nuanced, fine-grained analysis along these
lines in the future.

Effects  of  level  of  AWP  adoption.    Propo-
nents of the high-performance model gen-
erally  proceed  from  the  assumption  that
the effects of AWPs increase with the extent
to which they are adopted.  These effects
are  believed  to  operate  largely  through
psycho-social variables, either because they
enrich the work itself or because they allow
employees greater influence over their work
environment  (see  Cappelli  and  Rogovsky
1998:636–37).  Though a number of stud-
ies  have  assumed  linear  effects,  the  argu-
ment  has  increasingly  been  that  AWPs
complement each other, so that each AWP
is likely to have a larger effect to the extent
that it is implemented in combination with
others (Ichniowski et al. 1996:325; Becker
and  Huselid  1998;  Wood  1999:368,  391).
Within the literature on high-performance
practices, there is therefore an expectation
of steadily increasing marginal returns, so
that  the  return  for  each  additional  AWP
adopted is greater than that for its prede-
cessor.    If  AWPs  operate  largely  through
their  implications  for  workers,  we  might
thus expect similar results, with their com-
bined effects having an exponential rather
than a monotonic association with the ex-
perience and outcomes of work.  Thus:

Hypothesis  1a.    To  the  extent  that  they  are
adopted, AWPs can be expected to have positive
effects for employees, largely due to their impli-
cations  for  psycho-social  variables  (belong-
ingness, task involvement, empowerment).
Hypothesis  1b.    The  positive  effects  of  AWPs
can be expected to increase exponentially to
the extent that they are adopted in combina-
tion.

Although the arguments of critical schol-
ars have often appeared to contradict those
of proponents, these scholars have typically

focused  on  the  implications  of  AWPs  for
work  intensification  rather  than  psycho-
social  variables.    It  is  possible  that  AWPs
have contradictory effects, intensifying the
work  process  while  at  the  same  time  en-
hancing personal satisfaction and commit-
ment.    Thus,  even  if  AWPs  have  positive
psycho-social effects, they may still be asso-
ciated with work intensification.
Hypothesis  1c.    To  the  extent  that  they  are
adopted,  AWPs  can  also  be  expected  to  have
negative  effects  for  employees,  through  their
implications for work intensification (workload
and stressfulness).

Effects of alternative forms of work organiza-
tion.  As discussed earlier, many believe that
“lean”  work  organization  has  negative  ef-
fects,  mainly  through  its  implications  for
work  intensification,  while  “team”  work
organization  has  largely  positive  ones,
mainly through its implications for psycho-
social  variables.    The  essential  difference
between  “lean”  and  “team”  organization
would  appear  to  be  that,  although  both
entail organization by groups, the former is
implemented  in  the  context  of  a  just-in-
time  system  and  entails  little  team  au-
tonomy, while the latter is not implemented
in the context of a just-in-time system and
entails  considerable  autonomy  (for  ex-
ample,  Rinehart  et  al.  1997:85ff.).    Thus,
under lean work organization, employees
are  driven  to  work  harder.    In  contrast,
team work organization has the more “vol-
untaristic effects” assumed by proponents,
so that work is more meaningful, fulfilling,
and empowering.
Hypothesis 2a.  Lean work organization has largely
negative effects for employees, due primarily to
its implications for work intensity.
Hypothesis  2b.    Team  work  organization  has
largely positive effects for employees, due pri-
marily to its implications for psycho-social vari-
ables.

Authors have often failed to specifically
identify the form of organization to which
they are comparing lean and team organi-
zation.    It  would,  however,  seem  that  the
main referent is the individualized organi-
zation assumed to predominate in postwar
workplaces, not more traditional group or


HIGH PERFORMANCE AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF WORK?

783

team forms of organization, under which
there  is  no  JIT  system  and  no  team  au-
tonomy  (that  is,  traditional  supervision).
Though the latter cannot be associated with
the high-performance or transformed work-
place model, it can be considered an im-
portant  alternative  to  work  individualiza-
tion.  It can be expected to have positive
effects  due  to  its  implications  for
belongingness  and  possibly  task  involve-
ment and empowerment (as there is greater
social interaction and opportunity to exert
influence through one’s supervisor).
Hypothesis  2c.    Traditional  group  work  should
have positive effects for employees, largely due
to its implications for psycho-social variables.
Two other forms of organization might
also be identified:  individualized JIT, un-
der  which  there  is  a  JIT  system  yet  little
group work, and what Berggren (1992:254–
56)  has  dubbed  “post-lean”  organization,
which is a hybrid of lean and team organi-
zation combining elements of JIT with au-
tonomous  teams.    Though  these  alterna-
tives have received little notice in the litera-
ture, they comprise further alternatives to
the individualized work organization asso-
ciated with the postwar era and hence war-
rant  inclusion.    Generally,  individualized
JIT should have even more negative impli-
cations for workers than does lean organi-
zation, while “post-lean” organization may
combine the effects of both lean and team
organization, with mixed effects for work-
ers.
Hypothesis 2d.  Individualized lean work organi-
zation should have negative effects for employ-
ees, due to its implications for intensification
variables.
Hypothesis  2e.    Post–lean  work  organization
should have positive effects for employees due
to  its  implications  for  psycho-social  variables,
and negative effects due to its implications for
intensification variables.

Effects of individual AWPs.  Much of the
confusion over forms of work organization
appears to extend to the analysis of AWPs in
general.    It  may  be  possible  to  identify
distinctive systems of AWPs in theory, but
in practice AWPs tend to be adopted in a
piecemeal fashion, with the specific combi-

nation of AWPs adopted varying consider-
ably  from  one  workplace  to  the  next
(Appelbaum and Batt 1994).  There is hence
a need to attempt to “unbundle” the impli-
cations of AWPs.

AWP programs can be expected to affect
work  experience  and  outcomes  through
their implications for specific AWPs associ-
ated with them.  However, these programs
may contain a broader philosophy or set of
objectives not captured by individual AWPs,
with important implications for the broader
workplace  culture.    If  so,  any  effects  of
these  programs  should  be  observed  even
after specific AWPs have been entered into
the  analysis.    In  particular,  criticisms  of
lean  work  organization  appear  to  center
around the just-in-time system and its ap-
parent implications for the intensification
of the labor process.  Accordingly, just-in-
time should bear negative implications for
employees,  primarily  through  increased
workload, stressfulness, and fatigue.  Simi-
lar associations may be expected for work-
place re-engineering after controlling for
specific AWPs that may be associated with it
(for example, autonomous teams), because
it  typically  entails  “doing  more  with  less”
(Hammer 1990).  In contrast, quality man-
agement programs appear to require high
levels  of  employee  commitment  (Hyman
and Mason 1995:44).  We could thus expect
them to be implemented in ways that are
largely beneficial to employees, or at least
in such a way that employees are inculcated
with  values  and  beliefs  conducive  to  em-
ployer  goals  and  hence  to  more  positive
evaluations of their work experience.

Hypothesis 3a.  Just-in-time systems and re-engi-
neering programs should have largely negative
effects  for  employees,  primarily  due  to  their
implications for work intensification, while qual-
ity management programs should have largely
positive effects, primarily due to their implica-
tions for psycho-social variables.

Of  the  on-line  AWPs,  team-based  work
can be expected to have positive implica-
tions  for  employees,  primarily  because  it
allows for increased group interaction and
hence belongingness.  Consistent with ex-
isting research findings (Cotton 1993:188–


784

INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

90), team autonomy should also have posi-
tive implications, as should team responsi-
bility.    Both  can  be  expected  to  increase
empowerment  and  possibly  task  involve-
ment.    However,  both  may  also  result  in
increased  workload  and  stressfulness,  as
employees feel increased pressure to per-
form  (Barker  1992;  Graham  1995).    Job
rotation can be expected to have positive
implications, largely because it can be ex-
pected to reduce monotony and boredom
and hence enhance task involvement.  Multi-
skilling can also be expected to have posi-
tive implications for employees, as it should
enhance complexity and hence task involve-
ment.  Yet it may also have negative implica-
tions, as it is often a device for enhancing
“functional” flexibility, which in turn can
mean  work  intensification  and  hence  an
increased workload.
Hypothesis 3b.  Team-based work and job rota-
tion  may  have  positive  effects  for  employees,
due to their implications for psycho-social vari-
ables, while team autonomy, team responsibil-
ity, and multi-skilling should have both positive
and negative effects for employees, due to their
implications  for  psycho-social  and  intensifica-
tion variables, respectively.

Recent  reviews  of  the  research  on  par-
ticipative  decision-making  (for  example,
Locke et al. 1997) suggest that the effects of
off-line AWPs may be more limited than pro-
ponents  have  assumed.    This  may  be  espe-
cially true for nonunion representative par-
ticipation  systems  (Cotton  1993:129).    Yet
research addressing the implications of di-
rect participation mechanisms such as qual-
ity circles has also failed to yield “optimis-
tic” conclusions (Cotton 1993:86).  None-
theless, these findings could reflect some
of the methodological problems identified
earlier.  There are good reasons to expect
off-line AWPs to have positive implications
for the experience and outcomes of work.
Information  meetings  and  quality  circles
can be expected to enhance belongingness,
empowerment,  and  possibly  task  involve-
ment,  especially  to  the  extent  that  indi-
vidual workers are involved with them.  In
addition, committee systems and steering
committees,  because  they  entail  worker
representation,  can  be  expected  to  have

positive  associations  with  empowerment.
More generally, off-line AWPs can also be
expected to enhance the legitimacy of em-
ployer decisions, with positive overall im-
plications for attitudes and behavior.
Hypothesis 3c.  Off-line AWPs can be expected to
have positive effects for employees, due in part
to  their  direct  implications  for  psycho-social
variables, but also, indirectly, because they en-
hance legitimacy.

Economic  AWPs  appear  to  have  had  un-
certain  effects  (Hyman  and  Mason
1995:107; Freeman 2000:20).  Nonetheless,
proponents have argued that they can be
expected to enhance employee identifica-
tion with group or workplace performance,
and to establish norms conducive to perfor-
mance.  If so, economic AWPs may have a
“disciplinary  effect,”  associated  with  the
intensification of work, with negative impli-
cations  for  outcomes  associated  with  the
work  experience  (Hyman  and  Mason
1995:99).
Hypothesis 3d.  Economic AWPs should be posi-
tively associated with work intensification and
negatively associated with extra-work, attitudi-
nal, and behavioral outcomes.

Methods

To address the implications of AWPs, I
draw  on  data  from  a  telephone  survey  of
508  employed  Canadians  conducted  in
1997.    An  added  digit  version  of  random
digit dialing (see Lavrakas 1993) was em-
ployed.    Phone  numbers  were  generated
from the Canada telephone directory (avail-
able on CD Rom), and then the final two
digits  of  each  number  were  randomly  al-
tered, thereby ensuring accurate represen-
tation  of  unlisted  and  newly  listed  num-
bers.  Proportional sampling was used for
all  provinces  except  Quebec,  which  was
excluded  due  to  language  differences.4

4The sample characteristics, compared to the char-
acteristics of the Canadian labor force as a whole (see
Akyeampong  1997,  1998),  as  reported  in  brackets,
are the following:  53% female (vs. 47%), 30% repre-
sented  by  a  union  (vs.  31%),  40%  in  managerial/
professional  occupations  (vs.  34%),  40%  in  other


HIGH PERFORMANCE AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF WORK?

785

After ineligible respondents were excluded,
the estimated response rate was 55%.5

reliability 

inter-item 

The  variables  and,  where  appropriate,
their 
scores
(Cronbach’s alpha) appear in Tables 1 and
2.  The AWP measures (Table 1) are cre-
ated  from  single  items,  as  has  been  the
convention in the literature on AWPs.  The
work  experience  and  outcome  measures
consist of multiple Likert-type items (Table
2).  All have Cronbach’s alphas that equal
or exceed the .65 level (all but Stressfulness
have alphas above .70), which is generally
considered  acceptable  for  an  analysis  of
this  nature  (for  example,  Nunnally
1965:226).    Factor  analysis  also  indicated
that  these  variables  represent  distinct  di-
mensions  (that  is,  dimensional  validity).
But the lack of firm precedent in the litera-
ture  for  a  number  of  these  variables  may
give rise to validity concerns.  Thus, further
information relevant to their validity is in
the Appendix.

Work experience.  Belongingness, Task In-
volvement, and Empowerment are, respec-
tively, four-, nine-, and six-item scales.  The
items  for  these  scales  were  originally  de-
rived  from  the  literature  on  work  alien-
ation, especially the work of Melvin Seeman
(1959, 1967), Robert Blauner (1964), and

white-collar, sales, or service occupations (vs. 37%),
and 20% in blue-collar occupations (vs. 28%).  Re-
spondents on average reported that they worked 39
hours per week (vs. 38 hours), and were paid $16.22
per  hour  (vs.  15.76).    Ninety-one  percent  reported
permanent  employment  positions  (vs.  88%),  while
15% reported working less than 30 hours a week (vs.
17%), which is commonly defined as “part-time.”  The
sample characteristics thus appear to be reasonably
representative of the Canadian labor force as a whole.
The  only  major  differences  seem  to  be  the  under-
representation of males and blue-collar workers.  Both
may  reflect  low  sample  representation  of  construc-
tion and transport equipment-handling workers, who
represented only 2% of the sample, compared to 8%
of the Canadian labor force.

5Two hundred and seven contacts hung up before
their eligibility could be determined.  Of those who
did not hang up, 45% were eligible.  Imputing the
same eligibility percentage to hang-ups results in the
calculated response rate of 55%.  An assumption that
all hang-ups were eligible would produce a response
rate of 48%, which represents a lower bound.

Karl Marx (1959 [1844]:66–68).  However,
a number of specific items are drawn from
Tesluk  and  Vance  (1996)  and  from  the
National Organizations Survey (NOS; see
Kalleberg et al. 1996).  Workload consists of
three items drawn from the NOS and from
Tesluk and Vance (1996), while Stressfulness
consists of five items, two of which are drawn
from Tesluk and Vance (1996).

Outcomes.    Self-Esteem  consists  of  four
items drawn from Rosenberg’s self-esteem
scale  (see  Rosenberg,  Schooler,  and
Schoenbach 1989).  Fatigue is a three-item
scale developed specifically for this study.
Job Satisfaction is a four-item scale created
from the Michigan Organizational Assess-
ment Package (Institute for Social Research
1975).    Commitment  consists  of  a  three-
item scale drawn from Mowday’s Organiza-
tional  Commitment  Questionnaire
(Mowday et al. 1982), but adapted so that it
addresses commitment to “the person who
manages or is in charge of” the respondent’s
workplace.    In  making  this  adaptation,  I
sought to avoid possible confusion between
commitment to the management of a spe-
cific workplace, which appears to be cen-
tral to AWPs, and commitment to a possibly
distant corporate entity.  Motivation con-
sists of a five-item scale, two items of which
are  drawn  from  Brockner  et  al.  (1992).
Citizenship Behavior consists of seven items
based on three dimensions of citizenship
identified  by  Podsakoff  and  McKenzie
(1990):  altruism, courtesy, and civic virtue.
Although the convention in the literature
has  been  to  rely  on  supervisory  reports6
(for example, Niehoff and Moorman 1993;
Van Dyne et al. 1994; Cappelli and Rogovsky
1998),  the  method  of  the  present  study
required the use of self-reports.  In addi-
tion, factor analysis suggested two dimen-
sions, one for courtesy, and one combining
altruism and virtue (see Appendix).  How-
ever,  only  the  former  had  an  acceptable
reliability score, and neither performed as

6In addition, I operationalized Citizenship more
narrowly than other researchers have.  The broader
operationalization  employed  in  other  studies  over-
laps with many of the other variables in this study.


786

INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

Table 1.  Frequency and Extent of Individual AWPs.

Program or Practice

AWP Programs:

JIT (a system for minimizing inventories, supplies, and
work in progress; for example, just-in-time)
Re-Engineering (a workplace redesign, reorganization, or
re-engineering program)
Quality Mgmt. (a quality improvement program; for
example, total quality management, ISO 9000)

On-Line AWPs:

Rotation (a job rotation program)
Multi-Skilling (a cross-training or multi-skilling program)
Teams (a team-based work system)
Team Autonomy (team is self-directed or semi-autonomous;
no direct supervision)
Team Responsibility (team is given responsibility for
specific products or services)

Off-Line AWPs:

Information Sharing (informational meetings or briefings for
workers; for example, town hall meetings or team briefings)
QCs (team or area meetings held specifically for workers to
discuss quality or workflow issues; sometimes referred to as
quality circles)
Committee System (a committee system whereby
permanently established committees meet to address
specific issues other than health and safety; for example,
social issues, employee assistance, gain-sharing)
Joint Steering Com. (joint steering committee meetings,
with management and worker representatives, to address
overall changes and broad policies for the workplace as
a whole)

Economic AWPs:

Profit-Sharing (a profit- or gain-sharing system; for example,
for productivity gains)
Group Bonus (a group or departmental pay or bonus system)

% Reporting  % Reporting
Presence in Meaningful
Workplace
Involvement a

Means,
Degree of

Involvement b

44

37

50

24
39
62

49

53

78

70

47

47

22
34

13

14

17

8
12
44

30

35

48

40

8

6

8
13

1.7

1.7

2.0

1.4
1.7
2.8

2.3

2.5

21.3

24.7

7.3

5.0

1.4
1.7

Notes:  The descriptions in brackets indicate the specific wording of the items.  For the off-line reforms,
respondents were asked if the workplace had each, and if so, how many times per day, week, month, or year they
were involved with a meeting of each; answers were converted to a yearly frequency score.  For the remainder
of the items, respondents were asked to “indicate to the best of your knowledge whether your workplace has
each,” and, if so, “the extent to which it involves you”:  not at all (=1), very little (=2), to some extent (=3),
considerable extent (=4), to a great extent (=5).

aFor the off-line reforms, respondents are for present purposes considered to have “meaningful involvement”
if the frequency of their involvement is one or more times per month.  For the remainder, the term “meaningful
involvement” refers to either “considerable extent” or “a great extent.”

bFor  the  off-line  reforms,  the  means  are  calculated  as  the  average  number  of  times  per  year  that  the
respondent was involved in each.  For the remainder, the means are calculated as the averages for the five-point
scales.

well as a single additive index in the regres-
sion analyses.  Thus, they were combined to
form a single measure.

AWP programs.  Quality Management, JIT,

and Re-Engineering were measured by ask-
ing  respondents  if,  to  the  best  of  their
knowledge,  their  employer  had,  respec-
tively, “a quality management program (for


HIGH PERFORMANCE AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF WORK?

787

Table 2.  Dependent Variables.

Variable

Work Experience:  Psycho-Social Variables

Belongingness a = .73 (You are well-accepted by your co-workers; When at work, you
really feel like you belong; You feel like you just don’t fit in where you work; You feel
quite isolated from others where you work.)
Task Involvement a = .87 (The work you do is important; You often have a hard time
caring about your work; Much of the work you do seems like a waste of time; The work
you do is meaningful to you; Your work gives you a real sense of who you are; You are
often bored with your job; You get really involved in your work; You really feel at home
with yourself when doing your job; Time often seems to pass slowly when doing your job.)
Empowerment a = .84 (What happens to you in your job is pretty much beyond your
control; There is little point trying to affect the way things are done where you work; You
have little choice but to go along with things at work, even if you disagree with them; You
have little choice but to do what you are told at work, whether you like it or not; It does
little good to speak up about things at work; You can control how well you do your job.)

Work Experience:  Intensification variables

Workload a = .85 (Your job involves too much work to do everything well; You have too
much to do and too little time to do it; You spend much of you time merely trying to
keep up.)
Stressfulness a = .69 (Your job is stressful; Some days you feel like you can’t continue any
longer at your job; In your job, you are often confronted with problems you can’t do much
about; You have little time to think and contemplate on your job; You have conflicting
demands placed on you on your job.)

Outcomes:  Extra-Work

Fatigue a = .75 (You are often worn out by the end of the day; After working, you are too
tired to do things with others; When at home, all you want to do is rest.)
Self-Esteem a = .74 (You feel you are a person of worth, at least on an equal plane with
others; You feel you have a number of good qualities; You are able to do things as well as
most people; You have a positive attitude toward yourself.)

Outcomes:  Attitudinal

Job Satisfaction a = .80 (All in all, you like working where you do; You are satisfied with
the job you have; If you could start over, you would not be in the job you are in today;
You would not recommend your job to a close friend.)
Commitment a = .80 (You are loyal to the person who manages or is in charge of the
place where you work; Your values and this person’s values are very similar; You trust
this person not to act against your interests.)

Outcomes:  Behavioral

Motivation a = .78 (You always put as much effort as possible into your work; You are
highly committed to do the best job you can; For you, a good day at work is one in which
you have performed to your utmost; You try to work as hard as you can; You intentionally
expend a great deal of effort in doing your job.)
Citizenship Behavior a = .71 (You help others with their work-related problems; When
possible, you volunteer to help others with their work; When at work, you always try to be
courteous to others; When at work, you try not to hurt others’ feelings; When at work, you
always try to be mindful of the concerns of others; You take an active interest in what goes
on at work; You participate in meetings and in social events related to work.)

Mean

16.5

34.2

16.7

9.4

12.2

11.3

18.6

13.5

12.3

23.3

25.7

Notes:  Descriptive statistics are prior to standardization.  Items are reverse coded where appropriate for
purposes  of  scale  creation.    Response  categories  are  strongly  disagree,  disagree  somewhat,  neutral,  agree
somewhat, and strongly agree.

example,  total  quality  management,  ISO
9000),” “a system for minimizing invento-
ries,  supplies,  or  works  in  progress  (for

example, just-in-time),” and “a workplace
redesign,  reorganization,  or  re-engineer-
ing program.”  If they answered that there


788

INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

was such a program, they were then asked
to indicate the extent to which it involved
them.  The response options were not at all,
very little, to some extent, to a considerable
extent, and to a great extent.

On-Line AWPs.  Similarly,  Job Rotation,
Multi-Skilling,  Team-Based  Work,  Team
Autonomy, and Team Responsibility were
measured  by  asking  respondents  if  there
was, respectively, “a job rotation program,”
“a cross-training or multi-skilling program,”
“a team-based work system,” “self-directed
or  semi-autonomous  (no  direct  supervi-
sion)” teams, and teams given “responsibil-
ity for specific products or services.”  Again,
in  each  case  respondents  were  asked
whether the practice existed in their work-
place  and,  if  so,  the  extent  to  which  it
involved them.

Off-Line AWPs.  Informational Meetings,
QCs,  Committee  System,  and  Joint  Steer-
ing Committee were measured by asking if
there  were,  respectively,  “informational
meetings or briefings for workers (for ex-
ample,  town  hall  meetings  or  team  brief-
ings),” “team or area meetings held specifi-
cally  for  workers  to  discuss  quality  or
workflow issues (sometimes referred to as
quality circles),” “a committee system, where
permanently established committees meet
to address specific issues—other than health
and safety (for example, social, employee
assistance, gain-sharing),” and “joint steer-
ing committee meetings, with management
and worker reps, to address overall changes
and broad policies for your workplace as a
whole.”    Respondents  who  affirmed  the
presence of an off-line AWP were asked to
indicate how often they were involved in it.
These  responses  were  then  converted  to
yearly frequency scores.

Economic AWPs.  Profit-Sharing and Group
Bonus were measured in the same way as
on-line AWPs, based on items asking if there
was  “a  profit  or  gain  sharing  system  (for
example,  for  productivity  gains)”  and  “a
group or departmental bonus system,” re-
spectively.

Controls.  The implementation of various
AWPs, and the extent to which they affect
individual workers, can be expected to vary
with a number of factors—factors that may

also have consequences for the experience
and outcomes of work.  Most notable in this
respect is whether there has been growth or
decline  in  the  size  of  an  establishment,
because this can have implications for the
type of AWPs adopted and for the way work-
ers  experience  their  work  (Cooke  1989).
Establishment size may also be important,
because it has been shown to be a strong
predictor  of  the  adoption  of  AWPs
(Osterman 1994; Gittleman et al. 1998), yet
also has implications for work experience
and  outcome  variables  (Cully  et  al.
1999:181–89).  A number of additional fac-
tors  may  also  come  into  play,  including
whether the worker is temporary or perma-
nent, the number of hours worked, whether
there  is  a  union,  respondent  hourly  pay,
and gender.  All may be expected to have
some association with both the adoption of
AWPs  and  the  experience  and  perceived
outcomes  of  work.    These  more  “contex-
tual” variables are thus included as controls
(see notes to Tables 3, 5, and 6).

A further control variable is the nature
of the work itself.  Much of the theory of
AWPs  suggests  that  they  operate  in  part
through their implications for an enriched
job  design.    Yet  contingency  theories  of
AWP implementation (for example, Godard
1998) and of organization in general (in-
cluding  the  work  of  Woodward)  suggest
that AWPs may be more likely to be adopted
where the work is already complex or en-
riched.    If  so,  controlling  for  complexity
could  result  in  downward  estimation  bi-
ases,  yet  failing  to  do  so  could  result  in
upward biases.  I cannot fully address this
issue in this paper, but I do run regressions
with and without a complexity measure to
explore  the  extent  to  which  complexity
matters.  In so doing, I also shed light on
the extent to which AWPs have effects apart
from  those  on  job  enrichment,  thus  ad-
dressing debates over how AWPs work (see
Cappelli and Rogovsky 1998:636–37).  This
measure consists of five items drawn from
the Oldham and Hackman (1975) Job Di-
agnostic Index.7

7The items are “your job requires a high level of
skill,” “your job is challenging,” “your job makes you


HIGH PERFORMANCE AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF WORK?

789

Although these control variables help to
rule out a number of possible alternative
explanations  for  the  results  reported  be-
low, they may not exhaust all possible ex-
planations.  As I discuss further below, this
may limit the conclusions that can be drawn
from the analysis in this paper.

Results

Effects  of  level  of  AWP  adoption.    In  the
literature assessing the effects of high-per-
formance  practices,  authors  typically  cre-
ate an additive scale of the extent to which
these  practices  have  been  adopted  (for  a
discussion,  see  Godard  and  Delaney
2000:489).  To address the overall implica-
tions  of  AWPs  (hypotheses  1a–1c),  I  fol-
lowed this convention, first converting the
off-line  items  to  five-point  scales  so  as  to
ensure  roughly  equal  weighting  of  these
items with the programmatic, on-line, and
economic AWP items.8  The resulting scale
included  all  AWPs  identified  in  Table  1,
with the exception of JIT, which detracted
from  the  reliability  (Cronbach’s  alpha)
score.9  The alpha for this scale is .76.  To
aid  in  the  interpretation  of  the  results,  I
divided this scale by the number of items
comprising it.  As a result, the maximum
possible range of the scale is from 1.00 to
5.00.    The  actual  range  was  1.00  to  4.31,
with a mean of 1.85.

To explore for positive exponential ef-
fects (hypothesis 1a), I also converted this
index to its quadratic form.  If an exponen-
tial relationship obtains, as the arguments
of proponents suggest should be the case,
the coefficients for both the first- and sec-
ond-order  terms  should  be  positive  (see
Aiken  and  West  1991:66;  Jaccard  et  al.
1990:51).

keep learning new things,” “there is a lot of variety in
the kinds of things you do in your job,” and “your job
requires lots of mental effort.”  Cronbach’s alpha is
.88.

8The weighting was as follows:  1 = if two or fewer
meetings/sessions per year; 2 = if 2 to 6; 3 = if 7 to 12;
4 = if 13 to 24; 5 = if more than 24.

9Regressions  in  which  JIT  was  included  yielded

virtually identical results.

As indicated in column 1 of Table 3, the
linear form of AWP Involvement has posi-
tive and statistically significant associations
with all of the dependent variables except
Workload and Fatigue.  These results thus
suggest that AWPs are associated with more
stressful work (hypothesis 1c) but that they
also have positive implications for how work
is  experienced  and  the  outcomes  associ-
ated with it (hypothesis 1a).

A  different  picture  emerges  when  the
quadratic form is introduced (column 2).
Both the first order and the squared terms
are  statistically  significant  in  the  regres-
sions for Belongingness, Task Involvement,
Empowerment,  Job  Satisfaction,  Self-Es-
teem, and Citizenship Behavior.  But con-
trary  to  expectations,  the  signs  for  the
squared  term  are  consistently  negative.10
This suggests that, instead of increasing in
magnitude,  the  marginal  returns  to  AWP
adoption begin to decline and may even be
negative after a certain level of adoption is
reached.    To  try  to  identify  this  level,  I
estimated the bend point, or point at which
the maximum returns to AWPs are achieved,
for  each  dependent  variable  (Aiken  and
West 1991:76).  The estimates of this point
ranged from a score of 2.3 for Self-Esteem
to  3.1  for  Citizenship  Behavior,  with  an
average score of 2.7 across all the depen-
dent variables for which the quadratic form
is statistically significant (these calculations

10I also ran regressions with each individual AWP
included, and then performed an F test to see if the
addition of a dummy variable indicating whether the
respondent was in the highest quartile on the involve-
ment index made a difference.  In no case was the F
test significant.  I also tested for interactions between
team reforms and both off-line and economic AWPs.
I created a single variable combining Teams, Team
Autonomy,  Team  Responsibility,  and  Multi-Skilling
(alpha = .75).  I then ran a series of regressions with
the quadratic of this new team variable and an inter-
action term between it and either a single economic
or off-line AWP, repeating this process until all of the
economic  and  off-line  AWPs  had  been  tried.    The
interaction terms were rarely statistically significant,
and  where  they  were,  the  sign,  often  as  not,  was
opposite that expected, suggesting substitution rather
than complementary effects.  I also explored whether
using  the  linear  form  of  the  team  variable  yielded
better results.  It did not. See Godard (2001a).


790

INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

Table 3.  Regressions:  Level of AWP Involvement.

Belongingness

Task Involvement

Empowerment

Workload

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

AWP Involvement
AWP Involvement Sq.

R2

.19***
.72*** .50***
— –.53***–.64**
.08

.09

.15

.57***

.12***
.40**
— –.47** –.38**
.16

.45

.17

.18*** .56*** .65***
— –.73***–.52** — .27
.17
.13

.04 –.23 –.24
.28
.13

.18

.24

.12

Stressfulness

Fatigue

Self-Esteem

Job Satisfaction

AWP Involvement
AWP Involvement Sq.

R2

(1)

(2)

.16
.11**
— .05
.09
.09

(3)

.14
.05
.10

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

–.03

–.29
— .26
.04
.05

–.28
.26
.05

.65*** .62***

.18*** .92*** .80***
.06
— –.61***–.60*** — –.75***–.69***
.02

.04

.05

.15

.17

.30

Commitment

Motivation

Citizenship Behavior

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

AWP Involvement
AWP Involvement Sq.

R2

.44**

.12***
.37*
— –.33 –.30
.08
.13

.09

.13***
.28
— –.15
.08
.08

.19
–.12
.17

.22*** .65*** .57***
— –.46** –.42**
.12

.13

.19

Notes:  Column 1 contains results for a model that includes the linear expression of AWP Involvement; Column
2 contains results for a model including both the linear and squared expressions for AWP Involvement; and
Column 3 contains results that also control for Complexity.  All regressions also control for workplace growth/
decline (1 = considerable growth, 5 = considerable decline), workplace size (1 = under 25, 4 = over 500), hourly
pay, hours worked per week, if permanent status, if female, if union, and education (1 = under grade 10, 5 =
university degree).  All coefficients are standardized.

*Statistically significant at the .10 level; **at the .05 level; *** at the .01 level (two-tailed tests).

are  available  on  request).    Because  the
maximum range on the AWP index is from
1 to 5, and this index represents the aver-
age score for each of the 13 items compris-
ing it, these values suggest that the returns
to  AWPs  are  maximized  at  relatively  low
levels of adoption.

I  also  plotted  the  predicted  values  of
each dependent variable at different levels
of  AWP  Involvement  to  explore  whether
higher levels of adoption actually have nega-
tive  effects.11    Such  effects  were  observed
for some dependent variables.  For example,

11To  do  so,  I  relied  on  the  nonstandard  coeffi-
cients (available on request).  While this enabled me
to plot various raw values of AWP Involvement, the
dependent variables were computed from standard-
ized  items  and  hence  represent  standard  scores.    I
also computed the changes over the range from 3.0 to
4.0  because  only  a  limited  number  of  cases  scored
above 4.0.  To extrapolate beyond this would thus be
unwarranted.

as  the  AWP  Involvement  index  increases
from  a  value  of  3.0  to  4.0,  the  predicted
score on Self-Esteem declines from .76 to
.38, and on Job Satisfaction it declines from
1.4  to  1.08  (standardized  scores).    How-
ever,  on  the  remaining  variables  the  de-
cline  over  this  range  is  smaller,  varying
from .20 for Empowerment to a low of .07
for Citizenship.  Alternative specifications,
with  the  AWP  Involvement  index  divided
into  four  dummy  variables  representing
each  quartile  of  the  distribution,  yielded
similar results (available on request).

Also  notable  are  the  associations  for
Workload,  Stressfulness,  Fatigue,  Motiva-
tion,  and  Commitment.    The  coefficients
for  Stressfulness  are  statistically  insignifi-
cant but positive, consistent with the linear
association  observed  in  the  column  1  re-
gressions.  For Workload and Fatigue, both
coefficients  are  also  statistically  insignifi-
cant, but their signs suggest that AWPs are
associated with decreases in workload and


HIGH PERFORMANCE AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF WORK?

791

fatigue at low to moderate levels only, fol-
lowed by possible increases at higher levels
of adoption.  For Motivation and Commit-
ment,  the  results  suggest  positive  but  di-
minishing and even negative effects at high
levels  of  adoption;  but  the  second  order
terms  are  (again)  not  statistically  signifi-
cant,  suggesting  that  if  the  latter  effects
occur, they are relatively weak.

The  magnitudes  of  the  coefficients  for
AWP  Involvement  and  its  quadratic  form
drop  somewhat  when  Complexity  is  con-
trolled for (column 3).  However, the de-
clines are relatively small, and significance
levels generally remain unchanged.  This
suggests that AWPs have aggregate effects
beyond any implications they may have for
Complexity,  and  that  these  effects  are
largely not attributable to any tendency for
them  to  be  adopted  where  Complexity  is
already high.12  It would thus appear that
the level of AWP involvement, both before
and after I control for job complexity, gen-
erally has a number of positive implications
for employees up to a point, though it also
results in more stressful work.  Beyond that
point, any positive effects of further adop-
tion tend to decline in magnitude and in
some cases may even become negative, while
work becomes even more stressful.

It  is  possible  that  these  results  suffer
from common method bias.  Yet common
method bias usually implies artificially in-
flated linear associations.  While it may ac-
count for the associations observed for low
to moderate values of AWP Involvement, it
provides little obvious explanation for the
nonlinear associations observed across all
values.    In  addition,  measurement  of  job
characteristics represents one of the major
concerns in the method bias literature (for
example, Glick et al. 1986), and so if com-

12When the sample is reduced to exclude manage-
rial and professional workers (N = 310), the magni-
tudes of the coefficients increase somewhat, with the
squared  form  of  AWP  Involvement  also  becoming
statistically significant (and, again, negative) in the
Commitment regression, and the linear form becom-
ing statistically significant in the Fatigue regression.
But there are no substantive changes.

mon  method  bias  were  a  problem,  one
might expect controlling for Complexity to
partial  out  variation  attributable  to  this
bias, substantially weakening the observed
associations.  Yet this did not happen.  Fi-
nally, I created an alternative AWP Involve-
ment index in which all items were dichoto-
mized based on the presence or absence of
“meaningful  involvement”  (see  Table  1,
note a), thus reducing possible perceptual
biases.  This index yielded identical results,
except  that  the  magnitudes  of  the  coeffi-
cients (and, in a few cases, levels of signifi-
cance) were slightly smaller.

Effects of alternative forms of work organiza-
tion.  To address the implications of alter-
native forms of work organization (hypoth-
eses 2a–2e), I first created dummy variables
intended to represent each form identified
earlier,  based  on  whether  individuals  re-
ported that they were involved to a consid-
erable or great extent with (1) a JIT pro-
gram, (2) a team-based work system, and (if
the latter) (3) autonomous teamwork.  The
specific breakdowns appear in Table 4.  Most
are  self-explanatory,  though  I  label  non-
autonomous  teams  with  no  JIT  as  Tradi-
tional Group (rather than team) organiza-
tion to avoid confusion between this form
and Team Organization.  Subsequent analy-
sis also indicated that there is in any case
probably little reason to consider non-au-
tonomous teams different from traditional
groups in anything but name.13

Table 5 reports regressions of the depen-
dent variables on these measures, first con-
trolling for the context variables only (col.
1),  then  for  Complexity  as  well  (col.  2),
then for all additional AWPs as well (col.
3).14    Traditional  Individualized  Work  is

13To check this, I recomputed Traditional Group
using  a  different  item,  asking  simply  if  the  respon-
dent worked “as part of a team or group.”  The results
were essentially the same.

14There may be a tendency to confuse the specific
organization of work with additional AWPs that may
or may not be implemented in conjunction with this
form.  Thus, for example, any negative effects of lean
organization  may  be  offset  by  other  AWPs  imple-
mented  in  conjunction  with  this  form  of  organiza-
tion,  conflating  its  effects.    Controlling  for  these
other AWPs helps to address this possibility.


792

INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

Table 4.  Forms of Work Organization.

% with Each Form

Form of Work Organization

In Workplace

Meaningful Involvement a

Lean (JIT and Non-Autonomous Teams)
Team (Autonomous Teams, No JIT)
Post-Lean (Autonomous Teams and JIT)
Traditional Group (Non-Autonomous Teams)
Individualized Lean (Individual Work and JIT)
Traditional Individual (Individual Work, No JIT)

7
20
7
20
5
—

3
21
4
17
5
49

aRespondents are considered subject to JIT, teams, or autonomous teams if they said that these involved them

to a considerable or a great extent.  Also see Table 1.

the default or referent category.  As indi-
cated  in  column  1,  both  Team  and  Post-
Lean have moderately positive associations
with  Belongingness,  Empowerment,  and
Citizenship  Behavior  before  controls  are
added  for  Complexity  or  the  remaining
AWPs.    Team  is  also  positively  associated
with Motivation, while Lean has a statisti-
cally  significant  positive  association  with
Citizenship Behavior, but no other signifi-
cant associations.  The most powerful asso-
ciations,  however,  are  for  Traditional
Group,  which  is  positively  related  to
Belongingness, Task Involvement, Empow-
erment, Job Satisfaction, Self-Esteem, Mo-
tivation,  Commitment,  and  Citizenship
Behavior, and negatively related to Fatigue,
in all cases at statistically significant levels.
The  magnitudes  of  these  associations  are
all substantially greater than for any of the
other forms of organization.  Finally, Indi-
vidualized  Lean  has  a  statistically  signifi-
cant negative association with Fatigue (pos-
sibly reflecting a type I error), but no other
significant associations.

These  results  again  change  little  when
Complexity  is  controlled  for  (column  2),
indicating that the observed effects are not
attributable  to  task  characteristics.    How-
ever,  they  could  be  attributable  to  other
AWPs that are not used to create the mea-
sures  of  work  organization  forms  but  are
correlated with these forms.  As indicated
in  column  3,  the  results  for  Traditional
Group, however, remain largely unchanged
when these other AWPs (as well as context

variables) are controlled for.  There is also
no change for Lean.  But Team becomes
statistically insignificant in all but the Citi-
zenship Behavior regression, and Post-Lean
in all but the regressions for Empowerment
and  Citizenship  Behavior.    Individual-
ized Lean becomes statistically insignifi-
cant  in  all  regressions.    These  changes
could reflect collinearity problems.  But
they do suggest that the apparent effects
for all but Traditional Group are largely
illusory,  reflecting  the  effects  of  other
work practices with which they tend to be
associated.

These results should be interpreted with
caution, because the operationalization of
the different forms of work organization is
rudimentary.    But  they  strongly  suggest
that traditional group organization is pref-
erable not only to the individualized orga-
nization  associated  with  postwar  work  ar-
rangements, but also to team and lean forms
of  organization  associated  with  the  high-
performance model.

Effects of individual AWPs.  Columns 2
and 3 of Table 6 report regressions with
individual AWPs and AWP programs, be-
fore and after controlling for Complex-
ity (as well as context variables).  Column
1 reports zero-order correlations, so that
it is possible to explore whether a priori
implications  of  AWPs  observed  in  field
research  are  spurious,  reflecting  work-
place conditions or other programs and
practices  not  controlled  for  in  this  re-
search.


HIGH PERFORMANCE AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF WORK?

793

Table 5.  Regressions:  Form of Work Organization.

Belongingness           Task Involvement

Empowerment

Workload

Form of Work Organization

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Team
Lean
Post-Lean
Traditional Group
Indvidualized Lean

R2

.09**

.10**

.11**
.09
.01 –.00 –.01
.10**
.06
.21*** .17*** .18***
.02
.09

.00
.15

.05
.12

.02 –.02
.03
.06
.03
.01
.11*** .03
.01
.03
.16
.45

.01
.04
.02
.10**
.05
.19

.06

.08**

.08**
.04
.01 –.00 –.01
.08*
.08*
.16*** .12*** .14***
.04
.16

.02
.23

.03
.20

.05
.06

.04
.06
.06
.06
–.04 –.04 –.06
.01 –.02
.01
.05
.04
.04
.13
.13
.15

Form of Work Organization

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Stressfulness

Fatigue

Self-Esteem

Job Satisfaction

Team
Lean
Post-Lean
Traditional Group
Indvidualized Lean

R2

.05 –.07
.06
.02 –.01
.03
.05
.04
.01
.00 –.02 –.09
.01 –.03
.01
.08
.09
.12

.03
.00

.00
.03
.00
.01
–.03 –.03 –.06
–.09** –.09* –.12**
–.08* –.08*
.06
.06

.07
.10

.02 –.01
.02
.02
.03
.03
.04
.04
.04
.10*** .09*
.07
.01
.01
.03
.03
.04
.05

.04 –.00
.06
.01 –.00
.03
.04
.03
.01
.18*** .12***.12***
.04 –.05 –.03
.15
.21

.28

Form of Work Organization

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Commitment

Motivation           Citizenship Behavior

Team
Lean
Post-Lean
Traditional Group
Indvidualized Lean

R2

–.01 –.03 –.08
.03
.01 –.01
–.03 –.04 –.06
.14*** .10**
–.04 –.03 –.06
.13
.09

.14

.10**

.06
.09*
.01
.03
.04
.02
.15*** .09*
.05
.03
.18
.09

.06
.01
.02
.13**
.02
.10

.14*** .11*** .10*
.08*
.11*** .10**
.10**
.09**
.10**
.21*** .16*** .19***
.00 –.02
.20
.13

.01
.17

Notes:  Column 1 regressions report standardized coefficients controlling for workplace growth/decline (1 =
considerable growth, 5 = considerable decline), workplace size (1 = under 25, 4 = over 500), hourly pay, hours
worked per week, if permanent status, if female, if union, and education (1 = under grade 10, 5 = university
degree).  Column 2 regressions also control for Complexity.  Column 3 regressions also control for all other AWPs
(but not Complexity).  Individualized work is the default category.  See Table 4 for creation of forms of work
organization.

*Statistically significant at the .10 level; **at the .05 level; ***at the .01 level (two-tailed tests).

Of the programmatic variables, JIT ap-
pears  to  have  limited  albeit  negative  ef-
fects, with negative coefficients in the ini-
tial  Belongingness,  Job  Satisfaction,  and
Commitment regressions (col. 2).  This is
largely  consistent  with  expectations  (hy-
pothesis 3a), although no associations are
observed with the intensification measures.
Notably, these findings are stronger than is
suggested  by  the  zero-order  correlations
(col.  1),  possibly  because  JIT  tends  to  be
implemented along with other AWPs that
offset its negative effects.15

15For example, perusal of the AWP inter-correla-
tions suggested that this is because JITs are positively

Also  consistent  with  expectations  (hy-
pothesis  3a),  Re-engineering  appears  to
affect  only  the  work  intensification  vari-
ables,  having  positive  correlations  with
Workload  and  Stressfulness  and  positive,
statistically  significant  coefficients  in  the
initial  (col.  2)  regressions  for  Workload
and Fatigue.  It would thus appear that re-
engineering programs have negative impli-

correlated with Group Bonus, which is also positively
correlated with Belongingness, Job Satisfaction, and
Commitment  (though  it  becomes  statistically  insig-
nificant  in  the  Belongingness  and  Job  Satisfaction
regressions).


794

INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

Table 6.  Regressions: Individual AWPs.

Individual AWPs:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Belongingness

Task Involvement

Empowerment

Workload

AWP Programs
JIT
Re-Engineering
Quality Management
On-Line AWPs
Rotation
Multi-Skilling
Team-Based Work
Team Autonomy
Team Responsibility
Off-Line AWPs
Information Sharing
Quality Circles
Committee System
Steering Committee
Economic AWPs
Group Bonus
Profit-Sharing

R2

–.04
.01
.07

–.08*
.03
.03

–.07
–.03
.00

–.03
.04
.10**

–.03
–.01
.05

–.01
–.02
–.01

.06
.05
.10**

.02
.03
.03

.03
.03
.00

.02
.16***
.11***

.02
.09*
.05

.02
.09*
.05

.06
.14***
.20***
.04
.08*

–.00
.08*
.24***

–.00
.07
.28***
–.11** –.08
–.08
–.07

.03
.06
.14***
.04
.08*

.01
.00
.16***
–.09*
–.06

.03
.03
.07
–.03
.07

–.02
.02
.01
.09**
.18***
.18***
–.08
.07
.12*** –.03

–.01
.02
.14**
–.05
–.03

.01
–.05
.00
–.01
.10**

.05
–.08
–.09
–.04
.13*

.05
–.08*
–.10
–.04
.13**

.14*** –.11**

.17***
.11*** –.02
.02
.07
.08*
.01

–.00
.04
.02

.15*** –.08*
.19***
.02
.03
.13***
.12***
.02
.05
.09** –.02
.01

.10**
.20***
.02
.01

.05
.12***
–.08
–.01

.03
.10**
–.10**
–.01

–.01
.21***
.20***
.10**

.02
.01
.09*
.01

–.03
.01
.08*
–.01

.10**
.06

.07
.00
.13

–.04
-.01
.18

.04
.00

–.01
.04
.19

.02
–.03
.46

.18***
.04

.11**
–.07
.20

.12***
.06
.25

–.02
.10**

–.09*
.06
.16

–.09*
.06
.16

Stressfulness

Fatigue

Self-Esteem

Job Satisfaction

Form of Work Organization

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

AWP Programs
JIT
Re-Engineering
Quality Management
On-Line AWPs
Rotation
Multi-Skilling
Team-Based Work
Team Autonomy
Team Responsibility
Off-Line AWPs
Information Sharing
Quality Circles
Committee System
Steering Committee
Economic AWPs
Group Bonus
Profit-Sharing

R2

.03
.13***
.11***

.04
.08
.03

.04
.08
.02

–.06
.07
–.02

–.06
.10**
–.03

–.06
.10**
–.02

.00
–.00
.07

.01
–.00
.03
.07
.13***

–.04
.01

–.04
.01
–.19** –.22**
.05
.23***

.07
.22***

.00
–.09*

–.02
.01
–.11*** –.09*
–.06
.01
.06

–.18*** –.17***
.04
.19***

.03
.19***

.06
.03
.10**
.04
.09**

.01
–.04
.05

.07
–.03
.08
–.05
.04

.01
–.04
.04

.07
–.02
.06
–.04
.04

–.09** –.11*** –.09**
.02
.10**

–.04
.04

–.05
.00

.02
–.03
.14*** –.08
.20***
.22***
.08*
–.10*
.15*** –.02

–.02
.09
.14**
–.06
–.03

–.00
.05
.13***
.08*

–.04
.03
.11**
–.00

–.05
.03
.11*
.00

–.11*** –.12*** –.11**
.00
.01
.00

.04
.05
.01

.04
.06
.01

.10**
.06
.04
.06

.10**
–.01
–.01
.04

.10*
–.02
–.02
.05

.23***
.27***
.01
.14***
.12
.01
.10** –.04

.19***
–.02
.01
–.02

.00
.08*

–.05
.04
.14

–.05
.04
.14

–.08*
.02

–.06
.05
.10

–.06
.05
.10

–.01
.03

–.10** –.10*
.01
.010
.05
.06

–.11***
.06

.05
.07
.00
.01
.22
.33
Continued

cations for workers.  These implications do
not appear to be attributable to the condi-
tions of their adoption (for example, orga-
nizational  decline)  or  the  specific  AWPs
that might be associated with them, all of
which are controlled for.

In contrast, Quality Management has sta-
tistically  significant  positive  correlations

with Task Involvement, Empowerment, Job
Satisfaction, Commitment, and Citizenship
Behavior.  But it also has positive correla-
tions with Workload and Stressfulness.  The
magnitudes of these correlations are rela-
tively modest, however, and Quality Man-
agement has no statistically significant co-
efficients in the initial (column 2) regres-


HIGH PERFORMANCE AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF WORK?

795

Form of Work Organization

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Commitment

Motivation

            Citizenship Behavior

AWP Programs
JIT
Re-Engineering
Quality Management
On-Line AWPs
Rotation
Multi-Skilling
Team-Based Work
Team Autonomy
Team Responsibility
Off-Line AWPs
Information Sharing
Quality Circles
Committee System
Steering Committee
Economic AWPs
Group Bonus
Profit-Sharing

R2

–.07
–.03
.09*

–.11** –.10**
–.04
.07

–.04
.05

.04
.08*
.10**
–.03
.06

.00
.05
.06

–.00
.04
.10
–.17*** –.14***
.03

–.03

.11***
.10**
.01
.06

.10**
.05
–.05
.07

.07
.04
.07
–.08

.13***
.01

.09*
.05
.14

.11**
–.04
.17

.01
–.04
.04

–.01
.02
.07
–.05
.04

.07
.06
.04
.03

.03
.04

.03
–.03
.06

.03
–.03
.02

–.01
–.04
.04
.01
.12
.05
–.14** –.08
.05
.03

.06
.03
.04
–.02

.01
.03
.10

.02
.02
.02
.01

.01
.04
.18

.05
.04
.10**

.03
–.02
.05

.04
–.02
.02

–.02
.10**
.20***
.07
.14***

–.10** –.10**
.05
.22***
–.10*
.02

.07
.17***
–.08
.02

.16***
.16***
.08*
.10**

.11**
.06
.01
.03

.08*
.04
–.01
.04

.06
–.01

.04
.02
–.08** –.07
.16
.22

Notes:  Column 1 reports zero-order correlations.  Column 2 reports standardized regression coefficients, controlling for
workplace growth/decline (1 = considerable growth, 5 = considerable decline), workplace size (1 = under 25, 4 = over 500),
hourly pay, hours worked per week, if permanent status, if female, if union, and education (1 = under grade 10, 5 = university
degree).  Column 3 reports standardized regression coefficients, also controlling for Complexity.
*Statistically significant at the .10 level; **at the .05 level; ***at the .01 level (two-tailed tests).

sions.  This suggests that any observed ef-
fects of quality management programs are
attributable to the specific practices associ-
ated with them rather than to broader “pro-
grammatic” effects per se.

Among the “on-line” AWPs, Job Rotation
appears to have virtually no effects, with a
statistically  significant  association  in  only
the initial Citizenship Behavior regression.
This  association  is  also  negative,  which  is
contrary to expectations.  It is also possible
that rotation prevents employees from de-
veloping  commitment  toward  their  col-
leagues or the in-depth knowledge neces-
sary to provide them with assistance when
needed.  This may be especially true where
rotation is between rather than within work
areas.

Multi-Skilling is positively correlated with
Belongingness,  Empowerment,  Job  Satis-
faction, and Commitment, and negatively
correlated with Fatigue.  However, with the
exception of the association for Fatigue, all
of these associations are statistically insig-
nificant in the initial (col. 2) regressions.
Even  the  association  for  Fatigue  is  weak,

and  the  negative  sign  may  indicate  that
multi-skilling  is  more  likely  to  occur  in
workplaces  where  there  is  a  variable
workload  with  substantial  slack  times,  in
which  case  the  causal  association  may  be
reversed.

More noteworthy are the results for the
three team-related variables.  In particular,
Team-Based Work has strong and statisti-
cally significant positive correlations with
Belongingness, Task Involvement, Empow-
erment, Job Satisfaction, Self-Esteem, Com-
mitment, and Citizenship Behavior.  These
results change very little in the column 2
regressions, though Team-Based Work also
becomes  statistically  significant  in  the
Stressfulness and Fatigue regressions, where
it  has  negative  associations.    Thus,  team-
based work appears to have highly positive
implications  for  workers.    Yet  Team  Au-
tonomy  is  significantly  correlated  with
only  Job  Satisfaction,  and  has  statistically
significant negative coefficients in the col-
umn 2 regressions for Belongingness, Task
Involvement, Job Satisfaction, Motivation,
Commitment,  and  Citizenship  Behavior.


796

INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

In addition, though Team Responsibility
is  significantly  correlated  with  Belong-
ingness,  Task  Involvement,  Empower-
ment, Work-load, Stressfulness, Job Sat-
isfaction, and Self-Esteem (all positive),
its  coefficient  is  statistically  significant
(and  positive)  only  for  Workload,
Stressfulness,  and  Fatigue  in  the  initial
(col. 2) regressions.

The  results  for  Team  Autonomy  and
Responsibility,  both  of  which  may  be
viewed  as  differentiating  more  “tradi-
tional” group work from transformed or
“high-performance” teams, are contrary
to  expectations.    They  indicate  that  al-
though  team-based  work  has  important
positive effects, these effects may be de-
creased somewhat by the introduction of
team autonomy and of responsibility for
a specific product or service.  When both
of  these  variables  are  controlled  for,
therefore, the apparent (positive) effects
of team work are strengthened, no longer
offset by the negative effects of team au-
tonomy and responsibility.  In turn, when
team work is controlled for, the negative
implications  of  team  autonomy  and  re-
sponsibility for employees become more
apparent.  This is most striking with re-
spect  to  Team  Responsibility,  which  at
the correlational level appears to have a
number of positive implications for em-
ployees, but is associated primarily with
work  intensification  and  fatigue  once
other AWPs are controlled for.

With  the  exception  of  the  Workload,
Stressfulness, and Fatigue regressions, the
coefficients  for  Team  Autonomy  and
Team Responsibility are also substantially
smaller  than  are  those  for  Team-Based
Work,  indicating  that  the  negative  ef-
fects  of  the  former  may  not  offset  the
positive effects of the latter.  Thus, work-
ers  in  high-performance  teams  (that  is,
teams with autonomy and responsibility)
may find themselves worse off than their
counterparts in more traditional groups
or  teams  (that  is,  without  autonomy  or
responsibility).    But  they  may  be  better
off  in  some  respects  (for  example,
belongingness,  task  involvement)  than
those in traditional individualized jobs.

A similar story emerges with respect to
“off-line”  AWPs.16    Information  Sharing
is  positively  correlated  with  Belong-
ingness,  Task  Involvement,  Empower-
ment, Job Satisfaction, Self-Esteem, Com-
mitment, and Citizenship Behavior, and
negatively correlated with Fatigue.  These
results change little in the initial (col. 2)
regressions,  with  the  exception  of  the
Empowerment regression, where the co-
efficient is statistically insignificant.  In
contrast, Quality Circle, Committee Sys-
tem, and Steering Committee, despite a
number of significant correlations, have
few  statistically  significant  associations
in the initial (col. 2) regressions.  Quality
Circle  is  statistically  significant  only  in
the  Empowerment  regression,  Commit-
tee  System  only  in  the  Workload  and
Stressfulness  regressions,  and  Steering
Committee  in  none  of  the  regressions.
The finding for Quality Circles is as ex-
pected,  indicating  that  they  do  enable
workers to make (or at least perceive they
make) a difference in their work environ-
ment.  The results for Committee System
are difficult to explain, though it is pos-
sible that there is reverse causation, with
these systems implemented in workplaces
where there is more intensive and stress-
ful  work,  in  order  to  address  problems
and concerns of workers.  It appears that
steering committees simply do not mat-
ter.  The weakness of these latter findings
is generally consistent with prior research
on participative decision-making, as dis-
cussed earlier.  However, the finding for
Quality  Circles  points  to  the  value  of
using more fine-grained dependent vari-

16I employed the “involvement” measure only for
quality circles.  For the remaining off-line reforms I
used dummy variables indicating whether each was
simply in the workplace.  The reason is most obvious
for steering committees and committee systems, which
involve representational participation, but I also found
that the results for Information Sharing were stron-
ger when the dummy variable was introduced.  Possi-
bly,  it  serves  as  a  proxy  for  a  broader  culture  of
openness and trust.


HIGH PERFORMANCE AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF WORK?

797

ables  than  have  typically  been  used  in
prior research.17

Finally,  of  the  economic  AWPs,  Group
Bonus is positively and significantly corre-
lated with Belongingness, Empowerment,
Job Satisfaction, and Commitment.  But in
the  initial  (col.  2)  regressions  it  remains
significantly  associated  with  only  Empow-
erment and Commitment, while becoming
negatively associated with Workload and
Self-Esteem.  Profit-Sharing is significantly
and  positively  correlated  with  Workload
and Stressfulness, though it has only one
statistically  significant  association  in  the
initial regressions, a weak negative associa-
tion with Citizenship Behavior.  The asso-
ciations  between  Group  Bonus  and  both
Workload and Self-Esteem are difficult to
explain (possibly reflecting a causality prob-
lem), as is the negative association between
Profit Sharing and Citizenship Behavior.

When Complexity is controlled for,  some
of  the  findings  in  Table  6  are  weakened
(see column 3).  In particular, Team-Based
Work becomes statistically insignificant in
the regression for Task Involvement.  Team
Autonomy also becomes statistically insig-
nificant  in  the  regressions  for  Belong-
ingness, Task Involvement, Job Satisfaction,
Motivation,  and  Citizenship  Behavior,  re-
maining significant only in the regression
for  Commitment.    These  changes  could
reflect a tendency for team-based work and
team autonomy to be implemented where
work is already complex, although it is also
possible  that  these  practices  operate
through increased complexity.  Otherwise,
however, controlling for Complexity does
not  appear  to  substantially  alter  the  re-
sults.18

Discussion and Conclusions

The  results  suggest  that  conventional
assumptions  of  proponents  and  of  many
critics of AWPs are over-simplified.  In par-
ticular,  these  results  indicate  that  AWPs
tend to have a number of implications for
employees, but these implications appear
to  vary  depending  on  the  level  of  AWP
involvement,  the  form  of  work  organiza-
tion,  and  ultimately  the  specific  AWPs
adopted.

Relatively  moderate  levels  of  AWP  in-
volvement appear to have largely positive
implications,  as  reflected  in  increased
belongingness, empowerment, task involve-
ment, and ultimately in improved job satis-
faction,  self-esteem,  motivation,  commit-
ment,  and  organizational  citizenship  be-
havior.  Yet, with the exception of motiva-
tion and commitment, these positive impli-
cations tend to diminish and even decline
at higher levels of adoption.  This does not
appear  to  be  explained  by  increased
workload, as the level of AWP involvement
does not appear to be associated with this
variable.  It may, however, be explained by
increased stressfulness, for which there is
an association.  That is, even if high levels of
AWP  adoption  potentially  allow  for  still
greater  empowerment,  task  involvement,
and belongingness, none of these benefits
is  realized,  because  workers  are  in  effect
overwhelmed by higher stress levels.  Thus,
any initially positive implications of AWPs
diminish.

17There  is  some  literature  arguing  that  off-line
AWPs are more effective when accompanied by on-
line AWPs (for example, Appelbaum and Batt 1994;
Levine 1995).  But as discussed in fn. 9, when I tested
for interactions between on-line and off-line reforms,
I found no support for this argument.  I also reran the
regressions  on  a  subsample  consisting  only  of  re-
sponses  by  individuals  who  were  involved  in  team-
based work to at least “some extent” (N = 279; results
available on request).  There was little change in the
results.

18Analysis of a subsample excluding managers and
professionals (N = 310) did yield somewhat different

results.  First, the negative implications of Re-Engi-
neering were statistically significant in a larger num-
ber  of  regressions  (decreased  Belongingness,  Self-
Esteem, and Motivation), as were the positive implica-
tions  of  Quality  Management  (increased  Belong-
ingness and Job Satisfaction, and decreased Fatigue).
Second,  the  coefficients  for  the  individual  reforms
were weaker in a number of cases, particularly with
respect to Team Autonomy and Team Responsibility.
But overall, the pattern of relationships was the same,
even if somewhat less pronounced, and it is likely that
weaker associations reflect increased collinearity prob-
lems associated with the inclusion of all AWPs, due to
reduced sample variance and size.


798

INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

This finding is consistent with the litera-
ture  on  the  effects  of  stress  (Brief  et  al.
1981; Quick and Quick 1984).19  It is also
consistent, however, with Barker’s (1993)
finding that high levels of AWP adoption
may  engender  “concertive  control,”
through which initial improvements in the
work  experience  come  to  be  offset  by  in-
creased  peer  pressures  and  heightened
performance norms. Under the concertive
control thesis, we might expect peer pres-
sures and performance norms to be inter-
nalized and hence reflected in higher mo-
tivation and commitment on the one hand,
yet a more stressful and diminished quality
of  work  experience  on  the  other.    This
could explain the finding of no statistically
significant  diminishment  in  the  implica-
tions  of  AWP  involvement  for  motivation
and commitment despite increasingly stress-
ful  work  and  declining  or  even  negative
implications  for  empowerment,  involve-
ment, belongingness, job satisfaction, self-
esteem, and citizenship behavior.

The results addressing the form of work
organization  are  broadly  consistent  with
the  results  for  the  level  of  AWP  involve-
ment.  Although my operationalization of
these forms is rudimentary, it appears that
traditional  (that  is,  supervised)  group  or
team  work  has  positive  implications  for
employees, and that so-called lean, team,
and post-lean forms of organization associ-
ated  with  the  “high-performance”  model
may  be  inferior  to  these  groups.    As  for
AWP  involvement,  it  is  possible  that  this
latter result indicates that these forms en-
gender concertive control.  However, none
of  the  high-performance  forms  is  associ-
ated  with  either  stressfulness  or  commit-
ment,  and  only  team  organization  is
(weakly) associated with motivation.  Also
of note is the finding that although these
forms do appear to have some positive ef-
fects  when  compared  to  traditional,  indi-
vidualized forms of organization, these ef-
fects  largely  disappear  when  other  AWPs
are controlled for, suggesting that they are

19I thank an anonymous reviewer for this insight.

attributable to other AWPs that tend to be
adopted in their presence.  In contrast, the
effects  of  traditional  group  work  do  not
change.

Analysis of the implications of individual
AWPs further reinforces these general find-
ings, indicating that JIT and work re-engi-
neering, both of which are associated with
the high-performance model, tend to have
negative effects.  Team autonomy and re-
sponsibility for specific goods or services,
again commonly associated with the high-
performance  model,  also  have  largely
negative implications for employees.  In
contrast, team-based work and informa-
tion sharing have large positive implica-
tions.

The  findings  for  the  team-related  vari-
ables are especially contrary to the assump-
tions  of  high-performance  advocates  and
may  represent  the  key  to  understanding
both the findings of this paper and some of
the problems that have been identified with
AWPs in the literature.  It is possible that, in
the  absence  of  an  immediate  supervisor,
there is greater uncertainty and opportu-
nity for disagreement over how to allocate
and  perform  tasks,  increasing  individual
insecurities  and  resulting  in  intra-group
conflicts (Sinclair 1992:617–21).  In other
words, as traditionally assumed in the lead-
ership literature, it may be that “initiating
structure” generally matters.  In turn, team
responsibility may mean that output is more
closely  evaluated  and  that  members  feel
greater  pressure  to  perform,  thus  giving
rise to heightened stress levels.  This would
again  be  consistent  with  Barker’s  (1993)
finding that autonomous teams give rise to
concertive control, though it also suggests
that Barker may have conflated the effects
of  team  autonomy  with  those  of  team  re-
sponsibility.

Overall,  therefore,  the  results  suggest
that, when compared to “bad” practice as-
sociated  with  traditional  individualized
work,  the  so-called  “best”  practice  associ-
ated with high levels of AWP involvement,
with lean and autonomous team work orga-
nization,  and  with  the  provision  of  team
autonomy  and  responsibility  may  have  a
number of positive (as well as some nega-


HIGH PERFORMANCE AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF WORK?

799

tive) implications for employees.  But when
compared to what might be referred to as
“good” practice, or low to moderate levels
of AWP adoption, and especially traditional
group work organization and information
sharing, their implications tend, if anything,
to be negative.  It may be that so-called best
practice often gives rise to concertive con-
trol, under which workers are indeed sub-
ject to a “new iron cage” (to use Barker’s
adaptation of Weber’s famous metaphor).
Although such a conclusion must be con-
sidered tentative, the findings of this study
do provide some support for it.

A further possible explanation, one that
extends Barker’s analysis, is that, at higher
levels  of  AWP  adoption,  employees  may
feel  themselves  under  increased  pressure
to  exhibit  high  motivation  and  commit-
ment,  yet  may  also  become  increasingly
dissatisfied  with  the  pressures  placed  on
them and distrustful of employer motives.
Thus, the findings from this study may not
reflect reactions to group pressures so much
as they do reactions to employer-imposed
ones that may in turn come to be manifest
within groups.  In this regard, the problem
with autonomous teams may be less one of
initiating structure than of a tendency for
distrust and discontent to come to the sur-
face when employees work together with-
out  supervision,  explaining  less  favorable
evaluations  of  the  work  experience  and
possibly giving rise to intra-group conflicts.
Such  an  interpretation  calls  for  more  so-
phisticated analysis than is possible in this
paper.  However, it would be more consis-
tent  with  a  conflict-oriented,  “political
economy”  perspective  (Godard  1998,
2001c), accounting more fully for how the
institutional design of the employment re-
lation conditions the implications of AWPs.
A number of caveats are, however, called
for.    First,  it  may  be  that  the  observed
negative effects of high levels of AWP adop-
tion and of team autonomy reflect a failure
of employers to adopt complementary HRM
policies needed to ensure that workers are
able to cope with high levels of discretion
and responsibility.  Particularly important
in this respect could be an unwillingness of
employers  to  invest  in  sufficient  levels  of

training,  possibly  because  of  the  costs  of
doing  so.    Although  the  purpose  of  this
paper has been to explore what the average
effects  of  AWPs  appear  to  be  rather  than
what they can be, there is thus clearly a need
to investigate this and similar possibilities
more fully (though subsequent analysis of
the  data  from  this  study  suggested  that
training does not matter: Godard [2001a]).
There is also some possibility of omitted
variables  bias.    For  example,  workplaces
facing  a  threat  of  closure  may  be  more
likely  to  adopt  high  levels  of  AWPs.    Yet
employees may already experience stress-
ful working arrangements in these environ-
ments.    Though  this  link  should  to  some
extent  be  proxied  by  workplace  growth/
decline, as included in this study, it could
account  for  the  observed  association  be-
tween AWP involvement and stressfulness,
and possibly for the diminishing and even
declining effects of high levels of AWP in-
volvement.  It is also possible that the use of
AWPs is still spreading and high levels of
adoption are more likely to be recent, in
which case any observed negative effects at
these levels may reflect initial disruptions
and uncertainty rather than high levels of
adoption per se.

A similar possible problem involves cau-
sality.    It  is  possible  that  employers  are
more likely to introduce high levels of AWPs
where the work experience and outcomes
of  employees  are  negative  to  begin  with,
possibly  with  the  objective  of  creating  a
more  positive  environment.    If  so,  it  may
simply be that the observed negative asso-
ciations for high levels of AWP reflect their
limited  potential  for  effecting  positive
change.

Finally,  it  is  possible  that  the  implica-
tions of AWPs for workers depend on the
institutional conditions under which they
are  adopted.    In  particular,  we  would  ex-
pect  the  interests  of  workers  to  be  more
thoroughly  incorporated  into  the  imple-
mentation of this model where unions are
strong, or where workers enjoy co-decision
rights,  or  where  employers  are  free  from
short-term  performance  pressures  and
hence able to develop a longer-term per-
spective (see Godard 2001b).  Such condi-


800

INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

tions  largely  do  not  exist  at  present  in
liberal market economies such as that of
Canada (or, for that matter, the United
States and United Kingdom), but they do
exist in a number of European countries
(for example, Germany and Sweden).  It
is  possible  that  different  associations
would  be  observed  in  these  countries,
not only because employee interests are
more likely to be taken into account, but
also because trust levels are likely to be
higher.

These  and  other  possible  limitations
point to the need for further research.  But
if  taken  at  face  value,  the  results  of  this
study strongly suggest that the implications

of alternative work practices associated with
the high-performance model may be more
complex than commonly assumed, and that
what many view as “best” practice for em-
ployers  may  not  also  be  best  practice  for
workers  (if,  indeed,  it  is  even  necessarily
best for employers; see Godard 2001c).  If
so,  attempts  to  promote  the  high-perfor-
mance  model  as  a  means  of  enhancing
“equity” as well as “efficiency” may be mis-
guided, at least within the current institu-
tional  context.    For  those  genuinely  con-
cerned with quality of employment issues,
advocacy of more broad-based institutional
reforms  may  be  called  for  (see  Godard
2001b).

Appendix Table A1

Inter-correlation Matrix (Dependent Variables)

Work Experience Variables

Outcomes

Belong- Task In- Empow- Work
ingness volvement erment
load

Stress-
fulness

Fatigue

Self-

Esteem isfaction

Job Sat- Commit- Motiv-
ation

ment

Work Experience
Task Involvement
Empowerment
Workload
Stressfulness
Outcomes
Fatigue
Self-Esteem
Job Satisfaction
Commitment
Motivation
Citizenship
  Behavior

.42
.37
–.17
–.25

–.19
.25
.49
.34
.24

.42

.46
–.00
–.15

–.12
.19
.66
.39
.41

.45

–.22
–.36

–.28
.14
.43
.37
.10

.30

.55

.48
–.11
–.18
–.13
.11

–.08

.47
–.08
–.31
–.26
.10

–.09

–.18
–.27
–.09
.10

–.10

.17
.05
.14

.28

.41
.21

.37

.23

.41

.35

If r ge .056, p = .10 or less; if r ge .074, p = .05 or less; if r ge .104, p le .01 or less (two-tailed tests).


HIGH PERFORMANCE AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF WORK?

801

Appendix  Table A2

Factor Analysis:  Work Experience Variables

Variable

1

2

3

4

5

you work.

disagree with them.

you like it or not.

Belongingness a = .73
You are well-accepted by your co-workers.
When at work, you really feel like you belong.
You feel like you just don’t fit in where you work.
You feel quite isolated from others where you work.
Task Involvement a = .87
The work you do is important.
You often have a hard time caring about your work.
Much of the work you do seems like a waste of time.
The work you do is meaningful to you.
Your work gives you a real sense of who you are.
You are often bored with your job.
You get really involved in your work.
You really feel at home with yourself when doing your job.
Time often seems to pass slowly when you are doing your job.
Empowerment a = .84
What happens to you in your job is pretty much beyond your control.
There is little point trying to affect the way things are done where

You have little choice but to go along with things at work, even if you

You have little choice but to do what you are told at work, whether

It does little good to speak up about things at work.
(You can control how well you do your job.)
(If your employer wanted to cut your pay, there is not much anyone

could do.)

you work.)

(You have given up trying to affect the way things are done where

(People with new ideas are usually ignored where you work.)
(Sometimes you wonder how much difference your efforts at work

really make.)
Workload a = .85
Your job involves too much work to do everything well
You have too much to do and too little time to do it.
You spend much of you time merely trying to keep up.
(Your job does not make you work very hard.)
Stressfulness a = .69
Your job is stressful.
Some days you feel like you can’t continue any longer at your job.
In your job, you are often confronted with problems you can’t do

much about.

You have little time to think and contemplate on your job.
You have conflicting demands placed on you on your job.
(You worry about how well you do your job)
(You worry that your workplace could be closed down)

.0492
.2988
.2541
.2100

.6372
.6596
.4409
.8080
.7436
.6834
.7319
.6657
.4998

.0240

.2625

.2209

.2400
.1700

.0588
.1282
.1157
.1372

.0044
.2209
.1920
.1420
.1717
.2399
.1520
.0747
.2501

–.0468
.0769
.1082
.1229

–.0307
.0468
.1438
.0896
–.0144
–.1739
–.1149
.0660
–.2912

.7586
.7758
.7497
.5236

.2823
.2316
.1846
.1703
.0212
.0472
.0227
.2748
.0136

.5298

–.0486

.1687

.7683

.8267

.7901
.7247

.0271

.1289

.1051
.1822

.1432

.1029

.0138
.1271

–.0333
–.0099
.1133
.2447

–.0034
.0952
.3315
–.0681
–.1043
.2731
.0363
–.0278
.2895

.4252

.1463

.0500

.0475
.1399

–.0088
–.0728
.0081

–.1594
.3029

–.0079
.0828
.0159

.1130
.0878
.1635

.8005
.8551
.8280

.0526
–.0089
.1124

–.0475
.2796

.1821
.1378
–.0206

.4532
.2451

.1320
.4510
.4928

.0793
.0948

.0252
–.0130
.0763

.0949
.1174
.1145

.4337
.4841

.6742
.5014
.4894

Notes:  The factor analysis used oblique rotation.  Most items in parentheses were dropped after only 100 cases had been
collected, based on a preliminary factor analysis.  Others did not load well in the final analysis.  All bracketed items were thus
excluded from scale creation and from the factor analysis reported here.  The original expectation was for a six-factor solution,
but the items for two constructs (“meaninglessness” and “estrangement”) loaded on a single factor (factor 1) and hence are
combined for scale creation purposes and labeled “Task Involvement.”  Also, although there is overlap between the overload
and stressfulness factors (numbers 3 and 5), they still form distinct factors.  The regression results tended to confirm this,
finding somewhat different results for each of these dependent variables.


802

INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

Variable

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Appendix  Table A3

Factor Analysis:  Outcome Variables

Fatigue a = .75
You are often worn out by the end of the day.
After working, you are too tired to do things with others
When at home, all you want to do is rest.
Self Esteem a = .74
You feel you are a person of worth, at least on a equal

plane with others.

You feel you have a number of good qualities
You are able to do things as well as most people.
You have a positive attitude toward yourself.
(You feel you do not have much to be proud of.)
(At times, you think you are no good at all.)
Job Satisfaction a = .80
All in all, you like working where you do.
You are satisfied with the job you have.
If you could start over, you would not be in the job you are

in today.

You would not recommend your job to a close friend.
Commitment a = .80
You are loyal to the person who manages or is in charge of

the place where you work.

Your values and this person’s values are very similar.
You trust this person not to act against your interests.
Motivation a = .78
You always put as much effort as possible into your work.
You are highly committed to do the best job you can.
For you, a good day at work is one in which you have

performed to your utmost.

You try to work as hard as you can.
You intentionally expend a great deal of effort in doing

(You do no more than you have to at work.)
(You feel guilty if your performance is poor or you make a

your job.

mistake.)

Citizenship Behavior a = .71
You help others with their work-related problems
When possible, you volunteer to help others with their work
When at work, you always try to be courteous to others.
When at work, you try not to hurt others’ feelings
When at work, you always try to be mindful of the concerns

You take an active interest in what goes on at work.
You participate in meetings and in social events related to

(You worry about how developments at work affect others.)
(When at work, you are good at listening to others’

(When at work, you mind your own business).
(If others are having difficulties at work, that’s their problem.)
(When at work, you always try to be polite to others.)
(You tend to circumvent company rules if it serves your

of others.

work.

problems.)

interests.)

.2293
–.1701
–.0027 –.1261
.0289
–.0863

.0535
.0746
–.1406 –.0955
–.1458 –.0283

.6923
.8663
.8330

–.1136
.1344
–.0729
.0534
–.1585 –.0507

.1708
.1519
.0382
–.0003
–.0082 –.0487
.0939
.1000

.7553
.8082
.7568
.6427

.1051
–.1132 –.0586
.0476
.0337
–.0470
–.0204
.0335
.0283
–.1877 –.0162
.0633

.0670
.1646
.0534
.0107

.0790
.1347

.0586
.0289

.7278
.7717

.0910
.0710

.3197
.1384

–.0681
–.1358

.2248
.1635

.7332
.6600

.0461
–.0072

.0336
.1189

–.0632 –.0354
–.1821 –.0418

.1364
.0715
.0611

.1089
.2355
.2129

.0145
–.0772
.0002

.7731
.8032
.8467

.2677
.0620
.0804
–.0516
–.0715 –.0185

.8256
.7426

.1099
.2400

.0551
.0181

.0078
–.0856

.0806
.0422

–.0324
.1956

.5674
.1545
.8066 –.0253

.0538
.0375

.0341
.1575

–.0410
.0109

.2405
.0688

.0766
.0609

.0137
.0678

.0933
.1375
.0671

.0741
.0861

.1314
.0769

.6396 –.0708

.1351

.1775

.1392

.0596

.0500

.1312
.1601
.1912
.0550

.1549
.1780

.0595
–.0903
.0160
.0241

.0652
–.0261
.2188
.0207

.0138
.1018
.1148
.1228

.7680
–.0806
.6801
–.0925
–.0635
.1308
–.0202 –.0324

.1931
.4384

.1108
.0766

.0433
.2616

–.0209
.1103

.3145
.4870

.1000
.1768
.6938
.8416

.6670
.0416

.0364

.3816

.1153

.1505

–.0561

.5329 –.0228

Notes:  The factor analysis used oblique rotation.  Most items in parentheses were dropped after only 100 cases had been
collected, based on a preliminary factor analysis.  Others did not load well in the final analysis.  All bracketed items were thus
excluded from scale creation and from the factor analysis reported here.  The original expectation was for a six-factor solution,
but the Citizenship items loaded on two factors (6 and 7), the first including items associated with altruism and with civic virtue,
the second including items associated with courtesy.  Only the items comprising courtesy yielded an index with an acceptable
reliability score (.71).  However, this index did not perform as well as an overall index including all of the citizenship items.
Because the reliability score for the overall index was unchanged (.71), the decision was to include it in the regressions reported
in this paper.


HIGH PERFORMANCE AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF WORK?

803

REFERENCES

Adler, Paul.  1993.  “Time and Motions Regained.”
Harvard Business Review, Vol. 71 (Jan.–Feb.), pp. 97–
108.

Aiken,  Leone,  and  Stephen  West.    1991.    Multiple
Regression:    Testing  and  Interpreting  Interactions.
Newbury Park, Calif.:  Sage.

Akyeampong, Ernest B.  1997.  “A Statistical Portrait
of  the  Trade  Union  Movement.”    Perspectives  on
Labour and Income, Vol. 9, No. 4 (Winter), pp. 45–54.
____.    1998.    “The  Rise  of  Unionization  among
Women.”  Perspectives on Labour and Income, Vol. 10,
No. 4 (Winter), pp. 30–43.

Appelbaum, Eileen, Thomas Bailey, Peter Berg, and
Arne  Kalleberg.    2000.    Manufacturing  Advantage:
Why High Performance Work Systems Pay Off.  Ithaca,
N.Y.:  ILR Press (an imprint of Cornell University
Press).

Appelbaum, Eileen, and Rosemary Batt.  1994.  The
New American Workplace.  Ithaca, N.Y.:  ILR Press (an
imprint of Cornell University Press).

Babson,  Steve.    1993.    “Lean  or  Mean?    The  MIT
Model and Lean Production at Mazda.”  Labor Stud-
ies Journal, Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 3–24.

Barker, James R.  1993.  “Tightening the Iron Cage:
Concertive Control in Self-Managing Teams.”  Ad-
ministrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 38, No. 3 (Septem-
ber), pp. 408–37.

Batt,  Rosemary,  and  Eileen  Appelbaum.    1995.
“Worker Participation in Diverse Settings:  Does the
Form Affect the Outcome, and If So, Who Benefits?”
British Journal of Industrial Relations, Vol. 33, No. 3
(September), pp. 353–77.

Becker, Brian, and Barry Gerhart.  1996.  “The Impact
of Human Resource Management on Organizational
Performance:  Progress and Prospects.”  Academy of
Management  Journal,  Vol.  39,  No.  4  (August),  pp.
779–801.

Berg, Peter, Eileen Appelbaum, Thomas Bailey, and
Arne Kalleberg.  1996.  “The Performance Effects of
Modular Production in the Apparel Industry.”  In-
dustrial Relations, Vol. 35, No. 3 (July), pp. 356–74.
Berggren, Christian.  1992.  Beyond Lean Production.

Ithaca, N.Y.:  ILR Press.

Blauner, Robert.  1964.  Alienation and Freedom.  Chi-

cago:  University of Chicago Press.

Boreham, Paul, Richard Hall, and Bill Harley.  1996.
“Two  Paths  to  Prosperity.”    Work,  Employment  and
Society, Vol. 10, No. 3 (September), pp. 449–67.

Brief,  A.  P.,  R.  S.  Schuler,  and  M.  Van  Sell.    1981.

Managing Job Stress.  Boston:  Little, Brown.

Brockner,  Joel,  S.  Grover,  T.  Reed,  and  R.  DeWitt.
1992.  “Layoffs, Job Insecurity, and Survivor’s Work
Effort:    Evidence  of  an  Inverted-U  Relationship.”
Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 35, No. 2 (June),
pp. 413–25.

Brockner,  Joel,  and  Ted  Hess.    1986.    “Self-Esteem
and Task Performance in Quality Circles.”  Academy
of Management Journal, Vol. 29, No. 3 (September),
pp. 617–23.

Cappelli, Peter, and Nikolai Rogovsky.  1998.  “Em-
ployee Involvement and Organizational Citizenship:

Implications for Labor Law and Lean Production.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 51, No. 4
(July), pp. 633–53.

Cooke, William.  1989.  “Improving Productivity and
Quality  through  Collaboration.”    Industrial  Rela-
tions, Vol. 28, No. 2 (Spring), pp. 299–319.

Cotton, John L.  1993.  Employee Involvement.  Newbury

Park, Calif.:  Sage.

Cordery,  John  L.,  Walter  S.  Mueller,  and  Leigh  M.
Smith.  1991.  “Attitudinal and Behavioral Effects of
Autonomous Group Working.”  Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, Vol. 34, No. 2 (June), pp. 464–76.

Cully,  Mark,  Stephen  Woodland,  Andrew  O’Reilly,
and Gill Dix.  1999.  Britain at Work:  As Depicted by the
1998 Workplace and Employee Relations Survey.  Lon-
don:  Routledge.

Delbridge, Rick, and Peter Turnbull.  1992.  “Human
Resource  Maximization:    The  Management  of
Labour under Just-in-Time Manufacturing Systems.”
In P. Blyton and P. Turnbull, eds., Reassessing Hu-
man Resource Management.  London:  Sage.

Freeman, Richard.  2000.  “Single Peaked vs. Diversi-
fied Capitalism:  The Relation between Economic
Institutions and Outcomes.”  Working Paper 7556,
NBER.

Fucini, Joseph, and Suzy Fucini.  1990.  Working for the
Japanese:  Inside Mazda’s American Auto Plant.  New
York:  Free Press.

Ganster,  Daniel  C.,  and  Marvelline  Fusilier.    1989.
“Control in the Workplace.”  In Cary L. Cooper and
Ivan Robertson, eds.,  International Review of Indus-
trial and Organizational Psychology 1989.  Cichester:
John Wiley & Sons, pp. 235–80.

Gittleman, Maury, Michael Horrigan, and Mary Joyce.
1998.    “‘Flexible’  Workplace  Practices:    Evidence
from a Nationally Representative Survey.”  Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 52, No. 1 (October),
pp. 99–115.

Glick,  William,  G.  Douglas  Jenkins,  Jr.,  and  Nina
Gupta.    1986.    “Method  versus  Substance:    How
Strong Are Underlying Relationships between Job
Characteristics and Attitudinal Outcomes?”  Acad-
emy of Management Journal, Vol. 29, No. 3 (Septem-
ber), pp. 441–64.

Godard, John.  1998.  “An Organizational Theory of
Variation in the Management of Labor.”  In David
Lewin and Bruce Kaufman, eds., Advances in Indus-
trial and Labor Relations, Vol. 8.  Greenwich, Conn.:
JAI Press, pp. 25–66.

Godard, John.  2001a.  “When Do Alternative Work
Practices Have Positive Inplications for Workers?”
Working paper, University of Manitoba.

____.  2001b.  “Institutional Environments, Employer
Practices, and the State in Liberal Market Econo-
mies.”  Industrial Relations, forthcoming.

____.  2001c.  “Beyond the High Performance Para-
digm?  An Analysis of Variation in Canadian Mana-
gerial Perceptions of the Effectiveness of Workplace
Reforms.”  British Journal of Industrial Relations, Vol.
39, No. 1 (March), pp. 25–52.

Godard, John, and John Delaney.  2000.  “Reflections


804

INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

on  the  ‘High  Performance’  Paradigm’s  Implica-
tions for Industrial Relations as a Field.”  Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 53, No. 3 (April), pp.
482–502.

Graham,  Laurie.    1993.    “Inside  a  Japanese  Trans-
plant:  A Critical Perspective.”  Work and Occupations,
Vol. 20, No. 2 (May), pp. 174–93.

Griffin, Ricky W.  1991.  “Effects of Work Redesign on
Employee Perceptions, Attitudes, and Behaviors:  A
Long Term Investigation.”  Academy of Management
Journal, Vol. 34, No. 2 (June), pp. 425–35.

Hammer,  Michael.    1990.    “Re-Engineering  Work.”
Harvard Business Review, Vol. 68, No. 4 (July), pp.
104–13.

Havlovic, Stephen J.  1991.  “Quality of Working Life
and Human Resource Outcomes.”  Industrial Rela-
tions, Vol. 30, No. 3 (Fall), pp. 469–79.

Hodson,  Randy.    1996.    “Dignity  in  the  Workplace
under Participative Management:  Alienation and
Freedom  Revisited.”    American  Sociological  Review,
Vol. 61, No. 4 (October), pp. 719–38.

Hyman, Jeff, and Bob Mason.  1995.  Managing Em-
ployee Involvement and Participation.  London:  Sage.
Ichniowski, Casey, Thomas A. Kochan, David Levine,
Craig  Olsen,  and  George  Strauss.    1996.    “What
Works at Work:  Overview and Assessment.”  Indus-
trial Relations, Vol. 35, No. 3 (July), pp. 356–74.

Ichniowski,  Casey,  Kathryn  Shaw,  and  Giovanni
Prennushi.  1997.  “The Effects of Human Resource
Management Practices on Productivity:  A Study of
Steel  Finishing  Lines.”    American  Economic  Review,
Vol. 87, No. 3 (June), pp. 291–313.

Institute for Social Research.  1975.  Michigan Organi-
zational Assessment Package.  Ann Arbor, Mich.:  Sur-
vey Research Center.

Jaccard, James, Robert Turrisi, and Choi Wan.  1990.
Interaction  Effects  in  Multiple  Regression.    Newbury
Park, Calif.:  Sage.

Kalleberg,  Arne,  David  Knoke,  Peter  Marsden,  and
Joe Spaeth.  1996.  Organizations in America.  Thou-
sand Oaks, Calif.:  Sage.

Kemp,  Nigel  J.,  Toby  D.  Wall,  Chris  W.  Clegg,  and
John L. Cordery.  1983.  “Autonomous Work Groups
in a Greenfield Site.”  Journal of Occupational Psychol-
ogy, Vol. 56, No. 2, pp. 271–88.

Kochan, Thomas A.  “On the Paradigm Guiding In-
dustrial Relations Theory and Research:  Comment
on John Godard and John T. Delaney, ‘Reflections
on  the  “High  Performance”  Paradigm’s  Implica-
tions for Industrial Relations as a Field.’”  Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 53, No. 4 (July), pp.
704–11.

Kochan, Thomas A., and Paul Osterman.  1994.  The
Mutual Gains Enterprise.  Boston:  Harvard Business
School Press.

Kohn, Melvin, and Carmi Schooler.  1983.  Work and
Personality:  An Inquiry into the Impact of Social Strati-
fication.  Norwood, N.J.:  Ablex.

Landsbergis,  Paul,  Janet  Cahill,  and  Peter  Schnall.
1999.  “The Impact of Lean Production and Related
New  Systems  of  Work  Organization  on  Worker
Health.”    Journal  of  Occupational  Health  Psychology,
Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 108–30.

Lavrakas,  Paul  J.    1993.    Telephone  Survey  Methods.

Newbury Park, Calif.:  Sage.

Levine, David.  1995.  Reinventing the Workplace.  Wash-

ington, D.C.:  Brookings Institution.

Lewchuk, Wayne, and David Robertson.  1997.  “Pro-
duction without Empowerment:  Work Reorganiza-
tion from the Perspective of Motor Vehicle Work-
ers.”  Capital and Class, Vol. 63, pp. 37–63.

Locke, Edwin, Maryam Alavi, and John Wagner III.
1997.  “Participation in Decision Making:  An Infor-
mation  Exchange  Perspective.”    In  G.  Ferris,  ed.,
Research  in  Personnel  and  Human  Resource  Manage-
ment, Vol. 15.  Greenwich, Conn:  JAI Press, pp. 293–
332.

Martin, Jack M., and Paul Roman.  1996.  “Job Satisfac-
tion,  Job  Reward  Characteristics,  and  Employees’
Problem Drinking Behavior.”  Work and Occupations,
Vol. 23, No. 1 (February), pp. 4–25.

Marx, Karl.  1959 [1844].  Economic and Philosophical
Manuscripts of 1844.  Moscow:  Progress Publishers.
Matthews, John.  1994.  Catching the Wave:  Workplace

Reform in Australia.  Ithaca, N.Y.:  ILR Press.

Miller,  Katherine  I.,  and  Peter  R.  Monge.    1986.
“Participation,  Satisfaction,  and  Productivity:    A
Meta-Analytic Review.”  Academy of Management Re-
view, Vol. 29, No. 4 (December), pp. 727–53.

Mowday,  Richard  T.,  Lyman  Porter,  and  Richard
Steers.  1982.  Employee-Organization Linkages:  The
Psychology of Commitment, Absenteeism, and Turnover.
New York:  Academic Press.

Niehoff, Brian, and Robert Moorman.  1993.  “Justice
as a Mediator of the Relationship between Methods
of Monitoring and Organizational Citizenship Be-
havior.”  Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 36, No.
3 (June), pp. 527–56.

Nunnally, Jum.  1967.  Psychometric Theory.  New York:

Irwin.

Oldham,  Greg  R.,  and  J.  Richard  Hackman.    1980.

Work Redesign.  Redding, Mass.:  Addison-Wesley.

Osterman, Paul.  1994.  “How Common Is Workplace
Transformation and Who Adopts It?”  Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, Vol. 47, No. 2 (January), pp.
173–88.

____.    2000.    “Work  Reorganization  in  an  Era  of
Restructuring:  Trends in Diffusion and Effects on
Employee Welfare.”  Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, Vol. 53, No. 2 (January), pp. 179–96.

O’Toole, James, et al.  1974.  Work in America:  Report
of  the  Special  Task  Force  to  the  Secretary  of  Health,
Education,  and  Welfare.    Cambridge,  Mass.:    MIT
Press.

Parker, Mike, and Jane Slaughter.  1995.  “Unions and
Management by Stress.”  In Steve Babson, ed., Lean
Work:  Empowerment and Exploitation in the Global Auto
Industry.  Detroit:  Wayne State University Press.

Pfeffer, Jeffrey.  1998.  The Human Equation.  Boston:

Harvard University Press.

Podsakoff, Philip M., Scott B. McKenzie, Robert H.
Moorman, and Robert Fetter.  1990.  “Transforma-
tional  Leadership  Behaviors  and  Their  Effects  on
Followers’ Trust in Leader, Satisfaction, and Orga-
nizational Citizenship Behaviors.”  Leadership Quar-
terly, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 107–42.


HIGH PERFORMANCE AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF WORK?

805

Quick, James C., and Jonathan D. Quick.  1984.  Orga-
nizational Stress and Preventative Management.  New
York:  McGraw-Hill.

Rinehart, James, Chris Huxley, and David Robertson.
1997.  Just Another Car Factory?  Lean Production and
Its Discontents.  Ithaca, N.Y.:  ILR Press (an imprint of
Cornell University Press).

Rosenberg,  Morris,  Carmi  Schooler,  and  Carrie
Schoenbach.    1989.    “Self-Esteem  and  Adolescent
Problems.”  American Sociological Review, Vol. 54, No.
6 (December), pp. 1004–18.

Ross, Catherine, and Marylyn Wright.  1998.  “Women’s
Work, Men’s Work, and the Sense of Control.”  Work
and Occupations, Vol. 25, No. 3 (August), pp. 333–
55.

Seeman, Melvin.  1959.  “On the Meaning of Alien-
ation.”  American Sociological Review, Vol. 24 (Decem-
ber), pp. 783–91.

____.    1967.    “On  the  Personal  Consequences  of
Alienation  in  Work.”    American  Sociological  Review,
Vol. 32 (April), pp. 273–85.

Shaiken,  Harley,  Steven  Lopez,  and  Isaac  Mankita.
1997.    “Two  Routes  to  Team  Production:    Saturn
and Chrysler Compared.”  Industrial Relations, Vol.
36, No. 1 (January), pp. 17–46.

Sinclair,  Amanda.    1992.    “The  Tyranny  of  Team
Ideology.”  Organization Studies, Vol. 13, No. 4, pp.
611–26.

Taplin, Ian.  1996.  “Rethinking Flexibility:  The Case
of the Apparel Industry.”  Review of Social Economy,
Vol. 54, No. 2 (Summer), pp. 191–220.

Tesluk, Paul E., and Robert J. Vance.  1996.  “Em-
ployee  Reactions  to  Working  in  High  Involve-

ment  Contexts.”    Paper  presented  at  the  1996
Annual Meeting of the Academy of Management,
Cincinnati.

Turnbull, Peter J.  1988.  “The Limits to Japanization—
Just-in-Time, Labour Relations, and the U.K. Auto
Industry.”    New  Technology,  Work  and  Employment,
Vol. 3, pp. 7–20.

Van  Dyne,  Linn,  Jill  W.  Graham,  and  Richard
Dienesch.  1994.  “Organizational Citizenship Be-
havior:  Construct Redefinition, Measurement, and
Validation.”  Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 37,
No. 4 (August), pp. 765–802.

Wagner, John A.  1994.  “Participation’s Effects on
Performance and Satisfaction:  A Reconsideration
of  the  Evidence.”    Academy  of  Management  Review,
Vol. 19, No. 2 (April), pp. 312–30.

Wall, Toby D., Nigel J. Kemp, Paul R. Jackson, and
Chris W. Clegg.  1986.  “Outcomes of Autonomous
Workgroups:    A  Long  Term  Field  Experiment.”
Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 29, No. 2 (June),
pp. 280–304.

Wells, Donald.  1993.  “Are Strong Unions Compat-
ible with the New Human Resource Management?”
Relations Industrielles, Vol. 48, No. 1 (Winter), pp.
56–85.

Wood, Stephen.  1999.  “Human Resource Manage-
ment  and  Performance.”    International  Journal  of
Management Reviews, Vol. 1, No. 4 (December), pp.
367–413.

Woodward, Joan.  1965.  Industrial Organization:  Theory

and Practice.  Oxford:  Oxford University Press.

Zuboff,  Shoshanna.    1988.    In  the  Age  of  the  Smart

Machine.  New York:  Basic Books.

