 
 
Is High Employee Turnover Really Harmful? An Empirical Test Using Company Records
Author(s): Arie C. Glebbeek and  Erik H. Bax
Source: The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 47, No. 2 (Apr., 2004), pp. 277-286
Published by: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/20159578
Accessed: 02-08-2017 22:55 UTC
 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/20159578?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms

Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access
to The Academy of Management Journal

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:55:23 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 - Academy of Management Journal
 2004, Vol. 47, No. 2, 277-286.

 IS HIGH EMPLOYEE TURNOVER REALLY HARMFUL?
 AN EMPIRICAL TEST USING COMPANY RECORDS

 ARIE C. GLEBBEEK

 ERIK H. BAX

 University of Groningen

 We tested the hypothesis that employee turnover and firm performance have an
 inverted U-shaped relationship: overly high or low turnover is harmful. Our analysis
 was based on economic performance data from 110 offices of a temporary employment
 agency. These offices had high variation in turnover but were otherwise similar,
 allowing control for important intervening variables. Regression analysis revealed a
 curvilinear relationship; high turnover was harmful, but the inverted U-shape was not
 observed with certainty.

 We1 are not the first to conclude that a remark
 able imbalance exists in the literature on employee
 turnover. While much has been written about the
 determinants of turnover, little has been published
 about its effects. The research literature is domi
 nated by analyses in which turnover is treated as
 the dependent variable (e.g., Griffeth & Horn, 1995;
 Lee & Mowday, 1987; Morrow, McElroy, Laczniak,
 & Fenton, 1999). In general, researchers have set
 out to define factors that predict some empirical
 measurement of actual turnover, or they have used
 an indicator such as individuals' intentions to
 leave a job, or both (Mitchell, Holtom, Lee, Sablyn
 ski, & Erez, 2001).

 Studies that treat employee turnover as an inde
 pendent variable are relatively scarce. This imbal
 ance in the research on employee turnover was
 noted as' early as 1982, when Mobley wrote that
 "relative to the causes of turnover, consequences
 have been underemphasized" (Mobley, 1982: 31).
 In 1980, Staw explicitly pointed out the potential
 danger of a research practice that concentrates on
 the causes of employee turnover while neglecting
 its effects: such research is based on the assump
 tion that turnover is an important organizational
 problem and should be dealt with accordingly.
 Hence, potential positive effects for organizations
 are overlooked (Staw, 1980). Research on turnover
 has not really changed direction since then. In
 1989, Mueller and Price again pleaded for research
 into the consequences of turnover rather than into

 The authors thank Germaine van Bree, Hans Ooteman,

 and Raimond L. Schikhof for their assistance in collect
 ing data, and Peter van der Meer and Eric Molleman for
 their critical remarks on drafts of this work. Further, we
 want to thank the editor and three anonymous reviewers
 for their very clear and helpful comments.

 277

 its determinants. Nevertheless, in the Human Re
 source Management Review's 1999 special issue on
 employee turnover, all papers treated turnover as a
 dependent variable and not as an independent one.
 "While thousands of studies have investigated why
 employees choose to leave their jobs, very little
 research has directly examined the organizational
 consequences associated with voluntary employee
 turnover/' one of the authors observed (Williams,
 1999: 549). In another journal, we have read this:
 "While there is an immense literature covering the
 subject of personnel turnover, there is a paucity of
 writing on the impact of turnover on the organiza
 tion" (Hutchinson, Villalobos, & Beruvides, 1997:
 3202). It is significant that neither of these articles
 mentions even one relevant title.

 Even Griffeth, Horn, and Gaertner's (2000) meta
 analysis of the domain, which they described as "a
 final review of turnover research conducted in the
 20th century" (2000: 463), was explicitly limited to
 the causes of turnover, thereby completely neglect
 ing its effects. We agree with Hutchinson and his
 colleagues that "this dearth of studies on the im
 pact of turnover is especially surprising, since it is
 presumably the assumed impact of turnover on or
 ganizational effectiveness which has prompted so
 much turnover research in the first place"
 (Hutchinson et al., 1997: 3203).
 We have found only three recent studies that
 report on the effects of turnover. In all these cases,
 the topic is treated more or less as a side issue. The
 three studies yield evidence that suggests a nega
 tive effect of employee turnover on organizational
 performance, but the effects are small (Huselid,
 1995), not significant (Koys, 2001) or "preliminary"
 (Baron, Hannan, & Burton, 2001), resulting from the
 fact that the research design was not developed
 with this specific issue in mind. Therefore, impor
 tant control variables such as absenteeism could

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:55:23 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 278 Academy of Management Journal April

 not be considered. Furthermore, it remains uncer
 tain whether the effects of turnover were linear or
 only manifest beyond a certain level.

 One must therefore conclude that there seems to
 be no tradition of empirical research into the effects
 of employee turnover. The reason for this omission
 is probably twofold: first, companies are often un
 willing to provide the necessary data, and second,
 when data are available, they do not enable re
 searchers to control for spurious relationships. In
 the next section, we will explain that, as an unfor
 tunate consequence of all this, a sound theoretical
 model concerning the effects of employee turnover
 has remained untested. As a result, it has gone
 largely unnoticed in subsequent turnover research.
 In this study, we tested that theoretical model. As
 this model deviates from the assumptions common
 in turnover research, this test should also make a
 substantial contribution to the existing knowledge
 on turnover effects.

 THEORETICAL BACKGROUND AND

 HYPOTHESES

 Much research on the causes of turnover has
 been inspired by the thought that turnover is costly
 to firms and should therefore be prevented if pos
 sible. This assumption was popular in the consult
 ants' literature of the 1990s (e.g., Herman, 1997;
 White, 1995). In the theoretical literature, a more
 balanced view on turnover has been upheld, ac
 cording to which turnover may actually yield ben
 efits (e.g., Staw, 1980). This view has led to the
 well-known proposal that firms and researchers
 distinguish "functional" from "dysfunctional"
 turnover (Dalton, Krackhardt, & Porter, 1981). In
 the aggregate, these ideas suggest that a firm's turn
 over level can be too high or too low.

 This insight was expressed 20 years ago by Abel
 son and Baysinger (1984), in their "optimal turn
 over" model, which can still be regarded as the
 standard theoretical model for inferring the conse
 quences of turnover. Yet their model is not often
 applied, and it has left few traces in the empirical
 literature on turnover. The question, of course, is
 why this model has had so little impact.

 The starting point for Abelson and Baysinger
 (1984) is the fact that many companies and re
 searchers admit that turnover is not always dys
 functional. They do, however, dismiss as inade
 quate the most common solution of distinguishing
 between valuable and expendable employees (im
 plying that turnover should only be prevented for
 the former), as companies do not even retain valu
 able employees at all costs. Apart from higher
 wages and fringe benefits, a number of other expen

 ditures are inherent in tempting an employee to
 stay (pleasant working conditions, high job auton
 omy, flexible working hours, and so forth). There
 fore, a firm has to find a balance between the costs
 of turnover and the costs of avoiding it. As these
 turnover and retention costs are opposing forces,
 simple economic reasoning tells us that the rela
 tionship between employee turnover and the firm
 economic performance has to be an inverted U
 shaped curve. Figure 2 of the article by Abelson
 and Baysinger (1984) is a graph of this relationship.
 Performance is placed on the Y-axis, and the rate of
 turnover, on the X-axis. On the left side of the
 figure, the curve is upward sloping (representing a
 positive relation between turnover and perfor
 mance), and on the right, the curve is downward
 sloping (representing a negative relation).

 This theory implies that, for every company,

 there is an optimal turnover rate, which can be
 defined as "the rate that minimizes the sum of the
 costs of turnover plus the costs associated with
 reducing it" (Abelson & Baysinger, 1984: 333). At
 the same time, however, the theory implies that the
 optimal turnover rate is not the same for all organ
 izations. "The optimal turnover rate for different
 organizations is likely to vary according to differ
 ences in circumstances that influence the balance
 point between retention and turnover costs. Be
 cause this is peculiar to individual organizations,
 there probably is no general benchmark for the
 optimal, nonzero rate of turnover" (Abelson &
 Baysinger, 1984: 335, emphasis added).

 How then can an organization find out where its
 optimal turnover rate lies or?what is perhaps more
 relevant to everyday practice?on which side of the
 curve the organization finds itself? At this point,
 Abelson and Baysinger's article follows a course
 that, we believe, may explain the lack of impact it
 has had. Instead of offering the promised guide
 lines for "on-site evaluation of whether or not ob
 served turnover rates are optimal" (Abelson &
 Baysinger, 1984: 332), the authors ask their readers
 to perform an analysis that would discourage any
 human resource manager.

 The basis of this approach is a conceptual model
 that shows how individual, organizational, and en
 vironmental factors all influence the "individually
 perceived costs and benefits of quitting or staying."
 These costs in turn lead to an "individual quit
 propensity" that, together with the number of em
 ployees, produces the "baseline aggregate organiza
 tional turnover rate." Somehow, the human re
 source managers of an organization have to acquire
 a notion of this baseline rate and then estimate the
 turnover and retention costs that would support a
 policy aimed at the reduction of this baseline. This

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:55:23 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 2004 Glebbeek and Bax 279

 implies that human resource managers have to fa
 miliarize themselves with the determinants of turn
 over before they can estimate its effects.

 Learning these determinants would require no
 less than a massive research program. Even the "not
 exhaustive" list of possibly relevant factors that
 Abelson and Baysinger present (for instance, eco
 nomic conditions, skill levels, types of rewards de
 sired, staffing strategies, housing prices, local pub
 lic services, medical facilities, and so forth) is very
 long. "All of these attributes may influence (1) quit
 propensities and turnover rates and/or (2) the costs
 of turnover and retention for any given level of
 turnover.. . . Thus, it is important for future re
 search to examine which of these numerous vari
 ables influence aggregate optimal organizational
 turnover rates and the extent of this influence"
 (Abelson & Baysinger, 1984: 339). Only a mammoth
 alliance of managers and researchers could accom
 plish such a task.

 Even for academic researchers, it would be diffi

 cult if not impossible to identify a level of optimal
 turnover with the help of this method. Gigantic
 quantities of data would be needed to put all the
 necessary control variables in place. It is with good
 reason that Abelson and Baysinger proposed limit
 ing these endless variations by performing the nec
 essary analyses for a series of similar companies
 under similar conditions. For example, all hospi
 tals in a particular region could provide the objects
 of study. For this population, the relationship be
 tween employee characteristics, organizational fac
 tors, and other independent variables on the one
 hand and turnover rates on the other would have to
 be established. This process would yield regression
 weights that could subsequently be combined with
 the specific characteristics of a specific organiza
 tion. An estimate of the baseline aggregate turnover
 rate ofthat organization could then be obtained. We
 propose calling this procedure multivariate bench
 marking.

 Even with this less elaborate version, it might
 prove impossible to find enough organizations in
 sufficiently comparable circumstances to extract an
 externally validated turnover criterion. Further
 more, the empirically derived coefficients might
 soon be outdated, as the relevant relationships
 change over time. As Baysinger and Abelson them
 selves admitted, local and cyclical economic fluc
 tuations strongly influence the propensity of em
 ployees to quit. Finally, it is likely that interactions
 between variables would make a linear transforma
 tion of a regression coefficient to a specific organi
 zation impossible. In short, we have to conclude
 that Abelson and Baysinger (1984) have set re
 searchers and practitioners an impossible task by

 linking the application of their model to data that
 have to be obtained outside a given company itself.
 It is our belief that this is the main reason why
 this elegant and plausible model has not swept the
 field. The authors rightly stated that once the no
 tion of an optimal rate of turnover is widely ac
 cepted, "research into turnover should capture this
 possibility in its premises'' (Abelson & Baysinger,
 1984: 332, emphasis added). However, as our liter
 ature review has already revealed, the reverse
 seems to be true. "Although recognizing that each
 firm may have an optimal rate of turnover [Abelson
 & Baysinger, 1984], in this study I assumed that low
 rates of turnover are preferred to high rates,"
 Huselid (1995: 65) wrote?thus formulating what
 might be called the "conventional assumption of
 turnover research."

 The objective of our study was twofold. Firstly,
 we sought to demonstrate that Abelson and
 Baysinger's theory on the effects of turnover is
 essentially correct. Our central hypothesis is
 therefore:

 Hypothesis 1. The overall relationship between
 employee turnover and firm performance has
 an inverted U-shape.
 Secondly, we intend to demonstrate that the
 analysis concerned can be performed with intraov
 ganizational data?that is, company records. As
 suming these two goals are met, this article should
 provide a practical guideline for managers who
 wish to find out for themselves on which side of the
 optimal turnover curve their firm lies.

 METHODS

 It is not easy to empirically test Abelson and
 Baysinger's curve. To do that, one would need data
 from different firms or departments with different
 turnover rates (or, alternatively, data from one firm
 or department taken at different times). However,
 in these situations the relationship between turn
 over and performance is usually burdened with so
 many other differences between the organizations
 that the underlying curve easily becomes obscured.
 Normally, it is impossible to control for all these
 differences statistically. Besides, when control
 variables exceed a certain number, there is a risk of
 arbitrariness in the models. By some good fortune,
 we obtained a data set that was almost ideally
 suited for our purpose.

 Data

 Our data originate from a temporary job agency
 that has offices spread throughout The Nether

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:55:23 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 280 Academy of Management Journal April

 lands. The company functions in a highly compet
 itive and dynamic segment of the private service
 sector. Temping is a major business in The Nether
 lands; the total number of temp jobs equaled 3.5
 percent of Dutch employment in 1996. The vast
 increase of flexible labor, in combination with a
 general, rapid growth of employment, has been de
 scribed as the "Dutch miracle" of the labor market.

 Although the profits of the firm we studied
 largely depended on the turnover in other organi
 zations, the firm itself benefited by having a loyal
 and experienced staff. The subject of our study was
 this staff, comprising intermediaries, supervisors,
 office managers, and support staff. In the period to
 which our data refer, 1995-98, the agency's staff
 grew from 667 to 1,894 employees. (In the same
 period, the agency's average volume of daily work
 ing temp employees increased from 18,500 to
 39,000.) Our units of observation were those offices
 active during the whole period 1995-98; we omit
 ted from the analysis about 100 offices that began
 activity in this period and 2 offices that ceased
 activity. We also omitted the data of one office with
 a turnover percentage of zero, as we considered it
 lent an artificial bias: the office was primarily ac
 tive in an area dominated by seasonal employment,
 and employees from other offices were temporarily
 relocated there. A total of 110 offices were included
 in the analysis.

 The offices studied varied highly in staff turn
 over but were similar in product and operational
 management. In fact, the firm consisted of nearly
 identical units that provided an identical product.
 Consequently, we kept constant a number of factors
 potentially affecting turnover effects, including
 skill composition, firm-specific human capital, and
 learning curves. Because of the strong similarities
 between the offices, a unique opportunity to test
 the effects of employee turnover on office perfor
 mance presented itself. If the Abelson and Baysinger
 curve does exist, it should manifest itself here.

 The agency's management was convinced that
 the firm was on the right-hand side of the curve.
 Turnover was indeed an issue. After being at an
 average of 16 percent throughout 1995-97, it had
 risen to 18 percent in 1998. In that year, a quarter of
 all offices had turnover of more than 25 percent,
 and some had more than 40 percent. In the com
 pany's 1999 Plan of Operations, top management
 complained that "a turnover rate too high jeopar
 dizes the quality of service and costs a lot of
 money." Its target for 1999 was a decrease in turn
 over of one-third.
 We used several data sources, but all were offi
 cial firm statistical records. Data on the financial
 performance of the offices were taken from the

 central accounts of the firm's headquarters. Data on
 the number of employees, absenteeism, and turn
 over came from the company's automated person
 nel files. Of course, our use of firm records did not
 completely guarantee the reliability of the data, but
 the principle that unreliability is generally random
 and therefore suppresses existing relationships ap
 plied here. There was no basis for believing that a
 systematic bias in the data could artificially pro
 duce the relationship we meant to test.

 Measures

 Turnover. We measured the turnover rate of an
 office in a conventional way, using the formula
 number of leavers during year/average number of
 workers during same year. Although other formulas
 are conceivable (cf. Mobley, 1982), this one "is in
 widespread use and offers advantages of clarity and
 simplicity of calculations" (Wild & Dawson, 1972:
 3). In this measure "worker" is defined as a person
 and not as a full-time equivalent (FTE). To obtain
 the average number of office staff employed per
 office per year, we measured on three dates, Janu
 ary 1, July 1, and December 31, and divided the
 sum total by three. District managers, supporting
 staff at the district level, and all personnel not
 engaged in operational functions were excluded
 from the analyses and from the turnover figures.

 Performance. Since the bulk of the potential
 costs and benefits of turnover are indirect (Sailors &
 Sylvestre, 1994), it is advisable to take the total
 economic performance of an office as a measure of
 the effects of turnover (Staw, 1980). However, this
 dependent variable of our study is more difficult to
 grasp than the independent one. Temp agencies
 usually measure their performance in three differ
 ent ways. The first is the number of temp hours
 "sold" by an office. The second is the annual sales
 made by an office: the total number of temp hours
 multiplied by the price per hour. As with the first
 measure, one can calculate sales per full-time
 equivalent and use the result to compare one office
 with another. However, this procedure does not
 give insight into profitability: even if an office pro
 duces below the break-even point, sales may be
 impressive. The third measure, the gross result of
 an office, provides the desired insight into profit
 ability because it equals sales (second measure)
 minus the direct wage costs of the temp workers
 involved. However, it does not include other im
 portant costs, such as office staff wages and over
 head. This is unfortunate, as the wage costs of
 the office staff are directly related to the level of
 turnover.

 In order to solve these problems, we developed a

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:55:23 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 2004 Glebbeek and Bax 281

 fourth measure, the net result per office. This mea
 sure was made by taking the gross result per office
 and subtracting the wage costs of the office staff.
 For a complete picture of an office's contribution to
 the firm's profit, overhead costs made for office
 space and publicity might also be subtracted from
 the results. We did not do this, as the office staff
 could not influence the greater part of these costs
 and, consequently, these costs had no clear rela
 tionship to performance in an office. However, one
 could well argue that turnover-related costs such as
 those for recruitment and selection would now be
 obscured by the label "overheads." Given the struc
 ture of the data available, these costs could not be
 specified separately. Consequently, because the re
 sults of the offices with a relatively high level of
 recruitment and selection activities would be esti
 mated as too positive, any potential bias resulting
 from this procedure would flatten out the right
 hand side of the inverted U-shaped curve, thus
 weakening the hypothesized relationship (that is,
 the bias is conservative). Therefore, although our
 measure was not perfect, it suited our purpose,
 especially as it embraced all the "hidden costs" of
 turnover that may be regarded as being crucial to
 the research (Sailors & Sylvestre, 1994).

 The correlations between these four measures

 and the turnover rates of the offices show the rele
 vance of the choice for a particular performance
 measure. These correlations are -.45, -.42, -.39,
 and -.23, respectively. It is notably the net result
 (-.23) that differs. Its relation to turnover is con
 siderably weaker than is the case for the other three
 performance measures. This observation is in line
 with the arguments presented above. More than in
 the other measures, in the net result the positive
 effects of turnover, such as economizing on costs,
 are expressed. Consequently, if the management of
 our temp agency were to estimate the effects of
 turnover using the three traditional measures, the
 estimate of its disadvantages would be too high.

 Performance or change in performance. An
 other choice to be made concerned the question of
 whether the effect of turnover manifests itself in
 level of performance or in change in performance.
 The measures described above all relate to the av
 erage results for an office over a given time period.
 Differences in performance caused by factors in the
 past and not caught by control variables might con
 tinue to affect the dependent variable and thus the
 relationships at stake. For this reason, some re
 searchers consider a change in performance to be
 the preferred criterion. Thus, Baron and coauthors
 (2001: 1003-1007) analyzed the rise in sales of
 Silicon Valley firms by taking the sales of the first
 year of the period of research as a predictor for the

 sales in the last year of the period. This is an ade
 quate way of modeling change in performance. All
 the variance in the dependent variable that already
 existed in the first year is captured by the first-year
 variable, so the remaining variance must be the
 result of ensuing achievements. An additional ad
 vantage of this procedure is that it automatically
 corrects for differences between the offices that
 show up in past performance.
 We did not have a preference for one particular
 dependent variable. Rather, it was our view that the
 hypothesized effect of turnover, if robust, would
 appear in both. In order to test this robustness, we
 analyzed the data in both ways. Table 2 presents
 the results of analyses in which the average level of
 net result per office was the dependent variable;
 Table 3 presents results in which we estimated the
 change in results using Baron et al.'s (2001)
 method. In the latter case, to avoid contamination,
 we used the average result per office over the last
 three years of the period as the dependent variable.
 Causality. This important issue was the subject
 of a preliminary analysis. An obvious objection to
 the relationship presented by us is that it is not
 turnover that causes performance, but performance
 that causes turnover. This problem of causal inter
 pretation is endemic to cross-sectional analysis and
 can only be solved by presenting longitudinal data.
 Following Koys's (2001) approach, we used the fact
 that we had data covering several years and con
 ducted two "mirrored" analyses, one in which
 turnover preceded performance and one in which it
 followed performance. Like Koys, we employed
 cross-lagged regression analysis. We split the total
 four-year period into two parts of two years each. If
 the reversed-causality theory held, 1997-98 turn
 over should have been more strongly related to
 1995-96 performance than the other way around.
 The outcomes clearly show that this was not the
 case. Regression tables cannot be presented be
 cause of space limitations, but the results can be
 summarized by the correlations. When turnover
 rates preceded the four performance measures in
 time, the correlations were -.34, -.35, -.34, -.15,
 respectively. When this sequence was reversed, the
 correlations dropped to -.02, -.03, -.01, -.03. We
 therefore concluded that the performance of the
 offices could indeed be seen as being influenced by
 turnover and not as the cause of turnover.

 Time lag. It may take some time before a firm's
 performance reflects the effects of turnover. How
 ever, as there is no compelling theoretical argument
 with respect to the term within which these effects
 should manifest themselves (almost immediately,
 after a year, or after two years?), there is no a priori
 reason for preferring an analysis with time lag over

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:55:23 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 282 Academy of Management Journal April

 an analysis without time lag. Therefore, we per
 formed both. If the curvilinear effect were robust, it
 would show in both analyses. In the tables, the
 panel labeled "A" gives the cross-sectional results
 (over the whole four-year period), and "B" gives the
 lagged results based on the division into two peri
 ods mentioned above.

 Control Variables

 If, as we believe, the Abelson and Baysinger
 curve is fundamental, its appearance should not be
 dependent on extremely complex models with a
 range of control variables. Few theoretically con
 ceivable control variables are to be found in daily
 practice, and requiring them would have greatly
 reduced the practical value of our approach. We
 wanted our analysis to be as straightforward as
 possible, but three control variables remained in
 evitable.

 Absenteeism. Turnover and absenteeism owing
 to sickness may be related if they are caused by a
 common factor, such as high work pressure or bad
 human relations, thereby obscuring the fact that
 any negative effects are caused entirely by absen
 teeism and not by turnover (cf. Morrow et al.,
 1999). Therefore, it is difficult but crucial to control
 for absenteeism in an analysis of the effects of turn
 over. The personnel files provided a percentage
 based on the total number of calendar days lost to
 sickness per year (corrected for part-time contracts;
 pregnancy and maternity leaves were excluded).

 Age. Younger people are more inclined to leave
 jobs than older employees, and wages and salaries
 (and thus employee costs) are generally age-related.
 Controlling for the average age of the office staff
 was therefore necessary for avoiding artificial
 effects.

 Region. As they do elsewhere, economic struc
 tures and performance vary in different parts of The
 Netherlands. These economic differences affected
 the results of the offices studied, especially as the
 temp business is strongly dependent on the nature
 and volume of economic activity in its region. Also,
 the level of turnover will be linked to the state of a
 regional labor market. The Netherlands is com
 monly seen as having an economic center (the
 Randstad), a middle region, and an economic pe
 riphery. In terms of this conventional regional clas
 sification, 43 percent of the offices we studied were
 located in the economic center, 39 percent were in
 the middle area, and 18 percent were in the periph
 ery. As expected, the data showed that the average
 results of the offices varied according to the eco
 nomic strength of their respective regions (net re
 sults in the periphery were only 72 percent of the
 average), and turnover was higher in the tight labor
 market of the Randstad (18.5 percent as opposed to
 16.2 percent on average). Therefore, a regional clas
 sification was included as a control variable in the
 analysis.

 RESULTS

 Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics of the
 variables that were included in the analysis. In the
 table, one can observe negative correlations be
 tween our performance measures and the turnover
 rates. This is a first and preliminary indication that
 the firm's top management assumptions were cor
 rect. As one can see, no high correlations between
 the independent variables exist (they only occur
 between periodic variables that are entered in sep
 arate models), so multicollinearity is not a problem.
 Neither did we find other major violations of the

 Correlations, Means, and Standard Deviations3

 TABLE 1

 Variable

 Mean s.d.

 1. Turnover 16.2 5.7
 2. Turnover, 1995-1996 14.2 10.9 .64
 3. Absenteeism 3.9 2.1 .29 .22
 4. Absenteeism, 1995-96 3.8 3.3 .16 .14
 6. Regionb 2.2 0.7 .27 .08
 7. Netresultc 77.5 37.5 -.23 -.21
 8. Net result, 1995c 112.2 75.6 -.19 -.12
 9. Net result, 1996-98c 66.0 33.9 -.21 -.22
 10. Net result, 1997-98c 54.3 32.6 -.18 -.15

 5. Age 28.4 2.3 -.18 -.22

 .81
 .07
 .21
 .20
 .16
 .17
 .14

 a The period is 1995-98 unless otherwise is specified.
 b Periphery = 1, middle region = 2, and center = 3.
 c One thousand Dutch guilders per FTE in 1995 prices.

 .02
 .19
 .12
 .08
 .12
 .11

 .05
 .03
 .03
 .02
 -.02

 .19
 .06
 .32
 .35

 .79
 .89
 .72

 .42
 .20

 .91

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:55:23 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 2004

 Glebbeek and Bax

 TABLE 2

 283

 Results of Regression Analysis of the Effect of Employee Turnover on the Performance of the Offices3

 A. Net Result, 1995-98

 B. Net Result, 1997-98

 Variable

 Model 1

 Model 2

 Model 3 Model 4

 Model 1

 Model 2  Model 3  Model 4

 Turnover13
 Absenteeism0
 Age
 Region
 Turnover squaredb

 -.23*

 .20+
 .15
 .01

 .27**
 .19*
 .05
 .30**

 .17
 -.19+
 -.05

 .31**

 -.45

 .15

 -.15
 -.09
 -.05

 -.17+
 -.16+
 -.08

 .40*"

 F
 Adjusted R2

 6.3*
 .05

 2.8*
 .05

 4.8**
 .12

 4.1**
 .13

 2.4
 .01

 1.2

 .00

 6.0**
 .15

 a n = 110. Standardized coefficients are shown. Ordinary least squares regression analysis was used.
 b Turnover 1995-96 for panel B.
 c Absenteeism 1995-96 for panel B.

 fp < .10
 * p < .05
 **p < .01

 .22
 -.16+
 -.07

 .40**
 -.44*

 5.9**
 .18

 assumptions needed to conduct multiple regres
 sion analysis.
 We analyzed four models. The results are pre
 sented in Tables 2 and 3. In model 1, the net results
 of the offices are regressed against turnover only
 (and of course against the net result in the first year,
 when the change in performance is at stake). In
 model 2 we added the control variables for absen
 teeism and for the age of the office staff, and in
 model 3 we introduced economic region. This pro
 cedure allowed us to map the hypothesized rela
 tionship. The negative correlation between turn
 over and net result held if we controlled for age and
 absenteeism, and even increased if we also consid

 ered the regional factor. In model 3, turnover, ab
 senteeism, and region all had significant, and ex
 pected, effects on office performance. Either the
 level of performance (Table 2) or the change in
 performance (Table 3) can be used as the criterion.
 The unstandardized regression coefficient (not
 shown) of turnover in Table 2 indicates that a 1
 percent increase in turnover equals a loss of 1,780
 Dutch guilders, which is approximately 2.25 per
 cent of one FTE employee's contribution to the net
 result. From a management point of view, this is
 quite substantial. Therefore, the volume of turnover
 did have negative effects for the firm studied.

 In model 4, we added curvilinearity to the anal

 Results of Regression Analysis of the Effect of Employee Turnover

 on the Change in Performance of the Offices*

 TABLE 3

 A. Net Result, 1996-98

 B. Net Result, 1997-98

 Variable

 Model 1

 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 1

 Model 2 Model 3

 Model 4

 Net result, 1995
 Turnover13
 Absenteeism0
 Age
 Region
 Turnover squaredb

 .39**

 -.13

 .38**
 -.12
 -.08
 -.01

 .38**
 .22*
 .14+
 .06
 .43**

 .38*'
 .32
 -.14
 -.07
 .44*'
 -.56f

 .18+
 -.13

 .18+
 -.13
 -.08
 -.05

 .19*
 -.15+
 -.15+
 -.08

 .41**

 F
 Adjusted R2

 12.7**
 .18

 6.4**
 .17

 11.8**
 .33

 10.5**
 .34

 3.1*
 .04

 1.8
 .03

 5.9**
 .19

 .20*
 .25
 -.15+
 -.07

 .41*'
 -.45*

 6.0**
 .22

 a n = 110. Standardized coefficients are shown. Ordinary least squares regression analysis was used.
 b Turnover, 1995-96, for panel B.
 c Absenteeism, 1995-96, for panel B.

 +p < .10
 * p < .05
 ** p < .01

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:55:23 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 284 Academy of Management Journal April

 y sis, following the Abelson and Baysinger hypoth
 esis. This was done in the conventional way, by
 adding the squared term of turnover to the regres
 sion equation. If the inverted U-curve is underly
 ing, meaning that turnover is beneficial up to a
 certain level and harmful after that point, then the
 squared term should reflect this pattern by taking
 the negative sign while the linear term becomes
 positive. This is indeed shown in Tables 2 and 3.
 Although the variance explained remained about
 the same, the breaking down of the turnover vari
 able suggested that it is predominantly an excessive
 degree of turnover that had the negative effect on
 performance. Both the cross-sectional (panel A)
 and the longitudinal (panel B) analyses revealed
 this pattern. The curvilinear effect most strongly
 manifested itself when we allowed for a time lag.
 This result may indicate that the costs of turnover
 indeed are "hidden" and become apparent mainly
 in the long run (Saylors & Sylvestre, 1994).

 Do these findings provide enough evidence in

 favor of our hypothesis? There may be some doubts
 if one looks at significance. In all cases, after the
 addition of the squared term, the linear effect be
 comes positive, clearly pointing toward an inverted
 U-shaped relationship. The coefficients are not sig
 nificant, however. Moreover, the negative effect?
 now captured by the squared term?fails to pass the
 significance test in one of the four analyses. What
 does this mean for the hypothesis?

 First of all, model 4 may be overstretching our
 data. Splitting up a significant effect into two par
 tial effects with opposite signs reduces the chance
 that these partial effects are independently signifi
 cant. Requiring significance is asking a lot of the
 statistical power of the test and, of course, when
 there are only 110 cases, this power is limited.
 More specifically, the analysis suggests that the
 optimal turnover level in this firm lies between 6.3
 and 9.9 percent. (This range is based on calculation
 of the first derivative from the unstandardized co
 efficients in the regressions of Table 2). Only be
 tween 5.5 and 14 percent of the offices stayed be
 low this level, which indicates that turnover was
 generally too high in this firm. Thus, when the data
 are graphed, the right part of the inverted U is
 particularly apparent. This may help to explain the
 lack of significance of the positive effects in model
 4. At the times when the offices are more evenly
 distributed along the curve, negative and positive
 effects should both be significant.

 However, the above is speculation. We acknowl
 edge that, by conventional standards, the results
 are ambiguous. Curvilinearity is clearly indicated,
 but the nature of this nonlinearity (inverted U or
 otherwise) is only suggested by the regression co

 efficients. We therefore offer the reader two possi
 ble interpretations.

 Our "strong interpretation" is that the changing
 sign of the main effect indicates an inverted U
 curve. Statistical insignificance only reflects the
 lack of statistical power that follows from the fact
 that there are a mere 110 cases, with only a minor
 ity of these situated at the left of the top of the
 curve.

 On the other hand, our cautious interpretation is
 that the insignificance of the positive effects indi
 cates that they do not really deviate from zero. The
 pattern of linear and squared terms thus only re
 flects a kink in the curve. First, the effects of higher
 turnover are neutral (a sort of plateau), and then
 after a critical point a higher turnover rate becomes
 unprofitable.

 As we believe in the arguments put forward by
 Abelson and Baysinger, we tend to accept the first
 interpretation. Academic conventions regarding
 the interpretation of statistical insignificance may,
 however, call for the second, cautious, interpreta
 tion. It is important to note, though, that both in
 terpretations are at odds with the conventional
 assumption that higher turnover should be unprof
 itable all along the line.

 DISCUSSION

 The authors of human resource management
 (HRM) textbooks will find our main results encour
 aging. In that literature, turnover is often used as a
 performance indicator (e.g., G?mez-Mej?a, Balkin,
 & Cardy, 1995), implying that "it is generally
 viewed as negatively related to organizational ef
 fectiveness" (Phillips, 1996: 180). Consequently,
 Phillips included this indicator in his six-item Hu
 man Resources Effectiveness Index, stating that "an
 excessive turnover rate clearly has a tremendous
 negative impact on an organization's costs, and HR
 programs designed to reduce turnover can result in
 a tremendous bottom-line improvement" (Phillips,
 1996: 180). As usual, this author offers no hard
 empirical evidence, although some bivariate corre
 lations are presented in support of the index. The
 author later acknowledges that the cost of turnover
 is "an illusionary figure in most organizations"
 (Phillips, 1996: 286), forcing analysts to rely on soft
 data. As we observed before, this state of affairs is
 explained by the fact that little is known, or indeed
 could be known, about the empirical effects of em
 ployee turnover, because relevant data sources are
 not accessible.

 Our analysis shows that turnover can have neg

 ative effects on firm performance. Here we empha
 size the word "can," since economic performance

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:55:23 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 2004 Glebbeek and Bax 285

 depends on many factors that vary according to
 type of firm and related circumstances. This depen
 dence on many factors is also reflected in the weak
 relation between the variables in our analysis: even
 in the most elaborate model of Table 2, the variance
 explained does not rise above 18.5 percent. It is
 clear that, although employee turnover does ex
 plain part of the variation in the performance of the
 temporary agency offices studied here, other vari
 ables affect their performance to a much greater
 degree.

 This last conclusion is of course also implied in
 Abelson and Baysinger's model. If turnover effects
 are inverted-U-shaped, they will not, on average, be
 very large. We argued above that, although Abelson
 and Baysinger laid down the fundamentals of a
 theory of turnover effects, their work has gone
 largely unnoticed in turnover research. We believe
 this lack of notice can be attributed to a misdirected
 operational foundation. We hope that, with our
 research, based on a different empirical approach
 and testing, this model will be granted the place in
 management theory that it deserves.

 Of course we acknowledge that, although curvi
 linearity is clearly indicated, our results have not
 yielded compelling evidence for the existence of
 the inverted U-shaped curve. We believe the ab
 sence of compelling evidence can be attributed to
 the limitations of our study. The most important
 limitation is the restricted time period. The data
 pertain to the years 1995 through 1998, when The
 Netherlands was economically booming. As a re
 sult, most offices of our focal agency had to contend
 with extraordinarily high turnover rates, and only a
 few offices found themselves placed in the range
 where a higher turnover would have led to better
 results. The chances of testing the inverted U-curve
 were thus reduced. It would therefore be good to
 replicate this study in times of economic down
 turn, when turnover figures are much lower and
 many companies would welcome some mobility.
 Yet the apparent curvilinearity already implies that
 both researchers and textbook writers cannot safely
 assume that a lower rate of turnover is always pref
 erable to a higher rate.

 This finding will complicate future research into
 turnover. It implies that the conventional assump
 tion is not generally justified. For research that only
 includes turnover as a control variable, the solution
 is simple: always add the squared term to the re
 gression equation (just as labor economists make it
 standard practice to include an age-squared term
 when estimating wage equations or human capital
 models). As for the use of turnover as a perfor
 mance indicator, things are more complicated. The
 conventional assumption that high turnover is del

 eterious cannot simply be replaced by a universal
 optimal turnover level, since this level depends on
 circumstances. It would therefore be wise to work
 at least with a motivated threshold value (specific
 for a firm or industry) that indicates from which
 point onwards turnover can be considered as a
 negative indicator.

 For everyday practice, HR managers should have
 an idea what the optimal rate of turnover is for their
 organization. In addition, however, they should be
 aware that this optimal rate can be influenced. In
 the spirit of Abelson and Baysinger, they can imag
 ine a long list of factors that are likely to influence
 turnover and retention costs. As some of these fac
 tors are clearly within the scope of company policy,
 managers can act to reduce these costs, thereby
 softening the trade-off between flexibility and com
 mitment. To find out more about this, researchers
 should give priority to specifying the relationship
 between turnover and performance with regard to
 type of HR policy.
 More specifically, the question whether some
 types of HR policy are more vulnerable to turnover
 than others must be asked. We think the answer
 should be yes, as traditional "Tayloristic" practices
 have always been inspired by the aim of immuniz
 ing firms against worker mobility. In the present era
 of "high-commitment HRM," firms may still fall
 back on forms of standardization that reduce re
 placement costs; or, alternatively, they may try to
 devise the least expensive ways to retain their valu
 able employees. The upshot of all this is that HR
 policy should not only be directed at the level of
 turnover, but also at the effects of turnover. Job
 design, training policies, skills portfolios, and the
 development of distinctive competencies all relate
 to these turnover effects. If this conjecture is cor
 rect, it will take our topic into the realms of busi
 ness strategy and strategic human resource manage
 ment.

 The fact that the analysis proved possible with
 data stemming from just one company is very en
 couraging. Perhaps the necessary research agenda
 can now be fully realized. Of course, the cultural
 and structural characteristics of our temp agency,
 with its many offices producing the same product
 under similar conditions, offered an almost ideal
 starting point for our research. An analysis like
 ours should also be feasible in less ideal circum
 stances, provided sufficiently appropriate control
 variables can be found. Computerized personnel
 files make these company records increasingly ac
 cessible, and their analysis is a practical alternative
 to costly survey research and multivariate bench
 marking.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:55:23 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 286 Academy of Management Journal April

 REFERENCES

 Abelson, M. A., & Baysinger, B. D. 1984. Optimal and

 dysfunctional turnover: Toward an organizational
 level model. Academy of Management Review, 9:
 331-341.

 Baron, J. N., Hannan, M. T., & Burton, M. D. 2001. Labor
 pains: Change in organizational models and em
 ployee turnover in young high-tech firms. American
 Journal of Sociology, 106: 960-1012.

 Dalton, D. R., Krackhardt, D. M., & Porter, L. W. 1981.
 Functional turnover: An empirical assessment. Jour
 nal of Applied Psychology, 66: 716-721.

 G?mez-Mej?a, L. R., Balkin, D. B., & Cardy, R. L. 1995.
 Managing human resources. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
 Prentice-Hall.

 Griffeth, R. W., & Horn, P. W. 1995. The employee turn
 over process. In K. M. Rowland & G. R. Ferris (Eds.),
 Research in personnel and human resource man
 agement, vol. 13: 245-293. Greenwich, CT: JAI
 Press.

 Griffeth, R. W., Horn, P. W., & Gaertner, S. 2000. A meta
 analysis of antecedents and correlates of employee
 turnover. Journal of Management, 26: 463-488.

 Herman, R. 1997. Reducing costly employee turnover.

 HR Focus, 74(6): 15-16.

 Huselid, M. A. 1995. The impact of human resource
 management practices on turnover, productivity,
 and corporate financial performance. Academy of
 Management Journal, 38: 635-672.

 Hutchinson, S. T., Villalobos, J. R., & Beruvides, M. G.
 1997. Effects of high turnover in a serial assembly
 environment. International Journal of Production
 Research, 35: 3201-3223.

 Koys, D. J. 2001. The effects of employee satisfaction,

 organizational citizenship behavior, and turnover on
 organizational effectiveness: A unit-level, longitudi
 nal study. Personnel Psychology, 54: 101-114.

 Lee, T. W., & Mowday, R. T. 1987. Voluntarily leaving an
 organization: An empirical investigation of Steers
 and Mowday's model of turnover. Academy of Man
 agement Journal, 30: 721-743.

 Mitchell, T. R., Holtom, B. C, Lee, T. W., Sablynski, C. J.,

 & Erez, M. 2001. Why people stay: Using job embed
 dedness to predict voluntary turnover. Academy of
 Management Journal, 44: 1102-1121.

 Mobley, W. H. 1982. Employee turnover: Causes, con
 sequences, and control. Reading, MA: Addison
 Wesley.

 Morrow, P. C, McElroy, J. C, Laczniak, K. S., & Fenton,
 J. B. 1999. Using absenteeism and performance to
 predict employee turnover: Early detection through
 company records. Journal of Vocational Rehavior,
 55: 358-374.

 Mueller, C. W., & Price, J. L. 1989. Some consequences of
 turnover: A work unit analysis. Human Relations,
 42: 389-402.

 Phillips, J. J. 1996. Accountability in human resource

 management. Houston: Gulf.

 Sailors, J. F., & Sylvestre, J. 1994. Reduce the cost of
 employee turnover. Journal of Compensation &
 Renefits, 9(5): 32-34.

 Staw, B. M. 1980. The consequences of turnover. Journal

 of Occupational Rehaviour, 1: 253-273.

 White, G. L. 1995. Employee turnover: The hidden drain

 on profits. HR Focus, 72(1): 15-17.

 Wild, R., & Dawson, A. 1972. Labour turnover: Theories
 and remedial action. Bradford, England: MCB Ltd.
 Williams, C. R. 1999. Reward contingency, unemploy
 ment, and functional turnover. Human Resource
 Management Review, 9: 549-576.

 ??.

 Arie C. Glebbeek (a.c.glebbeek@ppsw.rug.nl) is an asso
 ciate professor of sociology at the University of Gro
 ningen, The Netherlands, from which he obtained his
 Ph.D., with an empirical study of labor market careers.
 His primary research interests are the labor market, so
 cioeconomic policy, and school-to-work transition. At
 present he is one of the leaders of a national research
 program on time competition and work stress.

 Erik H. Bax is an associate professor of human resource
 management at the University of Groningen, The Neth
 erlands. He obtained his Ph.D., from that university with
 a study of the relationship between long-term economic
 development and social changes in The Netherlands. His
 current research interests include organizational culture,
 strategic HRM, work organization, and risk management.

 A

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:55:23 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

