Inr. J. of  Human Resource Management 15:s December 2W4 1408-1423 

R ?zE%- 

High-involvement practices and 
performance of French firms 

Sylvie Guerrem and Val6rie Barraud-Didier 

. . 

Abstract  This  article  deals with  the  relationship between  human  resource practices 
(HRPs) and firm performances in France. It focuses on four s~ecific HRPs that are able to 
involve  employees: empowermml, compenaatlon.  communication and  training.  Each 
HRP taken in isolaoon is supwwd to be wsilivclv related to oerformances because it ib a 
source of  motivation and  commitment  for  employees.  But  there  also exists a  synergy 
between these practices:  when they are combined into a bundle and are implemented all 
together, they should lead to better firm performances.  A survey carried out among 180 
human resource managers of  large French companies leads to validation of  most of  our 
hypotheses.  Contrary  to  previous  research, we  do  not  find  a  significant link  between 
compensation and fum performance. The other HRPs are all indirectly related to financial 
wrformmes, with social performance playing a mediating role. When they are combined 
into a bundle.  HRPs havca stronger impact on  performake than when  tiley are studied 
individually. The d c l e  concludes with the  importance of  develonina a s~rdlralc human 
resource policy  and  of  implementing coherent  and  complemen~~- high-involvement 
practices to increase fum performance. 

Keywords  High involvement: performance: HR practices: bundle. 

Managers'  primary concern has always been  with  running their companies efficiently. 
This quest for excellence entails the creation of structures and manwement systems that 
favour the initiative and creativity of human resources. Following Pfeffer's  work (1994, 
1998)). several authors presented a set of human resource practices (HRPs) that bring a 
competitive  advantage  to  a  company  and  generate  benefits  because  they  are 
complementary.  For this,  they  were  named  high-performance  practices  (Bessant  and 
Caffyn.  1997; Delaney and  Huselid.  1996; Huselid,  1995) or strategic HRPs (Hiltrop, 
1999: Huselid er al., 1997) and considered by some scholars to be universal and directly 
related to financial performances. 

This field of research, mostly supported in the USA. has been widely developed for ten 
years, hut not without criticism. Previous research considered different ioconslstent sets 
of  HRPs  related  to performance, despite the list  of  seven practices by Pfeffer  (1998). 
In order to clarify the types of practices  that would  raise performances,  some authors 
refer to a specific bundle called 'high involvement'. They focus onLawler's work (1986) 
to provide a theoretical framework that describes how HRP can lead to higher company 
performance.  However,  it  does  not  explain  the  process  that  leads  from  HRP 
to  performance.  Conceptual  frameworks  have  been  addressed  to  fill  this  theoretical 

Sylvie Guerrero. Assmate Professor, Unlvernt6 du  Quebec B Mont6al. ESG, CP6192, Montdal 
H3C 4RZ. Canada (tel:  + 514-987-3000 ext. 8294, e-ma~k gumm.syIvre@uqam.ca). 
Valtrie  Barraud-Didler,  Associate  hofessor.  MP,  ENSAT  (tel:  f562-193900:  e-mail: 
valerie.banaud-didim@ensat fr). 

7'he  intemtion~l Joum(l1 u f H u m  Resource Momgc~nt 
ISSN 0958-5192 priotnSSN 14664399 oolim O Z W 4  Taylar & F-is 

Ltd 

hap:llwww.tandl.coOuWj~s 

MII: IO.IOSOI0958519W2W0158CQZ 


Guerrero  and  Barraud-Didier:  High-itivolvement  practices 

1409

to  financial  performance 

vacuum.  Gtjest  (1997, 2001)  suggested  an  integrative  model  showing  that  HRP  may  be
related 
including:  employee
commitment  and  satisfaction;  social  and  organizational  performance  (productivity  and
labour costs); and, finally, financial  performance.  Boselie et cd.  (2001) designed  a similar
model  based  on  research  done  on  high  involvement  in  the  Netherlands.

through  a  causal  chain, 

Most  empirical  results  on  high-involvement  practices  have  been  obtained  in  Anglo-
Saxon  countries  but  there  is still  a  lack  of  research  in  other countries.  Fey  et a!. (2(KK))
in  Russia  and  Bernard  and  Rodgers  in  Singapore  (2000)  replicated  these  studie.s
and  validated  hypotheses  that  helped  us to  better  understand  how  HRP can  be  a source
of  competitive  advantage  in  these  countries.  France  has  not  been  often  studied  in
the  past,  although  its  traditional  management  style  differs  from  those  usually  practised
by  Anglo-Saxons.  Early  comparalive  studies  on  the  effectiveness  of  high-involvement
practices  confirm  the  interest  of  additional  research.  Lorenz  (1992);  Wilkens  and
Pawlowski  (1997)  demonstrated  that  high-involvement  practices  are  less  effective
in  French  automobile  factories  than  in  Britain.  Japan  and  Germany.  They  concluded
through  case  studies  thai  teamwork  and  group  decision-making  are  hardly  seen  in
French  organizations.  Despite  the  delayering  {.•i\'  hierarchical  levels.  French  factories
remain among the most hierarchical  in Europe: information  starts from  the top and  works
its  way  down;  communication  is  limited,  which  creates  barriers  between  traditional
authoritarian  first-line  managers  and  (heir  employees  (d'Iribarne.  1996-7).  Thus,  we
question  the  relationship  between  high-involvement  practices  and  performances  in
French  companies.

This  paper  contributes  to  the  understanding  of  the  link  between  HRP  and  company
performance.  Il  focuses  on  Lawler'.s  (1986)  and  Guest's  (2(K)I} work  lo  deline  a  list  of
praclices and  their relation  to perl'ormance. The  firsl  section clarifies  the concept  ol" high
involvement  and  related  HRP,  which  provides  a  precise  theoretical  framework  for
understanding  the link  between  high involvement  and  company  results. It underlines  the
pertinence  of  the  bundle  concept,  by  demonstrating  the  importance  of  using  a  coherent
system  and  the  necessity  to  classify  performance  measures  according  lo  their  nature.
The  second  section  presents  an  empirical  sludy  from  180 French  companies.  It  aims  to
test  the  relationship  between  HR  management  and  tinancial  performance,  social  and
organizational  performance  playing  a  mediating  role  between  both  variables.  We  use
structural  equations  to  validate  the overall  model  of  ihe  HR-performance  link.

Theory  and  research  on  high-involvement  practices

High-involvement  pfiictices  and  firm  perfofmance

Definition  Lawler  (1986)  used  the  term  'high-involvement'  to  describe  management
sysiems  based  on  commitment  and  involvement,  as  opposed  to  the  old  bureaucratic
and  hierarchical  model  based  on control.  Control  management  relies  on  strict  rules  and
procedures  to  increase  efficiency  and  reduce  direct  labour  costs  (Arthur,  1994).
In contrast, commitmenl  systems  aim  to increase effectiveness  and  productivity  and  rely
on condilions that encourage employees lo identify  with  the goals of ihe organization  and
work  hard  to  accomplish  those  goals  (Wood  and  De  Menezes,  1998; Whitener,  2001).
The  underlying  hypothesis  is  that  each  employee  will  increase  their  involvement  in
ihe  company  if  they  are  given  the  opportunity  to  control  and  understand  their  work.
Thus high  involvement  consists of gathering  intelligence,  ideas and  the motivation  of all
workers.  It  also  bears  the  idea  that  employees'  efforts  are  oriented  towards  the  firm's
objectives  and  ihat  ihey  are  transformed  into actors  who are  willing  and  able  to  support
the  company.  This  approach  has  been  criticized  as  a  manipulative  management  to


1410  The Intemational  Journal  of Htttnati Re.wurce  Management

increase  control, stress and efforts  for  the good of the company  perlbrmance  but  not  for
the  employees  {Pil  and  MacDuffie,  1996;  Marchington  and  Grugulis,  2000).  However,
a  huge  number  of  results  tend  to  contirm  the  interest  of  high  involvement.  Recently,
Gelade  and  Ivery  (2003)  and  Kinnie  el  al.  (2000)  demonstrated  the  positive  impact  of
commitment-based  management  on employees'  hehaviour. assessed  by turnover rate and
work  climate.

High-involvement  practices  Scholars share the same conception  of high  involvement.
However,  they  use  a wide  range  of  practices  to  identify  ways  to develop  it.  Previously,
scholars  included  four  types  of  HR  practices  (Lawler,  1986;  [xana  and  Florkowski,
1992). relative to information,  training, remuneration  and  empowerment.  The  relevance
of  this  list  was  validated  in  1,000  American  eompanies  a  few  years  later  (Lawler  et  al..
1992). Other empirical  research  has  led  to other  bundles  of  high-involvement  practices.
Arthur (1994). in a study of 54 steel companies, identifies  six types of practices: training,
empowerment, high wages, performance-based  compensation, collective participation  in
decisions  and  skill  development.  Wood  and  de  Menezes  (1998)  add  recruitment,
appraisal  systems  and  job  security  to  the  practices  previously  studied.  Information,
empowerment, training and compensation seem to be included  in all research. In contrast,
the  other  Ihemes  covered  are  variable.  If  we  want  to  develop  a  cumulative  field  of
research  on  high  involvement,  it  seems  important  to centre  on  practices  that  are  a sitie
qua  non  for  all  scholars  and  have  been  included  in  a  majority  of  research.  Information,
skill  development,  compensation  and  empowerment  appear  together  as  a  core  practice
for  high  involvement.

Contribution  of the concept of bnndle to high-involvement  research  A key point in
high  involvement  is  that  individual  practices  cannot  be  implemented  effectively
in isolation.  It is the  use of  HRP in a coherent  package  that  is important.  Lawler  (1986)
asserts  that  this  synergy  is comparable  to a  multiplicative  model  so that,  if one  practice
has  been  neglected,  high  involvement  will  not  exist.  Most  scholars  grasp  this  idea
through  the notion of'bundle',  which originated  in the theory  of organization.  Burns and
Stalker's  work  (1961)  suggests  that  organizational  success  is  contingent  on  the  way
structure, technology  and  HR  adjust  to each  other.  It captures the  idea  that HRPs  form  a
synergy  when 
internal  coherence.  This
complementarity  bas  a  better  impact  on  performance  owing  to  the  interlocking  effect
and  mutual  reinforcement  of  different  practices  (MacDuftie,  1995).  Thus,  a  compatiy
willing  to  involve  employees  will  have  to  offer  simultaneously  more  compensation,
knowledge,  power  and  informalion  (Guest.  2001; Marchington  and  Grugulis,  2000).

linked  and  present 

tbey  are  closely 

From  high-involvement  practices  to  company  performance  How  can  the
implementation  of  high-involvement  practices  lead  to  better  performance?  What
process  or  causal  network  can  be  identified  lo  explain  the  link  witb  performance?
According  to  Lawler  (1986),  high-involvement  practices  are  supposed  lo  be  effective
because  they  act  as  a  synergy  and  bave  a  multiplicative  effect.  But  Lawler  does  not
specify  how  the  combined  effect  of  the  four  HRPs  can  be  a  source  of  a  competitive
advantage.  Guest  (1997)  has  been  one  of  the  first  scholars  to  present  an  explanatory
model  of the high-involvement  process. He suggests  that  the commitment  and  flexibility
provided  by  highly  involving  actions  lead  to  behaviour  changes  among  employees.
Beeause  employees  show  high  levels  of  motivation,  co-operation  and  citizenship,  they
adopl  better-performing  behaviours,  leading  to lower absenteeism  and  turnover  rates, to
better  productivity  and  quality  scores.  Guest  associates  these  behaviours  with  social


Guerrero  and  Barraud-Didier:  High-involvement  practices 

1411

results  (turnover, conilicts. absenteeism) and organizational  results (productivity,  quality
of goods  and  services, customer  complaints). Consequently,  these  types of  performance
are  supposed  to  affect  tinancial  perfonnance.  Guest's  model  has  gained  successful
attention.  A iirsl group of scholars  included  a behavioural  dimension  in the study  of high
involvement.  They  conducted  employees'  surveys  to  test  the  relationship  between  the
implementation  of  praetiees  and  individual  attitudes  and  behaviours.  Guest  (1999)  and
Whitener  (20(JI)  demonstrated  tbat  the  use  of  higb-involvement  practices  is  related  to
better  scores  t,)n trust  and  salisfaction  and  to less  pressure. Truss  (2001). who worked  at
Hewlett  Packard,  and  Kinnie  et al.  (2000). who  worked  at two  call  centres, reached  the
same  conclusion  alter  their  research.  They  linked  the  use  of  innovative  HRP  to  lower
tumover  and  absenteeism  rates.  A  second  group  of  scholars  tested  the  link  between
HR  and  financial  performance.  They  administrated  surveys  to  HR  directors  and  HR
managers,  and  compared  the  answers  with  the  (irm's  results.  Unforiunalely,  a  direct
relationship  bas been  tested  in most  studies  witbout  separating  social  and  organizational
results  from  the  financial  ones.  When  this  was done,  authors  validated  the  intermediate
role of  HR outcomes  (Chang and Chen. 2002; Fey et al.,  2000: Gelade and  Ivery, 2003).
To sum  up. the literature review  identifies  four core practices that increase employees"
information,  empowerment,  compensation  and  skill
commitment 
development. These practices are a source of a competitive advantage wben they are used
simultaneously  in  a coherent  HR  policy.  The  process  explaining  tbe  link  with  company
performances  is  usually  studied  in  two  complementary  approaches.  One  group  of
scboiars  focuses  on  the  relation  between  HR  practices  and  employees"  perceptions  and
bebaviours; a second group centres on the last part ol  Guest's model  and tests  hypotheses
relative  to  tbe  link  between  HRP,  HR  results  and  eompany  performances.

level,  based  on 

Research  hypotheses

Our research  takes  in account  the  four core  practices  we  identified,  and  tries to  measure
the  bundle  concept,  [t  also  deals  witb  (he  second  part  of  Guest's  modei.  We  want  to
test  the effect  of  HRP  on  two types  of  perfonnance:  social  and  {)rgani/-alional  results  -
e.g. HR outcomes or intermediate  performance  -  and  tinancial  results. We build  a set of
bypotbeses  for  higb  involvement  in  France,  lirst  about  eacb  isolated  HRP,  tben  about
their  synergy  when  grouped  in a  bundle.

Empowerment  Fmpowerment  practices  centre  on  tbe  sbaring  of  power  and  on
employee autonomy. Tbey are aimed at decentralizing decision-making and encompass a
set of methods based on task enrichment (enlargement of responsibilities,  encouragement
of  initiative, job  rolalion)  and  on  work  organization  (project  groups,  parallel  teams  as
quality  circles,  self-managed  teams),  Flmpowerment  is a  source  of  higb  involvement  in
tbat  it  enables  all  employees  lo  take  part  in  decisions  that  affect  procedures  and  work
methods. Decentralized  organization  of  work  and  participation  in decision-making  bave
been found  to be positively  related to fmanciai  perfonnance  and productivity  (Cbang and
Chen,  2002;  Pfeffer,  19^4).  In  an  effort  lo  summarize  6S  articles  on  this  topic.  Cotton
et  al.  (1988)  showed  that  participation  in  decision-making,  informal  participation  and
employee  ownership  lead  to  improvement  iti  the  company's  financial  performance.
Empowerment  practices should generate better social  and organizational  perfonnance  in
France  as  well.  The  French  organization  is  profoundly  hierarchical  and  based  on  social
classes:  tbe  'cadres'  (managers  and  professionals),  the  ^maitrise'  (tirst-line  supervisors)
and  the  others  (levels  below).  This  system  is  deeply  embedded  in  the  French  culture
and  tbere  is  no  evidence  of  change  in  spite  of  delayering  (d'iribarne,  1996-7).


1412  The  Ifitenuitional  Jotirnal  of  Human  Resoutce  Management

Frencb  employees are conditioned  to distance  themselves  from  the hierarchy.  Managers
and  supervisors  who  hreak  the  ice  and  empower  employees  would  generate  better
social  and  organizational  resuits.

Hypothesis  Uv. Empowerment  practices  are  positively  related  to  tirm  performance.

Hypothesis  lb\  Empowerment  practices  are  positively  related  to  organizational  and

social  performance.

//vpor/i^i/j/t:  Organizational  and  social  performance  mediates  the  relationsbip

between  empowerment  and  financial  performance.

compensation  practices 

Compensation  High-involvement 
recognize  group
efforts  and  support  them  as  part  of  the  organization's  objectives.  Basic  pay,  except  if
it  is  higher  tban  the  average  pay  on  tbe  labour  market,  is  not  supposed  to  be
highly  involving.  On  the  otber  hand,  compensation  based  on  collective  rewards.
either  monetary  (profit  sharing,  stock  ownersbip.  gain  sharing,  teamwork  bonus)  or
non-monetary  (fringe  benefits  and  social  benefits)  is  usually  considered  as  highly
involving.  Individual  performance-based  compensation  may  also  be  included.  In  the
UK  and  in  the  USA.  scholars  found  encouraging  results  on  the  relationship  between
compensation  and  employee  perfonnance,  productivity  and  finaneial  performance
(Delaney  and  Huselid,  1996). In  otber  L'ounlries.  a strong  correlation  was  also  found  in
Russia  (Fey  et ai,  2()(K)), in  Hong  Kong  (Ngo  et  al.  1998)  and  in  Taiwan  (Cbang  and
Chen,  2002),  Kruse  (1992)  and  Harel  and  Tzafrir  (1999).  however,  did  not  observe  a
significant  link.

(1997)  did  not  validate  a  significant 

In  France,  salary  grids  with  a  legal  minimum  must  be  respected  and  the  condilions
for  salary  increases  are  directly  connected  to  organizational  tenure.  This  may  explain
why  d'Arcimoles 
relationsbip  between
compensation  and  firm  perfonnance.  But,  in  addition  to  this,  a  set  of  laws  was  voted
to  foster  collective  remuneration  based  on  company  performance.  Firms  have
been  encouraged  to  develop  gain-sharing  since  1959  and 
in  1967  prolil-sbariiig
became  mandatory  in  organizations  with  fifty  or  more  employees.  Since  1984,  tbe  use
of  stock  options  and  stock  ownersbip  bas been  supported  by  an  attractive  fiscal  .system.
We  expeci  tbat  companies  implementing  al! these  compensation  practices  should  have
greater  performance,

Hypothesi.s 2a: Compensation  practices  are  positively  related  to firm  performance.

Hypothesis  2b:  Compensation  practices  are  positiveiy  related  to  organizationai  and

sociai  perfonnance.

Hypothesis2c\  Organizational  and  social  performance  mediate 
between  compensation  and  financial  performance.

tbe  relalionship

Communication  Communication  practices  are  related  lo  the  content  of  information
(strategy,  objectives,  salary  determination  criteria)  and  informalion  management:  from
tbe  top  down  (internal  newsletter,  meetings  witb  personnel)  or  from  the  bottom  up
(suggestion  box.  opinion  surveys),  Tbey  are  assumed  to  be  bighly  involving  so  ihal
employees  feel  ihal  tbe  company  takes  their  concerns  into  account.  The  link  wilh
performance  has nonetheless yielded  contradictory  resulls. Some  sludies show  a positive
association  between  these two variables  (Delaney  and Huselid,  1996), whereas others do
not (Harel  and TzafVJr,  1999). We believe tbal we should  find a significant  link in France,


Guenero  and  Barraud-Didier:  High  involvement  practices 

1413

since  sbaring  information  is  considered  as  a  major  challenge  in  firms  with  little
communication  between  the  different  groups  of  employees.

Hypothesis  3a: Communication  practices  are  positively  related  to  firm  performance.

Hypothesis3b:  Communication  practices  are positively  related  to organizational  and

social  perlbrmance.

Hypothesis  3c:  Organizalional  and  social  performance  mediate 
between  communication  and  financiai  perfomiance.

the  relationship

Training  and  skill  development  Tbese  practices  contribute  to  the  development  of
collective  competencies  and  organizational 
learning.  They  encompass  recruitment
to  acquire  new  skills,  training  to  develop  them  and  new  organization  of  work
for  better  dispatching  (career  plans,  coaching,  intemal  mobility).  The  impact  of
tbese  types  of  practices  on  performance  bas  produced  the  most  compelling  results.
The  research  of  Harel  and  Tzafrir  (1999)  shows  a  positive  significant  link  between
training  expenses  and  organizational  performanee.  Knoke  and  Kalleberg  (1994)
demonstrated  a  significant  link  witb  financial  performance.  In  addition,  a  positive
relation  was  found  witb  career  opportunities  (Blackweil  et  ai, 
i994;  Deiery  and  Doty,
1996).  in  non  Angio-Saxon  countries,  simiiar  re.sults  have  heen  Ibund  by  Fey  et  ai
(2000);  Ngo  et  ul.  (1998)  and  Cbang  and  Chen  (2(K)2).  In  France,  d'Arcimoles  (1997)
reached  the  same  conclusion.

Hypothesis  4a:  Training and skill  development  practices are positively  related  to  firm

performance.

Hypothesis4b:  Training  and  skill  deveiopment  practices  are  positively  related  to

organizational  and  social  performance.

Hypothesis  4c\  Organizational  and  social  performance  mediate 

the  relationship

between  training  and  skill  development,  and  financial  performanee.

Bundle  Current  research  testing  the  link  between  HRP  and  performance  tends  to
advocate  tbe  simultaneous 
impact  of  practices.  Bae  and  Lawler  (2000)  found  a
significant  positive  relationship  between  bundles  of  higb-commitment  praclices  and
financiai  performances  (ROIC).  Arthur  (i994)  obtained  a  significant  negative  iink
with  scrap  rates  and  turnover.  Other  studies  aiiow  confirmation  of  these  results.
Empirical  works  have  shown  a  direct  link  witb  social  perfonnance  (Gelade  and  Ivery,
2003;  Richard  and  Jobnson,  2001).  productivity  (Guthrie.  200i;  Huselid  et  ai, 
i997;
icbniowski  and  Shaw,  1999;  MacDuftie,  1995),  the  quality  of  services  and  products
(Huselid  et  ai. 
i997)  and  financiai  performances  (Huselid,  1995;  Wood  and  de
Menezes,  1998).  Regrettabiy.  these  studies  did  not  test  if  bundles  bave  a  stronger
impact  on  performances  iban  each  isoiated  practice.  The  expiained  variance  scores
remain  generally  low.  even  after  tbe  integration  of  control  variables  in  the  multiple
regression  equation.  Most  of  tbe  studies  yielded  R"^  beiow  10  per  cent,  with  tbe
exception  of  Huseiid,  wbo  expiained  more  tban  70  per  cenl  of  the  variance  of
financial  perfbrmance.

Two  researchers  have  dealt  witb  the  effect  of  a  bundle,  in  comparison  with  isolated
HRP. Ichniowski etai  (1993)  showed  that bundles have stronger effects  on  productivity
tban  HRP applied  in isolation.  Delaney  and  Huseiid  (1996) found  a significant  link  with
organizalional  peribnnance, but training practices led to heller resulls. To test tbe interest


1414  The International  Journal  of Human  Resoutce  Management

of  tbe bundle  concept,  furtber  researcb  needs  to be done  to clarify  the  effect  of  grouped
HRP,  in  comparison  to each  practice  taken  in  isolation.

Hypothesis  5a\  Tbe  bundling  of  HRPs  has  a significant  impact  on  firm  performance,

superior  to that  of  eacb  practice  taken  in  isolation.

Hypothesis  5b:  Tbe bundling of HRPs is positively  related to organizational  and  social

performance.

Hypothesis  5c:  Organizational  and  social  perfbrmance  mediate 

tbe  relationship

between  the  bundling  of  HRPs and  financiai  performance.

Empirical  study

Methods

Tbe empiricai  study  was supported  by  the  Frencb National  Association  of HR  Managers
and Directors and was conducted among French organizalions  in two steps. The first  slep
was  aimed  al  measuring  tbe  use  of  high-involvemenl  practices  as  well  as  social  and
organizational  peribnnance.  A questionnaire  was sent  lo  1.530  HR directors  working  in
large  companies  in  France,  regardless  of  tbeir  national  ownersbip.  With  follow-up  by
leiepbone,  182  managers  replied  and  180 questionnaires  were  usable  (equal  to  a  return
rate  of  12  per  cent).  We  studied  tbe  non-respondents"  characteristics  and  found  no
significant  statisticai difference  from  companies that were included  in the overall  sample.
The  companies  of  tbe  final  sample  originated  within  the  indu.strial  sector  (57  per  cent)
and  tbe  services  seetor  (42  per  cent).  Of  the  industrial  sector,  tbe  vast  majority  were
production  eompanies  (56 per cent) and only  I per cent  were  manufacturing  companies.
Of the services sector.  15 percent  were production  and distribution  companies; 3 percent
operated  in construction  and  13 per  cenl  in  wholesale  and  retail;  3 per cent  were  hotels
and restaurants;  16 per cent specialized  in transportation  and telecommunications,  22 per
cent  in  financial  activities,  8  per  cent  in  real  estate  and  12  per  cent  in  education  and
bealtb.  Lastly,  8 per  cent  were  puhlic  administrations.  Three-quaners  of  the  companies
surveyed  had  more  than  500  employees,  which  is consistent  of  Ihe  average  size  of  Ihc
1,530  organizations  contacted.

The  second  step consisted  of  collecting  inlbrmalion  on  tbe  financial  perfbrmance  of
the  180  organizations  thai  were  included  in  the  first  survey.  Tbe  data  about  financial
performances  were collected  the  same  year  (time  TO) and  also one  year  later  (time  Tl),
The  financial  ratio  has  heen  calculated 
thanks  to  ihe  accounting  data  of  each
organization,  given  by  financial  directors  or through  databases  (Figure  1).

Tbus. our researcb  was conducted  over a one-year  period,  financial  pertbrmanee  being
assessed  in  the  same  year  and  one  year  after  the  completion  of  the  questionnaires.  This
meth(Kl  enables  ihe  eslablisbment  of  causal  relalionships  between  HRPs  and  firm
perfbrmance, contrary to cros.s-sectional studies tbat measure ail variables at the same time.

TO 

Tl

High-involvement  practices  (questionnaire)
Social  and  organizaliomtl  pcrlormancf  (quc^lionnaire)

I inancial  performance  (financial  dala  basis) 

I inancial  per form a net- (linancial  Jala  basis)

Figure  1  Research  tnethod


Guerrero  and  Barraud-Didier:  High-involvement  practices 

1415

Measurement  of  variahles

High-involvement  practices  The questionnaire  Includes thirty-eight items  constructed
from  Lawler's (1986) work and covers the four dimension.s of high-involvement  practices
identified  above.  For  each  item,  human  resource  directors  were  asked  to  evaluate  the
degree of  use of practices on a 5-point  Likert  scale, from  1 -  being  used  very  little or not
at  all  (affecting  0-19  per  cent  of  personnel)  -  to 5  -  being  used  extensively  (affecting
80-100  per  cent  of  personnel).  Thus,  instead  of  using  traditional  agreement  scales,  we
measured  each  practice  according  to the degree  of  use  in  the  company.  In  a measure  of
this  nature,  firms  may  vary  in  scores  according  to  the  number  of  high-involvement
practices  used  and  according  to  the extent  of  employees  affected.  This  type  of  measure
has  been  used  very  often  in  past  studies,  which  facilitates  the  discussion  of  results.

Twelve  factors  were  obtained  after  the  factor  analysis.  We  grouped  them  into  four

dimensions  that  appeared  to  be  consistent  with  the  literature.

1  Empowerment  practices  were  measured  based  on  a three-factor  scale:  work  content
(CONT. 5 items, a  =  0.83),  work time  (two  items, r  —  0.33,/j  <  .01) and  teamwork
(two  items,  r  -  0.38./J  <  .01).

2  Compensation  practices  comprised  three  factors:  collective 

compensation 
(three  items,  a  =  0.68),  stock  ownership 
p  <  .01)  and fringe  benefits  (two  items,  r  =  0.18. /J <  .01).

petfornmnce-based
(two  items,  r =  0.37,

3  Communication  practices  included  five  factors.  The  three  first  were  about  general
information  concerning  the  organization  (six  items,  a  =  0,81),  information  related
to  compen.sation  (three  items,  a  =  0.74)  and  employees'  means  of  expression  (two
items,  r  =  0.18.  p< 
.01).  The  two  remaining  factors  are  aimed  at  developing
employees'  organizational  identification:  etnployee  marketing  (four  items, a  =  0.70)
and  employee  attachment  (two  items,  r =  0.54,  p  <  .01).

4  Training  and  skill  development  practices  formed  a  single  factor  (five  items,

a  =  0.74).

Bundle  of  HRPs  Several  measures  of bundles  were  used  in previous research.  In  some
cases, factor analysis has been the empirical  means of justifying  a combination of HRPs. But
not all variables, especially dichotomous ones, are well suited for this analysis, and  scholars
prefer  to  use  other  statistical  analysis  to  assess  bundles  (Guest,  2(X)1).  Interactive  and
additive  measures  have  also  been  conducted  (Wood  and  de  Menezes,  1998),  but  they
stipulate  that  each  practice  has  an  equal  importance  on  performance  and  do  not  fit  the
theoretical  approach  of bundles. Wood  (1996) conducted  a more relevant  analysis  through
the use of a latent variable, and this method  has been presented  as promissory  for the  future
(Guest,  2001).  We  adopted  a  similar  measure  and  performed  an  analysis  by  means  of
structural equations. This method allows the comparison of two models intended to study the
individual  impactof  practices and the impact ofcombinedpractices.  Two series of analysis
were conducted. We first studied the effect  of each isolated dimension of high  involvement.
Each  of  the  four  practices  was  related  to  sociai  and  organizational  performance,  then  to
financial  indicators.  The  second  model  aimed  at  testing  the  impact  of  combined  high-
involvement  dimensions.  Again  the  model  tested  included  social  and  organizational
perfonnance  as a mediating  variable and financial performance  as a final variable.

Social  and  organizational  performance  Sociai  and  organizational  performance  was
measured  by  means of two  items each, on a 5-point  Likert  scale: work climate,  employee
attendance,  quality  of  products  atid  service.s  and  employee  productivity.  These  four


1416  The International  Journai  of Human  Resource  Management

indicators  are  similar  to those  used  most  frequently  in  studies  of  the  iink  between  HRP
and  performance  (Arthur,  1994:  Delaney  and  Huselid.  1996:  Ichniowski  et  ai.  1993:
MacDuffie,  1995). Our measure  is perceptual  since HR  managers  provided  their opinion
on  organizational  performance.  In  addition, 
it  originates  from  comparison  with
competing  businesses  in the  same  sector of  activity.  Such  a measure  presents  limits  due
to  the  presence  of  a  uniqtie  respondent  and  to  the  subjectivity  of  the  HR  directors'
answers.  However,  Delaney  and  Huselid  (1996)  observed  from  several  studies  strong
correlations  between  perceptual  and  objective  measures  of  performance,  leading  to  the
conclusion  of  a satisfying  validity  of  perceptual  measures. In order  to test  the quality  of
these  four  indicators,  we  used  the  Kolmogorov-Smimov  test.  The  results  of  this  test
conlinn  the  normality  of  each  of  the  four  indicators  at  a  threshold  of  I per  cent.

Financial  performance  The  financial  performance  was  an  objective  measure
calculated  from  balance  results.  We  measured  economic  profitability,  which  is  the
most  common  ratio  used  in  French  research  about  HRP and  performance  (d'Arcimoles,
1997).  According  to  the  French  accounting  norms.

Economic profitability  =  {{Earnings before  interest)

X (long-term assets  +  cash flow  X 100))

Economic  profitability  was  measured  and  calculated  twice:  at  the  same  period  the
questionnaire  was  administered  and  also  one  year  later.  The  interest  of  this  measure  is
that  it  allows  appreciation  of  the  longitudinal  impact  of  high-involvement  practices.

Control  variables  The  activity  sector  and  the  size  of  the  company  were  retained  as
control  variables. The activity  sector was taken  into account  by measuring  the social  and
organizational  performance  relative  to  the  companies  of  the  same  sector.  We  asked
the  HR  directors  to  evaluate  the  four  indicators  in  comparison  to  their  competitors.
For the financial performance,  we calculated  the profitability  ratio relative to the  average
profitability  of  a given  sector.  Thus,  the  final  value  (V)  was:

V =  economic profitability  of the firm -  mean of the sector

With regard to company size, analysis of correlations with organizationai  performance
indicators  did  not  show  a  correlation,  most  likely  due  to  the  similar  size  of  the
organizations. We therefore  did  not  insert the size variabie  in the follow-up  analysis.

Explanatory  atialysis

The  correlation  matrix  (Table  1) shows  that  there  is  no  significant  correlation  between
high-involvement  actions and financial performance. This enables  us to conclude that the
direct  relationship  with  financial  performance  is not confirmed,  and  should  be  mediated
by  social  and  organizational  results.  Indeed,  economic  profitability  is  significantly
correlated  with  social  and  organizational  results, with  a slightly  stronger  effect  at  Tl.

Empowerment,  communication  and, to a  lesser extent,  training  practices  are  strongly
correlated  with  indicators  of  social  performances.  On  the  contrary,  the  link  with
remuneration  practices  is quite  insignificant.  Only  performance-based  compensation  is
related  to  work  climate  (r  =  .114,  /; <  .10)  and  the  quality  of  products  and  services
[r =  l\4.  p  <  .10).  Remuneration  based  on  profit  sharing  and  benefits  is  normalized
by  the  French  law  and  should  lead  to  fewer  discrepancies  among  company  practices.


Guerrero  and  Barraud-Didier:  High-involvement  practices 

1417

8 

ri  —

3  3

g  S5 

::!

— 

o 

— 

c

r',  O 

O  O  O

— 

-t  —  O 

*1

-T  —  r-

o  —  o 

o  —  o 

o 

o

g  S S -I
d 
d  -^  —

i  V


1418  The International  Journal  of Human  Resource  Management

This could explain  our results  and  the significant  correlation  wilh  the only  indicator  that
is not  taken  into  account  by  the  law:  pertbrmance-based  compensation.

Impact of practices taken  individually  To test hypotheses HI  to H4 and compare  the
impact ot bundles of  practices  in relation to praclices taken  individually  (hypothesis H^).
we have performed  an analysis  by means of  structural  equations. Each  HRP was  entered
as  an  input  variable.  Work  climate,  attendance,  quality,  productivity  were  grouped  in
a latent variable called  'social and organ, performance'.  Economic profitability  at TO and
Tl  formed  the  output  of  the  model  and  was  called  'financial  pertormance'.

Table  2 presents the results of  ihe causal  analysis about  the relationship  between  each
isolated  high-involvement  practice  and firm performance.  The results  show  a  significanl
relationship  between  empowerment  practices  and  organizational  performances.  The
value  of  CR.  (2.066)  confirms  that  this  relationship  is  statistically  significant  at  a
threshold  of/?  <  .05, social  and  organizational  performances  playing  a  mediating  role.
Hypothesis  HI 
is  thus  validated,  the  implementation  of  empowerment  practices
explaining  I3..1  per  cent  of  performance  scores.  In  contrast,  the  correlation  scores
indicate  no  significant  relationship  between  compensation  and  company  performance,
which  does  not  allow  validation  of  hypothesis  H2.  Analysis  by  means  of  structural
equations  has  yielded  better  results  conceming  communication  practices.  The  link  with
organizational  perfonnance  is significant  (CR.  =  2.262, p  <  .05)  and  the  R" is close  to
10 percent.  Hypothesis  H3 is consequently  validated. Lastly. Table 2 proves that there is
a  significant 
training  actions  and  organizational  performance
(CR.  =  1.702,  /)<.1O),  confirming  hypothesis  H4.  For  all  practices  related 
to
performances,  the  indices  of fit are satisfying  and  abide  by  the quality  criteria  of  a good
model  (Table  2).  The  GFI  and  AGFl  scores  are  greater  than  0.9:  the  RMR  scores  are
close  to 0.05:  the  CFI  and  [FI  scores  exceed  0.80  (Pcdhazur  and  Pedhazur-Schmelkin,
1991).  Moreover,  social  and  organizational  variables  play  a  systematic  mediating
role, confirming  the  reliance  of  Guest's  model.

relation  between 

Table  2  Relationship  between  ecich isoluied  HRP  andpeiformance 

(model  I)

Variables

HI  Empowermenl  —  social 

and  organ,  perfbrmance

Estim

CR.

R-

0.283 

2.066** 

0.133 

)C/ddi

0.845 

GFI

0.983 

RMR

0.044

Social  and  organ,  performance 

6.220 

1.809* 

0.052

—• financial  perfonnance
H2 Compensation  —  social 

and  organ,  performance

0.335 

0.627 

0.000 

1.194 

0.977 

0.062

Social  and  organ,  performance 

0.715 

0.142 

0.000

—' tinancliti  perfonnance

H3 Commtmicanon-•  social 

0.109 

2.262** 

0.097 

1.861 

0.980 

0.063

and  organ,  performance

Social  and  organ,  perfbrmance 

6.485 

1,731* 

0.051

—• financial  pcrformanee

H4 Training —  social 

and  organ,  performance

0.094 

1.702* 

0.046 

1.603 

0.982 

0.054

Social  and  organ,  perfbrniatice 

6,364 

1.675* 

0,047

—• financial  performance

Notes
*p  < .10; **/; < .05.


Guerrero  and  Barraud-Didier:  High-involvement  practices 

1419

Table  3  Relationship  between  the  HR  bundle  and  peifonnance 

(model  2)

Variables

Estim

CR.

GFI

RMR

H5  Btindle  of  practices 

0.241 

2.328** 

0.141 

1.552 

0.927 

0.064

—"  social  and  organ,  pertbrmanee

Social  and  organ,  performance 

—• financial  performance

6.591 

1.800* 

0.053

Notes
*p  < ,10; **;) <  .05.

Impact of high-involvement  bundles  Our final  objective  wa.s to verify  hypothesis  H5
related  to the  link  between  HRPs combined  within  a bundle  and company  performance.
We  tested  a  second  model,  including  an  additional  latent  variable  called  'bundle  of
practices'  that  groups  the  four  HRPs  together.  The  results  show  Ihat  this  bundle  is
significantly  and  positively  related  to  social  and  organizational  performance.  Table  3
shows  the  results  enabling  to  validate  hypothesis  H5.  The  value  of  CR.  is  2.328  and
the  R^ percentage  is  14.1 per cenl. We can conclude that there  is a combinatory  effect  of
high-involvement  practice.^  that  surpasses  that  of  each  practice  considered  separately.
The  CR.  and  R"  scores  are  both  higher  than  those  obtained  during  the  testing  of
hypotheses  HI  to  H4, even  if the  differences  observed  remain  modest.

Figure  2 summarizes  our results  and  highlights  tbe  causal  chain  that  we  validated  in
this  study,  lt helps  visualize  tbe two  models  we tested  and  the  hypotheses  we  validated.

Dis(ussioti

High-involvement  practices  Our  study  used  a  theoretical 
lield  based  on  high-
involvement  to  elaborate  a  list  of  HRPs.  It  leads  to  tbe  conclusion  that,  in  France,

communication

cmpowcmicni

compensation

Iniining and skill

bujiJIf  ofhigh-
involvemenl
practices

perform a nti'

- quality  of prodinjV

and ser\ ices

- employee priiiiuc-

tivity

social  performance

- employee
attendance

High-involvement practices

HR outcomes 

Financiai  perTormance

•• 

Model 1

Moiid  2 

^  Non-sign iticani relation

Figure  2  Test  of the  research  tnodel


1420  The Internalional  Journal  of Hutnan  Re.source  Management

communication  and  empowerment  practices  are  more  related  to  perfonnance  scores.
From a theoretical  standpoint, these results are consistent  with the detinition  that we have
provided  for  high  involvement:  improvement  of  effort  and  involvement,  and  thus
enhancement  of  organizational  performance  through  more  active  participation  of  all
employees. From  an empirical  standpoint,  our results  are consistent  with  those  obtained
in prior research  (Cotton etai.  1988; Chang  and  Chen, 2002), The results about  training
practices  indicate  that  skill  deveiopmcnt  and  career  management  are  also important  for
involving  employees  in the company  success. This is in line  with  prior research  but  to a
lesser  extent.  Several  empirical  studies  reached  the  conclusion  that  training  practices
have  had  the  strongest  impact  on  performance,  with  R'  scores  greater  than  10 per  cent
(d'Arcimoles.  1997  in  France:  Delaney  and  Huselid,  1996  in  the  USA).  While  our
research  enables  us  to  validate  hypotheses  HI.  H3  and  HI4,  it  contradicts  the  well-
established  postulate  that compensation  is a source  of commitment.  In the context  of the
French  culture,  intrinsic  rewards have  a greater  impact  on company  performance.  Work
enrichment  practices,  group  work,  culture  reinforcement  and  skills deveiopment  should
be implemented  to increase employee involvement, and subsequently to bolster company
performance.  In  contrast,  extrinsic  rewards  have  no  impact  on  organizational  results.
Therefore,  hypothesis  H2  is not  validated.

Bundles of  HRP  Regarding  the concept  of  bundle, the resulls  of  our research  confirm
its relevance. Combined  high-invoivement  practices  explain  a greater  percentage  of  the
variance  of  organizational  performance  (R-  ^0.141)  than  practices  implemented  in
isolation  (R-  =  0.046  to 0.133).  However,  the  additional  explanatory  power  is  limited,
which  leads  us  to  consider  that  H5  has  been  only  partially  validated.  This  finding  is.
however,  a  major  contribution  of  our  work  in  two  respects.  First,  we  used  an  original
methodology  based  on  structural  equations  and  not  on  cluster  analysis  and  additive
measures  as in  previous  research.  Second,  this  is one  of  the  rare comparative  studies of
the isolated  and joint  impactsof  HRPs. The results obtained  confirmed  ihe value of  using
a  structured  high-involvement  policy  to  improve  organizational  perfonnance.

Company  performance  We tested  part of  Guest's and Boselie et «/.'s  (2001)  models.
For  this,  we  set  out  an  indirect  relation  between  high  involvement  and  financial
perfbrmance.  with  social  and  organizational  outcomes  playing  an  intermediate  role.
Previous  studies  that  considered  the  specific  role  of  social  results  found  that  they
moderate  the  relationship  (Chang  and  Chen.  2002;  Fey  et  ai,  2000;  Gelade  and  Ivery.
2003) or mediate  it (Arthur.  1994; Huselid,  1995; Guthrie, 2001). The correlation  matrix
we obtained  clearly  shows that  social  and organizational  variables  play  a mediating  role
since  we  did  not  find  significant  correlations  between  HRP  and  financial  results.  The
following  analysis  confirmed  this  result  and  therefore  validated  theoretical  frameworks
about  the  high-involvement  process.

Conclusion  on  high-invulvement  practices  in  France

The  objective  of  this  article  was  to  demonstrate  the  impact  of  high-involvement
management  on the companies* overall  performance.  It provides evidence to validate the
theory  that  some  HRPs  can  contribute  to  the  improvement  of  organizational  results.
For this, we focused  on four  core  practices and  tried  to replicate  previous  research  in the
French  context.  A  study  conducted  among  180  firms  showed  that  empowerment  is
the  practice  most  related  to  performance,  whereas  compen.sation  has  no  effect  on
perfonnance.  Communication  and  training  are  also  a  source  of  better  organizational


Guerrero  and  Barraud-Didier:  High-invoivement  practices 

1421

results.  This  underlines  the  value  of  creating  ehallenging  and  enriched  activities  to
manage  high  involvemenl.  The  ability  to  incorporate  open  communication  and  power
sharing  in order to change  managers'  style of  leadership  should  help companies  improve
Iheir  HRM  and  consequently  perfomiances.  Finally,  our  work  illustrates  the  interest  of
the  bundle  concept:  when  high-involvement  practices  are  combined  through  a  latent
variable,  they  have  a  stronger  impact  on  performance  than  when  they  are  studied  in
isolation.  This  result  stresses  the  importance  of  developing  a  high-involvement  global
policy  for  employees,  since  there  is  a synergy  between  each  oi  the  four  practices.

Despite 

these  encouraging  results,  our  research  presents  several 

limitations.
We  measured  HRP  and  social  and  organizational  performance  with  perceptual  Likert-
scales  filled  in by  a  single  respondent.  Objective  measures  were  used  only  for  financial
performances.  Several  authors  have  criticized  this  methodology,  since  the  data  rely  on
the  opinion  ol  HR  directors  and  do  not  take  in  account  the  employees"  viewpoint
{Gerhart  et  al... 2000).  Objective  measures  of  turnover,  absenteeism  and  increases  in
productivity  would  have  improved  our  research.  Unfortunately,  we  were  unable  to
collect this infonnation,  which is the strongest  limit of our work. Another limit is the lack
of  data  collected  after  the  questionnaire  administration.  We  measured  fmancial  results
one year later, which enables  us to consider the causal  relationship hetween  intermediate
variables  and  financial  perfonnances.  But  the  longitudinal  dimension  of  our  method
remains  limited.  Further  research  should  include  a  measure  of  perfonnances  taken  two
years hefore  and after  the completion of the questionnaire. Such a method  would  increase
knowledge  about  the  HR-performance  link.

However,  our  work  raises  perspectives  for  a  future  research  agenda,  lt questions  the
weight that we should give to each HR practice in order to explain performance.  Whereas
compensation  policy  seems  of  prime  importance  in  most  countries  (UK.  USA.  Asiatic
countries.  Russia),  empowerment  and  communicalion  are  more  emphasized  in  France.
What  is  the  part  played  hy  each  practice  in  involving  employees?  The  use  of  a  latent
variable  does  not  enable  us  to  answer  this  question.  Comparative  studies  in  various
countries  could  belp improve  our knowledge  on  this topic. Finally, we assessed  one  part
of  the causal  process  that explains  how  HR can  lead to higher results. We did  not  collect
data  about  the  perception  hy  employees  of  feeling  highly  involved.  Future  researcb
should  test  Guest's  overall  model  to  verify  if  our  list  of  HRPs  is relevant  to  explaining
employees'  involvement,  satisfaction  and  consequently  tirm  results.

References

Anhur,  J.  (1994)  'F.ffects  of  Humyn  Resource  Systems  on  Manufacturing  Pertbrmanee  and

Turnover".  Acmleiny  of  Maiuificmcnl  Journal,  37(3):  670-87.

Bae. J, and Luwler. J. (2000)  "Organisatiodal  and HRM  Slraiegies in Korta:  hnpac-l on  Organisation

Performance  in  an  Emerging  Economy",  Academy  of  Manageinciir  Journal,  43(3):  502- 17.

Bemard.  M. and  Rodgers. R. (2000)  "How Are  Iniemally  Oriented  HRM  Policies  Related  Io High-
Performance  Work  Practices?  Evidence  from  Singapore".  Iniemulional  Journal  of  Human
Resource  ManagemenI.  11(6):  1017-46.

Bessant. J. and Caffyn,  S. (1997)  'High-Involvement  Innovation  through Conlinuotis  hiiprovemcnt".

Inlcrnmioual  Journal  ofJecbnoiogy  Mumtfiement.  I4( I):  7-28.

Blaekwell.  D.W,.  Brickley. J.A.  and  Wcisbach.  M.S. (1994)  "Accounting  Information  and  lnlernal

Performance  I:valuation".  .loiirnal  of Accounlinp  and  Economics.  17: 331 - ? 8.

Boselie. P.. Paauwe. J. andJansen.P. (2(H)1) "Human Resource ManagemenI and Pcrl"ormance: Lessons
from  the Netherlands'. Inlenuiliontil  Journal  of Hurtuin  Resource  Maiuigement,  12(7):  1107-25.

Bums. T.  and  Stalker.  G.  (1961)  The  Management  of Innovation.  London:  Tavistock.


1422  The International  Journal  of Human  Resource  Management

Chang.  P- and Chen.  W. (2002)  The Effecl  of  Human  Resource  Management  Practices  on Firm
Perfonnance:  Empirical  Evidence  from  High-Tech  Firms  in Taiwan". International  Journal of
Management.  19(4):  622-32.

Cotton. J.. Vollrath, D.. Froggatt. K., Lengnick-Hall, M. and Jennings. K- (1988)  'Employee  Participa-

tion: Diverse Forms and  Different  Otiteomes". Acculemy of ManagemenI  Review.  13( 1):  8-22.

d'Arcimoles,  C.H.  (1997)  "Human  Resource  Policies  and Company  Performance:  A Quantitative

Approach  Using  Longitudinal  Data".  Organisation  Studies.  18(5):  857-74.

Delaney.  J, and Huselid.  M. (1996)  "The Impact  of  Human  Resouree  Managctneni  Practices on
Perceptions of Organisational  Perfonnance'.  Academy  of ManagemenI  Journal.  39(4): 949-69.
Delery. E. and Doty. H. (1996) 'Modes of theorizing in strategic human resources management: test of
universalistic contingency and configurational  perfbrmance  predictions'. Academv  of  Management
Joumal  A9:%02-i5.

d'Iribarne. P. (1996-7)  'The Usefulness of an Ethnographic Approach tu the International  Comparison

of Organisations'. Internalional  Siudws  of Management  and Orgimisati<m.  26(4): 30-47.

Fey. C.   Bjorkman.  I. and Pavlovskaya.  A. (20(K))  "The Effect  of Human  Resouree  Management
in  Russia",  International  Journal  of  Human  Resource

Practices  on  Firm  Performanee 
Management.  11(1):  1-18.

Gelade. G. and Ivery. M. (2003)  'The Impact of Human  Resource  Management  and Work  Climate

on  Organisational  Perf"onTiance".  Personnel  Psvchotogw  56(2):  383-96.

Gerhart.  B.. Wrighi.  P.. McMahan.  G. and Snell.  S. (2000)  "Meastjrement  Error  in  Research  on
Human  Resources and  Firm  Perfonnance:  How  Much  Error Is There and  How  Does It Inltuence
Effect  Si/e Estimates?".  Personnel  Psychology.  53(4):  803-34.

Guest,  D.  (1997)  "Human  Resource  Management  and  Performance:  A  Review  and  Research

Agenda',  International  Journal  of Human  Resource  Management,  8: 263-76.

Guest,  D.  (1999)  'Human  Resource  Management  -  The Workers"  Verdict'.  Human  Re.wurce

Management  Joumal.  9(5): 24.

Guest,  D.  (2001) 

'Human  Resource  Management:  When  Research  Confronts  Theory'.

International  Jimrnal  of Human  Resource  Management,  12(7):  1092- 106.

Guthrie. J. (2001)  "High-Involvement  Work  Practices. Tumover. and Productivity:  Evidence  from

New  Zealand'.  Academy   of  Management 

Journal,  44(1):  1 8 0 - 9 0.

Harel,  G. and T/afrir.  S.  (1999)  'The Effect  of  Human  Resource  Management  Practices  on the
Perceptions of Organisational  and Market  Performance  of the  Organisation'.  Human  Re.source
Management.  38(3):  185-200,

Hiltrop.  J.M. (1999)  T he   Quest  for the Best:  Human  Resource  Praetiees  to  Attract  and  Retain

Talent",  European  Managemcni  Journal.  17(4):  422-30.

Huselid. M.(1995) "The Impact of Human Resource M;magement  Practices on Turnover. Productivity,

and Corporate  Financial  Performance". Academy  of Management  Journal.  38(3): 635-72.

Huselid.  M..  Jackson.  S.  and  Schuler.  R.  (1997)  Technical  and  Strategic  Human  Resource
Management  Effectiveness  as Determinants  of  Firm  Performance',  Academv  of  Management
Joumat.miy.  171-88.

Ichniowski.  C. and Shaw.  K. (1999)  The Effects  of  Human  Resource  Management  Sysiems on
Economic  Performance:  An Inlernalional  Comparison of US and Japanese  Planis',  Management
Science.  45(5): 704-21.

Ichniowski. C,  Shaw,  K. and Prennushi, G. (1993)  T he  Effects  of Human  Resource  Management
Practices on Productivity',  unpublished  paper  presented  at the ILR School. Cornell  University.
13 September.

Kinnie.  N.. Hutchinson,  S. and Purcell.  J.  (2(H)0)  'Fun and Surveillance:  The Paradox  of  High-
Commitment  Management  in  Call  Centres",  Inlernational  Journal  of  Human  Resource
Management,  11(5):  967-85.

Knoke,  D. and Kalleberg,  A. (1994)  "Job Training  in US Organizations'.  American  Sociological

Review,  59:  537-46.

Kruse.  D.  (1992)  'Profit-sharing  and  productivity:  MicriJeconomic  evidence  from  the  United

Slates".  The  Economic  Joumal.  June,  24-37.

Lawier.  E. (1986)  High-Involvement  Management.  San Francisco.  CA:  Jossey-Bass.


Guerrero  and  Barraud-Didier:  High-involvement 

practices 

1423

Lawler.  E..  Mohrman.  A.  and  Ledford.  E.  (1992)  Employee  Involvement  and  Total  Quality

Management.  San  Francisco.  CA:  Jossey-Bass.

Leana. C. and  Elorkowski, G. (1992)  "Employee  Involvemenl  Programs:  Integrating  Psychological
Theory  and  Management  Practice". Re.search in Personnel  and  Human  Resources  Management,
10:  233-70.

Lorenz,  E.  (1992)  Trust  and  the  Flexible  Firm:  International  Comparisons",  tndu.strial  Relations.

31(3):  455-72.

MacDuffie.  J.  (1995)  'Human  Resouree  Bundles  and  Manufacturing  Pertormance:  Organisational
Logic  and  Flexible  Production  Systems  in  the  World  Aulo  Industry'.  Indusirial  and  ixibor
Relations  Review,  8(2):  197-221.

Marchington.  M.  and  Grugulis.  I.  (20(X))  "Best  Practice  Human  Resource  Management:  Perfect
Opportunity  or  Dangerous  Illusion?'.  Inlernalional  Journal  of  Human  Resource  Management,
11(6):  1104-24.

Ngo, H., Turban. D., Lau. C. and  LuJ. S. (1998)  'Human  Resource  Practices and Firm  Perfonnance
of  Multinational  Corporations:  Influences  of  Counlry  Origin".  International  Joumal  of  Human
Resource  Management,  9(4):  632-51.

Pedhazur,  E.  and  Pedhazur-Schmelkin.  L.  (199!)  Measurement.  Design,  and  Analysis.  Hillsdale.

NJ:  Eribautn.

Pfeffer.  J.  (1994)  Competitive  Advantage 

ihrough  People.  Boston,  MA:  Harvard  Business

School  Press.

Pfeffer.  J.  (1998)  "Seven  Practices  of  Successful  Organisations".  Califomia  Management  Review,

40(2):  96-124.

Pil,  F.  and  MacDuffie,  J.  (1996)  "The  Adoption  of  High-Involvement  Work  Practices",  Indusirial

Relations.  35(3): 423-55.

Richard,  O.  and  Johnson.  N.  (2(H)1)  'Strategic  Human  Resource  Management  Effectiveness  and
Firm  Performance',  Inlernalional  Jounial  of Human  Resource  Management.  12(2):  299-310.
Truss. C. (2001)  "Complexities and Controversies  in Linking  HRM with Organisational  Outcomes'.

Joumal  of Management  Sludies.  38(8):  1121 -49.

Whitener.  E.  (2001)  'Do  "High  Commitment""  Human  Resouree  Practices  Affeet  Employee
Commitment?  A  Cross-Level  Analysis  Using  Hierarchical  Linear  Modelling',  Journal  of
ManagemenI,  27:  515-35.

Wilkens.  U.  and  Pawlowsky,  P. (I997|  'Human  Resource  Management  or  Machines  that  Change

the  World  in  the  AuUimotive  Industry'.  Management  International  Review,  37(1):  105—26.

Wood.  S,  (1996)  "How  Different  Are  Human  Resource  Practices  in  Japanese  "Transplants"" in  the

UK?'.  Industrial  Relations  Journal.  35(4):  511 - 2 5.

Wood. S. and  De  Menezes.  L. (1998)  'High  Commitment  Management  in the UK:  Evidence  from
the  Workplace  Industrial  Relations  Survey,  and  Employers'  Manpower  and  Skills  Practices
Survey'.  Human  Relations,  51(4): 485-515.


View publication stats
View publication stats

