Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal 20 (2012) 363–377

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal

j o u r na l h o me p a g e : ww w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l oc a t e / p a c f i n

Corporate philanthropy: Insights from the 2008 Wenchuan
Earthquake in China
Fox Gao a, Robert Faff a,⁎, Farshid Navissi b
a University of Queensland, Australia
b Monash University, Australia

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 7 November 2011
Accepted 15 November 2011
Available online 25 November 2011

JEL classiﬁcation:
G14
G19
M3
L19

Keywords:
China
Corporate philanthropy
Event study
Strategic investment
2008 earthquake

1. Introduction

We explore the equity market impact of board announcements of cor-
porate donations made in response to the May 12th 2008 Wenchuan
earthquake in China. Our event study uses a sample of board an-
nouncements of corporate donations from Chinese A-share listed
companies. We ﬁnd that donor companies providing products and/
or services directly to end-consumers tend to enjoy higher abnormal
stock returns, thereby documenting a link between corporate social
responsibility and corporate ﬁnancial performance at least for some
corporate citizens. In light of the empirical results, the study suggests
that corporate philanthropic involvement should be treated as a dif-
ferentiated type of marketing tool to obtain social reputation and
publicity, as well as a relationship cultivation mechanism with local
government authorities.

© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Drawing upon prior research (for example, Patten, 2008 and Godfrey, 2005), we examine the market
impact of board announcements of corporate donations made in response to the May 12th 2008 Wenchuan
earthquake in China by domestic listed companies. Speciﬁcally, we test if the market reacts positively to of-
ﬁcial board announcements of corporate donations with an event study based on a sample of 221 Chinese
A-share listed company announcements. Moreover, we conduct cross-sectional multiple regression ana-
lyses to investigate whether the size of the donations and the timing of the donation announcements, as

⁎ Corresponding author at: UQ Business School, University of Queensland, Queensland, 4072, Australia. Tel.: +61 7 3346 8055;

fax: +61 7 3346 8166.

E-mail address: r.faff@business.uq.edu.au (R. Faff).

0927-538X/$ – see front matter © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.pacﬁn.2011.11.002


364

F. Gao et al. / Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal 20 (2012) 363–377

possible factors that might affect public and media perceptions, inﬂuence the magnitude of market reac-
tion. Six other relevant ﬁrm characteristics are also explored as potential inﬂuences on the market
reaction observed: (1) whether the donor company's core business is directly consumer-oriented;
(2) whether the donor company has committed in-kind support in its donation announcement; (3) the de-
gree of competition within a donor company's industry; (4) the size of the donor company; (5) the proﬁt-
ability of the donor company; and (6) the degree of ﬁnancial leverage of the donor company.

Since Milton Friedman's (1970) famous ‘attack’ on corporate social responsibility, the literature on cor-
porate philanthropy has evolved dramatically. In the past decade or so, numerous studies have attempted
to uncover the ‘true’ objectives and functional forms of corporate philanthropic involvement, with the ma-
jority documenting a link between corporate philanthropy as a strategic investment and economic beneﬁts.
Distinct from the more generalised studies of corporate social responsibility, corporate philanthropy in
the context of natural disasters poses a distinct topic, mostly due to its contingent nature. While consider-
able media and academic attention has been paid in recent years focusing on the potential that ﬁrms invest
philanthropically in ordinary times, the relevant research has not reached any clear consensus in the ways
in which corporate philanthropic involvement in natural disaster relief efforts might be beneﬁcial to the
donor ﬁrm itself. Without clearly identiﬁable economic beneﬁts, corporate philanthropy goes against the
long-established concepts of rationality and proﬁt maximisation in ﬁnancial management. As such, the crit-
ical importance of providing strategic justiﬁcation to various stakeholders (especially investors) of this spe-
cial category of corporate philanthropy in the event of natural disasters is increasingly being recognised.
One way of providing strategic justiﬁcation of a ﬁrm's engagement in corporate philanthropic disaster
relief effort is through the effective communication between the ﬁrm and its investors. Assuming corporate
rationality and proﬁt maximisation, when investors are better informed, they might be able to consider the
ﬁrm's philanthropic involvement as a “strategic” investment. Muller and Whiteman (2009) report that
ﬁrms typically communicate their philanthropic participation in natural disaster relief efforts to the public
through press releases and/or website correspondence. If such communications come via ofﬁcial board
announcements, investors could be more conﬁdent that the ﬁrm is trying to gain strategic beneﬁts.

While studies on corporate philanthropy take many different forms (for example, Campbell et al., 1999,
2002; Gardberg and Fombrun, 2006; and Godfrey, 2005), with the majority advocating a positive relation-
ship between corporate philanthropy as part of corporate social responsibility and corporate ﬁnancial per-
formance and thus implying positive shareholder reactions, there is a distinct absence of research testing
this relationship empirically. One of the major obstacles to exploring such linkages is that ﬁrms are not
obliged to publicly report their philanthropic activities. While there are numerous cases where such dis-
closure does take place through various means such as board announcements, press releases and website
correspondence, there is a paucity of published studies that examine whether, and under what conditions,
market participants react positively to ofﬁcial board announcements of corporate donations to natural
disaster relief efforts. Our study aims to help redress this situation.

There is also a very limited amount of research addressing the economic incentives behind corporate
philanthropic involvement in the context of natural disasters and corporate responses. The occurrence
of a particular natural disaster can be seen as a special major event—which serves as a unique platform
for ﬁrms trying to obtain strategic beneﬁts, by actively participating in disaster relief efforts. As such, it
presents a powerful, natural experimental setting to explore investor reaction to corporate philanthropy.
Apart from the general economic reasoning that can be explored in this scenario, the unique Chinese
setting adds great ﬂavour to the understudied area of corporate philanthropy. As the largest emerging mar-
ket and transitional economy in the world, China has not yet been able to achieve an efﬁcient separation
between business entities and government agencies, making ‘relationship cultivation’ an essential factor
for ﬁrms to obtain economic rent-seeking beneﬁts. However, China's social and institutional characteristics
prohibit formal corporate political rent-seeking activities in the overt forms of campaign contributions or
corporate lobbying, resulting in strategic philanthropy being one important legal form of political rent-
seeking strategies.

Our study contributes to the literature in a variety of important ways. First, it directly addresses corpo-
rate philanthropic involvement issues raised from the one-off nature of natural disasters. Second, this
study provides evidence of the associations between the magnitude of abnormal stock returns and certain
donations and ﬁrm characteristics. Third, the results of this study assist a broad spectrum of stakeholders
in understanding corporate philanthropic involvement in natural disaster relief efforts and the underlying


F. Gao et al. / Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal 20 (2012) 363–377

365

economic implications, to establish a rational philanthropic mechanism which aligns corporate motiva-
tions with social and political expectations, as well as investor interests. Fourth, this study provides a bet-
ter understanding of the unique business culture in the largest emerging market in the world—China, by
which the objectives and functional forms of corporate philanthropy can be vastly different to those of
Western economies.

The remainder of our paper proceeds as follows. The next section provides a brief background of the
2008 Wenchuan earthquake and reviews the extant literature on corporate philanthropic involvement
in general, the relationship between corporate social responsibility and corporate ﬁnancial performance,
as well as the theoretical arguments underpinning any such relationship. The paper subsequently builds
on these arguments by developing a number of testable hypotheses in the event of a natural disaster.
Data and the research method used in this study are then discussed, followed by presentation of research
ﬁndings. Finally, the paper provides discussion and draws conclusions, as well as highlighting several
managerial and policy implications.

2. General background

2.1. The 2008 Wenchuan earthquake in China and the corporate response

In the afternoon of May 12th, 2008, a massive earthquake—measuring 8.0 on the Richter scale, occurred
in Wenchuan County, Sichuan (Szechuan) Province, China. The earthquake quickly spread to other adjacent
areas within the greater Sichuan area, killing more than 87,000 people, with many more injured, as well as
causing enormous economic losses, with an estimated total of 845.1 trillion RMB (CCTV.com, 2008).

As a direct response to this catastrophic event, massive donations from individuals, communities, as
well as corporations were made to the affected areas and victims. It is evident that corporate donations
dominate the total contribution from both public and private sources. However, in sharp contrast with
Western societies, the general public of China didn't exhibit overwhelming support for the donor ﬁrms.
To illustrate, two extreme examples associated with the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake relate to dona-
tions made by China Vanke Co., Ltd. and the JDB Group. As the largest listed property developer in
China, Vanke announced a donation of 2 million RMB on the day of the earthquake, inducing immediate
unexpected public and media criticism for being too miserly, accompanied by a fall in the company's
stock price. A week later (on May 19th), the company announced that it would further donate 100 million
RMB to the earthquake relief effort, and on May 21st, the chairman of the company, Shi Wang, made a
public apology for the company “not being socially responsive and responsible”; but this was interpreted
by the public and the media as subsequent “crisis management” and public perception of the company
remained negative for some time. On the other hand, the JDB Group, an unlisted manufacturer of a popular
soft drink (called Wong Lo Kat) in China, attracted seemingly unanimous public and media applause for its
100 million RMB donation announced on May 15th, accompanied by a sharp increase in sales.

From these two examples it can be observed that corporate donations do affect corporate image, and
might bring about certain strategic effects. If acts of corporate philanthropic involvement are viewed pos-
itively by the public, they can increase the value of the donating ﬁrm by creating/enhancing what Fombrun
(1996) and Godfrey (2005) refer to as “reputational capital”.

On the basis that corporate philanthropy is aimed at increasing ﬁrm value by way of achieving a poten-
tial strategic effect, such behaviour, if perceived favourably by various stakeholders, should enhance corpo-
rate image, reputation and ultimately be reﬂected by positive stock returns. That is, announcements of
corporate donations have a signalling effect regarding the donating company's decision of making a strate-
gic “investment”. The effectiveness of this strategic investment is then directly linked to the donor compa-
ny's share price.

Corporate donations themselves represent a cost to the company and thus, any associated signal must
create a beneﬁt that outweighs the cost to achieve a positive net outcome on ﬁrm value. However, market
participants might not perceive such corporate behaviour as rational and could interpret the donation as
an agency cost to the company. That is, company executives might pursue a “benevolent” status for their
own good; or as suggested by Huang et al. (2011) that in the case of China, such cash outﬂow could be an
over-investment induced by top executives’ overconﬁdence. Accordingly, our study seeks to investigate
market participants’ reaction to corporate donations, to assess whether such corporate resource outﬂows


366

F. Gao et al. / Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal 20 (2012) 363–377

represent an agency cost to the principal, or a costly signal to the market conveying strategic motivations
of the donating ﬁrm.

2.2. A general view of corporate philanthropic involvement

Given that the link between corporate social responsibility and corporate ﬁnancial performance might
not be directly observable, researchers attempt to look at various motivations behind corporate philan-
thropic involvement. Campbell et al. (2002) identify four such possible motivations: strategic, altruistic, po-
litical and managerial utility.1 It is widely accepted that, in line with Friedman's (1970) view, absent
strategic beneﬁt, corporate philanthropic involvement goes against the long-established concepts of corpo-
rate rationality and proﬁt maximisation in ﬁnancial management. As a result, the current study recognises
that corporate philanthropic involvement may serve more than just a benevolent purpose where it can be
treated as a strategic tool to improve a ﬁrm's own bottom line.

The prior literature has identiﬁed strategic motivation as the most notable explanation of corporate
philanthropic involvement. An abundance of prior literature (for example, Campbell et al., 1999, 2002;
Haley, 1991; Mescon and Tilson, 1987; Navarro, 1988; and Schiller, 1988) labels corporate philanthropic in-
volvement as another marketing tool to be employed in an attempt to achieve the ultimate goal of maxi-
mising sales. The literature generally provides that ﬁrms engage corporate philanthropic involvement by
focusing on strategies relating to their core business and customer base, and a perceived positive outcome
is an enhanced corporate public image, which ultimately leads to an indirect impact on sales.

A similar perspective is taken by both Godfrey (2005), and Gardberg and Fombrun (2006), where corpo-
rate philanthropy can create reputational capital among communities and stakeholders. Such capital can pro-
vide shareholders with “insurance-like” protection for many of a ﬁrm's relations with various stakeholders,
including government, employees, suppliers and partners, and ultimately customers. Given that corporate
philanthropy can be seen as a shareholder wealth-maximising strategy, a direct link can be established be-
tween corporate social responsibility and corporate ﬁnancial performance, in which social responsibility is
manifested by philanthropic involvement and ﬁnancial performance is measured by shareholder wealth.

There appears to be no published empirical studies that document a positive linkage between corporate
disclosures of donations towards natural disaster relief efforts and market reactions, with the exception of
the study by Patten (2008). Based on a sample of 79 Fortune 500 ﬁrms, Patten (2008) conducts an event
study which investigates whether the US ﬁnancial market reacted to press releases (general web page dis-
closures from the contributing ﬁrm and third-party sources) of corporate donations made to the disaster
relief effort following the 2004 Southeast Asian tsunami. He ﬁnds, in general, signiﬁcant positive results
in terms of a 5-day cumulative abnormal return of just less than 1%. He further contends that, the positive
market reactions to donation announcements stem [only] from enhanced reputational capital. However,
Patten's study proposes only two donation characteristics (namely, size of the donation and the timing of
the donation announcement) as the possible drivers of the market reaction, and they are only tested
under a univariate simple t-test setting. Overall, to the extent that his analysis provides evidence that
there is no market penalty associated with such philanthropic behaviour, Patten's work suggests that
ﬁrms should consider participating in natural disaster relief efforts. The study, however, fails to justify
the validity of both motivations for corporate philanthropic involvement as a strategic investment and
the notion of reputational capital, as well as the “insurance-like” protection for the contributing ﬁrm,
when there is an apparent heterogeneity among corporate donors.

Although documenting a positive market reaction, Patten's (2008) study lacks some convincing ingre-
dients. First, his is a relatively small sample size: a total of 79 ﬁrms. Our study uses a much larger sample
of 221 ﬁrms. Second, his univariate-based analysis ignores the joint inﬂuence of variables that potentially
impact the economic motivations underlying corporate philanthropy. In contrast, we employ a cross-
sectional multiple regression approach which overcomes the concern of such univariate comparisons.
Moreover, there could be other drivers behind abnormal market reactions; or, to put it another way, corpo-
rate philanthropic involvement as a strategic investment and the associated gain in corporate reputation
might not be sufﬁciently captured by the size of the donations and the timing of the donation

1 Rather than “corporate philanthropic behaviour”, Campbell et al. (2002) label this term as “corporate charitable involvement”.


F. Gao et al. / Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal 20 (2012) 363–377

367

announcements; there are other variables which can potentially explain abnormal market reactions. Third,
the characteristics of US ﬁnancial markets, in terms of the bonding between corporate philanthropy and the
socioeconomic environment might be very different and generally weaker than in many of the Asian coun-
tries. High social sentiment and politically-related economic motivations should trigger a more efﬁcient
market reaction to corporate philanthropic involvement, which could then address more directly and effec-
tively the strategic motivation and the “insurance-like” protection property of reputational capital behind
corporate philanthropy.

Given the above discussion, we focus on the Chinese market, which exhibits properties of high social
sentiment and a sensitive political environment that can facilitate the empirical testing of arguments sup-
porting the strategic beneﬁt of corporate philanthropy. There is also the possibility that, looking at general
press releases as the designated “event” in Patten's study, does not present as powerful an experimental
setting as ofﬁcial board announcements. We argue that board announcements of donations likely represent
a carefully considered decision in terms of strategic investments, which could in turn trigger a more efﬁ-
cient evaluation by the market participants.

2.3. Business culture in China and the event study setting

China exhibits a unique social and political environment within which corporations operate. Business
culture impacts on the way ﬁrms behave and for many years this has been used extensively in various
business literatures as the basis for explaining differences in corporate behaviour (Hofstede, 1984).

Corporate behaviour in China can be seen as a unique relationship cultivation strategy (Hung, 2004).
This relationship cultivation is twofold. At the social level, it focuses on the societal aspect of the business
culture in China, where sentimental or moral reasons might encourage ﬁrms to strengthen ties with their
“hometown”; while at the political level, the management of government affairs and subsequent public
opinions can encourage certain corporate political action in an attempt to cope with media function and
mainstream culture predetermined by the Chinese political system (Chen, 2007; Dahles, 2005; Gao,
2006; and Wu, 2002). Corporate philanthropic involvement, as an implicit but direct response to social
and political “request”, serves as a unique tool in managing the corporations’ public relations with the
host nation, China, at both the social and political levels.

A further reason for selecting China as the target market is that, according to Muller and Whiteman
(2009), there is a “home region effect” (i.e., home bias effect) in corporate philanthropic involvement to-
wards natural disaster relief efforts, by which ﬁrms pay more attention to natural disasters that are closer
to their home regions, due to a sense of responsibility or a greater degree of tangibility.

There is also anecdotal evidence that the widespread coverage and dominance of media in China, espe-
cially the Internet, plays an important role in corporate philanthropic behaviour. This is so because it pro-
vides a far-reaching platform for expressing both genuine and disingenuous opinions, in which case public
perception of a particular ﬁrm could stem from these obligation-free fora. As a result of this media promi-
nence in China, corporate philanthropic involvement can also be driven by the public exerting pressure on
corporate citizens.

Consistent with the literature drawn from developed countries, several recent studies aimed at the
Chinese market also show that corporate philanthropic involvement is based on various strategic factors.
Gao (2009) indicates that corporate philanthropy in China is still in its infancy but exhibiting a blowout ef-
fect, where it is evident that more and more companies are now paying attention to philanthropic activi-
ties; he also ﬁnds that companies in household electronics and banking/insurance industries are more
concerned with their philanthropic responsibility. Su and He (2010) argue that Chinese companies carry
out philanthropic activities to better protect property rights and nurture political connections, which in
turn leads to enhanced corporate proﬁtability. Zhang et al. (2010) and Zu and Song (2009) show that
Chinese companies participate in philanthropic activities with a view of gaining economic beneﬁts, by
enhancing their own reputation and credibility.

Chen et al. (2010) show that return predictors in China are less heterogeneously distributed and stock
price is less informative, compared to their US counterparts, implying general market inefﬁciency in the
Chinese stock market. This contrasts Cheung et al. (2009) and Lei and Song (2011), who both demonstrate
the effect of corporate tunnelling with and without proper information disclosure and ﬁnd that, on aver-
age, stock price in China reacts efﬁciently to publicly available information. These mixed ﬁndings suggest a


368

F. Gao et al. / Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal 20 (2012) 363–377

need for further empirical testing of market efﬁciency in China, hence, further motivating our study with
its adoption of the event study approach.

The event study approach is commonly used to assess whether there is an abnormal stock price effect
associated with an unanticipated event. It is mostly associated with mainstream corporate events such as
merger and acquisition, dividend/earnings announcement, and regulatory changes. But the actual application
can be extended to many more ‘non-standard’ events such as the effect of corporate name changes where
under certain conditions, the announcement by a listed company with regard to a trading name change in-
duces a stock price impact (Kot, 2011). Likewise, for the purpose of the current study, each individual commu-
nication (more speciﬁcally, corporate board announcements publicising the total monetary value of corporate
donations to the earthquake relief effort) can be seen as a discrete event representing a social investment by
the ﬁrm. If the corporate role in responding to catastrophic events like the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake in
China was so prominent, it is an important case for exploring whether, and under what conditions, making
a contribution in response to a natural disaster can be beneﬁcial to the ﬁrm itself.

3. Basic literature review and hypothesis development

3.1. General market reaction

While corporate philanthropy has become a reasonably common practice in recent times, whether it is
a value-enhancing activity is unresolved. A diverse body of literature has emerged to provide modern in-
sights into corporate philanthropic behaviour and argue that corporate donations can be justiﬁed on a
“strategic” level (Campbell et al., 1999, 2002; and Porter and Kramer, 2002). Campbell et al. (1999) and
Ricks (2005) show that corporate philanthropy can be associated with greater brand equity and consumer
perceptions, and can lead to increased sales due to a special marketing effect which corporate donations
can bring to the contributing ﬁrms themselves. Occurrence of natural disasters may create a special
one-off opportunity for a marketing campaign that companies can engage; and therefore corporate phil-
anthropic involvement in natural disaster relief efforts could be considered a form of cause-related mar-
keting to promote the ﬁrm's brand image.

Saiia et al. (2003, p. 170) deﬁnes strategic corporate philanthropy as the practice of “… giving of corpo-
rate resources to address nonbusiness community issues that also beneﬁt the ﬁrm's strategic position and,
ultimately, its bottom line.” Consistent with this line of reasoning, Godfrey (2005) argues that corporate
philanthropy can create what is known as “moral capital” or “relational wealth”, and by participating in
philanthropic activities, ﬁrms tie their social positions more closely to various stakeholders in an attempt
to enhance corporate reputation, which in turn can translate into higher levels of trust, loyalty, goodwill
and legitimacy. Consequently, these enhanced attributes can provide an “insurance-like” protection against
adverse conditions arising from various stakeholder groups, such as consumer boycotts and excessive gov-
ernment scrutiny.

Another potential strategic motivation behind corporate philanthropic involvement in natural disaster
relief efforts relates to the donating company's ability to “signal”. On the basis of being able to capture the
strategic beneﬁts associated with disaster relief engagement, corporate donations could signal the donating
company's current ﬁnancial standing. Such a signal could convey information to market participants that
the donating company is cash rich, experiencing sound ﬁnancial performance and expecting good future
business conditions, not constrained by ﬁnancial leverage, as well as trying to be identiﬁed as being socially
responsive and responsible. Thus, donor ﬁrms could attract the attention of market participants and lead to
a positive abnormal stock return.

Based on the forgoing discussion, the following hypothesis is proposed:

H1. The announcement of corporate donations to the earthquake relief effort will induce a positive market
impact.

3.2. Donation characteristics

Following Patten (2008), the donation characteristics that we examine are the size of donations and
the timing of the donation announcements. Assuming corporate rationality and proﬁt maximisation,


F. Gao et al. / Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal 20 (2012) 363–377

369

ﬁrms making larger (smaller) donations to the earthquake relief effort might be perceived as more (less)
generous and exhibiting more (less) genuine corporate social responsibility and, as a result, could lead to a
larger (smaller) increase in reputational capital as well as a better (weaker) marketing effect.

Because the early donation announcements received substantial media exposure towards the end of the
ﬁrst week following the earthquake (May 12th–May 18th), especially in the case of Vanke (one of the two
extreme examples with regard to the size of donations), announcements of corporate donations after the
ﬁrst week following the earthquake might be perceived as exhibiting disingenuous corporate social re-
sponsibility. As a result, delayed donations might lead to a lower, if any, increase in reputational capital
as well as the proposed marketing effect. A short reaction time with regard to announcements of corporate
donations within the ﬁrst week could be rewarded more by market participants as a result of the novelty
and ﬁrst mover advantage.

Accordingly, the following hypotheses are proposed:

H2. The announcement of corporate donations to the earthquake relief effort will induce a market impact that
is positively associated with the size of the donation.

H3. The announcement of corporate donations to the earthquake relief effort will induce a market impact that
is more positive for earlier announcing ﬁrms.

3.3. Firm characteristics

Campbell et al. (1999), Strahilevitz (1999), and Strahilevitz and Myers (1998), provide evidence that
corporate philanthropy can positively manipulate corporate public image by enhancing corporate reputa-
tion, leading to the ultimate goal of sales promotion. Therefore, ﬁrms could utilise corporate philanthropy
to increase their corporate reputation, by transforming corporate philanthropy into a marketing mecha-
nism. Campbell et al. (1999) further show that charitable behaviour varies considerably, based on the ﬁrm's
main type of product sold. That is to say, such marketing efforts should be more effective for ﬁrms’ products
or core business that are directly consumer-oriented, and a less effectiveness should be anticipated for
ﬁrms having non-directly consumer-oriented products or core business. For example, commodity manu-
facturers tend to incur a larger marketing expense than mining companies, because marketing could pro-
mote more sales for commodity manufacturers whereas customers of mining companies are not general
consumers, and the marketing efforts should be more effective for commodity manufacturers.

Accordingly, the following hypothesis is proposed:

H4. The announcement of corporate donations to the earthquake relief effort will induce a market impact that
is more positive for companies whose products or core business are directly consumer-oriented.

Apart from donating cash, many ﬁrms choose to participate in natural disaster relief efforts by donating
goods and/or services. In particular, ﬁrms make in-kind donations in line with their core business and such
in-kind donations, according to Campbell et al. (1999) and Ricks (2005), exhibit a cause-related marketing
effect in which the goods and/or services delivered are apparently associated with the donating company's
brand image, and thus serving as marketing samples. In addition, it could also be suggested that making in-
kind donations allow the donor company to write off its excess inventory while deducting taxes, as well as
attracting other strategic beneﬁts of corporate philanthropy. Based on this line of reasoning, market partic-
ipants might perceive corporate donations that include in-kind components (with or without cash dona-
tions) to be more strategic than cash only donations.

Based on the above arguments the following hypothesis is proposed:

H5. The announcement of corporate donations to the earthquake relief effort will induce a market impact that
is more positive for companies whose announced donation package includes in-kind donations.

The degree of competition within a speciﬁc industry can have an impact on market reaction in terms of
the usefulness and effectiveness of corporate philanthropic involvement as a strategic investment. For rel-
atively competitive industries, the strategic value of corporate philanthropic involvement manifested in the
form of a marketing mechanism should be higher, because a natural disaster provides a unique marketing


370

F. Gao et al. / Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal 20 (2012) 363–377

opportunity for ﬁrms to engage, and thus ﬁrms within these relatively competitive industries could enjoy a
relatively higher abnormal stock return. On the other hand, if the industries are relatively concentrated, the
attached strategic value is expected to be low, because the beneﬁt associated with corporate philanthropic
involvement is marginal and the marketing mechanism is less likely to be of much use, and, thus, ﬁrms
within these relatively concentrated industries might only experience a relatively lower abnormal stock
market reaction.

On the other hand, however, ﬁrms that have relatively large market power (i.e., ﬁrms within relatively
concentrated industries) are perceived to be more vulnerable to adverse political and social sentiment
than those in relatively competitive industries. Such ﬁrms might, at their discretion, seek protection
against adverse stakeholder pressures. It is therefore by participating in philanthropic activities, that
these ﬁrms make a strategic investment to “purchase” what Godfrey (2005) refers to as an “insurance-
like” protection from the general public, media and government agencies. The occurrence of a natural
disaster can serve as a special avenue of corporate reputation and legitimacy, and is vastly different to gen-
eral corporate philanthropy because of the substantial media exposure during the time of intense disaster
relief efforts. The effect of promoting corporate benevolence during natural disaster relief efforts is analo-
gous to the marketing effect, which can be magniﬁed because of the enormous scale of media and public
attention. Therefore, ﬁrms within relatively concentrated industries might see a higher stock market reac-
tion associated with a higher gain in reputational capital and legitimacy; whereas ﬁrms within relatively
competitive industries might only beneﬁt from marginal effects and, thus, experience a lower market
impact.

Accordingly, the following hypotheses are proposed:

H6a. The announcement of corporate donations to the earthquake relief effort will induce a market impact that
is more positive for companies within a relatively competitive industry.

H6b. The announcement of corporate donations to the earthquake relief effort will induce a market impact that
is more positive for companies within a relatively concentrated industry.

4. Data and research method

4.1. Sample

Our sample comprises Chinese A-share listed companies issuing a dated board announcement (as op-
posed to general press release) of corporate donation to the Wenchuan earthquake in China. The board an-
nouncements collected and utilised in this study range from the earliest on May 13th (one day right after
the earthquake) to July 18th, within a period of around two months.2 Similar to the argument in Patten
(2008), requiring a dated board announcement increases the likelihood that the company is motivated
by a strategic advantage; and also facilitates the implementation of the event study research method.

Board announcements made by China A-share listed companies in relation to the earthquake relief
effort have been hand collected and reviewed from the two Chinese stock exchange websites3 and one
ofﬁcial listed company information disclosure website.4 An initial sample of 278 earthquake relief effort
oriented board announcements issued within the two-month time frame are identiﬁed. However, 57 of
these are eliminated from the ﬁnal sample for one or more reasons.5 Accordingly, there are 221 announce-
ments in the ﬁnal sample, with 118 (103) coming from the Shanghai (Shenzhen) Stock Exchange.

2 The use of the cut-off date of July 18th, while ad hoc, is justiﬁed by a further data search which indicates that there are very few

board announcements made with regard to corporate donations to the earthquake relief effort beyond this time frame.

3 The Shanghai Stock Exchange (SSE): http://www.sse.com.cn; and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange (SZSE): http://www.szse.cn.
4 Shenzhen Securities Information Co., Ltd.: http://www.cninfo.com.cn.
5 First, for six of the announcements, the donation size cannot be determined. Second, 29 announcements were excluded because
the announcers, 14 companies in total, issued more than one donation announcement in the period of analysis indicating additional
contributions to the earthquake relief effort. Third, four announcements came together with an information release that the donat-
ing companies’ business operations were adversely affected by the earthquake. Fourth, one company was newly listed on the stock
exchange only 4 days prior to the earthquake. Finally, a review of the archived board announcements and stock market trading his-
tory revealed 17 companies with potentially confounding information disclosures and/or frequent trading halts during the period of
analysis.


F. Gao et al. / Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal 20 (2012) 363–377

371

Our sample spans 54 different industries (based on the two-digit primary CSRC code).6 Companies in
the pharmaceutical industry (22) and the chemical material and products manufacturing industry (16)
have the highest incidence. In terms of size (total operating revenues),7 our sample companies range
from 7.37 million RMB to 65.33 billion RMB. The mean size is 1.07 billion RMB, whereas the median is
339.56 million RMB.

4.2. Measuring market impact

An event study approach using the market and risk-adjusted return model (i.e., the standard market
model) and daily stock returns was employed to calculate the abnormal returns associated with a ﬁrm's
board announcement of its intent to donate towards the earthquake relief effort. This method analyses
the overall impact of announcements of corporate philanthropic involvement on donating companies’
stock returns, which is hypothesised to be positive (H1).

Market model estimation is based on a 100-trading day estimation window ending on May 9th, 2008
(the last trading day preceding the earthquake).8 Market return was measured using the two prominent
indices in China: Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index and Shenzhen Stock Exchange Component
Index. All stock return and market data were collected using the China Stock Market & Accounting Re-
search Database (CSMAR).

Cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) are calculated by summing daily abnormal returns (ARs) over the
5-day event window beginning on day 0 (the announcement date) and ending on day +4. Statistical sig-
niﬁcance is assessed following two alternative approaches. First, the one sample Student t-statistic is used
to verify whether the mean abnormal return for a particular event day is signiﬁcantly different from zero
(as discussed in Brown and Warner, 1985). Second, each ﬁrm's daily ARs are standardised using the mean
standard deviation of the company's prediction error over the estimation period adjusted for prediction
outside of the estimation window and then summed over the relevant event window to arrive at daily
and cumulative abnormal returns. The sample's mean standardised CARs are tested for statistical signiﬁ-
cance using the Z-statistic (as discussed in MacKinlay, 1997 and McWilliams and Siegel, 1997).

4.3. Donation and ﬁrm characteristics

To test H2 to H6a and H6b, a multiple regression model is estimated using the OLS method. The abnor-
mal return (ARit) and/or any cumulative abnormal return (CARit) on each ﬁrm's stock on the respective
day as derived from the event study above are chosen as the dependent variable in separate regressions.
The multivariate regression model is given by:

ð

ARi0 CARit

Þ ¼ α þ β1 Di=ORi

ð

Þ þ β2Ti þ β3COi þ β4IKi þ β5HHIi þ β6ORi þ β7ROAi þ β8DRi þ ε

ð1Þ

where ARi0 (CARit) is the Day 0 abnormal stock return (cumulative abnormal stock return); (Di/ORi) is the
total donation (both cash and in-kind) scaled by total operating revenue; Ti is the timing of board
announcement and is a dummy variable taking a value of 1 if the board announcement is made during
the ﬁrst week following the earthquake and 0 otherwise; COi is the consumer orientation and is a
dummy variable taking a value of 1 if the donor has direct consumer orientation and 0 otherwise; IKi is
the inclusion of in-kind donations and is a dummy variable taking a value of 1 if the board announcement
includes in-kind donations and 0 otherwise; HHIi is the Herﬁndahl–Hirschman Index indicating industry
concentration in the contributing ﬁrm's industry (whereby industry is deﬁned based on the two-digit pri-
mary CSRC code); ORi is the total operating revenue of the ﬁrm; ROAi is the return on assets of the ﬁrm,
deﬁned as net proﬁt over total assets; and DRi is the debt ratio, deﬁned as total liabilities over total assets.

6 China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC): http://www.csrc.gov.cn.
7 All ﬁnancial information for sample companies is sourced from the most recent quarterly accounting reports preceding the
earthquake, with all reports dated March 31st, 2008. Total operating revenue is used instead of market capitalisation because it
can be problematic to analyse ﬁrm size in China using market capitalisation due to the existence of various non-circulating stock-
holdings such as State shares and Legal person shares.

8 The use of a 100-day estimation period is necessary in this study, rather than the more standard 250-day estimation window,
because a number of sample companies were not established 100 days prior to the earthquake; also frequent trading halts occur
within the 250-day window, which could potentially undermine the consistency of AR estimation using the standard market model.


372

F. Gao et al. / Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal 20 (2012) 363–377

The variable (Di/ORi) is used to test H2; variable Ti is used to test H3; variable COi is used to test H4; and
variable IKi is used to test H5—in each case a positive coefﬁcient is predicted. HHIi is used to test H6a (H6b)
and a positive (negative) coefﬁcient is predicted. Variables ORi, ROAi, and DRi are used as control variables.
In Table 1, we present some basic descriptive statistics and correlations for our key empirical proxies.
We observe that the Consumer Orientation (CO) variable is positively correlated with daily abnormal
returns but not correlated with either of the two cumulative abnormal returns; whereas the Herﬁndahl–
Hirschman Index (HHI) variable is positively correlated with the two cumulative abnormal returns but
not correlated with daily abnormal returns; the Return on Assets (ROA) variable is negatively correlated
with both daily and cumulative abnormal returns. None of the other explanatory variables are statistically
correlated with the explained variables. Table 2 presents a summary of the hypotheses and how they relate
to the core test variables.

5. Results

5.1. Market reaction

Table 3 reports the results of the average abnormal stock returns associated with ofﬁcial board an-
nouncement of donations to the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake relief effort, for our sample of 221 ﬁrms.
The table shows daily abnormal returns for each day from day 0 to day +4, as well as cumulative abnormal
returns for the period of analysis, to capture possible price effects of board announcements. Table 3 also re-
ports the percentage of abnormal return measures that are positive across the full sample, which gives a
descriptive understanding as to the effects of announcements of corporate donations.

According to Table 3, the day zero abnormal return of approximately 0.414% is statistically signiﬁcant at
conventional levels (p-value b5%, for both the t-statistic and Z-statistic). Two-day cumulative abnormal
returns and three-day cumulative abnormal returns are also positive and statistically signiﬁcant at conven-
tional levels. However, an examination of subsequent individual daily abnormal returns reveals that the
day 0 positive return quickly disappears. Moreover, the pattern may be reversed later and move into neg-
ative territory, after the initial effects of the announcements gradually fade away. This could be due to
investors initially reacting positively in an efﬁcient manner to donation decisions, but then reversing
their pricing support when more and more companies participate in the cause-related campaign and,
thus, netting out the initial positive effects. Nonetheless, the proportion of positive effects (i.e. the percent-
age of positive return cases) outweighs the negative effects and the results, therefore, at least provide
evidence that for some companies, there is a favourable acceptance in the local stock market of board
announcements of corporate donations to the 2008 earthquake relief effort. It is thus informative, as
hypothesised earlier, to examine the ﬁrm-level drivers behind these event date returns in an attempt to
better explain the relationship between donation announcements and market reaction.9

5.2. Multiple regression analysis

Table 4 presents the results for the cross-sectional regression model when three alternative dependent
variables are used: day 0 AR, two-day CAR and three-day CAR, regressed upon the independent and con-
trol variables. The estimated multivariate regression shows that on day 0, Consumer Orientation (CO), as a
factor which could potentially affect the magnitude of announcements of corporate donations as a

9 Due to the existence of event time clustering in this the results presented in Table 3 could be biased due to potential dependen-
cies in abnormal returns. While Patten (2008) ignores this potential concern in his analysis of the 2004 Tsunami event, we apply a
portfolio return approach as a robustness check. The portfolio approach aggregates the individual abnormal returns into a portfolio
dated using event time (date of board announcement). This approach allows for cross correlation of the abnormal returns among
different securities and industries. Although daily abnormal return and two-day cumulative abnormal returns (untabulated) remain
signiﬁcant (three-day cumulative abnormal returns is now insigniﬁcant), their respective signiﬁcance levels drop from 5% to 10%.
This result does not threaten the validity of the general approach for detecting abnormal stock returns, as in their classic study of
event study methodologies using daily stock returns, Brown and Warner (1985) show that tests ignoring cross-sectional depen-
dence can be well speciﬁed and have higher power than tests which account for potential dependencies. Since the daily abnormal
return and two-day cumulative abnormal returns remain qualitatively unchanged to those reported in Table 3, we conclude that the-
se results are not materially affected by the potential dependencies in abnormal stock returns.


Table 1
Some basic descriptive statistics and correlations. The variables reported in this table are: ARi0 (CARit) is the Day 0 abnormal stock return (cumulative abnormal stock return) as described in the
text; (Di/ORi) is the total donation (both cash and in-kind) scaled by total operating revenue; Ti is the timing of board announcement and is a dummy variable with a value of 1 representing a board
announcement made during the ﬁrst week following the earthquake and 0 otherwise; COi is the consumer orientation and is a dummy variable with a value of 1 representing direct consumer
orientation and 0 otherwise; IKi is the inclusion of in-kind donations and is a dummy variable with a value of 1 representing board announcement that include in-kind donations and 0 otherwise;
HHIi is the Herﬁndahl–Hirschman Index indicating industry concentration in the contributing ﬁrm's industry (whereby industry is deﬁned based on two-digit primary CSRC code); ORi is the total
operating revenue of the ﬁrm; ROAi is the return on assets of the ﬁrm, deﬁned as net proﬁt over total assets; and DRi is the debt ratio, deﬁned as total liabilities over total assets. The sample is 221
board announcements of corporate donations made by Chinese A-share listed companies. * signiﬁcant at the 10% level; ** signiﬁcant at the 5% level and *** signiﬁcant at the 1% level.

Descriptive statistics

Correlations (Pearson product–moment)

Variable

Mean

S.D.

1 AR

2 CAR-2

3 CAR-3

4 TD

5 TD/OR

6 T

7 CO

8 IK

9 HHI

10 OR

11 ROA

Panel A: dependent variables—abnormal return measures
1
2
3

ARi0
2-day CARit
3-day CARit

0.00414
0.00495
0.00507

0.03278
0.04351
0.05353

1
0.7021⁎⁎⁎ 1
0.4692⁎⁎⁎ 0.8158⁎⁎⁎

1

Panel B: explanatory variables
Donation amount
4
(Di)
Di/ORi
Ti
COi
IKi
HHIi
ORi ($1 m)
ROAi
DRi

5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

2,799,18 4,429,91 0.0302

−0.0021

−0.0449

1

0.07385
0.1471⁎⁎

0.02016 −0.0752 −0.0657
0.00891
0.36591
0.15837
0.47608
0.34389
0.46258 −0.0097 −0.0538
0.30769
0.1185⁎
0.07728
0.08016
1,068.49 4,704.58 −0.0158 −0.0447
0.01467
0.50767

0.0153
0.0242

0.02563

−0.0660
0.00026
0.0370
−0.0815
0.1126⁎
−0.0844

0.02282 −0.1258⁎ −0.1399⁎⁎ −0.1742⁎⁎⁎ 0.1418⁎⁎
0.19577 −0.0155

0.002316

0.0088

0.2093⁎⁎⁎ 1
0.0145
0.0092
0.1773⁎⁎⁎ 0.1189⁎
0.0840
0.0683
−0.1243⁎ −0.0148 −0.1773⁎⁎⁎ −0.0890 1
0.0420
0.3106⁎⁎⁎ −0.0712

1
0.1034
−0.0475 0.0333

0.0119
0.1212⁎ −0.0265
−0.04199 −0.1547⁎⁎ −0.1055 −0.0266

−0.0517 0.0851
0.0196
−0.0789 0.0901

0.0016

0.0397

1

1

1

−0.0077 −0.0086

1

0.2211⁎⁎⁎ −0.3034⁎⁎⁎

F

.

G
a
o

e
t

a
l
.

/

P
a
c
i

ﬁ
c
-
B
a
s
i
n

F
i
n
a
n
c
e

J
o
u
r
n
a
l

2
0

(
2
0
1
2
)

3
6
3
–
3
7
7

3
7
3


374

F. Gao et al. / Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal 20 (2012) 363–377

Table 2
Summary of hypotheses and key test variables. The variables in this table are: ARi0 is the Day 0 abnormal stock return as described in
the text; (Di/ORi) is the total donation (both cash and in-kind) scaled by total operating revenue; Ti is the timing of board announce-
ment and is a dummy variable with a value of 1 representing a board announcement made during the ﬁrst week following the earth-
quake and 0 otherwise; COi is the consumer orientation and is a dummy variable with a value of 1 representing direct consumer
orientation and 0 otherwise; IKi is the inclusion of in-kind donations and is a dummy variable with a value of 1 representing
board announcement that include in-kind donations and 0 otherwise; HHIi is the Herﬁndahl–Hirschman Index indicating industry
concentration in the contributing ﬁrm's industry (whereby industry is deﬁned based on two-digit primary CSRC code).

Hypothesis
number

Hypothesis description

H1

H2

H3

H4

H5

H6a

H6b

The announcement of corporate donations to the earthquake relief effort will induce a
positive market impact
The announcement of corporate donations to the earthquake relief effort will induce a
market impact that is positively associated with the size of the donation
The announcement of corporate donations to the earthquake relief effort will induce a
market impact that is more positive for earlier announcing ﬁrms
The announcement of corporate donations to the earthquake relief effort will induce a
market impact that is more positive for companies whose products or core business are
directly consumer-oriented
The announcement of corporate donations to the earthquake relief effort will induce a
market impact that is more positive for companies whose announced donation package
includes in-kind donations
The announcement of corporate donations to the earthquake relief effort will induce a
market impact that is more positive for companies within a relatively competitive industry.
The announcement of corporate donations to the earthquake relief effort will induce a
market impact that is more positive for companies within a relatively concentrated industry

Key test
variable

ARi0

Di/ORi

Ti

COi

IKi

HHIi

Prediction

+

+

+

+

+

+

−

strategic investment on marketing expense, is positive and statistically signiﬁcant, thus supporting H4.
This ﬁnding is consistent with various theoretical arguments that corporate philanthropy has a marketing
effect and in the case of board announcements of engagement to disaster relief effort, market participants
continue to see value of such marketing strategy. The magnitude of the effect, 1.07%, is surprisingly large
and indicates that this strategic marketing effect could potentially dominate other possible strategic mo-
tivations behind corporate philanthropic involvement in natural disaster relief efforts.

The Herﬁndahl–Hirschman Index (HHI), although not signiﬁcant in the day 0 analysis, does exhibit sig-
niﬁcant effects on the two-day CAR and three-day CAR. The direction of the estimated coefﬁcient is positive
indicating that market participants value such strategic investment in line with the donating companies’
needs to raise reputational capital and legitimacy, as well as creating the “insurance-like” protection for
the ﬁrm, as opposed to a relatively non-productive marketing expense and the associated potential market
effect. This thus rejects hypothesis H6a and supports hypothesis H6b.

The other three test variables: donation amount (i.e. relating to H2), donation timing (i.e. relating to
H3) and in-kind (i.e. relating to H5) donations, are not statistically signiﬁcant. As such, these latter results
imply that: (1) market participants assume corporate rationality and proﬁt maximisation and regard the
amount of donations as appropriate; (2) investors continue to see value in the announcements of

Table 3
Daily abnormal returns (ARs) and cumulative abnormal returns (CARs). This table reports the outcome of the basic event study as
described in the text. ARit (CARit) is the Day 0 abnormal stock return (cumulative abnormal stock return) as described in the text.
The sample is 221 board announcements of corporate donations made by Chinese A-share listed companies. * signiﬁcant at the
10% level; ** signiﬁcant at the 5% level and *** signiﬁcant at the 1% level.

Event date

Mean ARit (%)

T-statistic

Z-statistic

CARit (%)

T-statistic

Z-statistic

Percentage CARs >0

0
1
2
3
4

0.414
0.081
0.013
−0.187
−0.200

1.88**
0.39
0.06
−1.00
−0.97

2.03**
0.40
0.42
−0.68
−0.44

0.414
0.495
0.508
0.321
0.121

1.88**
1.69**
1.41*
0.82
0.29

2.03**
1.72**
1.65**
1.09
0.78

59.73
56.56
57.92
57.47
56.56


F. Gao et al. / Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal 20 (2012) 363–377

375

Table 4
Multivariate cross-sectional regression analysis of the linkage between abnormal returns and donation and ﬁrm characteristics. This
table reports the outcome of estimating cross-sectional regressions designed to explain variation in market reaction to corporate
philanthropy in terms of donation and ﬁrm characteristics. The variables reported in this table are: ARi0 (CARit) is the Day 0 abnormal
stock return (cumulative abnormal stock return) as described in the text; (Di/ORi) is the total donation (both cash and in-kind)
scaled by total operating revenue; Ti is the timing of board announcement and is a dummy variable with a value of 1 representing
a board announcement made during the ﬁrst week following the earthquake and 0 otherwise; COi is the consumer orientation and is
a dummy variable with a value of 1 representing direct consumer orientation and 0 otherwise; IKi is the inclusion of in-kind dona-
tions and is a dummy variable with a value of 1 representing board announcement that include in-kind donations and 0 otherwise;
HHIi is the Herﬁndahl–Hirschman Index indicating industry concentration in the contributing ﬁrm's industry (whereby industry is
deﬁned based on two-digit primary CSRC code); ORi is the total operating revenue of the ﬁrm; ROAi is the return on assets of the
ﬁrm, deﬁned as net proﬁt over total assets; and DRi is the debt ratio, deﬁned as total liabilities over total assets. The sample is 221
board announcements of corporate donations made by Chinese A-share listed companies. * signiﬁcant at the 10% level; ** signiﬁcant
at the 5% level and *** signiﬁcant at the 1% level.

Variable

Di/ORi
Ti
COi
IKi
HHIi
ORi ($1 m)
ROAi
DRi
Intercept

Hypothesis and
prediction

H2: +
H3: +
H4: +
H5: +
H6a: +/H6b: −
Control
Control
Control

ARi0

Coefﬁcient
−0.1615
0.0063
0.0107**
−0.0003
0.0196
>−0.0001
−0.2145**
−0.0108
0.0083

Two-day CAR

Three-day CAR

t-statistic
−1.45
1.04
2.26
−0.05
0.70
−0.30
−2.12
−0.88
1.02

Coefﬁcient
−0.1391
0.0030
0.0045
−0.0040
0.0671*
>−0.0001
−0.2942**
−0.0103
0.0103

t-statistic
−0.94
0.37
0.72
−0.63
1.79
−0.80
−2.17
−0.63
0.95

Coefﬁcient
−0.1843
0.0015
0.0073
−0.0085
0.0809*
>−0.0001
−0.4454***
−0.0161
0.0162

t-statistic
−1.02
0.15
0.96
−1.10
1.77
−1.38
−2.71
−0.81
1.24

corporate philanthropic involvement in natural disaster relief efforts that were less timely than those of
the early responders; and (3) investors treat in-kind donations as comparable in corporate resource out-
ﬂow terms as cash donations, and in-kind donation's marketing effect is not valued as opposed to the con-
sumer orientation factor.

One of the control variables, return on assets (ROA), generates an interesting insight. While not
hypothesised, ROA turns out to be highly signiﬁcant across all three event windows and the negative esti-
mated coefﬁcients indicate that investors are rational in judging the appropriateness of corporate philan-
thropic involvement as a strategic investment. The rationale is that if a ﬁrm is currently enjoying a
relatively high proﬁtability from its business operations, the incentive to participate in philanthropic activ-
ities and the associated strategic motivations and beneﬁts are rather marginal, or such behaviour could
even represent a negative NPV investment and is detrimental to the value of the contributing ﬁrm.

6. Conclusion

Drawing on the general literature of strategic philanthropy, this study presents a special case of corpo-
rate philanthropic involvement in natural disaster relief efforts. Our results show that market participants
in general do react positively to the announcements of corporate donations towards the 2008 Wenchuan
earthquake relief effort. Extended analysis indicates that the abnormal stock returns are higher for compa-
nies whose products and/or services that are directly consumer oriented. It is believed that this is primarily
due to the marketing effect of the donor ﬁrm's participation in the disaster relief effort, leading to enhanced
brand image and awareness. It is also found that donating ﬁrms in relatively concentrated industries tend
to realise higher abnormal stock returns, implying that the market participants view the donating ﬁrm's
philanthropic behaviour as a relationship cultivation strategy with various stakeholders, especially govern-
ment authorities and the general public.

While possessing various strategic motivations and potential beneﬁts, corporate philanthropic involve-
ment should still be in line with overall corporate proﬁtability. Although not hypothesised, the return on
assets (ROA) variable exhibits signiﬁcant negative inﬂuence on the magnitude of abnormal stock returns.
This ﬁnding suggests that ﬁrms with relatively high proﬁtability need to carefully consider involvement in
philanthropic activities, as doing so tends to negatively affect stock returns.


376

F. Gao et al. / Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal 20 (2012) 363–377

The implications of this study are of particular interest to not only corporate management, but also var-
ious stakeholders, especially government policymakers and the general public. First, the evidence on cor-
porate philanthropic involvement in natural disaster relief efforts from China could be useful in other
settings, as the various underpinning theoretical arguments favouring corporate philanthropy generally
hold in this capital market research type of study. Second, the results of this study could enhance the mo-
tivations of corporate managers to make philanthropic contribution to disaster relief efforts, due to the po-
tential strategic beneﬁts associated with such philanthropic behaviour. Third, government policymakers
could take advantage of the potential economic beneﬁts corporations have to gain from philanthropic ac-
tivities, to better promote corporate philanthropy in the event of natural disasters. Finally, the general
public, especially the media, could better understand the objectives and forms of corporate philanthropic
involvement in natural disaster relief efforts and thus can also help encourage corporate giving.

References

Brown, S.J., Warner, J.B., 1985. Using daily stock returns: the case of event studies. Journal of Financial Economics 14 (1), 3–31.
Campbell, L., Gulas, C.S., Gruca, T.S., 1999. Corporate giving behavior and decision maker social consciousness. Journal of Business

Ethics 19 (4), 375–383.

Campbell, D., Moore, G., Metzger, M., 2002. Corporate philanthropy in the U.K. 1985–2000: some empirical ﬁndings. Journal of Busi-

ness Ethics 39 (1/2), 29–41.

CCTV.com, 2008. 汶川地震损失8451亿 遇难失踪人数超8.7万, Cctv.com (in Chinese). http://news.cctv.com/china/20080904/102837.shtml

2008.

Chen, Y.R., 2007. The strategic management of government affairs in China: how multinational corporations in China interact with

the Chinese government. Journal of Public Relations Research 19 (3), 283–306.

Chen, X., Kim, K.A., Yao, T., Yu, T., 2010. On the predictability of Chinese stock returns. Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal 18 (4), 403–425.
Cheung, Y.-L., Jing, L., Lu, T., Rau, P.R., Stouraitis, A., 2009. Tunneling and propping up: an analysis of related party transactions by

Chinese listed companies. Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal 17 (3), 372–393.

Dahles, H., 2005. Culture, capitalism and political entrepreneurship: transnational business ventures of the Singapore–Chinese in

China. Culture and Organization 11 (1), 45–58.

Fombrun, C.J., 1996. Reputation: Realizing Value from the Corporate Image. Harvard Business School Press, Boston.
Friedman, M., 1970. The social responsibility of business is to increase its proﬁts. The New York Times Magazine 122–126 September 13.
Gao, Y., 2006. Corporate political action in China and America: a comparative perspective. Journal of Public Affairs 6 (2), 111–121.
Gao, Y., 2009. Corporate social performance in China: evidence from large companies. Journal of Business Ethics 89 (1), 23–35.
Gardberg, N.A., Fombrun, C.J., 2006. Corporate citizenship: creating intangible assets across institutional environments. Academy of

Management Review 31 (2), 329–346.

Godfrey, P.C., 2005. The relationship between corporate philanthropy and shareholder wealth: a risk management perspective.

Academy of Management Review 30 (4), 777–798.

Haley, U.C.V., 1991. Corporate contributions as managerial masques: reframing corporate contributions as strategies to inﬂuence

society. Journal of Management Studies 28 (5), 485–509.

Hofstede, G., 1984. Culture's Consequences: International Differences in Work-Related Values. Sage Publications, CA, Beverly Hills.
Huang, W., Jiang, F., Liu, Z., Zhang, M., 2011. Agency cost, top executives' overconﬁdence, and investment-cash ﬂow sensitivity—

evidence from listed companies in China. Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal 19 (3), 261–277.

Hung, C.F., 2004. Cultural inﬂuence on relationship cultivation strategies: multinational companies in China. Journal of Communica-

tion Management 8 (3), 264–281.

Kot, H.W., 2011. Corporate name changes: price reactions and long-run performance. Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal 19 (2), 230–244.
Lei, A.C.H., Song, F.M., 2011. Connected transactions and ﬁrm value: evidence from China-afﬁliated companies. Paciﬁc-Basin Finance

Journal 19 (5), 470–490.

MacKinlay, A.C., 1997. Event studies in economics and ﬁnance. Journal of Economic Literature 35 (1), 13–39.
McWilliams, A., Siegel, D., 1997. Event studies in management research: theoretical and empirical issues. Academy of Management

Journal 40 (3), 626–657.

Mescon, T.S., Tilson, D.J., 1987. Corporate philanthropy: a strategic approach to the bottom line. California Management Review 29

(2), 49–61.

Muller, A., Whiteman, G., 2009. Exploring the geography of corporate philanthropic disaster response: a study of fortune global 500

ﬁrms. Journal of Business Ethics 84 (4), 589–603.

Navarro, P., 1988. Why do corporations give to charity? Journal of Business 61 (1), 65–93.
Patten, D.M., 2008. Does the market value corporate philanthropy? Evidence from the response to the 2004 tsunami relief effort.

Journal of Business Ethics 81 (3), 599–607.

Porter, M., Kramer, M., 2002. The competitive advantage of corporate philanthropy. Harvard Business Review 80 (12), 56–68.
Ricks, J.M., 2005. An assessment of strategic corporate philanthropy on perceptions of brand equity variables. The Journal of

Consumer Market 22 (3), 121–134.

Saiia, D., Carroll, A., Buchholtz, A., 2003. Philanthropy as strategy: when corporate charity “beings at home”. Business & Society 42

(2), 169–201.

Schiller, Z., 1988. Doing well by doing good. Business Week 5, 53–57 December.
Strahilevitz, M., 1999. The effects of product type and donation magnitude on willingness to pay more for a charity-linked brand.

Journal of Consumer Psychology 8 (3), 215–241.

Strahilevitz, M., Myers, J., 1998. Donations to charity as purchase incentives: how well they work may depend on what you are trying

to sell. Journal of Consumer Research 24 (4), 434–446.


F. Gao et al. / Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal 20 (2012) 363–377

377

Su, J., He, J., 2010. Does giving lead to getting? Evidence from Chinese private enterprises. Journal of Business Ethics 93, 73–90.
Wu, X., 2002. Doing PR in China: a 2001 version—concepts, practices and some misperceptions. Public Relations Quarterly 47 (2),

10–18.

Zhang, R., Rezaee, Z., Zhu, J., 2010. Corporate philanthropic disaster response and ownership type: evidence from Chinese ﬁrms’

response to the Sichuan Earthquake. Journal of Business Ethics 91, 51–63.

Zu, L., Song, L., 2009. Determinants of managerial values on corporate social responsibility: evidence from China. Journal of Business

Ethics 88, 105–117.

