Journal of Leadership &  
Organizational Studies
Volume 15 Number 4
May 2009  353-367
© 2009 Baker College
10.1177/1548051809332021 
http://jlos.sagepub.com
hosted at
http://online.sagepub.com

In the Eyes of the Beholder

Transformational Leadership, Positive 
Psychological Capital, and Performance

Janaki Gooty
State University of New York at Binghamton
Mark Gavin
Paul D. Johnson
M. Lance Frazier
D. Bradley Snow
Oklahoma State University

This  article  develops  and  tests  a  conceptual  model  of  followers’  perceptions  of  transformational  leadership  as  an 
antecedent to their positive psychological capital—a higher-order construct that represents an individual’s motiva-
tional propensity and perseverance toward goals. Positive psychological capital, in turn, has in-role performance and 
organizational citizenship behavior as consequences. Structural equation modeling results support the relationship 
between followers’ perceptions of transformational leadership and positive psychological capital, as well as the rela-
tionship  between  positive  psychological  capital  and  each  performance  outcome.  Implications  of  these  results  are 
discussed regarding the literatures of transformational leadership and positive organizational behavior.

Keywords:    transformational leadership; positive psychological capital; structural equation modeling

T ransformational leadership and its impact on fol-

lowers’  behavioral  and  attitudinal  outcomes  are 
well  documented  in  organizational  research  (e.g., 
Lowe, Kroeck, & Sivasubramaniam, 1996). However, 
an emerging stream of inquiry focuses on followers’ 
psychological reactions that translate transformational 
leadership  into  favorable  behavioral  outcomes  (e.g., 
Piccolo & Colquitt, 2006). The study of positive orga-
nizational behavior has also gained prominence in the 
organizational  sciences,  driven  by  an  emphasis  on 
managing  employees’  positive  psychological  capital 
(PsyCap;  see  Luthans,  Avolio,  Avey,  &  Norman, 
2007). Our work proposes that followers’ perceptions 
of transformational leadership serve as an important 
antecedent  to  the  development  of  their  PsyCap. 
Drawing  on  psychological  resource  theory,  we  pro-
pose that PsyCap in turn influences a range of perfor-
mance outcomes.

Our  work  contributes  to  both  the  transforma-
tional leadership literature and the positive organi-
zational  behavior 
to 
transformational leadership, this study answers recent 
scholarly calls for research focused on understanding 

literature.  With  regard 

how  transformational  leadership  affects  followers’ 
performance  (e.g.,  Piccolo  &  Colquitt,  2006).  We 
investigate PsyCap as one such mechanism. Our work 
is in line with the stream of emerging empirical work 
that examines the mechanisms through which PsyCap 
may  be  developed  among  followers  (cf.  Luthans, 
Avey,  &  Patera,  2008;  Luthans,  Norman, Avolio,  & 
Avey, 2008). Although this study does not include an 
examination of the domain of authentic leadership, we 
note  that  Gardner,  Avolio,  Luthans,  May  and 
Walumbwa (2005) suggest that authentic leaders can 
develop  followers’  positive  psychological  states  and 
resources via their own role modeling. Our theoretical 
contribution  lies  in  the  development  of  a  model  that 
connects the motivational impact of a transformational 
leader  to  the  motivational  propensity  inherent  in 

Authors’ Note: Address correspondence to Janaki Gooty, School 
of  Management  and  Center  for  Leadership  Studies,  State 
University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, NY 13902-
6000;  phone:  607-777-6638;;  e-mail:  jgooty@binghamton.edu. 
We thank Francis Yammarino for comments and suggestions on 
earlier drafts of this paper. 

353


354   Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies

PsyCap. Furthermore, this article extends such a con-
tribution through an examination of a range of follow-
ers’  performance  outcomes  based  on  PsyCap.  We 
know of no prior work that connects the well-estab-
lished  domain  of  transformational  leadership  as  an 
antecedent  to  followers’  PsyCap  and,  in  turn,  their 
performance outcomes.1

Transformational Leadership

Transformational leadership theory is founded on 
the assertion that leaders can arouse followers to high 
levels  of  performance  by  appealing  to  their  values, 
emotions,  attitudes,  and  beliefs  (Bass,  1985).  Key 
dimensions of transformational leadership include the 
following:  articulating  a  vision,  fostering  the  accep-
tance of group goals, modeling behaviors consistent 
with  the  articulated  vision,  providing  individualized 
support  and  consideration,  setting  high  performance 
expectations,  and  providing  intellectual  stimulation 
(Podsakoff, MacKenzie, & Bommer, 1996; Podsakoff, 
MacKenzie, Moorman, & Fetter, 1990). Specifically, 
articulating a vision encompasses a leader’s behaviors 
that  identify  new  opportunities  and  inspire  others 
through his or her vision of the future. Providing an 
appropriate model reflects behavior of the leader that 
serves as an example for others to follow. Fostering the 
acceptance of group goals includes leaders’ behaviors 
aimed at creating cooperation among employees so that 
they  work  toward  a  common  goal.  High  performance 
expectations encompass leaders’ behaviors that demon-
strate their expectations of excellence and high-quality 
performance  from  followers.  Individualized  support 
indicates  leaders’  behaviors  that  reflect  a  genuine 
respect for and consideration of followers’ needs and 
feelings. Intellectual stimulation is a leader’s behavior 
that  challenges  followers  to  examine  work  assump-
tions  and  rethink  ways  of  performing  in  their  roles. 
Empirical and conceptual support has emerged for the 
higher-order  representation  of  a  transformational 
leadership construct that encompasses these six leader 
behaviors (Podsakoff et al., 1996).

Although empirical support is extensive regarding 
the effects of transformational leadership on follow-
ers’ behavioral outcomes (Avolio & Bass, 1988; Judge 
&  Piccolo,  2004;  Lowe  et  al.,  1996;  Nemanich  & 
Keller,  2007;  Podsakoff  et  al.,  1996;  Rowold  & 
Heinitz, 2007), the focus has shifted to the processes 
that convey the effects of transformational leadership 
to  followers’  outcomes  (e.g.,  Piccolo  &  Colquitt, 
2006;  Schaubroeck,  Lam,  &  Cha,  2007),  and  our 
efforts here are in line with this focus.

Positive PsyCap

Positive organizational behavior is defined as “the 
study  and  application  of  positive  oriented  human 
resource  strengths  and  psychological  capacities  that 
can be measured, developed, and effectively managed 
for performance improvement in today’s workplace” 
(Luthans,  2002b,  p.  59).  Luthans  identified  the  four 
constructs  of  hope,  self-efficacy,  resiliency  and  opti-
mism as being consistent with the criteria for qualify-
ing  as  positive  PsyCap  (for  a  review,  see  Luthans 
et al., 2007). Hope is a motivational state that encom-
passes the ability to set valued goals (willpower) and 
the  conviction  that  one  can  overcome  obstacles  to 
achieve  those  goals  (way  power;  Snyder,  2000). 
Optimism is a favorable assessment of one’s social or 
material  future  (Tiger,  1979).  Self-efficacy  is  drawn 
from  Bandura’s  social  learning  theory  (1982,  1986), 
and it is an individual’s belief (confidence) in her or 
his abilities to successfully complete a task within a 
specific  context  (Stajkovic  &  Luthans,  1998). 
Resiliency  is  one’s  ability  to  deal  with  a  variety  of 
circumstances  (including  adversity  and  uncertainty) 
and yet be successful (Luthans, Avey, Avolio, Norman, 
& Combs, 2006).

Hope,  optimism,  resiliency,  and  self-efficacy, 
though  unique  in  their  own  right,  share  common 
underlying  characteristics  represented  by  a  core, 
higher-order  motivational  propensity  known  as 
PsyCap (Luthans et al., 2007). For example, Luthans 
and colleagues (2007) note,

We  propose  that  even  though  hope,  resilience,  opti-
mism,  and  self-efficacy  may  have  conceptual  inde-
pendence  and  discriminant  validity,  they  may  also 
make  a  unique  theoretical  and  measurable  contribu-
tion to a higher order, core construct of PsyCap, repre-
senting one’s positive appraisal of circumstances and 
probability for success based on motivated effort and 
perseverance. (p. 549-550; italics in original) 

PsyCap can vary within individuals on the basis of 
contextual  conditions  (e.g.,  an  inspirational  leader) 
and  individual  characteristics  (e.g.,  traits,  physical 
health; for a detailed review of the statelike nature of 
PsyCap, see Luthans et al., 2007). To date, PsyCap 
has been conceptually linked to work outcomes such 
as  performance  and  extra  role  behaviors  (e.g., 
Luthans,  2002a,  2002b; Wright,  2003).  In  addition, 
Luthans et al. (2007) presented psychometric support 
for a newly developed measure of PsyCap, as well as 
 initial  predictive  validity  evidence,  by  relating 


Gooty et al. / In the Eyes of the Beholder    355  

Figure 1

Theoretical Model: Perceptions of Transformational 
Leadership and Their Effect on Psychological Capital

Follower

Perceptions of
Transformational

Leadership

Psychological

Capital

In-role

Performance

OCB-I

OCB-O

Hope

Optimism

Self-efficacy

Resiliency

OCBI = organizational citizenship behavior directed toward individuals; OCBO = organizational citizenship behavior directed toward 
the organization.

PsyCap  to  job  performance  and  satisfaction  in  two 
samples (for similar findings, see Youssef & Luthans, 
2007). More recently, Avey, Wernsing, and Luthans 
(2008)  found  that  employees  with  higher  levels  of 
PsyCap experienced more positive emotions, which 
were  in  turn  related  to  their  engagement  and  cyni-
cism  during  organizational  change.  These  authors 
also found that positive emotions mediated the rela-
tionship  between  employees’  PsyCap  and  their 
behavior,  such  as  organizational  citizenship  behav-
iors  and  deviance.  Furthermore,  Luthans,  Avey, 
Clapp-Smith, and Li (2008) demonstrated the useful-
ness of PsyCap in a Chinese context for predicting 
employees’  performance,  whereas  others  (Avey, 
Patera,  &  West,  2006)  have  demonstrated  that 
PsyCap  helped  reduce  absenteeism  in  a  sample  of 
high  technology  employees.  Despite  this  emerging 
empirical  work,  Luthans  et  al.  noted  that  much 
remains to be done, especially in examining not only 
the  effects  of  PsyCap,  on  a  range  of  important  work 
outcomes, but also its antecedents.

Hypotheses Development

Figure 1 illustrates our theoretical model. Followers’ 
perceptions of transformational leadership affect their 

PsyCap,  which  in  turn  affects  their  in-role  perfor-
mance  and  organizational  citizenship  behavior 
(OCB).

Transformational 
Leadership and PsyCap

At  the  core  of  transformational  leadership  is  the 
leader’s ability to enthuse followers about a dream or 
a  higher  sense  of  purpose. Transformational  leaders 
articulate  a  vision  via  metaphors,  stories,  personal 
reflections,  humor,  and  images,  and  they  tend  to 
speak to followers’ minds and their sense of purpose 
rather  than  to  their  wallets  only  (cf. Avolio,  1999). 
Such  a  powerful  vision  can  then  facilitate  the  fol-
lower’s ability to (a) set goals and believe that those 
goals can be achieved, (b) generate a positive appraisal 
of the future, (c) create belief in one’s ability to suc-
cessfully perform tasks that tie in with the vision, and 
(d) trigger the ability to bounce back from adversity 
because  a  favorable  future  is  just  around  the  corner. 
The  articulation  of  a  clear  and  compelling  vision  for 
the  future  paints  a  worldview  in  which  the  follower 
evaluates  current  and  future  circumstances  favorably 
and is willing to put forth effort and persevere (Bass, 
1985). A  transformational  leader’s  role-modeling  can 
serve as a clear roadmap for what constitutes  desirable 


356   Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies

behaviors toward goal attainment. Such role-modeling 
then serves as a platform that helps followers’ develop 
confidence not only in their skills (Bandura, 2000) but 
in  the  fact  that  they  have  a  role  model  from  whom 
they  can  take  direction  when  faced  with  obstacles. 
Furthermore,  transformational  leaders  create  a  com-
mitment to group goals via a higher sense of purpose 
(Avolio,  1999). A  shared  goal  commitment  emerges 
in groups characterized by a climate of collaboration, 
with  all  members  energized  toward  the  same  goal. 
This  climate  serves  as  a  social  support  mechanism 
that followers can draw on in overcoming obstacles to 
goal accomplishment. Thus, followers’ perceptions of 
the transformational leader’s behavior of encouraging 
their  commitment  to  group  goals  trigger  followers’ 
beliefs in their goal accomplishment, thereby leading 
to  a  higher  level  of  effort  and  the  probability  of  a 
more favorable future.

That the leader sets high performance expectations 
intertwines  with  the  position  of  goal  setting  theory 
(Locke  &  Latham,  1990)  that  followers  are  more 
motivated  toward  accomplishing  challenging  goals 
than they are toward those that are unchallenging. A 
leader who expects high-quality work reaffirms her or 
his belief in each follower’s ability to cope with chal-
lenging  goals  and  adversity  (Avolio,  1999).  Setting 
challenging  goals  helps  build  the  follower’s  confi-
dence in task-specific skills (Bandura, 2000) and ele-
vates a follower’s sense of self-worth, thereby leading 
to a positive appraisal of one’s current and future cir-
cumstances. Followers’ perceptions of the transforma-
tional  leader’s  behavior  of  setting  high  performance 
expectations act as a catalyst to their motivation and 
so draw enhanced effort toward their goals and shap-
ing their perceptions of a favorable future.

Prior  research  has  demonstrated  that  transforma-
tional  leaders  encourage  followers  to  ask  questions, 
challenge the status quo, and think in previously unex-
plored ways (cf. Avolio, 1999). Transformational lead-
ers  encourage  followers  to  interpret  information  in 
novel  ways,  thus  leading  them  to  view  obstacles  as 
developmental challenges and so build their ability to 
bounce  back  from  adversity  (Bass,  1990).  Followers’ 
perceptions of the transformational leader’s behavior of 
intellectual stimulation open a broad range of thought 
patterns with respect to work problems, and the follow-
ers’ repertoire of possible solutions to a given problem 
significantly expands. This allows followers to believe 
in their ability to persevere toward goals and create a 
future marked by images of goal accomplishment.

Transformational  leaders  make  an  effort  at  con-
necting  with  each  follower  and  so  seek  to  infuse 

meaning into every individual’s role within the organ-
ization  (Avolio,  1999).  Such  individualized  consid-
eration  is  manifested  via  counseling,  mentoring, 
coaching,  and  delegation  of  challenging  tasks.  The 
leader acts as a powerful contextual resource that aug-
ments the followers’ confidence in their ability to set 
goals  and  accomplish  those  goals,  even  when  faced 
with adversity (Bass, 1990). All the transformational 
leader  behaviors  discussed  above  act  in  tandem 
toward  achieving  followers’  increased  effort  via 
higher  motivation  and  a  belief  in  a  more  positive 
future.  In  sum,  transformational  leadership,  when 
perceived as such by followers, acts as a contextual 
condition that helps their PsyCap to prosper. As such, 
our position is that a transformational leader, via the 
six behaviors, will build a broad follower-based psy-
chological  resource  that  is  directed  at  setting  goals 
and  accomplishing  them,  a  belief  in  overcoming 
obstacles,  and  a  belief  in  a  more  positive  future,  as 
represented by PsyCap.

Hypothesis  1:  Followers’  perceptions  of  transforma-
tional leadership positively relate to their PsyCap.

PsyCap and Outcomes

PsyCap  is  a  newly  introduced  construct  in  the 
domain  of  organizational  behavior.  For  PsyCap  to 
have  work-related  validity,  it  is  crucial  to  delineate 
and test theory that relates PsyCap to important work 
outcomes. For example, in a sample of manufacturing 
and  technology  professionals,  Luthans  et  al.  (2007) 
found  that  PsyCap  was  positively  related  to  work 
performance and job satisfaction. Similarly, Luthans, 
Norman, et al. (2008) examined the impact of PsyCap 
in the relationship between supportive organizational 
climate  and  performance.  They  found  that  PsyCap 
fully  mediated  the  relationship  between  supportive 
organizational climate and work performance. These 
studies  also  provide  initial  support  for  the  PsyCap–
performance linkage.

Based  on  this  work,  as  well  as  that  of  psycho-
logical resources theory (Fredrickson, 2001; Luthans, 
Norman, et al., 2008), PsyCap will have a positive 
impact on work performance. From this perspective, 
challenging  work  events  deplete  an  individual’s 
 psychological  resources  and  subsequently  lessen  
one’s  work  effectiveness  (e.g.,  Fredrickson,  2001). 
Theorists  in  the  domain  of  emotion  inquiry  now 
contend,  and  have  found  support  for  the  position, 
that positive emotions replenish an individual’s psy-
chological  resources  and  thus  can  have  a  positive 
impact  on  one’s  subsequent  work  performance 


(Fredrickson,  2001;  Fredrickson  &  Losada,  2005; 
Lyubomirsky, King, & Diener, 2005). Emotion theo-
rists  also  point  at  the  deeply  intertwined  nature  of 
emotions and cognitions (e.g., Lazarus & Folkman, 
1984; Ortony, Clore, & Collins, 1988). PsyCap rep-
resents an individual’s psychological resources that 
draws on positive job-related cognitions (e.g., being 
hopeful about work goals, having an ability to over-
come obstacles, possessing a cognitive appraisal of 
a positive future and a confidence in one’s skills and 
abilities).  Hobfoll  (2002)  suggests  that  when  indi-
viduals  possess  psychological  resources,  they  are 
more likely to remain engaged with goal attainment 
activities and so do not easily give up in the face of 
challenges.  In  addition,  individuals  with  more 
resources  “are  more  likely  to  have  either  the  spe-
cific  resources  needed  to  fit  demands  or  resources 
that can provide them with access to the resources 
that fit demands” (p. 318). Therefore, higher levels 
of PsyCap represent higher levels of psychological 
resources (i.e., strengths), which can help individu-
als perform better at work.

Hypothesis  2:  Followers’  PsyCap  relates  positively  to 

their work performance.

Whereas  work  performance  has  been  the  central 
behavioral  outcome  of  interest  to  organizational 
researchers,  other  discretionary  behaviors  (such 
OCBs) have also been shown to positively influence 
organizational  performance  (Motowidlo  &  Van 
Scotter, 1994). OCB represents any employee discre-
tionary behavior that is not a part of an employee’s 
task requirements but which benefits the organization 
(cf.  Borman  &  Motowidlo,  1993;  Organ,  1988, 
1997). Following earlier research in OCB, we adopt 
a  two-dimensional  approach  to  studying  the  impact 
of PsyCap on OCB. Specifically, we examine OCBs 
directed at other individuals within the organization 
(OCBI)  and  OCBs  directed  at  the  organization 
(OCBO;  e.g.,  Lee  &  Allen,  2002).  Avolio  and 
Gardner (2005) note that the current turbulent busi-
ness environment necessitates that firms gain a sus-
tainable competitive advantage via the development 
of not only PsyCap but also human and social capital. 
The focus on development of such forms of capital 
would then create an energized workforce that goes 
above and beyond the call of duty to ensure sustain-
able organizational success. As noted earlier, empiri-
cal evidence has started to emerge that PsyCap might 
be  linked  to  such  employee-based  discretionary 

Gooty et al. / In the Eyes of the Beholder    357  

behaviors as OCBs and deviance (Avey, Wersing, & 
Luthans, 2008). 

PsyCap represents the sum of an individual’s psy-
chological  resources,  and  it  draws  on  positive  job- 
related  cognitions.  Organ  and  Near  (1985)  note  that 
job cognitions represent an individual’s evaluation or 
assessment of life at work. Positive job cognitions have 
a  positive  impact  on  OCBIs  and  OCBOs.  However, 
prior work in the job cognitions–OCBs literature has 
focused on aspects of the job itself (e.g., pay, supervi-
sion; Organ & Konovsky, 1989). PsyCap represents a 
positive appraisal of one’s work circumstances and a 
high probability for success based on motivated effort 
and  perseverance  (Luthans  et  al.,  2007).  Intuitively, 
one  would  expect  that  such  positive  work  cognitions 
lead to higher OCBIs and OCBOs. According to Organ 
and  Near,  employees  that  favorably  evaluate  their 
future  are  more  willing  to  adjust  their  inputs  to  the 
organization, thereby contributing to the organization’s 
success.  Another  theoretical  explanation  for  the 
PsyCap–OCB  relationship  is  drawn  from  our  earlier 
discussion  of  psychological  resources:  Individuals 
with higher levels of PsyCap benefit from their ability 
to draw on positive psychological strengths to counter 
obstacles at work, replenish, and engage in more discre-
tionary behaviors (see also, Avey, Wersing, & Luthans, 
2008). Specifically, an employee who more favorably 
evaluates  her  or  his  future  at  an  organization  is  more 
likely  to  expend  effort  toward  shaping  that  beneficial 
future by engaging in OCBIs and OCBOs (e.g., helping 
behaviors,  sportsmanship,  initiative,  loyalty,  compli-
ance, civic virtue and self-development; LePine, Erez, 
& Johnson, 2002).

Hypothesis  3:  Followers’  PsyCap  relates  positively  to 

OCBI.

Hypothesis  4:  Follower’s  PsyCap  relates  positively  to 

OCBO.

Although  not  stated  as  a  formal  hypothesis,  the 
proposed model in Figure 1 allows for direct effects of 
followers’ perceptions of transformational leadership on 
their  performance  outcomes.  Our  hypotheses  build  the 
case  for  PsyCap  as  an  important  mechanism  through 
which the effects of followers’ perceptions of transforma-
tional  leadership  on  their  performance  are  transmitted. 
However, other mechanisms may also plausibly transmit 
these effects (e.g., Piccolo & Colquitt, 2006). Although 
not identified in this model or explored as a part of this 
study, those other potential mechanisms are allowed for 
by the direct effects of transformational leadership on 
in-role performance, OCBI, and OCBO.2


358   Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies

Method

Sample and Procedure

The  hypothesized  model  was  tested  using  mem-
bers of a marching band at a major Midwestern uni-
versity in the United States. A new band director had 
been in place for approximately 7 weeks before the 
beginning of data collection, and he was changing the 
band’s  organizational  vision  and  culture.  The  intro-
duction  of  such  leader-directed  changes  provided  a 
unique  opportunity  in  which  to  study  the  PsyCap-
related  effects  of  followers’  perceptions  of  transfor-
mational 
leadership  behaviors.  Band  members 
regularly  interacted  with  the  new  band  director,  not 
only as an entire band (e.g., band practices and per-
formances), but also in smaller units and individually 
(e.g.,  section  practices,  informal  meetings  after  or 
outside  of  practice,  visits  to  the  band  director’s 
office).  Thus,  we  expect  variance  in  the  followers’ 
perceptions  of  the  band  director’s  transformational 
behaviors,  given  that  each  follower  might  respond 
uniquely  to  such  behaviors.  Such  variations  in  per-
ception  are  likely  driven  by  differential  interpreta-
tions of the leader’s behaviors, as well as differential 
interactions  and  exposure 
those  behaviors. 
Furthermore, precedent exists in the leadership litera-
ture for a focus on followers’ perceptions of transfor-
mational  leadership  behaviors  (e.g.,  Schaubroeck  
et  al.,  2007).  Robust  research  supports  this  position 
that followers differ in their perceptions of transfor-
mational leadership on the basis of their personalities 
and  other  contextual  or  individual  factors  (Bass, 
1991;  Bommer,  Rich,  &  Rubin,  2005;  Felfe  & 
Schyns, 2006; Schyns & Sanders, 2007). For exam-
ple,  Bommer  et  al.  (2005)  found  that  substantial 
variation  in  ratings  of  transformational  leadership 
(77%) resided at the individual level, hence suggest-
ing  that  transformational  leadership  is  a  subjective 
individual experience even though followers rate the 
same leader.

to 

Although a marching band is not a typical sample 
for the organizational sciences, it has a number of fea-
tures  in  common  with  the  typical  organizational  set-
ting. First, it consists of a hierarchical organizational 
structure.  The  band  director  directs  section  leaders, 
who in turn direct members in daily activities. Second, 
although  a  marching  band  consists  of  students,  its 
members have formal policy and procedures to follow, 
as well as performance expectations within their roles 
in  the  band. Although  the  members  are  (technically) 
volunteers, the policies and performance expectations 

of band membership clearly delineate their in-role per-
formance expectations (Clary, Snyder, & Worth, 2003). 
Finally, the marching band is a highly visible organiza-
tion in a university setting, which requires a high level 
of  performance  in  its  activities.  The  band’s  role  at 
sporting events, campus spirit rallies, and fund-raisers 
demands excellence from the individual members. All 
of which is similar to the performance demands placed 
on members by other organizations.

All 253 band members were invited to participate 
in this study by completing a survey and 190 did so, 
thereby  representing  a  response  rate  of  75.1%.  The 
average  age  of  the  respondents  was  19.3  years  and 
42%  were  female.  The  band  director  was  new;  the 
band  members’  average  tenure  was  1.9  years.  Band 
members  provided  ratings  of  the  band  director’s 
transformational  leadership  and  their  own  PsyCap. 
Graduate assistants who work closely with the band 
director and his staff provided ratings of in-role per-
formance, OCBI, and OCBO. Seventy-five percent of 
the  graduate  assistants  were  male,  and  the  average 
age was 25.3 years. The graduate assistants were con-
sidered experts on performance in this context because 
of  their  familiarity  with  the  band,  its  requirements, 
and the skills necessary for members to be considered 
successful.  These  ratings  were  collected  2  weeks 
after the band members completed the surveys. The 
graduate assistants were asked to consider the perfor-
mance of the band members in the 2-week span after 
the  collection  of  the  band  members’  surveys.  Each 
band member was rated by a single graduate assistant 
most  familiar  with  the  performance.3  Participants 
were  removed  from  analysis  if  any  complete  scales 
were  missing.  Where  single  items  were  missing 
within scales, the average for the remaining items for 
that participants was used to replace the score of the 
missing  item.  Downey  and  King  (1998)  called  this 
approach  person  mean  substitution  and  suggested 
that  this  method  provides  a  good  representation  of 
original data for scales missing less than 20% of their 
items,  which  was  the  case  in  the  current  study  (for 
further  discussion,  see  Roth,  Switzer,  &  Switzer, 
1999; Switzer & Roth, 2002). The final usable sample 
size  with  matched  performance  data  comprised  158 
participants.

Measures

Transformational leadership. Band members rated 
the transformational leadership of the band director 
using  Podsakoff  and  colleagues’  22-item  multidi-
mensional  measure  (1996)  with  a  7-point  response  


(1 = strongly disagree, 7 = strongly agree). Consistent 
with past empirical studies that have utilized versions 
of  this  scale  and  examined  transformational  leader-
ship  as  a  single  construct  (e.g.,  Pillai,  Williams, 
Lowe, & Jung, 2003; Schaubroeck et al., 2007), we 
examined the reliability of the items pooled across all 
six dimensions (α = .96).

PsyCap. Self-reports of each band member’s PsyCap 
was assessed using the 24-item Psychological Capacity 
Questionnaire  (PCQ;  Luthans  et  al.,  2007).  Recent 
work  (Luthans  et  al.,  2007;  Luthans,  Norman,  et  al., 
2008) has provided initial evidence of validity for the 
PCQ.  Each  item  in  the  PCQ  is  based  on  a  6-point 
response (1 = strongly disagree, 6 = strongly agree). 
The PCQ itself is based on past, established scales of 
hope,  optimism,  resiliency,  and  self-efficacy.  Sample 
items include the following, per construct: hope, “I can 
think  of  many  ways  to  reach  my  current  musical 
goals,” (α = .89); self-efficacy, “I feel confident con-
tributing to discussions about the band’s performance” 
(α = .91); resiliency, “I usually take stressful things in 
the band in stride” (α = .72); optimism, “When things 
are uncertain for me in the band I usually expect the 
best” (α = .69). In previous validation work (Luthans 
et al., 2007), reliabilities for the four scales at four time 
points  were  above  .70  in  all  instances  but  two—
namely,  resiliency  and  optimism  (at  one  time  point 
each), generating values of .66 and .69, respectively.

Despite the initial evidence regarding the validity 
of the PCQ (Luthans et al., 2007), the newness of the 
measure gave us caution, as did the low Cronbach’s 
alphas  for  resiliency  and  optimism  relative  to  those 
for hope and self-efficacy. As such, we conducted an 
item  analysis.  The  results  suggest  that  dropping  the 
one  reversed-scored  item  for  resiliency  and  the  two 
reverse-scored  items  for  optimism  increased  the 
Cronbach’s alphas for these two scales to .80 and .83, 
respectively. Research has shown that reverse-scored 
items  can  at  times  negatively  influence  the  psycho-
metric properties of scales and thus alter their factor 
structures (e.g., Schmitt & Stults, 1985). That appears 
to be the case in this sample. We determined, via an 
examination of face validity, that dropping these three 
reverse-scored items did not appreciably alter the degree 
to which the scales captured their respective content 
domains. As such, we decided to utilize the five-item 
measure  of  resiliency  and  the  four-item  measure  of 
optimism  for  subsequent  analyses.  The  practice  of 
dropping  such  items  from  an  established  scale  has 
precedence in the literature (e.g., Piccolo & Colquitt, 
2006).  Having  different  numbers  of  items  for  each 
PsyCap dimension would have been problematic had 

Gooty et al. / In the Eyes of the Beholder    359  

we summed the 21 items to use a single index score 
for analysis (such as with regression), given that those 
dimensions  with  more  items  would  have  been  more 
heavily  weighted  in  forming  the  index  score  (e.g., 
Luthans et al., 2007). However, our hypothesis testing 
was  conducted  using  structural  equation  modeling, 
where  factors  can  be  adequately  represented  by  dif-
fering numbers of items, without giving undue weight 
to any one factor in capturing a construct (in this case, 
PsyCap). The reliability estimate for the 21 items was 
.95, which is higher than the reliability estimates for 
the 24-item PCQ in the Luthans et al. study (2007), 
which ranged from .88 to .89 across four periods.

Performance  outcomes.  Graduate  assistants  rated 
the  band  members’  in-role  performance  and  OCB 
using 19 of the 21 items from Williams and Anderson 
(1991).  Two  items  were  dropped  from  this  measure 
because they were deemed not relevant in the context 
of the marching band: “Great deal of time spent with 
personal  phone  conversations”  and  “Conserves  and 
protects organizational property.” We sought to repre-
sent  the  distinct  nature  of  OCBs  and  in-role  perfor-
mance  through  the  careful  rewording  of  items  to 
ensure fit with the context. For example, in-role per-
formance items included the following: “Marches and 
plays adequately” and “Fails to perform while march-
ing/playing.”  Sample  OCB  items  included  “Takes  a 
personal interest in other band members” and “Gives 
advance notice when unable to come to practice/meet-
ings.” Each item is based on a 5-point response (1 = 
strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree). All reliabilities 
were acceptable (in-role performance, α = .83; OCBI, 
α = .91; OCBO, α = .83).

Results

Table 1 presents descriptive statistics and correla-
tions  among  the  study  variables.  Before  testing  the 
hypotheses,  we  performed  a  series  of  confirmatory 
factor analytic models using LISREL 8.80 (Joreskog 
& Sorbom, 1996) to assess the structure of the PCQ 
and its discriminant validity relative to followers’ per-
ceptions  of  transformational  leadership. We  tested  a 
series of models following the general analytical strat-
egy used by Luthans et al. (2007; Luthans, Norman,  
et al., 2008). The first model specified four correlated 
first-order factors underlying the 21 items (Model 1), 
whereas  the  second  specified  a  one-factor  model, 
with all 21 items loading onto a single factor (Model 
2). The third model specified the four first-order fac-
tors of hope, self-efficacy, resiliency, and optimism as 


360   Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies

Descriptive Statistics and Zero-Order Correlations for Study Variables

Table 1

Variable 

Followers’ perceptions  
    of transformational leadership
Psychological capital 
In-role performance 
OCBI 
OCBO 

M 

4.94 

4.48 
3.94 
3.37 
3.95 

SD 

0.91 

0.76 
0.50 
0.69 
0.60 

1 

.96 

.56** 
.05 
.06 
.08 

2 

 

.95 
.11 
.13 
.12 

3 

 

 
.83 
.62** 
.68** 

4 

 

 
 
.91 
.66** 

5

 

.83

Note: n = 158. Cronbach’s alphas shown in the diagonal. OCBI = organizational citizenship behavior directed toward individuals; 
OCBO = organizational citizenship behavior directed toward the organization.
**p < .01.

 loading onto a higher-order PsyCap construct (Model 
3). Hu and Bentler (1999) suggest typical cutoffs for 
acceptable fit: (a) .95 and above for the comparative 
fit  index  (CFI;  Bentler,  1990)  and  (b)  close  to  or 
below  .08  for  the  standardized  root  mean  residual 
(SRMR).  Model  1  (χ2 =  552.64,  df =  183,  p <  .05) 
yielded acceptable fit statistics (CFI = .95, SRMR = 
.07). All factor loadings were significant, except for 
one resiliency item (“I usually take stressful things at 
work in stride”). Model 2 (χ2 = 594.11, df = 189, p < 
.05) yielded identical fit statistics (CFI = .95, SRMR 
= .07). However, model comparison via the chi-square 
difference  (χ2  =  41.47,  df  =  6,  p  <  .05)  indicated  a 
significant decrement to model fit with the one-factor 
model, thereby supporting the four-factor representa-
tion. Model 3 (χ2 = 553.93, df = 185, p < .05) yielded 
identical fit statistics as Models 1 and 2 (CFI = .95, 
SRMR = .07). However, a model comparison between 
Model  1  and  Model  3  via  the  chi-square  difference 
test  was  nonsignificant  (χ2  =  1.29,  df  =  2),  thereby 
providing support for the more parsimonious higher-
order  factor  representation  of  PsyCap.  In  addition, 
each  loading  of  hope,  self-efficacy,  resiliency,  and 
optimism  on  the  higher-order  PsyCap  factor  was 
positive and significant. Thus, the higher-order factor 
representation  of  PsyCap  (Model  3)  was  used  for 
hypothesis testing.

We also examined whether the PsyCap and follow-
ers’  perceptions  of  transformational  leadership  mea-
sures were empirically distinct. Luthans et al. (2007) 
provided  evidence  for  the  discriminant  validity  of 
PsyCap from a variety of other measures (e.g., Big Five 
personality traits). However, although the current study 
used different referents (oneself, in the case of PsyCap; 
the leader, in the case of transformational leadership), 
both  PsyCap  and  transformational  leadership  were 
collected from the same source and at the same time. 

Using the higher-order factor  representation of PsyCap 
from above, we ran two confirmatory factor analyses: 
one that specified a separate transformational leader-
ship factor (with each dimension’s scale score serving 
as an indicator), which was allowed to correlate with 
PsyCap, and a second that constrained the correlation 
between  PsyCap  and  transformational  leadership  to 
unity  (1.0).  The  chi-square  comparison  of  the  two 
models was significant, thus indicating support for the 
separate transformational leadership factor.

Hypothesis Testing

We tested the hypotheses using structural equation 
modeling  with  LISREL  8.80  (Joreskog  &  Sorbom, 
1996). Our sample size (n = 158), though reasonable 
for organizational research purposes, was too small to 
allow for the simultaneous estimation of a full mea-
surement model with item-level indicators underlying 
hope, self-efficacy, resiliency, and optimism and the 
higher-order PsyCap; with subscale indicators under-
lying followers’ perceptions of transformational lead-
ership;  and  with  item-level  indicators  underlying 
in-role  performance,  OCBI,  and  OCBO.  Doing  so 
would  have  required  the  estimation  of  a  number  of 
parameters,  across  both  the  measurement  and  the 
structural portions of the model, nearly equal to that 
of  our  sample  size.  Thus,  having  supported  the 
 higher-order representation of PsyCap and its indepen-
dence from followers’ perceptions of transformational 
leadership, we sought to use a less complex measure-
ment model for the purposes of hypothesis testing. As 
such,  with  the  exception  of  followers’  perceptions  of 
transformational  leadership,  we  estimated  models 
using single indicators for each construct (hope, self-
efficacy,  resiliency,  optimism,  in-role  performance, 


Gooty et al. / In the Eyes of the Beholder    361  

Model Fit and Model Comparison Results

Table 2

Model 

of psychological capital with direct and indirect effects

1:  Theoretical model with higher-order representation  
 
2:  Theoretical model with higher-order representation of psychological 
 
3:  Indirect effects model with higher-order representation of  
 

psychological capital and correlated residuals among the outcomes

capital and correlated residuals among the outcomes

χ2 

df 

Model Comparison 

552.64* 

183 

594.11* 

189 

553.93 

185 

— 

1–2 

1–3 

∆χ2 

— 

41.47* 6

1.29 

∆df

— 

 

2 

Note: Comparative fit index = .95; standardized root mean residual = .07.
*p < .05.

OCBI, and OCBO), with each indicator formed as a 
scale score of its corresponding items. The error vari-
ance  for  each  indicator  was  set  equal  to  the  value  
(1  –  scale  reliability),  times  the  scale  variance,  to 
account for unreliability in the measure. Incorporating 
the use of single indicators, adjusted for measurement 
error, has been shown to be as effective as employing 
multiple indicators to generate less biased structural 
parameter  estimates  (e.g.,  Netemeyer,  Johnston,  & 
Burton, 1990). As in the case of the confirmatory fac-
tor  analyses,  six  indicators  represented  followers’ 
perceptions  of  transformational  leadership.  To  keep 
the higher-order representation of PsyCap intact, we 
allowed each first-order factor of hope, self-efficacy, 
resiliency, and optimism to load onto the higher-order 
factor of PsyCap.

While  testing  the  hypotheses,  we  examined  a 
series of models to address the following questions: 
Should we allow for correlated residuals among the 
outcome variables of in-role performance, OCBI, and 
OCBO? Are the outcome effects from followers’ per-
ceptions  of  transformational  leadership  partially  or 
completely  transmitted  via  PsyCap? Table  2  reports 
results  from  these  models  regarding  overall  fit,  as 
well as model comparisons.

Our base model (Model 1) allowed for an indirect 
relationship of followers’ perceptions of transforma-
tional  leadership  on  the  outcomes  of  in-role  perfor-
mance,  OCBI,  and  OCBO  via  the  higher-order 
PsyCap.  Consistent  with  our  theoretical  arguments, 
this model allowed for the direct effects of followers’ 
perceptions  of  transformational  leadership  on  the 
outcomes,  given  that  there  are  likely  other  mecha-
nisms beyond PsyCap driving the relationship between 
leadership and the outcomes. As can be seen in Table 2, 
this model yielded an acceptable fit. Using this model 
as  a  foundation,  we  next  examined  Model  2,  which 
allowed for correlated residuals among the outcomes 

of in-role performance, OCBI, and OCBO. There are 
likely  common  omitted  predictors  of  these  various 
performance  dimensions.  In  such  cases,  correlating 
residuals  helps  to  address  this  issue  and  so  provide 
for  less  biased  parameter  estimates  (e.g.,  Frone, 
Russell,  &  Cooper,  1994;  Mayer  &  Gavin,  2005). 
With the exception of the addition of the correlated 
residuals, this model is identical to Model 1. As can 
be  seen  in  Table  2,  this  model,  when  compared  to 
Model  1,  yielded  a  slightly  improved  fit  and  a  sig-
nificant chi-square difference, thus providing support 
for  the  correlated  residuals.  Finally,  building  from 
Model 2, we examined Model 3, which allowed for 
only the indirect effects of followers’ perceptions of 
transformational  leadership  on  the  outcomes  of  in-
role  performance,  OCBI,  and  OCBO,  via  PsyCap. 
This model was identical to Model 2 except for the 
elimination  of  the  three  direct  effects  of  followers’ 
perceptions of transformational leadership on in-role 
performance,  OCBI,  and  OCBO. As  can  be  seen  in 
Table  2,  the  comparison  between  Models  3  and  2 
yielded a nonsignificant chi-square, thereby indicat-
ing support for the more parsimonious model speci-
fying  only  indirect  effects  of  followers’  perceptions 
of  transformational  leadership  on  the  outcomes  via 
PsyCap (i.e., Model 3). Hence, we used the estimates 
from this model for the purposes of hypothesis test-
ing. Figure 2 displays this model and the standardized 
structural parameter estimates.

Each  lower-order  dimension  of  hope,  resiliency, 
and self-efficacy loaded significantly onto the higher-
order PsyCap factor.4 Followers’ perceptions of trans-
formational 
leadership  were  significantly  and 
positively  related  to  PsyCap,  thereby  providing  sup-
port  for  Hypothesis  1.  In  addition,  PsyCap  was  sig-
nificantly and positively related to in-role performance, 
OCBI,  and  OCBO,  thereby  providing  support  for 
Hypotheses 2, 3, and 4, respectively. The significance 


362   Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies

Higher-Order Factor Model With Path Estimates

Figure 2

Follower Perceptions
of Transformational

Leadership

.91*

PsyCap

.84*

.65*

.63*

In-role

Performance

OCBI

OCBO

.18*

.90

.77*

.76*

Hope

Optimism

Self-efficacy

Resiliency

PsyCap = psychological capital; OCBI = organizational citizenship behavior directed toward individuals; OCBO = organizational citi-
zenship behavior directed toward the organization. Correlations among the residuals of the performance outcomes omitted for clarity. 
The loading of optimism onto the higher-order PsyCap construct was fixed to 1.0 to set the scale of PsyCap and to achieve identifica-
tion; as such, its estimated value was not subject to a significance test. Standardized parameter estimates are provided.
*p < .05.

of  the  indirect  outcome  effects  from  the  followers’ 
perceptions of transformational leadership was exam-
ined using the Sobel test, as implemented in LISREL. 
These results showed followers’ perceptions of trans-
formational  leadership  to  have  significant  indirect 
effects  (via  PsyCap)  on  in-role  performance  (stan-
dardized estimate = .77, p < .05), OCBI (standardized 
estimate  =  .60,  p  <  .05),  and  OCBO  (standardized 
estimate = .57, p < .05).

Note  that  the  structural  equation  parameter  esti-
mates  of  the  relationships  among  the  variables  pre-
sented  in  Figure  2  appreciably  depart  from  the 
zero-order  correlations  reported  in Table  1. This  fits 
the pattern of classic suppression (Maassen & Bakker, 
2001) in which the weights associated with path coef-
ficients are larger than the zero-order correlations. In 
the case of latent variable analysis, this is somewhat 
confounded by the correction for measurement error. 
In  our  case,  the  difference  between  the  path  coeffi-
cients and the zero-order correlations is likely a partial 
function of the measurement error correction, but the 
difference  is  too  large  to  be  explained  by  it  alone. 
Hence, we appear to have a suppression situation in 
which the combination of the two antecedents in the 

path  model  (perceptions  of  transformational  leader-
ship  and  PsyCap)  increases  the  estimated  effects  of 
these variables on the outcomes, even when causally 
connected. In such situations, as Maassen and Bakker 
(2001) recommend, one option involves dropping one 
or  both  variables  from  the  analysis;  however,  this  is 
not appropriate if the variables are substantively dif-
ferent.  Such  is  the  case  in  this  study,  where  percep-
tions  of  the  leader  (transformational  leadership)  are 
distinct, in target and content, from the assessment of 
one’s own PsyCap. The important point here is that 
the  suppression  situation  does  not  invalidate  the 
results  reported  in  Figure  2,  although  they  must  be 
interpreted  in  the  context  of  both  effects,  which  is 
what we have attempted to do in the results.

Discussion

This  study  contributes  to  organizational  literature 
on three counts. Its first contribution lies in offering 
theory  that  explains  how  followers’  perceptions  of 
transformational leadership can develop their PsyCap. 
Second,  it  empirically  examined  the  relationship 


between  followers’  perceptions  of  transformational 
leadership  and  PsyCap.  Third,  it  revealed  relation-
ships  between  followers’  PsyCap  and  important  per-
formance  behaviors.  Our  finding  that  followers’ 
perceptions  of  transformational  leadership  are  posi-
tively related to their PsyCap is novel and conceptually 
appealing because it integrates the motivational aspect 
of  transformational  leadership  with  the  motivational 
propensity of PsyCap. We find that followers’ percep-
tions  of  transformational  leader  behaviors  are  posi-
tively  related  to  their  PsyCap.  These  findings  are 
promising, especially when considering that scholars 
of  positive  organizational  behavior  have  called  for 
investigations  into  the  ways  in  which  followers’ 
PsyCap can be developed (e.g., Luthans, Avolio, et al, 
2007). From a conceptual and empirical standpoint, 
we found support for the position that PsyCap can be 
related to employees’ contextual conditions, such as 
the  presence  and  perception  of  a  transformational 
leader. This finding parallels that of Luthans, Norman, 
et  al.  (2008)  in  which  they  found  that  a  supportive 
organizational  climate  can  help  develop  employees’ 
PsyCap. Similarly, we find that when a leader is per-
ceived as being transformational, he or she acts as a 
positive contextual force that enables followers’ per-
ceptions of a positive future based on motivated effort 
and perseverance. With regard to the mechanisms that 
enable this relationship, we note that transformational 
leadership  behaviors,  when  followers  perceive  them 
as such, can create conditions appropriate for PsyCap 
to  thrive.  In  sum,  our  findings  highlight  the  role 
played  by  a  transformational  leader  in  developing 
PsyCap. This is one of the main contributions of the 
current study—that is, casting followers’ perceptions 
of  transformational  leadership  as  an  antecedent  to 
PsyCap.  From  a  practical  standpoint,  this  finding 
highlights the importance of a transformational leader 
in energizing the workforce toward positive psycho-
logical resources.

As  such,  we  now  turn  our  attention  to  the  other 
significant results from our study—specifically, those 
concerning  the  outcomes  of  PsyCap.  Several  critics 
(Fineman, 2006; Lazarus, 2003) of the positive move-
ment have notably raised concerns about the utility of 
PsyCap with respect to work outcomes. We weigh in 
on this issue by providing support for scholarly con-
ceptual  positions  indicating  that  PsyCap  does  relate 
to work performance (Luthans, 2002b; Wright, 2003); 
we also speak to the practical relevance of PsyCap. 
We found PsyCap to positively relate to in-role per-
formance,  OCBI,  and  OCBO.  As  one’s  PsyCap  is 
fostered, one is more likely to perform OCBs directed 

Gooty et al. / In the Eyes of the Beholder    363  

toward individuals and the organization. PsyCap rep-
resents  an  individual’s  psychological  resources,  and 
higher levels of these critical resources enable indi-
viduals  to  replenish,  recharge,  and  move  forward 
when faced with everyday work hassles. From a prac-
tical  standpoint,  this  implies  that  an  employee  who 
faces  a  major  setback  in  a  creative  project  might 
quickly bounce back from that failure by attributing it 
to temporary external circumstances (i.e., by display-
ing  optimism)  and  might  perceive  that  setback  as  a 
developmental  lesson  (i.e.,  by  demonstrating  resil-
iency). Similarly, high levels of PsyCap represent an 
employee’s positive work-related cognitions. Research 
has shown that when an individual positively appraises 
work conditions, she or he is more likely to expend 
effort  and  adjust  inputs  to  help  coworkers  and  the 
organization (Organ & Near, 1985). For example, an 
employee  who  favorably  evaluates  her  work  and  is 
willing  to  expend  motivated  effort  might  willingly 
help a coworker (i.e., demonstrate a form of OCBI) 
because  she  believes  that  the  act  might  further  the 
cause of a positive future. Similarly, drawing on her 
positive  work  appraisal,  she  might  display  pride 
while representing the organization or offer sugges-
tions  for  quality  improvements  to  further  a  positive 
future (a form of OCBO).

In line with Luthans, Normans, et al. (2008), who 
found  that  PsyCap  fully  mediated  the  relationship 
between supportive organizational climate and perfor-
mance, we found that PsyCap fully mediates the rela-
tionship  between 
followers’  perceptions  of 
transformational leadership and work behaviors. But 
this  finding  needs  be  interpreted  with  caution.  First, 
our  findings  in  general  are  preliminary,  and  further 
research  is  needed  before  we  can  speculate  that  the 
effects  of  followers’  perceptions  of  transformational 
leadership can be fully explained by one psychologi-
cal mechanism. Second, PsyCap is a broad construct 
and, as pointed out by Luthans et al. (2007), encom-
passes  common  underlying  psychological  processes 
driving hope, optimism, self-efficacy, and resiliency, 
which  in  turn  direct  motivation  and  behavior.  We 
fully  acknowledge  that  given  the  broad  nature  of 
PsyCap,  the  construct  might  also  be  tapping  into 
other  follower-based  psychological  reactions  that 
have been shown to transmit the effects of followers’ 
perceptions  of  transformational  leadership  to  work 
performance.  For  example,  consider  Piccolo  and 
Colquitt’s findings (2006) that followers’ perceptions 
of  transformational  leadership  had  both  direct  and 
indirect effects on their work performance and OCB 
via job characteristics, intrinsic motivation, and goal 


364   Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies

commitment. Recall that hope is a motivational state 
that reflects an individual’s ability to set valued goals 
(willpower) and a belief that she or he can overcome 
obstacles to achieve those valued goals (way power; 
Onwuegbuzie  &  Snyder,  2000).  One  can  speculate 
that hope shares conceptual space with goal commit-
ment; that is, one who is more hopeful might be more 
committed  to  goals.  Thus,  future  research  is  war-
ranted addressing PsyCap and other mediating mech-
anisms within the same study. That said, we view the 
findings of this study as offering initial evidence that 
PsyCap provides a potentially important mechanism 
for  understanding  how  followers’  perceptions  of 
transformational  leadership  relate  to  their  perfor-
mance. In addition, our study makes a contribution by 
linking two literatures—namely, those of transforma-
tional  leadership  and  positive  organizational  behav-
ior.  In  doing  so,  we  answer  recent  calls  (Piccolo  & 
Colquitt, 2006) to investigate the processes and link-
ing  mechanisms  by  which  followers’  perceptions  of 
transformational leadership affect their performance.
Several  strengths  in  our  study  allowed  for  these 
contributions. First, ratings of performance came from 
different sources and at different times than did those 
of  followers’  perceptions  of  transformational  leader-
ship  and  PsyCap.  Thus,  we  were  able  to  minimize 
problems associated with common method variance. 
Second,  we  were  able  to  study  these  hypothesized 
relationships in an organizational setting with a new 
leader  who  was  seeking  to  make  changes. Although 
caution must be given in generalizing to other types of 
organizations, we think that the context of a collegiate 
marching band—with real goals and real performance 
demands—represents  a  novel  organizational  setting 
that  is  not  only  interesting  but  relevant  in  that  it 
includes members who care about the band’s perfor-
mance and school spirit in general. With the transfor-
mations that the leader was trying to bring about, this 
environment provided a ripe context for studying the 
relationships that we hypothesized.

Limitations and Future 

 Research Directions

Our study is not without limitations. First, it is the 
first  of  its  kind  in  testing  linkages  between  followers’ 
perceptions of transformational leadership and PsyCap 
and between PsyCap and OCB. Given the uniqueness of 
the  setting,  we  are  cautious  about  generalizing  these 
results until further rigorous replication and alternative 

designs  can  offer  additional  support  for  the  model. 
Second, we acknowledge that longitudinal designs best 
accomplish the study of statelike variables, such as the 
PsyCap constructs. Third, as with most cross-sectional 
field  studies,  the  degree  of  confidence  that  one  can 
have  in  inferring  causal  relationships  is  limited.  As 
such, we tried to minimize the use of causal language 
in  interpreting  our  findings.  Future  research  should 
address  these  relationships  from  a  causal  standpoint 
via the use of controlled laboratory settings or longitu-
dinal  field  designs.  Although  our  hypothesized  rela-
tionships  are  consistent  with  much  of  the  literature 
regarding leadership behavior as an antecedent to fol-
lowers’  reactions,  their  PsyCap  may  influence  their 
perceptions of such behavior, as well as the behavior 
itself. Future research is required to fully address the 
directionality  and,  perhaps,  the  reciprocity  of  these 
relationships. Common method variance might also be 
a  limitation  in  this  study,  given  that  the  same  source 
rated  perceptions  of  transformational  leadership  and 
PsyCap. However, the referents on these scales were 
different,  which  should  serve  to  reduce  common 
method  variance  in  perceptual  reports.  Furthermore, 
our study focused on followers’ perceptions of trans-
formational leadership behaviors rather than the behav-
iors themselves. This line of inquiry has precedent in 
the  leadership  literature,  and  several  scholars  have 
noted  the  importance  of  followers’  perceptions  of 
transformational leadership (e.g., Bommer et al., 2005; 
Schaubroeck  et  al.,  2007).  However,  this  perspective 
has its limitations in that it places bounds on the impli-
cations of our findings; namely, it implies that follow-
ers should see leaders as being transformational. Our 
findings  should  be  further  interpreted  with  caution 
given that it rated a single transformational leader; that 
is,  an  examination  of  multiple  leaders  might  elicit  a 
more complex pattern of findings. We view this as an 
avenue for future research. From a measurement stand-
point,  the  reverse-scored  items  in  the  PCQ  caused 
problems  with  psychometric  properties  regarding  the 
resiliency and optimism measures, at least in the context 
of our study. We found that the three reverse-scored items 
grouped together, even though, theoretically, they should 
have loaded with their respective constructs. This could 
be a sample-specific finding; however, future research is 
warranted  addressing  the  psychometric  properties  of 
the PCQ. This study sets up a host of future research 
directions.  For  example,  one  might  examine  the  dif-
ferential contributions of authentic leadership (Avolio 
&  Gardner,  2005)  and  transactional  leadership  on 
 followers’  PsyCap.  Guided  by  space  and  parsimony 


constraints,  we  did  not  present  theory  and  findings 
concerning  the  relationships  at  the  underlying  factor 
level  (i.e.,  hope,  optimism,  resiliency,  and  self-effi-
cacy). We view an examination of the underlying fac-
tor space as the next logical step stemming from our 
study.  Finally,  potential  negative  effects  of  PsyCap 
and its dimensions could be considered. Specifically, 
can  being  overly  hopeful  or  optimistic  constitute  a 
departure from reality or have dampening effects on 
some work outcomes, such as creative performance? 
Alternatively, can employees who are overly resilient 
or who have high self-efficacy and optimism be driven 
to  extreme  workplace  deviance? All  these  questions 
need  be  addressed  in  future  research.  Qualitative 
research using semistructured interviews or daily dia-
ries might provide rich insights into the sources and 
consequences of PsyCap. In conclusion, both our con-
ceptual model and the empirical findings lend support 
to  the  role  of  followers’  perceptions  of  transforma-
tional  leadership  in  shaping  their  PsyCap,  which  in 
turn  has  positive  relationships  with  important  work 
behaviors such as performance, OCBI, and OCBO.

Notes

1. A recent article examines the role of psychological capital 
(PsyCap)  and  transformational  leadership  as  antecedents  to 
employees’ empowerment (cf. Avey, Hughes, Norman, & Luthans, 
2008), but our work differs from this article in that we cast trans-
formational leadership as an antecedent to PsyCap. 

2. We acknowledge that each positive psychological capacity 
has a rich history in the psychological sciences and, more recently, 
in  organizational  behavior.  However,  we  do  not  delve  into  the 
effects  of  each  PsyCap  resource,  for  conceptual  and  practical 
reasons: Conceptually, Luthans and colleagues (Luthans, Avolio, 
et  al.,  2007;  Luthans,  Norman,  et  al.,  2008)  suggest  that  the 
higher-order  construct  of  PsyCap  represents  a  unique  motiva-
tional propensity that goes beyond a simple aggregation of each 
PsyCap strength. In the interest of space, we limit ourselves to an 
examination of the higher-order construct of PsyCap.

3. Although having each band member be rated by multiple 
graduate assistants would have had some benefits (e.g., multiple 
raters  and  the  ability  to  assess  interrater  reliability),  it  was  not 
feasible  in  this  context,  for  two  reasons.  First,  the  workload 
required  of  each  graduate  assistant  to  rate  all  band  members 
would  have  been  prohibitive.  Even  with  single  ratings,  each 
graduate  assistant  rated,  on  average,  65  members.  Second,  and 
more important, each graduate assistant is assigned to work with 
certain sections of the band, with little-to-no overlap among the 
graduate assistants’ areas of coverage. Hence, no more than one 
graduate  assistant  would  be  knowledgeable  enough  of  a  given 
band member’s performance to provide accurate ratings.

4.  The  loading  of  optimism  onto  the  higher-order  PsyCap 
construct  was  fixed  to  1.0,  to  set  the  scale  of  PsyCap  and  to 
achieve identification; as such, its estimated value was not subject 
to a significance test.

Gooty et al. / In the Eyes of the Beholder    365  

References

Avey, J. B., Hughes, L. W., Norman, S. M., & Luthans, K. (2008). 
Using  positivity,  transformational  leadership  and  empower-
ment  to  combat  employee  negativity.  Leadership  and 
Organization Development Journal, 29, 110-126.

Avey, J. B., Patera, J. L., & West, B. J. (2006). Positive psychological 
capital: A new approach for understanding absenteeism. Journal 
of Leadership and Organizational Studies, 13(2), 42-60.

Avey, J. B., Wernsing, T. S., & Luthans, F. (2008). Can positive 
employees  help  positive  organizational  change?  Impact  of 
psychological capital and emotions on relevant attitudes and 
behaviors. Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 44, 48-70.
Avolio, B. J. (1999). Full leadership development: Building the 

vital forces in organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Avolio, B. J., & Bass, B. M. (1988). Transformational leadership, 
charisma, and beyond. In J. G. Hunt, B. R. Baliga, H. P. Dachler, 
&  C.  A.  Schriesmheim  (Eds.),  Emerging  leadership  vistas 
(pp. 29-49). Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.

Avolio,  B.  J.,  &  Gardner,  W.  L.  (2005).  Authentic  leadership 
development: Getting to the root of positive forms of leader-
ship. Leadership Quarterly, 16, 315-338.

Bandura, A. (1982). Self-efficacy mechanism in human agency. 

American Psychologist, 37, 122-147.

Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: a 

social cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ. Prentice Hall.
Bandura, A. (2000). Cultivate self-efficacy for personal and orga-
nizational effectiveness. In E. A. Locke (Ed.), The Blackwell 
handbook of principles of organizational behavior (pp. 120-
136). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.

Bass, B. M. (1985). Leadership and performance beyond expec-

tations. New York: Free Press.

Bass, B. M. (1990). Handbook of leadership (3rd ed.). New York: 

Free Press.

Bass, B. M. (1991). Congruence of self and others leadership rat-
ings of naval officers for understanding successful performance. 
Applied Psychology: An International Review, 40(4), 437-454.
Bentler, P. M. (1990). Comparative fit indexes in structural mod-

els. Psychological Bulletin, 107, 238-246.

Bommer, W. H., Rich, G. A., & Rubin, R. S. (2005). Changing 
attitudes  about  change:  Longitudinal  effects  of  transforma-
tional leader behavior on employee cynicism about organiza-
tional  change.  Journal  of  Organizational  Behavior,  26(7), 
733-753.

Borman, W. C., & Motowidlo, S. J. (1993). Expanding the crite-
rion domain to include elements of contextual performance. 
In N. Schmitt & W. C. Borman (Eds.), Personality selection 
(pp. 71-98). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Clary,  E.  G.,  Snyder,  M.,  &  Worth,  K.  (2003).  The  volunteer 
organization  environment:  Key  dimensions  and  distinctions. 
Washington, DC: Aspen Institute, Nonprofit Sector Research 
Fund.

Downey, R. G., & King, C. (1998). Missing data in Likert ratings: 
A  comparison  of  replacement  methods.  Journal  of  General 
Psychology, 125(2), 175-191.

Felfe, J., & Schyns, B. (2006). Personality and the perception of 
transformational  leadership:  The  impact  of  extraversion, 
neuroticism, personal need for structure, and occupational self 
efficacy. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 36, 708-741.
Fineman,  S.  (2006).  On  being  positive:  Concerns  and  counter-

points. Academy of Management Review, 31, 270-291.


366   Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies

Fredrickson, B. L. (2001). The role of positive emotions in posi-
tive  psychology:  The  broaden-and-build  theory  of  positive 
emotions. American Psychologist, 56, 218-226.

Fredrickson, B. L., & Losada, M. F. (2005). Positive affect and 
the  complex  dynamics  of  human  flourishing.  American 
Psychologist, 60, 678-686.

Frone, M. R., Russell, M., & Cooper, M. L. (1994). Relationship 
between  job  and  family  satisfaction:  Causal  or  noncausal 
covariation? Journal of Management, 20, 565-579.

Gardner,  W.  L.,  Avolio,  B.  J.,  Luthans,  F.,  May,  D.  R.,  & 
Walumbwa,  F.  (2005).  “Can  you  see  the  real  me?”  A  self-
based  model  of  authentic  leader  and  follower  development. 
Leadership Quarterly, 16(3), 343-372.

Hobfoll,  S.  E.  (2002).  Social  and  psychological  resources  and 

adaptation. Review of General Psychology, 6, 307-324.

Hu, L., & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit indices in 
covariance  structure  analysis:  Conventional  criteria  versus 
new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling, 61, 1-55.

Joreskog, K. G., & Sorbom, D. (1996). LISREL 8: User’s refer-

ence guide. Chicago: Scientific Software International.

Judge, T. A., & Piccolo, R. F. (2004). Transformational and trans-
actional leadership: A meta-analytic test of their relative valid-
ity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89, 755-768.

Lazarus, R. S. (2003). Does the positive psychology movement 

have legs? Psychological Inquiry, 14(2), 93-109.

Luthans, F., Norman, S. M., Avolio, B. J., & Avey, J. B. (2008). 
The mediating role of psychological capital in the supportive 
organizational  climate–employee  performance  relationship. 
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 29, 219-238.

Lyubomirsky, S., King, L., & Diener, E. (2005). The benefits of 
frequent  positive  affect:  Does  happiness  lead  to  success? 
Psychological Bulletin, 131(6), 803-855.

Maassen, G. H., & Bakker, A. B. (2001). Suppressor variables in 
path models. Sociological Methods & Research, 30, 241-270.
Mayer, R. C., & Gavin, M. B. (2005). Trust for management and 
performance: Who minds the shop while the employees watch 
the boss? Academy of Management Journal, 48, 874-888.

Motowidlo, S. J., & Van Scotter, J. R. (1994). Evidence that task 
performance should be distinguished from contextual perfor-
mance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79, 475-480.

Nemanich, L., & Keller, R. T. (2007). Transformational leader-
ship in an acquisition: A field study of employees. Leadership 
Quarterly, 18, 49-68.

Netemeyer, R. G., Johnston, M. W., & Burton, S. (1990). Analysis 
of  role  conflict  and  role  ambiguity  in  a  structural  equations 
framework. Journal of Applied Psychology, 75, 148-157.

Onwuegbuzie, A. J., & Snyder, C. R. (2000). Relations between 
hope and graduate students’ coping strategies for studying and 
examination-taking. Psychological Reports, 86, 803-806.

Organ,  D. W.  (1988).  Organizational  citizenship  behavior: The 

Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, and cop-

good soldier syndrome. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books

ing. New York. Springer.

Lee, K., & Allen, N. J. (2002). Organizational citizenship behav-
ior and workplace deviance: The role of affect and cognitions. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 131-142.

LePine, J. A., Erez, A., & Johnson, D. E. (2002). A meta-analysis 
of  the  dimensionality  of  organizational  citizenship  behavior. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 52-65.

Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (1990). A theory of goal setting 

and task performance. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Lowe,  K.  B.,  Kroeck,  K.  G.,  &  Sivasubramaniam,  N.  (1996). 
Effectiveness correlates of transformational and transactional 
leadership:  A  meta-analytic  review  of  the  MLQ  literature. 
Leadership Quarterly, 7, 385-425.

Luthans,  F.  (2002a).  The  need  for  and  meaning  of  positive 
organizational behavior. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 
23, 695-706.

Luthans, F. (2002b). Positive organizational behavior: Developing 
and  managing  psychological  strengths.  Academy  of 
Management Executive, 16, 57-72.

Luthans, F., Avey, J. B., Avolio, B. J., Norman, S. M., & Combs, G. M. 
(2006).  PsyCap  development:  Toward  a  micro-intervention. 
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 27, 387-393.

Luthans, F., Avey, J. B., Clapp-Smith, R., & Li, W. (2008). More 
evidence on the value of Chinese workers’ psychological capi-
tal: A potentially unlimited competitive resource? International 
Journal of Human Resource Management, 19, 818-827.

Luthans,  F.,  Avey,  J.  B.,  &  Patera,  J.  L.  (2008).  Experimental 
analysis of a Web-based intervention to develop positive psy-
chological  capital.  Academy  of  Management  Learning  & 
Education, 7(2), 209-221.

Luthans, F., Avolio, B. J., Avey, J. B., & Norman, S. M. (2007). 
Positive psychological capital: Measurement and relationship 
with performance and satisfaction. Personnel Psychology, 60, 
541-572.

Organ,  D.  W.  (1997).  Organizational  citizenship  behavior:  It’s 

construct clean-up time. Human Performance, 10, 85-97.

Organ, D. W., & Konovsky, M. A. (1989). Cognitive versus affec-
tive  determinants  of  organizational  citizenship  behavior. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 74, 157-164.

Organ, D. W., & Near, J. P. (1985). Cognition vs. affect in mea-
sures of job satisfaction. International Journal of Psychology, 
20, 241-253.

Ortony, A., Clore, G. L., & Collins, A. (1988). The cognitive struc-
ture of emotions. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Piccolo, R. F., & Colquitt, J. A. (2006). Transformational leader-
ship and job behaviors: The mediating role of core job charac-
teristics. Academy of Management Journal, 49, 327-340.

Pillai,  R., Williams,  E. A.,  Lowe,  K.  B.,  &  Jung,  D.  I.  (2003). 
Personality,  transformational  leadership,  trust,  and  the  2000 
U. S. presidential vote. Leadership Quarterly, 14, 161-192.

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., & Bommer, W. H. (1996). 
Transformational leader behaviors and substitutes for leader-
ship  as  determinants  of  employee  satisfaction,  commitment, 
trust,  and  organizational  citizenship  behaviors.  Journal  of 
Management, 22, 259-298.

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Moorman, R. H., & Fetter, R. 
(1990). Transformational leader behaviors and their effects on 
followers’ trust in leader, satisfaction, and organizational citi-
zenship behaviors. Leadership Quarterly, 1, 107-142.

Roth, P. L., Switzer, F. S., III, & Switzer, D. M. (1999). Missing data 
in multiple item scales: A Monte Carlo analysis of missing data 
techniques. Organizational Research Methods, 2, 211-232.

Rowold, J., & Heinitz, K. (2007). Transformational and charis-
matic  leadership:  Assessing  the  convergent,  divergent  and 
criterion  validity  of  the  MLQ  and  the  CKS.  Leadership 
Quarterly, 18, 121-133.

Schaubroeck, J., Lam, S. S. K., & Cha, S. E. (2007). Embracing 
transformational  leadership:  Team  values  and  the  impact  of 


leader  behavior  on  team  performance.  Journal  of  Applied 
Psychology, 92, 1020-1030.

Schmitt, N. W., & Stults, D. M. (1985). Factors defined by nega-
tively  keyed  items:  The  results  of  careless  respondents? 
Applied Psychological Measurement, 9, 367-373.

Schyns,  B.,  &  Sanders,  K.  (2007).  In  the  eyes  of  the  beholder: 
Personality  and  the  perception  of  leadership.  Journal  of 
Applied Social Psychology, 37(10), 2345-2363.

Snyder, C. R. (2000). Handbook of hope: Theory, measures and 

applications. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Stajkovic, A. D., & Luthans, F. (1998). Self-efficacy and work-
related performance: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 
124, 240-261.

Switzer, F. S., III, & Roth, P. L. (2002). Coping with missing data. 
In S. G. Rogelberg (Ed.), Handbook of research methods in 
industrial  and  organizational  psychology  (pp.  310-323). 
Malden, MA: Blackwell.

Tiger,  L.  (1979).  Optimism:  The  biology  of  hope.  New  York: 

Simon & Schuster.

Williams,  L.  J.,  &  Anderson,  S.  E.  (1991).  Job  satisfaction  and 
organizational  commitment  as  predictors  of  organizational 
 citizenship  and  in-role  behaviors.  Journal  of  Management,  3, 
601-617.

Wright, T. A.  (2003).  Positive  organizational  behavior: An  idea 
whose  time  has  truly  come.  Journal  of  Organizational 
Behavior, 24, 437-442.

Youssef, C. M., & Luthans, F. (2007). Positive organizational behav-

ior in the workplace. Journal of Management, 33, 774-800.

Janaki Gooty (PhD, Oklahoma State University) is an assistant 
professor  of  Organizational  Behavior  and  Leadership  at  State 
University of New York, Binghamton. Her current research inter-
ests include leadership, emotions, trust and multi level phenom-
enon. Her research has appeared in The Leadership Quarterly and 
Journal of Organizational Behavior amongst others. She serves 
on the editorial board at the Leadership Quarterly. 

Gooty et al. / In the Eyes of the Beholder    367  

Mark Gavin (PhD, Purdue University) is an associate professor 
of  management  and 
the  Carson  Professor  of  Business 
Administration  at  the  Spears  School  of  Business  at  Oklahoma 
State  University.  He  is  the  past  chair  of  the  Research  Methods 
Division of the Academy of Management and the current Program 
Chair  for  the  Southern  Management  Association.  His  research 
interests  include  trust,  emotions  and  multilevel  phenomena  and 
analysis. His research has appeared in the Academy of Management 
Journal, Journal of Applied Psychology, Journal of Management, 
Organizational  Behavior  and  Human  Decision  Processes,  and 
The Leadership Quarterly, among others.

Paul  D.  Johnson  is  currently  working  on  his  PhD  in  Business 
Administration from Oklahoma State University’s Spears School 
of Business. His areas of expertise include motivation and leader-
ship, innovation, creativity, performance management, and entre-
preneur development.

M.  Lance  Frazier  is  a  PhD  candidate  at  Oklahoma  State 
University  with  an  emphasis  on  organizational  behavior.  He 
received his MBA from Oklahoma City University and is a student 
member  of  the Academy  of  Management,  Society  of  Industrial 
Organizational  Psychology,  and  Southern  Management 
Association.  His  current  research  interests  include  proactivity  at 
work, high involvement work practices, organizational justice, and 
motivation. 

D.  Bradley  Snow  is  Director  of  Bands  and  Director  of  the 
Cowboy Marching Band at Oklahoma State University. He holds 
a  Doctor  of  Musical  Arts  in  conducting  from  University  of 
Southern  Mississippi.  His  teaching  responsibilities  include 
marching  band  methods,  band  literature,  and  music  education 
courses. Prior to Oklahoma State University, he performed with 
the United States Marine Band at Quantico, Virginia as the prin-
cipal trumpet player and cornet soloist. 

