 
 
When Should Original Equipment Manufacturers Use Branded Component Contracts with
Suppliers?
Author(s): Mrinal Ghosh and  George John
Source: Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 46, No. 5 (Oct., 2009), pp. 597-611
Published by: American Marketing Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/20618922
Accessed: 02-08-2017 17:11 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms

American Marketing Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and
extend access to Journal of Marketing Research

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 17:11:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 MRINAL GHOSH and GEORGE JOHN*

 Branded components are becoming increasingly popular in industrial

 markets; yet extant research provides limited understanding of the use of
 such arrangements in the real world. The authors use the governance
 lens of transaction cost economics to propose that leveraging the
 vendor's brand reputation and safeguarding the vendor's customization
 investments are key motivators for choosing branded component
 contracts. Data on 191 contracts from three engineering-intensive
 industry sectors provide support to the authors' hypotheses. The authors
 find that firms are more likely to choose branded component contracts
 when the supplier's brand name adds significant differentiation
 (leveraging) and when the component supplier has made significant
 component customization investments (safeguarding). This safeguarding
 motivation is relevant even to suppliers with modest brand reputation.
 The authors also investigate the normative consequences of these
 contracting decisions and find significant adverse outcomes from
 choosing the "wrong" contract form. Furthermore, they find that these
 outcomes are asymmetric in nature. In particular, choosing a "white box"
 contract when the theory argues for a branded component contract leads
 to more adverse outcomes than choosing a branded component contract
 when the theory predicts a "white box" contract. Finally, the authors draw
 key conclusions for theory and managerial practice.

 Keywords: component branding, self-enforcing agreements, transaction
 cost analysis, business-to-business marketing, organizational
 relationships

 When Should Original Equipment

 Manufacturers Use Branded Component
 Contracts with Suppliers?

 Original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) often develop

 and market products that comprise technologically separa
 ble components procured from independent suppliers.
 Legal contracts govern the relationship between such inde
 pendent firms, so a great deal of effort goes into crafting
 appropriate contracts. An increasingly popular contract
 form is the so-called branded component contract, which is
 distinguished by the legal obligation to use the supplier's

 *Mrinal Ghosh is W. "H" and Callie Clark Associate Professor of Mar
 keting, Department of Marketing, Eller College of Management, Univer
 sity of Arizona (e-mail: mghosh@eller.arizona.edu). George John is Gen
 eral Mills-Gerot Chair of Marketing, Carlson School of Management,
 University of Minnesota (e-mail: johnx001@umn.edu). The authors thank
 Shantanu Dutta, Shankar Ganesan, Manuel Gonzalez-Diaz, Jan Heide,
 Desmond Lo, Robert Lusch, and Scott Masten for their valuable advice
 and suggestions.

 brand on the OEM's end product and/or on marketing
 materials in conjunction with the OEM brand name. There
 are many variations of this contract form. For example,
 parties might agree to affix the brand names and logos to
 the equipment itself. Other agreements call for both brand
 names to be used in marketing communications and sales
 brochures. In essence, both brand names are conspicuously
 communicated to the end user. Early prominent examples
 include G.D. Searle's "Nutrasweet" brand placed on diet
 soda cans and Intel's "Intel Inside" logo placed on personal
 computer equipment. Consumer behavior scholars (e.g.,
 Desai and Keller 2002; Park, Jun, and Shocker 1996) have
 studied cobranding (or ingredient branding) in the labora
 tory and have concluded that a synergistic fit between a
 strong ingredient brand and a strong host brand enhances
 end-customer preferences for the host product; in essence,
 a host brand can leverage a strong component brand to

 ? 2009, American Marketing Association Journal of Marketing Research
 ISSN: 0022-2437 (print), 1547-7193 (electronic) 597 Vol. XLVI (October 2009), 597-611

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 17:11:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 598 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, OCTOBER 2009

 achieve greater differentiation. However, two key gaps exist
 in applying this leveraging insight to branded component
 contracts.

 First, it is not obvious that leveraging effects from labora
 tory studies can order real-world contracts, especially given
 the institutional complexities and the multiple motives of
 the parties. Second, casual observation of practice reveals
 patterns that go beyond the leveraging rationale. In Table 1,
 we describe several branded component contracts assem
 bled from public data sources. In many of these cases, the
 same component brand name is affixed to different versions
 of the component that have been incorporated into various
 OEMs' end products. Thus, Leece-Neville brand alternators
 with large design, performance, and functionality differ
 ences are incorporated into many different products (e.g.,

 heavy-duty trucks, power-generation sets, construction,
 mining and materials handling equipment) produced by dif
 ferent firms.1 Indeed, the practice of customizing the same
 basic component is the norm in many industrial markets.
 The differences across the customized versions undercut the
 sine qua non of using a brand name to signal consistent
 quality and performance. Yet Table 1 shows that FUJITSU
 Electronics and Baker Hughes explicitly attribute their

 lrThese examples contrast sharply with both Nutrasweet and Intel,
 which involved identical components sold to different OEMs. Perhaps the
 prominence of these two cases led the subsequent work to ignore the cus
 tomization of components that is so prevalent in many instances.

 BRANDED AND WHITE BOX COMPONENTS IN BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETS

 Table 1

 OEM Brand/Product

 Component Vendor Brand/Product

 Sales Pitch Employed in OEM Product Manuals/Brochures and/or

 Advertisements in Magazines/Trade Journals

 Branded Components

 Nissan multifuel industrial engines

 Zenith electronic fuel management

 system

 Frankly, the performance will amaze you,... specially designed to switch
 "on-the-fly" from propane to gasoline and back seamlessly and without loss

 of power.

 IBM services

 Siebel e-business software

 Andersen Consulting (now Accenture) Fasturn e-business solutions

 Mathcad from MathSoft

 Microsoft Excel

 FUJITSU Electronics

 C?modo (Internet security specialists)

 IBM's infrastructure and industry expertise. Siebel System's sophisticated
 e-business software. Combined, they enable personalized relationships via

 phone, Web, and e-mail. No more customer #345H ... only happier Bobs and

 higher sales.

 To customize a Web-enabled marketplace for retailers and manufacturers,...
 combines Fasturn's e-business solutions with Andersen Consulting's retail

 industry knowledge and experience ... to deliver high-value results.

 Patented electronic math technology lets engineers work with math

 notations,... seamlessly integrate(s) a variety of third-party data sources

 based on Excel....

 Collaborated on the development, marketing and distribution of products
 containing the SIDEN Trust Chip?a market leading security chip offering

 unrivalled cost effectiveness. Comodo's expertise in cryptography and

 integrated circuits has enabled considerable functionality to be

 incorporated,... whilst the cost of the chip has been dramatically reduced.

 Dell PowerEdge servers

 Intel Xeon processors

 Optimized to provide maximum flexibility, value, and price/performance.

 Baker Hughes AutoTrak rotary

 steerable oil drilling machines

 Hughes Christiansen PDC Drill bits are specially designed for these machines to deliver breakthrough

 (polycrystalline diamond compact) performance....

 drill bits

 Freightliner Custom Chassis

 Corporation

 Delco Remy or Leece-Neville

 alternators

 (Components) have been chosen to optimize your flexibility..

 White Box Components

 IBM Tivoli storage area network

 management system

 Brocade Communications network

 switches and software

 Ford Motor midsize/heavy trucks

 Detroit Diesel engines

 Presidio Networked Solutions

 enterprise voice and data
 communication

 Lycoming aircraft engines

 New Global Telecom Voice over

 Internet Protocol and service

 Crane Cam valve train and camshaft

 subsystem

 Notes: The last column is not applicable for white box component because OEMs do not communicate the vendor's brand name in these instances.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 17:11:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Branded Component Contracts 599

 product's differentiation as arising at least in part from
 incorporating a customized (branded) component.

 The leveraging rationale is also at odds with the cases in
 Table 1 in which the OEM's brand is much more prominent
 than its supplier's brand. For example, Nissan arguably
 enjoys much greater visibility than Zenith among industrial
 engine buyers; similarly, Accenture is a better-known brand
 than Fasturn in the information technology marketplace. As
 such, these branded component contracts appear to violate
 the dictum of leveraging the vendor's strong brand reputa
 tion. In other words, it is not clear how an OEM with a
 well-reputed brand can leverage a relatively unknown sup
 plier brand. This might expose the better-known OEM
 brand to the risk of dilution.

 This research addresses two key issues. First, what

 prompts the choice of a branded component contract over
 a "white box" contract in the real world?2 Second, what
 performance consequences follow from these contract
 choices? We begin with the position that these two contract
 forms are alternative governance institutions. To address
 the first question, we supplement the leveraging argument
 for branded contracts with the logic of self-enforcing
 agreements in the transaction cost analysis (TCA) tradition
 (e.g., Klein 1996; Williamson 1983).3 Here, branded con
 tracts offer a comparative governance advantage over the
 white box contract in safeguarding suppliers' efforts to cus
 tomize components. Using primary data from 191 OEM
 supplier contracts, we test these two explanations?
 whether branded contracts are actually chosen for their
 superior ability to support suppliers' customization invest
 ments and whether they are chosen for their ability to sup
 port differentiation gains from leveraging suppliers' brand
 names. We find that OEMs indeed follow a comparative
 advantage rule in making their component branding deci
 sions. Specifically, OEMs that stand to gain more from a
 branded component contract (because of higher levels of
 the two aforementioned factors) choose such contracts
 more often.

 We also examine the normative outcomes of these deci
 sions and draw three conclusions. First, we find that there
 are significant costs to the OEM from providing insuffi
 cient support for vendor customization investments and
 from foregoing differentiation gains that could be had by
 leveraging the supplier's brand name. Second, we find that
 these costs of misalignment are surprisingly asymmetric.
 Original equipment manufacturers that do not choose
 branded contracts when the theory argues for this contract
 form face significantly more adverse outcomes than OEMs
 that choose branded contracts when the theory argues
 against this contract form. Third, we find that the costs of
 misalignment that arise from providing insufficient support
 for the supplier's customization investment are larger than
 costs that arise from foregoing the differentiation gains
 from leveraging the supplier's differentiation capabilities.

 We organize the remainder of the article as follows: We

 first present our conceptual framework. Then, we present

 our empirical study. We conclude with a discussion of our
 findings and implications for research and practice.

 THEORY

 Consider the class of contracts between an OEM and an
 independent supplier for an engineered component (or line
 of related components) that is physically incorporated into
 the OEM's product and integral to its proper functioning.
 These multiyear contracts typically involve significant
 research, design, and development activities that vary in
 their level of specificity to the exchange partner and can
 be undertaken by one or both parties during the contract's
 execution phase.4 In our investigation, we exclude contracts
 that govern the supply of commodities, such as steel ingots,
 copper wire, and so on, and contracts for intangible prop
 erty, such as a trademarked character or logo, because these
 do not involve engineering investments in the execution
 phase. We also exclude intrafirm agreements and joint ven
 tures because the contracting problem is fundamentally dif
 ferent when the two parties are owned by a single legal
 entity. Finally, we focus on contracts in which the OEM
 initiates the relationship. Within this class of contracts, we
 distinguish two forms: white box contracts and branded
 component contracts.

 A white box contract is a legal arrangement between an
 OEM and a component supplier that does not obligate the
 OEM to use the supplier's brand alongside its own brand
 on marketing materials and/or the product. This form incor
 porates many variants, including "private-label" arrange
 ments, in which the supplier's identity is concealed from
 end customers. In another variant, the supplier's brand is
 present on the component, but it is not visible to the user in
 ordinary use (e.g., a branded air filter under the hood of a
 car). Yet another variant is when the supplier actually com
 municates its brand to end users, but it does so unilaterally
 and without any contractual agreement with the OEM.5 In
 summary, the defining characteristic of a white box con
 tract is that the marketing efforts of the two parties are
 undertaken without any legally binding agreement to use
 their two brand names in conjunction.

 A branded component contract is a legal agreement that
 specifies that the two brands will be used together in mar
 keting efforts over the length of the contract. It creates a
 cospecialized asset relationship in that each party is obli
 gated to deploy its own brand (asset) in conjunction with
 the other's brand. In TCA, it is argued that such cospecial
 ized relationships better support higher levels of coopera
 tion and coordination than white box contracts, albeit at
 a higher governance cost. The presence of commingled
 assets gives each party a secure basis for engaging the
 other party across a wide range of activities that might oth
 erwise be allocated solely to one or the other party. These
 activities include writing the specifications of the compo
 nent and the end product and defining the technical inter
 face between them, developing marketing programs and
 media plans on joint promotions, and negotiating financial
 burdens. These joint activities are unlikely to be completely

 2The origins of this term reside in the practice of shipping components
 in plain white boxes without any conspicuous use of the vendor's brand
 name. We use the term "white box" to refer to unbranded components.
 Table 1 offers several examples.

 3We use the terms "branded component contract" and "branded con

 tract" interchangeably.

 4"Specificity" refers to the degree to which the investments have

 reduced value outside their planned use.

 5An example would be brand names that are visible on automobile tires,
 but the contract does not specify the use of the component brand name in
 downstream marketing.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 17:11:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 600 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, OCTOBER 2009

 specified at the time of the initial agreement and will need
 to be revised in the face of changing circumstances during
 the execution phase. Additional costs are also incurred for
 monitoring because adverse events associated with one
 brand could spill over to the other brand. The greater adap
 tation pressure within this contract form than with the sim
 pler, arm's-length white box form is likely to manifest in
 several characteristic ways.

 First, cospecialized assets require a longer planning
 horizon; thus, the duration of branded contracts can be
 expected to be longer than that of white box contracts. Sec
 ond, to facilitate efficient adjustments to the original terms,
 the processes used to determine the price and technical
 design issues are likely to be more open-ended within
 branded contracts than white box contracts. Finally, the
 social norms of branded contracts carry expectations
 of greater flexibility, willingness to work together, and
 information exchange from each party than white box con
 tracts.6 In essence, branded contracts create an environment
 that fosters cooperation and coordination between parties
 that have an incentive to work toward a fruitful customer
 side realization and appeal ex post.

 Taken together, these aspects of branded contracts mirror
 the joint action that occurs in purchasing alliances (e.g.,
 Heide and John 1990) in which parties expend resources ex
 ante to craft complex, long-term arrangements and then
 expend resources ex post to enforce agreements, coordinate
 activities, and adapt to unforeseen situations. The costs of
 writing and enforcing branded contracts exceed the corre
 sponding costs of simpler white box contracts, which leads
 to the key question, What motivates parties to use the cost
 lier governance form? We argue that branded contracts
 mitigate trading hazards while encouraging value-enhancing
 adjustments, which makes them more attractive in exchanges
 with elevated hazards and/or larger adjustment possibilities.
 Subsequently, we identify these hazards; however, we
 digress briefly to clarify the notion of viewing these agree
 ments regarding brands as governance forms as distinct
 from viewing brands as product attributes.

 It could be argued that a customer evaluating a product
 carrying two brand names (OEM and supplier) versus the
 same product carrying just one brand name (OEM) might
 consider the second brand an additional product attribute.
 Under this lens, a branded contract is reduced to conveying
 an additional attribute (the second brand) to the customer.
 This is correct as far as the customer is concerned. How
 ever, note that when a white box form is employed, the
 supplier's brand name is still in existence; it is simply not
 conspicuously visible or promoted alongside the OEM's
 brand name. Neither party can unilaterally add the second
 brand; it takes a legal agreement with the other party. Thus,
 the OEM's choice of contract form is independent from the
 existence of the individual brands, which indeed act as
 attributes of their respective products. In other words, a

 6In spirit, branded contracts are not unlike other channel contracts (e.g.,

 exclusive dealing and territories, franchising) in the sense that parties for
 mally agree to enter into a long-term association but leave specific sub
 clauses (e.g., pricing, product specifications and introductions, product
 line design, focus of marketing and promotional programs) open for future
 adjustments.

 branded contract and a white box contract are alternative
 governance forms, not merely attributes of the products.

 Mitigating Hazards

 As we noted previously, we are interested in ties in

 which independent suppliers undertake component design
 and engineering activities that improve the functionality
 and end-user appeal of the client's product. These responsi
 bilities require that the supplier invest significant resources
 that are specialized to the client at hand, including the
 development of engineering designs and specs, manufac
 turing processes, specialized tools and equipment, and
 employee training in product development and integration
 tasks. Such investments generate value, but their low sal
 vage value across alternative clients makes them hazardous
 to the investing party (the vendor) because the other party
 (the OEM) could opportunistically renegotiate terms during
 the execution stage. Uncertainties about technology
 requirements and market shifts amplify such renegotiation
 opportunities. Anticipating this problem, farsighted suppli
 ers will seek safeguards to support such investments, and
 farsighted OEMs will offer safeguards. Absent sufficient
 safeguards, investment levels will drop, and desire to adapt
 will be low. In turn, consider the classic safeguards posited
 in TCA.

 Complete contracts. Complete contracts plan for contin

 gencies and fold required safeguards into the original legal
 agreement. As a practical matter, contracts are invariably
 incomplete in engineering-intensive settings (e.g., Crocker
 and Reynolds 1993). For example, OEMs engage suppliers
 early to reduce development cycle times. This also requires
 that the suppliers revise original designs to accommodate
 new developments. Consequently, the original designs at
 the contract initiation stage are often different from the
 implemented designs. Increasing the completeness of the
 initial design diminishes the hazard of opportunistic rene
 gotiation; however, writing more completely specified con
 tracts is costlier, and such contracts lock the parties in to
 the original specifications and reduce the flexibility to
 make desired changes ex post (e.g., Ghosh and John 2005).
 This opportunism-flexibility trade-off leads to contracts for
 engineered components being typically incomplete in many
 significant respects, and thus complete contracts are not a
 practical solution to the problem of hazardous investments.
 Relational contracts. Relational contracts refer to agree
 ments in which cooperative behavior is sustained by social
 norms and bilateral punishment rather than courts of law.
 Social norms enable parties to employ relatively incom
 plete contracts without fear of opportunistic renegotiation.
 Relational contracts are particularly valued for their ability
 to promote adaptation. Anderson and Weitz (1992) show
 that to promote relational behavior, buyer-supplier ties
 exchange hostages (Williamson 1983) in the form of
 symmetric-specific investments. Symmetric investments
 create self-enforcing agreements because both parties face
 adverse consequences from relationship termination.
 Unfortunately, symmetric investments are impractical in
 our setting because tasks cannot be simply shifted from the
 OEM to the supplier (or vice versa) without affecting the
 quality of outcomes. For example, not only is product
 design and development in engineering-intensive settings

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 17:11:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Branded Component Contracts 601

 an inherently creative task, but it also involves technical
 capabilities and expertise across diverse engineering disci
 plines (Carson 2007). In many cases, the vendor possesses
 superior expertise in designing the component and thus is
 the logical party to make the investment. Forcing symmet
 ric investments under such circumstances reduces the mar
 ginal productivity of these investments. In summary, the
 differences in the technological capabilities between the
 contracting parties preclude symmetric investments as a
 practical safeguard for suppliers' specialized investments.
 Given the infeasibility of complex, complete contracts and
 the difficulties of enacting relational contracting through
 symmetric investments, we consider the utility of branded
 contracts next.

 Branded component contracts as self-enforcing agree
 ments. Agreements are self-enforced when each party finds
 it beneficial not to breach the mutually understood intent
 and terms of the relationship (e.g., Klein 1996; Telser
 1981). We contend that a branded contract is a credible,
 self-enforcing safeguard that the OEM can offer its vendor
 to encourage investment in value-enhancing but noncon
 tractible customized investments. To support our argument,
 recall that in a branded contract, the parties formally agree
 to jointly promote the two brands. The joint promotion and
 commingling of the two brands necessitates close coordina
 tion between the parties to generate a fruitful realization ex
 post. This visible ongoing association between the two
 brands amounts to a hostage exchange and creates mutual
 dependence because improper coordination and implemen
 tation miscues can hurt both brands. As such, a branded
 contract works as a credible safeguard to support a sup
 plier's investment.

 Specifically, a branded contract curbs the OEM's desire
 to renegotiate opportunistically because negative fallout
 from any adverse outcome (e.g., improper coordination)
 could hurt its own brand. In effect, in a branded contract, it
 is in the OEM's interest to coordinate the joint activities to
 facilitate effective implementation. For the supplier, the
 presence of its own brand boosts its bargaining position
 during renegotiation, which strengthens its anticipated
 returns from its noncontractible investments (Gonzalez
 Diaz, B?rcala, and Arrunada 2002). Farsighted suppliers
 will anticipate this safeguard from a branded contract and
 will be better motivated to undertake specialized invest
 ments. Furthermore, the supplier's ownership rights arising
 from the presence of its brand on the end product motivate
 the search for value-enhancing adjustments (e.g., in product
 design) ex post (Whinston 2003); thus, less time will be
 spent renegotiating with the other party and convincing it
 of the productive redeployment of its activities.

 In summary, branded contracts extend the self-enforcing
 range of agreements between an OEM and its supplier,
 encourage investments, and foster adaptation at compara
 tively low governance costs. The utility of this safeguard
 increases with the levels of potentially hazardous cus
 tomization investments made by the supplier. As such, we
 expect that the likelihood of using a branded contract is
 higher at higher levels of such investments.

 H^ The greater the specific investments of the supplier, the
 higher is the likelihood of a branded component contract
 with that supplier.

 Enabling Differentiation Gains

 Commingling two brands enables each brand to leverage

 the reputational capital of the other brand (Aaker 2004).
 Specifically, Simonin and Ruth (1998) show that respon
 dents rated a product more highly when it was cobranded
 with a component that possessed a strong brand itself and
 enjoyed a good fit with the host brand. Desai and Keller
 (2002) show that respondents perceived the host brand
 more favorably when it was combined with another brand
 that added some unique properties. Finally, Park, Jun, and
 Shocker (1996) show that the quality of the constituent
 brands was perceived more for the jointly branded item
 when the two brands fit each other. Overall, these studies
 suggest that commingling two brands that reinforce each
 other enables differentiation gains.

 Applied to our context, we expect OEMs to use branded
 contracts with suppliers that possess strong brands that add
 to the appeal of the host product. We denote this attribute
 of the supplier as its ex ante differentiation capability. Note
 that this supplier capability is unrelated to and exists before
 the investments made by the supplier during contract
 execution.

 H2: The greater the ex ante differentiation capability of the sup

 plier's brand with respect to the OEM's end product, the
 higher is the likelihood of a branded component contract
 with that supplier.

 Contract Outcomes

 Hj and H2 employ TCA's governance cost minimization

 logic to predict the use of branded contracts. As such,
 choosing the "correct" alternative should lead to more
 favorable outcomes, and choosing an incorrect alternative
 should lead to less favorable outcomes. Specifically, using
 a white box contract when the vendor's investments are
 large or when it's ex ante differentiation capability is high
 would be an incorrect choice and should lead to more
 adverse outcomes. Likewise, using a branded contract
 when the vendor's investments are small or when it's ex
 ante differentiation capability is low would be an incorrect
 choice and should lead to more adverse outcomes. This
 leads to the following expectation:

 H3: OEMs that choose an incorrect contract form (branded
 component or white box contract) suffer adverse outcomes.

 We distinguish and investigate two forms of outcome
 variants here. First, prospective gains or losses can accrue
 to a randomly selected firm that is contemplating choosing
 a contract form but has not yet done so. Second, retrospec
 tive gains or losses can be incurred by a firm that is con
 templating switching away from its extant contract choice
 to an alternative (counterfactual) choice.

 EMPIRICAL STUDY

 Our model requires microlevel contract data that are
 unlikely to be found in archival sources. Thus, we employed
 a mail questionnaire administered to a carefully selected set
 of key informants from firms in three industry sectors. We
 selected nonelectrical machinery (Standard Industrial Clas
 sification [SIC] 35), electrical and electronic machinery
 (SIC 36), and transportation equipment (SIC 37) firms

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 17:11:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 602 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, OCTOBER 2009

 because our initial field interviews informed us that both
 contract forms are feasible alternatives in these settings.
 After we reviewed the relevant trade journals, it appeared
 that both forms were likely to be found in sufficient num
 bers. To foreshadow our results, approximately 35% of our
 contracts were branded component contracts.

 Our selected industry sectors fit our assumptions of (1)
 the impracticality of complete contracts, (2) the difficulties
 of relational safeguards, and (3) the absence of complete
 backward vertical integration. The end products incorporate
 numerous engineered components that require the contract
 ing parties to engage in significant levels of design and
 engineering activities and to seek revisions during the con
 tract execution stage; as such, written contracts are incom
 plete and cannot be relied on to safeguard investments.
 Component suppliers in these sectors also possess unique,
 specialized skills; as such, relational safeguards through
 symmetric investments are difficult to enact for the reasons
 described previously. Finally, the diverse technologies
 make it infeasible for OEMs to backward-integrate com
 pletely into component design and production.
 Data Collection

 We describe our data collection in an abbreviated way
 here. (For more details, we direct the reader to our previous
 article [Ghosh and John 2005].) Comprehensive open
 ended field interviews were undertaken at a dozen sites to
 establish the substantive relevance of our concepts. From
 these interviews and previous empirical research, we gener
 ated a survey instrument, which was then pretested at 18
 sites to verify wording, response formats, and so forth. We
 purchased a commercial list of names and addresses of pur
 chasing managers and directors at manufacturing firms in
 the specified SIC codes and drew a random sample of 1016
 names from this list. Each contact on the list was called to
 identify and qualify him or her as a key informant. This
 process required an average of five calls per firm and some
 times resulted in another person being nominated by our
 initial contact. After qualifying the contacts as informants,
 we asked them to identify their firm's most important end
 product line. We asked them to identify a contract that was
 organized within the last 12 months, under which their firm
 procured an engineered component from an independent
 supplier. This component had to be physically embedded
 into the previously identified end product. All subsequent
 questions made reference to this contract. Our unit of analy
 sis is the identified contractual relationship between each
 OEM and its identified supplier for a single component or a
 set of closely related components procured under a single
 contract.7

 Our qualification and screening efforts yielded 521 key

 informants who were then mailed the questionnaire.
 Follow-up telephone calls and reminder cards yielded 193
 completed questionnaires, from which we eliminated 2
 questionnaires for missing data. Our final sample consisted

 7"Closely related components" refer to slight specification differences
 in components that OEMs might need to incorporate into different ver
 sions of the systems they sell downstream. For example, an OEM selling
 CNC Systems machines/systems might seek different versions of an ASIC
 (application-specific integrated circuits) chip for different downstream
 applications.

 of 191 ties. We assessed informant knowledge and involve
 ment using two self-report items. Their mean responses
 were significantly above the midpoint of the seven-point
 scale for each item. Similarly, we compared early respon
 dents with later respondents to assess whether nonresponse
 biases existed. We found no significant differences, lending
 support to our conclusion that there are no significant non
 response bias issues in these data.
 We reiterate the institutional context of these OEM
 supplier ties to fix the boundary conditions that apply to
 our theory test. These are not arm's-length ties. The buyers
 are relatively large firms (on average, ten times larger than
 their suppliers) that nevertheless do not contract with their
 suppliers on a take-it-or-leave-it basis or employ standard
 form contracts. They write customized contracts covering
 an extended period (two-plus years, on average). In gen
 eral, there are several potential suppliers and buyers for
 these components. On average, the buyers and suppliers
 maintain commercial relationships with each other (though
 not necessarily for the focal component) for 8.1 years.8 In
 other words, markets exist, but there are significant poten
 tial trading hazards.

 Dependent Variable Measures

 In Tables 2 and 3, we show the measures and sample sta

 tistics, respectively. Next, we describe each of the measures.
 Contract form. We developed a grounded measure of this

 variable as follows: Each informant was asked whether his
 or her formal contract specified the use of the supplier's
 brand name on the end product and/or in promotions/
 marketing materials and activities. To put this into perspec
 tive, our branded contract form does not include observa
 tions in which a supplier's brand name can be discerned
 only after the end product has been disassembled. This is a
 conservative measure; however, it guarantees that the con
 tracting firms expended effort in discussing and formaliz
 ing the issue. For our contract form measure, BRAND = 1
 denotes branded contracts, and BRAND = 0 denotes white
 box contracts.

 Contract outcomes. Governance costs are the costs
 imposed on the OEM by self-interested strategic behavior
 and guile on the part of the supplier during contract execu
 tion. Recall that an opportunistic supplier might exploit
 incomplete contract terms by providing components with
 different specifications or inferior quality. Although-a sup
 plier might comply with the letter of the contract, it might
 not seek out improvements aggressively because the
 revised terms might be less favorable. Choosing the right
 contract form dampens such behavior, while an incorrect
 contract form exacerbates such behavior. Our vendor
 opportunism (VENDOPPT) measure of this construct con
 sists of a six-item scale. We adapted the seven-point Likert
 type items from John (1984).

 Independent Variable Measures

 Vendor's specific investments. This measure (SUPPINV)

 captures the physical and human asset investments the sup

 8The mean, median, minimum, and maximum values for the average
 length of the relationship in our data are 8.1 years, 7.6 years, 1.5 years,
 and 20 years, respectively.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 17:11:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Branded Component Contracts 603

 plier makes to customize the component to the OEM's
 needs. We borrowed the six-item, seven-point Likert-type
 scale from Ghosh and John (2005).

 Differentiation capability. We measured the extent to
 which a component from this supplier improves customers'
 perceptions of the OEM's product with a four-item scale

 Table 2

 OPERATIONAL MEASURES OF CONSTRUCTS

 Descriptive and
 Confirmatory Fit
 Statistics
 BRAND

 Differentiation

 (DIFF)
 X2(2) = 5.63,
 CFI = .99,
 NFI = .99, and
 reliability = .84

 Vendor's specific

 investments
 (SUPPINV)
 X2(9) = 24.1,
 CFI = .97,
 NFI = .97, and
 reliability = .91

 OEM's specific
 investments
 (OEMINV)
 X2(9) = 17.75,
 CFI = .99,
 NFI = .98, and
 reliability = .90

 Item Description and Response Format

 Does your formal contract with the vendor specify
 the use of this vendor's brand name in joint
 promotions or displays on your end product (or
 sales brochures) so that it is easily visible to the
 customers?

 1. The item procured under the relationship0 with

 this vendor has enhanced customer perceptions of
 our end-product performance.

 2. The relationship with this vendor for this item
 has enabled us to differentiate our end product
 vis-?-vis our competitors'.

 3. The image of our end product in our customer's

 eyes has received a boost due to the item
 supplied in this relationship.

 4. This relationship has allowed us to better capture

 design and engineering synergies between their
 item and our end product.

 1. This supplier has made significant investment in
 specialized tools and equipment dedicated to the
 relationship with us.

 2. This supplier has spent significant resources

 designing the specifications for their item(s) to
 ensure that it fits well with our production
 capabilities.

 3. The procedures and routines developed by the

 supplier for their item(s) are tailored to our
 particular product.

 4. We have some unusual technological norms and

 standards which have required extensive
 adaptation on the part of this supplier.

 5. Most of the training that the supplier's people

 have undertaken related to our requirement for
 this item(s) cannot be easily adapted for use with
 another customer.

 6. Training our personnel has involved substantial
 commitment of time and money on the part of
 the supplier.

 1. We have made significant investment in tools and
 equipment dedicated to the relationship with this
 supplier.

 2. We have spent significant resources designing the
 specifications for this item(s) to ensure that it fits
 well with the supplier's production capabilities.
 3. The procedures and routines we have developed

 to obtain this item(s) are tailored to this particular
 item from this supplier.

 4. This supplier has some unusual technological

 norms and standards which have required
 extensive adaptation on our part.

 5. Most of the training that our people have

 undertaken related to this supplier's item(s)
 would be of little value in dealing with another
 supplier.

 6. Training this supplier's people has involved
 substantial commitment of time and money.

 Relative size of

 OEM to vendor
 (RELSIZE)

 With respect to your last year's sales volume, how

 large is your firm relative to this supplier?

 Descriptive and
 Confirmatory Fit
 Statistics
 Number of
 potential
 vendors
 (NPOTVEND)

 Number of
 potential
 OEMs
 (NPOTOEM)

 Item Description and Response Format

 What is the total number of potential vendors for
 this type of item(s)?

 What is the total number of potential OEM buyers
 for this type of item(s)?

 Technological
 uncertainty
 (TECHUNCT)a
 a =.83

 1. Widely accepted/no industry standards for end

 product design and specifications exist.

 2. Industry standards for this item's performance

 specifications are very predictable/unpredictable.

 3. Competitors' end products are very
 similar/dissimilar to our end product.

 Norm of

 flexibility
 (FLEXIBLE)
 X2(9) = 30.7,
 CFI = .97,
 NFI = .96, and
 reliability = .92

 Vendor

 opportunism
 (VENDOPPT)
 %2(9) = 12.60,
 CFI= 1.00,
 NFI = .96, and
 reliability = .91

 Norm of joint

 action (JOINT)
 Reliability = .91

 1. Both parties are expected to be flexible in

 response to requests made by the other.

 2. It is expected that parties will make adjustments

 in the ongoing relationship to cope with changing
 circumstances.

 3. When an unexpected situation arises, parties

 would rather work out a new deal than holding
 each other to the original terms.

 4. The parties are open to the idea of making

 changes, even after having made an agreement.

 5. Parties are expected to make adjustments in their
 manufacturing processes to deal with unforeseen
 events.

 6. Changes in the terms of the contract are not ruled

 out, if considered necessary.

 1. This supplier has sometimes altered facts slightly

 in order to get what it wanted.

 2. This supplier always carries out its duties without

 any supervision on our part, (reverse coded)

 3. Sometimes the supplier has presented us facts in

 such a way that has made them look good.

 4. This supplier has sometimes promised to do

 things without actually doing them later.

 5. This supplier feels it is OK to do anything within
 its means that will help further its own interests.
 6. On occasion, the supplier has lied about certain

 things in order to protect its own interests.

 1. Problems that arise in this relationship are

 expected to be resolved jointly.

 2. Both parties are expected to make effort toward
 improvements that benefit the relationship as a
 whole rather than the individual party.

 3. Parties are expected to undertake extensive joint
 effort in activities like component testing and
 prototyping, forecasting demand, and long-term
 planning.

 Vendor control over 1. Ongoing design and engineering changes.

 decisions
 (CONTROL)b
 X2(2) = 6.91,
 CFI = .98,
 NFI = .98, and
 reliability = .84

 2. Supplier's production processes and

 manufacturing technology.

 3. Selection of supplier's subsuppliers.
 4. Supplier's quality control procedures.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 17:11:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 604 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, OCTOBER 2009

 Table 2
 CONTINUED

 Descriptive and
 Confirmatory Fit
 Statistics

 Importance of
 component
 (IMPTCMPT)a

 Item Description and Response Format

 Item is very unimportant/important element of our
 end product.

 Descriptive and
 Confirmatory Fit
 Statistics
 Contractual price How would you describe the pricing arrangement
 flexibility for the item(s) under this contract? (choose one)
 (FLEXPRIC) ?Fixed prices over the length of the contract.

 Item Description and Response Format

 Specified prices but with adjustment formulas
 (e.g., inflation, Producer Price Index).
 Specified prices but with negotiated adjustments.
 Prices not specified ahead of time of shipment.

 aSeven-point semantic differential scale.
 bThe anchors for this scale are 1 = "entirely decided by our firm" and 7 = "entirely decided by this supplier."
 cThe OEM respondents had identified an independent vendor from which their firm procured components that were physically incorporated into one of

 their most important product lines. Throughout the survey, respondents were reminded that this particular contractual exchange or "relationship" for the pro
 curement of the component (or a set of related components) was to be their sole focus in providing their assessment.

 Notes: Unless otherwise indicated, the anchors for the scale points are 1 = "strongly disagree" and 7 = "strongly agree." CFI = comparative fit index, and

 NFI = normed fit index.

 Table 3

 CORRELATION MATRIX OF MEASURES

 Construct

 1. BRAND
 2. DIFF
 3. TECHUNCT
 4. SUPPINV
 5. OEMINV
 6. IMPTCMPT
 7. RELSIZE
 8. NPOTOEM
 9. NPOTVEND
 10. VENDOPPT

 M  SD  Skew
 .57
 .36
 .18
 4.01
 .42
 2.91
 3.68
 .10
 .13
 3.52
 5.02
 -.26
 .00
 .09
 45.05
 2.26
 3.32
 20.34
 .24
 3.13

 .48
 1.31
 1.32
 1.07
 1.13
 1.30
 .87
 62.35
 53.26
 1.26

 1.00
 .30
 .06
 .32
 -.10
 .08
 -.16
 .01
 -.13
 .07

 4

 1.00
 .29
 .12
 .14
 -.17
 -.06
 -.07

 1.00
 .18
 .41
 .35
 .12
 .05
 -.06
 -.09
 -.12

 1.00
 .22
 -.04
 .08
 .27
 -.18
 -.13
 -.09

 Notes: Matrix represents pairwise correlations. All correlations greater than .14 are significant at the .05 level.

 10

 1.00
 .14
 .04
 -.07
 .03
 .03

 1.00
 .10
 -.08
 -.12
 -.07

 1.00
 -.22
 -.05
 .12

 1.00
 .25
 -.11

 1.00
 -.03

 1.00

 (DIFF). These items are identical to Ghosh and John's
 (2005) EPEOUTCOME measure with one exception. We
 dropped the fifth item for EPEOUTCOME ("The relation
 ship with this vendor for this item has helped boost the
 sales of our end product") from the DIFF measure because
 a boost in sales could also be generated without differentia
 tion (e.g., lowered costs). Each item employs a seven-point
 Likert-type format.

 In addition to the two hypothesized effects, we included
 other independent variables that have been shown to influ
 ence procurement contracts. We describe each of these
 variables briefly.

 OEM's specific investments. Specific investments by the
 OEM that parallel investments by the supplier could create
 a relational safeguard and thus affect the choice of the con
 tract form. To control for this possibility, we use the six
 item scale (OEMINV) from Ghosh and John (2005).

 Importance of component. Original equipment manufac
 turers' end products typically incorporate dozens of engi
 neered components. It is impractical to write a branded
 contract for each component, and thus OEMs are likely
 to consider the relatively costly branded contract form
 for components that are relatively more significant to the
 performance of the end product. A single-item measure
 (IMPTCMPT) on a seven-point Likert-type scale captures
 the component's impact on the overall performance of the
 OEM's end product.

 Technological uncertainty. The uncertainty of the evolu

 tion of technology is also a major concern to the parties.
 Higher levels of technological uncertainty require them to
 make larger or more frequent adaptations to their initial
 designs. The adaptation advantages of the branded contract
 form make it more suitable than the white box form in such
 circumstances. To control for this possibility, we use the
 three-item scale (TECHUNCT) with a seven-point Likert
 format from Ghosh and John (2005) to measure technologi
 cal uncertainty.

 Relative size. Although TCA emphasizes efficient (i.e.,
 joint-profit-enhancing) contracts, a powerful incumbent
 might sacrifice efficiency gains to maintain its share of a
 smaller total pool of profits. Recall that OEMs in our set
 ting were relatively more powerful than their suppliers, so
 they might be reluctant to write branded contracts because
 embedding suppliers in this way might lead to their own
 margins being bargained away. They might sacrifice the
 efficiency gains from branded component contracts to pro
 tect their own margins. To control for this possibility, we
 use the RELSIZE measure from Ghosh and John (2005),
 who measure the ratio of the OEM's sales volume to the
 supplier's sales volume.

 Number of potential vendors. "Thicker" markets disci
 pline exchange partners more closely, making arm's-length
 forms sufficient over a wider range of settings. Thus, hav
 ing a large number of potential suppliers would make the

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 17:11:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Branded Component Contracts 605

 use of a branded contact form less likely. Note that this
 would be true regardless of the actual number of incumbent
 suppliers. To control for this possibility, we use the inform
 ants' estimates of potential suppliers for this class of com
 ponents (NPOTVEND) as our measure.

 Number of potential OEMs. Paralleling the foregoing
 argument, having a large number of potential buyers for a
 component reduces the likelihood of using the branded
 contract form. However, note that these potential buyers
 need not be located in the same end-product market. To
 control for this possibility, we use informants' estimates of
 the number of potential buyers for this class of components
 (NPOTOEM) as our measure.

 Unobserved effects. To control for possible unobserved

 industry effects, we use two dummy variables (SIC 35, SIC
 36) for the three sectors. However, note that unobserved
 firm differences beyond the measured variables cannot be
 controlled for, because we have only one observation per
 firm.

 Measure Validity

 Our measure validation process follows that of Anderson
 and Gerbing (1988). We computed item-to-total correla
 tions for each multi-item scale and dropped items with esti
 mates below .30. Then, using LISREL 8.0, we estimated
 congeneric (single-factor) models for each set of items and
 used Werts and colleagues' (1978) formula to compute the
 scale reliability estimates (see Table 2). We conclude that
 our multi-item scales exhibit a satisfactory level of internal
 consistency and unidimensionality.

 Next, we assessed discriminant validity with confirma

 tory factor analysis. Following accepted practice, for each
 set of closely related constructs, we estimated a base model
 that allowed each item to load only on its own unobserved
 trait, and the different traits were intercorrelated. For each

 base model, we estimated a constrained model that
 restricted the intertrait correlations to 1.0. We tested the fit
 differences between the constrained and base models,
 which revealed significant differences between each pair.
 We conclude that the traits are sufficiently discriminated
 from each other. Given the adequacy of our measures, we
 turn to the tests of the hypotheses.

 Contract Form Hypotheses

 Table 4 reports probit models of contract form choices.
 Model 1 is a baseline specification with only the control
 variables as predictors, and Model 2 adds our two focal
 variables (vendor investments and differentiation capabil
 ity). Model 2 shows a good fit to the data (pseudo-R2 =
 .35) and an improvement over Model 1, suggesting a sig
 nificant contribution from the focal variables.

 Examining the vendor investment hypothesis first (Hi),

 we find a positive estimate for the relevant coefficient (? =
 .42, p < .01), which supports our prediction that OEMs use
 branded contracts as a safeguard for their vendors' haz
 ardous investments. Turning to the differentiation capabil
 ity hypothesis (H2), we find a positive estimate for the dif
 ferentiation coefficient (? = .29, p < .05), which supports
 our prediction that OEMs use branded contracts to gain
 from the differentiation capabilities of their vendors. We
 conducted additional analyses to assess the potential endo
 geneity of the DIFF measure.

 Endogeneity correction. The DIFF measure captures the
 extant differentiation enabled by incorporating the vendor's
 component into the OEM's end product. As such, this
 includes the differentiation gains from two contracting
 stages: (1) the gains arising from the preexisting strength of
 the vendor's brand name evident at the contract writing
 stage and (2) the gains arising from the vendor's invest
 ments and activities during the contract execution stage.

 Table 4

 PROBIT MODELS OF OEM'S CONTRACT CHOICE

 Dependent Variable: BRAND

 Hypothesis Coefficient Model 1 Coefficient Model 2

 42***
 29**

 (.14)
 (.13)

 Coefficient Model 3

 (IV!)

 Coefficient Model 4

 (IV2)

 50*** (.14)

 .55*

 (.13)

 .20*

 (.10)

 .16**

 (.08)

 -.07
 (.11)
 -.24**
 (.09)
 -.03*** (.01)
 .01 (.01)
 .08
 (.09)
 -.06
 (.09)
 (.07)
 (.06)
 (.53)
 (g)***

 .12*
 .05
 -.41
 23.01

 .20
 191

 -.14
 ? 35***
 -.02**
 -.00
 -.06
 -.09
 .10*
 .05

 (.12)
 (.10)
 (.010)
 (.01)
 (.09)
 (.08)
 (.06)
 (.06)
 -3.36*** (.61)
 39.26 (10)***

 .35
 191

 -.15 (.11)
 -.28*** (.08)
 -.02*
 (.01)
 -.00
 (.01)
 -.07
 (.09)
 -.09
 (.10)
 .11*
 (.06)
 .05
 (.06)
 -2.58*** (.59)
 42.32 (10)***

 .39
 191

 -.06
 ?.26***
 -.02**
 -.00
 .04
 .07
 .14**
 .07

 -3.50***
 35.41

 (.14)
 (.09)
 (.01)
 (.01)
 (.10)
 (.08)
 (.06)
 (.06)
 (.68)
 (10)***

 .33
 191

 Independent Variables
 Model Variables

 Vendor's specific investments (SUPPINV)
 Differentiation (DIFF)
 Vendor ex ante differentiation

 (EXANTEDIFF)

 Control Variables

 OEM's specific investments (OEMINV)
 Relative size of OEM to vendor (RELSIZE)
 Number of potential vendors (NPOTVEND)
 Number of potential OEMs (NPOTOEM)
 Importance of component (IMPTCMPT)
 Technological uncertainty (TECHUNCT)
 SIC 35
 SIC 36
 Constant
 Wald x2(d.f.)
 Pseudo-R2

 *p < . 1 (two-tailed).
 **/? < .05 (two-tailed).
 ***/? < .01 (two-tailed).
 Notes: Positive values indicate greater probability of branding the component. Standard errors are in parentheses.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 17:11:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 606 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, OCTOBER 2009

 Contract Outcomes

 We use a discrete choice switching regression modeling

 approach (Maddala 1983) to account for the endogeneity in
 contract choice; the results appear in Table 6. Three sepa
 rate sets of analyses address contract outcomes. In all sub
 sequent analyses, we use the measure of vendor ex ante dif
 ferentiation obtained as a residual from the regression
 Model IV1 in Table 5. To begin, we ask whether OEMs
 choose contract forms that yield better outcomes.

 Contract choice patterns. The first step of Maddala's
 (1983) two-step procedure is the probit models (reported in
 Table 4, Model 3), with contract form as the dependent
 variable. In the second step, the outcome measure (VEND
 OPPT) is regressed against the same independent variables
 and an additional variable, the inverse Mills ratio, com
 puted from the first-stage model. Two equations are esti
 mated in the second step?one for each of the two
 observed contract forms. The signs of the inverse Mills
 ratio coefficients in these two equations in Table 6 uniquely
 identify three possible contract choice patterns: (1) a gen
 eral tendency to select the branded contract form (positive
 selection into regime), (2) a general tendency to reject the
 branded contract form (negative selection into regime), and
 (3) a discriminating strategy that selects the contract form
 that yields the firm the better outcome (comparative advan

 Table 6

 GOVERNANCE COSTS UNDER ALTERNATIVE CONTRACT

 FORMS

 Dependent Variable: Vendor Opportunism (VENDOPPT)

 Branded
 Component White Box
 Contracts Contracts
 (n = 70) (n = 121)

 Independent Variables

 Coefficient (SE) Coefficient (SE)

 Because H2 speaks to the gains from preexisting brand
 strength, we control for possible endogeneity as follows.
 We regress DIFF on a set of exogenous variables corre
 lated with differentiation gains made at the contract execu
 tion stage. We select these variables from related work
 (e.g., Ghosh and John 2005; Jap 1999; Nickerson, Hamil
 ton, and Wada 2001). These studies show that end-product
 differentiation is correlated with more coordinated effort,
 specialized investments, and relational norms. Table 5
 reports our regressions. The residuals from this regression
 are a purified measure of differentiation gains that is no
 longer correlated with vendor investments and activities
 undertaken during the contract execution phase. We replace
 the original differentiation measure (DIFF) in the probit
 models with this residual measure, denoted as "vendor ex
 ante differentiation."

 Models 3 and 4 in Table 4 report the probit models of
 contract choice that employ the instrumented measure. The
 coefficient estimates of the measure (p = .20 and .16 in
 Models 3 and 4, respectively) are significant. To summa
 rize, in accordance with H2, OEMs are more likely to use a
 branded component contract with a supplier whose
 differentiation-enabling capabilities is higher.9

 Other effects. Several of the nonfocal independent
 variables show a significant effect. Larger OEMs are less
 likely to use branded component contracts (p = -.28 and
 -.26 in Models 3 and 4, respectively), as is true of OEMs
 facing large numbers of potential vendors (? = -.02 and
 -.02 in Models 3 and 4, respectively). Finally, OEMs oper
 ating in SIC 35 were marginally more likely to use branded
 component contracts (p = .11 and .14 in Models 3 and 4,
 respectively) than OEMs operating in SIC 37. Surprisingly,
 the importance of the component had no effect on contract
 choice. A potential reason for this could be that our sample
 consists of components the OEM informants believed to be
 more important (M = 5.02 on a seven-point scale).

 9We also investigated the differences in slopes across the SIC sectors
 for both the focal hypotheses. We find consistent and significant direc
 tional support for both sets of predictions. These analyses appear in the

 Web Appendix (see http://www.marketingpower.com/jmroct09).

 Table 5

 ENDOGENEITY CORRECTION FOR EX ANTE

 DIFFERENTIATION

 Dependent Variable: Differentiation (DIFF)

 Independent Variables Model IV1 Model IV2
 Vendor's specific investments

 OEM's specific investments

 (SUPPINV) .28** (.09) ?
 (OEMINV) .15* (.07) ?

 Vendor's specific investments

 (SUPPINV)

 Vendor ex ante differentiation

 (EXANTEDIFF)

 OEM's specific investments

 (OEMINV)

 Relative size of OEM to vendor

 (RELSIZE)

 Number of potential vendors

 (NPOTVEND)

 Number of potential OEMs

 (NPOTOEM)

 Importance of component

 (IMPTCMPT)

 Technological uncertainty

 (TECHUNCT)

 SIC 35
 SIC 36
 Inverse Mills ratio for BRAND
 Inverse Mills ratio for NOBRAND
 Constant
 R2
 I2
 P>%2
 Root mean square error_

 -.290**

 (.083)

 .014

 (.087)

 .105

 .126*

 .131*

 (.095)

 .157*

 (.088)

 (.072)

 .124*

 (.071)

 (.068)

 .176**

 (.081)

 -.109*

 (.060)

 -.057

 (.063)

 .110*

 (.059)

 .104*

 (.061)

 -.035

 (.075)

 -.001

 (.078)

 .011
 (.047)
 -.089*
 (.050)
 .002
 (.045)
 .169** (.076)

 4.156*** (1.114)

 .168
 47.84
 .0001
 .926

 .115** (.052)
 .000 (.051)
 .042
 (.048)
 -.126* (.069)
 2.481** (.944)

 .143
 42.66
 .0001
 .905

 Norm of joint action (JOINT) .28** (.07) .23** (.07)
 Norm of flexibility (FLEXIBLE) .05 (.10) .13 (.09)
 Contractual price flexibility
 (FLEXPRIC) .20* (.08) .22* (.09)
 Constant -1.77* (.66) -3.26** (.70)
 Pseudo-R2 .44 .21

 n 191 191

 *p < .1 (two-tailed).
 **/? < .05 (two-tailed).
 Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses.

 *p < .1 (two-tailed).
 **p < .05 (two-tailed).
 ***/? < .01 (two-tailed).

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 17:11:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Branded Component Contracts 607

 tage selection into regime). The third strategy is evidence
 of our governance cost arguments.

 Table 6 shows a positive (negative) inverse Mills ratio
 coefficient in the branded (white box) contract equation.
 This pattern uniquely identifies the comparative advantage
 selection pattern, in which OEMs that stood to reduce ven
 dor opportunism more with a branded contract are likely to
 select this form, while OEMs that stood to reduce vendor
 opportunism more with a white box contract are likely to
 select this form. In summary, our results indicate that the
 OEMs conform to the normative advice emanating from
 efficient governance theory.

 Comparative assessment. Next, we turn to the task of

 calculating the losses associated with not responding prop
 erly to each key independent variable. Because contract
 form is endogenous, the impact of the two drivers (vendor
 investment, vendor ex ante differentiation) cannot be ascer
 tained simply by inspecting the regression coefficients in
 Table 6. We employ the technique that Mayer and Nicker
 son (2005) develop to compare the expected performance
 of a hypothetical firm that proposes to contract with its
 supplier under each of the two alternative forms.
 We set all the independent variables except for the focal
 independent variable (i.e., vendor investments, vendor ex
 ante differentiation) in each equation in Table 6 to observed
 sample averages. Because we are concerned about a ran
 domly selected (hypothetical) project and not an observed
 project, we do not include the inverse Mills ratio terms. We
 calculate expected outcomes under four combinations: the
 two governance choices under low versus high (two stan
 dard deviations below and above the mean, respectively)
 levels of each of the focal independent variable of interest.
 Figures 1 and 2 plot the results.

 Figure 1 shows that at high levels of vendor investment,
 an OEM that chooses a white box contract (the "wrong"
 choice) faces a 65% increase in vendor opportunism (3.12
 versus 1.73) over the branded component contract (the rec

 GOVERNANCE COSTS OF VENDOR INVESTMENTS UNDER

 Figure 1

 ALTERNATIVE CONTRACT FORMS

 Recommended

 choice
 3.06
 2.97

 Mistaken
 choice

 Mistaken
 choice

 3.12

 1.73
 Recommended

 choice
 Low High

 Vendor Investments

 ommended choice). At low levels of vendor investment, an
 OEM that chooses a branded component contract (the
 wrong choice) faces a 3% decrease in vendor opportunism
 (2.97 versus 3.06) over the white box contract (the recom
 mended choice). Thus, losses from wrong choices made in
 hazardous circumstances are much larger than the corre
 sponding losses from wrong choices in more benign cir
 cumstances. Figure 2 plots the corresponding computations
 for the other independent variable, vendor ex ante differen
 tiation. The results are strikingly similar.

 To summarize, the prospective costs of misaligned gov
 ernance are detected for vendor investments and vendor ex
 ante differentiation capability. Unexpectedly, the computed
 losses from not conforming to the normative recommenda
 tion are much larger for more hazardous exchanges (i.e.,
 high vendor investments or large vendor ex ante differentia
 tion capability). We return to this asymmetry subsequently.

 Counterfactual assessment. We compute expected losses
 that would accrue to a firm that makes an observed (fac
 tual) choice if it were to switch to the alternative (counter
 factual) regime. This loss is different from prospective
 losses computed previously. Unlike the previous calcula
 tion, which compares the costs to a hypothetical firm con
 templating the two contract forms, the counterfactual
 assessment is based on our observations that represent
 intentional choices.

 Following Maddala (1983), we compute these counter
 factual outcomes and plot them in Figure 3. Original equip
 ment manufacturers that chose a branded contract would
 face much higher vendor opportunism levels (1.74 versus
 4.09, p < .01) if they were to switch to a white box con
 tract. Similarly, OEMs that chose a white box contract
 would face significantly increased vendor opportunism
 (3.34 versus 4.67, p < .05) if they were to switch to a
 branded contract form. However, note that the loss is much
 greater for firms that originally chose the branded contract

 GOVERNANCE COSTS OF VENDOR EX ANTE

 Figure 2

 DIFFERENTIATION CAPABILITY UNDER ALTERNATIVE

 CONTRACT FORMS

 Mistaken
 choice

 4.28

 3.81

 Recommended

 choice

 4.5

 t
 o
 a
 a
 O
 O
 o
 c
 <D
 >

 3.5

 2.5

 Recommended

 choice

 3.46

 3.39

 Mistaken
 choice

 Low High

 Vendor Ex Ante Differentiation Capability

 White box contract
 Branded contract

 White box contract
 Branded contract

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 17:11:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 608 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, OCTOBER 2009

 OVERALL GOVERNANCE COSTS UNDER ALTERNATIVE

 Figure 3

 CONTRACT FORMS

 Table 7

 COMPARISON OF CONTRACTUAL AND NONCONTRACTUAL

 FEATURES

 4.67

 Branded
 contract

 4.09

 White box
 contract

 5
 4.5
 E (0
 4
 "E 3
 3.5
 & a
 3
 O
 2.5
 i_
 o
 T3
 2
 C
 >
 1.5

 White box
 contract

 3.34

 Branded
 contract
 1.74

 Features Contracts (n - 70) (n = 121)
 Contract duration

 Branded Component White Box Contracts

 (years) 2.78** 1.45

 Number of suppliers

 Contract clause: price

 used for functionally
 similar component 1.80** 3.75
 flexibility 2.40** 1.70
 flexibility 2.55** 1.60

 Contract clause: design

 Informal norm of joint

 action 4.50** 3.20

 1

 Factual Counterfactual
 (Observed) (Alternative)

 Contract Choice

 (i.e., under more hazardous conditions). We conducted
 identical analyses on a second measure of performance?
 namely, OEM profitability from the relationship. The
 results were qualitatively similar to those we obtained pre
 viously and are available on request.

 In summary, these results make a strong case for H3.
 Branded contract forms and white box contracts must be
 aligned in a discriminating way with the attributes of the
 exchange. Incorrect alignment decisions adversely affect
 performance, and there is a decided asymmetry in these
 misalignment losses.

 Nomological Validity

 Allocation of control rights. Recall our core argument
 that branded contracts support noncontractible vendor
 investments. It follows that OEMs writing branded con
 tracts should also be willing to concede control over deci
 sions related to component design and development to the
 vendor. These are complementary contracting aspects
 because delegating decision control enables the vendor to
 make the best use of its investments and to make efficient
 ex post adjustments. We investigate this by regressing ven
 dor control against the two-way interaction between the
 vendor's specific investments and contract choice. We find
 that vendors have more control over these decisions when
 their noncontractible investments are supported by branded
 component contracts (p = .27, p < .01).

 Differences in contractual subclauses and informal
 norms. Compared with white box contracts, the greater
 coordination and adaptation within branded contracts imply
 closer relationships with longer contract horizons and more
 open-ended contractual subclauses and cooperative behav
 ioral expectations. Table 7 shows a comparison of the two
 contract forms in our sample on various key features. Con
 tract duration is significantly longer for branded contracts
 than for white box contracts. The written clauses specifying
 the processes used to determine price and technical design
 issues are also significantly more open-ended in branded
 contracts. We also find that the behavioral norms are more
 cooperative in branded contracts than in white box con

 Informal norm of
 flexibility 4.85* 4.01
 Informal norm of

 information exchange 4.52 4.41
 *p < .1 (two-tailed).
 **p < .05 (two-tailed).
 Notes: Comparisons were made using independent samples t-tests.

 tracts. Finally, the number of suppliers the OEM uses for a
 functionally similar component is significantly lower for
 branded component arrangements. In summary, the data
 support our thesis that branded contracts create an over
 arching environment that fosters cooperation and coordina
 tion between the two parties.

 DISCUSSION

 Extant research offers little evidence of the relative mer
 its of using branded component contracts over alternative
 white box forms. We used the governance lens of TCA to
 argue that these contracts are self-enforcing agreements
 used to economize on transaction costs generated by
 exchange hazards. We predict the actual choice of firms
 and assess the comparative merits of these alternative gov
 ernance devices using contract-level data. We draw on
 research in consumer behavior and governance analysis,
 and our results contribute to each of these theoretical
 streams.

 Commingling Brands

 Consumer behavior experiments have demonstrated the
 differentiation benefits of commingling a component and
 host brand but are silent about how this might be accom
 plished in practice. By examining contracting practices
 in engineering-intensive industry sectors, we identify the
 branded component contract as an institutional mechanism
 to accomplish commingling of a host brand with a compo
 nent brand. Our contract data provide the first evidence
 about cobranding practices in the real world in that suppli
 ers with brands that are likely to differentiate the OEM's
 end product are more likely to be engaged under branded
 component contracts.

 Governance Analysis

 Our study demonstrates the utility of branded component

 contracts as governance devices as distinct from their util

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 17:11:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Branded Component Contracts 609

 ity as differentiation-enabling devices. We show that these
 contracts secure vendors' noncontractible investments to
 customize the component to the OEM's benefit and that
 OEMs that stand to benefit more from a branded contract
 are more likely to choose that contract form. In effect,
 these OEMs appear to follow the comparative advantage
 decision rule implicated in governance theories. Our find
 ing adds to the emerging literature on brands as governance
 devices (e.g., Gonzalez-Diaz, Barcala, and Arrunada 2002)
 and complements recent developments that extend the effi
 cient governance logic of TCA to address strategic market
 ing choices (e.g., Ghosh and John 2005; Nickerson, Hamil
 ton, and Wada 2001). There are two additional specific
 insights from our work.

 Asymmetric costs of misalignment. A surprising result of
 our analysis was that the costs of wrong choices were much
 larger for more hazardous exchanges. Specifically, penal
 ties for making wrong choices in response to potential trad
 ing hazards posed by vendor investments or vendor differ
 entiation capability were much larger at high levels of these
 variables. Our counterfactual computations also show a
 similar asymmetry in costs of misalignment. Thus, OEMs
 that switch from an existing branded contract form to a
 white box form suffer more than OEMs that switch from an
 existing white box contract to a branded contract form.

 When examining the limited number of TCA studies
 addressing contract outcomes, we find a consistent asym
 metric pattern. Anderson's (1988) pioneering study of
 employee salespeople and independent representatives
 finds that the firm's realized ratio of cost to revenue was
 not significantly lower given the wrong choice (employees
 in low-uncertainty settings) in less hazardous exchanges,
 but it was significantly higher given the wrong choice (rep
 resentatives in high-uncertainty settings) in more hazardous
 exchanges. Similarly, Noordewier, John, and Nevin (1990)
 find that the percentage of late deliveries and the percent
 age of wrong deliveries by suppliers did not increase given
 the wrong choice (relational contracts in low-uncertainty
 settings) in less hazardous exchanges, but it was signifi
 cantly worse given the wrong choice (discrete contracts in
 high-uncertainty settings) in more hazardous exchanges.
 These early studies did not correct for the endogenous
 selection bias issue, so we examined two more efforts
 that control for this issue. Masten, Meehan, and Snyder's
 (1991) study of the costs of misalignment for make versus
 buy decisions in ship-building components shows signifi
 cantly larger penalties for wrong choices (buy) under more
 hazardous exchange conditions than for wrong choices
 (make) under less hazardous exchanges. Finally, Mayer
 and Nickerson's (2005) outsourcing study finds that the
 profitability of information technology projects is more
 adversely affected from making the wrong choice (contrac
 tors) under hazardous exchange conditions than making the
 wrong choice (employees) under nonhazardous conditions.

 The common thread in all these studies, including the
 current one, is that larger penalties result from mistakes in
 governing more hazardous exchanges. Given that gover
 nance theories implicitly assume symmetric costs of mis
 alignment, these findings call for further work. We specu
 late that hierarchical modes may be more robust and may
 provide insurance against costly mistakes, assuming mod
 est setup costs.

 Market failure or successful hierarchies! There is an
 ongoing debate about the origins of the comparative merits
 of alternative governance forms. Traditionally, it has been
 assumed that the comparative merits of hierarchies in gov
 erning hazardous exchange arise from the failure of the
 market mode rather than the superiority of the hierarchical
 mode. However, most studies estimate reduced-form
 regressions that relate observed governance forms to
 exchange attributes. As Masten (1993) argues, such tests
 cannot distinguish between market failure and hierarchical
 success; outcomes need to be measured and studied
 directly, as we do in the current study. Table 6 shows that
 as vendor investments increase, vendor opportunism is
 lower (? = -.29) in the branded contract sample but is
 insignificantly affected in the white box contract sample.
 Thus, the gains from branded contracts do not arise from
 trading hazards adversely affecting outcomes under the
 white box contracts. Instead, they arise from improved out
 comes under the branded contract mode. In summary, the
 hierarchical mode succeeded in our data as opposed to the
 market mode failing. These results point to a reworking of
 the basic theory.

 Implications for Managerial Practice

 A cursory glance at the industrial landscape suggests that
 branded components are popular in practice, but the under
 lying costs and benefits are not well understood. Our study
 provides a variety of new insights to help managers make
 decisions with regard to this strategy. Consider the follow
 ing five insights.

 Sensing the need for branded contracts. Typically,

 OEMs (even small firms) are aware of the potential value
 of engaging suppliers with strong brand names. For exam
 ple, Verado, a small Web applications hosting firm, promi
 nently uses the brand name of its key component, Oracle,
 to claim "safe and reliable management of complex web
 and applications hosting at lower costs." Various personal
 computer manufacturers have similarly used the "Intel
 Inside" logo to differentiate their product lines. However,
 OEMs are much less aware of the use of a branded contract
 to support the development of components designed exclu
 sively for an OEM. Consider the following case example
 from a supplier of a truck engine component: This compo
 nent was customized to the shape of the hood to reduce
 engine noise and vibrations. The OEM, which had its own
 in-house component division, offered the vendor an exclu
 sive production contract for one year. However, a contract
 of longer duration would be required by the vendor to
 recover its investment costs. Furthermore, to coordinate the
 development, the supplier would be obligated to disclose
 its engineering modeling processes used to achieve the
 noise reduction to the OEM's in-house component division.
 The vendor's customization investments are clearly in jeop
 ardy of being appropriated. We contend that a cobranding
 approach might have created switching costs to protect the
 supplier. Indeed the two parties discussed cobranding as a
 potential form of organization; unfortunately, they could
 not agree on the specific terms of the arrangement.

 Separating preengagement capabilities and investment
 effects. The value added by the preexisting strength of a
 supplier's brand is distinct from the value added by the
 supplier's actions and investments in the contract execution

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 17:11:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 610 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, OCTOBER 2009

 phase. Engaging a supplier with a highly respected brand
 under a branded contract will not always pay off if signifi
 cant investments are made in the contract execution phase.
 Consider Bose Automotive Systems Division, which sup
 plies branded audio systems to multiple OEMs. Each
 model of automobile has its unique acoustic fingerprint,
 and Bose uses a proprietary design process called "Clean
 Sheet Approach" to customize the circuits, digital signal
 processors, and speakers for each model. The end cus
 tomer's quality perception (quality and fidelity of music) is
 driven by these customization efforts. Anecdotal evidence
 from Internet boards and blogs suggests that Bose car
 audio systems are well received for some host brands
 (e.g., Lexus) but not for other host brands (e.g., Infiniti).
 Although we are not certain about the reasons for the varia
 tion in performance across the different applications, it is
 clear that engaging highly reputed suppliers under compo
 nent branded contracts will not automatically translate into
 benefits for the host product when customized engineering
 activities are important for value creation.

 Branded suppliers' go-to-market strategies. The relative
 significance of preexisting brand strength versus invest
 ments during contract execution has significant implica
 tions for the component firm's go-to-market strategies.
 Consider the case of a supplier that possesses a strong
 brand backed up with unique technology, but for which
 customization is relatively insignificant. For example,
 Bosch is a visible technology leader in automotive compo
 nents. Two equally attractive go-to-market strategies are
 available to such a firm. First, it can shop around its inno
 vative component to various OEMs and strike an exclusive
 deal for the best offer, in which case the OEM receives a
 unique differentiator. Second, the firm could supply multi
 ple OEMs (in which case the component is not a differen
 tiator because competing OEMs have access to it) and rely
 on end-user preferences to extract a better price.

 In contrast, when customization is the key to providing

 differentiation, a component vendor could simultaneously
 provide meaningful points of differentiation to multiple
 OEMs (even competing OEMs), as is true of Leece-Neville
 in Table 1. In this scenario, focusing on an exclusive
 supplier-OEM relationship becomes less attractive than a
 multiple-OEM strategy. These suppliers would also need to
 use a different approach to pricing their components.
 Because adaptations to an initial design to meet changing
 technological conditions are critical for such customized
 components, more flexible pricing structures (e.g., cost
 plus pricing) are likely to be more valuable than using
 mechanisms that determine the actual (final) price ex ante.

 Multiple go-to-market strategies versus multiple suppli
 ers. Many suppliers (e.g., International Truck and Engine
 Corporation) sell the same basic component (diesel
 engines) under branded and nonbranded contracts. Our
 study shows that, and explains why, there is an important
 nexus between the contract form and the specification and
 functionality of the component's variants. To the degree
 that customization activities are important and branded
 contracts serve to safeguard these investments and activi
 ties, greater differences between the variants sold to differ
 ent OEMs can be supported under branded contracts com
 pared with the variants possible under white box contracts.
 This is consistent with the commonly observed practice of

 offering enhanced performance components under branded
 contracts and standard performance components under
 white box contracts (private labels). Furthermore, our
 theory suggests that if customization activities are impor
 tant, a vendor is unlikely to offer identical components
 under a branded component contract versus under a white
 box contract.

 Likewise, OEMs face a parallel problem when the
 component-end product interface needs to be optimized.
 On the one hand, an OEM could contract with a single
 branded component supplier to customize the component to
 different applications and segments. For example, accord
 ing to an executive at a large OEM of CNC Systems, the
 company requires its sole branded component supplier to
 provide different versions of its ASIC (application-specific
 integrated circuits) chip for different product applications.
 Alternately, OEMs could purchase noncustomized branded
 components from different suppliers to serve different cus
 tomer markets and performance requirements. For exam
 ple, IBM markets its xSeries servers with the 64-bit Intel
 Xeon brand of processors, its 325 line of eServers with
 AMD's 64-bit Opteron processors, and its iSeries and
 pSeries lines with its in-house Power5 processors. Again,
 nonexclusive branded components tailored to OEM sys
 tems (and to which OEM systems are tailored in turn) can
 provide substantial differentiation gains to the OEM.

 Creating versus leveraging brands. Received wisdom

 suggests that a branded component approach is used pri
 marily to leverage the vendor's strong brand reputation. By
 directing attention to the ex post differentiation created by
 the component vendor, we also explain why a highly
 reputed OEM, such as Accenture, was willing to use Fas
 turn, a relatively unknown brand, for cobranding purposes.
 Essentially, we believe that Accenture realized the potential
 value that could be added by Fasturn's innovative product.
 However, this would require Fasturn to undertake signifi
 cant levels of noncontractible development effort to ensure
 a successful integration and coimplementation with Accen
 ture's information technology and consulting solutions. To
 incentivize Fasturn to undertake this effort, Accenture used
 its own market power (brand equity) to generate broader
 market coverage and to create potential future value (and
 revenue stream) for the Fasturn brand; in effect, Accenture
 created a market for Fasturn. The FUJITSU/Comodo exam
 ple in Table 1 also fits this motivation. This approach of
 incentivizing vendors could be a valuable strategy while
 dealing with state-of-the-art technology-based entrepre
 neurial companies that currently do not have an established
 reputation but have the capabilities in innovative niche
 technologies.
 Limitations

 First, our sample is drawn from industry sectors in which
 suppliers are routinely engaged with the same OEM for
 relatively long periods. It is not clear whether the coopera
 tion required to implement a branded component contract
 successfully is achievable with shorter-term exchanges.
 Second, we examined engineered components that are
 embedded into the end product and are necessary for its
 proper functioning. Contrast this with cobranding cases in
 which the constituent products have independent end-user
 markets in their own right. Here, the joint efforts of the par

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 17:11:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Branded Component Contracts 611

 ties serve primarily to capitalize on the preexisting brand
 equities established in their individual markets, and atten
 tion is focused on the fit of the brands. Furthermore, our
 components were not commodity products but required
 some form of research, design, and engineering activities?
 either general purpose or customized; thus, caution must be
 exercised when generalizing our conclusions beyond our
 setting. Third, we used a simple, additive specification to
 parse out the preexisting differentiation capabilities of the
 supplier from the realized differentiation measure. Nonlin
 ear or multiplicative specifications might provide different
 results. Fourth, we obtained our measures for the key con
 structs from informant reports with their attendant biases
 (e.g., due to the time lag between the contract date and our
 survey administration). Finally, we used a perceptual meas
 ure of performance as reported by the OEM. Perceptions
 obtained from supplier informants might reveal different
 patterns. Systematic research on branded component con
 tracts in other contexts is essential to address these
 limitations.

 Heide, Jan B. and George John (1990), "Alliances in Industrial
 Purchasing: The Determinants of Joint Action in Buyer
 Supplier Relationships," Journal of Marketing Research, 27
 (February), 24-36.

 Jap, Sandy D. (1999), "Pie-Expansion Efforts: Collaboration Pro
 cesses in Buyer-Supplier Relationships," Journal of Marketing
 Research, 36 (November), 461-75.

 John, George (1984), "An Empirical Investigation of Some
 Antecedents of Opportunism in a Marketing Channel," Journal
 of Marketing Research, 21 (August), 278-89.

 Klein, Benjamin (1996), "Why Hold-Ups Occur: The Self
 Enforcing Range of Contractual Relationships," Economic
 Inquiry, 34 (3), 444-63.

 Maddala, G.S. (1983), Limited Dependent and Qualitative
 Variables in Econometrics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni
 versity Press.

 Masten, Scott E. (1993), "Transaction Costs, Mistakes, and Per
 formance: Assessing the Importance of Governance," Manage
 rial and Decision Economics, 14, 119-29.

 -, James W. Meehan Jr., and Edward A. Snyder (1991),
 "The Costs of Organization," Journal of Law, Economics, and
 Organization, 1 (3), 1-25.

 REFERENCES

 Aaker, David A. (2004), Brand Portfolio Strategy. New York: The

 Free Press.

 Anderson, Erin (1988), "Strategic Implications of Darwinian Eco
 nomics for Selling Efficiency and Choice of Integrated and
 Independent Sales Forces," Management Science, 34 (5),
 599-618.

 -and Barton A. Weitz (1992), "The Use of Pledges to Build

 and Sustain Commitment in Distribution Channels," Journal of
 Marketing Research, 24 (February), 18-34.

 Anderson, James C. and David W. Gerbing (1988), "Structural
 Equation Modeling in Practice: A Review and Recommended
 Two-Step Procedure," Psychological Bulletin, 103 (May),
 411-23.

 Carson, Stephen J. (2007), "When to Give Up Control of Out
 sourced New Product Development," Journal of Marketing, 71
 (January), 49-66.

 Crocker, Keith J. and Kenneth J. Reynolds (1993), "The Effi
 ciency of Incomplete Contracts: An Empirical Analysis of Air
 Force Engine Procurement," RAND Journal of Economics, 24
 (Spring), 126^16.

 Desai, Kalpesh K. and Kevin L. Keller (2002), "The Effects of
 Ingredient Branding Strategies on Host Brand Extendibility,"
 Journal of Marketing, 66 (January), 73-93.

 Ghosh, Mrinal and George John (2005), "Strategic Fit in Indus
 trial Alliances: An Empirical Test of Governance Value Analy
 sis," Journal of Marketing Research, 42 (August), 346-57.

 Gonzalez-Diaz, Manuel, Marta Fernandez Barcala, and Benito

 Arrunada (2002), "Performance, Efficiency, and the Logic of
 Multi-Branding: The Case of Fresh Beef," paper presented at
 the International Society of New Institutional Economics Con
 ference, Cambridge, MA (September 27-29).

 Mayer, Kyle J. and Jackson A. Nickerson (2005), "Antecedents
 and Performance Implications of Contracting for Knowledge
 Workers: Evidence from Information Technology Services,"
 Organization Science, 16 (3), 225-A2.

 Nickerson, Jackson A., Barton H. Hamilton, and Tetsuo Wada
 (2001), "Market Position, Resource Profile, and Governance:
 Linking Porter and Williamson in the Context of International
 Courier and Small Package Services in Japan," Strategic Man
 agement Journal, 22 (3), 251-73.

 Noordewier, Thomas G, George John, and John R. Nevin (1990),
 "Performance Outcomes of Purchasing Arrangements in Indus
 trial Buyer-Vendor Relationships," Journal of Marketing, 54
 (October), 80-93.

 Park, C. Whan, Sung Youl Jun, and Alan D. Shocker (1996),
 "Composite Branding Alliances: An Investigation of Extension
 and Feedback Effects," Journal of Marketing Research, 33
 (November), 453-466.

 Simonin, Bernard L. and Julie A. Ruth (1998), "Is a Company
 Known by the Company It Keeps? Assessing the Spillover
 Effects of Brand Alliances on Consumer Brand Attitudes,"
 Journal of Marketing Research, 35 (February), 30-42.

 Telser, Lester (1981), "A Theory of S elf-Enforcing Agreements,"

 Journal of Business, 53 (February), 27-44.

 Werts, Charles E., D.R. Rock, R.L. Linn, and Karl G Joreskog
 (1978), "A General Method of Estimating the Reliability of a
 Composite," Educational and Psychological Measurement, 38,
 933-38.

 Whinston, Michael D. (2003), "On the Transaction Cost Determi
 nants of Vertical Integration," Journal of Law, Economics, and
 Organization, 19 (1), 1-23.

 Williamson, Oliver E. (1983), "Credible Commitments: Using
 Hostages to Support Exchange," American Economic Review,
 73 (September), 519-^0.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 17:11:01 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

