307

Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology (2004), 77, 307–322
© 2004 The British Psychological Society

www.bps.org.uk

The effects of pay level on organization-based
self-esteem and performance: A ﬁeld study

Donald G. Gardner1*, Linn Van Dyne2 and Jon L. Pierce3
1University of Colorado at Colorado Springs, USA
2Michigan State University, USA
3University of Minnesota Duluth, USA

Most compensation managers implicitly assume (or perhaps hope) that high pay levels
will maintain and enhance future performance. To date, this assumption has been
largely untested. Given the importance of pay level and the large expense that pay
represents to most organizations, understanding how and why pay level inﬂuences
the behaviour of employees in organizations is an important question. The purpose of
this study is to examine the motivational effects of pay level on employee perform-
ance. To examine these issues, we collected ﬁeld study data from a variety of sources,
at three different times, and assessed the effects of employee pay level on subsequent
self-esteem and performance. Speciﬁcally, we hypothesized that the effects of pay
level on performance would be mediated by pay level effects on organization-based
self-esteem. We base this hypothesis on the premise that level of pay within an
organization communicates a sense of how much the organization values an employee
and thus affects employee organization-based self-esteem which, in turn, enhances job
performance. After controlling for organization tenure, and previous pay change,
results supported a mediated model that suggests that pay level affects employee
self-esteem, which in turn, affects employee performance.

One of the strongest determinants of employee attitudes, motivation and behaviours is
compensation (Gerhart & Milkovich, 1992). For example, Opsahl and Dunnette (1966)
noted that, while employees profess to value many types of rewards (such as recog-
nition) more than pay, ‘they behave as if they value money highly’ (p. 106; also see
Wiley, 1997). The extant compensation research literature (e.g. Gerhart & Milkovich,
1992; Heneman, 1992; Lawler & Jenkins, 1992; Opsahl & Dunnette, 1966) provides
evidence that pay, in its various forms, affects employee–organization relationships.
However, most existing research on the effects of pay on employee behaviours and
attitudes has focused on how pay is administered. Consistent with reinforcement and
expectancy theories, most of this research concludes that when high performance
results in high pay increases, performance is reinforced and more likely to be repeated
in the future (see Jenkins, Mitra, Gupta, & Shaw, 1998, for a meta-analytic review; and

*Correspondence should be addressed to Donald G. Gardner, College of Business and Administration, University of Colorado
at Colorado Springs, Colorado Springs, CO 80933-7150, USA (e-mail: dgardner@uccs.edu).


308

Donald G. Gardner et al.

Lawler & Jenkins, 1992, on strategic uses of pay). Gerhart and Milkovich (1992), in a
major review of the compensation literature, stated that ‘Our sense is that there is
relatively strong evidence that individual
incentives, merit pay and bonuses, and
gainsharing [all reinforcers for past performance] can contribute to higher perform-
ance under the right circumstances ...’ (p. 533).

Gerhart and Milkovich (1992) and others (Pfeffer, 1998; Rynes & Gerhart, 2000),
however, also lament the fact that we don’t know more about how pay characteristics
affect employee attitudes and behaviours. One key characteristic of pay is the amount
of total direct compensation, or pay level, that each employee is given in exchange for
his or her labour. A number of factors affect pay level such as type of work, prior
performance-based pay increases and tenure within the organization. Nevertheless, it
remains an empirical question as to whether pay level, independently of pay increases/
changes, affects subsequent employee performance. Most compensation managers
implicitly assume (or perhaps hope) that high pay levels will maintain and enhance
future high performance (Kanter, 1987). Yet, this assumption remains largely untested.
Thus, the purpose of this study is to examine the motivational effects of pay level on
performance.

Several researchers have noted the dearth of research that examines the role that
individual differences might play in compensation→employee response relationships
(e.g. Barber & Bretz, 2000; Heneman & Judge, 2000; Shaw, Duffy, Mitra, Lockhart,
& Bowler, 2003). Our research focuses on one such individual difference construct,
organization-based self-esteem (the degree to which employees believe they are
competent, need-satisfying members of their organization), as one way in which pay
level may affect future employee performance. Specifically, we look at three research
questions: (a) Is there a relationship between pay level and subsequent employee
performance; (b) Is there a relationship between pay level and organization-based
self-esteem; and (c) Does organization-based self-esteem link pay level with perform-
ance? We hypothesize that organization-based self-esteem mediates the effects of pay
level on employee performance levels.

In this research, we differentiate pay level (an employee’s total direct compensation
excluding benefits) from pay increases (an employee’s pay raise or change in pay level
at some given point in time). We focus on pay level (a relatively stable construct that
represents the result of cumulative changes in pay across time) because we theorize
that it more closely represents the employee’s overall worth to an organization, as
opposed to a single change in pay. A single change in pay, in contrast, is often a
function of many factors including overall health of the economy, financial ability of
the firm to raise wages, union negotiations, the need to retain an important individual
or class of employees, and relative performance of a particular employee. Furthermore,
consistent with Thierry’s (2001) emphasis on the meaning of pay, we theorize that pay
level across time communicates more to employees about their value to the firm than
the information conveyed by a single change in pay which may be influenced by the
above external factors.

Pay level and performance
There is some empirical evidence that pay has direct effects on performance
(e.g. Gneezy & Rustichini, 2000; Hechler & Wiener, 1974), sometimes moderated
by other variables like self-esteem (e.g. Brockner, 1985). There is substantially
more evidence that positive outcomes such as higher subsequent performance are


Pay level, self-esteem and performance

309

more likely when pay increases are made contingent on good performance than when
pay increases are not contingent on performance (e.g. Gerhart & Milkovich, 1992;
Jenkins et al., 1998). Over several years, however, consistently higher performers
should also have higher pay levels than their lower performing counterparts (in
comparable positions). Under such conditions, equity theory (Adams, 1963) would
suggest that high pay levels represent high outcomes that should motivate employees
to adjust their inputs (performance) upward.

Extending past research and taking a different approach, we build on the meaning of
pay (Thierry, 2001) and social exchange theory (Blau, 1964) to guide our examination
of effects of pay level on performance. Social exchange theory focuses on the
exchange relationships between two or more actors (in our case, an organization and
its employees). Exchange occurs within an environment of mutual dependence, where
actors (or partners) control resources (such as pay and effort) that other actors value.
To consummate an exchange, each actor provides something that the other actor
values. Assumptions of social exchange theory include: (1) actors provide outcomes to
each other through exchange, (2) actors are motivated to obtain more of the outcomes
that they value and others control, and (3) exchanges between actors recur over time
(Molm, Takahashi, & Peterson, 2003).

When the nature of the exchange relationship is incomplete or ill-specified, neither
actor has a complete and comprehensive understanding of outcomes the other actor
will provide. Instead, in social exchange relationships, the norm of reciprocation
(Gouldner, 1960) predominates and one actor performs a beneficial act for another
without knowing when, or to what extent, the other actor will reciprocate. The
pattern of exchanges develops over time (not on the basis of discrete acts) and leads to
perceptions of fairness or justice regarding the exchange relationship (Molm et al.,
2003). For example, when one exchange partner receives a high level of benefits
(e.g. high pay level) from the other partner, application of social exchange theory
would predict a reciprocal response (such as high performance) and perceptions by
both partners that the exchange is fair (Cropanzano & Greenberg, 1997).

Substantial empirical evidence supports the norm of reciprocity (‘the more I get, the
more I give’), showing that positive benefits enhance positive attitudes, beliefs and
behaviours (e.g. Homans, 1961; Settoon, Bennett, & Liden, 1996; Tsui, Pearce, Porter,
& Tripoli, 1997). Applying prior theory and research to the present study, we propose
that the more inducements (in the form of pay) that an organization provides to an
employee, the more that employee will reciprocate by performing at higher levels.
Over time, this exchange should perpetuate itself, particularly when both parties
perceive the exchange to be fair (Colquitt, Conlon, Wesson, Porter, & Ng, 2001;
Cropanzano & Greenberg, 1997). Furthermore, because the organization is the primary
determinant of pay levels (e.g. through job evaluation and resulting pay structures), we
would expect employee reciprocity efforts such as job performance to benefit the
organization (Masterson, Lewis, Goldman, & Taylor, 2000; Rupp & Cropanzano, 2002).
Thus, we hypothesize:

H1: Pay level has positive effects on employee performance.

Pay level and organization-based self-esteem
Although it seems reasonable that high pay levels might lead to high performance, we
know little empirically about factors that might intervene between pay and perform-
ance. One individual difference construct that has potential to fill this role is


310

Donald G. Gardner et al.

organization-based self-esteem (OBSE), an employee’s self-perceived value as a member
of a specific organization. Pierce, Gardner, Cummings, and Dunham (1989) developed
the concept of OBSE, building on Coopersmith’s (1967) suggestion that self-esteem
reflects the extent to which an individual believes him/herself to be capable, signifi-
cant and worthy. Organization-based self-esteem reflects an assessment of personal
adequacy and worthiness as an organizational member. Thus, employees with high
organization-based self-esteem have come to believe that they are important, meaning-
ful and worthwhile within their employing organization.

Organization-based self-esteem is one component of overall self-esteem that, in turn,
is a facet of self-identity that is an even broader construct. OBSE differs from global
self-esteem and self-identity, however, because it is more situation-specific and thus is
more responsive to proximal factors. For example, although global self-esteem and
self-identity are relatively stable individual differences, based in large part on early
childhood and socialization experiences (Coopersmith, 1967), OBSE evolves over time
based on an employee’s overall experiences within a specific work organization.

In describing the origins of self-esteem, Korman (1970, 1976) emphasized the impor-
tance of messages from significant others which signal competence, capability, signifi-
cance and value. Pay level (Frank, 1985; Milkovich & Milkovich, 1992; Thierry, 1992,
1998, 2001) is an important signal from the organization, and we propose that it sends
an important message to employees about their worth (value) to the organization. For
example, Greller and Parsons (1995) concluded that even when pay increases were
not based on performance, they communicate an employee’s value to the organization.
In describing the ‘Frog Pond Effect’, Frank (1985) emphasized the importance of
relative status, specifically pay relative to others in the most proximal context. Thus
an employee’s pay level compared to others in the same organization is a tangible
indicator of that employee’s value to the organization. Pay level can also affect one’s
perception that one belongs to an elite group (Lawler & Jenkins, 1992), which in turn
would have an effect on self-esteem (Tyler & Blader, 2002).

Thierry’s (2001) ‘reflection theory of compensation’ is particularly instructive with
respect to the relationship between pay level and self-esteem. Thierry proposes four
ways in which pay can have meaning for an employee: motivational (instrumentality),
relative position (feedback and status), control (autonomy), and spending (what can be
purchased with pay). According to Thierry, ‘the pay an individual receives encom-
passes a variety of meanings that we consider to be vital to that person’s self-identity ...
pay “reflects” information about what is happening in other fields [external to the
person], the meaning of which connects to the person’s self-identity’ (Thierry, 2001
pp. 151–152). Although Thierry refers specifically to self-identity that is a broader
concept than self-esteem, the second aspect of pay meaning (relative position) is
especially relevant to our consideration of pay effects on OBSE. Research on Thierry’s
reflection theory of compensation suggests that the relative position aspect of pay
meaning has stronger effects on employees than the other three dimensions. We argue
that pay level represents the relative position aspect of pay and thus has positive
implications for self-esteem in a particular setting. When an employee’s pay is higher
than that of others in comparable positions, it enhances self-perceived status within
the organization and leads to higher OBSE.

We note that overall pay level (as opposed to the most recent pay increase) is one of
the most important signals of overall employee worth to the organization. This is
because many factors (such as the organization’s profits, changes in demand for labour,
inflation and a host of non-value-based factors) influence the size of any particular pay


Pay level, self-esteem and performance

311

change (Milkovich & Newman, 1996). Accordingly, cumulative increases in pay over
time (pay level) is more relevant to OBSE than the most recent pay increase. To date,
only a few studies have considered the relationship between pay level and self-esteem.
At
the macro level, economists have demonstrated that pay enhances global
self-esteem (Goldsmith, Veum, & Darity, 1997) and conclude: ‘Commanding a “high”
relative wage is associated with a more favorable view of self. These findings suggest
that wages do significantly influence a person’s self-esteem’ (p. 827). Shifting our focus
to more specific forms of self-esteem, as recommended by Tharenou (1979), we
also note other research that demonstrates relationships between pay level and job-
based or organization-based self-esteem (Aryee & Luk, 1996; Brockner, 1988; Tan &
Peng, 1997).

In sum, given the theory and past research that suggest messages about personal
value directly affect employee self-evaluation of global self-esteem, we hypothesize that
pay level will have a similar effect on organization-based self-esteem. Higher pay levels
signal to employees that they matter to the organization. Feeling that ‘I COUNT around
here’ is the essence of organization-based self-esteem. Thus:

H2: Pay level has positive effects on organization-based self-esteem.

Organization-based self-esteem and performance
Korman (1970, 1976), and Brockner (1988) posited that an employee’s self-esteem is
central to the explanation of work performance. Consistent with this, Judge and
Bono’s (2001) meta-analytic review reported a corrected mean correlation between
self-esteem and performance of .26, one of the strongest individual difference corre-
lates of performance. There are several plausible explanations for this relationship.
Proponents of self-consistency theory (e.g. Korman, 1970, 1976) argue that high self-
esteem individuals are motivated to maintain a positive self-perception. Performance at
a high level is one manner in which they can maintain behaviour that is consistent with
their self-concept. When confronted with a task to perform, high self-esteem people
value high performance, exert effort and engage in goal-directed behaviour. In
addition, high self-esteem individuals are more likely to have higher self-efficacy than
their low self-esteem counterparts (Gardner & Pierce, 1998; Locke, McClear, & Knight,
1996), which contributes to higher performance levels under almost all role conditions
(Bandura 1977, 1989). Thus, prior research has demonstrated that high self-esteem
individuals are more strongly task-motivated, are less distracted by adverse role
conditions and are more persistent when dealing with obstacles than their low
self-esteem counterparts.

Although most research shows a positive relationship between global self-esteem
and performance (Korman, 1970; Shrauger, 1972), the results have not been consist-
ently significant (Brockner, 1988). In response, scholars interested in self-esteem
effects within specific contexts (e.g. school and work settings) have argued that
situation-specific measures of self-esteem may provide more consistent results (e.g.
Rosenberg, Schooler, Schoenbach, & Rosenberg, 1995; Song & Hattie, 1985). Using
this approach, cross-sectional
relationships have been demonstrated between
organization-based self-esteem and in-role performance (e.g. Pierce et al., 1989) and
between organization-based self-esteem and extra-role behaviour (e.g. Van Dyne,
VandeWalle, Kostova, Latham, & Cummings, 2000). In addition, Pierce et al. (1993)
observed an 8-month lagged correlation (r=.21, p < .01) between organization-based
self-esteem and supervisory ratings of job performance. Consistent with past research


312

Donald G. Gardner et al.

and theory, we hypothesize that the psychological process of self-evaluation resulting
in OBSE will influence work performance:

H3: Organization-based self-esteem has positive effects on employee performance.

The mediating role of organization-based self-esteem
The last step in the development of the logic for the mediating role of OBSE in linking
pay level and performance is the theoretical ordering of the constructs in the model. In
the preceding sections, we proposed that (a) pay level affects employee performance,
(b) pay level affects organization-based self-esteem, and (c) organization-based self-
esteem affects employee performance. We now propose that pay level influences
employee performance by virtue of its effect on organization-based self-esteem. Thus,
we hypothesize that organization-based self-esteem mediates the pay level→employee
performance relationship. We view our mediation hypothesis as a step towards
enhanced understanding of the psychology of pay level effects by highlighting one
process through which pay level influences employee performance.

As discussed above, employee pay level signals value and importance to the organiz-
ation. Over time, employees with high pay levels come to believe that they are
significant, worthy and valuable to the organization and this message becomes inte-
grated into beliefs about the self. As argued above, we have proposed that employees
with high pay levels are motivated by self-consistency to maintain a positive self-image.
Accordingly, they put forth goal-directed effort that results in high performance. Even
under adverse role conditions, those with a positive self-image persist in their efforts
and sustain their motivation, which in turn enhances job performance. Our model,
therefore, suggests that pay level affects self-evaluations of organization-based
self-esteem, with a subsequent impact upon work performance.

In summary, we propose pay level is one key indicator of employee value to the
organization and thus it strengthens employee organization-based self-esteem that then
affects future job performance. In other words, we hypothesize that pay level influ-
ences performance through the mediating effect of organization-based self-esteem:

H4: Organization-based self-esteem mediates the effects of pay level on employee performance.

Method

Study design, participants and data collection
We tested our hypotheses on data from employees (N=91) in a construction company
located in the upper midwestern region of the USA. Participants represented all job
levels in the organization hierarchy including managerial, supervisory, professional and
support staff. One third of the sample was female.

The design of this field study involves three time periods. At Time 1, we obtained
pay level data, the yearly compensation received by each of the study participants. At
Time 2, three months later, employees completed a self-report questionnaire. At Time
3, nine months after Time 2, performance appraisals were conducted for the 12-month
period following measurement of employee pay level. Performance data were available
for 62 of the study participants (due to turnover and missing records in the host
organization). Univariate F statistics reveal no significant differences between partici-
pants with performance data and those with missing performance data on the two
other primary study variables—pay level and organization-based self-esteem.
In


Pay level, self-esteem and performance

313

addition,
below)—change in pay and organizational tenure.

there were no significant differences on the control variables (see

While our study design includes lagged data, the actual timing of each data collec-
tion period was determined more by the host organization’s requirements and by its
existing performance appraisal schedule than by extant theory. The design of this
study does, however, permit a time-lagged investigation of all hypotheses, with inde-
pendent sources of data. Thus, we are able to examine time-lagged pay level effects on
self-esteem and on subsequent performance and avoid problems associated with
common methods variance (Cook & Campbell, 1976).

Measures
Measurement of the study variables is free of common source and common method
effects. Pay level data were collected from personnel records of the host company.
Employee participants provided self-report of their organization-based self-esteem, and
supervisors assessed employee performance as part of the company’s performance
evaluation system.

Pay level

is the total compensation earned by each study participant for the
12-month period preceding our investigation. Pay level data were collected from the
company’s personnel records.

Organization-based self-esteem was measured with the scale developed and
validated by Pierce et al. (1989). Organization-based self-esteem (OBSE) reflects an
employee’s evaluation of his or her personal adequacy and worthiness as an organiz-
ational member (Gardner & Pierce, 1998) and was measured by 10 items (such as I
COUNT around here; I am an IMPORTANT PART OF THIS PLACE; I am a VALUABLE
PART OF THIS PLACE; 1=strongly disagree to 5=strongly agree).

Employee performance was assessed with the host organization’s 5-point scale
(1=very poor performance, 2=poor performance, 3=satisfactory performance, 4=very
good performance, and 5=excellent performance). Supervisors had first-hand knowl-
edge of individual performance, a second level of supervision reviewed the perform-
ance ratings before they were finalized, and the chief administrative officer had final
review before they were implemented. The mean (3.55), standard deviation (1.13),
and a non-significant skewness parameter (−.454) show that these ratings differen-
tiated performance between individuals and that ratings were not uniform across
employees. Although scholars recognize that measurement of performance is a flawed
and controversial process (Cummings & Schwab, 1973; Murphy & Cleveland, 1991),
some research indicates that performance ratings can be good indicators of relative
productivity (Medoff & Abraham, 1980). In addition, performance appraisal systems
can be viewed as the organization’s communication system regarding employee
performance (Cummings & Schwab, 1973; Murphy & Cleveland, 1991).

Control variables
While the focus of our study is on the mediating role of organization-based self-esteem
in the relationship between pay level and performance, we also acknowledge the
potential role of other factors that can influence pay levels. Organizational tenure may
contribute to the level of an employee’s pay (because pay increases compound over
time). As a result, pay level effects can be confounded with organizational tenure. Also,
as much prior research indicates (e.g. Gerhart & Milkovich, 1992; Jenkins et al., 1998),
contingent (merit) pay provides a potent alternative explanation for effects of pay on


314

Donald G. Gardner et al.

subsequent performance. Thus, we measured and statistically controlled for organiz-
ational tenure and change in pay in our analyses so we could examine the effect of pay
level on organization-based self-esteem and performance over and above the effects of
these controls. Organizational tenure data (i.e. the number of months employed)
were collected from personnel records. Change in pay (the change in total compen-
sation received by the study participants from the previous year) was collected from
the company’s personnel records at the same time as pay level data were collected. We
assessed change in pay as both the absolute change in dollars as well as the percentage
change in pay as discussed in the analyses below.

Analyses
We used partial correlations to test the direct effect hypotheses (H1 to H3) and to
examine the preconditions for mediation (Baron & Kenny, 1986). We tested the
mediating effects of organization-based self-esteem with a series of hierarchical regres-
sion analyses (Cohen & Cohen, 1983) where we regressed performance on the control
variables (organizational tenure and change in pay) in step 1, the independent variable
(pay level) in step 2, followed by entry of the mediator (organization-based self-esteem)
in step 3. The statistical significance of the variance uniquely attributed to the mediator
(organization-based self-esteem) after accounting for the variance attributed to the
controls (organizational tenure and change in pay) and exogenous variable (pay level)
is a test of the mediation hypothesis (Lindenberger & Potter, 1998).

Results
Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics and intercorrelations for the study variables.
The coefficient alpha for the only multiple item measure (OBSE) was acceptable at .87.

Direct effects
The correlations presented in Table 1 provide initial support for each of the three
direct effect hypotheses. All of the relevant product moment correlations are statisti-
cally significant. More importantly, after partialling out the variance attributable to the


Pay level, self-esteem and performance

315

control variables (organizational tenure and change in pay), the partial correlations
remain statistically significant between: (a) pay level and performance (H1: r=.21,
p=.067), (b) pay level and organization-based self-esteem (H2: r=.36, p < .01), and (c)
organization-based self-esteem and performance (H3: r=.36, p < .01). We compared
results using absolute (dollar) change in pay and percent change in pay and found no
differences. For space reasons, we report results only for absolute change in pay.
Inspection of the correlations in Table 1 also reveals that change in absolute pay was
not significantly related to either organization-based self-esteem (r=.09, p=.25) or
performance (r=.09, p=.25). Thus, there is empirical support for hypotheses 1, 2
and 3.

Mediated effects
Results presented in Table 2 reveal
that when performance was regressed on
organization-based self-esteem and pay level in step 3, organization-based self-esteem
had a statistically significant relationship with performance (β=.33, p < .05). The pay
level–performance relationship failed to reach significance (β=.10, p > .05) in step 3,
even though it had previously been marginally significant (β=.24, p=.067) at step 2.
This supports our mediation hypothesis (H4), suggesting that organization-based
self-esteem mediates the pay level–performance relationship.

Discussion
The majority of prior research on the effects of pay has focused on attitudinal conse-
quences (e.g. Heneman & Judge, 2000; Sturman & Short, 2000). In contrast, the
purpose of this study was to advance understanding about how pay level affects
employee performance. Given the importance of pay level and the large expense that


316

Donald G. Gardner et al.

pay represents to most organizations, understanding how and why pay level influences
the behaviour of employees in organizations provides important theoretical and practi-
cal insights (Shaw & Gupta, 2001). In addition, this research responds to calls for
research on individual differences and pay. For example, Mitchell and Mickel (1999)
argued that ‘an individual-difference perspective in assessing the meaning of money is
important and necessary in management research’ (p. 568). Our research shows that
organization-based self-esteem represents one possible process by which individual
differences link pay and performance.

Based on Thierry (2001), who suggested that pay level can communicate an indi-
vidual’s value to the organization, we theorized that pay level influences performance
via the psychological processes of self-evaluation involving self-esteem. We proposed
that pay level signals employee worth to the organization and influences beliefs about
personal adequacies and worthiness as an organizational member which, in turn,
influence employee performance. Our results support this hypothesis. After control-
ling for organizational tenure and change in pay, results supported mediation of the
pay level–employee performance relationship by organization-based self-esteem
(though sample size limits this conclusion; see below). In addition, our results demon-
strate that pay level was significantly related to both organization-based self-esteem and
performance. In sum, this study demonstrates that employees who receive higher
amounts of pay (pay level) feel more highly valued by the organization (OBSE), and
those who feel valued highly (OBSE) are rated as higher performers.

It should be noted that there may be alternative explanations for this mediated
relationship. In particular, perceptions of distributive and/or procedural justice may
account for our results. If participants perceived high pay levels as being fair and low
pay levels as being unfair, this could produce the effects we obtained in this study
(positive effects of pay level on performance, via justice perceptions; Cropanzano &
Greenberg, 1997). On the other hand, OBSE may still mediate or moderate this
relationship, for at least two reasons. First, we would expect perceptions of fairness to
have a positive effect on OBSE, which in turn would affect performance as argued
here. High pay can lead to strong fairness perceptions and fairness can connote trust
and valuing of employees, so it should have a positive effect on OBSE (see Brockner,
et al., 2003 and Koper, Van Knippenberg, Bouhuijs, Vermunt, & Wilke, 1993).

Secondly, OBSE may moderate the effects of

justice judgments. Whether an
employee perceives pay as fair or unfair might precipitate different reactions depend-
ing on high or low OBSE. Self-consistency motivations (Korman, 1976) would suggest
that high OBSE employees respond to high pay and high fairness perceptions with
positive attitudes and behaviours and low OBSE employees react negatively (or not at
all) to the same conditions. Alternatively, pay levels might be perceived as unfair or
arbitrary. In such situations, high pay may not induce high performance from high
OBSE employees, but it might influence performance of low OBSE employees. Because
we did not measure fairness or justice perceptions in the current study these are
interesting questions for future research. Indeed the whole issue of how pay level and
perceptions of
interactional and informational;
Ambrose, 2002) relate to OBSE remains to be fully explored theoretically and
empirically.

justice (distributive, procedural,

We did observe one unexpected finding in our results. There was no statistically
significant relationship between change in pay and subsequent performance. This is
counter to a number of other studies that have found that when financial incentives are
made contingent upon previous performance, subsequent performance is enhanced


Pay level, self-esteem and performance

317

(Jenkins et al., 1998). We can surmise that the performance appraisal ratings used in
our analyses contained a large quality component (as opposed to quantity). That is,
supervisors (the performance raters) were influenced more by the quality of
performance of subordinates than the quantity of their performance. Jenkins et al.
(1998) concluded that pay changes are related to quantity of performance measures
(mean r=.34), but were unrelated to quality measures. This conclusion would
explain the non-significant relationship between pay change and performance in our
study.1

Strengths and limitations
We note several strengths of our study: three different sources of data, inclusion of two
control variables (organizational tenure and change in pay), and time-lagged data for
pay level, self-esteem, and performance. In addition, the lack of common source and
common method variance indicates relatively robust relationships that are not a func-
tion of measurement artifacts. There are nevertheless several
limitations to our
conclusions.

Our goal was to provide insight into one factor (OBSE) that can link pay level and
future performance. We recommend that future research consider additional factors
(such as perceived organizational support, organizational commitment, particularly
continuance commitment, and fulfilment of the psychological contract) that also may
link pay level and performance. Additionally, we suggest the benefits of collecting
longitudinal data and assessing causal relationships. We note that in our study, any
inferences about causality are limited by the correlational nature of our data (snapshots
from three points in time). Most likely, some effects are reciprocal. For example, past
performance shapes an individual’s organization-based self-esteem over time (e.g.
Korman, 1976) and past performance influences future levels of pay in many organiz-
ations (Harris, Gilbreath, & Sunday, 1998). In addition, as pointed out by one reviewer,
supervisor performance ratings may have been biased by current pay levels, such that
those employees with high pay levels received high ratings regardless of their actual
performance. In sum, our time-lagged data collection does not produce evidence of
causality, but it does address one of the necessary conditions for examining causal links
(namely, the independent variable precedes the dependent variable; Cook & Campbell,
1976). Our results thus suggest that one way in which pay level impacts performance
is through its effects on organization-based self-esteem.

The relatively small size of our sample is another limitation of this investigation.
Although our results indicate full mediation, it is possible that the pay level β failed to
reach conventional levels of statistical significance at step 3 due to our sample size and
consequent low statistical power. At the same time, however, sample size should not
affect change in magnitude of the β coefficient. The β for pay level was reduced from
.26 (p < .05) at step 2 to .11 (ns) at step 3, after the inclusion of OBSE in the equation.
Accordingly, results provide evidence for a mediated relationship, but with uncertainty
regarding whether it is full versus partial mediation. Another boundary condition of
our research is the nature of our sample. The organization we studied used individual-
ized management systems where employees worked relatively independently. Perhaps
results would differ in team-based settings or in assembly line settings where pay is
group-based or set by contract.

1We thank an anonymous reviewer for suggesting this.


318

Donald G. Gardner et al.

Implications
There are several important implications of these findings. Pay level contributed to
employees’ sense of self-worth as organizational members and both pay level and OBSE
were significantly related to future employee performance. This is important because it
confirms an obviously ‘hoped-for’ by product of an organization’s compensation
system. Our research replicates and extends prior findings (Gardner & Pierce, 1998;
Pierce et al., 1989) by demonstrating a time-lagged relationship between organization-
based self-esteem and performance. Employees with high organization-based
self-esteem not only have more favourable work-related attitudes, but also have higher
subsequent performance than their low self-esteem colleagues. If the findings reported
here are supported in future investigations, a theory of pay level effects should
acknowledge the effects of pay level on self-esteem and performance.

Secondly,

organizations might

If managers want to increase the performance of employees, our study offers several
suggestions. First, managers should ensure that employees perceive that they are
receiving high pay (if true) and should make this a component of regular communi-
cation programmes.
implementing
competency- or skill-based pay systems (Gerhart & Milkovich, 1992) where employees
receive enhanced pay levels as they acquire new skills (e.g. programming) and/or
competencies (leadership) that are job-related and potentially improve their job
performance (Cira & Benjamin, 1998). This complements our view that pay level
reflects employee value to the organization: as employees increase their value to the
organization, their pay level should increase. Skill-based pay reinforces this relation-
ship. Thirdly, managers should send signals (direct and indirect, verbal and non-verbal)
that employees are valuable assets to the organization and that their contributions
make a difference to the organization. Higher organization-based self-esteem should,
based on our results, enhance performance.

consider

Our findings, however, also have a ‘dark side’. Although results show the positive
consequences of high pay levels, this implies that some employees have low(er)
pay levels. Over time, this may signal that some employees are less valued and less
worthwhile to the organization. This, in turn, may dampen their organization-based
self-esteem, motivation and subsequent performance. Self-enhancement
theory
(e.g. Dipboye, 1977) suggests that employees generally invest the effort needed to
perform and that they expect their effort and performance will be acknowledged and
reinforced by management. Since low pay level can be interpreted as signalling low
value and can detract from self-enhancement, it is critical that managers clearly com-
municate other reasons for low pay (e.g. comparisons to other employees, economic
conditions, cost pressures, or labour negotiations). Thierry (2001), for example,
suggests emphasizing to these employees that some determinants of pay level cannot
be influenced by employees (e.g. market conditions). To this end, Korman (1970,
1976) identified other sources of self-esteem (such as signals from significant others,
successful work experiences and systems that indicate employees are trusted) that
organizations may use to manage low pay level employees. Managers should make sure
that these employees receive other messages suggesting they are a valuable part of the
organization, but perhaps not as valuable as other employees who perform at a higher
level or who have different job responsibilities.

In conclusion, our finding that pay level influenced employee performance through
its effect on organization-based self-esteem indicates that organizations can increase
the return-on-investment of their compensation dollars by reinforcing the connection
between pay level and the employee’s value to the organization.


Pay level, self-esteem and performance

319

Acknowledgements
We would like to express our appreciation to Alison E. Barber, Chris J. Berger and Jason Laun for
their contributions to our work. We would also like to thank the Associate Editor, Sabine
Sonnentag, and two anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments on our study.

References

Adams, J. S. (1963). Wage inequities, productivity, and work quality. Industrial Relations, 67,

422–436.

Ambrose, M. (2002). Contemporary justice research: A new look at

familiar questions.

Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 89, 803–812.

Aryee, S., & Luk, V. (1996). Work and nonwork influences on the career satisfaction of dual-

earner couples. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 49, 38–52.

Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. Psychological

Review, 84, 191–215.

Bandura, A. (1989). Human agency in social cognitive theory. American Psychologist, 44,

1175–1184.

Barber, A. E., & Bretz, R. D., Jr (2000). Compensation, attraction, and retention. In S. L. Rynes
and B. Gerhart (Eds.), Compensation in organizations (pp. 32–60). San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Boss.

Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable distinction in social
psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1173–1182.

Blau, P. M. (1964). Exchange and power in social life. New York: Wiley.
Brockner, J. (1985). The relation of trait self-esteem and positive inequity to productivity.

Journal of Personality, 53, 517–529.

Brockner, J. (1988). Self-esteem at work: Research, theory, and practice. Lexington, MA: Lexing-

ton Books.

Brockner, J., Heuer, L., Magner, N., Folger, R., Umphress, E., van den Bos, K., Vermunt, R.,
Magner, M., & Siegel, P. (2003). High procedural fairness heightens the effect of outcome
favorability on self-evaluations: An attributional analysis. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 91, 51–68.

Cira, D.

J, & Benjamin, E. R. (1998). Competency-based pay: A concept

in evolution.

Compensation and Benefits Review, 30(5), 21–28.

Cohen, J., & Cohen, P. (1983). Applied multiple regression/correlation for the behavioral

sciences (2nd ed.) Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Colquitt, J. A., Conlon, D. E., Wesson, M. J., Porter, C. O. L. H., & Ng, K. Y. (2001). Justice at the
millennium: A meta-analytic review of 25 years of organizational justice research. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 86, 425–445.

Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (1976). The design and conduct of quasi-experiments and true
experiments in field settings. In M. D. Dunnette (Ed.), Handbook of industrial and organiz-
ational psychology (pp. 223–326). Chicago, IL: Rand McNally.

Coopersmith, S. (1967). The antecedents of self-esteem. San Francisco, CA: Freeman.
Cropanzano, R., & Greenberg, J. (1997). Progress in organizational justice: Tunneling through
the maze. In C. L. Cooper & I. T. Robertson (Eds.), International review of industrial and
organizational psychology (pp. 317–372). New York: Wiley.

Cummings, L. L., & Schwab, D. P. (1973). Performance in organizations: Determinants and

appraisal. Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman.

Dipboye, R. L. (1977). A critical review of Korman’s self-consistency theory of work motivation
and occupational choice. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 18,
108–126.


320

Donald G. Gardner et al.

Frank, R. H. (1985). Choosing the right pond: Human behavior and the quest for status. New

York: Oxford University Press.

Gardner, D. G, & Pierce, J. L. (1998). Self-esteem and self-efficacy within the organizational

context. Group and Organization Management, 23, 48–70.

Gerhart, B., & Milkovich, G. T. (1992). Employee compensation: Research and practice. In
M. D. Dunnette & L. M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psy-
chology, (Vol. 3, 2nd ed., pp. 481–570). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

Gneezy, U., & Rustichini, A. (2000). Pay enough or don’t pay at all. Quarterly Journal of

Economics, 115, 791–810.

Goldsmith, A. H., Veum, J. R., & Darity, W. (1997). The impact of psychological and human

capital on wages. Economic Inquiry, 35, 815–829.

Gouldner, A. W. (1960). The norm of reciprocity. American Sociological Review, 25, 165–167.
Greller, M. M., & Parsons, C. K. (1995). Contingent pay systems and job performance feedback.

Group and Organization Management, 20, 90–108.

Harris, M. M., Gilbreath, B., & Sunday, J. A. (1998). A longitudinal examination of a merit pay
system: Relationships among performance ratings, merit increases, and total pay increases.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 83, 825–831.

Hechler, P. D., & Wiener, Y. (1974). Chronic self-esteem as a moderator of performance

consequences of pay. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 11, 97–105.

Heneman, H. G., & Judge, T. A. (2000). Compensation attitudes. In S. L. Rynes and B. Gerhart

(Eds.), Compensation in organizations (pp. 61–103). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Boss.

Heneman, R. L. (1992). Merit pay: Linking pay increases to performance ratings. Reading, MA:

Addison-Wesley.

Homans, G. C. (1961). Social behaviour: Its elementary forms. London: Routledge and Kegan

Paul.

Jenkins, G. D., Mitra, A., Gupta, N., & Shaw, J. D. (1998). Are financial incentives related to
performance? A meta-analytic review of empirical research. Journal of Applied Psychology,
83, 777–787.

Judge, T. A., & Bono, J. E. (2001). Relationship of core self-evaluation traits—self-esteem, general-
ized self-efficacy, locus of control, and emotional stability—with job satisfaction and job
performance: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 80–92.

Kanter, R. M. (1987). From status to contribution: Some organizational implications of the

changing basis for pay. Personnel, 64, 12–37.

Koper, G., Van Knippenberg, D., Bouhuijs, F., Vermunt, R., & Wilke, H. (1993). Procedural

fairness and self-esteem. European Journal of Social Psychology, 23, 313–325.

Korman, A. (1970). Toward an hypothesis of work behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology, 54,

31–41.

Korman, A. (1976). Hypothesis of work behavior revisited and an extension. Academy of

Management Review, 1, 50–63.

Lawler, E. E., III, & Jenkins, G. D., Jr (1992). Strategic reward systems. In M. D. Dunnette &
L. M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (Vol. 3, 2nd
ed., pp. 1009–1055). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

Lindenberger, U., & Potter, U. (1998). The complex nature of unique and shared effects in
hierarchical linear regression: Implications for developmental psychology. Psychological
Methods, 3, 218–230.

Locke, E. A., McClear, K., & Knight, D. (1996). Self-esteem and work. In C. L. Cooper &
I. T. Robinson (Eds.), International review of industrial and organizational psychology
(pp. 132). New York: Wiley.

Masterson, S. S., Lewis, K., Goldman, B. M., & Taylor, M. S. (2000). Integrating justice and social
exchange: The differing effects of fair procedures and treatment on work relationships.
Academy of Management Journal, 43, 738–748.

Medoff, J. L, & Abraham, K. G. (1980). Experience, performance, and earnings. Quarterly

Journal of Economics, 95, 703–736.


Pay level, self-esteem and performance

321

Milkovich, G., & Milkovich, C. (1992). Strengthening the pay–performance relationship: The

research. Compensation and Benefits Review, 24(6), 53–62.

Mitchell, T. R., & Mickel, A. E. (1999). The meaning of money: An individual-difference perspec-

tive. Academy of Management Review, 24, 568–578.

Molm, L. D., Takahashi, N., & Peterson, G. (2003). In the eye of the beholder: Procedural justice

in social exchange. American Sociological Review, 68, 128–152.

Murphy, K. R., & Cleveland, J. N. (1991). Performance appraisal: An organizational perspec-

tive. Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.

Opsahl, R. L., & Dunnette, M. D. (1966). The role of financial incentives in industrial motivation.

Psychological Bulletin, 66, 95–116.

Pfeffer, J. (1998). Understanding organizations: Concepts and controversies. In D. Gilbert,
S. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (4th Ed., pp 733–777) Boston,
MA: McGraw-Hill.

Pierce, J. L, Gardner, D. G., Cummings, L. L., & Dunham, R. B. (1989). Organization-based
self-esteem: Construct definition, measurement, and validation. Academy of Management
Journal, 32, 622–648.

Pierce, J. L., Gardner, D. G., Dunham, R. B., & Cummings, L. L. (1993). The moderating effects of
organization-based self-esteem on role condition–employee response relationships. Academy
of Management Journal, 36, 271–288.

Rosenberg, M., Schooler, C., Schoenbach, C., & Rosenberg, F. (1995). Global self-esteem and
specific self-esteem: Different concepts, different outcomes. American Sociological Review,
60, 141–156.

Rupp, D. E., & Cropanzano, R. (2002). The mediating effects of social exchange relationships in
justice. Organizational

predicting workplace outcomes from multifoci organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 89, 925–946.

Rynes, S., & Gerhart, B. (2000). Compensation in organizations: Current research and prac-

tice. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Settoon, R. P., Bennett, N., & Liden, R. C. (1996). Social exchange in organizations: Perceived
organizational support, leader–member exchange, and employee reciprocity. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 81, 219–227.

Shaw, J. D., & Gupta, N. (2001). Pay fairness and employee outcomes: Exacerbation and attenu-
ation effects of financial need. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology,
74, 299–320.

Shaw, J. D., Duffy, M. K., Mitra, A., Lockhart, D. E., & Bowler, M. (2003). Reactions to merit pay
test of a signal sensitivity perspective. Journal of Applied

increases: A longitudinal
Psychology, 88, 538–544.

Shrauger, J. S. (1972). Self-esteem and reactions to being observed by others. Journal of

Personality and Social Psychology, 23, 192–200.

Song, I. S., & Hattie, J. (1985). Relationships between self-concept and achievement. Journal of

Research in Personality, 19, 365–372.

Sturman, M. C., & Short, J. C. (2000). Lump-sum bonus satisfaction: Testing the construct validity

of a new pay satisfaction dimension. Personnel Psychology, 53, 673–700.

Tan, G. Y, & Peng, K. Y. (1997). Antecedents of organization-based self-esteem: An empirical

study in Singapore. International Journal of Management, 14, 375–386.

Tharenou, P. (1979). Employee self-esteem: A review of the literature. Journal of Vocational

Behavior, 15, 1–29.

Thierry, H. (2001). The reflection theory on compensation. In M. Erez, U. Kleinbeck, &
H. Thierry (Eds.), Work motivation in the context of a globalizing economy (pp. 149–166).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Thierry, H. (1992). Payment: Which meanings are rewarding? American Behavioral Scientist,

35, 694–707.

Thierry, H. (1998). Compensating work. In P. J. D. Drenth, H. Thierry, & C. J. de Wolff (Eds.),
Handbook of work and organizational psychology (pp. 291–319). Hove: Psychology Press.


322

Donald G. Gardner et al.

Tsui, A. S, Pearce, J. L, Porter, L. W., & Tripoli, A. M. (1997). Alternative approaches to the
employee–organization relationship: Does investment in employees pay off? Academy of
Management Journal, 40, 1089–1121.

Tyler, T. R., & Blader, S. L. (2002). Autonomous vs. comparative status: Must we be better than
others to feel good about ourselves? Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 89, 813–838.

Van Dyne L., VandeWalle, D., Kostova, T., Latham, M. E., & Cummings, L. L. (2000).
Collectivism, propensity to trust, and self-esteem as predictors of organizational citizenship
in a non-work setting. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 21, 3–23.

Wiley, C. (1997). What motivates employees according to over 40 years of motivation surveys.

International Journal of Manpower, 18, 263–280.

Received 7 September 2002; revised version received 10 October 2003

