Psychological Reports, 2005,96,775-781.  O Psychological Reports 2005 

HARDINESS SCALES I N  IRANIAN MANAGERS: EVIDENCE OF 
INCREMENTAL  VALIDITY IN RELATIONSHIPS WITH THE FIVE 

FACTOR MODEL AND WITH ORGANIZATIONAL AND 

PSYCHOLOGICAL  ADJUSTMENT ' 

NIMA  GHORBANI 

AND 

P. J. WATSON 

University of Tehran 

University  of Tennessee at Chattanooga 

Summay.-This 

study examined the incremental validity  of  Hardiness scales in  a 
sample  of  Iranian  managers.  Along  with  measures  of  the  Five  Factor  Model  and  of 
Organizational  and  Psychological  Adjustment,  Hardiness  scales were  administered  to 
159 male  managers  (M age = 39.9, SD = 7.5) who had  worked  in their  organizations  for 
7.9 yr.  (SD = 5.4). Hardiness  predicted  greater  Job  Satisfaction, higher  Organization- 
based  Self-esteem,  and  perceptions  of  the  work  environment  as  being  less  stressful 
and  constraining.  Hardiness  also  correlated  positively  with  Assertiveness,  Emotional 
Stability,  Extraversion,  Openness  to  Experience,  Agreeableness,  and  Conscientious- 
ness  and negatively with Depression,  Anxiety, Perceived Stress, Chance  External  Con- 
trol,  and  a  Powerful  Others  External  Control.  Evidence  of  incremental  validity  was 
obtained when  the  Hardiness scales  supplemented  the  Five  Factor  Model in  predict- 
ing  organizational  and  psychological  adjustment.  These  data  documented  the  incre- 
mental  validity  of  the  Hardiness  scales in  a  non-Western  sample  and  thus  confirmed 
once again that  Hardiness has  a relevance  that extends beyond  the  culture  in  which  it 
was developed. 

Hardiness  as  a  personality  construct  is  defined  as  an  "existential  cour- 
age"  that  "emphasizes  self-confidence  and  self-reliance  at  times  of  peril" 
(Maddi,  1998, p.  9). Research  into  this  construct  began  with  an  analysis of 
how American  managers  coped with  the stress  of  severe corporate instability 
(Maddi, 2002). Three  dimensions of  Hardiness predicted  successful manage- 
rial  coping:  Commitment,  Control,  and  Challenge.  Commitment  reflected  a 
dedicated  involvement  of  managers  in  their  work.  Control  represented  an 
avoidance  of  passivity through proactive efforts to influence ongoing  circum- 
stances.  Challenge  was  evident  when  managers  embraced  difficulties  as  op- 
portunities  for  growth  rather  than  as  threats  to  personal  well-being.  Over 
the  past  quarter  century,  evidence  has  confirmed  that  Hardiness  is  associ- 
ated with  psychological  adjustment, superior work  performance,  and greater 
physical health  (Maddi, 2002). 

Scales  for  measuring  Hardiness  have  been  widely  used  and  translated 
into numerous languages  (Maddi, 2002). An  earlier  study, for instance, show- 

'Address  correspondence  to  P. J.  Watson,  Psychology  Department  No.  2805,  350  Holt  Hall, 
615  McCallie,  University  of  Tennessee  at  Chattanooga,  Chattanooga,  TN  37403,  U.S.A.  or  e- 
mail  (paul-watson@utc.edu). 


776 

N. GHORBANI & P. J. WATSON 

ed that  Persian  Hardiness measures  were  valid when  administered  to a  sam- 
ple  of  Iranian  managers  (Ghorbani, Watson,  & Morris,  2000). The  present 
project  extended  the  analysis  of  Iranian managers  by  most  importantly  test- 
ing  the  hypothesis  that  Hardiness  scales  would  display  incremental  validity. 
This  hypothesis  would  be  confirmed  if  Hardiness  increased  the variance  al- 
ready explained by the Five Factor Model  (Goldberg, 1999) when  predicting 
organizational and psychological adjustment  (e.g., Piedmont,  1999). 

Three subsidiary hypotheses supplied  the necessary backdrop  for  assess- 
ing  incremental  validity.  First,  given  that  Hardiness  predicts  adaptive  re- 
sponding  in  American  corporations  (Maddi,  2002)) it  was  expected  these 
scales would  also correlate with  self-reported managerial  adjustment  in  Iran- 
ian  work  organizations.  In  addition  to  the  Cooper  Work  Stress  Question- 
naire  (Cooper & Watt,  1992)) which  was  examined  in  the  previous  Iranian 
study  (Ghorbani, et al., 2000), managers  in  the present  sample responded to 
the  Intrinsic  and  Extrinsic  factors  of  the  Minnesota  Satisfaction  Scales 
(Weiss, Dawis,  England, & Lofquist,  1967)) to  the Organization-based  Self- 
esteem  Scale  (Pierce,  Gardner,  Cummings,  & Dunham,  1989)) and  to  the 
Organizational  Constraints  Scale (Spector  & Jex,  1998). The hypothesis was 
that  Hardiness  would  correlate  negatively with  Work  Stress  and  Organiza- 
tional Constraints  and positively with  the other indices  of  work  adjustment. 

Second,  Hardiness  was  expected  to  predict  psychological  adjustment. 
Depression  and  Anxiety  Scales (Costello & Comrey,  1967) not  examined  in 
the  previous  Iranian  study  were  administered  along  with  measures  of  Per- 
ceived Stress  (Cohen, Kamarack, & Mermelstein,  1983)) Assertiveness  (Rath- 
us,  1973)) and  an  Internal, Powerful  Others, and  Chance  Locus  of  Control 
(Levenson,  1973). The  specific hypotheses were  that  Control,  Commitment, 
and  Challenge  would  correlate  positively  with  Assertiveness  and  Internal 
Control  and  negatively with  Depression,  Anxiety,  Perceived  Stress,  Chance 
External Control, and a Powerful Others External Control. 

Finally,  a  demonstration  of  incremental  validity  would  be  especially 
noteworthy  if  Hardiness  also  displayed  associations  with  traits  of  the  Five 
Factor  Model.  Indeed,  the  presumed  adjustment  of  Control,  Commitment, 
and  Challenge  suggested  that  Hardiness  would  correlate  positively  with  all 
five traits,  including  Emotional  Stability, Extraversion,  Openness  to  Experi- 
ence,  Agreeableness,  and  Conscientiousness  (Goldberg,  1999). Within  the 
context of  such  relationships, evidence  of  incremental validity would  specify 
that  Hardiness  scales defined  at  least  somewhat  unique  sources  of  variance, 
which  were  not  reducible  to more general  dimensions of  psychological func- 
tioning. 

In  summary, the principal  goal  of  the present  study was  to  test  the hy- 
pothesis  that  Hardiness  scales would  display incremental validity.  Subsidiary 
hypotheses suggested  that Hardiness would  correlate positively with  Intrinsic 


HARDINESS IN IRANIAN  MANAGERS 

777 

and  Extrinsic  Work  Satisfaction, Organization-based Self-esteem, Assertive- 
ness,  Internal Control, and the Five Factor  Model traits,  and negatively with 
Work  Stress,  Organizational  Constraints,  Depression,  Anxiety,  Perceived 
Stress, Chance External Control, and a Powerful Others External Control. 

Participants 

Managers  from a wide  range  of  Iranian  private  sector  companies volun- 
teered  to serve as  the research  participants.  These  159 men  had  a mean  age 
of  39.9 yr.  (SD=7.5). All worked  in middle or upper management. They had 
been  in  their  organizations  for  7.9  yr.  (SD=5.4) and  in  their  current  posi- 
tions for 3.7 yr.  (SD = 2.4). 
Measures 

Three  questionnaire  booklets  contained  scales  employed  in  this  and  a 
number  of  other  projects.  All measures  had  been  translated  from  English 
into  Persian  in  preparation  for  the  present  or  previous  investigations.  The 
adequacy of  all translations was confirmed by translating the Persian versions 
of  questionnaires back into English. 

Hardiness  was  assessed with  the  second  version  of  the  Personal  Views 
Survey  (cf.  Maddi,  &  Khoshaba,  1994;  Maddi,  1997)  of  Ouellette2 which 
presented  statements  of  relevance  to the three  dimensions  of  Hardiness  and 
used  a  response  scale  with  anchors  of  I: not  at  all  true  and  4:  completely 
true.  For  Intrinsic  and  Extrinsic Job  Satisfaction, managers  rated  their  em- 
ployment  circumstances with  anchors of  1: very  dissatisfied  and 4: very  satis- 
fied.  On  the  Organizational  Constraints  measures,  managers  indicated  the 
frequency of  work  limitations experienced  from  0: less than  once per  month 
or  never  to  4:  several  times  per  day.  The  Work  Stress  Questionnaire  pre- 
sented  a  list  of  potentially  stressful  work-related events,  to  which  managers 
reacted  along  a scale anchored by  0: not  at  all stressful  and 4:  very  stressful. 
All  other  scales  employed  a  scale  in  Likert  format  using  anchors  of  0: 
strongly disagree  and 4:  strongly  agree.  Descriptive  statistics  and internal  re- 
liability information  for the Goldberg  (1999) ' Five Factor  Model  traits  were 
reported previously for this  sample (Ghorbani & Watson, 2004). 
Procedure 

Copies  of  questionnaires  were  sent  via  regular  mail  to managers  work- 
ing  throughout  Iran.  After  responding,  managers  sent  the  questionnaires 

'Suzanne  C. Ouellette  graciously  gave  permission  for  use  of  the  Personal  Views  Survey  in  this 
research. 
'This  inventory is  in  Dr. Goldberg's  International  Personality  Item  Pool  (http://ipip.ori.org/ip- 
ip/indextest.htm)  of measures of  individual  differences  in the public  domain. 


778 

N. GHORBANI & P. J. WATSON 

back  to the first  author. The final sample represented  79% of  a larger group 
of  individuals  who  had  earlier  enrolled  in  a  managerial  training  program. 
Data  on  promotion  were  available  for  99  of  these  participants,  but  Hardi- 
ness  scales displayed no significant correlations with  promotions. Given  that 
the focus of  this  project  was  on incremental validity, these  data were not  re- 
ported  for  the  sake  of  brevity.  Managerial  participation  in  the  study was 
fully voluntary, and  care was  taken  to guarantee  the confidentiality  of  all  re- 
sponses.  As  a  reward  for  taking  part  in  the  study, managers  were  given  an 
opportunity to attend a free workshop. 

With  one  exception,  adequate  internal  consistencies  were  obtained  for 
all the measures  (see Table  I). Internal Control was the lone scale displaying 
an  unacceptably  low  a of  .42, suggesting  a  need  for  caution  in  interpreting 
data  obtained  with  this  scale. Internal  reliabilities were  acceptable  for  Con- 
trol  ( a  = .7 1, M  response  per  item = 3.23,  SD = 0.3 l ) ,  Commitment  (a = 3 0 ,  
M=3.33, SD=0.36), and  Challenge  (a=.60, M=2.36, SD=0.35). Challenge 
predicted  higher levels of  Commitment  (.42) and  Control  (.33), with  the lat- 
ter  two variables  displaying a robust  positive  correlation as well  (.66, all ps< 
.OOl). 

With  regard  to  the  Five  Factor  Model,  Challenge  was  associated  with 
greater  Emotional  Stability  (21, p < .05), and  Commitment was  indicative  of 
higher  Conscientiousness  (.28, p < .01) and  Emotional  Stability  (.I$, p < .05). 

TABLE  1 

CORRELATIONS 

OF  CONTROL, COMMITMENT, AND  CHALLENGE WITH MF~ASURES 

OF  ORGANIZATIONAL 

AND  PSYCHOLOGICAL ADJUSTMENT 

Measure 

a 

M 

SD 

Correlations 

Control  Commit- Challenge 

ment 

Organizational Adjustment 

Intrinsic Work  Satisfaction 
Extrinsic Work  Satisfaction 
Organization  Based  Self-esteem 
Organization  Constraints 
Work  Stress Questionnaire 

Psychological Adjustment 

.70 
.76 
.86 
.89 
.93 

2.8 
2.2 
3.2 
1.3 
1.3 

0.5 
0.7 
0.5 
0.8 
0.5 

.27 
.23 
.28 
- 0  
-.I7 

.32 
.26 
.17 
- 2  
-.28 

.19 
.10 
.12 
-.I1 
-34 

Assertiveness 
Internal Control 
Powerful Others External  Control 
Chance External Control 
Depression 
Anxiety 
Perceived Stress 

.12 
.12 
-32 
-.27 
-.22 
-.23 
-.27 
correlations, r = .15 to .21 ( p  < .05); r = .22 to .28 ( p  < .01); and r > .28 ( p  < .001). 

.38 
.16 
-34 
-.38 
-.42 
-.26 
- 0  

.26 
.10 
-.26 
-38 
-.44 
-.23 
-.30 

3.1 
3.1 
1.6 
1.1 
0.7 
1.2 
1.1 

0.0 
0.4 
0.6 
0.7 
0.5 
0.7 
0.5 

.83 
.42 
.69 
.80 
.87 
.82 
.82 

Note.-For 


HARDINESS IN IRANIAN  MANAGERS 

779 

Positive correlations appeared between  Control and Agreeableness  (.23), Ex- 
traversion  (.25), Conscientiousness  (.20), and  Openness  to  Experience  (.18, 
all ps< .05). No  other  Hardiness linkages  with  the Five  Factor  Model  traits 
reached  conventional significance. 

Table  1 presents  the relationships of  Hardiness with  the remaining vari- 
ables.  The  absence  of  a  significant  relationship  between  Hardiness  and  In- 
ternal  Control was  the  only  outcome  which  did  not  support  the  empirical 
hypotheses. As  expected, at least  one and usually more dimensions of  Hardi- 
ness were associated with  higher ratings  of  Intrinsic  and Extrinsic Work  Sat- 
isfaction, Organization-based Self-esteem, and Assertiveness,  and with  lower 
scores  on  the  Organizational  Constraints,  Work  Stress,  External  Control, 
Anxiety, Depression, and Perceived  Stress measures. 

Hardiness scales displayed  clear incremental validity. After the Five Fac- 
tor  Model traits  had been  entered  into the first  step  of  multiple  regressions, 
the three  Hardiness  dimensions increased  the  amount  of  variance  explained 
in  7  of  the  12 organizational and  psychological  adjustment  variables.  Signifi- 
cant hR2 values ranged from  .O3  to .I5 (ps < .05). Commitment served  as the 
lone significant predictor  of  Depression  (p = -.22,  p < .05), and  the same was 
true  with  regard  to  the  association  between  Challenge  and  Work  Stress 
(p= -.25,  p < .01). In the other significant  results,  Control was  the only Har- 
diness  dimension  that  increased  the  predictability  of  Organizational  Con- 
straints  (p = -.32),  Assertiveness  (P = .30), Powerful  Others  External  Control 
(p = -.29),  Chance  External  Control  (P = -.3  I), and  Anxiety  (P =-.16,  ps < 
.05 ) . 

DISCUSSION 

This  study most  importantly  tested  the hypothesis that  Hardiness  scales 
would  display  incremental  validity  in  a  sample of  Iranian  managers.  Subsid- 
iary  hypotheses  suggested  that  Control,  Commitment,  and  Challenge would 
also be associated with  organizational and psychological adjustment  and with 
the traits  of  the Five Factor  Model.  The results  of  this  investigation  offered 
general support for all of  these expectations. 

With  regard  to  organizational variables,  Iranian  managers  high  in  Har- 
diness  were  more  satisfied  with  their  careers,  obtained  a  greater  sense  of 
self-esteem  through  their  contributions  to  the  organization,  and  evaluated 
their  work  environment  as  less  stressful  and  constraining.  Psychologically, 
they  were  more  assertive  and  less  depressed,  anxious,  and  stressed.  They 
also were less likely to operate from an external locus of  control. 

Data  obtained  with  the  Goldberg  (1999)  index  of  the  Five  Factor 
Model  further  clarified  the meaning  of  Hardiness in  Iranian  managers.  Spe- 
cifically, these  data  supplied  further  evidence  of  the  positive  psychological 
consequences  of  Hardiness. Challenge  was  indicative  of  Emotional  Stability, 


780 

N.  GHORBANI & P. J. WATSON 

whereas Commitment was associated with both Emotional  Stability and Con- 
scientiousness.  Only Emotional  Stability did  not  display significant  associa- 
tions  with  Control,  and  the  relatively broader  psychological  significance  of 
this  dimension  of  Hardiness  also  appeared  in  the  finding  that  Control  was 
more  likely than  Commitment  and  Challenge  to  exhibit  zero-order  correla- 
tions with  the other measures. 

At the same time, however, Hardiness was not  reducible  to the traits  of 
the Five  Factor  Model.  At  least  one  finding  testified  to the  incremental  va- 
lidity of  each  aspect of  Hardiness.  Control once again was identified  as  espe- 
cially  important  in  explaining  additional  variance  in  organizational  and  psy- 
chological adjustment. 

The complete  lack  of  Hardiness  correlations with  an  Internal  Locus  of 
Control represented  the lone failure  to obtain  at  least  some  support  for  the 
hypotheses  of  this  investigation.  The  Internal  Locus  of  Control  Scale  was 
also  the  one  scale that  displayed poor  internal  reliability,  which  presumably 
contributed  to  the  nonappearance  of  relationships.  The  importance  of  the 
Control dimension of Hardiness in predicting  other measures  nevertheless in- 
dicated that  the  concept  of  personal  control was  very  much  germane to un- 
derstanding  the  adjustment  of  Iranian  managers.  A  reasonable  conclusion, 
therefore,  would  be  that  either  the  Levenson  scale  (1973) does  not  express 
Internal  Control  in  a  manner  sensitive  in  the  Iranian  context  or  that  the 
translation  of  this scale was somehow inadequate. 

Hardiness  scales  were  developed  to  record  the  ability  of  managers  in 
the  United  States  to  cope with  severe stress. The present  and  previous  data 
have  demonstrated that these scales are valid for understanding the organiza- 
tional  and  psychological  adjustment  of  Iranian  managers  as  well.  Moreover, 
the  empirical  usefulness  of  the  three  Hardiness  scales was  not  reducible  to 
more  general  psychological  traits  like  those  described  by  the  Five  Factor 
Model.  Perhaps  most  importantly,  therefore,  these  data  once  again  con- 
firmed  that  the  Hardiness  construct  has  a  relevance  which  extends  beyond 
the culture in which  it was developed. 

REFERENCES 

COHEN, S., KAMARACK, T.,  & MERMELSTEIN, R.  A.  (1983)  A  global  measure  of  perceived  stress. 

Journal of Health  and Social Psychology, 24, 355-396. 

COOPER, C., &WATT, M.  (1992)  Relax: dealing with stress. London:  BBC Book. 
COSTELLO, C. G., &COMREY, A.  L.  (1967)  Scales for  measuring  depression  and  anxiety. Journal 

of Psychology, 66, 303-3 13. 

GHORBANI, N.,  &WATSON, I? J.  (2004)  Two facets  of  self-knowledge, the five factor model,  and 

promotions  among Iranian managers. Social Behavior and Personality,  32, 769-776. 

GHORBANI, N., WATSON, I? J.,  &MORRIS, R. J.  (2000)  Personality, stress  and mental  health: evi- 
dence of  relationships  in  a sample of  Iranian  managers. Personality  and  Individual  Differ- 
ences, 28, 647-657. 

GOLDBERG, L.  R.  (1999)  A  broad-bandwidth, public  domain, personality  inventory measuring 
the lower-level facets  of  several five-factor models. In I. Mervielde,  I. Deary, F. De Fruyt, 


HARDINESS IN IRANIAN  MANAGERS 

781 

& F.  Ostendorf  (Eds.), Personality  psychology  in  Europe.  Vol.  7.  Tilburg,  The  Nether- 
lands: Tilburg Univer.  Press. Pp. 7-28. 

LEVENSON, H. (1973)  Multidimensional locus  of  control  in psychiatric  patients. Journal of  Con- 

sulttng  and  Clinical Psychology, 4 1, 397-404. 

MADDI, S. R.  (1997)  Personal  Views  Surve  : 11. A measure  of  dis  ositional  hardiness.  In  C. P. 
Zalaquett  & R. J.  Woods  (Eds.), ~ v a $ t i n ~  stress: a  book  of?esources.  New  York: Rowan 
& Littlefield.  Pp. 293-3 10. 

MADDI, S.  R.  (1998)  Creating  meaning  through  making  decisions. In  P. T. P. Wong  & P. S. 

Fry  (Eds.), The human quest for  meaning. Mahwah, NJ:  Erlbaum. Pp. 3-26. 

MADDI, S.  R.  (2002)  The story  of  hardiness: twenty  years  of  theorizing,  research,  and practice. 

Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research, 54, 175- 185. 

MADDI, S.  R.,  &KHOSHABA, D. M.  (1994)  Hardiness  and  mental  health. Journal of  Personality 

Assessment, 63, 265-274. 

PIEDMONT, R.  L.  (1999)  Does  s  irituality  represent  the  sixth  factor  of  personality?  Spiritual 

transcendence  and the five-Pactor model. Journal of Personality,  67, 985-1013. 

PIERCE, J.  L.,  GARDNER, D.  G.,  CUMMINGS, L.  L.,  & DUNHAM, R.  B.  (1989)  Organization-based 
self-esteem:  construct  definition,  measurement,  and  validation.  Academy  of  Management 
Journal, 32, 622-648. 

RATHUS, S. A.  (1973)  A 30-item schedule for  assessing assertive  behavior. Behavior  Therapy, 4, 

398-406. 

SPECTOR, I?  E.,  & JEX, S.  M.  (1998)  Development  of  four  self-report measures  of  job  stressors 
and strain: Interpersonal  Conflict  at Work  Scale, Organizational Constraints  Scale, Quan- 
titative  Workload  Inventory,  and  Physical  Symptoms  Inventory. Journal  of  Occupational 
Health  Psychology, 3, 356-367. 

WEISS, D. J.,  DAWIS, R.  V.,  ENGLAND, G. W.,  & LOFQUIST, L.  H.  (1967)  Manual  for  Minnesota 

Satisfaction  Questionnaire. Minnesota Studies in Vocational Rehabilitation,  22, 120. 

Accepted April  5, 2005. 

