  

  

Customer co-creation in service innovation: a 

matter of communication? 

  

  

Anders Gustafsson, Per Kristensson and Lars Witell 

  

  

Linköping University Post Print 

  

  

  

  

N.B.: When citing this work, cite the original article. 

  

  

  

Original Publication: 

Anders  Gustafsson,  Per  Kristensson  and  Lars  Witell,  Customer  co-creation  in  service 
innovation: a matter of communication?, 2012, Journal of Service Management, (23), 3, 311-
327. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/09564231211248426 
Copyright: Emerald 

http://www.emeraldinsight.com/ 

Postprint available at: Linköping University Electronic Press 

http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:liu:diva-86567 
 


CUSTOMER CO-CREATION IN 

SERVICE INNOVATION – A MATTER 

OF COMMUNICATION? 

 

 

 

Anders Gustafsson, Professor 

Service Research Center, Karlstad University 

SE-651 88 Karlstad, Sweden  

and 

BI – Norwegian School of Management,  

0442 Oslo, Norway 

Per Kristensson, Associate Professor 

Service Research Center, Karlstad University 

SE-651 88 Karlstad, Sweden  

Lars Witell, Professor 

Service Research Center, Karlstad University 

SE-651 88 Karlstad, Sweden  

and 

Linköping University,  

SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden 

 

 

 

 

 


Anders Gustafsson 

Anders  Gustafsson  is  Professor  of  Business  Administration  in  the  Service  Research  Center 
(www.ctf.kau.se) at Karlstad University, Sweden. Dr. Gustafsson also holds a part-time position as a 
Professor  at  BI  Norwegian  School  of  Business,  Norway.  He  is  conducting  research  on  customer 
orientation,  customer  satisfaction  and  loyalty,  new  service  development,  service  infusion  in 
manufacturing,  and  management  of  customer  relationships.  Dr.  Gustafsson  has published  more than 
150 academic articles, book chapters, and industry reports. He has published articles in journals such 
as Journal of Marketing, Journal of Economic Psychology, Journal of Business Research, and Journal 
of Service Research.  

Per Kristensson 

Per Kristensson is an Associate Professor in the CTF (Service Research Center) at Karlstad 
University, Sweden. His main research interests concern co-creation and, more specifically, the 
conditions within which users are able to contribute creative ideas to instigate service 
development. He has published a variety of articles on topics such as service development, 
consumer behavior and creativity. 
 

Lars Witell 

Dr.  Witell  is  Professor  at  the  Service  Research  Center  (CTF)  at  Karlstad  University,  Sweden.  He 
conducts  research  into  product  and  service  development,  customer  orientation,  service  infusion  in 
manufacturing,  and  quality  management.  He  has  written  about  50  book  chapters  and  papers  in 
scientific  journals,  e.g.  the  Quality  Management  Journal,  Managing  Service  Quality,  and  the 
International  Journal  of  Technology  Management.  Contact  information:  lars.witell@kau.se,  CTF-
Service Research Center, Karlstad University, SE-651 88 Karlstad, Sweden, Telephone: +46 54 700 
21 34.  

 

 

 


Customer Co-creation in Service Innovation – A Matter of Communication? 

Abstract 

Purpose – Customer co-creation is becoming increasingly popular among companies, and intensive 

communication with customers is generally seen as a determinant of the success of a new service or 

product. This study analyzes customer co-creation based on four dimensions of communication – 

frequency, direction, modality, and content – in order to understand the value of customer co-

creation in service innovation. One of the key aims of the study was to investigate whether all 

dimensions of customer co-creation have an effect on product and market success, and if the effect 

depends on the degree of innovativeness of a development project.    

Design/methodology/approach – The authors conducted a study including 334 managers with 

experience in new service and product development to examine how development projects applied 

customer co-creation in terms of communication in order to address future customer needs. Data 

was analyzed using PLS (partial least squares). The first analysis was performed with a sub-sample of 

207 development projects regarding incremental innovations. A subsequent analysis was performed 

with a sub-sample of 77 development projects on radical innovations. 

Findings – Three of the four dimensions of customer co-creation (frequency, direction, and content) 

have a positive and equally significant effect on product success when developing incremental 

innovations. For radical innovations, frequency has a positive effect and content has a negative 

significant effect on product success. These findings suggest that co-creation and innovation can be 

combined, but that the choice of methods for co-creation differs depending on whether incremental 

or radical innovations are developed. 

Originality/value –Despite a general consensus that co-creation with customers is beneficial, there is 

a lack of agreement regarding how and why. The present article addresses this shortcoming and 

shows that co-creation is largely about communicating with customers in order to understand their 

future needs. On the other hand, a company working on radical innovations may wish to limit 

customer input that is too concrete or solution based. 


Keywords Customer co-creation, Innovation, Service-Dominant Logic (SDL), Communication, Pro-

active market orientation. 

Paper type Research paper 

 

 


Introduction 

As early as the 18th century, Adam Smith (1776/2007) identified users as a great source of 

innovation: “One of the greatest improvements that has been made upon this machine [was] the 

discovery of a boy who wanted to save his own labour” (p. 14–15). Today, there are many examples 

of companies attempting to collaborate with their customers in what is commonly referred to as co-

creation (Lusch, et al., 2007) and viewing them as an important resource when developing new 

offerings (Prahalad and Ramaswamy, 2004). As Smith noted, an important reason for such attempts 

is that users have innovative ideas about future offerings (Kristensson et al., 2004). The key question 

is how companies should design their development processes to communicate with customers in 

order to gain access to future customer needs and ideas.  

Despite the general consensus that co-creation with customers is beneficial, there is a lack of 

agreement regarding how and why (Kristensson et al., 2008; Witell et al., 2011). When describing 

the essence of the service-dominant logic, Lusch et al. (2007) contended that co-creation with 

customers for the purpose of innovation is a foundational part of modern marketing, and that co-

creation involves “shared inventiveness” (p. 11). Prahalad and Ramaswamy (2004) concluded that 

“informed, networked, empowered, and active consumers are increasingly co-creating value with 

the firm” (p. 1). However, the specific actions and behaviors that make up co-creation have not yet 

been fully addressed (Witell et al., 2011). Gruner and Homburg (2000) and Lundkvist and Yakhlef 

(2004) argued that the process of communication and socially rich interactions with customers is 

one of the determinants for product success. Furthermore, Payne et al. (2006) reported that 

communication is an important element in a company’s ability to manage value co-creation. The 

research has this far focused predominantly on when to listen to customers (Gruner and Homburg, 

2000), rather than how companies should communicate with customers. Therefore, the present 

study focuses on the communication process between a company and its customers and how this 

process can improve product and market success. 


The purpose of the study is to gain a better understanding of customer co-creation in the 

development process; that is, co-creation for others (Witell et al., 2011). The study applied a four-

dimensional communication model that has previously been used to analyze marketing channel 

communication (Mohr and Nevin, 1990; Bonner, 2010). The four dimensions are frequency, 

direction, modality, and content. Although previous research has emphasized the importance of 

communication, both with customers and within companies (Gruner and Homburg, 2000; 

Gustafsson and Johnson, 1997; Joshi and Sharma, 2004), research that uses communication theories 

to gain a deeper understanding of customer co-creation has been sparse. The present study also 

looked at whether all dimensions of the communication model have an effect on product and 

market success or whether the effect depends on the degree of innovativeness (incremental/radical) 

of a development project.    

 

Service innovation 

Conceptual framework 

Gallouj and Weinstein (1997) viewed innovation in services as any change that affects one or 

more terms of one or more service characteristics. Such changes are brought about based on a 

number of operations, such as addition, subtraction, association, dissociation, or formatting (Gallouj 

and Savona, 2011). Based on this view, six modes of innovation can be identified: radical innovation, 

improvement innovation, incremental innovation, ad hoc innovation, recombinative innovation, and 

formalization innovation. In a similar vein, Michel et al. (2008) suggested that service innovation can 

be viewed as a change in the role of the customer and the value creation processes. An innovation is 

often manifested as a change in the competences of the company, the competences of the 

customer, the prerequisites of the offering, or what the customer co-creates. Both of these 

conceptualizations of service innovation are independent of the offering’s degree of tangibility, and 

adopt the role and value-creational processes of the customer as the focus of attention. 

Consequently, the key to succeeding with service and product development should be identifying 


and understanding the value-creational processes. This is the point of departure in this article and is 

developed further in the next section. 

The importance of value-creational processes 

Based on a service-dominant logic, a market offering is attractive if it captures the value-in-

context for a customer (Vargo et al., 2009). Therefore, the focus is not on the offering per se but on 

the customers’ value creation process, through which value for customers emerges (Grönroos, 

2000). Vargo et al. (2009) claimed that value is not created until the customer integrates and applies 

the resources of the service provider with other resources in their own context. Value is always 

contextually specific and determined by the customer or the beneficiary. Furthermore, Kotler (1977) 

argued that the importance of the market offering lies not so much in owning the products 

themselves as obtaining the services they render. Therefore, service is a perspective of value 

creation and virtually anything can be viewed as a service (Edvardsson et al., 2005). In line with this, 

the service-dominant logic defines co-production and co-creation as phenomena that are connected 

to the production and delivery of a service; in other words, how companies deal with their 

customers through customer participation in the joint creation of service value (Vargo and Lusch, 

2004).  

Previous research is clear regarding the difficulty of understanding value-creation processes 

(von Hippel, 1994). Von Hippel (1994) explained that customer value is “sticky information,” which 

means it is costly to transfer from one place to another because it is tacit (Luthje et al., 2005). 

Therefore, companies find it difficult to identify, understand, and adopt knowledge about the value-

creational processes that customers experience. It follows explicitly from the service-dominant logic 

that value-creation processes are inherently subjective and must be understood in relation to each 

specific time and place in which they occur (Lusch et al., 2007). Accordingly, companies have started 

to treat their customers as active collaborators when developing various offerings. This contrasts 

with the traditional view of customers as passive informants from whom information can be 

extracted by means of surveys or focus groups. In line with this, Witell et al. (2011) showed that new 


offerings developed through market research techniques based on customer co-creation are more 

profitable than those developed with traditional market research techniques. In order to understand 

this in a conceptual way, Narver et al. (2004) made a distinction between responsive and proactive 

market orientation. A responsive market orientation refers to a business’s attempt to understand 

and satisfy its customers’ expressed or spoken needs, whereas a proactive market orientation refers 

to attempts to discover, understand, and satisfy customers’ latent needs. Expressed needs may have 

either expressed or latent solutions.  

Narver et al. (2004) suggested that companies that apply a proactive market orientation 

work more closely with their customers. Proactive market orientation can be achieved by working 

closely with lead users or by conducting market experiments to discover future needs that are 

typically difficult to foresee or articulate (Jaworski et al. 2000; Slater and Narver, 1998; Atuahene-

Gima et al., 2005; Rogers, 1995). Witell et al. (2011) suggested that it is necessary to distinguish co-

creation for use from co-creation for others: customers perform co-creation for use for their own 

benefit, while co-creation for others is oriented towards other customers. Therefore, co-creation in 

the development process mainly concerns co-creation for others. Furthermore, given that it can be 

difficult to identify or express certain customer needs (Slater and Narver, 1998; Tyre and von Hippel, 

1997), the present article assumes that co-creation for others typically depends on opportunities for 

interaction and communication. Essentially, customer co-creation concerns different ways of 

communicating and interacting with customers and their context. 

Companies often know more about their solution to a certain problem than they do about 

the customer’s needs regarding the same problem. Companies should communicate with customers 

in the development process in order to understand how the solution can be applied to satisfy the 

customer’s needs (Ogawa, 1998). Cohen and Levinthal (1990) described what they refer to as 

“absorptive capacity” (the company’s capacity to assimilate customer needs) as a major challenge 

for companies developing new offerings. Morgan and Hunt (1994) found that cooperation with all 

parts of a network (including customers) is essential in order to create an attractive offering. Based 


on a literature review, Gruner and Homburg (2000) concluded that intensive communication with 

customers is generally considered to be a determinant of product success and that previous studies 

have provided a “limited insight into the interaction with customers.” The present article concludes 

that because value-creation processes are difficult to understand, it is essential to collaborate with 

customers during the development process. Companies must also know more about customer 

interaction; that is, the communication process involved in applying a collaborative process. 

 

Customer co-creation as communication and interaction with customers 

In the organizational communication literature, Mohr and Nevin (1990) established specific 

dimensions that influence the quality or richness of the communication. Bonner (2010) showed that 

the communication literature offers a novel and valuable opportunity to examine the quality of the 

communication in development processes, particularly with regard to need-related information that 

can be difficult to transfer from a customer to a company. Based on the organizational 

communication literature, Mohr and Nevin (1990) and Bonner (2010) analyzed the frequency, 

direction, modality, and content of marketing channel communication. The present article uses 

marketing channel communication as a framework to understand how customer co-creation during 

the development process results in a deeper understanding of customers’ needs. The underlying 

idea is that intense co-creation leads to higher product success; this is depicted in our conceptual 

model, shown in Figure 1.  

 

>> insert Figure 1 about here << 

The four dimensions result in an interactive communication climate that is more or less 

conducive to the learning, sharing, and understanding of customer needs. Frequent, bidirectional, 

face-to-face, and active communication is likely to enable bilateral trust and high-quality information 

exchange about customers’ needs. Active communication enables customers and companies to 

meet and exchange information regarding needs that might otherwise be difficult to express or 


transfer. In line with this, the present article defines customer co-creation as a frequent, 

bidirectional, and face-to-face communication process that is used when attempting creative 

problem solving. Consequently, passive co-creation is considered less beneficial for the outcome of 

the innovation and less frequent, unidirectional, electronic, and anonymous communication in which 

there is an uneven distribution of initiative and creativity. Therefore, it less beneficial for a 

development process.  

 

Development of hypotheses 

The hypotheses build on the framework presented in Mohr and Nevin (1990) and, more 

specifically, on the four dimensions developed in their article and their relationship to product 

success. The first dimension, frequency, refers to the amount of time that the involved parties used 

for communication. In the context of customer co-creation, frequency refers to such aspects as the 

amount of on-going feedback between a company and its customers. It may also concern the 

number of mutual experiments or the amount of iteration that takes place with customers during 

the development of a specific version of the offering within a development project (Cooper, 1996; 

Thomke, 2003). Frequency can also refer to the extent to which a learning process about customers’ 

needs occurs and leads to the generation of new ideas in a development project (Day, 1994; 

Matthing et al., 2004). Given the framework in Mohr and Nevin (1990), a relationship with a higher 

frequency of co-creation will probably result in an increased likelihood of product and market 

success. Accordingly, the first hypothesis is:  

 

H1: Customer co-creation characterized by high frequency will lead to increased product and market 

success. 

 

The second dimension of the communication process that characterizes co-creation regards 

direction. Direction refers to the democratic aspect of communication; namely, the extent to which 


one party exerts power over the other(s). This could apply to issues such as whether both parties 

take equal initiative to interact and assume approximately the same workload. With regard to 

customer co-creation, direction is believed to be important when it is difficult to estimate future 

customer usability (Hiltz et al., 1986; Mohr and Sohi, 1995). In other words, when it is difficult to 

foresee or imagine value-creation, there must be an even distribution of communication between 

parties in order to envision or understand future customer needs (Bonner, 2010). Furthermore, 

when there is an even distribution of communication and interaction, both parties can be expected 

to contribute to the end result, which should lead to more novel ideas (von Hippel, 2005). 

In sum, the present article assumes that democratic dialogue results in processes that are 

beneficial for the outcome of development processes. Because companies often take an overly 

dominating role, the second hypothesis states that more evenly distributed initiatives will lead to 

more beneficial outcomes of the development process. 

 

H2: Customer co-creation characterized by direction (that is, an evenly distributed two-way 

communication) will lead to increased product and market success.  

 

The third dimension, modality, refers to how information is transmitted. For example, it 

could apply to aspects of the communication process, such as whether the dialogue takes place face 

to face or whether it is possible to provide immediate feedback. It may also apply to the degree to 

which communication is focused on a specific recipient (Daft and Lengel, 1987). With regard to 

customer co-creation, modality refers to the extent to which communication takes place face to face 

or in other ways (such as electronically) and the extent to which a customer is given the opportunity 

to deal directly with critical aspects in a development project. This article implicitly assumes that 

electronic communication typically addresses many recipients. Research confirms that group 

decision making is hampered when it is done through electronic communication as compared to 

face-to-face communication (Hiltz et al., 1986). Also, when customers are excluded from any part of 


a development project, it is most likely to be the critical parts, for which customer input might have 

the greatest impact. The third hypothesis predicts that collaborative processes, such as face-to-face 

communication and openness in critical aspects of a project, will facilitate successful development of 

future services and products.  

 

H3: Customer co-creation characterized by high modality will lead to increased product and market 

success.  

 

The final dimension that characterizes customer co-creation regards content, or what is 

transmitted during communication (Mohr and Nevin, 1990). In the context of co-creation between a 

company and its customers, content can relate to whether the focus is on customer needs and 

difficulties related to value-creation. On the other hand, customers may sometimes be invited to 

companies with the purpose of strengthening the relationship rather than improving the outcome of 

the development processes. This article focuses on whether companies enable customers to share 

their inventiveness at the locations where their needs are most likely to be present in the future 

(that is, without trying to determine them in a superficial laboratory, for example). The reason for 

this is related to the frequently documented difficulty of expressing needs (von Hippel, 1994; 

Morrison et al., 2000, Ulwick, 2004). It is assumed that latent needs are more easily detected if a 

search is conducted at the same time as the user experiences them (Kristensson et al., 2004). 

Hypothesis 4 predicts that new offerings will be more successful if they account for needs that have 

been identified from use experiences (Magnusson et al., 2010; Edvardsson et al., 2012). In addition, 

if customer inventiveness is shared at the location where needs are present, then other resources 

that are typically used in combination with the company’s potential solution will increase the 

likelihood of customer needs being fully understood (Luthje et al., 2005). This, in turn, should lead to 

product and market success (Lusch et al., 2007). The fourth hypothesis is formulated as follows: 

 


H4: Customer co-creation that focuses on content related to context will lead to increased product 

and market success. 

 

One issue is whether all dimensions of customer co-creation have an effect on product 

success in all kinds of development projects, or whether the effect depends on the degree of 

innovativeness of a development project. Based on the literature on customer co-creation for 

others, it is difficult to identify any research suggesting that active participation of customers in a 

development project would have any negative influence on product success. However, the present 

study has identified four separate dimensions of co-creation, and it is possible that a single 

dimension could have a negative effect on product success. Gruner and Homburg’s (2000) study of 

the relationship between customer interaction and product success throughout the development 

process in the German machine industry concluded that customer interaction is related to NPD 

success in some phases (idea generation, concept development, prototype testing, and market 

launch), but not in others (project definition and engineering). This line of research suggests that 

customer interaction could be beneficial for certain activities, but not for others. However, Gruner 

and Homburg’s study does not provide any guidance regarding how the degree of innovativeness 

would influence the effect of customer co-creation on product success. Therefore, the present study 

assumes that all the dimensions of customer co-creation should be beneficial for the innovation 

process. 

 

Sample 

Method 

The empirical data was collected through a paper-based survey sent to the service or 

product development managers of certain European companies, selected from an externally 

purchased database. It was not possible to screen companies in advance to determine which 

companies had a development organization. Accordingly, managers were asked to participate only if 


their organization conducted development projects. If the companies were unable to participate in 

the survey, perhaps because they did not conduct NSD or because the person included in the sample 

no longer was with the company, they were asked to notify either the data collection company or 

the researchers. These companies, which constituted 16.4 percent of the respondents for the total 

sample, were then removed from the sample. Reminders were sent to non-respondents one and 

two weeks after the initial mailing. The procedure yielded a response rate of usable responses of 

20.0 percent. Following the procedure recommended by Armstrong and Overton (1977), the tests 

indicated that there were no statistically significant differences between early and late respondents 

in terms of the survey data. 

A total of 334 companies sent usable responses. Complete data was obtained for 

manufacturing and service companies in industries such as the machine industry, pulp and paper, 

fabricated metal goods, machinery and equipment, renting and real estate, construction services, 

consumer services, and business services. All questions in the survey, including those regarding 

activities and performance, were asked at the project level. The respondents categorized all projects 

as improvements, incremental innovations, or radical innovations. The main research question in 

this article concerns customer co-creation in projects described as incremental innovations. The 

analysis of co-creation for incremental innovation resulted in a main analysis of a sub-sample of 207 

development projects. Separate analyses were then performed for the different categories of 

projects because the four dimensions of customer co-creation were observed to behave differently. 

Having established a model that behaved consistently for incremental innovations, a simplified 

analysis was carried out for the 77 projects that were classified as radical innovations.  

 

Measures and Descriptive Statistics 

The survey instrument was developed on the basis of previous research and existing 

research instruments. Twenty items were used to operationalize the six latent constructs that 

covered customer co-creation, product success, and market success. Each item was scored on a 10-


point scale that ranged from “completely disagree” to “completely agree” (except for a section 

containing descriptive categorizations of the organization and the development projects).  

Theory guided the item selection and generation for the four dimensions of customer co-

creation. Appendix 1 describes the scales that were used, as well as the mean values, standard 

deviations, and loadings for each item. As Appendix 1 also shows, frequency and content were 

operationalized as four-item constructs, while direction and modality were operationalized as three-

item constructs. Business performance was measured by two scales developed by Song and Perry 

(1997a; 1997b) that captured the product and market success of the innovation. Specifically, market 

success was measured by a three-item scale that assessed the market share of the offering relative 

to competitor’s offerings and the firm’s own offering (Song and Perry, 1997a; 1997b). The study’s 

constructs for product and market success were measured indirectly by asking the management of 

the participating organizations. Research into companies and business units of large companies 

commonly uses subjective measures of performance. 

 

Analysis 

 

The strong correlations between many of the communication practices that organizations 

use can obscure the relationships between practices and performance. Structural equation modeling 

and, especially, partial least squares (PLS) are well suited to handling such situations (Steenkamp and 

van Trijp, 1996). Whereas the aim of the competing structural equation modeling approach 

(covariance structure analysis) is to explain covariance, the objective of PLS is to explain variance in 

the endogenous variables; this makes it the most suitable method for the purpose of this research. 

In addition, small sample sizes and different measurement scales were used for subsequent analyses 

(for the control variables), and PLS is the structural equation approach that best handles these 

challenges (Bagozzi and Yi, 1994). PLS is an estimation procedure that integrates aspects of principal-

components analysis with multiple regression (Wold, 1982). The procedure extracts the first 

principle component from each subset of measures for the various latent constructs and uses these 


principle components within a system of regression models. The algorithm then adjusts the 

principle-component weights to maximize the predictive power of the model. 

All constructs were modeled using reflective indicators; that is, indicators were created 

based on the assumption that they all reflect the same underlying phenomenon (Chin, 1998). 

Jackknife estimates were generated in order to evaluate the significance of the paths in the model 

(Chin, 1998). Jackknifing generally involves deleting every nth case or observation, estimating the 

model parameters, and then repeating this sample-resample procedure in order to generate a set of 

standard errors for the model parameters (Efron and Tibshirani, 1993). Simple t-statistics were then 

computed in order to determine whether the parameters are different from zero. Following Tukey’s 

guidelines, five percent of the sample was removed during the re-sampling procedure, which 

resulted in 20 sub-samples per model. 

 

 

>> Insert Table 1 about here << 

The Average Variance Extracted (AVE) method was used to check the validity of the model 

(Fornell and Larcker, 1981). The AVE measures the amount of variance captured by the constructs in 

relation to the amount of variance due to measurement error (Fornell and Cha, 1994). To ensure 

discriminant validity of the constructs, the AVEs of the latent variables should be greater than the 

square of the correlations among the latent variables (Chin, 1998). In PLS, this comparison is made 

using the correlation matrix of the latent constructs, where the diagonal elements are replaced by 

the square root of the computed AVEs. Higher values for the diagonal elements compared to the off-

diagonal elements suggest good discriminant validity. As Table 1 shows, this is the case for the 

model, which ensures that the model shows good discriminant validity. 

Two control variables were introduced in the model: the size of the business unit (scale = 1–

4, mean value = 3.19, std = 0.69) and the experience of the respondent. Experience was measured by 

two variables: experience with development projects (mean = 12.14 years, std = 8.23) and the length 


of time the respondent has been with the company (mean = 13.46 years, std = 9.24). The results 

were equal or very similar to those from before the control variables were added. Consequently, it 

was concluded that the model for incremental innovation had good validity and generalizability.  

 

Results 

The proposed model was estimated using PLS across companies. The first step in assessing 

the measurement models was to test the reliability of each measured variable to ensure that the 

measurement variables (MVs) applied accurately to their related constructs. Overall, the MV 

loadings were all relatively large and positive. As the appendix shows, most of the loadings exceeded 

the recommended threshold value of 0.707 (Hulland, 1999). However, the standard research 

practice is to keep the item in the analysis if the loading exceeds 0.5, as long as there is a good 

theoretical reason for doing so. In this case, the fact that the study built on established scales for 

market success made it appropriate to keep all measures in this scale. Figure 2 presents the results 

of the analysis. All but one of the paths are significant (using adjusted t-tests and p< 0.05). The 

significant path coefficients were 0.150 for frequency, 0.165 for direction, and 0.205 for content. The 

non-significant path is modality. Although the model behaved well for incremental innovations, we 

also wanted to apply a similar model to a data set that covered development projects of radical 

innovations. 

 

>> insert Figure 2 about here << 

Revisiting the model for radical innovations 

As mentioned in the method section, the model in Figure 2 is based on data from projects 

that developed incremental innovations. In addition, the original data set had 77 responses that 

covered projects on radical innovation. The exact same model as the one illustrated in Figures 1 and 

2 and operationalized as described in the appendix was applied to this data. The result was that 

three of the latent variables – direction, modality, and content – had mixed signs among the 


indicators (-/+), which means that the underlying indicators do not belong to the same latent 

variable and that it is uncertain what is really being measured. To resolve this, the indicators with 

the lowest weight in the model and an opposing sign to the others were omitted. This resulted in a 

model with two indicators for all three of the mentioned latent variables, while frequency was 

intact. Of course, this indicates that the model does not work particularly well for radical 

innovations, which is a result in itself. The implication for the dysfunctional model is that the 

communication process – and therefore co-creation – is different for radical innovations than for 

incremental innovations. 

The model for radical innovations produced two significant paths (using adjusted t-tests), 

frequency (0.336, p< 0.05), and content (-0.246, p< 0.05). The results indicate that companies should 

interact frequently with their customers; this is similar to the findings in the case of incremental 

innovations. The path coefficient for content is negative, which indicates that customers should not 

be too highly involved in developing the actual content of radical innovations.  

Discussion 

This article has looked at customer co-creation as a communication process that is frequent, 

bidirectional, and face-to-face when attempting creative problem solving (that is, innovation). From 

such a perspective, communication and interaction are among the most important aspects of co-

creation to achieve product and market success. This research applied a model from research on 

market channel communication in order to understand the impact that different aspects of 

customer co-creation have on product and market success. The four different dimensions, which 

originated from research by Mohr and Nevin (1990) and Bonner (2010), were frequency, direction, 

modality, and content.  

The results of the present study contribute to a deeper understanding of why new offerings 

developed through market research techniques based on co-creation with customers are more 

profitable than those developed with traditional market research techniques (Witell et al., 2011). For 

development projects that aim to achieve incremental innovations, three dimensions of customer 


co-creation were equally important for product and market success. Good results from co-creation 

with customers are generally caused by frequency, direction, and content. This means that a 

company can improve the results of a development project by spending more time communicating 

with customers. This communication should be democratic; that is, the communication should be 

between two parties of equal power and should focus on specific types of content during 

communication. In addition, the study’s results support the theory that the way in which information 

is exchanged between the customer and the company does not explain why co-creation with 

customers performs better than traditional market research techniques. One explanation of this 

result is that the ability to interact with customers through social media and discussion panels on the 

Internet has enabled companies to get to know their customers without face-to-face interaction.  

From a managerial perspective, this suggests that it is beneficial when working with 

incremental innovation to spend time with customers, or in other words, become immersed in the 

customer’s context as much as possible (Gustafsson and Johnson, 2003). Examples of this can be 

found within the hospitality industry, where understanding of customer choice has been found to 

significantly facilitate service innovation (Victorino et al., 2005). The finding also suggests that 

treating customers as more equal partners in the process increases the chances of product and 

market success. Therefore, companies must open up their organization to a larger extent, which can 

be quite a challenge (Olson and Bakke, 2001). Companies should create dialogues with customers 

during the value co-creation process and meet and communicate with customers in the customers’ 

own environment or through various media, such as social media. The findings also corroborate 

those of previous studies in that information involving customer contexts or the transfer of sticky 

information is important in the development process. The results point toward the need for 

increased understanding of the circumstances surrounding the customers’ value-creation processes 

or value-in-context. Employees, whether front-line or elsewhere in the organization, must 

communicate with customers in order to understand the experiences that create value for them; 


otherwise, they will lose their capacity to generate ideas for the next generation of offerings that will 

serve their customers.  

However, the communication process of co-creation for radical innovations seems to behave 

quite differently in that the four suggested dimensions are not entirely applicable in the same way 

for radical innovation as they are for incremental innovation. The different dimensions in the 

communication process behave differently in the two conditions, which suggests that companies 

must apply different communication strategies in co-creation depending on the degree of 

innovativeness of a development project.  The two dimensions that are significant in radical 

innovation are frequency (positive) and content (negative). Direction and modality did not have a 

significant impact on product success. This implies that companies should learn from customers 

through frequent contact, which is the same as in the case of incremental innovations. However, 

companies should not be overly concerned with suggestions of the content of a potential new 

offering. Radical solutions can often be considered unthinkable in advance, which can make radical 

solutions hard to imagine, but customers know a good idea when they see and use it. Customers 

create solutions based on their previous experiences of usage of different products or services, 

which makes it difficult to suggest solutions that are truly radically. 

An example of this point is Apple, which is a leader in terms of offering value-creating radical 

innovations. In a recent article on co-creation, an Apple designer said, “At Apple we don’t waste our 

time asking users, we build our brand through creating great products we believe people will love” 

(Skibstedt and Bech Hansen, 2011). The demand for something fundamentally new is completely 

unpredictable. Even users themselves have no idea whether they will like an entirely new product 

before they start using it (and perhaps then only after years of use). Still, if radical innovations are to 

succeed, there must be latent customer needs connected to the new solution. The only way a 

company can form an opinion about the validity of this match between latent need and solution is to 

spend time with its customers generating knowledge about the context-specific sticky information, 

which may require a different tool set for companies (Witell et al., 2011). 


 

Limitations 

The respondents in this study came from a wide variety of companies and industries. Some of the 

companies can be categorized as pure service companies, some as pure goods companies, and some 

as a combination. It does not matter whether the media of delivering value is goods- or service-

based when it comes to communication regarding innovation with customers. Also, there is a trend 

among goods-based companies to generate more of their business on delivering services to their 

customers. This is sometimes expressed as the service infusion in manufacturing (Gustafsson, Brax, 

and Witell, 2010). In a similar vein, service-based companies are trying to become more product-like 

when delivering value to their customers. This is often accomplished using technology, and it is 

possible to talk about technology infusion into service (Edvardsson et al., 2000). The implication is 

that most companies have a mixture of tangible and intangible offerings and type of industry does 

not discriminate well if the innovation is service- or goods-based. Consequently, this study has 

adhered to the service-dominant logic (Vargo and Lusch, 2004) and viewed all companies as service 

companies.  

Furthermore, it was not possible to use exactly the same measurement model in both 

conditions (radical versus incremental innovations), which implies that the communication processes 

are simply too different. The main focus of this article was to understand the communication 

process for incremental innovations.  Consequently, the model for radical innovation is not as robust 

as the one for incremental innovations. 

References 

Armstrong, J.S. and Overton, T.S. (1977), “Estimating non-response bias in mail surveys”, Journal of 

Marketing Research, Vol. 14 No. 3, pp. 396–402. 

Atuahene-Gima, K., Stanley, S.F. and Olson, E.M. (2005), “The contingent value of responsive and 

proactive market orientations for new product program performance”, Journal of Product 

Innovation Management, Vol. 22 No. 6, pp. 464–482. 


Bagozzi, R. P. and Yi, Y. (1994), “Advanced topics in structural equation models”, in Bagozzi, R. P. 

(ed.), Advanced Methods of Marketing Research, Blackwell pp. 1–52. 

Bonner, J.M. (2010), “Customer interactivity and new product performance: Moderating effects of 

product newness and product embeddedness”, Industrial Marketing Management, Vol. 39 

No. 3, pp. 485–492. 

 Chin, W.W. (1998), “The partial least squares approach to structural equation modeling”, in 

Marcoulides, G.A. (Ed.), Modern Methods for Business Research, LEA, Mahwah, NJ. 

Cohen,  W.M. and Levinthal, D.A. (1990), “Absorptive capacity: a new perspective on learning and 

innovation”, Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 35 No. 1, pp. 128–152. 

Cooper, R.G. (1996), “Overhauling the new product process”, Industrial Marketing Management, 

Vol. 25 No. 6, pp. 465–482.  

Daft, R.L. and Lengel, R.H. (1986), “Organizational information requirements: media richness and 

structural design”, Management Science, Vol. 32 No. 5, pp. 554–571. 

Day, G. S. (1994). “The capabilities of market-driven organizations”. Journal of Marketing, Vol. 56, 

No. 5, pp. 37–52. 

Edvardsson, B., Kristensson, P., Magnusson, P. and Sundstrom, E. (2012), “Customer integration 

within service development—A review of methods and an analysis of insitu and exsitu 

contributions”, Technovation (in press).  

Edvardsson, B., Gustafsson, A., Johnson, M.D., and Sandén, B. (2000), New Service Development in 

the New Economy, Studenlitteratur, Lund 

Edvardsson, B., Gustafsson, A. and Roos, I. (2005), “Service portrays and service constructions – A 

critical review through the lens of the customer”, International Journal of Service Industry 

Management, Vol. 16 No. 1, pp. 107–121. 

Efron, B. and Tibshirani, R.J. (1993), An Introduction to the Bootstrap, Chapman & Hall, London. 

Fornell, C. and Cha, J. (1994), “Partial least squares”, in R. P. Bagozzi (Ed.), Advanced Methods of 

Marketing Research, Blackwell, Cambridge, MA, pp. 52–78. 


Fornell, C. and Larcker, D. (1981), “Evaluating structural equation models with unobservable 

variables and measurement error”, Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 18 No. 1, pp. 39–50. 

Gallouj, F. and Weinstein, O. (1997), “Innovation in services”, Research Policy, Vol. 26, No. 4–5, pp. 

537–556. 

Gallouj, F. and Savona, M. (2011), “Towards a theory if innovation in services: a state of the art”, in 

Gallouj, F. and Djellal, F. (eds.), The Handbook of Innovation and Services, Edward Elgar 

Publishing Inc., Northampton, US. 

Gruner, K.E., and Homburg, C. (2000), “Does customer interaction enhance new product success?” 

Journal of Business Research, Vol. 49 No. 1, pp. 1–14. 

Grönroos, C. (2000), “Service Management and Marketing: A Customer Relationship Management 

Approach”, John Wiley & Co, London. 

Gustafsson, A. Brax, S., and Witell, L. (2010), Setting a research agenda for service business in 

manufacturing industries, Journal of Service Management, Volume 21, Issue 5, pp. 557–563. 

Gustafsson, A. and Johnson, M.D. (1997), “Bridging the quality-satisfaction gap”, Quality 

Management Journal, Vol. 4 No. 1, pp. 27–43. 

Gustafsson, A. and Johnson, M.D. (2003), Competing in a Service Economy: How to Create a 

Competitive Advantage through Service Development and Innovation, Jossey-Bass, San 

Francisco, CA.  

Hiltz, R.S., Johnson, K. and Turoff, M. (1986), “Experiments in group decision making communication 

process and outcome in face-to-face versus computerized conferences”, Human 

Communication Research, Vol. 13 No. 2, pp. 225–252. 

Hulland, J., (1999), “Use of partial least squares (PLS) in strategic management research: a review of 

four recent studies”, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 20, pp. 195–204. 

Jaworski, B.J., Kohli, A.K. and Sahay, A. (2000), “Market-driven versus driving markets”, Journal of the 

Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 28 No. 1, pp. 45–54. 


Joshi, A.W. and Sharma, S. (2004), “Customer knowledge development: Antecedents and impact on 

new product performance”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 68, No. 1 pp. 47–59. 

Kotler, P. (1977), Marketing Management: Analysis, Planning, Implementation, and Control, Prentice 

Hall, Upper Saddle River.  

Kristensson, P., Gustafsson, A. and Archer, T. (2004), “Harnessing the creative potential among 

users”, Journal of Product Innovation Management, Vol. 21 No. 1, pp. 4–14. 

Kristensson, P., Matthing, J. and Johansson, N. (2008), “Key strategies for the successful involvement 

of customers in the co-creation of new technology-based services”, Journal of Service 

Management, Vol. 19 No. 4, 475–491. 

Lusch, R.F., Vargo, S.L. and O’Brien, M. (2007), “Competing through service: Insights from service-

dominant logic”, Journal of Retailing, Vol. 83 No. 1, pp. 5–18. 

Lundkvist, A., and Yakhlef, A., (2004), “Customer involvement in new service development”, 

Managing Service Quality, Vol. 14 No. 2/3, pp. 249–257. 

Luthje,  C., Herstatt, C. and von Hippel, E. (2005), “User-innovators and ‘local’ information: The case 

of mountain biking”, Research Policy, Vol. 34 No. 6, August, pp. 951–965. 

Magnusson, P., Kristensson, P. and Hipp, C. (2010), “Exploring the ideation patterns of ordinary 

users”, International Journal of Product Development, Vol. 11 No. 3/4, pp. 289–309. 

 Matthing, J., Sandén, B. and Edvardsson, B. (2004), “New service development: Learning from and 

with customers”, International Journal of Service Industry Management, Vol. 15, No. 5, pp. 

479–498. 

Michel, S., Brown, S. W. and Gallan, A. (2008), “An expanded and strategic view of discontinuous 

innovations: deploying a service–dominant logic”, Journal of the Academy of Marketing 

Science, Vol. 36, No. 1, pp. 54–66. 

Mohr, J. and Nevin, J. (1990), “Communication strategies in marketing channels: A theoretical 

perspective”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 50 No. 1, pp. 36–51. 


Mohr, J. and Sohi R.S, (1995), “Communication flows in distribution channels: Impact on assessments 

of communication quality and satisfaction”, Journal of Retailing, Vol. 71, No. 4, pp. 393–415. 

Morgan, R.M. and Hunt, S.D. (1994), “The commitment-trust theory of relationship marketing”, 

Journal of Marketing, Vol. 58 No. 3, pp. 20–38. 

Morrison, P.D., Roberts, J.H. and von Hippel, E. (2000), “Determinants of user innovation and 

innovation sharing in a local market”, Management Science, 46 No. 12, pp. 1513–1527. 

Narver, J.C., Slater, S.F. and MacLachlan, D.L. (2004), “Responsive and proactive market orientation 

and new product success”, Journal of Product Innovation Management, Vol. 21 No. 5, pp. 

334–347. 

Ogawa, S., (1998), “Does sticky information affect the locus of innovation? Evidence from the 

convenience-store industry”, Research Policy, Vol. 26, No. 7/8, pp. 777–790. 

Olson, E.L. and Bakke, G.  (2001). “Implementing the lead user method in a high technology firm: A 

longitudinal study of intentions versus actions”, Journal of Product Innovation Management, 

Vol. 18 No. 2, pp. 388–395. 

Payne, A.F., Storbacka, K. and Frow, P. (2008), “Managing the co-creation of value”, Journal of the 

Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 36 No. 1, pp. 83–96.  

Prahalad, C.K., and Ramaswamy, V. (2004), The Future of Competition: Co-Creating Unique Value 

with Customers, Harvard Business School Press, Boston. 

Rogers, E.M., (1962; 1995), Diffusion of Innovations (3rd Ed.), The Free Press, New York. 

Skibstedt, J. and Bech Hansen, R. (2011), “User-led Innovation can’t create breakthroughs; Just ask 

Apple and IKEA”, available at:  http://www.fastcodesign.com/1663220/user-led-innovation-

cant-create-breakthroughs-just-ask-apple-and-ikea (accessed 7 September 2011).  

Slater, S.F. and Narver, J.C. (1998), “Customer-led and market-oriented: Let’s not confuse the two”, 

Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 19 No. 10, pp. 1001–1006. 

Smith, A. (2007, originally published 1776), An inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of 

nations, Cosimo Classics, USA.  


Steenkamp, J.E.M. and van Trijp, H.C.M. (1996), “Quality guidance: A consumer-based approach to 

food quality improvement using partial least squares”, European Review of Agricultural 

Economics, Vol. 23, No. 2, pp. 195–215. 

Song, X.M. and Parry, M.E. (1997a), “A cross-national comparative study of new product 

development processes: Japan and the United States,” Journal of Marketing, Vol. 61, No. 2 pp. 

1–19. 

Song, X.M. and Parry, M.E. (1997b), “The determinants of Japanese new product successes”, Journal 

of Marketing Research, Vol. 34 No. 1, pp. 64–76. 

Thomke, S. (2003), Experimentation Matters, Harvard Business School Press, USA. 

Tyre, M.J. and von Hippel, E. (1997), “The situated nature of adaptive learning in organizations”, 

Organization Science, Vol. 8 No. 1, pp. 71–83. 

Ulwick, A. (2002), “Turn customer input into innovation”, Harvard Business Review, Vol. 80 (January), 

91–97.  

 Vargo, S.L., Morgan, F.W., Akaka, M. and He, Y. (2009), “The service-dominant logic of marketing: A 

review and assessment”, Review of Marketing Research, Vol. 6 No. 1, pp. 125–167. 

Vargo, S.L., and Lusch, R.F. (2004), “Evolving to a new dominant logic for marketing”, Journal of 

Marketing, Vol. 68 No. 1, pp. 1–17. 

Victorino, L., Verma, R., Plaschka, G., and Dev, C. (2005), “Service innovation and customer choices in 

the hospitality industry”, Managing Service Quality, Vol. 15, No. 6, pp. 555–576.  

von Hippel, E., (2005). Democratizing Innovation, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 

von Hippel, E., (1994), “‘Sticky information’ and the locus of problem solving: Implications for 

innovation”, Management Science, Vol. 40 No. 4, pp. 429–439. 

Witell, L., Kristensson, P. Gustafsson, A., and Löfgren, M. (2011), “Idea generation: customer co-

creation versus traditional market research techniques,” Journal of Service Management, Vol. 

22 No. 2, pp. 140–159. 


Wold, H., (1982), “Systems under indirect observation using PLS”, in Fornell, C. (Ed.), Second 

Generation of Multivariate Analysis Methods, Praeger, New York. 

 

 


 

Frequency  Direction  Modality 

Content 

Product 

Market 

success 

success 

Frequency 

0.80 

 

Direction 

0.39 

0.72 

 

 

Modality 

0.40 

0.57 

0.83 

 

 

 

Content 

0.52 

0.45 

0.65 

0.81 

 

 

 

 

Product 

0.32 

0.31 

0.27 

0.34 

0.88 

success 

 

 

 

 

 

Market 

0.34 

0.31 

0.26 

0.38 

0.78 

0.85 

success 

 

Table 1. Assessment of the validity of the model (AVE). 

 

 

 

 


Frequency 

Direction 

Modality 

Content 

Product 
success 

Market 
success 

Figure 1. Conceptual model. 

 

 

 


Frequency 

Direction 

0.150 

0.165 

Modality 

-0.025 

0.205 

Content 

 

Product 
success 

0.779 

Market 
success 

 

Figure 2. Conceptual model with results for incremental innovations. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Frequency 

Loadings  Mean 

Standard deviation 

Appendix I 

Ongoing feedback from customers 

Many ideas were tested 

Multiple experiments 

Learning process of customer needs 

Direction 

Communication and interaction leading to novel ideas 

To reduce lead time, we have focused on collaboration 

Open innovation system 

Modality 

We solve critical aspects together with customers 

A high degree of face-to-face communication 

Customer suggest solutions to problems 

Content 

Active customer involvement 

Customers were involved early in the development process 

Inspired by customer settings to generate ideas 

Used customer feedback 

Product Success 

Sales volume 

Overall profitability 

Profitability compared to goal 

Market Success 

Market share compared to other own products 

Market share compared to competitors 

Market share compared to goals 

 

 

0.71 

0.80 

0.83 

0.86 

0.82 

 

0.73 

0.61 

0.82 

 

0.90 

0.78 

0.84 

 

0.81 

0.83 

0.77 

0.88 

 

0.88 

0.89 

0.92 

 

0.91 

0.68 

5.20 

5.18 

4.99 

4.42 

4.92 

 

6.49 

2.40 

4.43 

 

4.45 

5.17 

5.05 

 

4.40 

6.88 

6.69 

6.14 

 

6.22 

6.33 

6.09 

 

6.57 

6.38 

2.97 

2.70 

2.88 

2.60 

2.61 

 

2.50 

1.91 

2.76 

 

2.91 

2.88 

2.95 

 

2.88 

2.62 

2.59 

1.97 

 

1.94 

2.09 

2.03 

 

1.99 

2.75 

