PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY
2011, 64, 315–350

THE IMPACT OF MOTIVATION, EMPOWERMENT, AND
SKILL-ENHANCING PRACTICES ON AGGREGATE
VOLUNTARY TURNOVER: THE MEDIATING EFFECT
OF COLLECTIVE AFFECTIVE COMMITMENT

TIMOTHY M. GARDNER

Owen Graduate School of Management

Vanderbilt University

PATRICK M. WRIGHT

Cornell University

LISA M. MOYNIHAN
London Business School

This study advances research on macro human resource management by
examining collective commitment as a mediator of motivation, empow-
erment, and skill-enhancing practices and aggregate voluntary turnover.
Findings from 20 top HR managers and 1,748 employees in 93 different
job groups suggest collective affective commitment independently me-
diates the negative relationships between motivation and empowerment-
enhancing practices and aggregate voluntary turnover. Human resource
practices functioning to enhance the knowledge, skills, and abilities
of the workforce are positively associated with voluntary turnover but
are not mediated by collective affective commitment. Functionally, this
paper resolves the divergent thinking of 4 streams of research regard-
ing HR practices, collective commitment and aggregate turnover. The
implications for macro-HRM theory and practice are discussed.

After thousands of published studies, voluntary turnover remains a rel-
evant and interesting topic of study for organizational scholars. Although
the vast majority of these studies examine the question of why individu-
als voluntarily leave organizations (Maertz & Campion, 2004), another,
less studied approach treats turnover as a collective rather than individual
phenomenon (Shaw, Duffy, Johnson, & Lockhart, 2005). In addition to
individual turnover decisions, managers are also interested in reducing the
aggregate turnover rates of the groups, business units, and organizations
they manage (Boorstin, 2005). In fact, aggregate voluntary turnover rates

This research was supported by a grant from the Center for Advanced Human Resource
Studies at Cornell University, Ithaca, NY. Thanks to the participants and discussants of
the 2007 Human Capital Conference hosted by the Wharton School for suggestions and
improvements.

Lisa M. Moynihan passed away on October 7, 2007. She was a fantastic colleague, a

friend to all, and is sorely missed.

Correspondence and requests for reprints should be addressed to Timothy M. Gardner

401 21st Ave. South Nashville, TN 37203615-343-2408; tim.gardner@vanderbilt.edu.
C(cid:2) 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

315


316

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

have become metrics executives track on a par with productivity, cus-
tomer satisfaction, and shrinkage as measures of overall organizational
effectiveness (Glebbeek & Bax, 2004; Shaw et al., 2005).

The macro human resource management research stream was born out
of the belief that how an organization manages its people is linked to its
performance. A growing body of empirical evidence built on increasingly
rigorous methodology suggests human resource systems affect individ-
ual, group, and organizational outcomes (Combs, Liu, Hall, & Ketchen,
2006). One of the key assumptions of this research stream is that because
organizations cannot “own” human capital like they can exert ownership
control over other assets (Coff, 1997), the main way ﬁrms can use human
resource systems to gain a competitive advantage is to reduce voluntary
turnover (Delery & Shaw, 2001). Thus this study, by focusing on aggregate
voluntary turnover, provides insights into how ﬁrms manage a critically
important performance outcome.

HR Practices and Aggregate Voluntary Turnover

The relationship between HR practices and voluntary turnover has
been a topic of interest for a number of researchers. Although a cursory
examination of this literature suggests that consensus exists regarding the
nature of this relationship, a more detailed analysis reveals signiﬁcant
disagreement. Four prominent research streams draw four very differ-
ent conclusions about the association between HR practices and aggre-
gate voluntary turnover. One camp asserts the relationship is direct and
unmediated (Becker & Huselid, 1998; Dyer & Reeves, 1995; Huselid,
1995). A second stream of work suggests that collective commitment me-
diates the relationship between HR systems and aggregate turnover but
does not theoretically develop or test the assertion (Way, 2002; Wilson
& Peel, 1991). The third camp includes papers that advance the idea that
“commitment-based” (Arthur, 1994, p. 672) or “commitment-inducing”
(Batt, 2002, p. 589) HR practices increase employee commitment and
thus reduce aggregate turnover but formally hypothesize and test only
the unmediated association between HR practices and aggregate turnover.
Finally, a fourth group of papers, grounded in efﬁciency wage theory
(Schlicht, 1978), suggest that employees stay when HR practices increase
utility and depart when utility is decreased (Batt, Colvin, & Keefe, 2002;
Leonard, 1987; Shaw, Delery, Jenkins, & Gupta, 1998) but do not test the
mediating mechanisms.

This dissensus leads to different conclusions and limits theoretical
development within this research space. The “direct effect” and “unde-
veloped mediation” streams (ﬁrst and second streams above) suggest that
greater use of HR practices monotonically leads to a reduction in aggregate
voluntary turnover, whereas the “commitment-enhancing practices” and


TIMOTHY M. GARDNER ET AL.

317

“efﬁciency wage theory” streams (third and fourth streams above) suggest
that, depending on their commitment/utility composition, bundles of HR
practices may be positively, negatively, or not associated with turnover.
The “direct effect” stream encourages succeeding researchers to explore
only the moderators of the HR-voluntary turnover relationship while the
remaining three streams suggest the possibility of more complex medi-
ating effects. The studies in which mediation is proposed but not tested
(second and third streams) can mislead scholars into thinking mediation
has been empirically established. Both Way (2002) and Arthur (1994)
have been cited as demonstrating that commitment acts as a mediator
at least once each (Coff, 1997, p. 389; Pare & Tremblay, 2007, p. 333).
Finally, none of these research streams fulﬁll two of the principal aims of
mediation theorizing and analysis: (a) explaining and demonstrating the
process by which HR practices inﬂuence aggregate voluntary turnover,
and (b) strengthening statistical conclusion validity that the observed as-
sociation between the independent and dependent variables is not merely
spurious (MacKinnon, Fairchild, & Fritz, 2007).

An analysis of the concept of “HR practices” adds to this potential
confusion. For instance, a number of speciﬁc practices such as retention
bonuses, golden handcuffs, and so on speciﬁcally aim to reduce turnover,
whereas HR practices such as early retirement incentives, performance
management, and forced distribution performance appraisals seek to in-
crease voluntary turnover among individuals or groups of employees.
Although these speciﬁc practices aim to address particular temporary
problems (e.g., ﬂeeing of talent after a merger or reducing the workforce
under challenging economic conditions), the general system of HR prac-
tices as usually assessed by measures of high performance work systems
reﬂects the more common experiences that employees have with the HR
system and that may shape their general attitudes and behaviors toward
the organization.

The Link Between Collective Affective Commitment and Aggregate
Voluntary Turnover

Organizational commitment, particularly affective commitment, is un-
derstood as a “psychological bond” an employee has with his or her
employer (Meyer & Allen, 1997, p. 14). The psychological state of com-
mitment encourages individuals to pursue courses of action that beneﬁt the
organization. Primarily, however, the behavioral consequence of affective
commitment is continued employment with the organization (Meyer &
Allen, 1997; Meyer & Herscovitch, 2001). The most recent meta-analysis
estimates the population correlation for affective commitment and volun-
tary turnover to be −0.23 (Meyer, Stanley, Herscovitch, & Topolnytsky,
2002).


318

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

We ground our conception of collective commitment on Morgeson
and Hofmann’s (1999) notion of a collective as an interdependent and
goal-directed combination of individuals. This could include a team, a
department, a business unit, or an entire organization. This is consistent
with Chan’s (1998) description of a group as a collection of individuals
with shared goals, embedded in an organizational context, interacting to
perform interdependent tasks. Collective affective organizational commit-
ment refers to a shared mindset and a shared psychological state among
a delimited collective of individuals regarding their employer typiﬁed by
feelings of loyalty and a desire to invest mental and physical energy in
helping the organization achieve its goals (Kanter, 1968; Meyer & Allen,
1997).

The theoretical and empirical work exploring the linkage between col-
lective attitudes and aggregate turnover is not nearly as reﬁned as the work
that has been done at the individual level (Hom & Griffeth, 1995). Nearly
all aggregate turnover studies assume homology between the mechanisms
linking individual attitudes and turnover and collective attitudes and aggre-
gate turnover (e.g., Angle & Perry, 1981; Hulin, 1968; Long, 1980; Simons
& Roberson, 2003). In a study of collective commitment and turnover in-
tentions, Ostroff (1992) noted the level of analysis issues with assuming
the mechanism that explains the association between individual attitudes
and turnover holds at the collective level. Instead, collective commitment
becomes more homogenous with repeated interactions among members.
Individuals with more deﬁned and speciﬁc levels of commitment trans-
mit these feelings to individuals with less-deﬁned commitment levels
(Barsade, 2002; Levinson, 1965). These patterns of interaction and shared
affect create norms of behavior for the group consistent with the shared
attitude (Morgeson & Hofmann, 1999, p. 251; Ostroff, 1992). Thus, col-
lective commitment affects the commitment levels of the individual group
members creating a group norm of committed behavior and retention.
Barsade’s (2002) work, drawing on theories of group emotional conta-
gion, documented the existence of shared affect and its impact on group
outcomes and behavior. Thus we expect, given homogeneous affective
commitment among group members, that the level of affective commit-
ment will be negatively associated with aggregate voluntary turnover.

Hypothesis 1: Collective affective organizational commitment will
be negatively associated with aggregate voluntary
turnover.

The Link Between HR Practices and Collective Affective Commitment

Nearly all of the macro-HR research has utilized a summed in-
dex composed of a highly varied set of HR practices to represent HR


TIMOTHY M. GARDNER ET AL.

319

“systems” (Delery & Shaw, 2001). For instance, Combs et al.’s (2006)
meta-analysis of the relationship between HR practices and performance
found tremendous variety in the practices included as components of high
performance work systems across the studies they included. The common
theme however, is the general tendency to treat the set of HR practices as a
unidimensional index. A second common practice is to cluster organiza-
tions by the similarity of their HR and work practices. MacDufﬁe’s (1995)
“MassProd,” “Transition,” and “FlexProd” and Arthur’s (1994) “Control”
and “Commitment” clusters are good examples. As Delery (1998) notes,
such treatments assume that the individual practices composing the indices
behave in the same way relative to each outcome.

Counter to this assumption, a number of empirical and theoretical
papers have suggested that HR practices affect workforce outcomes dif-
ferently and can be summarized along three dimensions. These include:
(a) motivation-enhancing practices such as regular performance feed-
back, individual and group incentives, and merit-based pay that motivate
discretionary employee effort and behavior; (b) empowerment-enhancing
practices such as information sharing, participation in decision making,
and grievance procedures that provide opportunities for employees to con-
tribute to organizational objectives; and (c) skill-enhancing practices such
as recruiting, selection testing, and training that affect the type and level
of the knowledge, skills, and abilities of the organization’s employees ei-
ther by bringing the skills into the organization or developing the skills of
current employees (Appelbaum, Bailey, Berg, & Kallenberg, 2000; Bai-
ley, 1993; Batt, 2002; Delery & Shaw, 2001; Gerhart, 2007; Lepak, Liao,
Ching, & Harden, 2006; Subramony, 2009). Instead of clustering similar
organizations or summing a set of HR practices, we use the “motiva-
tion, empowerment, and skill” framework to describe sets of HR practices
along the three dimensions.

Our theoretical assumption about the process by which human resource
practices lead to collective affective commitment is grounded in the “com-
position” process of collective construct emergence. As described above,
we assume that collective commitment emerges out of the interactions and
shared feelings among members of a job group. The resulting collective
commitment is functionally similar to the individual construct (Kozlowski
& Klein, 2000).

Individuals working in organizations are exposed to various struc-
tures, events, processes, and HR management practices affecting their
individual feelings, interpretations, and degree of commitment. Individ-
uals working as part of a shared organizational structure, such as work
groups, are exposed to the same stimuli and management practices re-
sulting in a convergence of commitment levels among the groups’ mem-
bers. Numerous studies over the last 60 years have documented the pro-
cess by which repeated interactions and communication among group


320

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

members create a common mental model, shared affect, and commit-
ment level (Kozlowski & Klein, 2000; Morgeson & Hofmann, 1999). We
argue below that variation in the use of motivation, empowerment, and
skill-enhancing practices affects the level of commitment of individuals
in the job group and thus the group’s level of collective commitment.
Attraction-selection-attrition processes exacerbates the role of interaction
among group members to further homogenize and stabilize the level of
collective commitment (Schneider, 1987).

The theoretical lens that best explains the process by which greater
use of motivation, empowerment, and skill-enhancing practices affect in-
dividual commitment, prior to cumulating into collective commitment,
is self-determination theory (SDT; Deci & Ryan, 1985). SDT posits that
people have three innate psychological needs: the need for autonomy
(participation in choices and being the instigator of one’s actions without
outside control), competence (experiencing oneself as capable and able
to affect outcomes), and the need for relatedness (feelings of belonging
to and participating in a collective involving mutual respect and caring;
Deci & Ryan, 1985). Factors that lead to the satisfaction of these in-
nate needs result in intrinsic motivation, overall well-being, and positive
work attitudes. As autonomy, competence, and relatedness closely match
the precursive psychological processes that arouse affective commitment
(Meyer & Allen, 1997, pp. 46–49; Meyer & Herscovitch, 2001), organiza-
tional practices that satisfy one or more of these basic needs will facilitate
the development of affective commitment. Research supports the asso-
ciation between need satisfaction and work attitudes including affective
organizational commitment (Greguras & Diefendorff, 2009).

Greater use of motivation-enhancing practices such as incentives and
other rewards-for-performance practices satisfy competence and relat-
edness needs, thus resulting in increased affective commitment. Such
practices signal a positive valuation of employees and their efforts by
the company (Appelbaum et al., 2000; Meyer & Allen, 1997). Task and
outcome performance followed by rewards convey signals of competence
(Deci & Ryan, 1985). Incentive plans create feelings of group and or-
ganizational belonging that enhances intrinsic motivation to act (Tyler,
1999). Individual level meta-analytic research has shown that greater role
ambiguity is associated with lower commitment (Mathieu & Zajac, 1990).
Thus, incentives that direct and reward desired behaviors and outcomes
will reduce such ambiguity and satisfy competence needs, thus increasing
commitment (Mowday, Porter, & Steers, 1982). Appelbaum et al.’s (2000)
work showed a positive relationship between motivation-enhancing prac-
tices and individual commitment. Through the emergent process described
above, we expect to ﬁnd this at the collective level as well.

Empowerment-enhancing practices are expected to satisfy autonomy,
competence, and relatedness needs, thus facilitating the development


TIMOTHY M. GARDNER ET AL.

321

of affective commitment. Organizations that allow employee input into
decisions, share information, and treat employees with respect strengthen
shared perceptions of congruence between employee and organizational
values, increase employees’ identiﬁcation with the ﬁrm, and enhance
feelings of relatedness, autonomy, and commitment (Arthur, 1994; Long,
1980; Meyer & Herscovitch, 2001). Second, the teamwork and social
interactions inherent in empowering HR practices strengthen the forces
of social cohesion among group members and thus the affective com-
mitment to the organization (Osterman, 1995). Previous work has shown
a positive association between organizations’ empowerment-enhancing
practices and individual commitment (Appelbaum et al., 2000). Increased
individual commitment is expected to aggregate to the collective level via
the emergent process described above.

Finally, skill-enhancing practices are expected to have an independent
inﬂuence on collective affective commitment, but the nature of this re-
lationship is less clear. On the one hand, research suggests that training
investments may increase employees’ perceptions that the organization
values their current and future contributions and thus their need for re-
latedness (Galunic & Anderson, 2000; Tannenbaum, Mathieu, Salas, &
Bowers, 1991). In addition, training may increase skill mastery, reduce
role confusion, and prepare employees for future promotions, thus increas-
ing feelings of competence and commitment (Lincoln & Kalleberg, 1996;
Pascale, 1985). Finally, intensive hiring and selection procedures used to
ensure highly competent employees may (a) make employees feel part of
a special and elite group, thus increasing commitment (Caldwell, Chat-
man, & O’Reilly, 1990); and (b) encourage less committed candidates to
self-select out of the hiring process (Ryan, Sacco, McFarland, & Kriska,
2000). In a narrative review of studies that examined the relationship be-
tween training (one of several skill-enhancing practices) and collective
attitudes, 12 of the 13 studies showed the relationship was positive and
signiﬁcant (Tharenou, Saks, & Moore, 2007).

On the other hand, skill-enhancing practices may, through both se-
lection and development processes, result in a pool of employees whose
knowledge, skills, and abilities are valuable to both the employing orga-
nization and outside ﬁrms. Becker’s (1975) original human capital frame-
work proposed a general/ﬁrm-speciﬁc dichotomy where speciﬁc skills
provided value only to the employing organization, whereas general skills
could provide value to any number of organizations. Today, skill speciﬁcity
is conceptualized along a continuum of transferability from usefulness at a
small number of ﬁrms to usefulness at all ﬁrms. Purely ﬁrm-speciﬁc skills,
meaning useful at a single organization, are uncommon; an employee with
primarily ﬁrm-speciﬁc skills, exceedingly rare; and a pool of employees
with primarily ﬁrm speciﬁc skills, highly unlikely (Lepak & Snell, 1999;


322

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

Parsons, 1972; Stone, 2004, Ch. 7). A growing body of evidence suggests
that the skills and abilities that are explicitly developed in-house or used
as the basis of employee selection are valued by outside ﬁrms (Almeida &
Kogut, 1999; Rao & Drazin, 2002). For instance, Lowenstein and Splet-
zer’s (1999) analysis of data from the National Longitudinal Study of
Youth noted that 89% of those receiving formal training at work reported
half to all of what they learned would be useful at other ﬁrms. Thus,
greater use of skill-enhancing practices may result in a pool of employees
with transferable skills valuable to a plurality of outside ﬁrms.

With greater use of skill-enhancing practices and thus more valuable
human capital, employees may recognize that they have more employ-
ment options and, despite their need satisfaction, feel less bonding to the
organization, resulting in lower affective commitment. Cappelli’s (1999,
pp. 39–40) and Price and Mueller’s (1981) work both show a negative
relationship between skill levels and commitment. The determination of
outside value by a few employees may then spread to the collective (Krack-
hardt & Porter, 1986). Although these effects (positive and negative) may
compete, we ultimately suggest that the extensive theoretical and empir-
ical evidence of a positive association between skill-enhancing practices
and commitment strongly outweighs the slim theoretical and empirical
evidence of a negative association. Thus we hypothesize the following:

Hypothesis 2a: Controlling for the use of empowerment and skill-
enhancing practices, there will be a positive relation-
ship between the use of motivation-enhancing human
resource practices and collective affective commit-
ment.

Hypothesis 2b: Controlling for

the use of motivation and skill-
enhancing practices,
there will be a positive rela-
tionship between the use of empowerment-enhancing
human resource practices and collective affective com-
mitment.

Hypothesis 2c: Controlling

for

the

use

of motivation

and
empowerment-enhancing practices
there will be
a positive relationship between the use of skill-
enhancing human resource practices and collective
affective commitment.

Collective Affective Commitment as a Consistent and Inconsistent Mediator
of the HR-Aggregate Voluntary Turnover Relationship

Although it is possible to hypothesize and empirically establish that a
bundle of “high performance” (Way, 2002) or “commitment-enhancing”
(Arthur, 1994) HR practices will have a net positive impact on aggregate


TIMOTHY M. GARDNER ET AL.

323

voluntary turnover, classifying HR practices into motivation, empower-
ment, and skill-enhancing practices requires us to propose heterogeneous
relations between these dimensions and aggregate voluntary turnover.
We expect to observe this heterogeneity in the form of collective af-
fective commitment acting as a consistent mediator for motivation and
empowerment-enhancing practices and as an inconsistent mediator for
skill-enhancing practices.

For the consistent mediation hypotheses of X leads to M leads to Y,
one assumes the inclusion of M in the statistical model will reduce the
strength of the X–Y relationship because it is in the causal path between
X and Y. The primary variable and the mediator affect the dependent vari-
able in the same direction. In the inconsistent mediation hypothesis, the
inclusion of the M variable increases the predictive validity of the X–Y
relationship, and most importantly the direct effect of X on Y and the
indirect effect of X on Y through M are opposite. Consider the following
example of inconsistent mediation. Intelligence is positively associated
with boredom and negatively associated with the number of errors for
subjects working on a simple task. Boredom is positively associated with
errors. The direct relationship between intelligence and errors is negative,
the indirect relationship mediated by boredom is positive (MacKinnon,
Krull, & Lockwood, 2000, pp. 174–175). Statistically, suppression and
inconsistent mediation are identical. When the purpose of adding a third
variable is to clarify the relationship between two variables, suppression
is the appropriate term. However, when one hypothesizes a direct ef-
fect opposite of the mediating effect, inconsistent mediation is the most
appropriate term (MacKinnon, 2008; MacKinnon et al., 2000).

Previous studies have found an association between motivation- (Long,
1980; Wilson & Peel, 1991) and empowerment-type practices (Spencer,
1986) as well as commitment-enhancing bundles of HR practices and ag-
gregate voluntary turnover (Arthur, 1994; Batt, 2002; Way, 2002). Each
has suggested, but not tested, the proposition that the focal practice or
practices increase collective employee commitment, subsequently de-
creasing aggregate turnover. We rely on this extant theory to suggest
that collective affective commitment will act as a consistent mediator be-
tween motivation- and empowerment-enhancing practices and aggregate
voluntary turnover: meaning both the direct and indirect effect of these
dimensions on voluntary turnover will be negative.

Hypothesis 3a: The negative

relationship between the use of
motivation-enhancing human resource practices and
aggregate voluntary turnover will be mediated by col-
lective affective commitment.

Hypothesis 3b: The negative

relationship between the use of
empowerment-enhancing human resource practices


324

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

and aggregate voluntary turnover will be mediated by
collective affective commitment.

We expect the mediation effect for collective affective commitment to
be inconsistent with respect to skill-enhancing practices. In other words,
we expect skill-enhancing practices to have an indirect negative effect,
via affective commitment, on voluntary turnover but a positive effect on
turnover independent of affective commitment. Benson, Finegold, and
Mohrman (2004) hinted at a similar inconsistent mediation process in
their study of tuition reimbursement programs. They noted that company-
paid tuition should lead to positive attitudes that then lead to retention;
greater employee development should increase employees’ ability to move
from one ﬁrm to another thus increasing turnover (p. 315). Galunic and
Anderson (2000, p. 2) and Baron and Kreps (1999, p. 375) both suggested
(but did not test) the notion that organizational investments in employees’
skills increase commitment, thus reducing turnover, while simultaneously
increasing skill levels, thus increasing turnover propensity.

Given that activities functioning to increase the knowledge, skills, and
abilities of current and incoming employees increase the value of these
employees to both current and outside ﬁrms, it stands to reason that greater
use of skill-enhancing practices will be associated with greater turnover
(Coff, 1997; Pigou, 1912, p. 153). The empirical evidence that higher
skill levels lead to turnover is only indirect. Price and Mueller’s (1981)
study concluded that greater nurse skill levels were associated with greater
turnover intentions and actual turnover. Trevor (2001) proposed the con-
cept of “movement capital” as the individual human capital factor that
facilitates mobility. Holding constant pay, job satisfaction, and unemploy-
ment rate, employees with greater movement capital were more likely to
voluntarily turnover. Alba-Ramirez’s (1993) study of overeducated work-
ers concluded that individuals with greater education were more likely to
leave their current ﬁrm for other ﬁrms.

There are two potential mechanisms by which the use of skill-
enhancing practices would lead to greater aggregate turnover. First, HR
practices that function to systematically “make” and “acquire” a talent
pool with greater value creation potential simultaneously create a col-
lection of employees with skills with greater value in the external labor
market and greater propensity to leave (Becker, 1975). Second, ﬁrms that
use more skill-enhancing practices may become targets of rivals seek-
ing to develop their own talent pools. General Electric is known as a
source for leadership talent. Proctor and Gamble is known as a source of
branding talent. Outside ﬁrms seeking to gain competitive parity are very
likely to expropriate value creating resources, including carefully selected
and developed human capital (Coff, 1997; Gardner, 2005; Pigou, 1912,
p. 153).


TIMOTHY M. GARDNER ET AL.

325

The empirical evidence is mixed. Studies that aggregate a compre-
hensive set of HR practices into a single index consistently show a
negative association with voluntary turnover (Subramony, 2009). Stud-
ies that use only skill-enhancing practices are inconclusive. Subramony’s
(2009) meta-analysis concluded that “skill-enhancing practices” (p. 17)
were unrelated to retention. In a narrative review of 10 studies examining
the relationship between organizational training programs and voluntary
turnover, four were nonsigniﬁcant, ﬁve showed a negative relationship
with turnover, and one showed a positive relationship with turnover
(Tharenou et al., 2007). Cappelli (2008, pp. 113–114) cites a set of consult-
ing studies showing that one of the best predictors of turnover is whether
an employee has recently received training.

Nearly all the studies mentioned above were postpredictive, mean-
ing turnover occurred prior to measuring HR practices (Wright, Gardner,
Moynihan, & Allen, 2005). With few exceptions (Batt, 2002; Shaw et al.,
1998), methodological issues such as distinguishing between voluntary
and involuntary turnover, adequate control variables, and unreliable mea-
sures of HR practices are a serious concern. Our study overcomes these
shortcomings and is a much cleaner empirical and longitudinal test of the
role human capital-enhancing HR practices play in affecting aggregate
turnover.

One might argue that as employers provide both ﬁrm-speciﬁc and gen-
eral training the net impact of skill-enhancing practices on turnover may
be negative. The best empirical evidence suggests the vast majority of
employer-provided training is general rather than ﬁrm speciﬁc (Lowen-
stein & Spletzer, 1999). Furthermore, by deﬁnition, employers select em-
ployees based on their general competencies (Baron & Kreps, 1999).
These ﬁndings and the fact that the domain of skill-enhancing practices
includes formal training, tuition reimbursement, and selection practices,
lead us to propose the following hypothesis.

Hypothesis 3c: Collective affective commitment will inconsistently
mediate the relationship between skill-enhancing prac-
tices and aggregate voluntary turnover. The indirect ef-
fect of skill-enhancing practices via commitment will
be negative. The effect of skill-enhancing practices in-
dependent of commitment will be positive.

Setting

Methods

This study was conducted in a single company that markets and
distributes food and food-related products through 62 stand-alone
business units in metropolitan areas across the United States. The


326

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

management teams for the business units are entirely responsible in the
local marketplace for the development and execution of their strategies.
With the exception of health and retirement beneﬁts managed from the
corporate headquarters, business unit presidents are free to develop cus-
tomized HRM programs. Furthermore, all business units employ approx-
imately 500 employees. If a unit grows too large to serve one market, it
is divided into two separate units to maintain an entrepreneurial spirit and
customized service. Thus, the operating units are highly similar in terms
of size, structure, technology, physical assets, and services provided but
differ in management practices, including HR management practices. The
authors were invited by the corporate HR leader to survey employees and
HR managers to document and diffuse best practices across the business
units.

The level of analysis for this study is the job group. There are six
job groups within each business unit including sales employees, ware-
house employees, delivery drivers, front-line supervisors, merchandising
employees, and administrative staff. Administrative staff, a catch-all des-
ignation for HR, IT, secretarial, and miscellaneous employees that neither
work together nor are managed with a common set of HR practices, does
not meet our previous deﬁnition of a group and was not included in the
analyses that follow. Interviews with several business-unit executives prior
to administering the survey conﬁrmed that job groups meet Chan’s (1998)
deﬁnition of a group: a collection of individuals interacting through meet-
ings, training, and interdependent work; shared goals, all within a larger
setting. Thus the remaining ﬁve job groups in the participating business
units represent the unit of analysis in this study.

Although the business unit was considered as a level of analysis for
this study, multiple site visits by the authors, informal discussions with
employees, and formal discussions with business-unit executives and cor-
porate HR executives convinced us that the job group was most appro-
priate. First, the HR practices were designed by the unit HR managers
for the job groups in their facilities. One business-unit measure of HR
practice usage would have unacceptably low reliability (Gerhart, Wright,
McMahan, & Snell, 2000). Second, union presence varied across business
units and across job groups within units with a union presence. Third,
employees interact most with the other workers in their job groups, facil-
itating the development of homogeneous collective commitment at that
level. Finally, using HR manager survey data and archival data from the
corporate ofﬁce (detailed below), we constructed a job group level volun-
tary turnover variable that would have been less reliable had the turnover
rates been calculated for the entire business unit. Given the availability
of statistical algorithms to control for the homogeneity of variance due to
the nesting of job groups within business units, we concluded job group
was the most appropriate unit of analysis.


TIMOTHY M. GARDNER ET AL.

327

The data for this study came from multiple sources at two points in
time. At Time 1, surveys of business unit HR managers were used to
measure job-group HR practices. Also at Time 1, surveys of employees
in each job group were used to measure affective organizational com-
mitment; commitment data were aggregated from the individual level to
the job-group level of analysis. Twelve months later, at Time 2, survey
data from the business-unit HR managers were combined with archival
data from the parent corporation to construct the measure of aggregate
voluntary turnover. Control variables were constructed with data from
employee surveys, company archives, and the U.S. Department of Labor.
The ﬁnal sample consisted of 93 job groups with survey data from a total
of 1,748 employees.

Data Collection

Employee surveys were developed by the authors in cooperation with
corporate HR staff. HR manager surveys were developed solely by the
authors. Corporate HR marketed the study to the presidents of all 62 of the
business units. Participation was voluntary; 33 business-unit presidents
chose to participate in the employee survey during ﬁrst wave of data
collection (late 1999 and early 2000) for a business-unit participation rate
of 53%. Of those 33 business units, HR managers of 31 (93.9%) agreed to
complete a survey regarding the HR practices used to manage the different
job groups in their business units. Twelve months later, all 62 business
units were again invited to participate in another round of surveys. Forty-
two (67.7%) of the business-unit presidents agreed to participate in the
employee survey (data not used). Of these 42 business units, HR managers
from 37 units (88.1%) agreed to provide data about job group turnover
in the previous year; HR data were also collected but not used. Of the
37 business units participating in the second round of data collection, 20
overlapped with the 31 business units for which there was both employee
and HR manager data in the ﬁrst round of data collection.

There were no notable differences between the 20 business units for
which there were Time 1 and Time 2 data and the 42 other units of the
corporation for which these data were not available. Speciﬁcally, there
was no difference in union presence between participating and nonpartic-
ipating business units. Two multivariate analyses of variance (MANOVA)
comparing proﬁtability (pretax proﬁts as a proportion of sales), produc-
tivity (cartons of product sold per payroll dollar), and quality (cartons
of product delivered per number of delivery errors) of the two groups
both at Time 1 (the third and second quarter before data collection) and
Time 2 (the quarter before and quarter during data collection) revealed no
signiﬁcant differences (p < 0.52; p < 0.71).


328

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

Business-unit HR managers were instructed by the corporate ofﬁce
to randomly select 20% or more of the employees from each of the job
groups for survey participation. Employees met on company time with the
HR managers who explained the purpose of the meeting and the survey
process. HR managers distributed the surveys to employees, gave them
time to complete them, and had the employees place the surveys into one
large, sealable envelope per meeting. Employees were not asked to provide
information that could directly identify them, and they were promised
conﬁdentiality by the researchers in the treatment of the information they
provided. The business-unit HR managers sent the unopened envelopes
directly to the researchers. The response rate for employees in these groups
was 100%. A total of ﬁve surveys were returned by employees entirely
incomplete. HR managers were instructed to complete and return the job-
group HR practice surveys by mail to the researchers. They were informed
that the data provided was for research purposes only and were also assured
the information they provided would be treated conﬁdentially.

The employee survey covered 10.4% of the population of business
unit employees of the entire food service division. Although business unit
HR staff were instructed to survey 20% or more of the employees from
each of the job groups, the average participation rate was 28% (SD =
18%; range = 0% to 100%). We determined through conversations with
HR managers that this variation was due to operating constraints that
prevented pulling employees away from their jobs. Sixty-ﬁve employees
failed to identify or identiﬁed more than one job group and were dropped.
To ensure adequate reliability of the collective commitment measure,
only job groups with data from four or more employees were included
the analyses; this resulted in the loss of ﬁve job groups. Data from two
job groups were not included as the HR managers did not collect survey
data from the groups. This reduced the ﬁnal sample from 100 potential
job groups to 93 with an average of 18.8 employees providing data for
each group.

Measures

Affective organizational commitment. Preferences for speciﬁc ques-
tions by the corporate HR leaders prevented the use of a published measure
of affective organizational commitment, and instead we used questions
from two different scales (Meyer & Allen, 1997; Porter, Steers, Mow-
day, & Boulin, 1974). Given this scale was constructed, we conducted a
principal components exploratory factor analysis to ensure the ﬁve items
composed of a single dimension. The result was a single factor with an
eigenvalue of nearly four, accounting for 63.8% of the total variance. All
loadings exceeded 0.70; together the items exhibited a coefﬁcient alpha of


TIMOTHY M. GARDNER ET AL.

329

Items Used to Measure Affective Organizational Commitment

TABLE 1

I feel a strong sense of belonging to this organization.
I am willing to work harder than I have to in order to help this company succeed.
I am proud to be working for this company.
I ﬁnd that my values and this company’s values are similar.
I would turn down a job with more pay in order to stay with this company.

0.85. The list of questions can be found in Table 1. As a step toward con-
struct validity of our scale, we tested its relationship with other variables
from the employee data set. Meyer et al.’s (2002) meta-analysis reported
weighted average corrected correlations between individual affective or-
ganizational commitment and turnover intentions (−0.51), gender (0.03),
and self-reported absenteeism (−0.11). The correlations between our mea-
sure and these variables were −0.47, 0.035, and −0.10, respectively. This
pattern of closely matching results suggests the scale represents an accept-
able measure of the construct. Thus the ﬁve questions were aggregated into
a scale measure of affective organizational commitment by calculating a
mean for each individual.

Given that all constructs were conceptualized and analyses were con-
ducted at the job-group level, we sought to demonstrate acceptable degrees
of interrater agreement and reliability to aggregate the individual affective
commitment variable to the appropriate unit of analysis. To do this we cal-
culated the following statistics: a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA),
ICC(1), ICC(2), and rwg using both the uniform distribution and the more
conservative slightly skewed assumptions (LeBreton & Senter, 2008). We
conducted the ANOVA with individual employee data using job-group
afﬁliation as the ﬁxed effect. Results indicated signiﬁcant between-job-
group variance: F(92, 1655) = 8.18, p < 0.00001. ICC(1) was 0.17 and
ICC(2) was 0.76. Using the assumption of a uniform null distribution, the
median rwg was 0.80 (mean = 0.78); using the more conservative assump-
tion of a slightly skewed distribution, the median rwg was 0.70 (mean =
0.68). Taken together, the pattern of results provide more than sufﬁcient
justiﬁcation for aggregating the individual affective commitment variable
to the job-group level (LeBreton & Senter, 2008).

Aggregate voluntary turnover. A measure of job-group voluntary
turnover was constructed from company archival data and survey data
provided by the HR managers in the second survey wave. For each job
group, the business-unit HR manager was asked: “In the past 12 months
how many employees in each job category quit or left [company name] vol-
untarily?” To ensure the managers reported only voluntary terminations,
a second question, not used in this study asked, “In the past 12 months,


330

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

approximately how many employees in each job category were discharged
or left [company name] involuntarily?” This number was then divided by
the average number of employees in the job category over the previous
12 months (provided by the corporate ofﬁce). We chose 12 months as it is
consistent with normative practice (Shaw, Dineen, Fang, & Vellella, 2009;
Terborg & Lee, 1984). As turnover was constructed as a ratio, it violated
important assumptions of OLS regression. Transformation by taking the
natural logarithm of the variable is a common and well-accepted remedy
for ratio variables (Hair, Anderson, Tatham, & Black, 1998, pp. 76–78).
We added 1.0 to the turnover variable and took the natural log.

We conducted two different analyses to demonstrate the construct
validity of the measure. First, we examined the correlation of aggregate
voluntary turnover with a measure of the local unemployment rate. Consis-
tent with previous ﬁndings (Hulin, Roznowski, & Hachiya, 1985, p. 237),
our measure of voluntary turnover was moderately, negatively correlated
with the regional unemployment rate (r = − 0.25, p < 0.05). Second,
we used the employee survey data to construct a three-item measure of
turnover intentions (e.g., “I plan to look for a job outside of this com-
pany in the next 6 months”). Interrater reliability and agreement indices
suggested it was appropriate to aggregate the individual measure to a job-
group measure of collective turnover intentions. The correlation between
collective turnover intentions and aggregate voluntary turnover (r = 0.39,
p < 0.001) was nearly identical to the reported individual-level correlation
found in Griffeth, Hom, and Gaertner’s (2000) meta-analysis.

Motivation, empowerment, and skill indexes. Drawing on MacDufﬁe
(1995), Huselid (1995), and Bailey (1993) as well as ﬁeld research at
the business units, we constructed an inventory of HR practices. The HR
managers reported the usage of each practice by indicating “Yes,” “No,”
or “I don’t know.” The list of items can be found in Table 2. The usage
of an HR practice was scored a 1 and the lack of usage was scored a 0.
One question asking about the number of hours of training per year was
scored 1 = 15 or more hours of training per year and 0 = fewer than
15 hours.1 Questions about the frequency of communication were scored
as 1 = quarterly or more frequently and 0 = annually or never. “I don’t
know” responses were scored as not using the practice. This may seem
an inappropriate use of missing data. However, if the top HR manager

1Fifteen hours was used as the cutoff based on a study of employer-provided training
conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (Frazis, Gittleman, Harrigan, & Joyce, 1998).
Both employers and employees of establishments of this size in the wholesale trade industry
report employees receive 16 to 24 hours of training each year. Fewer than 15 hours is well
below industry averages.


TIMOTHY M. GARDNER ET AL.

331

Human Resource Management Practice Questionsa

TABLE 2

Skill-enhancing HR practices

Applicants undergo structured interviews (job-related questions, same questions asked

of all applicants, rating scales) before being hired.

Applicants for this job take formal tests (paper and pencil or work sample) before being

hired.

On average how many hours of formal training do employees in this job receive each

year?b

The results of the performance evaluation process are used to determine the training

needs for employees in this job.

Employees in this job have the opportunity to receive tuition reimbursement for

completing college classes.

Motivation-enhancing HR practices

Employees in this job regularly (at least once a year) receive a formal evaluation of their

performance.

Pay raises for employees in this job are based on job performance.
Employees in this job have the opportunity to earn individual bonuses (or commissions)

for productivity, performance, or other individual-performance outcomes.

Employees in this job have the opportunity to earn group bonuses (or commissions) for

productivity, performance, or other group-performance outcomes.

Employees in this job have the opportunity to earn company-wide bonuses (or

commissions) for productivity, performance, or other operating
company-performance outcomes.

Qualiﬁed employees have the opportunity to be promoted to positions of greater pay

and/or responsibility within the company.

Empowerment-enhancing HR practices

Employees in this job have a reasonable and fair complaint process.
Employees in this job are involved in formal participation processes such as

quality-improvement groups, problem-solving groups, roundtable discussions, or
suggestion systems.

Employees in this job communicate with people in other departments to solve problems

and meet deadlines.

How often do employees in this job receive formal company communication regarding:c
Company goals (objectives, actions, and so on)?
Operating performance (productivity, quality, customer satisfaction, and so on)?
Financial performance (proﬁtability, stock price, and so on)?
Competitive performance (market share, competitor strategies, and so on)?

aWith the exception of those marked, the response option for these questions was “Yes, No,
I don’t know.”
bResponse option was “Hours ___________”
cResponse options for these questions were: “Never, Annually, Quarterly, Monthly, Weekly,
Daily.”

in a mid-sized warehousing facility does not know about the usage of an
HR practice, it is prudent to conclude the practice is not employed. Upon
ﬁrst receiving the data, the ﬁrst author contacted the corporate HR staff
and several business-unit HR managers to conﬁrm this hypothesis. The


332

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

consensus was that circling “I don’t know” meant “not to my knowledge,”
an alternative answer for “No.”

The decision to collect HR practice data at the job-group level is
consistent with Lepak and Snell’s (2002) ﬁndings and Batt’s (2002) and
Delery and Shaw’s (2001) observations that HR practices differ by occu-
pational group and should be measured separately to maximize validity
and reliability. Second, asking single informants objective questions at
the job-group level in mid-sized business units is consistent with Wright
et al.’s (2001) suggestion to achieve validity and reliability in the mea-
surement of HR practices.

We chose to conceptualize the variables “use” of motivation, empow-
erment, and skill-enhancing practices as representing formative rather
than reﬂective constructs. Classical test theory assumes that items of a
scale are intercorrelated, imperfect reﬂections of underlying latent con-
structs and thus considered reﬂective measures. Measures sometimes do
not represent reﬂections of latent constructs but instead combine to form
the latent construct. Such formative measures are viewed as “causing” the
latent construct; the items are not assumed to covary (MacKenzie, Pod-
sakoff, & Jarvis, 2005). Using the criteria outlined in MacKenzie et al.
(2005, pp. 712–713), these three variables may be considered formative.
First, the sums of the items deﬁned the constructs rather than being de-
ﬁned by them. Second, the different items representing each variable were
not interchangeable but represented different portions of the motivation,
empowerment, and skill-enhancing domains. Finally, there was no expec-
tation that the items for each variable would systematically covary. Use of
formative variables (indexes) was not only consistent with our conceptu-
alization of the constructs but also with past research (Appelbaum et al.,
2000; Batt, 2002; Trevor & Nyberg, 2008).

Construct validation of reﬂective measures is typically supported by
demonstrating shared variance among construct-speciﬁc items through
the use of factor analysis (Nunnally & Bernstein, 1994). As intercorrela-
tion is not expected among items composing of formative variables, this
was not an option. Batt (2002) and Appelbaum et al. (2000) utilized de-
duction to classify HR practices into the motivation, empowerment, and
skill-enhancing domains. Subramony (2009) used a version of interrater
reliability. For this paper, the three authors used deduction to narrow and
classify the HR practices listed in Table 2 and veriﬁed this qualitative clas-
siﬁcation with Hinkin and Tracey’s (1999) empirical content validation
procedures.

Convenience sampling was used to recruit 122 undergraduate/graduate
HR students and HR practitioners to participate in the study. Using
online survey methodology, each participant was randomly presented
with 1 of the 18 HR practices along with one of the deﬁnitions of


TIMOTHY M. GARDNER ET AL.

333

the three HR policy domains2; subjects were asked to rate the congru-
ence of the practice with the domain on a ﬁve-point Likert-type scale
(not at all consistent to completely consistent). This presentation was
randomly repeated a total of 54 times for each subject, ensuring each
HR practice was rated on congruence with each of the three policy do-
mains. Data from 14 of the respondents were cut for skipping 35 to
54 of the 54 items. Remaining subjects answered at least 53 of the
items. Data for 17 respondents were cut for zero variation in ratings of
congruency.

Consistent with the Hinkin and Tracey’s (1999) procedure, we com-
pared the mean ratings of congruency for each practice across the three
policy domains utilizing one-way ANOVAs; Duncan’s Multiple Range
Test was used to reduce Type-1 error rates. If the three sets of items were
consistently rated as more congruent with their a priori construct deﬁni-
tions they were assumed to be consistent with the construct deﬁnitions. The
results showed that the ﬁve skill-enhancing, six motivation-enhancing, and
seven empowerment-enhancing items were rated as more congruent with
their respective deﬁnitions than with the alternative deﬁnitions (p < 0.05).
These ﬁndings support the distinctive categorization of the items into the
three indexes (Hinkin & Tracey, 1999). The mean congruence scores for
each item are summarized in Table 3. These ﬁndings are consistent with
Lepak and associates’ (2006) and Subramony’s (2009) categorization of
HR practices.

Because formative measures determine and are not a function of un-
derlying constructs, it is inappropriate to use estimates of internal con-
sistency (e.g., coefﬁcient alpha) to test for consistency among the items
(MacKenzie et al., 2005). Test–retest correlations can provide evidence
of the stability of the three indexes (Trevor & Nyberg, 2008). As men-
tioned above, HR managers were resurveyed 12 months after the original
survey. Although not used for hypothesis testing, the HR managers were
again asked about the HR practices used to manage the employees in the
job groups within their business units. Questions about hours of training
(#3, Table 2) and company communications (#15–18, Table 2) were suf-
ﬁciently different or missing in the subsequent year and were excluded.
We compared the original three indexes, reconstructed without the ﬁve

2“Skill-enhancing practices are those designed to improve the knowledge and abilities
of a company’s employees either by developing the skills of those already employed or
by hiring the best people from the outside labor market; Motivation-enhancing practices
are those designed to affect employee’s desire and willingness to perform assigned work
roles and go above and beyond stated expectations; Empowerment-enhancing practices are
those designed to provide employees with opportunities and information to contribute to
work-group and organizational success.”


334

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

Summary of Means of Domain Congruency of HR Practice Items

TABLE 3

Structured interviews
Formal employment tests
Formal training
Training needs determined by performance

evaluation

Motivation
enhancing

Empowerment
enhancing

Skill

enhancing

2.92
2.45
3.60
3.40

3.18
2.34
3.70
3.42

3.73
3.23
4.15
4.04

Tuition reimbursement
Formal performance evaluations
Merit pay
Individual bonuses
Group bonuses
Company-wide bonuses
Promotion opportunities
Complaint processes
Formal participation programs
Cross-department communication
Communicate company goals
Communicate operating performance
Communicate ﬁnancial performance
Communicate competitive performance
N = 91.
Boldface type indicates a signiﬁcantly higher mean score relative to the other two scores
using Duncan’s Multiple Range Test (p < 0.05). Unbolded items in the same row marked
with an asterisk are signiﬁcantly different from one another (p < 0.05).

3.47
3.98
4.13
4.49
3.96
3.84
4.45
3.38∗
3.92
3.66
3.89∗
3.57
3.35∗
3.33

3.36
3.25
3.27∗
3.64
3.52∗
3.36∗
4.03∗
3.91
4.31
4.16
4.27
3.97
3.80
3.76

3.97
3.43
3.66∗
3.58
2.90∗
3.01∗
3.67∗
2.90∗
3.87
3.58
3.13∗
3.45
2.97∗
3.13

changed/missing questions, with the indexes constructed from data col-
lected 1 year later. The year-to-year correlation for motivation-enhancing
practices was 0.69; 0.64 for empowerment-enhancing practices; and 0.66
for skill-enhancing practices. Considering that the corporation’s interest
in supporting this study was the diffusion of best practices across the
business units, we suggest these levels of consistency are acceptable.

The employee survey used to measure affective organizational com-
mitment also asked employees to report on the HR practices used to man-
age the people in their own job group. To avoid issues with monomethod
bias, these data not used for hypothesis testing. The corporate HR group
would only allow us to ask the employees about a subset of the HR prac-
tice items to avoid priming them to wonder why they did not have certain
practices (e.g., group bonuses). To validate the three HR practice indexes,
the indexes constructed from the HR manager data were compared to
similar indexes constructed from the smaller number of HR practice items
using employee data. With regard to the employee reports of HR practices,
the average ICC(1) for the HR practice items was 0.17; the average ICC(2)


TIMOTHY M. GARDNER ET AL.

335

was 0.76. ANOVA tests using job group as the ﬁxed effect were signiﬁcant
for all three sets of practices at p < 0.01 level or better. Median rwgs for
the three sets of practices ranged from 0.81 to 0.84 using the assump-
tion of uniform distribution and 0.73 to 0.82 using the more conservative
slightly skewed distribution assumption (LeBreton & Senter, 2008). This
suggests an adequate degree of interrater agreement and reliability among
employees in the distinct job groups regarding the usage of the three sets
of HR practices to aggregate to this level (LeBreton & Senter, 2008).
The correlations between the measures of motivation, empowerment, and
skill-enhancing HR practices measured with employee and HR manager
data were 0.64, 0.48, and 0.34 (N = 93; p < 0.001), respectively. The
correlation between the employees’ and HR managers’ responses for an
index of all matching HR practices was 0.63 (N = 93; p < 0.001). These
correlations suggest the data collected from the HR managers reasonably
represent the motivation-, empowerment-, and skill-enhancing practices
used to manage the different job groups.

Control variables. Five control variables were used to reduce the
power of alternative explanations of job-group voluntary turnover. Re-
search has demonstrated unionized employees have different levels of
commitment (Hammer & Avgar, 2005) and turnover (Freeman, 1980)
than nonunion employees. The corporate HR group provided the union
status of the different job groups within each business unit with a union
presence. There is debate in the literature as to whether the proportion of
women in the workplace is associated with higher turnover (Batt et al.,
2002). Gender was captured in the employee survey and the proportion of
women was calculated for each job group. Tenure is consistently identi-
ﬁed as a negative predictor of voluntary turnover (Hom & Griffeth, 1995)
and was calculated for each job group. Greater outside opportunities, in
the form of low unemployment rates, has an impact on organizational
turnover rates (Terborg & Lee, 1984). Thus local unemployment rate for
each business unit between Time 1 and Time 2 was collected from U.S.
Department of Labor and included in the model. Finally, employees with
higher levels of education will have greater employment opportunities.
Thus the average education level of the employees in each job group was
calculated.

Analytical strategy. We used Shrout and Bolger’s (2002) revision of
Baron and Kenny’s (1986) procedures for testing mediation hypotheses
in an OLS regression framework. Given that the job groups were nested
within business units, we controlled for this nesting with the use of clus-
tered robust regression. This procedure estimates robust standard errors to
compensate for the fact that observations within clusters may be correlated
resulting in heteroskedastic error terms (Hofmann & Mark, 2006; Rogers,
1993; Williams, 2000). The residuals from the six clustered regressions


336

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

n
o
i
t
a
i
d
e
m
e
h
t
g
n
i
t
s
e
T

:
4

l
e
d
o
M

l
e
d
o
m

g
n
i
s
s
e
r
g
e
R

n
o

r
e
v
o
n
r
u
t

s
e
l
d
n
u
b
R
H

g
n
i
s
s
e
r
g
e
R

n
o

r
e
v
o
n
r
u
t

t
n
e
m

t
i

∗

m
m
o
c

4
1
0
.
0
−

d
n
a

s
e
l
d
n
u
b
R
H

∗

5
1
0
.
0
−

)
6
6
0
0
0
0
.
.
0
0
(
−

)
1
3
6
9
0
0
.
.
0
0
(
−

)
8
8
7
0
0
0
.
.
0
0
(
−

∗
∗

)
7
7
2
5
0
0
.
.
0
0
(
−

†

)
0
0
2
2
0
0
.
.
0
0
(
−

)
8
3
1
1
0
0
.
.
0
0
(
−

)
6
0
0
.
0
(

7
2
0
.
0

)
7
2
4
6
0
0
.
.
0
0
(
−

)
3
6
7
2
0
0
.
.
0
0
(
−

∗
∗

)
1
8
3
5
0
0
.
.
0
0
(
−

∗

)
1
4
2
2
0
0
.
.
0
0
(
−

∗

)
7
3
2
1
0
0
.
.
0
0
(
−

∗
∗
∗

)
7
1
0
.
0
(

6
4
0
.
0

∗
∗
∗

)
5
1
0
.
0
(

6
4
0
.
0

∗

)
5
0
9
1
0
0
.
.
0
0
(
−

)
1
1
0
.
0
(

∗
∗
∗

∗

6
2
0
.
0

5
4
.
0

)
3
5
0
.
0
(

∗
∗
∗

∗
∗
∗

2
4
.
0

5
1
.
0

:
3

l
e
d
o
M

g
n
i
s
s
e
r
g
e
R

e
v
i
t
c
e
l
l
o
c

n
o

t
n
e
m

t
i

m
m
o
c

s
e
l
d
n
u
b
R
H

7
0
0
.
0

∗
∗

)
0
5
1
4
3
0
.
.
0
0
−
(

∗

)
1
6
3
2
1
3
.
.
0
0
−
(

∗
∗
∗

)
3
6
1
.
0
(

8
8
1
.
0

∗

)
0
5
0
.
0
(

8
0
0
.
0

)
1
4
0
.
0
(

4
6
0
.
0

∗
∗

)
4
3
0
.
0
(

2
9
0
.
0

)
5
2
3
0
0
0
.
.
0
0
−
(

)
9
2
0
.
0
(

∗
∗
∗

∗
∗

4
5
.
0

9
0
.
0

:
2

l
e
d
o
M

g
n
i
s
s
e
r
g
e
R

n
o

r
e
v
o
n
r
u
t

e
v
i
t
c
e
l
l
o
c

e
v
i
t
c
e
l
l
o
C

e
v
i
t
c
e
f
f
a

y
l
n
o

s
l
o
r
t
n
o
C

:
1

l
e
d
o
M

t
n
e
m

t
i

m
m
o
c

∗

4
1
0
.
0
−

)
6
1
0
2
0
0
.
.
0
0
(
−

∗

)
7
7
7
6
0
1
.
.
0
0
(
−

)
1
9
8
2
0
0
.
.
0
0
(
−

∗

)
6
6
2
4
0
0
.
.
0
0
(
−

)
4
2
0
.
0
(

∗
∗

6
1
1
.
0
−

∗
∗
∗

∗
∗

2
3
.
0

5
0
.
0

)
6
4
0
.
0
(

t
n
e
m

t
i

m
m
o
c

∗

5
2
0
.
0

∗
∗
∗

)
5
2
0
1
5
0
.
.
0
0
(
−

)
8
9
0
9
1
1
.
.
0
0
(
−

∗
∗
∗

)
0
9
1
.
0
(

0
5
2
.
0

)
0
5
0
.
0
(

8
0
0
.
0

)
2
5
0
.
0
(

∗
∗

r
e
v
o
n
r
u
T

7
1
0
.
0
−

)
6
0
0
.
0
(

8
3
0
.
0

∗

)
0
4
6
4
1
0
.
.
0
0
(
−

∗

)
4
8
8
5
0
0
.
.
0
0
(
−

∗

)
9
7
2
4
0
0
.
.
0
0
(
−

)
6
2
0
.
0
(

t
n
e
m
y
o
l
p
m
e
n
U

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
V

n
o
i
n
U

e
l
a
m
e
f

n
o
i
t
r
o
p
o
r
P

l
e
v
e
l
n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
E

e
r
u
n
e
T

R
H

t
n
e
m
r
e
w
o
p
m
E

R
H
n
o
i
t
a
v
i
t
o
M

s
e
c
i
t
c
a
r
p

s
e
c
i
t
c
a
r
p
R
H

l
l
i
k
S

s
e
c
i
t
c
a
r
p

t
n
e
m

t
i

m
m
o
c

∗
∗
∗

5
4
.
0

∗
∗

7
2
.
0

2

R

.
3
9
=
N

2

R


†

0
1
.
0
<
p

.
)
t
s
e
t

d
e
l
i
a
t
-
e
n
o
(

.

1
0
0
0
<
p

∗
∗
∗

,
)
t
s
e
t
d
e
l
i
a
t
-
e
n
o
(

.

1
0
0
<
p

∗
∗

,
)
t
s
e
t
d
e
l
i
a
t
-
e
n
o
(

.

5
0
0
<
p

∗

,
)
t
s
e
t
d
e
l
i
a
t
-
e
n
o
(

4
E
L
B
A
T

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A
n
o
i
s
s
e
r
g
e
R
S
L
O

f
o

s
t
l
u
s
e
R


TIMOTHY M. GARDNER ET AL.

337

with robust standard error models outlined in Table 4 were normally
distributed.

Results

The descriptive statistics and zero-order correlations can be found in
Table 5. The tests of the hypotheses can be found in Table 4. Because all
seven hypotheses were directional, one-tailed tests of signiﬁcance were
used in the analyses reported in Table 4 and discussed below (Gravetter
& Wallnau. 2009, pp. 257–258; Sproull, 1995, p. 55).

Hypothesis 1 suggests that collective affective commitment will be
negatively related to job-group voluntary turnover. Model 2 in Table 4
suggests that
introducing the commitment variable into the control
variable model explains an additional 5% of turnover variance (p <
0.01). The regression coefﬁcient is, as expected, negative, supporting
Hypothesis 1.

Hypotheses 2a, 2b, and 2c predict that motivation, empowerment,
and skill-enhancing practices, independently, will be positively associ-
ated with collective commitment. The correlation table suggests all three
sets of practices are positively related to commitment (p < 0.05 or lower).
Model 3 in Table 4 shows that entering motivation, empowerment, and
skill-enhancing practices into the regression equation after the ﬁve con-
trol variables explains an additional 9% of the variance in collective
commitment (p < 0.01). The coefﬁcients for motivation-enhancing and
empowerment-enhancing practices are signiﬁcant and, as expected, pos-
itive. Contrary to the zero-order correlation, the coefﬁcient for skill-
enhancing practices is not signiﬁcant. These results support Hypotheses
2a and 2b but not 2c.

Hypotheses 3a and 3b suggest that collective affective commitment
will independently mediate the relationships between motivation- and
empowerment-enhancing practices and aggregate voluntary turnover.
Shrout and Bolger’s (2002) revision of Baron and Kenny’s (1986) four-
step protocol to assess mediation was used to test these hypotheses.
Step 1 is to ensure the mediator (commitment) is associated with the
dependent variable (turnover). The results for Hypothesis 1 supported
this relationship. Step 2 involves testing for a relationship between the
main variables (motivation and empowerment-enhancing practices) and
the mediating variable (commitment). The results for Hypotheses 2a and
2b support the association of motivation and empowerment-enhancing
practices with commitment. Step 3 is to test for an association between
the main variables and the dependent variable. Model 4a in Table 4 shows
that the inclusion of the three HR practice variables explains an additional
15% (p < 0.001) of the turnover variance. As expected, motivation and


338

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

7
0
0

.

9
0
0

.

∗
∗
∗

2
5
0

.

∗
∗

∗
∗
∗

7
6
3
0
3
3
0
0
0
−
−
−

.

.

.

∗

2
0
0

.

1
2
0

.

4
0
0

.

3
1
0
−

.

∗
∗

.

9
3
1
7
0
0
2
1
0
0
0
0
−
−
−

.

.

.

∗

∗

∗
∗
∗

∗
∗

∗
∗

6
2
0

.

.

4
3
3
2
0
0
−

.

2
3
0

.

4
3
0

.

∗
∗
∗

∗
∗
∗

∗
∗
∗

∗
∗
∗

∗

∗

8
3
0

.

3
2
0

.

.

6
1
6
2
0
0
−

.

4
4
0

.

0
5
0

.

∗
∗
∗

∗
∗
∗

∗

7
5
0

.

1
5
0

.

1
2
0

.

∗
∗
∗

∗
∗
∗

∗

.

7
7
5
1
0
0
−

.

5
2
0

.

1
5
0

.

5
1
0

.

6
0
0

.

3
1
0

.

9
0
0

.

∗
∗
∗

∗
∗
∗

∗
∗

∗
∗
∗

∗
∗
∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

1
0
2
4
4
3
.
.
.
0
0
0
−
−
−

.

0
5
2
2
.
0
0
−

6
7
6
6
3
3
2
2
.
.
.
.
0
0
0
0
−
−
−

D
S

6
1
0

.

0
4
0

.

9
4
1

.

5
2
1

.

8
3
1

.

8
7
1

.

6
3
0

.

2
2
0

.

4
6
0

.

5
6
0

.

n
a
e

M

7
1
0

.

8
6
3

.

7
6
3

.

3
7
3

.

1
8
2

.

7
8
3

.

5
1
0

.

9
1
0

.

4
0
3

.

8
7
3

.

5
E
L
B
A
T

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C
r
e
d
r
O
-
o
r
e
Z
d
n
a

s
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
S

e
v
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
D

t
n
e
m

t
i

m
m
o
c

e
v
i
t
c
e
f
f
a

e
v
i
t
c
e
l
l
o
C

s
e
c
i
t
c
a
r
p
R
H

t
n
e
m
r
e
w
o
p
m
E

s
e
c
i
t
c
a
r
p
R
H
n
o
i
t
a
v
i
t
o
M

r
e
v
o
n
r
u
t

f
o

g
o
L

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
V

e
t
a
r

t
n
e
m
y
o
l
p
m
e
n
U

s
e
c
i
t
c
a
r
p
R
H

l
l
i
k
S

e
l
a
m
e
f

n
o
i
t
r
o
p
o
r
P

l
e
v
e
l
n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
E

s
u
t
a
t
s

n
o
i
n
U

5
0
.
0
<
p

.
3
9
=
N

e
r
u
n
e
T

∗

.
)
t
s
e
t
d
e
l
i
a
t
-
o
w

t
(

1
0
0

.

0
<
p

∗
∗
∗

,
)
t
s
e
t
d
e
l
i
a
t
-
o
w

t
(

.

1
0
0
<
p

∗
∗

,
)
t
s
e
t
d
e
l
i
a
t
-
o
w

t
(


TIMOTHY M. GARDNER ET AL.

339

empowerment-enhancing practices are negatively associated with volun-
tary turnover (p < 0.05). The greater use of these sets of practices the
lower the aggregate turnover among the job-group employees. Model 4b
in Table 4 illustrates the ﬁrst part of Step 4 of the Shrout and Bolger (2002)
protocol. The inclusion of the commitment variable in the model that in-
cludes the control variables and the three HR practice variables explains
an additional 2.6% of the variance (p < 0.05) of turnover. The com-
mitment coefﬁcient is, as expected, negative and signiﬁcant (p < 0.05).
The regression coefﬁcients for motivation- and empowerment-enhancing
practices decreased (−0.004 and −0.009, respectively), providing an ini-
tial estimate of the indirect mediating effect of commitment for these two
variables.

The ﬁnal step is to estimate the statistical signiﬁcance of the indirect
mediating effects. Numerous authors have criticized the original Baron
and Kenny (1986) protocol for estimating the statistical signiﬁcance of
observed mediation effects. The bootstrap resampling method (Shrout &
Bolger, 2002) requires many fewer assumptions than the Baron and Kenny
(1986) approach, provides tests of signiﬁcance in samples as few as 20,
and is widely accepted across a variety of literatures (MacKinnon, 2008;
Shrout & Bolger, 2002).

The estimate of the indirect effect of variable X on Y mediated by M is
simply the product of the regression coefﬁcient describing the relationship
between X and M (“a”) and the regression coefﬁcient of the relationship
describing the relationship between M and Y controlling for X (“b”); or
a × b. Using Stata 9.2 we used bootstrapping with replacement to generate
1,000 samples of the entire data set accompanied by 1,000 estimates of
Model 3 allowing the calculation of 1,000 estimate of the “coefﬁcient a”
for both skill (a1) and motivation (a2) enhancing practices; and 1,000 es-
timates of Model 4b in Table 4 allowing us to calculate 1,000 estimates of
“coefﬁcient b” the regression coefﬁcient describing commitment’s effect
on turnover controlling for motivation, empowerment, and skill-enhancing
practices. Multiplying our 1,000 estimates of “a1” and “a2” with our 1,000
estimates of “b” gave us 1,000 estimates of “a1·b” and “a2·b,” the esti-
mates of the mediated effects of motivation- and empowerment-enhancing
practices on aggregate voluntary turnover. Consistent with the results re-
ported above, the mean-mediated effect for motivation-enhancing prac-
tices was −0.004 with a 95% conﬁdence interval of −0.0043 to −0.0037.
Also consistent with the results reported above, the mean-mediated ef-
fect for empowerment was −0.009 with a 95% conﬁdence interval of
−0.0097 to −0.00897. As neither of these conﬁdence intervals included
zero, the independent mediation effects were statistically signiﬁcant. Di-
viding the estimates of the mediated effects (“a1·b” and “a2·b”) by the
direct effect regression coefﬁcients describing the relationship between


340

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

motivation and empowerment-enhancing practices estimated in Model
4a (aka c1’ & c2’) in Table 4 suggests collective affective commitment
mediates 16.7% of the effect of motivation-enhancing practices impact
on aggregate turnover (0.004/0.024) and mediates approximately 33.3%
of the effect of empowerment-enhancing practices on aggregate turnover
(0.009/0.027). These results support Hypotheses 3a and 3b.

The same four steps used to test for consistent mediation are used to
test for inconsistent mediation (see pages 68–70 of MacKinnon [2008]).
As before, commitment is associated with turnover (Step 1). In Step 2, one
would expect to see a positive relationship between skill-enhancing prac-
tices and collective commitment. As can be seen in Model 3 of Table 4,
skill-enhancing practices are not associated with commitment. Step 3, as-
sessing for a relationship between skill-enhancing practices and voluntary
turnover, is conﬁrmed. As can be seen in Model 4a in Table 4, skill-
enhancing practices are, as expected, independently positively associated
with voluntary turnover. Unlike consistent mediation, where in Step 4 one
expects to see a reduction in the relationship between the main variable
and the dependent variable following the introduction of the mediator,
one expects to see a strengthening of this relationship in the presence
of inconsistent mediation. As can be seen in Model 4b in Table 4 this
effect is not observed. Thus Hypothesis 3c predicted that skill-enhancing
practices would have an indirect, negative relationship with voluntary
turnover mediated by collective commitment and a positive relationship
with voluntary turnover independent of commitment. Only the positive
relationship between skill-enhancing practices and voluntary turnover, in-
dependent of commitment, was observed providing only partial support
for Hypothesis 3c.

In summary, consistent with past research, the results of this study
suggest a negative relationship between collective affective commitment
and aggregate voluntary turnover. Using the results from Model 3 in
Table 4, all else being equal, a one standard deviation increase in a job-
group’s collective affective commitment will be associated with a 4.75
percentage point reduction in the raw turnover rate.3 Average turnover
rate in this sample was 18.53% suggesting this ﬁnding translates into a
25.63% relative decrease in turnover (4.75/18.53). Using the results from
Model 4a in Table 4, a one standard deviation increase in motivation-
enhancing practices will be associated with a 3.64 percentage point reduc-
tion in raw turnover and 19.64% relative decrease in voluntary turnover.

3To calculate this estimate, we took the inverse-log of the product of regression coefﬁcient
for commitment in Model 2 of Table 4 and the standard deviation of commitment variable
from Table 5. We then subtracted 1.0 to account for integer we added to all elements of the
turnover vector to allow calculation of natural log (see “Aggregate Voluntary Turnover” in
Methods section). X = (inv-ln(.116∗.40)) − 1.0.


TIMOTHY M. GARDNER ET AL.

341

Of the raw decrease in turnover, 0.61 raw percentage points (16.7%) are
mediated by affective commitment and 3.03 raw percentage points are
independent of affective commitment. A one standard deviation increase
in empowerment-enhancing practices will be associated with a 3.43 per-
centage point reduction in raw turnover and a 18.51% relative decrease in
voluntary turnover. Of the absolute decrease in turnover, 1.14 percentage
points (33.3%) of the change in turnover is mediated by collective com-
mitment and 2.29 raw percentage points of the raw change in turnover is
independent of affective commitment. A one standard deviation increase
in skill-enhancing practices will be associated with 6.55 percentage point
increase in raw and 35.94% relative increase in voluntary turnover. Un-
expectedly, collective affective commitment did not act as an inconsistent
mediator for skill-enhancing practices and voluntary turnover.

Discussion

Voluntary turnover is both an individual and an aggregate phe-
nomenon. Individual feelings, perceptions, human capital, incidents, and
behaviors all commingle resulting in an individual’s discrete choice to
dissolve the employment relationship. One-hundred years of empirical
research has unpacked and systematized these many factors. The homog-
enizing effects of similar work, group context, and management prac-
tices produce regularities in employees’ attitudes that result in predictable
trends in aggregate turnover (Baysinger & Mobley, 1983). By drawing
on research from the macro-HRM and self-determination theory litera-
tures, these empirical results can be used to support the hypothesis that
motivation- and empowerment-enhancing practices’ are negatively related
to aggregate turnover and that this relationship is partially mediated by
collective commitment. On the other hand, consistent with the human cap-
ital tradition embedded in Trevor’s (2001) reinvigoration of March and
Simon’s (1958) turnover framework, our results suggest skill-enhancing
practices are positively associated with aggregate voluntary turnover, and
this relationship is unmediated by commitment. The following sections
elaborate on these ﬁndings, discuss limitations of the research, and discuss
practical insights managers might use to reduce aggregate voluntary
turnover.

One important theoretical contribution of this study is reconciling the
conﬂicting streams of thought about the role of commitment in mediating
the relationship between HR practices and aggregate voluntary turnover.
As previously noted, researchers have offered a variety of descriptions
of the relationships among HR practices, commitment, and voluntary
turnover. Our ﬁnding that commitment acts as a partial mediator supports
the suggestions of a mediating effect found in Arthur (1994), Batt (2002),


342

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

and Way (2002) and contradicts Huselid’s (1995) assertion that the impact
of HR practices on turnover is direct. These ﬁndings provide a foundation
for future research seeking to better understand the causal mechanisms by
which HR practices and other yet to be identiﬁed factors affect aggregate
voluntary turnover. Our demonstration of a mediation effect also provides
very strong evidence that the previously published ﬁndings of associa-
tion between HR practices and aggregate turnover were not spurious or
artifactual (MacKinnon et al., 2007).

A second contribution of this study is the particularization of the the-
ory explaining the HR practice, collective commitment, and aggregate
turnover relationship. Arthur (1994), Batt (2002), and Way (2002) were
indeﬁnite about the process by which commitment mediates the impact
of HR practices on aggregate turnover. By drawing on macro-HR theories
and self-determination theory (Deci & Ryan, 1985; Lepak et al., 2006), we
developed a speciﬁc, robust, and testable explanation for the association
between HR practices and collective commitment and between collective
commitment and aggregate turnover. This is a much needed contribu-
tion to the literatures on the antecedents and consequences of collective
commitment (Angle & Perry 1981; Ostroff, 1992).

In their integrated model of macro-HRM, Lepak et al. (2006) suggest
(a) HR systems inﬂuence organizational climate that affects employee
attributes, behaviors, and organizational outcomes; and (b) HR systems
directly affect employees’ collective abilities (human capital), opportunity
to perform, and thus collective job performance. This paper is the ﬁrst to
provide support for both segments of this model. The pivot point of the ﬁrst
segment is the connection between HR practices, shared beliefs/affect, and
collective behavior. Our paper ties these three constructs together giving
greater insight into mechanisms by which HR systems affect employee
and organizational outcomes. At least part of the impact of two of the
HR bundles (motivation and empowerment) on voluntary turnover was
indirect, through their impact on affective commitment.

We also found support for Lepak et al.’s (2006) hypothesis of direct
impact of HR systems on employee attributes and behaviors, in the ﬁnd-
ing that skill-enhancing practices are positively associated with aggregate
turnover, independent of collective commitment. In this study, we are
limited, like March and Simon (1958, p. 92), to interpreting voluntary
turnover as a form of aggregate “performance.” We are also limited to
presuming that skill-enhancing practices’ impact on voluntary turnover
is mediated by an increase in collective abilities and movement capital.
Despite these limitations, this study still provides a contribution to this
framework due to the minimal past research examining the connection
among HR practices, employee human capital, and collective job perfor-
mance. Tharenou et al.’s (2007) meta-analysis identiﬁed only one study


TIMOTHY M. GARDNER ET AL.

343

of the impact of training on collective job performance, and the results
were nonsigniﬁcant (Horgan & Muhlau, 2006). Our ﬁndings strongly sug-
gest the value of examining the link between skill-enhancing practices,
collective abilities, and collective job performance outcomes.

Finally, our study provides empirical support for the efﬁcacy of ex-
amining the different bundles of HR practices as opposed to an overall
index. Subramony (2009) found that all three bundles of HR practices
(skill, motivation, and empowerment) were positively related to most or-
ganizational performance measures. However, he found that although the
motivation and empowerment bundles were positively related to reten-
tion, the analysis of three studies showed the skill bundle was unrelated.
The former two have common psychological processes to explain their
relationship with the entire range of outcomes. However, skill-enhancing
practices elicit a host of labor market processes that may lead to differ-
ent (from motivation and empowerment) relationships with any particular
outcome, and even inconsistent (or contingent) relationships across differ-
ent outcomes. This suggests that future research can seek to better tease
out how skill-enhancing practices may relate to a number of important
outcomes.

Future research should also test the more complete model of the con-
nection between skill, motivation, and empowerment-enhancing practices,
collective attitudes, aggregate turnover, and accounting, operational, and
ﬁnancial market. Huselid (1995) comes closest to testing all of these steps
in one study. The methodological and statistical advances used in this
study can serve as a foundation for such research. One of the ﬁrst steps
should be to explore the role of collective turnover intentions. Hom and
Griffeth’s integrated model of turnover (1995, p. 108) suggests withdraw
cognitions both directly affect turnover decisions and start a chain of job
search leading to turnover. We recommend the ﬁrst step be the devel-
opment of a theoretical foundation to conceptualize these cognitions at
multiple levels of analysis before attempting to ﬁnd simple single-level
associations between collective turnover intentions and aggregate volun-
tary turnover.

There are several limitations to this study that need to be considered in
evaluating the results reported. First, we did not include a measure of pay
level as a component of one of the functional HR bundles or as a control.
Despite the popular press emphasis on the importance of pay, we feel
this is only a minor omission. Hom and Griffeth’s (1995) meta-analysis
concluded that pay level and turnover were only correlated at −0.06 at
the individual level. In a meta-analysis of seven studies that included
1,645 ﬁrms and business units, the population estimate of the correlation
between pay level and aggregate turnover rate was −0.11, but the 90%
conﬁdence interval included zero (Bradley, 2005).


344

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

Second, measuring the presence/absence of the HR practices prior to
combining them into the three indexes is less than optimal. Although we
feel that using this type of measure is acceptable when studying multiple
job groups in autonomous business units, it would be inappropriate in
most other settings. Future researchers should attempt to document the
relevance and scope of practices at the business unit or job-group level
(Delery, 1998).

Third, we did not have a ﬁnancial criterion to which we could demon-
strate the impact of voluntary turnover rates. However, we believe that
with the plethora of research linking HR practices to ﬁnancial perfor-
mance, this research ﬁlled an important gap by examining more proximal
outcomes that theoretically mediate the HR performance relationship.
Fourth, we were unable to distinguish between the turnover of high and
low performers (Shaw et al., 2009). Certainly, this is an area for future
research.

Finally, the results of this study may not be generalizable to settings
outside of service or even the food service industry. We believe that the
complex nature of food service warehousing, delivery, and sales makes this
study generalizable to a large portion of the U.S. economy but additional
studies in other industries or multiindustry studies may be needed.

On the positive side, however, this study provided a solid test of the
issues we explored. This study used a true longitudinal design as opposed
to a retrospective longitudinal design (asking HR managers to estimate
HR practices or employees to estimate their commitment in the distant
past) or a postpredictive design (measuring a metric like turnover that
has taken place in the past at the same time current attitudes or HR
practices are measured). Voluntary turnover as opposed to total turnover
was measured. Common method bias was nearly a nonissue as collective
commitment and HR practices were measured using different sources;
HR practices and collective commitment were measured 12 months prior
to aggregate voluntary turnover. We used an established set of control
variables that controlled for human capital (gender, education, tenure) and
contextual factors (unionization and local unemployment rates) that might
have explained variation in aggregate turnover rates. Human resource
practices were measured at the job-group as opposed to the business-unit
level, allowing much more accuracy in measuring the use of the practices
(Gerhart et al., 2000). Finally, clustered regression with robust standard
errors allowed us to estimate parameter coefﬁcients while controlling for
the homogeneity resulting from job groups being nested within business
units.

This paper provides insights for managers seeking to control aggre-
gate turnover. Cappelli’s (1999) book, The New Deal at Work, mapped
the challenges of building a pool of talented employees through the use of


TIMOTHY M. GARDNER ET AL.

345

lateral hiring and training investments as employees’ willingness and
ability to freely move across organizational boundaries dramatically in-
creased. On one level, this study provides support for his assertion that in-
vestments in talent are portable. More importantly, these ﬁndings provide
a template for reducing the increased turnover associated with improved
hiring and training investments. In the broadest sense, tactics that increase
the affective commitment of the focal workforce may offset the increased
turnover from the use of skill-enhancing practices. Takeuchi, Chen, &
Lepak (2009) make a strong theoretical and empirical case that organiza-
tions that develop a climate of concern for employees (perceived organiza-
tional support) can improve individual affective commitment. Our results
speciﬁcally point to the role motivation- and empowerment-enhancing
practices play in improving collective commitment and thus reducing
aggregate turnover. Motivation-enhancing practices such as merit pay,
promotion opportunities, and individual, group, and organizational incen-
tives may increase commitment and reduce turnover and decrease aggre-
gate turnover in a process not mediated by commitment. Similarly, man-
agers may wish to implement or enhance their use of such empowerment-
enhancing practices as information sharing, formal grievance procedures,
and participation programs. Overall, our ﬁndings point to the importance
of the varying effects of different HR practices and the importance of sup-
plementing skill-enhancing practices with motivation-enhancing practices
to reduce turnover and potentially capture the performance beneﬁts of a
better workforce.

REFERENCES

Alba-Ramirez A. (1993). Mismatch in the Spanish labor market. Journal of Human Re-

sources, 28, 259–278.

Almeida P, Kogut B. (1999). The localization of knowledge and the mobility of engineers

in regional networks. Management Science, 45, 905–917.

Angle H, Perry J. (1981). An empirical assessment of organizational commitment and

organizational effectiveness. Administrative Science Quarterly, 26, 1–14.

Appelbaum E, Bailey T, Berg P, Kallenberg AL. (2000). Manufacturing advantage: Why

high-performance work systems pay off. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Arthur JB. (1994). Effects of human resource systems on manufacturing performance and

turnover. Academy of Management Journal, 37, 670–687.

Bailey T. (1993). Discretionary effort and the organization of work: Employee participation
and work reform since Hawthorne. Columbia University, New York (Paper prepared
for the Sloan Foundation).

Baron JN, Kreps DM. (1999). Strategic human resources: Frameworks for general man-

agers. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons.

Baron RM, Kenny DA. (1986). The moderator-mediator variable distinction in so-
cial psychological research. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51,
1173–1182.


346

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

Barsade SG. (2002). The ripple effect: Emotional contagion and its inﬂuence on group

behavior. Administrative Science Quarterly, 47, 644–675.

Batt R. (2002). Managing customer services: Human resource practices, quit rates, and

sales growth. Academy of Management Journal, 45, 587–597.

Batt R, Colvin AJS, Keefe J. (2002). Employee voice, human resource practices, and
quit rates: Evidence from the telecommunications industry. Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, 55, 573–594.

Baysinger BD, Mobley WH. (1983). Employee turnover: Individual and organizational
analysis. In Rowland KM, Ferris GR (Eds.), Research in personnel and human
resource management (pp. 269–319). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Becker BE, Huselid MA. (1998). High performance work systems and ﬁrm performance:
A synthesis of research and managerial implications. In Ferris GR (Ed.), Research
in personnel and human resource management, Vol. 16 (pp. 53—101). Greenwich,
CT: JAI Press.

Becker GS. (1975). Human capital. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Benson GS, Finegold D, Mohrman SA. (2004). You paid for the skills, now keep them:
Tuition reimbursement and voluntary turnover. Academy of Management Journal,
47, 315–331.

Boorstin J. (2005). Delivering at Domino’s Pizza. Fortune, 151, 7 February: 28.
Bradley BH. (2005). The effects of compensation practices on organizational turnover: A
meta-analysis. Working paper. University of Iowa: Department of Management and
Organizations.

Caldwell DF, Chatman JA, O’Reilly CA. (1990). Building organizational commitment: A

multiﬁrm study. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 63, 245–261.

Cappelli P. (1999). The new deal at work: Managing the market driven workforce. Boston,

MA: Harvard Business School Press.

Cappelli P. (2008). Talent on demand: Managing talent in an age of uncertainty. Boston,

MA: Harvard Business Press.

Chan D. (1998). Functional relations among constructs in the same content domain at
different levels of analysis: A typology of composition models. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 83, 234–246.

Coff RW. (1997). Human assets and management dilemmas: Coping with hazards
on the road to resource-based theory. Academy of Management Review, 22,
374–402.

Combs J, Liu Y, Hall A, Ketchen D. (2006). How much do high-performance work practices
matter? A meta-analysis of their effects on organizational performance. PERSONNEL
PSYCHOLOGY, 59, 501–528.

Deci E, Ryan RM. (1985). Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human behavior.

New York, NY: Plenum.

Delery JE. (1998). Issues of ﬁt in strategic human resource management: Implications for

research. Human Resource Management Review, 8, 289–309.

Delery JE, Shaw JD. (2001). The strategic management of people in work organizations:
Review, synthesis, and extension. Research in Personnel and Human Resource
Management, 20, 165–197.

Dyer L, Reeves T. (1995). HR strategies and ﬁrm performance: What do we need to
know and where do we need to go? International Journal of Human Resource
Management, 6, 656–670.

Frazis H, Gittleman M, Harrigan M, Joyce M. (1998). Results from the 1995 survey of

employer-provided training. Monthly Labor Review, 121, 3–13.

Freeman RB. (1980). The exit-voice tradeoff in the labor market: Unionism, job tenure,

quits, and separations. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 94, 643–673.


TIMOTHY M. GARDNER ET AL.

347

Galunic DC, Anderson E. (2000). From security to mobility: Generalized investments in

human capital and agent commitment. Organization Science, 11, 1–20.

Gardner TM. (2005). Interﬁrm competition for human resources: Evidence from the soft-

ware industry. Academy of Management Journal, 48, 237–256.

Gerhart B. (2007). Horizontal and vertical ﬁt in human resource systems. In Ostroff C,
Judge TA (Eds.), Perspectives on organizational ﬁt (pp. 317–348). New York, NY:
Psychology Press.

Gerhart B, Wright PM, McMahan GC, Snell SA. (2000). Measurement error in research
on human resource decisions and ﬁrm performance: How much error is there
and how does it inﬂuence effect size estimates? PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY, 53,
803–834.

Glebbeek AC, Bax EH. (2004). Is high employee turnover really harmful? An empirical

test using company records. Academy of Management Journal, 47, 277–286.

Gravetter FJ, Wallnau LB. (2009). Statistics for the behavioral sciences. Belmont, CA:

Wadsworth.

Greguras GJ, Diefendorff JM. (2009). Different ﬁts satisfy different needs: Linking person-
environment ﬁt to employee commitment and performance using self-determination
theory. Journal of Applied Psychology, 94, 465–477.

Griffeth RW, Hom PW, Gaertner S. (2000). A meta-analysis of antecedents and correlates
of employee turnover: Update, moderator tests, and research implications for the
next millennium. Journal of Management, 26, 463–488.

Hair JF, Anderson RE, Tatham RL, Black WC. (1998). Multivariate data analysis. Upper

Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Hammer TH, Avgar A. (2005). The impact of unions on job satisfaction, organizational

commitment, and turnover. Journal of Labor Research, 26, 241–266.

Hinkin TR, Tracey JB. (1999). An analysis of variance approach to content validation.

Organizational Research Methods, 2, 175–186.

Hofmann DA, Mark B. (2006). An investigation of the relationship between safety climate
and medication errors as well as other nurse and patient outcomes. PERSONNEL
PSYCHOLOGY, 59, 847–869.

Hom PW, Griffeth RW. (1995). Employee turnover. Cincinnati, OH: South-Western College

Publishing.

Horgan J, Muhlau P. (2006). Human resource systems and employee performance in Ireland
and the Netherlands. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 17,
414–439.

Hulin CL. (1968). Effects of changes in job-satisfaction levels on employee turnover.

Journal of Applied Psychology, 52, 122–126.

Hulin CL, Roznowski M, Hachiya D. (1985). Alternative opportunities and withdraw
decisions: Empirical and theoretical discrepancies and an integration. Psychological
Bulletin, 97, 233–250.

Huselid MA. (1995). The impact of human resource management practices on turnover, pro-
ductivity, and corporate ﬁnancial performance. Academy of Management Journal,
38, 635–672.

Kanter RM. (1968). Commitment and social organization: A study of commitment mech-

anisms in utopian communities. American Sociological Review, 33, 499–517.

Kozlowski SWJ, Klein K. (2000). A multilevel approach to theory and research on orga-
nizations: Contextual, temporal, and emergent processes. In Klein KJ, Kozlowski
SWJ (Eds.), Multilevel theory, research, and methods in organizations (pp. 3–90).
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Krackhardt D, Porter LW. (1986). The snowball effect: Turnover embedded in communi-

cation networks. Journal of Applied Psychology, 71, 50–55.


348

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

LeBreton JM, Senter JL. (2008). Answers to 20 questions about interrater reliability and

interrater agreement. Organizational Research Methods, 11, 815–852.

Leonard JS. (1987). Carrots and sticks: Pay, supervision, and turnover. Journal of Labor

Economics, 5, S136–S152.

Lepak DP, Snell SA. (1999). The human resource architecture: Toward a theory of human

capital allocation and development. Academy of Management Review, 24, 31–48.

Lepak DP, Snell SA. (2002). Examining the human resource architecture: The relationship
among human capital, employment, and human resource conﬁgurations. Journal of
Management, 28, 517–543.

Lepak DP, Liao H, Chung Y, Harden EE. (2006). A conceptual review of human resource
management systems in strategic human resource management research. Research
in Personnel and Human Resources Management, 25, 217–271.

Levinson H. (1965). Reciprocation: The relationship between man and organization. Ad-

ministrative Science Quarterly, 9, 370–390.

Lincoln JR, Kalleberg AL. (1996). Commitment, quits, and work organization in Japanese

and U.S. plants. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 50, 39–59.

Long RL. (1980). Job attitudes and organizational performance under employee ownership.

Academy of Management Journal, 23, 726–737.

Lowenstein MA, Spletzer JR. (1999). General and speciﬁc training: Evidence and implica-

tions. Journal of Human Resources, 34, 710–733.

MacDufﬁe JP. (1995). Human resource bundles and manufacturing performance: Organi-
zational logic and ﬂexible production systems in the world auto industry. Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, 48, 197–221.

MacKenzie SB, Podsakoff PM, Jarvis CB. (2005). The problem of measurement model
misspeciﬁcation in behavioral and organizational research and some recommended
solutions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90, 710–730.

MacKinnon DP. (2008). Introduction to statistical mediation analysis. New York, NY:

Erlbaum.

MacKinnon DP, Fairchild AJ, Fritz MS. (2007). Mediation analysis. Annual Review of

Psychology, 58, 593–614.

MacKinnon DP, Krull JL, Lockwood CM. (2000). Equivalence of the mediation, confound-

ing and suppression effect. Prevention Science, 1, 173–181.

Maertz CP, Campion MA. (2004). Proﬁles in quitting: Integrating process and content

turnover theory. Academy of Management Journal, 47, 566–582.

March J, Simon H. (1958). Organizations. New York, NY: Wiley.
Mathieu JE, Zajac D. (1990). A review and meta-analysis of the antecedents, correlates,
and consequences of organizational commitment. Psychological Bulletin, 108,
171–194.

Meyer JP, Allen NJ. (1997). Commitment in the workplace: Theory, research, and appli-

cation. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Meyer JP, Herscovitch L. (2001). Commitment in the workplace: Toward a general model.

Human Resource Management Review, 11, 299–326.

Meyer JP, Stanley DJ, Herscovitch L, Topolnytsky L. (2002). Affective, continuance,
and normative commitment to the organization: A meta-analysis of antecedents,
correlates, and consequences. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 61, 20–52.

Morgeson FP, Hofmann DA. (1999). The structure and function of collective constructs:
Implications for multilevel research and theory development. Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 24, 249–265.

Mowday RT, Porter LW, Steers RM. (1982). Employee-organization linkages: The psychol-

ogy of commitment, absenteeism, and turnover. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Nunnally JC, Bernstein IH. (1994). Psychometric theory. New York, NY: McGraw Hill.


TIMOTHY M. GARDNER ET AL.

349

Osterman P. (1995). Work/family programs and the employment relationship. Administra-

tive Science Quarterly, 40, 681–700.

Ostroff C. (1992). The relationship between satisfaction, attitudes, and performance: An

organizational-level analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78, 693–974.

Pare G, Tremblay M. (2007). The inﬂuence of high-involvement human resources prac-
tices, procedural justice, organizational commitment, and citizenship behaviors on
information technology professionals’ turnover intentions. Group and Organization
Management, 32, 326–357.

Parsons DO. (1972). Speciﬁc human capital: An application to quit rates and layoff rates.

The Journal of Political Economy, 80, 1120–1143.

Pascale R. (1985). The paradox of “corporate culture”: Reconciling ourselves to socializa-

tion. California Management Review, 27, 26–40.

Pigou AC. (1912). Wealth and welfare. London, UK: Macmillan.
Porter LW, Steers RM, Mowday RT, Boulin PV. (1974). Organizational commitment,
job satisfaction, and turnover among psychiatric technicians. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 59, 603–609.

Price JL, Mueller CW. (1981). A causal model of turnover for nurses. Academy of Man-

agement Journal, 24, 543–565.

Rao H, Drazin R. (2002). Overcoming resource constraints on product innovation by
recruiting talent from rivals: A study of the mutual fund industry, 1986–1994.
Academy of Management Journal, 45, 491–507.

Rogers WH. (1993). Regression standard errors in clustered samples. State Technical

Bulletin, 13, 19–23, Stata Technical Bulletin Reprints.

Ryan AM, Sacco JM, McFarland LA, Kriska SD. (2000). Applicant self-selection: Corre-
lates of withdrawal from a multiple hurdle process. Journal of Applied Psychology,
85, 163–179.

Schlicht E. (1978). Labour turnover, wages structure, and natural unemployment. Journal

of Institutional and Theoretical Economics, 134, 337–364.

Schneider B. (1987). The people make the place. PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY, 40, 437–453.
Shaw JD, Delery JE, Jenkins GD, Gupta N. (1998). An organization-level analysis
of voluntary and involuntary turnover. Academy of Management Journal, 41,
511–525.

Shaw JD, Dineen BR, Fang R, Vellella RF. (2009). Employee–organization exchange
relationships, HRM practices, and quit rates of good and poor performers. Academy
of Management Journal, 52, 1016–1033.

Shaw JD, Duffy MK, Johnson JL, Lockhart DE. (2005). Turnover, social capital losses,

and performance. Academy of Management Journal, 48, 594–606.

Shrout PE, Bolger N. (2002). Mediation in experimental and nonexperimental studies: New

procedures and recommendations. Psychological Methods, 7, 422–445.

Simons T, Roberson Q. (2003). Why managers should care about fairness: The effects
of aggregate justice perceptions on organizational outcomes. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 88, 432–443.

Spencer DG. (1986). Employee voice and employee retention. Academy of Management

Journal, 29, 488–502.

Sproull NL. (1995). Handbook of research methods. Kent, UK: Scarecrow Press.
Stone KVW. (2004). From widgets to digits: Employment regulation for the changing

workplace. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Subramony M. (2009). A meta-analytic investigation of the relationship between HRM

bundles and ﬁrm performance. Human Resource Management, 48, 745–768.

Takeuchi R, Chen G, Lepak DP. (2009). Through the looking glass of a social system: Cross-
level effects of high-performance work systems on employee attitudes. PERSONNEL
PSYCHOLOGY, 62, 1–29.


350

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

Tannenbaum SI, Mathieu JE, Salas E, Bowers JA. (1991). Meeting training expectations:
The inﬂuence of training fulﬁllment on the development of commitment, self -
efﬁcacy, and motivation. Journal of Applied Psychology, 76, 759–769.

Terborg JR, Lee TW. (1984). A predictive study of organizational turnover rates. Academy

of Management Journal, 27, 793–810.

Tharenou P, Saks AM, Moore C. (2007). A review and critique of research on training and
organizational-level outcomes. Human Resource Management Review, 17, 251–273.
Trevor CO. (2001). Interactions among actual ease-of-movement determinants and job sat-
isfaction in the prediction of voluntary turnover. Academy of Management Journal,
44, 621–638.

Trevor CO, Nyberg AJ (2008). Keeping your headcount when all about you are losing theirs:
Downsizing, voluntary turnover rates, and the moderating role of HR practices.
Academy of Management Journal, 51, 259–276.

Tyler TR. (1999). Why people cooperate with organizations: An identity-based perspective.

Research in Organizational Behavior, 21, 201–246.

Way SA. (2002). High performance work systems and intermediate indicators of ﬁrm
performance within the US small business sector. Journal of Management, 28,
765–785.

Williams RL. (2000). A note on robust variance estimation for cluster-correlated data.

Biometrics, 56, 645–646.

Wilson N, Peel MJ. (1991). The impact on absenteeism and quits of proﬁt-sharing and
other forms of employee participation. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 44,
454–468.

Wright PM, Gardner TM, Moynihan LM, Allen MR. (2005). The relationship between HR
practices and ﬁrm performance: Examining causal order. PERSONNEL PSYCHOL-
OGY, 58, 409–446.

Wright PM, Gardner TM, Moynihan LM, Park HJ, Gerhart B, Delery JE (2001). Mea-
surement error in research on human resource decisions and ﬁrm performance:
Additional data and suggestions for future research. PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY,
54, 875–901.

