INFORMATION TO USERS

This  manuscript has  been  reproduced from  the  microfilm  master.  UMI  films  the 
text  directly  from  the  original  or  copy  submitted.  Thus,  some  thesis  and 
dissertation  copies  are  in  typewriter face,  while others  may  be from  any type  of 
computer printer.

The quality of this reproduction  is  dependent upon  the quality of the  copy 
subm itted.  Broken  or  indistinct  print,  colored  or  poor  quality  illustrations  and 
photographs,  print  bleedthrough,  substandard  margins,  and  improper  alignment 
can adversely affect reproduction.

In the unlikely event that the author did not send UMI a complete manuscript and 
there  are  missing  pages,  these  will  be  noted.  Also,  if  unauthorized  copyright 
material had to be removed,  a note will indicate the deletion.

Oversize  materials  (e.g.,  maps,  drawings,  charts)  are  reproduced  by  sectioning 
the  original,  beginning  at  the  upper  left-hand  comer and  continuing  from  left  to 
right in equal sections with small overlaps.  Each original  is also photographed in 
one exposure and is included in reduced form at the back of the book.

in 

included 

the  original  manuscript  have  been 

Photographs 
reproduced 
xerographically in this copy.  Higher quality 6" x 9”  black and white photographic 
prints are available for any photographs or illustrations appearing in this copy for 
an additional charge.  Contact UMI directly to order.

Bell & Howell Information and Learning 

300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, Ml  48106-1346 USA 

800-521-0600

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


NOTE TO  USERS

This reproduction is the best copy available.

UMI’

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


WORKPLACE WHINING:  ANTECEDENTS AND PROCESS OF 

NONINSTRUMENTAL COMPLAINING

A Dissertation

Submitted to the Graduate Faculty o f the 

Louisiana State University and 

Agricultural and Mechanical College 

in partial fulfillment of the 

requirements for the degree of 

Doctor of Philosophy

in

The Interdepartmental Program of Business Administration

by

Anita Konieczka Heck 

B.S., Nicholls State University, 1987 

M.B.A., Nicholls State University, 1994 

December 2000

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


UMI Number: 9998682

Copyright 2000  by 
Heck, Anita Konieczka

All rights reserved.

___ 

®UMI

UMI Microform 9998682 

Copyright 2001  by Bell & Howell Information and Learning Company. 

All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against 

unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code.

Bell & Howell  Information and Learning Company 

300 North Zeeb Road 

P.O.  Box 1346 

Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


©Copyright 2000 

Anita Konieczka Heck 

All rights reserved

ii

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

I would like to thank Dr. Arthur G. Bedeian for his role as chair of my 

dissertation committee and for his unwavering support and guidance throughout my 

doctoral studies and dissertation process.  Additionally, I would like to thank my 

dissertation committee members:  Drs. Kevin W. Mossholder, Timothy D. Chandler, 

and Irving M. Lang for their invaluable contributions to my dissertation.  I would also 

like to thank my husband, David, and my family, for their support and encouragement 

during my studies at LSU.

iii

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


TABLE OF CONTENTS

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS..............................................................................................iii

LIST OF TABLES............................................................................................................. v

ABSTRACT........................................................................................................................ vi

CHAPTER

1:  THE DISSERTATION TOPIC......................................................................1

2:  CONCEPTUAL SCHEME DEVELOPMENT AND HYPOTHESES...  18

3:  PRETESTING...............................................................................................45

4:  METHOD...................................................................................................... 61

5:  ANALYSES AND RESULTS.......................................................................65

6:  DISCUSSION................................................................................................. 73

REFERENCES..................................................................................................................97

APPENDIX

A:  EMPLOYEE COVER LETTER (PILOT STUDY)..................................112

B:  EMPLOYEE SURVEY (PILOT STUDY)................................................ 114

Cl: SUPERVISOR SURVEY (PILOT STUDY)............................................ 120

C2: FOLLOW-UP SUPERVISOR SURVEY (PILOT STUDY)...................122

D:  LIST OF MEASURES (PILOT STUDY)................................................. 124

E:  TEACHER COVER LETTER  (FINAL STUDY)....................................128

F:  TEACHER SURVEY (FINAL STUDY)................................................... 130

G:  PRINCIPAL COVER LETTER  (FINAL STUDY).................................136

H:  PRINCIPAL SURVEY (FINAL STUDY)................................................ 138

I:  LIST OF MEASURES (FINAL STUDY)................................................. 140

V IT A ..............................................................................................................................144

iv

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


LIST OF TABLES

Table

1
Summary of Hypotheses.....................................................................................44

Table

2

Principal-Rated Whining Measures (Pilot Study)
Principal Axis Factor Analysis...........................................................................57

Table

3
Means, Standard Deviations, Reliabilities,
And Correlations for All Pilot Test Variables..................................................60

Table

4
Means, Standard Deviations, Reliabilities,
And Correlations for All Final Study Variables............................................... 66

Table

5
Results of Mediated Regression Analysis......................................................... 69

Table

6

Summary of Hypotheses and Outcomes............................................................72

v

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


ABSTRACT

The purpose of this dissertation was to develop a conceptual scheme that advances 

understanding o f workplace whining.  It reports an investigation into eight 

theoretically relevant antecedents to workplace whining, classified into four categories 

(i.e., dispositional, attitudinal, relational, behavioral).  Additionally, it explores the 

role of organization-based self-esteem in mediating the link between each antecedent 

and workplace whining.  Kowalski’s (1996) theory of complaining and self-esteem 

theory (Coopersmith,  1967, Epstein,  1973; Jones,  1973; Leary & Downs,  1995, Mruk, 

1995; Pierce et al., 1989) provided the primary theoretical underpinnings for a series 

of hypothesized relationships.  Data on 471 schoolteachers and their immediate 

supervisors from 25 elementary, middle, and high schools generally support the 

proposed conceptual scheme, indicating that when individuals detect discrepancies 

between their ideal states and their perceived actual states they become dissatisfied, 

which in turn results in a reduction in current levels of organization-based self-esteem. 

This deflation of self-esteem then motivates individuals to whine in an effort to 

distance themselves from negative and dissatisfying states or outcomes.  Furthermore, 

results support full mediation between workplace whining and seven of the eight 

specified antecedents.  That is, the effects of negative affectivity, overall job 

satisfaction, facet satisfaction, affective commitment, procedural justice, distributive 

justice, and leader-member exchange with workplace whining were fully mediated 

through organization-based self-esteem.  The relationship between the eighth 

antecedent (i.e., job performance) and workplace whining was partially mediated by

vi

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


organization-based self-esteem, indicating job performance significantly influenced 

workplace whining directly, as well as indirectly.

vii

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


CHAPTER 1:  THE DISSERTATION TOPIC 

Introduction

Complaining is primarily an expression of dissatisfaction.  Some people appear 

to be satisfied under most circumstances, whereas other’s appear to be perennially 

dissatisfied (Bassett,  1994).  Seemingly, however, everyone complains, though some 

individuals complain more than others.  In this respect, the types of complaints 

registered, reasons for complaining, the manner in which complaints are expressed, 

and the frequency of complaints play an important role in how others perceive and 

interact with those who complain (Alicke, Braun, Glor, Klotz, Magee, Sederholm, & 

Siegel,  1992).

The vast majority of research on complaining has been limited to consumer 

satisfaction in the marketing arena, focusing on issues such as consumer perceptions 

of costs and benefits associated with lodging complaints (Richins,  1980), consumer 

attitudes toward complaining (Richins, 1981), antecedents and consequences of 

consumer dissatisfaction (Bearden & Teel, 1983), consumer behavior following 

complaints (Bennett,  1997; Blodgett, Granbois, & Walters,  1993), and the impact of 

personality traits on postpurchase complaining (Mooradian & Olver,  1997).  In a 

similar vein, complaining as it pertains to symptom reporting has been studied in the 

health-psychology arena (e.g., Cohen, Doyle, Skoner, Fireman, Gwaltney, & Newsom, 

1995; Costa & McCrae,  1985).  Costa and McCrae (1985) found neuroticism to be 

related to subjective health complaints and generally unrelated to objective health 

indicators.  Likewise, Cohen and colleagues (1995) found the association between trait 

negative affectivity and complaining to be independent of objective symptoms of

1

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


2

illness.  Little research other than that involving formal labor-management grievance 

procedures (see Bemmels & Foley,  1996, for a review), however, has been conducted 

on complaining in the workplace.

Statement of the Problem

As an expression of dissatisfaction, complaining can be a pervasive and 

powerful form of interpersonal behavior involving social interaction and 

communication (Alicke et al.,  1992).  Dissatisfaction occurs when, upon evaluation, 

one determines that a discrepancy exists between one’s standards and one’s current 

situation or state of affairs (Kowalski,  1996).  In this respect, researchers have 

identified two distinct types of complaints -- instrumental and noninstrumental (Alicke 

et al.,  1992; Kowalski,  1996).  Instrumental complaints are expressed for the purpose 

of changing an undesirable state of affairs.  For example, a consumer who demands a 

refund for a faulty product or speaks to a supervisor concerning a rude customer 

service employee is expressing dissatisfaction and seeking redress by registering an 

instrumental complaint.  A substantial portion of the related consumer literature has 

addressed this type of complaining.  Likewise, research in labor-management relations 

concerning the nature of grievances and the grievance process has also primarily 

focused on instrumental complaining (Allen & Keaveny,  1985; Dalton & Todor,  1982; 

Eckerman,  1948; Klaas,  1989).

Within a unionized setting, grievances are complaints by employees who feel 

that their rights, as outlined in a collective bargaining agreement, have been violated 

(Cappelli & Chauvin, 1991).  As a form of instrumental complaining, many grievances 

are undoubtedly warranted, highlighting issues or circumstances that merit attention.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


3

For example, an employee who complains to a supervisor about hazardous working 

conditions is expressing an instrumental complaint.  Similarly, whistle-blowing, where 

an employee discloses illegal, immoral, or illegitimate practices to authorities outside 

an organization (Near & Miceli,  1985,  1996), may be considered an example of 

instrumental complaining.  This type of complaint has been widely addressed in the 

academic literature.

In contrast, this dissertation focuses on noninstrumental complaining, which 

has been virtually ignored in the academic literature, as well as in the published 

organizational behavior literature.  Alicke and colleagues (1992) report that over 75% 

of all complaints are noninstrumental, with the most frequent complaint involving the 

specific behaviors of another person.  A distinguishing characteristic of 

noninstrumental complaints is that they are expressed not to effect change in one’s 

environment, but rather to serve a social expressive or control-maintaining function 

(Alicke et al.,  1992).  Noninstrumental complaining provides an emotional release 

from frustration.  Simply put, individuals complain because it makes them feel better. 

Further, when control is threatened by an inability to confront the source of one’s 

dissatisfaction, complaining may aid in regaining control by providing an outlet for 

expressing one’s dissatisfaction (Alicke et al.,  1992).  Individuals may also use 

noninstrumental complaining as a method to “save face”, by attempting to influence 

negative impressions others may have formed of them.  Complaints motivated by an 

individual’s need to save face or preserve self-esteem may be manifested through 

blasting (i.e., derogating others to make oneself look better), excuse-making, or self- 

handicapping (Kowalski, 1996; Kowalski & Erickson,  1997).

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


4

Thus, whereas noninstrumental complaining may be instrumental for an 

individual in attaining intrapsychic (e.g., relieving feelings of frustration through 

venting) or interpersonal goals (e.g., changing perceptions or behaviors of others; 

Kowalski & Erickson, 1997), it is not generally instrumental in bringing about change 

or in problem solving within an organizational context.  By way of illustration, 

common noninstrumental complaints might include:  “The company doesn’t 

appreciate me.”  “The company won’t help me plan my career.”  “Nobody tells me 

what’s going on around here.”  “The boss is a knucklehead.”  “My evaluation wasn’t 

fair.”  “My last raise was too long ago, and too small” (Fisher,  1996, p. 206).

Noninstrumental complaining in and of itself is not necessarily aversive in 

nature.  There are particular features that differentiate aversive complaining from 

occasional expressions of dissatisfaction (Kowalski & Erickson,  1997).  Complaining 

may be perceived as aversive when it is frequent, indiscriminant, inauthentic, 

nonverifiable (i.e., involves subjective, personal opinions), indirect (i.e., voiced to 

individuals who are not, or have no control over, the source of the complaint), and 

focused on inconsequential issues (Kowalski & Erickson,  1997).

Individuals who complain habitually and primarily express noninstrumental 

complaints are often labeled “whiners” (Kowalski, Simons, Litty, Bryson, White, & 

Harris,  1997).  Webster’s New World Dictionary defines whining as “to utter a 

peevish, high-pitched, somewhat nasal sound, as in complaint, distress, fear, etc.” 

(Guralnik, 1972, p. 1620)  Whiners are characterized as “crybabies who voice 

protracted protests over the unimportant” (Solomon,  1990, p. 276).  They are seen as 

thriving on exaggerated gripes, such as unfair workloads, tardy reports, broken rules,

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


5

and coworkers’ shortcomings, rarely reporting legitimate problems (Solomon,  1990, p. 

267).

Kowalski and colleagues (1997) identified three factors that profile the chronic 

complainer: (a)  chronicitv of complaining (i.e., all or most conversations include a 

complaint); (b) doematisim (i.e., efforts to get others to share their views); and (c) 

pessimism (i.e., impossible to please).  In short, chronic complainers are seen by 

others as individuals who continually whine, lack social skills, and generally focus on 

themselves.  Given this negative profile, it is likely that the presence of chronic 

complainers produces negative workplace consequences.  Indeed, as observed by 

Kowalski (1997, p. 3), whining can be carried too far by overstepping the bounds of 

appropriate interpersonal interactions.  In such situations, ongoing interactions with 

chronic complainers can be aversive and of no benefit to their listeners, their work 

group, or their organization.  Ultimately, chronic whining will damage interpersonal 

relationships between a whiner and others in a work environment (Kowalski, 1997,

p.6).

Workplace whining is virtually inevitable due to the dynamic social and 

cultural context in which most working relationships exist.  Individuals in a workplace 

interact with one another and these interactions have individual, group, and 

organizational consequences.  Moreover, because organizations are social structures, 

aversive interpersonal behaviors, such as noninstrumental complaining (i.e., whining), 

should not be viewed as anomalies, but recognized as an unavoidable part of the social 

relationships that necessarily develop among organizational members (Kowalski, 

1997).  To date, however, the etiology of workplace whining has received sparse

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


6

attention in the organizational behavior literature.  Given its prevalence, as well as its 

aversive and detrimental nature, workplace whining is a topic that merits further 

investigation.

By focusing on identifying antecedents of workplace whining, we may gamer 

an awareness of a phenomenon that is seemingly ubiquitous in all work settings. 

Further, increased knowledge of the “whining process” may lead to the development 

of interventions to help minimize whining and ameliorate its negative consequences. 

Indeed, Kowalski (1996) has recently called for research into the antecedents and 

consequences of complaining, as a neglected area of interpersonal behavior.  She 

further proposed that a diversity of fields would likely benefit from practical 

implications such research might yield.  This dissertation is an initial step toward that 

end.

Drawing primarily from complaining and self-esteem theory, this dissertation 

develops a conceptual scheme that advances extant understanding by identifying four 

categories of antecedents to workplace whining.  These antecedents were drawn from 

several bodies of literature, including those dealing with affectivity, work attitudes, 

organizational justice, performance, and leadership.  The four categories of 

antecedents chosen include, dispositional, attitudinal, relational, and behavioral 

factors.  These specific antecedents were selected based on theory and their relevance 

to the workplace setting.  Self-enhancement theory provided a starting point for 

interpreting the motivational forces underlying the whining process.  Accordingly, the 

conceptual scheme explores the mediating process of a specific form of self-esteem as 

a linking mechanism between each antecedent and workplace whining.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


7

In sum, the purpose of this dissertation was to examine theoretically relevant 

antecedents and the motivational role of self-esteem in the whining process within a 

workplace context.  It is not suggested, however, that these particular antecedents are 

the only precursors of workplace whining nor is it proposed that they are better 

predictors than other constructs (e.g., supervisor trust and respect, violation of the 

psychological contract).  Likewise, it is not suggested that organization based self­

esteem is the best or only mediator.  It is suggested, however, that these constructs 

have the potential to increase our understanding of the determinants and process of 

workplace whining.

Theoretical Framework 

Kowalski (1996) recently proposed a theoretical framework outlining the 

conditions under which complaining occurs.  She suggested that dissatisfaction is a 

sufficient, but not necessary condition for complaining, and that individuals possess 

both separate dissatisfaction and complaining thresholds.  For example, an individual 

may be satisfied with a relationship (i.e., dissatisfaction threshold is high), but may 

also feel that expressing dissatisfaction will nevertheless achieve a desired outcome 

(i.e., complaining threshold is low), though no dissatisfaction is actually experienced. 

Conversely, if an individual is dissatisfied (i.e., dissatisfaction threshold is low), but 

perceives that the utility of complaining is outweighed by undesired consequences, an 

individual will likely withhold a complaint (i.e., complaining threshold is high).  The 

act of complaining is thus, generally, the consequence of two processes, one in which 

individuals complain because they have subjectively experienced dissatisfaction and 

another in which individuals complain, despite the absence of actual dissatisfaction,

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


8

because of the perceived utility of complaining (Kowalski,  1996).  Hence, Kowalski 

(1996) conceptualizes complaining as “an expression o f dissatisfaction, whether 

subjectively experienced or not, for the purpose of venting emotions or achieving 

intrapsychic goals, interpersonal goals, or both” (p.  180).

Within Kowalski’s (1996) framework, the state of self-focused attention 

underlies the aforementioned processes, whereby an evaluation is initiated by a 

comparison of one’s current situation with one’s standards for that situation.  When a 

discrepancy between an actual situation and an individual’s standards arises, an 

individual will experience dissatisfaction, prompting action(s) to reduce or remove the 

discrepancy.  Before acting to reduce such a discrepancy by complaining, however, 

individuals assess the utility of complaining through a cost-benefit analysis.  That is, 

an individual determines the probability that complaining will reduce the discrepancy 

and, hence, dissatisfaction, but not incur disproportional undesired consequences.  If 

the perceived utility of complaining is low, an individual’s complaining threshold 

rises, and an individual will not complain.  If the perceived utility of complaining is 

high, an individual’s complaining threshold is lowered and an individual will voice 

dissatisfaction.  Individuals in a state of self-focus, who do not perceive dissatisfaction 

may, however, still complain if they perceive the utility of complaining to be high. 

Additionally, Kowalski (1996) suggested that merely being self-focused might 

produce negative thoughts and feelings among individuals who hold negative self- 

concepts.  Therefore, self-focus may result in a low dissatisfaction threshold, even in 

the absence of a discrepancy between current and ideal states.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


9

Providing support for Kowolski’s framework, Richins (1980) has shown that 

perceptions of the costs and benefits associated with consumer complaining are, 

indeed, related to actual consumer complaining behavior.  Likewise, Capelli and 

Chauvin (1991) suggested that prior to filing grievances addressing workplace 

concerns, employees compare the costs of available resolution methods.

Psychological costs are among those assessed by employees in determining the utility 

of grievance filing (e.g., confronting one’s supervisor, being cross-examined, waiting 

extended periods of time to have a grievance resolved).  Employees tend to file 

grievances when advantages associated with their job are substantial (e.g., wage 

premiums, high unemployment levels) and the costs of using alternative methods of 

resolution, such as shirking or absenteeism (which could lead to dismissal), are greater 

than those of filing a grievance (Capelli & Chauvin,  1991).  Consonant with this view, 

Allen and Keaveny (1985) suggested that job dissatisfaction and the perceived 

instrumentality of filing a grievance were the two major factors influencing an 

employee’s decision to file a grievance.  They argued that dissatisfaction results from 

perceptions of inequity arising from an employee’s perception that a condition of 

employment deviates from what he or she believes it should be.

Consistent with Kowalski’s (1996) view of the role of self-focus in 

complaining, Gray (1985) has suggested the existence of a behavioral inhibition 

system (BIS), which functions to compare actual stimuli with expected stimuli.  If 

there is no discrepancy between actual and expected stimuli, no action is taken.  If 

there is a discrepancy, the BIS intervenes and takes control over behavior.  The 

process of checking stimuli is associated with anxiety and negative affect (see

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


10

Chapter 2).  That is, the greater the anxiety and negative affect, the more hypervigilant 

an individual tends to be.  Gray (1985) contends that individuals high in negative 

affectivity have an overactive BIS and tend to identify all stimuli as significant and in 

need of continuous monitoring as sources of potential trouble.

Kowalski (1996) suggested that complaining serves two basic functions. 

Complaints may be voiced to serve an interpersonal function, such as influencing 

another’s perceptions or modifying an aversive situation; or to serve an intrapsychic 

function, such as changing the complainer’s internal state.  Complaints may serve both 

functions simultaneously.  An individual may complain in an effort to change 

another’s perceptions or behavior (interpersonal function) and as a result that 

individual may feel better (intrapsychic function).  Complaining, in its intrapsychic 

function, may be employed to maintain or enhance self-esteem (Kowalski,  1996). 

Self-esteem refers to the “evaluation which the individual makes and customarily 

maintains with regard to himself:  it expresses an attitude of approval or disapproval, 

and indicates the extent to which the individual believes himself to be capable, 

significant, successful, and worthy” (Coopersmith,  1967, p. 5).  Whereas self-esteem is 

thought to be a personality characteristic that an individual brings to a workplace, self­

esteem can be enhanced or deflated through one’s work environment, actions of 

supervisors, and training (Camevale, Gainer, Meltzer, & Holland, 1988).

Pierce, Gardner, Cummings, and Dunham (1989) introduced the concept of 

organization-based self-esteem (OBSE), defined as “the degree to which 

organizational members believe that they can satisfy their needs by participating in 

roles within the context of an organization” (p. 625).  High-OBSE individuals tend to

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


11

have a sense of personal adequacy as organizational members and a sense of having 

satisfied needs from enacting past organizational roles (Pierce et al.,  1989).  The 

expectation that a specific self-esteem, such as OBSE, will have stronger effects on 

behavior than global self-esteem evolved from Fishbein and Ajzen’s (1975) theory of 

reasoned action, which suggests that the power of an attitude to predict a behavior is a 

function of how closely that attitude relates to the behavior in question.  In other 

words, the more specific the attitude, the greater its predictive power.  Consistent with 

Fishbein and Azjen (1975), research conducted by Epstein (1979) on the relationship 

between behaviors and attitudes suggests that the more self-esteem is framed in a 

context consistent with the behavior or attitude to be predicted, the higher the observed 

correlations tend to be.  Framing constructs within a specific context that is consonant 

with the focus of a study provides the benefit of narrowing attention and eliminating 

potential contamination, which may be caused by experiences and attitudes in other 

domains (Van Dyne, Vandewalle, Kostova, Latham, & Cummings, 2000).  Given that 

this dissertation seeks to explore determinants of workplace whining within the 

workplace setting, OBSE rather than global self-esteem, is the appropriate construct. 

Hence, OBSE is included as a mediator in the model presented below because it is 

work-specific and anticipated that it varies as a function of the relevant antecedents, 

and will, in turn, influence workplace whining.

Further theoretical justification for including OBSE as a mediator in the 

current study can be found in several extant theories discussed in this section.  The 

central assumption of self-enhancement theory proposes individuals are motivated to 

enhance their self-concept and to increase, maintain, or confirm their feelings of

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


12

personal satisfaction, worth, and effectiveness (i.e., self-esteem; Jones, 1973).  This 

need may manifest itself with respect to a particular aspect of one’s self-evaluation 

rather than to global feelings about one’s self.  Complaining motivated by self-esteem 

maintenance or enhancement may appear in the fonn of excuse-making, blasting, or 

self-handicapping (Kowalski,  1996; Kowalski & Erickson,  1997).  This type of 

complaining protects self-esteem by shifting causal attributions from internal, central 

aspects of the self to internal, less central aspects of the self or to external causes 

(Kowalski,  1996; Mehlman & Snyder,  1985; Snyder & Higgins,  1988).  Whereas 

individuals with high self-esteem tend to enhance their self-esteem in an open and 

direct manner, individuals with low self-esteem prefer a safer, more indirect means 

(Baumeister, 1993).  Pelham (1993) found that individuals low in self-esteem tend to 

choose indirect self-enhancement strategies, such as demeaning and derogating others, 

to affirm their self-esteem without having to openly claim superiority.  Demeaning and 

derogating others are forms of complaining.

Excuse theory (Snyder, Higgins, & Stucky,  1983) also contributes to the 

theoretical foundations of workplace whining.  Excuses, when used effectively and 

successfully, link an undesirable outcome to an external event or stimulus, thereby 

relieving an individual from responsibility and restoring self-esteem.  Kowalski (1996) 

suggested that excuse-making is a form of complaining that may be effective in saving 

face and protecting self-esteem by directing causal attributions for one’s shortcomings 

away from internal sources toward external sources.  Consider that two major benefits 

of excuse-making are a positive personal image and a sense o f control (Snyder & 

Higgins, 1988).  In support of this view, McFarland and Ross (1982) found that

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


13

individuals who attributed poor performance to external factors, such as task difficulty, 

reported higher self-esteem than those who attributed poor performance to a lack of 

ability.  Consistent with this position, Snyder and Higgins (1988) proposed that an 

excuse sequence is triggered when an individual is associated with a negative 

occurrence culminating in a perceived threat to his or her self-esteem (Snyder & 

Higgins,  1988).  Individuals attribute negative occurrences to external sources in an 

attempt to minimize self-focus and distance themselves from the threat to their self­

esteem.  With regard to cause and effect, research findings suggest that self-focused 

awareness results in lower self-esteem, intensified dysphoric affect, and reduction in 

persistence on failed tasks (e.g., Ganster and Schaubroeck,  1991).  Accordingly, 

engaging in whining, wherein an individual attributes the blame for shortcomings (i.e., 

excuse making) to external sources may achieve benefits that heighten self-esteem, 

affect, health, and performance.  Hence, the excuse sequence is successful in the 

maintenance of self-image and the retention of a sense of control (Snyder & Higgins, 

1988).  Therefore, it may be that when self-esteem is threatened, whining in the form 

of excuse-making, is triggered to preserve self-esteem.

Individuals who whine seem to be unaware o f the negative impressions they 

create by displaying this aversive interpersonal behavior (Kowalski,  1996).  Indeed, 

Alicke et al. (1992) found that such individuals are not highly attuned to their 

complaining habits regarding content and frequency of complaints.  Consistent with 

this finding, Snyder and Higgins (1988) proposed that excuse-making is more often 

automatic and reflexive, suggesting individuals may be unaware of making excuses.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


14

Therefore, ironically, chronic whining, while maintaining an individual’s self-esteem, 

may bring about the very outcome that is feared -  social exclusion.

More recently, the profile of the low self-esteem individual has been placed in 

a new light.  Instead of characterizing low self-esteem individuals as inferior, 

unworthy, lonely, and insecure, recent research has indicated that individuals low in 

self-esteem tend to be “more cautious than incapacitated, more self-protective than 

self-loathing, and more conservative than risk taking, because they wish to preserve 

the self-esteem they have and not because they hate themselves or life” (Mruk,  1995, 

p. 73).  Tice (1993) found individuals with low self-esteem appeared to be cautious, 

uncertain individuals who want success, and fear failure.  This fear often outweighs 

desire and results in an attitude of self-protection.  The main concern of low self­

esteem individuals is to protect themselves from dangers of failure, social rejection, 

and humiliation.

Drawing from both Kowalski’s (1996) broad prospective theory of 

complaining and self-esteem theory, this dissertation presents a conceptual scheme 

with a central focus on exploring four categories of antecedents of workplace whining, 

as well as the mediating role of organization-based self-esteem in linking these 

antecedents and workplace whining.  A principal contribution of this dissertation is 

that it centers on noninstrumental complaining, an aversive interpersonal behavior, and 

does so within a workplace context, a setting that has received little attention in extant 

research.  More specifically, the conceptual scheme, presented in Figure 1, proposes 

that noninstrumental complaining (i.e., workplace whining) is directly influenced by 

dispositional (i.e., negative affectivity), attitudinal (i.e., job satisfaction, organizational

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


15

commitment, organizational justice), relational (i.e., leader-membership exchange), as 

well as behavioral (i.e., supervisor-rated job performance) factors.  To complete the 

conceptual scheme, the antecedents of workplace whining are expected to also 

influence workplace whining indirectly through their effects on a specific form of self­

esteem (i.e., organization-based self-esteem).  These relationships are developed in 

detail in the next chapter.

The term “conceptual scheme” is used because the goal at this initial stage is to 

describe workplace whining as a phenomenon, examine the proposed antecedents, and 

to explore how and why the relationships among the variables develop, rather than to 

test a fully specified model.  Also, the term “antecedent” was chosen rather than the 

term “correlate” or “consequence”, because the variables examined are hypothesized 

to affect workplace whining directly and through the mediated effect of organization- 

based self-esteem, and is therefore, more likely to be an antecedent rather than a 

consequence of workplace whining.  As the reported study is exploratory in nature, 

being neither longitudinal nor experimental, causality cannot be inferred (Cook & 

Campbell,  1979).  Additionally, it is recognized that this conceptual scheme presents 

only one of the many possible sets of relationships.

Whereas the literatures reviewed have considered both instrumental and 

noninstrumental complaining, this dissertation focuses on noninstrumental 

complaining (i.e., whining) for three reasons.  First, according to Alicke et al. (1992), 

the majority of complaints expressed are expressive or noninstrumental in nature. 

Second, a thorough test of both types of complaining is beyond the scope of any one 

study.  Therefore, by narrowing the focus to noninstrumental workplace whining

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


R
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
e
d

 

wi
h

t

 

i

p
e
r
m
s
s
o
n

i

 

of

 

t

h
e 

c
o
p
y
r
i
g
h

t
 

o
w
n
e
r
.
 

F
u
r
t

h
e
r
 

r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i

o
n

 

i

p
r
o
h
b
i
t
e
d
 

w

i
t
h
o
u
t
 

p
e
r
m
s
s

i

i

o
n

.

+

Organization-Based

Self-Esteem

Workplace Whining 

(Principal-ralcd)

Dispositional

Negative AfTectivity

Attitudinal

Job Satisfaction

•  Overall
•  Facet

Affective Commitment

Organizational Justice

•  Procedural
•  Distributive

Relational

Leader-Member Exchange

Behavioral

Job Performance 

(Principal-ralcd)

A Conceptual Scheme for Understanding Workplace Whining Behavior

Figure  1


17

alone, the subset of variables under investigation becomes more manageable.  Third, 

little research has been conducted in the area of noninstrumental complaining, a 

prevalent and powerful form of workplace social interaction and interpersonal 

communication.

The variables representing the four antecedent categories (i.e., dispositional, 

attitudinal, relational, and behavioral) were chosen based on their potential to 

influence an individual’s complaining and dissatisfaction thresholds as described in 

Kowalski’s (1996) theory of complaining and in general self-esteem theory.

Summary of Remaining Chapters

This chapter introduced the dissertation by emphasizing the lack of attention 

given workplace whining.  It also presented a conceptual scheme for studying 

noninstrumental complaining within a workplace context.  Chapter 2 develops the 

conceptual scheme and presents hypotheses concerning the direct and indirect 

relationships of variables expected to be associated with workplace whining.  Chapter 

3 details the outcome of a pilot test to refine proposed survey measures.  Chapter 4 

describes the target sample and measures employed to test the hypotheses.  Chapter 5 

presents the results of the statistical analyses used to test the hypotheses.  Chapter 6 

identifies implications of the findings of the study for theory, research, and practice.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


CHAPTER 2:  CONCEPTUAL SCHEME DEVELOPMENT AND HYPOTHESES

As previously noted, whining is a pervasive and powerful form of social 

interaction and interpersonal communication (Alicke et al.,  1992).  As further 

observed, to date, there has been virtually no research in the organizational behavior 

literature on workplace whining.  Drawing on the conceptual scheme presented in 

Figure 1, hypotheses with respect to the antecedents identified in Chapter 1  and the 

intervening influence of self-esteem in the whining process are presented in this 

chapter.  First, the antecedents of workplace whining are reviewed.  Next, the link 

between OBSE and workplace whining is discussed.  Finally, the mediating effect of 

OBSE on the relationship between the individual antecedents and workplace whining 

is described.

Considering that dissatisfaction plays an integral role in the proposed 

conceptual scheme, further delineation of this variable is requisite.  Kowalski (1996) 

defines dissatisfaction as “the attitude resulting from disconfirmation o f expectancies” 

(p.  179).  In conformity with this definition, and drawing from the social psychology 

literature, Thibaut and Kelley (1959) posited that individuals experience 

dissatisfaction as a result of perceived outcomes falling below a level o f outcomes 

deemed equitable.  That is, a discrepancy exists between an individual’s minimum 

acceptable outcome threshold and the perceived actuality, resulting in dissatisfaction. 

Hence, dissatisfaction, as outlined in Kowalski’s (1996) theory of complaining and as 

presented in this dissertation, is regarded as discontentment or disaffection with a 

perceived level of work/organization-related attitudes, interpersonal relationships, and 

behaviors (i.e., job performance) as compared to one’s expectations for those

18

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


19

attitudes, interpersonal relationships, and behaviors.  Commensurate with the self­

focus literature discussed previously (Gray,  1985; Kowalski,  1996), the evaluative 

process is presumed to hold for attitudes and relationships associated with one’s job, 

one’s interpersonal relations, and one’s employer.

Whereas Thibaut and Kelley’s (1959) reasoning regarding experienced 

dissatisfaction is based on exchange relationships between individuals, it is likely that 

the same dynamics also apply to employee-organization relationships.  Indeed, there is 

evidence that employees regard organizations as entities with which they hold 

exchange relationships (Rousseau,  1990; Shore & Tetrick,  1994).  By way of 

illustration, psychological contracts relate to reciprocal obligations comprising 

employee-organization exchange relationships (Morrison & Robinson,  1997).  More 

specifically, psychological contracts refer to beliefs individuals hold regarding the 

terms of their employment relationship and encompass promises made, accepted, and 

relied upon (Rousseau & Wade-Benzoni,  1994).

Antecedents of Workplace Whining

Dispositional

A review of the published organizational literature produced only one 

empirical investigation of complaining within an organizational context.  Sachau, 

Houlihan, and Gilbertson (1999) examined two personality variables (i.e., trait 

reactance and propensity for counterproductive behavior) and one attitude variable 

(i.e., job satisfaction) as predictors of resistance to supervisors’ requests (i.e., 

noncompliance and complaining).  Their findings indicate that trait reactance, 

described as the motivational force to restore lost or threatened freedoms, is the best

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


20

predictor of employee complaints regarding supervisor requests.  Surprisingly, given 

Kowalski’s (1996) framework outlining the conditions under which complaining 

occurs, job satisfaction had no relationship with employee complaints.  Some doubt, 

however, regarding the veracity of the results of Sachau and colleagues’ (1999) study 

as they relate to complaining arises, inasmuch, as no theoretical explanation was 

presented to substantiate the inclusion of complaining as an outcome variable, nor was 

any supporting literature cited.

An unpublished study, conducted by Cantrell and Kowalski (1994), explored 

individual difference correlates of the propensity to complain.  The participants in that 

study consisted of a convenience sample of 150 undergraduates.  The results showed 

low to moderate positive correlations between the propensity to complain and global 

self-esteem, emotionality, and private self-consciousness.  Low to moderate negative 

correlations were also found between the propensity to complain and embarrassability, 

fear of negative evaluation, social anxiety, and agreeableness.  Remarkably, no 

association was found between negative affectivity, neuroticism, or depression and the 

propensity to complain, all individual differences that have been theoretically related 

to dissatisfaction and complaining.

There are at least two possible explanations for Cantrell and Kowalski’s (1994) 

equivocal results.  These include (a) the use of a convenience sample of undergraduate 

students and (b) the psychometric inadequacies adhering to the propensity to complain 

measure with which study data were collected.  This dissertation sought to improve the 

probability of obtaining more definitive results by conducting a field study involving a 

larger sample of full-time employed adults from a multiple site, single organization

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


21

and by collecting data using a pretested outcome measure.  Further, it explored a 

dispositional variable that theoretically (and intuitively) should be specifically 

associated with workplace whining, (viz., negative affectivity).  Theory and research 

suggest that job attitudes are influenced by disposition (Arvey, Bouchard, Segal & 

Abraham,  1989; Judge, Locke, Durham, & Kluger,  1998; Levin & Stokes,  1989; Staw, 

Bell, & Clausen, 1986; Staw & Ross,  1985).  Indeed, Staw et al. (1986) found that 

some employees are predisposed toward lower job satisfaction and greater 

complaining behavior independent of their jobs.  Further, Watson and Walker (1996) 

found trait affectivity to be stable and to maintain significant predictive power over a 

period o f seven years.

Kowalski (1996) has proposed that some individuals may be more willing to 

complain than others and, subsequently, experience lower complaining thresholds. 

Therefore, the propensity to whine may partially be a function of dispositional traits. 

Smith (1992) suggested that there is “a general temperamental or personality 

characteristic that distinguishes employees who are generally optimistic and cheerful 

from the chronic grouches, doomsayers, and complainers” (p.  10).  Therefore, this 

dissertation examined a personality characteristic that may be a potential influence on 

individuals’ perceived satisfaction and, hence, their dissatisfaction threshold, their 

utility o f complaining, and whining behavior itself.

Negative affectivity.  Negative affectivity (NA) is a stable and pervasive 

personality trait associated with the tendency to view the world and self in a negative 

light (Watson & Clark, 1984).  Because personality traits are stable, they are valuable 

in explaining differences in individuals’ cognitions and behaviors.  Tellegen (1985)

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


22

noted that NA is related to an unsettled and future-oriented cognitive mode, wherein 

an individual scans an environment with skepticism and uncertainty.  This vigilance to 

one’s environment increases anxiety and apprehension and may lead to whining.

There is strong evidence that NA may play a central role as an antecedent to 

workplace whining.  The focal feature of NA is the tendency to experience a wide 

range of negative and unpleasant emotions or states.  High-NA individuals are 

predisposed to experiencing distressed mood states such as anxiety, tension, jitteriness, 

and worry, as well as feelings of frustration, hostility, contempt, disgust, guilt, 

worthlessness, dissatisfaction, feelings of rejection, sadness, loneliness, discomfort, 

and irritability.  Moreover, they have a tendency to think and act in ways that support 

negative experiences (Clark & Watson,  1991; George,  1992; Watson & Clark,  1984; 

Watson & Tellegen,  1985).  Evidence as far back as the Hawthorne studies suggests 

that some individuals are chronically unhappy with their jobs (Roethlisberger,  1941). 

These individuals were referred to by the Hawthorne researchers as “chronic kickers” 

because of their persistent complaints (p.  18).  Therefore, it is logical that a negative 

disposition may strongly predispose an individual employee to express negative 

feelings through workplace whining.

Kowalski (1996) suggested that underlying the act of complaining, whether a 

result of experienced dissatisfaction or the desire for perceived benefits, is a state of 

self-focused attention.  Self-focus begins an evaluative process wherein the current 

situation is compared with an individual’s standards for that situation.  When there is a 

negative discrepancy between the perceived situation and an individual’s standards for 

the situation, wherein an individual perceives that events or behaviors are not meeting

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


23

up to his or her standards, then dissatisfaction and negative affect ensue, motivating 

the individual to reduce the discrepancy.  Moreover, research has found self-focused 

attention to be positively correlated with depression and negative affect (see 

Pyszczynski, Greenberg, & Becker,  1990, for a review).  Consequently, self-focus may 

generate negative thoughts and feelings even if an individual does not perceive a 

discrepancy between actual and ideal situations (Kowalski,  1996).  Consistent with 

this idea, Watson and Clark (1984) found that high-NA individuals tend to be more 

introspective and ruminative and more likely to discuss their feelings with others. 

Therefore, this internal orientation coupled with vigilant scanning of one’s work 

environment and an overall negative outlook, may lead high-NA individuals to 

perceive substantial discrepancies between desired and actual workplace situations 

resulting in increased complaining.

Because high-NA individuals tend to have a future-oriented cognitive mode, to 

be vigilant in scanning their environment for indications of potential trouble, and are 

more introspective than low-NA individuals (Tellegen,  1985; Watson & Pennebaker, 

1989), they may more selectively attend to unfavorable features of their work 

environment.  Moreover, Watson and Slack (1993) found that high-NA individuals 

tend to be less satisfied with the interpersonal aspects of their work environments, 

which is consistent with research that has shown that high-NA individuals generally 

experience more adversity in their interpersonal relationships (Watson & Clark, 1984).

Additional support for the NA-complaining relationship is encountered in the 

symptom reporting literature.  For example, research reveals that high-NA individuals 

generally report more physical complaints, but that NA is not associated with actual

Reproduced with permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


24

illness (Watson, 1988).  Similarly, Watson and Pennebaker (1989) found that NA was 

correlated with health complaints, but not to actual health status.  As a possible 

explanation for their findings they offered a symptom perception hypothesis that 

suggests because high-NA individuals tend to be more introspective and ruminative 

than low-NA individuals, high-NA individuals report more physical problems because 

they are more internally focused.  Thus, internal orientation increases physical 

symptom reporting.

In support of Watson and Pennebaker’s (1989) symptom-perception 

hypothesis, a study by Schaubroeck, Ganster, and Fox (1992) suggests that NA 

reflects dispositional effects on self-reporting of stress and not causal dispositional 

effects on actual stress.  Further, Schaubroeck et al. (1992) found no association 

between trait NA and job dissatisfaction, but a significant relationship between NA 

and physical symptom reporting.  These findings suggest that high-NA individuals 

have a negative world view and are predisposed to complain about essentially every 

aspect of their lives (Watson,  1988; Watson & Clark,  1984).

Consistent with these findings, Cohen et al. (1995) found that whereas the 

association between complaining and state NA was closely tied to actual illness, 

increased complaints among high-NA individuals were independent of objective 

illness.  This suggests that the relation between trait NA and symptom reporting is a 

function of one’s NA disposition and unrelated to state NA.  Cohen and colleagues’ 

results also support the assertion that trait NA is associated with cognitive biases that 

influence symptom reporting (Costa & McCrae,  1985; Watson & Pennebaker, 1989).

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


25

Kowalski (1996) maintains that, although health complaints represent only a 

subset of complaints that people express, the results of studies such as those reviewed 

above can be expected to apply to complaining at a more general level.  Therefore, 

evidence suggests that NA may have a direct dispositional effect on workplace 

whining. Additionally, based on the relevant literature, there is evidence to suggest 

that within a workplace setting, high-NA employees will tend to experience more 

disaffection resulting in a low dissatisfaction threshold, which wilt lead to workplace 

whining.

Attitudinal

Complaining behavior is frequently associated with high levels of 

dissatisfaction, resulting in a low dissatisfaction threshold, and/or high utility in 

complaining, resulting in a low complaining threshold (Bassett,  1994; Kowalski,

1996).  In accordance with Kowalski’s (1996) theory of complaining, there are 

circumstances wherein an individual experiences high dissatisfaction, but perceives 

low utility in complaining, thus, establishing a high complaining threshold.  In such 

cases, despite the presence of experienced dissatisfaction, an individual refrains from 

complaining.  Moreover, there are circumstances wherein individuals experience no 

dissatisfaction, but complain because they perceive high utility in complaining.  The 

focus of this dissertation was on experienced dissatisfaction and its effect on 

workplace whining.  Therefore, attitudinal variables related to the job and 

organizational context, and expected to be theoretically relevant in explaining whining 

behavior associated with experienced dissatisfaction were selected for study.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


26

Job satisfaction.  Job satisfaction is typically conceptualized as a general 

attitude reflecting one’s overall global feeling about one’s job or, more specifically, a 

constellation of attitudes about various facets of a job, such as rewards, coworkers or 

supervisors, the nature of a job itself, and the job’s context (Locke,  1976; Spector,

1997).  Job satisfaction has also been defined as an individual’s appraisal of the degree 

to which a work environment fulfills one’s needs (Dawis & Lofquist, 1984), as well as 

the degree of an individual’s affective orientation toward assigned work roles (Lease,

1998).

Fuentes, Sawyer, and Lehman (1991, cited in Lehman & Simpson,  1992) 

suggested that job dissatisfaction initiates behaviors, as a function of individual 

differences and organizational constraints, in an attempt to reduce negative affect. 

They found that employees who were dissatisfied with their jobs engaged in different 

withdrawal and adaptation behaviors depending on the behaviors’ perceived 

effectiveness in reducing negative affect.  Consistent with this finding, Lehman and 

Simpson (1992) reported that job dissatisfaction is one of the strongest individual 

predictors of antagonistic work behavior (e.g., filing formal complaints, spreading 

rumors or gossip about coworkers, reporting others for wrongdoing).  Further, Puffer

(1987)  found that noncompliant behaviors, defined as nontask behaviors having 

negative organizational consequences, were negatively related to satisfaction with pay 

and security.

Based on these findings, it is plausible that the more dissatisfied an individual 

is with a job and its work-related characteristics, the more likely the individual is to 

whine.  These findings are consistent with Kowalski’s evaluative process in which

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


27

current states of affairs are compared with an individual’s standards for those states of 

affairs.  When a discrepancy exists between the two, the dissatisfaction threshold is 

lowered, and an individual is motivated to reduce the discrepancy and dissatisfaction 

by whining.

With respect to whining in the workplace, some insight might be found in the 

concept of job adaptation, which has been hypothesized as the basis o f many diverse 

behavioral responses (Hulin,  1991).  Rosse and Miller’s (1984) organizational 

adaptation model and Hulin, Roznowski, and Hachiya’s (1985) organizational 

withdrawal model both intimate that individuals engage in certain behaviors to 

alleviate feelings of dissatisfaction or relative discontent.  Among the behaviors 

individuals may engage in to reduce work-related dissatisfaction are increasing job 

outcomes (e.g., stealing), reducing job inputs (e.g., talking with co-workers about 

trivia), reducing work role inclusion (e.g., quitting, absenteeism), and changing work 

roles (e.g., transfer attempts).  Any behavior, perceived by an individual as potentially 

lessening dissatisfaction, however, may be enacted.  The chosen behavior will likely 

be a function of situational constraints, personal constraints, and past behavior that 

was rewarded or punished (Hulin et al.,  1985).  Fisher and Locke (1992) indicated that 

dissatisfied individuals engage in negative behaviors more frequently than satisfied 

individuals, but tend to confine themselves to relatively less destructive behaviors, 

presumably to avoid severe consequences.  Hence, it is logical that individuals who are 

dissatisfied with their jobs may choose whining as an adaptive mechanism rather than 

more risky, costly mechanisms, such as stealing or quitting.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


28

Furthermore, as suggested by Kowalski (1997), it is likely that whining about 

dissatisfaction serves a cathartic function and, thereby, reduces experienced 

dissatisfaction.  Supporting this assertion, Alicke et al. (1992) found that 50% of the 

subjects in their study complained simply to vent frustration.  According to Rosse and 

Miller (1984), past behaviors that have effectively reduced dissatisfaction and 

behaviors that are situationally unconstrained are repeated if dissatisfaction continues 

or recurs. Therefore, it is possible that, when employees are dissatisfied with certain 

job-related concerns, their complaining thresholds are lowered and they are more 

likely to complain.

Organizational commitment.  Organizational commitment is a psychological 

state that characterizes an employee-organization relationship (Meyer, Allen, & Smith, 

1993).  Affective commitment is defined as “an affective or emotional attachment to 

the organization such that the strongly committed individual identifies with, is 

involved in, and enjoys membership in, the organization” (Allen & Meyer,  1990, p. 2). 

Employees with a strong affective commitment stay with an organization because they 

desire to do so (Meyer, Paunonen, Gellatly, Goffin, & Jackson,  1989).  Employees 

whose experiences within an organization are consistent with their expectations and 

satisfy their basic needs tend to develop a strong affective organizational attachment. 

These individuals tend to feel connected to an organization on an emotional level and 

take on the organization’s problems as their own.  Supporting this view, Shore and 

Wayne (1993) found that affective commitment was positively related to organization 

citizenship behavior (OCB), indicating a willingness to go beyond the call of duty.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


29

Thus, employees who are affectively committed to an organization are likely to 

possess high thresholds for both dissatisfaction and complaining and, therefore, are 

less likely to whine than those employees who are not affectively commitment. 

Because they feel a strong emotional attachment to an organization, their perceived 

level of affective commitment is in conformity with their desired standard of 

commitment, given their work circumstances, and, thus, there is no discrepancy or 

dissatisfaction.  Conversely, employees who are not affectively committed to an 

organization will possess low thresholds for both dissatisfaction and complaining, and 

will tend to whine more than their affectively committed counterparts.  It is likely that 

employees who do not emotionally identify with their organization maintain a 

discrepancy between their desired standard of commitment and their perceived level of 

commitment, resulting in dissatisfaction.

Organizational justice.  Organ (1990) argued, based on social exchange theory 

(Blau,  1964), that individuals in an employment relationship tend to assume that they 

are party to a social exchange.  This presumption continues until they perceive 

unfairness in the relationship, which causes dissatisfaction and, ultimately, alters the 

relationship from a social to a pure economic exchange.

Perceptions of fairness have been extensively addressed in the organizational 

justice literature (Cropanzano & Greenberg,  1997; Greenberg,  1990).  Distributive 

justice focuses on the perceived fairness of outcomes received from decision 

procedures (e.g., raises, promotions, evaluations).  According to Adams’ equity theory 

(1965), which is grounded in Festinger’s (1975) cognitive dissonance theory, 

individuals compare the ratio of their respective outcomes (e.g., pay) to inputs

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


30

(e.g., effort) with the corresponding ratio of a referent person.  When unfairness is 

perceived to exist, subordinates will act to eliminate inequities by reducing 

contributions and/or expecting additional rewards.  For equity to exist an individual 

should derive outputs (i.e., benefits) from a relationship in proportion to the value of 

his or her inputs (i.e., contributions) to the relationship.

In contrast to the distributive justice focus on outcomes, procedural justice 

focuses on the perceived fairness of decision procedures and the manner in which 

employees are treated by their supervisors during the execution of such procedures 

(Niehoff & Moorman, 1993).  Overall, individuals tend to be more accepting of 

decisions resulting from fair procedures than those resulting from unfair procedures. 

Niehoff and Moorman (1993) found that individuals who perceived fairness in the 

formal procedures tend not to complain.

Based on the preceding discussion, it is anticipated that individuals who 

perceive they have been treated unfairly either with respect to outcomes such as 

benefits, pay, and promotions (i.e., distributive justice), or procedures such as input 

concerning a work role (i.e., procedural justice) will become dissaffected (i.e., 

perceive inequity).  That is, they perceive an inequity resulting in a low threshold for 

dissatisfaction which, in turn, will be expressed in the form of workplace whining. 

Relational

Leader-member exchange fLMXL  LMX theory suggests that, within a formal 

organization, supervisors develop a unique, interpersonal relationship with each 

subordinate (Bums & Otte, 1999; Dienesch & Liden,  1986; Gerstner & Day,  1997; 

Graen & Scandura, 1987).  As with organizational justice, the primary basis for LMX

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


31

is social exchange theory, wherein parties to an exchange must offer something others 

see as valuable.  The exchange must also be viewed by all sides as equitable.  In a 

high-quality superior-subordinate relationship, a subordinate feels obligated to engage 

in behaviors that benefit a supervisor (i.e., leader) and the supervisor reciprocates 

(Liden, Sparrowe, & Wayne, 1997; Wayne, Shore, & Liden,  1997).  Wayne et al. 

(1997) found that LMX was positively related to outcomes that benefit a leader, such 

as performance, OCB, and performing favors.  Because subordinates who have 

developed a high-quality LMX relationship are more likely to engage in positive 

behaviors that benefit their leader, it is likely that they will also refrain from negative 

behaviors (e.g., whining) that may be disruptive in their work environment.

Following this line of reasoning, it is expected that the quality of a leader- 

member relationship will influence a subordinate member’s propensity to whine.  For 

example, subordinates may be less inclined to display an aversive behavior, such as 

whining, if they enjoy a satisfying high-quality LMX relationship.  Conversely, a 

subordinate who is dissatisfied with the quality of the LMX relationship may tend to 

whine.  More specifically, if individuals detect a discrepancy between the desired 

quality of the LMX relationship and the perceived quality of the LMX relationship, the 

more likely it is that they will whine.

Recent communication research has explored an important contextual issue, 

the effect of LMX on communications among coworkers (Sias,  1996; Sias & Jablin, 

1995).  Out-group members (i.e., those who experience low LMX) have been found to 

have discussed more incidents of a leader’s differential treatment in conversations with 

coworkers.  Out-group members have been found to perceive this differential

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


32

treatment as being unfair, whereas in-group members (i.e., those who experience high 

LMX) perceive the leader differentiated treatment to be fair.  Therefore, it is expected 

that subordinates with low-quality supervisor relationships will be dissatisfied with the 

poor relationship and tend to whine more than subordinates with high-quality 

supervisor relationships.

Behavioral

Job performance.  The concept of psychological contracts (discussed 

previously) illustrates how organizations and employees develop perceptions 

regarding their obligations to each other (Rousseau,  1989; Rousseau & Parks,  1992). 

Adequate performance is a basic obligation expected of employees.  Conflict may 

occur when a supervisor perceives an employee’s performance as unsatisfactory and 

the employee perceives his or her performance as adequate or better.  If a supervisor, 

for instance, perceives that an employee has violated an exchange relationship by 

performing inadequately, the employee may perceive a contract violation based on the 

supervisor’s negative evaluation of self-judged acceptable performance (Balser & 

Stem,  1999).

It is plausible that individuals, whose supervisor-based performance 

evaluations conflict with the judgments they hold about their own performance, will 

tend to whine.  In other words, in situations where their self-perceived performance 

does not concur with their supervisor’s assessment, a discrepancy and dissatisfaction 

may occur lowering their complaining threshold, resulting in workplace whining.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


33

Link Between OBSE and Workplace Whining

Hypotheses 

As previously noted, based on self-esteem theory (e.g., Epstein,  1973; Jones, 

1973; Leary & Downs,  1995; Pierce et al,  1989) and complaining theory (e.g., 

Kowalski,  1996; Mehlman & Snyder,  1985; Snyder & Higgins,  1988), organization- 

based self-esteem is expected to directly influence workplace whining.  The central 

assumption of self-esteem enhancement theory is that individuals are motivated to 

maintain a positive self-evaluation (Brockner,  1988).  Individuals want to think, feel, 

and act in a manner that will enhance or protect their self-esteem.  Similarly, 

individuals also wish to promote being accepted by others because social inclusion 

increases self-esteem (Leary & Downs, 1995).  Thus, individuals are motivated to 

increase their feelings of personal worth and are responsive to evaluative information 

gained from their own actions, comparisons to others, and appraisals from others 

(Jones,  1973; Leary & Downs,  1995).

Coopersmith (1967) concluded that four major factors contribute to self-esteem 

development.  The first factor is the degree to which significant others in an 

individual’s life treat him or her with respect, acceptance and concern.  That is, 

individuals tend to value themselves as they are valued.  A second factor is the history 

of an individual’s successes and position in the world.  In general, success brings 

recognition, social approval, status, and material rewards.  A third factor is an 

individual’s perception that he or she has fulfilled aspirations in areas that he or she 

holds to be o f value and significance.  A final factor that contributes to self-esteem is 

the way in which an individual responds to devaluation.  In an effort to maintain or

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


34

enhance self-esteem individuals may minimize, distort, or suppress both failure on 

their part and actions by others that are viewed as demeaning.  They may reject or 

discount the right of others to judge them.  On the other hand, they may be extremely 

sensitive o f others’ judgments.  As defenses, these mechanisms enable an individual to 

reduce anxiety and maintain personal equilibrium.  In other words, individuals have 

the ability to redefine an experience filled with negative implications and 

consequences into one that restores their sense of worthiness, ability, and power 

(Coopersmith,  1967).  Individuals tend to employ such defenses to aid in fending off 

the distress that follows devaluation.  It is plausible that workplace whining is one 

defense individuals use to attribute part or all of their failures and deficiencies to an 

external source rather than to their own limitations, thus enabling themselves to 

maintain and protect their self-esteem.

Brockner (1988) pointed to several factors suggesting that organizational 

contexts are “fertile grounds” for exploring the processes through which individuals 

endeavor to maintain self-esteem.  First, work is central to many individuals’ self- 

concepts.  Second, individuals tend to be markedly concerned with winning the esteem 

of their supervisors and coworkers.  For example, many organizational rewards, such 

as raises and promotions, are tied to supervisor, and sometimes coworker evaluations. 

Finally, public esteem generally begets acceptance and social inclusion.  Brockner

(1988)  further suggested that “while there may be little that practitioners can do to 

influence the non-work determinants o f employees’ global self-esteem, there is much 

that they can do to affect the work factors that influence specific self-esteem” (p.  119).

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


35

Likewise, Pierce and colleagues (1989) observed that, within an organizational 

context, global self-esteem measures often fail to show significant relationships with 

other constructs and that self-esteem should be measured at the same level of analysis 

as that of other focal variables.  Hence, Pierce et al. (1989) developed their OBSE 

measure to study “the degree to which organizational members believe they can satisfy 

their needs by participating in roles within the context of an organization” (p. 625). 

They found that high-OBSE individuals see themselves as important, meaningful, 

effectual, and worthwhile within their specific organizations.  Moreover, such 

individuals tend to exhibit greater job satisfaction and enhanced organizational 

commitment, and report having more challenging jobs than those low in OBSE.  These 

results indicate that organizational experiences affect employee OBSE levels, which 

likely influence employee attitudes and behaviors in an organizational context and are 

consistent with Fishbein and A den’s (1975) general position that the more specific an 

attitude, the more accurately it should predict relevant behavior.  Because self-esteem 

is an attitude, if placed in an organizational context, it should be a better predictor of 

organizational outcomes than global measures of self-esteem (Rosenberg, Schooler, 

Schoenback, & Rosenberg,  1995).

Therefore, it is plausible that individuals who feel unimportant and incompetent 

within a job and organization context experience diminished OBSE.  In line with self­

esteem theory, threats to individuals’ OBSE prompt protective behaviors to maintain or 

enhance their OBSE by distancing themselves from their limitations and deficiencies.  As 

previously noted, individuals tend to employ defenses to help fend off the distress that 

follows devaluation.  Workplace whining is one defense an individual may use to remove

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


36

blame from himself or herself and place on an external source or a less central internal 

source.  Given the preceding discussion, it is reasonable to expect that low-OBSE 

individuals will tend to whine.  Thus, within a workplace setting,

Hypothesis 1:  Organization-based self-esteem will be negatively 

related to workplace whining.

Mediation of Workplace Whining

A mediator “represents a process or mechanism, often intrinsic to an 

individual, that accounts for the relationship between a predictor variable and an 

outcome variable” (Lindley & Walker,  1993, p. 277).  Mediators are pivotal in 

explaining when, how, and why human phenomena occur (Baron & Kenny,  1986; 

Lindley & Walker,  1993).  Indeed, Van Dyne et al. (2000) found OBSE fully mediated 

the relationship between two dispositional characteristics (i.e., collectivism and 

propensity to trust) and organizational citizenship behavior.  In the conceptual scheme 

presented in Figure 1, four categories of antecedents of workplace whining are 

expected to affect workplace whining through the mediated effects of OBSE.  To 

support the argument that OBSE mediates the relationship between each antecedent 

and workplace whining, support must be found for a relationship between each 

antecedent and OBSE.  This section examines those associations and the published 

literatures that provided a theoretical basis for the expected relationships.

Dispositional

Negative affectivity.  Coopersmith (1967) indicated that an individual’s 

affective state is significantly related to his or her self-evaluation.  Individuals holding 

a negative view of their abilities, performance, and attributes implied by low

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


37

self-esteem would find it difficult to achieve happiness and contentment.  Coopersmith 

(1967) found a strong correlation between self-esteem and anxiety and concluded that 

high levels of negative affect, measured by reports of distress, tension, and symptoms, 

were more likely to be found in individuals with low self-esteem (p. 132).  Likewise, 

Clark and Watson (1991) found that individuals high in negative affectivity viewed 

themselves as victims, and tended to be dissatisfied with themselves, their jobs, and 

their lives in general.  Moreover, Ganster and Schaubroeck (1991) found that 

individuals with low self-esteem are more likely to react strongly to negative cues in 

their environment and are less likely to take constructive action to alleviate the effects 

of the cues, resulting in a chronic state of frustration and tension.

The general impression held in the literature about low self-esteem individuals

is that they suffer from a chronic condition of negative affect, and are anxious, 

%

depressed, and insecure (Mruk,  1995).  Harter (1993) found that low self-esteem was 

typically accompanied by high frequency of emotional distress and negative affect.  In 

a revised model of the causes of self-esteem, Harter (1993) included a “depression 

composite”, which is comprised of negative self-worth, negative affect, and general 

hopelessness.

Based on the discussion above, it is reasonable to expect that individuals high 

in negative affectivity will likely experience low OBSE, which will lead to workplace 

whining.  Thus, within a workplace setting,

Hypothesis 2:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects 

of negative affectivity on workplace whining.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


38

Attitudinal

Job satisfaction.  The self-esteem literature suggests that “self-esteem derives 

from a satisfaction with one’s life style, from a satisfying of one’s primary 

psychological needs, and from social dispositions which produce social effectiveness 

and acceptance” (Callahan & Kidd,  1986).  As previously noted, job satisfaction has 

been defined as a constellation of attitudes about various facets of a job, such as 

rewards, coworkers or supervisors, the nature of a job itself, and a job’s context 

(Locke,  1976; Spector,  1997).  It has also been described as an individual’s appraisal 

of the degree to which a work environment fulfills one’s needs (Dawis & Lofquist, 

1984).  Tharenou (1979) in a review of the self-esteem literature, concluded that 

extrinsic characteristics of the job, such as pay and supervisor support, are associated 

with work-specific self-esteem and feelings of task competence.  Job facets, such as 

pay, promotion, and recognition, may be associated with work-specific self-esteem 

because they are public representations of acceptance and respect from supervisors, 

coworkers, and the organization.  Therefore, it is plausible that individuals whose 

needs are not satisfied within a workplace environment with respect to the different 

job facets, or with respect to their relationships with supervisors, coworkers, and their 

organization, will likely experience job dissatisfaction resulting in a subsequent 

decrease in OBSE, which will, in turn, lead to workplace whining. Thus, within a 

workplace setting,

Hypothesis 3:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects

of job satisfaction on workplace whining.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


39

Organizational commitment.  Individuals who are affectively committed to an 

organization tend to have a strong emotional attachment to the organization  (Allen & 

Meyer,  1990, p. 2).  These individuals stay with an organization because they desire to 

do so (Meyer et al.,  1989).  Individuals whose experiences within an organization are 

consistent with their expectations and which satisfy their basic needs tend to develop 

strong affective organizational bonds.  Mathieu and Zajac (1990) found that perceived 

competence showed a large positive correlation with affective commitment.  This 

suggested that individuals become committed to an organization to the extent that it 

provides for growth and achievement needs.  Therefore, it is plausible that if an 

organization satisfies an individual’s needs, then that individual will likely develop an 

affective bond with the organization.  Furthermore, it is plausible that this affective 

attachment to an organization engenders feelings of being accepted as a competent and 

worthwhile organizational member, thereby, increasing OBSE.  Conversely, 

individuals whose growth, belonging, and achievement needs are unmet by an 

organization will less likely bond with the organization or feel accepted and valued as 

a worthwhile member.

Based on the above discussion, it is reasonable to expect that individuals who 

are not affectively committed to an organization will likely experience low OBSE, 

resulting in increased whining.  Thus, within a workplace setting,

Hypothesis 4:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects 

of affective commitment on workplace whining.

Organizational justice.  Procedural justice is the process by which decisions 

about job rewards, such as pay, promotions, and transfers are made.  Distributive

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


40

justice refers to actual rewards one receives.  Although procedural and distributive 

justice are distinct concepts, they are related because individuals who perceive little 

distributive justice tend not to have faith in an organization’s procedural decisions 

(Lease, 1998).

Milkovich and Newman (1996) posited that pay is a valued work outcome and 

symbolizes the individual’s value to an organization.  Individuals who receive high 

pay are more likely to believe that they are valued members of an organization than 

individuals who receive low pay (Taylor & Pierce,  1999).  Moorman, Niehoff, and 

Organ (1993) found that work procedures that are perceived to be fair led employees 

to believe that their inputs are valued by their organizations.  Therefore, it is plausible 

that individuals who perceive that the distribution of rewards and other outcomes is 

fair, their organization’s procedures for arriving at those outcomes are fair, and the 

organization’s agents treat them with respect and concern, will likely tend to feel that 

they are valued organization members.  Feelings of value and worthiness will likely 

result in increased OBSE.

Consistent with this line of thinking, group-value theory assumes individuals 

join organizations primarily because affiliation with an organization provides them 

with psychological outcomes, such as self-esteem and self-identity (Lind & Tyler, 

1988).  Organizational procedures are important to members because they regulate an 

organization’s activities and reflect its values.  Therefore, members view fair 

procedures as a sign of respect from an organization, which affirms their 

organizational status and fulfills their esteem and identity needs.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


41

Based on the above findings, it is logical to expect that perceptions of 

organizational justice will lead individuals to feel valued and fulfilled in terms of 

having their needs met, resulting in enhanced OBSE which, in turn, will lead to a 

reduction in whining.  The opposite would hold true where individuals perceive 

unfairness in procedures and in the distribution of rewards and other outcomes.  Thus, 

within a workplace setting,

Hypothesis 5:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects 

of distributive justice on workplace whining.

Hypothesis 6:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects 

of procedural justice on workplace whining.

Relational

Leader-member exchange.  Likert (1961) believed that an individual’s sense of 

personal worth and significance is enhanced by supportive relationships within a work 

unit, in that others’ actions communicate respect and recognition (Tharenou,  1979). 

Korman (1976) posited that an individual’s self-esteem is a “function of others’ 

expectations at any given time ... to the extent that others (a) think that we are 

competent, need-satisfying and able, and (b) exhibit such thoughts by their behavior 

toward us, to that extent our self-perceived competence concerning [a] task is 

increased.” (p. 51).  Pierce et al. (1989) found that a significant positive relationship 

existed between the perception of managerial respect for organization members and 

OBSE.  The implication is that if significant others believe that an individual is a 

valuable organizational member and significant others’ comments and behaviors 

reflect that belief, then an individual’s OBSE will likely be enhanced.  Conversely, if

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


42

individuals’ significant others do not treat them as valuable organizational members, 

then their OBSE is likely to be deflated.

In a high-quality superior-subordinate relationship, a subordinate feels 

obligated to engage in behaviors that benefit a supervisor (i.e., leader) and the 

supervisor reciprocates (Liden et al.,  1997; Wayne et al.,  1997).  Thus, it is reasonable 

to expect that in a workplace setting, where a high-quality relationship exists between 

an employee and supervisor, employees will receive cues from their supervisors that 

communicate that they are valuable organizational members, resulting in the 

enhancement of their OBSE, and a reduction in whining behavior.  The opposite 

would hold true in cases of low-quality superior-subordinate relationships. Thus, 

within a workplace setting,

Hypothesis 7:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects 

of leader-member exchange quality on workplace whining.

Behavioral

Job performance.  Individuals with high self-esteem are motivated to maintain 

and/or enhance their self-concept and expend the effort necessary for high 

performance (Taylor & Pierce,  1999).  Performance ratings serve as a communication 

directed from an organization to an employee by relating to the employee the 

organization’s belief regarding the individual’s value and importance to the 

organization (Pierce & Porter, 1986).  Individuals respond favorably to positive 

evaluations, which satisfy esteem needs, and respond unfavorably to negative 

evaluations.  That is, lower than expected evaluations frustrate esteem needs (Jones, 

1973).  Therefore, it is plausible that complaining is a reaction to a self-esteem threat

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


43

that serves to protect self-esteem by shifting causal attributions from internal, central 

aspects of the self to internal, less central aspects of the self or to external causes 

(Kowalski, 1996; Mehlman & Snyder,  1985; Snyder & Higgins,  1988).

Indeed, Taylor and Pierce (1999) found most participants in their study of 

employees’ targets of blame for receiving lower-than-expected ratings anticipated a 

rating higher than they actually received.  Participants made external attributions for 

rating discrepancies (i.e., actual vs. personal standard), blaming either their supervisor, 

their organization, or the prevailing performance management system.  Decreases in 

OBSE were not associated with disappointed rating expectations.  Taylor and Pierce 

(1999), however, provided a potential explanation for this tenuous finding.  They 

suggested that a possibility of a Type II error existed due to insufficient statistical 

power.

It is plausible that receiving a lower-than-expected performance rating signals 

to an individual that his or her efforts were inadequate.  It is also anticipated that a 

disconfirming communication regarding job performance would deflate an 

individual’s OBSE (Meyer,  1975).  Therefore, in accordance with self-enhancement 

theory and complaining theory, lowering OBSE triggers an individual’s self-esteem 

protection mechanism in the form of workplace whining in an effort to shift 

attributions for the individual’s shortcomings to external sources, or internal sources 

less central to the individual.  Thus, within a workplace setting,

Hypothesis 8:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects 

of supervisor-rated job performance on workplace whining.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


44

Summary

To summarize, this chapter proposed a conceptual scheme that identified 

antecedents (viz., dispositional, attitudinal, relational, behavioral) of noninstrumental 

complaining (i.e., workplace whining).  The conceptual scheme also identified 

organization-based self-esteem as a potential link between the antecedents and 

workplace whining.  That is, OBSE is expected to mediate the effects of the 

antecedents on workplace whining.  A summary of hypotheses appears in Table  I.

Table 1 

Summary of Hypotheses

Hypothesis 1:  Organization-based self-esteem will be negatively related to 

workplace whining.

Hypothesis 2:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects of negative 

affectivity on workplace whining.

Hypothesis 3:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects of job 

satisfaction on workplace whining.

Hypothesis 4:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects of affective 

commitment on workplace whining.

Hypothesis 5:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects of 

procedural justice on workplace whining.

Hypothesis 6:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects of 

distributive justice on workplace whining.

Hypothesis 7:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects of leader- 

member exchange on workplace whining.

Hypothesis 8:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects of 

supervisor-rated job performance on workplace whining.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


CHAPTER 3:  PRETESTING 

Many scholars have recommended pretesting as a means of enhancing a 

proposed study’s methodology before full-scale data collection (e.g., Brown & Beik, 

1969; Czaja, 1998; Dillman, 1978; Prescott & Soeken,  1989).  In addition to being 

useful in determining the feasibility of a planned study, adequacy of instrumentation, 

and potential difficulties in data collection, pretesting is also effective in addressing 

concerns related to measurement reliability and study geneiralizability (Cook & 

Campbell,  1979; Czaja,  1998; Prescott & Soeken,  1989).  For purposes of this 

dissertation, two pretesting techniques were employed.  First, a focus group was used 

to assist in the refinement of a final survey instrument.  Next, a pilot test was 

conducted in an actual field setting, with a representative subject sample, so as to 

assess the adequacy o f a prototype survey instrument and perfect a data-collection 

strategy.  Because there are no published studies providing measures of workplace 

whining, a pilot test was of particular importance in assessing the psychometric 

properties of two prospective measures for gauging noninstrumental complaining (i.e., 

whining).  Additionally, pilot testing allowed for an item analysis of other proposed 

study measures and revision of the prototype survey instrument before final data 

collection.

Focus Group

Focus groups are typically used as an aide in honing the meaning and clarity of 

survey items (Czaja,  1998).  The focus group for this dissertation consisted of six 

female school teachers employed by a school district located in the southeastern 

United States.  After introducing myself and informing the group that I was preparing

45

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


46

a survey to collect data for my dissertation relating to employee attitudes and 

behaviors, each teacher was given a six-page draft survey and cover letter.  They were 

asked to read the letter and complete the survey, noting any items that appeared 

ambiguous, offensive, inapplicable to their work setting or otherwise problematic, as 

well as to make written suggestions for improving the survey and cover letter.

One purpose of the focus group was to gauge approximately how long it would 

take a typical respondent to complete the survey.  The time required to complete the 

survey ranged from 25 to 40 minutes, including the extra time the respondents 

required to analyze individual items and make notes suggesting improvements.  After 

completion of the surveys, a discussion was held to address items the teachers found to 

be problematic.  For example, there were many items that contained the term 

“organization” and the teachers were uncertain whether “organization” referred to their 

particular school or larger school district.

Several other aspects of the survey were addressed, including length, the 

amount of time required for its completion, the clarity of item wording and 

instructions, and the survey’s format.  Several suggestions were offered, including 

shortening the survey and numbering survey items.  There were no objections relating 

to item content.  The teachers were also asked if they would have taken the time to fill 

out the survey had they received it in the mail from an individual they did not know. 

Half said they would not, because they received numerous surveys throughout the year 

from various sources and did not have time to complete them all.  As they were 

required to complete many surveys from their school district headquarters and state 

agencies, they tended to discard voluntary surveys.  A discussion was held about

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


47

possible incentives that would motivate the teachers to complete a voluntary survey. 

They agreed that a chance in a drawing for prize money would motivate them to 

complete the survey and, in their opinions, would motivate other teachers as well.

Sample

Pilot Test

Pilot testing consists of administering a survey to respondents selected from a 

population universe using procedures that are planned for a proposed study (Brown & 

Beik,  1969; Czaja,  1998; Dillman, 1978).  In addition to providing a trial run for 

collecting data, pilot studies also provide an opportunity to test procedures for 

processing data (Brown & Beik,  1969).  With respect to this dissertation, because of 

the large target sample (n~500), the length of the survey instrument, and the 

corresponding 500 principal surveys that would be involved, it was determined that 

the surveys would be printed and scanned electronically by the Louisiana State 

University’s Testing Service, so as to assure accuracy and timeliness of data input. 

Therefore, the pilot test also provided the opportunity to establish the efficacy of using 

a preprinted, electronically coded survey.  Lastly, a pilot test is extremely useful in 

helping to estimate response rates and to dry run survey administration mechanics 

(Dillman,  1978).

The pilot test target sample consisted o f 138 school teachers from three schools 

(i.e., one elementary, one middle, one high school) and their immediate supervisors 

(for a total of three principals) from the same school district in which the final 

dissertation data were collected.  All teachers employed by each of the three schools

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


48

were included in the pilot test.  The superintendent of the school district chose the 

three participating schools.

Interaction among coworkers and between teachers and their principals is a 

necessary presumption for testing many of the proposed hypotheses involving such 

variables as job satisfaction, whining, and job performance.  Because there existed 

ample opportunity each day for teacher-coworker and teacher-supervisor interaction 

(e.g., classroom observations, evaluations, lunch hours, breaks, weekly site committee 

meetings, and monthly faculty meetings attended by the principal), the pilot test 

sample was judged to be appropriate for examining the proposed hypotheses.  One- 

hundred percent of surveys that the principals were requested to complete (one for 

each teacher) were returned (N=138); and 78 percent of the teacher surveys (n=108) 

were returned.

Before distributing the surveys, the researcher met with the focal school 

district’s superintendent and the three principals to briefly review the study’s aim and 

to instruct the principals on procedures for distributing and collecting the surveys, as 

well as to address existing concerns.  Upon returning to their respective schools, the 

principals placed the surveys in each teacher’s mailbox.  A cover letter from the 

researcher explaining the purpose and importance of the pilot test, as well as 

instructions and incentives for participating, were attached to each survey. 

Confidentiality was guaranteed to all participants.  To ensure confidentiality, teacher 

names were not written on the surveys and a return envelope addressed to the 

researcher was provided for each teacher.  Each teacher was assigned an identification 

number that was printed on both the teacher’s survey and the corresponding

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


49

principal’s survey.  A trusted and respected contact teacher was chosen from each 

school by its principal to collect the completed surveys from the teachers.  I then 

personally collected the teacher surveys from each of these three contacts.  Likewise, I 

collected the principal’s surveys directly from the three principals.  The cover letter, 

teacher survey, and two-part principal survey are attached as Appendices A, B, Cl, 

and C2, respectively.

The pilot-test sample included male (13%) and female (87%) teachers of which 

95.3% were Caucasian and 4.7% African American.  The sample’s average age was 39 

years (sd =12.02).  Average tenure with the school district was 12 years (sd=9.91). 

average tenure with current school was 10 years (sd=8.93), and average tenure in 

current position was 8 years (sd =7.79).

Measures

Appendix D lists the measures selected to assess the variables identified in 

Figure 1.  In addition to variables of interest, the short form of the Marlowe-Crowne 

social desirability measure (Ballard,  1992), consisting of true-false statements, was 

administered to control for social responsibility response bias.  All measures, 

excluding the social desirability measure, were anchored by either a 5- or 7-point 

Likert response continuum.  Responses were summed and coded such that a high score 

indicates a high level of the focal measure.  Cronbach alpha reliability estimates were 

computed on the measures containing continuous data and Kuder-Richardson’s KR-20 

reliability estimate was computed on the social desirability measure containing 

dichotomous data.  A reliability coefficient of .70 or higher was interpreted as 

suggesting that the individual items comprising a measure produced similar

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


50

respondence patterns in different people and as suggesting that the items were 

homogenous and reliable (Bruning & Kintz,  1987; Nunnally,  1978).

Controls.  Because the data were susceptible to self-report contamination due 

to artificial inflation of relationships by common source variance or demand 

characteristics and pressure for positive self-presentation on whining and performance 

measures, precautions were taken to control for respondent biases.  First, multiple 

sources were used to collect the data (i.e., principals and teachers).  Inflation in 

observed relations often results when data for both predictor and criterion variables are 

collected from the same source.  To minimize same-source, common-method bias, 

teachers completed the dispositional, attitudinal, and relational measures, and 

principals completed the whining and job performance measures.  Furthermore, it was 

anticipated that the principals would be more forthcoming than the teachers in their 

responses and less likely to provide socially desirable responses to the whining and 

job performance measures.

Social desirability is largely considered “a tendency for an individual to 

present himself or herself, in test-taking situations, in a way that makes that person 

look positive with regard to culturally derived norms and standards” (Ganster, 

Hennessey, & Luthans,  1983, p. 322).  Hence, social desirability may be problematic 

in biasing responses and distorting relationships among variables.  Indeed, research 

suggests that social desirability should be controlled or eliminated in organizational 

research (e.g., Gopinath & Becker, 2000; Holden & Fekken, 1989; Moorman & 

Podsakoff, 1992; Mudrack, 1993).  Therefore, in both the pilot study and the final

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


51

study, teachers were administered the short form of the Marlowe-Crowne and social 

desirability was entered as a control variable in the statistical analyses.

Workplace whining.  Two measures were used to assess workplace whining. 

Principals completed each measure with respect to the degree a specific teacher was 

judged to whine.  The first measure was developed by Podsakoff, MacKenzie, 

Moorman, and Fetter (1990) and consists of the dimension known as Sportsmanship. 

This dimension includes five items which capture actions that, when avoided, 

constructively contribute to an organization’s effectiveness.  Individuals who display 

Sportsmanship “avoid complaining, petty grievances, railing against real or imagined 

slights, and making federal cases out of small potatoes” (Organ,  1988, p.  11). 

Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Paine, and Bachrach (2000) suggested in their critical review 

of the organizational citizenship behavior literature, that Sportsmanship has been 

defined rather narrowly.  In their opinion “good sports” are people who not only do 

not complain when they are inconvenienced by others, but also maintain a positive 

attitude even when things do not go their way, are not offended when others do not 

follow their suggestions, are willing to sacrifice their personal interest for the good of 

the work group, and do not take the rejection of their ideas personally.”  In assessing 

OCB Sportsmanship, all five items are reverse scored and summed to yield a single 

score.  In the pilot test, the items were not reverse scored, thereby providing a measure 

of Unsportsmanship, or, as termed here, Workplace Whining.  Unsportsmanship was 

chosen as a measure for Workplace Whining because the items captured the essence of 

whining as described in the literature.  Similarly, Schaubroeck et al. (1992) used this 

reverse scoring procedure on a Social Support from Co-workers measure to yield a

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


52

measure of Lack of Co-worker Social Support.  The Workplace Whining measure was 

presented on a 5-point response continuum, ranging from strongly disagree to strongly 

agree.  Items, adapted for the target sample, include, “This teacher consumes a lot of 

time complaining about trivial matters;” “This teacher always focuses on what’s 

wrong, rather than the positive side;” “This teacher tends to make mountains out of 

molehills;” “This teacher always finds fault with what the organization is doing;” 

“This teacher is the classic ‘squeaky wheel’ that always needs greasing.”  An alpha 

reliability of .98 was obtained for the principal-rated measure.

The second whining measure employed in the pilot test was developed by 

Cantrell and Kowalski (1994).  Using 14-items anchored on a 5-point Likert response 

continuum, ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree, principals rated the 

extent to which specific teachers exhibited a tendency to complain.  Sample items 

include:  “Whenever I am dissatisfied, I readily express it to other people;” “I usually 

keep my discontent a secret;” “When people or events don't meet my expectations, I 

usually communicate my dissatisfaction”.  This measure also produced an alpha 

reliability of .98.

Organization-based self-esteem.  Organization-based self-esteem (OBSE) was 

self-assessed using a 10-item measure developed by Pierce et al. (1989).  Respondents 

were asked to think about the messages they have received from the attitudes and 

behaviors of their supervisors and to indicate the extent to which they agreed or disagreed 

with each of ten statements.  Sample items include:  “I count around here;” “I am taken 

seriously around my school;” “I can make a difference around my school”.  The response

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


53

format in the pilot test ranged from 1 (strongly disagreed to 5 (strongly agree).  The 

items yielded an alpha reliability of .89.

Negative affectivity.  The extent to which individuals are predisposed to view 

the world in a negative light across time and situations was self-assessed by eleven 

items from the Multidimensional Personality Index (Watson & Tellegen,  1985). 

Sample items include:  “I often find myself worrying about something;” “My feelings 

are hurt rather easily;” “Often I get irritated at little annoyances”.  The response format 

ranged from  I  (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agreel.  The items yielded an alpha 

reliability of .88.

Job satisfaction.  Job satisfaction was self-gauged using Chalykoff and 

Kochan’s (1989) six-item measure, which assesses the extent of satisfaction toward 

one’s job, pay, benefits, promotion opportunities, recognition received for a job well 

done, and the amount of say individuals have in how their work is to be done.  The 

response format ranged from 1 (strongly disagree! to 5 (strongly agree).  An alpha 

reliability of .79 was obtained.

Affective commitment.  Affective commitment was self-assessed with Meyer 

and Allen’s (1991) six-item organizational commitment measure.  Response anchors 

ranged from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).  Sample items include: “I 

would be very happy to spend the rest of my career with this organization;” “I really 

feel as if this organization’s problems are my own;” “I do not feel a strong sense of 

“belonging” to my organization” (reverse coded). Alpha reliability for the six affective 

commitment items was .87.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


54

Procedural justice.  The extent to which employees perceive fairness with the 

procedures used to arrive at workplace decisions and the manner in which employees 

perceive they have been treated during the implementation of such decisions was self­

assessed using Greenberg’s (1986) nine-item measure.  Sample items include:  [In this 

organization]. . .  “consistent rules and procedures are used to make decisions about 

things that affect me;” “decisions that affect me are made ethically;” “my input is 

obtained prior to making decisions.”  The response format ranged from 1  (strongly 

disagree) to 5 ('strongly agree).  The items yielded an alpha reliability of .93.

Distributive justice.  The perceived fairness of outcomes resulting from 

workplace decisions (e.g., pay, promotion, evaluation) was self-assessed using Price and 

Mueller’s (1986) six-item measure.  Sample items include:  [I am fairly rewarded]. . .  

“considering the responsibilities I have;” “taking into account the amount of education 

and training that I have had;” “in view of the amount of experience that I have”.  The 

response format ranged from 1  ('strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).  The items 

yielded an alpha reliability of .95.

Leader-member exchange.  Teachers’ perceptions of the quality of their 

relationship with their supervisors were self-assessed using Scandura and Graen’s 

(1984) Leader-Member Exchange measure.  Sample items include:  “My supervisor 

understands my problems and needs;” “My supervisor would ‘bail me out’ at his/her 

expense;” “I have an effective working relationship with my supervisor”.  The 

response format ranged from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).  The items 

yielded an alpha reliability of .94.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


55

Job performance.  Principals were asked to rate teachers on twelve items in 

terms of various traits such as ability, accuracy, creativity, effort, job knowledge, and 

professional image.  This measure was adapted from Greenhaus, Bedeian, and 

Mossholder (1987).  Each item was rated on a continuum ranging from 

l=unsatisfactorv to 5=excellent.  The items yielded an alpha reliability of .98.

Social desirability.  Social desirability was self-assessed using the short form 

of the Marlowe-Crowne social desirability measure (Ballard,  1992).  The measure 

consists of 13 true-false items.  The Marlowe-Crowne social desirability has been the 

preferred measure of the vast majority of researchers conducting organizational 

behavior studies (Moorman & Podsakoff,  1992).  The items were scored so that true=l 

and false=0. with reverse scoring resulting in a possible range in scores of 0 to 13, 

when all responses are summed.  Sample items include:  “I sometimes feel resentful 

when I don’t get my way;” “On a few occasions, I have given up doing something 

because I thought too little of my ability;” “There have been times when I felt like 

rebelling against people in authority even though I knew they were right;” “No matter 

who I’m talking to, I’m always a good listener.”  The items yielded a KR-20 reliability 

coefficient of .76.

Results

Pilot testing affords the opportunity to perform an item analysis so that 

necessary revisions may be made prior to administration of a final survey (Prescott & 

Soeken,  1989).  Although reliability is both sample and situation specific, under 

circumstances where a pilot sample is representative of a target sample, a pilot test can 

be beneficial in assessing the reliability of a measure’s scores before embarking on the

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


56

final data collection (Fox & Ventura, 1983).  For instance, weak measures indicated by 

low reliabilities may be excluded, revised, or supplemented with additional measures. 

Factor analyses

Orthogonal rotation of factors is used almost automatically in the majority of 

factor analysis applications for convenience and simplicity’s sake (Pedhazur & 

Schmelkin,  1991, p. 615).  Oblique rotation is generally recommended when factor 

correlations are moderate to high; orthogonal rotation is otherwise recommended 

(Nunnelly & Bernstein,  1994, p. 501; Pedhazur & Schmelkin,  1991, p. 615).

Following Pedhazur and Schmelkin’s (1991, p. 615ff) preferred course of action, both 

orthogonal and oblique rotations were applied to both pilot test measures of whining. 

Varimax and oblimin solutions revealed very similar factor solutions.  The orthogonal 

(i.e., varimax) solutions were, therefore, retained and interpreted following Pedhazur 

and Schmelkin’s (1991, p. 621) suggestion that in situations where both oblique and 

orthogonal solutions are similar it is tenable to retain and interpret the orthogonal 

solution.

A principal-axis factor analysis performed on the principal-rated items from 

the workplace whining and propensity to complain measures yielded two factors.

Table 2 contains the resulting rotated factor matrix.  A scree plot of the eigenvalues of 

the principal factor axis analysis suggested a two-factor solution.  Four of the five 

workplace whining items (items OCBSP 1, 3,4, 5) loaded cleanly on the second 

factor, and nine of the  14 propensity to complain items (items PCSS 4,5,6,7,9,10, 

12,13,14) loaded cleanly on the first factor.  Eigenvalues of 13.08 and 2.6 were 

reported for the two factors, respectively.  These results suggest that the two measures,

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


57

as rated by the principals, represent two distinct constructs.  The factor intercorrelation 

was .53.  The workplace whining dimension and the propensity to complain dimension 

indicated high levels of internal consistency, both with Cronbach alphas of .97.

Table 2

Principal-Rated Whining Measures (Pilot Test) 

Principal Axis Factor Analysis with Varimax Rotation

Factor

2

.926
.901
.910
.865
.916
.360
.389
.335

.448

.325

1

.334

.873
.808
.885
.744
.865
.870
.797
.738
.847
.911
.859
.877
.877
.875

OCBSP 1
OCBSP2
OCBSP3
OCBSP4
OCBSP5
PCSS1
PCSS2
PCSS3
PCSS4
PCSS5
PCSS6
PCSS7
PCSS8
PCSS9
PCSS10
PCSS11
PCSS12
PCSS13
PCSS14

OCBSP =  Workplace whining (Podsakoff et al., 1990)
PCSS 

=  Propensity to complain scale (Cantrell & Kowalski,  1994)

Factor Two demonstrably reflects the type of noninstrumental complaining 

referred to in this dissertation as workplace whining, whereas Factor One pertains to a 

more general expression of dissatisfaction.  Whereas both factors represent

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


58

complaining, they appear to differ on the type of complaints expressed (i.e., 

instrumental vs. noninstrumental).  More specifically, Factor Two contains items that 

relate to complaining about insignificant matters, blowing things out of proportion, 

and fault-finding.  The items also consistently reflect the chronic nature of the 

complaining episodes, using terminology such as “always”, “a lot of time”, and 

“classic squeaky wheel.”  As mentioned previously, chronicity is a distinguishing 

factor associated with noninstrumental complaining (Kowalski et al.,  1997).  Likewise, 

the item content reflects the trivial nature of complaint episodes, suggesting that 

complaints expressed are not aimed at altering an undesirable state of affairs within an 

organization as much as they are to serve intrapsychic and interpersonal purposes.

The content of the items comprising Factor Two reflects the essence of workplace 

whining as described in this dissertation in that the complaints are not constructively 

aimed at bringing about change, typically focus on inconsequential issues, and are 

chronic in nature.

Moreover, Factor One emerges as a dimension of complaining encompassing 

items that relate to expressing dissatisfaction, annoyance, disappointment, 

discontentment, and unhappiness.  The type of complaint is not apparent, however, 

making it unclear as to whether the items loading on Factor One measure instrumental 

complaining, noninstrumental complaining, or both.  That is, the significance and 

motives for complaining cannot be gleaned from the item content.  The chronicity, 

pessimism, and pettiness of workplace whining, which embodies workplace whining 

and is germane to this dissertation, is absent from the item content of Factor One.

Thus, based on these factor analytic findings, Factor Two was judged to be a more

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


59

representative measure of workplace whining, the focus of this dissertation, than 

Factor One.  Therefore, Factor One was excluded from further analysis as it did not 

appear to discriminate between the two different types of complaining.

Table 3 depicts the number of cases, means, standard deviations, reliabilities, 

and correlations for all pilot test variables.  As Table 3 shows, principal-rated 

workplace whining was (as expected) negatively and significantly associated with job 

satisfaction, distributive justice, and job performance.  Although not statistically 

significant, OBSE, negative affectivity, affective commitment, procedural justice, and 

LMX were related to workplace whining in the expected directions.

Social desirability response bias did not appear to be problematic in this study. 

Prior research has suggested that a lack of social responsibility bias is evidenced by 

correlations in the range of +.10 to +.40 (i.e., Carson, Carson, & Bedeian,  1995; 

Morrow & Goetz,  1988).  In this study, correlations with social desirability ranged 

from +.05 through +.30, with the second highest correlation being .28, indicating that 

the data are not substantially contaminated by social desirability response bias. 

Because, however, social desirability correlated with the mediator variable (OBSE) 

and several of the independent variables, as an added measure, it was entered as a 

statistical control variable in the regression analyses presented later in the dissertation.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


R
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
e
d

 

wi
h

t

 

i

p
e
r
m
s
s
o
n

i

 

of

 

t

h
e 

c
o
p
y
r
i
g
h

t
 

o
w
n
e
r
.
 

F
u
r
t

h
e
r
 

r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i

o
n

 

i

p
r
o
h
b
i
t
e
d
 

w

i
t
h
o
u
t
 

p
e
r
m
s
s

i

i

o
n
.

Means, Standard Deviations, Reliabilities, and Correlations for All Pilot Test Variables

Table 3

Variables

Q

M

SD 

1

2

3

4

5

6

7 

8 

9

10

11

Dependent variables

1.  Workplace whining (principal)

2.  Prop, to complain (principal)

138

137

11.35

20.31

5.80 

(.97)

9.80 

.51**

(.98)

Mediating variable

3.  Org-based self-esteem

I0S

35.23

5.56 

-.04

.01

(.89)

Independent variables

4.  Negative afTectivity

S.  Job satisfaction

6.  Affective commitment

7.  Procedural justice

8.  Distributive justice

9.  Leader-member exchange

10.  Job performance (principal)

Control variable

99

106

108

105

107

107

138

34.07

17.83

20.44

26.61

17.30

23.05

50.83

8.35 

.17

.05

-.23*

(.88)

4.74 

-.33**

-.34**

5.19 

-.14

8.59 

-.14

.01

-.22*

8.55 

-.26**

-.33**

7.10 

-.17

9.98 

-.22*

-.18

.03

.40**

.41**

.56**

.37**

.62**

.16

-.27**

(79)

-.37**

-.16

-.21*

-.19

-.13

.58**

.70**

.79**

.69**

-.02

(87)

.50**

.44**

.43**

.11

(93)

.69** 

(.95)

-.18 

-.19 

.64** 

(.94)

-.07 

-.07

(98)

11.  Social desirability

104

7.96

3.03 

-.07

-.14

.16

-.30**

.28**

.23*

.09 

.19 

.05

-.10

(.76)

Note:  Correlations > +..20 are significant at p<.05 (two tailed test).  Alpha coefficients are in parentheses on the diagonal for 
all variables, except Social Desirability for which a KR-20 coefficient is reported.

O nO


CHAPTER 4:  METHOD 

Sample

The final dissertation sample consisted o f 471  school teachers and their 

immediate supervisors (i.e., principals) from 25 elementary, middle, and high schools 

located within one school district in the southeastern United States.  This sample 

consisted of a subset of teachers from each school.  Systematic sampling was 

employed in deriving the sample whereby the district’s central data-processing 

department selected every fourth teacher from an alphabetized list of all teachers at 

each school.  Systematic subset sampling was chosen for two reasons.  First, an a 

priori power analysis was performed to determine the sample size needed for the final 

study to detect small-medium effects (r=.20) with sufficient power.  That is, the 

probability of detecting a significant effect when an effect actually exists.  Using 

Cohen’s (1969) power convention of 80%, it was determined that a sample size of 190 

would be needed to achieve the desired power.  Additionally, Krejcie and Morgan 

(1970) was consulted to determine that 291 randomly selected subjects would be 

required to be statistically representative of the  1200 school teachers in the focal 

school district.  Second, a subset of teachers was selected from each school to reduce 

the burden placed on principals who were asked to rate the workplace whining and job 

performance of each teacher included in the study.

Exactly 317 teacher surveys were returned for a response rate of 67%. 

Twenty-two of the 25 principals returned 449 surveys.  As stated previously, this 

sample was judged appropriate for testing the proposed hypotheses because there are 

ample opportunities each day for coworker interaction (e.g., classroom observations,

61

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


62

evaluations, lunch hours, breaks, faculty meetings with the principal).  Interaction 

among coworkers and between teachers and their principals is necessary to test many 

of the proposed variables, such as supervisor-rated whining and job performance.

The final sample included male (18%) and female (82%) teachers of which 

94.6% were Caucasian and 4.2% African American.  The sample’s average age was 40 

years (sd =10.35).  Average tenure with the school district was 12 years (sd=9.62), 

average tenure with current school was 9 years (sd=8.91), and average tenure in 

current position was 7 years (sd =8.30).

Due to the number of schools and the teachers’ varied schedules, it was 

impossible to personally distribute and administer the survey instruments.  The 

surveys were, therefore, distributed through a central-office mail system.  A cover 

letter explaining the purpose and importance of the study, as well as instructions and 

incentives for participating were attached to the survey.  Confidentiality was 

guaranteed to all participants.  To ensure confidentiality, the teachers’ names were not 

placed on the surveys, and a return envelope addressed to the researcher in care of the 

central office was provided each teacher.  The principals’ surveys were likewise 

accompanied by a cover letter and distributed through the central-office mail system. 

An identification number was assigned to each teacher and that number was printed on 

the teacher’s survey and the corresponding principal’s survey.  Both teacher and 

principal surveys were returned via the central office-mail system where the researcher 

collected them.  Copies of the teacher cover letter, teacher survey, principal cover 

letter, and principal survey are attached as Appendices E, F, G, and H, respectively.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


63

Measures

Based on the item and factor analyses outlined in Chapter 3, the pilot test 

survey instrument was revised for use in final data collection.  With the exception of 

the addition of a facet satisfaction measure (see anon) and the deletion of Cantrell and 

Kowalski’s (1994) propensity to complain measure, all measures used to assess the 

variables in the conceptual scheme (Figure  1) are the same as those described in the 

pilot test.  Likewise, as with the pilot study, multiple sources (i.e., principals and 

teachers) were used to collect data to avoid artificial inflation of relationships by 

common source variance or demand characteristics and pressure for positive self­

presentation on whining and performance measures.

A facet satisfaction measure was added to supplement the overall job 

satisfaction measure to capture the facet of satisfaction with others.  In a study 

conducted by the U.S. Department of Education (1997), salary and benefits did not 

contribute a large amount to predicting teacher satisfaction.  Instead, teacher 

satisfaction was found to be shaped, in part, by workplace conditions that were within 

the reach of policy at the school and district levels.  For example, teachers were more 

satisfied with teaching as a career when they received support from administrators and 

cooperation from their colleagues.  Based on these findings, it was judged appropriate 

to include an additional measure that captures satisfaction with supervisors, 

coworkers, and one’s school.  These facets of satisfaction were deemed relevant to the 

proposed study because workplace whining is an interpersonal behavior that is 

influenced by perceptions of satisfaction/dissatisfaction arising from different sources

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


64

within an organization, including an organization itself.  Additionally, facet 

satisfaction may influence one’s organization-based self-esteem.

Once again, all survey measures were anchored by either 5- or 7-point response 

continuums.  As with the pilot test, all responses were summed and coded such that a 

high score indicates a high level of agreement.  Cronbach alpha reliability estimates 

were computed on the measures containing continuous data and Kuder-Richardson’s 

KR-20 reliability estimates were computed on measures containing dichotomous data. 

Appendix I contains a complete listing of measures included in the final survey 

administration.

Facet satisfaction

Three items adapted from the survey of organizations (Taylor & Bowers,  1972) 

were used to assess satisfaction with coworkers, principal, and school.  The items 

were:  “All in all, I am satisfied with my coworkers;” “All in all, I am satisfied with 

my principal;” “All in all, I am satisfied with my school”.  The response format ranged 

from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).  Coefficient alpha for this measure 

was .78.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


CHAPTER 5: ANALYSES AND RESULTS

This chapter reports the findings of the study’s final survey application.  The 

statistical analyses used to test the proposed hypotheses (Chapter 3) are presented, 

followed by their ensuing results.

Hypotheses Tests

The data analysis consisted of zero-order correlations and regression analysis. 

The number of cases, means, standard deviations, reliabilities, and correlations for all 

variables are presented in Table 4.  The pattern of correlations observed was 

suggestive that the potential for mediation existed in that each independent variable 

was significantly related to both OBSE (i.e., mediator) and workplace whining (i.e., 

dependent variable).  Further, OBSE was negatively correlated with workplace 

whining.

Hypothesis 1  predicted that organization-based self-esteem would be 

negatively related to workplace whining.  The zero-order correlation calculated 

between organization-based self esteem and workplace whining resulted in a 

significant correlation coefficient of -.35 (2 <  01), providing support for Hypothesis  1.

Hypotheses 2 through 8 predicted that organization-based self-esteem would 

mediate the effects of various antecedents on workplace whining.  Mediation was 

tested using the three-step mediated regression recommended by Baron and Kenny 

(1986).  First, a mediator is regressed on an independent variable; second, a dependent 

variable is regressed on the independent variable; and third, the dependent variable is 

regressed simultaneously on both the independent variable and the mediator. 

According to Baron and Kenny (1986), mediation is demonstrated if certain conditions

65

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


R
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
e
d

 

wi
h

t

 

i

p
e
r
m
s
s
o
n

i

 

of

 

t

h
e 

c
o
p
y
r
i
g
h

t
 

o
w
n
e
r
.
 

F
u
r
t

h
e
r
 

r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i

o
n

 

i

p
r
o
h
b
i
t
e
d
 

w

i
t
h
o
u
t
 

p
e
r
m
s
s

i

i

o
n

.

Means, Standard Deviations, Reliabilities, and Correlations for All Final Study Variables

Table 4

______________V ariables________________n
Dependent variable

M

SD

1

2

7_________8 

9 

10 

II

I.  W orkplace w hining (principal)  449 

9.50

4.86

(.96)

Mediating variable

2.  O rg-based self-esteem  

302

40.27

4.89

-.35***

(-87)

Independent variables

3. N egative afTectivity

4.

Job satisfaction - overall

5. Facet satisfaction
6. A ffective com m itm ent

7. Procedural justice

8. D istributive justice

9. Lcader-m em bcr exchange

Job perform ance (principal)

10.
Control variable 

297

305

310

309

308

311

312

427

32.57

19.13

11.54

21.69

29.53

18.12

24.42

51.31

7.80

4.28

2.20

4.35

6.38

5.99

5.44

9.62

.18**

-.22***

(.86)
-.11

-.15*

-.07

-.10

-.03

.43***

.49***

.59***

.64***

.46***

.67***

-.14*

.39***

-.04

-.22***

-.24***

-.28***

-.27***

-.23***

-.28***

-.36***

(.80)

.57***

(.78)

.52***

.62***

(.80)

.63***

.71***

.64***

.23***

.65***

.50***

.69***

.20***

.59***

0
s0
r

0
0

.43***

.65***

(.94)

.61***

.81***

.66***

(.90)

.27***

.33***

.23***

.33***

II .  Social desirability 

303

8.48

2.70

-.03

.23***

-.33***

.22***

.18***

.17**

.18** 

.10 

.16** 

-.03 

(.70)

Note:  *p<.05.  **p<.01.  ***p<.001.  Alphas coefficients are in parentheses on the diagonal for all variables except Social 
Desirability for which a KR-20 coefficient is reported.

ON
ON


67

are satisfied.  First, the independent variable must significantly influence the mediator 

in the first regression.  Second, the independent variable must significantly influence 

the dependent variable in the second regression.  Third, the mediator must 

significantly influence the dependent variable in the third regression.  Finally, the 

influence of the independent variable on the dependent variable must be less in the 

third regression than in the second (Baron & Kenny,  1986).  Full mediation is 

supported if the independent variable has no significant effect when the mediator is 

controlled.  Partial mediation is supported if the independent variable’s effect is 

smaller, but still significant when the mediator is controlled.

The extent to which an effect is reduced in the relationship between an 

independent variable and a dependent variable, when controlling for a mediator (i.e., 

change in regression coefficients) points to the potency of a mediator (Holmbeck, 

1997).  Further, the significance of the indirect effect of an independent variable on a 

dependent variable through a mediator can be tested (Baron & Kenny,  1986).  Sobel 

(1982) set forth an approximate significance test for an indirect effect o f an 

independent variable on a dependent variable through a mediator.  Baron and Kenny 

modified Sobel’s (1982) test and derived a direct test.  More specifically, if the criteria 

for Step 2 of a mediated regression (the test of a) and Step 3 (the test of b) are met, 

there is necessarily a reduction in the effect of an independent variable on a dependent 

variable.  Thus, an indirect and approximate test that ab=0 tests whether both a and b 

are zero (Steps 2 and 3; Kenny, Kashy, & Bolger, 1998).  Baron and Kenny’s (1986) 

test requires the standard error of a and the standard error of b.  The test of the indirect 
effect is given by dividing ab by the square root of b \ 2 + crs^2 + s,2 s,,2, and treating the

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


68

ratio as a Z test (i.e., larger than 1.96 in absolute value is significant at the .05 level; 

Kenny,  1998).

The mediated regression results for workplace whining are presented in Table 

5.  In Step 1, OBSE (the mediator) was regressed on each of the eight predicted 

antecedents of workplace whining:  negative affectivity, job satisfaction, facet 

satisfaction, affective commitment, procedural justice, distributive justice, leader- 

member exchange, and job performance.  The results were significant for all of the 

relationships (p < .001).  In Step 2, workplace whining was regressed on each of the 

eight predicted antecedents.  All eight of the regressions were significant (p < .001). 

Finally, in Step 3, workplace whining was regressed on OBSE and one of the eight 

antecedents.  This process was performed for each of the eight antecedents. 

Additionally, Baron and Kenny’s (1986) test of the indirect effects for all eight 

antecedents on the dependent variable was conducted as described above.  According 

to Kenny (1998), all absolute Z-values greater than 1.96 are significant at the .05 level. 

In the current study, the absolute Z-values were all greater than 1.96, and thus were 

significant at the .05 level.

This dissertation predicted that the antecedents of workplace whining would 

operate through organization-based self-esteem.  Of the eight relationships that were 

significant at Step 2, each passed the Step 3 test of having a significant coefficient for 

the mediator and a decrease in the magnitude of the coefficient for the focal 

independent variable.  Of these relationships, seven represented full mediation and one 

represented partial mediation (i.e., performance).  Thus, results provide strong support 

for Hypotheses 2, 3,4, 5 ,6, and 7 indicating full mediation.  That is, the findings

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


69

Table 5

Results of Mediated Regression Analysis

Antecedents 

(IV) 

Organization-based 
Self-esteem (OBSE)  Workplace whining

(M) 

(DV)

Negative affectivity (NA)

Step  1  (SD) 
(NA) 
Step 2  (SD)
(NA)
Step 3  (SD)

(OBSE) (M)
(NA)

Job satisfaction -  overall (JS)

Step  1  (SD) 
(JS) 
Step 2  (SD)
(JS)
Step 3  (SD)

(OBSE) (M)
(JS)

Facet satisfaction (FS)

Step  1  (SD)
(FS)
Step 2  (SD)
(FS)
Step 3  (SD)

(OBSE) (M)
(FS)

.179**
-.163***

.150**
.389***

.150**
4 7 |***

.061
.192**
.127*
-.363***
.109

.020
-.229***
.090
-.337***
-.117

.026
-.236***
.087
- 339***
-.063

Adj. R 2 
F 

.138 
14.68***

Adj. R2 
F 

.140 
15.11***

Adj. R2 
F 

.123 
13.36***

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


70

(Table 5 continued)

Antecedents 

(TV) 

Organization-based 
Self-esteem (OBSE)  Workplace whining

(M) 

(DV)

Affective commitment (AC)

Step  1  (SD) 
(AC) 
Step 2  (SD)
(AC)
Step 3  (SD)

(OBSE) (M)
(AC)

Procedural justice (PJ)

Step  1  (SD)
(PJ)
Step 2  (SD)
(PJ)
Step 3  (SD)

(OBSE) (M) 
(PJ)

Distributive justice (DJ) 

Step  1  (SD)
(DJ)
Step 2  (SD)
(DJ)
Step 3  (SD)

(OBSE) (M) 
(DJ)

.131**
.568***

. 102*
.625***

.172***
.439***

024
282***
086
337***
106

.020
-.294***
.072
-.348***
-.092

-.007
-.247***
.071
-.356***
-.106

Adj. R2 
F 

.149 
16.39***

Adj. R2 

.152
16.60***

Adj. R 

.155
17.19***

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


71

(Table 5 continued)

Antecedents 

(IV) 

Organization-based 
Self-esteem (OBSE)  Workplace whining

(M) 

(DV)

Leader member exchange (LMX)

.101*
.650***

Step  1  (SD)

Step 2  (SD)

(LMX)

(LMX)

Step 3  (SD)

(OBSE) (M)
(LMX)

.247***
.403***

Job performance (Perf)

Step  1  (SD)
(Perf)
Step 2  (SD)
(Perf)
Step 3  (SD)

(OBSE) (M)
(Perf)

.040
-.296***
.081
-.318***
-.107

-.036
-.415***
.042
-.259***
- 314***

Adj. R 2 
F 

.140 
15.52***

Adj. R 2 
F 

.218 
24.66***

Note:  Step 1 represents the regression of OBSE on the antecedents and does not 
include the dependent variable (workplace whining).  Step 2 represents the 
regression of workplace whining on the antecedents and does not include the 
mediator variable (OBSE).  Step 3 represents the simultaneous regression of 
workplace whining on both the mediator variable (OBSE) and the antecedents of 
workplace whining.  (IV) = independent variable.  (M) = mediator.  (DV) -  
dependent variable.  All three steps include social desirability (SD) as a control 
variable.  *p<.05;  **p<.01;  ***p<.001.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


72

indicate that workplace whining is indeed influenced by negative affectivity, job satisfaction, 

organizational justice, and LMX, but only indirectly through their effects on organization- 

based self-esteem.  The finding relating to Hypothesis 8 suggests that principal-rated job 

performance influences workplace whining both directly and indirectly through its effects on 

organization-based self-esteem.  A summary of the hypotheses and their outcomes are 

presented in Table 6.

Table 6

Summary of Hypotheses and Outcomes

Hypothesis  1:  Organization-based self-esteem will be negatively related to 

workplace whining.  Full Mediation Supported.

Hypothesis 2:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects of negative 

affectivity on workplace whining. Full Mediation Supported.

Hypothesis 3:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects of job 
satisfaction on workplace whining.  Full Mediation Supported.

Hypothesis 4:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects of affective 

commitment on workplace whining.  Full Mediation Supported.

Hypothesis 5:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects of 
procedural justice on workplace whining.  Full Mediation 
Supported.

Hypothesis 6:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects of 
distributive justice on workplace whining.  Full Mediation 
Supported.

Hypothesis 7:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects of leader- 

member exchange on workplace whining.  Full Mediation 
Supported.

Hypothesis 8:  Organization-based self-esteem will mediate the effects of

supervisor-rated job performance on workplace whining.  Partial 
Mediation Supported.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


CHAPTER 6: DISCUSSION 

Summary of Results 

The purpose of this dissertation was to develop a conceptual scheme (Figure I) 

that advances understanding of workplace whining.  It reports an investigation into 

eight theoretically relevant antecedents to workplace whining, classified into four 

categories (i.e., dispositional, attitudinal, relational, behavioral).  Additionally, it 

explores the role of organization-based self-esteem in mediating the link between each 

antecedent and workplace whining.  Kowalski’s (1996) theory of complaining and 

self-esteem theory (Coopersmith,  1967, Epstein, 1973; Jones,  1973; Leary & Downs, 

1995, Mruk,  1995; Pierce et al.,  1989) provided the primary theoretical underpinnings 

for a series of hypothesized relationships.

The reported results generally support the proposed conceptual scheme, 

indicating that when individuals detect discrepancies between their ideal states and 

their perceived actual states, they become dissatisfied, which in turn results in a 

reduction in current levels of organization-based self-esteem.  This deflation of self­

esteem then motivates individuals to whine in an effort to distance themselves from 

negative and dissatisfying states or outcomes.  More specifically, the reported results 

support full mediation between workplace whining and seven o f eight relevant 

antecedents.  That is, the effects of negative affectivity, overall job satisfaction, facet 

satisfaction, affective commitment, procedural justice, distributive justice, and leader- 

member exchange with workplace whining were frilly mediated through organization- 

based self-esteem.  Further, the relationship between the eighth antecedent (i.e., job 

performance) and workplace whining was partially mediated by organization-based

73

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


74

self-esteem, indicating job performance significantly influenced workplace whining 

directly, as well as indirectly.

The findings of this study, thus, reveal that within a workplace context 

“whiners” are generally individuals who typically hold a negative view of themselves 

and the world, find little satisfaction in their jobs, are not affectively bonded with their 

employing organization, do not feel fairly treated with respect to outcomes or 

procedures in determining outcomes, maintain low quality relationships with their 

supervisors, and perform poorly in their jobs.  These findings highlight the value of 

considering the need of individuals to maintain or enhance their self-esteem, together 

with the role of self-esteem in triggering the whining process.  That is, individuals 

experiencing one or more of the above dispositional, attitudinal, relational, or 

behavioral factors commonly sustain a reduction in their current level of organization- 

based self-esteem.  Such assaults on one’s personal adequacy arguably motivate 

individuals to engage in acts to restore their sense of self.  Therefore, individuals may 

engage in whining behavior to restore or enhance their self-esteem by distancing 

themselves from negative feelings, attitudes, or outcomes.  In essence, workplace 

whining is an effective defense mechanism in rerouting blame away from oneself onto 

external sources or less central internal sources, allowing one to feel better about one’s 

self as a valued and effective organizational member.

Organization-Based Self-Esteem and Workplace Whining Link

As predicted by Hypothesis 1, OBSE was directly and negatively associated 

with workplace whining.  This finding supports the predictions of the literatures on 

complaining (Kowalski,  1996; Kowalski & Erickson, 1997), excuse-making (Snyder

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


75

& Higgins, 1988; Snyder et al., 1983; Mehlman & Snyder, 1985), and self-esteem 

(Coopersmith, 1967, Epstein, 1973; Jones,  1973; Leary & Downs,  1995, Mruk,  1995; 

Pierce et al.,  1989), which assert that in an effort to enhance or maintain self-esteem 

that individuals will employ defense mechanisms (e.g., complaining) to direct 

attributions of unfavorable outcomes from themselves to external sources.  Simply put, 

individuals want to feel good about themselves.  When, however, circumstances arise 

that reflect poorly on individuals, the result will likely cause a decrease in their self­

esteem.  To combat this deflation of self-esteem, individuals may whine in an effort to 

direct blame from themselves to an external source, thereby relieving themselves of 

responsibility for negative outcomes that may have been initially attributed to them. 

Thus, within a work context, whining may be seen as a mechanism for protecting an 

individual’s organization-based self-esteem.  Although chronic complaining is 

generally considered an aversive interpersonal behavior (Kowalski,  1996: Kowalski & 

Erickson,  1997), these findings suggest workplace whining may also play an important 

role in maintaining and enhancing an individual’s self-esteem.

Self-Esteem and the Workplace Whining Process

An advantage of considering the role of self-esteem when studying 

complaining is that the relevant literature highlights its motivational nature.  Thus, this 

literature encourages the evaluation of not only “what” predicts workplace whining, 

but also delves into “how” and “why” individuals are prompted to whine.  For 

example, dissatisfaction may result when a discrepancy exists between the actual 

quality of an individual’s relationship with one’s supervisor and one’s ideal.  The 

ensuing dissatisfaction of a discrepant relationship may result in an individual feeling

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


76

less competent and less valued as an organizational member.  Hence, this reduction in 

OBSE likely motivates individuals to whine about their supervisors disliking them in 

an effort to enhance their self-esteem by attributing the responsibility for the low 

quality relationship to external factors.

Generally, as predicted in Hypotheses 2 through 7, OBSE played the role of 

M l mediator linking various antecedents and workplace whining.  In particular, seven 

antecedents (viz., negative affectivity, overall job satisfaction, facet job satisfaction, 

affective commitment, procedural and distributive justice, and leader-member 

exchange) were significantly related to workplace whining, but when controlling for 

OBSE, the relationship between each antecedent and workplace whining became 

nonsignificant while the relationship with OBSE remained significant.  OBSE was a 

partial mediator in Hypothesis 8.  That is, the behavioral antecedent, job performance, 

was significantly related to workplace whining, but when controlling for organization- 

based self-esteem, the relationship between job performance and workplace whining 

became weaker, but remained significant.  These results indicate that job performance 

influences workplace whining directly, as well as indirectly, through organization- 

based self-esteem.

Dispositional Antecedent.  The first category of antecedents presented in 

Figure 1 was the dispositional component comprised of negative affectivity.  As 

expected, negative affectivity was significantly related to workplace whining.  This 

result was consistent with the symptom reporting literature (e.g., Cohen et al.,  1995; 

Schaubroeck et al., 1992), which suggests that complaining is a function of trait 

negative affectivity.  When OBSE was controlled, however, negative affectivity was

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


77

no longer a significant predictor, providing evidence that negative affectivity affects 

workplace whining indirectly through OBSE, supporting Hypothesis 2.  This is 

compatible with the assertion in the self-esteem literature that one’s affectivity is 

significantly related to one’s self-evaluation (Clark & Watson,  1991; Coopersmith, 

1967; Ganster & Schaubroeck,  1991; Harter,  1993).  Extending that line of thinking, it 

is not surprising that individuals who hold negative views of themselves subsequently 

experience a decrease in their self-esteem, which leads to attempts at restoring self­

esteem through whining behavior.  Additionally, this finding is consistent with 

Kowalski’s (1996) view of the influential role of self-focus and negative affectivity in 

complaining.  That is, negative affectivity leads to self-recrimination, distress, and 

dissatisfaction (Abraham,  1999).  Such feelings readily diminish self-esteem and result 

in complaining.

Attitudinal Antecedents.  The second category of antecedents presented in the 

conceptual scheme was the attitudinal component and was represented by overall job 

satisfaction, facet satisfaction, affective commitment, procedural justice, and 

distributive justice.  As expected, all five antecedents were significantly related to 

workplace whining.  Hence, consistent with complaining theory, dissatisfaction 

experienced by individuals stemming from discrepancies between ideal and perceived 

attitudes likely lead to workplace whining.  The attitudinal antecedents were no longer

t

significant predictors, however, when OBSE was controlled, providing evidence that 

attitudinal antecedents affect workplace whining indirectly through OBSE, supporting 

Hypotheses 3 through 6.  These findings are commensurate with the self-esteem 

literature.  Self-esteem is bome from a satisfaction with one’s life style, psychological

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


78

needs, and relationships with others.  When individuals are dissatisfied with their jobs 

and its various facets, as well as fairness displayed by the organization in both 

outcomes and procedures, consequently their OBSE will suffer.  Likewise, when 

individuals do not feel a bond or affective connection with their employing 

organization, it is likely their growth, achievement, and relational needs are not being 

met leaving individuals feeling less accepted and valued as organizational members 

resulting in decreased in OBSE and increased in whining behavior.

Relational Antecedent.  The third category of antecedents represents the 

relational component of the conceptual scheme and was depicted by leader-member 

exchange.  As anticipated, leader-member exchange was significantly related to 

workplace whining.  Consistent with complaining theory, the dissatisfaction 

experienced by individuals stemming from a discrepancy between the relationship 

they would like to have with their supervisors and their perceived relationships will 

likely lead to workplace whining.  Supporting this finding, research has shown that 

individuals who experience low quality relationships with their supervisors tend to 

perceive the differential treatment between in-group and out-group members by 

supervisors as unfair.  Moreover, these individuals tend to discuss their dissatisfaction 

with coworkers (Sias, 1996; Sias & Jablin,  1995).  When OBSE was controlled, 

however, leader-member exchange no longer significantly predicted workplace 

whining, providing evidence that this relational determinant affects workplace whining 

indirectly through OBSE, supporting Hypothesis 7.  This finding is also commensurate 

with the self-esteem literature.  More specifically, this finding supports Korman’s 

(1976) proposition that an individual’s self-esteem is a “function of others’

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


79

expectations.”  In sum, if significant others believe in us, then we will believe in 

ourselves.  Further, this finding is consistent with Pierce et al.’s (1989) finding of a 

positive relationship between managerial respect and OBSE.  Moreover, the findings 

support Leary and Downs (1995) proposition that self-enhancement and maintenance 

of self-esteem is motivated by a desire to be accepted and included by individuals who 

are psychologically significant to one.  Workplace whining is one avenue to restore or 

enhance self-esteem.

Behavioral Antecedent.  The final category of antecedents presented in the 

conceptual scheme was the behavioral component, represented by job performance. 

The finding indicated that OBSE partially mediated the job performance-workplace 

whining relationship in that job performance still had a significant effect after 

controlling for the mediator, OBSE.  Thus, job performance had both a direct and 

indirect effect on workplace whining.  The finding suggested that job performance 

ratings influence OBSE, and that OBSE in turn influences workplace whining.  This 

finding is consistent with the self-esteem literature.  That is to say, job performance 

ratings serve as a communication to an employee, which relates the organization’s 

belief about individuals’ value and importance to the organization.  Individuals desire 

positive evaluations, which increase their feelings of psychological success and worth 

(Hall,  1971).  Conversely, individuals loathe negative evaluations, which decrease 

their feelings of worth within an organizational context (Pierce et al.,  1989).

Decreases in OBSE trigger individuals’ self-esteem protection drive and result in 

whining as an effort to shift attributions for their shortcomings to external targets.

This finding is also consistent with Baumgardner, Kaufman, and Levy’s (1989) study

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


80

showing that following an evaluation, individuals low in self-esteem displayed a 

coping mechanism that allowed them to internalize positive feedback and externalize 

negative feedback.  Low self-esteem individuals experienced an increase in self­

esteem after publicly complimenting those who evaluated them favorably and by 

publicly derogating those who did not (Baumgardner et al.,  1989).  Thus, low self­

esteem individuals tend to make clear that their failures are due to external causes, and 

chronically gossip about those who have evaluated them negatively (Baumgardner et 

al.,  1989).

The finding that job performance also independently influences workplace 

whining is consistent with complaining theory.  For example, when individuals receive 

poor ratings, a discrepancy arises between their desired ratings and their actual ratings. 

This discrepancy results in experienced dissatisfaction, which triggers whining 

behavior.  The direct effect of job performance on workplace whining is also 

consistent with the findings of Taylor and Pierce (1999), which showed that 

employees who received ratings lower than they expected complained about the source 

of their ratings (e.g., supervisor, employing organization).

Implications of the Proposed Conceptual Scheme 

Implications for theory and research

The results of this dissertation have both theoretical and research implications. 

Foremost, by developing a conceptual scheme based on variables specific to a work 

setting, the results of the reported study make a meaningful contribution to the 

literature on workplace whining, an area which has remained virtually unexplored. 

Kowalski (1996) called for research into the antecedents and consequences of

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


81

complaining (i.e., whining) to advance the understanding of this important aversive 

interpersonal behavior.  The current study takes a first step toward addressing that gap 

by providing insight into four substantive categories of theoretically relevant 

antecedents (i.e., dispositional, attitudinal, relational, behavioral), as well as the role of 

organization-based self-esteem in mediating the effects of those antecedents on the 

whining process.  A major contribution of this study is its focus on noninstrumental 

complaining within a workplace context.  Except for one study, which studied the 

relationship among job satisfaction, trait reactance, the propensity for 

counterproductive behavior, and complaining (Sachau et al.,  1999), no other such 

research has been published in the organizational literature.

Kowalski (1996) emphasized the beneficial impact research into complaining 

might have across a diversity of disciplines.  The proposed conceptual scheme (Figure 

1) contributes to theory development by linking the complaining, self-esteem, excuse- 

making, and organizational behavior literatures.  Moreover, the conceptual scheme 

suggests that organization-based self-esteem is an important mediating variable in the 

whining process.  The findings of this study relevant to OBSE are consistent with self­

enhancement theory (Epstein,  1973; Jones, 1973).

Future research areas

The results of the reported study suggest several avenues for future research. 

First, the conceptual scheme employed should be extended to include a more complete 

representation of potential antecedents.  For example, it may be useful to include 

situational factors that possibly influence OBSE, such as job characteristics and 

organization structure (Pierce et al.,  1989).  Motivating job characteristics, such as

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


82

meaningful work, autonomy, and feedback, may directly influence an individual’s 

feeling of effectiveness and worth within an organization and, in turn, influence 

workplace whining behavior.

Kowalski (1996) suggested that individuals high in negative affectivity were 

more likely than individuals low in negative affectivity to complain.  Given the results 

of this study, which examined negative affectivity in terms of one dispositional trait 

(i.e., negative affectivity) that predisposes individuals to complaining, future 

researchers should examine other theoretically based dispositional constructs. 

Kowalski (1996) indicated that because complaining may lead others to form negative 

impressions of an individual who complains, individuals who are dispositionally 

attuned to the impressions that others are forming o f them may be less likely to 

complain than individuals who are not as sensitive to self-presentational concerns.

One potential avenue of research would be to examine the psychological 

construct, self-monitoring, which refers to the observation and control of expressive 

and self-presentational behaviors (Snyder,  1974; Snyder & Copeland,  1989).  High 

self-monitors tend to be situationally-guided individuals (Snyder,  1979).  That is, 

individuals high in self-monitoring typically are vigilant to situational cues that guide 

them in the presentation of what they believe to be appropriate behaviors across a wide 

variety of situations, even if the behaviors are not totally consistent with their inner 

dispositions.  High self-monitors are sensitive to what others want and have the ability 

to control their actions to present a desired identity (Snyder,  1979).  Thus, high self­

monitors may recognize the aversive nature of whining and, therefore, may find low 

utility in whining leading to the maintenance of a high threshold for whining.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


83

Conversely, the prototypic low self-monitoring individual tends to be dispositionally- 

guided.  The low self-monitor displays behaviors that are congruent with inner 

feelings and beliefs, often risking social ridicule (Snyder,  1974,  1979; Snyder & 

Copeland,  1989).  Such individuals would likely have a low threshold for whining.

Risk-taking is another dispositional variable that could be investigated by 

future researchers.  It seems plausible that individuals high in propensity to take risks 

would complain more frequently because they tend not to be held back by the self- 

presentational concerns to the extent that individuals low in propensity to take risks 

are.  Additionally, a risk-taking mentality might perceive higher utility in complaining 

than individuals low in propensity to take risks because they are willing to take more 

risks.

This study further suggests that when individuals are dissatisfied with the 

current state of attitudinal, relational, or behavioral components (as compared to their 

ideal) they experience a decrease in OBSE.  Individuals whine to externalize negative 

outcomes so as to maintain or enhance their current level of self-esteem.  Longitudinal 

research should be conducted to track changes in OBSE over time.  According to 

Baumgardner et al. (1989), increases in one’s self-esteem after publicly derogating 

someone who has rendered a negative evaluation may be only temporary.  This type of 

aversive interpersonal behavior, in the long run, may culminate in more serious and 

longer term social rejection.  Extending this line of thinking to workplace whining, 

researchers should examine whether workplace whining does indeed help to maintain 

or enhance OBSE over the long run, or whether whining eventually leads to lower

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


84

self-esteem due to the negative interpersonal consequences of whining (e.g., disliking, 

avoidance, ostracism, poor evaluations).

Additionally, future researchers could track workplace whining behavior over 

time to determine whether individuals who whine do indeed experience a cathartic 

effect and, thus, a reduction in whining behavior, as Kowalski (1996) suggests.  Alicke 

et al. (1995) found that over 75% of all complaints registered were expressed for 

noninstrumental reasons, such as to vent frustration.  One function of complaining to a 

secondary source is to provide an emotional release from frustration (Alicke et al., 

1995).  Kowalski (1996) proposed that cathartic complaining may improve affect 

because it allows people to express dissatisfaction, instead o f suppressing it which 

may lead people to ruminate about the cause of their dissatisfaction and blow it out of 

proportion.

Another area for future longitudinal research is to explore the dynamics of 

complaining contagion. According to Kowalski and Erickson (1997), complaining is 

often contagious, exhibiting a domino effect that is initiated by one person 

complaining.  They suggest that hearing another’s complaints makes listeners more 

aware of their own negative feelings, thereby triggering negative affect, and a desire to 

complain.  Further, hearing another’s complaints creates a cognitive burden in listeners 

that may be alleviated by complaining to others.  Listening to others’ complaints may 

also remind listeners of events they have experienced and consequently instill a need 

to relate those negative experiences.  Therefore, future researchers should examine the 

dynamic nature of workplace whining contagion over time by tracking whining 

behavior of individuals in newly formed organizations, groups, or organizations that

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


85

have a minimal number of whiners.  Future researchers should also take into 

consideration the entrance and exit o f individuals to and from groups under study and 

the effects brought about by the changes in group composition relative to workplace 

whining.

Further, future researchers should evaluate the workplace whining process 

relative to newcomers to an organization.  Newcomers frequently are in a state of 

uncertainty until they “leam the ropes” (Brockner,  1988).  Performance evaluations 

provide cues to newcomers about their level of competence, which determines their 

beliefs about their organization-based worth (Pierce et al.,  1989), and subsequently 

affects their whining behavior.  Negative evaluations from supervisors during early 

socialization may be amplified by newcomers, thereby adversely affecting 

organization-based self-esteem and increasing workplace whining.  Likewise, positive 

evaluations may have a highly favorable impact on newcomers during this critical and 

ambiguous period, resulting in an increase in organization-based self-esteem and 

subsequent decrease in workplace whining.

Future researchers should examine the centrality of the job and job-related 

factors with regard to OBSE and workplace whining.  Tharenou (1979), in a review of 

the employee self-esteem literature, suggested that individuals whose work is an 

important part of their self-concept, might tend to associate feelings about the job with 

feelings about themselves.  Therefore, the importance placed on one’s job and job- 

related factors may moderate the degree to which OBSE is affected by discrepancies 

between ideal and perceived attitudinal, relational, and behavioral factors.  According 

to Lewin (1936), valence is defined as “the subjective attractiveness or aversiveness of

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


86

specific objects and events within the immediate situation” (p.  1135).  Valences are 

attached to a particular context and to a present time frame.  Valences also relate to 

affect in that affect occurs when a positively or negatively valent action occurs, or 

when a positive or negative outcome is experienced (Feather, 1995).

Applying this concept to workplace whining, valence is a function of a 

stimulus (i.e., negative outcomes resulting in dissatisfaction associated with perceived 

discrepancies) and the importance of a stimulus target (e.g., job, pay).  Specifically, 

the greater the importance attached by an individual to the target of an affect-inducing 

event, the greater will be the valence of the affect-inducing event.  For example, 

individuals who place high importance on their jobs and work relationships may 

experience dissatisfaction if they perceive that an aversive event has occurred (e.g., 

unfair treatment, disintegration in the quality of relationship with supervisor), that is 

inconsistent with their “ideal” and, thus, will attach a greater valence to the aversive 

event, and likely suffer a greater decrease in OBSE than individuals whom do not 

place great importance on their jobs and work relationships.  In other words, the more 

important job and job-related factors, the greater will be the impact of individuals’ 

experienced dissatisfaction on OBSE and, subsequently, on workplace whining. 

Knowing the importance of a job and various job-related facets to individuals may be 

influential in determining how to motivate, satisfy, and increase an individual’s 

OBSE.  For example, for individuals to whom money is important and an indicator of 

their organizational worth, an increase in salary would hold high valence and would 

have a positive effect on their OBSE, thereby eliminating the need to restore OBSE 

through whining.  For other employees, recognition might hold more valence and be a

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


87

better motivator, source o f satisfaction, increased OBSE, and decreased workplace 

whining.  Additionally, for individuals experiencing major changes, which hold high 

valence (e.g., loss of position and status due to economic cutbacks), and likely have 

permanent and negative affects on OBSE, counseling might prevent a permanent 

downward change in OBSE and increase in workplace whining.

Schneider (1987), in his Attraction-Selection-Attrition (ASA) model, 

suggested that people who do not fit an environment well will eventually leave it. 

Whereas, at first, people may be attracted to an organization, they may make errors, 

and find they do not fit and choose to leave.  If people who do not fit leave, then 

people who remain tend to be similar to one another and tend to form more 

homogeneous groups than those who were initially attracted to an organization 

(Schneider,  1987).  Future research should examine whether whiners attract, select, 

and retain whiners.

In a related vein, organizational climate is a set of shared perceptions of 

policies, practices, and procedures that are rewarded, supported, and expected through 

group interaction (Schneider,  1990; Schneider & Reichers,  1983).  Future researchers 

should investigate whether a climate for complaining may exist within some 

organizations, wherein people feel comfortable complaining and do not consider 

complaining an aversive behavior.  For example, it is plausible that complaining is 

rewarded, supported, and expected by organizational members wherein organizational 

members listen to one another and commiserate, thereby encouraging a complaining 

climate.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


88

Similarly, future researchers could also examine group norms relating to 

workplace whining.  Investigation into whether group members tend to complain more 

in groups where complaining is sanctioned by the group than where complaining is not 

sanctioned by the group might provide further insight into the whining process.  In 

cases where the group norm is complaining, then there would be no sanctions for 

complaining. The opposite would be true, however, if the group norm was to value 

and display positive attitudes and not complain about dissatisfactions.

Implications for practice

A general overview of practical implications is offered based on the findings of 

this study and is followed by more specific interventions that may be effective in 

decreasing workplace whining by influencing the whining process.

Self-esteem is very fragile and malleable.  Managers should make employee 

self-esteem a focal point in their daily workplace interaction (Cyr,  1992).  The 

preservation of self-esteem, as well as increases and decreases in self-esteem are 

readily influenced by many factors within the workplace setting.  Given the strong 

mediating role of OBSE, managers may want to stay attuned to their subordinates’ 

personal OBSE needs.  Due, in part, to differences in self-esteem, however, 

individuals' reactions to identical situations may vary (Ringer, Balkin, & Boss,  1993). 

Consequently, the appropriateness of workplace interventions may necessarily differ 

from employee to employee.  In this regard, OBSE represents a generative mechanism 

through which a variety of job-related factors (i.e., attitudinal, relational, behavioral) 

influence workplace whining.  Accordingly, there are several steps managers might

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


89

consider when interacting with their subordinates so as to preserve and enhance their 

subordinates’ OBSE and, thus, decrease workplace whining.

Managers should recognize signs of low OBSE and strive to determine 

wherein individuals’ dissatisfaction lies, so that remedial steps can be taken to restore 

their OBSE, and reduce their need to rebuild their OBSE through workplace whining. 

Further, Jones’s (1973) findings suggested that low self-esteem individuals’ attitudes 

toward their jobs may be more affected by evaluations than their high self-esteem 

counterparts.  Therefore, it might be beneficial for all involved, in terms of the 

influence of OBSE on workplace whining, if managers were generally aware of their 

subordinates levels of OBSE and were sensitive to each individual’s needs when 

conducting both formal and informal performance evaluations (Jones, 1973), thus, 

preventing a decrease in OBSE, resulting in less whining behavior.

Based on the findings of this study, employees who feel they are treated fairly 

and have a high-quality relationship with higher ups tend to experience higher OBSE. 

Therefore, managers should be attentive to and supportive of their subordinates, show 

respect, and give encouragement and feedback so as to foster high-quality 

relationships.  Additionally, equitable outcomes should be distributed through just 

procedures in a fair, respectful manner.  For example, individuals whose performance 

is complimented and encouraged by higher ups only to find that they receive a 

minimal pay raise with no explanation, may feel undervalued and question their 

competence and value as organizational members, resulting in reduced OBSE, and 

increased whining.  Therefore, managers should explain any extenuating 

circumstances that may affect outcomes, especially if the circumstances leading to less

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


90

than expected outcomes are unrelated to an individual’s performance.  Also, 

mechanisms should be in place for individuals to voice their concerns about unfair 

treatment (Ringer et al.,  1993).

As high-OBSE employees cultivate positive work environments free from 

aversive behaviors (such as whining), managers should reaffirm subordinates’ worth to 

an organization through praise and constructive criticism (Newstrom, Gardner, & 

Pierce,  1999).  They should establish trust with their subordinates and allow them 

discretion in performing their jobs.  Managers should design work that challenges their 

subordinates, yet allows success.  Moreover, organizations should establish training 

programs that allow employees to develop their skills.  This conveys to employees that 

an organization values them enough to invest in them and provide them with the skills 

needed to succeed in their jobs (Newstrom et al.,  1999), further establishing a positive 

work environment.

Presented below are more specific actions managers can implement to maintain 

and enhance employee self-esteem, further diminishing workplace whining.  Whining 

is contagious (Kowalski,  1996,  1997).  Employees who constantly whine and criticize 

their jobs, managers, co-workers, and organization have a destructive, demoralizing 

effect on their colleagues (Andrews, 1999).  There are many approaches that are 

accessible to managers that may have an ameliorating effect on workplace whining.

Managers should reassure whiners and reaffirm their worth to their 

organization by adequately praising them for a job well-done (Newstrom et al.,  1999). 

In general, most employees yeam for positive, verbal recognition of their 

achievements and acceptance (Cyr,  1992; Leary & Downs,  1995; Wayne et al.,  1997).

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


91

Timely and specific praise relates to employees that their work is appreciated, and that 

they are important to their organization and taken seriously.  Formal recognition for 

workplace achievements can be as simple as a letter of appreciation sent to employees, 

commendatory memos placed in employees’ personnel files, or nominations for 

monthly or annual awards (Cyr,  1992).  Such recognition will likely engender 

increased commitment, justice, job satisfaction, and superior-subordinate relations, 

leading to increased OBSE and reduced workplace whining.

When delivering constructive criticism for work that is less than satisfactory, 

managers should allow employees to “save face” by using opening comments such as 

“Perhaps you are not aware of this ...” and “Your method is one way to do this, but 

perhaps there are others ways you could explore, such as ...” when pointing out 

deficiencies (Boehle, Dobbs, & Stamps, 2000).  Managers should also take steps to 

design jobs such that employees experience success in the workplace, thus enhancing 

OBSE (Newstrom et al.,  1999).  Managers should likewise make certain to clarify 

roles and define exactly that which employees will be held accountable (Anonymous, 

2000).  Most employees want to succeed and role clarification helps them to do a good 

job.  Role clarification and the ensuing success will likely lead to feelings of greater 

job satisfaction, justice, and higher quality workplace relationships.

Managers should leam to quickly overcome feelings of annoyance, 

dissatisfaction, and disappointment they may experience in dealing with employees 

(Cyr, 1992).  Continuing disapproval on a manager’s part will likely be sensed by 

employees and lead to a decrease in their OBSE and an increase in whining.  Likewise, 

managers should avoid talking down to employees, petty criticisms, and criticizing

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


92

employees publicly in front of co-workers, as such actions tend to lower employee 

self-esteem, as well as diminish employees’ status with their co-workers.  Further, 

managers greeting employees, making eye contact when passing employees in 

hallways, and taking time for “small talk” will communicate to employees that no 

grudges are held, that the employees are o f value, and that they are important to an 

organization’s success (Andrews,  1999; Cyr,  1992).

Managers should trust employees to perform their jobs without constant 

monitoring and suggestions (Newstrom et al.,  1999).  Doing so conveys to employees 

that they are trusted and that management has faith in them to perform their jobs 

efficiently and effectively, thereby further bolstering employees’ OBSE.  Continually 

being told what to do tends to deflate employees’ sense of self-importance and, 

consequently, their OBSE.  In contrast, asking employees for their input and listening 

to their responses, fosters a sense of justice, and builds commitment, which tends to 

raise their OBSE and lessen whining (Cyr,  1992).

Managers should show respect and an appreciation of the importance of 

employees’ work, as well as the associated challenges.  People identify with their work 

(Cyr, 1992), and this identification has a direct effect on their OBSE (Pierce et al., 

1989).  Managers should show an appreciation for the reliability, cooperativeness, and 

commitment with which employees’ perform their work (Cyr,  1992).  One method of 

demonstrating appreciation for the importance of employees’ work is to include them - 

in meetings and decision-making processes relative to matters in which they have 

expertise (Cyr,  1992) and to invite them to give their perspective.  This will likely 

create feelings of belonging and value.  Additionally, assignments that allow

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


93

employees discretion, and challenges their knowledge, skills, and abilities, and is 

meaningful and yet attainable, will likely increase their job satisfaction and produce 

feelings of importance, value, and a sense that managers have faith in their employees 

(Newstrom et al.,  1999).  Managers should also equitably distribute less desirable 

assignments evenly among employees.  That is, no favoritism should be shown 

resulting in regularly giving the least interesting assignments to the same people (Cyr, 

1992).  Likewise, a manager should never denigrate the importance of a task or job.

Managers should ensure that pay increases are based on objective merit and not 

favoritism (Cyr,  1992).  Procedures for determining pay increases, as well as the 

amount of increases should be determined using fair and impartial means.  Managers’ 

employee performance appraisals should be completed using fair and objective 

procedures.  When no objective performance measures are available, managers should 

remain objective when completing employees’ performance appraisals, placing 

personal biases aside.  Managers should be aware that employees measure pay in both 

referent and absolute terms (Adams,  1965; Ringer et al.,  1993).  Employees may 

compare their pay to referents including, fellow employees, employees of other 

organizations, and similar jobs that they have held in the past.  When a pay decision is 

inconsistent with employees’ expectations, they may construe that decision as negative 

feedback regarding their performance.  Therefore, managers should be sensitive to 

both the content and process of feedback being sent to employees (Ashford,  1989; 

Ringer et al.,  1993).  Pay amount must be consistent with verbal messages being 

relayed to employees.  For example, if an employee has performed in an outstanding 

manner for an extended period of time, and has been complimented by his or her

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


94

manager to that effect, then his or her pay should be increased accordingly.  If pay 

raises are inconsistent with other feedback, then managers should explain the specific 

reasons why their employees’ pay is not what they deserve.  Managers can relay this 

information to employees through face-to-face meetings, memos, or group meetings 

about constraints on pay (Ringer et al.,  1993).  When pay constraints exist, managers 

can substitute other rewards for pay, such as days off, office or equipment upgrades, or 

educational opportunities.  The reward must be valued by employees and recognized 

as an acknowledgment of their performance.  Finally, managers should provide an 

avenue wherein employees can give feedback to managers and challenge pay decisions 

(Ringer et al.,  1993).  Such measures can help increase job satisfaction, feelings of 

organizational justice, leader-member exchange, and ultimately maintain or enhance 

employees’ self-esteem, resulting in less workplace whining.

Limitations

The contributions of this study must be considered in view of its limitations.  A 

basic limitation of this study was its reliance on cross-sectional data, which does not 

allow a true test of causal inferences or rule out the possibility of reverse causality 

(James & Brett,  1994).  Although there is theoretical and empirical support for the 

conceptual scheme guiding the reported research, alternative explanations for the 

findings cannot be excluded.  Because the reported study was cross-sectional in 

design, future research should consider longitudinal designs, which would allow for 

causal inferences of relationships as they unfold across time.

Although this study provides a useful initial step toward a basic understanding 

of the workplace whining construct and process, the guiding conceptual scheme does

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


95

not likely include all relevant and significant constructs.  Therefore, future research 

should extend the proposed conceptual scheme to include a broader set of predictors 

and other potential influences applicable to the whining process.

An additional limitation of this study is that, because most of the constructs 

were measured in a single administration by self-report, common method variance 

may have been inherent.  Subjects may have artificially inflated scores due to a 

tendency to respond in a consistent manner (Robinson & Morrison,  1995).  Social 

desirability bias was also a concern.  To offset some of the potential effects of these 

biases, two sources were used in the data collection.  Principals rated the teachers on 

workplace whining and job performance.  Teachers provided self-report data for the 

remaining measures.  Thus, teachers provided data for the predictor and mediator 

variables, and principals provided data for the dependent variable and one predictor 

variable (i.e., job performance).  Additionally, social desirability bias was statistically 

controlled in all regression analyses.

Some researchers are troubled by the potential overlap between NA and self- 

report measures (Brief et al.,  1988; Clark & Watson,  1991).  It is suggested that 

negative affectivity may inflate observed associations between variables (e.g., 

stressors and strains; Brief, Burke, George, Robinson, & Webster,  1988; Burke, Brief, 

& George, 1993).  Clark and Watson (1991) concluded, however, that the NA 

component of self-report scales is sufficiently strong that it emerges regardless of the 

substantive domain, and the general affective tone is as important as or more important 

than the specific item content.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


96

Future research would benefit by varying the sources of whining ratings.  For 

instance, the whining measure could also be completed by one or more of subjects’ 

peers, because coworkers are likely to have the opportunity to observe subjects’ 

whining behavior and to be less prone to social desirability response than subjects 

themselves.  The validity and reliability of peer appraisals have been well established 

in the performance appraisal literature (Cardy & Dobbins,  1994; Reilly & Chao,

1982).  Prior research has shown the information known by peers concerning 

employee performance may be more accurate than that of any other rater because peers 

have closer and more frequent contact with employees (Barclay & Harland,  1995).

A final limitation of the study is that the results are based on a sample o f 

schoolteachers and principals.  Although there does not appear to be any a priori 

reason why these results may not generalize to other samples, the findings should be 

replicated in future studies.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


REFERENCES

Abraham, R. (1999).  Negative affectivity:  Moderator or confound in 

emotional dissonance-outcome relationships?  Journal of Psychology.  133. 61-72.

Adams, J. S.  (1965).  Inequity in social exchange.  Advances in experimental 

psychology. 2 .267-299.

Alicke, M. D., Braun, J. C., Glor, J. E., Klotz, M. L., Magee, J., Sederholm, H., 

& Siegel, R.  (1992).  Complaining behavior in social interaction.  Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin.  18.  286-295.

Allen, N. J., & Meyer, J. P.  (1990).  The measurement and antecedents of 
affective, continuance, and normative commitment to the organization.  Journal of 
Occupational Psychology. 6 3 .1-18.

Allen, R. E., & Keaveny, T. J.  (1985).  Factors differentiating grievants and 

nongrievants.  Human Relations. 38. 519-534.

Andrews, J.  (1999, November 8).  A strong sense of self-esteem is key for 

those working in the hospitality industry.  Nation’s Restaurant News. 33. 38.

Anonymous.  (2000, March).  Interview with Nathaniel Branden:  Self-esteem 

at work.  Executive Excellence.  17. 7.

Arvey, R. D., Bouchard, T. J., Jr., Segal, N. L., & Abraham, L. M.  (1989).

Job satisfaction:  Environmental and genetic components.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology. 7 4 .187-192.

Ashford, S. J. (1989).  Self-assessments in organizations: A literature review and 
integrative model.  In L. L. Cummings & B. M. Staw (Eds.), Research in Organizational 
Behavior. Vol. 11 (pp.  133-174).  Greenwich, CN: Jai Press Inc.

Ballard, R.  (1992).  Short forms of the Marlowe-Crowne social desirability 

scale.  Psychological Reports. 7 1 .1155-1160.

Balser, D. B., & Stem, R. N.  (1999).  Resistance and cooperation:  a response 

to conflict over job performance.  Human Relations. 5 2 .1029-1054.

Barclay, J. H., & Harland, L. K.  (1995).  Peer performance appraisals.  Group 

& Organization Management. 2 0.39-60.

Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A.  (1986).  The moderator-mediator variable 
distinction in social psychological research:  conceptual, strategic, and statistical 
considerations.  Journal o f Personality and Social Psychology. 5 1 .1173-1182.

97

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


98

Bassett, G.  (1994).  The case against job satisfaction.  Business Horizons.

2Z(3), 61-68.

Baumeister, R. F.  (1993).  Understanding the inner nature of low self-esteem: 
Uncertain, fragile, protective, and conflicted.  In R. F. Baumeister (Ed.), Self-esteem: 
The puzzle of low self-regard (pp. 201-2181.  New York:  Plenum.

Baumgamder, A. H., Kaufman, C. M., & Levy, P. E.  (1989).  Regulating 

affect interpersonally:  When low esteem leads to greater enhancement.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology. 56.907-921.

Bearden, W. O., & Teel, J. E.  (1983).  Selected determinants of consumer 

satisfaction and complaint reports.  Journal of Marketing Research. 20. 21-218.

Bemmels, B., & Foley, J. R.  (1996).  Grievance procedure research:  A review 

and theoretical recommendations.  Journal of Management. 22. 359-384.

Bennett, R.  (1997).  Anger, catharsis, and purchasing behavior following 

aggressive customer complaints.  Journal of Consumer Marketing.  14.  156-172.

Blau,P.  (1964).  Exchange and power in social life.  New York:  Wiley.

Blodgett, J. G., Granbois, D. H., & Walters, R. G.  (1993).  The effects of 

perceived justice on complainants’ negative word-of-mouth behavior and repatronage 
intentions.  Journal of Retailing. 69.  399-428.

Boehle, S., Dobbs, K., & Stamps, D.  (2000, June).  How to take the venom out 

of vitriol.  Training. 37(61. 28.

Brief, A. P., Burke, M. J., George, J. M., Robinson, B., & Webster, J.  (1988). 
Should negative affectivity remain an unmeasured variable in the study of job stress? 
Journal of Applied Psychology. 73.  193-198.

Brockner, J.  (1988).  Self-esteem at work:  Research, theory, and practice. 

Lexington, MA:  Lexington.

Brown, L. O., & Beik, L. L.  (1969).  Marketing research and analysis.  New 

York: Ronald.

Bruning, J. L., & Kintz, B. L.  (1987).  Computational handbook of statistics 

(2nd ed.).  Glenview, IL:  HarperCollins.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


99

Burke, M. J., Brief, A. P., & George, J. M. (1993).  The role of negative 

affectivity in understanding relations between self-reports of stressors and strains:  A 
comment on the applied psychology literature.  Journal of Applied Psychology. 78. 
402-412.

Bums, J. Z., & Otte, F. L.  (1999).  Implications of leader-member exchange 

theory and research for human resource development research.  Human Resource 
Development Quarterly. 10.225-249.

Callahan, S. D., & Kidd, A. H.  (1986).  Relationship between job satisfaction 

and self-esteem in women.  Psychological Reports. 59. 663-668.

Cantrell, C. C., & Kowalski, R. M.  (1994).  What type of person complains? 
Paper presented at the meeting of the Society of Southeastern Social Psychologists, 
Winston-Salem, NC.

Cappelli, P., & Chauvin, K.  (1991).  A test of an efficiency model of 

grievance activity.  Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 45. 3-14.

Cardy, R. L., & Dobbins, G. H. (1994).  Performance appraisal:  Alternative 

perspectives.  Cincinnati:  South-Western Publishing Co.

Camevale, A. P., Gainer, L. J., Meltzer, A. S., & Holland, S. L.  (1988, 

October).  Workplace basics:  The skills employers want.  Training & Development 
Journal. 22-30.

Carson, K. D., Carson, P. P., & Bedeian, A. G.  (1995).  Development and 
contruct validation of a career entrenchment measure.  Journal of Occupational and 
Organizational Psychology. 68.301-320.

Chalykoff, J., & Kochan, T. A.  (1989).  Computer-aided monitoring:  Its 

influence on employee job satisfaction and turnover.  Personnel Psychology. 42. 807- 
834.

Clark, L. A., & Watson, D. (1991).  General affective dispositions in physical 
and psychological health.  In C. R. Snyder & D. R. Forsyth (Eds.) Handbook o f social 
and clinical psychology: The health perspective (pp. 221-245).  Elmsford, NY: 
Pergamon Press.

Cohen, J.  (1969).  Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences.  New 

York:  Academic.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


100

Cohen, S., Doyle, W. J., Skoner, D. P., Fireman, P., Gwaltney, J. M., Jr.,  & 
Newsom, J. T.  (1995).  State and trait negative affect as predictors of objective and 
subjective symptoms of respiratory viral infections.  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology. 6 8 .159-169.

Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T.  (1979).  Quasi-experimentation:  Design & 

analysis issues for field settings.  Chicago:  Rand-McNally.

Coopersmith, S.  (1967).  The antecedents of self-esteem.  San Francisco: 

Freeman.

Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R.  (1985).  Hypochondriasis, neuroticism, and 
aging:  When are somatic complaints unfounded?  American Psychologist. 40.  19-28.

Cropanzano, R., & Greenberg, J.  (1997).  Progress in organizational justice: 

tunneling through the maze. International review of industrial and organizational 
psychology.  12. 317-372.

Cyr, R.  (1992, June).  Maintaining employee self-esteem.  Supervisory 

Management. 37.  1.

Czaja, R.  (1998).  Questionnaire pretesting comes of age.  Marketing Bulletin. 

9j 52-66.

Dalton, D. R., & Todor, W. D.  (1982).  Antecedents of grievance filing 
behavior:  Attitude/behavioral consistency and the union steward.  Academy of 
Management Journal. 25. 5869.

Dawis, R. V., & Lofquist, L. H.  (1984).  A psychological theory of work 

adjustment.  Minneapolis:  University of Minnesota Press.

Dienesch, R. M., & Liden, R. C.  (1986).  Leader-member exchange model of 
leadership:  A critique and further development.  Academy of Management Review. 
XL 618-634.

Dillman, D. A.  (1978).  Mail and telephone surveys:  The total design method. 

New York:  Wiley.

Eckerman, A. C.  (1948).  An analysis of grievances and aggrieved employees 

in a machine shop and foundry.  Journal of Applied Psychology. 32.  255-269.

Epstein, S.  (1973).  The self-concept revisited:  Or a theory of a theory. 

American Psychologist. 28. 404-416.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


101

Epstein, S.  (1979).  The stability of behavior:  On predicting most of the 

people much of the time.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 37.  1097- 
1126.

Feather, N. T. (1995).  Values, valences, and choice:  The influence of values 
on the perceived attractiveness and choice of alternatives.  Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology. 68.  1135-1151.

Festinger, L. A.  (1957).  A theory of cognitive dissonance.  Evanston, IL: 

Row, Peterson.

Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I.  (1975).  Belief, attitude, intention and behavior. 

Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Fisher, A.  (1996, September 30).  Stop whining.  Fortune. 206-208.

Fisher, C. D., & Locke, E. A.  (1992).  The new look in job satisfaction 

research and theory.  In C. J. Cranny, P. C. Smith & E. F. Stone (Eds.), Job 
satisfaction:  How people feel about their jobs and how it affects their performance 
(pp.  165-194).  New York:  Lexington.

Fox, R. N., & Ventura, M. R.  (1983).  Small-scale administration of 

instruments and procedures.  Nursing Research. 32.  122-125.

Fuentes, R. R., Sawyer, J. E., & Lehman, W. E. K.  (1991).  Employee 

responses to iob dissatisfaction:  The effects of iob attitudes, worker perceptions and 
individual differences on withdrawal and adaptation action alternatives.  Unpublished 
manuscript, Texas A&M University at College Station, TX.

Ganster, D. C., Hennessey, H. W., & Luthans, F. (1983).  Social desirability 
response effects:  Three alternative models.  Academy of Management Journal. 26. 
321-331.

Ganster, D. C., & Schaubroeck, J.  (1991).  Work stress and employee health. 

Journal of Management.  17.235-271.

Ganster, D. C., Hennessey, H. W., & Luthans, F.  (1983).  Social desirability 

response effects:  Three alternative models.  Academy of Management Journal. 26. 
321-331.

George, J. M. (1992).  The role of personality in organizational life:  Issues and 

evidence.  Journal of Management  18.185-213.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


102

Gerstner, C. R., & Day, D. V.  (1997).  Meta-analytic review of leader-member 
exchange theory:  Correlates and construct issues.  Journal of Applied Psychology. 82. 
827-844.

Gopinath, C., & Becker, T. E.  (2000).  Communication, procedural justice, 
and employee attitudes:  Relationships under conditions of divestiture.  Journal of 
Management. 26. 63-83.

Graen, G. B., & Scandura, T. A.  (1987).  Toward a psychology of dyadic 

organizing.  Research in Organizational Behavior. 9.  175-208.

Gray, J. A.  (1985).  Issues in the neuropsychology of anxiety.  In A. H. Tuma 

& J. D. Master (Eds.), Anxiety and the anxiety disorders (pp. 5-25).  Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum.

Greenberg, J.  (1986).  Determinants of perceived fairness of performance 

evaluations.  Journal of Applied Psychology. 71. 334-342.

Greenberg, J.  (1990).  Organizational justice:  Yesterday, today, and 

tomorrow.  Journal of Management.  16. 399-432.

Greenhaus, J. H., Bedeian, A. G., & Mossholder, K. W.  (1987).  Work 

experiences, job performance, and feeling of personal and family well-being.  Journal 
of Vocational Behavior. 31.200-215.

Guralnik, D. B. (Ed.).  (1972).  Webster’s new world dictionary.  New York:

World.

Hall, D. T.  (1971).  A theoretical model of career subidentity development in 
organizational settings.  Organizational Behavior and Human Performance. 6. 50-76.

Harter, S.  (1993).  Causes and consequences of low self-esteem in children 

and adolescents.  In R. F. Baumeister (Ed.), Self-esteem:  The puzzle of low self- 
regard (pp. 87-1161.  New York:  Plenum.

Holden, R. R., & Gedden, G. C.  (1989).  Three common social desirability 

scales:  Friends, acquaintances, or strangers?.  Journal of Research in Personality. 23. 
180-191.

Holmbeck, G. N.  (1997).  Toward terminological, conceptual, and statistical 

clarity in the study of mediators and moderators:  Examples from the child-clinical and 
pediatric psychology literatures.  Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 65. 
599-610.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


103

Hulin, C. L.  (1991).  Adaptation, persistence, and commitment in 

organizations.  In M.D. Dunnette & L. M. Hough (Eds.).  Handbook of industrial and 
organizational psychology (2nd ed., pp. 445-505).  Palo Alto, CA:  Consulting 
Psychologists.

Hulin, C. L., Roznowski, M., & Hachiya, D.  (1985).  Alternative opportunities 
and withdrawal decisions:  Empirical and theoretical discrepancies and an integration. 
Psychological Bulletin. 97.233-250.

James, L. R., & Brett, J. M.  (1994).  Mediators, moderators, and tests for 

mediation.  Journal of Applied Psychology. 69. 307-321.

Jones, S. C.  (1973).  Self- and interpersonal evaluations:  Esteem theories 

versus consistency theories.  Psychological Bulletin. 7 9 .185-199.

Judge, T. A., Locke, E. A., Durham, C. C., & Kluger, A. N.  (1998). 

Dispositional effects on job and life satisfaction:  The role of core evaluations.  Journal 
of Applied Psychology. 8 3 .17-34.

Kenny, D. A. (1998, October 20).  Mediation.  [WWW document]. URL 

http://nw3.nai.net/~dakenny/mediate.htm.

Kenny, D. A., Kashy, D. A., & Bolger, N.  (1991).  Data analysis in social 
psychology.  In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.).  The handbook of 
social psychology (4th ed., pp. 233-265).  New York:  McGraw-Hill.

Klaas, B. S.  (1989).  Determinants of grievance activity and the grievance 
system’s impact on employee behavior:  An integrative perspective.  Academy of 
Management Review. 14.445-458.

Korman, A. K.  (1976).  Hypothesis of work behavior revisited and an 

extension.  Academy of Management Review.  1. 50-63.

Kowalski, R. M.  (1996).  Complaints and complaining:  Functions, 

antecedents, and consequences.  Psychological Bulletin.  119.  179-196.

Kowalski, R. M.  (1997).  The underbelly of social interaction:  Aversive 

interpersonal behaviors.  In R. M. Kowalski (Ed.), Aversive interpersonal behaviors 
(pp.  1-9).  New York:  Plenum.

Kowalski, R. M., & Erickson, J. R.  (1997).  Complaining:  What’s all the fuss 
about?  In R. M. Kowalski (Ed.l. Aversive interpersonal behaviors (pp. 91-109V  New 
York:  Plenum.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


104

Kowalski, R. M., Simons, A., Litty, C. G., Bryson, P., White, R., & Harris, M. 

(1997).  Behavioral indices of chronic complaining:  An act nomination procedure. 
Unpublished manuscript, Western Carolina University at Cullowhee, NC.

Krejcie, R. V., & Morgan, D. W.  (1970).  Determining sample size for 
research activities.  Educational and Psychological Measurement 30. 607-610.

Labig, C. E., Jr., & Helbum, I. B.  (1986).  Union and management policy 

influences on grievance initiation.  Journal of Labor Research. 7. 269-284.

Leary, M. R., Downs, D. L.  (1995).  Interpersonal functions of the self-esteem 

movie:  The self-esteem system as a sociometer.  In M. H. Kemis (Ed.), Efficacy, 
aeencv. and self-esteem (pp.  123-144).  New York:  Plenum.

Lease, S. H.  (1998).  Annual review,  1993-1997:  Work attitudes and 

outcomes.  Journal of Vocational Behavior. 53.  154-183.

Lehman, W. E. K., & Simpson, D. D.  (1992).  Employee substance use and 

on-the-job behaviors.  Journal of Applied Psychology. 77. 309-321.

Levin, I., & Stokes, J. P.  (1989).  Dispositional approach to job satisfaction: 

Role of negative affectivity.  Journal of Applied Psychology. 74. 752-758.

Lewin, K.  (1936).  Principles of topological psychology.  New York: 

McGraw-Hill.

Liden, R. C., Sparrowe, R. T., & Wayne, S. J.  (1997).  Leader-member 

exchange theory:  The past and potential for the future.  Research in Personnel and 
Human Resource Management.  15.47-119.

Likert, R.  (1961).  New patterns of management.  New York:  McGraw-Hill.

Lind, E. A., & Tyler, T. R.  (1988).  The social psychology of procedural 

justice.  New York:  Plenum.

Lindley, P., & Walker, S. N.  (1993).  Theoretical and methodological 

differentiation of moderation and mediation.  Nursing Research. 42(5). 276-279.

Locke, E. A.  (1976).  The nature and causes of job satisfaction.  In M. D. 
Dunnette (Ed.) Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (pp.  1297- 
1349).  Chicago: Rand McNally.

Mathieu, J. E., & Zajac, D. M.  (1990).  A review and meta-analysis of the 

antecedents, correlates, and consequences of organizational commitment. 
Psychological Bulletin. 108.171-194.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


105

McFarland, C., & Ross, M.  (1982).  Impact of causal attributions on affective 

reactions to success and failure.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 43. 
937-946.

Mehlman, R. C., & Snyder, C. R. (1985).  Excuse theory:  A test of the self- 

protective role of attributions.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 49. 994- 
1001.

Meyer, H. H.  (1975, Winter).  The pay-for-performance dilemma. 

Organizational Dynamics. 3. 39-50.

Meyer, J. P., & Allen, N. J.  (1991).  A three-component conceptualization of 

organizational commitment.  Human Resource Management Review.  1.61-98.

Meyer, J. P., Allen, N. J., & Smith, C. A.  (1993).  Commitment to 

organizations and occupations:  Extension and test of a three-component 
conceptualization.  Journal of Applied Psychology. 78. 538-551.

Meyer, J. P., Paunonen, S. V., Gellatly, I. R., Goffin, R. D., & Jackson, D.N. 

(1989).  Organizational commitment and job performance:  It’s the nature of the 
commitment that counts.  Journal of Applied Psychology. 74.  152-156.

Milkovich, G. T., & Newman, J. M.  (1996).  Compensation.  Boston:  BPI-

Irwin.

Mintzberg, H.  (1979).  The structuring of organizations.  Englewood Cliffs, N. 

J.:  Prentice-Hall.

Mooradian, T. A., & Olver, J. M.  (1997).  “I can’t get no satisfaction:”  The 

impact of personality and emotion on postpuchase processes.  Psychology & 
Marketing.  14. 379-393.

Moorman, R. H., Niehoff, B. P., & Organ, D. W.  (1993).  Treating employees 
fairly and organizational citizenship behavior:  Sorting the effects of job satisfaction, 
organizational commitment, and procedural justice.  Employee Responsibilities and 
Rights Journal. 6 .209-225.

Moorman, R. H., & Podsakoff, P. M. (1992).  A meta-analytic review and 

empirical test of the potential confounding effects of social desirability response sets 
in organizational behaviour research.  Journal of Occupational and Organizational 
Psychology. 65.  131-149.

Morrison, E. W., & Robinson, S. L.  (1997).  When employees feel betrayed:

A model of how psychological contract violation develops.  Academy of Management 
Review. 22.226-256.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


106

Morrow, P. C., & Goetz, J. F., Jr.  (1988).  Professionalism as a form of work 

commitment.  Journal of Organizational Behaviour. 32.92-111.

Mruk, C.  (1995).  Self-esteem:  Research, theory, and practice.  New York: 

Springer.

Mudrack, P. E.  (1993).  An investigation into the acceptability of workplace 

behaviors of a dubious ethical nature.  Journal of Business Ethics.  12. 517-524.

Near, J. P., & Miceli, M. P.  (1985).  Organizational dissidence:  The case of 

whistle-blowing.  Journal of Business Ethics. 4 . 1-16.

Near, J. P., & Miceli, M. P.  (1996).  Whistle-blowing:  Myth and reality. 

Journal of Management 2 2 .507-526.

Newstrom, J., Gardner, D., & Pierce, J.  (1999, February).  A neglected 

supervisory role:  Building self-esteem at work.  Supervision. 60. 9-12.

Niehoff, B. P., & Moorman, R. H.  (1993).  Justice as a mediator of the 

relationship between methods of monitoring and organizational citizenship behavior. 
Academy of Management Journal. 36. 527-556.

Nunnally, J. C.  (1978).  Psychometric theory.  New York:  McGraw-Hill.

Nunnally, J.C., & Bernstein, I. H.  (1994).  Psychometric theory (3rd ed.).

New York:  McGraw-Hill.

Organ, D. W.  (1988).  Organizational citizenship behavior:  The good soldier 

syndrome.  Lexington, MA:  Lexington.

Organ, D. W.  (1990).  The motivational basis of organizational citizenship 

behavior.  Research in Organizational Behavior.  12.43-72.

Pedhazur, E. J., & Schmelkin, L. P.  (1991).  Measurement, design, and 

analysis:  An integrated approach.  Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Pelham, B. W.  (1993).  On the highly positive thoughts of the highly 

depressed.  In R. F. Baumeister (Ed.), Self-esteem:  The puz7le of low self-regard (pp. 
183-199).  New York:  Plenum.

Pierce, J. L., Gardner, D. G., Cummings, L. L., & Dunham, R. B.  (1989). 

Organization-based self-esteem:  Construct definition, measurement, and validation. 
Academy of Management Journal. 32.622-648.

Reproduced with permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


107

Pearce, J. L., & Porter, L. W.  (1986)  Employee responses to formal 

performance appraisal feedback.  Journal of Applied Psychology. 71. 211-218.

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Moorman, R. H., & Fetter, R.  (1990). 

Transformational leader behaviors and their effects on follows’ trust in leader, 
satisfaction, and organizational citizenship behaviors.  Leadership Quarterly.  1.  107- 
142.

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenize, S. B., Paine, J. B., & Bachrach, D. G.  (2000). 

Organizational citizenship behaviors:  A critical review of the theoretical and 
empirical literature and suggestions for future research. Journal of Management. 26. 
513-563.

Prescott, P. A., & Soeken, K. L.  (1989).  The potential uses of pilot work. 

Nursing Research. 3Si'll. 60-62.

Price, J. L., & Mueller, C. W.  (1986).  Handbook of organizational 

measurement.  New York:  Harper & Row.

Puffer, S. M.  (1987).  Prosocial behavior, noncompliant behavior, and work 

performance among commission salespeople.  Journal of Applied Psychology. 72. 
615-621.

Pyszczynski, T., Hamilton, J. C., Greenberg, J., & Becker, S. E. (1990).  Self- 

awarenes and psychological dysfunction.  In C. R. Snyder & D. R. Forsyth (Eds.) 
Handbook of social and clinical psychology:  The health perspective (pp.  138-157). 
Elmsford, NY:  Pergamon Press.

Reilly, R. R. & Chao, G. T. (1982).  Validity and fairness of some alternative 

employee selection procedures.  Personnel Psychology. 35.  1-62.

Richins, M. L.  (1980).  Consumer perceptions of costs and benefits associated 

with complaining.  In H. K. Hunt & R. L. Day (Eds.).  Refining concepts and 
measures of consumer satisfaction and complaining behavior (pp. 50-53). 
Bloomington:  Indiana University.

Richins, M. L.  (1981).  An investigation of consumers’ attitudes toward 

complaining.  Advances in Consumer Research. 8. 502-506.

Ringer, R. C., Balkin, D. B., & Boss, R. W.  (1993, May).  Managing 

employee emotion.  HR Magazine. 38(51.140-142.

Robinson, S. L., & Morrison, E. W.  (1995).  Psychological contracts and 

OCB:  the effect of unfulfilled obligations on civic virtue behavior.  Journal of 
Organizational Behavior.  16.289-298.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


108

Roethlisberger, F. J.  (1941).  Management and morale.  Cambridge, MA: 

Harvard University Press.

Rosenberg, M., Schooler, C., Schoenback, C., & Rosenberg, F.  (1995).

Global self-esteem and specific self-esteem:  Different concepts, different outcomes. 
American Sociological Review. 60.  141-156.

Rosse, J. G., & Miller, H. E.  (1984).  Relationship between absenteeism and 

other employee behaviors.  In P. S. Goodman & R. S. Atkin (Eds.), Absenteeism:
New approaches to understanding, measuring, and managing employee absence (pp. 
194-228).  San Francisco:  Jossey-Bass.

Rousseau, D. M.  (1989).  Psychological and implied contracts in 
organizations.  Employee Responsibilities and Rights Journal. 2 .121-139.

Rousseau, D. M.  (1990).  New hire perceptions of their own and their 

employer’s obligations:  A study of psychological contracts.  Journal of Organizational 
Behavior.  11.389-400.

Rousseau, D. M., & Parks, J. M.  (1992).  The contracts on individuals and 

organizations.  Research in Organizational Behavior.  14.  1-43.

Rousseau, D. M., & Wade-Benzoni, K. A.  (1994).  Linking strategy and 

human resource practices:  How employee and customer contracts are created.  Human 
Resource Management. 33.463-489.

Sachau, D. A., Houlihan, D., & Gilbertson, T. (1999).  Predictors of employee 

resistance to supervisors’ requests.  Journal of Social Psychology.  139.1-7.

Scandura, T. A., & Graen, G. B.  (1984).  Moderating effects of initial leader- 
member exchange status on the effects of leadership intervention.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology. 69.428-436.

Schaubroeck, J., Ganster, D. C., & Fox, M. L.  (1992).  Dispositional affect 

and work-related stress.  Journal of Applied Psychology. 77.322-335.

Schneider, B.  (1987).  The people make the place.  Personnel Psychology. 40. 

437-453.

Schneider, B.  (1990).  The climate for service:  An application of the climate 

construct.  In B. Schneider (Ed.), Organizational climate and culture (pp. 383-412).
San Francisco:  Jossey-Bass.

Schneider, B., & Reichers, A.  (1983).  On the etiology of climates.  Personnel 

Psychology. 3 6 .19-40.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


109

Shore, L. M., & Tetrick, L. E.  (1994).  The psychological contract as an 
explanatory framework in the employment relationship  Trends in Organizational 
Behavior. 1.91-109.

Shore, L. M., & Wayne, S. J.  (1993).  Commitment and employee behavior: 
Comparison of affective commitment and continuance commitment with perceived 
organizational support.  Journal of Applied Psychology. 78.774-780.

Sias, P. M.  (1996).  Constructing perceptions of differential treatment:  An 

analysis of coworker discourse.  Communication Monographs. 63.  171-187.

Sias, P. M., & Jablin, F. M.  (1995).  Differential superior-subordinate 

relations, perceptions of fairness, and coworker communication.  Human 
Communication Research. 22. 5-38.

Smith, P. A.  (1992). In pursuit of happiness:  Why study general job 

satisfaction?.  In C. J. Cranny, P. C., Smith & E. F. Stone (Eds.), Job satisfaction:
How people feel about their jobs and how it affects their performance (pp. 5-191.  New 
York:  Lexington.

Snyder, C. R., & Higgins, R. L.  (1988).  Excuses:  Their effective role in the 

negotiation of reality.  Psychological Bulletin. 104.23-25.

Snyder, C. R., Higgins, R. L., & Stucky, R. J.  (1983).  Excuses:  Masquerades 

in search of grace.  New York:  Wiley/Interscience.

Snyder, M.  1974.  The self-monitoring of expressive behavior.  Journal of 

Personality and Social Psychology. 39.222-234.

Snyder, M. 1979.  Self-monitoring processes.  In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances 

in experimental social psychology.  12. 85-128.  New York:  Academic Press.

Snyder, M., & Copeland, J.  1989.  Self-monitoring processes in organizational 

settings.  In R. A. Giacalone & P. Rosenfeld (Eds.), Impression management in the 
organization (pp. 7-191.  Hillsdale, NJ:  Erlbaum.

Sobel, M. E.  (1982).  Asymptotic confidence intervals for indirect effects in 

structural equations models.  In S. Leinhart (Ed.), Sociological Methodology (pp. 290- 
312).  San Francisco:  Jossey-Bass.

Solomon, M.  (1990).  When your boss is a fault-finder.  Working with 

difficult people (pp. 251-283).  Englewood Cliffs, NJ:  Prentice Hall.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


110

Staw, B. M., Bell, N. E., & Clausen, J. A.  (1986).  The dispositional approach 

to job attitudes:  A lifetime longitudinal test.  Administrative Science Quarterly. 31. 
56-77.

Staw, B. M., & Ross, J.  (1985).  Stability in the midst of change:  A 

dispositional approach to job attitudes.  Journal of Applied Psychology. 70.469-480.

Taylor, J. C., & Bowers, D. G.  (1972).  Survey of organizations:  A machine 

scored standardized questionnaire instrument.  Ann Arbor: Institute for Social 
Research, University of Michigan.

Taylor, P. J., & Pierce, J. L.  (1999).  Effects of introducing a performance 

management system on employees’ subsequent attitudes and effort.  Public Personnel 
Management. 28 .423-452.

Tellegen, A.  (1985).  Structures of mood and personality and their relevance to 

assessing anxiety, with an emphasis on self-report.  In A. H. Tuma & J. D. Maser 
fEds.l. Anxiety and the anxiety disorders (pp. 681-7061.  Hillside, NJ:  Erlbaum.

Tharenou, P.  (1979)  Employee self-esteem:  A review of the literature.

Journal o f Vocational Behavior.  15.  1-29.

Thibaut, J. W., & Kelley, H. H.  (1959).  The social psychology of groups.

New York:  Wiley.

Tice, D.  (1993).  The social motivations of people with low self-esteem.  InR. 
F. Baumeister (Ed.), Self-esteem:  The pu77le of low self-regard.  New York:  Plenum.

U. S. Department of Education.  (1997).  Job satisfaction among America’s 
teachers:  Effects of workplace conditions, background characteristics, and teacher 
compensation.  Washington, D.C.:  National Center for Education Statistics. (NCES 
97-XXX).

Van Dyne, L., Vandewalle, D., Kostova, T., Latham, M. E., & Cummings, L.

L. (2000).  Collectivism, propensity to trust and self-esteem as predictors of 
organizational citizenship in a non-work setting.  Journal of Organizational Behavior. 
2L 3-23.

Watson, D.  (1988).  Intraindividual and interindividual analyses of positive 
and negative affect:  Their relation to health complaints, perceived stress, and daily 
activities.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 5 4 .1020-1030.

Watson, D., & Clark, L. A.  (1984).  Negative affectivity:  The disposition to 

experience aversive emotional states.  Psychological Bulletin. 96. 465-490.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Ill

Watson, D., & Pennebaker, J. W.  (1989).  Health complaints, stress, and 

distress:  Exploring the central role of negative affectivity.  Psychological Review. 96. 
234-254.

Watson, D., & Slack, A. K. (1993).  General factors of affective temperament 
and their relation to job satisfaction over time.  Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes. 54.181-202.

Watson, D., & Tellegen, A.  (1985).  Toward a consensual structure of mood. 

Psychological Bulletin. 98.219-235.

Watson, D., & Walker, L. M.  (1996).  The long-term stability and predictive 
validity of trait measures of affect.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 3. 
567-577.

Wayne, S. J., Shore, L. M., & Liden, R. C.  (1997).  Perceived organizational 
support and leader-member exchange:  A social exchange perspective.  Academy of 
Management Journal. 40. 82-111.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


APPENDIX A:  EMPLOYEE COVER LETTER (PILOT STUDY)

112

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


113

m

L o u i s i a n a  

S t a t e   U n i v e r s i t y

a h   o
William  W.  and  C atherine  M.  Rucks  D ep a rtm en t  o f M a n a g em en t 
f.  /.  Ourso  College  o f Business  A dm inistration

LSU Workplace Survey

Dear Survey Participant:

As a doctoral student in the College of Business Administration at Louisiana State University,
I am currently working on my dissertation which focuses on employees’ attitudes about their 
jobs and work environment.  You are among a small group of teachers chosen to participate in 
an initial pilot study to evaluate the clarity of the enclosed survey.  Your completion of the 
survey is vitally important because you have been selected to represent the opinions, interests, 
and behaviors of teachers in Lafourche Parish.  For the survey to be helpful in advancing 
existing knowledge of workplace relations, it is important that you provide honest and candid 
responses, and that you “tell it like it is.”

The enclosed survey should only take about 20-25 minutes to complete.  Your responses will 
be kept in the strictest confidence.  An identification number printed on the survey will be 
used for data entry purposes only.

When you have completed the survey, please check to be sure you have responded to all 
items.  To further insure confidentiality, place your completed survey in the envelope provided 
and seal it.  I am the only person who will open and have access to the surveys.  Please return 
the sealed envelope containing the survey to your school's contact person within seven (7) 
days o f receipt

Whereas I know I cannot pay you enough for your time, to show my appreciation all 
completed surveys from the pilot and final studies will be entered in a random drawing for 
three $100 cash prizes.  Time is critical so please return the survey within the seven days so 
that you will be eligible for the drawing.  Your time and cooperation are truly appreciated.

If you have any concerns, please feel free to contact me at (504)388-6110 (Office) or via 
e-mail at dnaheck@iamerica.net.

Sincerely,

Anita K. Heck 
PhD. Candidate

« a t o n  

l o n g i

 

•  

l o u i i i a n a  

•   U S *  

• 

r O i i S S - 6 3 1 2  

•   S 0 4 / 3 8 8 ~ 6 t 0 t  

•  

f a t   S 0 4 / 3 8 8 ' S I 4 0

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


APPENDIX B:  EMPLOYEE SURVEY (PILOT STUDY)

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

114
t


115

I
I
 

I
I
 

I 

I
I
 

I 

I 

I 

I
I
 

I
I

Employee Survey

The following statements relate to your attitudes and feelings.  There are no right or 
wrong answers.  You will probably  agree with some items and disagree with others.  Please
read each statement carefully ana  indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree  by
darkening in the corresponding oval.  To assure anonymity, a research number has been 
assigned to you.  Do not identify yourself by name anywhere on the form.  Please use a *2 
pencil_to complete this survey.

S tr o n g ly  

A gree 

Agree 

N eu tral 

D isa g re e 

S tr o n g ly  
D isa g r e e

'

1. 
I often find myself worrying  about something...
To a great extent my life is  controlled by
2. 
accidental happenings.......................
3.  Whether or not I get to be a leader depends 
mostly on my own ability....................
4.  Often Z get irritated at little annoyances....
5. 
I have often found that what is going to 
happen will happen..........................
6. 
I am too sensitive for my own good...........
Whether or not I get into a car accident 
7. 
depends mostly on how good a driver I am.......
8.  When I make plans,  I am almost certain to 
make them work.............................
9.  My feelings are hurt rather easily...........
10.  Often there is no chance of protecting ray 
personal interests from bad luck happenings
11.  When Z get what Z want,  it's usually because
Z'm lucky.........................  
 
12.  Z am easily startled by things that happen 
unexpectedly.  ............................
13.  Bow many friends Z have depends on how nice 
a person Z am................... ......
14.  Z often lose sleep over ray worries...........
15.  Whether or not Z aet into a car accident is 
mostly a matter o2 luck.....................
16.  Z suffer from nervousness...................
17.  zt * s not always wise for me to plan too far 
ahead because many things turn out to be a 
matter of good or bad fortune...............
18.  Whether or not Z get to be a leader depends 
on whether Z'm lucky enough to be in tne 
right place at the right time...............
19.  My mood often goes up and down...............
20.  Z can pretty much determine what will happen
in ray life.................................
21.  Minor setbacks sometimes irritate me too
much 
........... ............. .........
22.  1 am usually able to protect my personal
interests..................................
23.  Z sometimes feel "just miserable" for no good 
reason.....................................
24.  When Z get what Z want,  it's usually because
Z worked hard for it 
.............
25.  My life is determined by my own actions......
26.  There are days when Z'm "on edge” all of the 
time.......................................
27.  zt's chiefly a matter of fate whether or not I 
have a few friends or many friends...........

 

The following statements concern the way you feel about your supervisor ana school.

S tro n g ly  

A gree 

Agree 

N eu tral 

O fsa g rta  

S tr o n g ly  
D lta g r e e

28.  Z am taken seriously around my school.........
29.  Z look forward to being with the members
of my work group each day...................
30.  There is faith in me around my school
31.  Z am cooperative around ray school............. j
32.  Zn my school personal motives or biases
influence decisions that affect me...........  "
33.  Z count around ray school....................
34.  Z would be very happy to spend the rest
of ray career at ray school...................

serial 32075 

H H
± Sir-Scan by MBC 388-1145

S 75

page  0 l|

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


A gree 

N eu tral 

O ite g r e e  

S tro n g ly  
D isa g ree

S tro n g ly  

Agra* 

35.  In my school decisions that affect me
are made ethically..........................
36.  I am efficient around my school..............
37.  I feel that I have too few options to
consider leaving my school....... ...........
38.  In my school I am given the opportunity
to modify decisions that have already been
made................................ ......
36.  I can make a difference around my school......
39.  In my school the reasons behind the
decisions that affect me are explained.......
40.  In my school there is a real interest in
trying to be fair to me.....................
41.  I am valuable around my school.   ...........
42.  1 am fairly rewarded considering the
responsibilities I have.....................
43.  In my school my input is obtained prior to
making decisions............................
44.  I am fairly rewarded taking into account the
amount of education and training that I have 
had 
............... ..................

 

The  toiiowmg  statements  relate  to  various  aspects  ot  your  job.
Agree

Stron gly

Agree

N eutral 

O U e g r te  

S tro n g ly  
0 i sa g re e

45.46.

48.49.

50.
51.
52.53.54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.

60. 
61. 
62.
63.64.
65.
6 6 .
67.
6 8 .

 

I am helpful around my school...............
In my school consistent rules and 
procedures are used to make decisions about
things that affect me 
.......
I am fairly rewarded in view of the amount of 
experience that I have.
My supervisor recognizes my potential.......
I do not feel like "part of the family" at my
school............... ....................
In my school accurate information is used
to make decisions that affect me..... ......
I am fairly rewarded for the amount of effort
that I put forth............ ..............
In my school concern is shown for my rights...
X am important around my school.............
1 am fairly rewarded for the stresses and
strains of my job..........................
I know where I stand ...  I usually know how
satisfied ray supervisor is with what I do...
My supervisor understands my job problems and 
needs.
I am fairly rewarded for work that £ have 
done well.
I do not feel a strong sense of "belonging"
to my school.......................... ...
Regardless of how much formal authority my 
supervisor has built into his/her position, 
he/she would use that power to help me solve
problems at work. .....................
My supervisor would "bail me out" at his/her
expense..................................
I nave an effective working relationship
with ray supervisor........................
All in all,  X am satisfied with promotion
opportunities. 
The work group I belong to is a close one...
I am trusted around my school  .............
All in all,  X am satisfied with my job......
I would defend and justify my supervisor's 
decisions if he/she were not present to do so. 
Too much of my life would be disrupted if X
decided X wanted to leave my school now.....
All in all,  X am satisfied with the amount 
of say X have in how work is to be done 

.

116

I

I

I

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

 

I

I

I

 
l
l
I
■

serial 32075 

m

t Sir-Scan by MBC 388-1145

S 75

page 02

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


Agr** 

N eu tral  O U agra* 

S tr o n g ly  
D ia a g ra *

S tro n g ly  

A grw  
69.  All in  all, Z  am satisfied with my.pay........ j
70.  I feel  that Z  am really part of my work
group    ................................. :
71.  Z really feel as if this school's
problems are my own.........................
72.  Z do not feel "emotionally attached" to ray
school.....................................
73.  My school has a great deal of personal 
meaning for me..............................
74.  Right now, staying with ray school is a matter
of necessity as much as desire...............
75.  All in  all, Z  am satisfied with my  benefits....
75.  Zt would be  very hard for me to leave ray
school right now, even if Z wanted to........
77.  Zf Z had not already put so much of myself
into my school,  Z might consider working 
elsewhere..................................
78.  Z enjoy belonging to this work group because
Z am friends with many group members.........
79.  One of the few negative consequences of 
leaving my school would be the scarcity
of available alternatives...................
80.  All in all,  Z am satisfied with the 
recognition Z receive for a job well done....

The tblibwing statements  relate  to the level  of interpersonal disagreement that exists in
your job. Select 
strength.

but you are unable to Identify its

Option 3  if disagreement exists, 

N tv tr 
True 

G en erally 
Not  True 

81.  Other teachers often disagree with each
other about how work should be handled.......
82.  Z usually agree with the way other teachers 
think things should be done in my school.....
83.  My principal and Z usually agree about 
wnat my job is,  and the requirements Z
must fulfill 
.....-...................
84.  Z usually agree with the decisions my 
principal makes.......................... .

S o u t in e *   G en erally 

A la o st 

True 

True 

AI way*  True

In the next section you are asked ahout how you respond to various situations at work.

S tro n g ly

Agree

Agree

N eutral 

D isa g ree

S tr o n g ly  
0 i a a g re e

85.  Z help others who have been absent..........
86.  When Z am unhappy or upset,  I usually keep 
it to myself.................... .
87.  I am always ready to lend a helping hand to 
those around me............................
80.  Z consider the impact of my actions on
coworkers.................................
89.  Z consume a lot of time complaining about 
trivial matters............................
90.  Z help orient new people even though it is 
not required...............................
91.  Z tend to make "mountains out of molehills."..
92.  I take steps to try to prevent problems with 
my coworkers  .............................
93.  Z always find fault with what the school is 
doing....................... ........ .....
94.  I am the classic "squeaky wheel" that always 
needs greasing.............................
95.  Z help others who have heavy work loads.....
96.  Whenever Z am dissatisfied,  X readily express 
it to other people...... ..................
97.  Z frequently express dissatisfaction with the 
behavior of others.........................
98.  Z don't usually vent my frustrations or 
dissatisfactions...........................

serial 32075

± Sir*Scan by MEC 388-1145^  #  75

page 031

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


118

i

m

 
i
i

i 

i 

i 

 

l

l

i

i 

 

1
1
1
1
1
1
1

 

1
1
1
1
1

 

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i 

i 

 

i

m

A g r w  

N eutral 

O isagrc* 

StronQ ly 
0 f u g r t e

S tro n g ly  

Agrta

99.  When people annoy me,  I cell chem............
100. I willingly help others who have work 
relaced problems............................
101. I always focus on what1s wrong,  rather than 
che positive side...........................
102. I seldom inform others that I am disappointed..
103. I usually keep my discontent a secret........
104. I do not abuse the rights of others..........
105. When someone does something to make me feel 
bad,  I am likely to inform that person of my 
displeasure................................
106. I tend to complain a great deal..............
107. I seldom state my dissatisfaction with che 
behavior of others..........................
108. I am mindful of how my behavior affects ocher 
people's jobs..............................
109. I generally don't say much when I am 
dissatisfied...............................
110. I cry to avoid creating problems for 
coworkers..................................
111. I usually vent my dissatisfaction............
112. I keep my dissatisfactions to myself.........
113. When people or events don't meet my 
expectations,  I usually communicate my 
dissatisfaction.............................

The following statements represent the reelings people might have about themselves and 
others.  IF  a statement is TRUE or MOSTLY TRUE as applied to you,  answer T.  If a statement
is FALSE or  NOT USUALLY TRUE as applied to you, answer F.

to get along with.

different from my own.

114.  I don't seem to get what's coming to me.
115. I am sometimes irritated by people who ask favors  of me.
116. 
Ocher people always seem to get the breaks.
117.  There nave been occasions when I took advantage of someone.
118.  Although I don't show it,  I am sometimes eaten up with jealousy.
119.  I don't know any people that I downright hate.
120.  If I let people see the way I feel.  I'd be considered a hard person 
121.  At times I feel I get a raw deal out of life.
122.  When I disapprove of my friends' behavior,  I let them know it.
123.  I often find myself disagreeing with people.
124.  I can't help getting inco arguments when people disagree  with me.
125.  I have never Seen irked when people expressed ideas very
126.  I am always courteous, even to people who are disagreeable.
127.  Even when my anger is aroused,  I don't use "strong language."
128.  Almost every week I see someone I dislike.
129.  If somebody annoys me,  I am apt to cell him what I think of him.
130.  When people yell at me,  I yell back.
131.  when I get mad,  I say nasty things.
132.  I could not put someone in his place, even if he needed  it.
133.  I often make threats I don't really mean to carry out.
134.  When arguing,  I tend to raise my voice.
135.  I generally cover up ray poor opinion of others.
136.  I demand that people respect my rights.
137.  I would rather concede a point than get inco an  argument about it.
138.  I sometimes feel resentful when I don't get my way.
139.  I'm always willing to admit it when I make a mistake.
140.  On a few occasions,  I have given up doing something because 
141.  There nave been times when I felt like rebelling against people in 
142.  When I look back on what's happened to me,  I can't help feeling mildly 
143.  No matter who I'm calking to.  I'm always a good listener.
144.  I can renumber "playing sick* to get out of something.
145.  I sometimes try to get even rather than forgive and forget.
146.  There have been times when I was quite jealous of the good fortune 
147.  I have never deliberately said something that hurt someone's feelings.

I thought too little of my ability.
authority even chough I knew they were right.
resentful.

of others.

serial 32075 

■ ■   ■  
i Sir-Scan by MEC 388-1145  *  75

■

page 04

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


119

Rarely 

Sometimes

Some times

i  Seldom 

_  Seldom 

Constantly

Constantly

Very Often 
Rarely 

_  Very  Often 
:  Rarely 

In this section you are asked about different: aspects a t your work.
How often do you experience conflict with coworkers?
Never 
: Often 
How often do you experience conflict with your supervisor?
'  Never 
Often 
How often do you think about resigning your current job?
Never 
Often 
Very likely 
Neither likely nor unlikely 
Moderately unlikely 
Very desirable 
Slight undesirable 
Very difficult 
Neither easy  nor difficult 
Rasy 

Moderately likely 
_  Slightly unlikely 
Very unlikely
desirable for 

Difficult 
Somewhat easy 
_  very easy 

All things considered,  how 

Desirable 
Undesirable 

j  Very Often 

Constantly

you would 

_  Seldom 

Sometimes

Slightly desirable 
Very undesirable

How easy or difficult would it be financially for you to resign from your current job?
Somewhat  difficult 

How likely is it that you will resign from your current job in the next several months? 

Slightly likely

How easy or difficult would it be for you to resign from your current job in terms of 
finding other employment?
Somewhat difficult 

Very difficult 
Neither easy  nor difficult 
Rasy 

i  Difficult 
Somewhat easy 
Very easy 

Difficult 
Somewhat easy 
Very easy 

How easy or difficult would it be for you to resign from your current job in terms of your 
family and home life?

Very difficult 
Neither easy nor difficult 
Rasy 

■
■
a
Please respond to the following items.  These items will be used to summarize survey responses 
into meaningful groups such as length of work experience.
Including this year,  how long have you worked for the parish 
school board system?  For example,  if you have been working 
for 12 years, put 1 in the top box and 2 in the lower box and 
darken the appropiate ovals.
Including this year, how long have you worked for this school 
(in any capacity)?

Somewhat  difficult 

YEARS

■
■
■

■
■
■

resigning from your current job be?

Neutral

Including this year,  how long have you worked for this school 
in your present position?

How old were you on your last birthday?

B

Please indicate your gender: 
Male 
Please indicate your race: 
White 
Hispanic 
Please indicate your level of education:

College graduate 
Some graduate work 
Master's degree 

Female

r  African-American 
;  Asian 

American Indian
Other

Master's ♦ 
Doctor's degree
Other (explain)____________________

hours

Thank you for caking the time to complete this survey.  Please feel free to add any 
comments on the back of this sheet.

serial 32075 

* Sir-Scan by MBC 388-1145  f 75 

M

  ■  

■   ■   ■ ■ ■ ■ ■
|| 

£  

page 0S|  g

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


APPENDIX Cl:  SUPERVISOR SURVEY (PILOT STUDY)

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

120

*


121

i

l

l

i

n

i

u

m

Supervisor Survey

Please complece one o£ these a Ingle-page surveys for each teacher you supervise. 
Part I:  Please rate the teacher identified in terras of the following traits.
Darken the number that corresponds to your best description of the teacher.  Please 
answer all items.  Please use a »2 pencil to complete this survey.

Teacher’s Same

unsatisfactory 

Excellent

Ability........................
Accuracy.......................
Creativity.....................
Effort.........................
Gets job done..................
Initiative.....................
Job knowledge..................
Judgment.......................
Productivity...................
Professional image..............
Quality of work.................
Responsibility.................

Part I^:  Below are statements related to how teachers respond to various
situations at work.  Darken the number that corresponds to your best description of 
this particular teacher.  Please answer all items.

Agroe 

H outral 

D isa g r e e  

S tro n g ly  
D isa g re e

S tro n g ly  

Agree 

1.  Whenever this teacher is dissatisfied,
he/she readily expresses it to other people....
2.  This teacher frequently expresses 
dissatisfaction with the behavior of others....
3.  This teacher usually vents his/her 
frustrations or dissatisfactions..............
4.  When people annoy this teacher, he/she tells 
them........................................
5.  This teacher seldom informs others that he/she 
is disappointed.............................
6.  This teacher usually keeps his/her discontent
a secret....................................
7.  When  someone does something to make this
teacher feel bad,  he/she is likely to inform
that person of his/her displeasure............
8.  This  teacher tends to complain a great deal....
9.  This  teacher seldom states his/her
dissatisfaction with the behavior of others....
10. This teacher generally doesn't say much when 
he/she is dissatisfied.......................
11. This teacher usually vents his/her 
dissatisfaction.............................
12. This teacher keeps his/her dissatisfactions
to his/herself..............................
11.  When this teacher is unhappy or upset,
he/she usually keeps it to his/herself........
14.  When people or events don't meet this 
teacher's expectations, he/she usually 
communicates his/her dissatisfaction..........

serial 32020 

■   ■
* Sir-Scan by MEC 388-1145  *  76

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


APPENDIX C2:  FOLLOW-UP SUPERVISOR SURVEY (PILOT STUDY)

:

122

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


123

Strongly 
Agree
5 

5 

5 

5 

5

L  O  U  I  S  l  A N A   S  T A T E   U N I V E R S I T Y
William  W.  and  Catherine  M.  Rucks  Department  of  M anagement 
£.  /.  Ourso  College  of Business  Adm inistration

FOLLOW -UP SUPERVISOR SURVEY

Teacher’s N a m e : ______________________________________________

Please complete one survey for each teacher you supervise.  Please circle the number that 
corresponds to your response.

Strongly 
Disagree

Disagree  Neutral 

Agree 

1.  This teacher consumes a lot of time complaining about trivial matters.

2.  This teacher always focuses on what’s wrong, rather than the positive side.

3.  This teacher tends to make “mountains out of molehills.”

4.  This teacher always finds fault with what the school is doing.

5.  This teacher is the classic “squeaky wheel” that always needs greasing.

Again, thanks for your help.  It has been invaluable and much appreciated!

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


APPENDIX  D:  LIST OF MEASURES  (PILOT STUDY)

1 

124

:

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


125

Unsportsmanship: (Workplace Whining! (Podsakoff & MacKenzie,  1989)
1.  This teacher consumes a lot of time complaining about trivial matters.
2.  This teacher always focuses on what’s wrong, rather than the positive side.
3.  This teacher tends to make “ mountains out of molehills
4.  This teacher always finds fault with what the organization is doing.
5.  This teacher is the classic “ squeaky wheel”  that always needs greasing

Propensity to Complain Scale (Cantrell & Kowalski,  1994)
1.  Whenever this teacher is dissatisfied, he/she readily expresses it to other people.
2.  This teacher frequently expresses dissatisfaction with the behavior of others.
3.  This teacher doesn’t usually vent his/her frustrations or dissatisfactions. ®
4.  When people annoy this teacher, he/she tells them.
5.  This teacher seldom informs others that he/she is disappointed. ®
6.  This teacher usually keep his/her discontent a secret. ®
7.  When someone does something  to  make this  teacher  feel  bad,  he/she  is  likely to 

inform that person of his/her displeasure.

8.  This teacher tends to complain a great deal.
9.  This teacher seldom states his/her dissatisfaction with the behavior of others. ®
10. This teacher generally doesn't say much when he/she is dissatisfied. ®
11. This teacher usually vents his/her dissatisfaction.
12. This teacher keeps his/her dissatisfaction to him/herself. ®
13. When this teacher is unhappy or upset, he/she usually keeps it to him/herself. ®
14. When  people  or  events  don't  meet  this  teacher’s  expectations,  he/she  usually 

communicates his/her dissatisfaction.

Organizational-Based Self-Esteem (Pierce, Gardner, Cummings, & Dunham,  1989)
1.  I count around here.
2.  I am taken seriously around here.
3.  I am important around here.
4.  I am trusted around here.
5.  There is faith in me around here.
6.  I can make a difference around here.
7.  I am valuable around here.
8.  I am helpful around here.
9.  I am efficient around here.
10.1  am cooperative around here.

Negative Affectivitv (Watson & Tellegen, 1985)
1.  I often find myself worrying about something.
2.  My feelings are hurt rather easily.
3.  Often I get irritated at little annoyances.
4.  I suffer from nervousness.
5.  My mood often goes up and down.
6.  I sometimes feel “just miserable”  for no good reason.
7.  I am easily startled by things that happen unexpectedly.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


126

8.  I often lose sleep over my worries.
9.  Minor setbacks sometimes irritate me too much.
10. There are days when I’m “ on edge”  all of the time.
11.1  am too sensitive for my own good.

Job Satisfaction (ChalykofF & Kochan,  1989)
All in all, how satisfied or dissatisfied are you with the following items pertaining to work:
1.  Your job
2.  Your pay
3.  Your benefits
4.  Promotion opportunities
5.  The recognition you receive for a job well done
6.  The amount of say you have in how work is to be done.

Affective Commitment (Meyer & Allen,  1991)
1.  I would be very happy to spend the rest of my career with this organization.
2.  I really feel as if this organization’s problems are my own.
3.  I do not feel a strong sense of “ belonging”  to my organization. ®
4.  I do not feel “ emotionally attached”  to this organization. ®
5.  I do not feel like “ part of the family”  at my organization. ®
6.  This organization has a great deal of personal meaning for me.

Organizational Justice (Greenberg.  1986)

Procedural:
In this organization:
1.  Consistent rules and procedures are used to make decisions about things that affect me.
2.  Personal motives or biases influence decisions that affect me ®
3.  Decisions that affect me are made ethically.
4.  Accurate information is used to make decisions that affect me.
5.  My input is obtained prior to making decisions.
6.  I am given the opportunity to modify decisions that have already been made.
7.  The reasons behind the decisions that affect me are explained.
8.  Concern is shown for my rights.
9.  There is a real interest in trying to be fair to me.

Distributive Justice (Price & Mueller, 1986)
I am fairly rewarded:
1.  Considering the responsibilities I have.
2.  Taking into account the amount of education and training that I have had.
3.  In view of the amount of experience that I have.
4.  For the amount of effort that I put forth.
5.  For work that I have done well.
6.  For the stresses and strains of my job.

Reproduced with  permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


127

Leader-Member Exchange (Scandura & Graen,  1984)
1.  I know where I stand ... I usually know how satisfied my supervisor is with what I 

2.  My supervisor understands my job problems and needs.
3.  My supervisor recognizes my potential.
4.  Regardless  of how  much  formal  authority  my  supervisor  has  built  into  his/her 

position, he/she would use that power to help me solve problems at work.

5.  My supervisor would “ bail me out”  at his/her expense.
6.  I have an effective working relationship with my supervisor.
7.  I would defend and justify my supervisor’s decisions if he/she were not present to 

do.

do so.

Job Performance (Greenhaus, Bedeian, & Mossholder,  1987)
Rate the teacher in terms of the following traits on a 5-point scale (l=Unsatisfactorv. 
5=Excellenf)
1.  Ability
2.  Accuracy
3.  Creativity
4.  Effort
5.  Gets job done
6.  Initiative
7.  Job knowledge
8.  Judgment
9.  Productivity
10. Professional image
11. Quality of work
12. Responsibility

Short Form of the Marlowe-Crowne Social Desirability Scale fBallard.  1992)
1.  I sometimes feel resentful when I don’t get my way.®
2.  On a few occasions,  I have given up doing something because I thought too  little 

3.  There have been times when I  felt like rebelling against people in authority even 

of my ability. ®

though I knew they were right. ®

4.  No matter who I’m talking to, I’m always a good listener.
5.  I can remember “ playing sick”  to get out of something. ®
6.  There have been occasions when I took advantage of someone. ®
7.  I’m always willing to admit it when I make a mistake.
8.  I sometimes try to get even rather than forgive and forget. ®
9.  I am always courteous, even to people who are disagreeable.
10.1 have never been irked when people expressed ideas very different from my own.
11.  There have been times when I was quite jealous of the good fortune of others. ®
12.1 am sometimes irritated by people who ask favors of me. ®
13.1 have never deliberately said something that hurt someone’s feelings.

® = Reverse scored.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


APPENDIX E:  TEACHER COVER LETTER (FINAL STUDY)

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

128


129

L S U

L o u i s i a n a  

**  o 

a c  a

i  

r   u   a   a  

i  

S t a t e   U n i v e r s i t y

a m d

C n a m i c a l

 

c  o  l i  <  c  ■

D epartm ent  o f M anagem ent  •  £.  /.  Ourso  College  o f  Business  Adm inistration

May  11,  1998

LSU W orkplace Survey

Dear Survey Participant:

As a doctoral student in the College o f Business Administration at Louisiana State University,  I am 
currently working on my dissertation which focuses on employees’  attitudes about their jobs and 
w ork environment.  You are among a group o f teachers from Lafourche Parish who have been 
chosen to participate in this study.  Your completion o f the survey is vitally important because you 
are representing the opinions, interests, and behaviors o f teachers in Lafourche Parish.  For the 
survey to be helpful in advancing existing knowledge o f workplace relations,  it is important that you 
provide honest and candid responses, and that you “tell it like it is.”

The enclosed survey should only take about 20-25 minutes to complete.  Your responses will be 
kept in the strictest confidence.  An identification number printed on the survey will be used for data 
entry purposes only.  I have enclosed a No. 2 pencil and a paper guide to aid you in filling in the 
survey.  It is important that you completely fill in the whole oval that corresponds to each o f your 
answers so that the com puter scanner can pick up your answers.  You need not return the pencil or 
paper guide to me.

When you have completed the survey, please check to be sure you have responded to all items.  To 
further insure confidentiality, place your completed survey in the envelope provided and seal it. 
Please return the sealed envelope containing the survey to your school’s contact person within 
fourteen (14) days o f receipt  I am the only person who will open and have access to the surveys.

Whereas I know I cannot pay you enough for your time, to show my appreciation all completed 
surveys from this study will be entered in a random drawing for three $100 cash prizes.  Time is 
critical so please return the survey within the fourteen days so that you will be eligible for the 
drawing.  Your time and cooperation are truly appreciated.

I f you have any concerns, please feel free to contact me at (504)388-6110 (Office) or via e-mail at 
dnaheck@iamerica.net.

Sincerely,

Anita K. Heck 
Ph.D. Candidate

Enclosure

S a t a n  

l a a g t  

•  

l

l u l

i

i a i

 

•   U S i  

•   7 0 S  O  1 ■  I   1  I  1  

.   S 0 4 / J S S - H 0 I  

.  

f a ,   S  O 4  /   J  i t  ■  *  !  4   a

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


APPENDIX F:  TEACHER SURVEY (FINAL STUDY)

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

130


131

Teacher Survey

The statements in chi8 survey relate Co your attitudes and feelings abouc your job,
covortcers and school,  please read each statement carefully and indicate the extent to
which you agree or disagree by darkening in the corresponding oval.  Please use the
enclosed #2 pencil to complete this survey.

D isa g re e 

N eutral 

A gree 

S tron gly 

Agree

S tro n g ly  
D lea g ree 

1.  I often find myself worrying abouc something...'
2.  To a great extent my life is controlled by 
accidental happenings.......................
3.  Whether or not I get to be a leader depends 
mostly on my own ability....................
4.  Often I get irritated at little annoyances....
5.  I have often found that what is going to
happen will happen..........................
6.  I am coo sensitive for my own good...........
7.  Whether or not I get into a car accident
depends mostly on how good a driver I am.....
8.  When I make plans,  I am almost certain to
make them work.............................
9.  My feelings are hurt rather easily...........
10.  Often there is no chance of protecting my 
personal interests from bad luck happenings....
11.  When I get what I want,  it's usually because
I'm lucky..................................
12.  I am easily startled by things chat happen
unexpectedly...............................
13.  How many friends I have depends on how nice
a person I am..............................
14.  I often lose sleep over my worries...........
15.  Whether or not I get into a car accident is
mostly a matter of luck.....................
16.  I suffer from nervousness...................
17.  It's not always wise for me to plan coo far 
ahead because many things turn out to be a 
matter of good or bad fortune................
18.  whether or not I get to be a leader depends 
on whether I'm lucky enough to be in the 
right place at che right time................
19.  My mood often goes up and down...............
20.  I can pretty much determine what will happen 
in my life.................................
21.  Minor setbacks sometimes irritate me coo
much.......................................
22.  I am usually able to protect my personal 
interests..................................
23.  I sometimes feel "just miserable'' for no good 
reason.....................................
24.  When I get what I want,  it's usually because
I worked hard for it........................
25.  My life is determined by my own actions......
26.  There are days when I'm "on edge* all of che 
time.......................................
27.  It’s chiefly a matter of fate whether or not I 
have a few friends or many friends...........

The following statements concern che way you feel abouc your supervisor and school.

S tr o n g ly  
D lsogro* 

D lf s g r n  

N outral 

A grte 

S tro n g ly  

Agroo

28.  I am taken seriously around my school........
29.  I look forward to being with che members
of my work group each day...................
30.  There is faith in me around my school........
31.  I am cooperative around my school............
32.  In my school personal motives or biases 
influence decisions that affect me...........
33.  I count around my school....................
34.  I would be very nappy to spend che rest
of my career at my school...................
35.  In my school decisions that affect me
are made ethically..........................
36.  I am efficient around my school.............

serial 00405 

■   ■   ■  
* Sir-Scan by MSC 388-1145  < ~  

___

m  

ma 

page Oil

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


132

i

i

i

 

i 

i 

i 

i 

i 

i

i

i

 

m

i

D iM flro* 

N «utr«l 

Agr«« 

S tron gly
Agree

S tro n g ly  
O ft«gr*«

 

 

consider leaving my school................... _
to modify decisions that have already been 

37.  I feel that I have too few options to
3B.  In my school I am given the opportunity
..........
39.  I can make a difference around my school......
40.  In my school che reasons behind che
decisions chac affect me are explained.......
41.  in my school chere is a real inceresc in
crying co be fair co me.....................
42.  I am valuable around my school...............
43.  I am fairly rewarded considering che
responsibilities I have.....................
44.  In my school my inpuc is obcained prior co
making decisions............................
45.  I am fairly rewarded caking inco accounc che
amount of education and training chac I have 
had........................................

The following statements relate co various aspects of your jot>~

S tr o n g ly  
D isa g re e

O U e g r e e  

n eu tra l 

Agree 

S tro n g ly
Agree

46.  I am helpful around my school................
47.  In my school consistent rules and 
procedures axe used co mako decisions abouc 
chings chac affect me.......................
48.  I am fairly rewarded in view of che amount of 
experience chac I have......................
49.  My supervisor recognizes my pocencial........
50.  I do  noc feel like ’pare or che family*  ac my
school.....................................
51.  In my school accurate information is used
co make decisions chac affect me.............
52.  I am fairly rewarded for che amount of efforc 
chac I puc forth............................
53.  In my school concern is shown for my rights....
54 .  I am  important around my school..............
55.  I am  fairly rewarded for che stresses and
strains of my job...........................
56.  I know where I stand ... I usually know how 
satisfied my supervisor is with what 1 do....
57.  My supervisor understands my job problems and 
needs......................................
58.  I am fairly rewarded for work chac I have
done well..................................
59.  I do noc feel a strong sense of ’belonging*
co my school...............................
60.  Regardless of how much formal authority my 
supervisor has buile inco his/her position, 
he/she would use chac power co help me solve 
problems ac work............................
61.  My supervisor would ’bail me out" ac his/her 
expense....................................
62.  I nave an effective working relationship
with my supervisor..........................
63.  All in all, I am satisfied with pramocion 
opportunities..............................
64.  The work group I belong co is a close one....
65.  I am crusced around my school................
66.  All in all, I am Bacisfied with my job.......
67.  I would defend and justify my supervisor's 
dscisions if he/she were noc present co do so..
68.  Too much of my life would be disrupted if I 
decided 1 wanted co leave my school now......
69.  All in all,  I am sacisfied with che amounc
of say I have  in how work is co be done.......
70.  All in all,  I am satisfied with my pay........
71.  I feel chac  I am really pare of my work
group......................................
72.  I really feel as if this school's
problems are my own.........................
73.  I do noc feel ’emotionally attached’ co my 
school.....................................
serial 00405 
■ ■

■   ■   ■  
t  Sir-Scan by MSC 388*1145  # 7T 

g  

^  

page 02  g

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


133

S tr o n g ly  
O fsa g r w

D fta g rM  

N v u tn l 

Agre« 

S tro n g ly  

Agr«*

74.  My school has a gzeac deal of personal 
meaning for me.............................. -
75.  Right now,  staying with my school is a matter
of necessity as much as deBire............... ~
76.  All in all,  I am satisfied with my benefits.... i.
77.  it would be very hard for me co leave my
school right now, even if I wanted to........
78.  If I had not already put so much of myself 
into my school,  I might consider working 
elsewhere..................................
79.  I enjoy belonging to this work group because
I am friends with many group members.........
80.  One of the few negative consequences of 
leaving my school would be the scarcity
of available alternatives...................
81.  All in all,  I am satisfied with the
recognition I receive for a job well done....
82.  If given che chance,  I would leave my school 
and transfer to another.....................
83.  Teachers in my school get along well together..
84.  Teachers in my school readily defend each
other from criticism by outsiders............
85.  I find chat I generally do not get along
with ocher teachers.........................
86.  All in all, I am satisfied with my coworkers...
87.  All in all, I am satisfied with my principal...
88.  All in all, I am satisfied with my school.....
The following relates co the level ot interpersonal conflict chac exists in your job.

89. Other teachers often do not agree with each 
other about how work should be handled.......
90.  I usually agree with the way other teachers 
think things should be done in ray school.....
91. My principal and I usually agree about 
what my job is, and che requirements I
must fulfill...............................
92.  I usually agree with the decisions ray 
principal makes............................

N ever 
True 

G en er a lly  
Not  True 

S o n a tin a !  G en er a lly  

A laost

True 

True 

A laays  True

In che next section you are asked about how you respond to various situations ac work.

S tr o n g ly  
O U e g r e e  

O fu g r M  

N eutral 

Agree 

S tro n g ly  

Agree

93.  I help others who have been absent...........
94. When I am unhappy or upset,  I usually keep
it to myself...............................
95. I am always ready co lend a helping hand to 
chose around me............................
96. I consider che impact of my actions on 
coworkers..................................
97. I consume a lot of time complaining about 
trivial matters............................
98.  I help orient new people even chough it is
noc required...............................
99.  I tend to make "mountains out of molehills.*...
100. I cake steps to cry to prevent problems with 
my coworkers...............................
101.  I always find fault with what che school is 
doing......................................
102. I am the classic "squeaky wheel" chac always 
needs greasing.............................
103.  I help others who have heavy work loads......
104. Whenever I am dissatisfied,  I readily express 
it co ocher people..........................
105. I frequently express dissatisfaction with che 
behavior of others..........................
106. I don't usually vent my frustrations or 
dissatisfactions............................
107. When people annoy me,  I cell them............
108. I willingly help others who have work 
related problems...........................
m

■   ■   ■  
t  Sir-Scan by HBC 388-1145  *  79 

■ ■

serial 00405 

  g  

g| 

page 0 3 g g

Reproduced with permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


D faagrM  

N eu tral 

A gree 

str o n g ly  

Agraa

S tr o n g ly  
O isagrao 

109. I always focus on what's wrong,  rather than 
the positive side..........................
110. I seldom inform others that I am disappointed..
111. X usually keep my discontent a secret........
112. X do not abuse the rights of others..........
113. When someone does something to make me feel 
bad,  I am likely to inform that person of oiy 
displeasure................................
114. I tend to complain a great deal..............
115.  X seldom state my dissatisfaction with the 
behavior of others..........................
116.  X am mindful of how my behavior affects ocher 
people's jobs..............................
117.  I generally don't say much when X am 
dissatisfied...............................
118. I cry co avoid creating problems for 
coworkers..................................
119. X usually vent my dissatisfaction............
120.  X keep my dissatisfactions to myself.........
121. When people or events don't meet my 
expectations,  X usually comnunicate my 
dissatisfaction............................

The following statements represent the feelings people might have about themselves and 
others. 
is FALSE or  NOT USUALLY TRUE as applied co you, answer P.

XP a statement is TRUK or MOSTLY TRUE as applied co you,  answer T.  If a statement

co get along with.

different from my own.

122.  X don't seem to get whac's coming to me.
123.  I am sometimes irritated by people who ask favors of me.
124.  Other people always seem co get che breaks.
125.  There nave been occasions when I cook advantage of someone.
126.  Although I don't show it,  I am sometimes eaten up with jealousy.
127.  X don't know any people chac I downright hate.
128.  If X let people see che way I feel.  I'd be considered a hard person 
129.  At times X reel I get a raw deal out of life.
130.  When I disapprove of my friends' behavior,  I let them know it.
131.  I often find myself disagreeing with people.
132.  X can't help getting inco arguments when people disagree with me.
133.  X have never been irked when people expressed ideas very 
134.  X am always courteous,  even to people who are disagreeable.
135.  Even when my anger is aroused,  X don’t use "strong language."
136.  Almost every week I see someone X dislike.
137.  If somebody annoys me,  X am apt co tell him what X chink of him.
138.  When people yell at me,  I yell back.
139.  When I get mad,  I say nasty things.
140.  X could not put someone in his place, even if he needed  it.
141.  X often make threats X don't really mean to carry out.
142.  When arguing, X tend co raise my voice.
143.  X generally cover up my poor opinion of others.
144.  I demand chat people respect my rights.
145.  X would rather concede a point than get into an  argument abouc it.
146.  I sometimes feel resentful when I don't get my way.
147.  I'm always willing co admit it whan I make a mistake.
148.  On a few occasions,  I have given up doing something because
149.  There nave been times when X felt like rebelling against people in
150.  When I look back on whac's happened to me,  X can't help feeling mildly 
151.  No matter who I'm calking co,  I'm always a good listener.
152.  X can remember "playing sick* to get out of something.
153.  I sometimes try co get even rather than forgive and forget.
154.  There have been times when X was quite jealous of che good fortune 
155.  X have never deliberately said something that hurt someone's feelings.

X thought too little of my ability.
authority even chough X knew they were right.
resentful.

of others.

134

i

m

u 

i 

i 

i 

m 

i 

m 

i
i
i
i

 

u
m

 

m
u
m

i
n
i
m

i 

i 

 
i

m

In this section you are asked abouc different aspects of your work.
156.  How often do you experience conflict with coworkers?

Never 
Often 

Rarely 
Very Often 

Seldom
Constantly

serial 00405 

■   ■   ■  
* Sir-Scan by MBC 388-1145  0  75

■ ■

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


157. How ofcen do you experience conflict with your supervisor?

Sometimes
158. How often do you seriously consider quitting your job?
Often 
Constantly
159. How often do you think about leaving your current position?
Often 
Constantly
160. Row likely is it that you will search for a position in another school? 
Neither likely nor unlikely

Never 
Often 
Never 
Never 
Very likely 
Slightly unlikely 

Rarely 
Very Often 
Seldom 
Seldom 

Seldom 
Constantly
Sometimes 
Sometimes 

Slightly likely 
Very unlikely

161. Do you want to quit your job? 
162. Are you planning on quitting your job? 
163. How often do you think about being absent?
Seldom 
Constantly

Rarely 
Very often 

Never 
Often 

Yes 

No
Yes 

No
Sometimes

164. On average,  how often are you absent each month?  r~rn
1— 1— '

For example,  if you were absent 3 days, put 0 
in the left box and 3 in the right box and 
darken the appropriate ovals.

days

The following items will be used to summarize survey responses inco meaningful groups 
such as length of work experience.
YEARS
i---
Including this year, how long have you worked for the parish 
school board system?  For example,  if you have been working
for 2 years, put 0 in the cop box and 2 in che lower box and 
---
darken che appropriate ovals.
Including this year, how long have you worked for chis school  ---
(in any capacity)?

Including this year, how long have you worked for this school 
in your present position?

Hew old wore you on your lasc birthday?

BB

Please indicate your gender: 
Please indicate your race: 
Please indicate your level of education: 

Male
White
H is p a n ic

College graduate 
Sasie graduate work 
Master's degree

Thank you for taking the tine to complete 
comoents an the back of this sheet.

Female

African-American 
Asian 

American Indian
Ocher

hours

Master's ♦ 
Doctor's degree
Other (explain)____________________
this survey.  Please feel free co add any

135

I

l

l

l

l

l

l

l

l

l

 

I

I

 

I

I

 

I

I

 

I 

I 

I 

I
I
 

I

I

I

serial 00405 

■   ■   ■  
1 Sir-Scan by MBC 388-1145  « 75 

■ ■

■ ■   ■  

■  

page 051

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


APPENDIX G:  PRINCIPAL COVER LETTER (FINAL STUDY)

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

136


L S U A M O  

A C t

I  
D epartm ent  o f M a n a g e m en t  •  £.  j.  O urso  College  o f  Business  A dm inistration

M I C H A N l C A k

l C U l T U B A l

A M O  

C  O  

t  

 

 

I   C  

I

M ay  11,  1998

Principal 
School Address

D e a r________ :

As a doctoral student in the C ollege o f Business Adm inistration at Louisiana S tate 

U niversity, I am currently w orking on m y dissertation, w hich focuses on em ployees’ 
attitudes about their jobs and w ork environm ent.  I would greatly appreciate your help  in 
com pleting the enclosed surveys.

Please com plete a Principal Survey for each o f  the teachers at your school using 
the enclosed No. 2 pencil.  The last nam e and initial o f  the first nam e o f  the teachers are 
located at the top right hand com er o f  the surveys under the instructions.  Individual 
responses to these surveys will be kept absolutely confidential at all times.  I will be the 
only person with access to the surveys.  T o  further insure confidentiality, place the 
com pleted surveys in the enclosed envelope, seal it.  Should you have any questions or 
concerns, please feel free to contact m e at (504)388-6110 (office), (504)447-5591 
(hom e), or via internet at dnaheck@ iam erica.net.

Whereas I know  there is no w ay I can adequately com pensate you for your tim e, 

the nam es o f the teachers and principals w ho com plete surveys w ill be entered in a 
random  drawing for three $100 cash prizes.  T hank you for taking the tim e to com plete 
the surveys.  Again, your efforts and professional courtesy are truly appreciated.

Sincerely,

A nita K. Heck 
Ph.D. Candidate

Enclosures

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


APPENDIX  H:  PRINCIPAL SURVEY (FINAL STUDY)

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

138

i


139

m

i

n

i

u

m

Principal Survey

Please complete one of these single-page surveys for each teacher you supervise. 
Part I:  Please rate the teacher identified in terms of the following traits.
Darken the number that corresponds to your best description of the teacher.  Please 
answer all items.  Please use the enclosed *2 pencil to complete this survey.

Teacher’s Name _ 

_ 

_

Unsatisfactory 

Excellent

Ability.......................
Accuracy......................
Creativity.....................
Effort........................
Gets job done..................
Initiative.....................
Job knowledge..................
Judgment......................
Productivity...................
Professional image.............
Quality of work................
Respons ibili ty.................

Part II:  Below are statements related to how teachers respond to various
situations at work.  Darken the number that corresponds to your best description of 
this particular teacher.  Please answer all items.

D isa g r e e  

N eutral 

Agree 

S tron gly 

Agree

S tr o n g ly  
D isa g r e e  

1.  Whenever this teacher is dissatisfied,
he/she readily expresses it to other people...
2.  This teacher frequently does not express 
dissatisfaction with the behavior of others...
3.  This teacher usually vents his/her 
frustrations or dissatisfactions.............
4.  When people annoy this teacher, he/she tells 
them.......................................
5.  This teacher seldom informs others that he/she 
is disappointed............................
6.  This teacher usually keeps his/her discontent
a secret....... ........... ................
7.  When  someone does something to make this

teacher feel bad,  he/she is likely to inform
that person of his/her displeasure............
8.  This  teacher tends to complain a great deal....
9.  This  teacher seldom states his/her
dissatisfaction with the behavior of others...
10. This teacher generally doesn't say much when 
he/she is dissatisfied......................
11. This teacher usually vents his/her 
dissatisfaction............................
12. This teacher keeps his/her dissatisfactions
to his/herself.............................
13. When this teacher is unhappy or upset,
he/she usually keeps it to nia/herself........
14. When people or events don’t meet this 
teacher's expectations, he/she usually 
communicates his/her dissatisfaction..........
15. This teacher consumes a lot of time complaining 
about trivial matters............ ..........
16. This teacher always focuses on what's wrong, 
rather than the positive side................
17. This teacher tends to make "mountains out of 
molehills".................................
18. This teacher always finds fault with what
the school is doing.........................
19. This teacher is the classic "squeaky wheel" 

that always needs greasing............... .

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


APPENDIX I:  LIST OF MEASURES  (FINAL STUDY)

<

140

1

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


141

Unsportsmanship: (Workplace Whining"! (Podsakoff & MacKenzie,  1989)
1.  This teacher consumes a lot of time complaining about trivial matters.
2.  This teacher always focuses on what’s wrong, rather than the positive side.
3.  This teacher tends to make “ mountains out of molehills
4.  This teacher always finds fault with what the organization is doing.
5.  This teacher is the classic “ squeaky wheel”  that always needs greasing

Organizational-Based Self-Esteem (Pierce, Gardner, Cummings, & Dunham,  1989)
1.  I count around here.
2.  I am taken seriously around here.
3.  I am important around here.
4.  I am trusted around here.
5.  There is faith in me around here.
6.  I can make a difference around here.
7.  I am valuable around here.
8.  I am helpful around here.
9.  I am efficient around here.
10.1 am cooperative around here.

Negative Affectivitv (Watson & Tellegen,  1985)
1.  I often find myself worrying about something.
2.  My feelings are hurt rather easily.
3.  Often I get irritated at little annoyances.
4.  I suffer from nervousness.
5.  My mood often goes up and down.
6.  I sometimes feel “just miserable”  for no good reason.
7.  I am easily startled by things that happen unexpectedly.
8.  I often lose sleep over my worries.
9.  Minor setbacks sometimes irritate me too much.
10. There are days when I’m “ on edge”  all of the time.
11.1 am too sensitive for my own good.

Job Satisfaction (Chalykoff & Kochan,  1989)
All in all, how satisfied or dissatisfied are you with the following items pertaining to work:
1.  Your job
2.  Your pay
3.  Your benefits
4.  Promotion opportunities
5.  The recognition you receive for a job well done
6.  The amount of say you have in how work is to be done.

Facet Satisfaction (Taylor & Bowers (1972)
1.  All in all, I am satisfied with my coworkers.
2.  All in all, I am satisfied with my principal.
3.  All in all, I am satisfied with my school.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


142

Affective Commitment (Meyer & Allen, 1991)
1.  I would be very happy to spend the rest of ray career with this organization.
2.  I really feel as if this organization’s problems are my own.
3.  I do not feel a strong sense of “ belonging”  to my organization. ®
4.  I do not feel “ emotionally attached”  to this organization. ®
5.  I do not feel like “ part of the family”  at my organization. ®
6.  This organization has a great deal of personal meaning for me.

Organizational Justice (Greenberg,  1986)

Procedural:
In this organization:
1.  Consistent rules and procedures are used to make decisions about things that affect me.
2.  Personal motives or biases influence decisions that affect me ®
3.  Decisions that affect me are made ethically.
4.  Accurate information is used to make decisions that affect me.
5.  My input is obtained prior to making decisions.
6.  I am given the opportunity to modify decisions that have already been made.
7.  The reasons behind the decisions that affect me are explained.
8.  Concern is shown for my rights.
9.  There is a real interest in trying to be fair to me.

Distributive Justice (Price & Mueller,  1986)
I am fairly rewarded:
1.  Considering the responsibilities I have.
2.  Taking into account the amount of education and training that I have had.
3.  In view of the amount o f experience that I have.
4.  For the amount o f effort that I put forth.
5.  For work that I have done well.
6.  For the stresses and strains of my job.

Leader-Member Exchange (Scandura & Graen, 1984)
1.  I know where I stand ... I usually know how satisfied my supervisor is with what I 

2.  My supervisor understands my job problems and needs.
3.  My supervisor recognizes my potential.
4.  Regardless  of how  much  formal  authority  my  supervisor  has  built  into  his/her 

position, he/she would use that power to help me solve problems at work.

5.  My supervisor would “ bail me out” at his/her expense.
6.  I have an effective working relationship with my supervisor.
7.  I would defend and justify my supervisor’s decisions if he/she were not present to 

do.

do so.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


143

Job Performance (Greenhaus. Bedeian, & Mossholder, 1987)
Rate the teacher in terms of the following traits on a 5-point scale (1 =Unsatisfactorv. 
5=Excellenf)
1.  Ability
2.  Accuracy
3.  Creativity
4.  Effort
5.  Gets job done
6.  Initiative
7.  Job knowledge
8.  Judgment
9.  Productivity
10. Professional image
11. Quality of work
12. Responsibility

Short Form of the Marlowe-Crowne Social Desirability Scale fBallard.  1992)
1.  I sometimes feel resentful when I don’t get my way.®
2.  On a few occasions,  I have given up doing something because I thought too  little 

3.  There have been times when I  felt like rebelling against people  in  authority even 

of my ability. ®

though I knew they were right. ®

4.  No matter who I’m talking to, I’m always a good listener.
5.  I can remember “playing sick”  to get out of something. ®
6.  There have been occasions when I took advantage of someone. ®
7.  I’m always willing to admit it when I make a mistake.
8.  I sometimes try to get even rather than forgive and forget. ®
9.  I am always courteous, even to people who are disagreeable.
10.1 have never been irked when people expressed ideas very different from my own.
11.  There have been times when I was quite jealous of the good fortune of others. ®
12.1 am sometimes irritated by people who ask favors of me. ®
13.1 have never deliberately said something that hurt someone’s feelings.

® = Reverse scored.

Reproduced with permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


VITA

Anita K. Heck received her Bachelor of Science degree in Accounting and Master of 

Business Administration degree from Nicholls State University.  She is a certified 

public accountant and worked as a tax auditor prior to entering the doctoral program at 

Louisiana State University.  She has presented papers at annual meetings of the 

Academy of Management, Southern Management Association, and Southwest 

Academy of Management.  Her research interests include organizational deviant 

behaviors, affectivity/emotion, organizational self-esteem, justice, and citizenship 

behaviors.  She will receive the degree of Doctor of Philosophy at Fall 

Commencement, 2000.

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

144


DOCTORAL  EXAMINATION  AND  DISSERTATION  REPORT

Candidate; 

Anita Konieczka Heck 

Major Field: 

Business Administration

Title of Dissertation:  Workplace Whining:  Antecedents and Process of

Noninstrumental Complaining

Approved:

Major Professpr^and Chairman

EXAMINING  COMMITTEE:

Date of Examination:

October 18,  2000

Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.

