THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN JOB SATISFACTION AND

LOCUS OF CONTROL: A STUDY OF EMPLOYEES

IN FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS IN CHEYENNE, WYOMING

by

Selina E. Hoflund

A Dissertation Presented in Partial Fulfillment

Of the Requirements for the Degree

Doctor of Philosophy

Capella University

August, 2004


 
 
 

UMI Number:  3138514
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

________________________________________________________ 

UMI Microform  3138514

Copyright 2004 by ProQuest Information and Learning Company. 
All rights reserved.  This microform edition is protected against 

unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code. 

____________________________________________________________ 

 
 

ProQuest Information and Learning Company 

300 North Zeeb Road 

PO Box 1346 

Ann Arbor, MI 48106-1346 


© Selina Hoflund, 2004



4

Abstract

This  was  an  exploratory  study  bounded  by  geographic 

location.  The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  examine  the 

relationship between locus of control and job satisfaction among 

employees  in  financial  institutions  such  as  banks  and  credit 

unions in Cheyenne, Wyoming. This study also examined the impact 

of  gender  and  education  level  on  that  relationship.  The  Pearson 

product-moment correlation between work locus of control and job 

in  general  satisfaction  was  found  to  be  significant  and  that 

relationship  was  found  to  be  present  when  mediating  variables 

such  as  gender  and  levels  of  education  were  examined.  Male 

respondents  in  this  study  reported  higher  amounts  of  job 

satisfaction  while  individuals  with  higher  level  of  education 

were found to experienced higher levels of job satisfaction.


Dedication

This dissertation is dedicated to my adopted grandparents 

who raised me. They taught me that hard work and perseverance do 

payoff.

iii


Acknowledgements

I want to express my heartfelt gratitude and appreciation to 

my dissertation committee. First, to my mentor, Dr. Linda 

Suzanne Wing, for her unwavering support and dedication – I 

would have been so lost without her. Dr. Wing, thank you so much 

for not giving up on me even when your workload have increased 

tremendously. I appreciated your understanding, patience, 

guidance, and motivation more than I can ever express. Thank 

you, Dr. Carl Beekman, for your encouragement and for cheering 

me on throughout the whole process. Thank you, Dr. Robert 

Rodriguez, for your valuable insights and suggestions. Thank 

you, Dr. Marlene Tignor, for your keen eye to details and 

support. Thank you, Wanda Simmons, for your empathy and your 

friendship.

I also want to acknowledge Dr. Paul Spector for allowing me 

to use the Work Locus of Control for my study. I appreciated the 

tremendous work he has done in adding to the existing body on 

knowledge on locus of control and job satisfaction. 

To my husband, Brian Hoflund, I want to express my love and 

sincere gratitude for the sacrifices he made and the hardships 

he endured throughout this academic journey with me. I thank God

everyday for bringing him into my life - he inspires me to want 

to be a better person. Lastly, but not least, to my God, for all 

the blessings he brings to my life – I am not worthy of his 

love.

iv


Table of Contents

 Acknowledgements

Table of Contents

List of Tables (if tables used)

CHAPTER 1:  INTRODUCTION

Introduction to the Problem

Background of the Study

Statement of the Problem

Purpose of the Study

Research Questions and Rationale

Significance of the Study

Definition of Terms

Assumptions

Limitations

Organization of the Remainder of the Study

CHAPTER 2:  LITERATURE REVIEW

iv

v

viii

1

    1

    3

    8

   10

   12

   14

   18

   20

   21

   22

   24

Historical Appraisal of Financial Institutions  

   24

Early Adoption Period

Specific Application Period

Emergence Period

Diffusion Period

Job Satisfaction

v

   25

   29

   30

   32

   35


Job Satisfaction in Times of Change 

Perceptions of Control

Locus of Control

Theoretical Framework

Internal Locus of Control

External Locus of Control

Job Satisfaction and Locus of Control

Work Locus of Control as a Moderator

CHAPTER 3:  METHODOLOGY

Research Design

Characteristics and Size of Sample

Variables

Hypotheses

Instrumentation

Work Locus of Control Measure

Job Satisfaction Measure

Demographic Factors

   39

   42

   43

   44

   48

   50

   51

   55

   56

   56

   57

   62

   62

   64

   65

   67

   69

CHAPTER 4:  DATA COLLECTION, ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS       71

Data Collection

Data Analysis

Findings

Hypothesis One 

Hypothesis Two

vi

   71

   73

   75

   78

   80


Hypothesis Three

Additional Findings

   80

   82

CHAPTER 5:  RESULTS, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS     85

Discussion of Results

Work Locus of Control and Job Satisfaction

Mediating Effects of Gender

Mediating Effects of Education

Limitations and Future Directions

Recommendations

Policymakers

Practitioners

Conclusion

   85

   86

   87

   91

   94

   97

   98

  100 

102

vii


List of Tables

Table 1: Dimensions of IT Innovations in Commercial 
         Banking, 1846 – 1995 (Morris, 1986; 
         Quintás, 1991). 

26

Table 2: Growth of EFTPOS Terminals in Four 

   OCDE Countries, 1988-1995

   33

Table 3: Sample size for ±5%, ±7%, ±10% precisions 

   levels where confidence is 95%     

   61

Table 4: Distribution of Respondents for Selected 

   Variables

Table 5: Intercorrelations for Primary Study 

   Variables

Table 6: Correlations Between Job Satisfaction 

   And Work Locus of Control Mediating 
   For Gender or Education.

Table 7: Prediction of Job Satisfaction Based 
   On Demographic Factors and Work Locus
   of Control

   76

   78

   81

   83

viii


CHAPTER 1.  INTRODUCTION

Introduction to the Problem

Concerns for the quality of working life have preoccupied 

social scientists for the past 50 years (Dolan & Gosselin, 

2000). It is no wonder that thousands of studies revolved around 

the concept of job satisfaction as core concept of research in 

occupational stress (Cranny, Smith & Stone, 1992). Job 

satisfaction has been studied as an independent variable 

explaining such outcomes as direct performance, indirect 

performance (absenteeism, lateness, accidents, turnover, and 

line) and physical and mental health (Auerbach & Dolan, 1997; 

Baba, Jamal & Tourigny, 1998). 

Despite the detailed sociological studies of management and 

organization conducted for over four decades ranging from the 

cultural and psychological (Jaques, 1951), to the structural 

(Kanter, 1977), to the political and historical (Pettigrew, 

1985; Smith, Child, & Rowlinson, 1990), understanding 

organization and what it takes to manage employee job 

satisfaction remains a great challenge and is very complex. The 

presence of change, gender differences, and other forms of 

diversity no doubt adds to that complexity and takes the job of 

managing human resources to a different level. 


Job Satisfaction

2

Like many other industries, the management of human 

resources in the services industry continues to be a major 

challenge for most human resources practitioners because it is 

difficult to quantify the contributions of human resources 

(Nguwi, 2003). Like other organizations, financial institutions 

recognize that decisions about human resources are at the 

cutting edge of the business (Antonacopoulou, 2000). In a 

competitive financial market, financial institutions’ 

performances provide signals to depositors and investors whether 

to invest or withdraw their investments from these financial 

institutions (Nguwi, 2003), and the level of this performance 

related to effective Human Resources Management. As a result, 

financial institutions find themselves with an expanding mix of 

interrelated Human Resource Management problems. Prominent among 

those problems is managing job satisfaction. 

But what is job satisfaction?  Is job satisfaction in fact 

the opposite of job dissatisfaction?  That is, if one is 

dissatisfied with his or her job, would removing the cause allow 

a person to experience job satisfaction or would that just 

merely remove the dissatisfaction? In fact, what causes one 

person or a group of people to behave in one way and not another 

when confronted with issues of occupational stress and/or job 

satisfaction in today’s changing workplace?


Job Satisfaction

3

Locke (1969) suggests that job satisfaction is a state of 

pleasure gained from applying one’s values to a job. Spector 

(1997) believes that job satisfaction “can be considered as a 

global feeling about the job or as a related constellation of 

attitudes about various aspects or facets of the job” (p. 2). 

Even though there has been considerable research aimed at this 

question (Clark, Georgellis, & Sanfey, 1998; Cranny et al., 

1992; Kaldenberg & Regrut, 1999; Levy-Garboua, Montmarquette, & 

Simonnet, 2001; Locke, 1976; Savall, 1981; Syptak, Marsland, & 

Ulmer, 1999; Vroom, 1974), no clear answers have been found. 

This is because job satisfaction is too complex a phenomenon to 

be reduced to simple causal factors (Molineux, 2003). Each 

person is unique and has different needs, and so he or she 

differs in what satisfies each in his or her work (Gruneberg, 

1979). Some like security and structure; others like flexibility 

and the opportunity to be creative; some like boring jobs that 

do not involve or tax them; while others want to be challenged 

and committed (Griffin, 1991). 

Background of the Study

Financial institutions in the retail sector provide an 

interesting example of an industry that has undergone 

significant changes in recent years (Antonacopoulou, 2000). 

Changes, triggered by both external forces that arise from the 


Job Satisfaction

4

trends in the world economy, and internal forces within the 

sector that arise from changes in the market, continue to 

intensify competition; the dynamic developments in information 

technology are also contributors (Holmsen, Palter, Simon, & 

Weberg, 1998). These changes are fundamentally transforming the 

roles that various staff members are expected to play within 

these financial institutions and make planning staff numbers 

difficult, especially with increasing cost conscious initiatives 

(Antonacopoulou, 2000).  

The paternalistic approach adopted in financial institutions 

in the past was reflected in the remarkable degree of loyalty 

and esprit de corps among employees (Jones, 1991). However, in 

light of recent social changes, these organizations can no 

longer maintain their paternalistic approach to productivity, 

staff development, and employee retention. The psychological 

contract of employment in financial institutions is changing and 

it is no longer based on loyalty, commitment, and lifelong 

employment (Herriot, Pemberton, & Hawtin, 1996). The criteria 

for career progression and retention are in fact customer 

service and performance in meeting various sales targets 

(Banking Information Services, 1991).

Even though employee satisfaction and retention have always 

been important issues for employers (Syptak et al., 1999), few 


Job Satisfaction

5

practices (in fact, few organizations) have made job 

satisfaction a top priority. Freeman (1978) suggests that the 

neglect of job satisfaction might reflect a professional 

suspicion of what may be called “subjective variables”: 

variables that measure “what people say” rather than “what 

people do.” Nonetheless, those who understand the importance of 

job satisfaction understand the significant opportunities that 

it offers (Axtell et al., 2002). Satisfied employees tend to be 

more productive, creative, and committed to their employers, and 

recent studies have in fact shown a direct correlation between 

staff satisfaction and customer satisfaction (Kaldenberg & 

Regrut, 1999). This is an important point for all service-based 

industries to note.

It is natural to surmise that the more satisfied people are 

with their jobs, the less likely they are to quit. However, this 

assumption is flawed in many respects. Contrary to common 

beliefs, the reason dissatisfied workers quite more often is 

because they place a lower value on their current job when 

compared to future outside opportunities (Levy-Garboua et al., 

2001). That is also why quitters report more satisfaction in 

their new jobs than in their old ones (Akerlof, Rose, & Yellen, 

1988) and why mobile workers experience greater increases in 

satisfaction if they are willing to leave the job than if they 


Job Satisfaction

6

are not (Bartel & Borjas, 1981; Gottschalk & Maloney, 1985). 

Therefore, there is really no causal link between job 

satisfaction and quits (Levy-Garboua et al., 2001).

Further findings by Levy-Garboua et al. (2001) imply that 

even a uniform increase in market wages would have no effect on 

reported job satisfaction. These findings were consistent with 

Duncan (1975), as well as Easterlin’s (1973, 1975) seminal 

observation that satisfaction and happiness judgments are 

essentially relative. And even though some studies suggest the 

higher the prestige of the job, the greater the job 

satisfaction, Axtell et al. (2002) find that many workers are 

satisfied in even the least prestigious jobs – this suggests 

that some people simply like what they do.

So, what really affects one’s perception of job 

satisfaction? Although there have been many studies of 

occupational stress and job satisfaction (Dewe, 1991; Dolan & 

Gosselin, 2000), the dynamic mechanisms by which well-being and 

perceptions of control affect occupational stress and job 

satisfaction have received relatively little attention. Even 

though many detailed case studies that related job satisfaction 

to a host of specific aspects of the workplace, such as mode of 

supervision, physical work conditions, and so forth (Locke, 

1976; Vroom, 1974), the idiosyncratic ways in which individuals 


Job Satisfaction

7

report job satisfaction should be explored since each person is 

unique and has different needs and so differs in what aspect of 

work satisfies him or her (Gruneberg, 1979). Studies on core 

traits like self-esteem, well-being, and locus of control all 

supported the notion that there are common factors, outside of 

the attributes of the job, in which perceptions related to job 

satisfaction are derived (Brief, Butcher, George, & Link, 1993; 

Judge, Erez, Bono, & Thoresen, 2003; Judge, Locke, Durham, & 

Kluger, 1998; Staw, Bell, & Clausen, 1986; Staw & Ross, 1985).

In recent years, rising attention has been given to the 

hypothesis that factors within the individual, unconnected to 

the attributes of the job, affect the degree of satisfaction 

experienced on the job (Judge et al., 1998). These factors, 

called “dispositions,” affect the way individuals perceive job 

satisfaction. Although the possible effects of dispositions on 

satisfaction with the job have been acknowledged for many 

decades (Fisher & Hanna, 1931; Hoppock, 1935; Locke, 1976; 

Smith, 1955; Weitz, 1952), the work of Staw and Ross (1985) and 

Staw et al. (1986) first afforded empirical support for the 

dispositional hypothesis of job satisfaction. 

Studies from that point on began to shed light on the 

psychological processes fundamental to the dispositional source 

of job satisfaction (Judge et al., 1998). For instance, Weiss 


Job Satisfaction

8

and Cropanzano (1996) present a cognitive model that explains 

how job reactions result from the correlation between 

perceptions of the job and internalized standards. Similarly, in 

an empirical study, Brief, Butcher, and Roberson (1995) 

illustrate that, when subjected to the same task attributes, 

individuals' dispositional tendencies influence how they 

interpret whether those attributes are favorable or unfavorable.

Statement of the Problem

House, Shane, and Herold (1996) note in their recent 

appraisal of the dispositional literature that further 

explanations should be presented as to why some people feel 

happier than others. Proponents of the genetic approach argue 

that dispositions are inherent (Lykken & Tellegen, 1996). Arvey, 

Bouchard, Segal, and Abraham (1989), for example, found evidence 

that the job satisfaction experienced by identical twins who 

were raised apart was higher than that of less closely related 

individuals. However, Judge et al. (1998) believe that this 

argument by itself does not fully clarify the psychological 

processes fundamental to the dispositional source of job 

satisfaction. To them, even if it is true that some individuals’ 

brains are "wired" differently, this cannot be the complete 

story. What happens after birth and what conclusions individuals 

draw from their experiences could also profoundly affect 


Job Satisfaction

9

individuals' jobs and their perceptions of job satisfaction 

(Judge et al., 1998).

In that respect, how perceptions affect job satisfaction is 

worth further examination. Locus of control was proposed to 

moderate this relationship. Rotter’s (1966) personal construct

of locus of control will be used to provide the theoretical 

framework for this study, while Spector’s (1988) work locus of 

control will be used to specifically examine the relationship 

between locus of control and job satisfaction in the workplace.

Rotter, one of the founders of social learning theory, first 

studied the impact of an individual's perception of control over 

events back in 1954. A number of studies have suggested that 

beliefs about locus of control are established early in life 

(Davis & Phares, 1969; Duke & Lancaster, 1976; Hetherington, 

1972; Johnson & Kilmann, 1975; Katkovsky, Crandall, & Good, 

1967). Different childhood experiences presumably lead to 

different expectations about the extent to which people can 

control their own destiny. These expectations eventually harden 

and determine how the person will later try to respond and cope 

with new situations and developments (Goldsmith & Veum, 1996). 

Within the personal construct of locus of control, Rotter 

(1966) found that individuals can have either an internal locus 

of control or an external locus of control. Likewise, Spector 


Job Satisfaction

10

(1988) who studied locus of control in the workplace also found 

the two Locus of Control domains (internal and external), when 

the work locus of control instrument was used to test the 

relationship between locus of control and job satisfaction. 

Similar to Rotter (1966), Spector (1988) holds that those with 

an internal work locus of control (internals) believe that work 

outcomes are based on their own effort and ability. Conversely, 

those with an external work locus of control (externals) believe 

that work outcomes depend on external factors, such as luck, or 

knowing the right people. 

In reference to the above, how then will Spector’s (1988) 

concept of internal-external work locus of control affect 

perceptions of job satisfaction? Will a relationship therefore 

exist between work locus of control and overall job 

satisfaction? If so, what will be the direction of that 

relationship? 

Purpose of the Study

 The purpose of this study is to examine the relationship 

between work locus of control and job satisfaction among 

employees in financial institutions, such as banks and credit 

unions, in Cheyenne, Wyoming. It will also examine the 

relationship between work locus of control and job satisfaction 

when mediated by two factors: gender and education level. 


Job Satisfaction

11

Financial institutions were chosen for this study because 

the banking crisis and the recession of the early 1990s have far 

reaching consequences for financial institutions world-wide in 

hastening trends, particularly in the area of employment and 

occupational change (Holden, 1999). New technology, in the form 

of computerized banking operations, also accelerated change, and 

the convergence of these influences impacted the strategies and 

structures of financial institutions (Antonacopoulou, 2000). In 

turn, these factors had considerable impact on the processes of 

Human Resources Management, especially in the area of employees’ 

productivity, development, and job satisfaction.

Job satisfaction plays a central role in many empirical and 

theoretical studies in industrial and organizational psychology. 

These studies, however, typically have not focused on the effect 

of dissimilarity in the level of job satisfaction among one 

member and the other members of an organizational work group. 

Based on studies in the field of relational demography (Tsui, 

Egan, & O’Reilly, 1992), such individual-level distance from 

others in the group may have additional explanatory power. This 

study therefore examines the individual-level relationship 

between dissimilarity in job satisfaction and the social 

integration of individuals in their work group (Van der Vegt, 

2002).


Job Satisfaction

12

In respect to social integration, Goldsmith and Veum (1996) 

find that activities leading to self-attribution are powerful 

features of personality traits that should be sustained. 

However, the authors also hold that an environment that 

repeatedly fails to respond to individual action would affect 

the drive to exercise control. Here, it is important to note 

that although personality traits are stable, they are not 

invariant (Goldsmith & Veum, 1996). New developments can in fact 

alter an individual's disposition. 

For the purpose of this study, Spector’s (1988) theory of 

internal and external work locus of control will be used to 

examine the personal trait (or personal construct) of locus of 

control. This study will answer the questions pertaining to 

whether or not a relationship exists between work locus of 

control and job satisfaction, and what direction the 

relationship will take. In addition to that, the study will 

examine whether or not mediating factors like gender and 

education level have any effect on an individual’s perception of 

control and how that personal construct in turn affects job 

satisfaction.

Research Rationale and Questions

Psychological studies in the workplace have traditionally 

focused on men (White & Spector, 1987). Among male workers, 


Job Satisfaction

13

locus of control (Rotter, 1966) is a construct that has been 

shown to relate to job satisfaction (Andrisani & Nestel, 1976). 

However, there have been few studies that examine the 

relationships among job satisfaction, life satisfaction, and 

work locus of control among working women even though working 

women, may conceivably have different perceptions of control due 

to issues of sexual harassment, discrimination, and lower pay 

for equal work (Unger & Crawford, 1992). 

If locus of control as a personality trait is not invariant 

and if new developments can in fact alter an individual's 

disposition (Goldsmith & Veum, 1966), what types of experiences 

then are vivid and salient enough to alter an individual's 

personal work locus of control in the workplace? Would an 

individual’s gender and education level in fact affect a 

person's perception of control? And if so, would that also have 

an effect on the individual’s perception of job satisfaction? 

Answers to these questions may in fact be needed to help guide 

intervention programs in the workplace (i.e., financial 

institutions) that relate to productivity and job satisfaction.

Since the individual who has a strong belief that he or she 

can control his or her destiny is likely to be more alert to and 

to take advantage of those aspects of the work environment 

(Reed, Kratchman, & Strawser, 1994), this study is designed to 


Job Satisfaction

14

explore questions pertaining to the relationship between work 

locus of control and job satisfaction. Specifically, it will 

examine the direction of that relationship i.e. the impact of 

work locus of control (internal and external) on individuals’ 

perceptions of job satisfaction, and whether or not factors such 

as gender and levels of education affect that relationship. 

The following research questions were developed for this 

study: Is there a relationship between work locus of control and 

job satisfaction and if so, what direction would that 

relationship be? In addition, how would factors such as gender 

and education level affect that relationship?

Significance of Study

Organizations today are facing greater changes at a more 

rapid pace than ever before, and the rate of such change will 

probably continue to increase (Conner, 1992; Wanberg & Banas, 

2000). To remain competitive, organizations across industries 

have undergone a shift from a production orientation to an 

emphasis on service and knowledge (Drucker, 1993), as well as a 

shift from task and volume to an emphasis on process and value 

(Hammer & Champy, 1993; Magretta, 2002). With these shifts, 

workers are expected to make more decisions on their own, to 

work as members of teams, and to organize around the work 

process (Ryan, 1995).


Job Satisfaction

15

Consequently, individuals who have higher job satisfaction 

have higher abilities to stay on task without prompting, to work 

steadily through the entire work period, and to work at routine 

jobs without resistance; these individuals are highly valued by 

today’s organizations (Strauser & Ketz, 2002). This study is 

significant in its potential contribution to the understanding 

of what it truly takes to manage job satisfaction in today’s 

organizations. 

Although there have been many studies of occupational stress 

and job satisfaction (Dewe, 1991; Dolan & Gosselin, 2000), the 

dynamic mechanisms by which well-being and perceptions of 

control affect occupational stress and job satisfaction have 

received relatively little attention. If there is a significant 

relationship between personal constructs such as locus of 

control and job satisfaction, this study will help organizations 

understand the importance of psychological well-being and how it 

affects perceptions of job satisfaction, and, in turn, will 

create intervention programs that will help promote well-being 

and job satisfaction. 

Daniels and Guppy (1997) hold that poor psychological well-

being may lead to increased exposure to negative events, where 

these events may be appraised as more negative than they would 

have been if no changes in well-being had taken place. 


Job Satisfaction

16

Specifically, they suggested that increased anxiety acts 

directly on the automatic processes of attention allocation, 

leading to highly anxious individuals attending more to the 

threatening aspects of a given situation (Dalgleish & Watts, 

1990; MacCleod, 1991) than other aspects.

From both an individual and organizational standpoint, 

understanding how one’s locus of control affects one’s 

perception of job satisfaction may help both individuals and 

organizations manage behaviors in organizations and may enhance 

the likelihood of desirable outcomes by helping both people and 

organizations to adapt to the changing work environment 

(Goldsmith & Veum, 1996). This is especially crucial in a 

competitive (virtually world wide) industry such as financial 

institutions (Wilkinson & Lomax, 1989).

This study focuses on employees in financial institutions in 

the city of Cheyenne, Wyoming. Cheyenne currently houses a total 

of 22 financial institutions: 12 banks and 10 credit unions. 

Data provided by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (2000) show that 

Cheyenne has a total population of 53,011, with a population 

growth in the last 10 years of 2,802 or a 5.58%.  A point worth 

noting is that studies done by the U.S. Department of Labor 

(2000) found that there are fewer people within the “business 

and financial operation” job classification then one would 


Job Satisfaction

17

expect for this MSA when Cheyenne, Wyoming’s MSA was compared to 

national average. The studies also found that people in this job 

classification are making below average incomes indicating that 

employers are able to pay under the national average for human 

resources.

The most significant implication of being able to offer 

lower-than-average wages is that employers in the business and 

financial sectors in Cheyenne have a small pool of people to 

choose from. The 10-year trend reported by the U.S. Department 

of Labor for the Cheyenne metropolitan area shows a steady 

decline in the unemployment rate (2000). If the pool of job 

candidates within the financial industry in Cheyenne, Wyoming 

remains the same, it would suggest that the characteristics of 

these job candidates would remain the same. Therefore the 

ability to understand factors that affect job satisfaction in a 

highly competitive financial institution job market in the city 

of Cheyenne is critical. For this reason, this exploratory study 

is designed to examine individuals who work for financial 

institutions in this particular geographic location only. For 

this bounded study, generalization to a wider population may be 

limited. 


Job Satisfaction

18

Definition of Terms

For the purposes of this study, the following definitions 

are applied to selected terms used throughout this dissertation.

Banking. In this study, banking refers to financial 

transactions that occur in both banks and credit unions.

Financial institutions. In this study, it refers to both 

banks and credit unions in the town of Cheyenne. 

External locus of control or externals. Refers to a person’s 

general belief that outcomes are not related to his or her 

personal behavior but to external forces beyond his or her 

control (Szymanski, Hershenson, Ettenger, & Enright, 1996). 

Within Spector’s Work Locus of Control, individuals with an 

external locus of control believe that work outcomes depend on 

external factors, such as luck, or knowing the right people. 

Facets. Refers to various dimensions used to measure job 

satisfaction, such as work itself, work outcomes, motivation, 

pay, and so forth.

Gender. In this study, gender refers to the physical sex of 

respondents (i.e., male or female).

Internal locus of control or internals. Refers to a person’s 

general belief that outcomes are related to his or her behavior 

or personal investment (Szymanski et al., 1996). Within 

Spector’s (1988) Work Locus of Control, individuals with an 


internal locus of control believe that work outcomes are based 

Job Satisfaction

19

on their own effort and ability.

Job descriptive index (JDI). Refers to an instrument 

developed by Smith, Kendall, and Hulin (1969) to measure 

satisfaction in work and retirement. 

Job in general (JIG). Is part of the JDI developed by Smith 

et al. (1969). It contains 18 items, each with a short phrase 

about the job in general rather than just facets of a job. 

Job satisfaction. Refers to the extent to which people like 

their jobs (Stamps, 1997).

Levels of education. Refers to how much schooling each 

respondent has completed (i.e., no high school, high school or 

GED, some college, undergraduate degree, graduate degree, or 

post-graduate degree).

Locus of control. Refers to the degree to which persons 

expect that reinforcement or an outcome of their behavior is 

contingent on their own behavior or personal characteristics. 

This belief is in opposition to the degree to which persons 

expect that the reinforcement or outcome is a function of 

chance, luck, or fate; is under the control of powerful others; 

or is simply unpredictable (Rotter, 1966).


Personality trait. Is used synonymously in this study with 

“personal construct” and they refer to the theory of locus of 

Job Satisfaction

20

control.

Tenure. In this study, tenure refers to the amount of time 

respondents have been working for their current employers.

Work locus of control. Refers to Spector’s (1988) measure of 

perception of control when individuals are at work. Similar to 

Rotter (1966), individuals are found to either have an internal 

work locus of control or an external work locus of control.

This study assumes the following: 

Assumptions

1. Job titles are standardized in the financial institutions 

throughout the country and therefore throughout financial 

institutions in the town of Cheyenne.

2. All the respondents in this study have similar access to 

opportunities within their organizations.

3. The participants complete the questionnaires 

conscientiously and accurately.

4. Individuals responding to the survey do not differ 

significantly from those who fail to respond.

5. Characteristics of respondents employed by the financial 

institutions selected are similar to the characteristics of 


individuals employed by financial institutions in the rest 

Job Satisfaction

21

of the nation.

6. The instruments selected for this study are reliable and 

valid and yield data to test the hypotheses adequately.  

7. Respondents with less than 1 year of tenure with an 

organization are unable to determine his or her level of 

satisfaction within that limited period of time and 

therefore are not included in the data set.

Limitations

The following are limitations to the study. Even though 

research on locus of control has been wide-spread, as evident in 

the literature of the last twenty years (Lefcourt, 1982, 1991; 

Phares, 1976; Spector, 1988, 1994, 2002; Stevick, Dixon, & 

Willingham, 1980), the research, however, has not been 

systematically extended beyond the American context, as with 

this study. With respect to the self-reporting methodology used, 

the limitation of this study is that responses may be partly 

influenced by social desirability, for instance, “what they say” 

versus “how they truly feel” (Freeman, 1978). To address 

concerns about socially desirable responding and method bias, 

future research should gather job characteristics ratings from 

supervisors and coworkers as well.


Job Satisfaction

22

Despite assurances of confidentiality, participants may feel 

compelled to rate their jobs as important in order to justify 

their employment. This may inflate job characteristic ratings. 

In regard to the common variance problems such as respondents’ 

genders and educational levels, reverse causality may exist (De 

Jong & Schellens, 2001).

Due to recent reorganizations within some of the financial 

institutions in Cheyenne, Wyoming, a large number of these 

organizations have declined to participate in this study. 

Because of this significant limitation, this study had to rely 

on a convenient sample since obtaining a probability sample was 

not feasible.  

The exploratory study is bounded by geographic location and 

was limited to the number of individuals employed by the 

selected financial institutions located in the town of Cheyenne, 

Wyoming during March and April 2004. For those reasons, the 

ability to generalize from the study to the larger population is 

a limitation. The study is also limited to surveys that were 

completed.

Organization of the Remainder of the Study

Chapter 2 discusses literature that provides a framework 

for the problem described in Chapter 1. Chapter 3 describes the 

study design and methodology. A description of the population is 


Job Satisfaction

23

presented, as well as a discussion of sampling techniques. 

Chapter 4 describes the data collection process and data 

analysis. Chapter 5 describes the findings, discussions, 

recommendations, and conclusion.


CHAPTER 2.  LITERATURE REVIEW

Historical Appraisal of Financial Institutions

The deregulation of banking and financial markets in the 

1980s led to a much more highly charged and competitive 

environment (Holden, 1999). In the 1980s many financial 

institutions made a number of imprudent investments and mergers 

that have had a considerable impact in the financial down swing 

in the early 1990s (Bertrand & Noyelle, 1988; Cressey and Scott, 

1992; Hiltrop, 1991; Piggott and Kilminster, 1994; Rajan and 

Fryatt, 1988). In the past, financial institutions were able to 

rely on lucrative personal business to offset disasters caused 

by the swing in economic markets, but the increased competition 

in the high street banking sector from mortgage companies after 

deregulation meant that this cushion had been removed (Bátiz-

Lazo & Wood, 2002). The long-term result of these diverse but 

converging influences was that banking moved from being somewhat 

institutional in character to being totally commercial and 

businesslike in its structures (Holden, 1999).

Changes in external environments and advances in information 

technology influenced technological innovation (and the 

resulting changes in internal structure) within commercial 

banking (Bátiz-Lazo & Wood, 2002). Pugh (1973) is one of the 

first to empirically support the effect of environment on 


Job Satisfaction

25

organizations, of size relative to competitors, and of the 

adoption of technology. Table 1 briefly outlines key 

technological innovations in financial institutions as grouped 

in four distinct periods: early adoptions, specific application, 

emergence, and diffusion. 

Early Adoption Period (1864 - 1945)

The introduction of telecommunications into bank markets 

dates to 1846 when the telegraph reduced stock price 

differentials between New York and regional stock markets and 

the 1866 introduction of the trans-Atlantic cable equally 

enabled greater integration of securities trading between New 

York and London (Garbade & Silber, 1978). Greater integration 

took place as the completion of the cable reduced the time delay 

to execute a trade in New York that had been initiated in London 

from six weeks to only one day. According to Garbade and Silber 

(1978), early innovations such as the trans-Atlantic cable were 

accompanied by statistically significant evidence that this 

innovation substantially reduced or even eliminated foreign 

exchange and security price differentials among geographically 

distinct markets. It is no surprise, then, that the amount of 

statistical significance of the enhanced market integration was 


Table 1 

Dimensions of IT Innovations in Retail Banking, 1846 - 1995
Morris, 1986; Quintás, 1991).

Job Satisfaction

26

Use of Technology in the Organization

Impact on 

Early Adoption Specific 

Emergence

Diffusion

Retail 

Application

(1846-1945)

(1945-1968)

(1968-1980)

(1980-1995)

Innovation 

Reduce inter-

Conversion 

Growth of 

Supply of non-

in Service 

market price 

from branch 

cross border 

payment 

Offering

differentials

to bank 

payment

products such 

relationships

as insurances, 

mortgages and 

pensions

Automated 

ATM was 

bank 

introduced

statements

Check cards 

guaranty

Operational 

Increased 

 Reduce cost 

Automation  

Growth of 

Function 

coordination 

of labor 

of branch 

alternative 

Innovation

between head 

intensive 

accounting 

distribution 

office and 

activities 

and real-time 

channels like 

branches 

(clearing 

control 

phone banking 

system)

begins

and EFTPOS


greatest for early developments, that is, those financial 

transactions where information delays were greatest prior to the 

introduction of telecommunication applications (Garbade & Silber, 

Job Satisfaction

27

1978, p. 831).

The early introduction of telecommunications into banking 

markets did little to improve front office procedures, that is, 

methods of transactions between customers and financial 

institutions remained largely the same. During the early

adoption period, customers entered the banking system directly 

through retail branches or indirectly through agency 

representatives (such as savings banks, mortgage specialists, 

and even retail outlets). Telephone conversations between banking 

managers and customers took place as early as the 1890s, but, in 

spite of this, service remained largely unaffected by technology, 

with the front office relationship unchanged and controlled locally 

through asynchronous, analogue systems such as paper based records 

and passbook control (Garbade & Silber, 1978).

At that time, financial intermediaries observed little in 

the way of systematic product and customer group diversification 

(Bátiz-Lazo & Wood, 2002). The main function of the head office 

was to manage, to provide services such as check clearing and 

relations with the central bank, and to manage the bank’s 

liquidity and balance sheet through treasury operations. The head 


Job Satisfaction

28

office was also in charge of policing performance through 

financial control and draconian inspection methods (Garbade & 

Silber, 1978). 

During the late 1930s, adding and listing machines that 

supported the growing network of branches and agents were used, 

although the potential of these machines as mechanisms for 

recording and updating transactions were not fully exploited 

until after the late 1940s and early 1950s (Bátiz-Lazo & Wood, 

2002). At this time, increasing the size of the branch network 

and divesting under performing agents became a priority, where 

performance indicators primarily measured growth in size (such as 

assets per employee and investment referrals) rather than 

efficiency or effectiveness (such as financial profitability and 

credit risk exposure) (Garbade & Silber, 1978).

The characteristic provision of financial services in 

retail markets was to change with the commercial use of 

computers (Bátiz-Lazo & Wood, 2002). However, according to

Leslie (2000), it was government sponsored research in the 

United States rather than bank initiatives that provided the 

force behind the original innovations that would result in 

interactive Information Technology (IT) applications during the 

1970s. 


Specific Application Period (1945-1965)

Job Satisfaction

29

The second wave of IT innovation in retail finance began in the 

late 1950s and lasted up to the late 1960s (Bátiz-Lazo & Wood, 

2002). Financial institutions introduced computers to keep up 

with growth in business volume and, at the same time, to solve 

specific problems and to automate existing practices of specific 

departments (Seeger, Lorsch, & Gibson, 1974; Morris, 1986; BBC, 

1995). At that time, financial institutions developed the 

capacity to handle more complex and higher level service tasks 

with their existing “high street” skills and resources (Bátiz-

Lazo & Wood, 2002).  This resulted in the branch networks 

quickly becoming the main point of contact with retail 

customers, while internally, the need to supply top management 

with prompt financial information grew. Computer applications 

therefore concentrated on back-office operations because, with 

economies of scale, controlling the growing mountain of 

paperwork provided the potential for improved efficiency and 

market-wide processes (Morris, 1986).

By 1965, most major banks in the United States and the 

United Kingdom introduced electronic data processing and, 

towards the end of the decade, with the introduction of second 

or third computers, a major redistribution of organizational 

responsibilities followed (Morris, 1986). At this time, 


Job Satisfaction

30

organizations tried to solve the apparent paradox between the 

greater efficiency associated with automation (i.e., greater 

centralization) and the increasing complexity of service 

offerings coupled with retail branch staff divested of power to 

make decisions (Bátiz-Lazo & Wood, 2002).  

From 1967 to 1973, mergers reduced yet again the number of 

clearing banks. In 1968, along with changes in the membership of 

the clearing committee, clearing banks established their first 

computer based intraorganizational network aimed at exploiting 

the cost advantages of electronic data interchange (EDI) 

(Morris, 1986).

In brief, during this period, the first IT applications for 

financial institution client transactions were introduced. 

Enhanced computer power allowed banks to process the growing 

volume of paper based transactions at central locations, with the 

added benefit of lower labor costs (Morris, 1986). A new set of 

IT related capabilities also began to emerge as a necessary 

condition for competition in bank markets (Quintás Seoane, 1991; 

Fincham et al., 1994).

Emergence Period (1965–1980)

The third wave of IT innovations in retail finance emerged 

hand in hand with advances in telecommunications. During the 


Job Satisfaction

31

emergence period, financial institutions became one of the 

world's dominant customers for computer based applications, far 

exceeding other sectors such as capital goods manufacturers or 

transportation (Scherer, 1982; Quintás Seoane, 1991). Between 1968 

and 1980, financial institutions emerged as major customers of 

software and hardware, as they became involved in applications 

that delivered significant cost reductions and increased business 

volume and variety (Bátiz-Lazo & Wood, 2002).

Other distinctive characteristics of banking organizations 

during the emergence period included the introduction of full 

automation to branch accounting and, real-time operation and 

control of branches by the central office (Fincham et al., 1994). 

In brief, the immediate result of innovations during this period 

was that customers were able to access services at any point in 

the retail branch network (the previous arrangement had limited 

several transactions to the customer’s own branch) (Bátiz-Lazo & 

Wood, 2002). The first introduction of Automated Teller Machine 

(ATM) in the world and the magnetic stripe plastic cards by IBM 

in 1969 marked the birth of electronic banking, where self-service 

banking became the norm (Bátiz-Lazo, Wonlimpiyarat, & Wood,

2001). Indeed, the emergence of the ATM allowed customers to 

perform banking transactions 24-hour a day at the customers' 


convenience rather than during banking hours (Bátiz-Lazo et al., 

Job Satisfaction

32

2001).

Diffusion Period (1980-1995)

The diffusion period of the information revolution in 

commercial banking saw the spread, within organized markets, of 

new and powerful applications developed to handle the security 

required by high volume payments. IT related change became 

critical to support the unprecedented increase in the speed, 

quantity, and quality of information from cross-border 

transactions in organized markets (Bátiz-Lazo & Wood, 2002).

During the diffusion period, the information revolution in 

commercial banking saw the spread of IT to all aspects of banks' 

internal organizations and market relationships thanks to the 

introduction of personal computers (PCs) in clerical and 

managerial roles. The integration of services around digital 

networks (ISDN) and greater use of electronic data interchange 

(EDI) protocols were at the heart of new distribution channels, 

such as electronic fund transfer at point of sale (EFTPOS) 

terminals, telephone transfer systems, and smart cards (Bátiz-

Lazo & Wood, 2002). Table 2 illustrates the growth resulting 

from the adoption of EFTPOS terminals; this growth also 

reflected the use of IT applications rather than cash registers 


Job Satisfaction

33

Table 2

Growth of EFTPOS Terminals in Four OCDE Countries, 1988-1995: 
Number of terminals per million inhabitants

Country

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

 Belgium

1,925 2,47

2,82

3,21

4,03

5,24

6,294

7,174

 France

2,154 2,84

3,18

3,56

5,59

7,43

7,574

9,394

 UK

 US

426

2
1,31

0
1,91

8
3,29

4
3,80

5
4,63

5,993

8,647

183

200

240

348

450

759

1,440

2,107

Source: Bank for International Settlements (1989, 1996)

and telephone credit authorizations. Other innovations 

included check verification terminals and fund transfer terminals.

Card technology evolved to provide individual customers with 

borderless services, primarily under the trademarks of VISA and 

MasterCard International networks (Bauer, 1995). Technological 

innovation and, in particular, increasing applications of 

telecommunications in bank markets such as telephone banking, 

electronic cross-border payment systems, or wholesale payment 


Job Satisfaction

34

systems, have effectively modified the external and internal 

nature of the banking organization (Bátiz-Lazo & Wood, 2002).

In the early 1990s when financial institutions were facing a 

banking crisis brought on by imprudent investments and mergers, 

and the recession, restructuring, reducing redundancy, 

increasing part time and short term contracts made employees in 

these organization feel insecure, overworked, and in fear of 

unemployment (Holden, 1999). Many staff, though eager to fulfill 

their duties, were not shielded from the banking crisis and 

recession that led to much "belt-tightening" within financial 

institutions (Nguwi, 2003). 

This “restructuring” process was further influenced by the 

long term effects of new technology, which grew in intensity 

with each phase of development and implementation (Morris, 

1986). The boom following deregulation in the mid 1980s masked 

these underlying changes, but when the banking crisis began in 

earnest in the 1990s, the influences of new technology and 

recession converged in a devastating way (Holden, 1999). The new 

human resource management messages that urged trust between 

employers and employees and enhanced commitment and improved 

performance were greatly undermined by redundancy and the 

climate of fear.


Job Satisfaction

35

Traditionally, the performance and success of a financial 

institution is measured by its income, expenditures, 

profitability, asset quality, and capital adequacy (Nguwi, 

2003). However, with the advent of technology and rapid changes 

in competitive markets in this sector, staff productivity is the 

one factor that offers financial institutions a competitive edge 

(Antonacopoulou, 2000). While financial institutions can develop 

products and technology similar to their competitors, they may 

not be able to develop the same staff performance, and these 

companies can use this factor to gain competitive advantage 

(Nguwi, 2003). However, increasing employee productivity may not 

be the only challenge facing financial institutions 

(Antonacopoulou, 2000). Other challenges such as job 

satisfaction, employee development, and employee retention 

continue to perplex human resources practitioners.

Job Satisfaction

Job satisfaction is a subject that continues to receive 

popular attention in the field of sociology and industrial 

psychology (Axtell et al., 2002). Certain job attributes, 

especially attributes of the work such as challenge, 

significance, task feedback, opportunity for growth, autonomy, 

and variety are well established as being related to job 

satisfaction (Fried & Ferris, 1987; Hackman & Oldham, 1980; 


Job Satisfaction

36

Locke, 1976). However, are perceptions of work characteristics 

influenced by individual dispositions? Some initial theoretical 

and empirical work implies that they are. 

As an example, Larsen and Ketelaar (1991) tested a 

theoretical rationale for predicting dispositional differences 

in emotional susceptibility to rewards. Their results showed 

that extroverted individuals (those predisposed to experience 

positive affects and positive self-evaluations) were more 

affected by situations designed to induce positive affect, 

whereas neurotic individuals (those predisposed to experience 

negative affect or to hold negative self-evaluations) were less 

affected by those situations. 

The application of Larsen and Ketelaar’s findings to 

employees' reactions to job enrichment is fairly direct (Judge 

et al., 1998). Individuals with positive orientations would 

react favorably to enriched work, while individuals with 

negative orientations would react less favorably (or even 

negatively) to enriched work (Judge et al., 1998). In fact, an 

earlier study found that positive affect was related to 

perceptions of task characteristics (Kraiger, Billings, & Isen, 

1989). What is needed to expand these findings is clear 

attention to the characteristic of personality that may affect 

the perception of work characteristics, as well as further 


Job Satisfaction

37

consideration of the way in which these psychological processes 

may explain the dispositional source of job satisfaction. This 

is especially important in a time when the tapestry of 

employment relationships is changing.

In an employment relationship, there is usually a form of 

connectedness between an individual and the organization 

resulting in some kind of psychological contract (Schein, 1990), 

which in the past seemed self-evident. Unfortunately, as 

economic conditions changed and businesses started to go global 

(Pritchett, 1994), the employment contract began to change, 

making the employment relationship more complex. The old 

employment contract implied that, if the employee took care of 

business, the employer would take care of the employee 

(Bardwick, 1995). The employee did not have to be a star 

performer; just be faithful, obedient, and only modestly 

competent and the organization would be his or her home as long 

as the employee wanted to stay (Bardwick, 1995).

Unfortunately, in the new contract, the organization no 

longer assumes that it will employ people for the whole of their 

career, and therefore, it is unwilling to carry them (Bardwick, 

1995). People are valued more for present performance and less 

for historic loyalty, and hard work no longer guarantees upward 

mobility (Gibbs, 1989). As organizations continue to change, 


Job Satisfaction

38

individuals are required to cope with and to adapt to these 

changes quickly and efficiently (Pritchett, 1994). 

However, coping with change can be difficult for some 

individuals (Wanberg & Banas, 2000). Employees experiencing 

change often feel a loss of territory, are uncertain about what 

the future holds, and may fear failure as they are faced with 

new tasks (Coch & French, 1948). Employees may react negatively 

to even the smallest of change. However, some employees may not 

be bothered by organizational change and may look at change as a 

chance to grow and learn (Wanberg & Banas, 2000).

Numerous case studies, theoretical reviews, and applied 

articles have suggested which factors may be associated with an 

individual’s openness to organizational change, but most of the 

change research had focused on more macro level phenomena (e.g., 

organization level), as opposed to focusing on individuals 

(Wanberg & Banas, 2000). Even though it has not been studied, 

Wanberg and Banas (2000) believed that it is becoming 

increasingly important for individuals to be able to cope with 

change in the workplace.

Miller, Johnson, and Grau (1994) conceptualize openness to 

organizational change as involving (a) willingness to support 

the change and (b) positive affect about the potential 

consequences of the change (e.g., feeling that the changes will 


Job Satisfaction

39

be beneficial in some way). Change is stressful, and individuals 

with high levels of self-esteem, optimism, and perceived control 

have been shown to be more open to change because these 

individuals attempt to see change in the best light possible 

(Taylor & Brown, 1988). 

Why is an individual’s ability to see change in a positive 

light important in organizations? A high level of openness to 

change is arguably critical in creating employee readiness for 

organizational change (Armenakis, Harris, & Mossholder, 1993). 

Openness to changes is a "necessary, initial condition for 

successful planned change" (Miller et al., 1994, p. 60). High 

levels of openness to an organizational change suggest increased 

cooperation and may deter change resistance behaviors such as 

quarreling and hostility, deliberate restriction of production, 

and lack of cooperation with management (Coch & French, 1948).

Job Satisfaction in Times of Change

Numerous research has been conducted to examine why people 

behave the way they do, how those behaviors affect the health 

and work performance of individuals, and how to manage those 

behaviors so that the organization can achieve better economic 

results and survive in an increasingly competitive business 

environment (Dolan & Gosselin, 2000). Many of these studies 

found that individuals who are not open to change have negative 


general attitudes toward change and these negative attitudes can 

have negative consequences for an organization (Wanberg & Banas, 

Job Satisfaction

40

2000).

In a study by Rush, Schoel, and Barnard (1995), perceived 

pressures for change on state government employees were 

associated with increased stress, which, in turn, was associated 

with lower job satisfaction and increased intentions to quit. 

Similarly, in Schweiger and DeNisi's (1991) study, employees at 

two plants involved in a merger exhibited decreased levels of 

job satisfaction and organizational commitment and increased 

intentions to quit. Irritation at work (the tendency to become 

angry, aggravated, or annoyed) is also likely to peak among 

individuals who find a particular change stressful, frustrating, 

or distasteful (Fossum, 1989; Spector, 1997).

Individuals who perceive that a workplace change will affect 

them more directly (e.g., cause more disruption to their jobs) 

generally experience greater stress (Ashford, 1988). Since job 

satisfaction is associated with the affective response to the 

immediate work environment (Norris and Niebuhr, 1984), 

generally, employees are more satisfied with their jobs and 

committed to their organizations if they are content with the 

nature of the work itself, are satisfied with their supervisor 


Job Satisfaction

41

and coworkers, and are somewhat certain about what the future 

holds for them in the organization (Coch & French, 1948).

Consequently, less openness to the changes that occur within 

a reorganizing workplace was found to be related to lower levels 

of job satisfaction, higher levels of work-related irritation, 

and increased intentions to quit (Wanberg & Banas, 2000). In 

addition to that, studies show that perceived control was 

related to higher levels of change acceptance (Miller et al., 

1994; Taylor & Brown, 1988; Wanberg & Banas, 2000;). 

Specifically, internal locus of control, a concept closely 

related to perceived control, was found to be associated with 

increased openness to change (Lau & Woodman, 1995) and increased 

job satisfaction after organizational change (Nelson, Cooper, & 

Jackson, 1995).

It would seem, then, that individuals who are satisfied with 

life overall have a positive view of themselves and would 

believe that they have controlled, will control, and are able to 

control events that affect them (Schmitt, White, Coyle, & 

Rauschenberger, 1979). Similarly, research shows that, within 

the framework of stress and coping, the individual perception of 

job satisfaction may depend on how the situation is appraised 

and sometimes on emotion-focused coping efforts (Starrin & 

Larsson, 1987). Studies in cognitive adaptation theory 


Job Satisfaction

42

(Aspinwall & Taylor, 1982; Taylor & Brown, 1988) suggest that 

there are individually unique variables that may be important to 

an individual’s reactions to change. 

The premise behind the cognitive adaptation theory according 

to Wanberg and Banas (2000) is that individuals with the highest 

levels of well-being during stressful life events are those who 

have high levels of self-esteem (e.g., a high sense of self-

worth), optimism (e.g., a highly positive outlook on life), and 

perceive that they have control (e.g., a view of life and 

situations as being under personal control). Similar studies 

that focus on global measures of control expectancies (i.e., 

internal–external locus of control) have reported that 

individuals with an internal locus of control are more apt to 

apply task-oriented (e.g., problem-focused) strategies over 

emotion-focused strategies than those with an external locus of 

control (Parkes, 1984; Strickland, 1978).

Perceptions of Control

White (1959) in a well known article in the field of 

psychology suggests that one of the prime motives of human 

beings is to control their own environment. Heider (1958), who 

is known as the founder of attribution theory, suggests that 

individuals attribute to either (1) to self or (2) to situation 

when confronted with events that shape their current 


Job Satisfaction

43

environment. Kelley (1967) extends Heider's work by introducing 

a theory of how people select their attributional philosophy 

from the two categories. This researcher holds that, in an 

effort to assign cause, people tend to behave like scientists, 

examining the cause and effect between behavior and outcome. An 

important component of this examination is an individual’s 

perception of control.

Research has shown the importance of not only perceptions of 

control in the immediate work environment but also of a person's 

more general beliefs about control (Spector et al., 2002). Locus

of control, perhaps one of the most studied control related 

variables, reflects a person's belief in personal control in 

life (internality), rather than in control by outside forces or 

individuals (externality). It was noted that internal control 

beliefs are an important component of emotional adjustment and 

the ability to handle stress in general life (Kobasa, Maddi, & 

Kahn, 1982) and at work (Spector, 1982). Locus of control in the 

workplace in particular (that is, belief that one has control at 

work) has likewise also been linked to employee well-being 

(e.g., Spector, 1988; Spector & O'Connell, 1994).

Locus of Control

In psychology, locus of control is considered an important 

aspect of personality, and internal versus external control of 


Job Satisfaction

44

reinforcement is currently one of the most studied variables in 

psychology and the other social sciences (Rotter, 1990). The 

theoretical basis for this aspect of personality is Rotter’s 

(1966) social learning theory. The main idea here is that 

personality represents an interaction of the individual with his 

or her environment. One cannot speak of a personality, internal 

to the individual (that is, independent of the environment), and 

neither can one focus on behavior as being an automatic response 

to an objective set of environmental stimuli (Rotter, 1993). 

Rather, to understand behavior, Rotter (1993) held that one must 

take both the individual (i.e., his or her life history of 

learning and experiences) and the environment (i.e., those 

stimuli that the person is aware of and responding to) into 

account. Rotter (1993) also described personality as a 

relatively stable set of potentials for responding to situations 

in a particular way. 

Theoretical Framework

Although different terms in literature are used - locus, 

center, control of causality, and control place, among others -

the essence of the definition of locus of control remains 

intact. Rotter (1954) observed people in therapy and notices the 

following: (1) different people, given identical conditions for 

learning, learn different things; (2) some people respond 


Job Satisfaction

45

predictably to reinforcement, others less so, and some respond 

unpredictably; and (3) some people see a direct and strong 

connection between their behavior and the rewards and 

punishments received. Rotter (1966) believes, as do most social 

learning theorists, that if the individual sees a link between 

behaviors and reinforcers, then the reinforcers affect the 

individual’s behavior. To that end, satisfaction or 

dissatisfaction is intimately bound to the learning processes, 

and the effects of stimulus to a great extent depend on whether 

or not the subject recognizes the effects as a result of his or 

her own conduct or as a result of outside causes (Durán 

Branches, 2001). Thus, the theoretical locus of control is 

related to the personal perception (construct) about the origin 

of one’s act. It is a theoretical concept that has been 

developed to explain the beliefs characteristic of individuals. 

This social learning theory of Rotter (1966) has generated a 

great deal of interest and research to date (Lefcourt, 1982, 

1991; Phares, 1976; Spector, 1988, 1994; Stevick, Dixon, & 

Willingham, 1980). Current research continues at a high rate 

(Rotter, 1993). Since the appearance of Rotter’s monograph, more 

than 2,000 studies and several books have been published on 

locus of control (Stevick, et al., 1980). Perhaps even more 

surprising is how successful a test of individual differences in 


Job Satisfaction

46

predicting behavior for many different populations has been, 

rather than just providing after-the-fact explanations that 

strain credulity. 

Rotter’s (1966) ideas about locus of control provide the 

theoretical framework for the development of the internal-

external locus of control that are used in this study. According 

to Rotter (1966), when an individual perceives that an event or 

behavior is contingent upon his or her own behavior or 

characteristics, this belief is termed “internal locus of 

control.” If, on the other hand, the individual interprets a 

reinforcement as not entirely contingent on his or her own 

actions but as being in some way attributable to chance, fate, 

luck, or under the control of others, this belief is called 

“external locus of control” (Rotter, 1966).

The individual who views events as being the result of his 

or her own actions or within his or her control, is said to have 

“a belief in internal control,” while the individual who views 

events as being independent of his or her own actions but more 

dependent on fate, luck, or powerful others is said to have “a 

belief in external control” (Szilagyi, Sims, & Keller, 1976). 

Research efforts investigating the internal-external locus of 

control construct, particularly in relationship to work related 

variables, have increased significantly (Frese, 1974).


Job Satisfaction

47

Rotter (1966) suggests that both males and females develop 

generalized expectations concerning whether or not success in a 

given situation will be contingent on their own personal 

behavior or controlled by external forces. The individual who 

has a strong belief that he or she can control his or her 

destiny is likely to be more alert to and to take advantage of 

those aspects of the work environment (Reed, Kratchman, & 

Strawser, 1994). Watson and Baumal (1967) hypothesize that an 

individual’s belief in internal versus external locus of control 

may help to explain differences in individual task performance 

in incongruent or stressful situations.

Houston (1972), who investigated Watson and Baumal’s (1967) 

hypothesis in a laboratory setting with student subjects, 

reveals that in incongruent stressful situation, internal-

control subjects perform at a higher level than external-control 

subjects. The "internals" see rewards as contingent on their own 

actions, while the "externals" believe that unpredictable 

complex forces outside of their own actions determine the 

outcome of events (Houston, 1972). Thus, internally and 

externally directed people can encounter identical situations 

yet perceive that their actions will have quite different 

impacts on their lives. Therefore, in a work environment that is 

going through change, internality-externality represents a 


Job Satisfaction

48

generalized tendency where internals may be expected to 

attribute job success to internal causes, and externals to 

external causes (Norris & Niebuhr, 1984).

Internal Locus of Control

Rotter (1996) contends that individuals who perceive the 

outcome of life to be contingent on their own actions or 

behaviors (internals) are better adjusted emotionally than those 

who are dependent on external factors (externals). Taylor (1982) 

notes that “individuals perceiving an internal locus of control 

tend to view themselves as having more control over and personal 

responsibility for the direction of their lives than do 

externals, who are likely to feel themselves powerless to 

control events” (p. 319). Hjelle (1991) in his examination of 

literature on locus of control also concludes that internally 

controlled people are socially active and involved in their 

environment, while externally controlled people are not.

In research efforts involving work related variables, Evans 

(1974), whose study involved managers enrolled in an M.B.A. 

program, finds that not only did internals report higher 

motivation than externals but that internals perceive and 

respond to environmental contingencies more consistently than 

externals. Studies by Norris and Niebuhr (1984) also tend to 

support the hypothesis that persons who attribute outcomes to 


Job Satisfaction

49

internal causes experience heightened affective reactions 

(Weiner, 1972). As Spector (1982) suggests, if rewards follow 

performance, internals are likely to be more satisfied.

Similarly, Organ and Greene (1974) find that internals not 

only report less role ambiguity than externals, but they also 

report higher levels of job satisfaction. The study utilized 

Rotter’s (1966) Internal-External Scale, which has had extensive 

experimental validation (Lefcourt, 1966), and the Job 

Descriptive Index (JDI) (Smith et al., 1969). The JDI, which has 

been shown to have acceptable validity and reliability (Smith et 

al., 1969; Smith, Smith, & Rollo, 1974), measures five 

dimensions of job satisfaction: satisfaction with the work 

itself, satisfaction with pay, satisfaction with supervision, 

satisfaction with promotion, and satisfaction with coworkers.

Researchers have suggested that work involvement is related 

not only to intrinsic needs but also to the correlates of 

intrinsic needs, that is, internal locus of control and 

positivity of affect (Markku, 1996). Positivity of affect (a 

high level of positive affect and a low level of negative 

affect) is also considered to be a central indicator of mental 

well-being (Warr, 1987). As research has suggested, by assigning 

internal causes to job performance, the individual takes 


personal credit for job success and personal responsibility for 

Job Satisfaction

50

future job performance (Norris & Niebuhr, 1984).

External Locus of Control

While an individual with an internal locus of control 

believes that outcomes are related to his or her behavior or 

personal investment, an individual with an external locus of 

control believes that outcomes are not related to his or her 

behavior but to external forces beyond his or her control 

(Szymanski et al., 1996). Levenson (1972) extends the locus of 

control literature by proposing a distinction between two 

subtypes of external of control: control by chance and control 

by powerful others. Levenson’s (1973) reason for this 

distinction “stemmed from the reasoning that others who believe 

that the world is unordered (chance) would behave and think 

differently than people who believe that the world is ordered 

but that powerful others are in control” (p. 398).

Individuals with an external locus of control then may 

perceive life events to be controlled by luck, chance, fate, or 

powerful others (Szymanski et al., 1996). Individuals with an 

external locus of control are also less likely to change their 

behavior following reinforcement than individuals with an 

internal locus of control (Marks, 1998). That is why externals 

struggle more with role ambiguity and report lower levels of job 


Job Satisfaction

51

satisfaction when dealing with changes within their 

organizations (Organ and Greene, 1974).

According to Kahn and Byosiere (1992), the concept of locus 

of control is important to include in job stress research because 

it predicts that those with an external locus of control are more 

likely to refrain from action since they believe that changing 

the situation is beyond their power, while those with an 

internal locus of control are more likely to cope actively with 

job stress. Consequently, those with an external locus of 

control are expected to show lower levels of health, well-being, 

and job satisfaction when they are confronted with job stress 

than those with an internal locus of control (Szymanski et al., 

1996).

Job Satisfaction and Locus of Control

According to Smith et al. (1969), satisfaction should not be 

conceptualized in an absolute sense; instead, its level should 

be ascertained relative to the characteristics that are present 

in the individual’s work and personal situation. Leading 

theories have linked perceptions of control in various forms to 

employee well-being (broadly conceptualized to include positive 

attitudes and absence of physical and psychological symptoms), 

as well as to other variables (Spector et al., 2002). For 

instance, in their job characteristics model, Hackman and Oldham 


Job Satisfaction

52

(1976) consider autonomy to be a major cause of job satisfaction 

and positive adjustment to work. Karasek's (1979) demands-

control stress model hypothesizes that control at work buffers 

the influence of job stressors on well-being. Spector's (1986) 

meta-analysis shows that perceived autonomy and participation at 

work are related to job satisfaction and other measures of well-

being. Similarly, in their review of the workplace control 

literature, Ganster and Fusilier (1989) conclude that control is 

a vital element of well-being. 

The term “work or job satisfaction” refers to one’s degree 

of gratification resulting from work (Szymanski & Hershenson, 

1998). In a national probability sample of male workers, 

Valencha (1972) finds that individuals with an internal locus of 

control tend to be better informed about the knowledge required, 

the nature, and the demands of their work, and they believe to a 

greater extent than individuals with external locus of control 

that they control the benefits, achievements, and 

accomplishments related to their job behavior during periods of 

organizational change. Similarly, Organ and Greene (1974) found 

that internals reported greater satisfaction with work than 

externals in a study involving scientists in a research and 

development setting. Szilagyi et al. (1976) find in a separate 


Job Satisfaction

53

analysis that internals also perceived higher performance-to-

reward expectancies than externals.

Numerous researchers have concluded that people feel and 

perform better when their perception of control is high. 

According to Bandura (1986), the effects can be seen in enhanced 

confidence and decreased stress associated with job tasks. Other 

positive outcomes include a greater sense of intrinsic 

satisfaction, physical and mental health, longevity, 

concentration, task persistence, and job performance (Bandura, 

1986; Nonis, Hudson, Logan, & Ford, 1998). The basic 

distinguishing characteristics between internals and externals 

belief in personal control should have direct and powerful 

effects on organizations in several ways (Judge et al., 1998; 

Spector, 1982). Because internals that they can control the work 

setting through their behavior, they should attempt to exert 

more control than would externals, provided that control is 

perceived to lead to desired outcomes and rewards (Campbell, 

1988). 

Siu and Cooper (1998) examine the effects of locus of 

control on job satisfaction. Their results suggest that locus of 

control has a strong direct effect on job satisfaction. 

Externals tend to be dissatisfied with the job itself and think 

of quitting the job quite often, while the internals tend to be 


Job Satisfaction

54

more satisfied with the job itself and are less inclined to 

think about quitting. (Siu & Cooper, 1998).

Other research also found variables related to control to 

affect occupational outcomes and job satisfaction. Controls 

appeared to be essential in coping with stress and other factors 

affecting motivation (Campbell, 1988). The belief in one’s 

ability to influence or control one’s environment constitutes a 

significant factor that influences intrapersonal variables such 

as depression (Glass, McKnight, & Valdimarsdottir, 1993), 

learned helplessness (Seligman, 1975), and stress (Bowman & 

Stern, 1995). A sense of control also influences functional 

behavioral variables in the workplace such as performance and 

productivity (Bazerman, 1982) and creativity (Kanter, 1983).

Dailey (1978) studies the relationship between locus of 

control, perceived group cohesiveness, and satisfaction with 

coworkers. His sample consisted of 281 scientists and engineers. 

He finds that those subjects with an internal locus of control 

are less satisfied with coworkers, while the externals 

demonstrated a stronger relationship between perceived 

cohesiveness and satisfaction with coworkers than internals 

(Dailey, 1978).


Job Satisfaction

55

Work Locus of Control as a Moderator

Locus of control refers to the perception that one can 

personally affect particular outcomes. Spector (1988) holds that 

when individuals are at work, they also have a tendency towards 

either an internal work locus of control or an external work 

locus of orientation. To that end, those with an internal work 

locus of control (internals) believe that work outcomes are 

based on their own effort and ability, while those with an 

external work locus of control (externals) believe that work 

outcomes depend on external factors, such as luck, or knowing 

the right people (Spector, 1988). 

Since the Work locus of control Scale was developed 

explicitly to assess locus of control in employment situations, 

researchers argue that it is preferable to general locus of 

control scales when investigating behavior in organizations 

(Blau, 1993; Orpen, 1992; Spector, 1988). For this reason, the 

Work Locus of Control Scale is used in this study.


CHAPTER 3.  METHODOLOGY

The purpose of this study is to examine the relationship 

between work locus of control and job satisfaction among 

employees in financial institutions such as banks and credit 

unions in Cheyenne, Wyoming. It will also examine the 

relationship between work locus of control and job satisfaction 

when mediated by two factors: gender and education level. This 

chapter describes the research design, subjects of the study, 

variables, hypotheses, instrumentation, and data collection.

Research Design

This is a study of correlations. Data were collected using a 

survey instrument. The survey method was chosen because survey 

research is one of the best methods for collecting large 

quantities of high quality data in a timely manner (Creswell, 

2003). Therefore, a three-part survey consisting of two 

established inventories and a demographic section was used to 

collect data. Demographic data like gender and levels of 

education were also collected because among the various factors 

that could mediate the association between work locus of control 

and job satisfaction (Spector, 1992), age, gender, race, and 

level of education may contribute to the strength of association 

(Findley & Cooper, 1983; Riipinen, 1994). The demographic 


Job Satisfaction

57

section was designed to collect data relating to gender and 

education level for further analysis.

Two established inventories were used to collect data 

pertaining to work locus of control and job satisfaction of 

employees in various financial institutions in the town of 

Cheyenne, Wyoming. The data were then subjected to a correlation 

analysis using Pearson Correlation to determine the correlation 

coefficient of work locus of control and job satisfaction. 

Multiple regression analysis procedures were also used to 

analyze the data collected in the study because according to 

Kerlinger and Pedhazur (1973), multiple regression analysis is 

appropriate when studying the collective and separate 

contributions of two or more independent variables (p. 3).

Descriptive and inferential statistics were also employed to

analyze the demographic data from the responses of the 

participants in this study. The results from the answer 

inventories of the participants were used to help create an 

understanding of certain attitudes, characteristics, and 

behaviors of the larger population from which the sample was 

drawn (Frey, Botan, Friedman, & Kreps, 1991).

Characteristics and Size of Sample

This is an exploratory study designed to examine 

individuals who work for financial institutions in the city of 


Job Satisfaction

58

Cheyenne, Wyoming. The study is interested in examining this 

particular group of individuals because of the unique aspects of 

this geographic location. Even though Cheyenne is the capital of 

Wyoming, it has a small population of 53,011 and its population 

growth has consistently been very low (U.S. Department of Labor, 

2000). As compared to the national average, the U.S. Department 

of Labor (2000) finds that employers in Cheyenne are able to pay 

individuals who work in financial institutions below average 

wages. This has limited the number of new entrants into this 

particular financial industry in the city of Cheyenne.

Consequently the pool of job candidates that employers can 

recruit from is small and those who have been in the pool for a 

while are assumed to share similar characteristic. Understanding 

how this group of individuals perceives job satisfaction and 

what general orientation they have in relation to work locus of 

control (internal and external) was the basis for this 

exploratory study. 

Cheyenne currently houses a total of 22 financial 

institutions: 12 banks and 10 credit unions. A query of the 12 

banks and 10 credit unions found that these financial 

institutions have number of employees ranging from 2 employees 

to 80 employees, depending on the size of the operations. A 

majority of the financial institutions with 15 or more employees 


Job Satisfaction

59

are subsidiaries of larger banking operations, either with 

branches all over the country or within the state of Wyoming. 

The smaller financial institutions (those with less than 15 

employees) are typically owned and operated locally. 

 Employees in the smaller financial institutions in 

Cheyenne, Wyoming are highly differentiated from those financial 

institutions with larger operations and revenue base. Unlike the 

smaller financial institutions, those with larger operations and 

revenue base have to be competitive in the range of financial 

products they offer; and changes in the financial markets and 

trends in the world economy have more of a direct impact on 

them. Therefore, to minimize variances that might occur in 

factors affecting perceptions of control and job satisfaction 

between the smaller and larger financial institutions in this 

bounded exploratory study, those with less than 15 employees 

were not included in the sample. 

With regards to sampling limitations, recent reorganizations 

within some of these financial institutions caused a large 

number of them to decline participation in this study. Due to 

this limitation, this study had to rely on a convenient sample 

since obtaining a probability sample was not feasible. Because 

the general characteristics of employees in larger financial 

institutions are a good fit for the purposes of this study, four 


Job Satisfaction

60

banks and three credit unions with the largest group of 

employees were invited to participate in this study. Employees 

in this group of financial institutions have job titles ranging 

from production levels (i.e., loan processors and bank tellers) 

and administrative levels to management levels and executive 

levels.

To avoid failure of a study from insufficient data, Yaffee 

(1997) finds that power analysis is necessary to make sure that 

the sample size is large enough that statistical tests can 

actually detect the differences that they purport to find. 

Similarly, Bland and Altman (1994) also find that sample size 

calculations are important to ensure results with the required 

precision or confidence. Accordingly, if the sample size is too 

low, the standard statistical tests will not have the 

statistical power to detect differences that really exist 

(Yaffee, 1997). Stelzl (2000) supports that notion by stating 

that smaller sample sizes should not be considered because of 

the lack in statistical power that would result.

Yamane’s (1967) formula listed below was used to calculate 

the appropriate sample size for this study (p. 886): 

n =  
N     
      1 + N (e)2


Job Satisfaction

61

Table 3 

Sample size for ±5%, ±7%, ±10% precisions levels where 
confidence is 95%

Size of Population

Sample size (n) for Precision (e) of:

400

±5%

201

±7%

135

±10%

81

Table 3 shows an example of how the formula can be used to 

determine the precision level of a study, given a specific 

confidence level. The example is Table 3 shows that for a 

population of 400 (N = 400), a study would need a sample size of 

201 (n = 201) to achieve a precision level of ±5%, when the 

confidence level is set at 95%. To obtain a precision level of 

±7% and ±10%, a study would need a sample size of n = 135 and n 

= 81 respectively, if the same confidence level of 95% is set.

For this study, sample size calculations were also done 

using the web-based templates provided by various universities 

and statistical software providers. Sample size calculations 

using the various web-based templates mentioned above also 

yielded similar numbers as those listed in Table 3. The number 


of returned surveys would ultimately determine the final level 

Job Satisfaction

62

of precision this study would end up being.

Variables

Job satisfaction was the dependent variable of this study, 

while work locus of control was the independent variable. Job 

satisfaction was operationalized by the Job in General Scale of 

the Job Descriptive Index (JDI) (1997), while work locus of 

control is operationalized by the Work Locus of Control Scale 

(Spector, 1988). Mediating variables such as gender and 

education level identified the characteristics of the 

respondents. The number of years respondents have been at their 

current job will also be collected since this study was designed 

to exclude those respondents that have less than 1 year at their 

current job, based on the assumption that they cannot fully 

determine their levels of job satisfaction within that limited 

time.

Hypotheses

The dependent variable for the current study was job 

satisfaction. The relationship between job satisfaction and work 

locus of control was examined using independent sample t-tests. 

To determine if a significant relationship exists between job 

satisfaction and work locus of control, the following hypotheses 

were created:  


H1:

There is a significant relationship between work locus 

Job Satisfaction

63

of control and job satisfaction.

H0:

There is no significant relationship between work 

locus of control and job satisfaction. 

Pearson Correlation Coefficients were used to determine the 

correlation between the overall job satisfaction, the work locus 

of control, and the mediating variables of gender and level of 

education. To determine whether the mediating variables of 

gender and level of education of the participants affect overall 

job satisfaction and perceptions of control, the following 

hypotheses were also created:

H2:

No significant difference in the Pearson Correlation 

Coefficient (for work locus of control and job satisfaction 

scores) exists among employees who work in the financial 

institutions in Cheyenne for the mediating variable of gender.

H3: 

No significant difference in the Pearson Correlation 

Coefficient (for locus of control and job satisfaction scores) 

exists between education levels among employees who work in the 

financial institutions in Cheyenne.

Properly designed experiments ensure that power will be 

reasonably high to detect reasonable departures from the null 

hypothesis (Cohen, 1992). While significance deals with Type I 

errors, power deals with Type II errors, where a researcher 


Job Satisfaction

64

thinks that there is no relationship when in fact one exists 

(Henkel, 1976). Therefore, power calculations were performed 

using the web-based templates provided by various universities 

and statistical software providers. 

Power calculations performed for this study revealed that a 

power of 90% or more, depending on the sample size, should be 

applied in order for the study to not miss a real effect. A 

significance level of 10% (p = .10) was used for this study. 

Instrumentation

Established instruments were used to measure the two 

independent variables. Spector’s (1988) Work Locus of Control 

Scale and the Job in General Scale of the Job Descriptive Index 

(JDI) (1997), instruments that have previously been tested and 

evaluated, were used to collect data pertaining to the variables 

of work locus of control and job satisfaction, respectively. 

These two instruments plus a demographic section were combined 

to create a three-part survey. 

The demographic section of the survey gathers information 

pertinent to the mediating variables of gender, and education 

levels of employees and information on tenure with the financial 

institutions. Data on tenure was used solely to determine 

whether or not a survey would be included in the study, since 

new employees with less than 1 year of experience with the new 


Job Satisfaction

65

employer were assumed not be able to determine their levels of 

job satisfaction within that limited period of time.

Work Locus of Control Measure

Most locus of control research tend to use general measures 

such as Rotter’s 29-item I-E Scale (1966) or Levenson’s (1981) 

24-item LOC measures, which both assess how a person generally 

feels across all domains of life. For the work domain, this 

study utilized Spector’s (1988) Work Locus of Control Scale, 

which was developed to assess how people feel concerning control 

reinforcements in the workplace.

The Work Locus of Control Scale was used because it has been 

shown to correlate with job satisfaction (Moyle, 1995), often at 

a higher level than does general locus of control scales 

(Spector, 1988). This higher level of correlation was also 

supported by a longitudinal study done by Spector and O’Connell 

(1994), that found that work locus of control assessed in 

college related workplace significantly correlated with job 

satisfaction of employees at work. The instrument consists of 16 

Likert scale items with response categories ranging from 0 

(disagree very much) to 6 (agree very much). High scores on the 

scale represent externality, so the scores on the internally 

worded items were reversed before summing. This is because a 

score of 6 representing strongest possible agreement on an 


Job Satisfaction

66

externally worded item is equivalent to a score of 1 

representing strongest possible disagreement on an internally 

worded item (Spector, 1988).

The Work Locus of Control Scale consists of eight internally 

and eight externally worded items. An example of an internally 

worded item is "People who perform their jobs well generally get 

rewarded for it." An example of an externally worded item is 

"Getting the job you want is mostly a matter of luck." Item 

responses were summed to obtain an overall work locus of control 

score. Higher total scores represent greater externality while 

lower total scores represent greater internality (Spector, 

1988).

With respect to reliability, item analysis and factor 

analysis previously performed on the Work Locus of Control Scale 

have indicated high internal consistency. The alpha reliability 

coefficient for the Work Locus of Control was .85 (Lonergan & 

Maher, 2001). This was comparable to prior research indicating 

an average alpha of .82 across six samples (Spector, 1988). The 

Work Locus of Control Scale also has adequate convergent and 

divergent validity (Spector, 1988). Validity has also been 

demonstrated with the Work Locus of Control Scale and 

organizational variables, as well as other locus of control 

measures (Hoff-Macan, Trusty, & Trimble, 1996; Spector, 1988).


Job Satisfaction Measure

Job Satisfaction

67

In general, two useful and important strategies have been 

used to measure job satisfaction (Balzer et al., 2000). The 

first strategy that has been followed by a number of researchers 

was to obtain overall satisfaction scores, either through a 

single-item scales (e.g., Kunin, 1955; Quinn & Shepard, 1974; 

Scarpello & Campbell, 1983), or multiple-item scales (e.g., 

Brayfield & Rothe, 1951; Ironson, Smith, Brannick, Gibson, & 

Paul, 1989). The global or general measures of job satisfaction 

provide an overall indication of satisfaction toward the job by 

including and combining all aspects of the job (Balzer et al., 

2000). 

Many scales have been developed to measure job satisfaction 

(Brayfield & Rothe, 1951; Hackman & Oldham, 1980; Hoppock, 1935; 

Smith et al., 1969; Spector, 1994). Most are considered facts 

scales, in that they focus on specific major facets believed to 

strongly correlate with job satisfaction. But job satisfaction 

has also been conceptualized more generally as overall 

satisfaction measured by either a few general questions (Hackman 

& Oldham, 1980) or by a linear aggregation of individual facets 

(Levin & Stokes, 1989). 

Overall satisfaction is distinct from facet satisfactions in 

several ways (Balzer et al., 2000). Facet scales usually omit 


Job Satisfaction

68

some areas that may be important to an individual when 

evaluating his or her overall satisfaction (Scarpello & 

Campbell, 1983). Moreover, facet scales often include only 

descriptive items or have a mix of both descriptive and 

evaluative items; because it is thought that evaluative items 

better reflect the general affective components of the 

individual’s overall satisfaction, facet measures may not 

adequately reflect these aspects of satisfaction and, hence, may 

be less valid as predictors of behavior (Balzer et al., 2000). 

For these reasons, the Job in General (JIG) scale within the Job 

Descriptive Index (JDI) was chosen for this study.

After 40 years of research and application, the JDI remains 

one of the most widely used measures of job satisfaction 

(DeMeuse, 1985; Spector, 1997; Zedeck, 1987). The JDI measures 

five facets of employee satisfaction - satisfaction with the 

work itself, satisfaction with pay, satisfaction with 

opportunities for promotion, satisfaction with supervision, and 

satisfaction with coworkers - while the JIG scale measures 

overall, global satisfaction with the job (Balzer et al., 2000). 

Contrary to what people popularly believe, Ironson et al. (1989) 

hold that overall job satisfaction is not the sum of individual 

facets and therefore is appropriate to assess with a general 

scale like JIG. 


Job Satisfaction

69

This JIG scale contains 18 items, each with a short word or 

phrase about the job in general, and uses three response 

choices. For each item, respondents are asked if they “agree,” 

“are not sure,” or “disagree.” The positively worded items are 

assigned scores of 3, 1, and 0, and the negatively worded items 

are assigned scores of 0, 1, and 3. The total is the sum of the 

responses. The highest scores possible for the scale are 54, 

where the higher the score, the greater is the respondent’s 

satisfaction with the job in general. 

Convergent validity was demonstrated by correlation with 

other global measures of satisfaction (e.g., the Brayfield and 

Rothe [1951] measure), and construct validity was clearly 

evident in the pattern of correlations with 18 other tests for a 

sample of 670 employees  (Balzer et al., 2000). In addition to 

that, the coefficient alpha reliable estimates exceeded .90 

(Total N = 3566) in each of the samples from the Bowling Green 

data pool, with N > 100 (Balzer et al., 2000).

Demographic factors

Participants also completed the demographic section of the 

survey. This section included the following items: gender, 

highest educational level, and duration with their current 

employer. These data were collected because studies have shown 

that age, gender, race, and education level have important 


Job Satisfaction

70

effects on job satisfaction (Wharton, Rotolo, & Bird, 2000). For 

example, Varca, Shaffer, and McCauley (1983), who examined job 

satisfaction among alumni 5 years after they had graduated from 

college, found that men and women differ in their perceptions of 

job satisfaction, and a study by Sousa-Poza and Sousa-Poza 

(2000) suggested that worker’s level of education could affect 

perceptions of job satisfaction. For this study, mediating 

variables of gender and education were examined.


CHAPTER 4.  DATA COLLECTION, ANALYSIS, AND FINDINGS

Data Collection

This study utilized on a convenient sample since obtaining a 

probability sample was not feasible. The general characteristics 

of employees in larger financial institutions were a good fit 

for the purposes of this study and seven financial institutions 

with the largest group of employees were invited to participate. 

One declined participation while the other six initially 

expressed interests. However, two of them declined one week 

prior to data collection. Three banks and one credit union out 

of the seven financial institutions initially invited to 

participate in this study gave final approval for data 

collection. Permission letters from these four financial 

institutions were obtained prior to implementation of the study.

A total of 193 surveys were given to the employees by a 

representative in each of the four financial institutions that 

agreed to participate in this study. The participants were 

instructed to mail completed surveys back to the researcher’s 

home address in the stamped self-addressed envelopes provided. 

This is also a means to enhance confidentiality. 

Aside from the instruction letter attached to the survey 

instrument which outlined all the requirements stated in the 

previous paragraph and a dateline given by the representative 


Job Satisfaction

72

from the financial institutions, no other verbal instructions 

were given to the participants. Even though participation was on 

a voluntary basis, a reminder was sent via the financial 

institution representatives to the participants a week after the 

surveys were handed out.

After the two-week dateline given to participants to return 

their completed survey, the surveys were counted. The initial 

count was 149. An extra week was given for the data collection 

process to account for participants who may have missed the 

dateline for a day or so. The additional week yielded another 

eight returned surveys. Out of the 193 surveys handed out, 157 

were returned, a return rate of 81.3%. 

Scoring for the Work Locus of Control Scale (Spector, 1988) 

and Job In General Scale (Balzer et al., 2000) were performed on 

each of the 157 returned survey. Thereafter, demographic 

information and the scores from the above two scales were 

entered and stored in an Excel File. For this study, it is 

assumed that individuals whose tenure at their current jobs is 

less than 1 year are unable to determine their level of job 

satisfaction within that limited period of time and therefore 

were not included in the data set. For that reason, nine of 

surveys were not used. In addition to that, three of the 

returned surveys had too many missing values were not included 


in the study. The final count was 144 usable samples, a rate of 

74.61% when compared to the number of surveys given out.

Job Satisfaction

73

Data Analysis

This is an exploratory study bounded by geographic location 

and specific objectives. When trying to make a decision about 

significance levels, a researcher attempts to decide criteria 

for accepting or rejecting a hypothesis (Cooper & Schindler, 

2003). A critical part of that decision is evaluating whether 

losing a potential finding because the criteria were too 

stringent is worse than over interpreting the data because they 

were too liberal (T. Granoff, personal communication, April 22, 

2004). Because this is an exploratory study bounded by 

geographic location and specific objectives, it would be worse 

to miss potential findings than to over interpret the data. The 

results therefore were reported to a .10 level in order to avoid 

missing potential findings.

All analyses for this study were performed using the SPSS 

(Norusis, 2002) software. Descriptive and inferential statistics 

were used to analyze the data from the survey. Multiple levels 

of analysis were undertaken in order to provide a comprehensive 

set of results examining all related issues relevant to the 

study. The first-level analysis engaged descriptive statistics 

to analyze the mean scores and standard deviations on all the 


Job Satisfaction

74

variables. This was followed by the use of inferential 

statistics to look for correlations between job satisfaction and 

locus of control, intercorrelations of variables, and 

significant differences in the responses while mediating for 

gender and education. The analysis included an examination of 

the Pearson Product-Moment Correlation between work locus of 

control and job in general satisfaction. 

In the above analysis, test of interaction effect using 

multivariate analysis of variance on the independent variables 

of gender, education, years in current job, and Work Locus of 

Control; and the dependent variable of job satisfaction were 

also performed. Various posthoc analyses were also performed to 

see if any statistically significant findings were present in 

this bounded exploratory study. 

The final level of analysis focus on the use of a series of 

stepwise multiple regressions with dummy variables to see if 

there were interaction between the variables and if they were 

significant predictors of job satisfaction. Here, hierarchical 

multiple regressions were used to mediate the effects of the 

demographics. First, the analysis looked at the relationship of 

job satisfaction to demographics. Then, after taking into 

account gender and education levels, the analysis looked at 

whether locus of control makes a difference. 


Job Satisfaction

75

In the above analyses, job satisfaction measure was 

separately regressed onto each demographic factor and Work Locus 

of Control measure in a two-step process. Step 1 looked at the 

interaction of mediating factors such as gender, education, and 

years in current job to see if they were significant predictors 

of job satisfaction. Step 2 also looked at the interaction of 

the various demographic factors listed previously, but the Work 

Locus of Control measure was added to see if it would be a 

significant predictor of job satisfaction.

Findings

The purpose of this study was to examine the relationship 

between work locus of control and job satisfaction among 

employees in financial institutions such as banks and credit 

unions in Cheyenne, Wyoming. It also examines the relationship 

between work locus of control and job satisfaction by examining 

the impact of two mediating factors: gender and education level. 

A total of 144 respondents participated in this study.

Table 4 displays the distribution of respondents for each 

selected variables. For this particular sample, there were 105 

female respondents (72.92%) and 39 male respondents (27.08%). 

For education level distribution, 60 of the respondents (41.67%) 

had a high school degree or less, 73 (50.69%) had an 


Job Satisfaction

76

Table 4

Distribution of Respondents for Selected Variables (N = 144)

____________________________________

____________________________  

n

    %

Gender

     Male

     Female

Education

     High School or Less

     Associates/Undergraduate

     Graduate Studies or More

Years with Employer

     1-3 years

     3-5 years

     5-10 years

     More than 10 years

39

105

60

73

11

52

28

36

28

27.08

72.92

41.67

50.69

7.64

36.11

19.44

25.00

19.44

associates/undergraduate degree, while 11 (7.64%) had at least a 

graduate degree.

While years of employment with current employer for the 

respondents was not a variable being studied, it was collected 


Job Satisfaction

77

to make sure that those with less than one year of employment 

were not included in the analysis. The distribution for this 

category was also provided in Table 4. About a third of the 

respondents (36.11%) had been with their current employer one to 

three years, and 44.44% had been with their financial 

institutions for five or more years.  For this sample, work 

locus of control had a mean of 37.30 (SD = 9.66), and job in 

general satisfaction had a mean of 45.55 (SD = 8.65).

Table 5 shows the intercorrelations for primary variables 

analyzed. In Table 5 there are 5 rows: (1) Work Locus Of Control 

(WLCS), (2) Job Satisfaction, (3) Gender, (4) Years in the Job, 

and (5) Education Level. While there are no descriptions in the 

columns, the numbers in each column correspond with the 

description in the row with the same number. Where row 1 meets 

column 1, the score is 1.00, indicating that the variable is 

correlated with itself. When a relationship is significant, 

asterisks are placed next to the score to flag correlations 

significant at noted significance levels (e.g., * for p = .10, 

** for p = .05).

Hypothesis One 

Hypothesis One posited that there is no significant 

relationship between Work Locus of Control and job satisfaction. 

The Pearson Product-Moment Correlation between work locus of


Job Satisfaction

78

Table 5

Intercorrelations for Primary Study Variables (N = 144)

________________________________________________________________

______________________________________________________________________

1

2

3        4        5

1. WLCS

1.00

2. Job Satisfaction

-.43*****

1.00

3. Gender a

4. Years in the Job

-.06

-.04

-.16**

1.00

.11

-.15*

1.00

5. Education Level
______________________________________________________________________

.07     1.00

-.16** 

-.16**

.11

*p =.10  **p = .05  ***p = .01  ****p = .005  *****p = .001

a Point-biserial correlations: “1” = “Male” “2” = “Female”

Note. Lower Locus of Control scores reflect a more internal locus of 

control orientation.

control and job in general satisfaction in Table 5 shows that 

the correlation of Work Locus of Control (M = 37.30, SD = 9.66, 

N = 144) and job satisfaction (M = 45.55, SD = 8.65) of the 

respondents was highly significant, r (142) = -.43, p = .001. 

For the work locus of control scale, lower scores represent 

internality and high scores represent greater externality 

(Spector, 1988); while the higher the score in the JIG, the 


Job Satisfaction

79

greater is the respondent’s job satisfaction (Balzer et al., 

2000). A significant relationship here in the negative direction 

indicates that an internal locus of control corresponds to 

higher amounts of job satisfaction, while an external locus of 

control corresponds with lower amounts of job satisfaction. 

Based on the results here, the Null Hypothesis was rejected.

Further inspection of Table 5 reveals other statistically 

significant correlations. Since higher scores within the work 

locus of control scale represent an external locus of control 

while lower scores represent an internal locus of control 

(Spector, 1988), the negative correlation between education 

level and work locus of control r (142) = -.16, p = .049, 

indicates that a more internal locus of control was related to 

higher levels of education. 

To examine the relationship between gender and job 

satisfaction, a point-biserial correlation was done since one of 

the variables is dichotomous (“1” for “Male” and “2” for 

“Female”). A negative correlation indicates that male 

respondents in this study reported higher amounts of job 

satisfaction, r (142) = -.16, p = .052. Male respondents in this 

study also had more years of education r (142) = -.16, p = .058 

than the female respondents.

Hypothesis Two


Job Satisfaction

80

Hypothesis Two posited that no significant difference in the 

Pearson Correlation Coefficient (for work locus of control and 

job satisfaction scores) exists among employees who work in the 

financial institutions in Cheyenne for the mediating variable of 

gender. Table 6 provides the Pearson Product-Moment Correlations 

between work locus of control and job satisfaction for the male 

subsample (n = 39) and the female subsample (n = 105).  The 

significant relationship between work locus of control and job 

satisfaction was still present for the male subsample (r = -.49) 

and female subsample (r = -.44) providing support for Hypothesis 

Two. 

Hypothesis Three

Hypothesis Three posited that no significant difference in 

the Pearson Correlation Coefficient (for work locus of control 

and job satisfaction scores) exists among employees who work in 

the financial institutions in Cheyenne for the mediating 

variable of education level. Five levels of education were in 

the survey: 1) less than high school, 2) high school/GED, 3) 

associates/undergraduate, 4) graduate, and (5) Post-graduate.


Job Satisfaction

81

Table 6

Correlations Between Job Satisfaction and Work Locus of Control 
Mediating for Gender or Education.
________________________________________________________________

Work Locus

of Control
_________________________________________________________      _______

Job Satisfaction (All Respondents Combined - N = 144) 

-.43*****

Job Satisfaction (Males Only – n = 39) 

Job Satisfaction (Females Only – n = 105) 

Job Satisfaction (High School Only – n = 60) 

Job Satisfaction (Associates/Undergraduate 

Only – n = 73) 

-.49*****

-.44*****

-.51*****

-.37*****

Job Satisfaction (Graduate Degrees Only –n = 11) 
___________________________________________________________

.01

_____

p =.10.  **p = .05.  ***p = .01.  ****p = .005.  *****p = .001.

Note. Lower Locus of Control scores reflect a more internal locus of 

control orientation.

Table 6 provides the Pearson Product-Moment Correlations 

between work locus of control and job satisfaction for the high 

school subsample (n = 60), the associates/undergraduate 

subsample (n = 73), and the graduate subsample (n = 11).  A 

significant relationship between work locus of control and job 

satisfaction was still present for the high school subsample (r


Job Satisfaction

82

= -.51) and the associates/undergraduate subsample (r = -.37) 

but not for the small (n = 11) graduate subsample (r = .01).  

Since the pattern of correlation between work locus of control 

and job satisfaction holds for the high school and 

associates/undergraduate subsamples but not the graduate 

subsample, these findings provided only partial support for 

Hypothesis Three. 

Additional Findings

Table 7 displays the hierarchical regression model, which 

predicts job satisfaction using variables of gender, education, 

years in current job, and work locus of control. In Step 1, the 

relationship of gender, education, and years in current job, to 

job satisfaction was examined. Step 2 was performed to see if 

work locus of control makes a difference to the above 

relationship. Table 7 shows that the three demographic variables 

did not provide a statistically significant prediction of job 

satisfaction (p = .13), accounting for 3.9% of the variance in 

job satisfaction. Inspection of the beta weights in Step 1 for 

gender ((cid:1) = -.14), education ((cid:1) = .08), and years in current job 

((cid:1) = .08), found none of the three demographic predictors to be 

related to job satisfaction.


Job Satisfaction

83

Table 7

Prediction of Job Satisfaction Based on Demographic Factors and
Work Locus of Control (N = 144)
______ ________________________________________________________

Change

______________________________________________________________________

B

SE

(cid:1)

R

R2

Step 1

.039

.039

     Gender a

-2.67

1.65

-.14

     Education

1.01

1.08

.08

     Years in current job 0.600.63

.08

Step 2

     Gender a

-3.42

1.49

-.18**

.221

.182*****

     Education

0.03

0.99

     Years in current job

0.48

0.57

.00

.06

     Work LOC
______________________________________________________________________

-.43*****

-0.39

0.07

Step 1 Full Model: F (3, 140) = 1.90, p = .13. R2 = .039.

Step 2 Full Model: F (4, 139) = 9.87, p = .001. R2 = .221.

*p =.10. **p = .05. ***p = .01. ****p = .005. *****p = .001.

a Dummy Variable: “1” = “Male” “2” = “Female”

Note. Lower Locus of Control scores reflect a more internal locus of 

control orientation.


Job Satisfaction

84

Step 2 in Table 7 shows the results when work locus of 

control was included in the regression analyses. After 

controlling for the mediating variables of gender, education, 

and years in current job, this variable accounted for additional

variance in job satisfaction (R2 = .182), which was significant, 

F (4, 139) = 9.87, p = .001. In Step 2, gender demonstrated 

significant effects on job satisfaction ((cid:1) = -.18, p = .028). 

Male respondents in this case, reported higher level of job 

satisfaction than female respondents.

In summary, the purpose of this study is to examine the 

relationship between work locus of control and job satisfaction 

among employees in financial institutions such as banks and 

credit unions in Cheyenne, Wyoming.  A total of 144 respondents 

participated in this study. Three hypotheses were posited for 

this study. Work locus of control was posited to be related to 

job satisfaction (Hypothesis One) and this relationship was 

thought to still be present after mediating for the effects of 

gender (Hypothesis Two) and education level (Hypothesis Three). 

The analyses show that Hypotheses One and Two received full 

support from the data, while Hypothesis Three received partial 

support. 


CHAPTER 5.  RESULTS, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Discussion of Results

This study focuses on employees in financial institutions in 

the city of Cheyenne, Wyoming, which currently houses a total of 

22 financial institutions: 12 banks and 10 credit unions. 

Financial institutions were chosen for this study because the 

banking crisis and the recession of the early 1990s had far-

reaching consequences for financial institutions world-wide, 

which hastened trends, particularly in the area of employment 

and occupational change (Holden, 1999). For the city of 

Cheyenne, employers are able to pay individuals in this job 

classification lower than average wages. What this means is that 

these employers have a small pool of people to choose from. 

Coupled with small worker pool is the steady decline in 

unemployment rate (U.S. Department of Labor, 2000), suggesting 

that it is critical to understand factors that affect job 

satisfaction in the highly competitive financial institution job 

market in the city of Cheyenne.

The purpose of this study is to examine the relationship 

between work locus of control and job satisfaction among 

employees in financial institutions such as banks and credit 

unions in Cheyenne, Wyoming. For the 144 samples studied, work 


locus of control was found to be significantly correlated to job 

Job Satisfaction

86

satisfaction. 

Work locus of Control and Job Satisfaction

The relationship between work locus of control and job 

satisfaction is a well-researched topic. Various researchers 

found that individuals with an internal work locus of control 

experience more satisfaction with their work (Broedling, 1973; 

Spector, 1988), perceive more autonomy and control (Kimmons and 

Greenhaus, 1976), and enjoy longer job tenure relative to that 

experienced by the externals (Andrisani and Nestel, 1976). 

Additionally, Spector (1986) suggests that “perceived control 

[can] lead to greater satisfaction, commitment, involvement, 

motivation, and performance, and lower physical and emotional 

distress, role stress, and withdrawal” (p. 1015).

The results of this study support the findings in the 

literature. The strongest relationship between variables was 

found between work locus of control and job satisfaction (see 

Table 5). The negative correlation of-.43 indicates a strong 

relationship, which supported the hypothesis that individuals 

with who had lower work locus of control scores (internals) 

tended to have greater job satisfaction (higher JIG scores). 

Understanding that work locus of control could affect job 

satisfaction then may help organizations manage behaviors and 


Job Satisfaction

87

enhance the likelihood of desirable outcomes by helping both 

people and the organization to adapt to the changing work 

environment (Goldsmith, & Veum, 1996). Individuals who have a 

strong belief that they can control their destiny are likely to 

be more alert to and to take advantage of those aspects of the 

work environment (Reed et al., 1994). In the competitive 

business environment such as that faced by financial 

institutions (Wilkinson & Lomax, 1989), it is crucial to 

understand this point. 

Since financial institutions in Cheyenne, Wyoming, have a 

small pool of candidates from which to draw employees, it is 

especially important to understand the relationship between work 

locus of control and job satisfaction. It is equally important 

for financial institutions in the Cheyenne area to note that 

this study found the relationship to be valid even after 

mediating for the effects of gender and education levels. 

Mediating Effects of Gender 

Different studies have specifically considered the impact of 

race or gender on job satisfaction (Clark, 1997; Groot & van den 

Brink, 1998; Sloane & Williams, 2000). This study found no 

differences in correlation between work locus of control and job 

satisfaction when mediated by gender. The results from the 

point-biserial correlation analysis that examined the effects of 


Job Satisfaction

88

gender on work locus of control and job satisfaction, however, 

showed that, when compared to male respondents, the female 

respondents had lower amounts of job satisfaction. Consistent 

with results from research on general locus of control in the 

field of psychology, significant differences in perception of 

control exist between genders, and females exhibited a more 

external locus of control than males (Nunn, 1994). In this 

workplace, this would suggest that males have more of an 

internal work locus of control and, therefore, males in general 

should have higher levels of job satisfaction.

However, findings on the impact of gender on job 

satisfaction in other studies are at present not consistent. 

While some of the findings suggest that there are no differences 

in the level of job satisfaction among men and women (Mannheim, 

1983), others suggest that the expectations of working women in 

terms of job satisfaction are different from those of men 

(Martin & Hanson, 1985).

Previous empirical research into job satisfaction has shown 

that women consistently express that they are more satisfied 

with their jobs than men (Clark, 1996, 1997; Sloane & Williams, 

2000). This is surprising, given that there is extensive 

evidence that women hold a clearly disadvantaged position in the 

labor market in terms of earnings (Wright & Ermish, 1991) and in 


Job Satisfaction

89

areas such as hiring/firing (Riach & Rich, 1997) and promotion 

(Lazear & Rosen, 1990). 

Clark (1997) and Sanz de Galdeano (2001) provide some 

evidence supporting the notion that women’s higher job 

satisfaction may reflect their lower expectations regarding 

their jobs, which likely result from the poorer position in the 

labor market that they have traditionally held. Therefore, women 

will be more satisfied than men with the same objective 

characteristics and work values if they expect less than men 

from their job.

 In contrast, Chiu (1998) found that female lawyers had 

significantly lower job satisfaction than male lawyers. Further 

studies found professional women such as clinical psychologists, 

social workers, and medical workers experienced lower levels of 

job satisfaction than their male counterparts, suggesting that 

the effects of gender on job satisfaction vary according to the 

status or level of job (e.g., a service position versus an 

executive position) (Shapiro & Stern, 1975). Lower job 

satisfaction in the above cases could be attributed to the fact 

that women feel they have fewer opportunities for promotion than 

men (Chiu, 1998).

Pleck (1977) suggests that the relations between work and 

family roles were gendered in conventional ways. Hence, female 


Job Satisfaction

90

respondents in this study may have reported a lower level of job 

satisfaction due to the work/family relations. Consistent with 

this notion, Crouter, Perry-Jenkins, Huston, and Crawford (1989) 

find that, although both women and men report that their family 

roles influence their work roles, women experience more 

spillover from family to work and more constraints on work time 

due to family related time demands when compared with men. 

Similarly, Voydanoff (1988) reports that family demands are more 

influential for women's perceptions of work/family conflict than 

for men's. 

Consequently, women experiencd higher levels of anxiety and 

depression than men when aspects of work are perceived as 

interfering with family and that could in turn affect job 

satisfaction (MacEwen & Barling, 1994). This reasoning may apply 

to female respondents in this study who reported a lower job 

satisfaction level in general. 

Attitude toward the job can also be a highly significant 

predictor of job satisfaction (Staw et al., 1986; Szilagyi et 

al., 1976; Van der Vegt, 2002). For this study, female 

respondents in general had lower amounts of job satisfaction 

when compared to male respondents. Since 18.2% of the variation 

in the job in general satisfaction can be directly related to 

work locus of control, and more women than men are reported to 


Job Satisfaction

91

work in the financial institutions in the Cheyenne area, it 

would be beneficial to further understand how general locus of 

control can affect one’s perception in the workplace; and 

whether or not there are other mediating factors that can affect 

job satisfaction. 

Mediating Effects of Education

Research by Robinson (1997) and Sousa-Poza and Sousa-Poza 

(2000) suggests that an individual’s level of education may 

affect his or her perceptions of job satisfaction in the 

workplace. This study found no differences in correlation 

between work locus of control and job satisfaction when mediated 

by education level. This study also found a more internal work 

locus of control to be related to higher levels of education, as 

indicated by the negative relationship between the variables. 

Male respondents in this study also have higher levels of job 

satisfaction, and have more years of education than the female 

respondents. 

However, findings by other researchers on the impact of 

education level on job satisfaction were also inconsistent. 

While some researches found a positive relationship between 

education and job satisfaction, others found the relationship to 

be negative instead. For instance, researchers such as Carrell 

and Elbert (1974), Clark (1997), Clark and Oswald (1996), 


Job Satisfaction

92

DeSantis and Durst (1996), and Sloane and Williams (1996) found 

that there is a negative relationship between education and job 

satisfaction. According to these researchers, employees with 

higher levels of education in fact tend to be less satisfied 

with their jobs. This is especially true of younger workers 

assigned to routine tasks (Carrell & Elbert, 1974; DeSantis & 

Durst, 1996). 

The negative relation between education and job satisfaction 

suggests that higher levels of formal education, especially 

among those that are relatively young, may result in 

dissatisfaction in the bureaucratic routine tasks sometimes 

required by most government jobs (DeSantis & Durst, 1996). Many 

other studies have also shown that higher educated workers are 

less satisfied than lower educated workers (Clark, 1997; Clark & 

Oswald, 1996; Sloane & Williams, 1996). The common 

interpretation of this is that job satisfaction depends on the 

gap between outcomes and aspirations, and that aspirations are 

increased by education (Glenn & Weaver, 1982). Based on this 

notion, then, individuals with higher levels of education would 

tend to be less satisfied with their job because they have 

higher expectations than those with lower levels of education.

The above may explain why the pattern of correlation between 

work locus of control and job satisfaction did not hold for all 


Job Satisfaction

93

levels of education in this study. The results from this study 

show that the pattern of correlation between work locus of 

control and job satisfaction holds among respondents with high 

school education or less (r = -.51) and, 

associates/undergraduate degree (r = -.37), but it does not hold 

for respondents with graduate level education (r = .01). 

However, since there are only 11 respondents in this group, 

future studies should include a larger sample of this subgroup 

and respondents from other industries to see if the results are 

replicated. 

In contrast to findings on the negative relation between 

education and job satisfaction, Robinson (1997), who studied 

prison administrators and the impact of education, finds that 

there are in fact positive effects of education on job 

satisfaction. In another study, Hepburn (1989) observes that 

education was seen as a mechanism for increasing correctional 

officer satisfaction by promoting a sense of professionalism. 

Education was believed to enhance job performance and to boost 

morale. Accordingly, education may be associated with a greater 

interest in career development, a need for growth, the 

propensity to become "involved" in the job, and higher internal 

work motivation (e.g., deriving satisfaction from good job 

performance). Whatever the case, there is insufficient evidence 


Job Satisfaction

94

to conclude that more educated individuals are different in 

their career orientations than their less educated counterparts. 

Consistent with the findings of this study, education 

researchers have long recognized the relationship between 

general locus of control and educational attainment (Finn, 

1980). Similarly, results from the “Coleman Report” found that 

general locus of control, was strongly related to academic 

achievement (Coleman, 1966). Individuals with an internal locus 

of control generally more actively pursue their goals and 

improve their lives and therefore experience higher levels of 

job satisfaction. This is because individuals with higher levels 

of education may emphasize the "intrinsic" rewards of their jobs 

to a greater extent than do those with less education (Jurik, 

Halemba, Musheno, & Boyle, 1987).

Limitations and Future Directions

This exploratory study is limited by geographic location and 

the number of individuals employed by the selected financial 

institutions located in the town of Cheyenne, Wyoming, during 

March and April 2004. A major limitation is that findings in 

this study may not be able to be generalized to the larger 

population. Therefore, future studies should include a 

comparison of employees in financial institutions in a small 


town similar to Cheyenne and a large city to see if the findings 

Job Satisfaction

95

are consistent. 

Although the return rate of completed surveys was high 

(81.3%), it only yielded a usable sample of 144. Since the 

sample size was relatively small, the results of this study may 

not be conclusive even though they rendered full support for the 

Hypothesis One and Hypothesis Two, and partial support for 

Hypothesis Three. For a bounded exploratory study such as this 

one, where there are characteristics that may impact the outcome 

of the study, a higher percentage of the sample population 

should be included to ensure that validity is not compromised. 

With respect to the self-reporting methodology used, the 

limitation of this study is that responses may be partly 

influenced by social desirability - for instance, “what they 

say” versus “how they truly feel” (Freeman, 1978). To address 

concerns about socially desirable responding and method bias, 

future research should gather job characteristics ratings from 

supervisors and coworkers as well.

A question not addressed in this paper and that naturally 

arises from these results, is how to interpret the negative 

effect of being female on job satisfaction: why should a man and 

woman in identical jobs report different satisfaction scores? 

Gender differences on all variables in this study suggest that 


Job Satisfaction

96

more information is needed on why males and females have 

different views of the world of work and how they perceive job 

satisfaction. Given the obvious need for males and females alike 

to make an economic contribution to society, the different 

employment patterns of young people throughout their school days 

and the influence of their attitudes about work should be 

explored, as well as other factors that may impact differences 

in perception.

In studying adolescents, Kulas (1996) finds significant 

gender differences in the development of general locus of 

control orientation; females become more external and males 

become more internal over the course of one year. Greater 

stability in locus of control orientation exists for adolescents 

who are internally oriented than for adolescents who are 

externally oriented. Future direction should also include a 

longitudinal study that looks at the general locus of control 

orientation of individuals with similar backgrounds and 

characteristics to see if their general locus of control 

orientation would change over time and what factors may affect 

the change.

Studies have also shown that age may have an important 

effect on job satisfaction. Older workers, for example, are more 

likely to be satisfied than younger workers (Kalleberg & 


Loscocco, 1983). Future studies should include age in the 

Job Satisfaction

97

demographics.

Recommendations

Job satisfaction is a self-reported positive emotional state 

resulting from the appraisal of one’s job or from job 

experiences (Locke, 1976). Traditionally, economists have shied 

away from investigating job satisfaction and well-being. They 

view “personal judgments of satisfaction and other subjective 

opinions as a black box that should be opened only by 

psychologists and sociologists” (Lévy-Garboua & Montmarquette 

1997, p. 1). The main concern has been that no two people will 

use the same scale to answer questions about their perceptions 

of job satisfaction and well-being (Layard, 2003). However, many 

studies have tried to understand the determinants of job 

satisfaction following the seminal papers of Hammermesh (1977), 

Freeman (1978), and Borjas (1979), and these studues have 

considered job satisfaction as an economic variable (Spector, 

1997). Since then, economists have been increasingly interested 

in the assessment of subjective well-being and job satisfaction 

(Clark, 1997, 2001; Easterlin, 2001; Hammermesh, 1999; Ng, 1996; 

Sloane & Williams, 2000; Sousa-Poza & Sousa-Poza, 2000).

Because job satisfaction is too complex of a phenomenon to 

be reduced to a simple causal factor (Molineux, 2003), it makes 


Job Satisfaction

98

sense that researchers, policy makers, and practitioners alike 

explore various factors that could affect perceptions of job 

satisfaction. People are unique and have different needs and so 

differ in what satisfies them in their work (Gruneberg, 1979). 

Daniels and Guppy (1997) hold that poor psychological well-being 

may lead to increased exposure to negative events, where these 

events may be appraised as more negative than if no changes in 

well-being had taken place. Specifically, increased anxiety may 

act directly on the automatic processes of attention allocation, 

leading to highly anxious individuals attending more to the 

threatening aspects of a given situation that other aspects 

(Dalgleish & Watts, 1990; MacCleod, 1991). When studying job 

satisfaction, factors that affect well-being should continue to 

be explored.

Policymakers 

This study, along with numerous others cited in the 

literature review section, finds a significant relationship 

between work locus of control and job satisfaction (Campbell, 

1988; Ganster & Fusilier, 1989; Judge et al., 1998; Karasek, 

1979; Organ and Greene, 1974; Siu & Cooper, 1998; Spector, 1988; 

Valencha, 1972). For those involved in setting policies, 

governmental or organizational, the importance of psychological 


Job Satisfaction

99

well-being and how it affects perceptions of job satisfaction 

should be understood. 

This study is significant in its potential contribution to 

the understanding of what it truly takes to manage job 

satisfaction in today’s organizations. Like many other 

industries, the management of human resources in a services 

industry such as financial institutions and various service-

based governmental organizations continues to be a major 

challenge for most human resources practitioners (Nguwi, 2003). 

When developing policies that could potentially affect 

individuals’ perception of well-being and in turn their job 

satisfaction, policymakers in the public and private sectors 

should take the time to understand the impact that personal 

constructs such as locus of control may have on changes proposed 

by those policies. In the workplace, policymakers should embrace 

findings from all disciplines in the area of job satisfaction 

and work locus of control, as well as incorporate these valuable 

insights into the formulation of new policies or the revision of 

existing ones. 

In addition, policymakers should know that general locus of 

control orientation probably forms during childhood and 

stabilizes during adolescence; and that control expectancies are 

predicted to develop most quickly and be most malleable when an 


Job Satisfaction

100

individual has relatively few experiences (Sherman, 1984). 

Logically, if job performance varies as a function of 

educational experience, further education should become an 

important focus of employment and educational policies 

(Robinson, 1997). To that end, when making policies about 

education and curriculums for today’s classroom, policymakers 

should incorporate the body of knowledge that exists thus far on 

locus of control. Glenn and Weaver (1982) also described this 

phenomenon more generally with regards to how education affects 

job satisfaction in a variety of occupational categories.

Practitioners

The recommendations provided to policymakers would also hold 

true for practitioners (such as human resources managers). From 

both an individual and organizational standpoint, practitioners 

who understand how work locus of control affects perceptions of 

job satisfaction are more effective in managing behaviors and in 

enhancing the likelihood of desirable outcomes by helping both 

people and organizations adapt to the changing work environment 

(Goldsmith, & Veum, 1996). Practitioner understanding is 

especially crucial in a competitive industry such as financial 

institutions (Wilkinson & Lomax, 1989). To remain competitive, 

organizations across industries have emphasized service and 

knowledge (Drucker, 1993), as well as shifting from task and 


Job Satisfaction

101

volume to process and value (Hammer & Champy, 1993; Magretta, 

2002). To that end, an organization’s human resources provides 

its only competitive edge. 

Individuals who have higher job satisfaction have higher 

abilities to stay on task without prompting, to work steadily 

over the entire work period, and to work at routine jobs without 

resistance; these individuals are highly valued by today’s 

organizations (Strauser & Ketz, 2002). Understanding personality 

construct such as locus of control may have considerable impacts 

on the processes of human resources management, especially in 

the area of employees’ productivity, development, and job 

satisfaction. This is because, even though personality traits 

such as locus of control are stable, they are not invariant 

(Goldsmith & Veum, 1996). New developments can in fact alter an 

individual's disposition.

If locus of control as a personality trait is not invariant 

and if new developments can in fact alter an individual's 

disposition (Goldsmith & Veum, 1966), what types of experiences 

then are vivid and salient enough to alter an individual's 

personal locus of control? Kulas (1996) finds a greater

stability in locus of control exists for adolescents who are 

internally oriented than adolescents who are externally 

oriented. Studies also supported the idea that females can 


strengthen internal locus of control in other females (Teglasi, 

Job Satisfaction

102

1978). 

Therefore, understanding locus of control and the factors 

that affect internal versus external orientation may in fact 

help practitioners manage job satisfaction in today’s 

organizations. In turn, that knowledge helps these practitioners 

create intervention programs that promote well-being and job 

satisfaction. Individuals’ locus of control orientations may 

possibly be changed, since those who have an internal locus of 

control are generally more active in trying to pursue their 

goals and improve their lives (Rotter, 1966). Furthermore, 

through ingenuity and perseverance, internals find ways to exert 

some measure of control, even in situations containing limited 

opportunities and many constraints (Bandura, 1986). 

Conclusion

Due to the enormous body of knowledge that exists on the 

subject, a summary of findings on job satisfaction is difficult. 

The findings are not directly comparable because most of the 

studies use different conceptualizations. However, the 

relationships between specific predictor variables and job

satisfaction can be said to vary depending on 

conceptualizations, and the direction of the relationships tends 

to be somewhat consistent (Naumann, 1993). Karasek’s (1979) 


Job Satisfaction

103

demands-control stress model, hypothesizes that control at work 

buffers the influence of job stressors on well-being. Spector's 

(1986) meta-analysis shows that perceived autonomy and 

participation at work are related to job satisfaction and other 

measures of well-being. Similarly, in their review of the 

workplace control literature, Ganster and Fusilier (1989) 

conclude that control is a vital element of well-being.

Satisfied employees tend to be more productive, creative, 

and committed to their employers; recent studies have in fact 

shown a direct correlation between staff satisfaction and 

customer satisfaction (Kaldenberg & Regrut, 1999). This bounded 

exploratory study examines the relationship between work locus 

of control and overall job satisfaction among individuals who 

work in various financial institutions in the city of Cheyenne, 

Wyoming. In addition, this study also investigates the possible 

difference in perceptions of control and job satisfaction when 

taking into account gender and levels of education.

In this study, no differences in correlation between work 

locus of control and job satisfaction were found, even when 

mediating factors such as gender and levels of education were 

introduced and the findings were supported by Spector’s (1988) 

theory that job satisfaction is affected by Rotter’s (1966) 

Locus of Control, a theoretical concept that has been developed 


Job Satisfaction

104

to explain the control beliefs characteristic of individuals. 

The findings in this study suggest that the analysis of workers’

subjective well-being and the understanding of what makes 

different groups of workers satisfied may provide a number of 

insights into important labor market behaviors. 


                                   Job Satisfaction   105

REFERENCES

Akerlof, G. A., Rose, A. K., & Yellen, J.L. (1988). Job 

switching and job satisfaction in the U.S. labor market. 
Brookings Papers on Economics Activity, 2, 495-594.

Andrisani, P. J., & Nestel, G. (1976). Internal external control 

as a contributor to and outcomes of work experience. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 61, 156-165.

Antonacopoulou, E. P. (2000). Employee development through self-
development in three retail banks. Personnel Review, 29(4),
491–509.

Armenakis, A. A., Harris, S. G., & Mossholder, K. W. (1993). 

Creating readiness for organizational change. Human 
Relations, 46, 681-703.

Arvey, R. D., Bouchard, T. J., Segal, N. L., & Abraham, L. M. 

(1989). Job satisfaction: Environmental and genetic 
components. Journal of Applied Psychology, 74, 187-192.

Ashford, S. J. (1988). Individual strategies for coping with 

stress during organizational transitions. Journal of 
Applied Behavioral Science, 24, 19-36.

Aspinwall, L. G., & Taylor, S. E. (1992). Modeling cognitive 

adaptation: A longitudinal investigation of the impact of 
individual differences and coping on college adjustment and 
performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
63, 989-1003.

Auerbach, A. J., & Dolan, S. L. (1997). Fundamentals of 

 organizational behavior: The Canadian context. Toronto: 

Nelson.

Axtell, C., Wall, T., Stride, C., Pepper, K., Clegg, C., 

Gardner, P., & Bolden, R. (2002). Familiarity breeds 
content: The impact of exposure to change on employee 
openness and well-being. Journal of Occupational & 
Organizational Psychology, 75(2), 217-232

Baba, V., Jamal, M., & Tourigny, L. (1998). Work and mental-

health: A decade in Canadian research. Canadian Psychology, 
39(1-2), 94-107.


                                   Job Satisfaction   106

Balzer, W. K., Kihm, J. A., Smith, P. C., Irwin, J. L., 

Bachiochi, P. O., Robie, C., et al. (2000). Users’ manual 
for the job descriptive Index (JDI; 1997; version) and the 
Job in General scales. In J. M. Stanton & C. D. Crossley 
(Eds.), Electronic resources for the JDI and JIG, (9-35). 
Bowling Green, OH: Bowling Green State University.

Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of 

behavioral change. Psychological Review, 84, 191-215.

Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A 

social cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall.

Banking Information Service (BiS). (1991). A future in banking 

the branch network. London: BiS.

Bardwick, J. M. (1995). Danger in the comfort zone. New York: 

AMACOM.

Bartel, A. P., & Borjas, G. J. (1981). Wage growth and job-

turnover: An empirical analysis. In S. Rosen (Ed.), Studies 
in Labor Market, (232-245). Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.

Bátiz-Lazo, B., & Wood, D. (2002). A historical appraisal 

information technology in commercial banking. Electronic 
Markets, 12(3), 192-205.

Bátiz-Lazo, B., Wonlimpiyarat, J.,  & Wood, D. (2001). 

Barclaycard. In G. Johnson & K. Scholes (Ed.), Exploring 
Corporate Strategy: Text and Cases (pp 864-879). Harlow, 
Essex: Pearson.

Bauer, J. (1995). Shift a gear. The Banker, 11, 94-5.

Bazerman, M. H. (1982). Impact of personal control on 

performance: Is added control always beneficial? Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 67(4), 472-479.

BBC News and Current Affairs Department (23 September 1995 and 30 
September 1995). The Money Programme Special: Uncertain Times 
(Television broadcast). London: British Broadcasting 
Corporation.


                                   Job Satisfaction   107

Bertrand, O., & Noyelle, T. (1988). Human resources and 

corporate strategy: Technological change in banks and 
insurance companies. Paris: OECD. 

Bland, J. M., & Altman, D. G. (1994). One and two sided tests of 

significance. British Medical Journal, 309, 248.

Bowman, G. D., & Stern, M. (1995). Adjustment to occupational 

stress: The relationship of perceived control to 
effectiveness of coping strategies. Journal of Counseling 
and Psychology, 42(3), 294-303.

Brayfield, A. H., & Rothe, H. F. (1951). An index of job 

satisfaction. Journal of Applied Psychology, 35, 307-311.

Brehm, J. W. (1966). A theory of psychological reactance. New 

York: Academic Press.

Brief, A. P., Butcher, A. H., George, J. M., & Link, K. E. 

(1993). Integrating top-down and bottom-up theories of 
subjective well-being: The case of health. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 646-653.

Brief, A. P., Butcher, A. & Roberson, L. (1995). Cookies,

disposition, and job attitudes: The effects of positive 
mood inducing events and negative affectivity on job 
satisfaction in a field experiment. Organizational Behavior 
and Human Decision Processes, 62, 55-62.

Broedling, L. A. (1976). Relationship of internal-external 

control to work motivation and performance in an expectancy 
model. Journal of Applied Psychology, 60, 65-70.

Campbell, D. J. (1988). Task complexity: A review and analysis. 

Academy of Management Review, 13, 40-52

Carrell, M., & Elbert, N. (1974). Some personal and 

organizational determinants of job satisfaction of postal 
clerks. Academy of Management Journal, 16, 53-66.

Chiu, C. (1998). Do professional women have lower job 

satisfaction than professional men? Lawyers as a case 
study. Sex Roles, 38(7-8), 521-37.


                                   Job Satisfaction   108

Chubb, N. H., Fertman, C. I., & Ross, J. L. (1997). Adolescent 
self-esteem and locus of control: A longitudinal study of 
gender and age differences. Adolescence, 32(125), 113-130.

Clark, A. E. (1996). Job satisfaction in Britain. British

Journal of Industrial Relations, 34, 189-218. 

Clark, A. E. (1997). Job satisfaction and gender: Why are women 

so happy at work? Labor Economics, 4(4), 341-372.

Clark, A. E. (2001). What really matters in a job: Hedonic 

measurement using quit data. Labor Economics 8(2), 5, 223-
242.

Clark, A. E., Georgellis, Y., & Sanfey, P. (1998). Job 

satisfaction, wage change and quits. Research in Labor   
Economics, 17, 95-121.

Clark, A. E. & Oswald A. J. (1996). Satisfaction and comparison 

income. Journal of Public Economics 61(3), 359-382.

Coch, L., & French, J. R. P. (1948). Overcoming resistance to 

change. Human Relations, 1, 512-532.

Cohen, J. (1992). A power primer. Psychological Bulletin, 112,

155-159.

Coleman, J. S. (1966). Equality of educational opportunity. 
(Department of Education Study No. 66-6389) Washington 
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 21-22.

Conner, D. R. (1992). Managing at the speed of change: How 

resilient managers succeed and prosper where others fail.
New York: Villard Books.

Cooper, D. R., & Schindler, P. S. (2003). Business research

 methods (8th ed.). Boston: McGraw-Hill Irwin.

Cranny, C. L., Smith, P., & Stone, F. F. (1992). Job 

satisfaction: How people feel about their job and how it 
affects their performance. New York: Lexington Books.


                                   Job Satisfaction   109

Cressey, P., & Scott, P. (1992). Employment, technology and 

industrial relations in the UK clearing banks: Is the 
honeymoon over? New Technology, Work and Employment, 
autumn, 7(2), 83-96.

Creswell, J. W. (2003). Research design: Qualitative,

 quantitative, and mixed methods approaches (2nd ed.). 

Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Crouter, A. C., Perry-Jenkins, M., Huston, T. L., & Crawford, D. 

W. (1989). The influence of work-induced psychological 
states on behavior at home. Basic and Applied Social 
Psychology, 10, 273-292.

Dailey, R. C. (1978). Relationship between locus of control, 

perceived group cohesiveness, and satisfaction with 
coworkers. Psychological Reports, 42(1), 311-316.

Dalgleish, T., & Watts, F. N. (1990). Biases of attention and 
memory in disorders of anxiety and depression. Clinical 
Psychology Review, 10, 589-604.

Daniels, K. & Guppy, A. (1997). Stressors, locus of control, and 

social support as consequences of affective psychological 
well-being. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 2 
(2), 156-174.

Davis, W. L., & Phares, E. J. (1967). Internal-external control 

as a determinant of information seeking in a social 
influence situation. Journal of Personality, 35, 547-561.

De Jong, M., & Schellens, P. J. (2001). Readers' background 

characteristics and their feedback on documents: The 
influence of gender and educational level on evaluation 
results. Journal of Technical Writing and Communication, 
31(3), 267-281.

DeMeuse, K. P. (1985). A compendium of frequently used measures 

in industrial/organizational psychology. The Industrial-
Organizational Psychologist, 23, 53-59.

DeSantis, V., & Durst, S. (1996). Comparing job satisfaction 

among public and private sector employees. American Review 
of Public Administration, 26(3), 327-343


                                   Job Satisfaction   110

Dewe, P. (1991). Primary appraisal, secondary appraisal and 

coping: Their role in stressful work encounters. Journal of 
Occupational Psychology, 64, 331-351.

Dolan, S. L., & Gosselin, E. (2000). Job satisfaction and life 

satisfaction: Analysis of reciprocal model with social 
demographic moderators. Journal of Economics, 23, 3-24.

Drucker, P. F. (1993). Post-capitalist society. New York: Harper 

Collins.

Duke, M. P., & Lancaster, W. (1976). A note on locus of control 

as a function of father absence. The Journal of Genetic 
Psychology, 129, 335-336.

Duncan, O. D. (1975). Does money buy satisfaction? Social

Indicators Research, 2, 267-274.

Durán Branches, T. (2001). Construct of locus of control in the 

education decision making. Paedagogium Mexico, 1(3), 8-11

Easterlin, R. A. (1973). Does money buy happiness? The Public 

Interest, 30, 3-10.

Easterlin, R. A. (1975). Does economic growth improve the human-
lot? Some empirical evidence. In P.A. David and M.W. Reder 
(Eds.), Nations and household in economic growth (pp.89-
125). New York: Academic Press.

Easterlin, R. A. (2001). Income and happiness: Towards a unified 

theory. The Economic Journal 111, 465-484.

Evans, M. G. (1974). Extensions of the path-goal theory of 

motivation. Journal of Applied Psychology, 54, 172-178.

Fincham, R., Fleck, J., Procter, R., Scarbrough, H., Tierney, 

M., & Williams, R. (1994). Expertise and innovation: 
Information technology strategies in the financial services 
sector. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Findley, M. J., & Cooper, H. M. (1983). Locus of control and 
academic achievement - a literature review. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 44, 419-427.


                                   Job Satisfaction   111

Finn, J. (1980). Sex-differences in educational outcomes: A 

cross-national study. Sex Roles, 6, 9-26.

Fisher, S. (1984). Stress and the perception of control. London: 

Erlbaum.

Fisher, V. E., & Hanna, J. V. (1931). The dissatisfied worker.

New York: Macmillan.

Fossum, L. (1989). Understanding organizational change. Menlo 

Park, CA: Crisp.

Freeman, R. B. (1978). Job satisfaction as an economic variable. 

American Economic Association, 68, 135-141.

Frese, M. (1989). Theoretical models of control and health. In 

S. L. Sauter, J. J. Hurrell, & C. L. Cooper (Eds.), Job 
control and worker health (pp. 107-128). Chichester, UK: 
Wiley.

Frey, L. R., Botan, C. H., Friedman, P. G., & Kreps, G. L. 

(1991). Investigating communication: An introduction to 
research methods. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Fried, Y., & Ferris, G. R. (1987). The validity of the job 

characteristics model: A review and meta-analysis. 
Personnel Psychology, 40, 287-322.

Ganster, D. C., & Fusilier, M. R. (1989). Control in the work 

place. In C. L. Cooper & I. T. Robertson (Eds.), 
International review of industrial and organizational 
psychology (pp. 235—280). Chichester, England: Wiley.

Garbade, K. D., & Silber, W. L. (1978). Technology, 

communications and the performance of financial markets: 1840-
1975. Journal of Finance, 33(3), 819-832.

Gibbs, N. (1989). How America has run out of time. Times 

Magazine, 74, 58-67.

Glass, D. C., McKnight, J. D., & Valdimarsdottir, H. (1993). 

Depression, burnout, and perceptions of control in hospital 
nurses. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
61(1), 147-155.


                                   Job Satisfaction   112

Glenn, N. D., & Weaver, C. N. (1982). Further evidence on 

education and job satisfaction. Social Forces, 61, 46-55.

Goldsmith, A. H., & Veum, J. R. (1996). The psychological impact 

of unemployment and joblessness. Journal of Socio-
Economics, 25(3), 333-359.

Gottschalk, P., & Maloney, T. (1985). Involuntary termination, 

unemployment, and job matching: A test of job search 
theory. Journal of Labor Economics, 3, 109-122.

Griffin, R. W. (1991). Effects of work redesign on employee 

perceptions, attitudes, and behaviors: A long term 
investigation. Academy of Management Journal, 34, 425-435.

Groot, W., & van den Brink, H. M. (1998). Job satisfaction, 

wages and allocation of men and women (Working Paper 10-98) 
Amsterdam, Netherlands: Maastricht University

Gruneberg, M. M. (1979). Understanding job satisfaction. New 

York: John Wiley & Sons.

Hackman, J. R., & Oldham, G. R. (1976). Motivation through the 
design of work: Test of a theory. Organizational Behavior 
and Human Performance, 16, 250-279.

Hackman, J. R., & Oldham, G. R. (1980). Work redesign. Reading, 

MA: Addison-Wesley.

Hammer, M., & Champy, J. (1993). Re-engineering the corporation: 

A manifest for business revolution. New York: Harper 
Business.

Hammermesh, D. S. (1977). Economic aspects of job satisfaction. 

In O. E. Ashenfelter and W. E. Oates (Eds), Essays in labor 
market analysis (pp.53-72). New York: John Wiley. 

Hammermesh, D. S. (1999). The changing distribution of job 
satisfaction. Journal of Human Resources 36(1), 30-42.

Heider, E. (1958). Psychology of interpersonal relations. New 

York: Wiley.


                                   Job Satisfaction   113

Henkel, R. E. (1976). Tests of significance. Thousand Oaks, CA: 

Sage Publications. 

Hepburn, J. R. (1989). Prison guards as agents of social 

control. In the American prison: Issues in research and 
policy (pp. 191-206). New York: Plenum.

Herriot, P., Pemberton, C., & Hawtin, E. (1996). The career 

attitudes and intentions of managers in the finance sector. 
British Journal of Management, 7(2), 181-90.

Hetherington, E. M. (1972). Effects of father absence on 

personality development in adolescent daughters. 
Developmental Psychology, 7, 313-326.

Hiltrop, J. M. (1991). Human resource management in European 
banking: Challenges and responses. European Management 
Journal, 9(1), 36-42.

Hjelle, L. (1991). Relationship of social interest to internal-

external control and self-actualization in young women. 
Individual Psychology, 47, 101-105.

Hoff-Macan, T., Trusty, M. L., & Trimble, S. K. (1996). 

Spector's work locus of control scale: Dimensionality and 
validity evidence. Educational and Psychological 
Measurement, 56, 349-357.

Holden, L. (1999). The perception gap in employee empowerment: A 
comparative study of banks in Sweden and Britain. Personnel 
Review, 28(3), 20-27.

Holmsen, C. A., Palter, R. N., Simon, P. R., & Weberg, P. K. 

(1998). Retail banking: Managing competition among your own 
channels. McKinsey Quarterly, 1, 82-93.

Hoppock, R. (1935). Job satisfaction. New York: Harper.

House, R. J., Shane, S. A., & Herold, D. M. (1996). Rumors of 

the death of dispositional research are vastly exaggerated. 
Academy of Management Review, 21, 203-224.

Houston, B. K. (1972). Control over stress, locus of control and 

response to stress. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 21, 249-255.


                                   Job Satisfaction   114

Ironson, G. H., Smith, P. C., Brannick, M. T., Gibson, W. M., & 

Paul, K. B. (1989). Construction of a job in general scale: 
A comparison of global, composite and specific measures. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 74, 1-8.

Jaques, E. (1951). The changing culture of a factory. London: 

Tavistock.

Johnson, B. L., &  Kilmann, P. R. (1975). Locus of control and 

perceived confidence in problem solving abilities. Journal 
of Clinical Psychology, 31, 54-55.

Jones, C. (1991). A look into the crystal ball. The Banker,

141(781), 8-11.

Judge, T. A., Erez, A., Bono, J. E., & Thoresen, C. J. (2003). 

The core self-evaluations scale: Development of measure. 
Personnel Psychology, 56(2), 303-319.

Judge, T. A., Locke, E. A., Durham, C. C., & Kluger, A. N.  

(1998). Dispositional effects on job and life satisfaction: 
The role of core evaluations. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 83(1), 17-34.

Jurik, N. C., Halemba, G., Musheno, M. C., & Boyle, B. B. 

(1987). Educational attainment, Job satisfaction, and the 
professionalization of correctional officers. Work and 
Occupations, 14, 106-25.

Kahn, R. L., & Byosiere, P. (1992). Stress in organizations. In M. 
D. Dunnette & L. M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of Industrial and 
Organizational Psychology (2nd ed.), (pp. 571-650). Palo 
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

Kaldenberg, D. O., & Regrut, B. A. (1999) Do satisfied patients 

depend on satisfied employees? Or do satisfied employees 
depend on satisfied patients? The Satisfaction Report, 3, 
26-29.

Kalleberg, A. L., & Loscocco, K. A. (1983). Aging, values, and 

rewards: Explaining age differences in job satisfaction. 
American Sociological Review, 2, 78-90.


                                   Job Satisfaction   115

Kanter, R. (1977). Men and women of the corporation. New York: 

Basic Books.

Kanter, R. (1983). The change masters. New York: Simon & 

Schuster.

Karasek, R. A. (1979). Job demands, job decision latitude, and 

mental strain: Implications for job redesign. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 24, 285-311.

Katkovsky, W., Crandall, V. C., & Good, S. (1967). Parental 
antecedents of children's beliefs in internal-external 
control of reinforcement in intellectual achievement 
situations. Child Development, 28, 765-776.

Kelley, H. H. (1967). Attribution in social psychology. In D. 

Levine (Eds.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, (pp. 192-
238). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

Kerlinger, F. N., & Pedhazur, E. J. (1973). Multiple regression 

in behavioral research. New York: Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston, Inc.

Kimmons, G., & Greenhaus, J. H. (1976). Relationship between 

locus of control and reactions of employees work 
characteristics. Psychological Reports, 39, 815-820.

Kobasa, S. C., Maddi, S. R., & Kahn, S. (1982). Hardiness and 
health: A prospective study. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 42, 168-177.

Kraiger, K., Billings, R. S., & Isen, A. M. (1989). The 

influence of positive affective states on task perceptions 
and satisfaction. Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes, 44, 12-25.

Kulas, H. (1996). Locus of control in adolescence: A 

longitudinal study. Adolescence, 31(123), 721-729.

Kunin, T. (1955). The construction of a new type of measure. 

Personnel Psychology, 8, 65-78.


                                   Job Satisfaction   116

Larsen, R. J., & Ketelaar, T. (1991). Personality and 

susceptibility to positive and negative emotional states. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 132-140.

Lau, C., & Woodman, R. W. (1995). Understanding organizational 

change: A schematic perspective. Academy of Management 
Journal, 38, 537-554.

Layard, R. (2003, March 17). Happiness: Has social science a 

clue? Lionel Robbins Memorial Lectures 2002/3, Centre for 
Economic Performance, London School of Economics. 

Lazear, E. P., & Rosen, S. (1990). Male-female differentials in 

job ladders. Journal of Labor Economics, 8, 106-S123.

Lefcourt, H. M. (1966). Internal versus external control of 

reinforcement. Psychological Bulletin, 65, 206-220.

LefCourt, H. M. (1982). Locus of control: Current trends in 

theory and research (2nd ed.). New York: Halstead.

Lefcourt, H. M. (1991) Locus of control. In J.P. Robinson, P.R. 

Shaver & L.S. Wrightsman (Eds.), Measures of personality 
and social psychological attitudes (pp.413-499). New York: 
Academic Press. 

Leslie, S. W. (2000). The biggest “angel” of them all: The 

military and the making of Silicon Valley. In M. Kenney 
(Ed.), Understanding Silicon Valley (pp. 48-67). Stanford CA: 
Stanford University Press. 

Levenson, H. (1972). Distinctions within the concept of 

internal-external locus of control: Development of a new 
scale. Proceedings of the 80th Annual Convention of the 
American Psychological Association, 7, 259-260.

Levenson, H. (1973). Perceived parental antecedents of internal, 

powerful others, and chance locus of control orientations. 
Developmental Psychology, 9, 260-265.

Levenson, H. (1981). Differentiating among internally, powerful 
others and chance. In H. M. Lefcourt (Ed.), Research with 
the locus of control construct: Vol. 1. (pp. 15-63). New 
York: Academic Press.


                                   Job Satisfaction   117

Levin, I., & Stokes, J. P. (1989). Dispositional approach to job 

satisfaction: Role of negative affectivity. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 74, 752-758.

Levy-Garboua, L., Montmarquette, C. & Simonnet, V. (2001). Job 

satisfaction and quits: Theory and evidence from the German 
Socioeconomic Panel. (CIRANO Working Papers No. 2001s-41). 
Montreal: Center for International Research.

Locke, E. A. (1969). What is job satisfaction? Organization

Behavior and Human Performance, 4, 309-336.

Locke, E. A. (1976). The nature and causes of job satisfaction. 

In M. Dunnette (Eds.), Handbook of industrial and 
organizational psychology (pp. 1297-1350). Chicago: Rand 
McNally.

Lonergan, J. M., & Maher, K. J. (2001). The relationship between 

job characteristics and workplace procrastination as 
moderated by locus of control. Journal of Social Behavior & 
Personality, 16(1), 213-225.

Lykken, D., & Tellegen, A. (1996). Happiness is a stochastic 

phenomenon. Psychological Science, 7, 186-189.

MacCleod, C. (1991). Clinical anxiety and the selective encoding 

of threatening information. International Review of 
Psychiatry, 3, 279-292.

MacEwen, K. E., & Barling, J. (1994). Daily consequences of work 
interference with family and family interference with work. 
Work & Stress, 8, 244-254.

Maier, S. F, Seligman, M. E. P, & Solomon, R. L. (1969). 

Pavlovian fear conditioning and learned helplessness. In B. 
A. Campbell, & R. M. Church (Eds.), Punishment (pp. 299-
343). New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.

Magretta, J. (2002). What management is. New York: The Free 

Press.

Mannheim, B. (1983). Male and female industrial workers: Job 

Satisfaction, work role centrality and work place 
preference. Work and Occupations, 10, 113-136.


                                   Job Satisfaction   118

Martin, J., & Hanson, S. (1985). Sex, family wage earning status 

and satisfaction with work. Work and Occupations, 12, 91-
109.

Markku, R. (1996). The relation of work involvement to 

occupational needs, need satisfaction, locus of control, 
and affect. The Journal of Social Psychology, 136(3), 291-
304.

Marks, L. L. (1998). Deconstructing locus of control: 

Implications for practitioners. Journal of Counseling and 
Development, 76, 251-260.

McBride, M. (2001). Relative-income effects on subjective well-
being in the cross-section. Journal of Economic Behavior 
and Organization, 45, 251-278.

Miller, V. D., Johnson, J. R., & Grau, J. (1994). Antecedents to 

willingness to participate in a planned organizational 
change. Journal of Applied Communication Research, 22, 59-
80.

Molineux, J. B. (2003). Job satisfaction. Careers and 

Employment. Retrieved August 3, 2002 from
http://www.solveyourproblem.com/artman/publish/
article_195.shtml

Morris, T. (1986). Innovations in banking. London: Croom Helm.

Moyle, P. (1995). The role of negative affectivity in the stress 

process: tests of alternative models. Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, 16, 647-668.

Naumann, E. (1993). Organizational predictors of expatriate job 

satisfaction. Journal of International Business Studies, 
24(1), 61-81.

Nelson, A., Cooper, C. L., & Jackson, P. R. (1995). Uncertainty 
amidst change: The impact of privatization on employee job 
satisfaction and well-being. Journal of Occupational and 
Organizational Psychology, 68, 57-71.

Ng, Y. K. (1996). Happiness surveys: Some comparability issues 

and an exploratory survey based on just perceivable 
increments. Social Indicators Research, 38, 1-27.


                                   Job Satisfaction   119

Nguwi, M. (2003). Managing human resources in the banking 

sector. The Financial Gazette. Retrieved January 12, 2004 
from http://wwww.fingaz.com/fingaz/2003/August/August 
21/955.shtml

Nonis, S. A., Hudson, G. I., Logan, L. B., & Ford, C. W. (1998). 

Influence of perceived control over time on college 
students’ stress and stress-related outcomes. Research in 
Higher Education, 39(5), 587-605.

Norris, D. R., & Niebuhr, R. E. (1984). Attributional influences 

on the job performance-Job satisfaction relationship. 
Academy of Management Journal, 27(2), 424-431.

Norusis, M. J. (2002). SPSS 11.0: Guide to data analysis. Upper 

Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.

Nunn, G. D. (1994). Adult learners' locus of control, self-

evaluation and learning temperament as a function of age 
and gender. Journal of Instructional Psychology, 21(3),
260-264

Organ, D. W. & Greene, C. N. (1974). Role ambiguity, locus of 

control and work satisfaction. Journal of Applied 
Psychology , 59, 101-102.

Parkes, K. R. (1984). Locus of control, cognitive appraisal, and 

coping in stressful episodes. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 46, 655-668.

Pettigrew, A. (1985). The awakening giant. Oxford, England: 

Basil Blackwell.

Phares, E. J. (1976). Locus of control in personality. 

Morristown, NJ: General Learning Press.

Piggott, J., & Kilminster, A. (1994, April). The financial 

crisis in Scandinavia 1990-1992. Paper presented at the 
European Business Conference at Nottingham University (pp. 
77-79).

Pleck, J. H. (1977). The work-family role system. Social 

Problems, 24, 417-424.


                                   Job Satisfaction   120

Pritchett, P. (1994). New work habits for a radically changing 

  world. Dallas, TX: Pritchett and Associates.

Pugh, D. S. (1973). The measurement of organization structures: 

Does context determine form? In D. S. Pugh (Eds.)(4th Ed.),
Organization Theory (pp. 16-35). London: Penguin Books. 

Quinn, R. P., & Shepard, G. L. (1974). The 1972-73 quality of 

employment survey. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social 
Research.

Quintás Seoane, J. R. (1991). Tecnologiá y banca minorista enla 

decada de los noventa (Technology and retail banking in the 
nineties). Papeles de Economía Española, 47, 72-86.

Rajan, A., & Fryatt, J. (1988). Create or abdicate: The city's 

human resource choice for the 90s. London: Witherby & 
Company.

Reed, S. A., Kratchman, S. H., & Strawser, R. H. (1994). Job 

satisfaction, organizational commitment, and turnover 
intentions of United States accountants: The impact of 
locus of control and gender. Accounting, Auditing & 
Accountability Journal, 7(1), 31-50.

Riach, P. A., & Rich, J. (1987). Testing for sexual 

discrimination in the labor market. Australian Economic 
Papers, 26, 165-178.

Riipinen, M. (1994). Extrinsic occupational needs and the 

relationship between need for achievement and locus of 
control. Journal of Psychology Interdisciplinary & Applied, 
128(5), 577-87.

Robinson, D. (1997). The influence of educational attainment on 

the attitudes and job performance of correctional officers. 
Crime and Delinquency, 43(1), 60-78.

Rotter, J. B. (1954). Social learning and clinical psychology. 

Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized expectancies for internal 

versus external control of reinforcement. Psychological 
Monographs, 80(1), 609.


                                   Job Satisfaction   121

Rotter, J. B. (1982). The development and applications of social 

learning theory. New York: Praeger.

Rotter, J. B. (1990). Internal versus external control of 

reinforcement: A case history of a variable. American 
Psychologist, 45(4), 489-493

Rotter, J. B. (1993). Expectancies. In C. E. Walker (Ed.), The 

history of clinical psychology in autobiography: Vol. 2. 
(pp. 273-284). Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.

Rush, M. C., Schoel, W. A., & Barnard, S. M. (1995). 

Psychological resiliency in the public sector: "Hardiness" 
and pressure for change. Journal of Vocational Behavior,
46, 17-39.

Ryan, C. P. (1995). Work isn’t what it used to be: Implications 

recommendations, and strategies for vocational 
rehabilitation. Journal of Rehabilitation, 61(1), 7-11.

Sanz de Galdeano, A. (2001). The gender differential in job 

satisfaction: What is the role of reference level? Mimeo: 
European University Institute.

Savall, H. (1981). Work and people: An economic evaluation of  

job-enrichment. New York: Oxford University Press.

Scarpello, V., & Campbell, J. P. (1983). Job satisfaction: Are 

all the parts there? Personnel Psychology, 36, 577-600.

Schein, E. (1990). Organizational culture and leadership. San 

  Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass.

Scherer, F. M. (1982). Inter-industry technology flows in the 

United States. Research Policy, 11, 227-245.

Schmitt, N., White, J. K., Coyle, B. W., & Rauschenberger, J. 

(1979). Retirement and life satisfaction. Academy of 
Management Journal, 22(2), 282-290.

Schweiger, D. M., & DeNisi, A. S. (1991). Communication with 

employees following a merger: A longitudinal field 
experiment. Academy of Management Journal, 34, 110-135.


                                   Job Satisfaction   122

Seligman, M. E. P. (1975). Helplessness: On depression, 
development and death. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.

Seeger, J. A., Lorsch, J. W., & Gibson, C. F. (1974). First National 

Citibank Operating Group (A). Cambridge MA: Harvard Business 
School.

Shapiro, J. H. & Stern, L. W. (1975). Job satisfaction: Male and 

female, professional and non-professional workers. 
Personnel Journal, 7, 388-407.

Sherman, H. D. (1984). Improving the productivity of service 

businesses. Sloan Management Review, 25(3), 11-23.

Siu, O., & Cooper, C. L. (1998). A study of occupational stress, 
job satisfaction and quitting intention in Hong Kong firms: 
The role of locus of control and organizational commitment. 
Stress Medicine, 14(1), 55-66.

Sloane, P. J., &  Williams, H. (1996). Are “overpaid” workers 

really happy? A test of cognitive dissonance. Labor, 10(1),
3-15.

Sloane, P. J., & Williams, H. (2000). Job satisfaction, 

comparison earnings and gender. Labor, 14(3), 473-501.

Smith, C., Child, J., & Rowlinson, M. (1990). Reshaping work: 

The Cadbury experience. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.

Smith, P. C. (1955). The prediction of individual differences in 

susceptibility to industrial monotony. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 39, 322-329.

Smith, P. C., Kendall, L. M., & Hulin, C. L. (1969). The 

measurement of satisfaction in work and retirement.
Chicago: Rand McNally.

Smith, P. C., Smith, O. W., & Rollo, J. (1974). Factor structure 

for blacks and whites of the Job Description Index and its 
discrimination of job satisfaction. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 59, 99-100.


                                   Job Satisfaction   123

Sousa-Poza, A., & Sousa-Poza, A. A. (2000).  Well-being at work: 
A cross-national analysis of the levels and determinants of 
job satisfaction. Journal of Socio-Economics, 12, 517-538.

Spector, P. E. (1982). Behavior in organizations as a function 

of employee's locus of control. Psychological Bulletin, 91,
482-497.

Spector, P. E. (1986). Perceived control by employees: A meta-

analysis of studies concerning autonomy and participation 
at work. Human Relations, 39, 1005-1116.

Spector, P. E. (1988). Development of the work locus of control 

scale. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 61, 355-340.

Spector, P. E. (1992). Summated rating scales. Newbury Park, CA: 

Sage.

Spector, P. E. (1994). Using self-report questionnaires in OB 

research: A comment on the use of a controversial method. 
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 15, 385-392.

Spector, P. E. (1997). Job satisfaction: Application, 

assessment, cause, and consequences. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage.

Spector, P. E., Cooper, C. L., Sanchez, J. I., O'Driscoll, M., 

Sparks, K., Bernin, P., et al. (2002). Locus of control and 
well-being at work: How generalizable are Western findings? 
Academy of Management Journal, 45(2), 453–467.

Spector P. E., & O’Connell, J. B. (1994). The contribution of 

personality traits, negative affectivity, locus of control 
and type A to the subsequent reports of job stressors and 
job strains. Journal of Occupational and Organizational 
Psychology, 67, 1-12.

Stamps, D. L. (1997). Nurses and work satisfaction: An index for 

measurement. Chicago: Health Administration Press.

Starrin, B., & Larsson, G. (1987). Coping with unemployment: A 

contribution to the understanding of women’s unemployment. 
Social Science Medicine, 25, 163-171.


                                   Job Satisfaction   124

Staw, B. M., Bell, N. E., & Clausen, J. A. (1986). The 

dispositional approach to job attitudes: A lifetime 
longitudinal test. Administrative Science Quarterly, 31, 
56-77.

Staw, B. M., & Ross, J. (1985). Stability in the midst of 

change: A dispositional approach to job attitudes. Journal 
of Applied Psychology, 70, 469-480.

Stelzl, I. (2000). What sample sizes are needed to get correct 

significance levels doe log-linear models? A Monte Carlo 
study using the SPSS-procedure “Hiloglinear.” Methods of 
Psychological Research Online, 5(2), 96-116.

Stevick, R. A., Dixon, P. N., & Willingham, W. K. (1980). Locus 
of control and behavioral versus self-response measures of 
social interest.  Journal of Individual Psychology, 36(2), 
183-190.

Strauser, D. R., & Ketz, K. (2002). The relationship between 

self-efficacy, locus of control and work personality. 
Journal of Rehabilitation, 67(1), 20-26.

Strickland, B. R. (1978). Internal–external health expectancies 

and health related behaviors. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 46, 1192-1211.

Syptak, J. M., Marsland, D. W., & Ulmer, D. (1999). Job 

satisfaction: Putting theory into practice. Family Practice 
Management, 99(10), 215-230.

Szilagyi, A. D., Sims, H. P., & Keller, R. T. (1976). Role 
dynamics, locus of control and employee attitudes and 
behavior. Academy of Management Journal, 19(2), 259-275.

Szymanski, E. M., & Hershenson, D. B. (1998). Career development 
for people with disabilities: An ecological model. In R. M. 
Parker & E. M. Syzmanski (Eds.), Rehabilitation Counseling: 
Basics and Beyond (pp. 327-378). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.

Szymanski, E. M., Hershenson, D. B., Ettenger, J. M., & Enright, 

M. S. (1996). Career development interventions for people 
with disabilities. In E. M. Szymanski & R. M. Parker 
(Eds.), Work and Disability (pp. 255-276). Austin, TX: Pro-
Ed.


                                   Job Satisfaction   125

Taylor, K. M. (1982). An investigation of vocational indecision 
in college students: Correlates and moderators. Journal of 
Vocational Behavior, 21, 318-329.

Taylor, S. E., & Brown, J. D. (1988). Illusion and well-being: A 

social psychological perspective on mental health. 
Psychological Bulletin, 103, 193-210.

Teglasi, H. (1978). Sex-role orientation, achievement 

motivation, and causal attributions of college females. Sex 
Roles, A Journal of Research, 4, 381-397.

Tsui, A. S., Egan, T. D., & O’Reilly, C. A. (1992). Being 

different: Relational demography and organizational 
attachment. Administrative Science Quarterly, 33, 549-579.

U.S. Department of Labor (2000). 2000 Metropolitan area 

occupational employment and wage estimates: Cheyenne, WY 
MSA. Retrieved December 15, 2003 from 
http://stats.bls.gov/oes/2000/oes_1580.htm

Unger, R., & Crawford, M.  (1992).  Women and gender: A feminist 

psychology. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Valencha, G. K. (1972). Construct validation of internal-

external locus of control on reinforcement related to work-
related variables. Proceedings of the 80th Annual Convention 
of the American Psychological Association, USA, 7, 455-456.

Van der Vegt, G. S. (2002). Effects of attitude dissimilarity 

and time on social integration: A longitudinal panel study. 
Journal of Occupational & Organizational Psychology, 75(4),
439-453.

Varca, P. E., Shaffer, G. S., & McCauley, C. D. (1983). Gender 

differences in job satisfaction revisited. Academy of 
Management Journal, 6, 348-53.

Voydanoff, P. (1988). Work role characteristics, family 

structure demands, and work/family conflict. Journal of 
Marriage and the Family, 50, 749-761.

Vroom, V. (1974). Work and motivation. New York: Wiley.


                                   Job Satisfaction   126

Wanberg, C. R., & Banas, J. T. (2000). Predictors and outcomes 

of openness to changes in a reorganizing workplace.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 85(1), 132-142.

Warr, P. B. (1987). Job characteristics and mental health. In P. 

B. Warr (Ed.), Psychology at work (pp. 247-269). London: 
Penguin Books.

Watson, D., & Baumal, E. (1967). Effects of locus of control and 

expectation on future control upon present performance. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 6, 212-215.

Weiner, B. (1972). Theories of motivation: From mechanism to 

cognition. Chicago: Rand McNally.

Weiss, H. M., & Cropanzano, R. (1996). Affective events theory: 

A theoretical discussion of the structure, causes, and 
consequences of affective experiences at work. Research in 
Organizational Behavior, 18, 1-74.

Weitz, J. (1952). A neglected concept in the study of job 

satisfaction. Personnel Psychology, 5, 201-205.

Wharton, A. S., Rotolo, T., & Bird, S. R. (2000). Social context 

at work: A multilevel analysis of job satisfaction. 
Sociological Forum, 3, 65-87.

White, R. (1959). Motivation reconsidered: The concept of 

competence. Psychological Review, 66, 297-333.

White, A. T., & Spector, P. E. (1987). An investigation of age-
related factors in the age-job satisfaction relationship. 
Psychology and Aging, 2, 261-265.

Wilkinson, P., & Lomax, D. (1989). Lessons for banking from the 

1980s and the recent past. National Westminster Bank 
Quarterly Review, 5, 2-16.

Wortman, C., & Brehm, J. W. (1975). Responses to uncontrollable 

outcomes: An integration of reactance theory and the 
learned helplessness model. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances 
in experimental social psychology (Vol. 8), (pp. 278-332). 
New York: Academic Press.


                                   Job Satisfaction   127

Wright, R. E., & Ermish, P. J. (1991). Gender discrimination in 

the British labor market: A re-assessment. Economic 
Journal, 101(406), 508-521.

Yaffee, R. (1997). The perils of insufficient statistical power. 

Statistics and Social Sciences. Retrieved January 19, 2004 
from http://www.nyu.edu/its/pubs/connect/archives/97fall/
yaffeeperils.html

Yamane, T. (1967). Statistics: An introductory analysis, (2nd 

Ed). New York: Harper and Row.

Zedeck, S. (1987, October). Satisfaction in union members and 

their spouses. Paper presented at the Job Satisfaction: 
Advances in Research and Practice Conference, Bowling 
Green, Ohio.


APPENDIX A

Letter of Acceptance to Various Financial 

Institutions in Cheyenne, WY

January 30, 2004

Dear Sir,

I wanted to thank you very much for agreeing to participate 

in the study I have developed for my dissertation. 

My study will examine whether an individual’s perception of 
control affect the way he or she views general job satisfaction. 
Data collected from the survey will be analyzed to see if there 
is a positive relationship between a person’s locus of control 
and his or her perception of job satisfaction.  Other questions 
this study is designed to answer are whether or not men in 
general are more likely to exhibit an internal locus of control 
than women and whether an individual’s education level affects 
his or her perception of locus of control and general job 
satisfaction.

Upon approval of my dissertation proposal, I will supply 

you with the survey instruments. This would most likely happen 
at the end of February of 2004. As agreed, I will protect the 
confidentiality of your organization and the participants.

At the conclusion of the study and approval by my 

university, I will prepare an executive summary of my findings 
and if you wish, I would also be more than happy to do a 
presentation of my study to your organization.

Thank you once again for allowing me to include your 

organization in my study.

Sincerely,

Selina Hoflund


APPENDIX B

Letter to Participants

Dear Participant,

I am a student at Capella University. I have put together 
this questionnaire as part of a dissertation project required 
for my doctorate degree. The sole purpose of this questionnaire 
is to gather data pertaining to my study of the relationship 
between ones personal perception of control and ones perceptions 
of job in general. The survey should take less than 15 minutes 
to complete. 

There are no risks involved in this survey. Due to the 

electronic format used for the questionnaire, the 
confidentiality of your name and the name of your 
organization is fully guaranteed here, and, in any of the 
reports or subsequent papers produced by me. 

Your participation in this study is voluntary and you 

have the right to withdraw your participation at any time. 
It is my hope that what I learned in my study will be added 
to the general growing body of knowledge in Organization 
and Management. Your help therefore, will be greatly 
appreciated.  

Consent to participate in this study is indicated by 

your completion and submission of your completed 
questionnaire. 

Please complete the survey only once.  Thank you very 

much for affording me a few minutes of your time and thank 
you for your participation!

Selina Hoflund
Cheyenne, WY

