NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES 

WAGES,  EMPLOYER COSTS,  AND 

EMPLOYEE  PERFORMANCE  IN  THE  FIRM 

Harry  J. Hoizet 

Working Paper No.  2830 

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH 

1050 Massachusetts Avenue 

Cambridge, MA  02138 

January 1989 

I  would like to thank seminar participants at Michigan State and the NBER for 
their helpful comments.  This paper has been written as part of the 
Conference on Compensation and Firm Performance which  is being supported by 
the Sloan Foundation and the NBER.  This research is part of NBER's research 
program in Labor Studies.  Any opinions expressed are those of the  author not 
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research. 


NBER Working Paper #2830 
January 1989 

WAGES, EMPLOYER COSTS, AND 

EMPLOYEE  PERFORMANCE IN THE FIRM 

ABSTRACT 

In  this paper  I use data fros  a survey of firms  to  estimate the  effects 

of a firm's wage level on several measures of its hiring costs and the 

characteristics and  performance of its employees.  These measures include the 

previous experience and  current tenure of its employees; subjective 
productivity scores for these employees; job  vacancy rates;  perceived ease of 

hiring qualified workers for the firs;  and hours spent  hiring and training new 

workers.  In doing so,  I distinguish the case of high wages imposed on s firm 

by unions from that in which the firm might be choosing its wage level in 

order to maximize its  profits.  I also provide some rough measures of the 

extent to  which firms  offset their high wage costs in each case. 

The results  show generslly positive effects of firm wages on employee 

experience and tenure as  well as on subjective productivity scores.  The 

firm's wsges generally have negative effects on job  vacancy rates and  positive 

effects on the perceived ease of hiring qualified workers.  Training time is 

slso reduced.  While the magnitude of each individusl effect rssy  not aiwsys be 

large or even  significant, their combined effects suggest that firms  offset 5 

good desi  of their higher wage costs through improved  productivity and lower 

hiring and  turnover costs among  their  employees. 

Harry Hoizer 
Department of Economics 
Michigan State University 
East Lansing,  MI  48824 


I.  Introduction 

It  has long  been recognized that firms  which are forced  to pay above 

market—clearing wages will  respond by altering their hiring behavior. 

If,  for 

instance,  unions raise the wages of unskilled workers for  a  firm  or industry, 
firms should respond by substituting capital for labor and more highly skilled 
workers for  those  less  skilled.1  Thus, we would expect  to  find  higher skill 
levels and  higher productivity observed among workers at unionized firms,  in 
order to prevent workers from fully extracting their monopoly rents.  The 
amount of training provided to these workers once hired might be affected as 

well.2 

Of course,  these  labor  demand—side  explanations often  assume  that the 

skills of workers  are  perfectly observable, that workers  within skill 
categories  are homogenous, and that supplies of workers  in  each  category  are 
limitless (I.e.,  perfectly elastic).3  If, however, these conditions are not 
met, profit—maximizing firms might themselves choose to pay higher wages even 
in the  absence of unions.  The  recently burgeoning  "Efficiency Wage" 
literature stresses these difficulties  which  firms  may have  in  hiring, 
monitoring,  and/or retaining high  productivity workers.5  ecause of these 
difficulties,  firms might choose to pay higher  wages  In order to  raise  the 
quality  and/or quantity of job applicants, reduce supervision costs and  reduce 
turnover.  Employer  search  and  matching  models  also  suggest  that firms might 
choose  high  wages  in  order  to lower the foregone profits associated with 
lengthy job  vacancies  and  perhaps  to lower hiring costs as well.6  Finally, 
firms  might change the structure and  method of pay in  addition  to its average 
level  in order to create greater incentives for worker performance.7 

A great deal of empirical  evidence has also been produced on these 

general topics, but surprisingly little considers the direct effects of firm— 


level wages on employee characteristics and performance.  For  instance,  the 

effects of unions on worker productivity, profits,  training  and  turnover have 

received widespread attention, though few studies focus  on the  direct effects 

of wages as opposed to the  institution of unionism on these outcomes.8  More 

generally, wage effects on turnover  and  absenteeism have  been studied.9  But a 

much broader range of employee coats and  productive characteristics or 

outcomes among workers must be considered in order to correctly measure the 

firm's ability to  offset the costs of higher wages.  The magnitudes of the 

effects must be considered as well in  any reasonable attempt to  gauge the 

overall effects of wages on the firm.1° 

In this paper I  use data from  a survey of firms to estimate the effects 

of a firm's wages on its hiring costs and on the characteristics and 

performance of its workers.  The focus  on wages at the level of the firm (as 

opposed to the industry or individual worker) will distinguish this work from 

most previous studies on related issues.  This focus is consistent with the 

evidence of wage differentials between firms  for comparable workers of which 

economists have long been aware (e.g.  Dunlop (1957))  but which remain poorly 

understood to date. 

Several measures of worker quality and  performance are used  as outcomes 

here.  These include:  the previous experience of the worker and his/her 

tenure with the current employer; as well as subjective productivity scores as 

gauged by the employer.  In addition,  I will consider job vacancy rates  and 

the perceived ease  of hiring qualified workers to measure firm  hiring 

difficulties and how wages affect them.  Finally,  I will consider the number 

of hours spent hiring and training these new employees by the employer.  This 

fairly comprehensive list of responses to firm  wages  will  enable us to 

approximately measure the degree to which high wage costs are offset by firms, 

In a manner which has not been attempted to date. 

2 


In estimating fire—level  wage effects on these  outcomes,  we will 

distinguish between the effects of unions on wages,  which are generally 

imposed exogenously on the firm;11  and other  determinants of wage levels which 

might conceivably reflect firm choices.  These other determinants will include 

industry and  firm  size,  both of which have clearly been show  to be associated 

with long—run wage differences between firms.12  While this analysis is not an 
explicit test  of "Efficiency Wages"  or any other theory of wage determination, 
it should shed  some light on the general notion of whether firms eight ever 

find  it in  their  interest to  pay high (relative to  the  market)  wages. 

The data  which  are  used  here  to  measure  firm effects are  from the 1982 

wave of the  Employment  portunity Pilot  Project  (EOPP)  Survey  of Firms.13 
This  wave of the survey was administered to approximately 31100  firms  in 28 
local areas.  The survey is discussed in greater detail  below. 

The results of the estimation can be briefly summarized here.  We 

generally find  positive effects  of firm wages on employee experience and 
tenure as  well  as on  subjective  productivity scores.  The  firm's  wages  also 
have negative effects on  job  vacancy rates and  positive effects on  the 
perceived  ease of hiring qualified workers as well as negative  effects on 
hours  of training.  While  the  magnitude  and/or  significance  levels  of many  of 
the  individual  effects are  not large,  taken  together they  suggest  that  firms 
offset  a  good  deal  of their  higher wage  costs through improved  productivity 
and  lower  hiring 

costs  among  their employees. 

and  turnover 

The rest  of the paper  is laid  out as follows:  Section II describes the 

data and  the equations estimated in greater detail, while Section III  presents 
the results of estimated equations.  Section IV presents a summing  up of the 
various effects to estimate an overall effect of wages on profits,  while 
Section V contains the conclusion and implications of this work. 

3 


II.  Data and Equations 

In  order to  consider the  effects of a firm's wage level on its cost and 
profits, we must distinguish between its effects on fixed  hiring  costs and  on 
its variable costs and revenues of operating.  For a given period of time,  a 

firm's profits can be written as  follows: 

1) 

II  = PQ(W,  (1—V)J)—w(1—V)J  — 

FRCH 

where FR and CR reflect the frequency  of hiring and direct cost per  hire 
respectively; V reflects the rate at the firm;  .J  is the number of jobs 
currently available in the firm;  and  F,  Q and W reflect prices,  output and 
wages at the firm.  Both output and labor  costs therefore depend on non—vacant 
jobs (i.e., employment in the firm)  as well as on wages in this formulation, 
though employment above the specified  job level does not add to output or 

revenue here. 

The frequency of hiring should  reflect employee turnover as well as net 

employment growth at  the  firm.  The  cost  per  hire  should  reflect  both the 
duration  and  intensity of  hiring  activity, which in  turn  should  influence  the 
number  of  hours  spent by company  personnel  in  recruiting, screening,  and 
training new  employees.  The  wages  of  company personnel  and  other direct 
hiring expenditures (such  as  advertising,  etc.) are  included as  well  in  this 
term.  Finally, the vacancy rate also depends on both the frequency and 
duration of new hiring activity,  as well  as the fractions of each in which the 

positions being filled  are actually  vacant. 

The  firm's wage level might raise output levels by inducing the firm to 

hire more qualified workers. 

This should  be easier to do if the quantity 


and/or quality of job applicants attracted by the  firm  rises  with the wage. 

The wage level  might also affect direct hiring costs in a variety of ways.  By 

reducing employee turnover  (or,  equivalently, raising employee  tenure with the 

firm),  higher wages will reduce  the frequency with which new employees must be 
hired.  Costs per hire might also be reduced if a larger and  better applicant 

pool leads to  fewer  hours spent recruiting and training by company 

personnel.  Monetary costs of recruiting should  be reduced as well.  Finally, 

reductions in the frequency and duration of hiring will  also  reduce vacancy 

rates and thus the costs of foregone  output associated with vacant jobs.  Of 

course, large offsets of wage costs in terms of training or expected 

productivity should  imply smaller ones in terms of vacancy rates and/or 

turnover, as the net attractiveness of high—wage jobs  for workers becomes 

diminished. 

Assuming that  the price level  and number of jobs are fixed,  the effects 

of wages on firm profits can be seen by differentiating Equation 1)  as 

follows: 

2) 

dli 
dW 

— 

3Q 
3W 

— 

3Q  v 
3(1—V)J 3W 

— (1—V)J 

+ W.J• 

3V  3FH 

— 

3CH 

•C  —  F 

where the costs  of  higher  wages  must  be  balanced  against  the  potential 
benefits of  higher  output,  lower  vacancies  and  lower  direct  hiring  costs.  If 
the firm  is  free to  choose  its wage level, it will  do  so  in  the  usual manner 
of  equating these  marginal costs and benefits. 

If,  however,  the wage is 

exogenously determined (by unions or otherwise), Equation 2)  simply enables us 

to measure the degree to which these higher  costs can be offset by the firm. 

5 


The data with which we will analyze these  issues are from  the  EOPP 

Survey of firms  in  1980  and 1982.  This  survey was administered in 28 local 

areas that were sites for  the  EOPP  labor market experiments in  the  late 

1970's.  The sites are heavily concentrated in the South and mid—West,  and 

about  half are  SMSA's.  Large and/or  low—wage firma  were oversampled within 

each site. 

The 1982  survey,  which we  use  below,  asked  two general types  of 

questions of employers:  one type covering firm—wide characteristics (e.g., 

number of employees, fraction unionized, number of vacancies, perceived  hiring 

difficulties etc.) and the other covering the last worker hired during the 

previous year.  Mong  the  latter  questions in  the 1982  Survey were the 

occupation, sex,  age and  years of education of the worker,  as well as his or 

her wages — both starting and current (or most recent if the employee was no 
longer with  the firm). 

One measure of employee performance that is available for these workers 

is a subjective performance rating.  Employers were asked to score  the most 

recent employee's productivity on a scale from 0 to 100,  where the former 

would reflect no productivity and the latter the maximum feasible Output on 

the job.  The question was asked for different points in  the employee's tenure 

at the firm:  the first two weeks,  the third through twelfth weeks,  and 

currently/most recently. 

Separate  questions were asked  for "typical" 

employees on the same job so that relative comparisons could be made within 

the firm. 

As for more objective employee characteristics which might be 

performance—related, a few different measures of employee experience are 

available in  these data.  One question asked how many months of previous 

experience the employee had that  has some application to the current job. 

6 


Presusably, this question gauges occupation and/or  industry—specific 
experience.  From the  question on the employee's age and  years of education, 
we can also calculate a standard measure of total  labor market experience 

(i.e.,  age minus years of education minus 6). 

For a measure of turnover and therefore of hiring frequency, tenure 

within the firm was specifically asked  from those employees who were no longer 

with the firm.  For those  still present, tenure can be calculated from  the 

date of hiring and the survey date. 

In  addition to the tenure measures, 

several  questions  were  asked  about  the asount  of time explicitly invested in 
training  by  the  new  employee.  Total  hours  of  formal  and  informal  training 
provided  by  management, supervisors, or trained personnel as well  as  time 
spent  with co—workers are available.  The hours spent recruiting and  screening 

workers for this position are available as well. 

Using these data,  we can estimate the effects of firm—level wages on a 

variety of labor outcomes.  We note that an individual employee's wages and 

quality (or  productivity) can be decomposed into firm—wide and  individual— 

specific components: 

3) 

I) 

W1  W + 

Q..  Q.(W.)  + 

where  Wand Q reflect wages  and  quality  respectively  while the subscripts i 
and j denote  the  individual  and  firm  respectively.  Thus an  individual's  wage 
is  some  function  wj(Qj)  of his/her perceived quality in  addition to  a firm— 
wide  premiun W, which in turn influences the quality of worker  attracted 
and/or  retained by the firm.  Other equations  comparable to 'I)  could  be 

7 


specified for  employee tenure or for time  spent training the employee. 

In 

addition, some firm—wide outcomes (such as vacancy rates or ease of hiring) 

can be denoted as  follows: 

t)  V 

.3 

V(W.)  + v. 
3 

3 

with both wage—determined and random components. 

If direct observations on the firm -wage premium 

were available, 

these  equations could be estimated recursively.  But given that only 

individual employee's wages are available  in the data, we estimate the 

following simultaneous equations: 

5) 

6) 

6') 

W  .  =  a  + b X.. + c  Z  .  +  d  Y. + c 
ij 

W 13 

U ij 

W 3  W,13 

W 

X 

=  a  + b  14.  .  +  c  Z.  + e 
X 
ij 
V  =a +bW.+cZ.+e 
j 

X,1,J 
V lj  V,ij 

V ij 

X  3.3 

X  3.3 

V 

where  the 

are the observed individual characteristics or outcomes 

described above,  (such as experience and productivity ratings),  the Z1 are 
exogenous worker and job characteristics, and the 

are exogenous 

characteristics of the uirm.l!! 

high school or college) dummies. 

The Z1j  variables used here include sex,  occupation and education (i.e. 
The Y Include 2—digit industry dummies as 
well as fraction  unionized and  a group of firm size variables.  The latter 
include a continuous measure of  firm size  within the site as well as a set of 
dummies for  total  firm  size  (i.e.,  0—99,  1OO—249,  250—'99,  500—1999, 2000+). 

The crucial  assumption of this  model  is that  the 

can be excluded 

from and  thereby  used  to  Identify  equations 6)  and  6').  This is  tantamount to 

8 


assuming that  these  variables affect the various labor outcomes strictly 

through the wage and  not directly. 

This assumption is no doubt questionable, 

especially for industry (where  technological differences independent of the 

wage may determine differences in  hiring). 

Even  firm  size might directly 

affect the quality of job applicants independently of the wage.15 

Furthermore, the exogeneity of industry and  size with respect to the 

wage  as  well as the observed outcomes might also be in doubt,  as wage 

differentials with regards to  each might reflect maximizing behavior and 

therefore self—selection.  Indeed,  the "Efficiency Wage" theories noted above 

predict such self—selection, which may cause biases (though  mostly towards 

zero)  in estimated wage effects.16 

For those reasons,  we estimate different specifications of Equations 6) 

and 6').  In some,  the fraction unionized and/or plant and  firm size will be 

used to identify the  outcome equations; while in others, industry dummies will 

be used as well. 

In  all  cases,  statistical tests will be discussed for the 

validity of the  exclusions used. 

An additional concern in  some cases below involves the subjective 
nature of certain outcome variables — i.e.,  the productivity ratings and 
perceived ease  of hiring.  The former,  in particular, are known to contain a 
good deal of measurement error (Bishop,  1987)  and may also contain firm — 
specific  components  that are  correlated with our instruments for  firm—level 
wages,  thereby causing  biased  estimates.17  Of course,  the  additional  use of 
objective outcomes (i.e.,  experience/tenure instead of productivity scores  and 
vacancy  rates instead  of ease of hiring)  provides a  check  on  any  results 
obtained  with the subjective outcomes.  Furthermore, evidence will be provided 

below on the relationships between experience, productivity scores,  and  wages 

that will underscore the validity of both.  In partaicular, we will note that 

9 


fixed—effects estimates of these relationships are  fairly  comparable to  cross— 

sectional ones, thereby suggesting that biases from  firm—specific effects are 

not  severe. 

We note a few other econometric issues before moving on to  the 

results.  We estimate the various outcome equations independently of one 

another,  thus abstracting from  cross—equation effects and error 

correlations.18  Thus,  the outcome equations are of a reduced—form nature. 

A few other aspects of the estimation below are noted mm well.  For one 

thing, certain limited dependent variable functions will be estimated where 

appropriate, using predicted firm wages as the independent variable.19 

Finally, continuous hazard models of the Weibull form will be estimated in 

order  to gauge the  effect of the  firm's wages on tenure  outcomes. 

Ill.  Empirical Results 

In Table 1  we find  means and  standard deviations of several key 

variables for  the sample used here.  Two types of variables are considered: 

those which reflect the  characteristics and  performance of the last  worker 

hired as well as those of the firm itself. 

Several characteristics of workers and firma  in the sample are 

noteworthy.  The starting wages are relatively low,  reflecting a sample which 

is predominantly comprised of high school  workers in clerical, males,  and 

service jobs.  It is also a fairly young sample,  averaging 8—9 total years of 

experience in  the labor market.  Average tenure on the job is just under 1 

year.  These characteristics of workers reflect the fact that low—wage firma 

were overaaapled and also  that the last—hired workerm will over—represent 

high—turnover, low—wage jobs and low—tenure workers within firms. 

10 


Table 1 

Means (and  Standard  Deviations) of Key Variables 

Last Worker Hired: 
Starting Wage 

Education: 

High School 
College 

Occupation: 

Professional/Technical 
Managerial 
Clerical 
Sales 
Crafts 
Operatives 
Laborer 
Service 
Missing 

Prior  Experience  (Years): 

General 

Firm: 

Fraction Unionized 

Local Firm Size 

Vacancy Rate 

Perceived Ease of Hiring 

Qualified Workers: 

Very Easy 
Not Very Difficult 
Somewhat Difficult 
Very Difficult 

.113 

(.288) 

68.185 

(227.933) 

.018 
(.059) 

.315 
.267 
.2'48 
.170 

$5.02 
(1.88) 

.782 
.087 

.O'2 
.01O 
.15H 
.190 
.005 
.020 
.002 
.192 
.355 

Related 

Tenure (Months): 

Hours of Training: 

Formal 

Informal 

(Management) 

Informal 

(Co—workers) 
Hours spent Hiring: 

Total 

Per Applicant 

Productivity Score 

8.581 
(8.925) 
2.U6 
(I.1l2O) 

11. 380 
(7.152) 

8.991 

(3 8.779) 
5.118 
(73.716) 
38.768 
(129.283) 

12.225 
(2 8.865) 
2.155 
(I.6I7) 

80.057 
(17.598) 


The vast majority of training hours reported here  are for  informal 

training by both co—workers and management.  Flours spent hiring by management 

are lower  than those  spent training.  Current or most recent productivity 

scores average about 80, which is significantly higher than those attributed 

to workers at the time  of hiring. 

P.s  for the firms  themselves, we find  that they are relatively large but 

less unionized relative to  random national samples.20  Vacancy rates are 

fairly low, and a majority of firms  do not report difficulties in hiring 

qualified workers. 

Fixed Costs:  Hiring Time,  Training  Time 

In  Tables 2 and 3 we present estimates of the effects of the firm's 

wage levels on its hours spent hiring and  training respectively.  These 

estimates are from versions of Equation 6)  above  in which hours spent hiring 

or training are the dependent varlablea.  A similar set of equations are 

estimated for other outcomes and  reported below. 

The equations reported  here  and  below  are  estimated  using  two—stage 

least  squares.  Several specifications are  presented  In  which  industry, 
fraction unionized  and  firm size  variables  are  used  to identify the  two  stages 
and  provide estimates of the  firm wage.  To  test  whether  high  wages  caused  by 
unions  have different effects from those chosen by the firm,  we  present 

separate estimates of the union wage effect (column  3) and  the size—wage 

premium effect (Column H).  Coefficients on these variables when they appear 

as controls are presented as well.  We use the  individuafs  starting wage to 

calculate this premium,  and we control for a variety of personal 

characteristics (i.e.,  education, sex,  occupation, site,  and  year hired) in 

the outcome equation.21 

11 


Table 2 

Firm Wage Effects on Hours Spent  Hiring — 2SLS 

A. 

Total Hours Spent Hiring 

Firm  Wage 

Fraction Unionized 

Local Firm Size 

Firm Size 
Dummies 
Industry Dummies 

I 

13.14314 
(5.361) 

——— 

no 

no 

.055 

21.970 
(114.911) 

——— 

6.9140 

(13.906) 

——— 

3.4 

(.8111) 
yes 

yes 

.103 

no 

yes 

.087 

1'43.204 
(75.099) 

(.205) 

no 

yes 

.0314 

13. 

Hours Spent Hiring per Applicant 

Firm  Wage 

I 

.1044 

(.859) 
Fraction Unionized  ——— 

Local Firm Size 

Total Firm Size 
Dummies 
Industry Dummies 

no 

no 

.069 

—1.095 
(1.919) 

——— 

no 

yes 

.099 

I 

—.965 
(2.2112) 

——— 

.0141 
(.131) 
yes 

yes 

.101 

31459 
(7.142k) 

.007 
(.020) 

no 

yes 

.092 

NOTE:  Education, sex, occupation, site,  and year dummies are included in 
these and.  all  subsequent equations.  Sample size for this and all 
subsequent tables is 1278.  Industry dummies are 2—digit unless 
otherwise indicated.  Hours spent hiring include hours spent 
recruiting, screening and interviewing job applicants.  Standard 
errors are presented in parentheses in this and all other tables 
below. 


Table 3 

Firm Wage Effects on  hours Spent Training — 2SLS 

A. 

Formal Training by Management 

a 

a 

—3.397 
(7.308) 

—10. 87 8 
(15. 993) 

—12. 701 
(18. 738) 

Firm Wage 

Fraction Unionized 

Local Firm Size 

Total Firm Size 
Dummies 
Industry Dummies 

no 

no 

no 

yes 

82 

.035 

.088 

.458 
(1.096) 
yes 

yes 

.089 

Informal  Training 

by  Management 

Firm Wage 

Fraction Unionized 

—13.085 
(13.759) 

2 

1 

'1 

—50. 603 
(30.004) 

—28.982 
(35.507) 

Local Firm Size 

Total Firm Size 
Dummies 
Industry Dummies 

82 

no 

no 

.049 

no 

yes 

.084 

—2.762 
(2.077) 

yes 

yes 

.087 

Informal  Trainine 

by Co—Workers 

a 

3 

4 

Firm Wage 

—'15.258 
(24.384) 

—26.412 
(53. 911) 

—13.877 
(62.686) 

Fraction Unionized 

Local Firm Size 

Total Firm Size 
Dummies 
Industry Dummies 

82 

no 

no 

.035 

no 

yem 

.068 

—2.558 
(3.667) 

yes 

yes 

.074 

2.239 

(59. 210) 

—.037 
(.162) 

no 

yes 

.088 

—158.590 
(130.113) 
.306 
(.355) 

no 

yes 

.066 

82)412 
(204.606) 
—.308 
(.558) 

no 

yes 

.005 


Table 2 contains results for  hours spent hiring.  Because high—wage and 

large firms receive more job  applicants which, in turn,  should require more 

time spent  screening and interviewing applicants, we present estimates of 

equations for  total hours  spent as well as hours  spent per  applicant.22 

The results show that high—wage firms generally must spend  more total 

time on their hiring activities than do other firms.  Only when a strict  union 

wage premium is considered (i.e.,  when we control for  industry and  firm size) 

does this result not appear. 

However,  hours spent per applicant show no  such 

effect.  If anything, these effects are generally negative (though not 

significant).  Thus,  the larger  quantity (and  perhaps quality) of job 

applicants received by high—wage firms  requires them to  spend more time on 

screening, though some small  economies of scale may emerge.23 

The effects of firm wages on hours spent training new employees appear 

in Table 3.  Separate equations appear for the three types of training 

considered:  formal, informal provided by management, and  informal provided by 

co—workers. 

The results show generally negative effects of firm wages on all  three 

types of training,  though most effects are not  significant.  Only the effects 

on hours  of informal training provided by management are marginally 

significant when we control for  industry but not  firm size.2  We also note 

that the  results here conflict somewhat with those presented by Barron et.  al. 

using the same data.25 

Comparing Tables 2 and 3,  we find  that the magnitudes of the combined 

negative training effects are generally larger than the positive effects on 

total time spent hiring.  While the costs associated with the different kinds 

of time presumably differ, the results suggest that total time spent and costs 

per new employee might be lower in high wage firms. 

12 


Hiring Frequency:  Tenure 

Of' course,  the question remains as to  how frequently these  new 

employees must be hired,  which depends on turnover. 

Previous research (cited 

above) has shown  lower turnover among high—wage employees and  industries as 

well as  unionized firms.  In Table 14  we consider whether this holds more 
generally for employees of high—wage firms.  The table presents estimates of 
hazard functions in which the dependent variable is months of job  tenure. 

Estimates are presented using  the Weibull functional form. 

The results show that higher firm wages generally lead to higher  tenure 

with the firm.26  The effect of high wages in large firms  is particularly 

strong,  while that in union firms is negative but not significant.27 

Overall, then,  we find  that  high wages in a firm generally enable it to 
reduce turnover and thus the number of new employees it must hire,  as well as 

the total time associated with each new employee.  Fixed hiring costs thus 

appear to be lower in high—wage firms. 

Vacancies and Ease of Hiring 

As  noted above,  a firm's output and labor costs reflect its vacancies 

as well as its direct wage costs,  and vacancy rates can give  us some 
indication about  the frequency and duration of hiring activities.  In Table 5 
we present estimates of vacancy rate equations.  Given the large fraction  of 
firms (i.e.,  about 85%)  which report no vacancies, we estimate those equations 
using  Tobit as well  as  OLS. 
predicted wage  based  on  virtually the  same  instruments as  were  used  in  the 
previous tables,28  Control variables  are comparable as  well. 

In  both  cases, the  firm—level wage is the 

13 


Table  4 

Firm Wage Effect  on  Months  of  Job  Tenure  — 

Weibull  Hazard Functions 

.1 

1 

.1 

Firm Wage 
Fraction Unionized 

.0118 
(.050) 

——— 

Local Firm  Size 

Firm Size 
Dummies 
Industry  Dummies 

no 

no 

.180 
(.085) 

——— 

no 

yes 

—.048 
(.103) 

——— 

.033 
(.008) 
yes 

yes 

.540 
(.192) 
—.0013 
(.0006) 

no 

yes 

Log  L 

—17'I.68 

—146.78 

—154.30 

—164.21 


Table 5 

Firm Wage Effects on  Job Vacancy  Rates 

Fraction Unionized  ——— 

A. 

2SLS 

Firm Wage 

Local Firm Size 

Total Firm Size 
Dummies 
Industry Dummies 

R2 

B. 

Tobit 

Firm  Wage 

I 

—.020 
(.011) 

no 

no 

.052 

—.023 
(.048) 

Fraction Unionized  ——— 

Local Firm Size 

Total Firm Size 
Dummies 
Industry Dummies 

no 

no 

I 

—.014 
(.023) 
——— 

—.006 
(.002) 
yes 

yes 

.072 

—.158 
(.104) 
—— 

.014 
(.007) 
yes 

yes 

—.069 
(.038) 
.0001 

(.0001) 

no 

yes 

.059 

.388 
(.165) 
—.0017 
(.0006) 

no 

yes 

—.056 
(.019) 
——— 

yes 

.059 

—.028 
(.084) 
——— 

no 

yes 

I 

a 

Log L 

—547.7 

—253.9 

—250.3 

—249.2 

NOTE: 

In  these equations, firm wage is a predicted variable based on the 
regressors used in  all  of the previous tables.  Industry dummies 
are 1—digit  here. 


The results show that higher wages are usually associated with lower 

vacancy rates,  though once again the exact magnitudes are difficult to pin 

down.  Comparing Tobit estimates to those from  OLS equations we find 

coefficient magnitudes among the former which are much more unstable,  varying 

in both  sign  and  magnitude.  We also find  standard errors which are always 

larger among the former.  The largest and most significant negative effect is 

the one  associated with union wages in  the  Tobit equations, while the Tobit 

effect of large firm size has the opposite sign. 

An alternative method of testing for  hiring  effects of wages can be 

found by analyzing the firm's perceived ease of hiring qualified workers.  As 

noted above, this subjective variable may refer  to  any or all components of 
hiring costs  and  may  also reflect  firm—specific factors  that could  cause 
biases  if correlated with  regressors.  Still,  it provides us  with  an 
additional measure of hiring costs with  which to the estimate the effects of a 

firm's wages. 

in  Table  6. 

Equations for  the  effects of wages  on  perceived  ease  of hiring  appear 
In these  equations, the  dependent variable  takes  on  a  value of 
one  if firms  report  that  the hiring  of qualified  werkers  is  "very  easy"  or 
"not  very difficult" and zero  if such hiring is  "somewhat difficult" or every 

difficult".  Other specifications not reported  here provided relatively 
similar estImates. 29 

Equations are estimated using two—stage least squares. 

The results of Table 6 show that  higher  wages  generally 

cause 

the 

perceived 

ease  of hiring qualified workers to rise as  well.  Only the union 

wage effect is not significant here,  while the  wage effect associated with 

firm  size is  quite large. 

Overall, then,  we find  firm wage levels to be negatively associated 

with hiring costs and  difficulties.  Though hours spent recruiting and 

vI 


Table  6 

Firm  Wage Effects On Ease of  Hiring  —  2SLS 

.468 
(.093) 

Firm  Wage 
Fraction  Unionized 
Local Firm Size 

Total Firm Size 
Dummies 
Industry Dummies 

R2 

no 

no 

.095 

.563 
(.209) 

no 

yes 

.116 

.186 
(.232) 

.0112 
(.014) 
yes 

yes 

.135 

2.687 
(1.1123) 
.006 
(.004) 

no 

yes 

.0110 

NOTE: 

Dependent variable is equal to one if employer finds it  very 
easy on not very difficult to hire qualified workers and zero 
otherwise. 


Table 7 

Firm  Wage Effects On  Years of Prior  Experience 

A. 

General Experience —  2SLS 

Firm Wage 
Fraction  Unionized  ——— 

14.713 
(1.630) 

Plant Size 

Firm Size Dummies 

Industry Dummies 

——— 

no 

no 

.0148 

R2 

B. 

Related Experience — 2SLS 
I 

Firm Wage 

Fraction Unionized 

Plant Size 

Firm Size  Dummies 

Industry Dummies 

3.024 
(.775) 
——— 

——— 

no 

no 

.079 

C.  Related Experience — Tobit 

I 

Firm  Wage 
Fraction  Unionized  ——— 

14.1430 

(1.?53) 

Plant  Size 

Firm  Size  Dummies 

Industry Dummies 

no 

no 

I 

4.1468 
(4.199) 

——— 

—.012 
(.2145) 
yes 

yes 

.087 

I 

1.912 

(2.032) 

——— 

.017 
(.119) 
yes 

yes 

.110 

I 

1.139 
(2.392) 

—— 

.1142 
(.171) 
yes 

yes 

7.572 
(114.912) 
.029 
(.0141) 

no 

yes 

.068 

14.172 
(6.297) 
—.007 
(.017) 

no 

yes 

.113 

2.521 
(14.o9) 
—.003 
(.0114) 

no 

yes 

2.627 
(3.621) 

——— 

_—— 

yes 

yes 

.082 

1.837 

(1.739) 

——— 

——— 

no 

yes 

.108 

1.795 
(2.007) 

——— 

——— 

no 

yes 

Log L 

—2907.1 

—2902.1 

—2901.1 

—2902.1 

NOTE: 

The  tobit equations use 1—digit  industry dummies rather than  2—digit 
for computational reasons. 


Table 8 

Firm Wage Effects On Current Productivity Scores — 2SLS 

Firm Wage 

7.053 

(3.308) 
Fraction Unionized  ——— 

Local Firm Size 

——— 

Total  Firm Size 
Dummies 
Industry Dummies 

p2 

no 

no 

.01111 

16.056 
(7.1161) 

——— 

no 

yes 

.076 

I 

15.'187 
(8.719) 

——— 

.270 
(.570) 

yes 

yes 

.077 

16.773 

(27.788) 
—.002 
(.076) 

no 

yes 

.075 


screening rise  for high wage firms,  hours Spent  training per new 
fall  by even larger amounts.  The frequency of new hiring apparently. 
reduced and  employee  tenure rises while the costs associated with vacant 

are probably reduced  as  well. 

Employee tharacteristica and  Performance 

For  employees of relatively long  tenure,  the  variable  costs  of higher 

wages  per hour or week of work  will likely swamp  any  reductions in  fixed 
hiring costs which they might cause.  These  variable costs must therefore be 
compared to improvements in the characteristtc  and/or performance of 
employees hired  in these firms. 

Without direct evidence on worker output, we use two  different proxies 

for the performance of workers in the firm.  One is the number of years of 
prior experience which the employee has had,  either  general or related to the 
(described above)  job at the firm.  The other is the productivity score 
assigned to the worker either currently or at the end of his/her tenure with 
the firm.  The experience measures have the advantage of being objective, t5 
avoiding the problems associated with subjective variables.  1owever,  there 
may be some doubt as to whether prior experience is truly productivity— 

enhancing 

30 

In order to consider more carefully the  nature of these proxies for 
worker productivity, the Appendix contains estimates of OLS equations for 
wages and productivity scores of workers.  The wage equations correspond to 
Equation 5)  above.  They appear with and without the productivity score 
included as an additional independent variable. 

These equations show that both experience  and  productivity  scores  are 
positively associated with individuals wages.  Related  experience has  effects 

15 


which are several  times larger than  those of general experience.  Furthermore, 
the effects of productivity scores on  wages seem to be largely (though  not 
totally) explained by prior  experience.  The productivity score equations also 
show particularly large effects of related experience. 

Furthermore, a variety of wage—change and productivity—change equations 

presented in Hoizer (1988)  show results which are fairly  comparable to  those 

presented in the Appendix.31  Since these change equations omit fixed  effects 
of firms in  the  performance ratings (which should capture some of the 

subjective differencess across managers of different firms in how they rate 
employees), we may conclude that both prior experience measures as well as 

subjective productivity scores are reasonable proxies for worker performance 
at the firm. 

In Tables  7 and 8 we  move  on  to  consider the effects of firm—level 

wages on our  various  proxies  for worker  preference.  Table  7  contains 
equations  for  years  of  prior experience  while  Table 8 contains the  firm 
productivity scores. 

Table 7 provides separate estimates for general and related 

experience.  Because of the large fraction (i.e.,  about 110%)  of workers  with 
no related  experience  reported,  we  provide Tobit estimates  as  well  for  this 
latter  measure.32  The results show generally positive effects of firm  wages 
on  years of prior experience.  However, these estimates are generally not 
significant once we have controlled for industry.  Furthermore, it generally 
appears as though industry effects exist independently of firm wages 
(according to F—tests on  the  industry  dummies). 

The  results of productivity score  equations in  Table  8 provide strong 

support  for the  notion that worker  productivity rises  with  the  firm wage 
level.  Effects  of  wages  are  positive and  significant  in  all  cases except  for 

16 


Table 9 

Summary of Firm Wage 

Effects on Hiring Costs and 

Employee Performance 

Outcomes: 

Industry, 
Union,  Size 
Effects 

Union, Size 
Effects 

Union 
Effect 

Size 
Effect 

Hours Spent Hiring 

Total 
Per  Applicant 

Hours  Spent Training 

Formal 
Informal:  Management 
Informal:  Coworkers 

Months of  Tenure 
Job Vacancy Rates 
Ease of Hiring 
Prior  Experience 

General 
Related 

Productivity Scores 

+ 

——— 

+ 

+4+ 

++ 
— 

— 

— 

+++ 

+4+ 

+ 
+ 

— 
+ 

+ 
+ 

+++ 

+ 

+ 
+4+ 

+ 
+ 
+ 

NOTE:  Three plus or minus signs reflect statistical significance at the 10% level 

(2—tailed test); two reflect  it  at  the  20% level,  and one reflects the higher 
levels.  The four columns here correspond to columns 1—il  In Tables 2 through 
8.  Job vacancy rate and  experience  level estimates reflect 2SLS with linear 
(rather than Tobit)  second stage  here. 


the firm—size—wage effect. 

In  contrast,  coefficients on the  control variables 

for unionism and  local firm size  show little direct effects of these factors, 

Before moving on,  we present a summary  of  all of these estimated 

effects of firm wages on hiring costs and employee  characteristics or 
performance in  Table 9.  For  each outcome variable in Tables 2 through 8,  we 
present the sign (i.e.,  plus or minus)  of the wage effect under  each of the 
four different exclusion restrictions.  Results which are significant at the 
20% level in a 2—tailed test are represented hy 2 signs,  which  significance at 

or better  than 10% is represented by three signs. 

The table shows that the firm's  wage level generally has positive and 

negative effects respectively  on  total  hours  spent hiring  and  training  new 
workers.  Effects  on  vacancy rates  are  also  generally negative while  those on 
employee  tenure,  perceived ease  of hiring,  experience and  perceived 
productivity are positive.  The vacancy,  ease of hiring,  and productivity 
scare effects are significant in  three  of the  four  specifications presented 

and  the tenure effect is significant in two of the four.  In general, the wage 

premia associated with firm size  are more likely to be significant than are 
those associated with unicnism.  This is true despite the fact that selection 

biases are more likely to bias estimated coefficients towards zero  for the 

former. 

IV.  A  Summing  Up of Wage Effects 

Given the  variety of firm wage effects which we have estimated for 
hiring and  training, vacancy rates,  and worker quality/performance, we now 
must sum up these magnitudes to determine the  extent to  which wage costs can 
be offset for high—wage firms.  While this effort requires some fairly heroic 
assumptions and therefore must be viewed  as being only suggestive, it does 

17 


shed  light  on  the relative magnitudes of the estimated effects and therefore 
on how  these effects net  out  for  firma. 

To do this computation, we consider Equation (2)  from  page 5 above, 
which decomposes  wage effects on  profits into  components based on output 
(directly and  through  vacancy  rates),  wage costs, and fixed  hiring costs. 
order to  make  Equation  (2)  tractable for  this  effort,  we  must  transform  it 
into  the  following: 

In 

dm1! 
dlnW  - 

dlnPQ 
dlnW 

dlnWC 

w  dlnW 

dlnHC 
H dlnW 

where the revenue (PQ)  and wage cost (WC)  elasticities include the direct 

effects of wages (first and third  terms  of Equation 2) respectively) as well 

as their indirect effects through the vacancy rate (second  and  fourth terms of 

Equation 2) respectively).  The hiring cost (HC)  elasticity includes wage 
effects on both frequency and coat per hire (fifth and sixth terns of Equation 

2)), while the  l's represent the shares of revenue accounted for by direct 

wage costs and  hiring costs respectively. 

We obtain Equation (7)  by  dividing 

Equation (2)  by  PQJ/W.  The 

estimated effect of wages on profits can then be calculated from  our estimated 

means  and  coefficients in  previous tables.33  To perform the calculation, we 

make the assumption that labor accounts for about 70% of the total value of 

output and  that 10% of this goes to specifically personnel—related activity, 

so we can approximate 1  and 

1H 

with the fractions  .6  and .1  respectively. 

In order to obtain estimates of the elasticity of revenue with respect 

to wages, we also  make the following assumptions:  1)  proportional changes in 
performance ratings equal proportional changes in output per rker  and 
therefore  in revenue (since we are  treating prices as constant); and  2) the 

18 


Table  10 

Effects of a  10%  Wage 
Increase on Profita 

Industry, 
Union,  Size 
Effects 

Union 
Size 
Effect 

Union 
Effeot 

Size 
Effect 

1.  Output Effect 

Direct Wage Effect 
Vacancy Effect 
Total 

.0088 
.0020 
.0108 

.0201 
.0056 
.0257 

.0193 
.00114 
.0207 

.0210 
.0069 
.0279 

2.  Labor Coat  Effect 

Direct Effect 
Vacancy Effect 
Total 
Weighted by Share 

3.  Hiring Cost  Effect 

Cost per Hire  Effect 
Weighted by Share 

Frequency Effect 
Weighted by Share 

—.0982 
.0020 
—.0962 
—.0577 

.0295 
.0030 

.00148 
.0005 

—.0982 
.0056 
—.0926 
—.0556 

—.0982 
.00114 
—.0968 
—.0581 

—.0982 
.0069 
—.0913 
—.0548 

.0582 
.0058 

.0180 
.0018 

.0606 
.0061 

—.0332 
—.0033 

.00148 
—.0005 

.0540 
.0054 

4.  TOTAL EFFECT 

—.0318 

—.0223 

—.0248 

—.0434 

NOTE:  These four columns correspond directly to colums 1—k in Tablea 2 through 8. 
Job vacancy rate estimates reflect 2SLS with linear (rather than Tobit) second stage 
here. 


effect or a percentage point change in the vacancy rate (and therefore of 
occupied jobs)  on output is 1% — i.e., constant returns to  scale. 

As for  the  elasticity of profit with respect to hiring costs, we aasume 

that the hiring frequency is the inverse of expected job tenure and  then use 

our estimated wage effects on duration (Table  4) to calculate the  effects of 

wages on this rrequency.4  We use hours spent recruiting and training each 
each new employee as  a measure of the cost per  hire.35  But since an hour 

spent by co—workers is presumably not as costly to the firm as an  hour spent 
by management personnel, we value each of the latter at  twice the value of 
each of the  rormer.6  We also adjust time spent in formal  training to account 

for the  fact  that each hour of management time usually accommodates multiple 

employees.37  The elasticity of total hiring coats is then obtained by 

aggregating these  effects and dividing by appropriately weighted means. 

In  Table 10 we present calculations of how a 10% rise in the firm's 

wages will effect profits.  We present separate estimates based on wage 
effects  from  each  of the  four  specifications  used  in  Tables  2  through  8. 
Table  10  also  presents  estimates of  each  of the  three  terms  of Equation  (7), 
which are  appropriately  weighted  and  summed  to  produce  estimates of total 
effects  as well. 

The results show that a 10%  rise  in wages will lower  profits by 2.2%  to 

4.3%.  More specifically, the increase  caused by unions will lower profits  by 

3.3% while such a wage increase  associated with firm size reduce profits by 

about 2.5%.  Comparing the total  reduction in profits to  that which would be 

caused without any adjustment by the firm,  these results suggest that about 

46% of the higher wage costs associated with unions and about 58% of that 

associated with firm size is offset by firms. 

19 


The results are, of course,  driven primarily by the relatively large 

weight attached to the revenue effect and to the magnitude of the  wage effect 

on revenue (output)  which ia comparable between the  union and  firm  aize 

casem.  While the crucial aamumption that observed wage effects on performance 

rating effectm equal  those on output is  indeed questionable, we also  note  that 

the estimated magnitudes of the offset are consistent with various estimates 

of the fraction of the union wage differential that is accounted for by 

personal characteristics (e.g.,  Mincer (1983),  Freeman (1984)).  The evidence 

of lower profits in the union sector despite higher experience and/or 

productivity (Becker and Olson  (1987))  is also consistent with the finding 

here of a partial wage offset for unionized firms.  Finally, we note once 

again that  problems such as self—selection noted above are likely, if 

anything, to bias these results in downward direction. 

V.  Conclusion 

In  this paper I  provide estimates of how the wage level of a firm 

affects its hiring and training costs as well as the observed characteristics 

and performance of its  employees.  This is done using  data from  a nationwide 

survey of firms on the number of hours spent hiring and  training their most 

recent employee;  the characteristics (i.e.,  experience and job  tenure)  and 

performance (subjective ratings)  of that employee; and vacancy rates as  well 

as other measures of hiring difficulties.  Separate estimates are provided for 

union wage  premia as opposed to  those associated with firm size  and/or 

industry. 

The results generally show that high—wage firms  have lower hiring and 

training costs as well as better employee performance.  More  specifically, we 

find fewer  hours spent on informal  training,  longer tenure with the firm,  more 

20 


years of previous job experience, higher performance ratings,  lower vacancy 

rates,  and  higher perceived ease in  hiring for  higher  wage firms.  However, 

the exact magnitudes and  significance levels (as  well  as the signs in  a few 

cases)  are quite sensitive to  whether identification is achieved through 

fraction  unionized or employee size. 

Furthermore, we make some attempt to crudely measure the overall costs 
and  benefits to  the firm of these higher wages.  These calculations are quite 
incomplete and  require some heroic assumptions to which the  results are quite 

sensitive.  Nevertheless, the calculations suggest  that about 6% of the 

higher wage premia unions and about 58% of those  for of large firms are offset 

by reduced costs and  improved performance. 

Future research on these wage effects require better measures of 

outcomes,  especially those measuring worker Output and performance.  Financial 

data on the profits and  capital values of firms  might be preferable.  More 
careful specifications of how  various outcomes are  related  to  each  other  and 
to  wage  measures would  also  be  useful. 

21 


FOOT NOTES 

1References to  employer substitution in response to union wages date 

back as far  as Lewis (1963)  and  were also  stressed by Johnson(1975). 

Oiscussions of union effects on productivity and  profits appear in Slichter 
at.  al.  (1960),  though they focus on institutional factors rather  than direct 

wage effects. 

It  should  be noted that the predicted effects of union wages 

within a labor demand framework  contrast with those of the "efficient 
contracts" approach,  which stresses union control over employment as well as 
wages (Farber,  1986).  Union effects may also be present for non—union rkers 
due to "insider" power  (Lindbeck and Snower, 1986)  or the threat of 

unionization (Dickens,  1985). 

2The effects of unions on hours of' training are theoretically 

ambiguous.  If  unions have a larger effect on starting wages than on 
subsequent ones, we might expect unions to reduce on—the—job training in the 
same manner as the minimum wage appears to do (Haahimoto,  1981).  But if 

unions raise wages independently of (or more than proportionately with)  job 

tenure,  it may pay for firms  to invest more training in the new Mres.  On the 

other hand, employee incentives to invest in such training may be reduced 

(Mincer,  1983).  The specificity of the training involved and the expected 

tenure of the employee should also affect the firm's training choices. 

3simple labor—demand models of  wage—taking firms assume infinitely 
elastic supplies of labor in each category of workers.  If,  instead,  firms 
face upward—sloping labor Supply curves (especially in the short—run), the 
market—clearing wage  would  clearly  rise  as  well.  Firms  might still  prefer  to 
pay  an  above—market  wage  to  generate a  queue  of  highly skilled  workers from 
which  to choose. 

22 


4lhis  possibility has, of course,  long been recognized in  the 

personnel/human resources literature.  See,  for  example,  Milkovich and  Newman 

(1987). 

5The different versions of efficiency wage theory  are summarized in 

Yellen  (19814)  and  Katz (1987). 

6Employer search models include Barron et.  al.  (1985),  Jackman et.  al. 

(1985),  and Albrecht and Axell  (1985).  These models frequently posit that 

employees choose wages and/or search  intensities to maximize profits which, in 

turn, depend on efficient matching of jobs and workers.  Models in which wages 

depend on bargaining solutions once a match has occurred  include Pissarides 

(1985)  and  Davidson et. al.  (1987).  Evidence on employer  search intensity 

also appears in  Barron et.  al. 

7See  Brown  (1988)  and Ehrenberg and Milkovich (1987)  for discussions of 

these issues. 

8Union effects on productivity are reviewed  in  Addison and Hirsch 

(1986)  while those on firm profits  are discussed in  Becker and  Olson (1987). 
For union effects on turnover see Mincer (1983)  and Freeman and Medoff 

(1984).  The turnover studies generally sort  out wage  and union effects.  An 

alternative approach to this issue is to use  panel data in determining the 

extent to which the cross—sectional union wage effect is an actual wage 

premium as  opposed to a return for higher quality workers.  Mincer (1983)  and 

Freeman (1984)  conclude that half or more of the observed effect is a union 

premium. 

9See Pencavel  (1970),  Viscusi (1980)  and  Allen  (1981)  for evidence on 

turnover and absenteeimn effects of wages. 

23 


10For  recent  papers  which  consider 

the effects of  wages  on  several 

employee outcomes and then  compare  potential  benefits  with the  costs  of  higher 

wages  see Raft'  and  Summers (1987)  or Leonard (1987).  The  former  considers 

data on the Ford  Motor  Company before and  after the introduction of the "Five— 

Dollar Day" in  19iI.  The latter analyzes effects of wages on supervisory 

personnel and  turnover  in  six  occupations for a sample of high—technology 

firms. 

11This assumes,  of course, that estimated union  wage effects are not 

fully explained by differential union organizing success among highly—skilled 

workers. 

12lndustry wage effects (and their relative constancy over time)  are 

described in  Krueger and  Summers (1987)  and Dickens and Katz (1986).  Intra— 

industry wage differences are also considered in Groshen (1985).  Evidence of 

firm size effects on wages is provided in Mellow (1980)  and  Brown and  Medoff 

(1987) as well. 

13The  1982  wave of the EOPP Survey was designed at the National Center 

for Research on Vocational Education (Ohio State University) and  administered 

by Gallup, Inc. 

would be  possible  to  use  individual  instead  of  firm—level wages  in 
Equations  U).  However,  we continue to use firm—level wages, as the focus of 

this steady is on wage differentials at that level.  The firm—wide wages also 
lessen the problem of unobserved heterogeneity which would plague wages at the 

individual level. 

15Evidence presented in  Hoizer et.  al.  (1988)  shows  that firm  size 

affects the quantity of job applicants received per opening by firms 

independently of wages paid.  Assuming that the quantity and  quality of the 

best applicants are positively correlated, firm size might have independent 

effects on the quality of hires as well. 

2R 


161f  for instance,  all  firms  need  workers of a c 

level and  all choose the wages needed to  attain such uorker 
no relationship between wage levels and  performance.  Only to 

firms vary in  their need for  high  performance (because output and 
more dependent on such performance for  some  than  for others)  will  th 

effect be observed. 

17Purely random measurement error in  the dependent variable would 
result in  inefficiency  but  no  biases.  Fixed  effects can  cause biases  in 
either direction, depending on  the correlation of these effects with the 

relevant independent variables. 

8Seemingly Unrelated Regression estimates might have been appropriate 
here, but the identical specifications of right—hand  side  variables  eliminated 
this possibility. 

19lobjt models will be used for vacancy rates,  since most firms  (about 

80%)  report no vacancies.  They will also he used for  applicable experience, 
where  about l0%  of the sample reports move.  The use of predicted wage 
variables in these equations is an approximation to a fuller treatment of 
simultaneity in limited dependent variable models. 

20Average private sector  unionimn in the Unite States in  1982 was 

approximately 18%. 

21We use starting wages rather  than current/most recent wages for 

calculation of the  firm  wage  premia  because  the latter  is  strongly affected by 
job tenure,  which  is  an  outcome variable in  this study.  However, the 
correlation here between starting and current wages Is about  .9,  and estimated 

results using both variables are  quite  similar. 

22See Footnote 15. 
23These results are generally consistent with those of Barron,  Bishop 

and Ounkelberg (1985). 

25 


2Industry controls appear  to affect training independently of the 

wage, as F—statistics on these dummies are  highly significant in all of the 

training equations. 

25arron et.  al use log—odds specifications for the probabilities of 

workers receiving each type of training. 

Using  continuous as opposed to 

discrete training variables, as well as the use of firm—level rather  than 

individual wages,  appear to cause the conflicting results. 

26lndustry dummies are again significant in these outcome equations. 

is important to  remember while interpreting the coefficient on 

unions that this is a partial  effect,  controlling for the effects of firm 

wages which, in turn,  already capture industry,  size and  union effects. 

28For computational reasons,  we use 1—digit rather than  2—digit 

industry dummies here. 

All  other instrtsnents  and controls are comparable. 

29For instance,  defining the dependent variable as one if hiring is 

very easy and zero otherwise produces quite comparable results. 

30See,  for instance,  Medoff and Abraham (1981)  for evidence that tenure 

with the firm may not enhance worker productivity. 

those equations, I  interpret  employee tenure at the firm  as the 

change in total experience for that worker.  Experience effects on 

productivity scores and on wages as well as productivity scores effects on 

wages continue to be positive and significant in those equations, with most 

magnitudes remaining quite comparable to  those  of cross—section estimates, 

32As in the case of vacancy rate equations, the predicted wage variable 

is based on the same set of instruments as in  all  other equations except for 

the use of 1—digit dummies.  Controls are comparable as well. 

26 


33We  divide  by J for this and  all  other terms  of the  equation since our 

estimated effects apply only to the last worker hired.  The estimated effect 

of loW on performance ratings is  then  divided by mean performance and added  to 

the vacancy rate effect of lnW to obtain the elasticity estimate.  We use the 

OLS rather than  tobit estimates of vacancy effects,  since  the  former  are more 

stable  and plausible in magnitude. 

3If FH 

= l/T  then 

dLnFH/d&nW  —dLnT/d&nW, which is  simply the 

additive inverse  of any of the Weibull hazard  function coefficients presented 

in  Table 

35We 

thus  abstract from direct monetary costs of recruiting. 

36Mean weekly wages in May,  1978  for managers was $322 compared to 231, 

175,  and 152  for sales, clericals, and service workers respectively who  are 

paid  weekly.  Hourly rates are '4.66,  2.93,  3.72,  and 2.93 respectively.  (BLS 

Bulletin 2096,  September 1982).  The two—to—one ratio of managerial to  non— 

managerial wages is thus a reasonable approximation here. 

37See Bishop (1988),  who assumes  an  average class—size of two  at  formal 

training sessions. 

27 


Addison, John and Barry Hirsch.  The Economic  Analysis of Unions. 

Allen  and 

Irwin, 1986. 

REFERENCES 

Albrecht, James and Bo Axell. 

"An Equilibrium Model of Search 

Unemployment."  Journal of Political  Economy,  198B. 

Allen,  Steven,  "Trade Uniona, Absenteeism and  Exit—Voice".  Industrial and 

Labor  Relations Review,  1985. 

Barron, John et.  al.  "Employer Search:  The Interviewing and  Hiring  of New 

Employees."  Review of Economics and Statistics, February  1985. 

Barron, John  et.  al. "Job  Matching and On—the—Job Training."  UnpubLished, 

1986. 

Becker, Brian and Craig Olson.  "Labor Relations and  Firm Performance," in  B. 

Block et.  al. eds.  Human Resources and the Performance of the  Firm, 
IRRA,  1987. 

Bishop, John. 

"The  Recognition aod  Reward of Employee Performance."  Journal 

of Labor Economics, October 1987. 

Bishop, John. 

"Do  Employers  Share  the  Costs  and  Benefits of  General 

Training?"  Unpublished,  1988. 

Brown,  Charles.  "Firm Choice of Method of Pay,"  unpublished, 1988. 

Brown,  Charles and James Medoff.  "The Employee Size—wage Effect", 

unpublished, 1987. 

Dickens, William.  "Wages,  Employment, and the Threat of Collective Action by 

Workers."  NBER Working Paper No.  1856,  1986. 

Dickens, William and Lawrence Katz.  "Inter—industry Wage Differences and 

Industry Characteristics." NBER Working Paper No. 2O1, 1986. 

Ehrenberg, Ronald and George Milkovich.  "Compensation and Firm Performance," 

in  B.  Block et.  al.  eds.  Human Resources and the Performance of the 
Firm,  IRRA,  1987. 

Farber, Henry.  "The  Acalysis  of  Union  Behavior" 

Layard  eds.  Handbook of Labor  Economics.  North  Holland,  1986. 

in  0.  Ashenfelter and  B. 

Freeman,  Richard. 

"A Longitudinal  Analysis  of  Trade Unionism."  Journal  of 

Labor  Economic,  198B. 

Freeman, Richard and James Medoff.  What  Do  Unions Do?, Basic  Books,  1984. 

Groshen, Erica.  "Sources of Wage Dispersion:  The  Contribution of Inter— 

Employer Differentials by  Industry".  Unpublished,  1987. 

Hashimoto,  Masanori.  "Nonunion Wage Effects on Training on the  Job",  American 

28 


Economic Review,  1982. 

Holzer,  Harry. 

"The  Determinants of Employee Productivity and Earnings:  Some 

New  Evidence."  Unpublished, 1988. 

Hotzer,  Harry, Lawrence Katz and Alan  Krueger.  "Job Queues and Wages:  New 

Evidence on  Minimum Wages and  the  Inter_Industry Wage Structure."  NBER 
Working Paper No.  2561,  1988. 

Jackman,  Richard  et.  al.  "On Vacancies."  London School of Economics, Center 

for Labor Economics Working Paper,  1985. 

Johnson,  George.  "Economic Analysis of Trade Unionism"  American Economic 

Review,  1975. 

Katz, Lawrence,  "Efficiency Wage Theories:  A Partial  Evaluation", in S. 

Fischer ed.  Macroeconomics Annual,  NBER,  1987. 

Leonard, Jonathan.  "Carrots and  Sticks: 
Journal of Labor Economics, 1987. 

Pay,  Supervisions and Turnover", 

Lewis, H.  Gregg.  Unionism and  Relative Wages in the  United  States. 

University of Chicago Press,  1963. 

Lindbeck, Assar and  Dennis Snower. "Wage Setting,  Unemployment, and Insider— 

Outsider Relations", American Economic  Review,  1986. 

Medoff, James and Katherine Abraham,  "Are Those Paid 4re Really Mare 

Productive?  The Case of Experience", Journal  of Human Resources, 1981. 

Mellow, Wesley.  "Employer Size and Wages." Review of Economics and 

Statistics, 1980. 

Milkovich, George and Jerry Newman.  Compensation. Business Publications, 

1987. 

Mincer, Jacob.  "Union Effects:  Wages, Turnover, and  Job Training", NBER 

Working  Paper No.  808,  1981. 

Pencavel,  John,  An Analysis of the Quit Rate  in  American Manufacturing 

Industry, Princeton University, 1970. 

Pissarides, Christopher, "Short—Run Equilibrium Dynamics  of Unemployment, 

Vacancies, and Real  Wages",  American Economic  Review,  1985. 

Raft,  Daniel and  Lawrence Summers.  "Did Henry Ford  Pay  Efficiency Wages?" 

Journal of Labor Economics, 1987. 

Slichter,  Sumner et.  al.  The Impact of Collective Bargaining on Management, 

1960. 

Viscusi, W. Kip,  "Sex Differences in Worker Quitting" Review of Economics and 

Statistics, 1980. 

29 


Weiss, Andrew.  Hih School  Graduation, Performance, and Wages' Journal of 

Political Economy,  August,  1988. 

Yellen, Janet.  "Efficiency Wage Models of Unemployment", American Economic 

Review,  198'L 

30 


Experience, Productivity Scores,  and Wages of Individuals 

Appendix 

General Experience 

General Experience2 

Related Experience 

Related Experience2 

Productivity Score 

.0113 
(.0021) 

—.0003 
(.0001) 

.01411 

(.00144) 

—.00 10 
(.0002) 

2 

Wage Levels 
3 
.0112 
(.0026) 

—— 

—— 

—— 

—.0003 
(.0001) 

.0393 
(.00'lS) 

—.0009 
(.0002) 

.0019  .0009 

(.0004)(,0003) 

R2 

.511 

.423  .514 

General Experience 

General 

Experience2 

Related 

Exper ience 

Related 

Experience2 

Productivity Score Levels 

.1604 

(.2181) 

— .0007 
(.0060) 

2.0327 
(.3655) 

—.0545 
(.0151) 

.150 

NOTE: 

In addition to the variables listed,  the wage equations 
contain the following controls:  sex,  education, occupation, 
year,  and site  dummies,  as well as hours of training.  All 
but the year dummies also appear in the productivity score 
equations. 

