The Impact of Human Resource Management Practices on Turnover, Productivity, and
Corporate Financial Performance
Author(s): Mark A. Huselid
Source: The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 38, No. 3 (Jun., 1995), pp. 635-672
Published by: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/256741 .
Accessed: 27/08/2013 05:32

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 .

Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Academy
of Management Journal.

http://www.jstor.org 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


Academy  of  Management  Journal 

? 
1995,  Vol.  38,  No.  3,  635-672. 

THE IMPACT OF HUMAN  RESOURCE 

MANAGEMENT  PRACTICES  ON  TURNOVER, 

PRODUCTIVITY,  AND  CORPORATE 

FINANCIAL  PERFORMANCE 

MARK A. HUSELID 
Rutgers  University 

This  study  comprehensively 
evaluated  the  links  between  systems  of 
High  Performance  Work  Practices  and  firm  performance.  Results 
based  on  a national  sample  of nearly  one  thousand  firms  indicate  that 
these  practices  have  an  economically  and  statistically 
im- 
pact  on  both  intermediate  employee  outcomes  (turnover  and  produc- 
tivity)  and  short-  and  long-term  measures  of  corporate  financial  per- 
formance.  Support  for  predictions 
that  the  impact  of  High  Perfor- 
mance  Work  Practices  on  firm  performance 
is  in  part  contingent  on 
and  links  with  competitive  strategy  was  lim- 
their  interrelationships 
ited. 

significant 

The  impact  of human  resource  management  (HRM) policies  and  prac- 
tices  on  firm  performance  is  an important  topic  in  the  fields  of human  re- 
source  management, 
industrial  relations,  and  industrial  and  organiza- 
tional  psychology 
(Boudreau,  1991;  Jones  & Wright,  1992;  Kleiner,  1990). 
An  increasing  body  of work  contains  the  argument  that the  use  of High  Per- 
formance  Work Practices,  including  comprehensive  employee  recruitment 
incentive  compensation  and  performance  man- 
and  selection  procedures, 
agement  systems,  and  extensive  employee 
involvement  and  training,  can 
skills,  and  abilities  of  a  firm's  current  and  po- 
improve  the  knowledge, 
tential  employees, 
increase  their  motivation,  reduce  shirking,  and  en- 
hance  retention  of quality  employees  while  encouraging  nonperformers  to 
leave  the  firm  (Jones  & Wright,  1992;  U.S.  Department  of  Labor,  1993). 

I am very  grateful  to  Brian  Becker  for his  many  helpful  comments  on  this  article  and  for 
his  direction  and  guidance  on  the  dissertation  on which  it is based.  I would  also  like  to thank 
James  Begin,  Peter  Cappelli,  James Chelius,  John Delaney,  Steve  Director,  Jeffrey Keefe,  Mor- 
ris  Kleiner,  Douglas  Kruse,  Casey  Ichniowski,  David  Levine,  George  Milkovich,  Barbara Rau, 
Frank  Schmidt,  Randall  Schuler,  Anne  Tsui,  David  Ulrich,  seminar  participants  at  Cornell 
University  and  the  University  of Kansas,  and  this  journal's  anonymous  referees  for their  com- 
ments  on  earlier  versions.  Any  and  all  remaining  errors  are mine. 

This  study  was  partially  funded  by  grants  from  the  Human  Resource  Planning  Society, 
the  Society  for  Human  Resource  Management  Foundation, 
the  Mark  Diamond  Research 
Fund,  and  the  SUNY-Buffalo  School  of  Management.  The  interpretations,  conclusions,  and 
recommendations,  however,  are mine  and  do not  necessarily  represent  the  positions  of these 
institutions. 

635 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


636 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

June 

Arguments  made  in  related  research  are that  a firm's  current  and  po- 
in  the  development 
tential  human  resources  are important  considerations 
and  execution  of its  strategic  business  plan.  This  literature,  although  large- 
ly  conceptual,  concludes  that  human  resource  management  practices  can 
help  to  create  a  source  of  sustained  competitive  advantage,  especially 
when  they  are aligned  with  a firm's  competitive  strategy  (Begin,  1991;  But- 
ler, Ferris,  & Napier,  1991;  Cappelli  & Singh,  1992; Jackson  & Schuler,  1995; 
Porter,  1985;  Schuler,  1992;  Wright  & McMahan,  1992). 

In  both  this  largely  theoretical 

literature  and  the  emerging  conven- 
tional  wisdom  among  human  resource  professionals  there  is  a growing  con- 
sensus  that  organizational  human  resource  policies  can,  if  properly  con- 
figured,  provide  a direct  and  economically  significant  contribution  to firm 
performance.  The  presumption 
is  that  more  effective  systems  of  HRM 
practices,  which  simultaneously 
exploit  the  potential  for  complementar- 
ities  or  synergies  among  such  practices  and  help  to  implement  a  firm's 
competitive  strategy,  are sources  of  sustained  competitive  advantage.  Un- 
fortunately,  very  little  empirical  evidence  supports  such  a belief.  What  em- 
pirical  work  does  exist  has  largely  focused  on  individual  HRM practices 
to  the  exclusion  of  overall  HRM systems. 

This  study  departs  from  the  previous  human  resources 

literature  in 
three  ways.  First,  the  level  of  analysis  used  to  estimate  the  firm-level  im- 
pact  of HRM practices  is  the  system,  and  the  perspective 
is  strategic  rather 
than  functional.  This  approach  is  supported  by  the  development  and  val- 
that  reflects  the  system  of  High  Performance 
idation  of  an  instrument 
Work  Practices  adopted  by  each  firm  studied.  Second,  the  analytical  fo- 
cus  is  comprehensive.  The  dependent  variables  include  both  intermedi- 
ate  employment  outcomes  and  firm-level  measures  of  financial  perfor- 
mance,  and  the  results  are based  on  a national  sample  of firms  drawn  from 
a wide  range  of  industries.  Moreover,  the  analyses  explicitly  address  two 
methodological  problems  confronting  survey-based  research  on  this  top- 
ic:  the  potential  for  simultaneity,  or reverse  causality,  between  High  Per- 
formance  Work Practices  and  firm  performance  and  survey  response  bias. 
Third,  this  study  also  provides  one  of the  first  tests  of  the  prediction  that 
the  impact  of  High  Performance  Work  Practices  on  firm  performance 
is 
contingent  on  both  the  degree  of  complementarity,  or internal  fit,  among 
these  practices  and the  degree  of alignment,  or external  fit, between  a firm's 
system  of  such  practices  and  its  competitive  strategy. 

THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 

The  belief  that  individual  employee  performance  has  implications 

for 
firm-level  outcomes  has  been  prevalent  among  academics  and  practition- 
ers  for many  years.  Interest  in  this  area has  recently  intensified,  however, 
as  scholars  have  begun  to  argue  that,  collectively,  a firm's  employees  can 
also  provide  a unique  source  of  competitive  advantage  that  is  difficult  for 
its  competitors 
to  replicate.  For  example,  Wright  and  McMahan  (1992), 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


1995 

Huselid 

637 

theory  of  the  firm,  contended 
drawing  on  Barney's  (1991)  resource-based 
that  human  resources  can  provide  a source  of  sustained  competitive  ad- 
vantage  when  four  basic  requirements  are  met.  First,  they  must  add  val- 
ue  to  the  firm's  production  processes: 
levels  of  individual  performance 
must  matter.  Second,  the  skills  the  firm  seeks  must  be  rare.  Since  human 
performance  is  normally  distributed,  Wright  and  McMahan  noted,  all  hu- 
man  resources  meet  both  of  these  criteria.  The  third  criterion  is  that  the 
combined  human  capital  investments  a firm's  employees  represent  cannot 
be  easily  imitated.  Although  human  resources  are not  subject  to  the  same 
degree  of  imitability  as  equipment  or  facilities, 
in  firm-spe- 
cific  human  capital  can  further  decrease  the  probability  of  such  imitation 
by  qualitatively  differentiating  a firm's  employees 
from  those  of  its  com- 
petitors.  Finally,  a  firm's  human  resources  must  not  be  subject  to  re- 
placement  by technological  advances  or other  substitutes  if they  are to pro- 
vide  a  source  of  sustainable  competitive  advantage.  Although 
labor-sav- 
ing  technologies  may  limit  the  returns  for  some  forms  of  investment 
in 
human  capital,  the  continuing  shift  toward  a service  economy  and  the  al- 
ready  high  levels  of  automation 
in  many  industries  make  such  forms  of 
substitution 

investments 

less  probable. 

increasingly 

Wright  and  McMahan's  work  points  to  the  importance  of  human  re- 
sources  in  the  creation  of  firm-specific  competitive  advantage.  At  issue, 
then,  is  whether,  or how,  firms  can  capitalize  on  this  potential  source  of 
profitability.  Bailey  (1993)  contended  that  human  resources  are frequent- 
ly  "underutilized"  because  employees  often  perform below  their  maximum 
potential  and  that  organizational  efforts  to  elicit  discretionary  effort  from 
employees  are likely  to provide  returns  in  excess  of any  relevant  costs.  Bai- 
ley  argued  that  HRM practices  can  affect  such  discretionary  effort  through 
their  influence  over  employee  skills  and  motivation  and  through  organi- 
zational  structures  that  provide  employees  with  the  ability  to  control  how 
their  roles  are performed. 

HRM practices  influence  employee  skills  through  the  acquisition  and 
development  of a firm's human  capital.  Recruiting  procedures  that provide 
a  large  pool  of  qualified  applicants,  paired  with  a reliable  and  valid  se- 
lection  regimen,  will  have  a substantial  influence  over  the  quality  and  type 
of  skills  new  employees  possess.  Providing  formal  and  informal  training 
experiences,  such  as basic  skills  training,  on-the-job  experience,  coaching, 
mentoring,  and  management  development,  can  further  influence  employ- 
ees'  development. 

The  effectiveness  of  even  highly  skilled  employees  will  be  limited  if 
they  are not  motivated  to perform,  however,  and  HRM practices  can  affect 
them  to  work  both  harder  and 
employee  motivation  by  encouraging 
smarter.  Examples  of  firm  efforts  to  direct  and  motivate  employee  behav- 
ior include  the  use  performance  appraisals  that  assess  individual  or work 
linking  these  appraisals  tightly  with  incentive  com- 
group  performance, 
pensation  systems,  the  use  of internal  promotion  systems  that focus  on  em- 
intended  to  align  the  interests 
ployee  merit,  and  other  forms  of incentives 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


638 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

June 

of employees  with  those  of shareholders  (e.g.,  ESOPs  and  profit-  and  gain- 
sharing  plans). 

Finally,  Bailey  (1993)  noted  that  the  contribution  of  even  a  highly 
skilled  and  motivated  workforce  will  be  limited  if  jobs  are  structured,  or 
programmed,  in  such  a way  that  employees,  who  presumably  know  their 
work  better  than  anyone  else,  do  not  have  the  opportunity 
to  use  their 
skills  and  abilities  to  design  new  and  better  ways  of  performing  their 
roles.  Thus,  HRM practices  can  also  influence  firm  performance  through 
provision  of organizational  structures  that  encourage  participation  among 
employees  and  allow  them  to  improve  how  their  jobs  are  performed. 
Cross-functional 
teams,  job  rotation,  and  quality  circles  are  all  examples 
of  such  structures. 

Thus,  the  theoretical 

literature  clearly  suggests  that  the  behavior  of 
employees  within  firms  has  important  implications 
for organizational  per- 
formance  and  that  human  resource  management  practices  can  affect  indi- 
vidual  employee  performance  through  their  influence  over  employees' 
skills  and  motivation  and  through  organizational  structures  that  allow  em- 
ployees  to improve  how  their  jobs  are performed.  If this  is  so,  a firm's HRM 
practices  should  be  related  to  at least  two  dimensions  of its  performance. 
First,  if  superior  HRM practices  increase  employees'  discretionary  effort, 
I would  expect  their  use  to  directly  affect  intermediate  outcomes,  such  as 
turnover  and  productivity,  over  which  employees  have  direct  control. 
Second,  if the  returns  from  investments 
in  superior  HRM practices  exceed 
their  true  costs,  then  lower  employee 
turnover  and  greater  productivity 
should  in  turn  enhance  corporate  financial  performance.  Therefore,  in  an- 
ticipation  of  an  estimation  model  that  focuses  on  these  dependent  vari- 
ables,  my  review  of the  empirical  literature  concentrates  on  prior work  ex- 
amining  the  influence  of  HRM practices  on  employee  turnover,  produc- 
tivity,  and  corporate  financial  performance. 

PRIOR  EMPIRICAL WORK 

Individual  HRM Practices  and  Firm  Performance 

Turnover.  Prior  work  has  examined  the  determinants  of  both  indi- 
vidual  employees'  departures  and  aggregate  organizational 
turnover,  al- 
though  most  of  the  prior  work  has  focused  on  the  former.  For  example, 
Arnold  and  Feldman  (1982),  Baysinger  and  Mobley  (1983),  and  Cotton  and 
Tuttle  (1986)  concluded 
that  perceptions  of  job  security,  the  presence  of 
a  union,  compensation 
tenure,  de- 
level,  job  satisfaction,  organizational 
mographic  variables  such  as  age,  gender,  education,  and  number  of  de- 
pendents,  organizational  commitment,  whether  a job meets  an individual's 
expectations,  and  the  expressed 
intention  to  search  for  another  job  were 
all  predictive  of  employees' 
leaving,  and  Sheridan  (1992)  found  that  per- 
ceptions  of  organizational  culture  influenced 
turnover.  Thus,  the  theoret- 
ical  rationale  for examining  the  effects  of  HRM practices  on  turnover  lies 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


1995 

Huselid 

639 

in  their  effects  on  these  individual-level 
factors.  Among  the  few  empiri- 
cal  papers  on  the  effects  of  specific  HRM practices  on  aggregate  turnover, 
the  work  of  McEvoy  and  Cascio  (1985),  who  showed  that  job  enrichment 
interventions  and  realistic  job  previews  were  moderately  effective 
in  re- 
ducing  turnover,  is  notable. 

Productivity.  Research  on  the  impact  of  HRM practices  on  organiza- 
tional  productivity 
is  more  extensive.  Cutcher-Gershenfeld 
(1991)  found 
that  firms  adopting  "transformational"  labor relations-those 
emphasizing 
lower  costs,  less  scrap,  higher 
cooperation  and  dispute  resolution-had 
productivity,  and  a greater  return  to  direct  labor  hours  than  did  firms  us- 
ing  "traditional"  adversarial  labor  relations  practices.  Katz,  Kochan,  and 
Weber  (1985)  demonstrated  that  highly  effective  industrial  relations  sys- 
tems,  defined  as those  with  fewer  grievances  and  disciplinary  actions  and 
lower  absenteeism, 
increased  product  quality  and  direct  labor  efficiency, 
and  Katz,  Kochan,  and  Keefe  (1987)  showed  that  a number  of  innovative 
work  practices  improved  productivity.  Katz,  Kochan,  and  Gobeille  (1983) 
and  Schuster  (1983)  found  that  quality  of work  life  (QWL), quality  circles, 
and  labor-management  teams  increased  productivity.  Bartel  (1994)  estab- 
lished  a link  between  the  adoption  of training  programs  and  productivity 
growth,  and  Holzer  (1987)  showed  that  extensive  recruiting  efforts  in- 
creased  productivity.  Guzzo,  Jette,  and  Katzell's 
(1985)  meta-analysis 
demonstrated  that training,  goal  setting,  and  sociotechnical 
systems  design 
in- 
had  significant  and  positive  effects  on  productivity.  Links  between 
centive  compensation 
systems  and  productivity  have  consistently  been 
found  as  well  (Gerhart  & Milkovich,  1992;  Weitzman  & Kruse,  1990).  Fi- 
nally,  employee  turnover  also  has  an important  influence  on  organizational 
productivity 

(Brown  & Medoff,  1978). 

Corporate  financial  performance.  A number  of authors  have  explored 
the  links  between  individual  HRM practices  and  corporate  financial  per- 
formance.  For example,  Cascio  (1991)  and  Flamholtz  (1985)  argued  that the 
financial  returns  associated  with  investments  in progressive  HRM practices 
are  generally  substantial.  Similarly,  work  in  the  field  of  utility  analysis 
(Boudreau,  1991;  Schmidt,  Hunter,  MacKenzie,  & Muldrow  1979)  has  con- 
increase  in  employee  per- 
cluded  that the  value  of a one-standard-deviation 
formance  measured  in  dollars  (SD )  is  equivalent  to  40  percent  of  salary 
of  human  re- 
(per  employee)  and  that  the  organizational 
source  management  practices  that  can  produce  such  an  increase  are  con- 
siderable.  Although  most  of the  empirical  work  on this  topic  has  been  con- 
ducted  in  laboratories,  Becker  and  Huselid  (1992)  presented  field  data sug- 
gesting  that  SDy  may  in  fact  be  well  in  excess  of  40  percent  of  salary. 
Similarly,  Terpstra and  Rozell  (1993)  found  a significant  and  positive  link 
between  the  extensiveness  of recruiting,  selection  test  validation,  and  the 
use  of  formal  selection  procedures  and  firm  profits,  and  Russell,  Terborg, 
and  Powers  (1985)  demonstrated  a link  between  the  adoption  of  employ- 
ee  training  programs  and  financial  performance.  The  use  of  performance 
appraisals  (Borman,  1991)  and  linking  such  appraisals  and  compensation 

implications 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


640 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

June 

have  also  been  consistently 
(Gerhart  & Milkovich,  1992). 
Limitations  of  the  Prior  Empirical  Work 

connected  with  increased  firm  profitability 

In  summary,  prior  empirical  work  has  consistently 

found  that  use  of 
effective  human  resource  management  practices  enhances 
firm  perfor- 
mance.  Specifically,  extensive  recruitment,  selection,  and  training  proce- 
dures;  formal  information  sharing,  attitude  assessment, 
job  design,  griev- 
ance  procedures,  and  labor-management  participation  programs;  and  per- 
formance  appraisal,  promotion,  and  incentive  compensation  systems  that 
recognize  and reward  employee  merit  have  all been  widely  linked  with  val- 
ued  firm-level  outcomes.  These  policies  and  procedures  have  been  labeled 
High  Performance  Work Practices  (U.S.  Department  of Labor, 1993),  a des- 
ignation  I adopt  here. 

if  higher-performing 

However,  if this  line  of research  is to be  advanced,  several  serious  lim- 
itations  in  the  prior  empirical  work  have  to be  addressed.  Two are method- 
ological,  and  one  involves  both  conceptual  and  measurement 
issues.  The 
first  issue  concerns  the  potential  simultaneity  between  High  Performance 
Work  Practices  and  corporate  financial  performance,  a  problem  exacer- 
bated  by  the  prevalence  of cross-sectional  data in  this  line  of research.  For 
firms  are  systematically  more  likely  to 
example, 
adopt  High  Performance  Work Practices,  then  contemporaneous  estimates 
of  the  impact  of  these  practices  on  firm  performance  will  be  overstated. 
firms  turn  to 
Alternatively, 
High  Performance  Work Practices  as  a remedy.  If so,  then  such  cross-sec- 
tional  estimates  will  understate  the  true  effects  of  HRM practices  on  firm 
performance.  This  form  of  simultaneous  relationship 
is  less  probable  in 
the  case  of  turnover  and  productivity,  because  these  variables  would  be 
unlikely  to widely  influence  the  selection  of High  Performance  Work Prac- 
tices.  However,  given  the  direct  link  between  firm  profits  and  the  avail- 
ability  of  slack  resources  for  investment 
it  is  easy  to 
imagine  a firm's  financial  performance  having  such  an  influence. 

it  may  be  that  otherwise 

in  such  practices, 

lower-performing 

A  second  methodological  problem  is  related  to  the  widespread  col- 
lection  of  data  via  questionnaire.  Because  survey  respondents  generally 
self-select  into  samples,  selectivity  or response  bias  may  also  affect  results. 
The  most  common  form  of  selectivity  bias  occurs  when  the  probability  of 
responding  to  a questionnaire 
is  related  both  to  a firm's  financial  perfor- 
mance  and  the  presence  of  High  Performance  Work  Practices.  Without 
knowing  the  direction  of these  relationships  a priori,  however,  a researcher 
cannot  determine  the  effect  on  the  impact  of  such  practices  on  firm  per- 
formance.  Despite  a well-developed 
literature  devoted  to the  statistical  cor- 
rection  of selection  bias  (Heckman,  1979),  such  correction  has  rarely  been 
attempted  in  prior  work. 

Systems  of  HRM  practices  and  the  concept  of  fit.  The  third  signifi- 
cant  limitation  of prior  work  is  its  widespread  conceptual  focus  on  single 
High  Performance  Work Practices,  and  the  measurement  problems  inher- 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


1995 

Huselid 

641 

ent  in  broadening  the  focus  to  a system  of  such  practices.  A  focus  on  in- 
dividual  practices  presents  both  theoretical  and  methodological  dilemmas, 
as both  recent  research  (Arthur,  1992;  MacDuffie,  1995;  Osterman,  1987a, 
1994)  and  conventional  wisdom  would  predict  that  firms  adopting  High 
Performance  Work Practices  in  one  area are more  likely  to use  them  in  oth- 
er areas  as  well.  Therefore,  to  the  extent  that  any  single  example  reflects 
a  firm's  wider  propensity  to  invest  in  High  Performance  Work  Practices, 
any  estimates  of the  firm-level  impact  of the  particular  practice  will  be  up- 
wardly  biased.  This  likely  bias  presents  a significant 
limitation  for  a line 
of  research  that  attempts  to  estimate  the  firm-level 
impact  of  a firm's  en- 
tire  human  resources  function,  as  the  sum  of  these  individual  estimates 
may  dramatically  overstate  their  contribution  to  firm  performance. 

The  potential  for bias  associated  with  a focus  on  individual  policies 
has  not  been  lost  on  several  scholars,  who  have  recently  linked  data  on 
systems  of  High  Performance  Work Practices  with  valued  firm-level  out- 
comes.  For example,  Delaney  (in  press)  found  the  widespread  use  of pro- 
gressive  human  resource  management  practices  to  have  a strong  and  neg- 
turnover  in  the  manufacturing  sector.  Ich- 
ative  effect  on  organizational 
niowski,  Shaw,  and Prennushi  (1993),  using  longitudinal  data from 30 steel 
plants,  found  the  impact  of  "cooperative  and  innovative"  HRM practices 
to  have  a  positive  and  significant  effect  on  organizational  productivity. 
Similarly,  Arthur  (1994)  found  in  30  steel  "minimills" 
that  those  with 
"commitment"  human  resource  systems,  emphasizing  the  development  of 
employee  commitment,  had  lower  turnover  and  scrap rates  and  higher  pro- 
ductivity  than  firms  with  "control"  systems,  emphasizing  efficiency  and 
the  reduction  of  labor  costs.  Finally,  MacDuffie  (1995)  found  that  "bun- 
dles"  of  internally  consistent  HRM practices  were  associated  with  higher 
productivity  and  quality  in  62  automotive  assembly  plants. 

Each  of  these  studies  has  focused  on  the  impact  of  systems  of  High 
turnover  or  productivity.  Re- 
Performance  Work  Practices  on  employee 
search  on  the  links  between  systems  of  work  practices  and  corporate  fi- 
is  much  more  limited.  Kravetz  (1988)  and  Schuster 
nancial  performance 
(1986)  each  matched  data  on  global  human  resource  management  "pro- 
indexes  of  firm  profits.  Although  both  au- 
gressiveness"  with  accounting 
that  more  progressive  HRM  practices  were  associated 
thors  concluded 
with  enhanced  performance,  the  analyses  in  each  study  were  restricted  to 
simple  bivariate  correlations  and  thus  did  not  control  for  variables  such 
(1990)  concluded  that  the  use  of pro- 
as  firm  size  or industry.  Ichniowski 
gressive  HRM practices  was  associated  with  both  high  productivity  and 
high  financial  performance  in  65  business  units,  but  owing  to  data  limi- 
tations,  he  too  was  unable  to  resolve  the  issue  of  simultaneity  between 
HRM practices  and  firm  performance  or  provide  results  beyond  a  single 
sector,  manufacturing. 

In short,  although  a growing  empirical  literature  focuses  generally  on 
the  impact  of High  Performance  Work Practices,  prior  work  has  been  lim- 
ited  in  terms  of the  range  of practices  evaluated,  the  dependent  variables, 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


642 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

June 

and the  industry  context.  For example,  a finding  that  systems  of work  prac- 
tices  affect  turnover  or productivity  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  these 
practices  have  any  effect  on  firm  profits,  and  the  discovery  that  systems 
of High  Performance  Work Practices  affect  profitability  begs  the  important 
issue  of  the  processes  through  which  they  influence 
firm  financial  per- 
formance.  Therefore,  unlike  prior  work  this  study  included  the  full  range 
of  organizational  human  resource  practices,  examined  those  practices  in 
terms  of  their  impact  on  both  immediate  employment  outcomes  and  cor- 
porate  financial  performance,  and  did  so  within  the  context  of  a  broad 
range  of  industries  and  firm  sizes.  My  initial  summary  hypotheses  can  be 
stated  as  follows: 

la:  Systems  of High  Performance  Work Prac- 
Hypothesis 
tices  will  diminish  employee  turnover  and  increase  pro- 
ductivity  and  corporate  financial  performance. 
Hypothesis  Ib: Employee  turnover  and  productivity  will 
mediate  the  relationship  between  systems  of  High  Per- 
formance  Work Practices  and  corporate  financial  per- 
formance. 

The  second  hypothesis  will  allow  for  one  of  the  first  empirical  tests 
of  a  diverse  theoretical 
literature  positing  the  importance  to  firm  perfor- 
mance  of  synergies  and  fit  among  human  resource  practices  as well  as be- 
tween  those  practices  and  competitive  strategy  (Milgrom  & Roberts,  1993). 
Baird  and  Meshoulam  (1988)  described  the  first  of  these  complementari- 
ties  as  internal  fit.  Their  primary  proposition  was  that  firm  performance 
will  be  enhanced  to  the  degree  that  firms  adopt  human  resource  manage- 
ment  practices  that  complement  and  support  each  another.  Similarly,  Os- 
terman  (1987a)  argued  that  there  should  be  an underlying 
logic  to  a firm's 
system  of HRM practices  and that  certain  policies  and practices  fit together. 
Osterman  (1994)  found  that  firms  valuing  employee  commitment, 
for  in- 
stance,  are  less  likely  to  use  temporary  employees  and  more  likely  to  in- 
vest  in  innovative  work  practices  such  as skills  training  and  incentive  com- 
pensation.  A tangible  focus  on  employee  commitment  can  be  expected  to 
help  produce  a  stable  core  of  employees, 
thus  increasing  the  probability 
in  training. 
that  a firm  will  reap  the  benefits  associated  with  investments 
And  a preference  for committed  employees  and  the  use  of  incentive  com- 
pensation  may  also  help  attract  high-performing  employees,  because,  all 
in  such  firms  will  receive  higher  wages  to 
else  being  equal,  employees 
match  their  greater productivity.  Similarly,  the  returns  from the  use  of valid 
selection  procedures  are likely  to be  greater when  a firm's performance  ap- 
praisal  and  incentive  compensation 
systems  can  recognize  and  reward 
good  employee  performance,  and  incentive  compensation  systems  should 
perform  best  when  linked  with  high-quality  performance  appraisals.  An 
internal  promotion  system  provides  a strong  incentive  for employees  to re- 
main  with  a firm and,  when  combined  with  the  appropriate  incentive  com- 
pensation  and  performance  appraisal  systems,  can  magnify  the  returns 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


1995 

Huselid 

643 

in  employee  development  activities.  Finally,  the  effec- 
from  investments 
tiveness  of  employee  participation  systems  will  be  enhanced 
if  employ- 
ees  know  their  efforts  will  be  rewarded  and  will  increase  the  probability 
of  their  advancement.  Thus, 

Hypothesis  2:  Complementarities 
or  synergies  among 
High  Performance  Work  Practices  will  diminish  em- 
ployee  turnover  and  increase  productivity  and  corporate 
financial  performance. 

A second  form of complementarity,  Baird and  Meshoulam's  (1988)  ex- 
ternal  fit,  occurs  at  the  intersection  of  a  firm's  system  of  HRM practices 
and  its  competitive  strategy.  The  notion  that  firm  performance  will  be  en- 
hanced  by  alignment  of  HRM  practices  with  competitive 
strategy  has 
gained  considerable  currency  in  recent  years  and  in  fact  underlies  much 
of the  recent  scholarship 
in  the  field  (Begin,  1991;  Butler  et al.,  1991;  Cap- 
pelli  & Singh,  1993;  Jackson  & Schuler,  1995;  Schuler,  1992;  Wright  & 
McMahan,  1992).  Moreover,  a developing 
literature  suggests  that  firms  do 
indeed  attempt  to  match  HRM practices  with  competitive  strategies.  For 
example,  Jackson,  Schuler,  and  Rivero  (1989)  found  that  firms  pursuing  a 
strategy  of  innovation  used  HRM practices  that  were  broadly  consistent 
with  that  approach,  and  Arthur  (1992)  found  that  steel  minimills  adopt- 
ing  a strategy  of  differentiation  emphasized  employee  commitment.  Sim- 
ilarly,  Snell  and Dean  (1992,  1994)  that found  human  resource  management 
practices  varied  systematically  with  type  of  manufacturing  system,  indi- 
vidual  job  characteristics,  and  firm  environment.  Although  no  empirical 
work  has  suggested  that  firms  with  better  external  fit  exhibit  higher  per- 
formance,  the  expectation  that  they  should  provides  my  final  hypothesis: 

Hypothesis  3: Alignment  of  a firm's  system  of High  Per- 
formance  Work Practices  with  its  competitive  strategy 
will  diminish  employee  turnover  and  increase  produc- 
tivity  and  corporate  financial  performance. 

Fit  Versus  "Best  Practices" 

The  internal  fit  perspective  suggests  that  the  adoption  of  an internal- 
ly  consistent  system  of  High  Performance  Work Practices  will  be  reflect- 
ed  in better  firm performance,  ceteris  paribus:  It should  be possible  to iden- 
tify  the  best  HRM practices,  those  whose  adoption  generally  leads  to  val- 
ued  firm-level  outcomes.  The  external  fit perspective  raises  the  conceptual 
issue  of whether  any  particular  human  resources  policy  can  be  described 
as a best  practice,  or whether,  instead,  the  efficacy  of any  practices  can  on- 
ly  be  determined 
in  the  context  of  a particular  firm's  strategic  and  envi- 
ronmental  contingencies.  Although  prior  work  has  yet  to  provide  a direct 
test  of  these  competing  hypotheses,  recent  research  finding  strong  main 
effects  for the  adoption  of High  Performance  Work Practices  lends  credence 
to  the  best  practices  viewpoint. 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


644 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

June 

The  argument  that  firm  performance  will  be  enhanced  to  the  degree 
a firm's  HRM practices  are matched  with  its  competitive  strategy  is,  how- 
ever,  compelling.  In fact,  the  internal  and  external  fit hypotheses  may  not 
be  altogether  inconsistent:  All  else  being  equal,  the  use  of  High  Perfor- 
mance  Work  Practices  and  good  internal  fit  should  lead  to  positive  out- 
comes  for all  types  of firms.  However,  at the  margin,  firms  that  tailor  their 
work  practices  to  their  particular  strategic  and  environmental  contingen- 
cies  should  be  able  to  realize  additional  performance  gains.  For example, 
most  firms  should  benefit  from  the  use  of  formal  selection  tests,  although 
the  results  of such  tests  could  be  used  to  select  very  different  types  of peo- 
ple,  with  those  differences  perhaps  depending  on  competitive 
strategy. 
the  use  of  formal  performance  appraisal  and  incentive  com- 
Likewise, 
pensation  systems  has  been  widely  found  to  enhance  firm  performance. 
However,  each  of these  practices  can  be  used  to  elicit  very  different  types 
In  short,  the  process  of  linking  environ- 
of  behaviors  from  employees. 
mental  contingencies  with  HRM practices  may  vary  across  firms,  but  the 
tools  firms  use  to  effectively  manage  such  links  are likely  to be  consistent. 
The  issue  of whether  internal,  external,  or both  types  of fit  affect  firm  per- 
formance  is  central,  and  later  in  this  article  I provide  an  explicit  test  of 
these  hypotheses. 

METHODS 

Sample  and  Data  Collection 

A  study  of  this  type  presents  a number  of  data  collection  challenges. 
It requires  as broad  a sample  as possible  and  at the  same  time  requires  that 
each  data  point  provide  comprehensive 
information  on  both  organiza- 
tional  human  resource  practices  and  strategies  and  firm-level  performance. 
Thus,  my  sample  was  drawn  from  Compact  Disclosure,  a  database  con- 
financial  information  from  10-K reports'  on  near- 
taining  comprehensive 
in  the  sample  if 
ly  12,000  publicly  held  U.S.  firms.  Firms  were  included 
if  they  were  for- 
they  had  more  than  a hundred  employees  and  excluded 
eign-owned,  holding  companies,  or  publicly  held  divisions  or  business 
units  of larger firms.  These  criteria  yielded  3,452  firms  representing  all  ma- 
jor industries. 

Firm-level  data  on  High  Performance  Work  Practices  were  collected 
with  a  questionnaire  mailed  to  the  senior  human  resources  professional 
in  each  firm.  I pretested  the  survey  items  with  a number  of colleagues  and 
human  resource  professionals  and  conducted  a pilot  study  using  all  sur- 
vey  materials.  In  the  main  study,  representatives  of  968  firms  submitted 
usable  responses,  for  an  overall  response  rate  of  28  percent. 

1 10-k  reprints  are  informational  documents 

Commission. 

filed  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


1995 

Huselid 

645 

Questions  concerning 

each  High  Performance  Work  Practice 

indicated  the  proportion  of  employees 

(de- 
for  exempt  and  nonexempt  em- 
scribed  below)  were  asked  separately 
ployees,  and  respondents 
in  each 
category  who  were  affected  by  each  practice.  I then  weighted  the  response 
to  each  item  by  the  proportion  of  employees 
in  each  category:  the  value 
for each  question  was  the  sum  across  categories.  Prior  work  has  frequent- 
ly  employed  a dummy  variable  to indicate  the  presence  or absence  of each 
practice;  the  specification  used  here  is  more  sensitive  to the  breadth  of im- 
plementation  of  each  practice  throughout  a firm. 
Measurement  of  High  Performance  Work  Practices 

Scale  development.  Prior  work  on  the  measurement  of  High  Perfor- 
mance  Work Practices  is  extremely  limited.  The  only  relevant  study  was 
conducted  by  Delaney,  Lewin,  and  Ichniowski 
(1989),  who  in  1986  sent 
7,765  business  units  for  which  data  were  available  on  the  COMPUSTAT 
tapes  a 29-page  questionnaire  concerning  a wide  variety  of HRM practices. 
From the  responses  of 495  firms  (a 6.4  percent  response  rate),  Delaney  and 
colleagues  concluded  that ten  practices  in  the  areas  of personnel  selection, 
performance  appraisal,  incentive  compensation, 
job design,  grievance  pro- 
cedures,  information  sharing,  attitude  assessment,  and  labor-management 
in  human  resource  manage- 
participation  represented  "sophistication" 
ment.  In this  study,  I adopted  those  ten  items  because  they  are consistent 
with  the  prior  empirical  work.  However,  to provide  a more  exhaustive 
list 
of  contemporary  High  Performance  Work Practices,  I added  items  assess- 
found  to  affect  a  firm's  performance:  the  in- 
ing  three  practices  widely 
tensity  of its recruiting  efforts  (selection  ratio), the  average  number  of hours 
of training  per  employee  per year, and  its  promotion  criteria  (seniority  ver- 
sus  merit). 

These  13  items  broadly  represent  the  domain  of  High  Performance 
in  prior  work  (U.S.  Department  of Labor, 1993). 
Work Practices  identified 
important  choice  variables  on  which  many 
These  items  also  represent 
firms  differ  significantly 
(Delaney  et  al.,  1989).  However,  the  substantial 
conceptual  and  empirical  overlap  among  these  items  and  my  desire  to 
adopt  a systems  perspective  make  determination  of the  independent  con- 
tribution  of  each  practice  to  firm  performance 
impractical.  Therefore,  to 
uncover  the  underlying  factor  structure  associated  with  these  practices,  I 
factor-analyzed  each  item's  standard  score,  using  principal  component  ex- 
traction  with  varimax  rotation.  Two  factors  emerged  from  these  analyses; 
and  I constructed  a scale  for  each  by  averaging  the  questions 
loading  un- 
ambiguously  at  .30  or  greater  on  a  single  factor.  Table  1  shows  these  re- 
sults  and  the  questionnaire 

Following  Bailey  (1993),  I named  the  first  factor  "employee  skills  and 
organizational  structures."  This  factor  includes  a broad  range  of practices 
intended  to enhance  employees'  knowledge,  skills,  and  abilities  and  there- 
after  provide  a  mechanism 
through  which  employees  can  use  those  at- 
tributes  in performing  their  roles.  Specifically,  a formal  job design  program 

items. 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


646 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

June 

TABLE 1 

Factor  Structure  of  High  Performance  Work  Practicesa 
2 

Questionnaire 

Item 

1 

Alpha 

.67 

.66 

Employee  skills  and  organizational  structures 

What  is  the  proportion  of  the  workforce  who  are 

in  a formal  information  sharing  program 

included 
(e.g.,  a newsletter)? 

What  is  the  proportion  of  the  workforce  whose  job 

has  been  subjected  to  a formal  job  analysis? 

What  proportion  of  nonentry  level  jobs  have  been 

filled  from  within  in  recent  years? 

What  is  the  proportion  of  the  workforce  who  are 

administered  attitude  surveys  on  a regular  basis? 

What  is  the  proportion  of  the  workforce  who  participate 

in  Quality  of  Work Life  (QWL) programs,  Quality 
Circles  (QC), and/or  labor-management  participation 
teams? 

What  is  the  proportion  of  the  workforce  who  have 
access  to  company  incentive  plans,  profit-sharing 
plans,  and/or  gain-sharing  plans? 

What  is  the  average  number  of  hours  of  training  received 

by  a typical  employee  over  the  last  12  months? 

What  is  the  proportion  of  the  workforce  who  have  access 

to  a formal  grievance  procedure  and/or  complaint 
resolution  system? 

What  proportion  of  the  workforce  is  administered  an 

employment 

test  prior  to  hiring? 

Employee  motivation 

What  is  the  proportion  of  the  workforce  whose 

performance  appraisals  are used  to  determine  their 
compensation? 

What  proportion  of  the  workforce  receives  formal 

performance  appraisals? 

Which  of  the  following  promotion  decision  rules  do  you 
use  most  often?  (a) merit  or performance  rating  alone; 
(b) seniority  only  if  merit  is  equal;  (c)  seniority  among 
employees  who  meet  a minimum  merit  requirement; 
(d)  seniority.b 

For the  five  positions  that  your  firm  hires  most  frequently, 
how  many  qualified  applicants  do  you  have  per  position 
(on  average)? 

Eigenvalue 
Proportion  of  variance  accounted  for 

.54 

.53 

.52 

.52 

.02 

.18 

-.36 

-.07 

.50 

-.04 

.39 

.37 

.36 

.32 

.17 

.29 

.17 

-.07 

.13 

-.04 

.83 

.80 

-.07 

.56 

-.15 
2.19 
16.80 

.27 
1.76 
13.60 

a Bold  type  indicates  that  the  associated  question  loads  unambiguously  at .30  or greater 

on  a single  factor. 

b Item  was  reverse-coded. 

fit,  and  provid- 
and  enhanced  selectivity  will  help  ensure  employee-job 
ing  formal  training  will  enhance  the  knowledge,  skills,  and  abilities  of both 
new  and  old  employees.  Quality  of work  life  programs,  quality  circles,  and 
that  allow  em- 
labor-management 

teams  are  all  forms  of  participation 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


1995 

Huselid 

647 

ployees  to  have  direct  input  into  the  production  process.  Likewise,  infor- 
mation-sharing  programs,  formal  grievance  procedures,  and  profit-  and 
gain-sharing  plans  help  to  increase  the  probability  that  employee  partici- 
pation  efforts  will  be  effective  because  such  programs  provide  a  formal 
mechanism  for employer-employee  communication  on work-related  issues. 
The  Cronbach's  alpha  for this  scale  was  .67. 

The  second  factor,  which  I  named  "employee  motivation" 

(Bailey, 
1993),  is  composed  of  a more  narrowly  focused  set  of  High  Performance 
Work Practices  designed  to  recognize  and  reinforce  desired  employee  be- 
haviors.  These  practices 
include  using  formal  performance  appraisals, 
linking  those  appraisals  tightly  with  employee  compensation,  and  focus- 
ing  on  employee  merit  in  promotion  decisions.  Conceptually,  core  com- 
petencies  among  employees  are  developed 
training, 
and  the  design  of work  (factor  1, employee  skills  and  organizational  struc- 
tures)  and  are  subsequently 
through  the  second  factor,  em- 
ployee  motivation.  The  Cronbach's  alpha  for  the  employee  motivation 
scale  was  .66. 

through  selection, 

reinforced 

investments 

in  them.  First,  widespread 

Scale  validation.  Although  the  correspondence  between  these  scales 
and  the  prior  conceptual  work  was  encouraging,  I also  performed  several 
analyses  to  demonstrate  their  convergent  validity.  I began  by  identifying 
two  external  measures  of  the  degree  to  which  firms  valued  their  employ- 
in  High  Perfor- 
ees  by  investing 
mance  Work Practices  are likely  to require  additional  human  resources  staff 
to  assist  in  their  implementation.  Thus,  the  ratio  of human  resources  staff 
is  a proxy  for  the  importance  a firm  places  on  its  hu- 
to  total  employees 
man  resources.  I found  the  simple  correlation  between  both  factors  and this 
ratio  to be  .19  (p <  .001).  Thus,  as expected,  firms  with  high  levels  of High 
Performance  Work  Practices  also  "vote  with  their  dollars"  and  invest  in 
human  resources  staff.  However,  those  staff  levels  may  also  reflect  a firm's 
level  of bureaucracy  or institutional  conditions  related  to  its  industry,  ar- 
eas  potentially  unrelated  to  the  importance  it places  on  human  resources. 
As  a test  of  this  possibility,  I also  regressed  the  work  practices  scales  on 
the  human  resources  staff ratio  and  controls  for firm size  and  industry.  The 
in 
human  resources  staff  ratio  remained  positive  and  highly  significant 
each  of  these  equations. 

Second,  I  assumed  that  if  a  firm's  senior  managers  saw  human  re- 
sources  as  crucial  to  organizational  performance, 
it  would  (1)  communi- 
cate  this  importance  to  external  audiences  and  (2)  invest  in  High  Perfor- 
mance  Work  Practices.  Thus,  following  Keats  and  Hitt  (1988),  I took  all 
for  each  firm 
available  president's 
in  Compact  Disclosure.  These  docu- 
from  the  annual  reports  contained 
ments  were  subsequently  content-analyzed 
for  any  reference  to  the  im- 
portance  of  human  resources,  human  capital,  or the  like,  or to  the  impor- 
tance  of personnel,  people,  employee,  staff,  or workforce.  Firms  that  made 
such  comments  were  coded  1; others  were  coded  0.  Of the  763  firms  for 
which  annual  reports  were  available,  310  mentioned  the  importance  of hu- 

letters  and  management's  discussions 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


648 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

June 

man  resources  (41  percent),  and  453  did  not.  The  employee  skills  and  or- 
ganizational  structures  score  of  firms  citing  the  importance  of  human  re- 
sources  was  significantly  higher  than  that  of  those  making  no  such  com- 
ments  (t  =  2.33,  p  <  .01).  This  difference  remained  significant 
in  a logis- 
tic  regression  model  with  controls  for firm  size  and  industry.  Although  the 
equivalent  tests  for the  employee  motivation  scale  had  the  expected  sign, 
levels.  These  findings  are 
they  did  not  reach  significance  at conventional 
in  each  scale.  The  items 
plausible  given  the  nature  of  the  items  included 
in  the  employee  skills  and  organization  structures  factor  reflect 
included 
in  High  Performance  Work Practices  intended  to 
widespread 
and  thereafter  provide  a  mecha- 
develop  employee  core  competencies 
their  roles.  The  items  in- 
nism  through  which  employees  can  influence 
cluded  in  the  employee  motivation  factor,  however,  are  much  more  nar- 
for 
row  in  that  they  are intended  to  recognize  and  compensate  employees 
behaviors  consistent  with  the  interests  of the  firm's  shareholders.  Thus,  it 
is  perhaps  unsurprising  that  they  are not  reflected  in  such  a broad  context 
as  the  firm's  annual  report. 

investments 

Finally,  using  different  samples  and  time  periods,  but  similar  mea- 
sures  of High  Performance  Work Practices,  Delaney  (in  press)  reported  re- 
sults  for turnover,  and  Ichniowski 
(1990)  and  Ichniowski  and  colleagues 
(1993)  reported  results  for productivity  that  are highly  similar  to those  pre- 
sented  below.  In short,  as an initial  attempt  to  develop  indexes  of the  adop- 
tion  of  High  Performance  Work Practices  that  can  be  used  to  determine  if 
extensive  use  of  these  practices  really  is  better,  these  scales  demonstrate 
encouraging 
Measurement  of  Internal  and  External  Fit 

levels  of  reliability  and  validity. 

Despite  prior work  arguing  that  enhanced  internal  and  external  fit will 
enhance  firm performance,  the  relevant  research  has  not  specified  the  func- 
tional  form  that  fit  can  be  expected  to  take.  In the  business  strategy  liter- 
that  fit  is  most  common- 
ature,  however,  Venkatraman  (1989)  concluded 
ly  measured  in  terms  of a moderated  relationship,  or interaction,  between 
two  variables.  For example,  the  relationship  between  a firm's  competitive 
strategy  and  its  performance  could  co-vary  with  the  type  of  environment 
in  which  it  operates.  A  second  category  of  fit  that  is  relevant  in  this  con- 
text  is  the  degree  of  match  between  two  variables.  Fit  as  matching  differs 
in  that  an  explicit  external  performance  criterion 
from  fit  as  moderation 
is  lacking  (Venkatraman,  1989).  For example,  one  might  argue  that  fit  has 
if  a firm's  competitive  strategy  and  its  structure  have  been 
been  achieved 
aligned,  based  on  an  a priori  theoretical  prediction,  regardless  of the  out- 
come.  In  the  following  sections,  I  develop  several  alternative 
indexes  to 
assess  degree  of internal  and  external  High  Performance  Work Practices  fit, 
using  Venkatraman's  categories  of  fit  as  moderation  and  fit  as  matching. 
Given  the  paucity  of  prior  work  in  the  area,  however, 
these  measures 
should  be  considered  highly  exploratory  and  the  results  interpreted  with 
caution. 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


1995 

Huselid 

649 

involve 

Internal  fit  as moderation.  Internal  fit among  work  practices  could  be 
expected  to  take  the  form  of  complementarity  or synergy  both  within  and 
between  the  employee  skills  and  organizational  structures  and  employee 
motivation  factors.  An  indication  of  complementarity  within  each  factor 
would  be  reflected  in  positive  mixed  partial  derivatives  among  the  High 
Performance  Work Practices  (Milgrom  & Roberts,  1993),  a rough  proxy  of 
interacting  each  practice  within  each  factor  with 
which  would 
the  use  of  such  a measure  is  highly 
every  other  practice.  Unfortunately, 
impractical,  largely  because  of the  generally  high  levels  of multicollinearity 
among  High  Performance  Work Practices.  Therefore,  in  this  study  I focused 
on  the  development  of  measures  of  internal  fit  between  factors.  Concep- 
tually,  the  potential  for synergies  among  High  Performance  Work Practices 
should  increase  when  these  practices  have  been  consistently 
implement- 
in  the  imple- 
ed  throughout  a  firm.  Moreover,  the  degree  of  consistency 
mentation  of practices  should  interact  with  their  overall  level  in  that  con- 
sistently  applied  high  levels  of  High  Performance  Work Practices  should 
have  the  greatest  impact  on  firm  performance.  Thus,  the  first  measure  of 
internal  fit  I developed  consists  of  the  interaction  between  the  degree  of 
human  resources  policy  consistency  and  the  respective  factors.  Human  re- 
sources  policy  consistency  was  assessed  with  this  Likert-scale  survey 
item:  "How  would  you  describe  the  consistency  of  your  human  resource 
policies  across  any  divisions  or business  units  your  firm  may  have?"  (em- 
phasis  in  original).  Unfortunately,  this  measure  is  less  than  ideal  for two 
reasons.  First,  it  has  restricted  range,  as  firms  that  by  definition  do  not 
adopt  human  resource  policies  consistently, 
such  as  holding  companies, 
were  excluded  from the  sample.  Second,  because  the  two  factor scales  were 
based  on  the  proportions  of  coverage  of  exempt  and  nonexempt  employ- 
ees  throughout  a firm, a firm with  a high  score  on these  variables  must  have 
widely  adopted  each  practice. 

The  second  measure  of  internal  fit  as  moderation  I adopted  consists 
of  the  interaction  between  these  two  measures.  Based  on  the  assumption 
in  employee  skills  and  organizational 
that  the  returns  from  investments 
structures  will  be  higher  to  the  extent  that  firms  have  also  devoted  sig- 
nificant  resources 
this  measure  provides  a 
straightforward  test  of the  magnitude  of any  such  returns.  This  scale  is  su- 
perior  to the  first  internal  fit-as-moderation  measure  in  that  it  does  not  ex- 
hibit  the  psychometric  problems  outlined  above. 

to  employee  motivation, 

Internal  fit as matching.  The  second  broad  category  of internal  fit con- 
sists  of  the  degree  of  match  between  the  two  factor  scales  (Venkatraman, 
1989).  In the  current  context,  internal  fit as matching  would  occur  if a firm 
low,  medium,  or high  on  both  factors.  As  a test  of  the 
were  consistently 
matching  model  of  internal  fit,  I calculated  the  absolute  value  of  the  dif- 
ference  between  a firm's  scores  on  the  employee  skills  and  organization- 
al  structures  and  employee  motivation  scales  (Venkatraman,  1989). 

External  fit  as  moderation.  My  first  measure  of  external  fit  as  mod- 
eration  indicates  the  degree  of  correspondence  between  each  firm's  com- 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


650 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

June 

investments 

petitive  strategy  and  its  system  of High  Performance  Work Practices.  Porter 
(1985)  provided  the  dominant  typology  of  competitive 
strategies  in  the 
business  policy  literature;  the  types  specified  are  cost  leadership,  differ- 
entiation,  and  focus.  To provide  an  estimate  of  a firm's  competitive  strat- 
egy,  each  respondent 
indicated  the  proportion  of  its  annual  sales  derived 
from  each  of  those  strategies.  In view  of  prior  work  (Jackson  et  al.,  1989; 
Jackson  & Schuler,  1995),  I assumed  that  a predominantly  differentiation 
or  focus  strategy  would  require  more  intensive 
in  High  Per- 
formance  Work Practices  than  would  a cost  leadership  strategy.  Thus,  to 
test  the  external  fit-as-moderation  hypothesis,  I interacted  the  proportion 
of  sales  derived  from  either  a differentiation  or focus  strategy  with  scores 
on  the  employee  skills  and  organizational  structures  and  employee  moti- 
vation  scales,  respectively.2 

My  second  measure  of  external  fit  as  moderation 

is  based  on  behav- 
ioral  indication  of  the  emphasis  each  firm  placed  on  aligning  its  human 
resource  management  practices  and  competitive  strategy.  Specifically,  re- 
indicated  whether  or not  they  attempted  to  implement  each  of 
spondents 
seven  strategic  human  resource  management  activities  for  all  employees 
(the Appendix  lists  these  activities).  I then  constructed  an index  by  adding 
the  number  of  affirmative  responses  to  each  question  (ct =  .69).3  To test 
in  both  factors  will  be 
my  expectation 
greater  when  firms  explicitly  attempt  to  link  human  resources  and  busi- 
ness  objectives,  I interacted  each  firm's  score  on  the  strategic  HRM index 
with  each  factor  score. 

that  the  returns  from  investments 

2  I focused  on  the  differentiation  and  focus  strategies  for two  reasons.  First,  as  noted,  I 
assumed  that  the  use  of  a differentiation  or focus  strategy  would  require  more  intensive 
in- 
in  High  Performance  Work Practices  than  would  use  of  a  cost  leadership  strate- 
vestments 
gy. Second,  because  survey  respondents  were  asked  to indicate  the  proportions  of their  firms' 
annual  sales  derived  from each  of these  strategies,  their  responses  were  constrained  to  equal 
100  percent.  Thus,  the  proportion  of  sales  derived  from  cost  leadership  equaled  1  -  (dif- 
ferentiation  +  focus),  and  any  model  that  included  all  the  strategy  variables  and  the  inter- 
actions  between  these  variables  and  the  practices  scales  would  be  collinear.  Therefore,  to 
gauge  the  impact  of each  strategy  separately,  I estimated  models  for each  type.  In these  analy- 
ses,  cost  leadership  and  its  interactions  with  the  practices  scales  produced  results  very  sim- 
ilar  to  those  for  differentiation  and  focus  (the  results  were  generally  nonsignificant). 
In  ad- 
dition,  I created  a  dummy  variable  that  equaled  1  if  the  combined  value  of  differentiation 
plus  focus  was  greater  than  67  percent  (that  is,  the  majority)  and  0  otherwise, 
thereby  in- 
corporating  all  three  competitive  strategies  in  a single  variable.  These  results  were  also  con- 
sistent  with  the  results  presented  in  the  text. 
3 This  measure  was  adapted  from  Devanna,  Fombrun,  Tichy,  and  Warren  (1982).  One 
might  argue that, given  prior theoretical  work,  these  activities  should  also  be  considered  High 
Performance  Work Practices  and  included 
in  the  measurement  scales.  However,  as  present- 
ed  in  the  questionnaire, 
these  seven  items  represent  broad  human  resources  management 
goals,  and  respondents  were  only  asked  to  indicate  whether  they  attempted  to  implement 
them  for all  employees.  In comparison,  the  13 items  included 
in  the  practices  scales  refer  to 
specific  policies,  and  respondents  were  asked  to indicate  the  current  prevalence  of each  type 
of  activity  by  category  of  employee.  Thus,  the  items  included 
in  the  scales  and  the  strategic 
HRM index  differ  in  both  scale  of  measurement  and  level  of  analysis. 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


1995 

Huselid 

651 

External  fit  as matching.  Finally,  I calculated  the  fit-as-matching  vari- 
able  by  taking  the  absolute  value  of the  difference  between  the  Z score  of 
the  proportion  of sales  resulting  from a differentiation  or focus  strategy  and 
the  respective 
factor  scores  (Venkatraman,  1989).  This  variable  indicates 
the  degree  to  which  firms  adopting  differentiation  or focus  strategies  also 
employ  high  levels  of  High  Performance  Work Practices  and  vice  versa. 

My  expectation  was  that  each  fit-as-moderation 

interaction  would  be 
positive  and  significant 
for  the  financial  performance  dependent  vari- 
ables.  Given  that  a lower  score  for the  fit-as-matching  variables  indicates 
greater  fit,  I expected  each  of  these  measures  to  be  negative  and  signifi- 
cant. 
Dependent  Variables 

Turnover.  The  level  of  turnover  within  each  firm  was  assessed  with 
a  single  questionnaire 
item,  "What  is  your  average  annual  rate  of 
turnover?"  (emphasis  in  original).  This  question  was  asked  separately  for 
exempt  and  nonexempt  employees,  and  the  level  of  turnover  for  each 
firm  is therefore  the  weighted  average  across  each  of these  categories.  This 
variable  should  be  interpreted  with  caution,  however.  First,  consistent  with 
most  of  the  prior  work  in  this  area  (Cotton  & Tuttle,  1986),  this  measure 
includes  both  voluntary  employee  departures  (quitting)  and  involuntary 
ones  (firings).  Therefore,  to  the  extent  that  human  resource  management 
practices  affect  voluntary  but  not  involuntary  separation,  my  estimates  of 
the  impact  of HRM practices  on turnover  may be  understated.  The  salience 
of  this  issue  is  increased  as  my  data  were  collected 
in  a period  of  wide- 
(fiscal  year  1991),  which  increase  all  forms 
spread  corporate  downsizings 
of  turnover. 

Second,  economists 

typically  view  turnover  as  a  choice  variable  for 
firms,  involving  a  trade-off  between  employee 
separations  and  wages, 
benefits,  and  working  conditions.  Prior  empirical  work  has  substantiated 
this  view  (Bluedorn,  1982;  Osterman,  1987b).  However,  in  a  substantial 
body  of  empirical  research  lower  turnover  has  been  associated  with  de- 
sirable  organizational  outcomes 
(Baysinger  & Mobley,  1983;  Osterman, 
1987b).  Although  recognizing  that  each  firm  may  have  an  optimal  rate  of 
turnover  (Abelson  & Baysinger,  1984),  in  this  study  I  assumed  that  low 
rates  of  turnover  are  preferred  to  high  rates.  Given  that  my  model  for 
turnover  controls  for  employee  compensation, 
I believe  this  assumption 
to  be  justified. 

Productivity.  The  logarithm  of  sales  per  employee 

is  a  widely  used 
measure  of  organizational  productivity  and  was  adopted  here  to  enhance 
comparability  with  prior work  (Ichniowski,  1990;  Pritchard,  1992).  The  pri- 
mary  advantages  of  this  measure  are  that  it  provides  a  single  index  that 
can  be  used  to  compare  firms'  productivity  as well  as to  estimate  the  dol- 
in  High  Performance  Work Practices. 
lar value  of  returns  for investments 
It should  be  emphasized 
is  not  synonymous  with  prof- 
itability,  however;  a firm  can  go  bankrupt  maximizing  sales  per  employ- 

that  productivity 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


652 

Academy  of Manageement Journal 

June 

ee  while  ignoring  current  costs.  Models  specifying  productivity  as the  log- 
arithm  of  net  income  per  employee 
less  fre- 
quently  used  measure)  produced  very  similar  results. 

(an  alternative,  although 

for  depreciation, 

to  be  made  among  the  many  alternative  measures 

Corporate  financial  performance.  Prior  work  on  the  measurement  of 
is  extensive.  Perhaps  the  primary  dis- 
corporate  financial  performance 
tinction 
is  between 
measurements  of accounting  and  economic  profits  (Becker  & Olson,  1987; 
Hirsch,  1991).  Economic  profits  represent  the  net  cash  flows  that  accrue 
to shareholders;  these  are represented  by  capital  (stock)  market returns.  Ac- 
counting  profits  can  differ  from  economic  profits  as  a result  of  timing  is- 
choice  of  accounting  method,  and 
sues,  adjustments 
measurement  error. Additionally,  economic  profits  are forward-looking  and 
reflect  the  market's  perception  of both  potential  and  current  profitability, 
but  accounting  data  reflect  an  historical  perspective.  Although  there  is 
widespread  agreement  in  the  literature  that  capital  market  measures  are 
superior  to  accounting  data,  accounting  data  provide  additional  relevant 
information  (Hirschey  & Wichern,  1984).  Moreover,  accounting  data are of- 
ten  the  focus  of  human  resource  managers  who  must  allocate  scarce  re- 
sources.  Therefore,  I used  both  a market-based  measure  (Tobin's  q) and  an 
accounting  measure  (gross  rate  of  return  on  capital,  or GRATE) of  corpo- 
rate  financial  performance.  Each  is  the  best  available  measure  of  its  type 
(Hall,  Cummins,  Laderman,  & Mundy,  1988;  Hirsch,  1991;  Hirschey  & 
Wichern,  1984). 

The  logarithm  of Tobin's  q was  calculated  by  dividing  the  market  val- 
ue  of a firm  by  the  replacement  cost  of  its  assets  (Hall  et al.,  1988;  Hirsch, 
1991).  Conceptually,  q is  a measure  of  the  value  added  by  management.  I 
calculated  the  measure  of  accounting  profits,  gross  rate  of  return  on  cap- 
ital,  by  dividing  cash  flow  by  gross  capital  stock  (Hall  et al.,  1988;  Hirsch, 
1991).  GRATE is  a better  measure  of accounting  profits  than  the  traditional 
return  on  assets  or return  on  equity  because  it is  not  as greatly  affected  by 
depreciation  or  other  noncash  transactions 
(Brainard,  Shoven,  & Weiss, 
1980;  Hall  et al.,  1988).  The  calculations  I used  for q and  GRATE were  tak- 
en  from  Hall  and  colleagues.  Because  some  data  were  missing,  I was  un- 
able  to  complete  all  the  adjustments  to firm  capital  structure  those  sources 
recommend.  However,  I was  able  to  estimate  the  sensitivity  of  my  results 
to  the  missing  variables  by  substituting  values  for them  across  all  reason- 
able  ranges  into  my  calculations; 
the  analyses  indicated  that  the  missing 
data  did  not  materially  affect  my  estimates.  As  is  described  below,  I em- 
ployed  both  contemporaneous  and  subsequent  (t  +  1) years'  corporate  fi- 
nancial  performance  data  as  a partial  control  for the  effects  of  simultane- 
ity  bias. 

Research  in  the  field  of  financial  economics  often  omits  firms  in  the 
utility  and banking  industries  because  they  are subject  to governmental  reg- 
ulation.  In this  study,  these  industries  accounted  for  184  of  the  firms  on 
which  I had  complete  data.  Results  of  analyses  omitting  these  firms  were 
consistent  with  the  results  presented  below. 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


1995 

Huselid 

653 

Control  Variables 

is  measured  with  error  because 

The  estimation  models  were  developed  to provide  unbiased  estimates 
of  the  impact  of  High  Performance  Work  Practices  on  firm  performance. 
Thus,  the  selection  of the  control  variables  for each  dependent  variable  was 
based  on  a careful  review  of the  prior  empirical  work  (cf.  Huselid,  1993), 
focusing  on those  variables  likely  to be related  to both  the  dependent  vari- 
ables  and  the  use  of  High  Performance  Work  Practices.  The  controls  for 
each  dependent  variable  included  firm size  (total  employment),  capital  in- 
tensity,  firm-  and  industry-levels  of  union  coverage,  industry  concentra- 
tion,  recent  (five-year)  growth  in  sales,  research  and  development 
inten- 
sity,  firm-specific  risk  (beta),  industry  levels  of profitability,  net  sales,  to- 
tal  assets,  and  34  dummy  variables  representing  35  two-digit  Standard 
(SIC) codes.  Unfortunately,  there  was  no  straight- 
Industrial  Classification 
in  the 
forward  measure  of  firms'  total  wage  bills  available  for  inclusion 
turnover  model.  However,  selling,  general,  and  administrative  expenses  is 
a common  income  statement  item  that  serves  as a proxy  for employee  com- 
it  includes  a 
pensation.  This  variable 
number  of items  not  directly  related  to  wage  expenses  and  excludes  some 
in 
included 
wages  directly  related  to  production 
is 
the  cost  of  goods  sold).  If selling,  general,  and  administrative  expenses 
an adequate  proxy,  however,  the  level  of union  coverage  should  have  a pos- 
(Lewis,  1986),  if 
itive  and  sizable  effect  on  it,  as  it  does  on  compensation 
the  elements  unrelated  to  compensation  are invariant  to  union  coverage. 
As  a test  of  this  proposition,  I regressed  selling,  general,  and  administra- 
tive  expenses  on  firm-level  union  coverage  and  a series  of control  variables. 
Union  coverage  was  significant  and  positive,  and  the  magnitude  of this  ef- 
significant.  Firms  with  an  average  level  of  union 
fect  was  economically 
coverage  (11.34  percent)  had  8.1  percent  higher  selling,  general,  and  ad- 
ministrative  expenses  than  firms  with  no  union  coverage.  Alternatively, 
increase  in  union  coverage  created  a 19  per- 
each  one-standard-deviation 
cent  increase  in  these  expenses.  Finally,  firms  with  100  percent  union  cov- 
erage  had  125  percent  higher  selling,  general,  and  administrative  expens- 
es  than  firms  with  no  unions.  These  figures  are  broadly  consistent  with 
the  11 to  14  percent  union  wage  premium  calculated  by  Lewis  (1986)  and 
provide  support  for  the  assertion  that  these  expenses  are  an  adequate 
proxy  for employee  compensation.  Finally,  turnover  was  also  included  as 
a control  variable  in  the  productivity  models  because  prior  work  has  iden- 
tified  it  as  an  important  determinant  of  productivity  with  strong  links  to 
High  Performance  Work Practices. 

(the  latter  are typically 

Financial  data  were  taken  primarily  from  Compact  Disclosure.  I took 
considerable  care  to  ensure  that  all  data  were  matched  to  the  same  ac- 
counting  period  (July  1,  1991,  to  June  30,  1992).  Missing  data  were  re- 
trieved  from  Moody's  Industrial  Manual  or  the  Standard  & Poor's  Stock 
Price  Guide,  where  possible.  Otherwise,  missing  data  were  eliminated 
listwise  for each  dependent  variable.  Stock  price  data were  gathered  from 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


654 

Aca demy  of Management  Jo urnal 

June 

to  sales)  and  compensation 

the  Investment  Statistics  Laboratory  Daily  Stock  Price  Record  for Decem- 
ber  31.  Stock  dividend  and  stock  split  data  were  gathered  from  Standard 
& Poor's  Stock  Price  Guide.  Capital  intensity  was  calculated  as  the  loga- 
rithm  of  the  ratio  of  gross  property,  plant,  and  equipment  over  total  em- 
ployment.  The  five-year  trend  in  sales  growth  and  R&D intensity  (the  log- 
arithm  of  the  ratio  of  R&D expenditures 
lev- 
els  (proxied  by  selling,  general,  and  administrative 
expenses)  were 
calculated  directly  from  the  accounting  data.  Firm-level  union  coverage 
and  total  employment  were  taken  from  the  questionnaire,  and  industry- 
level  unionization  data  were  taken  from  Curme,  Hirsch,  and  Macpherson 
(1990).  Concentration  ratios  were  calculated  by  dividing  the  sum  of  the 
largest  four  firms'  sales  within  each  industry  by  the  total  sales  for that  in- 
dustry.  The  systematic  component 
in  the  variability  of a firm's  stock  price 
(systematic  risk,  or beta)  was  calculated  using  the  Center  for Research  on 
Stock  Prices  (CRSP)  database  and  a  250-day  period.  Initially,  betas  were 
only  available  for  543  firms.  Using  an  auxiliary  regression  equation,  I in- 
puted  data  for the  missing  observations 

(R2 =  .40). 

RESULTS 

Table 2 presents  means,  standard  deviations,  and  correlations.  The  em- 
ployee  skills  and  organizational  structures  and  employee  motivation  scales 
reflect  an  average  of  standard  scores,  so  their  means  are  very  near  zero. 
Turnover  averaged  18.36  percent  per  year,  and  the  logarithm  of  the  pro- 
ductivity  averaged  12.05,  or annual  sales  of  $171,099  per  employee.  The 
mean  q was  .46,  and  the  average  annual  gross  rate  of return  was  5.10  per- 
cent.  This  value  for q (e 46 =  1.58)  implies  that  the  market  value  of the  av- 
erage  firm  was  58  percent  greater  than  the  current  replacement  cost  of  its 
assets.  This  result  indicates  that  managements  were  generally  working  in 
to  increase  the  value  of  their  equity.  A 
the  interest  of  the  shareholders 
GRATE value  of 5.10  implies  that  each  dollar  invested  in  capital  stock  gen- 
erates  five  cents  in  annual  cash  flow.  Each  of  these  values  is  consistent 
with  the  results  of  prior  work  (Becker  & Olson,  1992;  Hirsch,  1991).  Av- 
erage total  employment  was  4,413  (the  logarithm  of this  variable  was  used 
in  all  subsequent  analyses);  firm level  unionization  averaged  11.34  percent; 
and  industry-level  unionization  averaged  13.97  percent.  Total employment 
and  union  coverage  were  lower  than  in  most  prior  work  in  this  area,  pri- 
marily  because  previous  research  has  focused  on  the  manufacturing  sec- 
tor, which  is  more  heavily  unionized.  Finally,  as  expected,  the  employee 
skills  and  organizational  structures  scale  was  negatively  related  to turnover, 
while  both  scales  were  positively  related  to productivity  and  corporate  fi- 
nancial  performance. 

Tables  3  through  6  present  the  regression  analysis  results  for  Hy- 
la  and  lb.  The  first  equation  in  each  table  contains  the  first  fac- 
potheses 
tor  scale,  employee  skills  and  organizational  structures,  the  second  equa- 
tion  contains  the  employee  motivation  scale,  and  the  third  equation  con- 
tains  both.  These  analyses  provide  some  indication  of the  sensitivity  of the 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


Means,  Standard  Deviations,  and  Correlationsa 

TABLE 2 

Variables 

Means 

s.d. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

1.  Turnover 
2.  Productivity 
3.  Tobin's q 
4.  Gross rate of 

return on assets 

5.  Employee  skills  and 

organizational 
structures 

6.  Employee  motivation 
7.  Total employment 
8.  Capital  intensity 
9.  Firm union  coverage 
10.  Industry union 

coverage 

11.  Concentration ratio 
12.  Sales  growth 
13.  R&D intensity 
14.  Systematic  risk 
15.  Selling,  general & 

administrative 
expensesb 

16.  HRM policy 
consistency 

17.  Differentiation/focus 
18.  Strategic HRM index 

18.36 
12.05 
0.46 

21.87 
0.99 
1.64 

-.24 
-.10 

.07 

5.10 

23.00 

-.03 

.15 

.35 

0.02 
0.00 

0.52  -.08 
.06 
.03 
0.78 
.04 
.13  -.22 
4,412.80  18,967.45 
.48 
-.29 
1.32 
-.11 
24.28  -.14 
.05  -.09 

3.96 
11.34 

.09 
.20 
.02 

.13 
.15 
.01 
.18  -.15 
.12 
-.23 
.02 
.05 
.02  -.05 
-.51 

-.01 

.21 

.29 

13.97 
0.38 
0.61 
0.03 
1.06 

13.55 
0.25 
1.08 
0.06 
0.32 

-.22 
.05 
.06 
-.09 
.09 

.11 
-.15 
.06 
-.01 
-.08 

-.11 
-.03 
.13 
.10 
.05 

.00 
-.14 
.01 
-.11 
-.05 

.04 
-.08 
-.03 
-.01 
.00 

-.36 
-.12 
.12 
.18 
.19 

.19 
.17 
-.02 
-.14 
.06 

.40 
.02 
-.04 
.06 
-.23 

.36 
.08 
-.16 
-.12 
-.18 

.16 
-.03 
-.12 
-.20 

286.54 

1,622.02 

-.02 

.31 

.09 

.18 

.23 

.00 

.77 

.21 

.16 

.13 

4.54 
-0.01 
3.36 

1.10 
1.02 
1.98 

-.10 
-.03 
-.02 

-.04 
-.10 
.01 

.01 
.12 
.00 

.04 
-.02 
.08 

.14 
.05 
.33 

.23 
.18 
.06 

-.12 
-.03 
.25 

-.06 
-.13 
-.01 

-.12 
-.15 
.08 

-.07 
-.15 
.01 

a  N =  816.  All  correlations  greater than or equal  to  .05  are significant  at the .05  level;  those  >  .07  are significant  at the  .01  level,  and those  -  .10 
are significant  at the  .001 level  (one-tailed  tests). Raw means are reported for total employment  and selling,  general, and administrative  expenses  to ease 
interpretation. The logarithms for these  variables  are used  in  all  subsequent  analyses. 

b In millions  of dollars. 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


656 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

June 

findings  to my  specification  and  a very  rough  estimate  of the  degree  of bias 
facets  of  High  Performance  Work 
associated  with  a  focus  on  individual 
lb,  in  the  fourth  equation  in  Tables  5 and 
Practices.  As  a test  of Hypothesis 
6  I  added  turnover  and  productivity 
for  Tobin's  q  and 
GRATE. 

to  the  models 

Turnover 

Table  3  shows  the  regression  results 

for  turnover.  Each  equation 
levels,  and  the  control  variables  gen- 
reached  significance  at conventional 
erally  had  the  expected  signs  and  significance 
levels.  Although  employ- 
ee  skills  and  organizational  structures  was  consistently  negative  and  sig- 
nificant,  employee  motivation  was  not  significant  in  either  model.  This  re- 
sult  is  less  surprising  when 
that  the  use  of  incentive 
systems  may  actually  encourage  employees  who  are  per- 
compensation 
forming  poorly  to  leave  a firm. 

it  is  recognized 

I next  estimated  the  practical  significance  of  the  impact  of  High  Per- 
formance  Work Practices  on  turnover,  from  the  results  of  the  third  equa- 
tion  shown  in  Table  3. With  all  other  variables  held  at their  means,  firms 
with  employee  skills  and  organizational  structures  and  employee  moti- 
vation  scores  three  standard  deviations  below  the  mean  exhibited  21.48 
percent  turnover,  but  firms  with  scores  three  standard  deviations  above  the 
mean  had  15.36  percent  turnover.  This  40  percent  decrease  of  course 
would  be  the  maximum  expected  effect  of high  performance  practices,  be- 
cause  it  implies  that  a firm  has  moved  from  the  total  absence  of  any  ef- 
fective  human  resource  programs  to  complete  participation  across  all  di- 
mensions.  A more  representative  estimate  can  be  made  by  calculating  the 
effect  of  a  one-standard-deviation 
in  each  practice  scale  on 
turnover.  Each  such  increase  reduced  turnover  1.30  raw percentage  points, 
or  7.05  percent  relative  to  the  mean.  Considering  that  this  model  controls 
for firm  size,  the  impact  of  unions,  and  employee  compensation 
(selling, 
general,  and  administrative  expenses),  this  effect  is  practically  as  well  as 
In  fact,  this  specification  provides  a  highly  re- 
statistically 
strictive  test  of the  impact  of High  Performance  Work Practices  on turnover, 
as  the  inclusion  of  selling,  general,  and  administrative  expenses  controls 
not  only  for employee  wage  levels  but  also  for any  direct  costs  associated 
with  the  implementation  of  these  practices.  Removing  this  variable  and 
thus  allowing  the  effect  of  High  Performance  Work Practices  on  compen- 
sation  to  be  reflected  in  the  direct  effect  of  such  practices  increased  the 
magnitude  of  their  impact  on  turnover  by  more  than  20  percent. 
Productivity 

significant. 

increase 

Table  4  presents  the  regression  results  for  productivity.  As  above, 
levels,  and  the  control 
each  equation  reached  significance  at conventional 
variables  generally  had  the  expected  signs  and  significance 
levels.  When 
employee  skills  and  organizational  structures  and  employee  motivation 
were  entered  individually 
(models  4  and  5),  each  was  positive  and  sig- 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


1995 

Huselid 

TABLE 3 

657 

Results  of  Regression  Analysis  for  Turnover 

Variables 

Constant 
Logarithm  of  total 

employment 

Capital  intensity 
Firm  union  coverage 
Industry  union  coverage 
Concentration  ratio 
Sales  growth 
R&D/sales 
Systematic  risk 
Selling,  general,  & 

administrative  expenses 

Employee  skills  and 

organizational  structures 

Employee  motivation 
R2 
AR2 
Ffor  AR2 
N 

Model  1 
b 

s.e. 
9.418 

Model  2 

b 

s.e. 

46.363*** 

9.420 

44.758*** 

Model  3 
b 

s.e. 
9.486 

44.965*** 

2.656*** 
-2.229*** 
-0.088*** 
-0.222*** 
-1.376 
0.329 
-3.509 
1.490 

0.772 
0.659 
0.029 
0.080 
3.611 
0.592 
11.298 
2.158 

2.507*** 
-2.279*** 
-0.089*** 
-0.225*** 
-1.369 
0.362 
-3.211 
1.577 

0.778 
0.663 
0.032 
0.080 
3.617 
0.592 
11.409 
2.177 

2.637*** 
-2.240*** 
-0.090*** 
-0.222*** 
-1.360 
0.332 
-3.278 
1.532 

0.783 
0.663 
0.032 
0.080 
3.615 
0.593 
11.403 
2.176 

-2.168*** 

0.749 

-2.175*** 

0.763 

-2.145*** 

0.763 

-1.769* 

1.245 

-0.359 

1.036 

-1.743* 
-0.162 

1.258 
1.045 

0.385*** 
0.002a 
2.017 
855 

0.383*** 
0.120a 
0.730 
855 

0.385*** 
0.002a 
1.020 
855 

a These  statistics  reflect  the  incremental  variance  accounted  for  when  employee  skills 
and  organizational  structures  and  employee  motivation,  respectively,  are added  to  the  com- 
for  each  model.  The  impact  of  High  Performance  Work Practices  on  the 
plete  specification 
that  the  in- 
dependent  variable  is  underestimated  by  this  statistic  because  the  assumptions 
dependent  variables  are orthogonal  and  have  been  entered  on  the  basis  of  a clear  causal  or- 
dering  are not  appropriate  in  the  current  study.  This  caveat  applies  to  all  reported  results. 

*p  <  .10,  one-tailed  test 
*p  <  .05,  one-tailed  test 
***p  <  .01,  one-tailed  test 

the  need  to  adopt  a  systems  perspective 

levels.  In model  6,  which  includes  both  employ- 
nificant  at conventional 
ee  skills  and  organizational  structures  and  employee  motivation,  only  the 
for  the  later  remained  significant.  This  finding  graphically 
coefficient 
in  evaluating  the 
demonstrates 
links  between  High  Performance  Work Practices  and  firm-level  outcomes 
and  the  way  in  which  focusing  on  a  subset  of  human  resources  manage- 
ment  practices  may  overstate  their  effects.  In fact,  these  analyses  are like- 
ly  to understate  the  biases  associated  with  a focus  on  individual  High  Per- 
formance  Work Practices,  as I focus  here  on  the  impact  of  omitting  an  en- 
tire  facet  of  these  practices,  rather  than  a single  practice. 

To  estimate  the  practical  significance  of  the  impact  of  High  Perfor- 
mance  Work  Practices  on  productivity,  I next  calculated  the  impact  of  a 
increase  in  each  practices  scale  on  the  numerator 
one-standard-deviation 
(net  sales)  while  holding  total  employment  and  all  other 
of  productivity 
variables  at  their  means.  These  analyses  were  based  on  model  6  from 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


658 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

June 

Results  of  Regression  Analysis  for  Productivity 

TABLE 4 

Model  4 

Model  5 

Model  6 
b 

Variables 

Constant 
Logarithm  of  total 

employment 

Capital  intensity 
Firm  union  coverage 
Industry  union  coverage 
Concentration  ratio 
Sales  growth 
R&D/sales 
Systematic  risk 
Turnover 
Employee  skills  and 

organizational  structures 

Employee  motivation 
R2 
AR2 
F for  AR2 
N 

b 

10.919*** 

-0.123*** 
0.399*** 
0.000 
0.001 
-0.240** 

0.105*** 

-0.771** 

0.083 
-0.003** 

0.073* 

0.490*** 
0.001a 
2.100 

855 

s.e. 
0.227 

0.018 
0.025 
0.001 
0.003 
0.146 
0.024 
0.457 
0.087 
0.001 

0.050 

b 

10.899*** 

-0.119*** 
0.404*** 
0.001 
0.001 
-0.251** 

0.100*** 

-1.004** 

0.042 
-0.003** 

0.160*** 
0.498*** 
0.010a 
15.448*** 

855 

s.e. 
0.225 

0.017 
0.025 
0.001 
0.003 
0.145 
0.024 
0.457 
0.087 
0.001 

0.041 

10.899*** 

-0.123*** 
0.403*** 
0.001 
0.000 
-0.251** 

0.101*** 

-1.002** 
0.043 
-0.003** 

0.046 
0.154*** 
0.498*** 
0.010a 
8.136*** 

855 

s.e. 
0.225 

0.018 
0.024 
0.001 
0.003 
0.145 
0.024 
0.457 
0.087 
0.001 

0.051 
0.041 

a These  statistics  reflect  the  incremental  variance  accounted  for  when  employee  skills 
and  organizational  structures  and  employee  motivation,  respectively,  are added  to  the  com- 
for  each  model.  The  impact  of  High  Performance  Work Practices  on  the 
plete  specification 
dependent  variable  is  underestimated  by  this  statistic  because  the  assumptions 
that  the  in- 
dependent  variables  are orthogonal  and  have  been  entered  on  the  basis  of  a clear  causal  or- 
dering  are not  appropriate  in  the  current  study.  This  caveat  applies  to  all  reported  results. 

*p  <  .10,  one-tailed  test 
**p  <  .05,  one-tailed  test 
***p  <  .01,  one-tailed  test 

Table  4.  The  findings  indicate  that  each  one-standard-deviation 
increase 
raises  sales  an average  of $27,044  per employee.  This  substantial  figure rep- 
resents  nearly  16  percent  of  the  mean  sales  per  employee 
($171,099). 
However,  this  is  a  single-period  estimate,  and  spending  on  High  Perfor- 
mance  Work Practices  should  be  thought  of as  an investment  that  can  rea- 
sonably  be  assumed  to  produce  gains  for  longer  than  a single  year.  If the 
effects  of  increasing  such  practices  are arbitrarily  assumed  to  accrue  for a 
five-year  period  at an  8 percent  discount  rate,  the  present  value  increase 
in  sales  will  be  $107,979  per  employee.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  as- 
is  that  High  Performance  Work 
sumption  underlying 
Practices  increase  sales  for  a  fixed  number  of  employees  rather  than  in- 
crease  efficiency  (lower  employment)  given  a constant  level  of  sales.  Oth- 
erwise  identical  specifications 
that modeled  sales  as a function  of total  em- 
ployment  produced  very  similar  results. 

this  specification 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


1995 

Huselid 

659 

Corporate  Financial  Performance 

Table  5 presents  the  results  for Tobin's  q, and  Table  6 shows  the  same 
for the  gross  rate of return  on  assets.  Each  equation  reached 
specifications 
levels,  and  the  control  variables  generally  had 
significance  at conventional 
the  expected  signs  and  significance 
levels.  For  example,  consistent  with 
Hirsch  (1991),  R&D expenditures  were  positively  related  to  q but negatively 
related  to GRATE. Hirsch  speculated  that these  relationships  occur  because 
firms  with  high  current  R&D expenditures  have  lower  reported  profits  but 
higher  expected  future  earnings.  More  centrally,  the  results  for  q showed 
the  employee  skills  and  organizational  structures  and  employee  motiva- 
tion  scales  to be  significant  in  each  equation.  For GRATE, employee  skills 
and  organizational  structures  was  positive  and  significant 
in  each  model 
but  employee  motivation  was  not.  Although  the  diversity  in  these  results 
reinforces  the  importance  of  researchers'  considering  multiple  outcomes 
when  evaluating 
the  impact  of  human  resources  department  activities 
(Tsui,  1990),  the  structure  of  incentive  systems  in  many  firms  may  help 
to  explain  them.  Given  the  numerous  problems  associated  with  the  use  of 
accounting  measures  of firm  performance  in  incentive  compensation  sys- 
tems  (Gerhart & Milkovich,  1992),  many  firms  have  begun  to explicitly  link 
employee  compensation  with  capital  market  returns.  This  shift  may  help 
to  explain  why  employee  motivation  has  a much  stronger  impact  on  the 
market-based  performance  measure  than  on  the  accounting  returns-based 
measure. 

I next  assessed  the  practical  significance  of  the  impact  of  High  Per- 
formance  Work Practices  on  firm  profits.  To do  so,  I estimated  the  impact 
of  a  one-standard-deviation 
increase  on  the  numerator  of  both  Tobin's  q 
and  GRATE while  holding  their  denominators  and  all  other  variables  at 
their  means.  These  analyses  were  based  on  models  9  and  13  from  Tables 
5 and  6,  respectively.  In terms  of market  value,  the  per  employee  effect  of 
increasing  such  practices  one  standard  deviation  was  $18,641  (relative  to 
q).  Such  an  increase  in  market  value  is  not  likely  to  occur  immediately, 
however.  A  more  likely  scenario  is  that  investments 
in  High  Performance 
Work  Practices  create  an  asset  that  provides  an  annual  return.  If one  as- 
sumes  (again,  arbitrarily)  that  these  returns  accrue  over  a five-year  period 
at an  8 percent  discount  rate,  then  such  an  investment  would  provide  an 
annuity  of  $4,669  per  employee  per  year. 

Estimates  of  the  practical  effects  of  increasing  use  of  these  practices 
can  also  be  made  on  the  basis  of  annual  accounting  profits.  Relative  to 
increase  in  High  Performance  Work 
GRATE, each  one-standard-deviation 
Practices  increased  cash  flow  $3,814.  These  figures  are remarkably  close 
to  the  five-year  annuity  values  calculated  above. 

Summary  of  financial  performance  results.  In  short,  although  there 
is  strong  support  for  the  hypotheses  predicting 
that  High  Performance 
Work  Practices  will  affect  firm  performance  and  important  employment 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


TABLE 5 

Results  of  Regression  Analysis  Results  for  Tobin's  q 
Model  7 

Model  8 

Model  9 

s.e. 

0.505 
0.040 
0.054 
0.002 
0.007 
0.326 
0.053 
1.009 
0.194 

0.113 

b 

0.672* 
0.065** 
-0.125*** 

0.000 
-0.002 
-0.443* 

0.205*** 
2.354*** 

-0.039 

0.215* 

0.138*** 
0.004a 
3.635* 
826 

b 

0.515 
0.082** 
-0.115** 
0.004 
-0.003 
-0.469* 

0.195*** 
1.935*** 

-0.115 

s.e. 

0.495 
0.039 
0.054 
0.003 
0.007 
0.325 
0.053 
1.013 
0.194 

0.297*** 

0.090 

0.146*** 
0.012a 
10.842*** 

826 

b 

0.642 
0.067** 
-0.119** 
0.004* 

-0.003 
-0.471* 

0.198*** 
1.937** 

-0.112 

0.165* 
0.277*** 

0.148*** 
0.014a 
6.483*** 
826 

Variables 

Constant 
Log of  total  employment 
Capital  intensity 
Firm  union  coverage 
Industry  union  coverage 
Concentration  ratio 
Sales  growth 
R&D/sales 
Systematic  risk 
Employee  skills  and 

organizational  structures 

Employee  motivation 
Turnover 
Productivity 
R2 
AR2 
Ffor  AR2 
N 

a These  statistics  reflect  the  incremental  variance  accounted  for when  employee  skills  and  organizational  structures,  employee  motivation, 
for each  model.  The  impact  of  High  Performance  Work Prac- 
turnover,  and  productivity,  respectively,  are added  to  the  complete  specification 
tices  on  the  dependent  variable  is  underestimated  by  this  statistic  because  the  assumptions  that  the  independent  variables  are orthogonal  and 
have  been  entered  on  the  basis  of  a clear  causal  ordering  are not  appropriate  in  the  current  study. 

*p <  .10,  one-tailed  test 
**p  <  .05,  one-tailed  test 
***p  <  .01,  one-tailed  test 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


Results  of  Regression  Analysis  for  Gross  Rate  of  Return  on  Assets 

Model  11 

Model  12 

Model  13 

TABLE 6 

s.e 

0.072 
0.006 
0.007 
0.000 
0.001 
0.046 
0.007 
0.144 
0.027 

0.016 

b 

-0.126** 

0.019*** 
0.011* 
0.000 
0.000 
-0.077** 
0.008 
-0.213* 
-0.050* 

0.041** 

0.117*** 
0.008a 
6.649*** 
826 

b 

-0.159** 

0.023*** 
0.012* 
0.000 
0.000 
-0.075** 
0.008 
-0.202** 
-0.049* 

s.e 

0.072 
0.006 
0.008 
0.000 
0.001 
0.046 
0.007 
0.146 
0.028 

-0.003 

0.013 

0.109*** 
0.001a 
0.680*** 
826 

b 

-0.125*** 
0.019*** 
0.011* 
0.000 
0.000 
-0.076** 
0.008 
-0.201** 
-0.048* 

0.043** 

-0.008 

0.117*** 
0.008a 
3.356*** 
826 

Variables 

Constant 
Log of  total  employment 
Capital  intensity 
Firm  union  coverage 
Industry  union  coverage 
Concentration  ration 
Sales  growth 
R&D/sales 
Systematic  risk 
Employee  skills  and 

organizational  structures 

Employee  motivation 
Turnover 
Productivity 
R2 
AR2 
Ffor  AR2 
N 

a These  statistics  reflect  the  incremental  variance  accounted  for when  employee  skills  and  organizational  structures,  employee  motivation, 
for each  model.  The  impact  of High  Performance  Work Prac- 
turnover,  and  productivity,  respectively,  are added  to  the  complete  specification 
tices  on  the  dependent  variable  is  underestimated  by  this  statistic  because  the  assumptions  that  the  independent  variables  are  orthogonal  and 
have  been  entered  on  the  basis  of  a clear  causal  ordering  are not  appropriate  in  the  current  study. 

*p  <  .10,  one-tailed  test 
**p  <  .05,  one-tailed  test 
***p  <  .01,  one-tailed  test 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


662 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

June 

outcomes,  the  results  are  not  completely  unambiguous.  Notably,  the  sig- 
nificant  effects  found  are  also  financially  meaningful.  Moreover,  where 
these  effects  are meaningful  their  magnitude  is  consistent  across  very  dif- 
ferent  measures  of financial  performance.  For example,  a one-standard-de- 
viation  increase  in  High  Performance  Work Practices  yields  a $27,044  in- 
crease  in  sales  and  a $3,814  increase  in  profits.  The  ratio  of these  variables 
(cash  flow  to  sales)  at  14  percent  is  very  near  the  sample  mean  of  10  per- 
cent.  And  assuming  that  the  market  value  of  a firm  reflects  the  discount- 
ed net  present  value  of all future  cash  flows,  the  present  value  of these  cash 
flows  ($15,277  at  8 percent  for five  years)  is  remarkably  close  to  the  esti- 
mated  per  employee 
impact  on  firm  market  value  of  $18,614.  The  point 
of these  analyses  is  to  demonstrate  that  High  Performance  Work Practices 
have  impacts  of  similar  magnitude  on  each  dependent  variable  of  inter- 
est.  In fact,  these  results  show  a remarkable  level  of  internal  consistency, 
especially  given  the  fact  that  they  are  based  on  measures  of  firm  perfor- 
mance  that  are only  moderately 
Sources  of  the  Gains  from  High  Performance  Work  Practices 

intercorrelated. 

The  next  series  of  analyses  examined  the  processes 

through  which 
High  Performance  Work Practices  affect  corporate  financial  performance. 
lb  states  that  employee  turnover  and  productiv- 
Specifically,  Hypothesis 
ity  will  mediate  the  relationship  between  systems  of  work  practices  and 
corporate  financial  performance.  Following  Baron  and  Kenny  (1986),  I first 
regressed  the  mediating  variables  (turnover  and  productivity)  on the  prac- 
tices  scales  (see  Tables  3  and  4).  The  next  step  was  to  regress  each  de- 
pendent  variable  on  those  scales  (see  models  7,  8,  and  9  in  Table  5  and 
models  11,  12,  and  13  in  Table  6).  The  significant  effects  shown  in  each 
case  are necessary  but  not  sufficient  conditions  to  establish  that  mediation 
exists.  Finally,  as  an  estimate  of  the  magnitude  of  any  mediation  effect,  I 
regressed  the  dependent  variables  on the  work  practices  scales  and  the  me- 
diating  variables.  These  results  are shown  in  the  final  models  in  Tables  5 
and  6.  Here,  the  decrement  in  the  coefficients 
for the  employee  skills  and 
organizational  structures  and  employee  motivation  scales  as turnover  and 
productivity  are entered  into  the  profitability  equations  provides  an  esti- 
mate  of  the  degree  to  which  the  effects  of  High  Performance  Work  Prac- 
tices  on  firm  performance  can  be  attributed  to  these  factors. 

As  expected,  the  coefficient  on  each  practices  scale  becomes  smaller 
once  turnover  and  productivity  have  been  entered  into  the  models.  The 
magnitude  of  this  effect  can  be  shown  by  calculating 
the  proportionate 
change  in  the  impact  of High  Performance  Work Practices  on  corporate  fi- 
nancial  performance  that  can be  attributed  to the  inclusion  of turnover  and 
productivity.  Although,  on  the  average,  the  coefficients  on  the  two  scales 
fall  by  approximately  20 percent  each  when  turnover  and  productivity  are 
entered  into  the  models,  the  joint  effect  is  to  reduce  the  estimated  finan- 
cial  impact  of High  Performance  Work Practices  on  q by  74 percent  and  on 
GRATE by  77  percent.  This  effect  is  sizable  and  suggests  that  a significant 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


1995 

Huselid 

663 

proportion  of  the  impact  of  High  Performance  Work  Practices  on  corpo- 
rate financial  performance  is  attributable  to  either  lower  turnover  or high- 
er  employee  productivity,  or to  both.  The  fact  that  turnover  and  produc- 
tivity  are temporally  antecedent  to  my  measures  of  firm  profits  and  that 
estimates  of  the  profitability  effects  were  highly 
the  contemporaneous 
similar  increases  my  confidence 
Evidence  of  Complementarity 

in  these  results. 

The  final  phase  in  the  analyses  was  to  evaluate  the  influence  of  in- 
ternal  and  external  fit  on  the  dependent  variables.  Owing  to  space  con- 
straints,  I focus  here  on  firm  profits,  but  the  results  for turnover  and  pro- 
ductivity  were  similar.  The  results  of  Tobin's  q and  GRATE appear  in  Ta- 
bles  7 and  8,  respectively,  where  the  internal  and  external  fit  measures  I 
developed  were  individually  added  to  the  complete  specifications  pre- 
sented  in  Tables  5 and  6. 

Internal  fit  as  moderation.  The  first  measure  of  fit  I developed  was 
the  interaction  between  the  degree  of  human  resources  policy  consisten- 
cy  and  each  of  the  scales  measuring  High  Performance  Work  Practices. 
These  results  were  uniformly  nonsignificant.  Conversely,  the  second  mea- 
sure  of  internal  fit,  the  interaction  between  the  employee  skills  and  orga- 
nizational  structures  and  employee  motivation  scales,  was  positive  and  sig- 
nificant  for both  Tobin's  q and  GRATE. 

Internal  fit  as  matching.  The  internal  fit-as-matching  variable,  which 
assesses  the  degree  to  which  a firm  adopts  the  same  level  of  High  Perfor- 
is  presented  in  the  final 
mance  Work Practices  throughout  its  operations, 
column  of Tables  7 and  8.  These  results  were  negative  and  significant  for 
GRATE but  nonsignificant 

External  fit  as  moderation.  The  first  external  fit-as-moderation  vari- 
ables  reflect  the  interaction  between  the  proportion  of sales  associated  with 
differentiation  and  focus  strategies  and  the  employee  skills  and  organiza- 
tional  structures  and  employee  motivation  scales  respectively.  These  re- 
sults  were  uniformly  nonsignificant. 

The  second  measures  of  external  fit  as  moderation  reflects  the  inter- 
action  between  firms'  scores  on  the  strategic  HRM index  and  the  practices 
scales.  With  the  exception  of  the  interaction  between  this  index  and  em- 
for  GRATE, these  analyses  were  also  uniformly  non- 
ployee  motivation 
significant. 

for  q. 

External  fit  as  matching.  Finally,  the  fit-as-matching  variables  for ex- 
the  unanticipated 

for  q to  be  positive-in 

ternal  fit  show  the  coefficient 
direction-and 

significant,  but  nonsignificant  elsewhere. 

In  summary,  most  of  the  coefficients  on  the  fit  measures  had  the  ex- 
pected  signs,  and  the  interaction  of  employee  skills  and  organizational 
structures  and  employee  motivation  was  consistently  positive  and  signif- 
icant.  But despite  the  strong  theoretical  expectation  that better  internal  and 
in  better  financial  performance,  on  the 
external  fit  would  be  reflected 
whole  the  results  did  not  support  the  contention  that  either  type  of fit has 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


664 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

June 

Estimates  of  the  Impact  of  Internal  and  External  Fit  on  Tobin's  qa 

TABLE 7 

Model  15  Model  16  Model  17  Model  18  Model  19 

1.676* 
(0.121) 
0.287*** 
(0.095) 

0.165* 
(0.1.19) 
0.299*** 
(0.094) 

0.157* 
(0.114) 
0.283*** 
(0.092) 

0.182 
(0.228) 
0.295** 
(0.145) 

0.136 
(0.121) 
0.248** 
(0.101) 

-0.080 
(0.064) 

0.005 
(0.117) 
-0.040 
(0.072) 

0.192* 
(0.139) 

-0.084 
(0.129) 

0.063 
(0.057) 

-0.114 
(0.105) 
0.048 
(0.066) 

-0.061** 
(0.032) 

0.014 
(0.061) 
-0.002 
(0.040) 

0.153*** 
0.002 
1.924 
826 

0.151*** 
0.003 
1.003 
826 

0.155*** 
0.004 
1.185 
826 

0.145* 
(0.099) 
-0.034 
(0.097) 
0.153*** 
0.003 
0.858 
826 

Variables 
Employee  skills  and 

organizational  structures 

Employee  motivation 

Internal  fit 

HR policy  consistency 

HR policy  consistency  x 

employee  skills  and 
organization  structures 
HR policy  consistency  x 

employee  motivation 

Employee  skills  and 

organizational  structures  x 
employee  motivation 

Match:  Employee  skills  and 
organizational  structures 
and  employee  motivation 

External  fit 

Differentiation/focus 

Differentiation/focus 

x 
employee  skills  and 
organizational  structures 

Differentiation/focus 

x 
employee  motivation 

Strategic  HR index 

Strategic  HR index  x 

employee  skills  and 
organizational  structures 

Strategic  HR index  x 
employee  motivation 

Match:  Differentiation/focus 
and  employee  skills  and 
organizational  structures 
Match:  Differentiation/focus 
and  employee  motivation 

R2 
AR2 
Ffor  AR2 
N 

0.152*** 
0.002 
0.658 
826 
a Standard  errors  are  in  parentheses. 

*p  <  .10,  one-tailed  test 
**p  <  .05,  one-tailed  test 
***p  <  .01,  one-tailed  test 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


1995 

Huselid 

TABLE 8 

665 

Estimates  of  the  Impact  of  Internal  and  External  Fit  on  Gross  Rate  of 

Return  on  Assetsa 

Variables 
Employee  skills  and 

organizational  structures 

Employee  motivation 

Internal  fit 

HR policy  consistency 

HR policy  consistency  x 

employee  skills  and 
organization  structures 
HR policy  consistency  x 

employee  motivation 

Employee  skills  and 

organizational  structures  x 
employee  motivation 

Match:  Employee  skills  and 
organizational  structures 
and  employee  motivation 

External  fit 

Differentiation/focus 

Differentiation/focus  X 
employee  skills  and 
organizational  structures 

Differentiation/focus 

x 
employee  motivation 

Strategic  HR index 

Strategic  HR index  x 
employee  skills  and 
organizational  structures 

Strategic  HR index  x 
employee  motivation 

Match:  Differentiation/focus 
and  employee  skills  and 
organizational  structures 
Match:  Differentiation/focus 
and  employee  motivation 

R2 
AR2 
F for  AR2 
N 

Model  20  Model  21  Model  22  Model  23  Model  24 

0.045*** 
(0.017) 
-0.011 
(0.013) 

0.054*** 
(0,017) 
-0.009 
(0.013) 

0.044*** 
(0.016) 
-0.009 
(0.013) 

0.070** 
(0.032) 
-0.045** 
(0.020) 

0.050*** 
(0.017) 
-0.025* 
(0.015) 

0.011 
(0.008) 

0.016 
(0.016) 
0.007 
(0.010) 

0.035** 
(0.019) 

0.003 
(0.015) 

0.003 
(0.016) 
-0.003 
(0.010) 

-0.000 
(0.005) 

-0.005 
(0.009) 
0.012** 
(0.006) 

0.132***127* 
0.003 
0.438 
826 

0.004 
3.299 
826 

0.13** 

0127  ** 
0.001 
0.121 
826 

0.005 
1.430 
826 

-0.040** 
(0.019) 

-0.004 
(0.014) 
-0.002 
(0.014) 
0.13** 
0.133** 
0.006 
1.659 
826 

a  Standard  errors  are in  parentheses. 

*p  <  .10,  one-tailed  test 
**p  <  .05,  one-tailed  test 
***p  <  .01,  one-tailed  test 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


666 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

June 

any  incremental  value  over the  main  effects  associated  with  the  use  of High 
Performance  Work Practices. 
Empirical  Estimation  Issues 

The  strength  and  magnitude  of  these  results  must  be  interpreted 

in 
inherent  in  the  design  of  this  study. 
light  of  several  potential  confounds 
Perhaps  the  primary  threat  to the  validity  of this  study's  findings  is  the  po- 
tential  for  endogeneity  or  simultaneity  between  corporate  financial  per- 
formance  and  High  Performance  Work Practices.  I dealt  with  this  issue  in 
two  ways.  First,  because  a firm's  current  work  practices  can  be  expected 
to  affect  both  present  and  future  profitability,  I used  both  contemporane- 
(t  +  1  year)  measures  of  corporate  financial  perfor- 
ous  and  subsequent 
mance.  Although  the  results  for the  subsequent  years'  profits  were  slight- 
ly  weaker  than  the  contemporaneous  results,  they  were  highly  consistent. 
Thus,  I present  them  here  because  they  are more  conservative. 

Second,  to  assess  the  magnitude  of  any  simultaneity  between  High 
Performance  Work Practices  and  firm profits,  I used  Hausman's  (1978)  test 
to evaluate  the  ordinary-least-squares  (OLS) regression  assumption  that the 
High  Performance  Work Practices  scales  are  exogenous 
in  the  profitabili- 
ty models.  In analyses  whose  results  are not  shown,  I generated  a predicted 
value  for the  employee  skills  and  organizational  structures  and  employee 
motivation  scales  using  a reduced-form  model.  Then  I included  each  scale 
and  its  predicted  value  in  an  OLS model  for Tobin's  q and  GRATE. A  sig- 
nificant  coefficient  on  the  predicted  value  for  each  scale  would  indicate 
in  the  model  being  estimated  (Hausman,  1978).  Although 
it is  endogenous 
these  results  showed  that the  High  Performance  Work Practices  scales  were 
not  in  fact  endogenous 
in  the  profitability  models,  the  general  controver- 
sy  surrounding  the  use  of  this  test  (Addison  & Portugal,  1989)  led  me  to 
estimate  two-stage  least-squares  models  for  each  dependent  variable  as  a 
formal  correction  for simultaneity.  Not  only  were  these  results  consistent 
with  the  OLS results,  but  they  were  in  each  case  somewhat  larger than  the 
OLS results  presented  here. 

Survey  response  bias  was  also  considered  directly.  The  presence  of re- 
sponse  bias  implies  that  unobserved  determinants  of  the  decision  to  re- 
spond  to this  study's  survey  are related  to both  firm performance  and  High 
Performance  Work  Practices.  Given  the  extensive  control  variables 
in- 
cluded  in  my  models,  such  bias  in  unlikely.  However,  to  formally  test  this 
possibility,  I used  Heckman's  (1979)  procedure,  which  generates  an inverse 
in  the  OLS and  two-stage  least-squares  re- 
Mills'  ratio  that  I then  included 
for  each  dependent  variable  to  control  for  selectivity 
gression  models 
bias.  In each  case,  the relationship  between  the  work  practice  measures  and 
the  dependent  variables  remained  consistent  with  the  results  presented 
above,  and  in  no  case  would  these  corrections  have  altered  my  conclu- 
sions.  In fact,  most  of the  corrections  for simultaneity  and  selectivity  bias 
produced  estimates  of the  impact  of High  Performance  Work Practices  larg- 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


1995 

Huselid 

667 

er than  my  OLS regression  results,  which  implies  that  the  specifications 
relied  on  here  are conservative. 

DISCUSSION 

that  investments 
turnover  and  greater  productivity 

Prior work  in both  the  academic  and  popular  press  has  argued  that the 
use  of High  Performance  Work Practices  will  be reflected  in better  firm per- 
in  support  of  these  asser- 
formance.  This  study  provides  broad  evidence 
tions.  Across  a wide  range  of  industries  and  firm  sizes,  I found  consider- 
in  such  practices  are as- 
able  support  for the  hypothesis 
and 
sociated  with 
lower  employee 
corporate  financial  performance.  That  my  results  were  consistent  across 
diverse  measures  of  firm  performance  and  corrections  for  selectivity  and 
simultaneity  biases  lends  considerable  confidence 
The  magnitude  of  the  returns  for  investments 

to  these  conclusions. 
in  High  Performance 
increase  in  such 
Work Practices  is  substantial.  A  one-standard-deviation 
practices  is  associated  with  a relative  7.05  percent  decrease  in  turnover 
and,  on  a  per  employee  basis,  $27,044  more  in  sales  and  $18,641  and 
$3,814  more  in  market  value  and  profits,  respectively.  These  internally 
consistent  and  economically  and  statistically  significant  values  suggest  that 
firms  can  indeed  obtain  substantial  financial  benefits  from  investing  in  the 
practices  studied  here.  In  addition,  these  estimates  imply  a constant  lev- 
in  such  practices  each  year.  If an  increase  requires  only 
el  of  investment 
a  one-time  expense  (as  perhaps  could  be  the  case  with  recruiting  or  se- 
lection  costs),  these  values  will  be  underestimates  of  the  impact  of  High 
Performance  Work Practices  on  firm  performance.  Moreover,  these  calcu- 
lations  only  include  a  firm's  portion  of  the  gains  from  increasing  use  of 
these  practices.  Presumably,  some  of  the  value  created  by  adopting  more 
in  the  form  of  higher 
effective  HRM practices  will  accrue  to  employees, 
wages  and benefits  (Becker & Olson,  1987).  Since  higher  levels  of High  Per- 
formance  Work Practices  lead  to  lower  turnover,  and  presumably  greater 
employment  security,  there  appears  to be  considerable  justification  for en- 
from  a public  policy  perspec- 
couraging  firms  to  make  such  investments 
tive. 

The  impact  of  High  Performance  Work Practices  on  corporate  finan- 
is  in  part  due  to  their  influence  on  employee  turnover 
cial  performance 
and  productivity.  The  identification 
through 
which  these  practices  affect  firm  profits  helps  to  establish  the  plausibili- 
ty  of  a link  with  corporate  financial  performance.  However,  some  of their 
influence  on  firm profits  remains  unaccounted  for, and  the  source  of these 
remaining  gains  is  an  important  topic  for  future  research. 

of  some  of  the  processes 

But  despite  the  compelling 

theoretical  argument  that  better  internal 
and  external  fit  will  increase  firm  performance,  I found  only  modest  evi- 
dence  of  such  an  effect  for internal  fit  and  little  evidence  for  external  fit. 
These  findings  are in  fact  consistent  with  recent  attempts  to  model  fit  in 
the  organizational  strategy  literature  (Venkatraman,  1989),  and they  are per- 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


668 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

June 

haps  unsurprising  given  the  preliminary  nature  of the  measures  of fit I de- 
veloped.  And  given  the  substantial  main  effects  associated  with  systems 
of  High  Performance  Work Practices,  one  might  conclude  that  the  simple 
is  more  important  than  any  efforts  to  ensure 
adoption  of  such  practices 
these  policies  are  internally  consistent  or  aligned  with  firm  competitive 
strategy.  However,  the  theoretical  arguments  for  internal  and  external  fit 
remain  compelling,  and  research  based  on  refined  theoretical  and  psy- 
chometric  development  of these  constructs  is  clearly  required  before  such 
a  conclusion  can  be  accepted  with  any  confidence.  The  very  large  theo- 
retical  literature  in  the  fields  of  human  resources  management  based  on 
the  premise  that  fit makes  a difference  cries  out  for more  work  in  this  area, 
and  the  primary  import  of  the  current  findings  may  in  fact  be  to  call  at- 
tention  to  this  important  line  of  research. 

Finally,  the  reader  is  cautioned  to  recognize  the  limitations  associat- 
ed  with  the  use  of  cross-sectional  data  when  an  attempt  to  draw  conclu- 
sions  about  causality 
is  made.  Although  the  use  in  this  work  of  simulta- 
neous  equations,  corrections  for  response  bias,  measures  of  current  and 
subsequent  years'  profits,  extensive  control  variables,  and  a large  and  di- 
verse  sample  mitigate  many  of  the  traditional  methodological 
concerns, 
longitudinal  data  on both  High  Performance  Work Practices  and  firm  per- 
formance  are needed  to  conclusively  replicate  the  findings  presented  here. 
But  such  data  are extremely  costly  to  generate  and  are as yet  unavailable. 
This  caveat  is  not  intended  to  obviate  the  central  conclusions  of  this 
study,  however.  Although  traditional  economic  theory  would  suggest  that 
the  gains  associated  with  the  adoption  of High  Performance  Work Practices 
cannot  survive 
(because  the  returns  from  these  invest- 
ments  will  be  driven  toward  equilibrium  as  more  and  more  firms  make 
them),  the  substantial  variance  in  the  HRM practices  adopted  by  domes- 
tic  firms  and  the  expectation  that investments  in  such  practices  help  to  cre- 
ate  firm-specific  human  capital  that  is  difficult  to  imitate  suggest  that,  at 
least  in  the  near  term,  such  returns  are available  for the  taking. 

into  perpetuity 

REFERENCES 

Abelson,  M. A.,  & Baysinger,  B. D.  1984.  Optimal  and  dysfunctional 

turnover:  Toward  an  or- 

ganizational-level  model.  Academy  of  Management  Review,  9:  331-341. 

Addison,  J. T.,  & Portugal,  P. 1989.  The  endogeneity  of  union  status  and  the  application  of 

the  Hausman  test.  Journal  of  Labor  Research,  10: 437-441. 

Arnold,  H. J., & Feldman,  D. C. 1982.  A multivariate  analysis  of the  determinants  of turnover. 

Journal  of  Applied  Psychology,  67:  350-360. 

Arthur,  J. B.  1992.  The  link  between  business  strategy  and  industrial  relations  systems 

American  steel  minimills.  Industrial  and  Labor  Relations  Review,  45:  488-506. 

in 

Arthur,  J. B.  1994.  Effects  of  human  resource  systems  on  manufacturing  performance  and 

turnover.  Academy  of  Management  Journal,  37:  670-687. 

Bailey,  T.  1993.  Discretionary 

effort  and  the  organization  of  work:  Employee  participa- 

tion  and  work  reform  since  Hawthorne.  Working  paper,  Columbia  University,  New  York. 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


1995 

Huselid 

669 

Baird,  L., & Meshoulam,  I. 1988.  Managing  two  fits  of strategic  human  resource  management. 

Academy  of  Management  Review,  13:  116-128. 

Barney,  J. 1991.  Firm  resources  and  sustained  competitive  advantage.  Journal  of  Manage- 

ment,  17:  99-120. 

Baron,  R. M., & Kenny,  D. A.  1986.  The  moderator-mediator  variable  distinction 

in  social  psy- 
chological  research:  Conceptual,  strategic,  and  statistical  considerations.  Journal  of Per- 
sonality  and  Social  Psychology,  51:  1173-1182. 

Bartel,  A. P. 1994.  Productivity  gains  from the  implementation  of employee  training  programs. 

Industrial  Relations,  33:  411-425. 

Baysinger,  B. D.,  & Mobley,  W. H.  1983.  Employee  turnover:  Individual  and  organizational 
in  personnel  and  human  re- 

analysis.  In K. M. Rowland  & G. R. Ferris  (Eds.),  Research 
source  management, 

vol  1: 269-319.  Greenwich,  CT: JAI Press. 

Becker,  B. E.,  & Huselid,  M. A.  1992.  Direct  estimates  of  SDy and  the  implications 

ty  analysis.  Journal  of  Applied  Psychology,  77:  227-233. 

for utili- 

Becker,  B. E.,  & Olson,  C. A.  1987.  Labor relations  and  firm  performance.  In  M. M.  Kleiner, 
R. N. Block,  M. Roomkin,  & S. W. Salsburg  (Eds.), Human  resources  and  the performance 
of  the  firm:  43-85.  Washington,  DC: BNA  Press. 

Becker,  B. E., & Olson,  C. A.  1992.  Unions  and  firm profits.  Industrial  Relations,  31: 395-415. 
systems  perspective.  En- 
Begin,  J. P. 1991.  Strategic  employment  policy:  An  organizational 

glewood  Cliffs,  NJ: Prentice-Hall. 

Bluedorn,  A.  1982.  The  theories  of turnover:  Causes,  effects,  meanings.  In S. Bacharach  (Ed.), 

Research 

in  the  sociology  of  organizations: 

75-128.  Greenwich,  CT: JAI Press. 

Borman,  W. C. 1991.  Job behavior,  performance,  and  effectiveness.  In M. D. Dunnette  & L. M. 
(2d  ed.),  vol.  2: 

Hough  (Eds.),  Handbook  of  industrial  and  organizational  psychology 
271-326.  Palo  Alto,  CA: Consulting  Psychologists  Press. 

Boudreau,  J. W.  1991.  Utility  analysis 

In  M. D. 
Dunnette  & L. M.  Hough  (Eds.),  Handbook  of  industrial  and  organizational  psycholo- 
gy  (2d  ed.),  vol.  2: 621-745.  Palo  Alto,  CA: Consulting  Psychologists  Press. 

in  human  resource  management  decisions. 

Brainard,  W.,  Shoven,  J., & Weiss,  L.  1980.  The financial 

tal.  Washington,  DC: Brookings  Institution. 

valuation  of  the  return  to  capi- 

Brown,  C.,  & Medoff,  J. 1978.  Trade unions  in  the  production  process.  Journal  of  Political 

Economy,  86:  355-378. 

Butler,  J. E., Ferris,  G. R., & Napier,  N. K. 1991.  Strategy  and  human  resources  management. 

Cincinnati:  South-Western. 

Cappelli,  P., & Singh,  H.  1992.  Integrating  strategic  human  resources  and  strategic  manage- 
in  industrial 
ment.  In  D.  Lewin,  O. S.  Mitchell,  & P. Sherer  (Eds.),  Research  frontiers 
relations  and  human  resources:  165-192.  Madison,  WI: Industrial  Relations  Research 
Association. 

Cascio,  W. F. 1991.  Costing  human  resources:  The  financial 

nizations 

(3d  ed.).  Boston:  PWS-Kent. 

impact  of  behavior 

in  orga- 

Cotton,  J. L.,  & Tuttle,  J. M.  1986.  Employee  turnover:  A  meta-analysis  and  review  with  im- 

plications 

for research.  Academy  of  Management  Review,  11:  55-70. 

Curme,  M. A.,  Hirsch,  B. T., & Macpherson,  D. A.  1990.  Union  membership  and  contract  cov- 

erage  in  the  United  States.  Industrial  and  Labor  Relations  Review,  44:  5-33. 

Cutcher-Gershenfeld,  J. 1991.  The  impact  on  economic  performance  of  a transformation 

industrial  relations.  Industrial  and  Labor  Relations  Review,  44:  241-260. 

in 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


670 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

June 

Delaney,  J. T. In Press.  Unions,  human  resource  innovations,  and  organizational  outcomes. 

Advances 

in  Industrial  and  Labor  Relations. 

Delaney,  J. T., Lewin,  D.,  & Ichniowski,  C. 1989.  Human  resource  policies  and  practices 

American  firms.  Washington,  DC: U.S.  Government  Printing  Office. 

in 

Devanna,  M. A.,  Fombrun,  C.,  Tichy,  N.,  & Warren,  L.  1982.  Strategic  planning  and  human 

resource  management.  Human  Resource  Management,  22:  11-17. 

Flamholtz,  E. G.  1985.  Human  resource  accounting 
Gerhart, B., & Milkovich,  G. T. 1992.  Employee  compensation:  Research  and  practice.  In M. D. 
Dunnette  & L. M.  Hough  (Eds.),  Handbook  of  industrial  and  organizational  psycholo- 
gy,  vol.  3: 481-569.  Palo  Alto,  CA: Consulting  Psychologists  Press. 

(2d  ed.).  San  Francisco:  Jossey-Bass. 

Guzzo,  R. A.,  Jette,  R. D.,  & Katzell,  R. A.  1985.  The  effect  of  psychologically  based  inter- 
vention  programs  in  worker  productivity:  A  meta  analysis.  Personnel  Psychology,  38: 
275-291. 

Hall,  B. H.,  Cummins,  C.,  Laderman,  E. S.,  & Mundy,  J. 1988.  The  R&D master  file  docu- 
mentation.  Technical  working  paper  no.  72,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research, 
Boston. 

Hausman,  J. A.  1978.  Specification 
Heckman,  J. J.  1979.  Sample  selection  bias  as  a  specification 

tests  in  econometrics.  Econometrica,  46:  1251-1271. 

error.  Econometrica, 

47: 

153-161. 

Hirsch,  B. T. 1991.  Labor  unions  and  the  economic  performance 

W. E. Upjohn  Institute  for Employment  Research. 

offirms.  Kalamazoo,  MI: 

Hirschey,  M.,  & Wichern,  D. W.  1984.  Accounting  and  market-value  measures  of  profitabil- 
ity:  Consistency,  determinants,  and  uses.  Journal  of  Business  and  Economic  Statistics, 
2: 375-383. 

Holzer,  H. J. 1987.  Hiring  procedures  in the  firm: Their  economic  determinants  and  outcomes. 
In  M. M.  Kleiner,  R. N.  Block,  M.  Roomkin,  & S. W.  Salsburg  (Eds.),  Human  resources 
and  the  performance 

of  the firm:  Washington,  DC: BNA  Press. 

Huselid,  M. A.  1993.  Essays  on  human  resource  management  practices, 

turnover,  pro- 
ductivity,  and  firm  performance.  Unpublished  Doctoral  Dissertation,  State  University 
of  New  York at Buffalo. 

Ichniowski,  C. 1990.  Manufacturing  businesses.  NBER working  paper  series  no.  3449,  Na- 

tional  Bureau  of  Economic  Research.  Cambridge,  MA. 

Ichniowski,  C.,  Shaw,  K.,  & Prennushi,  G.  1993.  The  effects  of  human  resource  manage- 

ment  practices  on productivity.  Working  paper,  Columbia  University. 

Jackson,  S. E., & Schuler,  R. S.  1995.  Understanding  human  resource  management  in  the  con- 
text  of  organizations  and  their  environments. 
In  J. T.  Spence,  J. M.  Darley,  & D. J. Foss 
(Eds.),  Annual  review  of psychology,  vol.  46:  237-264.  Palo  Alto,  CA: Annual  Reviews, 
Inc. 

Jackson,  S. E.,  Schuler,  R. S.,  & Rivero,  J. C.  1989.  Organizational  characteristics  as  predic- 

tors  of  personnel  practices.  Personnel  Psychology,  42:  727-786. 

Jones,  G. R.,  & Wright,  P. M.  1992.  An  economic  approach  to  conceptualizing 

human  resource  management  practices.  In  K. Rowland  & G.  Ferris  (Eds.),  Research 
personnel  and  human  resources  management, 
Press. 

the  utility  of 
in 
vol.  10:  271-299.  Greenwich,  CT: JAI 

Katz, H. C., Kochan,  T. A.,  & Gobeille,  K. R. 1983.  Industrial  relations  performance,  economic 
performance,  and  QWL programs: An  interplant  analysis.  Industrial  and  Labor  Relations 
Review,  37:  3-17. 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


1995 

Huselid 

Katz,  H. C., Kochan,  T. A.,  & Keefe,  J. H.  1987.  Industrial  relations  and  productivity 

U.S.  automobile 

industry.  Washington,  DC: Brookings  Institution. 

671 

in  the 

Katz,  H. C.,  Kochan,  T. A.,  & Weber,  M. R. 1985.  Assessing  the  effects  of  industrial  relations 
systems  and  efforts  to improve  the  quality  of working  life  on  organizational  effectiveness. 
Academy  of  Management  Journal,  28:  509-526. 

Keats,  B. W.,  & Hitt,  M. A.  1988.  A  causal  model  of  linkages  among  environmental  dimen- 
sions,  macro  organizational  characteristics,  and  performance.  Academy  of  Manage- 
ment  Journal,  31:  570-598. 

Kleiner,  M. M.  1990.  The  role  of  industrial  relations  in  firm  performance.  In J. A.  Fossum  & 
J. Mattson  (Eds.), Employee  and  labor  relations:  4.23-4.43.  Washington,  DC: BNA  Press. 
Implementing  progressive  manage- 

Kravetz,  D. J. 1988.  The  human  resource  revolution: 

ment  practices  for  bottom-line  success.  San  Francisco:  Jossey-Bass. 

Lewis,  H. G.  1986.  Union  relative  wage  effects.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press. 
MacDuffie,  J. P. 1995.  Human  resource  bundles  and  manufacturing  performance:  Organiza- 
tional  logic  and  flexible  production  systems  in  the  world  auto  industry.  Industrial  and 
Labor  Relations  Review,  48:  197-221. 

McEvoy,  G. M., & Cascio,  W. F. 1985.  Strategies  for reducing  employee  turnover:  A meta-analy- 

sis.  Journal  of  Applied  Psychology,  70:  342-353. 

Milgrom,  P., & Roberts,  J. 1993.  Complementarities 

andfit:  Strategy,  structure,  and  orga- 

nizational  change.  Working  paper,  Stanford  University,  Stanford,  CA. 

Osterman,  P. 1987a.  Choice  of employment  systems  in  internal  labor  markets.  Industrial  Re- 

lations,  26:  46-57. 

Osterman,  P. 1987b.  Turnover, employment  security,  and  the  performance  of the  firm. In M. M. 
Kleiner,  R. N.  Block,  M. Roomkin,  & S. W. Salsburg  (Eds.), Human  resources  and  the per- 
formance  of  the firm:  275-317.  Washington,  DC: BNA  Press. 

Osterman,  P. 1994.  How  common  is  workplace  transformation  and  how  can  we  explain  who 
adopts  it?  Results  from  a national  survey.  Industrial  and  Labor  Relations  Review,  47: 
173-188. 

Porter, M. E. 1985.  Competitive  advantage:  Creating  and  sustaining  superior  performance. 

New  York: Free  Press. 

Pritchard,  R. D.  1992.  Organizational  productivity.  In M. D.  Dunnette  & L. M.  Hough  (Eds.), 
(2d  ed.),  vol.  3: 443-471.  Palo 

Handbook  of  industrial  and  organizational  psychology 
Alto,  CA: Consulting  Psychologists  Press. 

Russell,  J. S.,  Terborg, J. R.,  & Powers,  M. L.  1985.  Organizational  performances  and  organi- 

zational  level  training  and  support.  Personnel  Psychology,  38:  849-863. 

Schmidt,  F. L., Hunter,  J. E., McKenzie,  R. C., & Muldrow,  T. W. 1979.  Impact  of  valid  selec- 
tion  procedures  on  work-force  productivity.  Journal  of Applied  Psychology,  64: 609-626. 
Schuler,  R. S.  1992.  Strategic  human  resource  management:  Linking  people  with  the  needs 

of  the  business.  Organizational  Dynamics,  20:  19-32. 

Schuster,  F. E. 1986.  The  Schuster  report:  The proven  connection  between  people  and  prof- 

its.  New  York: Wiley. 

Schuster,  M.  1983.  The  impact  of  union-management 

cooperation  on  productivity  and  em- 

ployment.  Industrial  and  Labor  Relations  Review,  36:  415-430. 

Sheridan,  J. E.  1992.  Organizational  culture  and  employee  retention.  Academy  of  Manage- 

ment  Journal,  35:  1036-1056. 

Snell,  S. A.,  & Dean,  J. W., Jr. 1992.  Integrated  manufacturing  and  human  resource  manage- 

ment:  A  human  capital  perspective.  Academy  of  Management  Journal,  35:  467-504. 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


672 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

June 

Snell,  S. A.,  & Dean,  J. W., Jr. 1994.  Strategic  compensation 

moderating  effects  of job and  organizational 
37:  1109-1140. 

for integrated  manufacturing:  The 
inertia.  Academy  of  Management  Journal, 

Terpstra,  D. E.,  & Rozell,  E. J. 1993.  The  relationship  of  staffing  practices  to  organizational 

level  measures  of  performance.  Personnel  Psychology,  46:  27-48. 

Tsui,  A.  S.  1990.  A multiple-constituency  model  of effectiveness:  An  empirical  examination 
at the  human  resource  subunit  level.  Administrative  Science  Quarterly,  35:  458-483. 
U.S.  Department  of Labor. 1993.  High  performance  work  practices  andfirm  performance. 

Washington,  DC: U.S.  Government  Printing  Office. 

Venkatraman,  N.  1989.  The  concept  of  fit  in  strategy  research:  Toward  a verbal  and  statisti- 

cal  correspondence.  Academy  of  Management  Review,  14:  423-444. 

Weitzman,  M. L., & Kruse,  D. L. 1990.  Profit  sharing  and  productivity.  In A.  S. Blinder  (Ed.), 

Paying  for  productivity:  95-141.  Washington,  DC: Brookings  Institution. 

Wright,  P. M.,  & McMahan,  G. C. 1992.  Theoretical  perspectives  for strategic  human  resource 

management.  Journal  of  Management, 

18(2):  295-320. 

APPENDIX 

Components  of  the  Strategic  Human 

Resources  Management  Indexa 

1.  Match  the  characteristics  of  managers  to  the  strategic  plan  of  the  firm. 
2.  Identify  managerial  characteristics  necessary  to  run  the  firm  in  the  long  term. 
3.  Modify  the  compensation 
long-term 

system  to  encourage  managers  to  achieve 

strategic  objectives. 

4.  Change  staffing  patterns  to  help  implement  business  or corporate  strategies. 
5.  Evaluate  key  personnel  based  on  their  potential  for carrying  out  strategic  goals. 
6.  Conduct  job  analyses  based  on  what  the  job  may  entail  in  the  future. 
7.  Conduct  development  programs  designed  to  support  strategic  changes. 
a 
Adapted  from  Devanna,  Fombrun,  Tichy,  and  Warren  (1982). 

Mark  A.  Huselid 
is  an  assistant  professor  in  the  School  of  Management  and  Labor 
Relations  at  Rutgers  University.  He  holds  a  Ph.D.  degree  in  human  resource  man- 
agement  from  the  State  University  of  New  York at Buffalo.  His  current  research  fo- 
cuses  on  the  linkages  between  human  resource  management  systems,  corporate  strat- 
egy,  and  firm  performance. 

This content downloaded from 14.161.0.90 on Tue, 27 Aug 2013 05:32:55 AM

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

