 

 

THE SUPPLY OF CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY DISCLOSURES  

AMONG U.S. FIRMS  

Lori Holder-Webb* 

Department of Accounting and Information Systems 

University of Wisconsin – Madison 

 

Jeffrey Cohen 

Department of Accounting 

Boston College 

 

Leda Nath 

Department of Sociology 

University of Wisconsin – Whitewater 

 

David Wood 

Center for Corporate Citizenship 

Boston College 

November 30, 2007 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

We would like to acknowledge the financial support of the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority In-
vestor Education Foundation (formerly the NASD Investor Education Foundation), the research assis-
tance of Belinda Hoff and Cameron Pratt, and workshop participants at Simmons College School of Man-
agement. The views expressed in this paper are the views of the authors and not the views of the FINRA 
Investor Education Foundation. All information in this paper is available from public sources. 
 

*Corresponding author: 4285 Grainger Hall, 975 University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706. Tel: 608-263-

4386. e-mail: lholder@bus.wisc.edu 

 


 

1 

THE SUPPLY OF CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY DISCLOSURES  

AMONG U.S. FIRMS  

 

 
Abstract: Corporate social responsibility (CSR) is a dramatically expanding area of activity for 

managers and academics.  Consumer demand for responsibly produced and fair trade goods is swelling, 

resulting in increased demands for CSR activity and information.  Assets under professional management 

and invested with a social responsibility focus have also grown dramatically over the last ten years. Inves-

tors choosing social responsibility investment strategies require access to information not provided 

through traditional financial statements and analyses. At the same time, a group of mainstream institu-

tional investors has encouraged a movement to incorporate environmental, social, and governance infor-

mation into equity analysis, and multi-stakeholder groups have supported enhanced business reporting on 

these issues. The majority of research in this area has been performed on European and Australian firms.  

We expand on this literature by exploring the CSR disclosure practices of a size- and industry-stratified 

sample of 50 publicly-traded U.S. firms, performing a content analysis on the complete identifiable public 

information portfolio provided by these firms during 2004. CSR activity was disclosed by most firms in 

the sample, and was included in nearly half of public disclosures made during that year by the sample 

firms. Areas of particular emphasis are community matters, health and safety, diversity and human re-

sources (HR) matters, and environmental programs. The primary venues of disclosure are mass media 

releases such as corporate websites and press releases, followed closely by disclosures contained in man-

datory filings.  Consistent with prior research, we identify industry effects in terms of content, emphasis, 

and reporting format choices.  Unlike prior research, we can offer only mixed evidence on the existence 

of a size effect.  The disclosure frequency and emphasis is significantly different for the largest one-fifth 

of the firms, but no identifiable trends are present within the rest of the sample.  There are, however, iden-

tifiable size-effects with respect to reporting format choice.  The primary trends are that the use of web-

sites is increasing in firm size, while the use of mandatory filings is decreasing in firm size. Finally, and 

also consistent with prior literature, we document a generally self-laudatory tone in the content of CSR 

disclosures for the sample firms.  

 

Key Words: Corporate Disclosure, Non-financial Information, Corporate Social Responsibility 

Reporting, Content Analysis

 


THE SUPPLY OF CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY DISCLOSURES  

AMONG U.S. FIRMS  

1 

 

 

Introduction 

 

Corporate social responsibility (CSR) activity is an area of intense and increasing interest both on 

the practice and academic fronts.  Investor interest in firms that engage in these activities has grown dra-

matically. Between 1995 and 2005, investments of professionally-managed assets grew from $7 trillion to 

$24.4 trillion, while the share of these assets invested in socially responsible investments grew from $639 

billion to $2.29 trillion (Social Investment Forum [SIF] 2006).1 At the same time, large institutional in-

vestors and multi-stakeholder groups -- including the UN Principles for Responsible Investment project, 

the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) and the CERES, a coalition of investors and public interest groups – 

have focused attention on the materiality of social and environmental information to equity analysis. The 

magnitude and growth of socially-responsible investing (SRI) assets has driven an equally dramatic 

growth in the need for information. The objective if this study is to document the disclosure patterns of 

CSR by U.S. firms. 

Investors are not the only interested parties; CSR activity provides an increasing focus of product-

development and marketing practitioners. Research demonstrates that certain types of CSR activity pro-

duce value for firms in terms of brand loyalty and marketing advantages (Brown and Dacin 1997; Sen and 

Bhattacharya 2001). As Handleman and Arnold (1999, p. 36) note,  

“In any community, it is common to find retailers donating to local charities, sponsoring 

little league sports teams, and proudly displaying the national flag.  These actions demon-

strate the retailer’s adherence to unwritten but powerful normative rules of acceptable so-

cial conduct, such as becoming involved with the community and promoting national 

pride.”  

While the question of what exactly motivates firms to engage in CSR practices is a matter for on-

going research, it is clear from both the growth in SRI assets and customer markets for socially-

responsible goods that there is a need for information on these practices. The historical emphasis of tradi-

tional financial information does not answer the needs of these parties, who require information not only 

about future earnings but also about the firm’s social and environmental responsibility and interactions 

with the environment and home communities (Adams 2004; Anderson et al. 2005). The concern with 

non-financial factors as well as with equity returns results in a demand for greater accountability from 

managers. According to the SIF (p. 5), “[i]ssues now occupying mainstream consciousness – corporate 

                                                      

1 This amount includes approximately $1.49 trillion in assets owned by institutions (SIF 2006). 

 


 

2 

governance, transparency, accountability, and greater disclosure – have long been central to the practice 

of social investing.” 

Much of the work in this area is directed at examining disclosures from European and Australian 

firms, and nearly all multi-national studies indicate international differences in disclosure behavior. It is 

not established, therefore, how U.S. corporations have responded to these increased demands for informa-

tion. Furthermore, prior research evaluating the content of CSR disclosures has focused primarily on a 

single reporting format (generally the annual report, more recently, the corporate website).  Gray et al. 

1995a has suggested that the use of a single format for analysis purposes may be significantly limiting the 

understanding that can be derived about CSR disclosure behavior.  We therefore extend this literature by 

exploring the entire identifiable body of public disclosures made by the sample firms during 2004.  A ma-

jor contribution of our paper is the development of a means to assess directly the emphasis that manage-

ment places on disseminating a given type of information; prior research has largely relied upon fre-

quency of disclosure alone as a proxy for emphasis. In this paper, we evaluate the state of reporting of 

social and environmental responsibility (often known as corporate social responsibility, or CSR) reporting 

among a sample of U.S. firms to determine what types of information are being provided and through 

what means of transmission. We perform a content analysis on the disclosures made by a size- and indus-

try-stratified sample of 50 publicly-traded U.S. firms during 2004.2 Results suggest that companies dis-

close a wide variety of CSR information through mandated and voluntary media. Consistent with prior 

research, we find size and industry-driven differences in disclosure behavior. Our results suggest differ-

ences in the pattern and volume of disclosure in U.S. firms when compared with other studies examining 

global enterprises. 

In the next section, we review the relevant theory and research and present the research questions 

and hypotheses. Then we describe the research method and discuss the results. We conclude with the im-

plications of the study for reporting activists, accounting firms, regulators and academics who are recon-

sidering the nature of corporate reporting of non-financial information.  

 
Literature Review, Research Questions, and Hypotheses 

 

It is difficult, from an academic and theoretical perspective, to disentangle the differences be-

tween a firm’s decision to engage in CSR activities and the decision on why, how, and when to report on 

those activities to stakeholders.  The choice of broad theoretical framework depends on whether the re-

searcher approaches the question of CSR from an economic or an ethical standpoint (Cetindamar and Hu-

                                                      

2 Disclosures include those made through mandatory filings, such as 10-Ks, as well as voluntary reports 

and company websites. 

 


 

3 

soy, 2007). Ethical theories indicate that these activities should be promoted because they are the “right 

thing” to do.3  Economic theories indicate that these activities should be promoted only to the degree that 

they create shareholder wealth through increasing profit.4  Virtually all theoretical approaches carry the 

implication that it is not enough to partake of a CSR action, it is necessary then to disseminate informa-

tion about the action that has been taken.  A matter of significant difference between the theories pertains 

to what actions should be taken, and who should be informed of them.  To some extent, the answer to the 

first drives the answer to the second: if the primary goal of the activity is to enlist the support of a particu-

lar party, the firm will of necessity publicize the activity through channels likely to reach that party.  

Therefore, before launching an exploration of the approaches to disclosure, we offer a brief overview of 

the “why” of CSR activity. 

 

Neo-Classical Economics 

Bird et al. (2007) adopt a traditional economic approach to the question, suggesting that managers 

should apply net present value (NPV) analysis to all potential CSR activities and take only the actions that 

result in a positive NPV and thus, increase shareholder wealth.  An important element of this theory in the 

CSR context is the neo-classical notion that the shareholder is the only stakeholder of significant interest. 

This study finds that markets are slow to impound the valuation implications of non-event-type actions 

into market prices, with the exception of diversity initiatives.  While the authors do not explicitly consider 

the matter of information dissemination, the implication of their approach is that disclosure should take 

place through the channels to which shareholders are accustomed (i.e., mandatory filings such as annual 

reports and 10-Ks).  A problematic issue for the traditional neo-classical approach to CSR is that unlike 

production decisions, CSR activities and their outcomes may not yield the mathematical tractability nec-

essary for reliable NPV analysis.  

 
Marketing Strategy 

Another stream of inquiry that suggests that CSR may be motivated mainly by wealth concerns is 

found in the marketing literature (see Robin and Reidenbach 1987 for an extensive survey of this litera-

ture). Brown and Dacin (1997) provide empirical evidence that consumer beliefs about products are influ-

enced by the information that they possess both about corporate ability (the producer’s competitive ad-

vantage) and about the producer’s corporate social responsibility, even though the CSR policies are often 

                                                      

3 Robin and Reidenbach (1987) define corporate CSR as actions driven by the social contract and corporate 

ethics as the set of carefully considered moral guidelines under which the business operates. However, they high-
light the commonalities between the two and distinguish between actions undertaken for the purpose of fulfilling 
organizational values and those undertaken strictly to influence profitability. 

4 For a compelling and step-by-step refutation of the proposition that the only moral duty that a manager 

has is to maximize profits, see Kolstad (2007), who also concludes that justifications of CSR activities based on ex-
pected profits also cannot be sustained under ethical theory. 

 


 

4 

unrelated to the company’s ability to produce.  Both items are key elements in creating a good corporate 

reputation, posited by numerous theorists to provide a source of economic benefits to an organization (see 

Brown and Dacin 1997 for a review of this literature). Brown and Dacin (1997) find that negative CSR 

perceptions are shown to exert negative effects on consumer behavior, while positive CSR perceptions 

exert positive effects on consumer behavior.  They note that even though there is potential economic 

value to doing so, it can be difficult to communicate corporate positions built around developing CSR 

associations: a need potentially answered by CSR disclosures in the public forum. 

Handelman and Arnold (1999) provide further evidence on wealth creation through marketing ac-

tivities subsumed under CSR. They suggest that consumers appear to possess a demand for intangible 

factors indicating congruence with local social norms and values, and that the firm’s promotion of these 

elements may yield a strategic angle equal to that of competitive positioning and product attributes. Con-

sistent with Brown and Dacin (1997), they find that negative institutional associations exert a significant 

negative effect on customer perceptions and behavior, and suggest that stakeholders have a “minimal 

level of institutional actions” below which even highly positioned firms begin to experience negative con-

sequences. Hooghiemstra (2000) suggests that CSR activity is a form of impression management for the 

firm. This image management theory – which encompasses matters of corporate identity and corporate 

image – is likewise driven by direct economic concerns such as customer perceptions and access to capi-

tal markets, etc.  The marketing-oriented literature on CSR activity suggests these actions are a strategic 

tool to build and maintain customer loyalty and market share.  The implications for disclosure are that the 

primary targets for information are the existing customers and members of the public with a general inter-

est and that the content of the disclosure will be chosen to emphasize congruence with customer values. 

 

Political Economy 

A third theoretical approach considers these actions through the lens of the political economy 

(Dowling and Pfeffer, 1975; Guthrie and Parker, 1990; Gray et al. 1995a; Deegan and Gordon, 1996; 

Cormier and Gordon, 2001; Deegan, 2002; O’Donovan, 2002; Maignan and Ralston, 2002; Campbell et 

al. 2003).  In this approach the firm is not considered to be an economic entity that can be divorced from 

its social context; it is instead an organic organism that is a party to a social contract with the other mem-

bers of its context.  In order for the firm to survive, it must obtain the support and approval of its stake-

holders, whether those be primary stakeholders (those without whose support the firm cannot function at 

all, including customers, suppliers, or providers of labor and capital) or secondary stakeholders (who are 

indirectly affiliated but in a position to significantly influence the firm’s success, including regulators and 

media) (Clarkson, 1995).  CSR activity and the consequent disclosure is a part of the ongoing communi-

cation process required in order to enlist and maintain that support (Gray et al. 1995a). Under this general 

 


 

5 

heading, researchers have variously advanced theoretical arguments based on stakeholder theory (Clark-

son, 1995; Hooghiemstra, 2000; Maignan and Ralston 2002) and on legitimation (i.e., Gray et al. 1995a; 

Campbell 2000) to explain both CSR activities and disclosure. 

Legitimation pertains to efforts on the part of the firm to establish, maintain, or repair public per-

ception of its dedication to stakeholder norms and values, thus evincing respect for the “social contract” 

that permits it access to capital and labor markets and other economic resources necessary to ensure or-

ganizational survival. Dowling and Pfeffer (1975) outline three means to establishing or improving le-

gitimacy: adapting operations to conform to existing societal expectations, altering social definitions to 

conform with existing firm operations; or engaging in communication to promote its public identification 

with socially legitimate symbols, values, and institutions. The degree to which the organization is visible 

and/or relies on social and political support drives the concern for legitimacy (and consequent access to 

resources and support) (Dowling and Pfeffer 1975). 5 A potential issue with applying legitimacy theory to 

CSR activity is that social norms and values are largely a function of temporal matters – as issues are 

brought to the attention of society, they seem to replace other issues of prior focus (Guthrie and Parker 

1990; Gray et al. 1995a; Campbell 2000 and 2003; Campbell et al. 2003; Bird et al. 2007).  Therefore, in 

order for legitimacy theory to yield firmly testable hypotheses it must be possible to identify both the 

population with whom the firm is concerned with establishing legitimacy and the values that the popula-

tion holds at the specific point in time. 

Closely related to legitimacy theory is stakeholder theory. Balmer et al. (2007) elaborate upon 

this view, stating (p. 10) that “…in contrast to the traditional legal/economic perspective, which disre-

gards all non-marketplace interaction and avows that the corporation’s sole responsibility is to maximize 

its shareholders’ wealth, stakeholder theory takes a more pragmatic stance that sees shareholders as one 

among multiple contributors to the firm” and that this view indicates that management has a moral obliga-

tion to all contributors, not only the shareholders. However, in the area of CSR it is difficult to distinguish 

between the drivers and implications of legitimacy theory versus stakeholder theory, as the target popula-

tion according to both theories will be the community of individuals providing access to resources, or 

those in a position to enhance or diminish the firm’s ability to access resources.  While theories derived 

from the political economy result from a very different framework of reasoning, they share this drive to 

secure access to resources with the neo-classical and marketing approaches.  Therefore, regardless of the 

                                                      

5 An example of this type of activity and disclosure can be found in Hill (2001), who states that at TXU 
Europe, sustainability and disclosure are driven by the desire to “’bring the outside in’ through the dialogue proc-
ess…[continuing] the engagement by taking our refocused strategy ‘inside out’, gaining enhanced reputation and 
consequent added value to shareholders as increased share price.  [The company believes] that stakeholder account-
ability involves a process.  This includes the following activities: managing stakeholder dialogues to identify issues, 
awareness raising around sustainability issues, facilitating the development of actions and change, measuring per-
formance through indicators and reporting progress back to stakeholders.” (p. 33) 

 


 

6 

motivation of an individual firm, the observable output is likely to be very similar: promoting a variety of 

CSR activities, and ensuring that the target population is kept apprised of this behavior. 

 

Institutional Theory 

The recent upsurge in interest in CSR activities on the part of investors and customers raises the 

specter of yet another theoretical standpoint: institutional theory.  Institutional theory suggests a process 

of organizational convergence (isomorphic behavior) (DiMaggio and Powell, 1983; Dacin, 1997). The 

isomorphic argument possess implications both for CSR action and disclosure: to the extent that manag-

ers of contemporary organizations have been inculcated with the belief that CSR activity is necessary (for 

purposes of adding to market share, incrementing stockholder wealth, or for straightforward ethical prin-

ciples) it is possible that the surge in this type of activity – and related disclosure – represents a form of 

normative isomorphism.  To the extent that the upsurge in such activity is perceived by managers to be a 

competitive requirement irrespective of the need to deploy ethical principles or to derive gains from spe-

cific sources, it may be mimetic. Institutional theory also proposes selective use of information dissemina-

tion to direct attention to desirable factors and to deflect it away from controversial or unacceptable ac-

tivities (Meyer and Rowan 1977; Elsbach and Sutton 1992).  This suggests that CSR disclosure may be 

deployed in an effort to forestall undesirable regulation, or to emphasize what the corporation is doing 

“well” while downplaying what it is not.  However, in an environment where CSR activity and disclo-

sures are part of the accepted norm, the predictions of institutional theory converge with those discussed 

above: CSR activity will be undertaken and disclosed by any firms requiring the appearance of legiti-

macy.  Thus, for the purposes of this study, we view institutional theory as representing another variant of 

the political economy-based theories discussed above. 

 

Shareholder Demands and Intangible Assets 

An additional stimulus for disclosure may be categorized as a pragmatic management response to 

a demand situation. The intense growth in SRI assets suggests an increasing demand for CSR disclosures 

(and presumably, for CSR actions); these disclosures may be a simple response to the information needs 

of shareholders. Financial data is historical in nature and yields a limited perspective of the firm, insuffi-

cient to permit a sophisticated understanding of the firm’s future prospects.6 A majority of top executives 

at multinational firms believe that non-financial performance measures outweigh financial performance 

measures in terms of creating long-term shareholder value (PricewaterhouseCoopers 2002). From an aca-

demic perspective, Lev (2001) argues that when the market value of a corporation is decoupled from the 

                                                      

6 See Cole and Jones (2005) and Holder-Webb and Cohen (2007) for a review of the literature pertaining to 

this issue. 

 


 

7 

value of its underlying tangible assets, non-financial information offers a tool to measure the large propor-

tion of intangible value currently unaccounted for in traditional corporate reporting. Clark et al.. (2005) 

and Chua (2006) also indicate that changing circumstances, including an increasingly global business en-

vironment, have amplified the importance of intangible issues. While these concerns are relevant to the 

interests of all equity holders, they are of particular import to SRI investors.7 SRI investing does not dis-

regard rigorous financial analysis; it simply adds to that analysis a consideration of the social and envi-

ronmental consequences of the investments, such as environmental, health and safety, diversity, and hu-

man resources issues. Traditional financial statements are not adequate to supply the informational needs 

indicated by this type of investing activity. Many international companies have therefore responded by 

providing a variety of CSR disclosures.8  

While some critics may suggest that CSR reporting constitutes mere public-relations or damages 

sources of shareholder value through dissipating comparative advantages, empirical evidence suggests 

that deploying CSR policies does not harm the market prospects of the publicly-traded firm, and in some 

instances has been shown to improve those prospects (Al-Tuwaijri et al. 2004; Dowell et al. 2000; Hamil-

ton et al. 1993; Orlitzky et al. 2003; and Waddock and Graves 1997a, 1997b). As a result of the combined 

financial and non-financial benefits, Kinder (2005) notes that incorporating CSR policies into decision-

making is emerging as an element of fiduciary duty for investment managers.  

Despite the growing trends in SRI investing and the benefits to implementing CSR policies, re-

porting on these issues continues to be inconsistent. In particular, there is heterogeneity in responses 

based on geographical dispersion (Ambachtsheer 2005). In general, CSR disclosures are more commonly 

provided and more heavily used by investing parties outside of the U.S. This may be a function of the 

lack of regulation of or attestation services for these disclosures in the U.S., compared to other industrial-

ized nations.9 The lack of regulation and attestation standards for CSR disclosures in the U.S. has not di-

minished the demand for this information as a basis for SRI investing practices, but may have engendered 

variability in reporting practices among U.S. firms. 

                                                      

7 The Social Investment Forum reports that shareholder activism pertaining to social and environmental 

concerns is on the rise. They find that shareholder resolutions on these topics increased from 299 proposals in 2003 
to 348 in 2005 (SIF 2006). Many of these items pertained to investor demand for increased disclosure and transpar-
ency. This activism is not limited to individual investors; the SIF also reports that social and environmental factors 
are increasingly important to mainstream asset managers (SIF 2006). 

8 KPMG International (2005) reports that 64 percent of the top 250 companies of the global Fortune 500 

provide CSR reports. Ambachtsheer (2005) finds that 37 percent of investment managers worldwide predict that SRI 
performance indicators will become mainstream disclosures within five years, while 73 percent of this group pre-
dicts that these indicators will become mainstream disclosures by ten years. 

9 See Simnett et al. (2006), as well as Kolk (2003, 2005) for a discussion of these issues. KPMG Interna-

tional (2005) reports that 30% of the top 250 firms of the global Fortune 500 offered assurance statements (generally 
provided by a major accountancy firm) with their CSR report. 

 


 

8 

As discussed above, it is difficult to identify a single comprehensive theory that both has unambi-

guous implications for CSR disclosure behavior and delivers empirically testable hypotheses.  Therefore, 

the initial exploration of the CSR disclosures for U.S. firms relies on a non-directional research question: 

RQ1: What CSR reporting is being provided by U.S. firms? 

 

While the annual report has been the primary focus of researchers exploring CSR disclosures 

(Gray et al. 1995a, 1995b; and Campbell 2000, 2003, among others), Gray et al. 1995b note that all forms 

of information entering the public environs should be considered to be part of the accountability structure, 

and thus provide avenues for CSR reporting. Campbell et al. (2003) argue that stockholders are relatively 

less concerned about legitimacy issues than non-investor stakeholders, and thus for effective legitimation, 

the firm should employ disclosure venues other than the annual report (which may not be read by the non-

investors). O’Donovan (2002) concurs, indicating that the level of sophistication of the non-investor 

stakeholders is such that an annual report is less likely to be read and that the proliferation of specialized 

environmental reports may be a response to this issue.  Maignan and Ralston (2002) and Patten (2002) 

departed from the analysis of annual reports and explored the CSR content of web pages.  Because the 

theories discussed above are largely couched in terms of disclosure to less-sophisticated investors, we 

consider the full panoply of public disclosure opportunities, posing the following research question: 

RQ2: What reporting formats are U.S. firms choosing to provide CSR disclosures? 

The literature identifies several firm-specific characteristics that have been shown to affect CSR 

disclosure behavior for foreign firms, including management decision horizons, systematic risk, social 

constraints (Deegan and Gordon 1996), attitude of the chair of the board (Campbell, 2000), ROE and 

fixed asset ratios (Cormier and Gordon 2001), and capital intensity, age of the firm, strategic posture, and 

the existence of a social responsibility committee (Gray et al. 1995a). KPMG International (2005) reports 

industry trends in dedicated CSR disclosures, where industrial sectors with significant reputation expo-

sure have typically tended to be more forthcoming on environmental issues.10 Furthermore, it is known 

that large firms are disproportionately exposed to reputation and political costs (Watts and Zimmerman 

1986). A survey of prior literature yields the information that the only trends that are consistently associ-

ated with CSR disclosure behavior in foreign firms are size and industry, although Gray et al. (1995a) 

caution that size may not be a continuous function as first, small organizations may have unobservable 

means of communications, and second, financial size may be less important than political exposure and 

public visibility. 

Therefore, we present the following hypotheses: 
                                                      

10 These are industries that are often involved in operations that potentially pollute the environment, such as 

chemical manufacturers, computers and electronics, utilities, automotive manufacturing, and oil and gas sectors. 
Likewise, pharmaceutical manufacturers are also exposed to negative reputation effects as a result of perceived in-
equities in cost and access to medicines.  

 


 

9 

H1: CSR disclosures for U.S. firms will vary by industry. 

H2: CSR disclosures for U.S. firms will be subject to a firm-size effect. 

Finally, prior literature has explored the question of the content of CSR disclosures, in an effort to 

discern whether these items constitute legitimate informative activities or simple public relations releases.  

Some of the consumer-market driven theories above do not distinguish between the two approaches, as 

the substance of the CSR activity is less relevant than the public perception among the consumer base. 

Guthrie and Parker (1990, p. 165) reflect similar concerns, suggesting that CSR disclosures are made in 

an effort to  

“demonstrate a constructive response to social pressure and avoid further regulation of 

their disclosures.  In this way they may seek to pacify sociological demands made on 

business while attempting to win or maintain support from particular targeted constituen-

cies. Such a disclosure strategy may include emphasizing the corporation’s positive con-

tributions to social welfare and highlighting its attempts to minimize its harmful effects 

on various elements of society.” 

The constructiveness of the response would seem to be a key issue.  Consistent with this and with 

the marketing approach, Deegan and Gordon (1996) and Deegan and Rankin (1996) find that the majority 

of environmental disclosures are self-laudatory and contain little quantitative detail.  This finding extends 

to a selection of firms that is known to possess “bad news” with respect to environmental matters and thus 

is demonstrated to disclose in a very biased manner. Cormier and Gordon (2001) argue that CSR disclo-

sures will be avoided in areas where a firm has a poor track record, thus raising the perceived proprietary 

costs of releasing the information. Therefore, we propose the following hypothesis: 

H3: CSR disclosures of U.S. firms will be generally positive in content. 
 
Research Design 

As discussed above, prior research on CSR disclosures focuses mainly on large multi-national 

firms.  While such firms provide a sample that is conveniently comparable to studies of financial disclo-

sures, they are less useful for obtaining an impression of generalized disclosure practices.  Therefore, we 

depart from the existing CSR disclosure literature in two ways: first, we ensure the capture of a broad 

spectrum of firms in order to determine the degree to which disclosure patterns identified among large 

firms are generalizable to smaller ones, and second, we expand the disclosure net beyond the studies of 

annual reports or corporate websites to include the possibility that firms are communicating these matters 

to other constituents than shareholders. 

 

 


 

The Sample 

10 

In this study, we use a stratified random sampling technique. With stratified random sampling, 

researchers control the relative quantity of each stratum, rather than letting random processes 

control it. This guarantees the proportion of different strata within a sample and therefore pro-

duces a final sample that has more equal representation of each sub-group from the population 

than simple random methods provide (Neuman, 2005).   

The sampling frame for industry was limited to publicly-traded U.S. firms listed on Compustat, 

excluding those engaged primarily in providing financial services, investment funds, and trusts.11  Based 

on the general SIC and NAICS categories represented by these firms, the largest general industry sector is 

manufacturing (39%), followed by firms engaged in production of intellectual property, including soft-

ware and publishing (13%), those working with extractive natural resources, including agriculture, for-

estry, and extractive activities (12%), and those engaged primarily in sales, including wholesalers and 

retailers (11%).  No other general industry sector yielded more than 5% of the sampling frame during 

2004.  Due to the significant share of the industrial market represented by manufacturing enterprises, we 

subdivided the category into those engaged primarily in simple manufacturing, and those engaged in 

manufacturing pursuant to significant research and development activities.  This process yielded five in-

dustry sectors: manufacturing (simple), manufacturing (R&D intensive), extractive natural resources, in-

tellectual property generation, and sales.  Each general industry category was scrutinized to determine 

which sub-section of the category offered the greatest depth of firms that could be considered to be rela-

tively homogeneous (as established by 4-digit SIC codes).  Within each industry grouping, the largest col-

lection of firms with identical 4-digit SIC codes was chosen as the representative sample. This process 

yielded the industries examined in the current paper: simple manufacturing (MFG), as represented by 

manufacturers of surgical equipment; R&D intensive manufacturing (R&D), as represented by pharma-

ceutical preparation and manufacturing firms; extractive natural resources (OIL), as represented by crude 

petroleum and natural gas extractors; intellectual property generation (SOFTWARE), as represented by 

software publishers; and sales (RETAIL), as represented by supermarkets and other grocery stores. 

All Compustat firms within each of these industries were ranked by size (total assets and sales) 

and stratified into quintiles according to their relative position in the rankings by these measures.12  A 

random sample of two firms from each size quintile within each industry was chosen.  See Table 1 for a 

listing of sample firms, by industry, and size quintile. 

                                                      

11 These entities operate under substantially different reporting requirements and may or may not have ac-

tive operations. 

12 The identification of quintiles and position within quintiles was qualitatively unaffected by the choice of 

variable (total assets or sales) as proxy for firm size. 

 


 

 

The Data 

11 

Public data sources (Edgar, Lexis/Nexis Academic Universe, and company and investor-relations 

websites) were searched in order to identify the body of publicly-disclosed information items for that firm 

for calendar year 2004. This process resulted in the identification of 863 public information bursts. Web-

site content was captured into documents to ensure that the content remained fixed across the data collec-

tion and analysis period. We define an “information burst” as a single stand-alone document (i.e., 10-K, 

specialized CSR report, proxy statement, etc.) or a homogenous unit of text (i.e., employee diversity web-

page[s], product information sheet for a given product or product line, etc.). Table 2 provides a frequency 

table for reporting format category and information burst type for the full set of identifiable public disclo-

sures. 

 

The Analysis Technique 

Content analysis is a way of codifying text and content of written narratives into groups or cate-

gories based on selected criteria, with the end goal of transforming the material into quantitative scales 

that permit further analysis (Weber 1988). It has been widely used in the literature examining non-

financial disclosure behavior (see Gray et al 1995a; Deegan and Gordon 1996; Deegan and Rankin 1996; 

Milne and Adler 1999; Campbell 2000; Holder-Webb 2007; Holder-Webb et al. 2007, among others). A 

content analysis was performed on each burst of information by a trained member of the research team. A 

list of CSR variables was developed based on the major categories indicated by the GRI’s reporting 

guidelines for stakeholder engagement.  Stakeholder groups identified by the GRI guidelines are commu-

nities, civil society, customers, shareholders and providers of capital, suppliers, and employees, other 

workers, and their trade unions. The resulting variable list (shown in Appendix 1) is a reflection of the 

tradeoff between the desire to capture the fullest possible set of variables and the need to condense the 

source data.  

Prior literature (e.g., Gray et al 1995a; Deegan and Gordon 1996; Deegan and Rankin 1996; 

Milne and Adler 1999; and Campbell 2000) relies upon either word counts or page counts to quantify the 

volume of disclosure.  These mechanical approaches present difficulties when the potential exists for in-

formation to be repetitively offered (word counts implicitly overestimate the volume of unique disclosure) 

or where information may be scattered throughout the document or interleaved on a page with informa-

tion from a separate category.  Yet, as Gray et al. (1995b, p. 80) state, “the extent of disclosure [is an] in-

dication of the importance of an issue to the reporting entity.” In an effort to provide a more sensitive and 

nuanced picture of disclosure behavior than that provided by studies employing simple word and page 

counts to evaluate the extent of disclosure, we construct a scale whereby each information burst is evalu-

 


 

12 

ated as a single unit for the extent of disclosure of any given type present in the entire burst. This coding 

scheme represents a conceptual analysis with phrases or words as the level of analysis.  

The coding scheme represents a conceptual analysis with phrases or words as the level of analy-

sis.  Each document in the sample was read to determine how intensively it covered a given variable.  

Each variable was coded for this intensity using a 7-point Likert scale (i.e., 0=No mention of [variable]; 

1=[Variable] mentioned but only in reference to another document or statement; 2=Brief mention of 

[variable] with little or no detail; 3=Discussion of [variable] with some detail but not extensive detail; 

4=Detailed discussion of [variable]; 5=Discussion of [variable] comprises over 50 percent of the docu-

ment text; and 6=Document completely dedicated to discussion of [variable]). The traditional 5-point 

Likert scale was increased to 7-items when differentiating between our definitions of information inten-

sity. In addition, our seven levels do not include a “neutral” middle score as a traditional 5-point Likert 

scale on “level of agreement” might.  Increasing the levels in this manner permits the treatment of the 

ensuing disclosure rating as an interval scale variable for purposes of applying more advanced statistical 

tests. This coding scheme incorporates both coding for the existence (codes of zero versus non-zero) and 

the relative degree of dedication to the different information types (codes of 1-6). 

To check for inter-rater reliability, three researchers used the specified coding system on 41 

documents from five companies in the sample. Coders were compared for their level of inter-rater reli-

ability using correlation coefficients. Coefficients exceeding 0.70 or 70 percent are considered reliable 

(Frey et al. 2000; Neuendorf 2002). Seven of the twelve variables had inter-rater correlations of 100 per-

cent. All of the remaining five variables had inter-rater correlations of at least 85%, exceeding the cut-off 

rate established in the literature. Of those five variables, three had qualitatively significant discrepancies 

on a limited number of disclosures for the raters. For these items, the directions for the content coding 

instrument were clarified and further training was provided to the coders before resuming data collection. 

This process resulted in a set of translation rules that was applied to the entire sample. A summary of the 

directions is provided in Appendix 1. 

A packet of all disclosure items, including website content, was assembled for each firm. Items 

were randomly assigned to coders to reduce the potential for coding errors due to researcher familiarity 

biases.  

 

Analysis and Discussion 

 

Quantity of CSR Reporting Provided by U.S. Firms 

Research Question 1 asks what CSR reporting is being provided by U.S. firms. Of the 863 infor-

mation bursts collected, 357 (41.4%) contained some CSR information. Table 3 shows the reporting rates 

by disclosure category. Information is provided in the community relations, health/safety, and diver-

 


 

13 

sity/human resources categories with some frequency (with 16%, 11.6%, and 10.8% of the original 863 

disclosures featuring these types, respectively). See Appendix 2 for a selection of sample disclosures from 

the original source documents.  Of the 50 sample firms, six provided no CSR disclosures at all: Fooda-

rama (Grocery quintile 1), Genelabs (Pharma quintile 2), Icagen (Pharma quintile 2), Kestrel Energy (Oil 

quintile 1), Panhandle Royalty (Oil quintile 2), and W&T Offshore (Oil quintile 4).  

Having established the general state of affairs with respect to the full package of public disclo-

sures made by the sample firms in 2004, we limit the remaining discussion to the 357 information bursts 

that contained CSR disclosures. Table 4 displays the number of information bursts containing information 

pertaining to the specific study variables. The community relations and humanitarian initiative variables 

post the highest frequencies (each appearing in approximately 24% of information bursts offering CSR 

content contained each type of disclosure) consistent with the findings for the disclosure categories. Dis-

closures of environmental programs and employee health/safety issues were also common, with over 15 

percent of CSR disclosures containing this type of information. Figure 1 provides a depiction of the fre-

quency of disclosure aggregated across general categories.  The emphasis on community disclosures is 

consistent with political economy theories suggesting CSR undertaken in pursuit of building or maintain-

ing legitimacy with the social environment. Disclosures in the health and safety category are primarily 

aimed at customers, suggesting support for the use of these items to build or maintain consumer loyalty 

and market share.  Diversity and HR disclosures may be made in order to secure the support of the pro-

viders of labor capital and possible as marketing tools to demonstrate convergent values with consumer 

bases.   

Table 4 also shows a measure of disclosure that takes into consideration the degree to which the 

information bursts are dedicated to conveying information about the given variable (Intensity). Intensity is 

computed by multiplying the number of information bursts disclosing variable X at any given level of the 

Likert-scale coding Y (where 0≥Y≥6) by Y, and summing them across variables. This measure captures 

both the frequency of information bursts featuring a particular type of disclosure, and the degree to which 

the information bursts are dedicated to the type of disclosure.  The portfolio of public disclosures for a 

firm represents multiple information bursts disseminated through multiple media, as discussed below.  It 

is unlikely that any given target population (with the possible exception of a buy-side analyst following 

the firm) will encounter the entire package of disclosures. The Intensity score incorporates the assumption 

that companies that are highly motivated to disclose a particular type of information both will disclose it 

in more venues (to increase the probability that the target audience will encounter it) and will dedicate 

more space within a given venue to conveying the information (to increase emphasis and direct audience 

attention more effectively to the information). Higher levels of Intensity thus indicate a greater emphasis 

on disclosure of the given variable. This is also true in a relative sense, where higher levels of Intensity 

 


 

14 

for a given frequency of disclosure indicates that the information bursts were more dedicated to disclosure 

of that variable. Appendix 3 provides an illustration of the computation of the Intensity score.  

Table 4 shows that while community relations matters were the most frequently reported item, it 

appears from the Intensity scores that humanitarian initiatives were more intensively discussed; that is, 

when information on humanitarian initiatives appeared, it consumed relatively more of the document in 

which it appeared than did community relations. Political giving again occupies the lowest position, indi-

cating that when it was mentioned within an information burst it was not given particular attention within 

the burst.  Figure 2 provides a depiction of the Intensity scores for the disaggregated CSR variables. Firms 

do not only frequently disclose in the community category, they provide heavy emphasis on these matters 

when they are introduced.  While Figure 1 does not suggest a particular emphasis on environmental mat-

ters, it is clear from Figure 2 that certain types of environmental issues, proactive environmental man-

agement policies, are important for managers to convey.  They may not appear with the frequency of the 

health and safety disclosures, but when they do appear, they appear prominently.  The focus on these mat-

ters, as on the individual Diversity and HR variables, also lends support to the legitimacy and stakeholder 

arguments for CSR actions and disclosures. If these arguments are true, it appears that firms are most con-

cerned at this time with demonstrating values that converge with those of their customers, employees, and 

communities. 

It appears from the data presented in this section that CSR reporting is not uncommon among 

U.S. firms, but that the amount and degree of coverage of various elements of CSR is highly variable. 

Nearly half of all public disclosures made during 2004 by the sample firms contained at least some ele-

ment of CSR reporting. In particular, community relations and humanitarian initiatives were frequently 

reported, as well as environmental and health and safety matters. The least commonly disclosed informa-

tion pertains to political giving; this is consistent with the perceived lack of disclosure of this type of in-

formation reported by SIF (2006). Less than two percent of all disclosures made during 2004 included 

this type of information, and less than four percent of all disclosures containing CSR information in-

cluded it. Coverage of this topic remains skimpy, despite numerous shareholder resolutions attempting to 

address perceived reporting deficiencies.  

 

Reporting Formats for CSR Disclosures 

Research Question 2 asks what reporting formats U.S. firms choose to convey CSR disclosures. 

Reporting media were collapsed into the format categories outlined in Table 2: mandatory filings; web-

sites; governance documents other than proxies; product fact sheets; CSR reports or brochures; press re-

leases; and other. Figure 3 provides a pie chart representing the relative frequencies (percentages) of each 

format category within the full sample of 863 information bursts. Of the 863 disclosures, websites are the 

 


 

15 

most common medium (37.31%), while stand-alone governance documents are the second most common 

medium (19.58%). Mandatory filings are represented in approximately the same numbers as product fact 

sheets (12.05% and 9.04%, respectively). Consistent with the findings of Kolk (2003) the issuance of 

stand-alone CSR reports or brochures is relatively uncommon (4.52%).  

Figure 4 provides a pie chart representing the relative frequencies (percentages) of each format 

category for information bursts that featured CSR content (n=357). Of these 357 disclosures, websites are 

a more common medium for providing CSR content (46.22%) than suggested by the distribution shown 

in Figure 3 (37.31%). These figures stand in contrast to the findings of Patten (2002) who observed, based 

on disclosures in 2000, low volume of social responsibility disclosures on corporate websites; it is prob-

able that observed differences are due to temporal effects arising from waves of technological adoption. 

Press releases are the second-most popular medium, constituting 15.41 percent of information bursts with 

CSR content. The third most common format for providing these disclosures is the body of mandatory 

filings, at 12.89 percent. A comparison of the information presented in Figures 4 and 5 suggests a predi-

lection for distributing CSR activity information through mass-media approaches such as corporate web-

sites and press releases, and also suggests a target audience other than shareholders.  This approach would 

generally be consistent with the marketing and political economy theories, as firms attempt to communi-

cate their goal convergence or legitimacy status to their communities and non-investor stakeholders.  

Mandatory filings are also strongly represented in the distribution of information venues, suggesting that 

managers also wish to communicate their policies to shareholders.  It is possible that if the general per-

ception is that CSR activity is a useful marketing tool, it may provide a proxy for the intangible benefits 

of the marketing strategy and thus be generally considered to have value-relevance. 

Table 5 shows the reporting of CSR disclosure categories by reporting format category.13 In gen-

eral, the most common format for delivering CSR data is via the company’s website. Beyond the website, 

there is a fair amount of dispersion in the frequency of use of other formats. Over half of community rela-

tions information (55.7%) is provided through websites, with the remainder being primarily provided 

through press releases (22.1%). Diversity and human relationship disclosures are also provided largely 

through websites (43%) but many are also provided through mandatory filings (25.8%). Environmental 

disclosures are made mainly through websites (44.1%) but are also commonly made through CSR reports 

and brochures (20.6%). Employee health and safety information is likewise provided though websites 

                                                      

13 The category-level results reported in Table 5 are generally qualitatively indicative of the underlying 

variables. Differences are found in the Diversity and Human Relations category, where workforce retention matters 
are more commonly reported in mandatory filings than on websites, and diversity and human capital initiatives are 
frequently (although not most frequently) reported in CSR reports and brochures. There is also a difference in the 
Human Rights and Supply Chain category, where human rights matters are most commonly reported in CSR reports 
and brochures and next-most commonly on websites. 

 


 

16 

(40%) but also often through mandatory filings (18.0%). Human rights and supply chain matters are dis-

cussed on websites (35.5%) as well as in CSR reports and brochures (19.4%). Political giving disclosures 

are split between mandatory filings, websites, governance documents, and “other” media.  The proposi-

tion of relationships between format choices and disclosure types suggested by the comparison of Figures 

4 and 5 is supported with a chi-square test (Yates’ continuity-adjusted to accommodate low cell counts for 

some items) at p<.001. 

It is evident from the analysis of this data that the venues most preferred by corporations for dis-

seminating CSR information are corporate websites and press releases. It is also evident that the content 

of mandatory filings is expanding to include this type of information, especially in employment-related 

categories. CSR reports are not common, but include a broad range of topics and depth of coverage when 

they are offered. 

 

Industry Differences in CSR Reporting 

Hypothesis 1 asks to what extent there are industry-sector differences in CSR disclosures for U.S. 

firms. Table 6 shows disclosures by industry for each of the disclosure categories. Panel A of Table 6 dis-

plays the frequency of information bursts containing CSR disclosures. Panel A suggests inter-industry 

differences in disclosure pattern, consistent with prior literature, while Panel A displays mean and median 

Intensity scores for each disclosure category, by industry.  Figure 5 provides a depiction of frequencies 

for each disclosure category, by industry. 

Pharma frequently disclosed Community, Diversity and HR, and Health and Safety information.  

This would be consistent with the political economy theories as well as stakeholder wealth-maximizing: 

this is an R&D intensive industry that relies very heavily on the intellectual property developed through 

human capital.  It is also a manufacturing industry with a very high public profile due to the nature of its 

product and frequent public-policy controversy over the availability and pricing of its products.  The other 

manufacturing industry, Surgical Equipment, also disclosed these items most frequently.  The legitima-

tion argument is plausible in that this sector also relies on human capital issues; however, the marketing 

and political economy theories imply that the closer a firm is to consumers the more likely it is to engage 

in CSR.  Therefore, the fact that this industry sector generally markets to other businesses rather than in-

dividual consumers suggests that the legitimation argument is less pronounced with respect to the Com-

munity category.  The difference in median scores between Pharma and Mfg suggests that Community 

matters may indeed have been considered more important by Pharma firms, while providing assurances as 

to the safety of its processes and products seems to have been more strongly emphasized by Mfg. The 

Pharma sector arguably has similar issues with respect to the need to assure its constituencies of the safety 

of its processes (which as chemical manufacturing, may generate industrial accidents) and products (drug 

 


 

17 

efficacy and safety).  While theory suggests that reduced disclosure levels may be a function of the pos-

session of “bad” news away from which managers wish to deflect information, it is also possible that the 

R&D intensiveness of young firms in this industry may result in fewer processes and products about 

which to make CSR disclosures. 

As would be predicted by both the marketing and political economy theories, the sector with the 

closest ties to the consumer base and the community (Grocery) yields the most intensive efforts to dis-

close CSR information of nearly all types.  Frequency and intensity (in mean and median terms) of all 

categories except for political giving are high in this sector.  Software emphasizes employment issues (di-

versity and HR) and the safety of its processes and products (health and safety).  As another industry that 

generates substantial intellectual property, it seems reasonable to interpret the diversity disclosures as an 

attempt to establish and maintain legitimacy with the firm’s human resources.  The health and safety dis-

closures for this industry revolve largely around security issues with various pieces of consumer software; 

given the context and nature of these firms, these may be at least as much of an effort to regain legitimacy 

(after reports of hacking, viral infections, and exposure to identity theft) as they are an effort to build or 

maintain it.  In the context of regaining legitimacy, the only significant area of focus for the Oil sector is 

in the category of environmental matters.  Other items are disclosed, but at fairly low rates and intensities. 

Statistical tests of these industry differences on the firm level yields mixed results.  The large dif-

ferences between mean and median values shown in Panel B of Table 6, and the small sample sizes for 

each cell (10 firms per industry) suggest the use of non-parametric tests.  Median tests yield statistical 

significance (at p<.1) for the community, diversity and HR, environment, and health and safety disclosure 

categories.  Results of a Kruskal-Wallis test are generally supportive of the median tests. The statistical 

evidence at hand, then, provides support for H1, in that inter-industry differences exist in CSR disclosure 

frequencies. 

Hypothesis 1 also extends to the question of whether there are industry-driven differences in re-

porting format choice.  All theoretical approaches that suggest that CSR activity and disclosure are aimed 

at securing the loyalty of a particular customer base or access to labor or financial capital indicate that the 

choice of disclosure venue will be a function of the particular constituency with whom the company is 

attempting to establish legitimacy.  That is, legitimacy efforts aimed at shareholders may well be con-

veyed in mandatory filings (which are distributed to all shareholders), those aimed at customers will be 

conveyed through product fact sheets, while those aimed at poorly defined constituencies are more likely 

to be conveyed through mass-media such as press releases or corporate websites.  Therefore, in Table 7 

we provide an analysis of inter-industry patterns in format choices.   

Website disclosure is popular with all industries; however, beyond that, there appear to be marked 

industry differences in preferred venue for disclosure. The overwhelming majority of CSR disclosures in 

 


 

18 

the Pharma industry are made through websites, suggesting the existence of a somewhat nebulous con-

stituency.  The Grocery sector, consistent with theoretical implications that this retail industry will be 

primarily concerned with communities and customers, makes most of its CSR disclosures through the 

mass-media approaches of websites and press releases. Manufacturing CSR disclosures are made web-

sites and press releases, with a relatively large number made through mandatory filings as well.  The use 

of mandatory filings, according to the theory, suggests a concern with shareholder expectations of the 

value of CSR activity. The Pharma, Grocery, and Mfg firms also produce relatively large numbers of spe-

cial-purpose CSR reports.  The existing theoretical literature does not yield clear expectations about these 

special-purpose statements.  They are perhaps intended to serve as a marketing function, but this does not 

explain why they would be produced with any regularity in a sales environment primarily characterized 

by business-to-business transactions.  Software firms use websites to disseminate this information, al-

though not as extensively as the Pharma firms do.  Software firms also use product fact sheets to convey 

CSR information, primarily that concerned with production process and product safety matters.  Oil firms 

make use of websites, but also make considerable use of mandatory filings and governance documents.  

This suggests both a concern for the perceptions of the general public and for communicating sources of 

shareholder value.  A chi-square test for association between industry and format choice rejects the null at 

p<.001, indicating that there are industry-driven differences in reporting format choice, and providing 

additional support for H1. The findings here stand in contrast to those of Maignan and Ralston (2002) 

who were unable to identify industry differences in website presentation of CSR disclosures. This could 

also be temporal effects, as Maignan and Ralston’s (2002) data was based on disclosures made in 1999. 

  

Firm-Size Differences in CSR Reporting 

Hypothesis 2 asks to what extent CSR disclosure of U.S. firms is a function of firm size.  Table 8 

shows disclosures by category and by size.  Panels A and B are based on relative firm size – that is, quin-

tile rankings by industry category – based on total assets for each firm.  According to Table 1 there is rea-

son to believe that industries are not evenly distributed along the size continuum.  Therefore, in Panels C 

and D of Table 8 we replicate the statistics based on absolute size – that is, quintile ranking the entire 

sample according to size and assigning firms to rankings irrespective of industry membership.  Panel E 

displays the new industry distribution among the absolute size rankings.  Panel E suggests that firms in 

the Grocery sector are disproportionately bunched near the top two absolute quintiles; all other firms are 

relatively evenly distributed among the absolute size quintiles. 

Panel A of Table 8 is suggestive of a general size effect, with the largest firms within each indus-

try disclosing CSR activity with the greatest frequency.  Panel B also reflects this, indicating that the larg-

est firms within each industry also place greater emphasis on their CSR activity when they discuss it. 

 


 

19 

What is interesting about Panels A and B, and not suggested by the literature, is that below the top quin-

tile, the disclosures are on the whole not increasing in frequency and intensity with size.  Other than a 

dramatic increase in disclosure for the very largest firms within each industry, no clear trends are discern-

able from Panels A and B. 

In Panels C and D the firms have been re-ranked to create absolute size quintiles.  As with the 

previous panels, these show evidence of a marked increase in disclosure among the very largest firms.  

Kruskal-Wallis and median tests indicate significant differences, likely as a function of the dramatic dif-

ferences in median values between the largest quintile and all other firms. Below the largest quintile, there 

is little discernable pattern among either the frequencies or intensities of disclosure.  While the prior lit-

erature in general suggests a firm-size effect for CSR disclosures (Gray et al. 1995a; and Deegan and 

Gordon 1996 for example), there is no evidence in this sample for a continuous effect.  While Gray et al. 

(1995a) suggest that size may not be a continuous function for CSR because smaller firms may have al-

ternative channels of communication, this explanation is not entirely consistent with our findings in this 

paper, which indicate that the smallest firms are disclosing with frequencies and intensities comparable to 

mid-size firms.  Alternatively, Gray et al. (1995a, p. 70) posit that financial size may be less relevant than 

“political presence and public visibility” – difficult constructs to measure.   

In an effort to explore the potential for size effects further, we examine reporting format choice 

by absolute size quintiles.  Results are presented in Table 9.  The use of websites to disseminate CSR in-

formation is roughly increasing with firm size, while the use of mandatory filings is roughly decreasing in 

firm size as is the use of press releases.  These findings are not consistent with the speculation of Gray et 

al. (1995a) who, as noted above, suggest that smaller firms make more use of informal unobservable 

channels of communication with their constituencies.  The findings are consistent with the proposition 

that smaller firms, who are required to make mandatory filings anyway, take advantage of those filings to 

also disclose their CSR activities and thus reduce the marginal direct costs of producing this information.  

They also make use of the relatively less costly press release, which may be consistent with the arguments 

of Gray et al. (1995a).  These findings are also inconsistent with those of Patten (2002) who found low 

levels of CSR disclosure on websites.  No clear pattern is identifiable with respect to the release of spe-

cial-purpose CSR reports. A chi-square test (continuity-adjusted for low expected cell counts) rejects the 

null hypothesis of no associate between format choice and size at p<.001.  In summary, we offer mixed 

evidence with respect to Hypothesis 2: there do appear to be statistically significant differences between 

disclosures from the very largest firms and all other firms, but we are not able to provide evidence of any 

other size-related trend in disclosure frequency or intensity.  We are, however, able to document clear 

size-driven trends with respect to the reporting format choices. 

 

 


 

Positive Content 

20 

In light of prior research (i.e., Deegan and Gordon 1996; Deegan and Rankin 1996; and Adams 

2004, among others) we advance Hypothesis 3, that the content of CSR disclosures will be generally posi-

tive (or, as Deegan and Gordon 1996 refer to them, “self-laudatory”). We expect these disclosures to 

show the company in a favorable light, relative to less-favorable information. In order to accomplish tests 

of this hypothesis, all disclosures of study variables were evaluated by members of the research team to 

determine their degree of positive or negative content (or spin). Inter-rater reliability was assessed follow-

ing the technique used for the main content analysis and described above.  As with the main analysis, reli-

ability levels were within conventional bounds.  Documents were coded on a scale of one to five (inclu-

sive) where a score of one was assigned to documents that were presented in an overall negative manner 

and a score of five to documents that were presented in an overall positive manner. Documents presented 

in a neutral manner received a score of three. The assessment was based on the presentation rather than 

the content of the information itself. That is, information about strong governance structures may be con-

sidered positive by some investors, however, the coding pertains to the manner in which the company 

presented the information, not its intrinsic content. See Appendix 4 for examples of favorable (positive) 

and unfavorable (negative) disclosures. 

Table 10 presents information on positive/negative rating frequencies for the CSR disclosures. 

Panel A shows how many disclosures fell into each mutually-exclusive rating category. Overall, disclo-

sures were positive in tone, consistent with the proposition that CSR disclosures may have a significant 

marketing role. Panel B considers reporting frequency of positive and negative disclosures by size quin-

tile. These results suggest that smaller companies tend to make more neutral disclosures than larger ones. 

It is possible that this reflects a conservative tendency on the part of the smaller and presumably riskier 

firms. However, consistent with Panel A, the majority of disclosures regardless of the size of the firm 

within its industry are positive in tone. Panel C aggregates the positive and negative ratings into means 

and medians for each size quintile. All means cluster between 4.00 and 4.50 reflecting the overall positive 

tone of these disclosures with no significant difference based on size quintiles. Panel D presents mean and 

median tone by industry sector; results indicate a clustering of mean ratings between 4.19 and 4.58, re-

flecting an overall positive tone with no significant industry differences. 

Table 11 presents mean positive and negative ratings. Panel A shows mean ratings based on dis-

closure category. The community relations category, which includes the frequently-reported community 

relations and humanitarian initiatives variables, has the most positive tone of all disclosure types. This 

lends support to the proposition that these disclosures are made to improve the company’s reputation 

and/or decrease its political costs. The only significant outlier in this table is the tone of disclosures of 

political costs. These disclosures appear, on average, to be neutral in tone rather than positive.  

 


 

21 

Panel B of Table 11 presents an analysis of mean positive and negative ratings by format cate-

gory. An ANCOVA analysis (not separately reported) modeling the mean positive or negative rating as a 

function of the reporting format category yields statistically significant results (Adj R2=.178). A post-hoc 

Bonferroni test yields the information that the mean ratings for mandatory filings are significantly differ-

ent than CSR reports or brochures, press releases, and other formats (p<.000, 000, and .021, respectively). 

Mean ratings for website disclosures are significantly different from those of governance documents (ex-

cluding proxies) at p<.001. Mean ratings for governance documents, excluding proxies, are also signifi-

cantly different from CSR reports or brochures and press releases at p<.001. Mean ratings for product fact 

sheets are significant different from those for press releases at p<.018. 

The results presented in Tables 10 and 11 are supportive of Hypothesis 3, that disclosure content 

is generally positive.  These results are consistent with the findings of earlier research that suggests that 

CSR disclosures are predominantly self-laudatory.  They are consistent with the prediction of the market-

ing theories that suggest that firms engage in CSR activity in an effort to woo customers.  They are also 

consistent with the predictions of the political economy-based theories that suggest that corporations will 

focus on what they do “well” in the hopes of deflecting attention away from what they do poorly.  This is, 

in fact, one of the primary venues of legitimation outlined by Dowling and Pfeffer (1975).  Thus, these 

findings broadly lend support both to the marketing and political economy theories.  The findings also 

indicate that firms are less “self-laudatory” when reporting CSR information in a document that is audited 

or reviewed and when reporting CSR data in venues commonly used to convey governance information. 

Unregulated, unattested-to documents such as press releases and websites contain, on the whole, informa-

tion that is more positive in presentation. 

 

Conclusions 

 

The objectives of this study are to explore and describe CSR reporting practices among U.S. 

firms. We find first that CSR reporting is not uncommon among U.S. firms sampled in the study; 44 of 50 

firms provided some CSR disclosures, and approximately 41% of public disclosures made by the sample 

firms contained some form of CSR reporting.  The most common types of information disclosed during 

the period pertained to community relations, health and safety matters, and diversity and HR. Environ-

mental matters were not discussed as often as these categories, but received considerable focus when they 

were introduced. Consistent with complaints levied by shareholders and activists (SIF 2006), political 

giving was very infrequently discussed and received minimal attention and detail when it was. In general, 

the volume, type of information, and intensity of focus of the CSR disclosures made by the sample firms 

appear to be consistent with the expectations of marketing and political economy-based theories, includ-

ing legitimation and stakeholder theories. Finally, the U.S. appears to lag foreign firms in terms of the 

 


 

22 

rates of disclosure of CSR activities. This may be a function of the regulatory and/or attestation environ-

ment as many other nations regulate non-financial and CSR data; several nations also provide for attesta-

tion to the reliability of the CSR information. It is possible U.S. firms are dissuaded from disclosing as 

investors may not take information seriously without assurance as to its quality. Additionally, the lack of 

disclosure on political giving is glaring. It is clear that shareholders have a desire for this information, yet 

disclosures remain spare and shallow. It is unclear whether shareholder resolutions or regulatory action 

will prove effective in ensuring that investors receive the information that they desire.  

We then explored reporting format choices for these firms, including all public disclosures identi-

fied for 2004 for the sample firms.  In contrast to prior research, we find that the corporate website is the 

most popular avenue for disseminating CSR disclosures, followed by press releases and by mandatory 

filings.  This behavior is consistent both with the legitimation and stakeholder theories as well as share-

holder wealth-maximization theories. Community information was disseminated primarily through web-

sites and press releases, reflecting its usefulness to a broad and poorly-defined target audience.  Diversity 

and HR disclosures were made primarily through websites and mandatory filings, suggesting that it con-

fers information potentially valuable to shareholders, as well as to the broader target audience. Environ-

mental disclosures were made primarily via websites and special-purpose CSR reports.  These findings 

are also consistent with the expectations of political economy-based theories. 

Based on prior literature, we hypothesized both industry and size effects.  Industry effects were 

evident in the sample firms both in terms of frequency and intensity of focus and in reporting format 

choice.   The hypothesized firm-size effects were evident only, however, for the very largest firms.  Firms 

below the top quintile in asset size demonstrated no clear patterns or trends in frequency and intensity of 

analysis.  Clear size trends were evident in reporting format choice, with website disclosures increasing in 

firm size, and disclosures through mandatory filings decreasing in firm size.  The industry hypothesis is 

supported by the evidence in this study, but contrary to prior research, we can provide only mixed evi-

dence for the size hypothesis.  Also based on prior research, we find support for the proposition that the 

content of CSR disclosures is predominantly optimistic and self-laudatory.  This effect, however, is at-

tenuated when evaluating disclosures made in audited or reviewed documents vis-à-vis those made in 

non-reviewed forums. 

The study results, therefore, provide a broad picture of CSR disclosure behavior among the sam-

ple of U.S. firms and provide some support for legitimacy, stakeholder, and marketing arguments pertain-

ing to the corporate motivation for providing these disclosures. The study contributes to the existing lit-

erature in the area by extending deeper consideration to U.S. firms, expanding the consideration of CSR 

disclosures beyond a limited selection of media (as prior studies focus on the annual report alone, or on 

the corporate website, alone), and providing a tool for determining the amount of emphasis management 

 


 

23 

places on a disclosure type that is more informative than simple frequency analysis. We also draw upon 

several established theories in order to better understand why managers choose to disclose this material, 

and to what extent the disclosure choices and content are sensitive to the business and resource context of 

the firm. 

One potential implication from the results of this study is that perhaps the disclosures should be 

regulated to ensure consistency and comparability among the disclosures. This will allow comparative 

CSR analysis much in the way that financial statement analysis is currently undertaken. This in turn 

should benefit investors who want to allocate their investments among socially responsible firms. Further, 

the reliability of the disclosures could be enhanced if it was audited by an objective third party. Much in 

the way that financial statement data is given more reliability because it is audited, CSR disclosures may 

have more legitimacy if they received a stamp of approval from a third party. Finally, the study has impli-

cations for the marketing of more socially responsible firms. It appears with the tremendous growth in the 

investment in socially responsible firms, companies can explore how to capitalize on this trend through 

open and thorough CSR disclosures in both their audited material as well as on company websites.  

As with any study, there are limitations that represent opportunities for future research. The sam-

ple firms are drawn from a limited number of relatively homogenous industries. Future studies could in-

vestigate disclosures in other industries such as those that are heavily regulated (e.g. financial services, 

noted by Kolk 2005 as a growing supplier of CSR disclosures). Additionally, we did not examine the role 

of corporate governance in determining disclosure. Thus, a follow-up study could examine whether better 

boards demand better disclosures of non-financial information. We also did not investigate whether the 

non-financial information is consistent with the financial data. It is possible that differential attention is 

paid to non-financial information depending on whether it corroborates or contradicts the financial data. 

Finally, our analysis evaluates only the presence and intensity of disclosure, not its quality. Future re-

search should determine how much attention investors pay to the quality and/or depth of information dis-

closed.  

Enhanced reporting may offer investors the means to better assess a company’s likelihood of fu-

ture success, current business acumen, or risk management systems. Indeed, it has been argued, for in-

stance by the UNEP FI Asset Management Working Group (2004), that standards of materiality in equity 

pricing are changing as the role of business in global society changes. It will be essential to obtain both an 

understanding of investor demand for non-financial disclosures and an improved understanding of how 

investors use the types of non-financial disclosures examined in this paper. Only then will it be possible 

to consider standardizing or regulating this type of information. 

A final major issue involves not only the disclosures of U.S. firms, but also of international firms 

as well. KPMG International (2005) notes that only 21 percent of the companies they surveyed engage 

 


 

24 

with shareholders to identify the information needs of this group. The most commonly reported source for 

the content of CSR disclosures is the GRI, rather than active input from constituent parties. As KPMG 

(2005, 5) notes “It appears that the decision-making process for defining materiality, and therefore the 

content of sustainability reports, needs further attention if future reports are to fulfill the information 

needs, and therefore the consequent actions, of investors, customers, neighbors, and the public.” It is clear 

that it is time for researchers to investigate the demands for CSR disclosure, and to evaluate the degree to 

which the supply of these disclosures aligns with the demand. 

 


 

25 

REFERENCES 

 
Adams, C. 2004. The ethical, social, and governmental reporting-performance portrayal gap. Accounting, 

Auditing and Accountability Journal, (17): 5. 

Al-Tuwaijri, S. A., T. E. Christensen, and K. E. Hughes. 2004. The relations among environmental dis-
closure, environmental performance, and economic performance: A simultaneous equations ap-
proach. Accounting, Organizations and Society (29): 447-471.  

Ambachtsheer, J. 2005. SRI: What do investment managers think? Mercer Investment Consulting Survey 

(March 21). Available at http://www.merceric.com/srisurvey. 

Anderson, A., P. Herring, and A. Pawlicki. 2005. EBR: The next step. Journal of Accountancy (June): 71-

75. 

Balmer, J. M. T., K. Fukukawa, and E. R. Gray. 2007. The nature and management of ethical corporate 

identity: A commentary on corporate identity, corporate social responsibility, and ethics. Journal 
of Business Ethics 76: 7-15. 

Bird, R., A. D. Hall, F. Momente, and F. Reggiani. 2007. What corporate social responsibility activities 

are valued by the market? Journal of Business Ethics 76: 189-206. 

Brown, T. J. and P. A. Dacin. 1997. The company and the product: Corporate associations and consumer 

product responses. Journal of Marketing 61(1): 68-84. 

Business Roundtable. 2007. S.E.E. Change Initiative (to adopt strategies that measurably improve Soci-

ety, the Environment, and the Economy). 

Campbell, D. J. 2000. Legitimacy theory or managerial reality construction? Corporate social disclosure 

in Marks and Spencer Plc corporate reports, 1969-1997. Accounting Forum 24(1): 80-100 

Campbell, D. 2003. Intra- and intersectoral effects in environmental disclosures: Evidence for legitimacy 

theory? Business Strategy and the Environment 12(6): 357-371.  

Campbell, D., B. Craven, and P. Shrives. 2003. Voluntary social reporting in three FTSE sectors: a com-
ment on perception and legitimacy. Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal 16(4): 558-
581. 

Cetindamar, D. and K. Husoy. 2007. Corporate social responsibility practices and environmentally re-

sponsible behavior: The case of the United Nations Global Compact. Journal of Business Ethics 
76: 163-176. 

Chua, W. F. 2006. Extended performance reporting: A review of empirical studies. The Institute of Char-

tered Accountants in Australia. Sydney, New South Wales. 

Clark, G., T. Hebb, and D. Wojcik. 2005. Institutional investors and the language of finance: the global 

metrics of market performance. Working paper: Oxford University School of Geography and the 
Environment. Oxford, United Kingdom. 

Clarkson, M. B. E. 1995. A stakeholder framework for analyzing and evaluating corporate social per-

formance. The Academy of Management Review 20(1): 92-117. 

Cole, C. J. and C. L. Jones. 2005. Management Discussion and Analysis: A review and implications for 

further research. Journal of Accounting Literature (24): 135-174. 

Cormier, D. and I. M. Gordon. 2001. An examination of social and environmental reporting strategies. 

Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal 14(5): 587-616. 

Dacin, M. T. 1997. Isomorphism in context: The power and prescription of institutional norms. Academy 

of Management Journal 40(1): 46-81. 

Deegan, C. and B. Gordon. 1996a. A study of the environmental disclosure practices of Australian corpo-

rations. Accounting and Business Research 26(3): 187-199. 

Deegan, C. and M. Rankin. 1996. Do Australian companies report environmental news objectively? An 

analysis of environmental disclosures by firms prosecuted successfully by the Environmental Pro-
tection Authority. Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal 9(2): 50-67. 

Deegan, C. 2002. Introduction: The legitimising effect of social and environmental disclosures – a theo-

retical foundation.  Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal 15(3): 282-311. 

 


 

26 

DiMaggio, P. J. and W. W. Powell. 1983. The iron cage revisited: Institutional isomorphism and collec-

tive rationality in organizational fields. American Sociological Review 48(2): 147-160. 

Dowell, G., S. Hart, and B. Yeung. 2000. Do corporate environmental standards create or destroy market 

value? Management Science 46(8): 1059-1074.  

Dowling, J. and J. Pfeffer. 1975. Organizational legitimacy: Social values and organizational behavior. 

Pacific Sociological Review. 18: 122-136. 

Elsbach, K. D. and R. I. Sutton. 1992. Acquiring organizational legitimacy through illegitimate actions: A 
marriage of institutional and impression management theories. Academy of Management Journal 
35(4): 699-738. 

Epstein, M. and M. Freedman. 1994. Social disclosure and the individual investor. Accounting, Auditing, 

and Accountability Journal 7(4): 94-109.  

Frey, L. R., C. H. Botan, and G. L. Kreps. (2000). Investigating Communication: An Introduction to Re-

search Methods (2nd Ed.) Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 

Fukukawa, K., J. M. T. Balmer, and E. R. Gray. 2007. Mapping the interface between corporate identity, 

ethics, and corporate social responsibility.  Journal of Business Ethics 76: 1-5. 

Garriga, E. and D. Mele. 2004. Corporate social responsibility theories: Mapping the territory. Journal of 

Business Ethics 53: 51-71. 

Global Reporting Initiative (GRI). 2006. Sustainability Reporting Guidelines. Amsterdam: Global Report-

ing Initiative. 

Gray, R., R. Kouhy, and S. Lavers. 1995a. Corporate social and environmental reporting: A review of the 
literature and a longitudinal study of UK disclosure. Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Jour-
nal 8(2): 47-77. 

Gray, R., R. Kouhy, and S. Lavers. 1995b. Methodological themes: Constructing a research database of 

social and environmental reporting by UK companies. Accounting, Auditing & Accountability 
Journal 8(2): 78-101. 

Guthrie, J. and L. Parker. 1990. Corporate social disclosure practice: A comparative international analy-

sis. Advances in Public Interest Accounting 3: 159-176. 

Hamilton, S., H. Jo, and M. Statman. 1993. Doing well while doing good? The investment performance 

of socially responsible mutual funds. Financial Analysts Journal 49(6): 62-67. 

Handelman, J. M. and S. J. Arnold. 1999. The role of marketing actions with a social dimension: Appeals 

to the institutional environment. Journal of Marketing 63(3): 33-48. 

Hill, J. 2001. Thinking about a more sustainable business – an Indicators approach. Corporate Environ-

mental Strategy 8(1): 30-38. 

Holder-Webb, L. 2007. The question of disclosure: Providing a tool for evaluating Management’s Dis-

cussion and Analysis. Advances in Accounting Behavioral Research 10: 183-223. 

Holder-Webb, L. and J. Cohen 2007. The association between disclosure, distress, and failure. Journal of 

Business Ethics 75: 301-314. 

Holder-Webb, L., J. Cohen, L. Nath and D. Wood. 2007. A survey of governance disclosures among U.S. 

firms. Forthcoming in Journal of Business Ethics. 

Hooghiemstra, R. 2000. Corporate communication and impression management – new perspectives why 

companies engage in corporate social reporting. Journal of Business Ethics 27(1/2): 55-68. 

Kinder, P. D. 2005. New Fiduciary Duties in a Changing Social Environment. The Journal of Investing 

14(3): 24-39. 

Kolk, A. 2003. Trends in sustainability reporting by the Fortune Global 250. Business Strategy and the 

Environment 12: 279-291. 

Kolk, A. 2005. Sustainability Reporting. VBA Journaal 21(3): 34-42. 
Kolstad, I. 2007. Why firms should not always maximize profits. Journal of Business Ethics 76: 137-145. 
KPMG International. 2005. KPMG International Survey of Corporate Responsibility Reporting 2005. 

Amsterdam: Drukkerij Reijnen Offset. 

Lantos, G. P. 1999. Motivating moral corporate behavior. Journal of Consumer Marketing 16(3): 222-

233. 

 


 

27 

Lev, B. 2001. Intangibles: Management measurement and reporting. Brookings Institution Press, Wash-

ington, D. C.  

Lev, B. and P. Zarowin. 1999. The boundaries of financial reporting and how to extend them. Journal of 

Accounting Research (37): 353-383. 

Maignan, I. and D. A. Ralston. 2002. Corporate social responsibility in Europe and the U.S.: Insights 

from businesses’ self-presentations. Journal of International Business Studies 33(3): 497-514. 
Meyer, J. W. and B. Rowan. 1977. Institutionalized organizations: Formal structure as myth and cere-

mony. American Journal of Sociology 83: 340-363. 

Milne, M. J. and R. W. Adler. 1999. Exploring the reliability of social and environmental disclosures con-

tent analysis. Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal 12(2): 237-256. 

Morhardt, J. E., S. Baird, and K. Freeman. 2002. Scoring corporate environmental and sustainability re-
ports using GRI 2000, ISO 14031 and other criteria. Corporate Social Responsibility and Envi-
ronmental Management 9: 215-233. 

Neuendorf, K. A. (2002). The Content Analysis Guidebook. Sage Publications, Inc. 
Neuman, W. L. 2005. Social Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches, (6th Ed.). Bos-

ton: Allyn & Bacon. 

O’Donovan, G. 2002. Environmental disclosures in the annual report: Extending the applicability and 

predictive power of legitimacy theory. Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal 15(3): 
344-371. 

Orlitzky, M., F. L. Schmidt, and S. L. Rynes. 2003. Corporate social and financial performance: A meta-

analysis. Organization Studies, 24(3): 403-441. 

Patten, D. M. 2002. Give or take on the Internet: An examination of the disclosure practices of insurance 

firm web innovators. Journal of Business Ethics 36(3): 247-259. 

Pricewaterhousecoopers. 2002. Non-financial measures are highest-rated determinants of total share-

holder value, Pricewaterhousecoopers finds. Management Barometer (April 22). 

Quaak, L., T. Aalbers, and J. Goedee.  2007. Transparency of corporate social responsibility in Dutch 

breweries. Journal of Business Ethics 76: 293-308. 

Robin, D. P. and R. E. Reidenbach. 1987. Social responsibility, ethics, and marketing strategy: Closing 

the gap between concept and application. Journal of Marketing 51(1): 44-58. 

Sen, S. and C. B. Bhattacharya. 2001. Does doing good always lead to doing better? Consumer reactions 

to corporate social responsibility. Journal of Marketing Research 38(2): 225-243. 

Simnett, R., A. Vanstraelen, and W. F. Chua. 2006. Assurance on general purpose non-financial reports: 

An international comparison. Working paper, Universiteit Antwerpen. 

Social Investment Forum. 2006. 2005 Report on Social Responsible Investing Trends in the United 

States: 10-Year Review. Social Investment Forum Industry Research Program: Washington, DC. 
UNEP FI. 2004. The Materiality of environmental, social, and governance to equity pricing. The United 

Nations Environment Program Finance Initiative. Geneva, Switzerland. 

Waddock, S. A. and S. B. Graves. 1997a. The corporate social performance-financial performance link. 

Strategic Management Journal 18(4): 303-319. 

Waddock, S. A. and S. B. Graves. 1997b. Finding the link between stakeholder relations and quality of 

management. Journal of Investing 6(4): 20-25. 

Watts, R. and J. Zimmerman. 1986. Positive Accounting Theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Weber, R. P. 1988. Basic Content Analysis. Sage University Paper Series on Quantitative Applications in 

the Social Sciences, Series No. 07-049. Sage: Beverly Hills, CA and London. 

 

 


 

Table 1. Sample Firms 
Size* 

Company 

1 
1 
2 
2 
3 

1 
1 
2 
2 
3 

1 
1 
2 
2 
3 

1 
1 
2 
2 
3 

Foodarama Supermarkets 
Wild Oats Markets Inc 
Ingles Markets Inc 
Whole Foods Market Inc 
Pathmark Stores Inc 

Cardima Inc 
Cytomedix Inc 
Bioject Medical Technol 
Rochester Medical Corp 
Memry Corp 

Kestrel Energy Inc 
Aspen Exploration 
Panhandle Royalty Co 
Gulfport Energy Corp 
Petroquest Energy Inc 

Med Gen Inc 
Lectec Corp 
Genelabs Technologies Inc 
Icagen Inc 
Auxilium Pharma Inc 

28 

Total Assets 
(in millions) 

Size* 

Company 

Total Assets 
(in millions) 

Grocery 

348.636 
405.560 
1063.687 
1519.793 
1253.400 

3  Winn-Dixie Stores Inc 
4  Great Atlantic & Pac Tea Co 
4  Supervalu Inc 
5  Safeway Inc 
5  Kroger Co 

Manufacturing 

6.537 
8.186 
18.370 
21.384 
32.988 

2.991 
6.946 
54.186 
78.150 
231.617 

Oil 

Pharma 

0.610 
2.803 
29.383 
38.137 
61.040 

Software 

3  Endocare Inc 
4  Possis Medical Inc 
4 
5  Boston Scientific Corp 
5  Baxter International Inc 

Icu Medical Inc 

3  Atp Oil & Gas Corp 
4  W&T Offshore Inc 
4  Cabot Oil & Gas Corp 
5  Occidental Petroleum Corp 
5  Devon Energy Corp 

3  Seracare Life Sciences Inc 
4  Chattem Inc 
4  K V Pharmaceutical 
5 
Johnson & Johnson 
5  Pfizer Inc 

2618.891 
2801.968 
6278.342 
15377.400 
20491.000 

34.374 
86.021 
164.768 
8170.000 
14147.000 

372.147 
760.784 
1210.956 
21391.000 
29736.000 

89.128 
371.724 
558.317 
53317.000 
123684.000 

97.803 
222.721 
275.344 
5194.641 
92389.000 

Summus Inc/Oasys Mobile 
Simulations Plus Inc 
Peerless Systems Corp 
Document Sciences Corp 
Ultimate Software Group Inc 

1 
1 
2 
2 
3 
*Size quintiles (within industries) ranked from 1 (smallest) to 5 (largest). 
 

2.406 
4.964 
12.647 
23.513 
52.546 

3  Art Technology Group Inc 
4  Mro Software Inc 
4  Webmethods Inc 
5  Sungard Data Systems Inc 
5  Microsoft Corp 

 


 

29 

Table 2. Reporting Format Frequencies for Information Bursts, Full Sample 

Format Category 

Information Burst 

CSR Report or Brochure 

Governance Doc, Not Proxy 

Mandatory Filing 

Other 

Press Release 
Product Fact Sheet 

Website 

 
 
 

CSR Report, Stand-Alone 
S/G/E, H/E/S, Enviro, Or Citizenship Brochure 
Whistleblowing/Complaint Procedures 
Governance Guidelines 
Code Of Ethics/Code Of Conduct 
Board Committee Charters 
8-K (Other than Press Release) 
Annual Report 
Proxy 
10-K 
Letter from Management, included in Annual Report 
Analyst Conference Call 
Letter From Mgt, Stand-Alone 
Other 
Press Release 
Product Fact Sheets 
Website (Company History) 
Website (Charitable Giving And Foundations) 
Website (Careers And Employment) 
Website (Community Relations) 
Website (Other) 
Website (S/G/E) 
Website (About The Company) 
Website (Products And Services) 
Total 

Frequency  Percent 
.2 
4.3 
.7 
2.1 
5.6 
11.2 
.2 
2.8 
3.7 
5.3 
.5 
.6 
.6 
5.0 
10.9 
9.0 
.9 
2.4 
3.0 
4.6 
5.7 
5.9 
6.5 
8.2 
100.0 

2 
37 
6 
18 
48 
97 
2 
24 
32 
46 
4 
5 
5 
43 
94 
78 
8 
21 
26 
40 
49 
51 
56 
71 
863 

 


 

30 

Table 3. Frequencies and Rates of CSR Disclosures, by Category (n=863)* 

Disclosure Categories 

Frequency 

Percent of Total Information Bursts** 

Community 
Diversity and Human Resources 
Environmental 
Health and Safety 
Human Rights and Supply Chain 
Political 
Other 
*Includes all public disclosures identified for the entire sample of fifty firms 
**Percentages will not sum to 100 percent, as not all disclosures include CSR information, and some disclosures 
contain more than one category of CSR information. 

16.2 
10.8 
7.9 
11.6 
7.2 
1.6 
3.6 

140 
93 
68 
100 
62 
14 
31 

 


 

31 

Table 4. Reporting Intensity by CSR Variable, Full Sample (n=357)* 

 

Number (%) of Information Bursts  

Intensity Score** 

COMMREL 
HUMANAT 
DIVERS 
HUMCAP 
WKFRCRET 
ENVIROPROG 
ENVIRORAT 
CUSTSAFETY 
HLTH 
HUMRTS 
SUPPCHAIN 
LOBBY 
*Includes only information bursts containing some CSR disclosures. 
**Sum of intensity scores [0-6] multiplied by the number of information bursts receiving each score; higher scores 
indicate variables that are more intensively discussed 

87 (24.4) 
84 (23.5) 
42(11.8) 
29 (8.1) 
45 (12.6) 
63 (17.6) 
18 (5.0) 
53 (14.8) 
55 (15.4) 
24 (6.7) 
47 (13.2) 
14 (3.9) 

373 
381 
156 
96 
141 
253 
64 
188 
190 
86 
181 
49 

 


 

32 

Table 5. Format Category Frequencies (Percent) for Disclosure Categories (n=357) 

 

Disclosure 
Category 

Mandatory 

Website 

Governance 

Product 

Doc, Not 

Fact Sheet 

Format Categories 

11 (7.9) 
24 (25.8) 

78 (55.7) 
40 (43.0) 

9 (13.2) 
18 (18.0) 
10 (16.1) 

30 (44.1) 
40 (40.0) 
22 (35.5) 

Proxy 
1 (0.7) 
2 (2.2) 

4 (5.9) 
5 (5.0) 
4 (6.5) 

CSR Re-
port or 

Brochure 

9 (6.4) 
7 (7.5) 

Press Re-

Other 

lease 

31 (22.1) 

9 (6.4) 

6 (6.5) 

13 (14.0) 

1 (0.7) 
1 (1.1) 

0 (0.0) 

10 (10.0) 

0 (0.0) 

14 (20.6) 

8 (8.0) 

12 (19.4) 

6 (8.8) 
9 (9.0) 
8 (12.9) 

5 (7.4) 

10 (10.0) 

6 (9.7) 

3 (21.4) 
2 (6.5) 

4 (28.6) 
7 (22.6) 

3 (21.4) 
3 (9.7) 

0 (0.0) 
7 (22.6) 

0 (0.0) 
9 (29.0) 

0 (0.0) 
2 (6.5) 

4 (28.6) 
1 (3.2) 

Community 
Diversity and 
Human Resources 
Environmental 
Health and Safety 
Human Rights and 
Supply Chain 
Political 
Other 
 
 

 


 

33 

Table 6. Disclosures by Category and Industry 
Panel A. Frequencies of Disclosure 

 

Disclosure Category 

Frequency of Information Bursts 

Pharma 
(n=89) 

Grocery 
(n=104) 

Mfg 

(n=79) 

Software 
(n=52) 

Oil 

(n=33) 

Total 

Community 
Diversity and Human Resources 
Environmental 
Health and Safety 
Human Rights and Supply Chain 
Political 
 
Panel B. Intensity of Disclosure 

 

Disclosure Category 

Community 
Diversity and Human Resources 
Environmental 
Health and Safety 
Human Rights and Supply Chain 
Political 
 

38 
28 
15 
25 
12 
5 

54 
23 
24 
17 
28 
6 

24 
20 
11 
26 
11 
2 

15 
11 
2 
23 
6 
0 

9 
11 
16 
9 
5 
1 

140 
93 
68 
100 
62 
14 

Mean (Median) Intensity Score 

Pharma 

19.00 (0.00) 
11.30 (2.00) 
7.30 (0.00) 
9.10 (0.00) 
4.90 (1.00) 
2.00 (0.00) 

Grocery 

30.40 (25.50) 

8.90 (7.00) 
9.90 (7.00) 
6.80 (4.00) 
12.70 (3.00) 
2.10 (0.00) 

Mfg 

12.20 (0.00) 
8.00 (5.00) 
4.60 (0.00) 
9.40 (4.00) 
3.30 (0.00) 
0.50 (0.00) 

Software 
8.60 (0.00) 
5.40 (3.50) 
1.00 (0.00) 
9.70 (9.00) 
2.40 (1.00) 
0.00 (0.00) 

Oil 

5.00 (0.00) 
5.60 (0.00) 
8.70 (1.00) 
2.80 (0.00) 
1.60 (0.00) 
0.30 (0.00) 

 


 

34 

Table 7. Reporting Format Choices by Industry 
 

Frequencies (%) 

Format Category 

Mandatory Filing 
Website 
Governance Doc, other than Proxy 
Product Fact Sheet 
CSR Report or Brochure 
Press Releases 
Other 
 

Pharma  
6 (6.7) 

63 (70.8) 

2 (2.2) 
0 (0.0) 

10 (11.2) 

1 (1.1) 
7 (7.9) 

Grocery 
12 (11.5) 
40 (38.5) 

5 (4.8) 
2 (1.9) 
7 (6.7) 

32 (30.8) 

6 (5.8) 

Mfg 

15 (19.0) 
23 (29.1) 

2 (2.5) 
3 (3.8) 
8 (10.1) 
20 (25.3) 
8 (10.1) 

Software 
7 (13.5) 
22 (42.3) 

1 (1.9) 

14 (26.9) 

2 (3.8) 
2 (3.8) 
4 (7.7) 

Oil 

6 (18.2) 
17 (51.5) 
4 (12.1) 
0 (0.0) 
5 (15.2) 
0 (0.0) 
1 (3.0) 

 


 

35 

Table 8. Disclosures by Category and Firm Size 
Panel A. Frequencies of Disclosure, Relative Firm Size* 

 

Disclosure Category 

Frequency of Information Bursts 

Q1 

n=29 

Q2 

n=37 

Q3 

n=45 

Q4 

n=37 

Q5 

n=209 

Total 

Community 
Diversity and Human Resources 
Environmental 
Health and Safety 
Human Rights and Supply Chain 
Political 
*Firms in each industry ranked on total assets; represents relative size within industry 
 
Panel B. Intensity of Disclosure, Relative Firm Size* 

11 
5 
10 
7 
8 
1 

11 
9 
6 
22 
5 
1 

8 
9 
6 
8 
17 
3 

7 
10 
1 
15 
3 
0 

103 
60 
45 
48 
29 
9 

140 
93 
68 
100 
62 
14 

 

Mean (Median) Intensity Score 

Disclosure Category 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Community 
Diversity and Human Resources 
Environmental 
Health and Safety 
Human Rights and Supply Chain 
Political 
*Firms in each industry ranked on total assets; represents relative size within industry 
 
Panel C. Frequencies of Disclosure, Absolute Firm Size* 

3.30 (0.00) 
2.70 (3.00) 
3.20 (0.00) 
3.00 (0.00) 
8.30 (0.00) 
0.80 (0.00) 

6.70 (0.00) 
1.70 (1.50) 
3.60 (0.00) 
2.80 (0.00) 
2.70 (0.00) 
0.30 (0.00) 

6.20 (1.00) 
3.00 (1.00) 
2.10 (1.00) 
7.10 (4.00) 
1.60 (0.00) 
0.30 (0.00) 

Q4 

3.80 (0.00) 
4.20 (2.00) 
0.30 (0.00) 
6.00 (2.00) 
0.80 (0.00) 
0.00 (0.00) 

Q5 

55.20 (57.00) 
27.60 (21.00) 
22.30 (18.50) 
18.90 (13.50) 
11.50 (7.00) 
3.50 (1.00) 

 

Disclosure Category 

Frequency of Information Bursts 

Q1 

n=83 

Q2 

n=52 

Q3 

n=57 

Q4 

n=103 

Q5 

n=62 

Total 

Community 
Diversity and Human Resources 
Environmental 
Health and Safety 
Human Rights and Supply Chain 
Political 
*All sample firms ranked on total assets; represents absolute size rankings rather than relative ones 
 
Panel D. Intensity of Disclosure, Absolute Firm Size* 

36 
26 
27 
24 
30 
6 

15 
23 
16 
21 
9 
1 

25 
22 
12 
28 
16 
1 

19 
10 
4 
16 
0 
3 

45 
12 
9 
11 
7 
3 

140 
93 
68 
100 
62 
14 

 

Mean (Median) Intensity Score 

Disclosure Category 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q5 

Community 
Diversity and Human Resources 
Environmental 
Health and Safety 
Human Rights and Supply Chain 
Political 
*All sample firms ranked on total assets; represents absolute size rankings rather than relative ones 
 
Panel E. Distribution of Industries within Absolute Size Rankings 

0.00 (0.00) 
2.80 (1.00) 
0.50 (0.00) 
7.60 (2.00) 
0.60 (0.00) 
0.30 (0.00) 

0.20 (0.00) 
2.30 (3.00) 
0.90 (0.00) 
2.90 (0.00) 
1.40 (0.00) 
0.30 (0.00) 

1.00 (0.00) 
1.80 (1.00) 
0.20 (0.00) 
4.10 (0.00) 
0.40 (0.00) 
0.00 (0.00) 

3.40 (3.00) 
7.80 (2.50) 
4.70 (3.00) 
10.60 (0.00) 
0.80 (0.00) 

16.20 (10.00) 

57.80 (57.00) 
28.90 (21.00) 
22.10 (18.50) 
18.50 (13.50) 
11.90 (8.00) 
3.50 (1.00) 

 

Industry 

Pharma 
Grocery 
Mfg 
Software 
Oil 

 

Number of Firms in Absolute Size Quintile 

Q1 
2 
0 
3 
3 
2 

Q2 
3 
0 
3 
2 
2 

Q3 
2 
1 
2 
3 
2 

Q4 
1 
6 
0 
1 
2 

Q5 
2 
3 
2 
1 
2 


 

36 

Table 9. Reporting Format Choices by Absolute Size Rankings 

 

Format Category 

Mandatory Filing 
Website 
Governance Doc, other than Proxy 
Product Fact Sheet 
CSR Report or Brochure 
Press Releases 
Other 
 

Q1 

 

17 (20.5) 
24 (28.9) 

2 (2.4) 
3 (3.6) 
8 (9.6) 

20 (24.1) 
9 (10.8) 

Frequencies (%) 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q5 

12 (23.1) 
9 (17.3) 
2 (3.8) 

14 (26.9) 

1 (1.9) 

12 (23.1) 

2 (3.8) 

5 (8.8) 

29 (50.9) 

4 (7.0) 
2 (3.5) 
7 (12.3) 
5 (8.8) 
5 (8.8) 

10 (9.7) 
54 (52.4) 

5 (4.9) 
0 (0.0) 

12 (11.7) 
15 (14.6) 

7 (6.8) 

2 (3.2) 

49 (79.0) 

1 (1.6) 
0 (0.0) 
4 (6.5) 
3 (4.8) 
3 (4.8) 

 


 

37 

Table 10. Descriptive Analysis of Favorable and Unfavorable Disclosures 
Panel A. Full Sample 

Positive/Negative Rating* 

Frequency 

Percent 

Strictly Negative 
Mostly Negative 
Neutral 
Mostly Positive 
Strictly Positive 
Total 
*Rating pertains to the manner in which the company presented the information, not the intrinsic content of the in-
formation. 
Panel B. Frequencies of Positive/Negative Ratings by Size Quintile, within Industry 

0.0 
1.1 
13.2 
35.3 
50.4 
100.0 

0 
4 
47 
126 
180 
357 

 

Positive/Negative Rating 

Strictly Negative 
Mostly Negative 
Neutral 
Mostly Positive 
Strictly Positive 

Number (%) of Information Bursts 

Q1 

n=29 
0 (0.0) 
0 (0.0) 
6 (20.7) 
8 (27.6) 

15 (51.7) 

Q2 

n=37 
0 (0.0) 
1 (2.7) 
8 (21.6) 
9 (24.3) 
19 (51.4) 

Q3 

n=45 
0 (0.0) 
1 (2.2) 
6 (13.3) 
22 (48.9) 
16 (35.6) 

Q4 

n=37 
0 (0.0) 
0 (0.0) 
5 (13.5) 
21 (56.8) 
11 (29.7) 

Q5 

n=209 
0 (0.0) 
2 (1.0) 

22 (10.5) 
66 (31.6) 
119 (56.9) 

Panel C. Mean Positive/Negative Ratings by Size Quintile, Within Industry 

Quintile 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 

N 
29 
37 
45 
37 
209 

Mean 
4.31 
4.24 
4.18 
4.16 
4.44 

Panel D. Mean Positive/Negative Ratings by Industry 

Industry 

Pharma 
Grocery 
Manufacturing 
Software 
Oil 
 

N 
89 
104 
79 
52 
33 

Mean 
4.19 
4.58 
4.32 
4.31 
4.21 

Median 

5.00 
5.00 
4.00 
4.00 
5.00 

Median 

4.00 
5.00 
4.00 
4.00 
4.00 

 


 

38 

Table 11. Mean Favorable and Unfavorable Trends 
Panel A: By Disclosure Category 

 

Disclosure Categories 

Community 
Diversity and Human Resources 
Environmental 
Health and Safety 
Human Rights and Supply Chain 
Political 
Other 
Panel B. By Format Category 
 

Format Category 

Mandatory Filings 
Website 
Governance Doc, Not Proxy 
Product Fact Sheet 
CSR Report or Brochure 
Press Releases 
Other 

Positive/Negative Rating 

Mean 
4.70 
4.25 
4.49 
4.19 
4.39 
3.64 
4.23 

Positive/Negative Ratings 

Mean 
3.72 
4.45 
3.64 
4.16 
4.50 
4.76 
4.27 

Median 

5.00 
4.00 
5.00 
4.00 
4.00 
3.50 
4.00 

Median 

4.00 
5.00 
3.50 
4.00 
5.00 
5.00 
4.00 

N 
140 
93 
68 
100 
62 
14 
31 

N 
46 
165 
14 
19 
32 
55 
26 

 


 

39 

Figure 1. Information Included in CSR Disclosures, by General Type 

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

% of Bursts Containing Type of Information

Political

Human Rights and Supply Chain

Health and Safety

Environment

Diversity and HR

Community

 


 

40 

Figure 2. Intensity Scores for Disclosure Types 
 

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

450

Intensity Score

Lobbying and Political Giving

Environmental Ratings

Human Rights Issues

Human Capital Development

Workforce Retention

Employee Diversity

Supply Chain Practices

Customer Safety

Workplace Health and Safety

Environmental Programs

Community Relations

Humanitarian Initiatives

 


 

41 

Figure 3. Disclosures by General Format, All Information Bursts (n=863) 

6.60%
Other Types

12.05%

Mandatory Filings

10.89%

Press Releases

4.52%

CSR Reports or Brochures

9.04%

Product Fact Sheet

Stand-Alone Governance Document, Other Than Proxy

19.58%

Website
37.31%

 

 

__  

 

 

 


 

42 

Figure 4. Disclosures by Format Category, Information Bursts Containing CSR Disclosures Only 
(n=357) 
_ 

7.28%

Other Types

12.89%

Mandatory Filings

15.41%

Press Releases

8.96%

CSR Reports or Brochures

5.32%

Product Fact Sheet

Stand-Alone Governance Document, Other Than Proxy

3.92%

Website
46.22%

 

 

 


 

43 

Figure 5. Mean Intensity Scores by Disclosure Category for Each Industry 

Oil

Software

Mfg

Grocery

Pharma

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Frequencies for Disclosure Category

 

Political

Human Rights and Supply Chain

Health and Safety

Environmental

Diversity and Human Resources

Community

 


 

44 

Appendix 1. CSR Variables Coded in the Study 

Disclosure 
Category 

 

Variable 

 

Detailed Description 

Discussion of programs designed to enhance the company’s reputation in the 
community, including provision of goods or services at a discount to customers 
with financial needs. Includes community development programs, provision or 
funding of non-essential educational opportunities, company or related founda-
tion funding of product development or research related to company’s production 
function. 
Discussion of the company’s participation in humanitarian initiatives. Includes 
charitable contribution campaigns, contributions of money, services, or products 
to disaster relief efforts, donations of money, services, or products to indigent 
populations in the U.S. or abroad, and provision of educational services neces-
sary to prevent spread of disease or maintain basic quality of life to indigent 
populations. 
Discussions pertaining to existing employee diversity or diversity development 
initiatives. Includes diversity awards, certifications, or recognition conferred by 
an external party; statements of commitment to diversity in the workforce; dis-
cussions of multi-nationalism or multi-racialism within offices.  
Discussion of any professional development opportunities provided to/available 
to employees through the company. Includes college tuition reimbursement 
plans; support for attending professional seminars; sponsoring of professional 
seminars for employees; and granting of fellowships for employees. 
Employee retention rates that do not involve comparison to other firms, bench-
marks, or industry averages. 
Discussion of environmental management policies or programs. Includes esti-
mates for waste management, recycling, and/or waste management; impact of 
organic/non-organic activities in biological supply chain; programs for reducing 
employee or community exposure to workplace toxins; statements of commit-
ment to any environmental management practices or philosophies.  
Discussion of external awards, certifications, notices, or other recognition per-
taining to the company’s environmental practices. Includes mention of censure 
for poor environmental practices and ratings of waste-management. 
Discussion of programs to protect customer safety or to enhance customer satis-
faction. Includes defect rates; customer loyalty metrics that are not couched in 
terms of industry or external comparisons; potential risks associated with prod-
ucts. 
Discussion of customer safety programs, initiatives, or discussion of significant 
customer or employee safety concerns; environmental safety issues; risks and 
metrics. 
Discussion of human rights issues with respect to the supply/consumption chain. 
Includes statements of “fair” treatment of employees/suppliers; use of sweat-
shops; fair trade practices; and payment of “living wages” to foreign providers. 
Discussion of dedication, interest, or lack thereof in the quality of the supply 
chain. Includes description of quality or product requirements places on suppli-
ers; unique supplier populations or unique requirements relative to standard in-
dustry practice. 
Discussion of political giving, lobbying activities, including mention of PACs. 
Includes disclosure of related parties presence on relevant regulatory bodies.  
Other social or environmental disclosures that do not fall within another category 

Community 

Diversity  
and HR 

COMMREL 

HUMANAT 

DIVERS 

HUMCAP 

WKFRCRET 

ENVIROPROG 

Environment 

ENVIRORAT 

CUSTSAFETY 

HLTH 

HUMRTS 

SUPPCHAIN 

Health  
and Safety 

Human 
Rights  
and Supply 
Chain 

Political 

POLGIVING 

Other 
 

OTHER 

 


 

45 

Appendix 2. Selected Disclosures from Source Documents 
1. Press Release Disclosing a Community Relations Initiative 
“The Kroger Co. (NYSE: KR) today announced that it donated more than 26 million pounds of food last year to 
America’s Second Harvest, the nation’s largest domestic hunger relief organization. The donation, which was valued 
at over $42 million, ranked as the largest in Kroger’s history.  
‘Kroger is proud to support America’s Second Harvest in the fight against hunger,’ said David B. Dillon, Kroger 
chief executive officer. ‘At a time when food pantries across the nation are facing increased demand, our retail divi-
sions are working in partnership with local food banks and food-rescue organizations to generate greater awareness 
of hunger relief programs, share best practices in raising food donations, and pursue new donation opportuni-
ties...Kroger’s retail divisions work with more than 40 regional food banks around the country that are affiliated 
with Second Harvest. Kroger consistently ranks as one of the largest retail contributors of food and grocery products 
to the non-profit organization. The Company twice has been named ‘National Retailer of the Year’ by America’s 
Second Harvest.’”14 
2. Website Disclosing a Humanitarian Initiative 
“Through Our Credo, Johnson & Johnson is committed to improving the community through a variety of programs 
both in the United States and abroad. In this section, you can learn about our Contributions program, Environmental 
commitments and Health and Safety efforts...[at] Johnson & Johnson's subsidiary in Indonesia, its employees and its 
companies in the region responded quickly to the massive earthquake that recently struck the central Java region of 
Indonesia. In addition, Johnson & Johnson disaster supplies were airlifted by Direct Relief International, a long-
standing partner of Johnson & Johnson in providing critical products to assist the people affected by natural disas-
ters. The Company also made arrangements with the American Red Cross, Islamic Relief USA, and Project HOPE 
for employees to make direct and immediate donations to Indonesia, which will be matched dollar-for-dollar by 
Johnson & Johnson.”15 
3. Website Disclosing Environmental and Health and Safety Information 
“Through our contributions efforts, we are actively involved in supporting ongoing health care, educational and cul-
tural programs. We are committed to a healthy environment through a reduction in our facility environmental im-
pacts and our participation in conservation projects. Johnson & Johnson has established high standards for the health 
and safety of our workers and has worked with others in our community to share our knowledge in this area.”16 

                                                      

14 As the only content of the press release, this disclosure was assigned an intensity code of 6 for commu-

nity relations. 

15 As a portion (less than 50%) of the website information burst, this disclosure was assigned an intensity 

code of 4 for humanitarian initiatives. 

16 As a portion of a website information burst, this disclosure was assigned an intensity code of 2 for envi-

ronmental programs and health and safety. 

 


 

 
Appendix 3. Examples of Computation of Intensity Scores 
 
Community Relations 

Level of Dedication 

No of Disclosures Per Level 

0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Total Intensity Score 
 
Customer Safety 

Level of Dedication 

0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Total Intensity Score 
 
Lobbying and Political Giving 

Level of Dedication 

0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 

 

 

Total Intensity Score 

 

776 

2 
15 
13 
16 
8 
33 

No of Disclosures Per Level 

810 

2 
17 
10 
9 
4 
11 

No of Disclosures Per Level 

849 

2 
1 
5 
3 
0 
3 

46 

 

 

 

0 
2 
30 
39 
64 
40 
198 
373 

0 
2 
34 
30 
36 
20 
66 
188 

0 
2 
2 
15 
12 
0 
18 
49 

 


 

47 

Appendix 4. Sample Favorable and Unfavorable Disclosures, from Source Documents 
1. Slightly Negative Disclosure of Workforce Retention Issues 
“We believe our relationship with our employees is good, thought that may not continue” 
2. Neutral Disclosure of Workforce Retention Issues 
“As of April 23.2004 the Company had a total of 121 employees plus 19 who performed efforts as consultants and 
contractors. None of the Company’s employees is represented by a labor union, and the Company has never experi-
enced any work stoppage. The Company considers its relations with its employees to be good.” 
3. Positive Disclosure of Health and Safety Issues 
“Safeway Inc. (NYSE:SWY) today announced a public education and employee training program aimed at inform-
ing consumers and its employees about California tobacco laws to help curb tobacco sales to minors. The program 
was designed with the help of California Attorney General Bill Lockyer and Los Angeles City Attorney Rocky 
Delgadillo and is part of the Attorney General's statewide effort to significantly reduce the purchase of tobacco 
products by underage teens. ‘Safeway takes the sale of tobacco products to minors seriously. We have worked with 
Attorney General Lockyer to develop a program that makes Safeway a leader in helping reduce the purchase of to-
bacco products by underage teens,’ said Safeway Executive Vice President Larree Renda. "This new initiative will 
strengthen our ongoing programs and help send a clear message to minors not to attempt purchasing tobacco prod-
ucts at our stores.” 

 

