J PROD INNOV MANAG 2010;27:321–335
r 2010 Product Development & Management Association

Reputation for Product Innovation: Its Impact on Consumers

David H. Henard and Peter A. Dacin

Just as ﬁrms compete for customers, they also vie for reputational status across their relevant constituent groups. To
many ﬁrms, a reputation as an innovative company is something that is both prized and actively sought after. Despite an
abundance of anecdotal evidence pointing to several ﬁrms’ active pursuit of an innovative reputation, there is little
empirical evidence to evaluate the soundness of this pursuit. On a general level, this research recognizes that ﬁrms
compete for competitive advantage via their tangible and intangible resources. Much of the innovation literature centers
on the tangible impact that new product development initiatives have on outcomes of innovation. Yet research inves-
tigations of the less tangible facets of innovation, such as a reputation, remain relatively uninvestigated despite their
promise as a source of sustainable competitive advantage. This study investigates the effects of a corporate reputation
for product innovation (RPI) and its impact on consumers. Consumer involvement levels are proposed to mediate the
relationship between RPI and consumer outcomes. Empirical results indicate that a high consumer perceived RPI, via
the involvement construct, leads to excitement toward and heightened loyalty to the innovative ﬁrm. A more positive
overall corporate image and tolerance for occasional product failures are also positive outcomes noted in the results.
Contrary to expectations, a high perceived RPI does not lead to a consumer propensity to pay price premiums.

Introduction

E ach year, corporations collectively spend bil-

lions of dollars on research and development
(R&D) activities. The drive for innovation
and product development is so pervasive in some
ﬁrms that their corporate reputations are inexorably
associated with product innovation. These ﬁrms ag-
gressively advertise and promote the perception that
they are innovative entities and that they regularly
introduce innovative products to the marketplace.
While these companies obviously view the ‘‘innova-
tor’’ moniker to be commercially beneﬁcial, there is
little empirical evidence to evaluate the validity of
such a viewpoint. The practical question for managers
then becomes one of whether publicly fostering an
innovative perception is strategically beneﬁcial.

To be successful, ﬁrms must effectively interact with
a number of constituents such as customers, competi-
tors, employees, and stakeholders. Corporations pro-
mote a reputation in an attempt to inﬂuence their
constituents (Dowling, 1986; Freeman, 1984). Some
scholars think that developing a corporate reputation
and actively promoting it is a modern business necessity
(e.g., Gray and Balmer, 1998); thus, ﬁrm reputation

may serve as a strategic business tool (Aaker, 1989;
Fombrun, 1996; Hall, 1993). Among other effects, a
corporate reputation impacts individual beliefs and
attitudes regarding a ﬁrm (Brown and Dacin, 1997;
Rao, Qu, and Ruekert, 1999), signals strategic inten-
sions to competitors (Kreps and Wilson, 1982; Milgrom
and Roberts, 1982) and inﬂuences employee organiza-
tional identiﬁcation (Dutton, Dukerich, and Harquail,
1994). Yet despite the potential inﬂuence that a ﬁrm
reputation can have on its constituents, academic in-
vestigation of many of its effects is noticeably absent.
This research investigates a corporate reputation for
product innovation. Understanding how an innovative
reputation impacts various ﬁrm constituents allows
scholars to more accurately design research initiatives
that lead to effective managerial prescriptions. This re-
search undertakes an empirical study to test the impact
that perceptions of a ﬁrm’s reputation for product in-
novation has on a key constituent: consumers. In the
following section, the conceptual foundation for the re-
search hypotheses is presented. The hypotheses are then
tested, and a discussion of the results is presented. Im-
plications for managers and scholars follow this.

Address correspondence to: David H. Henard, Box 7229, North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27587. E-mail: dhhenard@
ncsu.edu.
 This research was funded in full by a grant from Procter & Gamble.
The authors thank Rajan Varadarajan and Tina Dacin for comments
on earlier versions of this research.

A corporate reputation for product innovation (RPI)
is deﬁned as a constituent-speciﬁc perception of a
ﬁrm’s track record of product innovations, degree of
creativity, and potential for continued innovative ac-

Conceptual Development


322

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2010;27:321–335

D.H. HENARD AND P.A. DACIN

tivity in the future. The general rationale for devel-
oping and promoting a corporate reputation is that a
reputation can create a corporate identity, can inﬂu-
ence constituents, can signal a strategic direction, and
can promote shared values, among other things
(Dowling, 1986; Fombrun, 1996; Fombrun and Shan-
ley, 1990; Schatzel, Calantone, and Droge, 2001).
Recent years bear witness to increasing managerial
and scholarly interest in innovation research. How-
ever, much of the empirical research focus examines
the relationships between determinants of new prod-
uct development and their ultimate performance out-
comes (see Henard and Szymanski, 2001), while
building evidence hints that the impact of innovation
on performance is perhaps a richer set of relationships
than extant research suggests (e.g., Brown and Dacin,
1997; Fombrun; Fombrun and Shanley; Hall, 1992,
1993; Rao, 1994; Weigelt and Camerer, 1988).

Reputation as a Concept

Several conceptualizations of corporate reputation
and various terms describe the relative standing of
organizations. Prestige, image, reputation, and good-
will are terms that can all be found in the literature. A
synthesis of the various deﬁnitions imparts three basic
tenets of a corporate reputation: (1) reputation devel-
ops over time through repeated interactions; (2) rep-
utation is multifaceted; and (3) different constituents
will have different perceptions of a ﬁrm’s reputation.
Just as ﬁrms compete for customers, they also vie
for reputational status (Fombrun and Shanley, 1990).
This competition and the resulting ﬁrm reputation

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES

Dr. David H. Henard is associate professor of marketing at North
Carolina State University and director of the North Carolina State
Global Innovation Management initiative. His research interests
focus on knowledge management and product development issues.
Dr. Henard’s research is published in journals such as Journal of
Marketing Research, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
Journal of Product Innovation Management, and Journal of Retail-
ing. Prior to entering academics, Dr. Henard worked several years
for a large, multinational consumer products ﬁrm.

Dr. Peter A. Dacin is the Kraft Professor of Marketing at Queen’s
University. Dr. Dacin’s primary area of research is judgment for-
mation, a theme that runs through all of his research. His research
strategy is one of integrating his expertise on this topic into other,
more applied/managerial areas of marketing. Dr. Dacin’s research
has appeared in journals including Journal of Marketing, Journal of
Consumer Research, Journal of Marketing Research, Journal of Busi-
ness Research, and Journal of Personal Selling and Sales Manage-
ment.

occur over time and after some historical consistency
of action (Avolonitis, Kouremenos, and Tzokas,
1994; Fombrun, 1996; Rao, 1994; Weigelt and
Camerer, 1988). Individuals generally attribute repu-
tation to an organization based on their unique past
experience with the organization, its performance, its
partners, and products and can thus be thought of as
a social memory (Vandelo, 1998). Once acquired, rep-
utations are enduring (Russo and Fouts, 1997; Vergin
and Qoronﬂeh, 1998) provided that the organization
is vigilant in its efforts to preserve or enhance the
reputation (Donlon, 1998). In essence, a favorable
corporate reputation is usually the product of years of
demonstrated competence, which takes time to create
and cannot be transferred (Hall, 1992).

While ﬁrm reputation is often referred to in broad or
all-encompassing terms,
it actually is a multifaceted
construct. In addition to a general corporate reputa-
tion, ﬁrms can have context-speciﬁc reputations. Exam-
ples include reputations for social responsibility, pricing
aggressiveness, and product quality with each facet be-
ing conceptually related to, yet distinct from, a general
corporate reputation. These context-speciﬁc reputations
can appeal greatly to highly involved constituents while
potentially enhancing the perception of a general repu-
tation among relatively less involved constituents.

When dealing with an intangible resource such as
reputation, it is important to note that perceptions are
bound to the context within which they arise (Berger
and Luckmann, 1966). As such, in investigating the im-
pact of a reputation for product innovation, one cannot
simply rely on a proxy (e.g., number of patents ﬁled,
R&D dollars spent) to adequately capture the true
measure of an organization’s RPI. Likewise, percep-
tions across constituency groups vary and could pro-
duce distinct outcomes across groups. Put simply, while
a ﬁrm’s reputation exists in people’s minds, there is no
unanimously shared corporate image for any given
company (Berger and Luckmann; Brown and Dacin,
1997; Fombrun and Shanley, 1990). As with any oper-
ationalization of an intangible ﬁrm resource such as
reputation, the RPI construct must take into account
an individual’s perceptions of, experiences with, and
expectations of a ﬁrm’s product innovativeness (Weigelt
and Camerer, 1988). In essence, a corporate reputation
is neither one-dimensional nor perceptually singular.

Reputation as a Signal

As previously noted, a corporate reputation can act as
a signal to constituents. Signaling theory (Farrell and


REPUTATION FOR PRODUCT INNOVATION: ITS IMPACT ON CONSUMERS

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2010;27:321–335

323

Saloner, 1986; Milgrom and Roberts, 1982; Nelson,
1974; Olson, 1977; Rao and Monroe, 1989; Rao et al.,
1999; Robertson, Eliashberg, and Rymon, 1995;
Spence, 1974) posits that ﬁrms possess observable,
unalterable attributes as well as other unobservable
attributes that are subject to manipulation. A further
premise is the assumption that the environment is un-
certain in that
individuals cannot readily obtain
all salient information regarding the ﬁrm. Spence
(1974) regards signals, such as corporate reputation,
as parameters by which ﬁrms can shape the beliefs
of individuals and therefore inﬂuence their behavior.
Within the context of this research, a corporate rep-
utation is viewed as an intangible ﬁrm asset that
is subject to manipulation (via signaling) by the
organization. Given that the marketplace is inherently
uncertain, a corporation’s promotion of its reputation
serves as a signal to potentially inﬂuence constituent
behavior.

Signaling is widely regarded as a rational strategy
to convey pertinent information to individuals. The
message signaled is likewise thought to be a reliable
indicator since a false or inaccurate signal makes the
ﬁrm vulnerable to future economic sanctions (Rao
et al., 1999). Conceptually speaking, ﬁrms that signal
false claims to constituents run the risk of damaging
their past investment in corporate reputation as well
as their future proﬁt stream since the promotion
of corporate reputation is a dissipative signal that
involves upfront ﬁrm expenditures that will be for-
feited if the claims are later discovered to be inaccu-
rate (ibid.).

Due to the imperfect information inherent in the
marketplace, constituents of a ﬁrm routinely rely on
its reputation when forming perceptions and making
judgments regarding investment decisions, product
purchases, career choices, or partnership opportuni-
ties (Dowling, 1986; Fombrun and Shanley, 1990).
Corporate reputations act as a signal, imparting in-
formation that allows ﬁrms to promote product qual-
ity, to erect market entry barriers, to charge price
premiums, and to shape individuals’ attitudes toward
company products among other outcomes.

Consumer Impact

In this section, the model of the proposed impact that
a corporate RPI has on consumers is presented. The
study hypotheses, methodology, and results are then
presented. Figure 1 details the proposed model of how
a perceived RPI impacts consumers. The model is not
intended to be exhaustive but is simply a model of
strategically important factors associated with a con-
sumer’s perception of ﬁrm RPI levels. RPI is mea-
sured here as the individual consumer’s perception.
How the reputation signal was broadcast is not a
concern, but rather how the company’s reputation is
perceived and the resulting outcomes of that percep-
tion is the focus.

Firms with a positively perceived reputation for
product innovation are likely to have a track record of
successful new products. They are perceived as new
product leaders on the cutting edge of product devel-
opment. Such ﬁrms are likely to be perceived as both
creative and progressive with regard to product in-
troductions and should instill expectations of future
new product innovations. In this research, RPI is con-
ceptually perceived along a continuum from a high
(i.e., strongly positive) reputation to a low (i.e.,
strongly negative) reputation. With the previous con-
ceptual discussion serving as the foundation for a
ﬁrm’s reputation for product innovation, the discus-
sion now focuses on the remaining model variables.

The Role of Involvement

The involvement level of consumers is viewed as play-
ing a mediating role between a perception of a ﬁrm’s
RPI and the hypothesized outcomes of that percep-
tion. The personal involvement level of individuals is
a key construct by which researchers study the effec-
tiveness of a ﬁrm’s message (Greenwald and Leavitt,
1984; Petty and Cacioppo, 1981; Petty, Cacioppo, and
Schumann, 1983; Zaichkowsky, 1985, 1994). Involve-
ment is deﬁned here as personal relevance—an endur-
ing trait over time (Greenwald and Leavitt; Petty and

RPI

Consumer
Involvement

(cid:129) Excitement Toward the Firm
(cid:129) Overall Firm Image
(cid:129) Propensity to Pay Price Premiums
(cid:129) Loyalty to the Firm
(cid:129) Tolerance For Occasional Failure

Figure 1. Model of the Impact of a Firm’s Reputation for Product Innovation on Consumers


324

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2010;27:321–335

D.H. HENARD AND P.A. DACIN

Cacioppo; Zaichkowsky 1985, 1994). While this deﬁ-
nition is widely regarded as a generally accepted deﬁ-
nition of the construct, another rationale for deﬁning
the construct in this manner is that involvement is
conceptualized as being constantly present but capa-
ble of being heightened or suppressed at different
points in time (Bloch and Richins, 1983; Zaichkow-
sky, 1986). Such a conceptualization recognizes that
consumer involvements is dynamic and, therefore,
subject to change as antecedents to it change.

Bloch and Richins (1983) and Zaichkowsky (1986)
categorize the antecedents to involvement into three
factors: (1) personal characteristics, deﬁned as a per-
son’s inherent value system along with their unique
experiences; (2) characteristics of the object of interest,
deﬁned as the perceived differences between the object
and other similar objects; and (3) context of the situ-
ation, deﬁned as the salience of the object to the in-
dividual. Changes in one or more of these antecedents
may affect individual involvement levels, which, in
turn, may impact consumer attitudes and behaviors.
Given this categorization scheme, a ﬁrm’s consumer-
perceived RPI is arguably classiﬁed as an antecedent to
involvement. The RPI construct clearly falls under the
second antecedent factor, given that the overt RPI mes-
sage is an attempt by the signaling ﬁrm to differentiate
itself from competitors. Given that consumers are het-
erogeneous and have multiple purchase options, the
personal relevance of a ﬁrm’s perceived RPI is likely
to be perceived across a wide range of involvement
levels. Thus, it is reasonable to propose that different
consumers may perceive a ﬁrm’s RPI quite differently
and that this range of relevance should therefore be
accounted for when assessing the consumer constitu-
ency. In this view of consumer involvement, ﬁrms may
actively inﬂuence the involvement levels of consumers
with respect to their products. Thus, a history of prod-
uct development success or failure can directly inﬂuence
involvement levels.

Involvement, as already deﬁned and described, is a
likely antecedent to the proposed consumer effects
shown in Figure 1. Research indicates that more
highly involved individuals are more likely than less
involved individuals to actively engage in cognitively
processing information related to the object of interest
(e.g., Celsi and Olson, 1988; Park and Young, 1986).
It is therefore probable that a consumer’s perception
of a ﬁrm’s RPI does not directly impact the individual
attitudes and behaviors presented in Figure 1. It is
likely that a consumer’s historical experiences with a
ﬁrm, their perceived importance of that ﬁrm, and their

perceived differentiation of that ﬁrm among compet-
itors are components of a reputation for product in-
novation that lead to the formation of consumer
involvement levels. The resulting involvement level
can directly impact consumer behavior and can inﬂu-
ence how consumers react toward the ﬁrm and its
products (Bagozzi, Baumgartner, and Yi, 1992).

Consumer Effects

Excitement toward the Firm. For the company
with a reputation for innovative products, consumer
excitement can arguably arise. Consumer enthusiasm
and excitement for new product introductions by an
innovative ﬁrm may induce both a feeling of antici-
pation for future ﬁrm offerings as well as an expecta-
tion of satisfaction given positive past performance.
In other words, a consistent history of product inno-
vations augmented by the perception of a high RPI
will likely lead to a scenario where consumers are ex-
cited or even inspired by the ﬁrm, are motivated to
seek out new products from the innovative ﬁrm, and
have a positive predisposition toward it.

Consumer attitudes toward a ﬁrm form after expo-
sure to the company over time (Fishbein, 1963). The
premise that the ﬁrm has developed a high RPI in the
consumer’s mind indicates that the consumer has been
exposed in some manner to the ﬁrm’s products and
that the RPI has been signaled in some manner. As-
suming a positive consumer perception of a RPI, the
ﬁrm, by default, has a perceived track record of suc-
cessful new product introductions (Avolonitis et al.,
1994). This consistency of successful NPD initiatives,
as perceived by the consumer, and the implicit prom-
ise of future initiatives should heighten the personal
relevance (i.e., consumer involvement) of the com-
pany and lead to a positive consumer outlook toward
the innovator and its products. Repeated satisfactory
product introductions, leading to increased consumer
involvement level with the ﬁrm, can arguably lead to a
consumer attitude that transcends satisfaction.

Product satisfaction alone rarely leads to consumer
excitement. Deming (1986, p. 141) notes, ‘‘It will not
sufﬁce for ﬁrms to have customers that are merely sat-
isﬁed.’’ As such, ﬁrms must develop ways to excite, or
delight, consumers. Customer delight roughly equates
to consumer excitement and can be conceptualized as a
function of a surprisingly favorable consumption expe-
rience, arousal, and positive affect (Oliver, Rust, and
Varki, 1997). Oliver et al. further state that arousal
comes about only in the presence of high levels of con-


REPUTATION FOR PRODUCT INNOVATION: ITS IMPACT ON CONSUMERS

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2010;27:321–335

325

sumer involvement. It seems, therefore, that consumer
excitement may ﬂow directly from relatively higher lev-
els of involvement. Thus, a high perceived RPI may
serve as an enticement to consumers whereby the prom-
ise of continued innovation might heighten the personal
relevance of the ﬁrm and lead to consumer anticipation
and excitement toward the ﬁrm.

Firm Image. Image enhancement is a complement
to heightened consumer excitement. A positive ﬁrm im-
age is deﬁned here as the overall perception that the
ﬁrm is generally perceived in a favorable light. The or-
ganization with a positive overall ﬁrm image is viewed
as an industry leader that is well liked by consumers in
general. Intuitively, each successful product launch aug-
ments the image of the ﬁrm in the minds of consumers.
Over time, consumers may begin to resolutely associate
the high RPI ﬁrm with product innovation. Carpenter
and Nakamoto (1989) propose that pioneering ﬁrms
have a major inﬂuence on how consumers value prod-
uct attributes (i.e., which ones become salient stan-
dards) and that pioneers are more likely to become the
de facto standard within a category against which all
other competitors are measured.

In other words, if consumer preferences are ambig-
uous, consumers may view the pioneer’s product as
the category standard, thus further enhancing its rep-
utation. A ﬁrm with a perceived high RPI conceivably
shapes consumer perceptions through signals and re-
investment in a manner similar to market pioneers. If
a ﬁrm consistently and successfully introduces new
products to the marketplace, a likely result is that the
relevance (i.e., consumer involvement) of that ﬁrm
increases for consumers. With an increase in personal
relevance arguably comes a more favorable predispo-
sition toward the ﬁrm. A natural outcome of a height-
ened consumer disposition may be a more positive, or
heightened, image of the innovative ﬁrm.

Paying a Price Premium. The signal of a high RPI
is logically an attempt by a ﬁrm to differentiate it from
competitors and to engage consumer involvement lev-
els via an object of interest factor (Zaichkowsky,
1986). The ability to charge a price premium is argu-
ably a strategic goal of the differentiation effort. The
view that a high consumer-perceived RPI leads to
greater consumer willingness to pay a price premium
to competitive offerings ﬁnds some support in the lit-
erature in that ﬁrms that move beyond mere satisfac-
tion and subsequently delight or excite consumers can
command a price premium to competition (Cameron

and Whetten, 1983; Taher, Leigh, and French, 1996).
An interesting perspective in the pricing literature is
that ﬁrms often treat consumer pricing decisions as a
technical problem that must be dealt with rather than
a creative marketing challenge to be met with insight
into consumer motivations (Nagle, 1983, 1984).

More highly involved individuals have, by deﬁni-
tion, a positive predisposition toward a ﬁrm (Mueh-
ling, Laczniak, and Andrews, 1993). This positive
predisposition, arguably brought about after ﬁrm–
consumer interactions over time, may allow ﬁrms to
command a reasonable price premium to competitors
that fail to induce equally high involvement levels
(Cameron and Whetten, 1983; Taher et al., 1996). An
arguable consequence of greater involvement levels is
a reduction in price sensitivity derived from an inher-
ent increase in positive bias toward the innovative
ﬁrm. Research indicates that consumers have rela-
tively low internal price reference knowledge (Zeit-
haml, 1988) and spend little
cognitively
processing price points or comparing prices of alter-
native brands (Dickson and Sawyer, 1990). This view
implies that consumers may be conditioned to favor
certain products regardless of price. Thus, ﬁrms that
are of greater relevance to an individual should help
to reduce consumer comparison-seeking behavior.

time

Loyalty to the Firm. Fishbein (1963) states that
consumer attitudes are automatically learned as one
learns about a new product and that this learning oc-
curs in the form of beliefs about product attributes.
The resulting consumer attitude can be deﬁned, there-
fore, as a learned disposition to respond in a consis-
tently favorable or unfavorable manner (Fishbein and
Ajzen, 1975). It is the inclusion of the term consis-
tently that may makes research on attitude relevant to
explicating the view that an innovative reputation
leads to consumer loyalty. To maintain a high RPI
image, ﬁrms will reinvest in activities that promote
that reputation. As consumers experience a string of
successful introductions, they may view the ﬁrm as a
reliable source of product satisfaction. If the ﬁrm be-
comes more relevant to a consumer, heightened ﬁrm
loyalty is a plausible outcome.

Dick and Basu (1994) gauge customer loyalty as the
strength of the relationship between an individual’s
relative attitude and the degree of repeat patronage.
The stronger a consumer’s relative attitude toward a
ﬁrm, the less likely the consumer is to be swayed by
appeals from competitive ﬁrms (Assael and Kamins,
1989; Petty et al., 1983) and the more inclined they are


326

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2010;27:321–335

D.H. HENARD AND P.A. DACIN

to engage in a longer-term relationship with that ﬁrm.
This view of loyalty as the positive outcome of atti-
tude ﬁts well with the belief that consumer involve-
ment level mediates the RPI–loyalty relationship. The
relationship marketing literature offers further sup-
port for the belief that loyalty may be an ultimate
consequence of an innovative reputation. A funda-
mental axiom of consumer–ﬁrm relationships is that
consumers like to reduce choices by engaging in an
ongoing loyalty relationship with marketers (Sheth
and Parvatiyar, 1995). The assumption in this deﬁni-
tion is that consumers want to simplify their buying
and consuming tasks, simplify their cognitive process-
ing tasks, and reduce their perceived risks in an at-
tempt to maintain cognitive consistency. A history of
successful reinvestment in the high RPI signal and the
implicit promise of future innovation may aid in this
simpliﬁcation and lead to greater consumer loyalty.

that

Tolerance for Failure. Woodruff, Cadotte, and
Jenkins (1983) suggest that consumers may use experi-
ence-based norms as a standard for comparing between
product performance expectations and actual product
performance. Under such a model, expectations of
product performance are based on a consumer’s expe-
rience with a class of products or brands (Yi, 1990). This
experience occurs via interaction with a ﬁrm over time in
the same manner that a corporate reputation for inno-
vation develops. Hence, the same signaling and rein-
vestment experiences
lead to the individual
perceptions of a ﬁrm’s RPI and subsequent involvement
level may also shape individual expectations or attitudes
via an institutionalization process. Cadotte, Woodruff,
and Jenkins (1987) test the experience-based model and
ﬁnd that an individual’s comparison standards are based
on their overall experiences with the brand being eval-
uated and with related brands over time. In essence, in-
dividuals develop an attitude toward a ﬁrm after
repeated experience with that ﬁrm and its competitors.
Along these lines, consumers are posited to have ‘‘zones
of indifference’’ regarding product performance evalua-
tions (Miller, 1979; Woodruff et al.). When product
performance falls within the zone, consumer product
assessments are relatively positive. Given the knowledge
that highly involved individuals are positively predis-
posed to a ﬁrm (Muehling et al., 1993; Petty and Ca-
cioppo, 1981; Petty et al., 1983), they should intuitively
have relatively wider zones of indifference and thus have
a wider zone of acceptable performance for a high RPI
ﬁrm to psychologically engage. In essence, these con-
sumers are less likely to be dissatisﬁed with an occa-

sional product failure from a ﬁrm to which they have a
relatively high personal relevance.

Consumer assessment, modeled as the discrepancy
between performance and some standard of expectation
(see Oliver, 1980), implies that the overall assessment
may differ if different standards are being used—as is
likely given the heterogeneity of the consumer popula-
tion. For the failure tolerance assumption to be accu-
rate within an experience-based model of assessment,
the implication is that a reputation for product inno-
vation shapes consumer perceptions via involvement
level. While expectations of performance from product
initiatives of the innovative ﬁrm may intuitively rise
over time, a history of successful product innovation
and the promise of subsequent innovation may buffer
the normally negative impact of an occasional market
failure that results when actual performance falls short
of expectations. This buffering is presumed to be an
outcome of a relatively wider personal zone of indiffer-
ence for the more innovative ﬁrm.

The model hypotheses are summarized in Table 1.
In the following section, the methodology used in this
study is outlined. The results are subsequently re-
ported and followed with a discussion of those results.

Methodology

Methodological Domain

The choice of a product class and subsequent manu-
facturing ﬁrms used in the empirical investigation of
the consumer-related outcomes was important. The

Table 1. Consumer Impact Model Hypothesesa

Number Hypothesis

H1

H2

H3

H4

H5

Consumer involvement mediates the positive
relationship between consumer perceptions of a ﬁrm’s
RPI and consumer excitement toward the ﬁrm.
Consumer involvement mediates the positive
relationship between consumer perceptions of a ﬁrm’s
RPI and a consumer’s overall image of the ﬁrm.
Consumer involvement mediates the positive
relationship between consumer perceptions of a ﬁrm’s
RPI and consumer propensity to pay price premiums.
Consumer involvement mediates the positive
relationship between consumer perceptions of a ﬁrm’s
RPI and consumer loyalty to the ﬁrm.
Consumer involvement mediates the positive relationship
between consumer perceptions of a ﬁrm’s RPI and
consumer tolerance for occasional product failure.

a RPI, reputation for product innovation.


REPUTATION FOR PRODUCT INNOVATION: ITS IMPACT ON CONSUMERS

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2010;27:321–335

327

ﬁrms used must have a variance regarding consumer
perceptions of their RPI yet also have a relatively
narrow product base. The variance in RPI perceptions
is necessary to elicit statistical variance in the study.
An industry that contains multiple ﬁrms capable of
eliciting perceptual variance is also a prerequisite.
Likewise, the product class should be readily know-
able by consumers and of sufﬁciently narrow focus so
that the measure of interest is an object of consumer
focus. A narrow product line eliminates some of the
variance in individual perceptions of a ﬁrm and allows
subjects to focus more closely on the measures of in-
terest. A more focused product line permits subjects
to focus on perceptions of a ﬁrm’s RPI instead of on
myriad potential product-level confounds.

Two consumer pretests were administered to elicit
unaided recollections of ﬁrms with relatively high,
medium, and low reputations for product innovation.
Business school student subjects (n 5 120) were asked
to indicate three ﬁrms (from any industry) with a
‘‘strong reputation,’’ three with a ‘‘moderate reputa-
tion,’’ and three with a ‘‘weak reputation’’ for product
innovation. While student subjects were not the ulti-
mate target population, they are familiar with many
product classes germane to this research and were
deemed appropriate for scale pretesting purposes. The
unaided responses resulted in a list of several potential
ﬁrms from predominantly three industries: consumer
food products, computer software/hardware, and auto-
mobiles. Automobile manufacturers were ultimately
chosen as the industry domain for this study. Automo-
bile manufacturing ﬁrms are generally well known to an
adult subject population, provide a range of perceptions
as to the innovativeness of automotive products, and
allow for a relatively focused product line. While other
industries and product classes arose as alternatives to the
automobile industry, an overlap of product lines (e.g.,
Hewlett-Packard), a blurring of personnel and corporate
reputations (e.g., Dell, Microsoft), or a lack of variance
in manufacturers within an industry (e.g., Coca-Cola,
Pepsi Cola) left automobiles as the best alternative.

The goal in the choice of speciﬁc automobile man-
ufacturers in this study was to capture ﬁrms with a
range of consistent consumer RPI perceptions (i.e.,
high, medium, and low). This was necessary to avoid
any bias that might result from erroneously choosing an
individual ﬁrm that rests at either end of the RPI con-
tinuum. After pretesting numerous automobile ﬁrms on
their RPI scores (n 5 412), three ﬁrms were selected as
the manufacturers with statistically distinct (p  .05)
RPI scores that also spanned the high/medium/low

spectrum of reputation perceptions. While the individ-
ual ﬁrms are not as important to the ﬁndings as the
consumer perceptions of the ﬁrm’s product innovative-
ness, care was taken to avoid any skew in manufacturer
perceptions and to provide subjects with ﬁrms most
likely to elicit a broad range of perceptions.

Scale Development

Scale development for the consumer constituency model
follows established statistical paradigms. Whereas scales
for some model variables exist, others required modiﬁ-
cation, and still others were originally developed for this
study. For each of the study’s scales, the procedure of
specifying the domain of each construct, generating
scale items, collecting data from an appropriate subject
pool, and engaging in iterative scale puriﬁcation and
further data collection was used. The development of
each scale used in this study is discussed next.

Reputation for Product Innovation. Since no scales
for RPI or related constructs exist, RPI scale items
were developed using executive interviews, the rele-
vant literature, and small consumer focus group input
as a guide. A 20-item scale was initially developed.
This scale was pretested with 62 nonstudent adult
subjects to derive a more concise and parsimonious
RPI scale. Ultimately, a seven-item Likert-type sum-
mated rating scale was constructed to measure a ﬁrm’s
reputation for product innovation. All study scales
appear in Appendix A. There is some evidence that
various facets of corporate reputation are correlated
and may potentially represent a single, latent con-
struct (see Fryxell and Wang, 1994; Rowe, Cannella,
and Harris, 1998). Thus, a concern in developing and
testing the RPI scale was that the effects attributed to
a ﬁrm’s reputation for product innovation not be con-
founded with other facets of corporate reputation.

A conﬁrmatory factor analysis was conducted to
determine the discriminant validity of the RPI scale.
In addition to the RPI scale, items measuring other
key facets of reputation—as determined from a review
of the literature—were measured. The other facets
measured were ﬁrm reputations for quality, value, so-
cial responsibility, and pricing aggressiveness in addi-
tion to an overall general corporate reputation. These
facets of reputation are the subjects of existing
empirical investigation and represent facets of repu-
tation that are both prominent and a potential
source of confound for the RPI scale. Principle com-
ponents extraction with varimax rotation and Kaiser


328

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2010;27:321–335

D.H. HENARD AND P.A. DACIN

normalization was performed. The results indicate
that a ﬁrm’s RPI, as measured by the seven-item
scale, loads on a single component. Further, no other
facets of reputation load on the same component in-
dicating that the RPI measure is operationally pure.

Involvement. Consumer involvement with the ﬁrm
was measured using the Zaichkowsky (1994) Personal
Involvement Inventory (PII) scale, which was originally
developed to measure the personal relevance levels that
individuals hold toward a product. The 10-item sum-
mated rating scale was employed virtually unchanged
from its original structure. The only change to the
original scale is that the point of reference in this study
is a ﬁrm versus the original Zaichkowsky reference to
a product. The scale was pretested using automotive
manufacturers as the point of reference. Subjects in this
and subsequent scale development discussions were
business school students (n 5 86). The reliability coefﬁ-
cient for the pretest was .94.

Excitement toward the Firm. A seven-item Likert-
type summated rating scale was developed to measure
the excitement that consumers have toward a ﬁrm.
Mano and Oliver’s (1993) scale, originally designed to
measure the dimensionality of the consumption expe-
rience for consumers, was leveraged to develop a scale
to capture the excitement level that consumers have
toward a ﬁrm. Some items from the original scale
were not included because they were deemed to be
nongermane to the excitement toward the ﬁrm do-
main (see Churchill, 1979).

Overall Firm Image. A ﬁve-item semantic differen-
tial scale was used to measure consumer perceptions
of a ﬁrm’s overall or general image. Mishra, Umesh,
and Stern’s (1993) four-item scale—developed to mea-
sure the degree of perceived popularity that a speciﬁed
brand has among consumers—was used in its original
form, except for one modiﬁcation: one new item an-
chored with ‘‘weak image’’ and ‘‘strong image.’’ This
item was added because it directly assesses a con-
sumer’s perception of overall ﬁrm image. Addition-
ally, the locus of investigation for the scale is a ﬁrm as
opposed to a brand.

Propensity to Pay Price Premiums. This scale was
developed using Lichtenstein, Ridgeway, and Netem-
eyer’s (1993) and Srinivasan and Ratchford’s (1991)
scales as guides. A domain-oriented goal in the devel-
opment of this scale was to capture a consumer’s

degree of price consciousness and intention to ‘‘shop
around’’ for lower prices. Both scales examined the
external search and shopping behavior of consumers
when faced with a purchase decision. Lichtenstein et
al.’s measure captures a consumer’s willingness to ex-
pend time and energy to purchase grocery items at the
lowest prices. Srinivasan and Ratchford’s measure
captures the time, energy, and effort a consumer ex-
pends on the information search process before buy-
ing an automobile. Using these two scales as guides,
six statements were developed to capture the propen-
sity to pay a premium for an automobile purchase.

Loyalty to the Firm. A six-item Likert-type sum-
mated rating scale was derived using Raju’s (1980)
and Beatty and Kahle’s (1988) scales as sources for
scale items. The former measures the degree to which
a person reports being loyalty prone for a variety of
product categories, and the latter captures the degree
to which a person expresses loyalty to a brand. De-
veloped from the two prototype scales, the scale items
were reworded to be more in accord with the focus of
the current investigation. Some items from the exist-
ing scales were not used because they were deemed not
applicable to the automobile product class under in-
vestigation in this study.

Tolerance for Occasional Failure. A seven-item
scale was developed to measure a consumer’s tolerance
for occasional product defects from a given ﬁrm. With
no extant scale basis for item development, initial items
were developed via extended deliberation and referral
to customer satisfaction literature. The objective of this
scale was to capture consumers’ attitude toward minor
defects that might be associated with an automobile
purchase—speciﬁcally, their attitude toward the manu-
facturer. In light of this, seven scale items were devel-
oped and eventually retained in the measure.

Subjects and Procedure

A total of 273 adults were the subjects in this study.
Four surveys were deemed unusable because of in-
complete answers, resulting in a ﬁnal n 5 269 (98.5%
inclusion). By design, six different survey booklets
(three manufacturers  two presentation orders)
were randomly distributed to subjects. Each subject
received a booklet containing the independent and
dependent measures. The ﬁrst page of the booklet
contained general instructions and explained that the


REPUTATION FOR PRODUCT INNOVATION: ITS IMPACT ON CONSUMERS

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2010;27:321–335

329

consumer study examined an automobile manufac-
turer and that subjects would be expected to provide
certain opinions and perceptions regarding that ﬁrm.
Subjects then reviewed a short description of the au-
tomobile manufacturer. This description was consis-
tent across manufacturers with only the differing
name of the three manufacturers distinguishing the
descriptions. Subjects were then instructed to com-
plete the survey measures. As a precaution to mitigate
any effects of common response bias, the order of
presentation of the RPI scale balanced between the
ﬁrst and last scale completed by the subjects, follow-
ing the suggestions of Podsakoff and Organ (1986).
The order of the remaining measures was consistent
across survey booklets.

Consumer involvement is hypothesized to mediate
the relationship between RPI and the proposed con-
sumer outcomes. In essence, the effect of RPI on con-
sumer outcomes (H1 through H5; see Table 1) is
proposed as an indirect effect with involvement serv-
ing as an intermediary variable. Regression is the sta-
tistical method chosen to analyze the relationship
between a ﬁrm’s perceived reputation for product in-
novation, consumer involvement level, and the subse-
quent consumer outcomes detailed in Figure 1. The
mediation of involvement is tested by using a series of
three regression equations (see Table 2) as prescribed
by Baron and Kenny (1986) whereby the predictor
variable (i.e., RPI) is regressed on the mediator vari-
able (i.e., involvement) in equation 1, the predictor
variable is regressed on the criterion variable (e.g.,
excitement toward the ﬁrm) in equation 2, and both
the predictor and mediator variable are regressed on
the criterion variable in equation 3.

To establish mediation, three conditions must be
met: (1) the predictor variable must impact the media-
tor variable in equation 1; (2) the predictor variable
must impact the criterion variable in equation 2; and (3)
the mediator must impact the criterion variable in equa-
tion 3. Perfect mediation is supported if the predictor
variable’s impact in equation 3 has no statistically sig-
niﬁcant effect when the mediator is controlled (Baron
and Kenny, 1986). If this statistical condition holds in
the results, it indicates that an RPI impacts only the
outcomes through the indirect effect of consumer in-
volvement level. Partial mediation is supported if the
beta value for the predictor variable in equation 3 is less
than its beta value in equation 2. If this statistical con-
dition holds in the results, it indicates that, while RPI
impacts consumer outcomes via the mediation of the
involvement construct, other variables may also inﬂu-

Table 2. Regression Results for the Consumer Impact
Model

Model Equation

b

Std. Error VIF

H1a

1. RPI ! Involvement
2. RPI ! Excitement Toward Firm
3. RPI ! Excitement Toward Firm

Involvement ! Excitement Toward
Firm

H2

1. RPI ! Involvement
2. RPI ! Firm Image
3. RPI ! Firm Image

Involvement ! Firm Image

.63
.66
.42
.38

.63
.69
.50
.30

H3

1. RPI ! Involvement
.63
2. RPI ! Propensity to Pay Premiums   .33
3. RPI ! Propensity to Pay Premiums   .20
  .21

Involvement ! Propensity to Pay
Premiums

1. RPI ! Involvement
2. RPI ! Firm Loyalty
3. RPI ! Firm Loyalty

Involvement ! Firm Loyalty

H4

H5

1. RPI ! Involvement
2. RPI ! Tolerance for Failure
3. RPI ! Tolerance for Failure

Involvement ! Tolerance for Failure

.63
.57
.34
.36

.63
.54
.39
.24

.06
.04
.04
.03

.06
.04
.04
.04

.06
.03
.04
.03

.06
.04
.04
.03

.06
.04
.05
.04

1.00
1.00
1.67
1.67

1.00
1.00
1.67
1.67

1.00
1.00
1.67
1.67

1.00
1.00
1.67
1.64

1.00
1.00
1.67
1.67

 p  .05, df 5 268.

ence the relationship. Findings of partial mediation
would conﬁrm the hypotheses but also suggest that
the search for additional factors is warranted.

Results

Table 2 combines the regression results for each of the
hypotheses. It is clear from Table 2 that involvement
mediates the relationship between RPI and consumer
excitement levels. H1 equation 1 shows the statisti-
cally signiﬁcant relationship between RPI and in-
volvement (p  .05). Equation 2 likewise indicates
that RPI has a signiﬁcant main effect impact on con-
sumer excitement levels (p  .05). Finally, regression
equation 3 denotes the statistically signiﬁcant rela-
tionship between involvement and consumer excite-
ment, cumulatively fulﬁlling each of the prerequisites
to establish the mediation of consumer involvement
and supporting H1. Adjusted R2 results for H1 mod-
els 1–3 are .40, .43, and .52, respectively.

Table 2 highlights the statistical relationships among
RPI, consumer involvement, and the positive overall


330

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2010;27:321–335

D.H. HENARD AND P.A. DACIN

image of the ﬁrm across all subjects and provides sta-
tistical support for H2. The relationship between RPI
and involvement is statistically signiﬁcant (p  .05) as is
the main effect of RPI on ﬁrm image (p  .05) as noted
in model equations 1 and 2, respectively. Equation 3,
denoting the relationship between predictors RPI and
involvement and ﬁrm image, shows that involvement
mediates the relationship between RPI and overall ﬁrm
image. Adjusted R2 results for H2 models 1–3 are .40,
.47, and .52, respectively.

The third hypothesis, proposing that consumer in-
volvement mediates the relationship between RPI and
consumer propensity to pay a price premium for a
ﬁrm’s product, is not supported by these data. While
RPI signiﬁcantly impacts involvement (p  .05), the
hypothesized positive relationship between RPI and
propensity to pay price premiums is not supported in
model equation 2. The results detailed in equation 3
further fail to support the proposed relationships. The
results provide statistical support for H4. Model equa-
tion 1 for H4 shows the statistically signiﬁcant impact
of RPI on involvement. Equation 2 denotes the signiﬁ-
cant
relationship between RPI and ﬁrm loyalty
(p  .05), whereas the relationship of involvement on
loyalty to the ﬁrm is supported in equation 3 (p  .05).
Therefore, the mediation of involvement between RPI
and ﬁrm loyalty is afﬁrmed. Adjusted R2 results for H4
models 1–3 are .40, .32, and .39, respectively.

The ﬁnal hypothesis, H5, which states that involve-
ment mediates the relationship between RPI and con-
sumer tolerance for an occasional product failure, is
likewise supported by these data. The impact of RPI on
involvement noted in H5 model equation 1 is signiﬁcant
(p  .05) as is the main effect of RPI on the criterion
variable (p  .05) detailed in equation 2. The effect of
involvement on consumer tolerance for failure shown
in equation 3 is also statistically supported (p  .05).
the empirical evidence supports the
Cumulatively,
hypothesis that consumer involvement mediates the
relationship between RPI and consumer tolerance
for an occasional product failure. Adjusted R2 results
for H5 models 1–3 are .40, .29, and .32, respectively.

Discussion

In total, four of the ﬁve hypotheses forwarded are
supported by these data. Consumers’ perceptions of a
ﬁrm’s RPI directly and positively impact consumer
involvement levels. The resulting consumer involve-
ment level affects consumer perceptions and actions in

a variety of ways. For one, results indicate that
consumers exhibit greater levels of excitement toward
the innovative ﬁrm. This excitement arises from the
presence of high levels of involvement and may lead
to a predisposition toward consumer satisfaction. In
essence, consumer involvement level—a direct conse-
quence of consumer perceptions of a ﬁrm’s RPI—may
seed the expectation of satisfaction even before prod-
uct consumption. The resulting excitement toward the
ﬁrm is also likely to motivate consumers to seek out
other product offerings of the ﬁrm and to eagerly
anticipate any subsequent new product offerings. In
essence, consumer-perceived RPI positively shapes
consumer attitudes and behavior by inﬂuencing con-
sumer involvement levels.

In addition to generating excitement toward the
ﬁrm and its products, a positive RPI leads to an
enhancement of the general image of the ﬁrm. By
directly inﬂuencing consumer involvement levels, in-
novative ﬁrms may be better able to position them-
selves and their products as the ideal reference point
within the minds of consumers. As consumers become
psychologically engaged by the activities of the inno-
vating ﬁrm, their overall perceptions of the ﬁrm are
enhanced. Additionally, the empirical results indicate
that consumer-perceived RPI, acting through its in-
ﬂuence on consumer involvement levels, heightens
consumer loyalty toward the ﬁrm and its products.
Often, loyal consumers are less apt to purchase prod-
ucts from competitive companies and usually remain
loyal over an extended period of time.

The hypothesis predicting consumer tolerance for
an occasional product failure from a ﬁrm with a pos-
itive consumer-perceived RPI is also supported by the
data. The interesting effect noted in this study is that
consumers are more tolerant of product failures from
the relatively more innovative ﬁrms. The implication
is that a positive consumer-perceived RPI may ulti-
mately act as a competitive tool by shaping consumer
expectations for all competitors within an industry.
As consumers perceive a history of ﬁrm innovative-
ness, expectations for products from the innovative
ﬁrm and its competitors will arguably rise. However,
as expectations rise for all ﬁrms, ﬁrms with a relatively
lower consumer-perceived RPI are not recipients of
the same tolerance for product failure.

It is hypothesized that a reputation for product in-
novation leads to the ability to command a price pre-
mium versus competitors (H3). Results from these
data indicate that perceptions of a positive RPI do not
ultimately reduce consumer price sensitivity. In fact,


REPUTATION FOR PRODUCT INNOVATION: ITS IMPACT ON CONSUMERS

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2010;27:321–335

331

the relationship investigated using the automobile
product category shows a statistically signiﬁcant neg-
ative relationship between both RPI and involvement
and the propensity to pay price premiums. One logical
reason for this contradictory ﬁnding is that the pur-
chase of automobiles (i.e., a relatively high-cost prod-
uct) automatically lends itself
to consumer price
shopping regardless of consumer’s perceptions of the
manufacturers’ RPI or the consumer’s relative in-
volvement level toward that ﬁrm.

Post hoc, one might still expect the hypothesis to be
substantiated in a relatively lower cost product cate-
gory. This possibility was explored in a follow-up sur-
vey using clothing as a product class. Clothing was
chosen because it is a product category of which every
consumer is aware and one with a moderate pricing
range relative to automobiles and other staple items.
The statistical mediation of involvement between con-
sumer perceptions of ﬁrm RPI and propensity to pay
price premiums is not supported in a lower-cost cloth-
ing category either. However, the impact of involve-
ment on the propensity to pay premiums is positive
and statistically signiﬁcant in the clothing setting.
These results may indicate that consumer perceptions
of RPI apparently do not inﬂuence consumer price
elasticity, whereas personal relevance does.

impacts that a ﬁrm’s RPI may have and can serve as a
guide in subsequent innovation scale development
efforts. Thus, development of the RPI scale is a ﬁrst
step in measuring distinct facets of corporate reputa-
tion that are not confounded by a measure of the
ﬁrm’s general reputation.

The investigation of the outcomes of a corporate
reputation for product innovation is motivated by a
desire to broaden the horizon for innovation research
and to introduce new strategic decision variables to
managers. It addresses academic acknowledgments of
gaps in our knowledge of the impact of reputation on
key constituencies of the ﬁrm and is a step toward a
better understanding of the differing perceptions that
individuals have toward ﬁrms and the products they
produce. On one level, this research contributes to the
innovation literature by expanding areas of research
potential and answering standing calls to critically re-
think how researchers approach the study of innova-
tion (Wind and Mahajan, 1997). The proposed model
and empirical ﬁndings of this research will hopefully
introduce a broader perspective for approaching in-
novation research issues. It subsequently responds to
the noted dearth in the literature regarding the impact
of reputation on key corporate constituencies by in-
vestigating the impact of a reputation for product in-
novation on consumers.

Contributions and Implications

Limitations and Future Research

On a general level, this research recognizes that ﬁrms
compete for competitive advantage via their tangible
and intangible resources. Much of the innovation lit-
erature centers on the tangible impact that new prod-
uct development initiatives have on outcomes of
innovation. Yet research investigations of the less
tangible facets of innovation, such as RPI, remain
relatively uninvestigated despite their promise as a
source of sustainable competitive advantage. This re-
search contributes to the literature several ways. First,
the principles of signaling theory are applied to an
innovation context. Signaling theory is used in the lit-
erature to investigate how ﬁrms can use signals such
as price, brand name, product features, or warranties
to inﬂuence consumer perceptions. In this research, an
initial investigation of potential outcomes of being
perceived as a new product innovator is undertaken to
assess if there is strategic value in signaling a reputa-
tion for product innovation to consumers. Developing
an empirical scale for this context-speciﬁc facet of ﬁrm
reputation allows future researchers to assess other

This research focuses empirically on consumer percep-
tions of the innovative reputation of automobile man-
ufacturers. While there is no theoretical indication that
these results will not extend to a broader subject or
product class population, the generalizability of the
ﬁndings might be limited to the consumer constituency
and the automotive product category. While this model
of a ﬁrm’s RPI advances hypotheses for the consumer
constituency, hypotheses for additional constituents
(e.g., employees, competitors, governmental regula-
tors) remain open to investigation. Deeper investiga-
tion into one or more of the constituency group effects
is one possible avenue of approach for the interested
researcher. Further inquiry of the consumer constitu-
ency effects is also encouraged. For example, the de-
velopment of another measure of consumer propensity
to pay price premiums may provide insight into the
lack of signiﬁcant results found in this study. A more
precise understanding of this proposed relationship
holds signiﬁcance for managers responsible for the in-
troduction of new products.


332

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2010;27:321–335

D.H. HENARD AND P.A. DACIN

An explication of the interrelationships among var-
ious constituents would be worthwhile. For example,
a better understanding of how employee interaction
with consumers affects consumer perceptions of a
ﬁrm’s reputation is beneﬁcial to many organizations,
notably service-oriented ﬁrms. A positive relationship
between the two would indicate a need for ﬁrms to
train front-line employees on how to effectively inter-
act with consumers to maximize consumer perception
of a ﬁrm’s RPI. Research into the impact that co-in-
novation or partnerships between a ﬁrm and its sup-
plier has on consumer perceptions would likewise
yield valuable practical insights. Given the degree of
commitment associated with such arrangements, a
better understanding of this hypothesized outcome
would help managers to assess the cost-beneﬁt rela-
tionship of pursuing such partnerships.

Given the rising importance of the capital market
in modern strategic business decisions, the interaction
effects between ﬁnancial analysts of other ﬁrm con-
stituencies (e.g., suppliers, consumers) and their sub-
sequent impact on market valuation would prove
valuable. There are also obvious beneﬁts that emerge
from the study of innovation in the relatively unex-
plored channels or ﬁnancial market contexts. For in-
stance, uncovering the relationship between the
degree of ﬁrm-analyst interaction and subsequent
stock opinions could guide senior managers as to
the appropriate degree of interaction with market an-
alysts. A research investigation of the impact that a
supplier–ﬁrm partnership, or joint venture, has on
both analyst opinion and market capitalization would
provide key insight into the overall value of partner-
ing (from a capital market perspective) and the im-
portance of choosing a partner with an appropriately
perceived reputation. An investigation of the compat-
ibility (or lack of) of perceived reputations between
ﬁrms’ partners and the impact of these perceptions on
certain constituencies might also prove insightful and
assist in the selection of channel partners.

A deeper understanding of how RPI impacts atti-
tude formation, product expectations, and emotional
responses would prove beneﬁcial to both consumer
behavior and consumer satisfaction researchers alike.
By understanding the impact a reputation may have,
managers could then begin to investigate how to sig-
nal an appropriate reputation to achieve a desired
constituency response. Likewise, a deeper investiga-
tion of innovation effects can be applied to other re-
search areas
such as organizational behavior,
organizational learning, competitive advantage, and

market orientation just as knowledge from other areas
and disciplines can augment our knowledge of inno-
vation.

Empirical ﬁndings and theoretical hypotheses illus-
trate that innovation research has applications to sev-
eral discipline’s literature streams. For
instance,
innovation antecedents and outcomes impact the lit-
erature on consumer behavior, organizational behav-
ior, ﬁnancial management, operational strategy, and
human resource management, to name a few. The
ﬁndings in this study point to the impact a perceived
reputation for product innovation can have in em-
ployee attraction and retention as well as its role is
attitude formation, among other effects. Thus, inno-
vation research has the potential to augment academic
knowledge across an array of disciplines because the
effects of innovation initiatives impacts not only con-
sumers but also employees, senior managers, ﬁnancial
analysts, and competitors.

References

Aaker, D.A. (1989). Managing Assets and Skills: The Key to a Sus-
tainable Competitive Advantage. California Management Review
31(2):91–106 (Winter).

Assael, H. and Kamins, M.A. (1989). Effects of Appeal Type and In-
volvement on Product Disconﬁrmation: A Cognitive Response Ap-
proach through Product Trial. Journal of the Academy of Marketing
Science 17(3):197–207.

Avolonitis, G.J., Kouremenos, A., and Tzokas, N. (1994). Assessing
the Innovativeness of Organizations and Its Antecedents: Project
Innovstrat. European Journal of Marketing 28(11):5–28.

Bagozzi, R.P., Baumgartner, H., and Yi, Y. (1992). State versus Action
Orientation and the Theory of Reasoned Action: An Application to
Coupon Usage. Journal of Consumer Research 18:505–18 (March).

Baron, R.M. and Kenny, D.A. (1986). The Moderator-Mediator Vari-
able Distinction in Social Psychological Research: Conceptual,
Strategic, and Statistical Considerations. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 51(6):1173–82.

Beatty, S.E. and Kahle, L.R. (1988). Alternative Hierarchies of the
Attitude-Behavior Relationsip: The Impact of Brand Commitment-
and Habit. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 16:1–10
(Summer).

Berger, P.L. and Luckmann, T. (1966). The Social Construction of Re-

ality. New York: Doubleday & Company, Inc.

Bloch, P.H. and Richins, M.L. (1983). A Theoretical Model for the
Study of Product Importance Perceptions. Journal of Marketing
47:69–81 (Summer).

Brown, T.J. and Dacin, P.A. (1997). The Company and the Product:
Corporate Associations and Consumer Product Responses. Journal
of Marketing 61:68–84 (January).

Cadotte, E.R., Woodruff, R.B., and Jenkins, R.L. (1987). Expectations
and Norms in Models of Consumer Satisfaction. Journal of Mar-
keting Research 14:305–14 (August).

Cameron, K.S. and Whetten, D.A. (1983). Organizational Effectiveness:

A Comparison of Multiple Models. New York: Academic Press.

Carpenter, G.S. and Nakamoto, K. (1989). Consumer Preference For-
mation and Pioneering Advantage. Journal of Marketing Research
26:285–98 (August).


REPUTATION FOR PRODUCT INNOVATION: ITS IMPACT ON CONSUMERS

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2010;27:321–335

333

Celsi, R.L. and Olson, J.C. (1988). The Role of Involvement in Atten-
tion and Comprehension Processes. Journal of Consumer Research
15:210–24 (September).

Mishra, S., Umesh, U.N., and Stern, D.E. (1993). Antecendents of the
Attraction Effect: An Information-Processing Approach. Journal of
Marketing Research 30:331–49 (August).

Churchill Jr., G.A. (1979). A Paradigm for Developing Better Mea-
sures of Marketing Constructs. Journal of Marketing Research
16:64–73 (February).

Muehling, D.D., Laczniak, R.N., and Andrews, J.C. (1993). Deﬁning,
Operationalizing, and Using Involvements in Advertising Research:
A Review. Journal of Current Issues in Advertising 15(1):21–57.

Deming, W.E. (1986). Out of the Crisis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Center

Nagle, T. (1984). Economic Foundations for Pricing. Journal of Busi-

for Advanced Engineering Study.

ness 57(12):3–26.

Dick, A.S. and Basu, K. (1994). Customer Loyalty: Toward an Inte-
grated Conceptual Framework. Journal of the Academy of Market-
ing Science 22(2):99–113.

Nagle, T. (1983). Pricing as Creative Marketing. Business Horizons

July–August:14–19.

Nelson, P. (1974). Advertising as Information. Journal of Political

Dickson, P.R. and Sawyer, A.G. (1990). The Price Knowledge and Search

Economy 81(4):729–54.

of Supermarket Shoppers. Journal of Marketing 54:42–53 (July).

Donlon, J.P. (1998). What’s Your Company’s Reputation? Chief

Executive July/August.

Dowling, G.R. (1986). Managing Your Corporate Images. Industrial

Marketing Management 15:109–15.

Dutton, J.E., Dukerich, J.M., and Harquail, C.V. (1994). Organiza-
tional Images and Member Identiﬁcation. Administrative Science
Quarterly 39:239–63 (June).

Farrell, J. and Saloner, G. (1986). Installed Base and Compatibility:
Innovation, Product Preannouncements, and Predation. American
Economic Review 76:940–55 (December).

Fishbein, M. (1963). An Investigation of the Relationship between
Beliefs about an Object and the Attitude toward That Object.
Human Relations 16:233–40.

Fishbein, M. and Ajzen, I. (1975). Beliefs, Attitude, Intentions, and
Behavior: An Introduction to Theory and Research. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley.

Fombrun, C. (1996). Reputation: Realizing Value from the Corporate

Image. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.

Fombrun, C. and Shanley, M. (1990). What’s in a Name? Reputation
Building and Corporate Strategy. Academy of Management Journal
33(2):233–58.

Freeman, R.E. (1984). Strategic Management: A Stakeholder Ap-

proach. Boston: Pitman Press.

Fryxell, G.E. and Wang, J. (1994). ‘‘The Fortune Corporate ‘‘Reputation’’

Index: Reputation for What? Journal of Management 20(1):1–14.

Gray, E.R. and Balmer, J.M.T. (1998). Managing Corporate Image

and Corporate Reputation. Long Range Planning 31(5):695–702.

Greenwald, A.G. and Leavitt, C. (1984). Audience Involvement in Ad-
vertising: Four Levels. Journal of Consumer Research 11:581–92 (June).

Hall, R. (1993). A Framework Linking Intangible Resources and
Capabilities to Sustainable Competitive Advantage. Strategic
Management Journal 14:607–18.

Hall, R. (1992). The Strategic Analysis of Intangible Resources.

Strategic Management Journal 13:135–44.

Henard, D.H. and Szymanski, D.M. (2001). Why Some New Products
Are More Successful Than Others. Journal of Marketing Research
38(3):362–75.

Kreps, D.M. and Wilson, R. (1982). Reputation and Imperfect Infor-

mation. Journal of Economic Theory 27(2):253–79.

Oliver, R.L. (1980). A Cognitive Model of the Antecedents and Con-
sequences of Satisfaction Decisions. Journal of Marketing Research
17:460–69 (November).

Oliver, R.L., Rust, R.T., and Varki, S. (1997). Customer Delight:
Foundations, Findings, and Managerial Insight. Journal of Retail-
ing 73(3):311–36.

Olson, J.C. (1977). Price as an Informational Cue: Effects on Product
Evaluations. In: Consumer and Industrial Buying Behavior, ed. A.
Woodside, J. Sheth, and P. Bennett. New York: Elsevier.

Park, C.W. and Young, S.M. (1986). Consumer Response to Television
Commercials: The Impact of Involvement and Background Music
on Brand Attitude Formation. Journal of Marketing Research
23:11–24 (February).

Petty, R.E. and Cacioppo, J.T. (1981). Attitudes and Persuasion: Classic

and Contemporary Approaches. Dubuque, IA: William C. Brown.

Petty, R.E., Cacioppo, J.T., and Schumann, D.T. (1983). Central and
Peripheral Routes to Advertising Effectiveness: The Moderating
Effect of Involvement. Journal of Consumer Research 10:135–46
(September).

Podsakoff, P.M. and Organ, D.W. (1986). Self-Reports in Organiza-
tional Research: Problems and Prospects. Journal of Management
12(4):531–44.

Raju, P.S. (1980). Optimum Stimulation Level: Its Relationship to
Personality, Demographics, and Exploratory Behavior. Journal of
Consumer Behavior 7:272–82 (December).

Rao, A.R. and Monroe, K.B. (1989). The Effect of Price, Brand Name,
and Store Name on Buyer’s Perceptions of Product Quality: An In-
tegrative Review. Journal of Marketing Research 26:351–57 (August).

Rao, A.R., Qu, L., and Ruekert, R.W. (1999). Signaling Unobservable
Product Quality through a Brand Ally. Journal of Marketing Re-
search 36:258–68 (May).

Rao, H. (1994). The Social Construction of Reputation: Certiﬁcation
Contests, Legitimization, and the Survival of Organizations in the
American Automobile Industry: 1895–1912. Strategic Management
Journal 15:29–44.

Robertson, T.S., Eliashberg, J., and Rymon, T. (1995). New Product
Announcement Signals and Incumbent Reactions. Journal of
Marketing 59:1–15 (July).

Rowe, W.G., Cannella Jr., A.A., and Harris, I.C. (1998). In Search of
Meaning: Is the Fortune Reputation Survey a Source of New Infor-
mation to Investors? College Station: Texas A&M University.

Lichtenstein, D.R., Ridgeway, N.M., and Netemeyer, R.G. (1993).
Price Perceptions and Consumer Shopping Behavior: A Field
Study. Journal of Marketing Research 30:234–45 (May).

Russo, M.V. and Fouts, P.A. (1997). A Resource-Based Perspective on
Corporate Environmental Performance and Proﬁtability. Academy
of Management Journal 40(3):534–59.

Mano, H. and Oliver, R.L. (1993). Assessing the Dimensionality of
Structure of the Consumption Experience: Evaluation, Feelings, and
Satisfaction. Journal of Consumer Research 20:451–66 (December).

Milgrom, P. and Roberts, J. (1982). Predation, Reputation, and Entry

Deterrence. Journal of Economic Theory 27(2):280–312.

Miller, J.A. (1979). Studying Satisfaction, Modifying Models, Eliciting
Expectations, Posing Problems, and Making Meaningful Measure-
ments. In: Conceptualization and Measurement of Consumer Satis-
faction and Dissatisfaction, ed. H.K. Hunt. Cambridge, MA:
Marketing Science Institute.

Schatzel, K.E., Calantone, R.J., and Droge, C. (2001). Beyond the
Firm’s Initial Declaration: Are Preannouncements of New Product
Introductions and Withdrawals Alike? Journal of Product Innova-
tion Management 18(2):82–95.

Sheth, J. and Parvatiyar, A. (1995). Relationship Marketing in Con-
sumer Markets: Antecedents and Consequences. Journal of the
Academy of Marketing Science 23(4):255–71.

Spence, A.M. (1974). Market Signaling: Informational Transfer in Hir-
ing and Related Screening Processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.


334

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2010;27:321–335

D.H. HENARD AND P.A. DACIN

Srinivasan, N. and Ratchford, B.T. (1991). An Empirical Test of an
External Search for Automobiles. Journal of Consumer Research
18:233–42 (September).

Taher, A., Leigh, T.W., and French, W.A. (1996). Augmented Retail
Services: The Lifetime Value of Affection. Journal of Business
Research 35:217–28.

Vandelo, M.T. (1998). Narrating Corporate Reputation: Becoming
Legitimate through Storytelling. International Studies of Manage-
ment & Organization 28(3):120–37.

Woodruff, R.B., Cadotte, E.R.,

(1983).
Modeling Consumer Satisfaction Processes Using Experience-
Based Norms. Journal of Marketing Research 20:296–304
(August).

and Jenkins, R.L.

Yi, Y. (Ed.) (1990). A Critical Review of Consumer Satisfaction. Chi-

cago: American Marketing Association.

Zaichkowsky, J.L. (1985). Measuring the Involvement Construct. Jour-

nal of Consumer Research 12:341–52 (December).

Zaichkowsky, J.L. (1986). Conceptualizing Involvement. Journal of

Vergin, R.C. and Qoronﬂeh, M.W. (1998). Corporate Reputation and

Advertising 15(2):4–14.

the Stock Market. Business Horizons January–February:19–26.

Weigelt, K. and Camerer, C. (1988). Reputation and Corporate
Strategy: A Review of Recent Theory and Applications. Strategic
Management Journal 9:443–54.

Wind, Y.J. and Mahajan, V. (1997). Issues and Opportunities in New
Product Development: An Introduction to the Special Issue. Jour-
nal of Marketing Research 34:1–12 (February).

Zaichkowsky, J.L.

(1994). The Personal Involvement Inventory:
Reduction, Revision, and Application to Advertising. Journal of
Advertising 33(4):59–70.

Zeithaml, V.A. (1988). Consumer Perceptions of Price, Quality, and
Value: A Means-End Model and Synthesis of Evidence. Journal of
Marketing 52:2–22 (July).

Appendix A. Consumer Impact Model Study Scales

Excitement toward ﬁrm (alpha 5 .97).

anchors ! strongly disagree . . .. . .. . .. . ... strongly agree
When I think about [company name], I feel:

1. enthusiastic
2. interested
3. excited
4. inspired
5. motivated

Firm image (alpha 5 .96).

Rate your perception of the image of [company name]:

Consumer loyalty (alpha 5 .78).

Propensity to pay price premiums (alpha 5 .78).

1. Not an industry leader. . . . . . . . . . . . . . Industry leader
2. Not at all popular. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Very popular
3. Not widely accepted. . . . . . . . . ; . . . . . . . Widely accepted
4. Few like it. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .Many like it
5. Weak image. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Strong image
anchors ! strongly disagree . . .. . .. . .. . ... strongly agree
If I were to consider purchasing an automobile from [company name]:
1. I would shop at more than one dealership to seek out low [company name] prices
2. The money saved by ﬁnding a lower price would deﬁnitely be worth the time and effort spent shopping around.
3. I would not shop around at multiple places to ﬁnd low prices.
anchors ! strongly disagree . . .. . .. . .. . ... strongly agree
Regarding [company name]:
1. If I bought a car from [company name], I would not switch and buy a different make on my next auto purchase.
2. I would get tired of driving a car from [company name] over a long period of time.
3. If I bought cars fairly often, I would probably purchase other makes of autos instead of mostly ones from [company name].
4. I consider myself to be loyal to [company name].
5. I would prefer to purchase another make of car rather than wait for my model of choice from [company name].
anchors ! strongly disagree . . .. . .. . .. . ... strongly agree
Assume that you have decided to purchase an automobile from [company name]:
1. Even if a friend experienced a minor product defect with a car from [company name], I would still consider buying a [company name].
2. Any minor defect with a car from [company name] would be totally unacceptable to me.
3. I would trust [company name] to ﬁx minor problems with the car.
4. A minor defect with the car would cause me anxiety.
5. Finding out about a minor defect with cars from [company name] would cause me to never buy a [company name].
6. I would be tolerant of minor product defects with a car from [company name].
7. I expect all cars (including those from [company name]) to have some minor defects but would purchase a car from [company name]

Tolerance for failure (alpha 5 .81).

anyway.
Involvement (alpha 5 .92).

To me, [company name] is:
1. Important . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Unimportant
2. Boring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Interesting


REPUTATION FOR PRODUCT INNOVATION: ITS IMPACT ON CONSUMERS

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2010;27:321–335

335

Appendix A. (Contd.)

Reputation for Product Innovation (RPI) (alpha 5 .97).

3. Relevant . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . Irrelevant
4. Exciting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Unexciting
5. Means nothing . . . . . . . . .Means a lot to me
6. Appealing . . . . . . . . . . . . .Unappealing
7. Fascinating . . . . . . . . . . . . Mundane
8. Worthless . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Valuable
9. Involving . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Uninvolving
10. Unfamiliar . . . . . . . . . . . . Familiar
anchors ! strongly disagree . . .. . .. . .. . ... strongly agree
1. [Company name] has a track record of successful new automobiles.
2. [Company name] is a cutting-edge automobile company.
3. [Company name] is a new product leader in its industry.
4. [Company name] is an innovative company when it comes to automobiles.
5. [Company name] is a progressive company when it comes to automobiles.
6. With regard to automobiles, [company name] is a creative company.
7. I expect [company name] to introduce innovative autos in the future.

NOTE: An asterisk ( ) indicates that the item is reverse scaled.

