 
 
The Management of Customer-Contact Service Employees: An Empirical Investigation
Author(s): Michael D. Hartline and  O. C. Ferrell
Source: Journal of Marketing, Vol. 60, No. 4 (Oct., 1996), pp. 52-70
Published by: American Marketing Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1251901
Accessed: 02-08-2017 20:12 UTC
 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/1251901?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms

American Marketing Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and
extend access to Journal of Marketing

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:12:29 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Michael D. Hartline & O. C. Ferrell

 The Management of
 Customer-Contact
 Service Employees:

 An Empirical Investigation

 The authors develop and test a model of service employee management that examines constructs simultaneously
 across three interfaces of the service delivery process: manager-employee, employee-role, and employee-cus-
 tomer. The authors examine the attitudinal and behavioral responses of customer-contact employees that can influ-
 ence customers' perceptions of service quality, the relationships among these responses, and three formal man-
 agerial control mechanisms (empowerment, behavior-based employee evaluation, and management commitment
 to service quality). The findings indicate that managers who are committed to service quality are more likely to
 empower their employees and use behavior-based evaluation. However, the use of empowerment has both posi-
 tive and negative consequences in the management of contact employees. Some of the negative consequences
 are mitigated by the positive effects of behavior-based employee evaluation. To increase customers' perceptions of
 service quality, managers must increase employees' self-efficacy and job satisfaction, and reduce employees' role
 conflict and ambiguity. Implications for the management of customer-contact service employees and directions for
 further research are discussed.

 M any service firms are subject to failures in service

 delivery because they must depend on customer-
 contact employees to deliver service to their cus-
 tomers. Because the delivery of service occurs during the
 interaction between contact employees and customers (the
 service encounter), the attitudes and behaviors of contact
 employees can influence customers' perceptions of the ser-
 vice (Bowen and Schneider 1985). Because of the impor-
 tance of the service encounter, service firms must find ways
 to effectively manage their customer-contact employees to
 help ensure that their attitudes and behaviors are conducive
 to the delivery of quality service.

 The management of customer-contact employees has
 been extensively discussed in the services marketing litera-
 ture. However, previous research examines the employee
 management process from one of three perspectives: the
 manager-employee interface, the employee-role interface,
 and the employee-customer interface. The manager-

 Michael D. Hartline is Assistant Professor, Department of Marketing, Col-
 lege of Business Administration, Louisiana State University. 0. C. Ferrell is
 Visiting Distinguished Professor of Marketing, University of Tampa, and
 Distinguished Professor of Marketing and Business Ethics, University of
 Memphis. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the
 Marketing Science Institute, as well as the guidance of Emin Babakus, Pat
 Schul, and Tom Ingram in planning and conducting this study. They also
 thank Richard Netemeyer, Dan Sherrell, the editor, and three anonymous
 JM reviewers for their valuable suggestions in preparing and revising this
 article.

 employee interface deals with human resource management
 issues and the activities involved in managing the responses
 of customer-contact employees. Previous research in this
 area has examined issues such as management commitment
 to service quality (cf. Ahmed and Parasuraman 1994),
 empowerment (cf. Bowen and Lawler, 1992), employee
 socialization (cf. Hartline and Ferrell 1993), traditional
 managerial functions (cf. Bowen and Schneider 1985),
 employee reward policies (cf. Bush et al. 1990), and internal
 marketing (cf. George 1990). The employee-role interface
 deals with the relationships among contact employee behav-
 iors, responses, and attitudes. Research in this area has
 investigated the effects of role conflict and role ambiguity
 (cf. Singh 1993); the relationships among job satisfaction,
 self-efficacy, adaptability, and employee effort (cf. Glisson
 and Durick 1988; Spiro and Weitz 1990); and the use of cog-
 nitive scripts in the delivery of service (cf. Humphrey and
 Ashforth 1994). The employee-customer interface deals
 with employee-customer interaction during the service
 encounter. Previous research in this area has examined the
 relationship between customer perceptions of the service
 encounter and contact employees' attitudinal and behavioral
 responses (cf. Bitner 1990; Bitner, Booms, and Mohr 1994).
 Specific employee responses that have been investigated
 include role stress (cf. Singh 1993); ability, competence, and
 adaptability (cf. Bitner, Booms, and Tetreault 1990); and job
 satisfaction (cf. Bowen and Schneider 1985).

 The findings from previous research lead to two major

 conclusions: (1) managers can influence customer-contact
 employees' responses so as to enhance service quality and

 52 1 Journal of Marketing, October 1996

 Journal of Marketing
 Vol. 60 (October 1996), 52-70

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:12:29 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 (2) the responses of customer-contact employees heavily
 intluence customers' perceptions of service quality and the
 service encounter. Drawing from these conclusions, we
 attempt to gain a better understanding of contact employee
 management by simultaneously examining all three inter-
 faces. Within the employee-customer interface, we examine
 the attitudinal and behavioral responses of customer-contact
 employees that can influence customers' perceptions of ser-
 vice quality. We also examine the relationships among these
 responses within the employee-role interface. Within the
 manager-employee interface, we examine managerial con-
 trol mechanisms that can be used to manage the responses of
 customer-contact employees. Consistent with a call from
 Rust and Oliver (1994), we also capture perceptions and
 judgments across all three participants in the service quality
 delivery process: managers, employees, and customers. This
 approach enables us to examine the relationships between
 constructs across all three interfaces and determine the rela-
 tive importance of these relationships within the overall
 employee management process.

 Service Employee Management

 Although employee management has been addressed in
 marketing (primarily in sales research) (cf. Basu et al. 1985;
 Churchill et al. 1985; Singh 1993; Spiro and Weitz 1990),
 few attempts have been made to explicate a composite
 description of the employee management process in service
 organizations. In one of the first studies to address service
 employee management, Bowen and Schneider (1985) argue
 that traditional managerial functions should be altered
 because of the unique characteristics of services. Some of
 their recommendations include (I) involving employees in
 the planning and organizing of service activities, (2) recog-
 nizing that the work environment of service employees has
 a strong influence on how customers experience the service,
 and (3) understanding that the firm's human resource prac-
 tices can ultimately influence customers' service experi-
 ences. The underlying premise of these recommendations is
 that if managers treat their employees well, the employees
 will treat customers well (Bowen and Schneider 1985;
 Gronroos 1983).

 Zeithaml, Berry, and Parasuraman (1988) identify sev-

 eral communication and control processes that managers
 could implement to manage service employees. These
 processes include managerial activities and employee
 responses that are hypothesized to affect service quality.
 Parasuraman, Berry, and Zeithaml (1990) test these rela-
 tionships, but many of their hypotheses are not supported.
 Subsequent research suggests that the lack of empirical sup-
 port is due to the use of gap analysis and problems with the
 measurement of service quality (cf. Babakus and Boiler
 1992; Cronin and Taylor 1992). In a later study, Singh
 (1993) examines several managerial determinants and
 employee response outcomes of the role ambiguity experi-
 enced by boundary-spanning employees. Although his study
 does not focus exclusively on service employees, it provides
 empirical evidence that managerial actions do influence
 boundary-spanning employee responses. Still, Singh's study
 does not examine service quality as an outcome or the inter-

 action between boundary-spanning employees and the
 firm's customers.

 In the vein of previous attempts to embody the service
 employee management process, we propose the conceptual
 model in Figure 1. Drawing from research in a variety of
 disciplines, this model explores important components of
 service employee management simultaneously across all
 three interfaces. Rather than adapt previous models to a ser-
 vices framework, we attempt to develop a model that cap-
 tures relationships that are unique to service employee man-
 agement or are understudied within the context of services
 marketing. In the following discussion, we examine how the
 attitudinal and behavioral responses of contact employees
 affect customers' perceptions of service quality (the
 employee-customer interface). Next, we discuss the rela-
 tionships among these employee responses (the employee-
 role interface). Finally, we examine the managerial control
 mechanisms that can be used to manage employee responses
 (the manager-employee interface).

 The Employee-Customer Interface
 The attitudinal and behavioral responses of customer-contact
 employees are important because of the interactive nature of
 service delivery (how the service is delivered) (Gronroos
 1983). Research has shown that employees' attitudinal and
 behavioral responses can positively and negatively affect
 customers' perceptions of the service encounter and their
 judgments of service quality (Bitner 1990). On the negative
 side, early studies by Schneider (1980) and Shamir (1980)
 reveal that employees' role stress (conflict and ambiguity)
 and dissatisfaction are major contributors to their inability to
 deliver good service. Singh (1993) provides empirical evi-
 dence that the role ambiguity experienced by boundary-span-
 ning employees greatly reduces their job satisfaction and per-
 formance. Contact employees who experience ambiguous or
 conflicting role expectations are likely to exhibit decreased
 job satisfaction and performance, which leads to a decrease
 in customers' perceived service quality (Schneider 1980).

 Other attitudinal and behavioral responses have been
 shown to positively affect customer perceptions of quality.
 Bateson (1985) argues that contact employees are better able
 to satisfy customers when the employee has some control
 over the service encounter. Similarly, Bitner (1990) and Bit-
 ner, Booms, and Tetreault (1990) show through qualitative
 studies that customers are more satisfied with the service
 encounter when employees possess the ability, willingness,
 and competence to solve their problems. Bitner, Booms, and
 Tetreault (1990) also find that an employee's ability to adapt
 to special needs and requests enhances customers' percep-
 tions of the service encounter. Finally, several studies have
 shown that the friendliness, enthusiasm, and attentiveness of
 contact employees positively affect customers' perceptions
 of service quality (cf. Bowen and Schneider 1985; Rafaeli
 1993).

 Based on a review of the literature, we chose to examine
 five attitudinal and behavioral responses of customer-con-
 tact employees that are hypothesized to positively (self-effi-
 cacy, job satisfaction, and adaptability) and negatively (role
 conflict and role ambiguity) affect the ability of contact
 employees to serve customers in a manner that enhances ser-

 Customer-Contact Employees / 53

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:12:29 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 The Management of Customer-Contact Service Employees: A Conceptual Modela

 FIGURE 1

 aConstructs within the dashed line are the attitudinal and behavioral responses of customer-contact employees.

 vice quality. These responses were chosen for two reasons.
 First, though self-efficacy, job satisfaction, and adaptability
 are familiar constructs in other literature, the services mar-
 keting literature has yet to empirically link these responses
 to customers' perceptions of service quality. Second, these
 five responses have been conceptually linked with all three
 interfaces. Including these responses enables us to connect
 the interfaces to examine them simultaneously within the
 same study. Other constructs that we might have chosen
 (e.g., effort, persistence, ability) were either too focused
 within a single interface or too broad for the scope of our
 study.

 Employee self-efficacy. As a key part of Bandura's
 (1977) social learning theory, self-efficacy refers to an
 employee's belief in his or her ability to perform job-related
 tasks. The importance of self-efficacy lies in its ability to
 increase employee performance. Self-efficacy grows
 stronger over time as the employee successfully performs
 tasks and builds the confidence necessary to fulfill his or her
 role in the organization (Gist and Mitchell 1992). As self-
 efficacy increases, employees exert more effort, become
 more persistent, and learn to cope with task-related obsta-
 cles (cf. Bandura 1977; Gist 1987). Empirical studies con-
 firm that self-efficacy has a strong, positive relationship with
 employee performance (cf. Earley 1994). It is therefore rea-
 sonable to expect that contact employees who possess
 strong self-efficacy beliefs are more likely to create favor-

 54 / Journal of Marketing, October 1996

 able service encounters than those who do not. Employee
 performance during a service encounter typically involves
 responding to customer needs, handling special requests,
 and performing under adverse circumstances (Bitner,
 Booms, and Tetreault 1990). Because of the increased effort
 that accompanies self-efficacy, highly self-efficacious con-
 tact employees should perform better in these service activ-
 ities, thereby increasing customers' perceptions of service
 quality. Likewise, self-efficacious contact employees should
 be able to cope with demanding situations that arise during
 the service encounter.

 In summary, the self-efficacy of contact employees
 should play an important role in shaping customers' percep-
 tions of the service encounter. When customers are served
 by employees who believe strongly in their own abilities,
 they are likely to receive higher-quality service. Accord-
 ingly, we propose the following hypothesis:

 Hi: Higher customer-contact employee self-efficacy leads to a
 higher level of service quality as perceived by customers.

 Employee job satisfaction. Locke (1969, p. 316) defines
 job satisfaction as "the pleasurable emotional state resulting
 from the appraisal of one's job as achieving or facilitating
 the achievement of one's job values." The conceptual
 domain of job satisfaction is broad, because it includes "all
 characteristics of the job itself and the work environment
 which salesmen [sic] find rewarding, fulfilling, and satisfy-

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:12:29 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 ing, or frustrating and unsatisfying" (Churchill, Ford, and
 Walker 1974, p. 255). Operationally, job satisfaction con-
 sists of several facets, including satisfaction with the super-
 visor, work, pay, advancement opportunities, coworkers, and
 customers (Brown and Peterson 1993). Although some stud-
 ies examine the effects of these facets separately, others
 average across facets to create a global measure of job satis-
 faction. We take the latter approach because research indi-
 cates that averaging across facets better captures the domain
 of the job satisfaction construct (Brown and Peterson 1993).
 Despite the intuitive connection between job satisfaction
 and employee performance, meta-analytic research reports a
 modest correlation of only .15 between employee satisfac-
 tion and performance across many studies (Brown and
 Peterson 1993). However, this weak relationship may be
 partly due to the fact that most studies measure employee
 performance in terms of outcomes (i.e., sales volume or
 quota) rather than in terms of behaviors (i.e., effort, team-
 work, friendliness). Churchill and colleagues (1985) argue
 that job satisfaction is closely related to employees' behav-
 ioral performance in a sales context. A similar relationship
 is likely to occur with respect to service employees. During
 the service encounter, employee behavioral performance
 often is the service, as it is perceived by customers (Bitner
 1990). This relationship lies in the interaction between con-
 tact employees and customers, in which satisfied employees
 are more likely to engage in behaviors that assist customers
 (Locke and Latham 1990; Weatherly and Tansik 1993).
 Schneider (1980) finds evidence that job satisfaction is a pri-
 mary reason that employees deliver good service. Although
 many other researchers have argued that customers' percep-
 tions of a service are influenced by employee job satisfac-
 tion (cf. Bowen and Schneider 1985; Gronroos 1983), the
 connection between employee job satisfaction and cus-
 tomers' perceptions of service quality has not been empiri-
 cally examined. Accordingly, we propose the following
 hypothesis:

 H2: Higher customer-contact employee job satisfaction leads to
 a higher level of service quality as perceived by customers.

 Employee adaptability. We define adaptability as the
 ability of contact employees to adjust their behavior to the
 interpersonal demands of the service encounter. This defini-
 tion is consistent with that of functional flexibility and inno-
 vativeness in the organizational behavior literature (cf. Paul-
 hus and Martin 1988), and that of adaptive selling in the
 sales management literature (Spiro and Weitz 1990). All
 four terms are functionally equivalent, because their defini-
 tions include two common components: (1) the ability to
 adjust behavior and (2) interpersonal situations. Adaptabil-
 ity can be described as a continuum ranging from confor-
 mity to an established script, in which employees approach
 each customer the same way, to service personalization, in
 which employees must adapt to serve individual customers
 (Solomon et al. 1985).

 Previous research has linked adaptability with employee
 performance. For example, Spiro and Weitz (1990) show
 that salesperson performance is positively correlated with
 the practice of adaptive selling. Employee adaptability also
 has been linked with customers' perceptions of the service

 encounter. Humphrey and Ashforth (1994) provide evidence
 that employees who "mindlessly" follow a service script are
 more likely to make mistakes and less likely to meet the
 individual needs of their customers. Bitner (1990) and Bit-
 ner, Booms, and Tetreault (1990) show that customers eval-
 uate the service encounter more favorably when employees
 are able to adapt to meet their special needs and requests.
 This finding is further supported in a qualitative study by
 Bitner, Booms, and Mohr (1994, p. 99), in which they report
 that "almost half of particularly satisfying customer encoun-
 ters reported by employees resulted from their ability to
 adjust the system to accommodate customer needs and
 requests. Success is attributed in these cases to the
 employee's own ability and willingness to adjust." Based on
 previous research, it is reasonable to expect that contact
 employees who adapt their behaviors during customer inter-
 actions are more likely to fulfill the needs and requests of
 their customers, thereby increasing customers' perceptions
 of service quality. On the basis of this reasoning, we propose
 the following hypothesis:

 H3: Higher customer-contact employee adaptability leads to a
 higher level of service quality as perceived by customers.

 The Employee-Role Interface

 Effects of self-efficacy. Previous research suggests that
 self-efficacy has a positive influence on job satisfaction and
 adaptability. McDonald and Siegall (1992), who found a sig-
 nificant positive correlation between self-efficacy and job
 satisfaction, argue that job satisfaction increases, because the
 feelings of competence and confidence that accompany self-
 efficacy make the job more enjoyable. Increased competence
 and confidence also should increase employee adaptability,
 because employees become more able and willing to adapt to
 customer requests (cf. Jones 1986). On the basis of these
 findings, we propose the following hypotheses:

 H4: Higher customer-contact employee self-efficacy leads to
 higher levels of customer-contact employee (a) job satis-
 faction and (b) adaptability.

 Effects of role conflict and role ambiguity. Role conflict
 is defined as the incompatibility between one or more roles
 within an employee's role set, such that fulfilling one role
 would make fulfilling the others more difficult (cf. Weatherly
 and Tansik 1993). Role ambiguity occurs when an employee
 "lacks salient information needed to effectively enact his or
 her role" (Singh 1993, p. 12). Role conflict or ambiguity
 have been shown to reduce employees' job satisfaction (cf.
 Brown and Peterson 1993), self-efficacy beliefs (cf. Jex and
 Gudanowski 1992), and adaptability (Scott and Bruce 1994).
 We expect these findings to hold in a services context,
 because contact employees act as "boundary spanners"
 between the firm and its customers (Bowen and Schneider
 1985). This places the contact employee in the unique posi-
 tion of acquiescing to the demands of the firm (i.e., man-
 agers, policy, rules) and its customers (Bateson 1985).

 As is indicated in Figure 1, we do not hypothesize a
 direct relationship between role conflict or ambiguity and
 service quality. Our placement of conflict and ambiguity
 within the model is based on Schneider's (1980) argument
 that conflict and ambiguity precede other employee

 Customer-Contact Employees / 55

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:12:29 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 responses. In an empirical test of this relationship, Parasur-
 aman, Berry, and Zeithaml (1990) find no support for a
 direct relationship between role conflict or ambiguity and
 service quality. These findings suggest that the effects of
 role conflict and ambiguity on service quality are mediated
 by employee responses. As a result, we expect that role con-
 flict and ambiguity will negatively affect the self-efficacy,
 job satisfaction, and adaptability of customer-contact
 employees. Hence, we propose the following hypotheses:

 H5: Higher customer-contact employee role conflict leads to
 lower levels of customer-contact employee (a) self-effi-
 cacy, (b) job satisfaction, and (c) adaptability.

 H6: Higher customer-contact employee role ambiguity leads to
 lower levels of customer-contact employee (a) self-effi-
 cacy, (b) job satisfaction, and (c) adaptability.

 Previous research also indicates that role conflict exerts

 a strong influence on role ambiguity (cf. Behrman and Per-
 reault 1984). The conflicting role expectations of the firm,
 manager, and customers can increase employees' uncer-
 tainty about the best way to perform their jobs and the
 importance of job activities. Hence, we propose the follow-
 ing hypothesis:

 H7: Higher customer-contact employee role conflict leads to a
 higher level of customer-contact employee role ambiguity.

 The Manager-Employee Interface
 Many managerial activities have the potential to effectively
 manage employee behaviors and responses in ways that
 improve service quality. The problem lies in identifying the
 most effective activities. Jaworski (1988, p. 26) calls these
 activities formal controls and defines them as "manage-
 ment-initiated mechanisms that influence the probability
 that employees or groups will behave in ways that support
 the stated marketing objectives." According to Jaworski,
 there are three types of formal controls: input controls
 (actions taken prior to the implementation of a marketing
 activity), process controls (attempts to influence behaviors
 and/or activities during implementation), and output con-
 trols (setting performance standards and monitoring or eval-
 uating results). Examples of input controls include the
 recruitment, selection, and training of employees; strategic
 planning; and resource allocations. Process controls include
 any mechanism that attempts to influence employee behav-
 iors and responses during implementation (e.g., organiza-
 tional structure, operating procedures, rewards). Finally,
 output controls include both performance standards that are
 stated in terms of quality outcomes (i.e., complaints, service
 quality, customer satisfaction) and the evaluation of those
 outcomes.

 To make our study manageable, we focus on formal
 process control mechanisms. This focus seemed appropriate
 given our study's emphasis on the managerial controls that
 can be used to make employee behaviors and responses
 more conducive to the delivery of service quality. Previous
 service research has addressed the importance of process
 controls. For example, researchers have argued that to effec-
 tively manage boundary-spanning service employees, man-
 agers should maintain flexible work climates (Schneider
 1980), place greater emphasis on the firm's human resource

 practices (Bowen and Schneider 1985), reward employees
 for their contributions to customer satisfaction (Bowen and
 Schneider 1985; Reardon and Enis 1990), increase their own
 commitment to service (George 1990; Zeithaml, Berry, and
 Parasuraman 1988), and increase employees' discretion
 (empowerment) in serving customers (Bowen and Lawler
 1992; Kelley 1993). After reviewing previous research, we
 selected three service-related process control mechanisms
 that matched Jaworski's (1988) definition of formal process
 controls (i.e., mechanisms associated with the means to
 achieving desired employee responses): empowerment,
 behavior-based evaluation, and management commitment to
 service quality (MCSQ). Empowerment and behavior-based
 evaluation are mechanisms that can be used to control
 employees' behaviors and activities. Management commit-
 ment to service quality is a precursor to the use of other
 process control mechanisms, which makes it one of the most
 important factors in the successful implementation of ser-
 vice strategy (George 1990).

 Empowerment. Empowerment refers to a situation in
 which the manager gives employees the discretion to make
 day-to-day decisions about job-related activities (Bowen
 and Lawler 1992; Conger and Kanungo 1988). By allowing
 contact employees to make these decisions, the manager
 relinquishes control over many aspects of the service deliv-
 ery process. Empowerment is thought to be necessary
 because contact employees need the flexibility to make on-
 the-spot decisions to completely satisfy customers. Allow-
 ing contact employees to use their discretion in serving cus-
 tomers has many positive influences on their responses and
 the service encounter. Bowen and Lawler (1992) suggest
 that empowered employees feel better about their jobs and
 more enthusiastic about serving customers, with an end
 result of quicker response to customer needs and increased
 customer satisfaction. Although the effects of empowerment
 have not been empirically verified, studies that have exam-
 ined similar constructs provide some evidence of empower-
 ment's positive influence. For example, increases in
 employee job satisfaction and decreases in employee role
 stress have been associated with employees' decision-mak-
 ing influence (Niehoff, Enz, and Grover 1990), task auton-
 omy (Brown and Peterson 1993), and decision-making lati-
 tude (Westman 1992). Likewise, Singh (1993) reports that
 boundary-spanning employees who are given job autonomy
 experience significantly less role ambiguity.

 One of the primary outcomes of empowerment is
 increased employee self-efficacy (Conger and Kanungo
 1988). As employees gain more discretion over how their
 jobs are performed, their levels of self-efficacy increase
 because they decide the best way to perform a given task
 (Gist and Mitchell 1992). Empowered employees also are
 likely to be more adaptive because of the increased flexibil-
 ity that accompanies empowerment (Scott and Bruce 1994).
 Empowerment removes the constraints imposed on cus-
 tomer-contact employees, which gives them room to maneu-
 ver as they attempt to serve customers' needs (Reardon and
 Enis 1990). The empowerment/adaptability relationship has
 received tentative empirical support, because adaptability
 has been associated with autonomy and decision-making

 56 / Journal of Marketing, October 1996

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:12:29 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 taneously experiencing less role stress. Accordingly, we pro-
 pose the following hypotheses:

 H9: An increase in the manager's use of behavior-based
 employee evaluation leads to higher levels of customer-
 contact employee (a) self-efficacy, (b) job satisfaction, and
 (c) adaptability, and lower levels of customer-contact
 employee (d) role conflict and (e) role ambiguity.

 Management commitment to service quality. Manage-

 ment commitment to service quality is defined as "encom-
 passing the conscious choice of quality initiatives as opera-
 tional and strategic options for the firm, and engaging in
 activities such as providing visible quality leadership and
 resources for the adoption and implementation of quality
 initiatives" (Ahmed and Parasuraman 1994, p. 85). It
 involves two components: (1) a strong, personal commit-
 ment to quality improvement and (2) a visible and active
 involvement in the quality-improvement process (Mohr-
 Jackson 1993). Although some theorists have argued that
 MCSQ is the single most important determinant of whether
 good service is delivered to customers (George 1990; Gron-
 roos 1983), it has generated little empirical research. In per-
 haps the only test of the MCSQ construct, Parasuraman,
 Berry, and Zeithaml (1990) fail to find a direct relationship
 between MCSQ and service quality. A probable reason for
 this finding is that the relationship between MCSQ and ser-
 vice quality is indirect. Theory suggests that managers must
 first possess a personal, affective commitment to improve
 the firm's service quality (Mohr-Jackson 1993). Managers
 who exhibit this commitment are more likely to take initia-
 tives that help the firm and its employees deliver superior
 quality (George 1990). Examples of these initiatives include
 creating more flexible processes, dedicating resources to the
 improvement effort, promulgating a quality-oriented vision
 throughout the firm, and rewarding employees for their
 efforts and commitment to the process (Ahmed and Parasur-
 aman 1994; Wall and Zeynel 1991).

 We postulate that empowerment and behavior-based
 evaluation are MCSQ-type initiatives that managers can use
 to influence contact employee responses during their deliv-
 ery of service quality. This reasoning is consistent with
 Jaworski's (1988) definition of process controls (i.e., man-
 agerial attempts to influence employee behaviors and activ-
 ities during implementation). Thus, we hypothesize that
 managers who are committed to service quality are more
 likely to empower their employees and emphasize behav-
 ioral criteria in employee evaluations. Hence, we propose
 our final hypotheses:

 Hl0: An increase in the manager's commitment to service qual-
 ity leads to an increase in the manager's use of (a) empow-
 erment and (b) behavior-based employee evaluation.

 influence (Niehoff, Enz, and Grover 1990; Scott and Bruce
 1994), as well as with freedom of employee action (Spiro
 and Weitz 1990).

 In summary, empowerment should have a positive influ-
 ence on the attitudinal and behavioral responses of contact
 employees. The increased discretion and flexibility experi-
 enced by empowered contact employees make them feel bet-
 ter about their jobs, reduce the stress they feel in performing
 their jobs, increase their confidence in performing job-
 related tasks, and increase their ability to adapt to changing
 conditions within the service encounter. On the basis of this
 reasoning, we propose the following hypotheses:

 H8: An increase in the manager's use of empowerment leads to
 higher levels of customer-contact employee (a) self-effi-
 cacy, (b) job satisfaction, and (c) adaptability, and lower
 levels of customer-contact employee (d) role conflict and
 (e) role ambiguity.

 Behavior-based evaluation. As one facet of a behavior-

 based control system, behavior-based evaluation involves
 evaluating employees on the basis of how they behave or act
 rather than on the basis of the measurable outcomes they
 achieve (Anderson and Oliver 1987). Under a behavior-based
 system, contact employees are evaluated and compensated
 on the basis of criteria such as effort, commitment, team-
 work, customer orientation, friendliness, the ability to solve
 customer problems, and/or other behaviors that are directed
 toward improved service quality (Bowen and Schneider
 1985; Reardon and Enis 1990). Linking evaluations to ser-
 vice-related behavioral criteria gives employees the incentive
 to engage in behaviors that are conducive to improved ser-
 vice quality (George 1990; Gronroos 1983). It also gives
 employees more control over the conditions that affect their
 performance evaluations (Anderson and Oliver 1987;
 Cravens et al. 1993). Although outcomes such as sales and
 profit can be influenced by several factors, contact employ-
 ees are solely responsible for their behavioral responses.

 Previous research supports the positive relationship
 between behavior-based evaluation and employee responses.
 For example, an emphasis on behavioral criteria has been
 shown to increase employees' competence (Cravens et al.
 1993), self-efficacy (Gist and Mitchell 1992), and job satis-
 faction (Oliver and Anderson 1994). Researchers have also
 found that employee adaptability increases when employees
 perceive that rewards are the result of their own behaviors or
 when rewards are tied to innovative behavioral performance
 (Scott and Bruce 1994; Spiro and Weitz 1990). Behavior-
 based evaluation also reduces employees' role conflict and
 ambiguity because it gives employees more control over the
 conditions that affect their evaluations (Basu et al. 1985) and
 frees them from the pressures to produce measurable out-
 comes (Anderson and Oliver 1987).

 In summary, the use of behavior-based evaluation should
 have a positive influence on the attitudinal and behavioral
 responses of customer-contact employees. By emphasizing
 behavioral criteria during employee performance appraisals,
 managers make employees responsible for their behaviors
 and give them more control over the conditions that affect
 their evaluations. These employees respond by feeling more
 satisfied, more competent, and more adaptive, while simul-

 Research Method

 Sample
 We chose hotels as our sampling frame because the delivery
 of hotel services requires considerable customer contact. To
 initiate a sample, we contacted the marketing managers of
 nine hotel chains. Three chains, each offering services in the

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:12:29 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Customer-Contact Employees / 57


 middle to high price and quality range, agreed to participate
 by providing a complete mailing list of general managers'
 names and hotel addresses. This procedure resulted in a pool
 of 444 hotel units, all of which were sampled. The corporate
 marketing managers of the three chains mailed a letter to
 each general manager that explained the research and asked
 for their support. Approximately two weeks later, question-
 naire packets were mailed to each general manager. Each
 packet contained one manager survey, five employee sur-
 veys, forty guest surveys, one page of instructions, and
 postage-paid return envelopes. Each respondent group was
 surveyed regarding the issues for which they would be most
 knowledgeable. Hotel managers were asked about their
 commitment to quality, their use of empowerment, and their
 emphasis on behavioral criteria in employee evaluations.
 Customer-contact employees were asked about their levels
 of role stress, self-efficacy, satisfaction, and adaptability.
 Service quality was assessed by questioning hotel guests.

 Constraints imposed by the participating hotel chains

 prohibited us from directly contacting employees or guests.
 As a result, we relied on the general managers to distribute
 the employee and guest surveys. The general managers were

 instructed to distribute the employee surveys across a broad
 range of customer-contact positions (e.g., front desk, food
 service, housekeeping, bellstaff) and to distribute the guest
 surveys during checkout. Approximately two months after
 the initial mailing, a second wave of materials was mailed.
 All questionnaires were returned directly to the researchers.
 Of the total sample, 279 different hotel units responded

 by returning at least one questionnaire from a manager,
 employee, or customer (a total of 2389 questionnaires). Of
 these, only 24 employee and 35 customer surveys were
 unusable. Usable questionnaires were returned by 236 hotel
 managers (53.2% response rate), 743 employees (33.5%
 response rate), and 1351 customers (5.1% response rate).
 Because 165 hotels failed to return any type of question-
 naire, we tested for nonresponse bias using a time-trend
 extrapolation test (Armstrong and Overton 1977). We found
 no differences in perceived service quality between early
 and late customer respondents and no differences in demo-
 graphic characteristics between early and late employee or
 manager respondents. The demographic characteristics of
 employees and general managers are reported in Table 1.
 Employee respondents were screened to ensure that their

 Demographic Characteristics of Customer-Contact Employees and Managers

 TABLE 1

 Customer-Contact Employees

 n = 561

 Managers
 n = 236

 Frequency %

 Frequency %

 176
 379

 32
 354
 83
 55
 22
 9

 42
 128
 240
 119
 14
 11

 301
 116
 53
 41
 30
 20

 32.0
 68.0

 5.8
 63.8
 14.9
 9.9
 4.0
 1.6

 7.6
 23.1
 43.3
 21.5
 2.5
 2.0

 53.7
 20.7
 9.4
 7.3
 5.3
 3.6

 Sex

 Male
 Female

 Age (years)

 Under 20
 20 to 30
 31 to 40
 41 to 50
 51 to 60
 Over 60

 Education

 Some high school
 High school graduate
 Some college
 College graduate
 Some graduate work
 Graduate degree

 Position

 Front desk/customer service
 Housekeeping
 Food/room service
 Reservations/sales
 Bellstaff
 Assistant manager

 Industry Experience (years)

 0 to 5
 5 to 10
 10 to 15
 15 to 20
 Over 20

 58 / Journal of Marketing, October 1996

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:12:29 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 158
 77

 0.0

 65
 109
 44
 13

 3

 1
 17
 82
 109

 9
 17

 36
 71
 52
 49
 27

 67.2
 32.8

 0.0
 27.8
 46.6
 18.8
 5.5
 1.3

 .4
 7.2
 34.9
 46.4
 3.8
 7.2

 15.3
 30.2
 22.1
 20.9
 11.5


 managers emphasize behavioral criteria when conducting
 employee evaluations.

 jobs involved customer contact by asking them to report
 their job position on the questionnaire. Customer-contact
 positions were confirmed through discussions with corpo-
 rate managers. The 182 employees who did not meet this
 criterion were dropped before we tested the measures and
 the hypothesized model.

 Measures

 To remain consistent with previous research, the measures
 were taken or adapted from previous studies in marketing,
 management, and psychology. A list of the measures is pro-
 vided in Appendix B.

 Role conflict and ambiguity. Although the scales devel-
 oped by Rizzo, House, and Lirtzman (1970) are the most
 commonly used measures of role conflict and ambiguity, we
 chose not to use them because research casts doubt on their
 validity (cf. McGee, Ferguson, and Seers 1989). Instead, we
 used the role conflict and role ambiguity scales developed
 by Chonko, Howell, and Bellenger (1986). The original 30-
 item role conflict and 36-item role ambiguity scales were
 designed for use in a sales context. To adapt the scales for
 our use, we selected scale items that could apply to any
 boundary-spanning employee (i.e., items pertaining to
 expense accounts, extending credit, and/or sales commis-
 sions were deleted). The final 12-item role conflict scale
 asks employees to indicate the agreement between them-
 selves and t'.eir job expectations, supervisors, and cus-
 tomers on a scale ranging from "no agreement" to "com-
 plete agreement." The final 17-item role ambiguity scale
 asks employees to indicate how certain they are about per-
 forming job tasks on a scale ranging from "not at all certain"
 to "completely certain." After reversing the scale responses,
 higher scores reflect higher role conflict and role ambiguity.

 Management commitment to service quality. We opera-
 tionalized MCSQ as the manager's affective desire to
 improve his or her unit's service quality. Although Parasur-
 aman, Berry, and Zeithaml (1990) developed a four-item
 scale to measure MCSQ, we did not use their scale because
 it exhibited low reliability (average of .54) and the items
 measure MCSQ initiatives rather than affective commit-
 ment. Because our goal was to tap affective MCSQ, we
 adapted nine items from Mowday, Steers, and Porter's
 (1979) organizational commitment scale. Because this scale
 was originally designed to measure affective commitment
 to an organization, we reworded the items to reflect the
 Self-efficacy. Self-efficacy was operationalized as the
 manager's affective commitment to service quality. Man-
 extent to which employees feel confident about their job
 agers were asked to indicate their agreement with each item
 skills and abilities. The measure we used is an eight-item
 through a five-point scale ranging from "strongly disagree"
 scale developed by Jones (1986), which is designed to mea-
 to "strongly agree." Higher scores reflect a stronger com-
 sure employees' perceptions about their job skills, abilities,
 mitment to service quality. We were concerned that our
 qualifications, and confidence. Employees rated each item
 measure might be negatively skewed, with managers
 on a seven-point scale ranging from "strongly disagree" to
 reporting high MCSQ. A highly skewed distribution could
 "strongly agree." Higher scores reflect higher perceived
 attenuate the correlations between MCSQ and other vari-
 self-efficacy.
 ables, thus underestimating the "true" relationship.
 Although our measure is slightly skewed (skewness =
 -1.11), it is not sufficiently skewed to cause a bias in the
 responses.

 Empowerment. Empowerment was operationalized as
 the extent to which managers allow employees to use their
 own initiative and judgment in performing their jobs.
 Because no measure of empowerment existed at the time of
 our study, we used the eight-item tolerance-of-freedom scale
 from the LBDQ XII, which measures the degree to which
 managers encourage initiative, give employees freedom, and
 trust employees to use their judgment (Cook et al. 1981).
 Hotel managers rated each item on a five-point scale rang-
 ing from "strongly disagree" to "strongly agree." Higher
 scores indicate that the manager uses a greater degree of
 empowerment in managing their employees.

 Job satisfaction. Consistent with the work of Brown and
 Peterson (1993), employee job satisfaction was operational-
 ized as an eight-item measure that assesses satisfaction with
 eight facets of the overall job (e.g., pay, coworkers, supervi-
 sor). The measure asks employees to indicate how satisfied
 they are with each facet, using a five-point scale ranging
 from "extremely dissatisfied" to "extremely satisfied." After
 averaging across facets, higher scores reflect higher overall
 job satisfaction. Research by Peterson and Wilson (1992)
 suggests that many satisfaction measures are negatively
 skewed, with most respondents reporting high satisfaction.
 Our satisfaction measure is negatively skewed to a small
 degree (skewness = -.600), which indicates that the
 responses are not significantly biased.

 Behavior-based evaluation. Behavior-based evaluation

 was operationalized as the extent to which managers empha-
 size behavioral criteria in evaluating employees. The scale
 we employed uses five items from the behavior-based per-
 formance scale of Bush and colleagues' (1990) study, which
 assess the importance of several behavioral criteria (cour-
 tesy, innovativeness, commitment to the firm and customers,
 and ability to resolve customer problems) in the manager's
 evaluation of contact employees. Managers rated this impor-
 tance on a five-point scale ranging from "not at all impor-
 tant" to "extremely important." Higher scores indicate that

 Adaptability. Employee adaptability was operational-
 ized as the ability of customer-contact employees to adjust
 their behavior to the interpersonal demands of the service
 encounter. To measure adaptability, we modified the 16-item
 adaptive selling scale developed by Spiro and Weitz (1990)
 by dropping 6 redundant items and changing the wording of
 the remaining items to eliminate the personal selling aspects
 within each statement. The final 10-item scale assesses con-
 tact employees' ability to adapt to changing service encoun-
 ters by altering their approach toward customers. Employees
 indicated their agreement with each item, using a seven-
 point scale ranging from "strongly disagree" to "strongly

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:12:29 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Customer-Contact Employees /59


 agree." Higher scores reflect a greater degree of employee
 adaptability.

 Perceived service quality. Parasuraman, Berry, and Zei-

 thaml (1990) define service quality as the difference
 between customer expectations and perceptions of service.
 Their SERVQUAL scale has been criticized for the use of
 gap scores, positively and negatively worded items, the gen-
 eralizability of SERVQUAL dimensions, and the defining of
 a baseline standard for "good" quality (cf. Brown, Churchill,
 and Peter 1993; Oliver 1993a). To help alleviate these prob-
 lems, researchers have shown that combining expectations
 and perceptions into a single measure outperforms the
 SERVQUAL scale in terms of both reliability and validity
 (cf. Babakus and Boiler 1992; Brown, Churchill, and Peter
 1993). Cronin and Taylor (1992) argue for the superiority of
 a performance-only measure of service quality on the basis
 that it is more efficient and generalizable than SERVQUAL.
 After evaluating the criticisms leveled against their
 approach, Parasuraman, Zeithaml, and Berry (1994, pp.
 120-21) state: "Because the cumulative empirical evidence
 ... has not established conclusively the superiority of one
 measure over the other, additional research in this area is
 warranted." Because of these unresolved issues, choosing
 the "correct" measure of service quality has become some-
 what problematic.

 We chose to use items from the original SERVQUAL
 scale with two major modifications. First, research indicates
 that customers judge quality on the basis of specific quality-
 related attributes (Oliver 1993a; Taylor and Baker 1994).
 Because our intent is to measure only one attribute (i.e., the
 quality of service delivered by customer-contact employ-
 ees), we restricted our measure to ten items that specifically
 assess employee-related aspects of service quality. Second,
 we combined expectations and perceptions into a single
 measure, as was suggested by Brown, Churchill, and Peter
 (1993). This modification is consistent with Silverman and
 Grover's (1995) findings that customers do use expectancy
 disconfirmation in their assessments of quality. Our measure
 asks hotel guests to rate each item, using a five-point scale
 ranging from "much worse than I expected" to "much better
 than I expected." Higher scores reflect higher perceived ser-
 vice quality.

 Measure Validation

 We subjected all measures to confirmatory factor analysis
 to assess their psychometric properties and unidimension-
 ality. Because of sample size restrictions associated with
 the large number of measures used in the study, we per-
 formed separate analyses for each sample group by using
 three complete (nonaggregated) data sets. After we
 accounted for missing data, the sample sizes were 236
 responses for managers, 561 responses for employees, and
 1238 responses for customers. To assess discriminant
 validity across all three samples, the employee and cus-
 tomer responses were aggregated (averaged) and matched
 with the manager responses to create a single data set in
 which the cases represent hotel units rather than persons.
 Hotel units that did not provide at least three responses
 from both employees and customers were dropped. These

 procedures resulted in a final sample of 97 hotel units,
 with each unit consisting of the matched responses from
 one general manager, an average of 3.37 employees, and
 an average of 9.38 customers. The details and results of
 our measure validation procedures are in Appendices A
 and B.

 Analysis and Results

 We tested our hypotheses with structural equation modeling.
 The procedures associated with estimating the hypothesized
 model and the statistical results are reported in Appendix A.
 Within the employee-customer interface, employee self-effi-
 cacy and job satisfaction have a positive effect on cus-
 tomers' perceived service quality, which supports HI and
 H2. These effects are fairly strong, with self-efficacy having
 a stronger influence on perceived quality than job satisfac-
 tion. Contrary to H3, employee adaptability does not have a
 significant effect on perceived service quality.

 Within the employee-role interface, the effect of
 employee self-efficacy on job satisfaction is significant and
 negative (contrary to H4a), which indicates that highly self-
 efficacious contact employees tend to be less satisfied with
 their jobs. H4b also is not supported, because self-efficacy
 does not have a significant effect on employee adaptability.
 Role ambiguity appears to be the most influential construct
 within the employee-role interface. In accord with H6, role
 ambiguity has a significant negative effect on employee self-
 efficacy, job satisfaction, and adaptability. These results dif-
 fer from those of H5, in which role conflict does not reduce
 employee self-efficacy, job satisfaction, or adaptability. In
 fact, contrary to H5a, role conflict has a significant positive
 effect on self-efficacy. Role conflict also has a significant
 positive effect on role ambiguity, which supports H7. Over-
 all, the results indicate that role ambiguity has a direct influ-
 ence on contact employees' responses and mediates most of
 the effects of role conflict.

 Within the manager-employee interface, overall support
 for H8 and H9 is somewhat limited. In accord with H8a,
 empowerment increases employee self-efficacy. Contrary to
 H8d, empowerment increases role conflict. The remaining
 parts of H8 are not supported. However, the results indicate
 that empowerment has an indirect negative effect on
 employees' job satisfaction (-.358, p < .001) and adaptabil-
 ity (-. 100, p < .001), and an indirect positive effect on role
 ambiguity (.245, p < .001). Overall, the results suggest that
 though empowered employees are more confident in their
 job skills, they experience increased conflict and ambiguity
 in their attempts to balance role demands.

 In support of H9c and H9d, behavior-based evaluation

 increases employee adaptability and decreases employee
 role conflict. The remaining parts of H9 are not supported.
 However, the results indicate that behavior-based evaluation
 has an indirect positive effect on job satisfaction (. 117, p <
 .01), and an indirect negative effect on self-efficacy (-.03, p
 < .05) and role ambiguity (-. 198, p < .001). Finally, the use
 of empowerment and behavior-based evaluation are depen-
 dent on MCSQ, which supports both parts of Hio. Although
 not hypothesized, the results also indicate that MCSQ
 increases employee job satisfaction. This relationship was

 601 Journal of Marketing, October 1996

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:12:29 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 indicated by a large modification index in the LISREL
 analysis.

 result, adaptation across service encounters is likely to have
 no effect on service quality within a single encounter.

 Discussion

 Few studies have approached the management of service
 employees by examining the process simultaneously from
 three perspectives. By capturing perceptions and judgments
 across managers, employees, and customers, our study is
 among the first to empirically link the perceptions of all
 three groups in a single study. This combination of perspec-
 tives sheds light on the practical and theoretical issues
 involved in managing customer-contact employee responses
 in order to enhance the delivery of service quality. Our study
 also helps lay the groundwork for additional research into
 the complex issues associated with the management of cus-
 tomer-contact employees.

 The Employee-Customer Interface
 The importance of customer-contact employees to the
 delivery of service quality is underscored by the results of
 our study. Specifically, we found that employee self-effi-
 cacy and job satisfaction increase customers' perceived
 service quality. Because many services (e.g., hotels) are
 produced and consumed "in the factory," confident and sat-
 isfied employees are likely to perform better than appre-
 hensive and dissatisfied employees during the service
 encounter, which leads to an increase in customers' per-
 ceptions of service quality. Although both responses are
 important, self-efficacy has a stronger effect on service
 quality than job satisfaction. This finding may be due to
 the boundary-spanning nature of the employees' positions.
 As contact employees become more confident in their abil-
 ity to serve customers, they become more proactive and
 persistent, and they put forth greater effort. As a result,
 highly self-efficacious contact employees may be better
 able to handle the difficulties inherent in their jobs, which
 leads to better performance and higher perceived service
 quality.

 We found no evidence of a relationship between
 employee adaptability and customers' perceived service
 quality. There are two plausible reasons for this finding.
 First, service encounters are situation specific, which means
 that the degree of adaptation that customers expect or
 receive varies from one service encounter to another. In
 encounters in which customers expect little or no adaptation,
 their judgments of service quality may be based on getting
 what they expect with no "surprises" (Solomon et al. 1985).
 Thus, for a hotel-based encounter, employee adaptability
 may not affect service quality, because customers do not
 expect or receive adapted service from employees. Second,
 the conceptualization and measurement of adaptability may
 not match the way customers perceive employee adaptabil-
 ity. As was conceptualized and measured in the literature
 and our study, employee adaptability occurs across service
 encounters (i.e., from one customer to another). However,
 customer perceptions of employee adaptability occur within
 the service encounter that they experience; therefore, cus-
 tomers are unlikely to notice adaptive employee responses
 as they occur across employee-customer encounters. As a

 The Employee-Role Interface
 Role ambiguity appears to have the most prominent effect
 within the employee-role interface, because it maintains a
 negative relationship with employees' self-efficacy, job sat-
 isfaction, and adaptability. Role ambiguity also is exacer-
 bated by role conflict. Although these findings are not new,
 they underscore the difficulties inherent in fulfilling a cus-
 tomer-contact position. As contact employees span the
 boundary between the firm and its customers, they can
 become frustrated and confused in their search for the best
 way to fulfill their multiple roles. Role ambiguity is espe-
 cially menacing because of its negative relationship with
 employee self-efficacy and job satisfaction. As its negative
 effects extend into the employee-customer interface, role
 ambiguity can diminish employees' ability to serve cus-
 tomers and indirectly decrease customers' perceptions of
 service quality. Reducing the ambiguity associated with the
 customer-contact position could be one of the biggest chal-
 lenges in the management of service employees.

 Our finding that role conflict increases self-efficacy was
 not expected. However, research indicates that the emotional
 or physiological arousal caused by role conflict may
 increase employees' self-efficacy beliefs (cf. Bandura
 1986). Employees who experience role conflict become
 emotionally aroused in their efforts to cope with conflicting
 role demands. As employees learn to cope with these diffi-
 culties, their self-efficacy increases. Because role conflict is
 an unavoidable aspect of the contact employee's job (Shamir
 1980), coping with role conflict may be a prerequisite for
 successful role performance (Behrman and Perreault 1984).
 This could lead to a symbiotic relationship: role conflict
 increases self-efficacy, which enables the employee to better
 cope with conflicting role expectations (cf. Gist 1987).

 Although previous research indicates that self-efficacy
 increases job satisfaction and adaptability, our results do not
 support these contentions. The lack of a self-efficacy/adapt-
 ability relationship is most likely due to the ability of other
 constructs in the model (i.e., role ambiguity and behavior-
 based evaluation) to predict adaptability better than self-effi-
 cacy. In particular, the level of role ambiguity inherent in
 customer-contact positions may suppress the effects of self-
 efficacy. Self-efficacy may lead to an increase in adaptabil-
 ity only when contact employees are certain about how to
 fulfill their role requirements. This relationship deserves
 further empirical investigation.

 The negative relationship between self-efficacy and job
 satisfaction may lie in the nature of the customer-contact
 position, in which employees are typically underpaid,
 undertrained, overworked, and highly stressed (cf. Weath-
 erly and Tansik 1993). The employees in our study also are
 typical of many retail service employees in that they are
 young, well-educated, and likely to be holding the job while
 attending school (see Table 1). Considering the characteris-
 tics of a customer-contact position and that most of these
 jobs do not require specialized skills, these employees are
 not likely to consider their current job as a permanent career

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:12:29 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Customer-Contact Employees / 61


 choice. The young, college-educated employees that fill
 many customer-contact positions are likely to have goals of
 upward mobility that simply do not match the characteristics
 of most boundary-spanning retail positions.

 The higher-level goals to which these employees aspire
 may be the cause of the negative self-efficacy/job satisfac-
 tion relationship. Research has shown that self-efficacious
 people set higher goals for themselves, which creates a sit-
 uation in which the person must accomplish more to be sat-
 isfied (Locke and Latham 1990). The relationship between
 goals and satisfaction creates a unique situation: "[Ilf goals
 are set at a low level, the individual will be satisfied but
 unproductive, and if they are set at a high level, the indi-
 vidual will be productive but dissatisfied" (Locke and
 Latham 1990, p. 243). The job characteristics theory of
 Hackman and Oldham (1980) also argues that employees
 experience greater job satisfaction when the job has per-
 sonal significance for them. As a contact employee's goals
 and self-efficacy increase, it is likely that the job takes on
 less personal significance. Thus, highly self-efficacious
 employees could be dissatisfied with their jobs because
 they aspire to higher goals. This could cause the personal
 significance attached to the job to decrease and further
 lower the level of job satisfaction.

 The Manager-Employee Interface
 The most striking finding within the manager-employee
 interface is that the use of empowerment leads to both posi-
 tive and negative employee outcomes. Our findings suggest
 that though empowered employees gain confidence in their
 abilities, they also experience increased frustration (conflict)
 in their attempt to fulfill multiple roles at the organization's
 boundary. In addition to fulfilling the demands of their man-
 agers and customers, empowered employees take on added
 job responsibilities (Conger and Kanungo 1988). For some
 employees, this situation could prove to be frustrating.
 Although this conflict leads to an increase in self-efficacy as
 employees learn to cope with conflicting role demands, it
 also increases role ambiguity and indirectly reduces job sat-
 isfaction and adaptability. These complex relationships cre-
 ate a challenge for service managers to find ways to allevi-
 ate the role conflict associated with the empowerment of
 their contact employees.

 One way to alleviate employees' role conflict may be to
 emphasize behavioral criteria in employee evaluations.
 Because employees can control their own behaviors more
 easily than work-related outcomes, behavior-based evalua-
 tion gives employees more control over their evaluations,
 thereby reducing conflict (Basu et al. 1985). Emphasizing
 behavioral criteria also gives contact employees the incen-
 tive to adapt to changing customer needs. Furthermore,
 behavior-based evaluation leads indirectly to reduced role
 ambiguity and increased job satisfaction. These findings
 suggest that the use of behavior-based evaluation comple-
 ments the use of empowerment by mitigating some of its
 negative consequences.

 Finally, our results strengthen the argument that man-
 agers must be committed to improving service quality
 before engaging in activities that have the potential to
 improve service quality (i.e., empowerment and behavior-

 62 / Journal of Marketing, October 1996

 based evaluation). Previous research also has argued that
 MCSQ is the most important determinant of exceptional ser-
 vice quality (cf. George 1990; Gronroos 1983; Wall and
 Zeynel 1991). Our results lend some empirical support to
 these theorists, because MCSQ has an indirect positive
 effect on service quality (.105, p < .01). Although this con-
 nection is important, our results show it to be entirely medi-
 ated by managerial controls and employee responses, partic-
 ularly employee job satisfaction. Thus, though we concur
 that MCSQ is vital to the delivery of good service, our find-
 ings suggest that the attitudinal and behavioral responses of
 customer-contact employees are the primary determinants
 of customers' perceptions of service quality.

 Implications and Suggestions for

 Further Research

 Before discussing managerial implications and future
 research suggestions, the limitations of our study should be
 noted. First, a cross-sectional study incorporating multiple
 sample groups is extremely difficult to execute. Because we
 were not allowed to contact employees or customers
 directly, we relied on the hotel managers to distribute the
 surveys. If the managers did not randomly distribute the sur-
 veys as instructed, an increased potential for bias exists.
 Despite this risk, we did not note any bias as we coded the
 questionnaires. We did, however, observe one consequence
 that could have resulted from our reliance on general man-
 agers: Most (68%) of the employee respondents were
 female, whereas most (67.2%) of the general managers were
 male. We feel that this outcome may be a reflection of the
 distribution of employees within the sampled chains and is
 not likely to bias the results of our study.

 Second, though it would have been desirable to measure

 many of the same constructs across managers and employ-
 ees as a form of cross-validation, real concerns over ques-
 tionnaire length precluded our doing so. However, by
 assessing the model's constructs across three separate sam-
 ples, we were able to examine all three interfaces simulta-
 neously. Such an approach would seem preferable to asking
 a single sample (e.g., managers) to assess every construct in
 the model. The major drawback of our approach is that
 aggregating and matching sample groups limited the overall
 sample size to 97 hotel units. In addition, the limited sample
 size required that we create summed-scale indicators for
 each construct and fix the measurement portion of the model
 to account for measurement error. Using single rather than
 multiple indicators makes it somewhat easier to confirm
 each hypothesis. Likewise, the use of multiple indicators
 would have made the results more reliable.

 Third, though the total variance explained by the model
 is fairly high, the model's explanatory power is limited to its
 included constructs. Obviously, many other constructs could
 affect service employee management. For example, Parasur-
 aman, Berry, and Zeithaml (1990) discuss how employee-
 job fit, horizontal communication, and task standardization
 affect contact employees and their delivery of service qual-
 ity. Likewise, we did not examine the effects of formal input
 controls (i.e., employee recruitment, selection, and training)
 or formal output controls (i.e., performance standards). Fur-

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:12:29 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 thermore, our measure of service quality does not include an
 assessment of the affective reactions of customers (Oliver
 1993b).

 Fourth, our focus on a single service industry may raise
 concerns about limited generalizability. However, constrain-
 ing the study to a single industry eliminates problems asso-
 ciated with the effects of industry differences. Additionally,
 neither the high end (e.g., Ritz-Carlton) nor the low end
 (e.g., Motel 6) of the hotel services spectrum is represented
 in the sample. Notwithstanding these limitations, the con-
 structs examined in our study could be applied to any indus-
 try, service, or otherwise.

 Managerial Implications
 Issues concerning the three interfaces of service employee
 management were addressed in our study. Based on our
 findings, we maintain that the employee-customer interface
 is the most important determinant of customers' perceptions
 of service quality. As a result, managers must find ways to
 increase the self-efficacy and job satisfaction of contact
 employees. However, these two goals may be incompatible
 given the characteristics of the typical customer-contact
 position. Self-efficacious contact employees are likely to
 serve customers more effectively; however, these employees
 may be less satisfied with the job because their goals of
 upward mobility do not match the characteristics of the cus-
 tomer-contact position. The challenges for the service man-
 ager are to (1) recruit and retain self-efficacious employees
 who also can be satisfied in a customer-contact position and
 (2) manage these employees in ways that maintain or
 increase their levels of self-efficacy and job satisfaction.

 To meet these challenges, our results highlight the
 importance of four issues. First, managers must be commit-
 ted to improving the firm's service quality. Put simply, man-
 agers who are personally committed to service quality are
 more likely to engage in activities that improve service qual-
 ity. In our study, MCSQ translates into an increased use of
 empowerment and behavior-based evaluation and to an
 increase in employee job satisfaction. Although we did not
 hypothesize the relationship between MCSQ and job satis-
 faction, previous research has alluded to a possible connec-
 tion (cf. Niehoff, Enz, and Grover 1990). Management com-
 mitment to service quality is important because it helps
 align the firm toward a common goal of superior service
 quality (cf. Reardon and Enis 1990). In this sense, MCSQ
 can become the manager's "vision" for the firm. This vision
 is likely to be noticed and modeled by employees, which
 ultimately increases employee satisfaction and service qual-
 ity (cf. Niehoff, Enz, and Grover 1990).

 Second, managers must recognize that the use of
 empowerment has both positive and negative consequences
 for contact employees and the firm's service quality.
 Because of the importance of self-efficacy in the employee-
 customer interface, the use of empowerment has positive
 outcomes for both employees and the firm's service quality.
 However, empowered employees can become frustrated in
 their attempts to balance role demands, which can lead to an
 increase in role conflict and many negative consequences
 for employees and service quality. For this reason, we cau-
 tion managers to use empowerment under the appropriate

 conditions. Previous research suggests that empowerment
 works best when the firm's culture supports its use by guid-
 ing and limiting employee actions (Bowen and Lawler
 1992). If the firm's culture does not support employees for
 exercising discretion, empowerment is likely to be counter-
 productive (Kelley 1993). To support empowerment, man-
 agers should focus on behavioral criteria in evaluating con-
 tact employees. By evaluating contact employees on the
 basis of their behaviors (i.e., use of discretion) rather than
 outcomes (i.e., mistakes), behavior-based evaluation can
 help reduce employees' role conflict. In addition to behav-
 ioral evaluation, managers also should train employees on
 how to use their decision-making authority wisely. Training
 can help ensure that empowered employee decisions are in
 the best interests of the organization (Conger and Kanungo
 1988).

 Third, the use of behavior-based evaluation also

 increases employee adaptability. Although employee adapt-
 ability does not have an effect on service quality in our
 study, it is likely to be an important component of the ser-
 vice encounter for other services. One of the best ways to
 ensure that employees behave in certain ways is to reward
 them for doing so. To enhance adaptability, or other cus-
 tomer-oriented behaviors, managers should tie the behavior
 to the employee evaluation system.

 Fourth, managers must find ways to reduce contact
 employees' role conflict and ambiguity. Although both exert
 a considerable negative influence on employee responses,
 role ambiguity appears to have the most prominent effect,
 particularly on self-efficacy and job satisfaction. When con-
 tact employees are unsure about how to perform their jobs,
 their confidence and job satisfaction decline. This translates
 into a decrease in customers' perceived service quality. Role
 ambiguity also reduces employees' ability to adapt to
 changes in the service encounter. Managers should make
 every effort to ensure that contact employees fully under-
 stand their role requirements and expectations. Although
 good socialization and training programs can help alleviate
 employees' role ambiguity (Hartline and Ferrell 1993),
 reducing role conflict may depend on the manager's ability
 to communicate with his or her employees (Reardon and
 Enis 1990).

 Suggestions for Further Research
 Our findings suggest several directions for further research.
 First, our study could be replicated within other services
 (e.g., banking, insurance, hospitals) to further examine our
 hypothesized relationships. For example, the relationship
 between employee adaptability and customers' perceived
 service quality may vary from one service to another. To
 examine this relationship, qualitative research methods may
 be more useful than a cross-sectional approach (cf. Bitner
 1990; Kelley 1993). Additional research also is needed on
 the relationship between employee self-efficacy and job sat-
 isfaction. In professional services (e.g., nurses, lawyers,
 accountants) in which employees have chosen the service
 position as a career, self-efficacy may lead to an increase in
 job satisfaction. Likewise, the relationship between
 employee self-efficacy and adaptability may depend on the
 level of role stress experienced by employees.

 Customer-Contact Employees / 63

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:12:29 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Second, the mixed effects of empowerment raise an
 interesting question for further research: What are the con-
 ditions under which empowerment is beneficial and/or detri-
 mental to employee management and service delivery'?
 Conger and Kanungo (1988) argue that managers who use
 empowerment expect greater effort and performance from
 their employees. Thus, additional research could address the
 impact of empowerment on employee motivation, effort,
 and performance. The relationship between empowerment
 and its outcomes also may be moderated by other employee
 responses. For example, empowered employees may exhibit
 increased effort and performance when they are committed
 to the firm and/or share the firm's value system. Likewise,
 further research could investigate the importance of
 employee socialization and training in the effective use of
 empowerment (cf. Hartline and Ferrell 1993).

 Third, methodological issues in aggregating and match-
 ing responses across multiple samples warrant further
 empirical research. Cross-validation of responses, though
 difficult to obtain in lengthy surveys, also could offer
 insights into the differences between manager and employee
 perceptions of the employee management process. In addi-
 tion, researchers could explore whether the problems asso-
 ciated with the use of positively and negatively worded
 items (such as those in the SERVQUAL scale) extend to
 other constructs. In situations in which data are aggregated
 and matched across samples, the use of positive and negative
 scale items might lead to problems in estimating measure-
 ment models. Furthermore, though the "best" measure of
 service quality is open to debate, researchers could consider
 adapting the service quality measure to the service context.
 This would allow for more precise measurement of the
 employee and nonemployee elements of service quality.

 Fourth, additional research is needed on the internal

 aspects of service quality, service implementation, and ser-
 vice employee management. The debate over measurement
 issues in service quality research ignores the important
 strategic and managerial problems associated with the peo-
 ple involved in service delivery. Further research could
 examine issues such as communication processes, organiza-
 tional structure, management styles, employee socialization
 and training, or the use of internal marketing strategies.
 Likewise, the roles of "other" people in service delivery,
 such as noncontact employees and nonfocal customers,
 could be investigated. Studying these issues could give aca-
 demicians and practitioners a stronger basis for making pre-
 scriptive statements about the management of service
 employees and service quality.

 Appendix A

 Measure Validation and Model Estimation

 been suggested as a method for respecifying indicators that
 do not "work out" (Anderson and Gerbing 1988). For the
 remaining items, all t-values exceed 2.00, thus meeting this
 criterion for convergent validity (Anderson and Gerbing
 1988). These results, and the construct reliabilities of each
 scale (Joreskog 1971), are provided in Appendix B.

 Discriminant validity was assessed in two phases. First,
 we performed one-at-a-time chi-square difference tests for
 the largest cross-construct correlations within the manager
 and employee samples (the 4 coefficient was constrained to
 1.00). We also examined the 95% confidence interval (CI) to
 ensure that the correlation plus or minus two standard errors
 did not include the value 1.00 (Anderson and Gerbing
 1988). Within the manager data, the largest correlation
 occurred between MCSQ/BEHAVIORI (() = .461; X2diff =
 143.35, 2 df; CI = .329 to .593). Within the employee data,
 the largest correlations were between CONFLICT/AMBIG
 (() = .691; X2diff = 514.43, 4 df; CI = .635 to .747), CON-
 FLICT/ADAPT () = -.539; X2diff = 391.53,4 df; CI = -.619
 to -.459), and AMBIG/SATIS (( = -.451; X2diff = 760.46, 4
 df; CI = -.531 to -.371). In each case, the increase in the
 value of chi-square exceeded the critical value by a wide
 margin (o < .001), and no confidence interval contained the
 value 1.00.

 Second, we assessed discriminant validity across all
 three samples by aggregating and matching responses.
 Because the final sample size (97 units) was small in rela-
 tion to the number of scale items, we averaged the items in
 each scale to create a summed-scale indicator for each con-
 struct. Each indicator was standardized (mean = 0, standard
 deviation = 1) to account for scale differences. To account
 for measurement error, each k coefficient was fixed at the
 square root of its construct reliability, and each 09 coeffi-
 cient was fixed at one minus the construct reliability (cf.
 Anderson and Gerbing 1988). The cross-construct correla-
 tions (() coefficients) resulting from this analysis are
 reported in Table A 1.

 As before, we assessed discriminant validity for the
 largest cross-construct correlations: CONFLICT/AMBIG
 (( = .700; X2diff = 89.86, 8 df; CI = .426 to .974),
 SATIS/SELFEFF (() = -.641; X2diff = 64.79, 8 df; CI = -.939
 to -.343), MCSQ/BEHAVIOR () = .632; X2diff = 54.94, 8
 df; CI = .346 to .918), and CONFLICT/SATIS (() = -.556;
 X2diff = 114.84, 8 df; CI = -.828 to -.284). In each case, the
 increase in the value of chi-square exceeds the critical value
 and no confidence interval contains the value 1.00. These
 results provide evidence for the discriminant validity of the
 measures.

 Structural model estimation and fit. Before estimating

 the hypothesized conceptual model, we computed the vari-
 ance inflation factor (VIF) for each variable in order to
 assess multicollinearity. In this test, each variable becomes a
 dependent variable and is regressed on the remaining inde-
 pendent variables. The VIF, the inverse of (1 - R2), should
 be close to 1.00, which indicates little or no multicollinear-
 ity. Hair and colleagues (1995) suggest a cutoff value of
 10.00 as an acceptable VIE Among the variables in our

 IFor definitions of terms, see Appendix B.

 Measurement model. We analyzed the data by using

 PRELIS to create covariance matrices with pairwise dele-
 tion. These matrices were used as input to LISREL 8, in
 which the "completely standardized solution" was requested
 (Joreskog and Sorbom 1993). In the initial stage of the
 analysis, several items were deleted from the scales because
 of nonsignificant t-values. This item-deletion procedure has

 64 / Journal of Marketing, October 1996

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:12:29 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Measure Correlations, Means, and Standard Deviations

 TABLE A1

 Measure Mean SD 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

 1. MCSQ 4.61 .429
 2. EMPOWER 4.07 .529 .43
 3. BEHAVIOR 4.41 .532 .63 .31
 4. CONFLICT 1.95 .330 -.13 .26 -.13
 5. AMBIG 1.94 .360 -.09 .25 -.16 .70
 6.SELFEFF 4.88 .743 .23 .24 .19 .16 -.07
 7. SATIS 3.83 .517 .14 -.27 .01 -.56 -.42 -.64
 8. ADAPT 5.95 .455 .38 -.02 .41 -.39 -.46 .19 .23
 9. QUALITY 3.95 .401 .07 .04 .04 -.18 -.22 .21 .09 0.0

 Correlation coefficients are ( estimates from LISREL. Coefficients of .21 or greater are significant at the p < .10 level, coefficients of .31 or
 greater are significant at the p < .05 level, and coefficients of .38 or greater are significant at the p < .01 level.

 TABLE A2

 Hypothesized and Final Path Models of Service Employee

 Management:

 Structural Parameter Estimates (n = 97)

 Path Hypothesis Coeff. t-value R2 Coeff. t-value R2

 Hypothesized Model Final Model

 H1 (+)
 H2 (+)
 H3 (+)

 H5a (-)
 H6a (-)
 H8a (+)
 H9a (+)

 H4a (+)
 H5b (-)
 H6b (-)
 H8b (+)
 H9b (+)

 a

 H4b (+)
 H5C (-)
 H6c (-)
 H8c (+)
 H9c (+)

 H8d (-)
 H9d (-)

 H7 (+)
 H8e (-)
 H9e (-)

 Hioa (+)

 Hiob (+)

 SELFEFF->QUALITY
 SATIS--QUALITY
 ADAPT--QUALITY

 CONFLICT-4SELFEFF
 AMBIG->SELFEFF
 EMPOWER->SELFEFF
 BEHAVIOR--SELFEFF

 SELFEFF->SATIS
 CONFLICT->SATIS
 AMBIG--SATIS
 EMPOWER--SATIS
 BEHAVIOR--SATIS
 MCSQ--SATIS

 SELFEFF--ADAPT
 CONFLICT-ADAPT
 AMBIG-*ADAPT
 EMPOWER- ADAPT
 BEHAVIOR--ADAPT

 EMPOWER--CONFLICT
 BEHAVIOR-CONFLICT

 CONFLICT->AMBIG
 EMPOWER- AMBIG
 BEHAVIOR-AMBIG

 MCSQ-4EMPOWER

 MCSQ->BEHAVIOR

 Goodness-of-fit statistics:

 aNot hypothesized.

 .194

 .170

 .448
 .383

 .436
 -.461
 .287

 2.54
 2.28

 2.21
 -2.44
 2.10

 .117

 .215

 .695

 -.744 -6.92 .722

 -.474

 -5.19

 .212

 2.37

 -.410

 -3.80

 .380

 3.21

 .353

 .343
 -.276

 2.51
 -2.11

 .141

 .714

 7.61 .510

 .368

 .123

 .505

 .598
 .530
 -.198

 .383
 -.381
 .214
 .139

 -.662
 -.255
 -.293
 .035
 .098

 .086
 -.138
 -.282
 -.037
 .372

 2.93
 2.74
 -1.45

 1.92
 -1.97
 1.34
 0.93

 -5.51
 -1.65
 -1.97
 0.29
 0.90

 0.64
 -0.73
 -1.55
 -0.26
 2.77

 .321 2.32
 -.259 -1.94

 6.29
 0.99
 -0.94

 .654
 .115
 -.102

 .421

 .667

 3.43 .177

 6.17

 .445

 .429

 .655

 3.50 .184

 6.02 .429

 X212 =10.68, p= .557
 GFI = .974
 AGFI = .904
 CFI = 1.00
 PNFI = .316
 RMSR = .032
 Overall R2 = .504

 X221 = 13.72, p = .881
 GFI = .968
 AGFI = .931
 CFI = 1.00
 PNFI = .544
 RMSR = .045
 Overall R2 = .532

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:12:29 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Customer-Contact Employees / 65


 study, the highest VIF occurs for SATIS (VIF = 1.97, R2 =
 .492), which indicates that the effect of multicollinearity
 among the variables is negligible.

 We tested the hypothesized model by using LISREL 8

 (Joreskog and Sorbom 1993). Hypothesis testing was
 accomplished by examining the completely standardized
 parameter estimates and their t-values. Estimating the
 hypothesized model produced the following statistics: X212
 = 10.68 (p = .557), goodness-of-fit index (GFI) = .974,
 adjusted goodness-of-fit index (AGFI) = .904, comparative
 fit index (CFI) = 1.00, and parsimonious normed fit index
 (PNFI) = .316. The structural parameter estimates from the
 hypothesized model are reported in Table A2. Because many
 of the paths were not significant, we dropped these paths to
 create a more parsimonious model. Model trimming is
 appropriate in exploratory research if it is not used as a sub-

 stitute for a priori hypothesis development (Anderson and
 Gerbing 1988). Although ADAPT did not have a significant
 effect on QUALITY, we retained ADAPT in the trimmed
 model because of its theoretical importance to service deliv-
 ery. After reestimating the model, the modification indices
 revealed that one new path (MCSQ -> SATIS) and two orig-
 inal paths (AMBIG -> ADAPT, EMPOWER -> SELFEFF)
 should be set free. Estimating the final, trimmed model pro-
 duced the following statistics: X221 = 13.72 (p = .881), GFI
 = .968, AGFI = .931, CFI = 1.00, and PNFI = .544. The
 structural estimates from the trimmed model are reported in
 Table A2. A comparison of the AGFIs and PNFIs from both
 models indicates that the final model is more parsimonious
 and fits somewhat better than the hypothesized model. In
 addition, the overall R2 for the trimmed model is good at
 .532. The final path model is shown in Figure Al.

 Service Employee Management: A Path Diagram of Structural Relationships

 FIGURE A1

 aThis path was not hypothesized.
 bThe signs of these paths are not as hypothesized.

 APPENDIX B

 Confirmatory Factor Analysis Results

 Manager Data (n = 236)
 Fit Statistics: X274 = 156.80, p = .000; GFI = .912; AGFI = .876; CFI = .919; RMSR (root mean square residual) = .025

 Management Commitment to Service Quality (MCSQ)a
 (Cronbach's a = .86; Construct reliability = .86)
 MQ1 I feel strongly about improving the quality of my organization's services
 .675
 MQ2 I enjoy discussing quality-related issues with people in my organization
 .809
 MQ3 I gain a sense of personal accomplishment in providing quality services to my customers
 .658
 MQ4 I explain to all of my employees the importance of providing high quality services to
 b

 our customers

 Factor
 Loading

 t-value

 11.09
 14.24
 10.74

 MQ5 I often discuss quality-related issues with people outside of my organization

 b

 66 / Journal of Marketing, October 1996

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:12:29 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 MQ6 Providing high quality services to our customers should be the number one priority of

 my organization b

 Factor
 Loading t-value

 MQ7 I am willing to put in a great deal of effort beyond that normally expected in order to help

 my organization deliver high quality services to our customers .694 11.51

 MQ8 The way I feel about quality is very similar to the way my organization feels about quality .660 10.79
 MQ9 I really care about the quality of my organization's services .774 13.36

 Empowerment (EMPOWER)c (Cronbach's a = .71; Construct reliability = .71)
 EM1 I allow employees complete freedom in their work b
 EM2 I permit employees to use their own judgment in solving problems .592 8.27
 EM3 I encourage initiative in my employees .668 9.37
 EM4 I let employees do their work the way they think best b
 EM5 I assign tasks, then let employees handle them b
 EM6 I turn employees loose on a job, and let them go to it b
 EM7 I allow employees a high degree of initiative .651 9.14
 EM8 I trust employees to exercise good judgment .533 7.37

 Behavior-Based Evaluation (BEHAVIOR)d (Cronbach's a = .74; Construct reliability = .75)

 How important is each of the following factors when you evaluate the performance of
 customer-contact employees?
 BB1 A track record of courteous service to customers b
 BB2 The ability to resolve customer complaints or service problems in an efficient manner .808 12.50
 BB3 The ability to innovatively deal with unique situations and/or meet customer needs .616 9.21
 BB4 The employee's commitment to the organization .545 8.00
 BB5 The employee's commitment to customers .622 9.31

 Employee Data (n = 561)
 Fit Statistics: X2892 = 3673.47, p = .000; GFI = .730; AGFI = .700; CFI = .722; RMSR = .100

 Employee Role Conflict (CONFLICT)e
 (Cronbach's a = .83; Construct reliability = .83)
 How much agreement is there between you and your job on
 RC1 The amount of work you are expected to do and the amount of work you actually do (-)f .461 10.79
 RC2 The number of customers you are expected to serve and the number of customers

 you actually serve (-) .491 11.58

 RC3 The number of non-work tasks you are expected to perform and the number of non-work

 tasks you actually perform (-) .436 10.13

 RC4 The amount of leisure time you expect to have and the amount of leisure time you

 actually have (-) .361 8.26

 How much agreement is there between you and your supervisor on
 RC5 How often you should report to your supervisor (-) .568 13.76
 RC6 How far you should bend the rules to satisfy customers (-) .502 11.90
 RC7 How much service you should provide to customers (-) .615 15.16
 RC8 How much authority you have in making decisions (-) .537 12.87

 How much agreement is there between you and your customers on
 RC9 Your performance in serving customer needs (-) .677 17.15
 RC10 How much service you should provide to customers (-) .672 16.97
 RC11 How you resolve customer complaints (-) .637 15.84
 RC12 How far you should bend the rules to satisfy customers (-) .487 11.47

 Employee Role Ambiguity (AMBIG)g (Cronbach's a = .91; Construct reliability = .91)
 How certain are you about
 RA1 How best to serve customers (-) .578 14.48
 RA2 How much time you should spend on various aspects of your job (-) .631 16.13
 RA3 How to resolve customer complaints(-) .567 14.13
 RA4 How to fill out required paperwork (-) .483 11.72
 RA5 How to plan and organize your daily work activities (-) .604 15.28
 RA6 How to handle unusual problems or situations (-) .669 17.39
 RA7 Where to get assistance in doing your job (-) .514 12.58
 RA8 The extent to which you can bend the rules to satisfy customers (-) .527 12.97

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:12:29 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Customer-Contact Employees / 67


 Factor
 Loading t-value
 RA9 The extent to which you can make decisions without your supervisor's approval (-) .579 14.49
 RA10 Your company's rules and regulations (-) .616 15.64
 RA11 How your supervisor will evaluate your performance (-) .697 18.35
 RA12 How satisfied your supervisor is with your performance (-) .685 17.92
 RA13 The aspects of your work-related training (-) .686 17.97
 RA14 The factors that determine your promotion and advancement (-) .610 15.45
 RA15 How your supervisor expects you to allocate your time (-) .709 18.79
 RA16 How satisfied your customers are with your performance (-) .624 15.91
 RA17 What your customers expect of you in performing your job (-) .645 16.59

 Employee Self-Efficacy (SELFEFF)h (Cronbach's a = .67; Construct reliability = .71)
 SE1 My job is well within the scope of my abilities b
 SE2 I did not experience any problems in adjusting to work at this organization b
 SE3 I feel that I am overqualified for the job I am doing .766 18.04
 SE4 I have all the technical knowledge I need to deal with my job, all I need now is

 practical experience b

 SE5 I feel confident that my skills and abilities equal or exceed those of my colleagues .455 10.15
 SE6 My past experiences and accomplishments increase my confidence that I will be able
 to perform successfully in this organization b

 SE7 I could have handled a more challenging job than the one I am doing .799 18.86
 SE8 Professionally speaking, my job exactly satisfies my expectations of myself (-) .399 8.80

 Employee Job Satisfaction (SATIS)i (Cronbach's a = .82; Construct reliability = .82)
 JS1 Your overall job .632 15.55
 JS2 Your fellow workers b
 JS3 Your supervisor(s) .615 15.04
 JS4 Your organization's policies .753 19.58
 JS5 The support provided by your organization .825 22.21
 JS6 Your salary or wages b
 JS7 Your opportunities for advancement with this organization .638 15.74
 JS8 Your organization's customers b

 Employee Adaptability (ADAPT)i (Cronbach's a = .77; Construct reliability = .77)
 AD1 Every customer requires a unique approach b
 AD2 When I feel that my approach is not working, I can easily change to another approach .589 13.75
 AD3 I like to experiment with different approaches .503 11.45
 AD4 I don't change my approach from one customer to another (-) b
 AD5 I am very sensitive to the needs of my customers .586 13.68
 AD6 I find it difficult to adapt my style to certain customers (-) b
 AD7 I vary my approach from situation to situation .572 13.28
 AD8 I try to understand how one customer differs from another .547 12.62
 AD9 I feel confident that I can effectively change my approach when necessary .764 18.99
 AD10 I treat all customers pretty much the same (-) b

 Customer Data (n = 1238)
 Fit Statistics: X235 = 450.29, p = .000; GFI = .931; AGFI = .892; CFI = .969; RMSR = .015

 Customers' Perceived Service Quality (QUALITY)k
 (Cronbach's a = .97; Construct reliability = .97)
 Please rate the quality of service you received in each of the following areas:
 SQ1 Receiving prompt service from our employees .831 35.80
 SQ2 Never being too busy to respond to your requests .853 37.36
 SQ3 Employee behaviors that instill confidence in you .882 39.41
 SQ4 The safety you feel in transactions with our employees .856 37.50
 SQ5 The courteousness of our employees .840 36.44
 SQ6 The ability of our employees to answer your questions .846 36.87
 SQ7 The individual attention you received from us .890 40.03
 SQ8 The personal attention you received from our employees .906 41.21
 SQ9 Having your best interests at heart .910 41.55
 SQ10 The ability of our employees to understand your specific needs .851 37.15
 aA nine-item scale adapted from the organizational commitment scale developed by Mowday, Steers, and Porter (1979). Items from the original
 scale were reworded to reflect the manager's affective commitment to service quality.
 bitem was dropped during confirmatory factor analysis because of a nonsignificant t-value.

 68 / Journal of Marketing, October 1996

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:12:29 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 cThe eight-item Tolerance of Freedom scale from the LBDQ XII (Cook et al. 1981).
 dA five-item scale adapted from the behavior-based performance scale of Bush and colleagues (1990).
 eA 12-item scale adapted from the role conflict scale of Chonko, Howell, and Bellenger (1986).
 fNegative signs (-) indicate reverse scoring.
 9A 17-item scale adapted from the role ambiguity scale of Chonko, Howell, and Bellenger (1986).
 hThe eight-item self-efficacy scale developed by Jones (1986).
 iAn eight-item measure designed to assess employee job satisfaction across eight facets of the overall job. The selection of facets for the scale
 was based primarily on the research of Brown and Peterson (1993) and Churchill, Ford, and Walker (1974).
 JA ten-item scale adapted from the adaptive selling scale developed by Spiro and Weitz (1990).
 kA ten-item scale based on the original SERVQUAL scale (Parasuraman, Berry, and Zeithaml 1990). We restricted our measure to those items
 that pertained specifically to employee-related aspects of service quality. The scale was also modified to combine expectations and percep-
 tions into a single measure, as per the suggestion of Brown, Churchill, and Peter (1993).

 REFERENCES
 Ahmed, Irfan and A. Parasuraman (1994), "Environmental and

 Positional Antecedents of Management Commitment to Service
 Quality: A Conceptual Framework," in Advances in Services
 Marketing and Management, Vol. 3, Teresa A. Swartz, David E.
 Bowen, and Stephen W. Brown, eds. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press,
 69-93.

 Anderson, Erin and Richard L. Oliver (1987), "Perspectives on
 Behavior-Based Versus Outcome-Based Salesforce Control Sys-
 tems," Journal of Marketing, 51 (October), 76-88.

 Anderson, James C. and David W. Gerbing (1988), "Structural
 Equation Modeling in Practice: A Review and Recommended
 Two-Step Approach," Psychological Bulletin, 103 (May),
 411-23.

 Armstrong, J. Scott and Terry S. Overton (1977), "Estimating Non-
 response Bias in Mail Surveys," Journal of Marketing Research,
 14 (August), 396-402.

 Babakus, Emin and Gregory W. Boiler (1992), "An Empirical
 Assessment of the SERVQUAL Scale," Journal of Business
 Research, 24 (May), 253-68.

 Bandura, Albert (1977), Social Learning Theory. Englewood Cliffs,

 NJ: Prentice-Hall.

 (1986), Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social

 Cognitive Theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

 Basu, Amiya K., Rajiv Lal, V. Srinivasan, and Richard Staelin
 (1985), "Sales Compensation Plans: An Agency Theoretic Per-
 spective," Marketing Science, 4 (Fall), 267-91.

 Bateson, John E. G. (1985), "Perceived Control and the Service

 Encounter," in The Service Encounter: Managing
 Employee/Customer Interaction in Service Businesses, John A.
 Czepiel, Michael R. Solomon, and Carol F Surprenant, eds.
 Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath and Company, 67-82.

 Behrman, Douglas N. and William D. Perreault, Jr. (1984), "A Role

 Stress Model of the Performance and Satisfaction of Industrial
 Salespersons," Journal of Marketing, 48 (Fall), 9-21.

 Bitner, Mary Jo (1990), "Evaluating Service Encounters: The
 Effects of Physical Surroundings and Employee Responses,"
 Journal of Marketing, 54 (April), 69-82.

 , Bernard H. Booms, and Lois A. Mohr (1994), "Critical
 Service Encounters: The Employee's Viewpoint," Journal of
 Marketing, 58 (October), 95-106.

 , and Mary Stanfield Tetreault (1990), "The Service
 Encounter: Diagnosing Favorable and Unfavorable Incidents,"
 Journal of Marketing, 54 (January), 71-84.

 Bowen, David E. and Edward E. Lawler III (1992), "The Empow-
 erment of Service Workers: What, Why, How, and When," Sloan
 Management Review, 33 (Spring), 31-39.

 and Benjamin Schneider (1985), "Boundary-Spanning-
 Role Employees and the Service Encounter: Some Guidelines
 for Management and Research," in The Service Encounter:
 Managing Employee/Customer Interaction in Service Busi-
 nesses, John A. Czepiel, Michael R. Solomon, and Carol F. Sur-
 prenant, eds. Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath and Company,
 127-47.

 Brown, Steven P. and Robert A. Peterson (1993), "Antecedents and
 Consequences of Salesperson Job Satisfaction: Meta-Analysis

 and Assessment of Causal Effects," Journal of Marketing
 Research, 30 (February), 63-77.

 Brown, Tom J., Gilbert A. Churchill, Jr., and J. Paul Peter (1993),
 "Improving the Measurement of Service Quality," Journal of
 Retailing, 69 (Spring), 127-39.

 Bush, Robert P., Alan J. Bush, David J. Ortinau, and Joseph F. Hair,
 Jr. (1990), "Developing a Behavior-Based Scale to Assess Retail
 Salesperson Performance," Journal of Retailing, 66 (Spring),
 119-36.

 Chonko, Lawrence B., Roy D. Howell, and Danny N. Bellenger
 (1986), "Congruence in Sales Force Evaluations: Relation to
 Sales Force Perceptions of Conflict and Ambiguity," Journal of
 Personal Selling and Sales Management, 6 (May), 35-48.

 Churchill, Gilbert A., Jr., Neil M. Ford, Steven W. Hartley, and
 Orville C. Walker, Jr. (1985), "The Determinants of Salesperson
 Performance: A Meta-Analysis," Journal of Marketing
 Research, 22 (May), 103-18.

 , and Orville C. Walker, Jr. (1974), "Measuring the
 Job Satisfaction of Industrial Salesmen," Journal of Marketing
 Research, 11 (August), 254-60.

 Conger, Jay A. and Rabindra N. Kanungo (1988), "The Empower-
 ment Process: Integrating Theory and Practice," Academy of
 Management Review, 13 (July), 471-82.

 Cook, John D., Sue J. Hepworth, Toby D. Wall, and Peter B. Warr
 ( 1981), The Experience of Work. New York: Academic Press.

 Cravens, David W., Thomas N. Ingram, Raymond W. LaForge, and
 Clifford E. Young (1993), "Behavior-Based and Outcome-Based
 Salesforce Control Systems," Journal of Marketing, 57 (Octo-
 ber), 47-59.

 Cronin, J. Joseph, Jr. and Steven A. Taylor (1992), "Measuring Ser-
 vice Quality: A Reexamination and Extension," Journal of Mar-
 keting, 56 (July), 55-68.

 Earley, P. Christopher (1994), "Self or Group? Cultural Effects of
 Training on Self-Efficacy and Performance," Administrative Sci-
 ence Quarterly, 39 (March), 89-117.

 George, William R. (1990), "Internal Marketing and Organizational
 Behavior: A Partnership in Developing Customer-Conscious
 Employees at Every Level," Journal of Business Research, 20
 (January), 63-70.

 Gist, Marilyn E. (1987), "Self-Efficacy: Implications for Organiza-
 tional Behavior and Human Resource Management," Academy
 of Management Review, 12 (July), 472-85.

 and Terence R. Mitchell (1992), "Self-Efficacy: A Theoret-

 ical Analysis of Its Determinants and Malleability," Academy of
 Management Review, 17 (April), 183-21 1.

 Glisson, Charles and Mark Durick (1988), "Predictors of Job Satis-
 faction and Organizational Commitment in Human Service
 Organizations," Administrative Science Quarterly, 33 (March),
 61-81.

 Gronroos, Christian (1983), Strategic Management and Marketing

 in the Service Sector, Marketing Science Institute Working
 Paper Series, Report No. 83-104. Cambridge, MA: Marketing
 Science Institute.

 Hackman, Richard J. and Greg R. Oldham (1980), Work Redesign.

 Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

 Customer-Contact Employees / 69

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:12:29 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Hair, Joseph F., Jr., Rolph E. Anderson, Ronald L. Tatham, and
 William C. Black (1995), Multivariate Data Analysis, 4th ed.
 New York: Macmillan Publishing Company.

 Hartline, Michael D. and 0. C. Ferrell (1993), Service Quality Imple-
 mentation: The Effects of Organizational Socialization and Man-
 agerial Actions on Customer-Contact Employee Behaviors, Mar-
 keting Science Institute Working Paper Series, Report No. 93-
 122. Cambridge, MA: Marketing Science Institute.

 Humphrey, Ronald H. and Blake E. Ashforth (1994), "Cognitive
 Scripts and Prototypes in Service Encounters," in Advances in
 Services Marketing and Management, Vol. 3, Teresa A. Swartz,
 David E. Bowen, and Stephen W. Brown, eds. Greenwich, CT:
 JAI Press, 175-99.

 Jaworski, Bernard J. (1988), "Toward a Theory of Marketing Con-
 trol: Environmental Context, Control Types, and Consequenc-
 es," Journal of Marketing, 52 (July), 23-39.

 Jex, Steve M. and David M. Gudanowski (1992), "Efficacy Beliefs
 and Work Stress: An Exploratory Study," Journal of Organiza-
 tional Behavior, 13 (September), 509-17.

 Jones, Gareth R. (1986), "Socialization Tactics, Self-Efficacy, and
 Newcomers' Adjustments to Organizations," Academy of
 Management Journal, 29 (June), 262-79.

 Joreskog, Karl (1971), "Statistical Analysis of Sets of Congeneric

 Tests," Psychometrika, 36 (June), 109-33.

 and Dag Sorbom (1993), LISREL 8: A Guide to the Pro-

 gram and Applications. Chicago, IL: SPSS.

 Kelley, Scott W. (1993), "Discretion and the Service Employee,"

 Journal of Retailing, 69 (Spring), 104-26.

 Locke, Edwin A. (1969), "What Is Job Satisfaction?" Organiza-

 tional Behavior and Human Performance, 4 (April), 309-36.

 and Gary P. Latham (1990), "Work Motivation and Satis-
 faction: Light at the End of the Tunnel," Psychological Science,
 1 (July), 240-46.

 McDonald, Tracy and Marc Siegall (1992), "The Effects of Tech-
 nological Self-Efficacy and Job Focus on Job Performance, Atti-
 tudes, and Withdrawal Behaviors," Journal of Psychology, 126
 (September), 465-75.

 McGee, Gail W., Carl E. Ferguson, Jr., and Anson Seers (1989),
 "Role Conflict and Role Ambiguity: Do the Scales Measure
 These Two Constructs?" Journal of Applied Psychology, 74
 (October), 815-18.

 Mohr-Jackson, Iris (1993), "Comparing Total Quality With Market
 Orientation: An In-Depth Interview Approach," in AMA Winter
 Educators' Conference Proceedings, Rajan Varadarajan and
 Bernard Jaworski, eds. Chicago: American Marketing Associa-
 tion, 427-32.

 Mowday, Richard T., Richard M. Steers, and Lyman W. Porter
 (1979), "The Measurement of Organizational Commitment,"
 Journal of Vocational Behavior, 14 (April), 224-47.

 Niehoff, Brian P., Cathy A. Enz, and Richard A. Grover (1990),
 "The Impact of Top-Management Actions on Employee Atti-
 tudes and Perceptions," Group & Organization Studies, 15 (Sep-
 tember), 337-52.

 Oliver, Richard L. (1993a), "A Conceptual Model of Service Qual-
 ity and Service Satisfaction: Compatible Goals, Different Con-
 cepts," in Advances in Services Marketing and Management,
 Vol. 2, Teresa A. Swartz, David E. Bowen, and Stephen W.
 Brown, eds. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 65-85.

 (1993b), "Cognitive, Affective, and Attribute Bases of the
 Satisfaction Response," Journal of Consumer Research, 20
 (December), 418-30.

 and Erin Anderson (1994), "An Empirical Test of the Con-
 sequences of Behavior- and Outcome-Based Sales Control Sys-
 tems," Journal of Marketing, 58 (October), 53-67.

 Parasuraman, A., Leonard L. Berry, and Valarie A. Zeithaml (1990),
 An Empirical Examination of Relationships in an Extended Ser-
 vice Quality Model, Marketing Science Institute Working Paper
 Series, Report No. 90-122. Cambridge, MA: Marketing Science
 Institute.

 Valarie A. Zeithaml, and Leonard L. Berry (1994),
 "Reassessment of Expectations as a Comparison Standard in

 70 / Journal of Marketing, October 1996

 Measuring Service Quality: Implications for Future Research,"
 Journal of Marketing, 58 (January), 111-24.

 Paulhus, Delroy L. and Carol Lynn Martin (1988), "Functional
 Flexibility: A New Conception of Interpersonal Flexibility,"
 Journal of Personalitl and Social Psychology, 55 (July),
 88-101.

 Peterson, Robert A. and William R. Wilson (1992), "Measuring
 Customer Satisfaction: Fact and Artifact," Journal of the Acad-
 emy of Marketing Science, 20 (Winter), 61-71.

 Rafaeli, Anat (1993), "Dress and Behavior of Customer Contact
 Employees: A Framework for Analysis," in Advances in Ser-
 vices Marketing and Management, Vol. 2, Teresa A. Swartz,
 David E. Bowen, and Stephen W. Brown, eds. Greenwich, CT:
 JAI Press, 175-211.

 Reardon, Kathleen K. and Ben Enis (1990), "Establishing a Com-
 pany-Wide Customer Orientation Through Persuasive Internal
 Marketing," Management Communication Quarterly, 3 (Febru-
 ary), 376-87.

 Rizzo, John R., Robert J. House, and Sidney I. Lirtzman (1970),
 "Role Conflict and Ambiguity in Complex Organizations,"
 Administrative Science Quarterly, 15 (June), 150-63.

 Rust, Roland T. and Richard L. Oliver (1994), "Service Quality:
 Insights and Managerial Implications From the Frontier," in
 Service Quality: New Directions in Theory and Practice,
 Roland T. Rust and Richard L. Oliver, eds. Thousand Oaks, CA:
 Sage Publications, 1-19.

 Schneider, Benjamin (1980), "The Service Organization: Cliriate

 Is Crucial," Organizational Dynamics, 9 (Autumn), 52-65.

 Scott, Susanne G. and Reginald A. Bruce (1994), "Determinants of

 Innovative Behavior: A Path Model of Individual Innovation in
 the Workplace," Academy of Management Journal, 37 (June),
 580-607.

 Shamir, Boas (1980), "Between Service and Servility: Role Con-

 flict in Subordinate Service Roles," Human Relations, 33
 (October), 741-56.

 Silverman, Steven N. and Rajiv Grover (1995), Forming Percep-
 tions of Overall Quality in Consumer Products: A Process of
 Quality Element Integration, Marketing Science Institute Work-
 ing Paper Series, Report No. 95-103. Cambridge, MA: Market-
 ing Science Institute.

 Singh, Jagdip (1993), "Boundary Role Ambiguity: Facets, Deter-
 minants, and Impacts," Journal of Marketing, 57 (April),
 11-31.

 Solomon, Michael R., Carol Surprenant, John A. Czepiel, and Eve-

 lyn G. Gutman (1985), "A Role Theory Perspective on Dyadic
 Interactions: The Service Encounter," Journal of Marketing, 49
 (Winter), 99-111.

 Spiro, Rosann L. and Barton A. Weitz (1990), "Adaptive Selling:
 Conceptualization, Measurement, and Nomological Validity,"
 Journal of Marketing Research, 27 (February), 61-69.

 Taylor, Steven A. and Thomas L. Baker (1994), "An Assessment of
 the Relationship Between Service Quality and Customer Satis-
 faction in the Formation of Consumers' Purchase Intentions,"
 Journal of Retailing, 70 (Summer), 163-78.

 Wall, Stephen J. and S. Charles Zeynel (1991), "The Senior Man-
 ager's Role in Quality Improvement," Quality Progress, 24
 (January), 66-68.

 Weatherly, Kristopher A. and David A. Tansik (1993), "Managing
 Multiple Demands: A Role-Theory Examination of the Behav-
 iors of Customer Contact Service Workers," in Advances in Ser-
 vices Marketing and Management, Vol. 2, Teresa A. Swartz,
 David E. Bowen, and Stephen W. Brown, eds. Greenwich, CT:
 JAI Press, 279-300.

 Westman, Mina (1992), "Moderating Effect of Decision Latitude
 on Stress-Strain Relationship: Does Organizational Level Mat-
 ter?" Journal of Organizational Behavior, 13 (December),
 713-22.

 Zeithaml, Valarie A., Leonard L. Berry, and A. Parasuraman
 (1988), "Communication and Control Processes in the Delivery
 of Service Quality," Journal of Marketing, 52 (April), 35-48.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:12:29 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

