Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 260–270

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Int. J. Production Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijpe

The impact of supplier integration on customer integration and new
product performance: The mediating role of manufacturing ﬂexibility
under trust theory
Yuanqiong He a,n, Kin Keung Lai b, Hongyi Sun c, Yun Chen d
a School of Management, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Luoyu Road 1037, Wuhan 430074, PR China
b College of Business, City University of Hong Kong, Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong
c Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, City University of Hong Kong, Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong
d School of Business Administration, Hubei University of Economics, PR China

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 31 May 2012
Accepted 28 April 2013
Available online 4 May 2013

Keywords:
Supplier integration
Customer integration
New product performance
Manufacturing ﬂexibility
Service capability

The impact of supply chain integration on new product development has been very well studied in
literature. However,
little literature examines the relationship between supplier integration and
customer integration when they inﬂuence new product performance. This study aims to explore the
complicated relationships among supplier integration, customer integration and new product perfor-
mance via the mediating roles of manufacturing ﬂexibility and service capability under the trust theory.
The research is based on the data from International Manufacturing Strategy Survey (IMSS). It is found
that both supplier integration and customer integration had positive direct effects on new product
performance. It is also found that supplier integration has a positive impact on customer integration
through the mediating role of manufacturing ﬂexibility. The study contributes to supply chain integration
by exploring the complicated relationship between supplier integration and customer integration based
on the trust theory. It bears implications for both practice and future research.

& 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1.

Introduction

New product development (NPD) is one of the critical processes
by which companies sustain or even increase their competitive
advantage (Tessarolo, 2007). Research in NPD ﬁeld has shown that
a number of factors are important to the creation of successful
new products, and integration is recognized as one of critical
enablers. Integration in NPD takes complex and mixed forms, such
as cross-functional team integration, intra-process or concurrent
integration, resource integration, supply chain or external integra-
tion (Hong et al., 2004). As the beneﬁts of internal integration
become more widely acknowledged, the literature is increasingly
focusing on the relationship between external supply chain
integration and new product development. Previous literature
suggested that a company’s ability to integrate its supplier and
customer can improve new product performance and business
performance (Koufteros et al., 2005; Petersen et al., 2003, 2005;
Flynn et al., 2010). However, the following questions are still
needed to be answered in this ﬁeld.

n Corresponding author. Mobile: +86 013697358896.

E-mail addresses: heyuanqiong@mail.hust.edu.cn (Y. He),

mskklai@cityu.edu.hk (K. Keung Lai), mehsun@cityu.edu.hk (H. Sun),
chenyun0010@sina.com (Y. Chen).

0925-5273/$ - see front matter & 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2013.04.044

First, recent literature has addressed the importance of custo-
mer integration in product development (e.g. Bonner, 2005; Enkel
et al., 2005; Fang, 2008; Lam and Chin, 2005). However, it was
observed that many companies did not integrate customers
successfully in their product development process (Tollin, 2002;
Enkel et al., 2005). One of the important reasons is that customers
will consider the inherent risks in integration with manufacturers,
such as the loss of know-how to the outsiders, dependence on
manufacturers, increased costs of coordination and inﬂexibility
(Das and Narasimhan, 2006; Enkel et al., 2005). The existing
literature suggested the design of technological tools (such as
information system, Internet based communication) and internal
integration (such as cross-functional integration) to decrease the
risks perceived by customers so as to improve customer integra-
tion (Fuller et al., 2010; Piller and Walcher, 2006; Devaraj et al.,
2007; Tollin, 2002; Frohlich and Westbrook, 2002; Vickery et al.,
2003). Nevertheless, the nature of customer integration is funda-
mentally a social process so that technological tools cannot solve
all of the problems in customer integration (Ragatz et al., 2002).
Therefore, it needs to consider other factors besides technologies
to improve customer integration in further research.

Second, a great deal of effort have been spent on showing how
companies that incorporate a customer’s perspective in new
product technology decisions developed more successful products


Y. He et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 260–270

261

(e.g. Bonner, 2005; Fang, 2008; Lam and Chin, 2005). Supplier
integration is the most common form of supply chain integration,
while it is until the past years when supplier integration has
received signiﬁcant attention in new product development efforts
(Petersen et al., 2005; Lin and Chen, 2008; Primo and Amundson,
2002). Evidence supporting supplier integration is less clear than
evidence on the positive contribution of customer integration, and
the inﬂuential mechanism of supplier integration in new product
development is still largely a “black box” (Ragatz et al., 2002;
Primo and Amundson, 2002). Therefore,
future research will
identify and examine how supplier integration affect new product
performance (Fawcett and Magnan, 2002; Swink et al., 2007;
Petersen et al., 2005; Jain et al., 2009).

Third, researchers considered supplier integration and custo-
mer integration as two distinct concepts and have limited their
analyses to integration with customers (Bonner, 2005; Fang, 2008;
Lam and Chin, 2005) or suppliers (Das and Narasimhan, 2006;
Handﬁeld et al., 2009; Jain et al., 2009; Vachon et al., 2009) in
order to ascertain their distinct contribution to performance. A few
recent studies have begun to take a broader perspective and
consider both the supplier integration and customer integration
simultaneously (Tracey and Tan, 2001; Tan and Tracey, 2007; Lee
et al., 2007; Flynn et al., 2010; Danese and Romano, 2011). In fact,
customer integration was signiﬁcantly correlated with supplier
integration and the interaction of them had positive impact on
ﬁrm performance (Lau et al., 2010; Frohlich and Westbrook, 2001;
Devaraj et al., 2007). For instance,
it is well known that the
beneﬁts due to bullwhip-effect reduction are maximized when a
high level of customer integration is accompanied by a high level
of supplier integration. However, the report on the connection
between supplier integration and customer integration in new
product development is still very limited. Therefore, an interesting
opportunity to improve our understanding of the mechanism of
supply chain integration lies in the empirical exploration of
relationship
customer
integration.

integration

between

supplier

and

To address these gaps, this study explores the relationship
between supplier integration and customer integration and their
effects on new product performance from the theoretical perspec-
tive of trust theory. The nature of customer integration is funda-
mentally a social process so that technological tools cannot solve
all of the problems in customer integration (Ragatz et al., 2002).
A partnership in essence is characterized by a long-term commit-
ment and mutual trust between the collaborators (Morgan and
Hunt, 1994). Trust is deﬁned as “the belief that one’s partner will
act in a predictable manner, will keep his word, and will behave in
a way that will not negatively affect the other” (Spekman et al.,
2002). When a ﬁrm believes the other party is reliable, it is willing
to cooperate with them (Morgan and Hunt, 1994). The absence of
trust among supply chain members might hinder the activities
related to it, and cause problems of free riding, hold-ups, and
leakages, which lead to less satisfactory supply chain performance
or even supply chain defection (McCarter and Northcraft, 2007).
Competence trust and goodwill trust were regarded as two types
in buyer–supplier relationships (Sako, 1992). Competence trust
reﬂects conﬁdence in a partner’s ability to fulﬁll an agreed upon
obligation and goodwill trust refers to the expectation that a
partner intends to fulﬁll their role and responsibilities (Das and
Teng, 2001). We argue that manufacturing ﬂexibility is one
effective way of enhancing competence trust since it is a core
competence against uncertain environment for a manufacturer
(Narasimhan et al., 2004), and service capability is one effective
way of
improving goodwill trust because of the social and
interaction nature of service (Vargo and Lusch, 2008). Therefore,
there may be two potential contributions to the literature on
supply chain integration and new product development. First, we

combine supplier integration and customer integration in one
study and examine their impacts on new product performance.
Second, we explore the relationship between supplier integration
and customer integration through the mediating roles of manu-
facturing ﬂexibility and service capability from the theoretical
perspective of trust.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The next section
develops the hypotheses. Thereafter the method and the results of
the study are presented. The paper ends with a discussion of its
theoretical contribution,
limitations and future directions, the
managerial implications, and a conclusion.

2. Hypotheses development

Our conceptual

framework is presented as in Fig. 1. The
relationships among various constructs will be developed as
follows.

2.1. The direct impact of external supply chain integration on
new product performance

As being information intensive and resource requirements, new
product development process was not merely a chain of intra-ﬁrm
activities, but a network of inter-ﬁrm processes (Mele et al., 2010).
External
integration is related to the ability to gain further
information by involving external entities in the development
process through network relationships (Tessarolo, 2007). Through
integration, a ﬁrm can partner with its external entities to
structure their inter-organizational strategies, procedures and
behaviors into collaborative, synchronized and manageable pro-
cesses in order to create values (Das and Narasimhan, 2006;
Jayaram and Tan, 2010; Zhao et al., 2008). Customers and suppliers
are the major sources of innovative ideas for stimulating new
products. For example, Procter & Gamble (P&G) aimed to source
50% of all innovation outside the company from suppliers and
customers (Chesbrough, 2003). We argue that supplier integration
and customer integration have both similar and different mechan-
isms in new product development. We elaborated the impacts of
customer integration and supplier integration on new product
performance separately as follows.

Customer integration is the extent to which customers and
manufacturers coordinate decisions related to inventory level,
production planning, demand forecasting, order tracking, and
products delivery (Wong et al., 2011). The positive effect of
customer integration on new product performance could be
explained from the following aspects. First, customers’ wants
and needs, as well as their acquired knowledge through the actual
use of products, make them an essential external resource for new
product development (Thomke and von Hippel, 2002). Customers
can provide innovative ideas when they specify their requirements
and articulate their unmet needs (Chesbrough, 2003). In addition,

H2 

H4

Manufacturing

flexibility

H3 

Supplier
integration

Customer
integration

H1

New product
performance

H6 

Service
capability

H5

Fig. 1. The conceptual framework in this study.


262

Y. He et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 260–270

customers can provide the ﬁrm with strategic insights into market
expectations and future opportunities, ultimately enabling a more
efﬁcient and effective response to customer needs (Wong et al.,
2011).

to customers. Customer

Second, as the voice of the customer is embedded in the
product development effort, a ﬁrm can provide personalized
customization products
integration
involves determining customer requirements and tailoring inter-
nal activities to meet these requirements. Customers could provide
the producer with feedbacks on quality and delivery performance
so that manufacturers can solve product problems efﬁciently
(Frohlich and Westbrook, 2001). Through customer integration,
ﬁrms will penetrate deep into the customer organization to
understand its product, culture, market and organization in such
a way that they can respond precisely to the customer’s needs and
requirements.

Third,

involving customers from the beginning of product
development can help clarify what products should be developed,
which can cut the need for reworks caused by requirement
misunderstandings and ultimately better time performance in
the design phase (Bajaj et al., 2004). A close relationship between
customers and the manufacturer offers opportunities for improv-
ing the accuracy of demand information, which reduces manu-
facturer’s product design and production planning time and
inventory obsolescence, allowing it to be more responsive to
customer needs. Gupta and Souder (1998) discovered that short-
cycle-time companies, when compared to long-cycle-time
companies, were characterized by extensive user involvement at
the very early stages of new product development. As one of the
reasons for the delay of product development, Dyer et al. (1999)
identiﬁed difﬁculties in product and market deﬁnition, which can
be greatly reduced by involving customers early on in the devel-
opment process. Hence, we propose the following hypothesis:

H1. Customer integration has a positive impact on a ﬁrm's new
product performance.

Supplier integration is the extent to which suppliers and
manufacturers coordinate decisions related to inventory manage-
ment, collaborative planning, forecasting, replenishment, and the
ﬂows of physical resources (Wong et al., 2011). Supplier talent and
capabilities can bring a signiﬁcant advantage to the product devel-
opment process. The positive effect of supplier integration on new
product performance could be explained from the following
aspects.

First, a new generation innovation model was to balance the
market needs and technology development
(Zedtwitz and
Gassmann, 2002). The product innovativeness locates not only at
ﬁnal product functions (how customer use a product) but also at
raw materials and process technologies. Suppliers may provide
emerging technology change, and reduce potential risks of man-
ufacturing pitfalls (Ragatz et al., 2002). Suppliers can generate
innovative ideas when they develop new materials for manufac-
turers and co-design new products with the manufacturers to
demonstrate these new materials (Lau et al., 2010). For instance, a
car manufacturer plans to innovate the engine of a car so as to
reduce gasoline consumption and create value for customers. Raw
material
for realizing this goal. The
suppliers often have better information or greater expertise
regarding raw material technologies than the car manufacturer’s
design personnel. It is suggested that car manufacturer can use
new types of raw material (such as aluminum) to substitute the
iron engine which has much gasoline consumption because of
heavy weight, or improve the iron technology and use new iron
engine to use less fuel. Suppliers participating early in the
product-design process can offer more cost-effective design

innovation is beneﬁcial

choices, help select the best components and technologies, and
help in design assessment (Narasimhan and Das, 1999).

Second, early and extensive supplier involvement results in a
faster development process (Petersen et al., 2003, 2005; Handﬁeld
et al., 1999). Based on the data from a study of the world auto
industry to investigate lead-time differentials between Japanese
and American automobile companies, Clark (1989) found that
supplier involvement (and strong supplier relationships) contri-
butes four to ﬁve months of the lead-time advantage (of Japanese
auto producers). Supplier involvement tends to reduce the team
workload since carrying out of certain steps is delegated to those
who have the competences and information to perform them
more quickly (Kessler and Chakrabarti, 1996; Hartley et al., 1997).
Droge et al. (2000) found in a study of NPD in the automotive
industry that supplier closeness provides ways to share under-
standing about the different tasks underlying product develop-
ment and launch efforts so as to reduce NPD time and improve
NPD performance. At the same time, supplier integration provides
outsourcing and external acquisitions possibilities which reduce
the internal complexity of NPD or permits the manufacturer to
focus on the subset of development tasks in which they can take
advantage of their key competences, skills, and information, thus
shortening the critical path and further speeding up the process
(Tessarolo, 2007; Richey et al., 2010). In addition, supplier and
manufacturing engineers whose ﬁrms have collaborated closely
are less likely to misread blueprints or misinterpret information
which could reduce the re-work time (Leonard-Barton et al., 1994;
Rosenzweig et al., 2003).

Third, supplier integration is beneﬁcial for product quality and
reliability. In the internal value chain, the starting point for ﬁrms
to produce quality products is the acquisition of quality incoming
materials and parts from suppliers. Effective supplier management
can reduce variances in incoming materials and parts and make
sure that the suppliers meet quality speciﬁcations and standards,
which reduces process variability and can have a positive effect on
delivery time and product reliability (Das and Narasimhan, 2006).
Bonaccorsi and Lipparini (1994) found that higher quality with
fewer defects was one of beneﬁts of early supplier involvement.
Hence, we propose the following hypothesis:

H2. Supplier integration has a positive impact on a ﬁrm’s new
product performance.

2.2. The mediating role of manufacturing ﬂexibility between supplier
integration and customer integration

The concept of external supply chain integration as a set of
practices to support business processes across ﬁrms is closely
related with the effort to overcome inter-organizational distrust
(Das and Narasimhan, 2006). Trust is simply a calculated risk
assessment in an economic exchange (Williamson, 1993). In other
words, when you trust your partners, you calculate a certain
probability of them acting positively toward you and reach a
decision that you would take the risk of their opportunism based
on this probability. The trust between supplier and customer will
reduce the risk perceptions of customers and motivate customers
to invest more in integration (Mithas et al., 2005).

Three types of trust in buyer–supplier relationships were
proposed (Sako, 1992): contractual trust (Will the other party
carry out its contractual agreements?), competence trust (Is the
other party capable of doing what it says it will do?), and goodwill
trust (Will the other party make an open-ended commitment to
take initiatives for mutual beneﬁt while refraining from unfair
advantage taking?). A contract can never stipulate every potential
contingency. When a contract becomes excessively detailed, it will
be inﬂexible and monitoring compliance becomes impossible


Y. He et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 260–270

263

(Poppo and Zenger, 2002). In a legal society, every member will
obey the rules and carry out the contracts with other parties.
Therefore, we focused on the perspective of competence trust and
goodwill trust, rather than contractual trust, to explain the indirect
relationship between supplier integration and customer integra-
tion in our study. We proposed that manufacturing ﬂexibility and
service capability are the mediators between supplier integration
and customer integration based on the theoretical perspective of
competence trust and goodwill trust. Our argument can be
illustrated as follows.

Competence trust reﬂects conﬁdence in a partner’s ability to
fulﬁll an agreed upon obligation, and it reduces the perceived risk
of inadequate performance by a partner (Das and Teng, 2001). New
product development is an uncertain process so that it requires
ﬁrms to equip with enough ﬂexibility. Manufacturing ﬂexibility,
being the most important capability against uncertainty in new
product development, refers to the quickness and ease with which
plants can respond to changes in market conditions. Being con-
cerned with NPD as a strategic issue, there are three basic types of
manufacturing ﬂexibility to consider in our study: mix, volume,
and delivery time ﬂexibility. These types of ﬂexibility are ﬁrst-
order ﬂexibility types and will directly affect the competitive
position of a ﬁrm in a market (Koste and Malhotra, 1999). Mix
ﬂexibility has typically been measured by the number of products
that a system produces at any point in time. A highly ﬂexible mix
has been equated with a broad product line (which has been
associated with larger market share and proﬁtability). Volume
ﬂexibility refers to the capacity to quickly expand the quantities of
a given product mix produced, and it concerns not only with
vendor response time but also with the ability to expand order
sizes without extending lead times for delivery. The manufacturer
with strong manufacturing ﬂexibility can adjust its operations to
satisfy customer needs quickly and effectively. As a consequence,
manufacturing ﬂexibility could enhance the competence trust
between a manufacturer and its customers and competence trust
may facilitate both the extent and the efﬁciency of
inter-
organizational learning (Lui, 2009). Customers without enough
competence trust on suppliers can lose faith in the supplier's
ability and commitment to supply them with new products
according to their needs. This seems to be the case with some of
the customers who say the supplier’s competence is not strong
enough to make them continue the cooperation deeply in the
supply chain management. Therefore, we propose the following
hypothesis:

H3. Manufacturing ﬂexibility has a positive impact on a ﬁrm's
level of customer integration.

Manufacturing ﬂexibility of a ﬁrm will depend on the respon-
siveness and ﬂexibility of its key suppliers (Narasimhan et al.,
2004). That is to say, supplier responsiveness, as one of the ﬁrm’s
ﬂexible manufacturing resources, may signiﬁcantly affect how
quickly the ﬁrm can react to new market conditions. For instance,
Rho et al.’s (1994) study of 39 machinery and electronics ﬁrms in
South Korea reported signiﬁcant association between supplier
relationships and manufacturing ﬂexibility. Effective supplier
partnership is a key determinant for delivery and ﬂexibility by
providing more accurate and up-to-date demand and supply
information, more detailed production plans and forecasts, and
clearer future trends and directions (Narasimhan et al., 2004).
With seamless information channels connected to suppliers, and
thus a high level of supply-chain visibility, manufacturers can
more easily track variations in production, product quality, inven-
tory levels, and delivery capability of suppliers. By receiving such
information in a more timely way, manufacturers can plan and
adjust their own operations more rapidly, and thereby achieve

greater adaptability to any unexpected events caused by suppliers.
In addition, by providing suppliers with timely information
regarding their own changes of plan, manufacturers also allow
their suppliers to adjust themselves to such changes more rapidly,
which in return could enhance manufacturer’s ﬂexibility (Wang
et al., 2006). Consequently, we believe that supplier integration
should have beneﬁcial effects on a ﬁrm's manufacturing ﬂexibility.
We propose the following hypothesis:

H4. Supplier integration has a positive impact on a ﬁrm’s level of
manufacturing ﬂexibility.

2.3. The mediating role of service capability between supplier
integration on customer integration

Goodwill trust refers to the expectation that a partner intends
to fulﬁll their role and responsibilities, which is often based on the
previous positive experience in the relationship (Das and Teng,
2001). As conﬁdence in a partner’s good intention increases, there
is closer cooperation, a more open information exchange, and a
deeper commitment between the partners (Fryxell et al., 2002).
Lambert et al. (1998) suggest that customer service management is
a key process for successfully implementing supply chain integra-
tion. We argue that providing service could be beneﬁcial for
enhancing trust relationship with customers. Our argument could
be explained from the following aspects.

First, providing service by a manufacturer leads to an inter-
active dialog with the customers. The interaction between part-
ners is the antecedent of mutual trust. Through their direct
interactions, rather than depending on the second hand experi-
ence or superﬁcial insight of particular functional personnel, a ﬁrm
can learn more about customers and improve the information
quality and knowledge content of customers. That is, intensity and
richness of
the interaction enables the deep understanding
between a manufacturer and its customers so as to improve the
goodwill trust between them.

Second, service, being integrated with tangible product as an
offering for customer, is often beyond the expectation of custo-
mers and it will provide competitive advantage. The services, such
as maintenance and upgrading activities, contribute very much to
how the ﬁnal outcome is perceived by the customer (Davies et al.,
2007). During the service providing, customer may feel that a
manufacturer will consider its need ﬁrst and make efforts to
satisfy them, which could enhance the goodwill trust of custo-
mers. The more practices which are beyond a customer’s expecta-
tion,
trust produces between partners.
Therefore, we propose the following hypothesis:

the more goodwill

H5. Service capability has a positive effect on a ﬁrm’s level of
customer integration.

A ﬁrm needs to attempt alignment or integration with suppli-
ers having special resources and technological knowledge to
implement service strategy.
Industrial product is complicated
and a ﬁrm often cannot produce all of components included in
the product. If it will provide a spare-parts service to its customers,
it may need the help from its suppliers. In supplier integration,
suppliers can learn more about the operations of ﬁrms. By
developing a good understanding of the ﬁrm’s operations, a
supplier can help improve the ﬁrm’s service capability. In addition,
supplier integration can provide a ﬁrm the opportunity to focus on
its core competencies and particular areas of expertise (Stevens,
1989; Cagliano et al., 2006). By developing a high level of strategic
integration with suppliers, ﬁrms are able to identify and eliminate
non-value-added activities and subsequently strengthen product
quality and delivery reliability capabilities (Rosenzweig et al.,
2003). Strategic integration synchronizes core competencies and


264

Y. He et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 260–270

capabilities of suppliers to jointly achieve improved service cap-
abilities at lower total supply chain cost (Stank et al., 2001). Hence,
we propose the following hypothesis:

H6. Supplier integration has a positive impact on a ﬁrm’s service
capability.

3. Methodology

3.1. Data and sample

The data used in this study were drawn from the ﬁfth round of
International Manufacturing Strategy Survey (IMSS), a worldwide
research project using a standard questionnaire which gathers
information about practices and performance associated with
manufacturing strategy in a global context. It has been carried
out since 1992 by an international network of operations strategy
researchers.

In IMSS-V (starting in 2009), there are 726 valid samples, which
locate across twenty countries of Europe, Asia and America. In
countries where English was not a primary or common language,
the surveys were translated by the research coordinator, typically a
full-time university professor in the operations management area,
who would have been familiar with concepts of manufacturing
strategy in both the national language and English. Questionnaire
were mailed or emailed to the Director of Operations/Manufactur-
ing or the General Manager in the company. An attached letter
explained the purpose of the survey, the structure of the ques-
tionnaire, and assurances of conﬁdentiality. Questionnaires were
returned by mail or fax to the country ofﬁce. The surveys were
administered separately by research coordinators in each of the
countries, and data were pooled in a common database.

The survey focused on the ISIC Division 38: Manufacture of
Fabricated Metal Products, Machinery and Equipment. The ﬁnal set
included 320 samples which had usable responses for the pur-
poses of this study. Table 1 shows the distribution of 320
manufacturers by industry and country. ANOVA test found no
signiﬁcant differences between this subset and the total sample
regarding size, or production process (Table 2). Thus, usable
responses might be viewed as a random sample of the complete
population of respondents; using the complete response subset
did not bias the conclusions from statistical analyses to follow.

3.2. Measure development

Structural equation modeling (SEM) employing Amos was
utilized. The measures used in our study were adapted from
established scales (Cagliano et al., 2006; Kim, 2009; He and Lai,
2012; Mathieu, 2001; Gebauer, 2007; Moorman and Rust, 1999;
Hutchison and Das, 2007; Chang et al., 2003). The measurement
items, factor loadings, and reliabilities are reported in Table 3.

Supplier integration and customer integration were measured
by six items which focused on the degree of information sharing
with suppliers and customers, according to Cagliano et al. (2006)
and Kim (2009). 1 means “none”, and 5 means “high”. The values of
Cronbach alpha of supplier integration and customer integration
are both 0.85. Various ways were used to measure manufacturing
ﬂexibility in literature (Boyle and Scherrer-Rathje, 2009). The
common approach is to evaluate ﬂexibility based on the following
dimensions such as mix, volume, delivery (Hutchison and Das,
2007; Chang et al., 2003). These dimensions are long-term ﬂex-
ibility and associated with strategic decisions. Respondents were
asked to assess various manufacturing ﬂexibility compared to
three years ago. 1 means “deteriorated more than 10% compared
to three years ago” and 5 means “improved more than 50%
compared to three years ago”. The Cronbach alpha of this construct

was 0.83. Service capability is deﬁned as the extent of offering
services in manufacturers. We focused on product-based services
in our study, such as maintenance of products sold to customers,
product upgrades, repair, spare-parts and training. Five items,
adapted from He and Lai (2012), Mathieu (2001) and Gebauer
(2007), were used to measure the service capability of a manu-
facturer. The Cronbach alpha of
this construct was 0.83.
New product performance was assessed by mostly judgmental
measures. Judgmental measures of performance are more appro-
priate than objective performance measures for cross-sectional
research (Moorman and Rust, 1999). In our study, new product
performance was measured by three items tapping the extent to
which the new product achieved its expected quality and relia-
bility, time to market and innovativeness. Respondents were to ask
to assess indicators of new product performance compared to
their main competitors. 1 means “much worse” and 5 means
“much better”. The Cronbach alpha of this construct was 0.76.

3.3. Validation of measures

We follow Anderson and Gerbings (1988) who recommended
two-step approach to test our hypotheses. In step 1 we test the
measurement model to establish validity and reliability of the
scales used in our analysis and followed by the test of structural
relationships in step 2. The reliability of scales was measured by
Cronbach’s alpha. In our study, all values of Cronbach’s alpha
ranged from 0.76 to 0.85 (see Table 3). Usually, Cronbach of 0.7 or
above was considered to be the criteria for demonstrating internal
consistency of new scales and established scales respectively
(Bagozzi and Yi, 1988). Conﬁrmatory factor analyses were used
to assess the convergent and discriminant validity of the measures
with structural equation modeling in AMOS 20.0. The measure-
ment model ﬁt the data satisfactorily (χ2/df¼1.57, NFI¼0.89,
RMSEA¼0.04, TLI¼0.95, CFI¼0.96), and all factor loadings were
highly signiﬁcant (po0.001), which indicated the unidimension-
ality of the measures (Anderson and Gerbing, 1988). Convergent
validity was assessed using standardized parameter loadings of
the measurement items on their respective constructs. All stan-
dardized parameter loadings were signiﬁcant (p-value o0.01) and
ranged from 0.58 to 0.81 (see Table 3), providing strong support
for convergent validity. The composite reliabilities, which ranged
from 0.77 to 0.86, exceeded 0.70, implying the variance captured
by the factor is signiﬁcantly more than the variance indicated by
the error components. Then we assessed the discriminant validity
of all ﬁve latent constructs. According to the test suggested by
Fornell and Larcker (1981), discriminant validity was evaluated by
comparing the AVE (Average Variance Extracted) to the squared
correlation between the constructs. And Fornell and Larcker
argued that the square root of AVE for the latent variables should
be greater than the correlation among the latent variables. Table 4
shows the means, standard deviations, correlations between con-
structs, composite reliability and AVE. Taken together, the results
indicated that the measures in this study possessed reasonably
adequate reliability and validity.

4. Data analysis and results

SEM is used to analyze the data and its relationships. SEM
procedures permit modeling of a set of relations among con-
structs, simultaneous estimation of all hypothesized paths, and
estimation of indirect or mediating effects. The ﬁnal structural
equation model with standardized regression weights is shown in
Fig. 2. Overall, the model has a very good ﬁt with the data (χ2/df
¼1.61, NFI¼0.88, RMSEA¼0.04, TLI¼0.94, CFI¼0.95) and all of the


Y. He et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 260–270

265

Table 1
Sample composition (n¼320).

Country of origin

Belgium
Brazil
Canada
China
Denmark
Estonia
Germany
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea
Mexico
Netherland
Portugal
Romania
Spain
Switzerland
Taiwan
UK
USA
ISIC code
Manufacture of fabricated metal products, except machinery and equipment
Manufacture of machinery and equipment not elsewhere classiﬁed
Manufacture of ofﬁce, accounting and computing machinery
Manufacture of electrical machinery and apparatus not elsewhere classiﬁed
Manufacture of radio, television and communication equipment and apparatus
Manufacture of medical, precision and optical instruments, watches and clocks
Manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers
Manufacture of other transport equipment

N

8
9
5
44
4
13
14
28
2
24
14
28
7
17
4
14
16
13
23
13
20

98
85
10
46
22
21
21
17

%

2.5
2.81
1.56
13.75
1.25
4.06
4.38
8.75
0.63
7.5
4.38
8.75
2.18
5.31
1.25
4.38
5.00
4.06
7.19
4.06
6.25

30.63
26.56
3.13
14.38
6.87
6.56
6.56
5.31

Table 2
Differences between used and unused sample.

Variables

Unused sample Used sample p-Value

Size (total sales of the business unit) 7.7 billion
Production process (% of value added)
Fabrication
Assembly

22.73
20.94

17.7 billion

0.25

20.46
23.35

0.27
0.52

paths are signiﬁcant at the level of 0.1 at least, except for the path
from service capability to customer integration.

Fig. 2 showed that supplier integration and customer integra-
tion had positive effects on new product performance (its standard
coefﬁcients were 0.12 and 0.13, with the signiﬁcance level of 0.1,
separately), which supported H1 and H2. Supplier integration had
positive effect on manufacturing ﬂexibility (its standard coefﬁcient
was 0.23, with the signiﬁcance level of 0.01), and manufacturing
ﬂexibility had positive effect on customer integration (its standard
coefﬁcient was 0.17, with the signiﬁcance level of 0.05), which
supported H3 and H4. Supplier integration had positive effect on
service capability (its standard coefﬁcient was 0.52, with the
signiﬁcance level of 0.01, which supported H6), while service
capability had positive effect on customer integration insignif-
icantly (its standard coefﬁcient was 0.03, which refused H5).

5. Discussion

Supply chain integration has received increasing attention
among academicians and practitioners alike in recent years
(Frohlich and Westbrook, 2001; Vickery et al., 2003; Das and
Narasimhan, 2006; Swink et al., 2007; Zhao et al., 2008;

Braunscheidel and Suresh, 2009; Flynn et al., 2010). The nature
of supply chain integration is complex and more knowledge is
needed on its relation to new product performance (Ragatz et al.,
2002). This paper extends the previous work by empirically
exploring the impacts of supplier integration and customer inte-
gration on new product performance, and the indirect relationship
between supplier integration and customer integration through
the mediating roles of manufacturing ﬂexibility and service cap-
ability based on the theoretical perspective of trust.

In a highly competitive and uncertain environment, ﬂexibility
and service become two critical factors for obtaining competitive
advantages (He and Lai, 2012; Koste and Malhotra, 1999;
Braunscheidel and Suresh, 2009). The beneﬁts of external integra-
tion must ﬁrst be translated into internal operational capabilities
(Rosenzweig et al., 2003). First, the results showed that supplier
integration and customer integration had positively direct effects
on new product performance. Customer integration was positively
related with new product performance, with a coefﬁcient of 0.13
and signiﬁcant level of 0.1, which provided global manufacturing
empirical evidence to support the positive role of customer
integration (Bonner, 2005; Fang, 2008; Hartley et al., 1997;
Petersen et al., 2003). There are inconsistent ﬁndings about role
of customer integration in literature. The positive aspects of
sharing information with customers are widely acknowledged,
but the negative sides are still discussed (Enkel et al., 2005; Tang,
2006). Too much investment in sharing information with custo-
mers may limit strategic choice in product development and lead
to poorer proﬁts and declining overall market share (Swink et al.,
2007). We argue the inconsistency may attribute to not distin-
guishing the difference between current and new customers.
Firms may fail to develop innovative products because they are
attentive to the needs of current customers (Enkel et al., 2005).
Customers sometimes ask for familiar products and encourage the


266

Y. He et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 260–270

Table 3
The measurement of all constructs.

Supplier integration: Cronbach α¼0.85

SFL

How do you coordinate planning decisions and ﬂow of goods with your key/strategic suppliers?
Share inventory level information
Share production planning and demand forecast information
Dedicated capacity
Vendor managed inventory or consignment stock
Plan, forecast and replenish collaboratively
Just-in-time replenishment (e.g. kanban)
Customer integration: Cronbach α¼0.85
How do you coordinate planning decisions and ﬂow of goods with your key/strategic

0.62
0.62
0.65
0.75
0.81
0.78

customers?

0.63
0.64
0.77
0.73
0.77
0.69

Share inventory level information
Share production planning and demand forecast information
Dedicated capacity
Vendor managed inventory or consignment stock
Plan, forecast and replenish collaboratively
Just-in-time replenishment (e.g. kanban)
Manufacturing ﬂexibility: Cronbach α¼0.83
How has your ﬂexibility changed over the last three years?
Product customization ability
Volume ﬂexibility
Mix ﬂexibility
Delivery speed
Delivery reliability
Service capability: Cronbach α¼0.83
To what extent does your business unit offer the following services alongside with the products?
0.71
Maintenance of products sold to customers
Product upgrades (software, product modiﬁcations)
0.65
0.68
Training in using the products
0.78
Repairs
Spare-parts
0.71
New product performance: Cronbach α¼0.76
How does your current new product performance compare with main competitors?
Product quality and reliability
Time to market
Product innovativeness

0.58
0.70
0.73
0.81
0.71

0.73
0.68
0.77

Model Fit: χ2/df¼1.57, NFI¼0.89, TLI¼0.95, CFI¼0.96, RMSEA¼0.04
Note: SFL means standardized factor loading.

Table 4
Discriminate validity test.

Variables

1 supplier integration
2 customer integration
3 ﬂexibility
4 service capability
5 new product performance

Mean

2.91
2.99
3.24
3.19
3.43

S.D.

0.78
0.73
0.71
0.94
0.59

Composite reliability

1

2

3

4

5

0.86
0.86
0.83
0.83
0.77

0.71
0.53 nnn
0.33 nnn
0.28 nnn
0.20 nnn

0.71
0.31 nnn
0.24 nnn
0.23 nnn

0.71
0.28 nn
0.27 nnn

0.71
0.29nnn

0.73

The number in the cells of diagonal line are the square root of AVE.

nn p¼0.05.
nnn p¼0.01

manufacturer not to innovate, as new products usually require the
customer to put in new supporting resources for the product,
which would lead to a waste of some customers’ existing resources
(Lau et al., 2010). By limiting themselves to information acquired
from current customers, ﬁrms might restrict their capability of
developing highly innovative products.

The results showed that supplier integration was positively
related with new product performance, with a coefﬁcient of 0.12
and a signiﬁcant level of 0.1, which provided empirical evidence to
support the positive role of supplier integration (Tracey and Tan,
2001; Petersen et al., 2005; Koufteros et al., 2005; Ragatz et al.,
2002; Petersen et al., 2003). Our study combined supplier integra-
tion and customer integration in one study and highlighted that

while the gathering of intelligence about customers’ expressed
needs and wants is one of useful ways in new product develop-
ment, supplier integration is also another important way for
manufacturing ﬁrms, which was consistent with the previous
literature (Lee et al., 2007).

Second, our results indicated that supplier integration had
positive indirect effect on customer integration through the
mediating role of manufacturing ﬂexibility. The nature of relation-
ship between supplier integration and customer integration is
complex, and they are signiﬁcantly correlated (Lau et al., 2010;
Frohlich and Westbrook, 2001; Devaraj et al., 2007). For instance,
Barua et al. (2004) posit that the supplier-side “digitization” (such
as the online transactions and information exchanges) serves as a


Y. He et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 260–270

267

0.12* 

0.23*** 

Manufacturing

Flexibility

0.17** 

Supplier 
integration

Customer
integration

0.13* 

New product
performance

0.52*** 

Service
capability

0.03 

***p=0.01

**p=0.05

*p=0.1 

Fig. 2. Structural model results.

exchange

(Osegowitsch

theoretical arguments for

prerequisite for digitization on the customer-side. Without
increasing supplier-side digitization, a ﬁrm may over-promise
customers and then fail to deliver. Most of the previous literature
regarded them as independent constructs and investigated the
main impact of each integration on ﬁrm performance (Lee et al.,
2007), while a few explored the interaction effect of supplier
integration and customer integration (Flynn et al., 2010; Danese
and Romano, 2011). Current
the
expected direct and interacting effects of external and internal
integration efforts included: the resource-based views of the ﬁrm,
transaction cost theory, market power, monopoly proﬁt and
information
2003;
Grossman and Helpman, 2002; Yeung et al., 2009; Tan and
Tracey, 2007). Our results introduced the theoretical perspective
of trust and explained that manufacturing ﬂexibility was a core
competence against uncertainty in NPD so as to build competence
trust between a manufacturer and its customers. Our argument
that supply chain integration can enhance internal operational
capability is consistent with other authors. For example, Lau et al.
(2010) found that supplier integration improved performance,
mediated by capability of product innovation. Other empirical
studies validate the direct and positive impacts of supply chain
integration on productivity, ﬂexibility, and quality (Rosenzweig
et al., 2003; Swink et al., 2007). What is more important, our study
not only supported the theoretical perspective of trust in supply
chain integration which being consistent with Yeung et al. (2009)
but also made a further step by separating and discussing the role
of competence trust and goodwill trust.

and Madhok,

Our results about the indirect relationship between supplier
integration and customer integration can support and extend the
evolutionary argument of supply chain integration. At a strategic
level, there could be a common set of steps that organizations pass
through to improve their supply chain integration maturity. A four
stage integration model was proposed in literature (Stevens, 1989;
Poirier and Quinn, 2003), where a focal organization matures from
baseline to external integration. Our empirical evidence showed
that at the fourth stage of Stevens’s (1989) model, the ﬁrst sub-
step may be supplier integration, and then is customer integration
because of the positive effect of supplier integration on customer
integration.

Our results did not support the mediating role of service
capability in the relationship between supplier integration and
customer integration, although supplier integration had positive
effect on service capability. On one hand, the positive effect of
supplier integration on service capability is consistent with pre-
vious literature (He and Lai, 2012). The service offering provided
by manufacturing industries is often complicated and technology
intensive, which needs the cooperation with suppliers. On the
other hand, we did not ﬁnd the positive effect of service capability
on customer integration. We insist on the theoretical development

of relationship between service capability and customer integra-
tion from the perspective of goodwill trust. The rejection of this
hypothesis may attribute to measurement of service capability
which was emphasized as capability providing product-based
service in our study. Mathieu (2001) argued that product-based
service such as maintenance and repair no longer lead to a
sustainable competitive advantage within many industries.
As product-based service offerings spread throughout the manu-
facturing industries, their distinctiveness erodes and they become
minimum requirements. He and Lai (2012) proposed that custo-
mer action-based service has more positive direct effect on ﬁrm
performance than product-based service has. Therefore, product-
based service is not enough to enhance the trust with customers
so as to improve customer integration in our study.

In an effort to probe into the relationship between supplier
integration and customer integration and their effects on new
product performance, this paper has made several theoretical and
empirical contributions as follows. First, most of
literature
regarded supplier integration and customer integration as inde-
pendent constructs and a few explored the interaction effect of
these two constructs (Lee et al., 2007; Flynn et al., 2010; Danese
and Romano, 2011). Our ﬁndings contribute to this ﬁeld by
exploring the indirect relationship between supplier integration
and customer integration through the mediating roles of manu-
facturing ﬂexibility and service capability. At the same time, the
positive effect of supplier integration on customer integration
could support and extend the evolutionary argument of supply
chain integration in this ﬁeld (Stevens, 1989; Poirier and Quinn,
2003; Frohlich and Westbrook, 2001). Second, our study proposed
the manufacturing ﬂexibility as a mediator between supplier
integration and customer
integration from the theoretical
perspective of trust, which can contribute to the understanding
of mechanism of supply chain integration. Previous literature
explain the mechanism of supply chain integration using transac-
tion cost theory, market power, monopoly proﬁt and information
exchange (e.g. Tan and Tracey, 2007; Osegowitsch and Madhok,
2003; Grossman and Helpman, 2002; Yeung et al., 2009). These
theoretical perspectives are mainly located in the ﬁeld of econom-
ics, which cannot completely explain the social aspect of supply
chain integration. The perspective of trust could complement the
theories of economics and add insights to supply chain integration.
Third, customer integration is mostly emphasized in new product
development and the impact of supplier integration is neglected in
literature (Ragatz et al., 2002; Primo and Amundson, 2002). There
are a few research studies in the product development arena
where both supplier and customer integration variables are
included in the same study (Lee et al., 2007; Flynn et al., 2010;
Danese and Romano, 2011). Our study contributed to this ﬁeld by
simultaneously examining the effects of customer integration and
supplier integration on new product performance in global man-
ufacturing industries. Fourth, many research studies found that
supplier and customer integration can directly improve company
performance but contain little discussion about the indirect effects
of this integration on performance (Rosenzweig et al., 2003;
Vickery et al., 2003). We provide answers to the important
question of how supplier integration and customer integration
affect new product performance. Finally, we make empirical
contribution by providing global evidence of supply chain integra-
tion by IMSS data, and by introducing the method of structural
equation modeling.

5.1. Managerial implications

In product development, it is difﬁcult for manufacturers to
manage the entire product development process without involve-
results provide
ment

from suppliers and customers. Our


268

Y. He et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 260–270

managerial insights about speciﬁc practices that work in product
development projects. First, managers are suggested to emphasize
the positive role of supplier integration in new product develop-
ment, besides customer integration. Collaborative new product
development environment has a positive effect (Tan and Tracey,
2007) so that ﬁrms should provide incentives for suppliers to offer
suggestions regarding product design and component simpliﬁca-
tion to improve new product performance. Both supplier and
customer integration are valuable assets for a company to improve
innovation performance. Second, it has been proposed that imple-
menting integration both upstream and downstream is better than
concentrating the ﬁrm’s efforts on integrating customers or
suppliers only. The fragmented supply chains have some dangers
of misunderstanding and distrust. Third, supply chain integration
is not easy to realize and needs much investment (such as
development of IT infrastructure). Understanding how to manage
relationships through trust is important in the discourse of supply
chain integration. It is suggested that a manufacturer may inte-
grate suppliers ﬁrst, and then customers. On one hand, supplier
integration is relatively easier to realize than customer integration.
On the other hand, supplier integration could improve customer
integration through enhancing manufacturing ﬂexibility. Fourth,
managers are suggested to develop customer action oriented
service (not only emphasizing product based service) which is
more difﬁcult to imitate and can add value to their products and
satisfy more complex customer demands, which is beneﬁcial for
enhancing the trust with customers.

5.2. Limitations and future directions

The theoretical and methodological limitations suggest a vari-
ety of future research directions. First, we have emphasized the
product-based service which was one type of industrial services. It
may be useful for future research to explore the role of customer
action oriented service in the mechanism of supply chain integra-
tion. Second, there are different approaches to deﬁning integration
in literature, besides information sharing. Future studies are
suggested to explore other mechanisms of integration, such as
co-development product, system integration, and process coordi-
nation (Rosenzweig et al., 2003; Vickery et al., 2003; Stevens,
1989). In addition, it needs to identify different types of informa-
tion sharing with customers and suppliers and examine their
effects in new product development. For instance, Enkel et al.
(2005) argue that sharing technological and marketing informa-
tion with customers may be detrimental to a ﬁrm if the customer
takes this knowledge to a competitor for product development,
which leads to a reduction in the comparative advantage of a
ﬁrm’s new products in the marketplace. Third, future direction
should pursue to compare the integration mechanism with differ-
ent customers (such as current and potential customers). Informa-
tion shared by customers may be restricted to what is familiar to
the customers. Firms may fail to develop innovative products
because they are attentive to the needs of current customers
(Enkel et al., 2005). Katz (2003) also argues that customers
sometimes ask for familiar products and encourage the ﬁrm not
to innovate, as new products usually require the customer to put
in new supporting resources for the product, which would lead to
a waste of some customers’ existing resources. Fourth, future study
is suggested to compare the effects of supplier integration and
customer integration in different stages of new product develop-
ment, such as concept development, design and new product
testing. Fifth, we focused on the ISIC Divison 38 and our remarks
are limited to these sectors. We recommend applying our ﬁndings
to other branches which are confronted with similar problems.

6. Conclusion

This article has explored the relationships between supplier
integration and customer integration and their impacts on new
product performance in global manufacturing industries. With
reliable and robust IMSS-V data, we ﬁnd that supplier integration
and customer integration have positive effects on new product
performance. And supplier integration has positive impact on
customer integration through the mediating role of manufacturing
ﬂexibility. From an academic perspective, this paper is an impor-
tant empirical step in research of supply chain integration and
new product performance in global manufacturing industries.
Furthermore, the method of structural equation modeling is
introduced, which may examine the dynamic and complicated
relationship between supplier integration, customer integration
and new product performance. From a practitioner perspective,
our ﬁndings suggest supplier integration and customer integration
should be emphasized simultaneously in new product develop-
ment. Managers may also adopt practices of supplier integration
ﬁrst because these practices will enhance customer integration so
as to improve new product performance.

Acknowledgment

This paper is ﬁnancial supported by National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. 71172088) and Innovation Research Fund
of Huazhong University of Science and Technology (2011WA004)
and a General Research Fund (CityU 148808) offered by the Hong
Kong SAR Government.

References

Anderson, J.C., Gerbing, D.W., 1988. Structural equation modeling in practice: a
review and recommended two-step approach. Psychological Bulletin 103,
411–423.

Bagozzi, R., Yi, Y., 1988. On the evaluation of structural equation models. Journal of

the Academy of Marketing Science 16, 74–94.

Bajaj, A., Kekre, S., Srinivasan, K., 2004. Managing NPD: cost and schedule
performance in design and manufacturing. Management Science 50 (4),
527–536.

Barua, A., Konana, P., Whinston, A.B., Yin, F., 2004. An empirical investigation of net-

enabled business value. MIS Quarterly 28 (4), 585–620.

Bonaccorsi, A., Lipparini, A., 1994. Strategic partnerships in new product develop-
ment: an Italian case study. Journal of Product Innovation Management 11 (2),
134–145.

Bonner, J.M., 2005. The inﬂuence of formal controls on customer interactivity in

new product development. Industrial Marketing Management 34 (1), 63–69.

Boyle, T.A., Scherrer-Rathje, M., 2009. An empirical examination of the best
practices to ensure manufacturing ﬂexibility. Journal of Manufacturing Tech-
nology Management 20 (3), 348–366.

Braunscheidel, M.J., Suresh, N.C., 2009. The organizational antecedents of a ﬁrm’s
supply chain agility for risk mitigation and response. Journal of Operations
Management 27 (2), 119–140.

Cagliano, R., Caniato, F., Spina, G., 2006. The linkage between supply chain
integration and manufacturing improvement programmes. International Jour-
nal of Operations & Production Management 26 (3/4), 282–299.

Chang, S., Yang, C., Cheng, H., Sheu, C., 2003. Manufacturing ﬂexibility and business
strategy: an empirical study of small and medium sized ﬁrms. International
Journal of Production Economics 83 (1), 13–26.

Chesbrough, H.W., 2003. The era of open innovation. Sloan Management Review,

44. MIT pp. 35–41.

Clark, K.B., 1989. Project scope and project performance: the effect of parts strategy
and supplier involvement on product development. Management Science 35
(10), 1247–1263.

Danese, P., Romano, P., 2011. Supply chain integration and efﬁciency performance: a
study on the interactions between customer and supplier integration. Supply
Chain Management: An International Journal 16 (4), 220–230.

Das, R., Narasimhan, S.T., 2006. Supplier integration-ﬁnding an optimal conﬁgura-

tion. Journal of Operations Management 24 (5), 563–582.

Das, T.K., Teng, B.S., 2001. Trust, control, and risk in strategic alliances: an integrated

framework. Organization Studies 22 (2), 251–283.

Davies, A., Brady, T., Hobday, M., 2007. Organizing for solutions: systems seller vs

systems integrator. Industrial Marketing Management 36, 183–193.


Y. He et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 260–270

269

Devaraj, S., Krajewski, L., Wei, J.C., 2007. Impact of eBusiness technologies on
operational performance: the role of production information integration in the
supply chain. Journal of Operations Management 25 (6), 1199–1216.

Droge, C., Jayaram, J., Vickery, S.K., 2000. The ability to minimize the timing of new
product development and introduction: an examination of antecedent factors
in the North American automobile supplier industry.
Journal of Product
Innovation Management 17 (1), 24–40.

Dyer, B., Gupta, A.K., Wilemon, D., 1999. What ﬁrst-to-market companies do

differently. Research-Technology Management 42 (2), 15–21.

Enkel, E., Kausch, C., Gassmann, O., 2005. Managing the risk of customer integra-

tion. European Management Journal 23 (2), 203–213.

Fang, E., 2008. Customer participation and the trade-off between new product

innovativeness and speed to market. Journal of Marketing 72 (4), 90–104.

Fawcett, S.E., Magnan, G.M., 2002. The rhetoric and reality of supply chain
integration. International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Manage-
ment 32 (5), 339–361.

Flynn, B.B., Huo, B., Zhao, X., 2010. The impact of supply chain integration on
performance: a contingency and conﬁguration approach. Journal of Operations
Management 28 (1), 58–71.

Fornell, C., Larcker, D.E., 1981. Evaluating structural equation models with unob-
servable variables and measurement error. Journal of Marketing Research 18,
39–50.

Frohlich, M.T., Westbrook, R., 2001. Arcs of integration: an international study
Journal of Operations Management 19 (2),

of supply chain strategies.
185–200.

Frohlich, M.T., Westbrook, R., 2002. Demand chain management in manufacturing
Journal of

and services: web-based integration, drivers, and performance.
Operations Management 20 (6), 729–745.

Fryxell, G.E., Dooley, R.S., Vryza, M., 2002. After the ink dries: the interaction of
trust and control in US-based international joint ventures. Journal of Manage-
ment Studies 39 (6), 865–886.

Fuller, J., Faullant, R., Matzler, K., 2010. Triggers for virtual customer integration in
the development of medical equipment-From a manufacturer and a user’s
perspective. Industrial Marketing Management 39 (8), 1376–1383.

Gebauer, H., 2007. The logic for increasing service revenue in product manufactur-
ing companies. International Journal of Services and Operations Management 3
(4), 394–410.

Grossman, G.M., Helpman, E., 2002. Integration versus outsourcing in industry

equilibrium. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (1), 85–120.

Lau, A.K.W., Tang, E., Yam, R.C.M., 2010. Effects of supplier and customer integration
innovation and performance: empirical evidence in Hong
Journal of Product Innovation Management 27 (5),

on product
Kong manufacturers.
761–777.

Lee, C.W., Kwon, I.G., Severance, D., 2007. Relationships between supply chain
performance and degree of linkage among supplier, internal integration and
customer. Supply Chain Management: An International
Journal 12 (6),
444–452.

Leonard-Barton, D., Bowen, H.K., Clark, K., Holloway, C.A., Wheelwright, S.C., 1994.
Regaining the lead in manufacturing: how to integrate work and deepen
expertise. Harvard Business Review 72 (5), 121–130.

Lin, M.J., Chen, C., 2008. Integration and knowledge sharing: transforming to long-
term competitive advantage. International Journal of Organizational Analysis 16
(1/2), 83–108.

Lui, S.S., 2009. The roles of competence trust, formal contract, and time horizon in

interorganizational learning. Organization Studies 30 (4), 333–353.

Mathieu, V., 2001. Service strategies within the manufacturing sector: beneﬁts,
costs and partnerships. International Journal of Service Industry Management
12 (5), 451–475.

McCarter, M.W., Northcraft, G.B., 2007. Happy together? Insights and implications
of viewing managed supply chains as a social dilemma. Journal of Operations
Management 25, 498–511.

Mele, C., Spena, T.R., Colurcio, M., 2010. Co-creating value innovation through
resource integration. International Journal of Quality and Service Sciences 2 (1),
60–78.

Mithas, S., Krishnan, M.S., Formell, C., 2005. Why do customer relationship
management applications affect customer satisfaction? Journal of Marketing
69 (4), 201–209.

Moorman, C., Rust, R., 1999. The role of marketing. Journal of Marketing, 63 (Special

issue), 180–197.

Morgan, R.M., Hunt, S.D., 1994. The commitment-trust theory of relationship

marketing. Journal of Marketing 58 (3), 20–38.

Narasimhan, R., Talluri, S., Das, A., 2004. Exploring ﬂexibility and execution
competencies of manufacturing ﬁrms. Journal of Operations Management 22,
91–106.

Narasimhan, R., Das, A., 1999. An empirical investigation of the contribution of
strategic sourcing to manufacturing ﬂexibilities and performance. Decision
Sciences 30 (3), 683–718.

Osegowitsch, T., Madhok, A., 2003. Vertical integration is dead, or is it? Business

Gupta, A.K., Souder, W.E., 1998. Key drivers of reduced cycle time. Research-

Horizons 46 (2), 25–34.

Technology Management 41 (4), 38–43.

Handﬁeld, G., Ragatz, K., Petersen, R.M., 1999. Involving suppliers in new product

development. California Management Review 42 (1), 59–82.

Handﬁeld, R., Petersen, K., Cousins, P., Lawson, B., 2009. An organizational
entrepreneurship model of supply management integration and performance
outcomes. International Journal of Operations & Production Management 29
(2), 100–126.

Hartley, J.L., Zirger, B.J., Kamath, R., 1997. Managing the buyer-supplier interface for
on-time performance in product development. Journal of Operations Manage-
ment 15 (1), 57–70.

He, Y., Lai, K.K., 2012. Supply chain integration and service oriented transformation:
Journal of

evidence from Chinese equipment manufacturers.
Production Economics 135 (2), 791–799.

International

Hong, P., Doll, W.J., Nahm, A.Y., Li, X., 2004. Knowledge sharing in integrated
product development. European Journal of Innovation Management 7 (2),
102–112.

Hutchison, J., Das, S.R., 2007. Examining a ﬁrm’s decisions with a contingency
framework for manufacturing ﬂexibility. International Journal of Operations &
Production Management 27, 159–180.

Jain, V., Wadhwa, S., Deshmukh, S.G., 2009. Select supplier-related issues in
modeling a dynamic supply chain: potential, challenges and direction for
future research.
Journal of Production Research 47 (11),
3013–3039.

International

Jayaram, K.C., Tan, S.P.N., 2010. Examining the interrelationships between supply
chain integration scope and supply chain management efforts. International
Journal of Production Research 48 (22), 6837–6857.

Katz, R., 2003. The Human Side of Managing Technological Innovation (2nd ed).

New York: Oxford University Press.

Kessler, E.H., Chakrabarti, A.K., 1996. Innovation speed: a conceptual model of
context, antecedents, and outcomes. Academy of Management Review 21,
1143–1191.

Kim, S.W., 2009. An investigation on the direct and indirect effect of supply chain
integration on ﬁrm performance. International Journal of Production Econom-
ics 119 (2), 328–346.

Koste, L.L., Malhotra, M.K., 1999. A theoretical

framework for analyzing the
dimensions of manufacturing ﬂexibility. Journal of Operations Management
18 (1), 75–93.

Koufteros, X., Vonderembse, M., Jayaram, J., 2005. Internal and external integration
for product development: the contingency effects of uncertainty, equivocality,
and platform strategy. Decision Sciences 36 (1), 97–133.

Lam, P.K., Chin, K.S., 2005. Identifying and prioritizing critical success factors for
conﬂict management in collaborative new product development. Industrial
Marketing Management 34 (8), 761–772.

Lambert, D.M., Cooper, M.C., Pagh, J.D., 1998. Supply chain management imple-
mentation issues and research opportunities. International Journal of Logistics
Management 9 (2), 1–18.

Petersen, K.J., Handﬁeld, R.B., Ragatz, G.L., 2005. Supplier integration into new
product development: coordinating product, process and supply chain design.
Journal of Operations Management 23 (3/4), 371–388.

Petersen, K.J., Handﬁeld, R.B., Ragatz, G.L., 2003. A model of supplier integration
into new product development. Journal of Product Innovation Management 20,
284–299.

Piller, F.T., Walcher, D., 2006. Toolkit for idea competitions: a novel method to
integrate users in new product development. R&D Management 36 (3),
307–318.

Poirier, C.C., Quinn, F.J., 2003. A survey of supply chain progress. Supply Chain

Management Review 7 (5), 40–47.

Poppo, L., Zenger, T., 2002. Do formal contracts and relational governance function

as substitutes or complements? Strategic Management Journal 23, 707–725.

Primo, M.A.M., Amundson, S.D., 2002. An exploratory study of the effects of
Journal of

supplier relationships on new product development outcomes.
Operations Management 20 (1), 33–52.

Ragatz, G.L., Handﬁeld, R.B., Petersen, K.J., 2002. Beneﬁts associated with supplier
integration into new product development under conditions of technology
uncertainty. Journal of Business Research 55 (5), 389–400.

Rho, B.H., Hahm, Y.S., Yu, Y.M., 1994. Improving interface congruence between
manufacturing and marketing in industrial product manufacturers. Interna-
tional Journal of Production Economics 37, 27–40.

Richey, R.J., Roath, A.S., Whipple, J.M., Fawcett, S.E., 2010. Exploring governance
theory of supply chain management: Barriers and facilitators to integration.
Journal of Business Logistics 31 (1), 237–256.

Rosenzweig, E.D., Roth, A.V., Dean Jr., J.W., 2003. The inﬂuence of an integration
strategy on competitive capabilities and business performance: an exploratory
study of consumer products manufacturers. Journal of Operations Management
21 (4), 437–456.

Sako, M., 1992. Prices, Quality and Trust: Inter-ﬁrm Relations in Britain and Japan.

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Spekman, R.E., Spear, J., Kamauff, J., 2002. Supply chain competency: learning as a
key component. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal 7 (1),
41–55.

Stank, T.P., Keller, S.B., Daugherty, P.J., 2001. Supply chain collaboration and

logistical service performance. Journal of Business Logistics 22 (1), 29–48.

Stevens, G.C., 1989. Integrating the supply chain. International Journal of Physical

Distribution and Materials Management 19 (8), 3–8.

Swink, M., Narasimhan, R., Wang, C., 2007. Managing beyond the factory walls:
effects of four types of strategic integration on manufacturing plant perfor-
mance. Journal of Operations Management 25 (1), 148–164.

Tan, C.L., Tracey, M., 2007. Collaborative new product development environments:
implications for supply chain management. Journal of Supply Chain Manage-
ment 43 (3), 2–15.

Tang, C.S., 2006. Perspectives in supply chain risk management. International

Journal of Production Economics 42 (3), 1944–1958.


270

Y. He et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 260–270

Tessarolo, P., 2007.

Is integration enough for fast product development? An
empirical investigation of the contextual effects of product vision. Journal of
Product Innovation Management 24, 69–82.

Thomke, S., von Hippel, E., 2002. Customers as innovators: a new way to create

value. Harvard Business Review 80 (4), 74–81.

Tollin, K., 2002. Customization as a business strategy-a barrier to customer
integration in product development? Total Quality Management 13 (4),
427–439.

Tracey, M., Tan, C.L., 2001. Empirical analysis of supplier selection and involvement,
customer satisfaction and ﬁrm performance. Supply Chain Management: An
International Journal 6 (4), 174–188.

Vachon, S., Halley, A., Beaulieu, M., 2009. Aligning competitive priorities in the
supply chain: the role of interactions with suppliers. International Journal of
Operations & Production Management 29 (4), 322–334.

Vargo, S.L., Lusch, R.F., 2008. Service-dominant logic: continuing the evolution.

Journal of the Academy Marketing Science 36, 1–10.

Vickery, S.K., Jayaram, J., Droge, C., Calantone, R., 2003. The effects of an integrative
supply chain strategy on customer service and ﬁnancial performance: an

analysis of direct versus indirect relationships. Journal of Operations Manage-
ment 21 (5), 523–539.

Wang, E.T.G., Tai, J.C.F., Wei, H., 2006. A virtual integration theory of improved
supply-chain performance. Journal of Management Information Systems 23 (2),
41–64.

Williamson, O.E., 1993. Calculativeness, trust, and economic organization. Journal of

Law & Economics 36, 453–486.

Wong, C.Y., Boon-itt, S., Wong, C.W.Y., 2011. The contingency effects of environ-
mental uncertainty on the relationship between supply chain integration and
operational performance. Journal of Operations Management 29 (6), 604–615.
Yeung, J.H.Y., Selen, W., Zhang, M., Huo, B., 2009. The effects of trust and coercive
power on supplier integration. International Journal of Production Economics
120 (1), 66–78.

Zedtwitz, M., Gassmann, O., 2002. Market versus technology drive in R&D
internationalization: four different patterns of managing research and devel-
opment. Research Policy 31 (4), 569–588.

Zhao, X., Huo, B., Flynn, B.B., Yeung, J., 2008. The impact of power and relationship
commitment on the integration between manufacturers and customers in a
supply chain. Journal of Operations Management 26 (3), 368–388.

