Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management
Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 10, 153–164 (2003)
Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI: 10.1002/csr.038

THE GLOBAL REPORTING 
INITIATIVE AND CORPORATE
SUSTAINABILITY REPORTING
IN SWEDISH COMPANIES

Carl-Johan Hedberg1 and Fredrik von Malmborg2*

1 Linköpings Universitet, Environmental Science Programme, Norrköping,
Sweden
2 Linköpings Universitet, Environmental Technology and Management,
Linköping, Sweden

With empirical evidence from Swedish
companies, this paper analyses the
phenomenon of corporate sustainability
reporting (CSR) in general and the use of
CSR guidelines developed by the Global
Reporting Initiative (GRI) in particular.
The main questions at issue are why
companies have chosen to use the GRI
guidelines and how this has affected
corporate social responsibility and
environmental management. From
interviews with all Swedish companies
that use the guidelines, we have found
that companies produce CSRs mainly to
seek organizational legitimacy, and that
the main reason for use of the GRI
guidelines is an expectation of increasing
credibility of the CSR, but also that it
provides a template for how to design a
report. Moreover, we have found that the

CSR report and the GRI guidelines are of
more help for internal than external
communication at this stage of
development. It could help corporations
to learn about themselves and to see what
has actually been done in the
organization. In all, the GRI guidelines
would have the potential for gaining
visibility and control of the triple bottom
line on a corporate level, but they are in
need of further development, not least in
relation to the issue of veriﬁcation.
Copyright © 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
and ERP Environment.

Received 19 August 2002
Revised 10 October 2002
Accepted 17 October 2002

* Correspondence  to:  Dr  F.  von  Malmborg  Environmental  Tech-
nology  and  Management,  Linköpings  Universitet,  SE-58183,
Linköping, Sweden, E-mail: frema@ikp.liu.se

Copyright © 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment.

INTRODUCTION

For a number of reasons, several compa-

nies  worldwide  began  to  publish  sepa-
rate  corporate  environmental  reports
(CERs) in the early 1990s (Roberts, 1991; Gray


et  al.,  1995;  Stittle  et  al.,  1997;  Kolk,  1999; 
Ljungdahl,  1999;  Cormier  and  Gordon,  2001;
Cerin, 2002). This voluntary reporting activity
follows  an  earlier  trend  of  companies  includ-
ing environmental disclosures in their annual
reports, an activity that has been seen as a way
for  companies  to  manage  public  impressions 
of  the  organization’s  operations  to  establish 
or maintain organizational legitimacy (Patten,
1992; Blacconiere and Patten, 1994; Neu et al.,
1998). The United Nations has shown its inter-
est in environmental reporting and states that
corporate environmental reports have quickly
become the key channel for companies to com-
municate  their  environmental  performance
and, just as important, have become an effec-
tive  tool  to  demonstrate  company-wide  inte-
grated  environmental  management  systems,
corporate  responsibility  and  the  implementa-
tion  of  industry  voluntary  codes  of  conduct
(UNEP/SustainAbility,  1994).  However,  both
the  CERs  and  environmental  disclosures 
have been criticized for being biased and self-
laudatory  (Deegan  and  Rankin,  1996; Azzone
et al., 1997; Ljungdahl, 1999; Cerin, 2002), only
showing what the company is good at, leaving
the  bad  perspectives  aside.  The  reliability  of
the reports is in doubt.

incentive 

Following  discussions  on  sustainable  de-
increasing  stakeholder
velopment  and  an 
in  corporate  social  responsibility,
interest 
several  companies  have  now  turned  their
CERs 
into  corporate  sustainability reports
(CSRs),  integrating  accounting  on  environ-
mental,  social  and  economic  issues  into  so-
called  ‘triple  bottom  line’  (TBL)  accounting.
One 
to  corporate  sustainability
reporting  is  the  Dow  Jones  Sustainability
Group  Index  (DJSGI)  where  the  companies
appear according to their work on sustainabil-
ity issues (Cerin and Dobers, 2001). Banks and
insurance  companies  use  such  indexes  as
DJSGI,  when  they  are  making  investments  in
their  ethical  and  ecological  funds  (Knoepfel,
2001).  Somewhat  mindful  of  the  critiques
towards  CERs,  the  production  of  CSRs  goes

C.-J. HEDBERG AND F. VON MALMBORG

along with the development of an international
CSR guideline, i.e. the Global Reporting Initia-
tive (GRI) guideline.

Aiming to shed light on the phenomenon of
CSR in general and the GRI in particular, this
paper analyses why companies are producing
CSRs  and  especially  why  they  use  the  GRI
guidelines  in  doing  so.  It  also  analyses  the
effects this has on corporate social responsibil-
ity and environmental management. What are
the companies’ experiences and how will they
act on the issue in the future? The GRI guide-
line  is  especially  interesting  as  it  is  a  global
guideline for CSRs and there is a certain inter-
est to see what the experiences have been from
using the guidelines. In all, we want to know
whether  CSR  and  GRI  are  a  way  to  go  if  a
company is thinking about its TBL. Are the GRI
guidelines useful for a company and for what
purpose?

METHOD OF INVESTIGATION

Swedbank 

In this study, the use and experiences of GRI in
ten  companies  based  in  Sweden  have  been
investigated:  Electrolux,  ESAB,  ITT  Flygt,  the
Scandinavian Airline  System  (SAS),  Schenker
BTL, 
(Föreningssparbanken),
Swedish Meats, Sydkraft, Volvo Car Corpora-
tion  (VCC)  and  AB  Volvo  (Table  1).  Volvo  is
represented as two companies since the Volvo
group  divides  into  Volvo  Car  Corporation
(VCC), which is a part of the Ford Company,
and AB Volvo.

Except for Sydkraft, the criterion for choos-
ing companies was that they were on the list of
companies  at  the  GRI  homepage1 when  the
study commenced in November 2001. This list
presents  all  companies  worldwide  that  have
claimed that they use the GRI guidelines. The
reason  for  us  to  include  Sydkraft  is  that  we

1 Global  Reporting  Initiative  http://www.globalreporting.org  [5
November 2001].

Copyright © 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 10, 153–164 (2003)

154


GRI AND CSR IN SWEDEN

Table 1. Companies studied (data for year 2000)

Company name

Industry sector

Number of
employees

Annual turnover

(MSEK)

First CER
published

Number of

CERs

Electrolux
ESAB
ITT Flygt
SAS
Schenker
Swedbank
Swedish Meats
Sydkraft
Volvo Car Corp.
AB Volvo

Home appliances
Welding equipment
Pumps and valves
Air transports
Logistics
Finance
Food and beverages
Energy
Cars
Transport solutions

for commercial use

22 000
8 000
4 000
31 000
4 000
13 000
4 800
5 800
27 400
50 000

124 500
9 000
5 500
47 500
8 600
24 000
7 600
14 300

Ford Corp.

130 000

1994
1997
1997
1995
1994
1997
1995
1987
1990
1990

6
4
3
6
6
4
7
6
1
10

stumbled  over  the  fact  that  they  are  about  to
use the guidelines in their forthcoming report.
Sydkraft  was  also  previously  involved  in  the
GRI  structure  feedback  companies  and  is  on
the list as a stakeholder, which means that they
have  been  commenting  on  the  design  of  the
guideline. We think it is interesting to include
the opinion of a company at the beginning of
their  work.  Besides  Sydkraft,  Swedbank  and
ITT Flygt have also been involved in the GRI
development. ITT Flygt was of special interest
as  their  Corporate  Environmental  Manager,
Magnus  Enell,  is  a  representative  in  the  GRI
steering committee. His experience was inter-
esting for getting a picture of the work behind
the  GRI  guidelines.  Along  the  journey,  there
has  also  been  brief  communication  with  the
Sweden  ofﬁce  of  the  consulting  ﬁrm  Deloitte
and  Touche,  as  their  international  branch  is
part of the development of the GRI guidelines.
Deloitte and Touche is also of interest as they
have  developed  their  own  version  of  CSR
guidelines.

The data was mainly collected through per-
sonal  qualitative  interviews  with  represen-
tatives  from  each  company,  but  also  by
communicating  with  the  GRI  interim  secre-
tariat  in  Boston.  Along  with  the  interviews,
which  took  place  in  December  2001  and

January  2002,  the  actual  reports  of  each
company  have  been  compared  with  the
instructions in the June 2000 edition of the GRI
guidelines, and with each other.

THE GLOBAL REPORTING
INITIATIVE

GRI  was  established  in  1997  by  a  number  of
companies  and  organizations  belonging  to 
the  Coalition  for  Environmentally  Respon-
sible  Economies  (CERES),  with  the  mission 
of  developing  globally  applicable  guidelines 
for reporting on economic, environmental and
social  performance,  initially  for  corporations
and  eventually  for  any  business  or  govern-
mental  or  non-governmental  organization
(GRI,  2002).  The  GRI  organization  contains
representatives from several companies in dif-
ferent  areas,  NGOs  and  the  United  Nations
Environment Program (UNEP). To make sure
that  the  guidelines  are  serving  its  purpose, 
a  stakeholder  council  continuously  evaluates
what the layout should be and what the reports
should  contain.  It  is  also  free  for  anyone  to
become  a  stakeholder  to  the  GRI  and  leave
comments on the work with the guideline, as

Copyright © 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 10, 153–164 (2003)

155


it  continues.  Stakeholders  are  encouraged  to
develop the guidelines and the GRI encourages
the companies that are using the guidelines to
communicate with their stakeholders.

The main reason for starting the GRI project
was that there was no guideline on what a vol-
untary  CER  or  CSR  should  contain.  Because 
of  this,  there  was  no  possibility  to  compare
reports  from  different  companies.  The  guide-
lines, which have been released in two versions
so  far,  are  constructed  to  be  applicable  to  the
ISO  14001  standard.  The  ﬁrst  version  was
released  in  1999  and  tested  on  a  number  of
pilot companies worldwide, one of which was
ITT  Flygt,  Sweden.  The  version  that  we  have
been  looking  at  was  published  in  June  2000,
but a third revised version was released in Sep-
tember  2002,  after  this  study  was  ﬁnished.
Stakeholders and companies are continuously
commenting  on  the  guidelines  by  discussing
them  at  meetings  and  ﬁlling  out  forms  that 
the GRI secretariat has designed. GRI has the
ambition  to  continuously  improve  the  guide-
lines  in  an  ongoing  process.  To  develop  the
guidelines  they  have  established  a  group  of 
so-called  structured  feedback  companies (SFCs),
which have ﬁlled out a form in order to tell the
GRI  what  they  have  found  to  be  in  need  of
improvement in the guidelines.

In  its  second  version  from  June  2000  (GRI,
2000), the guidelines recommend the following
parts to be included in the report:

(i) EO statement, including a statement from
the organization’s CEO describing the key
elements of the report;

(ii) proﬁle  of  reporting  organization,  including
an overview of the reporting organization;
indicators,

(iii) executive  summary  and  key 

showing an overview of the GRI report;

(iv) vision  and  strategy,  giving  the  organiza-
tion’s vision and how the vision integrates
economic,  environmental  and 
social 
performance;

(v) policies,  organization,  and  management
systems,  including  an  overview  of  the
organization’s  governance  structure  and

C.-J. HEDBERG AND F. VON MALMBORG

the management systems that are in place
to implement the vision, and

(vi) performance, covering a report of the orga-
nization’s  economic,  environmental  and
social performance.

The  GRI  is  recommending  the  company  to
report  information  for  the  current  period  as
well as two previous periods. In the edition of
June  2000  it  is  mentioned  that  guidance  on
indicators is in need of revision. This is since
the only part that has reached a ready phase is
the  way  to  present  the  environmental  indica-
tors. The indicators that are included so far are
giving  some  guidance  on  what  the  report
needs  to  contain.  It  should  also  be  noticed 
that  the  guidelines  do  not  provide  guidance 
for  implementing  data  collection.  One  of  the
general ideas with the GRI report is to provide
the  company  with  information  to  be  able  to
make  continuous  improvements  among  with
the illumination of the connection between the
three  elements  of  sustainability:  economic,
environmental  and  social  performance.  The
guideline is designed for use in the entire orga-
nization but the GRI is also accepting an incre-
mental application of the guidelines.

In January 2002 the recommendations for the
revised  version  2002  were  presented.  Several
subjects have been discussed in the guideline
revision  process,  e.g.  changing  the  order  and
content of the main headlines of the guidelines.
Other  issues  are  the  key  indicators  and
whether there should be a guide how to use the
guidelines included. The ofﬁcial third, revised,
version of GRI was released in September 2002.
It is more extended than previously, containing
a developed chapter on the report content. This
chapter  describes  the  indicators  on  TBL per-
formance.  Also,  the  recommended  parts  of  a
GRI report are slightly changed as they recom-
mend  that  the  CEO  statement  be  included 
in  ‘Proﬁle  of  the  reporting  organization’.  The
order  of  the  headlines  is  also  changed.  The
linkage  between  sustainability  reporting  and
ﬁnancial reporting is discussed in four pages.
In  this  version  the  issue  of  credibility  is 

Copyright © 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 10, 153–164 (2003)

156


GRI AND CSR IN SWEDEN

highlighted  and  GRI  encourages,  more  than 
in  the  previous  version,  dialogue  with  the 
stakeholders.

CORPORATE SUSTAINABILITY
REPORTING AND GLOBAL
REPORTING INITIATIVE IN SWEDEN

What the Reports Look Like
A general  impression  of  the  so-called  CSRs
released  so  far  by  Swedish  companies  using
the GRI guidelines is that they are of very dif-
ferent standards, despite the fact that all com-
panies have used the guidelines in some way.
The level of ambition is diverging among the
companies, as some companies use the guide-
lines as a template for their report while others
use them only as a source of inspiration. More-
over, some companies have used GRI to help
include TBL in their report and thus to develop
their CER to a CSR, while others have just been
looking  at  the  guidelines  and  then  produced 
a  report  without  the  actual  TBL approach,
excluding  both  social  and  economic  aspects. 
A similarity  among  all  studied  companies
though is that they came to look at GRI while
looking for a way to develop the way to report
on  environmental  and  sustainability  issues.
Interestingly  though,  none  of  the  companies
have made a complete CSR, at least not accord-
ing to the GRI guidelines. Some of the compa-
nies  called  their  report  a  sustainability  report,
e.g.  ESAB,  ITT  Flygt  and  Swedbank.  VCC
chose  to  name  theirs  corporate  citizenship  and
Swedish  Meats  named  theirs  annual  report
including  environment  and  ethics.  All  the  other
companies  called  theirs  environmental  reports.
So far, there is no company in Sweden that has
produced more than one CSR ‘using’ the GRI
guidelines. During 2002, however, there will be
a second generation of reports presented from
both  companies  new  to  this  reporting  proce-
dure  and  companies  that  have  already  been
using the GRI guidelines.

Taking  a  more  speciﬁc 

the
CERs/CSRs of the companies included in this

look  at 

study  and  their  use  of  the  GRI  guidelines,
ESAB has chosen an own alternative and pro-
duced  three  versions  of  their  report  to  suit 
different  readers.  SAS  has  chosen  to  make
theirs  according  to  the  checklist  of  Deloitte 
and  Touche,  which  is  comparable  with  the 
GRI guidelines (Deloitte and Touche Sweden,
2002).  At  the  time,  back  in  1995,  when  SAS
decided to produce their ﬁrst report, the guide-
lines  were  not  ready  to  use.  According  to
Kristin  Haaland,  Environmental  Advisor  at
SAS,  they  have  focused  their  report  on  the
environmental  issues  with  economical  ele-
ments. The social issues have not been consid-
ered as relevant in the same way as they are in
countries  outside  Scandinavia  and  Europe. A
similar statement is found in the evaluation by
Deloitte and Touche Sweden (2001). Electrolux
did  not  make  their  report  according  to  the
guidelines either; instead, they made a report
to  ﬁt  their  annual  report  and  presented  more
details  on  their  ofﬁcial  homepage. According
to  Henrik  Sundström,  Vice  President  Group
Environmental  Affairs,  Electrolux  only  used
the GRI guidelines as a source of inspiration.
Sydkraft,  Schenker AB,  VCC  and  ITT  Flygt
have one particular thing in common, as their
majority  owner  is  a  foreign  corporation.  The
companies  do  diverge  though  when  it  comes
to  reporting  sustainability.  ITT  Flygt  was  one
of  the  pilot  companies  that  tested  the  draft
version of the guidelines from 1999 and there-
fore their report is according to the guidelines,
at least within the areas where they were able
to  collect  data.  Schenker  AB  does  not  report
according to every point in the guideline and
their report is rather to be considered an ordi-
nary environmental report. They have a table
at the beginning of their environmental report
telling  what  is  included  in  the  report.  This  is 
in  conformity  with  what  the  guideline  says
should  be  mentioned:  ‘It  is  essential  for  a
reporting organization to state precisely what
is included and what is excluded’ (GRI, 2000,
p. 7). Schenker even tells in their report that the
GRI has not controlled the content. VCC states
that their report does not follow every point in

Copyright © 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 10, 153–164 (2003)

157


the  guidelines  but  mentions  clearly  on  the
other hand that they have the ambition to do
so in the future.

AB Volvo, however, does not report sustain-
ability and has only used the guideline as an
example.  According  to  Lena  Gevert,  Director
Environmental Affairs, AB Volvo does not have
any ambitions to make a sustainability report.
Regarding the subject of experiences of making
environmental  reports,  Lena  Gevert  responds
that Volvo has a renowned reputation on envi-
ronmental  issues  and  the  corporation  has  a
picture  of  what  they  need  to  improve.  AB
Volvo wants to show that they are not hiding
any data. The Volvo report has been separate
but  is  now  included  in  their  ﬁnancial  report,
with additional information on environmental
issues  available  on  the  Internet.  Swedbank  is
reporting sustainability in a similar way to ITT
Flygt, but Swedbank has put their focus some-
what  away  from  the  environmental  issues  in
favour of the social issues. The focus on social
issues relates to the personal interest of Britt-
Marie  Lundh,  Senior  Vice  President  Environ-
mental  Affairs  at  Swedbank.  Swedish  Meats
did ﬁrst begin with a sustainability report but
due to their ﬁnancial status they had to reduce
their efforts to a shorter version focusing on the
animal situation, a focus they chose because of
the general interest of the public. During their
work  on  the  report,  Swedish  Meats  changed
their board of directors, something that inﬂu-
enced  the  ambitions  on  the  reporting  issue.
Olov Osmark at Swedish Meats says that they
prioritize their real work towards sustainabil-
ity before reporting on the matter.

There are different possible explanations of
the  differences  in  report  design.  The  fact  that
the companies have used the GRI guideline to
different extents, as a template or a mere source
of inspiration, is one. Even if all had used it as
a  template  it  would,  however,  not  automati-
cally imply that they would have included all
the  headlines  in  the  guideline  and  produced
similar reports. However, this is in line with the
guideline, as it is a voluntary guideline aiming
to  assist  the  company  in  reporting  activities

C.-J. HEDBERG AND F. VON MALMBORG

while at the same time giving a lot of room for
personal adjustment to the user. There are no
concrete  demands  in  the  guideline,  only  rec-
ommendations as for how to design a CSR. It
does not say that the company should include
everything  to  be  able  to  use  it.  However,  the
guideline does tell the user to explain why the
excluded parts are not included.

The  differences  in  the  reports  could  also 
be  explained  by  new  institutional  theory
(DiMaggio and Powell, 1991) as the reporting
activities  and  environmental  management
depend on their apprehension of their market
situation  and  relation  to  the  stakeholders. 
Similarly,  it  could  be  related  to  the  thoughts 
of Schwartz (1997) that companies act accord-
ing  to  their  own  perception  of  their  effect  on
the  environment.  In  our  case  this  could  be
stretched to include even the social dimension.
As  in  the  case  of  SAS,  they  believed  that  the
social  issue  is  not  an  argument  as  they  are  a
Scandinavian  company  and  do  not  have  any
social problems such as mentioned in the GRI
guideline. AB Volvo found problems in deﬁn-
ing where their responsibility ends. According
to  Lena  Gevert,  they  consider  that  the  use 
of  the  product  is  not  within  their  control.
However,  not  only  differences  but  also  simi-
larities  in  CSR  design  could  be  explained  by
new  institutional  theory.  For  sure,  companies
interact  with  each  other  and  create  isomor-
phic patterns for the design of environmental
and sustainability reports. The companies are
watching  each  other  in  order  not  to  do  any-
thing that is considered too much.

Why Companies Publish CSRs
This leads us to the question of why the com-
panies  produce  their  CERs/CSRs.  A general
ﬁnding from the data collected is that the com-
panies  in  this  study  were  particularly  inter-
ested  in  reporting  their  environmental  and
ethical/social statistics to their ﬁnanciers. The
companies  also  press  to  present  what  they
actually do for ‘sustainability’. In some cases,
they feel that they have an unfair reputation on

Copyright © 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 10, 153–164 (2003)

158


GRI AND CSR IN SWEDEN

this  issue.  However,  it  should  be  mentioned
that most companies in our study seem to have
difﬁculties  in  deﬁning  sustainability  and  sus-
tainable  development.  Besides  ﬁnanciers  and
other  primary  stakeholders,  some  companies
see the general public and potential employees
as  target  groups  too.  In  all,  most  companies
seem  to  seek  legitimacy  in  their  organization
ﬁelds  and  the  general  society  from  their  CSR
activities. For instance, SAS wants to legitimize
their line of business and attain more credibil-
ity  on  their  environmental  work  by  telling
stakeholders  what  their  actions  on  environ-
mental issues are. As a result, SAS has received
prizes for ‘Best CER of the year’ a number of
times,  something  that  in  itself  could  improve
the image of the company. Moreover, Swedish
Meats has been and is under serious criticism
because they are dealing with animals, which
come  with  a  certain  responsibility  to  care  for
them. By presenting what their operation rou-
tines  are  like,  they  could  gain  a  possibility 
to  form  a  dialogue  with  their  criticizers  and
stakeholders. Sydkraft is also a subject of criti-
cism  as  their  energy  production  originates
from  different  more  or  less  unsustainable
sources. Volvo and VCC are producing trans-
port equipment run by fossil fuels, which they
continuously need to legitimize. Although not
all  companies  are  active  in  ‘dirty’  areas,  they
publish  their  reports  to  provide  information
mainly  showing  how  responsible  and  well
organized they are. As mentioned by Magnus
Enell at ITT Flygt, practicing sustainable devel-
opment  is  to  look  after  the  company  brand.
Our  argument  has  bearing  also  in  company
statements that they all came up with the idea
to make a CER/CSR by themselves; no one has
asked them to do it. In all, our ﬁndings resem-
ble  what  others  have  argued  earlier  as  a
driving force for voluntary environmental and
social reporting (see e.g. Gray et al., 1995; Neu
et al., 1998). However, we have found another
driving  force  too,  namely  internal  capacity
building. ITT Flygt not only wanted to provide
a  tool  for  stakeholders  to  compare  ITT  Flygt
with  other  companies  but  they  also  had  the

intention  to  use  the  report  as  education  ma-
terial  internally  in  the  company.  In  addition,
Schenker wanted to learn more about how the
company operates.

Why companies use the GRI guidelines
Why then use the GRI guidelines when devel-
oping their CSRs? The main ﬁnding from our
interviews  is  that  companies  considered  the
guidelines to be a generally accepted standard
or framework when they started and that this
would  lend  credibility  to  their  reports. All  of
them were looking for a way to develop their
CERs  and  they  liked  the  idea  of  a  global 
standard  that  would  attest  to  the  seriousness 
of  the  voluntary  report.  Swedish  Meats,  for
instance,  wanted  to  give  the  possibility  of  an
external  audit  of  their  operation  as  a  prime
motive for using GRI. They had the impression
that  GRI  would  verify  the  report.  As  men-
tioned, Sydkraft was on its way to producing
the  ﬁrst  CSR  using  the  GRI  guidelines  when
this  study  was  undertaken.  Sydkraft  was
looking for a way to integrate different areas of
accounting  and  reporting,  i.e.  to  account  for
TBL. They do not consider GRI to be generally
accepted today, but they have the impression
that  it  will  reach  acceptance  and  that  this 
motivates  the  use  of  the  guidelines.  Another
important  reason  for  using  GRI,  mentioned 
by  several  company  representatives 
(e.g.
Schenker, Swedish Meats and VCC), is that the
guidelines provide the companies with a good
and  established  structure  for  their  reports,
including  sets  of  indicators  in  areas  that  are
rather new to the companies, as well as ways
to report transparent information.

EXPERIENCES AND MANAGEMENT
EFFECTS FROM USING GRI

As a result of using the GRI guidelines, some
of  the  companies  have  started  with  a  forum 
for sustainable development in which they are
dialoguing  with  all  kinds  of  stakeholder,  as

Copyright © 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 10, 153–164 (2003)

159


encouraged by the GRI. Other companies have
just begun to have this dialogue. This relates to
their  level  of  ambition  with  the  guideline.  A
pattern discovered among the studied compa-
nies is that the ones that just have been look-
ing  at  the  guideline  and  not  using  it  do  not
mention any effects of their work at all. Inter-
nal  effects  that  these  users  have  experienced
are that they in several cases need to develop
their  internal  communication  within  the  area
of  TBL.  In  fact,  Sydkraft  has  already  noticed
that  the  communication  between  the  differ-
ent  business  areas  has  increased  and  been
improved since they began their work with the
forthcoming report. TBL is not always consid-
ered as a part of the ordinary business, which
is a matter that needs to be overcome. On the
other hand, they have discovered that the inte-
gration of TBL throughout their organizations
has  increased  by  producing  CSRs  and  using
the  GRI  guidelines.  The  fact  that  TBL is  not
considered as part of ordinary business could
relate to the fact that it expands the organiza-
tion  ﬁeld  to  include  more  organizations  such
as  the  local  community  and  other  undeﬁned
stakeholders.

An  early  experience  at  ITT  Flygt  was  that
most people, e.g. the personnel at ITT Flygt, do
not  know  that  the  environmental  issues  are
integrated in sustainable development. At ITT
Flygt they also discovered that they did much
more  within  the  sustainability  area  than  they
actually  knew  they  did  when  they  began  to
collect data for their ﬁrst sustainability report.
Thanks  to  developing  the  report,  they  also
developed a way to communicate their actions
within the organization. ITT Flygt has internal
focus  groups  concerning  sustainability  and
they  have  also  developed  a  control  docu-
mentary  on  sustainability.  Representatives
throughout  the  organization  form  the  focus
groups within the company as cross functional
groups. This together with stakeholder group
meetings is giving them required inputs on the
demands  on  sustainability.  The  company  has
developed  a  special  action-plan  handbook  to
act according to.

C.-J. HEDBERG AND F. VON MALMBORG

When  interviewing  Britt-Marie  Lundh  at
Swedbank, she said that it is hard to reach out
to  all  employees,  as  they  do  not  know  what
sustainability  really  is,  but  she  believes  the 
sustainability  report  has  given  the  personnel 
a  greater  knowledge.  She  added  that  some
people  have  discovered  the  possibility  to  do
business  on  sustainability  especially  towards
communities, which has helped the integration
of the sustainability work. They have noticed
that the report is a driving force, especially in
the  company’s  local  ofﬁces,  where  a  greater
knowledge  has  emerged  and  nobody  reacts
negatively  against  the  concept.  At  Swedbank
the  focus  on  the  pure  environmental  issues
decreased when sustainability was put on the
agenda. Instead, they focus on the social issues
such as establishing a bank ofﬁce in a district
with many immigrants. At one ofﬁce they have
adapted to this and hired personnel who know
the languages and culture in the area. This is
also  a  way  to  attract  customers  from  ethnic
minorities. Swedbank does however continue
with  an  on-going  project  implementing  ISO
14001, so they have not left the environmental
issues completely.

At Swedish Meats there has been a sustain-
ability driving force by the work on the report,
which  has  given  the  company  a  comprehen-
sive  view  on  TBL.  The  collection  of  data  at
Swedish Meats has improved as a direct con-
sequence  of  the  work  with  the  report.  They
believed that there were internal advantages to
gain  with  GRI  and  it  led  towards  integrating
all issues in operational management. A deeper
understanding  of  the  products’  life  cycles  is
another subject mentioned by Olov Osmark.

At  ESAB,  Stefan  Larsson  says  that  the  sus-
tainability report has helped pushing the inter-
nal  work  on  the  matter.  He  also  says  that 
the  issues  that  before  had  the  ability  to  fall
between  chairs  are  now  being  integrated.  He
continues  by  mentioning 
the  economical
aspects as an example. The conclusion at ESAB
is that work on sustainability and environment
has  been  given  a  push  and  gained  depth. At
VCC,  the  sustainability  reporting  has  forced

Copyright © 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 10, 153–164 (2003)

160


GRI AND CSR IN SWEDEN

them  to  follow  up  on  the  report  and  this  has
affected  their  organizational  structure.  More-
over,  the  sustainability  reporting  has  made
environmental  management  at  VCC  change
from  a  manufacturer/customer  relationship
towards a broader mindset. An example men-
tioned  is  a  bioenergy  initiative  for  the  city  of
Gothenburg.  However,  Catarina  Paulson  at
VCC  did  not  think  that  the  GRI  guidelines
gave them anything other than a structure for
the report from a third party, which she on the
other hand believes give credibility. AB Volvo
believed  that  their  work  with  collecting  data
for their environmental report affected all their
data  collection  in  a  positive  direction,  which
helped  them  develop  their  routines  and  sys-
tems  for  collecting  data.  Furthermore,  Elec-
trolux has changed their environmental focus
from  the  manufacturing  phase  to  the  user
phase  as  a  result  of  environmental  and  sus-
tainability reporting. Their products have more
environmental  impact  than  their  production
processes.  At  Schenker,  as  a  contrast  to  the
other  interview  statements,  it  is  not  believed
that using the GRI guidelines has affected their
work in any way.

In  all,  all  companies  have  positive  experi-
ences  from  the  use  of  GRI.  According  to  the
interviews  with  the  Swedish  corporate  repre-
sentatives  their  corporations  have  received
greater credibility as they are using GRI guide-
lines,  externally  but  also  internally.  The  com-
pany  appearance  on  a  list  like  the  GRI  list  is
most  certainly  giving  credit  to  the  internal
work; it probably also gives the sustainability
issue legitimacy within the company. When the
company representatives were asked whether
they  would  continue  to  make  this  kind  of
report they all answered yes, but if it was going
to be a printed version there was serious doubt
in  several  cases.  The  possibility  to  distribute
the  information  on  the  company  website  is
offering  greater  ﬂexibility  and  provides  the
possibility  to  make  updates  continuously.  In
fact,  all  companies  publish  their  CERs/CSRs
on the Internet today. The website alternative
is often cheaper than the printed version as it

is produced in a large quantity. The alternative
to  combine  the  printed  version  with  a  web-
based version is also mentioned. In this com-
bination, the details would be available on the
Internet  and  a  shorter  compilation  in  their
annual  report  in  order  to  save  paper  and
money.  A web-based  report  is  also  recom-
mended by the GRI, as it will facilitate frequent
updating of the content.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

As always in a corporate environmental man-
agement context, the management’s behaviour
and statements are most essential for the inter-
nal  engagement  and  results  and  so  are  their
knowledge  and  expertise  (Schwartz,  1997,  p.
304).  The  intention  of  GRI  is  to  provide  a
guideline  for  companies  that  want  to  report
their  work  externally,  but  from  the  results  of
this  study  the  most  important  fact  is  that,  by
looking  at  the  guidelines  and  collecting  the
required  data,  the  management  achieves  a
useful overview of the company. The company
does  not  have  to  report  the  information  to
begin with, but the management will have the
information  available  if  there  is  an  external
demand  for  the  information.  As  some  of  the
companies  in  our  study  discovered  that  they
already were acting in areas they did not know
they  were  acting  in,  it  is  possible  to  say  that 
the  data  collection  procedure  also  affects 
the  company’s  apprehension  of  itself  on  the
market  as  well  as  between  its  departments.
Unknown  interactions  between  departments,
events, individuals and outside factors are dis-
covered and used to serve a purpose internally
as  well  as  externally.  Interestingly,  a  similar
effect has been found in local authorities when
they  implement  environmental  management
systems 
(Burström,  2000;  Burström  von 
Malmborg,  2002).  Among  the  companies  in-
cluded in this study, it was common that they
began  with  working  out  who  wanted  the
report,  i.e.  who  were  the  stakeholders.  An
analysis  of  this  kind  could  also  be  of  help  in

Copyright © 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 10, 153–164 (2003)

161


working out in what organizational ﬁeld they
are  acting.  It  could  also  help  in  ﬁnding  out
which stakeholders they have to address ﬁrst.
As an example, Swedbank did make a nation-
wide investigation to make sure they provided
proper information in their report.

All  the  companies  studied  had  their  report
design as the main reason for using the guide-
lines.  Considering  this  as  a  general  fact,  they
have  gained  more  than  design  by  using  the
guidelines. That is, most of them indicate that
their  internal  communication  has  improved
thanks to the guidelines, between parts of the
organization  that  normally  do  not  communi-
cate that much. This fact is important, because
if TBL is to be properly integrated there has to
be  communication  between  departments  and
operations  (Post  and  Altman,  1994;  Welford,
2000, p. 101ff). As a bonus, there will most cer-
tainly  be  advantages  in  other  areas  as  well
when  people  and  organizations  start  to  com-
municate.  If  a  corporation  seeks  legitimacy,
perhaps it will get it by presenting these kinds
of report. The experience is that it has become
easier 
the
company. If the report gives legitimacy for the
company  externally,  then  perhaps  the  report
gives the sustainability work legitimacy within
the company. As it has become easier to obtain
the  information  and  they  have  reached  inte-
gration in some areas, this theory might have
ground.  The  companies’  attitudes  towards
their  products’  environmental  effects  and
whose  responsibility  the  product  impact  is
varies. Is the environmental impact of driving
a car or a truck the user’s responsibility or the
manufacturer’s,  or  maybe  both?  Is  it  the
product  itself  or  the  service  the  company
provide with a product that is the issue? The
GRI report could help corporations to be able
to see what actually has been done in the orga-
nization  and  make  improvements  from  the
accounted result.

information  within 

to  obtain 

From  the  empirical  data  in  this  study,  our
conclusion is that the GRI guideline would be
a potential tool to gain control and visibility of
the TBL on a corporate level and highlight the

C.-J. HEDBERG AND F. VON MALMBORG

importance of collecting internal information.
By collecting the information that is needed for
the report, the company discovers details that
were  previously  unknown.  Furthermore,  by
using  the  guidelines  or  at  least  parts  of  them
the  management  and  the  stakeholders  will 
see  what  is  going  on  within  the  company. 
The  transparency  that  is  provided  by  a  GRI
report  may  shorten  the  distance  between  the
company  and  society  as  well  as  between  the
management  and  its  employees.  To  report
according  to  the  GRI  guidelines  is  also  a
natural  way  to  take  the  environmental  man-
agement  at  any  company  a  step  further  in
order  to  reach  continual  improvements.  The
guidelines  are  compatible  with  the  already
common ISO 14001. Thus, it should not be that
hard to try this kind of reporting. As the exter-
nal report seems to give internal communica-
tion and reporting a push, it is possible to gain
advantages in more than one area. The possi-
bility with the guidelines is not only to report
externally;  it  is  also  to  report  internally.  The
report  could  be  used  as  commercial  material
but also as pure informative material to exter-
nal  and  internal  stakeholders  who  demand
and need the information. In the interviews, it
was  mentioned  that  the  employees  did  not
know  what  sustainability  was.  In  such  cases
the work with a GRI report gives the employ-
ees  something  to  touch  and  look  at;  the 
sustainability  becomes  visible.  By  using  the
guidelines  and  determining  the  company’s
intentions  on  each  point  in  the  guideline
would give a speciﬁcation of requirements on
employees and suppliers.

A ﬁnal  reﬂection  though  is  that  we  have
found  that  companies  are  mentioned  on  the
GRI  list  although  they  have  only  been  using
the  guidelines  as  a  source  of  inspiration,  not
using  them  strictly.  Notable  in  this  context  is
the fact that the list of companies presented on
the GRI homepage is not veriﬁed by the GRI.
The  companies  have  not  shown  the  report  to
the GRI, which gives a lot of space for compa-
nies  that  have  the  ambition  to  be  on  the  list.
According  to  Mark  Brownlie  at  GRI  interim

Copyright © 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 10, 153–164 (2003)

162


GRI AND CSR IN SWEDEN

secretariat, the routine with the list of compa-
nies is that the company reports to the GRI that
they have used the guideline in some way and
then  the  GRI  puts  them  on  the  list.  Since  the
GRI  guidelines  are  just  a  guide,  there  are  no
concrete  demands,  only  recommendations.
The comparability suffers though from the fact
that the organizations are free to use whatever
level  of  report  suits  the  company  and  their
level of ambition. This we believe gives a lack
of  credibility  for  the  GRI  and  maybe  it  could
affect the company credibility in the long run
as well. As mentioned, at least one of the com-
panies in our study chose to use GRI since they
had the impression that GRI would verify the
reports  and  account  for  seriousness  in  corpo-
rate  environmental  and  sustainability  report-
ing. After correspondence with Magnus Enell
at ITT Flygt and a member of the GRI Stake-
holder  Council  Working  Group,  he  clariﬁes
that  the  intention  is  that  stakeholders  would
react if the information on the list were false.
He  also  conﬁrms  that  there  are  ongoing  dis-
cussions  on  the  veriﬁcation  issue.  If  a  veri-
ﬁcation  system  is  established  by  the  GRI
headquarters, and a clearer deﬁnition on how
to  use  the  guideline  in  the  different  levels  of
ambition, there is a possibility to compensate
the different ways of using and help interpret
the  GRI  guideline  ambitions.  The  GRI  does 
not,  however,  have  the  required  funding  to
perform veriﬁcation and, according to Magnus
Enell, such activities would compete with the
consulting  ﬁrms  that  are  involved  with  the
GRI.  In  all,  the  lack  of  possibility  to  provide
veriﬁed  and  comparable  reports  would  cer-
tainly be a key issue to solve if GRI is going to
be  a  guideline  that  reduces  the  criticisms  of
voluntary corporate reporting as being biased
and self-laudatory. In our opinion, the release
of the revised version of GRI in September 2002
will  hardly  relieve  this  criticism;  it  concerns 
the contents of the report rather than the use of
the reports. Thus it continues to be a key issue.
In  the  meanwhile,  CSRs  and  the  GRI  guide-
lines could be seen as a potential tool for com-
panies  that  want  to  get  a  better  picture  of

themselves  and  use  it  for  internal  capacity
building.

To end, one should keep in mind the fact that
GRI guidelines are a rather new way of report-
ing.  The  guidelines  ought  to  be  treated  as 
the dynamic instrument they claim to be and
therefore will continuously be developed. The
transparency  that  the  guidelines  provide  is
perhaps more important than having identical
reports to compare.

REFERENCES

Azzone G, Brophy M, Noci G, Welford R, Young W. 1997.
A stakeholder’s view of environmental reporting. Long
Range Planning 30(5): 699–709.

Blacconiere  WG,  Patten  DM.  1994.  Environmental 
disclosures,  regulatory  costs,  and  changes  in  ﬁrm
value.  Journal  of  Accounting  and  Economics 18:  357–
377.

Burström  F.  2000.  Environmental  management  systems
and  co-operation  in  municipalities.  Local  Environment
5(3): 271–284.

Burström  von  Malmborg  F.  2002.  Environmental  man-
agement systems, communicative action and organiza-
tional  learning.  Business  Strategy  and  the  Environment
11(5): 312–323.

Cerin P. 2002. Communication in corporate environmen-
tal  reports.  Corporate  Social  Responsibility  and  Environ-
mental Management 9(1): 46–66.

Cerin P, Dobers P. 2001. What does the performance of the
Dow  Jones  Sustainability  Group  Index  tell  us?  Eco-
Management and Auditing 8(3): 123–133.

Cormier  D,  Gordon  IM.  2001. An  examination  of  social
and  environmental  reporting  strategies.  Accounting,
Auditing and Accountability Journal 14(5): 587–616.

Deegan  C,  Rankin  M.  1996.  Do  Australian  companies
report environmental news objectively? An analysis of
environmental  disclosures  by  ﬁrms  prosecuted  suc-
cessfully  by  the  Environmental  Protection  Authority.
Accounting,  Auditing  and  Accountability  Journal 9(2):
52–69.

Deloitte  and  Touche  Sweden.  2001.  Swedish  Voluntary
Reporting 2001 – Evaluation and International Comparison.
http://www.deloitte.se/stores/publications/en/envr
eport2001.pdf [8 January 2002].

Deloitte and Touche Sweden. 2002.

http://www.deloitte.se [8 January 2002].

DiMaggio PJ, Powell WW. 1991. The New Institutionalism
in Organisational Analysis. University of Chicago Press:
Chicago, IL.

Copyright © 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 10, 153–164 (2003)

163


Global  Reporting  Initiative  (GRI).  2000.  Sustainability
Reporting  Guidelines  on  Economic,  Environmental,  and
Social Performance. GRI: Boston.

Global Reporting Initiative (GRI). 2002.

http://www.globalreporting.org/AboutGRI/GRI_Bro
chure–July2000.pdf [19 March 2002].

Gray  R,  Kouhy  R,  Lavers  S.  1995.  Corporate  social  and
environmental reporting: a review of the literature and
a  longitudinal  study  of  UK  disclosure.  Accounting,
Auditing and Accountability Journal 8(2): 47–77.

Knoepfel I. 2001. Dow Jones Sustainability Group Index:
a global benchmark for corporate sustainability. Corpo-
rate Environmental Strategy 8(1): 6–15.

Kolk  A.  1999.  Evaluating  corporate  environmental 
reporting. Business Strategy and the Environment 8: 225–
237.

Ljungdahl F. 1999. Utveckling av Miljöredovisning i Svenska
Börsbolag  –  Praxis,  Begrepp,  Orsaker,  PhD  Dissertation.
Lund University Press: Lund.

Neu  D,  Warsame  H,  Pedwell  K.  1998.  Managing  public
impressions:  environmental  disclosures  in  annual
reports.  Accounting  Organisations  and  Society 23(3):
265–282.

Patten  DM.  1992.  Intra-industry  environmental  disclo-
sures  in  response  to  the  Alaskan  oil  spill:  a  note  on
legitimacy theory. Accounting, Organizations and Society
17(5): 471–475.

Post JE, Altman BW. 1994. Managing the environmental
change  process:  barriers  and  opportunities.  Journal  of
Organizational Change 7(4): 64–81.

Roberts  CB.  1991.  Environmental  disclosures:  a  note  on
reporting  practices  in  mainland  Europe.  Accounting,
Auditing and Accountability Journal 4(3): 62–71.

Schwartz B. 1997. Det Miljöanpassade Företaget – Strategiska
Uppträdanden på den Institutionella Scenen. Nerenius and
Santérus: Stockholm.

Stittle  J,  Blas  MM,  Conesa  IM.  1997.  Environmental
reporting  in  Europe:  an  analysis  of  UK  and  Spanish
developments. European Business Review 97(5): 215–223.

C.-J. HEDBERG AND F. VON MALMBORG

United Nations Environment Program (UNEP)/Sustain-
Ability.  1994.  Company  Environmental  Reporting:  a
Measure of the Progress of Business and Industry Towards
Sustainable Development, Technical Report 24 UNEP IE.
UNEP Industry and Environment Ofﬁce: Paris.

Welford RJ. 2000. Corporate Environmental Management 3:

Towards Sustainable Development. Earthscan: London.

BIOGRAPHIES

Mr  Carl-Johan  Hedberg  holds  BSc  and  MSc
degrees  from  the  interdisciplinary  environ-
mental  science  programme  at  Linköpings 
Universitet,  Campus  Norrköping.  He  can  be
contacted  at  Linköpings  Universitet,  Envi-
ronmental  Science  Programme,  SE-601  74 
Norrköping, Sweden.
Tel.: +46 73 9313400
Email: cjhedberg@home.se

Dr  Fredrik  von  Malmborg  (corresponding
author) serves as senior lecturer at Linköpings
Universitet, teaching corporate environmental
management  at  undergraduate  and  graduate
levels.  During  2001,  he  was  post-doc  visit-
ing  academic  of  the  Environmental  Policy 
and  Management  Group,  Imperial  College,
London.  He  can  be  contacted  at  Linköpings
Universitet,  Division 
of  Environmental 
Technology  and  Management,  SE-581  83
Linköping, Sweden.
Tel.: +46 70 7228287
Email: frema@ikp.liu.se

Copyright © 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 10, 153–164 (2003)

164

