European Accounting Review, Vol. 14, No. 1, 41 – 61, 2005

The Value Relevance of
Environmental Performance

LARS HASSEL, HENRIK NILSSON AND SIV NYQUIST†
A˚ bo Akademi University, Umea˚ School of Business and Economics and †Swedish University of
Agricultural Sciences

(Received February 2002; accepted August 2004)

information. Our

ABSTRACT This paper provides insight into how environmental information is reﬂected
in the market value of listed Swedish companies. Using the residual income valuation
model, we express market value of equity as a function of book value of equity,
accounting earnings, and environmental performance, where the last variable is used as
a proxy for other value-relevant
research is motivated by the
recommendation of the Swedish Society of Financial Analysts regarding environmental
reporting. This recommendation assumes that environmental
information has value
relevance, since it is likely to affect the expected future earnings of listed companies.
We contribute empirical ﬁndings to current debate on the relationship between
environmental performance and shareholder value. The cost-concerned school argues
that environmental investments represent only increased costs, resulting in decreased
earnings and lower market values. The value creation school regards environmental
efforts as a way to increase competitive advantage and improve ﬁnancial returns to the
investors. The current research ﬁnds support for the cost-concerned school, because the
results indicate that environmental performance has a negative inﬂuence on the market
value of ﬁrms.

1.

Introduction

The purpose of this study is to investigate the value relevance of environmental
performance ratings for the market values of ﬁrms listed on Stockholm stock
exchange (Stockholmsbo¨rsen). The study proposes that the market value of

Correspondence Address: Henrik Nilsson, Umea˚ School of Business and Economics, Umea˚ University,
SE-901 87 Umea˚, Sweden. E-mail: henrik.nilsson@fek.umu.se

0963-8180 Print=1468-4497 Online=05=010041 – 21 # 2005 European Accounting Association
DOI: 10.1080/0963818042000279722
Published by Routledge Journals, Taylor & Francis Group Ltd on behalf of the EAA.


42 L. Hassel et al.

ﬁrms will reﬂect both their ﬁnancial and environmental performance. According
to our research model, ﬁnancial performance does not alone explain market
values of ﬁrms, but the value relevance of ﬁnancial statement information can
be increased if it is combined with environmental information that has been com-
piled into performance ratings. In this respect, the study is related to research on
value relevance of non-ﬁnancial information in other contexts. Such extensions
of purely ﬁnancial models include the Amir and Lev (1996) study of the wireless
communications industry, the Deng et al. (1999) study of high-tech ﬁrms, and
the studies by Trueman et al. (2000) and Rajgopal et al. (2003) of the valuation
of internet stocks. There is also a stream of value relevance studies of intangible
assets, such as brand assets, that are not disclosed in ﬁnancial statements (Kalla-
pur and Kwan, 2004).

Accounting research on the ﬁnancial outcomes of environmental efforts con-
sists of two main streams. The ﬁnancial beneﬁts of environmentally friendly
practices are searched for in pollution level studies. Event studies are used to
demonstrate ﬁnancial gains or returns from ‘greening’. Proponents of ‘it pays
to be green’ say that there is a causal link between environmental and ﬁnancial
performance. Pollution reduction is said to produce future cost savings and mini-
mize future environmental liabilities (Porter and van der Linde, 1995; Reinhardt,
1999). An early pollution control related study was the Belkaoui (1976) study of
the relationship between market reaction and disclosed pollution control expen-
ditures. Spicer (1978) found that expenditures for pollution control were associ-
ated with ﬁnancial performance among pulp and paper ﬁrms. Freedman and Jaggi
(1986) searched for the relationship between market value and pollution disclos-
ures, and Cormier et al. (1993) and Bath (1999) for the relationship between
ﬁnancial variables, market values, and pollution levels. Hart and Ahuja (1996)
investigated the relationship between emission reductions and both return on
assets and return on sales. They showed that changes in pollution predate
changes in ﬁnancial performance. King and Lennox (2001) had difﬁculties inter-
preting the Hart and Ahuja study because of difﬁculties linking environmental
performance improvements to future ﬁnancial gain. Attempts to isolate the
effects of pollution control on future net cash ﬂows and to account for ﬁrm differ-
ences beyond environmental efforts have proven to be a challenge for accounting
research.

Environmental event type studies attempt to demonstrate that ‘greening’
results in ﬁnancial gains. Such studies look at changes in stock prices or
market values following some environmental event. Hart (1997) has proposed
that excess ﬁnancial returns result from the relative environmental capabilities
of ﬁrms. When isolating an environmental event within a narrow window,
important ﬁrm differences can be controlled for;
the events under study,
however, are only partially environmental and their dynamics are unknown.
Shane and Spicer (1983) investigated the relationship between security price
movements and disclosed studies of social performance. Research inspired
by environmental
regulations includes Maloney and McCormick (1982),


The Value Relevance of Environmental Performance

43

environmental

standards. Klassen and McLaughlin (1996)

Blacconiere and Patten (1994), and Dowell et al. (2000), the latter of which
examined the relationship between market values and adoption of stringent
global
and
Feldman et al. (1997) studied the effects of published events on ﬁrm value,
and found that both positive and negative events were related to ﬁrm value.
Freedman and Jaggi (1986) could not, however, relate ﬁrm value to environ-
mental management. Milne and Chane (1999) conducted an experimental
study of the relationship between narrative social disclosures and investment
decisions. They found that only a small minority of respondents altered
their investment decisions because of social disclosures. Based on prior litera-
ture, Cormier and Magnan (1997) suggested a study on the relationship
between environmental stewardship and ﬁrm value. Subsequent research has
produced mixed ﬁndings, and has not explicitly focused on the value rele-
vance of environmental performance in complementing traditional accounting
numbers. This paper contributes to ﬁlling that gap, by considering how the
stock market reﬂects environmental performance over and above traditional
ﬁnancial statement information.

This paper uses an accounting-based valuation model developed by Ohlson
(1995), in which the market value of equity is considered as a function of
book value, accounting earnings, and environmental performance. The
environmental performance variable is used as a proxy for other value-relevant
information in the model. Ilinitch et al. (1998) have presented both a theo-
retical and empirical approach to an enhanced measurement of environmental
performance. In this paper we use a special performance index, or an envi-
ronmental rating of companies, developed for institutional investors in the
Swedish stock market. Because the performance rating is disclosed for ﬁnan-
cial market purposes, the index is a priori expected to be a potential driver of
future earnings of a company with value relevance on the Stockholm stock
exchange.

Our results indicate that environmental performance ratings complement
accounting information, and consequently, that environmental performance has
value relevance in the Swedish stock market. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd a signiﬁcant
negative relationship between the market value of listed Swedish companies
and their environmental performance ratings as measured by an environmental
performance index. The results also indicate that the negative relationship is
more pronounced in the latter portion of the study period, after environmental
accounting regulations was changed. The results also apply universally across
all industry groups.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses
the value relevance of environmental performance in the Swedish context. The
following section presents the theoretical model that has been used and related
regression equations developed to link ﬁnancial and environmental performance
to the market value of ﬁrms. The data, sample, and results are presented before
the conclusions of the paper.


44 L. Hassel et al.

2. The Relevance of Environmental Performance

There is a general belief that various stakeholders require information from com-
panies regarding their environmental performance. According to Deegan and
Rankin (1997), annual report users have been found to believe that environmental
information is important for their decision making and that they seek such infor-
mation in annual reports. However, Deegan and Rankin (1997) also claim that the
quality of environmental performance disclosures by companies themselves is low
and biased. This section will brieﬂy highlight the developments of environmental
disclosures in Sweden and the need for and foundations of the environmental
performance rating that is used in the empirical section of the study.

The importance to the investor of information on a company’s environmental
concerns and performance has recently been highlighted by the Swedish Society
of Financial Analysts (SFF). Their recommendation, Environmental Information
for Financial Analysts, states: ‘For an increasing number of ﬁrms a positive
environmental proﬁle has become an important element in their marketing strat-
egy, and a lack of such a proﬁle constitutes a risk factor’ (SFF, 2000, p. 58;
author’s translation). More importantly for this study, they suggest that: ‘environ-
mental factors will increasingly inﬂuence the future cash ﬂows of ﬁrms in both a
positive and negative way. Equity valuation, credit analysis, and other economic
decisions that involve ﬁnancial analyses are based on forecasts of future earnings
or cash ﬂows. These forecasts are inﬂuenced by or complemented with sensitivity
analysis and risk estimation. The opinion of the Society is that such estimation
will be increasingly determined by environmental factors’ (SFF, 2000, p. 58;
author’s translation).

Swedish companies voluntarily disclose environmental information. However,
from January, 1999, environmental information is also required by the account-
ing legislation. Companies that have a license to operate, according to the
Environmental Code, must disclose information in their administrative reports
as to how their operations directly inﬂuence the external environment (SFS,
1995: 1554). The increased focus on environmental reporting is not unique to
Sweden. Bebbington (1999) says that Danish companies are mandated
to publish environmental information as ‘green accounts’. In June 2001, the
European Commission adopted a recommendation on the recognition, mea-
surement, and disclosure of environmental
issues in annual accounts and
annual reports. This recommendation applies to all companies covered by the
EU fourth and seventh Company Law Directives (78/660/EEC and 83/349/
EEC), and was to be applied to all accounting periods starting within 12
months of the date of adoption. The recommendation aims to improve the
quality, transparency, and comparability of the environmental information that
companies present in their annual reports (European Commission, 2001).

An evaluation of the environmental performance must, however, go beyond
liabilities (Ilinitch
mere ﬁnancial statement disclosures of environmental
et al., 1998). Gauging environmental performance requires the measurement of


The Value Relevance of Environmental Performance

45

non-ﬁnancial dimensions of performance. Systematic attempts have been made
to describe good environmental performance, and Epstein (1996) has outlined
the components of corporate environmental scorecards. Lober (1996) suggested
that organizations consider four dimensions of environmental effectiveness.
He suggests an output-based approach to how well ﬁrms meet stated goals,
a system resource-based approach to how ﬁrms capture resources in order to
be competitive, an internal process-based approach to information ﬂows and
employee communication, and, ﬁnally, a strategic constituency-based approach
to how well stakeholders’ needs are met. Ilinitch et al. (1998) have integrated
the process, outcome, internal, and external components of environmental per-
formance criteria into a framework useful to various stakeholder groups, such
as investors. This theoretical framework provides the foundation of the environ-
mental performance ratings used in this study, as it meets the need for a practice-
and organizational effectiveness-oriented measurement.

This paper makes use of accounting-based valuation theory developed by
Ohlson (1995) to model the relationship between market value and environ-
mental performance. Following recent studies in market-based accounting
research (e.g. Trueman et al., 2000; Ali and Hwang, 2000), we deﬁne value rel-
evance as the ability of accounting or non-accounting measures to capture or
summarize information that affects equity value. The model expresses the
market value of equity as a function of a ﬁrm’s book value, earnings, and
other value-relevant non-ﬁnancial information. An index attempting to mirror
the environmental performance of Swedish listed ﬁrms was provided for this
study by the Swedish ﬁrm, CaringCompany (CC) Research, AB. We use the
index as a proxy for environmental performance.

Current debate on how environmental performance impacts the market
value of ﬁrms is basically divided into two schools (The Assabet Group,
2000). The cost-concerned school argues that environmental investments and
high environmental performance represent only increased costs, resulting in
decreased earnings and lower market values. Consequently, the relationship
between environmental performance and market value of a ﬁrm is expected to
be negative (e.g. Jaggi and Freedman 1992; Walley and Whitehead, 1994).
The value creation school regards environmental efforts as a way to increase com-
petitive advantage and improve ﬁnancial returns to the investors. The relationship
between environmental performance and market value is expected to be positive
according to this view (e.g. Konar and Cohen 2000; Dowell et al., 2000).

The difﬁculty of linking environmental reporting to ﬁnancial outcomes has
been brought up by Bebbington (1999). Danish companies have since 1996
been mandated to publish environmental information in the form of a ‘green
account’. Bebbington (1999) reviews an governmental report on environmental
reporting outcomes of legislation in Denmark, and concludes that it appears to
have had no signiﬁcant adverse effects. One ﬁnding of the review was that
about 50% of the ﬁrms complying with the environmental reporting legislation
reported having achieved ﬁnancial beneﬁts exceeding the costs involved. The


46 L. Hassel et al.

estimated costs of the environmental reports were difﬁcult to measure, but he
concluded that the distribution of costs and beneﬁts was probably uneven.
Case studies conducted by Repetto and Duncan (1999) revealed that companies
operating in the pulp and paper industry face different levels of exposure to and
associated ﬁnancial risks from environmental issues. In some cases, environ-
mental issues had little impact on ﬁnancial performance and could be a source
of increased value. In other cases, environmental issues could involve costs
exceeding 10% of their current stock market values and materially affect their
competitive positions. Also, King and Lenox (2001) found evidence of an associ-
ation between pollution reduction and ﬁnancial performance, but were unable to
prove the direction of causality (p. 113). Even though ﬁrms in cleaner industries
had a higher Tobin’s q, the confounding effects of ﬁxed ﬁrm attributes could not
be ruled out. Based on the accounting standard adopted in 1990 in Canada, Li and
McConomy (1999) have suggested that the disclosure of provisions for future
removal and site restoration costs is relevant for ﬁrm value, as it may enable
capital markets to proxy for the liabilities involved. The evidence was,
however, inconclusive and the environmental proxy was more limited than that
used in this study.

The research evidence mentioned above suggests that environmental efforts
could lead to different ﬁnancial outcomes, as future earnings could be inﬂuenced
both positively and negatively. Environmental information disclosed as per-
formance ratings for the investor community is in this study expected to be
value relevant and to complement ﬁnancial
information in the valuation
process. Value relevance is determined by analyzing how environmental per-
formance is reﬂected in the current expectations of future earnings that determine
market values. If a relationship can be established, the ﬁnding would be consist-
ent with investors’ employing environmental performance information when
setting prices, and the metric used to gauge environmental performance would
be regarded as capturing the environmental information used by market partici-
pants in valuing ﬁrms.

3. The Valuation and Regression Models

Linking Environmental Performance to the Market Value of the Firm

The valuation model developed by Ohlson (1995)1 is based on three main
assumptions. First, the value of equity equals the present value of all future divi-
dends. Second, the accounting system satisﬁes a clean surplus relationship.
Finally, abnormal earnings evolve as a modiﬁed ﬁrst-order, auto-regressive
process and other information, nt, as a simple ﬁrst-order, auto-regressive
process. Based on these assumptions, Ohlson (1995) derives the following valua-
tion model:

MVt ¼ BVt þ a1AEt þ a2vt,

(1)


The Value Relevance of Environmental Performance

47

where MVt is market value of equity at time t, BVt equals book value of equity at
the end of the year t, AEt is equal to abnormal earnings (deﬁned as the difference
between net income and opening book value of equity multiplied by the req-
uired rate of return) for period t, and vt is other non-accounting value-relevant
information. Some of this non-accounting information consists of information
regarding companies’ environmental performance. In the sequel our concern is
limited to information regarding companies’ environmental performance. The
model emphasizes the use of both accounting and non-accounting information
in the valuation process. Furthermore, the valuation framework allows the
environmental performance, EP, of the ﬁrm to be explicitly added in a regression
model through the vt term. Hence, we model environmental performance as a
proxy for other information in the framework.

Estimating (1) requires an estimate of the required rate of return in order to cal-
culate abnormal earnings. Because of data constraints, no generally accepted
method for estimating the required rate of return applies here. Therefore, follow-
ing Collins et al. (1999) and Lin and Walker (2000), we instead restate (1) in
terms of cum-dividend market value, opening book value, earnings, and other
information (see Appendix for a derivation), and present the following empirical
analogue of the Ohlson model:2

MVt þ DIt ¼ b0 þ b1BVt 1 þ b2NIt þ b3vt þ 1t

(2)
where DIt is the dividend, MVt þ DIt is the cum-dividend adjusted market
value, BVt21 equals opening book value, and NIt is current period net income.
Equation (2) constitutes the empirical model foundation for this study, where
the value relevance of environmental performance will be empirically investi-
gated through the other information variable, vt. The next section presents the
estimated regressions based on equation (2).

The Regression Models and Research Design Issues

We start by ﬁrst investigating the value relevance of accounting information
solely by estimating the following regression of cum-dividend market value on
net income:

MVi,t þ DIi,t

BVi,t 1

¼ b0

1

BVi,t 1

þ b1 þ b2

NIi,t
BVi,t 1

þ ei,t,

(3)

where MVi,t is the market value of ﬁrm i, BVi,t21 is ﬁrm i’s closing book value of
equity available at quarter t 2 1 and NIi,t is the net income for quarter t. MVi,t
is measured 10 days after the end of quarter t, since it is published by CC at
that time point.

Compared to equation (2), this model is deﬂated by BVi,t21 to control for size
differences. The constant term, b1, which corresponds to the coefﬁcient of


48 L. Hassel et al.

book value in equation (2), is expected to be positive. The coefﬁcient of deﬂated
net income, b2, is expected to be positive as well.

Next, in order to study the incremental value relevance of environmental
information, we extend model (3) to include a measure of environmental
performance, EP:

MVi,t þ DIi,t

BVi,t 1

¼ b0

1

BVi,t 1

þ b1 þ b2

NIi,t
BVi,t 1

þ b3EPi,t þ ei,t:

(4)

EP is our proxy for vt in equation (2). Note that EP is not deﬂated since our
measure of environmental performance is assumed to be independent of
company size. Based primarily on anecdotal evidence, high environmental per-
formance is expected to increase the demand for a company’s products and ser-
vices while at the same time increasing the cost of operations. A priori, EP has an
impact on both revenues and expenses and the future beneﬁts can either be posi-
tive or negative. Since no theoretical or empirical guidelines exist to suggest
whether high environmental performance increases or decreases future net
income, its effect on market value is a priori unknown. Therefore, EP is expected
to be value relevant, i.e., b3 will be signiﬁcantly different from zero, but the sign
will be an open empirical question.

Both equations (3) and (4) are estimated on the full sample. Two extensions
of equation (4) regarding the value relevance of environmental performance
are made. First, we investigate the possibility of environmental performance
having different degrees of value relevance in two different industries, service
and manufacturing. Second, we investigate a possible structural change in the
value relevance of environmental information. In 1999 the accounting legislation
for environmental reporting was changed in Sweden. Therefore it is of interest to
see whether this legislation change had an impact on the value relevance. To test
for differences between industries and differences caused by the change in legis-
lation, we introduce two indicator (dummy) variables. The dummies are type of
industry, I, and time period, T, whose coefﬁcients will reﬂect possible unknown
systematic differences between industries and time periods. In addition we also
introduce their interactions with the environmental performance measure.
Equation (5) serves as the model for these tests:

MVi,t þ DIi,t

BVi,t 1

1

þ b1 þ b1,IIi,t þ b1,T Ti,t þ b2

¼ b0
NIi,t
BVi,t 1
þ b3EPi,t þ b4(Ii,tEPi,t) þ b5(Ti,tEPi,t) þ ei,t

BVi,t 1

(5)

where all variables are as before. The variable, I, is equal to zero for manu-
facturing companies and equal to one for service companies. Similarly, variable
T is equal to zero for the time period before the change in accounting law, and
equal to one for the time period after the change.


The Value Relevance of Environmental Performance

49

Deegan and Rankin (1997) say that environmental reports often lack com-
parability and may often be positively biased. This is not a severe problem
in this study. As will be discussed in the next section, the environmental per-
formance measure used in this study not only relies on the ﬁrms’ own environ-
mental disclosures, but also contains both private and other public information
concerning environmental issues. The advantage of this is that the measure
contains more
information than would be voluntarily disclosed and
may therefore presumably also contain more ‘negative’ information. The dis-
advantage is that to some extent parts of the market might be unaware of the
information in CC’s environmental performance measure. This was especially
the case before the change in Swedish accounting legislation on January 1,
1999. After that date, Swedish companies were required to disclose environ-
mental
the
market’s familiarity with the information in the environmental performance
measure might differ before and after the change in legislation. To account
for this possibility, the indicator variable, T, is included to facilitate investi-
gation of the usefulness of environmental performance information (in addition
to accounting information) before and after the change in accounting regu-
lations. It is believed that the impact of environmental information on the
market value of ﬁrms is increasing over time. An argument against a slow
or limited dissemination of the performance rating information among inves-
tors is that the environmental performance rating might be value relevant
because it captures a widespread general opinion regarding the environmental
reputation of individual listed companies in Sweden, a matter that the perform-
ance index conﬁrms.

reports. Consequently,

information in their

administrative

Inclusion of the industry dummy, I, lets us study a possible difference in
the impact of environmental performance information between the service
and manufacturing industries. Our hypothesis is that high environmental per-
formance is likely to be more costly for manufacturing ﬁrms because they nor-
mally operate in environmentally sensitive sectors. To investigate this
hypothesis,
the ﬁrms in our sample are ﬁrst classiﬁed according to the
Global Industry Classiﬁcation Standard (GICS) used by the Stockholm stock
exchange, Stockholmsbo¨rsen. Based on the GICS standard,
the companies
are then classiﬁed into 8 different industry groups (see Table 1 for a list of
the sample ﬁrms). Finally, industry groups 1 – 4 are classiﬁed as manufacturing
ﬁrms, while groups 5-8 are classiﬁed as service ﬁrms. Unfortunately,
the
limited sample size does not allow us to examine more than two industry
groups in this study.

Equations (3–5) are estimated by pooling observations cross-sectionally and
over time. Furthermore, the coefﬁcients in the equations are estimated using the
ordinary least squares technique. Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors
using White’s procedure are estimated to allow for any non-constant residual var-
iance (White, 1980). The next section presents data sources and the ﬁnal sample of
the study.


5
0

L

.

H
a
s
s
e
l

e
t

a
l
.

Table 1. The sampled ﬁrms. The Global Industry Classiﬁcation Standard is the basis of the classiﬁcation made in this study. Materials ¼ 1;
industrials ¼ 2; consumers discretionary ¼ 3; consumer
information technology ¼ 7;

staples ¼ 4; health care ¼ 5; ﬁnancials ¼ 6;

telecommunication services ¼ 8; utilities ¼ 9

Clas.

Firm name

Clas.

Firm name

Clas.

Firm name

2
7
5
2
7
1
5
5
2
3
1
3
2
6
7
6
6
6
3
7
8
2
7
6
9

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
Our classiﬁcation. The ﬁrm was not listed on the Stockholmsbo¨rsen at the time for classiﬁcation.

ABB
Adera AB
Aerocrine AB
AGA
Allgon AB
AssiDoma¨n AB
Astra
AstraZeneca PLC
Atlas Copco
Autoliv Inc.
Avesta Shefﬁeld AB
Bilia AB
Cardo AB
Castellum AB
Digital Vision AB
Diligentia AB
Dio¨s AB
Drott AB
Electrolux AB
Ericsson
Europolitan AB
Finnveden AB
Framfab
Fo¨renings-Sparbanken AB
Graningeverkens AB

Gra¨nges AB
Haldex Group
Handelsbanken Svenska AB
Hennes&Mauritz
Holmen AB
Ho¨gana¨s AB
Icon Medialab AB
JM AB
Kalmar Industries AB
Karlshamns AB
Lindab
Lindex AB
Lundbergfo¨retagen AB
Mandamus Fastigheter AB
Mandator AB
MediTeam Dental AB
Mekonomen AB
MeritaNordbanken AB
Micronic Laser Systems AB
Munters AB
NetCom AB
Norrporten AB
Om Gruppen AB
Pharmacia&Upjohn
Pharmacia Corporation

26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50

1
2
6
3
1
1
7
2
2
4
2
3
6
6
7
5
3
6
7
2
8
6
6
5
5

51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

6
2
7
1
2
1
1
2
6
6
2
2
1
1
2
8
6
2
6
7
2

PriFast AB
Profﬁce AB
RKS Data AB
Rottneros AB
Sandvik AB
Sapa AB
SCA
Scania
SEB
Skandia
Skanska
SKF AB
SSAB
StoraEnso
Svedala AB
Telia
Tornet Fastighets AB
Trelleborg AB
Wihlborgs Fastigheter AB
WM Data AB
Volvo AB


The Value Relevance of Environmental Performance

51

4. Data

The data used in this study were collected from three different main sources.
Stock prices and the number of shares were obtained from the Trust Database
of Bonnier-Findata, Sweden. Accounting information,
i.e., book value of
equity and net income, were manually collected from the companies’ ﬁnancial
statements (interim reports).3 Finally, the environmental performance infor-
mation used in this study was not collected directly from the ﬁnancial reports.
Instead, we obtained environmental performance measures from CaringCom-
pany (CC) Research, AB. While there are several indices useful in assessing a
company’s environmental performance, for instance the Dow Jones Sustainabil-
ity Group Index, we chose the index provided by CC for three reasons. First, the
model captures the theoretical foundations suggested by Ilinitch et al. (1998) for
an organizational effectiveness and stakeholder-oriented measure. Second, data
at an individual level is a necessity for the model, and CC kindly provided us
with their environmental performance ratings for Swedish ﬁrms. Finally, the
number of Swedish ﬁrms included in the Dow index is very limited.

issues (ﬁve criteria);

CC is a member of an international network that provides information on
the ethical and environmental responsibility of ﬁrms. Their clients are leading
investment companies, banks, and insurance companies in Sweden. Their pro-
prietary performance-rating model is built on 23 criteria and aggregated into
ﬁve categories. The categories on which ﬁrms are evaluated are as follow:
(I) environmental objectives and strategy, includes environmental reporting
(ﬁve criteria); (II) implementation of environmental processes (ﬁve criteria);
(III) production-related environmental
(IV) product-
related environmental issues (ﬁve criteria); and (V) service company-related
issues (three criteria). Evaluation is done using information obtained from ofﬁcial
documents, such as annual and interim reports, and also by directly contacting the
companies, for example, by surveys or visits. Information is also collected from
authorities and to some extent from newspaper reports. A ﬁrm that is rated
receives points according to how well it meets the various criteria. The resulting
environmental index is an equally weighted average of the points from the differ-
ent criteria. The index can range from 0 to 3, with a high score indicating high
environmental performance. According to CC, their index not only summarizes
the environmental information contained in ﬁnancial reports, but also other
public and private information. The criteria used in each category and the require-
ments for the scores cannot be disclosed, since they comprise a proprietary model
developed by CC. Hence, it is outside our ability fully to assess the reliability and
validity of the index as a proxy for environmental performance. According to CC,
however, the index is widely used among large institutional investors and should
have high face validity.

CC has been evaluating environmental performance on a quarterly basis since
June 30, 1998. This limits the research period of this paper to the nine quarters
from June 30, 1998 to September 30, 2000. The total number of rated Swedish


52 L. Hassel et al.

ﬁrms listed on the Stockholmsbo¨rsen was 71, and the total number of quarterly
ratings in the database was 384 (see Table 1). Ten ﬁrms lack one or more
values in the quarterly rating series, so for these cases we calculated an
average between the two nearest available adjacent observations. This procedure
increases the number of available quarterly ratings to 407.

To be included in the sample, we require that a ﬁrm be rated in the CC data-
base. In addition, net income, NIt, and opening book value, BVt21, must be avail-
able in the ﬁrm’s quarterly report.4 Finally, the stock price and the total number of
issued shares have to be available in the Trust Database. After excluding ﬁrms
that lacked sufﬁcient accounting or market value data for the period, 337 valid
ﬁrm quarter observations remained.5 As is evident, the limited time series of
the performance index results in a somewhat limited sample size. Also, note
that the number of observations reported in the empirical analysis in the next
section may not equal 337. To ensure that the regression results are not unduly
sensitive
excluded observations with absolute values
of Studentized residuals greater than 3. This approach is in line with those of
other value relevance studies, such as Rajgopal et al. (2003).

to outliers, we

5. Results of the Study

Descriptive Statistics and Correlations

Panel A in Table 2 provides descriptive statistics on the dependent and indepen-
dent variables in the study (before deleting outliers). All of these variables, except
environmental performance, are deﬂated by book value. For the sample ﬁrms,
market value is on average 4.60 times higher than the book value. The high
level of this ratio reﬂects the somewhat extreme market conditions prevalent
during the research period. However, there are some ﬁrms whose market value
is lower than the book value (minimum 0.37), and others with extremely high
market values, especially among the ‘new economy ﬁrms’ (maximum 48.15
times higher market than book value). The median deﬂated market value of
the sample is about half of the mean (1.90) because of outliers at the higher
end and the concentration of the sample at the lower end of the distribution.
Hence, the distribution of this variable is positively skewed. The deﬂated net
income variable, NIi,t/BVi,t21, indicates that the mean return on equity in the
sample is 4% on a quarterly basis. The median return is 4% as well. This suggests
that the yearly proﬁtability on average equals 16% for the sample ﬁrms. Never-
theless, some sample ﬁrms show extreme levels of proﬁtability. Extreme negative
proﬁtability is found among a few consulting ﬁrms, and extreme positive proﬁt-
ability is found among a very few companies with large capital gains.
The environmental performance variable, EPi,t, has a mean of 1.44 and a slightly
higher median of 1.55. The actual performance scores range from 0.18 to 2.19 on
a theoretical performance scale ranging from 0 to 3. Hence, the sample consists of
both high and low environmental performers.


Table 2. Descriptive statistics. The table reports the descriptive statistics of the sample. The sample consists of 71 ﬁrms listed on the stock
exchange in Sweden, Stockholmsbo¨rsen. The research period is June 30, 1998 to September 30, 2000, and nine environmental performance
rating periods are used. The statistics are presented for 337 ﬁrm quarter observations. Market value, MVi,t, is the market value of ﬁrms 10
days after the end of the quarter, the same day that the environmental performance report is released. Book value, BVi,t21, is the ﬁrms’
opening book value of equity for the quarter and NIi,t is the net income for the same quarter. EPi,t is the environmental performance rating for

the quarter. Panel B provides Pearson correlation coefﬁcients between the explanatory variables in the model (P values in parentheses)

Variables

Mean

Median

Std. deviation

Minimum

Maximum

Panel A. All companies before deleting outliers (337 observations)
MVi,t/BVi,t21
NIi,t/BVi,t21
EPi,t

2.01
0.04
1.55

4.60
0.04
1.44

Panel B. Pearson Correlation Coefﬁcients (337 observations)
Variables
1/BVi,t21
NIi,t/BVi,t21
EPi,t

20.49 (0.00)
20.26 (0.00)

1/BVi,t21

1.00

1.00
0.12 (0.03)

NIi,t/BVi,t21

0.37
20.52
0.18

48.15
0.93
2.19

6.53
0.09
0.43

1.00

EPi,t

T
h
e
V
a
l
u
e
R
e
l
e
v
a
n
c
e

o
f

E
n
v
i
r
o
n
m
e
n
t
a
l

P
e
r
f
o
r
m
a
n
c
e

5
3


54 L. Hassel et al.

Panel B in Table 2 provides the correlation coefﬁcients between the explana-
tory variables in the model (before deleting outliers). The statistics show that
the inverse of the book value, 1/BVi,t21, is negatively related (2.49) to net
income, NIi,t/BVi,t21. Not surprisingly, in practice this means that there is a posi-
tive association between book value of equity and net income. Environmental per-
formance is positively associated with both book value as well as with net income,
and both correlation coefﬁcients are signiﬁcant. However, the correlation matrix
does not suggest
the presence of any serious multicollinearity problems.
In addition, unreported calculations of VIF statistics support this ﬁnding. Next,
we explore whether the variation in market values is associated with variation in
environmental performance, after controlling for ﬁnancial information.

Regression Analysis

Recall that the study proposes that market value should reﬂect both the ﬁnancial
and environmental performance of the companies. The ﬁnancial statement infor-
mation, in this study book value of equity, BV, and net income, NI, are expected
to be positively related to the cum-dividend market value of equity, MV þ D.
No elaborate theoretical work exists to guide us as to whether environmental per-
formance has a positive or negative effect on market values. However, we
propose that ﬁnancial performance alone cannot explain market values,
because many stock market participants today carefully screen potential invest-
ments both on ﬁnancial and environmental performance criteria. The empirical
question is whether the relationship between environmental performance and
market value is positive or negative. Table 3 provides the results of regression
models based on equations (3) – (5).

Column A of Table 3 reports the results for the earnings regression. Consistent
with theory, the coefﬁcient for net income is signiﬁcant with the expected

sign (b2 ¼ 18.22, t-value ¼ 3.84). Also, note that the intercept term, which cor-

responds to the coefﬁcient for book value, is signiﬁcant with the expected sign.
The adjusted R2 equals 0.22 and the F-statistic is signiﬁcant. This result corrobo-
rates prior ﬁndings of Marton (1998) and Runsten (1998) concerning the value
relevance of earnings and book value in the Swedish market. Adding the environ-
mental performance variable (column B) increases the adjusted R2 to 0.30, and all
coefﬁcient estimates are statistically signiﬁcant. The ﬁnding indicates that the
environmental performance measure contains information that is value-relevant
to investors. More importantly, the sign of the coefﬁcient for environmental per-
formance is negative. A negative coefﬁcient is consistent with the view of the
cost-concerned school. That is, high levels of environmental performance are
costly and will have a negative impact on the expected earnings and market
values. Column C further investigates this possible explanation.

Column C reports the results of the dummy variable approach. Two dummy
variables, one for industry and one for time period, and their interactions with
EP are added. When including the control variables in the model, the adjusted


The Value Relevance of Environmental Performance

55

Table 3. Regression results. The table reports the results of regressing market value on
ﬁnancial measures and environmental performance (all ﬁnancial measures scaled by
opening book value). Column A presents the results of regressing market value on net
income (NI). Column B shows the results when environmental performance (EP) is
added to the regression. Finally, Column C presents the results when two indicator vari-
ables and their interactions with EP are added to the model as independent variables.
The indicator variable, I, equals zero if the company is classiﬁed as a manufacturing
ﬁrm and one if it is classiﬁed as a service ﬁrm. Similarly, variable T equals zero to indicate
the period before the change in accounting law, and equals one to indicate the period after

the change.

A

B

C

2.54 (8.60)
420.13 (8.69)
18.22 (3.84)

8.96 (6.63)
312.65 (6.45)
12.36 (2.90)
24.12 (27.73)

Intercept (a0)
1/BVi,t21
NIi,t/BVi,t21
EPi,t
Ii,t
Ii,tEPI,t
Ti,t
Ti,tEPi,t
Adj. R2
F value
Num. obs.
 and  indicate signiﬁcance at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively. The t-statistics are one-tailed
where the sign is predicted, two-tailed otherwise. All t-statistics are estimated using White’s (1980)
standard error.

4.04 (2.28)
298.75 (6.54)
11.64 (3.13)
21.62 (21.59)
20.45 (20.17)
1.14 (0.53)
6.51 (3.04)

23.34 (22.62)

48.68 ( p , 0.01)

48.39 ( p , 0.01)

25.7 ( p , 0.01)

0.35

0.22

0.30

329

329

329

R2 increases marginally to 0.35. The coefﬁcient for industry, I, is not signiﬁcant,
indicating that
there are no unknown systematic unexplained differences
between the two industries. Somewhat surprising the coefﬁcient for interaction,
Ii,tEPi,t, is positive, but insigniﬁcant at a 5% level of signiﬁcance. One would
expect investments in high environmental performance to be less costly for
service than for manufacturing companies. These ﬁndings rule out high environ-
mental performance as a strong marketing tool. Of course, our industry classiﬁ-
cation is crude and the number of observations included in the study is limited;
consequently, the results should be interpreted with care. Further research into
the value relevance of environmental performance in various industries is needed.6
The coefﬁcient for time period, T, is statistically signiﬁcant and indicates that
there are systematic differences in time periods indicating that the change in
legislation is of signiﬁcant importance. The coefﬁcient of interaction between
time period and environmental performance, Ti,tEPi,t, is also signiﬁcant. This
ﬁnding implies a structural shift in the relationship between cum-dividend
market values and environmental performance. The negative relationship has
strengthened over time, suggesting that market participants have increased
their focus on environmental performance information and increasingly pena-
lized high performance.


56 L. Hassel et al.

Based on the statistical tests we conclude that environmental performance
seems to have incremental value relevance for the market value of Swedish
listed companies. According to the results, the relationship between market
values and environmental performance is negative. Moreover, the negative
relationship seems to have increased over time. Overall, the results of our
study differ from those of most prior studies, which show a positive relationship
between environmental performance and market value. This study, however,
controls for ﬁnancial variables when estimating the relevance of environmental
information.

6. Conclusions

This study is among the ﬁrst to investigate the relationship between market
value and overall environmental performance in conjunction with ﬁnancial state-
ment information. We ﬁnd that in the quarterly ﬁnancial statements of Swedish
listed companies, both book value of equity and net income provide value-rel-
evant information to investors. Environmental performance has an incremental
explanatory power, as suggested. The negative relationship between environ-
mental performance and the market value of equity indicates that ﬁrms rated
highly in terms of environmental performance are not, ceteris paribus, highly
valued by investors. The argument of the cost-concerned school is that high
environmental performance is costly and thus has a negative impact on expected
earnings and market values.

Considering that our sample size is small, the environmental performance
measure is novel, and the time period studied is relatively short, the results of
this study have to be interpreted with caution. Nevertheless, we provide the follow-
ing suggestions for the negative relationship between environmental performance
and market value: (1) investors perceive that environmental performance is used
for the window dressing of book values and ﬁnancial performance; (2) investors
perceive that environmental responsibility activities are made at the expense of
increased proﬁts, and rational investors react negatively because of expected
reductions in proﬁtability with no corresponding reduction in risk (Holman
et al., 1985); and (3) the market is short-term oriented, and investors do not con-
sider longer-term environmental information when making investment decisions.
Hence, investors do not reward companies that are rated highly in terms of
environmental performance. The amount of money invested in environmental
and ethical funds does not seem to be large enough to reward high environmental
performance. Of course, even for these funds environmental performance might
be a subordinate investment criterion.

The results of the study differ from most of the prior U.S. studies that
used other measures of environmental performance, such as pollution control
information, pollution levels, CEP reports, and adoption of stringent global
environmental standards. The majority of these studies ﬁnd a positive relation-
reactions/investment
ship between environmental

information and market


The Value Relevance of Environmental Performance

57

return. Therefore, the value relevance of environmental information in combi-
nation with ﬁnancial statement information is still an open question that needs
to be further addressed. We believe that studying European data using different
measures of environmental performance for cross-county comparisons and indus-
try comparisons within the EU would be an interesting future research area.
Such a study would put the results of the current study into a broader perspective.
Although well accepted among accounting and ﬁnance researchers, the model
used here to link environmental performance and market value is somewhat
crude. Therefore we share the view of Feldman et al. (1997) that future research
should focus on developing a theoretical model that explicitly relates environ-
mental performance to a ﬁrm’s sales, earnings, competitive position, and ulti-
mately, market value.

We conjecture that the increased focus on environmental issues is here to
stay, and that the future will bring more available data and improved measures
of environmental performance. Prospective studies will address the question
of value relevance in a more exhaustive way. The debate between the cost-con-
cerned and the value creation school is far from over.

Acknowledgements

We gratefully acknowledge CaringCompany in Stockholm for providing us
with environmental performance data and Jan Wallanders och Tom Hedelius
Stiftelse for providing ﬁnancial support. Valuable comments have been received
from Xavier de Luna, Rickard Olsson, Tim Wilson, and participants at the
accounting and ﬁnance research workshop in Umea˚, the Asian-Paciﬁc Confer-
ence on International Accounting Issues in Brazil, and the EAA Conference in
Greece 2001. This paper was awarded The Vernon Zimmerman best paper
award at the Thirteenth Asian-Paciﬁc Conference on International Accounting
Issues in Brazil.

Notes

1See also Appendix.
2Also note that the intercept allows for the non-zero mean valuation effects of other valuation-
relevant information, besides environmental performance which is picked up by the error term.
3Five of the companies studied did not use SEK as a reporting currency. For these companies, we
translated the accounting numbers into SEK using the relevant exchange rate as of the last
trading day of the quarter. The exchange rates were collected from the Trust Database.
4In a few cases NI was not available on a quarterly basis. To avoid a further reduction of the
sample size, we used proﬁt after ﬁnancial items or operating proﬁt adjusted for proxy tax for
those ﬁrms.
5Forty-two ﬁrm quarters were deleted because no available stock prices and/or total number of
stocks ﬁgure appeared in the Trust Database.
6As a robustness check, we reran all the tests deﬂating equations 3 – 5 by sales instead of opening
book value. The results obtained were very similar to those reported in the paper.


58 L. Hassel et al.

References

Ali and Hwang (2000) Accruals and future stock returns: tests of the naive investor hypothesis,

Journal of Accounting, Auditing and Finance, 15(2), pp. 161– 181.

Amir, E. and Lev, B. (1996) Value-relevance of non-ﬁnancial information: the wireless communi-

cation industry, Journal of Accounting and Economics, 22(1 – 3), pp. 3 – 30.

Assabet Group (2000) The Emerging Relationship Between Environmental Performance and Share-

holder Wealth, The Assabet Group, Concord, MA.

Bhat, V. N. (1999) Does it pay to be green?, International Journal of Environmental Studies,

56(4), pp. 497 – 507.

Bebbington, J. (1999) Compulsory environmental reporting in Denmark: an evaluation, Social &

Environmental Accounting, 19(2), pp. 2 – 4.

Belkaoui, A. (1976) The impact of the disclosure of the environmental effects of organizational

behavior on the market, Financial Management, 5(4), pp. 26 – 31.

Blacconiere, W. G. and Patten, D. M. (1994) Environmental disclosures, regulatory costs, and changes

in ﬁrm value, Journal of Accounting and Economics, 18(3), pp. 357– 377.

Chandra, U., Oricassini, A. and Waymire G. (1997) The information content of non-ﬁnancial dis-
closures: evidence from the semiconductor industry’s book-to-bill ratio, Working Paper,
Emero University.

Collins, D. W., Pincus, M. and Xie, H. (1999) Equity valuation and negative earnings: the role of book

value of equity, The Accounting Review, 74(1), pp. 29 – 61.

Cormier D., Magnan, M. and Morard, B. (1993) The impact of corporate pollution on market valua-

tion: some empirical evidence, Ecological Economics, 8(2), pp. 135– 155.

Cormier, D. and Magnan, M. (1997) Investors’ assessment of implicit environmental liabilities,

Journal of Accounting, Auditing and Finance, 16(2), pp. 215– 241.

Deegan, C. and Rankin, M. (1997) The materiality of environmental information to users of annual

reports, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, 10(4), pp. 562 – 583.

Deng, Z., Lev, B. and Narin, F. (1999) Science and technology as predictors of stock performance,

Financial Analysts Journal, 55(3), pp. 20 – 32.

Dowell, G., Hart, S. and Yeung, B. (2000) Do corporate global environmental standards create or

destroy market value?, Management Science, 46(8), pp. 1059– 1074.

Edwards E. O. and Bell, P. W. (1961) The Theory and Measurement of Business Income (Berkeley,

CA: University of California Press).

Epstein, M. J. (1996) Measuring Corporate Environmental Performance (Chicago, IL: Irwin

Professional).

European Commission (2001) Commission Recommendation of 30 May 2001 on the Recognition,
Measurement and Disclosure of Environmental Issues in the Annual Accounts and Annual
Reports of Companies, Commission of the European Communities, Brussels, 2001/453/EC.
OJ L 156 13.6.2001.

Feldman, S. J., Soyoka P. A. and Ameer, P. G. (1997) Does improving a ﬁrm’s environmental manage-
ment system and environmental performance result in a higher stock price?, The Journal of
Investing, 6(4), pp. 87 – 97.

Freedman, M. and Jaggi, B. (1986) An analysis of the impact of corporate pollution disclosures included
in annual ﬁnancial statements on investors’ decisions, in: M. Neimark, B. Merino and T. Tinker
(Eds) Advances in Public Interest Accounting, Vol. 1, pp. 193– 212 (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press).
Hart, S. (1997) Beyond greening: strategies for a sustainable world, Harvard Business Review,

75(1), pp. 66 – 76.

Hart, S. L. and Ahuja, G. (1996) Does it pay to be green? An empirical examination of the relationship
between emission reduction and ﬁrm performance, Business Strategy and the Environment,
5(1), pp. 30 – 37.

Holman, W. R, Randoloph, N. J. and Singer, D. (1985) The impact of corporate social responsive-
ness on shareholder wealth, in: Lee E. Preston Research on Corporate Social Performance
and Policy, Vol. 8 (Greenwich, CT).


The Value Relevance of Environmental Performance

59

Ilinitch, A.Y., Soderstrom, N. S. and Thomas, T. E. (1998) Measuring corporate environmental

performance, Journal of Accounting and Public Policy, 17(4 – 5), pp. 383 – 408.

Jaggi, B. and Freedman, M. (1992) An examination of the impact of pollution performance on
economic and market performance: pulp and paper ﬁrms, Journal of Business Finance and
Accounting, 19(5), pp. 697– 713.

Kallapur, S. and Kwan, S. Y. S. (2004) The value relevance and reliability of brand assets recognized

by U.K. ﬁrms, The Accounting Review, 79(1), pp. 151– 172.

King, A. A. and Lenox, M. J. (2001) Does it really pay to be green: an empirical study of ﬁrm environ-

mental and ﬁnancial performance, Journal of Industrial Ecology, 5(1), pp. 105– 116.

Klassen, R. and McLaughlin, C. (1996) The impact of environmental management on ﬁrm perform-

ance, Management Science, 42, pp. 1199– 1214.

Konar, S. and Cohen, M. A. (2000) Does the market value environmental performance, Working

paper, Vanderbilt University.

Li, Y. and McConomy, B. J. (1999) An empirical examination of factors affecting the timing of
environmental accounting standard adoption and the impact on corporate valuation, Journal of
Accounting, Auditing & Finance, 14(3), pp. 279– 314.

Lin, S. and Walker, M. (2000) FRS3 earnings, headline earnings, and accounting-based valuation

models, Accounting and Business Research, 30, pp. 299– 306.

Lober, D. (1996) Evaluating the environmental performance of corporations, The Journal of Manage-

rial Issues, 8(2), pp. 184 – 205.

Maloney, M. T. and McCormick, R. E. (1982) A positive theory of environmental quality regulation,

Journal of Law and Economics, 25(2), pp. 99 – 123.

Marton, J. (1998) Accounting and stock markets – a study of Swedish accounting for international
investors and analysts, Ph.D. thesis, Gothenburg School of Economics and Commercial Law,
Go¨teborg University.

Milne, M. J. and Chan, C. C. C. (1999) Narrative corporate social disclosures: how much of a difference

do they make to investment decision-making, British Accounting Review, 31(4), pp. 439– 457.

Ohlson, J. A. (1995) Earnings, book value, and dividends in equity valuation, Contemporary Account-

ing Research, 11(2), pp. 661 – 687.

Peasnell, K. V. (1982) Some formal connections between economic values and yields and accounting

numbers, Journal of Business Finance & Accounting, 9(3), pp. 361– 381.

Porter, M. and van der Linde C. (1995) Green and competitive, Harvard Business Review,

September– October, pp. 121 – 134.

Rajgopal, S., Venkatachalam, M. and Kotha, S. (2003) The value relevance of network advantages:

the case of E-commerce ﬁrms, Journal of Accounting Research, 41(1), pp. 135– 162.

Reinhardt, F. (1999) Market failure and the environmental policies of ﬁrms, Journal of Industrial

Ecology, 3(1), pp. 9 – 21.

Repetto, R. and Austin, D. (1999) Estimating the ﬁnancial effects of companies’ environmental

performance, Greener Management International, 27, pp. 97 – 110.

Runsten, M. (1998) The association between accounting information and stock prices – model
development and empirical tests based on Swedish data, Ph.D. thesis, Stockholm School of
Economics, Stockholm University.

SFS (1995) A˚ rsredovisningslagen, The Swedish Annual Report Act, 1554.
Shane, P. B. and Spicer, B. H. (1983) Market response to environmental information produces outside

the ﬁrm, The Accounting Review, 58, pp. 521– 538.

SFF (2000) Swedish Society of Financial Analysts. Finansanalytikernas rekommendationer, miljo¨in-

formation fo¨r ﬁnansanalytiker (Stockholm: The Swedish Society of Financial Analysts).

Spicer, B. (1978) Investors, corporate social performance and information disclosure: an empirical

study, Accounting Review, 53(1), pp. 94 – 111.

Trueman, B., Wong, F. M. H. and Zhang, X. (2000) The eyeballs have it: searching for the value in
internet stocks, Journal of Accounting Research, 38, pp. 137 – 162. Supplement on Studies on
Accounting Information and the Economics of Firm.


60 L. Hassel et al.

Walley, N. and Whitehead, B. (1994) It’s not easy being green, Harvard Business Review, 3, pp. 46 – 52.
White, H. (1980) A heteroscedasticity consistent covariance matrix estimator and a direct test for

heteroscedasticity, Econometrica, 48(4), pp. 817 – 838.

Appendix

This appendix presents Ohlson’s (1995) valuation framework and shows that
his book value – abnormal earnings model can be re-expressed in terms of
current period earnings and opening book value. Please note that this derivation
draws heavily on the papers by Collins et al. (1999) and Lin and Walker (2000).
Three main assumptions underlie the Ohlson (1995) valuation model. First, the
value of a ﬁrm’s equity, MVEt, equals the discounted present value of expected
dividends, Dtþt, at a constant discount rate, r:

MVEt ¼

(1 þ r)

 tEt½Dtþt

X1

t¼1

Second, the clean surplus relation of accounting holds:

BVt ¼ BVt 1 þ NIt   Dt

(1)

(2)

The ﬁnal assumption deﬁnes the time series process for abnormal earnings,
AEt, and other value-relevant non-accounting information, vt, as a modiﬁed
and standard ﬁrst-order auto regressive process, respectively:

AEtþ1 ¼ vAEt þ nt þ 11,tþ1
vtþ1 ¼ gvt þ 12,tþ1

(3)

were v and g are parameters, and 11,t and 12,t are unobserved random variables.
Based on these three assumptions, Ohlson derives the following valuation model:

MVt ¼ BVt þ a1AEt þ a2nt

(4)

where

a1 ¼

v

(1 þ r   v)

, a2 ¼

1 þ r

(1 þ r   v)(1 þ r   g)

By using the deﬁnition of abnormal earnings, AEt, in equation (1), market
value can alternatively be expressed as a function of current net income, NIt,
closing book value, BVt, opening book value, BVt21, and other information, vt:

MVt ¼ BVt þ a1NIt   a1rBVt 1 þ a2nt

(5)


The Value Relevance of Environmental Performance

61

Furthermore, using the clean surplus relation and substituting the closing

value of book value in (2) results in:

MVt ¼ BVt 1 þ NIt   Dt þ a1NIt   a1rBVt 1 þ a2nt

(6)

Collecting terms generates a valuation function expressed in the form of
cum-dividend market value, current period net income, opening book value,
and other value-relevant non-accounting information:

MVt þ Dt ¼ (1 þ a1)NIt þ (1   a1r)BVt 1 þ a2nt

Finally, the empirical analogy to equation (E4) is:

MVt þ Dt ¼ b0 þ b1BVt 1 þ b2NIt þ b3nt þ 1t

(7)

(8)

which is the same as equation (2) in the paper. Note that the intercept allows
for non-zero mean valuation effects of other valuation relevant information,
besides environmental performance which is picked up by the error term.


