Journal of Business and Psychology, Vol. 19, No. 4, Summer 2005 (Ó2005)
DOI: 10.1007/s10869-005-4519-1

INCREMENTAL VALIDITY OF LOCUS
OF CONTROL AFTER CONTROLLING
FOR COGNITIVE ABILITY AND
CONSCIENTIOUSNESS

Keith Hattrup
San Diego State University

Matthew S. O’Connell
Select International, Inc.

Jeffrey R. Labrador
Central Michigan University

ABSTRACT: This research examined the criterion-related validity of work-spe-
ciﬁc locus of control in predicting job performance, including incremental validity
after controlling for cognitive ability and conscientiousness. Data from a student
sample and from a large employee sample were used to evaluate the scale
properties of measures of locus of control, conscientiousness, and cognitive abil-
ity. Two concurrent criterion-related validation studies were then conducted to
evaluate the incremental validity of locus of control. In both validation studies,
locus of control demonstrated overall and incremental relationships with per-
formance after controlling for ability and conscientiousness, such that employees
with higher internal locus of control performed more effectively than externals.

KEY WORDS: job performance; locus of control; personality.

INTRODUCTION

Prior to the 1990’s, many authors concluded that personality was not
strongly related to individual job performance (e.g., Guion & Gottier,
1965; Hunter & Hunter, 1984; Schmitt, Gooding, Noe, & Kirsch, 1984).

Address correspondence to Keith Hattrup, Department of psychology, San Deigo
State University, 5500 Campanile Dr. San Diego, CA, 92182-4611, USA., E-mail:
keattrup@sunstroke.sdsu.edu.

461

0889-3268/05/0600-0461/0 Ó 2005 Springer Science+Business Media, Inc.


462

JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY

More recently, interest in the use of personality as a predictor of job
performance has grown, in part because of the emergence of a compre-
hensive taxonomy of personality dimensions (e.g., Digman, 1990; McCrae
& Costa, 1987), and meta-analytic evidence of the validity of personality
dimensions in predicting job performance (e.g., Barrick & Mount, 1991;
Hurtz & Donovan, 2000; Tett, Jackson, & Rothstein, 1991). In particular,
ﬁve factors, often referred to as the Big 5 or Five Factor Model (FFM),
have emerged in studies of the factor structure of personality (e.g.,
McCrae & Costa, 1985). These factors are: (a) Openness to Experience,
(b) Conscientiousness, (c) Extraversion, (d) Agreeableness, and (e) Neu-
roticism.

Of the ﬁve factors, conscientiousness provides the most consistently
valid prediction of performance across jobs and organizations (e.g.,
Barrick & Mount, 1991; Hurtz & Donovan, 2000). Furthermore, con-
scientiousness demonstrates incremental validity in predicting job per-
formance after controlling for cognitive ability (Schmidt & Hunter, 1998).
Nevertheless, a number of researchers have questioned the comprehen-
siveness of the FFM, identifying additional personality dimensions that
appear relevant to job performance (e.g., Hough, 1992; Judge, Erez, &
Bono, 1998). Others have suggested that the ﬁve factors may be too
broad, and that prediction of job performance may be improved by relying
on narrower sub-dimensions of the FFM (e.g., Ashton, 1998; Hough,
1992; Schneider, Hough, & Dunnette, 1996). Of the personality traits
that have been suggested to reside outside of the FFM, or that may
represent an important sub-dimension of a broader job-relevant
personality factor, locus of control has been identiﬁed as a potentially
valid predictor of job performance (Spector, 1982). Recently, Hough
(1992) reported that locus of control correlated signiﬁcantly with work
outcomes, but was ‘‘missing entirely from the Big Five (p. 153).’’ A
number of studies have demonstrated signiﬁcant relationships between
work-speciﬁc locus of control and measures of job performance (e.g.,
Blau, 1993; Hough, Eaton, Dunnette, Kamp, & McCloy, 1990; Macan,
Trusty, & Trimble, 1996; Spector, 1988). And, a recent meta-analysis by
Judge and Bono (2001) reported a corrected correlation between job
performance and locus of control that was ‘‘equal to that of conscien-
tiousness (p. 85).’’ Clearly, locus of control appears to have potential in
predicting performance at work.

Although evidence supports the criterion-related validity of locus of
control, largely unexplored is the incremental validity of locus of control
after controlling for cognitive ability and conscientiousness. Hence, the
purpose of the present study is to examine the incremental validity of a
measure of work-speciﬁc locus of control in predicting job performance,
after controlling for general cognitive ability and conscientiousness.
Thus, the present study is designed to contribute to our knowledge about


KEITH HATTRUP, MATTHEW S. O’CONNELL, AND JEFFREY R. LABRADOR 463

the role of a speciﬁc job-relevant trait in the prediction of job performance
after controlling for general cognitive ability and a broad conscientious-
ness factor.

Criterion-Related Validity of Conscientiousness

Optimism about the usefulness of personality measures in predicting
job performance criteria is largely attributed to two developments. First,
it is thought that earlier pessimistic conclusions about the validity of
personality were due to the lack of a common framework for organizing
personality dimensions (e.g., Barrick & Mount, 1991). By applying the
FFM developed by other researchers (e.g., Digman, 1990; Goldberg, 1981;
McCrae & Costa, 1987), Barrick and Mount (1991) were able to demon-
strate generalizable relationships between conscientiousness and job
performance criteria. Subsequent meta-analyses (e.g., Barrick & Mount,
1995; Hurtz & Donovan, 2000; Salgado, 1997; Tett et al., 1991) also re-
ported useful criterion-related validities of dimensions of the FFM, par-
ticularly conscientiousness.

A second development is the recognition that personality measures
that are developed on the basis of a job analysis are conceptually more
job-relevant and therefore, more likely to be job related (e.g., Weiss &
Adler, 1984). Thus, conscientiousness is thought to relate to job perfor-
mance because of its focus on behaviors that are relevant to effectiveness
in organizations. Research has also demonstrated that conscientiousness
adds incrementally to the prediction of job performance above that pre-
dicted by cognitive ability (e.g., Schmidt & Hunter, 1998). This is because
cognitive ability and conscientiousness correlate with somewhat differ-
ent dimensions of job performance. Whereas cognitive ability correlates
highest with performance of core transformation and maintenance
activities, or task performance, work orientation and conscientiousness
correlate more strongly with behaviors that support and maintain the
organizational context, or contextual performance (e.g., Hattrup,
O’Connell, & Wingate, 1998; Motowidlo & Van Scotter, 1994; McHenry,
Hough, Toquam, Hanson, & Ashworth, 1990).

Criterion-Related Validity of Locus of Control

Locus of control refers to a generalized expectancy that outcomes,
such as the attainment of rewards or the avoidance of punishment, are
controlled by one’s own actions (internal locus of control) or by external
factors (external locus of control) (e.g., Spector, 1982, 1988). Persons with
an internal locus of control believe that reinforcements are determined by
personal effort, ability, and initiative, whereas persons with an external
locus of control tend to believe that reinforcements are determined by


464

JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY

other persons, luck, or fate (O’Brien, 1984). Internal locus of control is
negatively related to anxiety (Spector, 1982), which is conceptually sim-
ilar to the neuroticism dimension of the FFM, and is positively correlated
with achievement orientation. Research has shown that individuals with
higher internal locus of control report less stress, less anxiety, higher
work motivation, and are more likely to emerge as leaders than persons
with higher external locus of control (Spector, 1982).

Currently, there is a lack of consensus in the literature about the
relationship between locus of control and the FFM. Hough (1992) for
example, argued that the prediction of job performance requires more
than ﬁve broad factors, and that instead, at least nine personality factors
are necessary, including locus of control. Similarly, Tett et al’s. (1991)
meta-analysis of the criterion-related validities of personality dimensions
in predicting job performance included locus of control as a trait factor
that was independent of the FFM. In contrast, Costa and McCrae (1992)
suggested that locus of control is a part of the broader conscientiousness
factor (see also Judge, Erez, Bono, & Thoreson, 2002a,b). More recently, a
number of studies has provided evidence that locus of control may be a
sub-dimension of a broader Core Self-Evaluations construct, along with
self-esteem, self-efﬁcacy, and neuroticism (Bono & Judge, 2003; Erez &
Judge, 2001; Judge & Bono, 2001; Judge et al., 2002a,b). According to
these authors, core self-evaluations may represent a broad factor
neuroticism factor (Bono & Judge, 2003; Erez & Judge, 2001; Judge &
Bono, 2001; Judge et al., 2002a,b). Thus, it appears that locus of control
has been considered as an independent factor and as a sub-dimension of
conscientiousness, neuroticism, or core self-evaluations. Despite some
lack of consensus about the relationship of locus of control to the FFM, it
is clear that most authors consider locus of control to represent a speciﬁc,
rather than broad, personality trait.

Evidence of relationships between locus of control and job perfor-
mance has appeared in the literature (O’Brien, 1984; Spector, 1982).
Hough (1992), for example, reported an average observed correlation of
.19 across 11 studies between locus of control and overall job perfor-
mance, such that internals performed better than externals. Only mea-
sures of achievement orientation correlated as highly with overall
performance in this study as locus of control. Tett et al. (1991) reported a
weaker relationship in their meta-analysis (q = .13) between higher
internal locus of control and better job performance, although their re-
sults were based on a smaller number of studies (k = 7). A more com-
prehensive recent meta-analysis by Judge and Bono (2001) reported a
corrected validity of .22 (k = 35).

Studies of the processes underlying relationships between locus of
control and performance suggest that internals perceive higher expec-
tancies that effort will lead to good performance, and that performance


KEITH HATTRUP, MATTHEW S. O’CONNELL, AND JEFFREY R. LABRADOR 465

will lead to valued outcomes, than do externals (e.g., Lied & Pritchard,
1976; Mitchell, Smyser, & Weed, 1975; Szilagyi & Sims, 1975). Hence,
internals demonstrate higher task motivation, as long as valued job re-
wards are perceived to be linked to performance levels (Spector, 1982).
Further, internals are more likely than externals to react to stress with
behavioral responses rather than emotional reactions (e.g., Anderson,
Hellreigel, & Slocum, 1977). Internals also demonstrate more work-
group cooperation, self-reliance, and independence than do externals
(e.g., Cravens & Worchel, 1977; Tseng, 1970). Because of its correlation
with achievement orientation, motivation, and conscientiousness, it is
reasonable to expect positive correlations between internal locus of con-
trol and measures of general cognitive ability.

Thus, substantial empirical evidence demonstrates that locus of
control has direct relationships with job performance. Locus of control
also appears to provide incremental prediction after controlling for cog-
nitive ability (Blau, 1993). These ﬁndings underscore a need to further
explore the nomological network of work-speciﬁc locus of control and its
unique relationships with job performance. Of particular interest is the
extent to which locus of control adds incrementally to the prediction of
job performance after controlling for cognitive ability and conscien-
tiousness. Given research demonstrating low to moderate correlations
between locus of control and conscientiousness (e.g., Morrison, 1997), and
signiﬁcant relationships between locus of control and job performance
(e.g., Blau, 1993), we predict that locus of control will correlate positively
with job performance and will add incrementally to the prediction of
performance after controlling for cognitive ability and conscientiousness.
We predict that internals will perform their jobs more effectively than
externals, and that this relationship will hold after controlling for the
effects of cognitive ability and conscientiousness.

As noted above, research has demonstrated that conscientiousness and
work orientation relate more strongly to contextual behaviors at work
than to behaviors reﬂecting task performance (e.g., Hough et al., 1990;
Motowidlo & Van Scotter, 1994). Hough et al., (1990) also reported stronger
relationships between several other personality measures, including locus
of control, and measures of effort and leadership, personal discipline, and
physical ﬁtness and military bearing, than between the same personality
scales and measures of technical proﬁciency and general soldiering
proﬁciency. These results lead to the expectation that locus of control will
relate more strongly to contextual performance than to task performance.

The Measurement of Locus of Control

A variety of measures of locus of control has appeared in the lit-
erature (e.g., Lefcourt, 1976, 1981; Rotter, 1966). Several authors have


466

JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY

argued that measures that focus on locus of control in a speciﬁc domain
should correlate more strongly with behavior in the same domain than
would general measures (e.g., Lefcourt, 1976, 1981; Stipek & Weisz,
1981). For example, Blau (1993) reported stronger relationships between
a work-speciﬁc locus of control measure (Spector, 1988) and several job
performance criteria, compared to Rotter’s general measure. Thus, goal-
speciﬁc measures of locus of control have been developed for a variety of
speciﬁc purposes or populations (e.g., Crandall, Katkovsky, & Crandall,
1965; Donovan & O’Leary, 1978; Montag & Comrey, 1987; Wallston &
Wallston, 1981; Wong, Watters, & Sproule, 1978). Given the focus of the
present study on the prediction of job performance, a measure of locus of
control for outcomes of work-related behaviors is of most relevance.
Hence, the present research examines a measure of work-speciﬁc locus of
control, and measures of conscientiousness and cognitive ability, that were
developed as part of a computerized multi-attribute test battery designed
for use in the selection of entry- and mid-level production workers.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE WORK-SPECIFIC LOCUS OF CONTROL

SCALE

Several steps were followed in developing the work-speciﬁc locus of
control measure. A review of the literature led to the development of an
initial pool of 35 items, which were subsequently administered to
a sample of 85 applicants for retail sales positions. Responses were
provided on a 5-point scale, anchored ‘‘strongly disagree’’ to ‘‘strongly
agree’’. Internal consistency reliability analyses were used to identify 16
items, which were then administered to a sample of 54 retail store
managers and 40 undergraduate students. After scoring all items so that
higher levels of agreement indicated internal locus of control, and lower
levels of agreement indicated higher external locus of control, item-total
correlations were examined, and a single item was chosen for elimination
from the measure. The 15-item scale was then administered to an
additional group of 49 applicants for retail sales positions, along with
Rotter’s (1966) locus of control scale. The correlation between the two
scales was .50, which is very similar to the correlation observed between
the work-speciﬁc locus of control measure described by Spector (1988) and
Rotter’s (1966) scale (Blau, 1993; Spector, 1988).

As described below, the resulting 15-item scale was then examined
using two normative samples, including a sample of college undergrad-
uates and a large sample of job applicants and incumbents in various
positions in organizations throughout the United States. Its criterion-
related validity and incremental validity were examined in two local
concurrent validation studies.


KEITH HATTRUP, MATTHEW S. O’CONNELL, AND JEFFREY R. LABRADOR 467

NORMATIVE STUDIES

Method

Samples and Procedures

Data were collected from two samples to evaluate the internal con-
sistency and intercorrelations involving the locus of control scale, the
proprietary measures of conscientiousness and cognitive ability that
were used in the subsequent validation studies, and a published measure
of each of the dimensions of the FFM. The ﬁrst sample included 77
undergraduate students at a large public university in the Midwestern
U.S. Participants in the student sample completed paper-and-pencil
versions of the locus of control scale described above, the conscientious-
ness measure described below, and the International Personality Item
Pool indicators of the FFM (Goldberg, 1999; International Personality
Item Pool, 2001).

The second normative sample included 3491 applicants and incum-
bents from eight manufacturing ﬁrms operating in the Midwestern U.S.
The positions encompassed a wide range of entry to mid-level manufac-
turing, assembly, and operator positions, and included repetitive light,
moderate, and heavy manufacturing jobs, as well as more sophisticated
operator positions focusing on monitoring and troubleshooting processes.
Participants completed the 15-item locus of control measure, along with
the proprietary measures of conscientiousness and cognitive ability de-
scribed below, using a computer. Applicants were administered the
measures during pre-employment testing, whereas incumbent partici-
pants were randomly selected from the organizations’ current pool of
employees to complete the measures during work hours in a proctored
administration.

Measures
Work-Speciﬁc Locus of Control. The 15-item measure described above
was administered in both normative samples. The student sample was
too small to perform exploratory factor analysis, so this sample was used
only to evaluate the intercorrelations between the measures used in this
research and a published measure of the FFM. In this student sample,
the 15-item locus of control scale had an internal consistency reliability of
.56. The same 15-items were administered to the larger employee sam-
ple. In this sample, exploratory principal factors analysis with varimax
rotation identiﬁed anywhere from one to three distinct factors, cumula-
tively accounting for 19.6, 31.3, and 39.3% of the item variance, respec-
tively. Items were retained for factors if their loadings exceeded .30 on a
factor and were at least .10 larger than their loadings on alternative
factors. Both the two and three factor solutions separated the subset of


468

JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY

positively worded items from the subset of reverse-worded items, and the
Alpha reliabilities of scales formed from these solutions ranged from .52
to .71. Because neither factor solution was consistent with existing the-
oretical models of the dimensionality of locus of control, and because
there was little empirical support for retaining scales formed from the
two and three factor solutions, we evaluated the scale properties of the
composite formed from all 15 items. This analysis identiﬁed a single item
that showed a low item-total correlation (r = .03), and that when deleted,
resulted in a 14-item work-speciﬁc locus of control measure with an
internal consistency reliability of .65. Scale scores were formed after
recoding items so that higher levels of agreement indicated higher
internal locus of control. The 14-item measure was then used in all
subsequent analyses involving the employee sample used in the normative
phase of the research, and the two validation studies described below.

Conscientiousness. A 23-item work-speciﬁc conscientiousness scale de-
scribed by Hattrup et al., (1998) was included in the battery of tests
administered to participants in this research. This measure was designed
to reﬂect the broad conscientiousness factor, and hence, included four
items reﬂecting hard work/achievement/work ethic, three items related
to persistence, six items related to effective use of time (versus wasting
time), three items related to detail orientation, four items related to
impulse control, two items related to physical appearance/presentation,
and one item that reﬂected decisiveness (see Hough & Ones, 2001, for a
comparison of facets). Hattrup et al., (1998) reported an internal con-
sistency of .70, and correlations of .23 and –.24 between the measure and
measures of organizational citizenship and absenteeism, respectively.
Items were rated using a 5-point Likert scale anchored ‘‘Strongly Dis-
agree’’ to ‘‘Strongly Agree.’’ Internal consistency reliability in the student
sample was .72 and was .73 in the employee sample.

Cognitive Ability. A 26-item cognitive ability measure was developed to
reﬂect three broad domains, including analytical reasoning, numerical
reasoning, and applied reasoning. These domains were considered relevant
to the jobs of interest given the requirements of each job for problem solving,
manipulation of quantitative information, and reliable performance of
assembly and production tasks. Items were scored dichotomously, and the
sum across the 26 items was used as the composite ability score. The ability
measure was administered in the employee normative sample. Internal
consistency reliability of 26-item ability measure was .81 in this sample.

Five Factor Model. The 50-item IPIP measure of the FFM (Goldberg,
1999; International Personality Item Pool, 2001) was administered to the
student sample. The IPIP is a publicly available pool of items that is


KEITH HATTRUP, MATTHEW S. O’CONNELL, AND JEFFREY R. LABRADOR 469

designed, in part, to measure the ﬁve broad factors of the FFM. Partic-
ipants use a 5-point Likert response scale to indicate the extent to which
each item is, as a self-description, ‘‘very inaccurate’’ to ‘‘very accurate.’’
The IPIP (International Personality Item Pool, 2001) reports internal
consistencies of each of the 10-item factor scales that range between .79
and .87. In the present student sample, internal consistencies ranged
between .74 and .91.

Results and Discussion

Table 1 presents means, standard deviations, and intercorrelations
among the measures administered to the student sample. As can be seen,
the 23-item conscientiousness measure used in this research demon-
strated good convergent validity with the IPIP conscientiousness scale,
as indicated by the large correlation between these variables. As ex-
pected, the 23-item conscientiousness scale had much lower correlations
with the other four dimensions of the FFM. The locus of control scale
correlated .15 with the 23-item conscientiousness scale, and –.07 with the
IPIP conscientiousness scale. Its correlations with the other dimensions
of the FFM were also small. Thus, the locus of control scale appears
relatively independent of the FFM, suggesting that it may either reside
outside the FFM as suggested by Hough (1992), or may represent a
speciﬁc sub-component of a very broad conscientiousness factor as sug-
gested by Costa and McCrae (1992), or a broad self-evaluations factor
(Judge & Bono, 2001). Whatever the conceptual relationships between
locus of control and the FFM and core self-evaluations, the results of the
present study suggest that the criterion-related validity of locus of con-
trol in predicting job performance is not accounted for by the broader
dimensions of the FFM.

Means, Standard Deviations, Internal Consistency Reliabilities, and Intercorre-

lations of Variables in the Student Sample (N = 77)

Table 1

Variable

Mean SD

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

1. 23-Item conscientiousness 3.38
3.18
2. 15-Item locus of control
3.58
3. IPIP conscientiousness
3.38
4. IPIP extraversion
5. IPIP neuroticism
3.24
4.27
6. IPIP agreeableness
7. IPIP openness
3.66

.36
.31
.58
.36
.81
.50
.53

(.72)
.15
(.56)
.74* –.07
–.27*
.04
–.26*
.14
–.15
–.20
–.21
–.18

(.84)
–.41*
(.89)
–.25* –.05
.13
–.19
.24*
–.20

(.91)
–.05
.19

(.87)
.10

(.74)

*p < .05.


470

JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY

Table 2 presents means, standard deviations, and intercorrelations
among the measures that were administered to the larger employee
normative sample. As can be seen, locus of control correlated signiﬁ-
cantly with the 23-item conscientiousness measure, suggesting that
persons who are higher in conscientiousness are more likely to be high in
internal locus of control than persons who are lower in conscientiousness.
Internal locus of control also correlated positively with the measure of
cognitive ability (r = .08), as did conscientiousness (r = .11). Thus, the
data collected in two samples showed a good pattern of convergent and
discriminant validity of the locus of control and conscientiousness mea-
sures used in this research with measures of the FFM and cognitive
ability. Of more direct relevance to the goals of the present study, how-
ever, is whether locus of control incrementally predicts job performance
after controlling for cognitive ability and conscientiousness. These rela-
tionships are examined in the validation studies reported below.

VALIDATION STUDY 1

Method

Sample and Procedure

Participants in this study included 121 operators at a paint pro-
cessing facility in the U.S., including 106 male employees, 13 female
employees, and two others for whom gender information was unavail-
able. Participants were randomly selected from current employees who
had been working in the company for at least 1 year. They completed the
cognitive ability, conscientiousness, and locus of control measures de-
scribed above as part of a larger research project, during work hours in a
proctored administration. All three measures were administered and
scored by computer. Job performance of the sample was evaluated by
immediate supervisors. Participants in this study monitored machines
and equipment used in the processing of paints and dyes that are used
for coloring various products. Hence, the job required paying attention to

Means, Standard Deviations, Internal Consistency Reliabilities, and Intercorre-

lations of Variables Examined in the Normative Sample (N = 3491)

Table 2

Variable

1. Cognitive ability
2. Conscientiousness
3. Locus of control

**p < .01.

Mean

13.51
3.92
3.69

SD

4.79
.31
.39

1

(.81)
.11**
.08**

2

3

4

(.73)
.51**

(.65)


KEITH HATTRUP, MATTHEW S. O’CONNELL, AND JEFFREY R. LABRADOR 471

detail, monitoring production processes, and developing unique solutions
to novel problems.

Measures

The cognitive ability, conscientiousness, and locus of control mea-
sures described above were administered. Internal consistency reliabili-
ties were .78, .72, and .65, respectively, in the present sample. Table 3
presents the means, standard deviations, intercorrelations, and internal
consistency reliabilities of these measures in the present sample.

Job Performance. Supervisors rated the job performance of participants
using a 10-item graphic rating measure. Each of the 10 items repre-
sented a dimension of job performance that had been identiﬁed in a job
analysis, including initiative, work motivation, leadership, dependabil-
ity, attention to detail, practical learning, teamwork, technical knowl-
edge, and quantitative and qualitative problem solving. Supervisors used
a 10-point rating scale to indicate how effectively the ratee had demon-
strated behaviors related to each dimension. An exploratory principal
factors analysis with varimax rotation was performed in the sample of
121 participants in the validation sample. Items were assigned to a factor
if their loadings on the factor exceeded .30 and were at least .10 different
from their loadings on alternative factors. The qualitative problem
solving item was eliminated from the analysis because it correlated 1.0
with the quantitative problem solving item. A three factor solution,
accounting for about 77% of the variance in the items, appeared most
interpretable. The ﬁrst factor was comprised of the items measuring
leadership, teamwork, and positive attitude, and thus, is consistent with
the interpersonal facilitation dimension of contextual performance de-
scribed by Van Scotter and Motowidlo (1996). The second factor included
the conscientiousness, initiative, work motivation, and practial learning
items, and thus, is consistent with the job dedication dimension of per-
formance described by Van Scotter and Motowidlo (1996). The third
factor included the technical knowledge and quantitative problem solv-
ing items, and was most consistent with the dimension of task perfor-
mance, described by several authors (Borman & Motowidlo, 1993;
Motowidlo et al., 1997). Internal consistency reliabilities of the inter-
personal facilitation, job dedication, and task performance scales were
.85, .81, and .77, respectively. As can be seen in Table 3, intercorrelations
among the three job performance scales ranged from .53 to .69.

Results and Discussion

Table 3 presents the means, standard deviations, and intercorrela-
tions among the predictor and criterion variables examined in this study.


472

JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY

Means, Standard Deviations, Internal Consistency Reliabilities, and Intercorre-

lations of Variables Examined in Validation Study 1 (N = 121)

Table 3

Variable

Mean

SD

1

2

3

4

5

6

1. Cognitive Ability
2. Conscientiousness
3. Locus of control
4. Task performance
5. Job dedication
6. Interpersonal facilitation

14.40
3.47
3.23
6.03
5.93
5.61

5.09
.29
.36
1.49
1.37
1.41

(.78)
.09
.18*
.23*
.27**
.25**

(.72)
.57**
.02
.18*
.14

(.65)
.19*
.31**
.38**

(.77)
.69**
.53**

(.81)
.62**

(.85)

*p < .05, **p < .01.

As can be seen, conscientiousness showed a strong relationship with lo-
cus of control (r = .57). Cognitive ability correlated signiﬁcantly with
locus of control but not with conscientiousness. As can be seen in Table 3,
cognitive ability was signiﬁcantly related to all three performance
dimensions, which is somewhat inconsistent with previous research
demonstrating stronger correlations between cognitive ability and task
performance than between cognitive ability and dimensions of contextual
performance (e.g., McHenry et al., 1990; see also Motowidlo et al., 1997).
Conscientiousness correlated signiﬁcantly only with the job dedica-
tion dimension (r = .18), which is consistent with the suggestion of Van
Scotter and Motowidlo that job dediction should be predictable from
scores on measures of conscientiousness, whereas interpersonal facili-
tation should be predicted from agreeableness and extraversion. The
results are also consistent with previous research demonstrating stron-
ger relationships between conscientiousness or work orientation and
contextual performance than between these predictors and task perfor-
mance (e.g., McHenry et al., 1990; see also Motowidlo et al., 1997;
Murphy & Shiarella, 1997). Follow-up tests of differences in dependent
correlations (Cohen & Cohen, 1983) showed that conscientiousness was
more strongly correlated with the job dedication scale than with the task
performance scale, whereas no other differences in the criterion-related
validity coefﬁcients for conscientiousness were signiﬁcant.

Locus of control correlated signiﬁcantly with all three performance
dimensions, demonstrating more effective task performance, job dedica-
tion, and interpersonal facilitation among employees who were higher in
internal locus of control. Follow-up tests revealed that locus of control
was more strongly correlated with the interpersonal facilitation dimen-
sion than with the task performance dimension, although no other dif-
ferences in correlations involving locus of control and the criteria were
signiﬁcant. The strong correlation between internal locus of control and
interpersonal facilitation is consistent with previous research demon-
strating positive relationships between internal locus of control and


KEITH HATTRUP, MATTHEW S. O’CONNELL, AND JEFFREY R. LABRADOR 473

effectiveness in leadership and teamwork roles (e.g., Anderson &
Schneier, 1978; Goodstadt & Hjelle, 1973).

Table 4 presents results of regressions designed to evaluate the
incremental validity of locus of control in predicting the three job perfor-
mance dimensions. As can be seen, conscientiousness failed to show unique
relationships with any of the job performance dimensions when used in
conjunction with cognitive ability. This result is inconsistent with ﬁndings
that suggest generalizability of the relationship between conscientiousness
and job performance across settings (e.g., Barrick & Mount, 1991), and
incremental validity of conscientiousness above the effects of cognitive
ability (e.g., Schmidt & Hunter, 1998). On the other hand, the results of this
study may be consistent with ﬁndings from other research which shows
that conscientiousness is often unrelated or negatively related to perfor-
mance of tasks that require creativity, initiative, and problem solving (e.g.,
George & Zhou, 2001; Hogan & Hogan, 1995). Effective performance in the
job examined in this study required that employees identify unique solu-
tions to novel problems. Rule-bound or rigid adherence to standardized
problem solutions would result in incomplete or slower solutions than ap-
proaches that involve innovative solutions. As would be expected in such
jobs, cognitive ability was signiﬁcantly related to ratings of effectiveness,
and conscientiousness correlated signiﬁcantly only with job dedication. It is
important to note, however, that creativity is often considered an aspect of
openness, rather than low conscientiousness (see Hough & Ones, 2001).

Table 4 shows that locus of control added incrementally to the pre-
diction of all three performance dimensions after controlling for cognitive
ability and conscientiousness. The positive sign of the regression coefﬁ-
cient for locus of control indicates that participants who scored higher in

Regressions of Task Performance, Job Dedication, and Interpersonal

Facilitation on Cognitive Ability and Personality Measures in Validation

Study 1 (N = 121)

Table 4

Task Performance

Job Dedication

Interpersonal Facil

Independent Variables

b

R2

DR2

b

R2

DR2

b

R2

DR2

Step 1
Cognitive ability
Conscientiousness

Step 2
Cognitive ability
Conscientiousness
Locus of control

.23*
–.00

.20*
–.12
.22*

*p < .05, **p < .01.

.05*

.10**

.08**

.08*

.03*

.25**
.16

.22*
.01
.26*

.14**

.04*

.24**
.12

.19*
–.11
.41**

.19**

.11**


474

JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY

internal locus of control demonstrated better task performance,
job
dedication, and interpersonal facilitation than participants with higher
external locus of control, even after controlling for the effects of cognitive
ability and conscientiousness. Thus, the results of Study 1 underscore
the job-relevance of locus of control as a potentially important predictor
of job performance. A second validation study was conducted to assess
the generalizability of these effects in a job that was characterized by
different demands and performance expectations.

VALIDATION STUDY 2

Method

Sample and Procedure

Participants in this study included 113 male and 29 female pro-
duction workers at a large automobile manufacturing facility in the U.S.
As in the ﬁrst validation study, participants were randomly selected from
current employees who had been working in the company for at least one
year. They completed the assessment as part of a larger research project
during work hours in a proctored administration, and were assured that
the results would be used only for research purposes. Their job perfor-
mance was rated by their direct supervisors. Employees worked as
‘‘Production Team Members’’, and were trained in a variety of the func-
tions involved in the manufacture of automobiles, including paint, body,
ﬁnal assembly, trim, and so on. According to a job analysis, effectiveness
depended on attention to detail, work pace, and periodic cooperation with
coworkers to resolve unexpected problems.

Measures
Predictors. The measures of cognitive ability, conscientiousness, and
locus of control were administered by computer, as described above.
Internal consistency reliabilities of the ability, conscientiousness, and
locus of control measures were .47, .74, and .58, respectively, in Valida-
tion Study 2. The lower reliabilities of the ability and locus of control
measures in the second validation study, as compared to the normative
sample and ﬁrst validation study, are difﬁcult to interpret, but may be
partly a result of the lower variances of these two measures in the second
validation sample as compared to the other samples.

Job Performance. Supervisors rated incumbents’ performance using a
32-item behavioral observation measure. Items described examples of
effective or ineffective behavior in each of seven job areas, including
organizational citizenship, work pace, teamwork, quality awareness,
problem solving, responsibility, and ﬂexibility. Between three and 10


KEITH HATTRUP, MATTHEW S. O’CONNELL, AND JEFFREY R. LABRADOR 475

items were written for each dimension. Supervisors rated the frequency
with which each of the 32 behaviors was observed using a 7-point Likert
scale, with anchors ‘‘Never’’ to ‘‘Always.’’ Exploratory principal factors
analysis with varimax rotation failed to converge on an interpretable
solution, owing to the large number of very highly correlated items in the
measure. We also formed a contextual performance scale by averaging
scores on the organizational citizenship, teamwork, responsibility, and
ﬂexibility subscales; and a task performance scale by averaging scores on
the quality awareness, problem solving, and work pace. The correlation
between the task and contextual performance scales was .89, and pre-
dictors showed almost identical relationships with the two performance
dimensions. Thus, results strongly suggest that a composite unidimen-
sional performance measure best ﬁts the pattern of responses in Vali-
dation Study 2. The internal consistency reliability (Alpha) of the
performance measure in this sample was .97.

Results and Discussion

Table 5 presents the correlations among locus of control, conscien-
tiousness, cognitive ability, and job performance. As can be seen, con-
scientiousness and locus of control were signiﬁcantly correlated, as was
the case in the normative sample and in Study 1. In the present sample,
about 21% of the variance was shared between the locus of control
measure and the conscientiousness scale, which is similar to the results
observed in the normative sample and ﬁrst validation sample. As can be
seen in Table 5, both conscientiousness and locus of control were sig-
niﬁcantly related to the job performance measure. The positive correla-
tion between conscientiousness and performance is consistent with
literature that demonstrates positive effects of conscientiousness on
performance of tasks that do not require high levels of creativity and
innovativeness. The non-signiﬁcant correlation between cognitive ability

Means, Standard Deviations, Internal Consistency Reliabilities, and Intercorre-

lations of Variables Examined in Validation Study 2 (N = 142)

Table 5

Variable

1. Cognitive ability
2. Conscientiousness
3. Locus of control
4. Job performance ratings

*p < .05, **p < .01.

Mean

15.18
3.57
3.44
4.72

SD

2.85
.31
.30
.86

1

(.47)
–.04
–.10
–.03

2

3

4

(.74)
.46**
.28**

(.58)
.27**

(.97)


476

JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY

Regressions of Job Performance on Cognitive Ability and Personality Measures

in Validation Study 2 (N = 142)

Table 6

Variables

Step 1.
Cognitive ability
Conscientiousness

Step 2.
Cognitive ability
Conscientiousness
Locus of control

*p < .05, **p < .01.

b

–.02
.28**

–.01
.20*
.18*

R2

.08**

.11**

DR2

.03*

and performance may be the result of lower internal consistency of the
ability measure in this sample.

Table 6 presents the results of regression analyses designed to test
the incremental validity of locus of control. As can be seen, conscien-
tiousness had unique effects on performance after controlling for
ability. Locus of control also added incrementally to the prediction of
performance after controlling for ability and conscientiousness. These
ﬁndings are consistent with the results of Study 1, which showed a
similar incremental relationship between locus of control and job
performance after controlling for both ability and conscientiousness.
(Table 4)

GENERAL DISCUSSION

The goal of this research was to examine the incremental validity of
locus of control in predicting job performance, after controlling for the
effects of cognitive ability and conscientiousness. As hypothesized, locus
of control showed signiﬁcant incremental relationships with job perfor-
mance after controlling for cognitive ability and conscientiousness. The
ﬁndings of the present study are consistent with research that has
demonstrated signiﬁcant validity associated with locus of control when
predicting job performance (e.g., Blau, 1993; Hough, 1992; Judge & Bono,
2001). The unique contribution of the present study is in demonstrating
incremental relationships between locus of control and job performance,
after controlling for both cognitive ability and a measure of conscien-
tiousness.

The incremental effects of locus of control on ratings of job perfor-
mance demonstrate that unique variance in the criterion is accounted for


KEITH HATTRUP, MATTHEW S. O’CONNELL, AND JEFFREY R. LABRADOR 477

by locus of control. From a practical point of view, locus of control ex-
plained an additional .03 to .11 proportion of variance in job performance
after accounting for ability and conscientiousness. Schmidt and Hunter
(1998) reported that conscientiousness added .09 to the proportion of
criterion variance explained by cognitive ability, whereas job knowledge
measures, assessment centers, and biodata added only .07, .02, and .01,
respectively. Results of the present study demonstrate that, after con-
trolling for two constructs commonly used in the selection of personnel,
locus of control adds an increment to the proportion of explained job
performance variance that compares favorably to the increment added by
job knowledge tests, assessment centers, biodata, education, or job
experience above cognitive ability alone. Clearly, the results underscore
a need for additional research that evaluates relationships between locus
of control and the FFM and core self-evaluations, and that tests various
theoretical models that include locus of control as a speciﬁc trait relevant
to work-related behaviors.

From a theoretical point of view, the incremental validity of locus of
control suggests a need to better ascertain the substantive meaning of
the criterion variance that is uniquely explained by locus of control.
Studies that have addressed the incremental effects of conscientiousness
on job performance have demonstrated that one important reason for the
unique effects of conscientiousness is that ability and conscientiousness
relate to somewhat different dimensions of job performance (e.g., Mot-
owidlo et al., 1997; Motowidlo & VanScotter, 1994). Results of Study 1
were somewhat consistent with this previous research in that conscien-
tiousness correlated signiﬁcantly only with the measure of job dedication,
and its correlation with job dedication was signiﬁcantly greater than its
correlation with task performance. In the same sample, locus of control
was more strongly correlated with the interpersonal facilitation dimen-
sion of performance than with task performance, suggesting that locus of
control may contribute to performance by increasing the likelihood that
workers will form positive relationships with others, demonstrate lead-
ership, and exhibit positive attitudes.

It is noteworthy that locus of control was the only predictor that
related uniquely to job performance criteria in both validation studies. As
noted above, ability, but not conscientiousness was related to perfor-
mance for employees who performed the process monitoring and trou-
bleshooting tasks in Study 1, whereas conscientiousness, but not ability,
was related to performance of assembly and teamwork behaviors in
Study 2. For the most part, employees in Study 1 monitored automated
chemical processing equipment, and were required to troubleshoot
equipment failures and develop novel solutions to production problems.
Hence, the job required abstract reasoning and problem solving, which is
consistent with the recognition that process monitoring and maintenance


478

JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY

of automated systems is cognitively challenging (e.g., Argote, Goodman,
& Schkade, 1983; Hesketh & Neal, 1999; Weick, 1990), and with our
ﬁnding of a positive correlation between ability and performance in these
jobs. Cognitive ability was not signiﬁcantly related to performance in the
jobs examined in Study 2, however. The jobs examined in Study 2 in-
volved simple production and assembly tasks, and hence, previous re-
search leads to the expectation of a relatively lower correlation between
ability and performance than was observed in Study 1, due to the relative
lack of signiﬁcant cognitive demands (e.g., Hunter & Hunter, 1984).

The ﬁndings of the present research with respect to conscientious-
ness also provided mixed support for previous research. On one hand,
conscientiousness related signiﬁcantly and incrementally with perfor-
mance in Study 2. This is consistent with previous research demon-
strating incremental
relationships between conscientiousness and
overall job performance (e.g., Schmidt & Hunter, 1998). In Study 1,
however, conscientiousness correlated signiﬁcantly with job dedication,
but not with task performance or interpersonal facilitation. Hence, re-
sults of the present study are consistent with Van Scotter and Moto-
widlo’s (1996) suggestion that conscientiousness should relate mainly to
job dedication, whereas interpersonal facilitation and task performance
are predictable from other constructs.

Of course, the studies reported here are not without limitations.
Perhaps most signiﬁcant is the use of unpublished measures of key
constructs in the present study, which is often considered less desirable
than using measures with more well-known psychometric properties.
However, results demonstrated acceptable levels of internal consistency
of each of the measures used in this research, although the internal
consistency of the locus of control scale was somewhat lower. Results of
the two normative studies and two validation studies were generally
consistent with our hypotheses, and with the extant literature. More-
over, the measure of conscientiousness used in this research was shown
in a previous study to relate signiﬁcantly with measures of organiza-
tional citizenship and attendance (Hattrup et al., 1998). The available
empirical literature includes a variety of validation studies that use
disparate measures of ability and personality constructs, and the use of
proprietary measures in ﬁeld research is not uncommon. Overall, the
evidence obtained in the present research provides strong support for the
incremental effects of locus of control on job performance after control-
ling for cognitive ability and conscientiousness.

Researchers should attempt to replicate these ﬁndings in ﬁeld set-
tings using a variety of instruments. Carefully designed research that
varies measurement methods and constructs will contribute substan-
tially to our understanding of the latent individual difference constructs
underlying performance in organizations. It is also hoped that the


KEITH HATTRUP, MATTHEW S. O’CONNELL, AND JEFFREY R. LABRADOR 479

present ﬁndings might contribute to future meta-analytic research de-
signed to identify relationships among various ability and personality
constructs and various job performance dimensions. Such research has
the potential to provide more power to detect stable relationships at the
population level. Although the samples used in both validation studies
reported here were moderate in size, some non-signiﬁcant results may
have been observed due to low statistical power. Researchers are urged to
follow-up on the present ﬁndings with additional large sample ﬁeld re-
search and meta-analytic investigations. The results of this research
clearly demonstrate the need for researchers to look beyond conscien-
tiousness and the FFM, and to consider other speciﬁc personality variables
that may have considerable usefulness in predicting valued outcomes in
organizations. Locus of control appears to offer this potential.

REFERENCES

Anderson, C. R., Hellriegel, D. & Slocum, J. W. (1977). Managerial response to environ-

mentally induced stress. Academy of Management Journal, 201, 260–272.

Anderson, C. R. & Schneier, C. E.

leader behavior, and
leader performance among management students. Academy of Management Journal,
21, 690–698.

(1978). Locus of control,

Argote, L., Goodman, P. S. & Schkade, D. (1983). The human side of robotics: How workers

react to a robot. Sloan Management Review, 24, 31–41.

Ashton, M. C. (1998). Personality and job performance: The importance of narrow traits.

Journal of Organizational Behavior, 19, 289–303.

Barrick, M. R. & Mount, M. K. (1991). The Big 5 personality dimensions and job perfor-

mance. Personnel Psychology, 44, 1–25.

Blau, G. (1993). Testing the relationship of locus of control to different performance

dimensions. Journal of Organizational and Occupational Psychology, 66, 125–138.

Costa, P. T. Jr. & McCrae, R. R. (1992). Four ways ﬁve factors are basic. Personality and

Individual Differences, 13, 653–665.

Crandall, V. C., Kratovsky, W. & Crandall, V. J. (1965). Children’s beliefs in their control of
reinforcements in intellectual achievement behaviors. Child Development, 36, 91–109.
Cravens, R. W. & Worchel, P. (1977). The differential effects of rewarding and coercive
leaders on group members differing in locus of control. Journal of Personality, 45,
150–168.

Digman, J. M. (1990). Personality structure: Emergence of the ﬁve factor model. Annual

Review of Psychology, 41, 417–440.

Donovan, D. M. & O’Leary, M. R. (1978). The drinking-related locus of control scale.

Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 39, 759–784.

Erez, A. & Judge, T. A. (2001). Relationship of core self-evaluations to goal setting, moti-

vation, and performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 1270–1279.

George, J. M. & Zhou, J. (2001). When openness to experience and conscientiousness are
related to creative behavior: An interactional approach. Journal of Applied Psychology,
86, 513–524.

Goldberg, L. R. (1981). Language and individual differences: The search for universals in
personality lexicons. Review of personality and social psychology. Beverly Hills, CA:
Sage 141–166.

Goldberg, L. R. (1999). A broad-bandwidth, public domain, personality inventory measuring
In I. Mervielde, I. Deary, F. De

the lower-level facets of several ﬁve-factor models.


480

JOURNAL OF BUSINESS AND PSYCHOLOGY

Fruyt & F. Ostendorf (Eds.). Personality psychology in Europe (pp. 7–28). Tilburg, The
Netherlands: Tilburg University Press.

Goodstadt, B. E. & Hjelle, L. A. (1973). Power to the powerless: Locus of control and the use

of power. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 27, 190–196.

Guion, R. M. & Gottier, R. F. (1965). Validity of personality measures in personnel selection.

Personnel Psychology, 18, 135–164.

Hattrup, K., O’Connell, M. S. & Wingate, P. H. (1998). Prediction of multidimensional
criteria: Distinguishing task and contextual performance. Human Performance, 11,
305–319.

Hesketh, A. & Neal, A. (1999). Technology and performance. In D. R. Ilgen & E. D. Pulakos

(Eds.). The changing nature of performance, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Hogan, R. & Hogan, J. (1995). Hogan personality inventory manual. 2nd, Tulsa, OK: Hogan

Assessment Systems.

Hough, L. M. (1992). The ,Big Five’ personality variables—construct confusion: description

versus prediction. Human Performance, 5, 139–155.

Hough, L. M., Eaton, N. L., Dunnette, M. D., Kamp, J. D. & McCloy, R. A. (1990). Criterion-
related validities of personality constructs and the effect of response distortion on those
validities. Journal of Applied Psychology, 75, 581–595.

Hough, L. M. & Ones, D. S. (2001). The structure, measurement, validity, and use of per-
sonality variables in industrial, work, and organizational psychology. In N. Anderson,
D. S. Ones, H. K. Sinangil, & C Viswesvaran (Eds.). Handbook of industrial, work, and
organizational psychology (pp. 233–277). London: Sage.

Hunter, J. E. & Hunter, R. F. (1984). Validity and utility of alternative predictors of job

performance. Psychological Bulletin, 96, 72–98.

Hurtz, G. M. & Donovan, J. J. (2000). Personality and job performance: The Big 5 revisited.

Journal of Applied Psychology, 85, 869–879.

International Personality Item Pool (2001). A Scientiﬁc Collaboratory for the Development
of Advanced Measures of Personality Traits and Other Individual Differences
(http://ipip.ori.org/). Internet Web Site.

Judge, T. A. & Bono, J. E. (2001). Relationship of core self-evaluation traits – self-esteem,
generalized self-efﬁcacy, locus of control, and emotional stability – with job satisfaction
and job performance: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 80–92.

Judge, T. A., Erez, A. & Bono, J. E. (1998). The power of being positive: The relation
between positive self-concept and job performance. Human Performance, 11, 167–187.
Judge, T. A., Erez, A., Bono, J. E. & Thoreson, C. J. (2002a). Are measures of self-esteem,
neuroticism, locus of control and generalized self-efﬁcacy indicators of a common con-
struct?. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 693–710.

Judge, T. A., Erez, A., Bono, J. E. & Thoreson, C. J. (2002b). The core self-evaluations scale:

Development of a measure. Personnel Psychology, 56, 303–331.

Lefcourt, H. M. (1976). Locus of control: Current trends in theory and research. New York:

Wiley.

Lefcourt, H. M. (1981). Research with the locus of control construct: Volume 1, Assessment

methods. New York: Academic Press.

Lied, T. R. & Pritchard, R. D.

(1976). Relationships between personality variables
and components of the expectancy-valence model. Journal of Applied Psychology, 61,
463–467.

Macan, T. H., Trusty, M. L. & Trimble, S. K. (1996). Spector’s work locus of control scale:
Dimensionality and validity evidence. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 56,
349–357.

McCrae, R. R. & Costa, P. T. Jr. (1985). Updating Norman’s ‘‘adequate taxonomy’’: Intel-
ligence and personality dimensions in natural language and in questionnaires. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 710–721.

McCrae, R. R. & Costa, P. T. Jr. (1987). Validation of the ﬁve-factor model of personality
across instruments and observers. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52,
81–90.

McHenry, J. J., Hough, L. M., Toquam, J. L., Hanson, M. A. & Ashworth, S. (1990). Project a
validity results: the relationship between predictor and criterion domains. Personnel
Psychology, 43, 335–354.


KEITH HATTRUP, MATTHEW S. O’CONNELL, AND JEFFREY R. LABRADOR 481

Mitchell, T. R., Smyser, C. M. & Weed, S. E. (1975). Locus of control: Supervision and work

satisfaction. Academy of Management Journal, 18, 623–631.

Montag, I. & Comrey, A. L. (1987). Internality and externality as correlates of involvement

in fatal driving accidents. Journal of Applied Psychology, 72, 339–343.

Morrison, K. A. (1997). Personality correlates of the ﬁve-factor model for a sample of
business owners/managers: Associations with scores on self-monitoring, Type A behavior,
locus of control, and subjective well-being. Psychological Reports, 80, 255–272.

Motowidlo, S. J., Borman, W. C. & Schmit, M. J. (1997). A theory of individual differences in

task and contextual performance. Human Performance, 10, 71–83.

Motowidlo, S. J. & Van Scotter, J. R. (1994). Evidence that task performance should
be distinguished from contextual performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79,
475–480.

Murphy, K. R. & Shiarella, A. H. (1997). Implications of the multidimensional nature of job
performance for the validity of selection tests: Multivariate frameworks for studying
test validity. Personnel Psychology, 50, 823–854.

O’Brien, G. E. (1984). Locus of control, work, and retirement. In H. M. Lefcourt (Eds.).
Research with the locus of control construct (Vol. 3): Extensions and limitations, New
York: Academic Press.

Rotter, J. B. (1996). Generalized expectancies for internal versus external control of re-

inforcement. Psychological Monographs, 80, (Whole No. 609).

Salgado, J. F. (1997). The ﬁve factor model of personality and job performance in the

European community. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82, 30–43.

Schmidt, F. L. & Hunter, J. E. (1998). The validity and utility of selection methods in
personnel psychology: Practical and theoretical implications of 85 years of research
ﬁndings. Psychological Bulletin, 124, 262–274.

Schmitt, N., Gooding, R. Z., Noe, R. A. & Kirsch, M. (1984). Meta-analysis of validity studies
published between 1964 and 1984 and the investigation of study characteristics. Per-
sonnel Psychology, 37, 407–422.

Schneider, R. J., Hough, L. M. & Dunnette, M. D. (1996). Broadsided by broad traits: How to
sink science in ﬁve dimensions or less. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 17,
639–655.

Spector, P. E. (1982). Behavior in organizations as a function of employees’ locus of control.

Psychological Bulletin, 91, 482–497.

Spector, P. E. (1988). Development of the work locus of control scale. Journal of Occupa-

tional Psychology, 61, 335–340.

Stipek, D. J. & Weisz, J. R. (1981). Perceived personal control and academic achievement.

Review of Educational Research, 51, 101–137.

Szilagyi, A. D. & Sims, H. P. (1975). Locus of control and expectancies across multiple

occupational levels. Journal of Applied Psychology, 60, 638–640.

Tett, R. P., Jackson, D. N. & Rothstein, M. (1991). Personality measures as predictors of job

performance: A meta-analytic review. Personnel Psychology, 44, 703–742.

Tseng, M. S. (1970). Locus of control as a determinant of job proﬁciency, employability, and
training satisfaction of vocational rehabilitation clients. Journal of Counseling Psy-
chology, 17, 487–491.

Van Scotter, J. R. & Motowidlo, S. J. (1996). Interpersonal facilitation and job dedication as
separate facets of contextual performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81, 525–531.
Wallston, K. A. & Wallston, B. S. (1981). Health locus of control scales. In H. M. Lefcourt
(Eds.). Research with the locus of control construct (pp. 189–244). New York: Academic
Press.

Weick, K. E. (1990). Technology as equivoque: Sensemaking in new technologies. In P. S.
Goodman, L. S. Sproull & Associates (Eds.). Technology and organizations (pp. 1–44).
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Weiss, H. M. & Adler, S. (1984). Personality and organizational behavior. In B. M. Staw &
L. L. Cummings (Eds.). Research in organizational behavior (pp. 1–50). Greenwich, CT:
JAI.

Wong, P. T. P., Watters, D. A. & Sproule, C. F. (1978). Initial validity and reliability of the
Trent Attribution Proﬁle as a measure of attribution schema and locus of control.
Educational and Psychological Measurement, 38, 1129–1134.

