Cornell University ILR School
DigitalCommons@ILR
Center for Advanced Human Resource Studies
(CAHRS)

CAHRS Working Paper Series

4-1-2008

Targeted Employee Retention: Performance-Based
and Job-Related Differences in Reported Reasons
for Staying
John Hausknecht
Cornell University, jph42@cornell.edu

Julianne M. Rodda
DePaul University

Michael J. Howard
Harrah's Entertainment

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/cahrswp

Part of the Human Resources Management Commons

Thank you for downloading an article from DigitalCommons@ILR.
Support this valuable resource today!

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Center for Advanced Human Resource Studies (CAHRS) at DigitalCommons@ILR. It
has been accepted for inclusion in CAHRS Working Paper Series by an authorized administrator of DigitalCommons@ILR. For more information,
please contact hlmdigital@cornell.edu.


Targeted Employee Retention: Performance-Based and Job-Related
Differences in Reported Reasons for Staying

Abstract
A content model of 12 retention factors is developed in the context of previous theory and research. Coding of
open-ended responses from 24,829 employees in the leisure and hospitality industry lends support to the
identified framework and reveals that job satisfaction, extrinsic rewards, constituent attachments,
organizational commitment, and organizational prestige were the most frequently mentioned reasons for
staying. Advancement opportunities and organizational prestige were more common reasons for staying
among high performers and non-hourly workers, and extrinsic rewards was more common among low
performers and hourly employees, providing support for ease/desirability of movement and psychological
contract rationales. The findings highlight the importance of differentiating human resource management
practices when the goal is to retain those employees valued most by the organization.

Keywords
retention, job performance, hourly workers, professional employees

Disciplines
Human Resources Management

Comments
Suggested Citation
Hausknecht, J. P., Rodda, J. M. & Howard, M. J. (2008). Targeted employee retention: Performance-based and
job-related differences in reported reasons for staying (CAHRS Working Paper #08-06). Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University, School of Industrial and Labor Relations, Center for Advanced Human Resource Studies.
http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/cahrswp/484

Required Publisher Statement
The final paper is forthcoming in Human Resource Management, published by John Wiley & Sons.

This article is available at DigitalCommons@ILR: http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/cahrswp/484


 
 
 

 
W O R K I N G   P A P E R   S E R I E S    

CAHRS at Cornell University 
615B Ives Hall 
Ithaca, NY  14853-3901  USA 
Tel.  607 255-9358 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/CAHRS 

Targeted Employee Retention: 
Performance-Based and Job-Related 
Differences in Reported Reasons for 
Staying 

 
 
John P. Hausknecht  
Julianne M. Rodda 
Michael J. Howard 
 
Working Paper 08 – 06 
      
  
 

 
 

 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-06 

Targeted Employee Retention: 

Performance-Based and Job-Related 

Differences in  

Reported Reasons for Staying 

 
 
 

John P. Hausknecht  

Cornell University 

Julianne M. Rodda 
DePaul University 

Michael J. Howard 

Harrah’s Entertainment  

April 2008 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/cahrs

This paper has not undergone formal review or approval of the faculty of the ILR School.  It is 
intended to make results of Center research available to others interested in preliminary form to 

encourage discussion and suggestions. 

Most (if not all) of the CAHRS Working Papers are available for reading at the Catherwood 

Library.  For information on what’s available link to the Cornell Library Catalog: 

http://catalog.library.cornell.edu if you wish. 

 

Page 2 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 

 

 

Abstract 

CAHRS WP08-06 

A content model of 12 retention factors is developed in the context of previous theory 

and research. Coding of open-ended responses from 24,829 employees in the leisure and 

hospitality industry lends support to the identified framework and reveals that job satisfaction, 

extrinsic rewards, constituent attachments, organizational commitment, and organizational 

prestige were the most frequently mentioned reasons for staying. Advancement opportunities 

and organizational prestige were more common reasons for staying among high performers and 

non-hourly workers, and extrinsic rewards was more common among low performers and hourly 

employees, providing support for ease/desirability of movement and psychological contract 

rationales. The findings highlight the importance of differentiating human resource management 

practices when the goal is to retain those employees valued most by the organization.  

KEYWORDS: retention, job performance, hourly workers, professional employees 

 
 
 
 
 
 

* Note: This is a preprint of an article accepted for publication in Human Resource Management 

© Copyright 2008, Wiley 

 

 

 

Author Note:  

John P. Hausknecht, Department of Human Resource Studies, Cornell University; 

Julianne M. Rodda, Department of Psychology, DePaul University; Michael J. Howard, Harrah’s 
Entertainment, Memphis, Tennessee.  

An earlier version of this study was presented at the 65th Annual Meeting of the 

Academy of Management, Honolulu, Hawaii. 

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to John P. Hausknecht, 
School of Industrial and Labor Relations, Department of Human Resource Studies, 388 Ives 
Hall, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, 14853. E-mail: jph42@cornell.edu.  

 

Page 3 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-06 

Targeted Employee Retention: Performance-Based and Job-Related Differences 

in Reported Reasons for Staying 

 

Retaining top talent remains a primary concern for many organizations today. Critical 

analysis of workforce trends points to an impending shortage of highly-skilled employees who 

possess the requisite knowledge and ability to perform at high levels, meaning that 

organizations failing to retain high performers will be left with an understaffed, less qualified 

workforce that ultimately hinders their ability to remain competitive (Rappaport, Bancroft, & 

Okum, 2003). Despite the vast literature on employee turnover, which is aimed at identifying 

factors that cause employees to quit (e.g., Griffeth, Hom, & Gaertner, 2000), much less is 

known about the factors that compel employees to stay. For example, Maertz and Campion 

noted “relatively less turnover research has focused specifically on how an employee decides to 

remain with an organization and what determines this attachment…retention processes should 

be studied along with quitting processes” (1998, p. 65). Steel, Griffeth, and Hom added “the fact 

is often overlooked, but the reasons people stay are not always the same as the reasons people 

leave” (2002, p. 152). 

Retention is a critical element of an organization’s more general approach to talent 

management, which is defined as “the implementation of integrated strategies or systems 

designed to increase workplace productivity by developing improved processes for attracting, 

developing, retaining, and utilizing people with the required skills and aptitude to meet current 

and future business needs” (Lockwood, 2006, p. 2). The latter part of this definition is important 

because it suggests that talent management programs should be tailored to those who are most 

responsible for the organization’s success. In this study, we focus on job performance as one 

indicator of employee value under the assumption that high performers are most likely to 

possess the knowledge, skills, and experience necessary to contribute to the overall success of 

the organization. We also examine employees at different job levels based on the premise that 

 

Page 4 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 
an organization’s most critical talent, whether top management or line employees, may value 

CAHRS WP08-06 

 

different aspects of the what the organization has to offer when deciding whether to stay.  

Thus, we propose that understanding the reasons why people stay, on average, is an 

important goal, but also contend that it may be more valuable to examine how these retention 

factors differ for high performers and those at different levels of the organization (Griffeth & 

Hom, 2001). Blanket retention policies may be disadvantageous if they appeal to employees at 

all levels of performance, and organizations would want to adopt particular strategies that 

contribute to the retention of their most valued employees while avoiding control methods that 

would appeal primarily to average or low performers (Steel et al., 2002). In terms of job level 

differences, many talent management programs emphasize developing and retaining the group 

of employees who have potential to occupy the top leadership positions within the organization 

in the near future. To this end, organizations can benefit from knowing whether retention 

reasons differ based on job level, which might then call for different retention strategies 

depending on where individuals reside within the organizational hierarchy. 

In summary, little research has examined employees’ reasons for staying while testing 

whether these factors differ based on job performance or job level. In this study, we develop a 

content model of employee retention that is grounded in theory and past research (e.g., March 

& Simon, 1958; Mobley, Griffeth, Hand, & Meglino, 1979; Porter & Steers, 1973; Price & 

Mueller, 1981), and then test it with a sample of nearly 25,000 employees who were asked to 

comment on why they stay with their employer. We also develop and test predictions grounded 

in ease/desirability of movement (March & Simon, 1958) and psychological contract (Robinson, 

Kraatz, & Rousseau, 1994) rationales to explain why high and low performers and those at 

different job levels will be more or less likely to emphasize particular retention dimensions.  

A Content Model of Employee Retention 

 

The first goal of this study was to generate a theoretically-derived set of factors that 

would serve as the foundation for the content analysis of the primary data relating to employees’ 

reported reasons for staying. To this end, we reviewed the major theories that have been 
 

Page 5 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 
advanced in the literature over the last 50 years that help explain why employees stay or quit. A 

CAHRS WP08-06 

 

brief summary of these content models is described below. The list of retention factors and 

literature review is not meant to be exhaustive of all possible theories or variables related to 

employee retention and turnover (see Hom & Griffeth, 1995; Griffeth et al., 2000, for extensive 

reviews). Rather, the emphasis in this study is placed on testing the relative frequency with 

which various retention factors emerge when analyzing employees’ open-ended explanations 

for why they stay. Names and definitions of the 12 retention factors examined in this study are 

provided in Table 1. 

Description and Definition of Retention Factors 

Table 1 

 

Retention Factor 
 
Advancement opportunities 
 
 
Constituent attachments 
 
 
Extrinsic rewards 
 
 
Flexible work arrangements 
 
Investments 
 
Job satisfaction 
 
Lack of alternatives 
 
Location 
 
Non-work influences 
 
 
Organizational commitment  
 
 
Organizational justice  
 
 
Organizational prestige 
 
Note. Several definitions adapted from Price & Mueller (1981) and Steers (1977). 

Definition  
 
The amount of potential for movement to higher levels within the 
organization  
 
The degree of attachment to individuals associated with the 
organization such as supervisor, co-workers, or customers 
 
The amount of pay, benefits, or equivalents distributed in return for 
service 
 
The nature of the work schedule or hours 
 
Perceptions about the length of service to the organization  
 
The degree to which individuals like their jobs 
 
Beliefs about the unavailability of jobs outside of the organization 
 
The proximity of the workplace relative to one’s home 
 
The existence of responsibilities and commitments outside of the 
organization 
 
The degree to which individual’s identify with and are involved in the 
organization 
 
Perceptions about the fairness of reward allocations, policies and 
procedures, and interpersonal treatment 
 
The degree to which the organization is perceived to be reputable and 
well-regarded 

 

 

 

Page 6 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-06 

One of the earliest models of turnover is March and Simon’s (1958) theory of 

organizational equilibrium, in which the authors proposed that desirability of movement and 

ease of movement are the two main drivers of employee turnover. Desirability of movement is 

commonly defined by the individual’s satisfaction with the job, whereas ease of movement 

generally reflects perceived or actual job alternatives in the external market. Viewed from the 

perspective of retention, the model suggests that employees will be more likely to stay when 

they are satisfied with their jobs and believe that there are few alternatives available. Hence, job 

satisfaction and lack of alternatives are included here as two important factors in employees’ 

decisions to stay (see Table 1). As described below, many of the subsequent theories of 

turnover have built upon the satisfaction/alternatives framework outlined by March and Simon.  

Porter and Steers (1973) introduced one of the first major updates to the March and 

Simon model, and asserted that a variety of work-related and personal factors were important 

precursors of turnover. From the standpoint of explaining why employees stay, five dimensions 

from their model are relevant to this study, and are thus included in Table 1. Two of these 

dimensions, extrinsic rewards (e.g., pay, benefits) and advancement opportunities, should be 

related to staying because employees are sensitive to receiving fair rewards for their efforts and 

may leave when opportunities to receive greater rewards exist elsewhere. A third factor, 

constituent attachments, in the form of effective supervision and positive peer group relations, 

should also be related to retention. Porter and Steers reviewed evidence from previous research 

showing higher turnover among employees when supervisors had treated them poorly, 

displayed low levels of consideration behaviors, or did not meet their needs regarding feedback 

and recognition. Additionally, co-workers may influence retention because they can provide 

support and encouragement to employees to help them adjust to the work environment, thereby 

facilitating attachment to the organization. Fourth, Porter and Steers suggested that employees 

are more likely to stay as they build longer tenure with the organization (because of seniority-

related perks or other valued outcomes), a notion that we label here as investments. Finally, 

non-work influences such as family responsibilities were mentioned as another factor that may 
 

Page 7 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 
be related to employee retention, which has since been expanded to include a variety of ties to 

CAHRS WP08-06 

 

one’s community, family, and other life activities outside of work (Mitchell, Holtom, Lee, 

Sablynski, & Erez, 2001).  

Several years later, Mobley and colleagues offered a revised framework that specified 

many of the factors discussed above (e.g., pay, promotion, supervision), but also included 

several new dimensions that could influence retention (Mobley et al., 1979). In terms of work 

attitudes, job satisfaction was viewed as the primary determinant of quit intentions in their 

model, and the authors were also among the first to discuss the role of organizational 

commitment in turnover decisions, which was defined in earlier work as an “individual’s 

identification with and involvement in a particular organization” (Steers, 1977, p. 46). The 

authors suggested that committed employees are expected to remain because they believe in 

the goals and values of the organization and are willing to exert effort on its behalf. Since that 

time, and along with job satisfaction, organizational commitment represents one of the most 

widely studied antecedents of turnover (Griffeth et al., 2000). Thus, Mobley et al. and others 

reinforce the value of several dimensions included here, and were among the first to recognize 

organizational commitment as an important retention factor.  

Price and Mueller (1981) presented an updated model that encompasses many of the 

earlier retention factors while introducing several new ones. Drawing from earlier perspectives, 

job satisfaction and perceived alternatives were considered proximate causes of decisions to 

stay, whereas pay, promotional opportunities, constituent attachments, kinship, and 

organizational commitment were included as distal influences. One important addition to the 

model was distributive justice. Drawing from the developing literature on equity theory at that 

time, the authors suggested that employees would be satisfied (and thus more likely to stay) if 

they felt that the outcomes they received reflected the effort and other inputs that they had 

invested. More recently, organizational justice has been defined more broadly to include 

fairness perceptions related to outcomes, procedures, and interpersonal interactions, which 

 

Page 8 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 
have been shown to be related to employees’ decisions to remain with their employer (Aquino, 

CAHRS WP08-06 

 

Griffeth, Allen, & Hom, 1997).  

A handful of other explanatory constructs have emerged in the retention literature since 

the earliest models were introduced. First, a number of organizations have offered employees 

flexible work arrangements in order to accommodate different employee preferences regarding 

when (and where) they perform their work (Baltes, Briggs, Huff, Wright, & Neuman, 1999; 

Dalton & Mesch, 1990). These programs typically involve alternative work hours and/or 

compressed scheduling and are often established with the goal of reducing tensions between 

competing work and non-work demands. Second, Muchinsky and Morrow (1980) introduced the 

notion of organizational prestige as a potentially important retention factor. This dimension is 

similar to definitions of company reputation (Fombrun & Shanley, 1990), and also reflects the 

more recent effort by organizations to attract and retain talented employees by becoming an 

“employer of choice”, which often involves communicating and emphasizing the positive 

features of working for a particular organization to current and potential employees (Branham, 

2005). Finally, the location of the workplace has been investigated in relation to withdrawal 

behaviors such as absenteeism, although few studies (if any) have empirically examined 

location effects on turnover. Research reveals positive associations between distance to work 

and absence (Muchinsky, 1977; Scott & McClellan, 1990), perhaps because longer commute 

times are a source of stress and limit the ability of employees to attend to non-work 

responsibilities. In the context of retention, living close to work can be viewed as an influence 

that promotes job embeddedness (Mitchell et al., 2001) or perhaps continuance commitment 

(Hrebiniak & Alutto, 1972), as employees may have to relinquish a favorable commute if they 

were to leave the organization.  

Taken together, the content model developed here is thought to reflect many of the 

potential influences on employee retention. Early contributions in this area emphasized job 

satisfaction and perceived alternatives, followed by models that featured extrinsic rewards, 

advancement opportunities, constituent attachments, investments, and non-work influences. 
 

Page 9 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 
More recently, organizational commitment, organizational justice, flexible work arrangements, 

CAHRS WP08-06 

 

organizational prestige, and location have been viewed as potentially important determinants of 

employees’ decisions to stay. As described in the methodology, the 12-factor model was used in 

this study as the organizing framework for analyzing the open-ended comments related to why 

employees stay.  

Reasons for Staying and Job Performance 

Researchers emphasize performance-specific differences when studying employee 

retention processes because of the negative consequences that are associated with turnover 

among high performers (e.g., Allen & Griffeth, 2001; Griffeth & Hom, 1995; Trevor, Gerhart, & 

Boudreau, 1997). Organizations must bear performance losses, high replacement costs, and 

potential talent shortages, all of which ultimately erode the core leadership base of the 

organization (Staw, 1980). Therefore, employers seek to retain high performers and replace low 

performers with workers who bring greater skills and abilities to the organization, a notion that is 

consistent with both the recent talent management emphasis described above and arguments 

introduced several decades ago concerning turnover functionality (Dalton & Todor, 1979; 

Dalton, Todor, & Krackhardt, 1982; Staw, 1980). Dalton and others have argued that turnover is 

functional when high performers stay (and low performers leave) and dysfunctional when low 

performers stay (and high performers leave). Thus, an effective approach to retention 

management involves understanding why employees stay, but also examines differences in 

reasons based on what the organization is trying to accomplish from a talent management 

perspective (e.g., retaining high performers).  

March and Simon’s (1958) discussion of desirability and ease of movement factors 

suggests that employees who are high performers are presumably also those who can leverage 

their superior skills in the labor market to secure another position with greater rewards. The 

skills and attributes that enhance an individual’s mobility outside of the organization have been 

termed “movement capital”, and include dimensions such as education, cognitive ability, and 

occupation-specific training (Trevor, 2001). Given that these elements are positively related to 
 

Page 10 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 
job performance (Hunter & Hunter, 1984), high performers likely have a greater capacity to act 

CAHRS WP08-06 

 

on dissatisfaction with workplace elements than low performers because they can turn to the 

external market when conditions are unfavorable (Jackofsky & Peters, 1983). Applying the 

notion of movement capital to the content model outlined in Figure 1, one could expect that 

relative to low performers, high performers should report staying because of factors such as 

satisfying work, organizational commitment, extrinsic rewards, advancement opportunities, and 

perceived justice because they would likely draw upon their movement capital and leave if 

conditions were otherwise. In addition, factors that promote retention among high performers 

may be organization-specific (or else they would likely leave), which suggests that dimensions 

such as organizational prestige or constituent attachments may be more prominent in high 

performers’ decisions to stay. Of the limited empirical evidence available to date, findings 

indicate that high performers are more likely to stay when there is opportunity for salary growth, 

when they are satisfied with their work, and when contingent rewards are available (Allen & 

Griffeth, 2001; Mossholder, Bedeian, Norris, Giles & Feild, 1988; Trevor et al., 1997). In 

contrast, drawing from the ease of movement aspects of March and Simon, low performers 

should mention a lack of alternatives more often as a reason for staying because of their 

restricted movement capital. In addition, given fewer alternatives, low performers would accrue 

greater tenure with the organization and should cite investments as another reason why they 

stay (Jackofsky, 1984).  

Hypothesis 1: High performers will cite retention factors that indicate low desirability of 
movement (i.e., advancement opportunities, constituent attachments, extrinsic rewards, 
flexible work arrangements, job satisfaction, location, non-work influences, 
organizational commitment, organizational justice, organizational prestige) at a higher 
rate than low performers. Low performers will cite factors that reflect low ease of 
movement (i.e., investments, lack of alternatives) at a higher rate than high performers.   
  

Reasons for Staying and Job Level 

 

The final goal of this study was to examine job-level differences in reasons for staying. 

Differences across job levels (i.e., hourly, supervisory, managerial, and salaried/professional 
 

Page 11 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 
positions) are expected because each group may hold a different type of “psychological 

 

CAHRS WP08-06 

contract” with the organization. Psychological contracts have been defined as the beliefs about 

what employees owe to the organization and what the organization owes to them (Robinson, 

1996). Researchers distinguish between “transactional” contracts, which are characterized by 

specific, monetary-oriented exchanges between parties over a relatively short period of time, 

and “relational” contracts, which involve broader, relationship-oriented exchanges that maintain 

the employer-employee relationship over the long term (Robinson et al., 1994). Previous 

research shows that extrinsic factors such as pay, benefits, and flexible work schedules tend to 

be viewed as more transactional, whereas intrinsic dimensions such as meaningful work, 

opportunities for advancement, and personal support are seen as more relational (Kickul & 

Lester, 2001; Zhao, Wyane, Glibkowski, & Bravo, 2007). Further, transactional obligations tend 

to be clearly specified in advance, such as in a written employment contract, whereas relational 

obligations are less predictable and more intangible (Zhao et al., 2007). Applying these 

conceptual distinctions to the content model presented in Figure 1 suggests that extrinsic 

rewards and flexible work arrangements can be characterized as more transactional in nature, 

whereas advancement opportunities, constituent attachments, job satisfaction, organizational 

commitment, organizational justice, and organizational prestige develop gradually and in a more 

relational manner.1  

We expect that employees at each end of the job level continuum will emphasize 

different aspects of the psychological contract when explaining why they stay. The nature of 

work for hourly employees is transactional in many ways. Work hours are clearly defined and 

tend to be closely monitored, and hourly employees are compensated in direct exchange for 

time worked. The short-term capacity of most hourly work is evident in studies showing that 

turnover is very high for hourly jobs, both in an absolute sense and relative to managerial and 

professional employees (Pizam & Thornburg, 2000). In addition, previous researchers have 
                                                 
1 The remaining dimensions of the content model (lack of alternatives, location, investments, and non-
work influences) are not easily classified into the transactional/relational typology; thus, job-level 
differences for these factors are reported on an exploratory basis. 
 

Page 12 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 
found that hourly workers place the highest value on better pay, a defining element of 

 

CAHRS WP08-06 

transactional contracts, as the characteristic that would cause them to leave their employer 

(DiPietro & Milman, 2004; Milman, 2003). In short, hourly work typifies many elements of the 

transactional psychological contract (e.g., short-term capacity, emphasis on extrinsic rewards), 

leaving employees at higher levels of the organization with more opportunities to develop 

relational psychological contracts.  

Hypothesis 2: Hourly employees are expected to cite transactional retention factors (i.e., 
extrinsic rewards, flexible work arrangements) at a higher rate than managerial and 
professional employees. Managerial and professional employees are expected to cite 
relational factors (i.e., advancement opportunities, constituent attachments, job 
satisfaction, organizational commitment, organizational justice, organizational prestige) 
at a higher rate than hourly employees. 

 

Method 

Participants 

A total of 30,556 employees participated in an annual employee opinion survey 

conducted within a large company in the leisure and hospitality industry (out of 34,842 

employees; overall response rate = 87.7%). Of those who participated, we excluded employees 

who responded in a language other than English (N = 2,269) and those who left blank the 

retention question (N = 3,458). Thus, of interest in this study were responses from 24,829 

English-speaking employees to an open-ended survey question concerning retention (described 

below). Four job levels were represented among the respondents, including hourly (77.6%), 

supervisory (12.6%), managerial (4.9%), and salaried/professional (4.9%) employees. The 

sample was ethnically diverse and included 16.5% African-American, 7.6% Asian/Pacific 

Islander, 59.1% White/Caucasian, 10.8% Hispanic/Spanish, 3.4% Native American, and 2.6% 

“Other” respondents. Nearly half of the respondents had been working for the company between 

1 and 5 years (47.2%), and the remainder of the sample had been working for 6 to 10 years 

(21.1%), more than 10 years (11.9%), 91 days to 1 year (15.0%), or less than 90 days (4.8%). 

 

Page 13 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 
Finally, participants worked in one of 21 geographically disperse properties located throughout 

CAHRS WP08-06 

 

the United States. Hypothesis tests involving job performance and job level were conducted with 

subsamples of 17,372 and 19,748 participants, respectively, who had complete data for these 

variables and the retention reasons.  

Procedure 

Job incumbents were asked about their reasons for staying through an employee 

opinion survey that was given during the last three months of 2003. The human resources 

department at each property designated a team of survey coordinators who were responsible 

for the logistics of the survey administration, which was conducted using the company’s online 

survey system. Survey coordinators instructed participants to choose at random a unique code 

to gain access to the online survey. The surveys were administered in large rooms containing 

banks of 10 to 30 computers (varied by location) set up for the purpose of the survey. 

Computers were arranged in such a way as to discourage employees from seeing other 

employees’ responses. Only a subset of items from the larger survey were relevant to this 

study, including data concerning the employees’ self-reported reasons for staying, most recent 

performance appraisal rating, and job level.  

Measures 

Reported reasons for retention. In order to identify the primary factors that influence 

retention decisions, incumbents were asked to type a response to the question, “What are the 

top two reasons that you stay employed with [this company] vs. the competition?” As detailed 

below, responses were subsequently coded into one or more of the 12 categories of retention 

factors listed in Table 1 using qualitative data analysis software. Each participant’s response 

was coded as “1” when a particular retention reason was mentioned and “0” when it was not. 

The 12 factors were: advancement opportunities, constituent attachments, extrinsic rewards, 

flexible work arrangements, investments, job satisfaction, lack of alternatives, location, non-work 

influences, organizational commitment, organizational justice, and organizational prestige (See 

Table 1). 
 

Page 14 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-06 

Job performance. Respondents were asked on the survey to indicate the overall rating 

they received at their last performance review. Ratings were made on a 5-point scale (“1” = 

Needs Improvement, “2” = Marginal, “3” = Successful, “4” = Highly Successful, “5” = 

Outstanding Results). Because survey responses were anonymous, they could not be matched 

with actual performance review ratings from company records. However, for the subsample of 

hourly employees included in this study, we were able to compare the distribution of reported 

ratings with the organization’s guided distribution that stated approximately 10% of hourly 

employees should be rated “Outstanding”, 15% “Highly Successful”, 65-70% “Successful”, and 

the remaining 5-10% either “Marginal” or “Needs Improvement.” The actual distribution of self-

reported ratings for the 13,218 hourly employees included in this study were 6.8% 

“Outstanding”, 34.5% “Highly Successful”, 53.3% “Successful”, and 5.3% either “Marginal” or 

“Needs Improvement”, suggesting that the employee reports approximated the recommended 

distribution.   

Job level. Participants were asked to select their current job level from a list of four 

options in the demographics section of the survey. Response options included “hourly”, 

“supervisory”, “managerial”, and “salaried/professional” positions. Line-level hourly employees 

worked in various departments such as food service and housekeeping. The other three job 

levels consisted of supervisors who directly managed the hourly staff, managers who were 

responsible for overseeing an entire department or shift (including supervisors and hourly staff), 

and salaried/professional employees positions who held specialized training in a particular field 

(e.g., accounting, human resources, computer programming).   

Coding and Analysis Strategy 

The reported reasons for retention generated a large volume of qualitative data, 

spanning over 500 pages of single-spaced text. Employees’ reported reasons for retention 

averaged 11.0 words per respondent. Given the large volume of responses, computer-assisted 

qualitative data analysis software was used to code participant data. ATLAS/ti 4.2 (ATLAS) is a 

software program designed for the qualitative analysis of textual, graphical, and/or audio data 
 

Page 15 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 
(Muhr, 1997), and is based on the tradition of Hermeneutics, or the in-depth analysis of printed 

CAHRS WP08-06 

 

or oral text. ATLAS allows users to create categories, assign keywords (i.e., a collection of 

synonyms and phrases) to those categories, and then subsequently “auto-code” the primary text 

into categories using the keywords. For example, one category used in this study was 

“constituent attachments”, and keywords such as “supervisor” and “co-workers” served as 

primary text examples of this category. It is critical that the categories and keywords selected 

are representative, exhaustive, and accurate, and many steps were taken to ensure the 

reliability and validity of the coding process used in this study, as we describe below. In all 

cases, the turnover and retention literature served as a guide to the selection of categories and 

was consulted to clarify keyword assignments when necessary.  

Category generation. After establishing the 12 retention categories, we content-sampled 

the raw data to record possible synonyms and keywords that respondents might use to refer to 

the same factor. Two strategies were used to ensure that “theoretical saturation” was reached, 

which is the point when no new information or categories emerge from additional coding of the 

primary data (Strauss & Corbin, 1998). First, a random sample of 5% of the raw data was 

extracted by the authors and analyzed by reading each line of text to identify common 

responses that could be organized into categories. Once identified, possible synonyms were 

recorded for each category to capture subtleties and alternative phrases. For example, the 

category for extrinsic rewards included “pay” and a number of other similar terms such as 

“money” “salary”, and “wages.” Second, a simple word frequency analysis was conducted using 

ATLAS to determine the words that respondents used most often. Thus, linkages between 

categories and keywords were drawn using a combination of the line-by-line analysis and word 

frequency strategies.  

Coding of raw data. After establishing the 12 retention categories in ATLAS, the keyword 

synonyms were assigned to each. Keywords were mutually exclusive in that each keyword was 

assigned to only one category. The auto-coding feature of the software was then used to scan 

the entire data set and assign any response that contained one or more of the associated 
 

Page 16 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 
keywords to the appropriate category. When respondents mentioned multiple reasons (e.g., 

CAHRS WP08-06 

 

“good pay and opportunities for advancement”), each reason was counted separately for each 

category. However, if a respondent mentioned the same reason multiple times (e.g., “money, 

money, money”), the reason was counted only once for that category. Thus, the unit of analysis 

in this study is the individual; for each employee a value of “0” or “1” was recorded depending 

on whether or not each of the 12 retention factors was mentioned. This process was repeated 

for each category until all of the responses had been coded. To check the exhaustiveness of the 

coding scheme, each remaining response that was not assigned to a category was reviewed to 

determine if it could be hand-coded into one of the existing categories. After the hand-coding 

was complete, approximately 5.5% of the responses remained uncoded because they contained 

nonsense characters or were otherwise idiosyncratic.  

Reliability and validity of coding process. As a check on the reliability and accuracy of 

category generation, two authors coded the data independently following the procedures 

described above. To assess agreement, Cohen’s kappa was computed for the assignment of 

keywords to categories, yielding a value of .71. Differences were discussed by the authors and 

were ultimately settled by consensus to arrive at the final category structure and keywords. 

Inevitably, some keywords were eliminated from further analysis (e.g., company, department, 

area) either because they were used by respondents to introduce their response (e.g., “I stay 

with this company because…”), or because they could not be reliably coded into any single 

category. After the coding process was completed, a final check on coding accuracy was 

conducted. Two authors reviewed the collection of coded responses within each category by 

reading respondents’ statements in their entirety to ensure that the coding decisions accurately 

represented the respondents’ intended meaning. This “back-translation” revealed very few 

meaningful discrepancies, which were either removed or reassigned to a more appropriate 

category when found. 

Data analysis strategy. Prior to testing the primary hypotheses of the study, we report 

frequencies for each of the retention dimensions listed in Table 1. These results provide an 
 

Page 17 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 
ordinal structure to the different retention antecedents, thereby identifying those constructs that 

CAHRS WP08-06 

 

appear most important to employees, and also perhaps most worthy of research attention. In 

addition, representative employee responses for each factor are provided to add richer meaning 

to these constructs as they are described by employees in their own words. Finally, the results 

of this analysis provide the foundation for testing the substantive hypotheses presented earlier, 

specifically that reported reasons would differ based on job performance and job level. These 

hypotheses were tested using univariate analysis of variance (ANOVA) to determine whether 

there were statistically significant differences between performance categories or job levels in 

the frequency of the reasons given for staying. In order to avoid capitalizing on Type I error that 

may occur when conducting multiple univariate ANOVAs, a multivariate analysis of variance 

(MANOVA) was calculated first to assess the overall effects of job performance and job level on 

the 12 reported reasons for retention2.  

Results 

Descriptive Results 

The primary reported reasons why employees stay with their employer are presented in 

Table 2 along with frequencies, percentages, and representative quotes (Insert Table 2 about 

here). The retention reason mentioned most frequently was job satisfaction (51% of all 

respondents indicated this reason), followed by extrinsic rewards (41%), constituent 

attachments (34%), organizational commitment (17%), organizational prestige (13%), lack of 

alternatives (10%), investments (9%), advancement opportunities (8%), location (8%), 

organizational justice (7%), flexible work arrangements (7%), and non-work influences (3%).  

In terms of the actual responses that were given regarding job satisfaction, employees 

mentioned enjoying the actual work involved in serving customers, liking what they do as an 

employee, and having fun while on the job. For extrinsic rewards, employees cited aspects of 

the company’s compensation such as competitive wages, health benefits, retirement 

                                                 
2 Given the dichotomous nature of the outcome variables, we also conducted analyses using logistic 
regression, which produced a similar pattern of results. Details are available from the first author.  
 

Page 18 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention:
 
 
contributions, and incentive plans as primary reasons for staying. Concerning constituent 

 

CAHRS WP08-06 

attachments, employees mentioned having personal connections with co-workers, positive 

interactions with guests, and healthy supervisor relations. Representative quotes for all 12 

retention categories are listed in Table 2.  

 

Page 19 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-06 

Frequency Distribution of Retention Factors and Representative Quotes 

Table 2 

 
Retention Factor 

Frequency

% 

1.   Job satisfaction  

12,640 

50.9 

2.   Extrinsic rewards 

10,256 

41.3 

3.   Constituent attachments 

8,321 

33.5 

4.   Organizational commitment  

4,328 

17.4 

5.   Organizational prestige 

3,149 

12.7 

6.   Lack of alternatives 

2,428 

9.8 

7.   Investments 

2,286 

9.2 

Representative Quotes 
I love the job; I like my job and I have lots of fun; I am happy in my current position and 
enjoy the work that I do here; I love my job and I feel like I’m accomplishing something; I 
feel I have one of the best jobs in town; I really enjoy what I do as an employee; I still 
enjoy coming to work every day 
It pays better salaries than other businesses in this field; The money is better here than at 
most places; All the benefits we are offered including 401K, insurance, tuition if needed, 
and many more; The benefits are among the best in the industry; Better pay and benefits 
than anyone else around here; I believe the pay, benefits, and bonus incentives are 
competitive compared to other companies  
The people I have come to know here prevent me from wanting to leave; My coworkers 
are fun-loving, goal-oriented, and help me stay motivated; I feel like I am part of a team 
working here; My supervisor is a great role-model; I like the interaction I have with guests; 
The customers that come in here are so friendly; The people I work with are like family to 
me 
I’m not the type of person that jumps from job to job; I am proud to work here; I believe in 
loyalty to the company that hired me; I love this place; I feel [company name] is a part of 
my family and I am loyal to that; Because I made a commitment to do the job and I don't 
jump ship just because the water gets rough; My personal commitment to stay at one 
place to show my loyalty hoping for the same in return 
It feels good to say I work for the #1 company in the industry; Our company is highly 
respected; the rest of the town usually follows what [company name] does; People always 
say [company name] is the best place to work for; Has a great reputation for being good to 
it's employees and a brand name in the service industry, which makes us more 
marketable just for working here 
Slow economy and lack of other jobs; I don’t like the experiences I’ve had with any of our 
competitors; I haven’t received a better job offer; I have applied for other positions in the 
past four years and have decided to give this up – no employer wants to offer me what I 
am making at this company nor give me the great benefits which I need; The economy is 
down and I can’t find another job; I received no other job offers while looking for work 
I’ve been here too long to change jobs; I have 22 years with this company; Too 
much time invested at this company; I have been here for so long that I have the 
days off and the hours I want, I don't want to start over; I have 12 years invested; 
My years of service to this company; I’ve been with you so long, I’d be crazy to 
change now 

 

Page 20 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-06 

8.   Advancement 
opportunities 

2,053 

8.3 

9.   Location 

2,037 

8.2 

10. Organizational justice 

1,856 

7.5 

11. Flexible work 
arrangements 

1,757 

7.1 

12. Non-work influences 

841 

3.4 

Excellent opportunities for advancement and development; This company offers 
me the chance to move up; I see the potential and I see a future here; I started a 
year ago and was promoted a lot with in a year and I love that; I like the 
opportunity to grow; They hire and promote talent instead of seniority; The chance 
of upward mobility 
It’s really close to my house; The location to and from work is really accessible; 
Decent commute from home to here; Not having to travel through the city to get to 
work; It is a short and convenient drive from my home; The company is close to 
my home 
The company cares what its’ employees think and lets us give input; I am treated 
as a trusted and valued team member; Our policies are more fair; I have visited 
other [companies] and have experienced how NOT to be treated; [company name] 
is very fair in the way they treat their employees; I am satisfied with the company 
policy and procedures 
I like the flexible work hours; I have the shift I want; Right now these hours and 
days off work well with my school hours; The company has always worked with 
me on my work schedule; I know that my supervisors and manager will work with 
me and try to help out any scheduling difficulties I may have; The flexible work 
schedule 
Working here allows me to go to school at the same time; I stay employed here 
because I want a better life for my child; My schedule allows a very nice home life; 
I have a family to support 

Note. N = 24,829. Employees asked “What are the top two reasons that you stay employed with [this company] vs. the competition?” 
“Frequency” refers to the total number of employees reporting a given reason, and “%” represents the frequency divided by the total 
number of responding employees (i.e., 24,829). 

 

 

Page 21 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention:
 
 
Hypothesis Tests 

 

CAHRS WP08-06 

Hypothesis 1 predicted that high performers would be more likely to cite retention factors 

that reflect low desirability of movement, whereas low performers would be more likely to cite 

retention factors that reflect low ease of movement. The results of the MANOVA revealed a 

significant overall main effect for job performance (Wilk’s (cid:31)= .995, F (48, 65939) = 1.71, p < 

.01). Subsequent univariate analyses (ANOVAs with Tukey post hoc comparisons) are 

presented in Table 3 along with frequencies of retention reasons by level of job performance. 

 In addition, Figure 1 illustrates the relative positioning of the 12 retention factors by 

performance level. Post hoc comparisons, focusing on differences between those who were 

rated highest by the organization (i.e., “Outstanding Results”) and those who were rated among 

the lowest (i.e., “Needs Improvement” or “Marginal”), reveal several statistically significant 

differences between employees in these performance categories. Results show that high 

performers were actually more likely to cite investments and less likely to report extrinsic 

rewards as retention factors, both of which run counter to Hypothesis 1. In addition, we did not 

find support for high-low performance differences for organizational commitment, non-work 

influences, flexible work arrangements, or lack of alternatives. On the other hand, as predicted, 

high performers were more likely to report staying because of advancement opportunities, 

constituent attachments, job satisfaction, organizational justice, and organizational prestige, all 

of which reflect low desirability of movement factors. Effect size estimates (d) are presented in 

the final column of Table 3 and provide an index of the magnitude of differences between high 

and low performers (i.e., “Outstanding Results” vs. “Needs Improvement”). Relative to other 

dimensions, the largest effects were found for advancement opportunities (d  = .25), 

organizational prestige (d = .24), investments (d = .21), and job satisfaction (d = .20). For 

example, the frequency with which the highest performers mentioned advancement 

opportunities (11%) was nearly three times that reported by the lowest performers (4%), and the 

frequency with which the highest performers mentioned organizational prestige (16%) was twice 

that of the lowest performers (8%). Overall, there was mixed support for Hypothesis 1.  
 

Page 22 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-06 

Reported Reasons for Retention by Level of Job Performance 

Table 3 

 
 

 

 

Job 

 

 

 

 

Performance 

 

Successful 
(N = 9524) 

Highly  

Successful 
(N = 5774) 

Outstanding 

 
F 

 
d 

 
Retention Factors 
 
1.   Advancement 
opportunities  

2.   Constituent attachments 
3.   Extrinsic rewards 
4.   Flexible work 
arrangements 

5.   Investments 
6.   Job satisfaction 
7.   Lack of alternatives 
8.   Location 
9.   Non-work influences 
10. Organizational 

commitment 

Needs 

Improvement 

(N = 272) 
.04e
.34 
.42 
.06 
.02cde
.48e
.04bcd
.07 
.04 
.16 
.07 
.08e

Marginal 
(N = 515) 
.06e
.32e
.50e
.07 
.08 
.50de
.11a
.10 
.04 
.18 
.05e
.11 

.08e
.35 
.47e
.07 
.10a
.52de
.11ae
.10e
.03 
.18e
.07e
.13e

Results 
(N = 1287) 
.11abcd
.38b
.39bcd
.09 
.08a
.58abc
.09c
.07c
.03 
.21c
.10bc
.16ac

.09e
.36 
.46e
.08 
.10a
.56bc
.10a
.09 
.04 
.19 
.08 
.14 

5.84***
3.33* 
9.24***
1.79 
5.44***
9.59***
6.07***
3.91**
0.93 
3.62**
5.45***
4.19**

.25 
.08 
.06 
.12 
.21 
.20 
.16 
.00 
.06 
.13 
.11 
.24 

11. Organizational justice  
12. Organizational prestige 
Note. N = 17,372. Cells contain relative frequency percentages. Post hoc comparisons performed within row using Tukey’s 
honestly significant difference test; aValue is significantly different than “Needs Improvement” performance category; bvalue is 
significantly different than “Marginal”, cvalue is significantly different than “Successful”, dvalue is significantly different than “Highly 
Successful”, evalue is significantly different than “Outstanding Results”. 
 
*p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001   

 

 

 

Page 23 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-06 

Reported Reasons for Retention by Level of Job Performance 

Figure 1 

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
R

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

 

 

Advancement opportunities 
Constituent attachments
Extrinsic rewards
Flexible work arrangements
Investments
Job satisfaction
Lack of alternatives
Location
Non-work influences
Organizational commitment
Organizational justice 
Organizational prestige

Needs Improvement

Marginal

Successful

Highly Successful

Outstanding Results

 

Page 24 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention:
 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-06 

Hypothesis 2 predicted that hourly workers would be more likely to cite transactional 

retention factors, whereas workers at higher levels would be more likely to cite relational 

retention factors. The results of the MANOVA revealed a significant overall main effect for job 

level (Wilk’s (cid:31)= .997, F (36, 50575) = 1.57, p < .05). Subsequent univariate analyses are 

presented in Table 4 along with frequencies of retention reasons by job level. Figure 2 illustrates 

the relative positioning of the 12 retention factors by job level. Post hoc comparisons revealed 

several level-based differences in the relative importance of particular retention factors. As 

predicted, the importance of relational retention factors including advancement opportunities, 

job satisfaction, organizational commitment, organizational justice, and organizational prestige 

increased as job level increased from hourly workers upward to salaried/professional 

employees, whereas transactional retention factors including extrinsic rewards and flexible work 

arrangements increased in importance as job level decreased from the management positions 

to hourly workers. No support was found for constituent attachments. Effect size estimates (d) 

are presented in the final column of Table 4 to index the magnitude of differences between 

hourly and salaried/professional workers. Relative to other dimensions, the largest effects were 

found for advancement opportunities (d  = .81), organizational prestige (d = .48), and extrinsic 

rewards (d = .36). Particularly noteworthy is the finding that advancement opportunities was 

mentioned as a retention factor least often by hourly employees (7%), whereas this figure 

doubled for supervisors (14%), increased again for managers (19%), and was highest for 

salaried/professionals (30%), reaching a value that was over four times as large as that reported 

by the hourly group. Frequencies for organizational prestige also showed substantial differences 

across job levels, with the lowest values for hourly employees (11%), increasing for supervisory 

and managerial (18%), and reaching the highest levels for salaried/professionals (27%). In 

addition, employees at higher levels were successively less likely than those at lower levels to 

report extrinsic rewards as a primary reason for staying. Nearly half of the hourly workers 

mentioned extrinsic rewards (47%), and this value decreased for supervisors (43%), managers 

(37%), and reached its lowest level for salaried/professionals (29%). Overall, Hypothesis 2 was 

supported.  
 

Page 25 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-06 

Reported Reasons for Retention by Job Level 

Table 4 

 

 

 

 

 

Hourly 

Salaried/ 

Job Level

Professional 

Supervisory 
(N = 2493) 

 
 
 
Retention Factors 
 
1.   Advancement opportunities  
2.   Constituent attachments 
3.   Extrinsic rewards 
4.   Flexible work arrangements 
5.   Investments 
6.   Job satisfaction 
7.   Lack of alternatives 
8.   Location 
9.   Non-work influences 
10. Organizational commitment 
11. Organizational justice  
12. Organizational prestige 
Note. N = 19,748. Cells contain relative frequency percentages. Post hoc comparisons performed within row using Tukey’s honestly significant difference test; aValue is significantly 
different than “Hourly” performance category; bvalue is significantly different than “Supervisory”, cvalue is significantly different than “Managerial”, dvalue is significantly different than 
“Salaried/Professional.” 
 

Managerial 
(N = 960) 
.19abd
.40a
.37abd
.03a
.08b
.63ab
.12 
.08 
.04 
.24ab
.09d
.18ad

(N = 15331) 
.07bcd
.35c
.47bcd
.08bcd
.09b
.53bcd
.11 
.09d
.03 
.18bcd
.07d
.11bcd

272.98***
4.26**
49.81***
38.86***
5.05**
23.08***
0.79
4.05**
0.69
20.84***
21.11***
98.51***

.14acd
.37 
.43acd
.05ad
.11acd
.56acd
.12 
.09 
.04 
.20acd
.08d
.18ad

.30abc
.36 
.29abc
.01ab
.08b
.63ab
.10 
.06a
.03 
.26ab
.14abc
.27abc

(N = 964) 

 
F 

 
d 

.81 
.02 
.36 
.27 
.03 
.20 
.03 
.10 
.00 
.20 
.26 
.48 

*p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001 

 

 

Page 26 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-06 

Figure 2 

Reported Reasons for Retention by Job Level 

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
R

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

 

 

Advancement opportunities 
Constituent attachments
Extrinsic rewards
Flexible work arrangements
Investments
Job satisfaction
Lack of alternatives
Location
Non-work influences
Organizational commitment
Organizational justice 
Organizational prestige

 

Hourly

Supervisory

Managerial

Salaried/Professional

 

 

Page 27 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-06 

Discussion 

Retention Models and Relative Importance of Retention Factors 

This study contributes to the growing literature on employee retention by developing and 

testing a theoretically-derived content model among a sample of nearly 25,000 employees in the 

leisure and hospitality industry. Based on content analysis of employee responses, we found 

general support for the 12-factor model. Relative to other dimensions, and when considered 

across the entire sample, job satisfaction emerged as the primary retention factor and was 

followed by extrinsic rewards and constituent attachments. Taken together, job satisfaction, 

extrinsic rewards, and constituent attachments were each mentioned by at least one-third of the 

sample when asked why they stay, and provide support for the desirability of movement 

rationale found in previous theories of employee turnover (March & Simon, 1958; Mobley et al., 

1979; Price & Mueller, 1981).  

Organizational commitment, lack of alternatives, and organizational prestige were each 

mentioned by approximately 10-20% of employees. Organizational commitment is found in 

nearly every contemporary model of employee turnover (e.g., Griffeth & Hom, 1995), and 

although it was mentioned less frequently in a relative sense, is a strong predictor of actual 

resignations (Griffeth et al., 2000). Respondents who cited lack of alternatives as a reason for 

staying commented on a slow economy and failure to find suitable alternatives, providing 

support for ease of movement aspects of the retention process (Griffeth, Steel, Allen, & Bryan, 

2005; March & Simon, 1958). Organizational prestige ranked fifth among the dimensions 

studied, yet is virtually absent from the empirical literature on employee turnover. As other 

scholars have noted (Steel et al., 2002), certain factors will induce employees to leave (e.g., 

better benefits), but these must supersede reasons for staying, which may be very different 

(e.g., organizational prestige). Thus, in a traditional turnover study aimed at uncovering reasons 

why people leave, it is unlikely that organizational prestige would have emerged, which 

suggests that focusing on retention factors may offer additional insight into employees’ decision 

making processes. Overall, although organizational prestige was addressed briefly in early 
 

Page 28 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 
models of turnover (Muchinsky & Morrow, 1980), our results suggest that richer integration of 

CAHRS WP08-06 

 

reputation-based attachments into existing models may offer better prediction and 

understanding of employee retention.  

The remaining dimensions in the model received at least some support, including 

investments, advancement opportunities, location, organizational justice, flexible work 

arrangements, and non-work influences. As we discuss below, although these dimensions 

appear somewhat less important in a relative sense, the performance- and level-based analyses 

revealed that dimensions such as advancement opportunities and location were much more 

important to particular employee groups. Thus, while the content model developed here is a 

useful starting point toward understanding why employees stay, it is also important to consider 

how these findings differ based on performance and job level.  

Differences in Reasons for Staying across Performance and Job Levels 

Overall, our findings lend support to the notion that retention profiles differ between high 

and low performers (Griffeth & Hom, 2001; Steel et al., 2002). High performers were more likely 

than low performers to report staying because of advancement opportunities, constituent 

attachments, job satisfaction, organizational justice, and organizational prestige, all of which are 

believed to reflect low desirability of movement (March & Simon, 1958). On the other hand, we 

did not find support for the prediction that low performers would cite low ease of movement 

factors (i.e., lack of alternatives, investments) at a greater rate than high performers. It is 

possible that high and low performers may have cited lack of alternatives at the same rate but 

for different reasons. Low performers may stay because they cannot find external alternatives of 

any kind, whereas high performers stay because they cannot find alternatives that offer rewards 

that exceed those associated with their current position. Overall, and in the context of this study, 

low performers appear to be somewhat marginalized; more often they report staying because of 

pay and benefits rather than opportunities to advance, fair treatment, or positive attitudes toward 

the job, the company, or its constituents. On the other hand, high performers, perhaps owing to 

clear linkages between their inputs and outcomes, stay because they feel fairly treated, believe 
 

Page 29 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 
they have a future with the organization, and enjoy their work and the connections they have 

CAHRS WP08-06 

 

with others.  

We also found systematic job-level differences between employees at hourly, 

supervisory, managerial, and salaried/professional levels, and our findings lend support to the 

distinction in the psychological contracts literature between transactional and relational 

contracts (Robinson et al., 1994; Zhao et al., 2007). Generally speaking, as the job level 

increased, so too did the frequency of reports that employees stay for relational reasons 

including advancement opportunities, job satisfaction, organizational commitment, 

organizational justice, and organizational prestige. Conversely, as job level increased, the 

frequency of transactional retention reasons related to extrinsic rewards and flexible work 

arrangements decreased. Job level differences are rarely studied in the literature, yet these 

findings indicate that beliefs about what the organization owes to employees differ across hourly 

and managerial ranks.  

Implications for Practice 

The importance of retention factors such as satisfaction, commitment, and extrinsic 

rewards have been widely supported in past research (Griffeth et al., 2000), and there are a 

number of sound practical recommendations available to practitioners in these areas (Griffeth & 

Hom, 2001; Steel et al., 2002). One of the novel recommendations that stems directly from our 

research is the finding that organizational prestige shaped the decision to stay among many 

respondents. Whereas efforts to promote the organization’s reputation or brand have been 

shown to influence applicant’s attraction to the organization during the recruitment phase (e.g., 

Collins, 2007), our findings show that organizational prestige also offers retention benefits for 

employees who are currently on the job. Thus, organizations might consider applying the 

marketing campaigns that are more typical of external recruitment to retention management 

practices.  

Our findings that many retention dimensions differ based on job performance and job 

level suggest that there may be value in tailoring retention interventions to specific employee 
 

Page 30 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 
groups rather than adopting undifferentiated retention strategies that appeal to all employees 

CAHRS WP08-06 

 

(Steel et al., 2002). Our findings suggest that two dimensions, organizational prestige and 

advancement opportunities, were particularly important to high performers and those at higher 

job levels, whereas extrinsic rewards were more prominent for low performers and hourly 

workers. As described above, the efforts to enhance the prestige of the organization through 

internal marketing or branding campaigns may enhance retention among high performers and 

non-hourly employees. In terms of advancement opportunities, career ladders could be 

structured and communicated to employees so that they see obvious avenues for progression 

from one role to the next (Griffeth & Hom, 2001). Finally, it is interesting to note that low 

performers and hourly employees mentioned extrinsic rewards as a retention factor more 

frequently than high performers and non-hourly employees. If the goal of the company is to 

retain these latter groups, it may be more beneficial to focus on the relational dimensions of 

retention over those that are more transactional. Regardless of the approach taken, careful 

research should accompany group-specific interventions to test whether they actually enhance 

retention behavior among the targeted groups.  

Methodological Implications and Limitations 

 

Traditional approaches to studying employee turnover and retention often rely on closed-

ended survey questionnaires. One advantage of the open-ended survey approach used here is 

that employees were free to state retention reasons in their own words, which places no 

limitations on the domain of responses and allowed us to create the set of retention factors 

inductively using content analysis. This approach is somewhat akin to recommendations to use 

focus groups with employees when studying retention (Griffeth & Hom, 2001), a practice that 

allows organizations to tailor subsequent closed-ended questionnaires more precisely to 

employees’ concerns. Other advantages of the content analysis approach are that the predictor 

and outcome variables were measured using different response formats, and the open-ended 

responses were coded independently prior to testing the main hypotheses of the study, both of 

which reduce potential concerns related to same-source bias associated with designs that rely 
 

Page 31 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 
entirely on self-reports. Finally, large-scale coding of open-ended survey data was not possible 

CAHRS WP08-06 

 

prior to the advent of qualitative data analysis software. Researchers now have greater 

opportunities to develop extensive coding structures that can be applied to a large volume of 

textual data.  

On the other hand, a limitation of this approach is that there are likely additional factors 

contributing to employee retention that were not identified here. Participants in this study did not 

(nor could they) describe the fundamental psychological processes underlying retention. They 

would also be unlikely to comment on market-related, behavioral, or demographic factors that 

sometimes influence retention when observed across participants. The wording of open-ended 

questions also likely shapes the nature of the responses obtained. For example, given that the 

retention question asked participants to consider why they stay with the company relative to the 

competition, it is unclear whether or how our results might change if the participants had been 

asked to comment on retention factors without asking them to consider the issue in the context 

of competing firms. In addition, although participants were asked to list the top two reasons for 

staying so that the most important reasons for staying could be identified, employees may have 

responded differently if they were not limited in this way.  

Conclusion 

This study answers several recent calls for additional research on factors that contribute to 

employee retention (Maertz & Campion, 1998; Steel et al., 2002). To this end, we proposed and 

tested a model of 12 content-related factors thought to be partially responsible for employees’ 

decisions to stay. Based on the analysis of employees’ open-ended responses, the relative 

importance of different retention reasons was found to vary across dimensions and based on 

the job performance and job level of employees. Those interested in studying and promoting 

employee retention should consider how alternative retention management strategies will 

influence these different employee groups.  

 

Page 32 of 34 


Targeted Employee Retention: 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-06 

References 

Allen, D.G., & Griffeth, R.W. (2001). Test of a mediated performance-turnover relationship 

highlighting the moderating roles of visibility and reward contingency. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 86, 1011-1021. 

Aquino, K., Griffeth, R.W., Allen, D.G., Hom, P.W. (1997). Integrating justice constructs into the 

turnover process: A test of a referent cognitions model. Academy of Management 
Journal, 40, 1208-1227. 

Baltes, B.B., Briggs, T.E., Huff, J.W., Wright, J.A., & Neuman, G.A. (1999) Flexible and 

compressed workweek schedules: A meta-analysis of their effects on work-related 
criteria. Journal of Applied Psychology, 84, 496-513. 

Branham, L. (2005). Planning to become an employer of choice. Journal of Organizational 

Excellence, 24, 57-68. 

Collins, C.J. (2007). The interactive effects of recruitment practices and product awareness on 

job seekers’ employer knowledge and application behaviors. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 92, 180-190.  

Dalton, D.R., & Mesch, D.J. (1990). The impact of flexible scheduling on employee attendance 

and turnover. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35, 370-387. 

Dalton, D.R., & Todor, W.D. (1979). Turnover turned over: An expanded and positive 

perspective. Academy of Management Review, 4, 225-235. 

Dalton, D.R., & Todor, W.D., & Krackhardt, D.M. (1982). Turnover overstated: The functional 

taxonomy. Academy of Management Review, 7, 117-123. 

DiPietro, R.B., & Milman, A. (2004). Hourly employee retention factors in the quick service 

restaurant industry. International Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Administration, 5, 
31-51. 

Fombrun, C. J., & Shanley, M. (1990). What’s in a name: Reputation-building and corporate 

strategy. Academy of Management Journal, 33, 233-258. 

Griffeth, R.W., & Hom, P.W. (1995). The employee turnover process. Research in Personnel 

and Human Resources Management, 13, 245-293.  

Griffeth, R.W., & Hom, P.W. (2001). Retaining valued employees. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.  
Griffeth, R.W., Hom, P.W., & Gaertner, S. (2000). A meta-analysis of antecedents and 

correlates of employee turnover: Update, moderator tests, and research implications for 
the next millennium. Journal of Management, 26, 463-488.  

Griffeth, R.W., Steel, R.P., Allen, D.G., & Bryan, N. (2005). The development of a 

multidimensional measure of job market cognitions: The Employment Opportunity Index 
(EOI). Journal of Applied Psychology, 90, 335-349.  

Hom, P.W., & Griffeth, R.W. (1995). Employee turnover. Cincinnati, OH: South-Western. 
Hrebiniak, L.G., & Alutto, J.A. (1972). Personal and role-related factors in the development of 

organizational commitment. Administrative Science Quarterly, 17, 555-573. 

Hunter, J.E., & Hunter, R.F. (1984). Validity and utility of alternate predictors of job performance. 

Jackofsky, E.F. (1984). Turnover and job performance: An integrated process model. Academy 

Psychological Bulletin, 96, 72-98. 

of Management Review, 9, 74-83. 

Jackofsky, E.F., & Peters, L.H. (1983). The hypothesized effects of ability in the turnover 

process. Academy of Management Review, 8, 46-49.  

Kickul, J., & Lester, S.W. (2001). Broken promises: Equity sensitivity as a moderator between 

psychological contract breach and employee attitudes and behavior. Journal of Business 
and Psychology, 16, 191-217. 

Lockwood, N.R. (2006). Talent management: Driver for organizational success. 2006 SHRM 

Research Quarterly. Alexandria, VA: Society for Human Resource Management. 

Maertz, C.P., Jr., & Campion, M.A. (1998). 25 years of voluntary turnover research: A review 
and critique. International Review of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 13, 49-
81.  

 

Page 33 of 34 


CAHRS WP08-06 

Targeted Employee Retention: 
 
March, J.G., & Simon, H.E. (1958). Organizations. New York: John Wiley.  
Milman, A. (2003). Hourly employee retention in small and medium attractions: The Central 

 

Florida example. International Journal of Hospitality Management, 22, 17-35.  

Mitchell, T.R., Holtom, B.C., Lee, T.W., Sablynski, C.J., & Erez, M. (2001). Why people stay: 

Using job embeddedness to predict voluntary turnover. Academy of Management 
Journal, 44, 1102-1121. 

Mobley, W.H., Griffeth, R.W., Hand, H.H., & Meglino, B.M. (1979). Review and conceptual 

analysis of the employee turnover process. Psychological Bulletin, 86, 493-522. 

Mossholder, K.W., Bedeian, A.G., Norris, D.R., Giles, W.F., & Feild, H.S. (1988). Job 

performance and turnover decisions: Two field studies. Journal of Management, 14, 403-
414. 

Muchinsky, P.M. (1977). Employee absenteeism: A review of the literature. Journal of 

Vocational Behavior, 10, 316-340.  

Muchinsky, P.M., & Morrow, P.C. (1980). A multidisciplinary model of voluntary employee 

turnover. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 17, 263-290. 

Muhr, T. (1997). ATLAS/ti. Visual qualitative data analysis management model building in 

education research & business (Version 4.2) [Computer software and manual]. Berlin: 
Scientific Software Development.  

Pizam, A., & Thornburg, S.W. (2000). Absenteeism and voluntary turnover in Central Florida 

hotels: A pilot study. International Journal of Hospitality Management, 19, 211-217. 

Porter, L.W., & Steers, R.M. (1973). Organizational, work, and personal factors in employee 

turnover and absenteeism. Psychological Bulletin, 80, 151-176. 

Price, J.L., & Mueller, C.W. (1981). A casual model of turnover for nurses. Academy of 

Management Journal, 24, 543-565. 

Rappaport, A., Bancroft, E., & Okum, L. (2003). The aging workforce raises new talent 

management issues for employers. Journal of Organizational Excellence, 23, 55-66. 

Robinson, S.L. (1996). Trust and breach of the psychological contract. Administrative Science 

Quarterly, 41, 574-599. 

Robinson, S.L., Kraatz, M.S., & Rousseau, D.M. (1994). Changing obligations and the 

psychological contract: A longitudinal study. Academy of Management Journal, 37, 137-
152. 

Scott, K.D., & McClellan, E.L. (1990). Gender differences in absenteeism. Public Personnel 

Management, 19, 229-253. 

273. 

Staw, B.M. (1980). The consequences of turnover. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 1, 253-

Steel, R.P., Griffeth, R.W., & Hom, P.W. (2002). Practical retention policy for the practical 

manager. Academy of Management Executive, 16, 149-162. 

Steers, R. (1977). Antecedents and outcomes of organizational commitment. Administrative 

Science Quarterly, 22, 46-56. 

Strauss, A., & Corbin, A. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for 

developing grounded theory (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Trevor, C.O. (2001). Interactions among actual ease-of-movement determinants and job 

satisfaction in the prediction of voluntary turnover. Academy of Management Journal, 44, 
621-638.  

Trevor, C.O., Gerhart, B., & Boudreau, J.W. (1997). Voluntary turnover and job performance: 

Curvilinearity and the moderating influences of salary growth and promotions. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 82, 44-61. 

Zhao, H., Wayne, S.J., Glibkowski, B.C., & Bravo, J. (2007). The impact of psychological 

contract breach on work-related outcomes: A meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology, 60, 
647-680. 

 

 

Page 34 of 34 

