JOURNAL OF THE ACADEMY OF MARKETING SCIENCE

0092070303261415
Homburg, Stock / SALESPEOPLE’S JOB SATISFACTION

ARTICLE

SPRING 2004

The Link Between Salespeople’s Job
Satisfaction and Customer Satisfaction
in a Business-to-Business Context:
A Dyadic Analysis

Christian Homburg
University of Mannheim

Ruth M. Stock
Universität der Bundeswehr Hamburg

Although it has frequently been argued that the job satis-
faction of a company’s employees is an important driver of
customer satisfaction, systematic research exploring this
link is scarce. The present study investigates this relation-
ship for salespeople in a business-to-business context. The
theoretical justification for a positive impact of salespeo-
ple’s job satisfaction on customer satisfaction is based on
the concept of emotional contagion. The analysis is based
on a dyadic data set that involves judgments provided by
salespeople and their customers collected across multi-
ple manufacturing and services industries. Results indi-
cate the presence of a positive relationship between
salespeople’s job satisfaction and customer satisfaction.
Furthermore, the relationship between salespeople’s job
satisfaction and customer satisfaction is found to be par-
ticularly strong in the case of high frequency of cus-
tomer interaction, high intensity of customer integration
into the value-creating process, and high product/service
innovativeness.

Keywords:

job satisfaction; customer satisfaction;
customer orientation; sales management;
business-to-business marketing

In recent years, many companies have invested consid-
erable resources into programs for measuring and

Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science.
Volume 32, No. 2, pages 144-158.
DOI: 10.1177/0092070303261415
Copyright © 2004 by Academy of Marketing Science.

increasing employees’ job satisfaction (e.g., Heskett,
Sasser, and Schlesinger 1997). The implicit assumption
underlying these activities is that increased employee sat-
isfaction ultimately leads to increased customer satisfac-
tion. Indeed, the link between employee satisfaction and
customer satisfaction is a central element of a conceptual
framework referred to as the service profit chain (e. g.,
Heskett et al. 1997). This model suggests a causal chain
linking employee satisfaction to financial performance
through the mediating constructs of employee loyalty,
customer satisfaction, and customer loyalty. However, the
suggested link between employee satisfaction and cus-
tomer satisfaction is based on limited and anecdotal evi-
dence. A similar logic is provided by Reichheld (1996),
who suggests a “loyalty-based cycle of growth” that
contains a positive impact of employee loyalty on
customer loyalty.

With respect to the academic domain, it is worth not-
ing that customer satisfaction (e.g., Fornell, Johnson,
Anderson, Cha, and Bryant 1996; Oliver 1996) and
employees’ job satisfaction (e.g., Brown and Peterson
1993; Churchill, Ford, Hartley, and Walker 1985) are two
of the most widely studied constructs in marketing re-
search. However, there is little systematic research relating
the two constructs to each other. The existing studies
mostly provide support for a positive link between em-
ployee and customer satisfaction in several industries such
as fast-food restaurants (Bernhardt, Donthu, and Kennett
2000), the insurance sector (Schlesinger and Zornitsky
1991), the software industry (Tornow and Wiley 1991),

Downloaded from 

jam.sagepub.com

 at SAGE Publications on December 6, 2012

   
and retailing (Wiley 1991). Another study, conducted by
Loveman (1998) within the banking sector, does not pro-
vide empirical support for the suggested positive impact of
employee satisfaction on customer satisfaction. The exist-
ing empirical research on this link, however, is subject to
numerous limitations.

First, several studies have collected data exclusively
from employees (e.g., Schlesinger and Zornitsky 1991)
rather than using data from both sides of the dyad. Like
many of the classical profit impact of market strategy
(PIMS)-based studies (Buzzell and Gale 1987), this
research has used managers’ assessment of customers’
perceptions. The problem with such an approach is that
highly satisfied employees might rate customer satis-
faction higher than dissatisfied employees based on their
generally positive perception of the company (common
method bias). Second, studies that have been based on
dyadic data have typically been restricted to a single com-
pany (e.g., Bernhardt et al. 2000; Loveman 1998; Tornow
and Wiley 1991; Wiley 1991). Such a design may restrict
the generalizability of the findings. Third, data analysis
has typically been based on bivariate approaches (e.g.,
Loveman 1998; Schlesinger and Zornitsky 1991; Tornow
and Wiley 1991; Wiley 1991). A main concern with bi-
variate analysis is that it is not possible to account for other
factors that may affect the dependent variable, which may
lead to erroneous conclusions concerning the relationship
of interest (omitted variables bias). Furthermore, simple
bivariate analysis does not allow for a distinction between
different mechanisms through which the independent
variable influences the dependent variable. This issue is
highly relevant in the context of our study, because one
might argue that salespeople’s job satisfaction affects
customer satisfaction directly as well as indirectly (i.e.,
through some mediating variables related to salespeople’s
behavior). Simple bivariate analysis does not allow for dis-
tinguishing direct and indirect effects.

Fourth, to the best of our knowledge, no empirical
study has examined factors that influence the strength of
the link between employees’job satisfaction and customer
satisfaction. We consider this to be a serious limitation
because it seems highly plausible that there are conditions
under which the impact of employees’ job satisfaction on
customer satisfaction is particularly strong. As an exam-
ple, one might argue that the relationship between the two
constructs is much stronger if the interaction with custom-
ers is more frequent as opposed to situations with very
limited customer interaction.

Fifth, previous empirical research has almost exclu-
sively studied consumer services (e.g., Bernhardt et al.
2000; Loveman 1998; Schlesinger and Zornitsky 1991;
Tornow and Wiley 1991; Wiley 1991). Thus, the question
of whether there is a positive relationship between
employees’ job satisfaction and customer satisfaction in a
business-to-business (B2B) context remains essentially

Homburg, Stock / SALESPEOPLE’S JOB SATISFACTION 145

unexplored. This question is interesting since, based on
previous work in B2B marketing, different predictions can
be made. On one hand, one might argue that interpersonal
interaction between the supplier and the customer com-
pany is highly relevant in B2B settings (e.g., Weitz and
Bradford 1999), so that a positive link between the two
constructs seems plausible also in this context. On the
other hand, one might argue that transactions in B2B mar-
keting are often highly technical in nature and driven by
highly rational decisions on the customer side (e.g., Eckles
1990; Webster 1991), so that the relevance of customer
contact employees’satisfaction may be low, if not neglect-
able, in this context.1

Against this background, this article aims at providing
insight into the relationship between employees’ job sat-
isfaction and customer satisfaction in a B2B-context.
Although in B2B marketing, there are typically several
people from the supplier organization interacting with
customers (e.g., salespeople, customer service people,
technical experts), we focus on salespeople in studying
employees’job satisfaction. This approach is based on evi-
dence that despite the growing importance of customer
service in B2B marketing (e.g., Anderson and Narus 1995;
Webster 1991), the salesperson is still the primary point of
contact for the customer (e.g., Anderson and Narus 1999;
Weitz and Bradford 1999). As an example, Weitz and
Bradford (1999) highlighted the important role of sales-
people in a B2B-context:

As the primary link between the buying and selling
firms, they have considerable influence on the
buyer’s perceptions of the seller’s reliability and the
value of the seller’s services and consequently
the buyer’s interest in continuing the relationship.
(P. 241)

In this study, we address two research questions, the first
of which focuses on the main effect between the two
constructs:

Research Question 1: Is there a positive relationship be-
tween salespeople’s job satisfaction and customer
satisfaction?

The second research question addresses moderators of
the relationship under consideration. Our basic theoretical
reasoning in the context of moderator effects is that the
suggested direct effect of the salesperson’s job satisfaction
on customer satisfaction depends on the visibility of the
salesperson’s job satisfaction to the customers. We there-
fore chose three moderator variables that presumably af-
fect the extent to which a salesperson’s job satisfaction is
visible to customers. They include frequency of customer
interaction, intensity of customer integration into the
value-creating process, and product/service innovative-

Downloaded from 

jam.sagepub.com

 at SAGE Publications on December 6, 2012

   
146

JOURNAL OF THE ACADEMY OF MARKETING SCIENCE

SPRING 2004

ness. Against this background, the second research
question of our study is the following:

Research Question 2: Do frequency of customer inter-
action, intensity of customer integration into the
value-creating process, and product/service innova-
tiveness moderate the link between salespeople’s
job satisfaction and customer satisfaction?

Our analysis is based on dyadic data, that is, data in-
volving judgments by employees (i.e., salespeople) and
their customers, ruling out the risk of a common method
bias in the data. To enhance the generalizability of our
findings, we use data collected from multiple companies
in different manufacturing and services industries in a
B2B-context. Moreover, the link between employee satis-
faction and customer satisfaction is not studied with a sim-
ple bivariate approach. Rather, we analyze a causal model
that distinguishes between a (rather obvious) indirect ef-
fect of salespeople’s job satisfaction on customer satis-
faction (through the mediating construct of quality of
customer interaction) and a direct effect. The interesting
question, then, is whether the effect of job satisfaction on
customer satisfaction is totally mediated by quality of cus-
tomer interaction. Our model also controls for other im-
portant antecedents of customer satisfaction. Finally, as is
obvious from the second research question, we analyze
moderators of the link between employees’ job satisfac-
tion and customer satisfaction. Thus, our research design
allows us to overcome the five major limitations of pre-
vious research.

Research of this type is relevant from both a theoretical
and a managerial perspective. From a theoretical perspec-
tive, this research can contribute to an improved under-
standing of the antecedents of customer satisfaction.
While previous research has identified numerous drivers
of customer satisfaction, such as product/service quality
(e.g., Anderson, Fornell, and Lehmann 1994; Gotlieb,
Grewal, and Brown 1994) and quality of customer-related
processes (e.g., Banting 1984; Homburg and Rudolph
2001), the potential role of salespeople’s job satisfaction
as an antecedent of customer satisfaction has not been sys-
tematically analyzed in previous research (as discussed
above). Also, our research can contribute to an improved
understanding of the role of customer contact personnel in
B2B settings. From a managerial perspective, our research
provides guidance for managers concerning the appropri-
ateness of investments into employee satisfaction. Specifi-
cally, if our study reveals a positive impact of salespeo-
ple’s job satisfaction on customer satisfaction, this result
should encourage managers in B2B companies to strive
for a high level of salespeople’s job satisfaction in order to
secure customer satisfaction. In addition, the moderator
analysis helps managers determine situations in which the
link between employees’ job satisfaction and customer

satisfaction is particularly strong. In these situations,
investments into high levels of salespeople’s job
satisfaction are particularly promising in terms of
customer satisfaction.

FRAMEWORK AND HYPOTHESES

Our unit of analysis is a specific salesperson in a B2B
setting and the customer base for which this salesperson is
responsible. We thus analyze how this salesperson’s job
satisfaction affects customer satisfaction. We conceptual-
ize employees’ job satisfaction in accordance with previ-
ous research (e.g., Locke 1976) as an attitude that results
from an evaluative process, where some comparison stan-
dard about the work environment is compared with the
actually perceived work environment. Customer satisfac-
tion refers to an affective state that is the emotional reac-
tion to an experience or a sequence of experiences with a
supplier. It is produced by the customer’s assessment of
the degree to which a supplier’s performance is perceived
to have met or exceeded some comparison standard. This
conceptualization of customer satisfaction is consistent
with previous research (e.g., Cadotte, Woodruff, and
Jenkins 1987; Spreng, MacKenzie, and Olshavsky 1996).
Figure 1 shows the basic framework underlying the
study. As mentioned above, the salesperson’s job satis-
faction is supposed to influence customer satisfaction not
only in a direct way but also indirectly through the mediat-
ing construct of the quality of customer interaction.

The framework also includes two additional predictors
of customer satisfaction referred to as “quality of the com-
pany’s offer” and “quality of customer-related business
processes.” The first of these constructs captures aspects
of product and service quality, which have been identified
as key antecedents of customer satisfaction in numerous
studies (e.g., Gotlieb et al. 1994). The second construct
refers to processes such as order handling and invoicing,
the quality of which has also been identified as an impor-
tant driver of customer satisfaction in B2B settings (e.g.,
Homburg and Rudolph 2001). The inclusion of these con-
trol variables is particularly important because it is highly
plausible that they may be positively correlated with both
salespeople’s job satisfaction and customer satisfaction.
Including these constructs as additional predictors of cus-
tomer satisfaction allows us to find out whether salespeo-
ple’s job satisfaction has a significant impact on customer
satisfaction after accounting for the variance explained
by the quality of the company’s offer and the quality of
customer-related business processes.

In the following, we develop hypotheses within this
framework. We first focus on our basic hypothesis related
to the effect of the salesperson’s job satisfaction on cus-
tomer satisfaction. After that, we develop hypotheses re-
lated to moderator effects on this relationship. Finally, we

Downloaded from 

jam.sagepub.com

 at SAGE Publications on December 6, 2012

   
Homburg, Stock / SALESPEOPLE’S JOB SATISFACTION 147

Relationship Between Sales Personnel’s Job Satisfaction and Customer Satisfaction:

A Conceptual Model

FIGURE 1

Salespeople’s Perceptions of: 

Customers’ Perceptions of: 

- Intensity of Customer 
  Integration into the
  Value Creating
  Process 
 
- Product/Service 
  Innovativeness 

H2a (+) 

H2b (+) 

- Frequency of
  Customer  
 Interaction

H2c (+) 
H2c (+) 

Sales

Person’s  

Job  

Satisfaction 

H1 (+)

Customer
Satisfaction 

H3 (+)

Quality of
Customer
Interaction

H4 (+)

Quality of

the 

Company’s 

Offer

Quality of

 the 

Processes 

suggest hypotheses concerning the remaining effects
within our model.

Basic Hypothesis

To justify the main effect in our model, we draw on the
concept of “emotional contagion” (Chartrand and Bargh
1999; Gump and Kulik 1997; Hatfield, Caccioppo, and
Rapson 1992, 1994). This concept is rooted in the field
of social psychology. According to Howard and Gengler
(2001), emotional contagion “refers to someone (hereafter
the receiver) catching the emotion being experienced by
another (hereafter the sender), wherein the emotion of
the receiver converges with that of the sender” (p. 189).
Besides other fields of interpersonal interaction, the con-
cept of emotional contagion has also been studied in the
context of company employees interacting with customers
(e.g., Pugh 2001; Verbeke 1997). In general, these studies
provide support for the presence of emotional contagion
effects between customer-contact employees (e.g., sales-
people) and customers. For example, Howard and Gengler
(2001) found that product attitudes were positively influ-
enced when customers “caught” a positive emotion from
the customer-contact employees. Additional conceptual
and empirical support for the phenomenon that emotions

displayed by a salesperson transfer to the customer is
provided by Pugh (2001) and Verbeke (1997).

To make the mechanism driving emotional contagion
more concrete, we argue that a customer will directly per-
ceive certain emotional states of an employee that are
associated with job satisfaction. As is typical in the phe-
nomenon of emotional contagion (Pugh 2001), these emo-
tional correlates of job satisfaction are typically not
consciously controlled by the employee. As an example,
the level of experienced job stress has been shown to be
a negative correlate of job satisfaction (e.g., Sullivan and
Bhagat 1992). Thus, a highly dissatisfied salesperson will
exhibit a significant level of emotional tension that will be
felt by the customer (e.g., Singh, Goolsby, and Rhoads
1994) and affect the customer’s satisfaction via the pro-
cess of emotional contagion. This, in turn, will create
cognitive tension for the customer, thus reducing cus-
tomer satisfaction (e.g., Oshikawa 1968; Parkington and
Schneider 1979; Russo, Meloy, and Medvec 1998). On the
other hand, employees with a high level of job satisfaction
will appear to the customer more balanced and pleased
with their environment. In this case, the process of emo-
tional contagion will lead to a positive influence on the
level of customer satisfaction. In summary, the process of
emotional contagion can be described as follows (Pugh

Downloaded from 

jam.sagepub.com

 at SAGE Publications on December 6, 2012

   
148

JOURNAL OF THE ACADEMY OF MARKETING SCIENCE

SPRING 2004

2001): “Customers, when exposed to the emotional dis-
plays of employees, experience corresponding changes
in their own affective states” (p. 1020). Following this, we
propose:

Hypothesis 1: The greater the salesperson’s job satisfac-

tion, the greater the customer satisfaction.

Hypotheses on Moderating Effects

Frequency of customer interaction. This construct re-
lates to the frequency of interaction between a company’s
employees and customers (Murray, Kotabe, and Wildt
1995). We argue that the level of salespeople’s job satis-
faction will be more visible to customers in relationships
with frequent interactions. Therefore, the link between job
satisfaction and customer satisfaction is supposed to be
stronger, the higher the frequency of customer interaction
is. In other words, in the case of high frequency of cus-
tomer interaction, a change in job satisfaction will lead to a
higher change in customer satisfaction than in the case of
low frequency of customer interaction. We hypothesize
the following:

Hypothesis 2a: The higher the frequency of customer
interaction, the stronger is the relationship be-
tween the salesperson’s job satisfaction and cus-
tomer satisfaction.

Intensity of customer integration into the value-creating
process. This construct relates to the degree to which cus-
tomers are involved into a company’s value-creating pro-
cess. This level of integration is particularly high in a
services context due to the “inseparability of production
and consumption,” which is a key characteristic of ser-
vices (Zeithaml, Parasuraman, and Berry 1985:33). As a
consequence of this characteristic, the customer must be
present during the production of many services. However,
customer integration is not restricted to the services sector.
As an example, customer integration can encompass such
things as customers’ participation in the new product de-
velopment process (e.g., von Hippel 1988). In the case of
high customer integration, salespeople play an important
role for the customer because of their role as boundary
spanners (e.g., Singh 1988). In relationships with high
customer integration, the level of salespeople’s job satis-
faction will be more visible to customers and thus, the link
between job satisfaction and customer satisfaction will be
stronger. We hypothesize,

Hypothesis 2b: The higher the intensity of customer inte-
gration into the value-creating process, the stronger
is the relationship between the salesperson’s job sat-
isfaction and customer satisfaction.

Product/service innovativeness. This construct refers
to the rate of change in the products or services themselves
and the changes around the products or services (e.g.,
Murray et al. 1995). A lot of research in recent years has
emphasized the important role of sales personnel in the
context of highly innovative products (e.g., Kleinschmidt
and Cooper 1991; Kotabe and Swan 1995; Olson, Walker,
and Ruekert 1995). Olson et al. (1995) pointed out that
when the product is new to customers, customers are not
able to use prior experiences with a product. We argue that
customers tend to place greater emphasis on the salesper-
son in charge of them when a product is highly innovative.
Support by salespeople is needed by the customer in order
to track and understand the changes of a product. Thus,
a salesperson’s job satisfaction will be more visible for
customers in the context of highly innovative products/
services. Thus, we suggest

Hypothesis 2c: The higher the product/service innova-
tiveness, the stronger is the relationship between
the salesperson’s job satisfaction and customer
satisfaction.

Additional Hypotheses

In addition to the direct effect of the salesperson’s job
satisfaction on customer satisfaction, we also hypothesize
an indirect effect through the mediating construct of the
quality of customer interaction. This construct is defined
as the extent to which customer interaction is open, flexi-
ble, and customer oriented. It is conceptually rooted in the
B2B marketing literature (e.g., Cannon and Homburg
2001; Homburg 1998) and captures key aspects of cus-
tomer interaction behavior that have been identified in the
relevant literature.

We argue that salespeople’s job satisfaction will have a
positive effect on the quality of customer interaction. This
reasoning is in line with a research stream revealing favor-
able behavioral outcomes of salespeople’s job satisfac-
tion (e.g., Bhagat 1981, 1982; Brown and Peterson 1993,
1994). As an example, job satisfaction has been shown to
be positively related to pro-social behaviors, including
helping behaviors, in organizations (e.g., MacKenzie,
Podsakoff, and Ahearne 1998; Smith, Organ, and Near
1983). Moreover, studies by Behrman and Perreault
(1984) and Singh, Verbeke, and Rhoads (1996) reveal
links between industrial salespeople’s job satisfaction and
those aspects covered in our construct of quality of cus-
tomer interaction (i.e., openness, flexibility, and customer
orientation). On the basis of the results of these studies, we
hypothesize,

Hypothesis 3: The higher the salesperson’s job satisfac-
tion, the higher the quality of customer interaction.

Downloaded from 

jam.sagepub.com

 at SAGE Publications on December 6, 2012

   
Homburg, Stock / SALESPEOPLE’S JOB SATISFACTION 149

TABLE 1

Sample Characteristics

Percentage

Customers

Industry

14.6
19.5
7.9
14.6
12.2
26.3
4.9

1.8
6.1
25.0
23.2
9.8
6.1
14.0
14.0

Distributors
Machinery
Chemical
Automotive
Services
Building materials
Other manufacturing industries

Firm size (number of employees)

Less than 50
50 to 100
100 to 200
200 to 400
400 to 600
600 to 1.000
1.000 to 2.500
More than 2.500

Percentage

24.7
15.2
12.4
11.5
21.3
8.3
6.6

15.4
13.3
10.0
10.9
20.5
7.9
6.0
16.0

Salespeople

Industry

Chemical
Machinery
Electronics
Automotive
Plastics
Banking services
Insurance services

Firm size (number of employees)

Less than 50
50 to 100
100 to 200
200 to 400
400 to 600
600 to 1.000
1.000 to 2.500
More than 2.500

We further argue that the quality of customer interac-
tion will be positively related to customer satisfaction.
This hypothesis is consistent with previous research ex-
ploring the antecedents of customer satisfaction in B2B re-
lationships (e.g., Anderson and Narus 1990; Cannon and
Perreault 1999). Thus, we hypothesize,

Hypothesis 4: The higher the quality of customer interac-

tion, the higher the customer satisfaction.

METHOD

Sample and Data Collection

Data were obtained from salespeople and their custom-
ers. Data collection was organized in several steps. In the
first step, 1,305 salespeople were randomly selected from
a listing maintained by a commercial address provider.
The selected salespeople had a clearly defined responsibil-
ity (by regions or industries) for a specific customer base.
In the case that a company had business customers as well
as consumer customers, the process of respondent identifi-
cation made sure that the selected respondent was respon-
sible for business customers. About two thirds of these
salespeople represented manufacturing industries such as
the machinery, electronic, and automotive industry. The
remaining third represented the service sector, that is,
banking and insurance services.

The salespeople were contacted by telephone and asked
to participate in the study. Depending on their readiness to
participate, telephone interviews were carried out either
immediately or at a later time. Five weeks later, this pro-
cess yielded 221 telephone interviews (giving a response

rate of 16.9%). Salespeople were asked about their own
level of job satisfaction. During the interviews, the sales-
people were asked for about five addresses of customers
they are responsible for. Of the 221 salespeople, 115
agreed to give names and addresses of their customers.
These 115 salespeople provided a total of 488 customers.
In the second step, these customers were contacted in a
telephone survey. The goal was to obtain two customer
assessments per salesperson, and we stopped collecting
data related to a dyad after having completed two cus-
tomer observations. Respondents were essentially asked
about their satisfaction with the supplier who had identi-
fied them. A total of 222 usable customer responses were
received (yielding a response rate of 45.5%). The proce-
dure led us to a total of 111 dyadic cases consisting of a
salesperson response and two related customer responses.
To further increase our sample size, we collected addi-
tional dyadic data using the same procedure and the same
respondent basis as in the first wave of data collection. We
conducted a telephone-based follow-up activity among
those salespeople who could not be reached by telephone
in the first wave or had refused to participate because of
time constraints. By this procedure, we received 53 addi-
tional usable dyadic cases. Thus, our database consists of
164 dyadic cases consisting of a salesperson response and
two related customer responses. Table 1 provides informa-
tion on sample characteristics. For subsequent data analy-
sis, the two customer responses were averaged, as sug-
gested in the literature (e.g., Deshpandé, Farley, and
Webster 1993; Morgan and Piercy 1998).

We acknowledge that our approach for obtaining
dyadic data may bring about a systematic bias in the level
of customer satisfaction since salespeople are likely to
select customers they know well and with whom they have

Downloaded from 

jam.sagepub.com

 at SAGE Publications on December 6, 2012

   
150

JOURNAL OF THE ACADEMY OF MARKETING SCIENCE

SPRING 2004

good relationships. It is important to note, though, that
such a positive bias would only lead to a generally higher
level of the dependent variable in our study (i.e., customer
satisfaction). Since the causal modeling approach we will
use for data analysis is entirely based on covariances
between measured variables, such a positive bias would
not affect the findings of our study (i.e., strength and sig-
nificance of relationships between constructs).

As mentioned before, different constructs in our frame-
work are measured with data obtained from different sides
of the dyad (see Figure 1). While the salesperson’s job sat-
isfaction was measured on the basis of the salespeople’s
responses, customer satisfaction, quality of customer
interaction, quality of the company’s offer, and quality of
customer-related business processes were based on data
collected from the customers.

Measure Development and Assessment

The constructs used in our study were measured by
multiple items with the exception of frequency of cus-
tomer interaction and return on sales. Items were gener-
ated based on interviews with selected salespeople and a
review of the extant literature. Six items adapted from
Babin and Boles (1998) and Brayfield and Rothe (1951)
were used to assess the salesperson’s job satisfaction.
Consistent with our conceptualization of this construct,
the items reflect overall satisfaction rather than any spe-
cific dimension of satisfaction.

The construct quality of customer interaction is mea-
sured from the customer’s perspective in our study (see
Figure 1). The four-item scale we use includes a number of
aspects that have been used to capture the quality of inter-
action in business relationships in previous studies (e.g.,
Cannon and Homburg 2001; Homburg 1998). They in-
clude open information exchange between two exchange
parties and flexibility.

Two things are worth mentioning concerning the con-
ceptualization of customer satisfaction. First, we refer to
overall satisfaction rather than to any specific facet of the
offer (e.g., Boulding, Kalra, Staelin, and Zeithaml 1993;
Johnson and Fornell 1991). Second, we use a cumulative
conceptualization of this construct. This means that we
look at the satisfaction level that has developed over time
within the supplier-customer relationship rather than satis-
faction with a specific transaction/interaction. The con-
struct was assessed using adapted items developed by
Cannon and Perreault (1999).

The two control variables, quality of the company’s
offer and quality of customer-related business processes,
are also measured from the customer’s perspective in our
study (see Figure 1). With respect to the first construct, we
use two items that directly ask respondents for an evalua-
tion of the supplier’s product and service quality, respec-
tively. Similar items have been used by Fornell et al.

(1996). The second construct is measured through a single
item.

The first moderator variable used in our study is fre-
quency of customer interaction. It was measured by a sin-
gle item adopted from Murray et al. (1995). Some previ-
ous studies that have analyzed this construct used a multi-
item measurement approach for it. However, the key rea-
son for this multi-item scale is the intention to capture the
use of different communication modes (written communi-
cation, personal communication, etc.). Such an approach
has been used in the studies by Cannon and Homburg
(2001) and Mohr, Fisher, and Nevin (1996). Since differ-
ent communication modes are not an issue studied in our
research, we feel that a single-item measurement for fre-
quency of customer interaction is appropriate in this study.
A four-item scale was used to measure the construct of
intensity of customer integration into the value-creating
process. Items capturing the domain of this construct were
generated based on previous research (e.g., Kelley,
Donnelly, and Skinner 1990; Zeithaml, Parasuraman, and
Berry 1985). The scale for measuring our third moderator,
product/service innovativeness, is adapted from Murray
et al. (1995). It includes six items and refers to such issues
as updating products/services with new features or adding
new products/services to the company’s offer.

To assess measurement validity, a confirmatory factor
analysis containing all the constructs in our framework
was run with LISREL VIII (Jöreskog and Sörbom 1993).
Confirmatory factor analysis is considered superior to
more traditional criteria (such as Cronbach’s alpha) in the
context of scale validation because of its less restrictive
assumptions (Bagozzi, Yi, and Phillips 1991; Gerbing and
Anderson 1988). The overall fit indices (Goodness-of-Fit
Index [GFI] = .99, Adjusted Goodness-of-Fit Index
[AGFI] = .98, Comparative Fit Index [CFI] = .99, root
mean square error of approximation [RMSEA] = .03) pro-
vide support for this model. Furthermore, the ratio of χ2 =
356.44 over df = 243 is 1.4, which also indicates a good fit
of the model (Baumgartner and Homburg 1996). Table 2
shows the confirmatory factor analysis results together
with additional reliability information for the individual
constructs. A complete list of items with their individual
reliabilities is shown in the appendix.

As can be seen in the appendix, the individual item
reliabilities of a small number of items are below the criti-
cal value of .4 that is suggested by Bagozzi and
Baumgartner (1994). These items were retained because
we felt that they cover important facets of the underlying
constructs. This approach is consistent with the perspec-
tive of Bagozzi and Baumgartner (1994):

Although small individual item reliabilities may
point to inadequate measurement of a construct by a
given indicator, it is usually more important that the
construct be measured adequately by all indicators

Downloaded from 

jam.sagepub.com

 at SAGE Publications on December 6, 2012

   
Homburg, Stock / SALESPEOPLE’S JOB SATISFACTION 151

TABLE 2

Measurement Information

Factor

Number
of Items

Cronbach’s Alpha

(standardized)

Composite
Reliability

Average

Variance Extracted

Salesperson’s job satisfaction
Quality of customer interaction
Quality of the company’s offer
Quality of customer-related business processes
Customer satisfaction
Frequency of customer interaction
Intensity of customer integration into the value-creating process
Product/service innovativeness

6
4
2
1
5
1
4
6

.97
.83
.73
—
.91
—
.88
.87

.98
.84
.81
—
.92
—
.90
.90

.66
.50
.50
—
.55
—
.57
.43

TABLE 3

Factor Correlation Matrix

1. Salesperson’s job satisfaction
2. Customer satisfaction
3. Quality of customer interaction
4. Quality of the company’s offer
5. Quality of customer-related business processes
6. Frequency of customer interaction
7. Intensity of customer integration into the value-creating process
8. Product/service innovativeness

*p < .05.

1

1.00
.28*
.21*
.06
.17
.02
.05
.53*

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

1.00
.64*
.72*
.49*
.02
.05
.16

1.00
.60*
.29*
–.01
.22*
.01

1.00
.19*
.05
.27*
.08

1.00
–.01
.22*
.01

1.00
.14
–.07

1.00
.27*

1.00

of the construct jointly. This can be assessed by
computing an index of composite reliability. (P. 402)

Composite reliability represents the shared variance
among a set of observed variables measuring an underly-
ing construct (Fornell and Larcker 1981). Generally, a
composite reliability of at least .6 is considered desirable
(Bagozzi and Yi 1988:82). This requirement is met for
every factor. The values of average variance extracted also
provide satisfactory results with the exception of product/
service innovativeness, which has an average variance ex-
tracted slightly below .5. Furthermore, as can be seen from
Table 2, coefficient alpha values are all above .8.

LISREL VIII was also used to test discriminant validity
as suggested by Fornell and Larcker (1981). The results
support discriminant validity because, for every pair of
factors, the squared correlation between them is below the
two values of average variance extracted. A factor correla-
tion matrix is shown in Table 3.

Data Analysis Procedure

First, the main effects shown in Figure 1 were estimated
via causal analysis via LISREL VIII. The key benefit of
this methodology in the context of our study is that it
allows for a distinction between direct and indirect effects
(Jöreskog and Sörbom 1982, 1993). Next, we assessed the
influence of the three moderator variables shown in Figure

1. We conducted separate median splits in our sample
based on the values of an individual moderator variable.
Subsequently, multiple-group LISREL was performed
comparing the two subsamples (high versus low values of
the moderator variable). Specifically, we compared two
models that are different only with respect to the effect of
the salesperson’s job satisfaction on customer satisfaction.
One model restricts this parameter to be equal across sub-
samples, while the more general model allows this param-
eter to vary across groups. Since these are nested models
with the general model having one degree of freedom less
than the restricted model, the chi-square value will always
be lower for the general model than for the restricted
model. The question is whether the improvement in chi-
square when moving from the restricted to the more gen-
eral model is significant. This would indicate differential
effects of job satisfaction on customer satisfaction in the
two subsamples, thus supporting the hypothesis of a mod-
erator effect.

RESULTS

Main Effects

The overall fit measures suggest that the model shown
in Figure 1 is a plausible representation of the structures
underlying the empirical data. The GFI (.91), AGFI (.90),

Downloaded from 

jam.sagepub.com

 at SAGE Publications on December 6, 2012

   
152

JOURNAL OF THE ACADEMY OF MARKETING SCIENCE

SPRING 2004

FIGURE 2

Results of Main Effects

Salespeople’s Perceptions of: 

Customers’ Perceptions of: 

Sales

Person’s  

Job  

Satisfaction 

ξ1

Quality of

the 

Company’s 

Offer
ξ2

 

Quality of
Processes 

ξ3

γ21= .24* 
(t = 8.52)

Quality of 
Customer 
Interaction

η1

Customer
Satisfaction 

η2

β21 = .66*   
(t = 12.01)

γ11=.18* 
(t = 6.54)

γ22 = .60*   
(t = 10.13)

γ23 = .45*   
(t = 9.87)

NOTE: Fully standardized solutions are reported.
*p < .05.

CFI (.91), and the ratio of chi-square to degrees of free-
dom clearly exceed the threshold values recommended in
the literature (Bagozzi and Yi 1988; Baumgartner and
Homburg 1996). Furthermore, the ratio of χ2 = 434.27
over df = 210 is 2.07, which also indicates a good fit of the
model (Baumgartner and Homburg 1996). Thus, we con-
clude that the model fits the data well. The results concern-
ing the main effects are shown in Figure 2.

Hypotheses related to the main effects in our model
were supported with parameter estimates being significant
at the 5 percent level in every case. Hypothesis 1, which
suggested a positive link between salespeople’s job satis-
faction and customer satisfaction, was supported by the
data (γ
21 = .24). Also, the indirect effect of salespeople’s
job satisfaction on customer satisfaction, mediated by the
quality of customer interaction, was supported (γ
11 = .18,
β
21 = .66). This finding is particularly important, since this
causal link is supported by data collected from different
sides of the dyad. While job satisfaction was evaluated by
the salespeople, customer satisfaction and the quality of
customer interaction were evaluated by the customers.
Furthermore, both control variables, that is, quality of the
company’s offer (γ
22 = .60) and quality of customer-related

business processes (γ
effects on customer satisfaction.

23 = .45) exhibit positive significant

Moderating Effects

After having found support for the main effects, we
examined the hypothesized moderator effects to gain
deeper insights into the relationship between a sales-
person’s job satisfaction and the customer satisfaction.
The corresponding results are shown in Table 4.

A positive moderating effect of the frequency of cus-
tomer interaction on the link between the salesperson’s job
satisfaction and customer satisfaction was suggested in
Hypothesis 2a. As can be seen in Table 4, in case of low
frequency of interaction, the effect of job satisfaction
on customer satisfaction is weaker (γ
21, low = .09, p < .05)
than in situations where interaction happens frequently
(γ
21, high = .19, p .05). Also, the chi-square difference (∆χ2 =
12.33, p < .05) indicates the presence of a significant mod-
erator effect. Thus, Hypothesis 2a is confirmed.

Hypothesis 2b considered the positive moderating
effect of the intensity of customer integration into the
value-creating process on the link between job satisfaction

Downloaded from 

jam.sagepub.com

 at SAGE Publications on December 6, 2012

   
Homburg, Stock / SALESPEOPLE’S JOB SATISFACTION 153

Results of Multiple-Group Causal Analysis

TABLE 4

Moderator Variable

Frequency of customer interaction (Hypothesis 2a)

Intensity of customer integration into the value-creating process

(Hypothesis 2b)

Product/service innovativeness (Hypothesis 2c)

* p < .05.

Low Value

of Moderator

High Value
of Moderator

γ
21 = .09
(t = 2.95)
γ
21 = .10
(t = 1.38)
γ
21 = .11
(t = 2.24)

γ
21 = .19
(t = 3.97)
γ
21 = .29
(t = 5.24)
γ
21 = .22
(t = 4.94)

Hypothesized

21 high

Moderator Effect
γ
21 low < γ
21 low < γ
21 low < γ

21 high

21 high

γ

γ

Chi-Square Difference

(∆df = 1)
∆χ2 = 12.33*

∆χ2 = 4.02*

∆χ2 = 32.44*

and customer satisfaction. As can be seen from Table 4, we
observe a strong impact of job satisfaction on customer
satisfaction in the case of high intensity of customer inte-
gration (γ
21, high = .29, p < .05). That means that, in the pres-
ence of intensive customer integration, job satisfaction is
an important driver of customer satisfaction. On the other
hand, we do not observe a significant effect in the case of
low intensity of customer integration (γ
21, low = .10, p < .05).
Again, the chi-square difference indicates significance
(∆χ2 = 4.03, p < .05). Thus, Hypothesis 2b is also sup-
ported by our findings.

Similarly, we do find support for Hypothesis 2c, which
suggested a positive moderating effect of product/service
innovativeness. That means that, in the case of low prod-
uct/service innovativeness, the effect of job satisfaction
on customer satisfaction is weaker (γ
21, low = .11, p < .05)
as opposed to products/services that are more innova-
tive (γ
21, high = .22, p < .05). The chi-square difference is
highly significant in the case of this moderator (∆χ2 =
32.44, p < .05).

In summary, we find support for each of the three sug-
gested moderating effects. In each case, the chi-square
difference between the model that restricts the job
satisfaction-customer satisfaction link to be equal across
subgroups and the unrestricted model is significant. More-
over, the link between the salesperson’s job satisfaction
and customer satisfaction is consistently higher in the sub-
samples with high values of the moderator variables. Thus,
Hypotheses 2a, 2b, and 2c are supported by our empirical
analysis.

Tests of Stability

A critical issue in studying complex causal models re-
lates to the stability of the parameter estimates. It depends
largely on the relationship between the sample size and the
number of parameters to be estimated (Baumgartner and
Homburg 1996). To analyze the stability of our results and
to make sure that the removing of a few observations
would not radically change our findings, we conducted a
number of stability tests. In these tests, we randomly

eliminated 10 percent of the observations and reran the
analysis (including both the tests of main effects and of
moderator effects) based on the reduced sample. We
carried out 10 independent tests.

The results of our hypotheses testing were confirmed in
every case with only very minor changes in the estimated
parameters. The standardized coefficients (see Figure 2)
referring to γ
21 varied from .20 to .26. Significance at the 5
percent level was observed in each of the 10 analyses.
Also, there was limited variance for γ
11 (from .17 to .22,
p < .05), γ
21 (from .62 to .67, p < .05), γ
22 (from .59 to .62, p
< .05), and γ
23 (from .42 to .47, p < .05). In summary, these
tests provide strong support for the stability of our findings
concerning the main effects shown in Figure 2.

Similar findings were observed for the stability tests
concerning the moderating effects. Specifically, in each
case, the chi-square difference between the model that
restricts the job satisfaction-customer satisfaction link to
be equal across subgroups and the unrestricted model was
significant. Moreover, the link between job satisfaction
and customer satisfaction was consistently higher in the
subsamples with high values of the moderator variables.
Thus, our findings concerning the moderating effects are
also stable against minor changes of the database.

DISCUSSION

Research Issues

Although a positive link between employees’ job satis-
faction and customer satisfaction has frequently been sug-
gested, systematic theory-driven research based on sound
empirical analysis exploring this link is scarce. This study
focuses on the link between job satisfaction and customer
satisfaction in a B2B context. Consistent with previous lit-
erature, we argue that salespeople are the primary bound-
ary spanners toward customers in the B2B context. On the
basis of this reasoning, we argued that a salesperson’s job
satisfaction would positively affect the customer satisfac-
tion for which this salesperson is responsible.

Downloaded from 

jam.sagepub.com

 at SAGE Publications on December 6, 2012

   
154

JOURNAL OF THE ACADEMY OF MARKETING SCIENCE

SPRING 2004

Our research provides new insights into the relation-
ship between employees’ job satisfaction and customer
satisfaction. Specifically, our findings show that a sales-
person’s job satisfaction does have an impact on customer
satisfaction. It is particularly important that our study has
demonstrated the presence of this relationship based on
dyadic data because this approach rules out the possibility
of a common method bias.

Moreover, our study reveals a positive impact of sales-
people’s job satisfaction on customer satisfaction in a
model where an indirect effect through the mediating con-
struct of quality of customer interaction is controlled for.
Thus, our findings indicate that salespeople’s job satisfac-
tion influences customer satisfaction in two different
ways, that is, directly (through the process of emotional
contagion) and indirectly (through the way salespeople
interact with their customers). We feel that this distinction
between direct and indirect effects is an important contri-
bution of our study, which provides a deeper understand-
ing of the link between the two constructs than previous
research.

Our study also shows that there are contingency factors
that systematically strengthen or weaken the relationship
between job satisfaction and customer satisfaction. To the
best of our knowledge, our study is the first to address the
issue that the link between job satisfaction and customer
satisfaction may not be equally strong in every situation.
Specifically, our research shows that this relationship is
particularly strong in the case of high frequency of cus-
tomer interaction, high intensity of customer integration
into the value-creating process, and high product/service
innovativeness.

An interesting research issue of our study relates to the
concept of emotional contagion, which has attracted lim-
ited attention in marketing research so far. In this study, we
find support for our theoretical reasoning that emotional
contagion leads to a positive impact of salespeople’s job
satisfaction on customer satisfaction. We feel that this
finding underlines the importance of this concept for
studying interpersonal interaction in marketing research.
It is also worth emphasizing that we find a positive link
between salespeople’s job satisfaction and customer satis-
faction in a B2B context. Literature in B2B marketing
tends to suggest that transactions in B2B marketing are
often highly technical in nature and driven by highly ratio-
nal decisions on the customer side (e.g., Eckles 1990;
Webster 1991) so that the relevance of customer-contact
employees’ satisfaction may be low, if not neglectable, in
this context. However, our study reveals that employee sat-
isfaction does play an important role in driving customer
satisfaction in B2B settings.

Several limitations of our study need to be mentioned.
First, the customers who were surveyed in our empirical
study had been identified by salespeople, which may pro-
duce a selection bias. Although we feel, as mentioned

before, that the key consequence of this would be a posi-
tive bias in the mean value of customer satisfaction that
would not affect the results of our analyses, we cannot
totally rule out the possibility that the selection bias also
has other consequences. Certainly, dyadic data with no
influence of salespeople on customer selection would
have been a superior database for our study. Second, our
approach to studying moderator effects based on median
splits of the data, while allowing us to do the moderator
analysis in the framework of a causal model distinguishing
direct and indirect effects, constitutes a limitation of our
study because this involves a reduction of the scale level
(from ordinal to high/low) and therefore a loss of informa-
tion. Moderated regression analysis (Sharma, Durand, and
Gur-Arie 1981; Stone 1988) would have been an alterna-
tive method that avoids median splits but requires a more
simple basic model (i.e., a model that does not contain
indirect effects) than the framework that our study is based
on. Finally, the use of two single-item measures may be
mentioned as a limitation.

Based on our research, several avenues for future re-
search in this area can be suggested. First, future research
might look at the relationship between salespeople’s job
satisfaction and customer satisfaction in a more compre-
hensive framework including additional organizational
constructs. As an example, one could argue that organiza-
tional effectiveness might have an impact on both employ-
ees’ job satisfaction and customer satisfaction. If this was
the case, it would be interesting to find out whether the
impact of job satisfaction on customer satisfaction is still
significant after accounting for this common predictor
variable. While our finding that this relationship is subject
to systematic moderation of third variables suggests that
the relationship cannot totally be attributed to common
predictors of the two constructs, exploring the link be-
tween job satisfaction and customer satisfaction in a more
comprehensive framework is certainly an interesting area
for future research.

Second, future research could consider additional mod-
erator variables that strengthen or weaken the link
between job satisfaction and customer satisfaction. For
example, the link between job satisfaction and customer
satisfaction might be moderated by characteristics of the
exchange (e.g., intensity, age of relationship, level of
mutual trust), the customer (e.g., level of commitment,
dependence, price sensitivity), the employee (e.g., empa-
thy, job experience, expertise, reliability), and the industry
(e.g., market dynamism, competitive intensity) in which
the relationship is embedded.

Third, future research could theoretically and empiri-
cally analyze to which extent behavioral consequences
of salespeople’s job satisfaction are subject to moderator
effects. Research of this type could, for example, study
salespeople’s interaction behavior as a dependent con-
struct. Finally, it would be interesting to study the effect

Downloaded from 

jam.sagepub.com

 at SAGE Publications on December 6, 2012

   
Homburg, Stock / SALESPEOPLE’S JOB SATISFACTION 155

of salespeople’s job satisfaction on customer satisfaction
within a dynamic setting. An interesting research question
in this context would be how quickly changes in sales-
people’s job satisfaction lead to changes in customer
satisfaction.

job satisfaction has an effect on its own on customer satis-
faction. Thus, our study provides further evidence of the
high relevance of salespeople as boundary spanners in
B2B settings.

APPENDIX

Managerial Issues

Besides the high relevance of our study for research,
our work also has managerial implications. In the last
years, many companies have invested considerable re-
sources into programs to enhance the satisfaction of their
employees (e.g., Heskett, Jones, Loveman, Sasser, and
Schlesinger 1994; Heskett et al. 1997). The implicit prop-
osition underlying these activities is that a high level of
employee satisfaction actually does lead to highly satisfied
customers.

Our results tell managers in B2B firms that high job sat-
isfaction of salespeople leads to a higher level of the qual-
ity of customer interaction. Thus, programs to increase job
satisfaction of the sales force are an important way to
achieve a more favorable perception of the firm in the eyes
of the customer. In addition, job satisfaction increases cus-
tomer satisfaction in a direct way. Thus, on an overall
basis, managers can be encouraged to invest into sales-
people’s job satisfaction in order to increase customer
satisfaction.

Furthermore, our study tells managers that increasing
salespeople’s job satisfaction is especially fruitful in terms
of customer satisfaction under certain circumstances.
First, this is the case if customer interaction is frequent.
Second, the relationship between salespeople’s job satis-
faction and customer satisfaction is stronger the more the
customers are integrated into the value-creating process.
This finding is particularly relevant for managers in many
service industries where customer integration is high due
to the “inseparability of production and consumption”
(Zeithaml et al. 1985:33). Examples of B2B services
where customer integration is high include management
consulting, financial services, and many other profes-
sional services. Finally, salespeople’s job satisfaction be-
comes more important as a driver of customer satisfaction
if the product/service is highly innovative. Thus, managers
in highly innovative companies and industries (such as
high-tech machinery, software, telecommunication) can
be encouraged to invest into salespeople’s job satisfaction.

CONCLUSION

Much academic research has focused on providing a
better understanding of the factors that drive customer sat-
isfaction in B2B marketing. Our research shows that,
besides the characteristics of the firm’s offer, salespeople’s

Measures and Items

Salespeople’s job satisfaction*a

Overall, I am quite satisfied with

my job.

I do not intend to work for a

different company.

I like my job.
There are no fundamental things I

dislike about my job.

I like my job more than many

Item

M SD Reliability

4.51 0.64

0.88

4.59 0.79
4.65 0.61

0.93
0.97

4.10 0.85

0.79

employees of other companies.

4.25 0.75

0.76

I consider this employer as first

choice.

4.39 0.83

0.89

Customer satisfaction*b

We are very pleased with the

products and services that this
company delivers.

We enjoy collaborating with this

company.

On an overall basis, our experience

with this company has been
positive.

This company is first choice for us

for the purchase of these products
and services.

On an overall basis, we are satisfied

3.98 0.61

0.74

4.31 0.54

0.71

4.28 0.56

0.84

4.12 0.67

0.53

with this company.

4.15 0.57

0.85

Quality of customer interaction**b
Relative to other suppliers, please

evaluate the interaction with
respect to . . .

Salespeople’s customer

orientation.

3.91 0.68

0.61

Flexibility of the employees
in dealing with customers.

Openness in providing

information to customers.
Openness to suggestions from

3.83 0.72

0.73

3.85 0.67

0.67

customers.

3.68 0.64

0.34

Quality of company’s offer**b

Relative to other suppliers, please
evaluate the performance of this
supplier with respect to . . .

Product quality.
Service quality.

3.90
3.87

0.59 —
0.64 —

Downloaded from 

jam.sagepub.com

 at SAGE Publications on December 6, 2012

   
156

JOURNAL OF THE ACADEMY OF MARKETING SCIENCE

SPRING 2004

Measures and Items

M SD Reliability

Item

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Quality of customer-related business

processes**b

Relative to other suppliers, please
evaluate the performance of this
supplier with respect to . . .

Quality of customer-related

business processes.

3.81 0.69

0.70

Moderator Variables
Frequency of customer interactionb
How often do you interact with this
company on average? (1 = daily,
2 = once per week, 3 = once per
month, 4 = several times a year,
5 = once per year)

Intensity of customer integration into

the value-creating process*a

Our products/services require

3.20 0.93

—

the integration of the customer
into the value-creating process. 3.64 1.06

0.61

Our products/services are

strongly influenced through
customers during their
production.

Our products/services require
regular discussions with the
customers during the
production process.

Our customers are involved into

3.62 1.10

0.74

3.49 1.22

0.63

the value-creating process right
from the start.

3.59 1.18

0.82

Product/service innovativeness*a
Our products/services are highly

innovative.

3.51 0.96

0.47

Our product/service offer is

continuously updated with new
products or services.

Our products/services are state of

the art.

Our products/services are

continuously supplemented with
new features.

Our products/services are subject

4.11 0.96

0.64

4.11 0.81

0.28

3.98 0.93

0.84

to permanent innovations.

4.01 0.92

0.76

On an overall basis, our product/

service offer is highly innovative. 3.79 0.85

0.62

a. Measured on the basis of an employee survey.
b. Measured on the basis of a customer survey.
* 5-point Likert-type scales with strongly agree and strongly disagree as

anchors were employed.

** 5-point Likert-type scales with much better and much worse as an-

chors were employed.

The authors thank Wayne D. Hoyer for his helpful
comments on a previous draft of the article. They also
acknowledge the financial support provided by the Stif-
tung Rheinhyp.

NOTE

1. At this point, a research stream in the services marketing discipline
that has analyzed the link between employee attitudes/perceptions and
customer attitudes/perceptions is worth mentioning. Studies in this
stream include Parkington and Schneider (1979); Schmit and Allscheid
(1995); Schneider (1973); Schneider and Bowen (1985, 1993);
Schneider, Parkington, and Buxton (1980); and Schneider, White, and
Paul (1998). While some of these studies do overcome the limitations
mentioned in the text (e.g., through the use of dyadic data or the analysis
of a complex causal network through causal modeling), it is important
to realize that each of these studies uses different employee attitudes/
perceptions and/or customer attitudes/perceptions compared to our study.
On the employee side, these studies focus on constructs such as human re-
sources practices and procedures (Schneider and Bowen 1985, 1993),
service climate (Schneider et al. 1998), and organizational variables to
improve the operation of the business (Schmit and Allscheid 1995). On
the customer side, these studies focus on constructs such as customers’
service quality perception (Parkington and Schneider 1979; Schneider
and Bowen 1985, 1993; Schneider et al. 1980), and switching intentions
of customers (Schneider 1973). While two of these studies use job sat-
isfaction as an independent construct (Parkington and Schneider 1979;
Schneider et al. 1980) and one of them uses customer satisfaction as a
dependent construct (Schmit and Allscheid 1995), none of these studies
relate the two constructs to each other. Against this background, our
literature review focuses on those studies that explicitly relate employee’s
job satisfaction to customer satisfaction.

REFERENCES

Anderson, Eugene W., Claes Fornell, and Donald R. Lehmann. 1994.
“Customer Satisfaction, Market Share, and Profitability: Findings
From Sweden.” Journal of Marketing 58 (July): 53-66.

Anderson, James C. and James A. Narus. 1990. “A Model of Distributor
Firm and Manufacturer Firm Working Partnerships.” Journal of Mar-
keting 54 (January): 42-58.
 and . 1995. “Capturing the Value of Supplementary Ser-
 and . 1999. Business Market Management: Understand-
ing, Creating, and Delivering Value. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall.

vices.” Harvard Business Review 73 (January-February): 75-83.

Babin, Barry J. and James S. Boles. 1998. “Employee Behavior in a Ser-
vice Environment: A Model and Test of Potential Differences
Between Men and Women.” Journal of Marketing 62 (April): 77-91.

Bagozzi, Richard P. and Hans Baumgartner. 1994. “The Evaluation of
Structural Equation Models and Hypothesis Testing.” In Principles of
Marketing Research. Ed. Richard P. Bagozzi. Cambridge, MA:
Blackwell Publishers, 386-422.
 and Youjae Yi. 1988. “On the Evaluation of Structural Equation
Models.” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 16 (1): 74-97.
, , and Lynn W. Phillips. 1991. “Assessing Construct
Validity in Organizational Research.” Administrative Science Quar-
terly 36 (September): 421-458.

Banting, Peter M. 1984. “Customer Service in Industrial Marketing: A
Comparative Study.” European Journal of Marketing 10 (3): 136-145.

Downloaded from 

jam.sagepub.com

 at SAGE Publications on December 6, 2012

   
Baumgartner, Hans and Christian Homburg. 1996. “Applications of
Structural Equation Modeling in Marketing and Consumer Research:
A Review.” International Journal of Research in Marketing 13 (2):
139-161.

Behrman, Douglas N. and William D. Perreault Jr. 1984. “A Role Stress
Model of the Performance and Satisfaction of Industrial Salesper-
sons.” Journal of Marketing 48 (Fall): 9-21.

Bernhardt, Kenneth L., Naveen Donthu, and Pamela A. Kennett. 2000. “A
Longitudinal Analysis of Satisfaction and Profitability.” Journal of
Business Research 47:161-171.

Bhagat, Rabi S. 1981. “Determinants of Performance in an Innovative
Organizational Setting: A Longitudinal Analysis.” Journal of Occu-
pational Behavior 2:125-138.
. 1982. “Conditions Under Which Stronger Job Performance-Job
Satisfaction Relationships May Be Observed: A Closer Look at Two
Situational Contingencies.” Academy of Management Journal 25 (4):
772-790.

Boulding, William, Ajay Kalra, Richard Staelin, and Valarie A. Zeithaml.
1993. “A Dynamic Process Model of Service Quality: From Expecta-
tions to Behavioral Intentions.” Journal of Marketing Research 30
(February): 7-27.

Brayfield, Arthur H. and Herold F. Rothe. 1951. “An Index of Job Satis-

faction.” Journal of Applied Psychology 35 (October): 307-311.

Brown, Steven P. and Robert A. Peterson. 1993. “Antecedents and Conse-
quences of Salesperson Job Satisfaction: A Meta-Analysis and
Assessment of Causal Effects.” Journal of Marketing Research 30
(February): 63-77.
 and . 1994. “The Effect of Effort on Sales Performance on

Job Satisfaction.” Journal of Marketing 58 (April): 70-80.

Buzzell, Robert and Bradley T. Gale. 1987. The PIMS Principles. New

York: The Free Press.

Cadotte, Ernst R., Robert B. Woodruff, and Roger J. Jenkins. 1987.
“Expectations and Norms in Models of Consumer Satisfaction.”
Journal of Marketing Research 24 (August): 305-314.

ships and Customer Firm Costs.” Journal of Marketing 65 (1): 29-43.

Cannon, Joseph P. and Christian Homburg. 2001. “Buyer-Seller Relation-
 and William D. Perreault Jr. 1999. “Buyer-Seller Relationships in
Business Markets.” Journal of Marketing Research 36 (November):
439-460.

Chartrand, Tanya and John Bargh. 1999. “The Chameleon Effect: The
Perception-Behavior Link and Social Interaction.” Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology 76 (June): 893-910.

Churchill, Gilbert A., Jr., Neil M. Ford, Steven W. Hartley, and Orville C.
Walker. 1985. “The Determinants of Salesperson Performance: A
Meta-Analysis.” Journal of Marketing Research 22 (May): 103-118.
Deshpandé, Rohit, John U. Farley, and Frederick E. Webster Jr. 1993.
“Corporate Culture, Customer Orientation, and Innovativeness in
Japanese Firms: A Quadrad Analysis.” Journal of Marketing 57 (Jan-
uary): 23-27.

Eckles, Robert W. 1990. Business Marketing Management: Marketing of
Business Products and Services. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Fornell, Claes, Michael Johnson, Eugene W. Anderson, Jaesung Cha, and
Barbara E. Bryant. 1996. “The American Customer Satisfaction
Index: Nature, Purpose and Findings.” Journal of Marketing 60
(October): 7-18.
 and David F. Larcker. 1981. “Evaluating Structural Equation
Models With Unobservable Variables and Measurement Error.” Jour-
nal of Marketing Research 18 (February): 39-50.

Gerbing, David W. and James C. Anderson. 1988. “An Updated Paradigm
for Scale Development Incorporating Unidimensionality and Its
Assessment.” Journal of Marketing Research 25 (May): 186-192.

Gotlieb, Jerry B., Dhruv Grewal, and Stephen W. Brown. 1994. “Con-
sumer Satisfaction and Perceived Quality: Complementary or Diver-
gent Constructs?” Journal of Applied Psychology 79 (6): 875-885.

Gump, Brooks B. and James A. Kulik. 1997. “Stress, Affiliation and
Emotional Contagion.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
72 (February): 305-319.

Hatfield, Elaine, John T. Caccioppo, and Richard L. Rapson. 1992.
“Emotional Contagion.” In Review of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, Vol. 14, Emotional and Social Behavior. Newbury Park, CA:
Sage, 151-177.

Homburg, Stock / SALESPEOPLE’S JOB SATISFACTION 157

, , and . 1994. Emotional Contagion. Paris: Cam-

bridge University Press.

Heskett, James L., Thomas O. Jones, Gary W. Loveman, W. Earl Sasser
Jr., and Leonard A. Schlesinger. 1994. “Putting the Service-Profit
Chain to Work.” Harvard Business Review 72 (March-April): 164-174.
, W. Earl Sasser Jr., and Leonard A. Schlesinger. 1997. The Ser-
vice Profit Chain: How Leading Companies Link Profit and Growth
to Loyalty, Satisfaction, and Value. New York: Free Press.

Homburg, Christian. 1998. “On Closeness to the Customer in Industrial
Markets.” Journal of Business-to-Business Marketing 4 (4): 35-72.
 and Bettina Rudolph. 2001. “Customer Satisfaction in Industrial
Markets: Dimensional and Multiple Role Issues.” Journal of Busi-
ness Research 52 (1): 15-33.

Howard, Daniel J. and Charles Gengler. 2001. “Emotional Contagion
Effects of Product Attitudes.” Journal of Consumer Research 28
(September): 189-201.

Jöreskog, Karl G. and Dag Sörbom. 1982. “Recent Developments in
Structural Equation Modeling.” Journal of Marketing Research 19
(November): 404-416.
 and . 1993. LISREL 8, A Guide to the Program and Appli-

cations. Chicago: SPSS, Inc.

Johnson, Michael D. and Claes Fornell. 1991. “A Framework for Com-
paring Customer Satisfaction Across Individuals and Product Cate-
gories.” Journal of Economic Psychology 12 (2): 267-286.

Kelley, Scott W., James H. Donnelly Jr., and Steven J. Skinner. 1990.
“Customer Participation in Service Production and Delivery.” Jour-
nal of Retailing 66 (3): 315-335.

Kleinschmidt, Elco J. and Robert G. Cooper. 1991. “The Impact of Prod-
uct/Service Innovativeness on Performance.” Journal of Product
Innovation Management 8:240-251.

Kotabe, Masaaki and Scott Swan. 1995. “The Role of Strategic Alliances
in High-Technology New Product Development.” Strategic Manage-
ment Journal 16:621-636.

Locke, Edwin A. 1976. “The Nature and Causes of Job Satisfaction.” In
Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology. Ed. Marvin
Dunnette. Chicago: Rand McNally.

Loveman, Gary W. 1998. “Employee Satisfaction, Customer Loyalty,
and Financial Performance: An Empirical Examination of the Ser-
vice Profit Chain in Retail Banking.” Journal of Service Research 1
(1): 18-31.

MacKenzie, Scott B., Philip M. Podsakoff, and Michael Ahearne. 1998.
“Some Possible Antecedents and Consequences of In-Role and
Extra-Role Salesperson Performance.” Journal of Marketing 62
(July): 87-98.

Mohr, Jakki, Robert J. Fisher, and John R. Nevin. 1996. “Collaborative
Communication in Interfirm Relation, Moderating Effects of Integra-
tion and Control.” Journal of Marketing 60 (July): 103-115.

Morgan, Neil A. and Nigel F. Piercy. 1998. “Interactions Between Mar-
keting and Quality at the SBU Level: Influences and Outcomes.”
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 26 (3): 190-208.

Murray, Janet Y., Masaaki Kotabe, and Albert R. Wildt. 1995. “Strategic
and Financial Performance Implications of Global Sourcing Strat-
egy: A Contingency Analysis.” Journal of International Business
Studies 26(4):181-202.

Oliver, Richard L. 1996. Satisfaction: A Behavioral Perspective on the

Consumer. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Olson, Eric M., Orville C. Walker Jr., and Robert V. Ruekert. 1995.
“Organizing for Effective New Product Development: The Moderat-
ing Role of Product/Service Innovativeness.” Journal of Marketing
59 (January): 48-62.

Oshikawa, Sadaomi. 1968. “The Theory of Cognitive Dissonance
and Experimental Research.” Journal of Marketing 5 (November):
429-430.

Parkington, John J. and Benjamin Schneider. 1979. “Some Correlates of
Experienced Job Stress: A Boundary Role Study.” Academy of Man-
agement Journal 22 (2): 270-281.

Pugh, Douglas S. 2001. “Service With a Smile: Emotional Contagion
in the Service Encounter.” Academy of Management Journal 44 (5):
1018-1027.

Reichheld, Frederick F. 1996. The Loyalty Effect: The Hidden Force

Behind Growth, Profits, and Lasting Value. Boston: Bain.

Downloaded from 

jam.sagepub.com

 at SAGE Publications on December 6, 2012

   
158

JOURNAL OF THE ACADEMY OF MARKETING SCIENCE

SPRING 2004

Russo, Edward J., Margaret G. Meloy, and Victoria Husted Medvec.
1998. “Predecisional Distortion of Product Information.” Journal of
Marketing Research 35 (November): 438-452.

Schlesinger, Leonard A. and Jeffrey Zornitsky. 1991. “Job Satisfaction,
Service Capability, and Customer Satisfaction: An Examination of
Linkages and Management Implications.” Human Resource Plan-
ning 14 (2): 141-149.

Schmit, Mark J. and Steven R. Allscheid. 1995. “Employee Attitudes and
Customer Satisfaction: Making Theoretical and Empirical Connec-
tions.” Personnel Psychology 48(32): 521-536.

Schneider, Benjamin. 1973. “The Perception of Organizational Climate:
The Customer’s View.” Journal of Applied Psychology 57 (3): 248-256.
 and David E. Bowen. 1985. “Employee and Customer Percep-
tions of Service in Banks: Replication and Extension.” Journal of
Applied Psychology 70 (3): 423-433.
 and . 1993. “The Service Organization: Human
Resources Management Is Crucial.” Organizational Dynamics 21:
39-52.
, John J. Parkington, and Virginia M. Buxton. 1980. “Employee
and Customer Perceptions of Service in Banks.” Administrative Sci-
ence Quarterly 25:252-267.
, Susan S. White, and Michelle C. Paul. 1998. “Linking Service
Climate and Customer Perceptions of Service Quality: Test of a
Causal Model.” Journal of Applied Psychology 83 (2): 150-163.

Sharma, Subhash, Richard Durand, and Oded Gur-Arie. 1981. “Identifi-
cation and Analysis of Moderator Variables.” Journal of Marketing
Research 18 (August): 291-300.

Singh, Jagdip. 1988. “Consumer Complaint Intentions and Behavior:
Definitional and Taxonomical Issues.” Journal of Marketing 52 (Jan-
uary): 93-97.
, Jerry R. Goolsby, and Gary K. Rhoads. 1994. “Behavioral and
Psychological Consequences of Boundary Spanning Burnout for
Customer Service Representatives.” Journal of Marketing Research
31 (November): 558-569.
, Willem Verbeke, and Gary K. Rhoads. 1996. “Do Organizational
Practices Matter in Role Stress Processes? A Study of Direct and
Moderating Effects for Marketing-Oriented Boundary Spanners.”
Journal of Marketing 60 (July): 69-86.

Smith, C. Anne, Dennis W. Organ, and Janet P. Near. 1983. “Organiza-
tional Citizenship Behavior: Its Nature and Antecedents.” Journal of
Applied Psychology 68:453-463.

Spreng, Richard A., Scott B. MacKenzie, and Richard W. Olshavsky.
1996. “A Reexamination of the Determinants of Consumer Satisfac-
tion.” Journal of Marketing 60 (July): 15-32.

Stone, Eugene F. 1988. “Moderator Variables in Research: A Review and
Analysis of Conceptual and Methodological Issues.” Research in Per-
sonnel and Human Resources Management 6:191-229.

Sullivan, Sherry E. and Rabi S. Bhagat. 1992. “Organizational Stress, Job
Satisfaction and Job Performance: Where Do We Go From Here?”
Journal of Management 19 (2): 353-374.

Tornow, Walter W. and Jack W. Wiley. 1991. “Service Quality and Man-
agement Practices: A Look at Employee Attitudes, Customer Satis-
faction, and Bottom-Line Consequences.” Human Resource
Planning 14 (2): 105-115.

Verbeke, Willem. 1997. “Individual Differences in Emotional Contagion
of Salespersons: Its Effect on Performance and Burnout.” Psychology
and Marketing 14 (6): 617-636.

von Hippel, Eric. 1988. The Sources of Innovation. New York: Oxford

University Press.

Webster, Frederic. 1991. Industrial Marketing Strategy. 3d ed.

Englewood Cliffs, NJ: John Wiley.

Weitz, Barton A. and Kevin D. Bradford. 1999. “Personal Selling and
Sales Management: A Relationship Marketing Perspective.” Journal
of the Academy of Marketing Science 27 (2): 241-254.

Wiley, Jack W. 1991. “Customer Satisfaction: A Supportive Work Envi-
ronment and Its Financial Cost.” Human Resource Planning 14 (2):
117-127.

Zeithaml, Valarie A., A. Parasuraman, and Leonard L. Berry. 1985.
“Problems and Strategies in Services Marketing.” Journal of Market-
ing 48 (Spring): 33-46.

ABOUT THE AUTHORS

Christian Homburg is a professor of marketing and chair of the
Marketing Department at the University of Mannheim, Ger-
many. He also serves as director of this university’s Institute for
Market-Oriented Management. He holds master’s degrees in
business administration and mathematics and a Ph.D. in business
administration from the University of Karlsruhe, Germany. He
also holds a habilitation degree from the University of Mainz,
Germany. His research interests include market-oriented man-
agement, buyer-seller relationships, and business-to-business
marketing. He is also the founder of Professor Homburg & Part-
ners, an internationally operating management consulting firm.

Ruth M. Stock is an associate professor at the Universität der
Bundeswehr in Hamburg, Germany. She holds a master’s degree
in psychology from the University of Hagen, Germany; a Ph.D.
in marketing from the University of Mannheim, Germany; and a
habilitation degree from the University der Bundeswehr in Ham-
burg, Germany. Her main research areas include interpersonal in-
teractions and teams in business-to-business marketing and
buyer-seller relationships.

Downloaded from 

jam.sagepub.com

 at SAGE Publications on December 6, 2012

   