Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Industrial Marketing Management 37 (2008) 206 – 217

Customer perceived value in B-t-B service relationships: Investigating the

importance of corporate reputation☆

Håvard Hansen a,⁎, Bendik M. Samuelsen b,1, Pål R. Silseth b,1

a Norwegian School of Management, Department of Marketing, P.O.Box 1505, N-4093 Stavanger, Norway

b Norwegian School of Management, Department of Marketing, Nydalsveien 37, N-0484 Oslo, Norway

Received 28 January 2004; received in revised form 28 September 2006; accepted 30 September 2006

Available online 1 November 2007

Abstract

The importance of customer perceived value (CPV) has been advocated in numerous publications over the recent years. The research presented
in this article aims at 1) understanding drivers of customers' perception of economic value, especially when the service provided has high a degree
of intangibility, and 2) assessing the consequences of value perceptions. The authors present a theoretical model of antecedents and consequences
of CPV in a B2B service industry setting. Corporate reputation, information sharing, distributive fairness and flexibility are modeled as drivers of
CPV whereas word-of-mouth (WOM) and search for alternatives (loyalty measures) represent the effects of CPV. A test of the hypothesized model
using structural equation modeling showed that corporate reputation had substantially stronger effect on CPV than the other drivers measured.
This indicates that when the intrinsic nature of service performance is hard to evaluate, corporate reputation works as substantial shorthand for
value. Finally, customers' perceptions of economic value increase their likelihood of recommending the supplier and reduce their tendency to seek
information about alternatives.
© 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Performance; Services; Relationships (Marketing); Multivariate statistics

1. Introduction

Delivering superior value to customers is indisputably a
main task for service firms in today's competitive marketplace.
Companies with a superior ability to provide a service product
that customers perceive as valuable will incur an important
competitive advantage. Hence, both managers and academics
are interested in how customers evaluate and emphasize the
value of a service delivery (Ulaga & Chacour, 2001; Ulaga,
2003; Ulaga & Eggert, 2006). For example, managers are

☆ The authors would like to thank Thomas Hauge, Geir Hovden and Kine H.
Vestad for their invaluable help in collecting the data. We are also indebted to
Luk Warlop, Kåre Sandvik and Leif E. Hem for their helpful comments on
earlier versions of this paper.
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +47 98251718.

E-mail addresses: havard.hansen@bi.no (H. Hansen),

bendik.samuelsen@bi.no (B.M. Samuelsen), pal.r.silseth@bi.no (P.R. Silseth).

1 Tel.: +47 06600.

0019-8501/$ - see front matter © 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.indmarman.2006.09.001

continuously giving statements like “we have to provide value
for money” or “we should provide added value”.

The research presented in this article aims at 1) extending the
knowledge on antecedents to customers' perceived economic
value, especially when the service provided has a high degree of
intangibility, and 2) assessing consequences of value percep-
tions. It is argued that even for highly intangible services,
customers will seek to establish a perception of the economic
worth of the service. The question is how they do this when the
quality or merits of intrinsic attributes are hard to assess.
Different drivers of value have been addressed in the signaling
paradigm (e.g., Akerlof, 1970; Darby & Karni, 1973; Kirmani &
Rao, 2000; Nelson, 1974),
the transaction cost economics
paradigm (e.g., Heide & John, 1988; Williamson, 1985), the
social exchange paradigm (Ouchi, 1980; Thibaut & Kelly,
1959), and combined in the political economy paradigm
(Gassenheimer, Huston, & Davis, 1998; Stern & Reve, 1980).
Many of these studies identify flexibility, information sharing,
shared goals and fairness as important drivers of value.


H. Hansen et al. / Industrial Marketing Management 37 (2008) 206–217

207

However, many services have characteristics that lead customers
to rely on other cues to assess the value or quality of the received
service. First, based on Bendapudi and Berry (1997), and
Lovelock (1983), the argument can be made that the intangibility
and variability of intrinsic service attributes makes it harder for
customers to assess value obtained from services than for
products. In essence, if the quality or value of an offering can
only be assessed after purchase and consumption, customers are
inclined to base choices and judgments on signals from the
service provider (Kirmani & Rao, 2000; Rubin, 1993). One type
of signal is the reputation of the service supplier. In the absence
of intrinsic cues for value assessment, brand name or corporate
reputation might be taken as shorthand for quality of the service
(Akerlof, 1970; Zeithaml, 1988). In fact, level of quality and
value received can be hard to assess even after consumption, as
performance might have credence properties (e.g., Darby &
Karni, 1973). Second, in a service category where differences
between competitors are hard to detect due to information
asymmetry prior to purchase and intangibility of the service
offering, differentiation could boil down to this one critical
factor:
the
importance of a strong,
company's reputation. The overall
favorable corporate reputation is by far acknowledged by today's
managers, but how it actually affects the evaluations they make
about economic value received from service suppliers, is less
known. How perceptions of corporate reputation impact
customers' economic value judgments is a focal issue in this
research. Third, as service relationships are characterized by
higher interaction between service-reps and the customers, value
might arise as a function of flexibility and sharing of information
in order to tailor the service to a customer's particular needs.
Finally, as relationships are inherently process-phenomena, and
their content change over time, the process of distributing benefits
and costs between relationship partners might affect
the
perceptions of fairness of the exchange, and accordingly, the
perception of value obtained in the relationship (e.g. Dwyer,
Schurr, & Oh, 1987; Gassenheimer et al., 1998). More
specifically, the purpose of this article is to investigate how
corporate reputation adds to perceptions of value received from
highly intangible services, when compared to the importance of
information sharing, distributive fairness, and flexibility.

the favorability, strength and uniqueness of

to investigate the extent

While understanding how these drivers might contribute to
assessment of economic value has merits on its own, it is
important
to which perception of
economic value also implies some consequences for decisions
about relationship development (cf. Gassenheimer et al., 1998).
Accordingly,
research also investigates how
perceptions of economic value are related to the customer's
inclination to search for alternative suppliers, and motivation to
recommend the current service supplier.

the current

2. Customer perceived value

The notion of value has been described in the literature on
marketing exchange (e.g. Eggert, Ulaga, & Schultz, 2006; Flint,
Woodruff, & Gardial, 2002; Gassenheimer et al., 1998; Wilson,
1995). Typically, most definitions and conceptualizations focus
on the economic worth of tangible outcomes. For example, one
view is that value is the economic worth of a bundle of physical
goods and services that is exchanged for some price (Newman,
1988). Anderson and Narus (1990) suggest a broader
conceptualization, and define value as “… the worth in monetary
terms of the economic, technical, service and social benefits a
customer receives in exchange for the price it pays for a product
offering” (p. 5). Definitions of this kind clearly state that value is
an economic issue. Recently, Hogan (2001) introduced the term
‘relationship value’, and defined it as “the perceived net worth
of the tangible benefits to be derived over the life of the
relationship”. While the stringent focus on economics is not an
explicit part of Hogan's concept, the focus on tangibles is.
Ulaga and Eggert (2006) maintain the trade-off notion, but they
stress the multifaceted nature of the benefits and sacrifices in
this trade-off, shifting the focus away from tangibles to some
extent. As a contrast, Wilson (1995) defines value in a
relationship as the outcomes that result from a collaborative
relationship that enhance the competitive abilities of
the
partners. While acknowledging all these previous definitions,
improvements can still be made. Particularly, it is important to
differentiate between the means contributing to value creation,
and the perception of value as an end. Value (the end) is
inherently a trade-off assessment of the type “what you get for
what you give”, as implied by the aforementioned definitions.
This allows an investigation of how both tangible and intangible
variables serve as means toward perceptions of economic value.
As such, drawing on Newman's (1988) work value is defined as
the benefits received by the customer divided by the resources
sacrificed to acquire them. Formally, the conceptualization can
be portrayed as in Eq. (1),

CPV ¼

Pn
i¼1
Pn
i¼1

Bi

Si

ð1Þ

where CPV is a function of the total sum of benefits (B) received
divided by the total sum of sacrifices (S) made by the customer
to receive the benefits. In the theoretical discussion to follow,
ways in which key drivers affect value perceptions through
increased benefits and decreased sacrifice are proposed.

The paper starts with a definition and description of the focal
construct in this study — customer perceived value (CPV). The
is then outlined, and its corresponding
theoretical model
the
hypotheses specified. The methodology applied to test
model
tests. Finally,
the
results are discussed, managerial implications outlined, and
pathways for future research offered.

is presented along with empirical

3. Theoretical model

The theoretical model departs with the assumption that even
in business-to-business markets, perceptions of customer value
are not exclusively based on rational economic criteria.
According to Eq. (1), CPV will vary across different levels of


208

H. Hansen et al. / Industrial Marketing Management 37 (2008) 206–217

the nominator and denominator variables. It is hypothesized that
the supplier's corporate reputation,
the
distributive fairness associated with the relationship and the
supplier's flexibility might all be related to the nominator and
denominator in the equation, and thus influence the customer's
perception of value. The succeeding paragraphs will outline the
model in detail.

information sharing,

to the suggested impact on the level of transaction costs derived
from monitoring, it is suggested that corporate reputation might
decrease the cost side of Eq. (1).

As a natural conclusion to the preceding paragraphs the

following hypothesis is suggested:

H1. Corporate reputation has a positive effect on CPV.

3.1. Corporate reputation

3.2. Information sharing

Drawing on the conceptualizations offered by Selnes (1993)
and Fombrun (1996) corporate reputation is conceived of as a
perceptual representation of the firm's overall appeal when
compared with other rivals. In this way, corporate reputation is a
sort of market validated information — a company would not
have a good reputation unless the market thought so, and vice
versa. A good reputation represents an asset to the owner, and
the customer would trust the supplier to honor this because
doing otherwise (e.g., by shirking on service quality) would
jeopardize the value of this asset (Kirmani & Rao, 2000).
Additionally, the comparative aspect implies that this market-
based assessment has an ordering-effect, i.e., “this brand is
amongst the best in the category”. These two facets of the
reputation assessment are even more important when the
performance of the service provider is hard to evaluate. Based
on the definition of CPV and Eq. (1) there are several reasons to
believe that a customer's perception of the supplier's corporate
reputation will influence CPV. First, services entail a large
amount of experience — and often credence based performance
information, leading to difficulties in assessing the intrinsic
qualities of the service offering prior to purchase (e.g. Darby &
Karni, 1973; Zeithaml, 1988). These difficulties should persist
in the case of credence properties, even in ongoing service
relationships. Facing such performance ambiguity, a good
reputation will serve as a proxy for the level of service quality
(e.g., Kirmani & Rao, 2000; Rubin, 1993). As such, corporate
reputation might lead the customer to trust that the received
benefits are comparatively good, thereby increasing the benefit
side of Eq. (1). Additional confidence in this judgment would
arise from the perception that “this is the reputation in the
market, and the market can't be too wrong”. Second, related to
the cost side of the equation, when trading with a supplier
whose reputation is superior to its competitors, less resources
has to be allocated towards relational safeguarding. According
to transaction cost economics (e.g., Rindfleisch & Heide, 1997),
one of the relational characteristics that drive transaction costs is
the monitoring mechanism exchange — parties have to
implement to control opportunism. In other words, reduced
need for safeguarding activities should reduce monitoring costs.
Related to the model, the argument is that the more positive
corporate reputation of the supplier, the lower the perceived
need for monitoring. Not that the need for monitoring will be
completely removed, but it will be less pronounced compared to
the case of a supplier with a less beneficial reputation. In other
words, the perceived risk associated with performance ambi-
guity and information asymmetry will decrease in comparison
to other suppliers, thus reducing monitoring costs. Hence, due

The information sharing notion is also central to this study,
and the concept is defined as the extent to which the service firm
informs its customers about features relevant for the relationship
(Noordewier, John, & Nevin, 1990). Examples of such features
range from the results of price comparisons and future price
changes, to new products, services, and organizational changes.
This sharing of information should contribute to a more efficient
relationship, in addition to a reduction of information asymmetry
and performance ambiguity. Again,
information sharing is
believed to influence the customer's perception of the cost–
benefit ratio in Eq. (1). First, information sharing increases the
benefit side of the CPV equation. Being open and disclosing
information that
is not only relevant and positive for the
relationship, but also sometimes negative and exigent, should
intuitively be rated as a positive quality and an asset to the
relationship, as it might foster adaptation and trust (Noordewier
et al., 1990). For example,
the service firm might reveal
information on expected changes in the market that the customer
is unaware of. This will enable the customer to be prepared or
take necessary precautions should the supplier's predictions be
brought to fruition. Hence, information sharing might reduce
maladaption costs and increase the perceived benefit of the
relationship. Additionally, information shared with the customer
might reduce the customer's perception of the service's
performance ambiguity, enabling the customer to more accu-
rately assess the benefits received,
thereby increasing the
customer's ability to detect supplier opportunism.

Second, information sharing is believed to also influence the
cost side of Eq. (1). Being a market-oriented firm includes the
collection, dissemination and responsiveness to market infor-
mation (Kohli & Jaworski, 1990). Furthermore, to enable the
customer to adapt its value-chain efficiently to up- and down-
stream markets, information about the supplier side of the
value-chain is a prerequisite. Information gathering is not free,
but the costs related to information acquisition from the supplier
side might be reduced if the supplier is proactive in terms of
sharing information. Stated differently, a certain amount of
market intelligence costs will have to be allocated towards any
relationship a firm has to a supplier. However, these costs can be
relatively lower for the customer if the supplier operates with a
high level of information sharing within the relationship.
Typically, monitoring costs are reduced if the supplier discloses
information on own initiative, and the customer might adapt
more efficiently if such information is disclosed. Thus, it is
suggested that:

H2. Information sharing has a positive effect on CPV.


H. Hansen et al. / Industrial Marketing Management 37 (2008) 206–217

209

3.3. Distributive fairness

The level of distributive fairness associated with a rela-
tionship or doing business with a supplier is defined as the
customer's perception of whether the gains and losses are fairly
distributed within the relationship. To explain the concept of
distributive fairness more in depth, the current research draws
on the dual entitlement principle of price fairness (Kahneman,
Knetsch, & Thaler, 1986). This principle states that firms are
entitled to a reference profit in return for products sold at a given
price. As the parties to exchange understand that changes in
price cannot be subjectively made to exploit market power
or surplus demand, the customer's entitlement is thus also
protected by the principle. The conceptualization of distributive
fairness includes the customer's perception of how fairly
distributed the resource contribution is in the relationship, in
addition to the idea of a fair supplier reference profit and a fair
customer reference cost (i.e. price).

from a perception of unfairness.

Moving from the conceptualization to the theoretical model,
it is argued that distributive fairness will influence CPV. First, it
seems logical to assume that the benefit side of the Eq. (1) will
suffer
If distribution is
perceived as unfair, it is probably due to the fact that one
party extracts more benefits (or covers lower costs) in the
relationship than the other. Clearly, the value of the relationship
will be lower than if both parties gained fairly (Patterson,
Johnson, & Spreng, 1997). However, if level of service quality
is hard to assess for the customer (i.e., high credence), it will
also be more difficult to assess the distributive fairness. This
could imply a diminishing effect of distributive fairness on CPV
as credence increases. Second, the cost side may be influenced
as well. Being in a relationship that seems to distribute benefits
and costs unfairly might instigate activities like investigating the
possibility of contract termination (i.e., relationship dissolution:
Gassenheimer et al., 1998). Costs associated with such
“unnecessary” activities will reduce CPV. Thus,
the third
hypothesis suggests that:

H3. Distributive fairness has a positive effect on CPV.

3.4. Flexibility

Hypothesis four is related to how customer perceived value
could be affected by the service provider's flexibility. Flexibility
implies the supplier's ability to adapt to situations where the
customer has needs and wants that deviates from the norm or
existing standards (Noordewier et al., 1990). This might also
include incidents of service failure arising from misunderstand-
ings, the supplier's ability to correct service failures, and their
willingness to do so. Flexibility might affect both sides of the
CPV equation in (Eq. (1)) due to unpredictability in both
supplier and buyer markets. First, changes in a customer's own
markets may bring forth a need for changes in the services
acquired from a given supplier. The supplier's ability to adapt to
such changes in a short time will be an indication of flexibility,
and will show that
the supplier is responsive to changing
customer needs. Hence, flexibility and responsiveness are

closely related terms, and according to Taylor (1995) “respon-
siveness deals with the willingness of the service provider to
help customers and provide prompt service”. When customers
face this kind of flexibility and responsiveness, the perceived
value of the relationship partner is likely to increase because
economic losses faced due to unexpected external changes
might be reduced. In contrast, suppliers who stick to the
wording of a contract and refuse to initiate necessary
adjustments fast enough will be associated with less value
than the flexible ones. Furthermore, flexibility and responsive-
ness increase the market orientation of the relationship in total,
as market orientation implies responsiveness to market
information (Kohli & Jaworski, 1990). Hence, capitalizing the
economic potentials of market orientation is often contingent on
parties outside the firm itself, i.e. a relationship partner. The
comfort of knowing that
to
changing demands ensures the customer that the entities in the
relationship they are a part of are sufficiently market-oriented,
which should in itself be beneficial (Narver & Slater, 1990).

the partner will respond fast

While the previous paragraphs argue that the benefit side of
the equation is affected by flexibility, an equivalently important
effect might be found in relation to the cost side. When a
supplier is inflexible, more resources have to be spent on
specifying a wider array of details in the relationship contract.
Hence, relationship initiation costs might increase, as might the
monitoring costs derived from continuously checking actions
and requests against the wording of a contract. Accordingly,
hypothesis four reads:

H4. Flexibility has a positive effect on CPV.

3.5. CPV and behavioral intentions

The attention given to CPV in marketing would rest on an
assumption that positive value perceptions will have some
beneficial consequences for the relationship. To strengthen the
hypothesized model, this assumption is also tested. Specifically,
the literature on buyer–seller relationships has established both
theoretical and empirical reasons to suggest that CPV results in
behavioral consequences favorable for the supplier (e.g.; Ulaga
& Eggert, 2006; Gassenheimer et al., 1998; Ping, 1995). Among
others, two such behaviors are of interest: customer exit, and
word-of-mouth (Hirschman, 1970; see also Ping, 1993; 1997).
The supplier would benefit from the positive word-of-mouth of
the buyer, as this contributes to a better corporate reputation,
and might also directly convince new customers to try the
services offered. For the buyer, positive word-of-mouth would
demonstrate commitment to the relationship (e.g. Gundlach,
Achrol, & Mentzer, 1995). On the other hand, search for
alternatives is an initial act that might result in exit, as exit is
usually not possible before an alternative supplier is available. If
the relationship produces low value for the customer, he might
be more inclined to initiate search for alternatives (Kumar,
Hibbard, & Stern, 1994). Based on these arguments,
is
proposed that
the inclination to recommend the supplier
combined with external search behavior will provide a good
test of the beneficial consequences of CPV. The reasons why

it


210

H. Hansen et al. / Industrial Marketing Management 37 (2008) 206–217

Fig. 1. Conceptual model.

these intentions are influenced by CPV follow in the subsequent
paragraphs.

Drawing on Dick and Basu (1994), word-of-mouth (WOM)
is conceived of as volitional post-purchase communications
between customers. As Dick and Basu further suggest, WOM is
believed to follow from an evaluation of how the acquired
service or product performs. Extending these assumptions, it is
argued that customers who find their supplier
to deliver
satisfactory levels of value will recommend their partner to
others to a much larger extent than if the relationship is less
valuable. There are several reasons for this. If a customer is
asked to help someone else in a decision process, they are not
likely to recommend a supplier they will rather not be associated
with. Hence, to safeguard their own image externally, suppliers
delivering low CPV will not be recommended. Customers
might
low value suppliers. In
contrast, if the supplier delivers great value, they might get
recommended to others as an attempt from the customer to
reciprocate the benefits perceived to grow out of
the
relationship. According to Bagozzi (1995), reciprocity is a
basic quality of buyer–seller relationships, and one way to
reciprocate perceptions of superior value is to externally
promote the supplier. A less altruistic motive could be that
recommendations indirectly suggest to the supplier that you are
a valuable customer because you bring him more business.

in fact warn others against

Contradictory to the suggested effect on WOM, high levels
of CPV should reduce the extent to which the customer searches
for alternative suppliers. The two intentions are opposites in
terms of favorability, and as such the effects should also be in
contrast to each other. It is believed that customers who perceive
lower value will search for alternative suppliers more actively
than customers who perceive higher value. Within a relation-
ship, customers also make decisions about product purchases or
relationship maintenance, and the basic assumption is that these
decisions are grounded in economic rationality. While the

perception of value itself might result from other than purely
rational attributes, the decision to stay or leave is usually based
on a rational evaluation of whether the perceived value is
satisfactory (Gassenheimer et al., 1998). If the answer is no,
customers will initiate search for alternatives with the goal of a)
finding a new supplier, or b) obtaining external information that
might serve as a reference point when evaluating the current
relationship partner. Regardless of motive, alternative search
might be seen as unfavorable behavior, as it
is basically
motivated by some negative side of the current relationship, e.g.
low CPV. Customers who find themselves in a satisfying
relationship are less inclined to spend resources on alternative
search. Previous research supports this hypothesis (Kumar et al.,
1994), and the previous paragraphs conclude with the following
hypotheses:

H5. CPV has a positive effect on word-of-mouth.

H6. CPV has a negative effect on search for alternatives.

The theoretical model and its corresponding hypotheses are

summarized in Fig. 1.

4. Methodology

To test the conceptual model in this study, several aspects
were considered. First, reputation effects are more likely to arise
as services move from search, via experience to credence
(Rubin, 1993).
In other words, when customers find it
increasingly difficulty to evaluate the quality, reputation should
have a greater effect. Second, the present study addressed the
effects of reputation in a relational context. In a relational
context, the customers have had at least initial experiences with
the service providers, which should penalize the effects of
reputation, thus putting the conceptual model to a stronger test.
Finally, a highly competitive B-2-B category was sought for,
with a combination of older well-known service providers and


H. Hansen et al. / Industrial Marketing Management 37 (2008) 206–217

211

newly established companies, all competing on a relatively
comparable core service.

Consequently, the telephone service industry was chosen.
Recently deregulated in most European countries, and with a
rapid technological development
including the rise of IP-
telephony, this industry satisfied the considerations mentioned
above. The data used to test
the conceptual model were
collected in a telephone survey of business customers of a
European telephone company. These firms were randomly
drawn from a sampling frame that consisted of the telephone
company's entire business customer database. Each customer
had one specific contact person, and in situations where a
customer had more than one phone number (e.g. a multitude of
telephone lines), the phone number to the contact person was
the one listed in the sampling frame. To reduce bias due to key-
informant problems, it was double-checked that the contact
person on the contact list was in fact the correct and appropriate
person. A total of 264 customers agreed to participate.

4.1. Measures

All variables were measured with multi item scales. While
the scales were generally adapted from existing literature, some
of the items used were also self-constructed. The corporate
reputation scale was based on Selnes (1993), while the items
capturing information sharing and flexibility were adapted from
Noordewier et al. (1990). The measures for distributive fairness
and customer perceived value were self-constructed based on
literature reviews and depth interviews with customers.
Measures for behavioral intentions were adapted from Kumar
et al. (1994), and Zeithaml, Berry, and Parasuraman (1996). All
scales were in a 7-point Likert type format with anchors totally
agree (7) and totally disagree (1).

Face validity was pursued in a two-step pretest. First, two
marketing professors assessed the measures, and the items were
altered according to their comments and suggestions. Next, 15
customers were asked to answer the questions and comment on
the complexity of the scales, the wording, and the length of the
survey. No significant changes followed from this exercise.
Measures are listed in the Appendix.

4.2. Construct measurement model

The measurement model was tested in the LISREL Structural
Equation Modeling software package. A confirmatory factor
analysis was employed with all variables treated as exogenous.
If a distinction was made between endogenous and exogenous
variables at his point, model fit could suffer from constrained
paths between constructs. Hence, the model only tested the
specified relations between the indicators and the latent
variables (Anderson & Gerbing, 1988).

After the initial test of the measurement model, some items
were removed to meet
the requirements of unidimensional
measures. Among the removed items was the second question
of the alternative search scale, leaving this construct with a
single-item measure. Since the paths for single-item scales are
fixed in structural equation models, the error term was fixed to

0.19 to impose measurement error on the scale and thus enforce
a stronger test (Bagozzi & Yi, 1988). After re-specification the
model had a satisfactory fit with a Chi-square value of 160.40
(df = 115) with p-value 0.00. The other fit
indices were a
RMSEA of 0.034, CFI of 0.98, and NNFI of 0.98. These fit
indices all meet
the requirements for a well fitting model
(Browne & Cudeck, 1993; Hu & Bentler, 1999).

The reliability of the measures was also quite satisfactory,
and test scores are reported in Table 1. The composite reliability
is good for all constructs, while average variance extracted is
above the cut-off value of 0.5 for all variables except flexibility.
However,
the value of 0.48 is marginally below 0.5 and
considering the fact that reliability values are greatly accounted
for in structural equation models (Jöreskog & Sörbom, 1982),
all items are included in the model to ensure that the theoretical
domain of the constructs is empirically covered. To test
discriminant validity, the correlations between the constructs
were scrutinized. Discriminant validity can be claimed if no
single pair of variables is perfectly correlated within the range of
random error, (Anderson & Gerbing, 1988). According to the
data, all correlations possess the obliged distance to |1| when
adjusted for ± 2 standard deviations (see Table 2).

5. Results and discussion

In consumer markets, the value of a product is often based on
more than pure functional features. For example, the symbolic
value of a brand may result in a high willingness to pay among
consumers, even if the functional quality of the product does not
support the price paid. Nevertheless, consumers are satisfied
and CPV is high.

In business markets, where customers are believed to be
more rational due to professional purchasers and professional
sellers, the major determinants of CPV are often assumed to be
more functional or instrumentally grounded than in consumer
markets. As such, value has often been viewed in light of the
intrinsic product or service itself, and more seldom has extrinsic
product or service variables been part of the discussion. The
model tested here introduces corporate reputation as a critical
variable in assessing the perception of economic value of
services. Corporate reputation should show its importance even
when more traditional relational variables (information sharing,
flexibility, and distributive fairness) are taken into account.
The results show that the proposed model is predominantly
the variance–
supported, and the structural model also fit
covariance matrix satisfactory, with a Chi-square value of
193.61 (df = 124, p = 0.00), RMSEA equal to 0.041, a CFI of
0.98 and NNFI of 0.97. The squared multiple correlations were
0.65 for customer perceived value, 0.60 for word-of-mouth, and
0.29 for alternative search (see Table 3). Hence, the model
contributes significantly to the explanation of the endogenous
variables.

First, it was argued that corporate reputation was driving
CPV, and the assumption was supported as the gamma-
coefficient was 0.55 (t = 5.17). Different services might have
different levels of experience and credence based performance
information based on intangibility of intrinsic service attributes.


212

H. Hansen et al. / Industrial Marketing Management 37 (2008) 206–217

Table 1
Reliability information for the measurement model
Itema

Factor loadingb

T-value

Error termb

T-value

Item reliability

Average variance extracted

Composite reliability

Corporate reputation

Rep1
Rep2
Rep3

Information sharing

Info1
Info2
Info3

Distributive fairness

Fair2
Fair3

Flexibility

Flex1
Flex2
Flex4

Customer perceived value

Cpv2
Cpv3
Cpv4
Cpv6

Word-of-mouth

Wom1
Wom2

Search for alternatives

Search1

λ1,1
λ2,1
λ3,1

λ4,2
λ5,2
λ6,2

λ7,3
λ8,3

λ9,4
λ10,4
λ11,4

λ12,5
λ13,5
λ14,5
λ15,5

λ16,6
λ17,6

λ18,7

0.75
0.80
0.85

0.84
0.97
0.93

0.61
0.89

0.77
0.59
0.71

0.55
0.76
0.90
0.86

0.94
0.95

0.90

13.52
14.81
16.31

16.84
21.10
19.51

5.36
5.85

13.19
9.57
11.94

9.30
14.12
18.26
17.23

19.80
19.94

–

θ1,1
θ2,2
θ3,3

θ4,4
θ5,5
θ6,6

θ7,7
θ8,8

θ9,9
θ10,10
θ11,11

θ12,12
θ13,13
θ14,14
θ15,15

θ16,16
θ17,17

θ18,18

0.44
0.36
0.27

0.29
0.06
0.14

0.63
0.21

0.40
0.65
0.49

0.70
0.43
0.20
0.25

0.11
0.10

9.43
8.60
7.11

10.01
3.43
7.01

4.84
0.82

7.24
9.97
8.56

11.04
10.11
7.22
8.38

4.36
4.08

0.19c

–

0.49
0.64
0.72

0.70
0.94
0.86

0.36
0.79

0.59
0.35
0.50

0.30
0.58
0.81
0.68

0.88
0.90

–

0.63

0.84

0.58

0.48

0.60

0.89

–

Note: a: Item number refers to the item list in the Appendix, b: Completely standardized coefficients, c: Fixed parameter.

0.84

0.93

0.72

0.76

0.86

0.94

–

This implies higher levels of performance ambiguity, and the
findings demonstrate the important role an extrinsic service
attribute like corporate reputation serves in this case, especially
considering its impact on perception of economic value, and the
result shows its impact to be substantially higher than the effects
of the other value drivers. So doing,
it corroborates the
proposition set forth by Zeithaml (1988), which was formulated
for consumer markets. In business-to-business markets, services
might be even more complex than in consumer market.
Different kinds of service packages offered from suppliers
might be even harder to assess, and even less comparable.
Accordingly, the competence deficit on behalf of the buyer might
lead to enhanced reliance on corporate reputation in business
markets in order to assess CPV. As trust might arise from this
judgment (e.g. Ganesan, 1994),
that corporate
reputation also might serve to reduce the fear of opportunistic
behavior, thus leading to reduced need for monitoring, and lower

is logical

it

Table 2
The correlations among the constructs

Rep
0.44a
0.15
0.73
0.78
0.57
0.29

Info
–
0.05
0.43
0.48
0.43
0.24

Fair
0.07b
–
0.14
0.19
0.17
0.27

Flex

0.06
0.08
–
0.66
0.62
0.28

CPV

Wom

Search

0.05
0.07
0.05
–
0.76
0.54

0.05
0.07
0.05
0.03
–
0.53

0.07
0.08
0.07
0.05
0.05
–

Info
Fair
Flex
CPV
Wom
Search

Note: a: correlation coefficient; b: standard error; Rep: Corporate reputation,
Info: Information sharing, Fair: Distributive fairness, Flex: Flexibility, CPV:
Customer perceived value, Wom: Word-of-mouth, Search: Search for
alternatives.

costs for the buyer. The strong effect of corporate reputation all-
together, suggests that a service firm's reputation is not only
important in terms of attracting new customers, but also to deliver
value to, and keeping, the customers with whom relationships are
already established. As it is measured in this study, reputation
refers to perceived superiority in the service category. Accord-
ingly, it accentuates the need for service firms to benchmark their
performances, and to strive to communicate extensively both
formally and informally with the customers to enhance their
opportunity to assess the quality of the service (see also
Deighton, 1992; Mohr & Nevin, 1990).

Hypothesis 2 outlined the effects of information sharing, and
the suggested effect was supported (gamma = 0.16, t = 2.91). As
argued, suppliers who proactively disclose information enable

Table 3
Structural equation model results

Hypothesis

H1
H2
H3
H4
H5
H6

Path
Corporate reputation → Customer perceived value
Information sharing → Customer perceived value
Distributive fairness → Customer perceived value
Flexibility → Customer perceived value
Customer perceived value → Word-of-mouth
Customer perceived value → Search for alternatives

Estimate
0.55⁎⁎
0.16⁎
n.s.
0.19⁎
0.78⁎⁎
−0.54⁎⁎

Squared multiple correlations
Customer perceived value
Word-of-mouth
Search for alternatives

χ2 (124) = 193.61 (p = 0.00); RMSEA = 0.041; NNFI = 0.97; CFI = 0.98
⁎p b 0.05; ⁎⁎p b 0.01; n = 264.

0.65
0.60
0.29


H. Hansen et al. / Industrial Marketing Management 37 (2008) 206–217

213

Fig. 2. Empirically supported model.

the customer to adapt its own production more efficiently. As
the risk of costly hang-ups and other failures are reduced,
operations are allowed to run more smoothly. When a supplier
discloses information,
this can be seen as a signal of
commitment to the relationship, which evidently is valued by
the customer
(see also Gundlach et al., 1995). Fear of
opportunism incurs substantial transaction costs in a business-
to-business market, as costly actions have to be made to ensure
the other party's obligation to the contractual agreements. In
this situation, information sharing proves itself to be essential to
curb these costs. This might be even more pronounced in
service-markets where performance ambiguity exists. As such,
the support for Hypothesis 2 should be seen in conjunction with
support for Hypothesis 1. Information sharing and assessment
of corporate reputation might very well complement each other
in providing an impression of the received service, i.e., they are
both vehicles of communication. This implies that the service
provider is better off sharing information proactively,
than
reactively.

Contradictory to the effect hypothesized in H3, distribu-
tive fairness was not found to impact CPV significantly (t-
value = 1.94). Without running into post-hoc justifications, it
might be the case that this effect is captured through the effects
of flexibility, in the sense that as partners' flexibility might
imply distributional aspects. As long as the customer is satisfied
with supplier flexibility, one might assume that costs and
benefits are equally distributed in the relationship. Alternative-
ly, the strong effect of corporate reputation might also contain
aspects of distributive fairness. As corporate reputation here is
measured in relative terms (relative to competitors), it could be
the case that a supplier with unfair practices would suffer from a
poor reputation as well.

Hypothesis 4 addressed an important part of all relationships:
the willingness to show flexibility to the other partner. Supplier
flexibility increases CPV significantly in the study, with a
gamma-value of 0.19 and a t-value of 2.03. The customer's
competitiveness in its own market is dependent on the ability to
adapt to changes in demand. Consequently, the efficiency of the
customer's own value-chain depends partially on supplier
flexibility in order to adapt. Furthermore, the supplier might
provide information, but it is of less value until information is
followed by actions. At the same time, the supplier cannot be
meaningfully flexible unless the customer shares information.
The significant effect of flexibility on CPV could thus indicate
that information should flow both ways to contribute to CPV.
By implication, suppliers should show flexibility to improve
customer value. They might do this either reactively by
complying to customer requests as far as it is economically
justifiable, or proactively to signal
to the
customer's ability to create value in the customer's market. This
places huge demands on the parties' ability to communicate
openly, but it might even out the balance of power in the
relationship, fostering trust and strengthening the competitive-
ness of the relationship.

its commitment

As expected, both WOM and alternative search were
significantly related to CPV. In Hypothesis 5 CPV was argued
to positively influence word-of-mouth, and Hypothesis 6
predicted a negative effect on search for alternatives. Both
hypotheses were supported by the data, with beta coeffi-
cients = 0.78 (t = 8.71) and −0.54 (t =−6.04), respectively. This
clearly illustrates the important role of CPV for relationship
development. The effect of CPV on intention to recommend
the supplier shows that providing good customer value could
be a good means to attract new business to the supplier,


214

H. Hansen et al. / Industrial Marketing Management 37 (2008) 206–217

consequently laying grounds for increased market. In this sense,
behaving in a way that increases customer value is not altruistic,
but rather a sound strategy in economic terms, as this word-of-
mouth is free compared to paid marketing communications, and
probably more credible than any paid market communication.
The strong negative effect of CPV on alternative search is
interesting. A priori, one might expect customers to routinely
search for information about competing service providers to
benchmark their current supplier. The strong negative effect
obtained in this study indicates that when CPV increases, the
incentive to make this comparison decreases. Interestingly, by
neglecting to search for information about alternative suppliers,
assessing the quality of the current supplier's service becomes
even harder, and the customer becomes even more tied to the
supplier. One possible explanation for this neglect could be that
services in the business-to-business market are compiled in
different types of “service packages” from different suppliers.
So doing, the customer will lack the opportunity to compare
prices and benefits on an attribute-by-attribute basis. Supplier
performance ambiguity would add to this. Supporting this
speculation is the strong effect of corporate reputation (an
extrinsic service attribute) on CPV. When intrinsic service
attributes are hard to assess, reliance will be put on extrinsic
service attributes.

6 of the 7 hypotheses in the tested model gained empirical
support, and the model with non-significant paths closed is
presented in Fig. 2.

6. Managerial implications

Overall, this study confirms the key role CPV serves as a
mediator of business activities on relationship outcomes. As key
consequences of CPV, word-of-mouth and reduced motivation
to seek information about alternative suppliers are key indicators
of relationship strength. For B-2-B services, word-of-mouth is
an indispensable source of credible information for potential
customers, as potential customers will tend to lend more trust to
non-paid advocates. Thus, the benefits for service companies are
two-fold: first, it is “free advertising”, and second, as word-of-
mouth can be perceived as the voice of the market, all else being
equal, the supplier with more positive word-of-mouth can be
perceived as the less risky choice. Reduced motivation to seek
information about alternatives is also an indication of protection
from competition. Basically, with low motivation, the current
customers will tend to a) not actively seek information, and b)
potentially bias or distort
the information received from
competing providers. Clearly, it should be in the interest of all
service providers to obtain a relationship with their customers
described by these two qualities.

CPV turns out to be the key driver of these relationship
outcomes. Based on the model, two sets of implications can be
outlined. The first group relates to the managerial use of the
concept itself in business processes, the second relates to ways
in which CPV can be nurtured.

The conceptualization of CPV captures an important relative
aspect through the trade-off notion. What a customer gets is always
judged in relation to what he gives. In essence, when assessing the

current state of perceived value amongst their customers, the
service provider should be able to partition out if the benefit side is
perceived adequate, and/or if the cost side is deemed (in)adequate.
Additionally, the current conceptualization is relative in the sense
that it asks the customer to assess value with reference to what he
might expect to obtain from alternative suppliers. Through this
comparative notion, CPV is more applicable when judgments are
made between alternative suppliers,
is normally
captured through the customer satisfaction construct. The latter
rarely asks explicitly for satisfaction compared to any standards
other than the customer's own expectations.

than what

The measurement of CPV presented in the current study
suggests that service providers could benefit from utilizing CPV
in customer portfolio management. Basically, companies would
want their more profitable customers to have higher CPV in
order to maximize relationship outcomes. CPV represents a
yardstick gauging the temperature of the relationship, and
diminishing CPV in important customer segments should call
for alarm. In addition, by investigating the components of CPV,
the provider might also learn ways to tailor their service offering
to turn less profitable into more profitable customers. In
essence, the provider could analyze the return on investments
necessary to alter the CPV ratio either by reducing customers'
perceived costs, or perceived benefits.

Finally, the CPV measure could also be incorporated into more
comprehensive management information systems like balanced
scorecard (BSC). The purpose of BSC is to relate “soft” measures
of e.g., customer responses, to “hard” numbers, and the ratio-
notion of CPV could relate it to both costs and investments.

levels of

Turning to the left side of the model, with variables causing
CPV, corporate reputation stands out as the most significant
driver. Given the services context, this is not surprising — as
offerings with higher
intangibility (or credence
properties) normally should be more sensitive to reputation
factors. The Arthur Andersen–Enron case vividly describes
this. Arthur Andersen suffered a severe breach of trust, a
fundamental characteristic for companies in that business.
Everyone knows the consequence — they went out of business.
The focus on reputation is also captured through Fortune's
“America's most admired companies” list, where companies are
compared and rated based on overall reputation, and eight sub-
dimensions. Those dimensions also correspond to the reputation
drivers identified by the Reputation Institute.

In the current study, reputation is captured on the overall,
general level. Still, it shows strong and significant influence.
One managerial question rising from this should be: what do I
do to enhance the corporate reputation of my company? The
answer is certainly not straight forward, but linked to CPV,
managers might consider the following. CPV is essentially a
ratio between benefits and costs. Given this, and reputation's
strong influence on CPV, managers should aim to learn the
answer to “a reputation for what?” What reputation content
is important to increase customers' perception of benefits, and
costs?

Customers' perception of benefit superiority is closely
related to the service offering dimension of reputation. The
company has to build the perception that their services are better


H. Hansen et al. / Industrial Marketing Management 37 (2008) 206–217

215

than those of competitors. When core services are hard to
differentiate (as for some telecom companies), the company has
to rely on the extended or augmented service experience. After
all,
the customer asks for
benefits fulfilling needs of different types.

the company sells services, but

In addition to service superiority, the company has to earn a
reputation for innovation excellence. They have to substantiate
service excellence by continuously innovate, and try to be
among the first to market with those innovations. This will serve
as proof points of dedication to ideally lead market develop-
ment, or at least, adapt rapidly to changing demands.

From the customer point of view, service excellence and
innovation represent reputation dimensions with rather obvious
links to the value they receive. The two aspects essentially
describe the company's ability to provide value. However, as
the Arthur Andersen–Enron case vividly illustrates, corporate
conduct in its many facets is also important for customers'
perceived reputation, even though the close bearing on CPV is
less obvious.

Service excellence and innovation have to be produced
through high business standards, norms, and ethics. In concrete
terms, the company should produce value for customers based
on credible leadership, and good corporate governance.
Furthermore, for employees to continuously produce excellent
service, the company needs a reputation for high workplace
standards. Finally, the company should further substantiate its
reputation by showing concern to other stakeholders than
customers by demonstrating corporate social responsibility.

One important point when going into the preceding details is
that customers might be unlikely to consciously assess all these
potential facets of reputation or keep them in mind at all times,
and they will utilize overall reputation as a means to reduce
uncertainty about quality for intangible services. For managers,
it is very hard to improve reputation in general. Consequently,
they should acknowledge that working with reputation in
practice is more than being liked in general; it is proactively
seeking to define what the company should be liked for — in
relation to CPV.

The implications of the remaining two drivers of CPV
should be seen in conjunction with the dominant role of
reputation. The positive effect of information sharing on CPV
underscores the assumption that services are information
intensive. It is essential to be proactive, i.e., to provide infor-
mation to customers even before they might be aware of their
need for that particular information. But information can easily
become overwhelming; hence information should be tailored to
the customer's needs as far as possible. In addition, the service
provider should carefully communicate information about
issues of particular importance for CPV, meaning information
about core and extended services, and information about
innovations with particular impact on customers' benefits and
costs. Information can be an important asset in the form of
knowledge, and companies can benefit from proactively
sharing knowledge with customers. Knowledge is information
with an interpretive frame, and the service provider should try
to provide this frame by showing how the customer can benefit
from this knowledge. This would also be a manifestation of

customer orientation, i.e., an explicit pledge to maintain the
relationship from the service provider's side. So, a key im-
plication is to ensure that relevant information is transferred in a
proactive manner, and not just provide all kinds of information,
as the latter will lead to information overload. This is further
emphasized if one looks at the particular measures for this
variable, as they all contain the phrase “relevant
to our
relationship”.

Finally, in B-2-B markets, the customer's needs are often
subject to change due to derived demand. A service provider has
to have both the ability and the willingness to show flexibility
in such circumstances. The key here is first and foremost to keep
promises given regarding serviceability. This can be ensured by
empowering front-line service personal with authority to make
decisions in response to customer requests. If a customer
repeatedly experiences answers like “I am not authorized to
make that decision”, and/or “please hold while I put you through
to another person”, it is likely that perceptions of flexibility will
be reduced. It does not help however, to have flexible staff unless
you have flexible routines and services. Hence, the service
provider needs to allow for flexibility in service bundling,
especially so when it comes to extended service offerings.

6.1. Limitations and future research

While the results of the study can be argued to be valid and
representative, there are nevertheless limitations that would
help direct future research on CPV. First, future research
should sample respondents across several service industries.
This study is limited to one service industry only, and while
the results are somewhat generalizable across industries,
additional empirical sources on which to generalize would
be fruitful. Second, snapshot surveys of customers from one
industry will necessarily only provide correlations between
measured constructs. To enable a more efficient test of the
causality in the model,
longitudinal studies would be an
especially productive design in future studies of antecedents
and consequences of CPV. Especially interesting in such a
design would be the possibility to scrutinize at which levels
of CPV customers start leaving their service supplier. Third,
the measures used in this study are a combination of self-
constructed items and scales adapted from existing literature.
While the measurement model received satisfactory fit sta-
tistics, and the reliability tests were generally good, future
research should pursue a further purification of the scales.
Only by theoretical and empirical refinement will the scales
achieve higher validity. Fourth, the customer's level of in-
volvement with the service delivery frequently impacts overall
evaluations of the service received. Hence, level of involve-
ment might also have an effect on value perceptions. One path
for future research could thus be to scrutinize the effects of
involvement both on value perceptions and on the antecedents
to value as well.

Fifth, the empirical test is based on data from a pure service
situation. Future research would benefit from the inclusion of
industries where the product element is more significant and the
service element holds a smaller portion of the benefits received.


216

H. Hansen et al. / Industrial Marketing Management 37 (2008) 206–217

Stated differently, offerings with various combinations of
service vs. product elements should be employed in a quest
for more generalizable results.

Finally, CPVand its antecedents and consequences should be
included in more extensive models of service relationships. By
connecting the bits and pieces reported in different studies, and
molding these into a larger nomological net, a more general and
overall picture of both service relationships and CPV's role in
these relationships will crystallize. This would be a fruitful path
for future research.

4. We consider it very advantageous to be a customer of

(supplier).

5. After our relationship with (supplier) was established we
spend fewer resources on monitoring our telephone supplier.⁎
6. As a customer of (supplier) we get more value for money.

Word-of-mouth

1. We would probably encourage other acquaintances to do

business with (supplier).

2. We would recommend (supplier) to someone who seeks our

Appendix A. List of measures

Corporate reputation

advice.

Search for alternatives

1. (Supplier) has a good reputation among your colleagues and

alternative telephone suppliers.

1. We spend a significant amount of resources to identify

friends.

2. (Supplier) have a good reputation compared to their

competitors.

3. (Supplier) has a good reputation in the market in general.

Note: (r) denotes reversed items; ⁎ These items were deleted

during the validation of the measurement model.

Information sharing

References

1. We are often informed by (supplier) about issues that might

relate to our relationship.

2. (Supplier) informs us rapidly on issues that might influence

our future relationship.

3. (Supplier) informs us rapidly on issues that might influence

our day-to-day performance.

Distributive fairness

1. (Supplier) always offers our

solutions.⁎

firm the best prices and

2. What we gain from the relationship with (supplier) is
unreasonable compared to how (supplier) profit from having
us as a customer. (r)

3. What we gain from the relationship with (supplier) is
unreasonable compared to what we have invested in the
relationship. (r)

Flexibility

1. (Supplier) is flexible in response to requests we make.
2. (Supplier) can readily adjust to meet unforeseen needs that

might occur.⁎

3. Supplier reacts quickly to our requests.
4. (Supplier) adapts to our needs and wishes.

Customer perceived value

1. Our relationship to (supplier) is very beneficial to us.⁎
2. Our telephone costs have decreased more than we expected

when the relationship to (supplier) was established.

3. It is more valuable to us to do business with (supplier) than

with other telephone companies.

Anderson, J. C., & Gerbing, D. N. (1988). Structural equation modeling in
practice: A review and recommended two-step approach. Psychological
Bulletin, 103(3), 411−423.

Anderson, J. C., & Narus, J. A. (1990). A model of distributor firm and
manufacturer firm working relationships. Journal of Marketing, 54(1),
42−58.

Akerlof, G. A. (1970). The market for “lemons”: Quality, uncertainty, and the
market mechanism. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 48(August), 488−500.
Bagozzi, R. P. (1995). Reflections on relationship marketing in consumer

markets. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 23(4), 272−277.

Bagozzi, R. P., & Yi, Y. (1988). On the evaluation of structural equation models.

Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 16(1), 74−94.

Bendapudi, N., & Berry, L. L. (1997). Customers' motivations for maintaining

relationships with service providers. Journal of Retailing, 73(1), 15−37.

Browne, M. W., & Cudeck, R. (1993). In K. A. Bollen & J. S. Long (Eds.),
in testing structural models

fit,

Alternative ways of assessing model
London: Sage Publications.

Darby, M. R., & Karni, E. (1973, April). Free competition and the optimal

amount of fraud. Journal of Law and Economics, 16, 67−86.

Deighton, J. (1992, December). The consumption of performance. Journal of

Consumer Research, 19, 362−372.

Dick, A. S., & Basu, K. (1994). Customer loyalty: Towards an integrated
conceptual framework. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 22(2),
99−113.

Dwyer, F. R., Schurr, P. H., & Oh, S. (1987, April). Developing buyer–seller

relationships. Journal of Marketing, 51, 11−27.

Eggert, A., Ulaga, W., & Schultz, F. (2006). Value creation in the relationship
life cycle: A quasi-longtitudinal analysis. Industrial Marketing Manage-
ment, 35, 20−27.

Flint, D. J., Woodruff, R. B., & Gardial, S. F. (2002, October). Exploring the
phenomenon of customers' desired value change in a business-to-business
context. Journal of Marketing, 66, 102−117.

Fombrun, C. W. (1996). Reputation: Realizing value from corporate image.

Boston, MA: Harvard University Press.

Ganesan, S. (1994, April). Determinants of long-term orientation in buyer–seller

relationships. Journal of Marketing, 58, 1−19.

Gassenheimer, J. B., Huston, F. S., & Davis, J. S. (1998). The role of economic
value, social value, and perceptions of fairness in interorganizational
retention decisions. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 26(4),
322−337.


H. Hansen et al. / Industrial Marketing Management 37 (2008) 206–217

217

Gundlach, G. T., Achrol, R. S., & Mentzer, J. T. (1995, January). The structure

of commitment in exchange. Journal of Marketing, 59, 78−92.

Heide, J. B., & John, G. (1988). The role of dependence balancing in
safeguarding transaction specific assets in conventional channels. Journal of
Marketing, 52, 32−44.

Hirschman, A. O. (1970). Exit, voice & loyalty: Responses to decline in firms,

organizations and states. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Hogan, J. E. (2001). Expected relationship value: A construct, a methodology
Industrial Marketing

for measurement, and a modeling technique.
Management, 30, 339−351.

Hu, L. T., & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance
structure analysis: Conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural
Equation Modelling, 6(1), 1−55.

Jöreskog, K. G., & Sörbom, D. (1982). Recent developments in structural
equation modelling. Journal of Marketing Research, 19(November),
404−416.

Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L., & Thaler, R. (1986). Fairness and the

assumptions of economics. Journal of Business, 76(4), 285−300.

Kirmani, A., & Rao, A. R. (2000). No pain, no gain: A critical review of the
literature on signaling unobservable product quality. Journal of Marketing,
64(2), 66−79.

Kohli, A. K., & Jaworski, B. J. (1990, April). Market orientation: The construct,
research propositions, and managerial implications. Journal of Marketing,
54, 1−18.

Kumar, N., Hibbard, J. D., & Stern, L. W. (1994). The nature and consequences
of marketing channel intermediary commitment. Working paper, report No.
94–115 Cambridge, Massachusetts: Marketing Science Institute.

Lovelock, C. H. (1983, Summer). Classifying services to gain strategic

marketing insights. Journal of Marketing, 47, 9−201.

Mohr, J., & Nevin, J. R. (1990, October). Communication strategies in
marketing channels: A theoretical perspective. Journal of Marketing, 54,
36−51.

Narver, J. C., & Slater, S. F. (1990, October). The effect of a market orientation

on business profitability. Journal of Marketing, 54, 20−35.

Nelson, P. (1974). Advertising as information. Journal of Political Economy, 82(4),

724−759.

Newman, R. G. (1988). Single source qualification. Journal of Purchasing and

Materials Management, 24(2), 10−17.

Noordewier, T. G., John, G., & Nevin, J. R. (1990, October). Performance
outcomes of purchasing arrangements in industrial buyer–vendor relation-
ships. Journal of Marketing, 54, 80−93.

Ouchi, W. G. (1990, March). Markets, bureaucracies, and clans. Administrative

Science Quarterly, 25, 129−141.

Patterson, P. G., Johnson, L. W., & Spreng, R. S. (1997). Modeling the
determinants of customer satisfaction for business-to-business professional
services. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 25(1), 4−17.

Ping, R. A., Jr. (1993, Fall). The effects of satisfaction and structural constraints
on retailer exiting, voice, loyalty, opportunism, and neglect. Journal of
Retailing, 69, 320−352.

Ping, R. A., Jr. (1995). Some uninvestigated antecedents to retailer exit

intention. Journal of Business Research, 24, 171−180.

Ping, R. A., Jr. (1997). Voice in business-to-business relationships: Costs of exit

and demographic antecedents. Journal of Retailing, 73(2), 261−281.

Rindfleisch, A., & Heide, J. B. (1997, October). Transaction cost analysis: Past,

present, and future applications. Journal of Marketing, 61, 30−54.

Rubin, P. H. (1993). Managing business transactions: Controlling the cost of
coordinating, communicating, and decision making. New York: The Free
Press.

Selnes, F. (1993). An examination of the effect of product performance on brand
reputation, satisfaction and loyalty. European Journal of Marketing, 27(9),
19−35.

Stern, L. W., & Reve, T. (1980, Summer). Distribution channels as political
economies: A framework for empirical analysis. Journal of Marketing, 44,
52−64.

Taylor, S. (1995). The effects of filled waiting time and service provider control
the Academy of

over the delay on evaluations of service. Journal of
Marketing Science, 23(1), 38−48.

Thibaut, J. W., & Kelly, H. (1959). The social psychology of groups. New York:

John Wiley & Sons.

Ulaga, W. (2003). Capturing value creation in business relationships: A

customer perspective. Industrial Marketing Management, 32, 677−693.

Ulaga, W., & Chacour, S. (2001). Measuring customer-perceived value in
business markets: A prerequisite for marketing strategy development and
implementation. Industrial Marketing Management, 30, 525−540.

Ulaga, W., & Eggert, A. (2006). Relationship value and relationship quality.
Broadening the nomological network of business-to-business relationships.
European Journal of Marketing, 40, 311−327.

Williamson, O. (1985). The economic institutions of capitalism. New York: The

Free Press.

Wilson, D. T. (1995). An integrated model of buyer–seller relationships. Jour-

nal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 23(4), 335−345.

Zeithaml, V. A. (1988, July). Consumer perceptions of price, quality, and value:
A means-end model and synthesis of evidence. Journal of Marketing, 52,
2−22.

Zeithaml, V. A., Berry, L. L., & Parasuraman, A. (1996, April). The behavioral

consequences of service quality. Journal of Marketing, 60, 31−46.

Håvard Hansen is Associate professor of Marketing at the Norwegian School
of Management, Department of marketing. His primary research interests are
consumer decision-making and economic psychology, combined with a keen
interest in relationship marketing in service industries.

Bendik M. Samuelsen is Associate Professor of Marketing at the Norwegian
School of Management, Department of marketing. His primary research
interests are brand management, communication and customer relationship
management.

Pål Silseth is Project Manager at
the Norwegian Customer Satisfaction
Barometer and a doctoral student at the Norwegian School of Management,
Department of marketing. His primary research interest is customer relation-
ships in service industries.

