Int. J. Production Economics 153 (2014) 54–65

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Int. J. Production Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijpe

Internal integration as a pre-condition for external integration in global
sourcing: A social capital perspective

Philipp Horn n, Paul Schefﬂer, Holger Schiele

University of Twente, School of Management and Governance, P.O. Box 217, NL-7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 10 December 2012
Accepted 25 March 2014
Available online 1 April 2014

Keywords:
Global sourcing
Integration
Social capital

The purpose of this study is to explore the link between integration and global sourcing success in
international operations and by doing so, to clarify the ambiguous picture that prevails in the existing
literature. Speciﬁcally, this quantitative study aims at identifying the role of the buying companies’
internal and external integration with suppliers using a social capital lens. Data were collected from the
central purchasing department of a multinational automotive OEM located in Germany. A sample of 82
purchasers was surveyed about their assessment of global sourcing projects, focusing on internal cross-
functional integration, external supplier integration and project success. The data were analyzed with
structural equation modeling procedures, using SmartPLS. The ﬁndings indicate that internal integration
is a precondition for external integration with suppliers, which accordingly has a strong positive
inﬂuence on global sourcing success. Surprisingly, the direct relationship between internal and external
integration was not signiﬁcant, indicating a mediating role of social capital within this relationship. The
theoretical originality lies in the use of the social capital theory and its three dimensions: cognitive,
structural and relational capital for both internal and external integration, and in the connection
between integration and global sourcing success. From a practical perspective, it can be recommended
that managers distinguish between an internal and an external perspective. Internally, the focus should
lie on the clear communication of common goals and norms, whereas externally, the deﬁnition of
mutual contact points between organizations is of higher importance.

& 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1.

Introduction

Following the idea of lower factor costs in certain supply
markets, there seems to be a strong consensus,
in particular
among practitioners, that international sourcing is either inevita-
ble and/or beneﬁcial
for ﬁrms (Kotabe and Mudambi, 2009;
Nassimbeni, 2006; Schiele et al., 2011a; Steinle and Schiele,
2008). Global sourcing has been called “an automatic expectation
to respond to competition” (Carter et al., 2008, p. 225). However,
previous ﬁndings concerning the results of global sourcing initia-
tives are somewhat contradictory; they show effects that range
from negative to neutral (Kotabe and Omura, 1989; Murray et al.,
1995; Schiele et al., 2011a) to 20% savings (Petersen et al., 2000;
Trent and Monczka, 2003b; Weber et al., 2010). Some scholars
argue that global sourcing is primarily a means of generating
short-term cost advantages on a unit price level (Petersen et al.,
2000; Schiele et al., 2011a), omitting a longer-term total cost
perspective (Holweg et al., 2011; Murray, 2001; Trent and
Monczka, 2003b).

n Corresponding author.

E-mail address: p.horn@utwente.nl (P. Horn).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2014.03.020
0925-5273/& 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

It has been argued that the success of global sourcing is based
on the “worldwide integration of engineering, operations, and
procurement centers within the upstream portion of a ﬁrm's
supply chain” (Trent and Monczka, 2003b, p. 608). Thus, organiza-
tions face the challenge of integrating their internal functions with
the entire supply chain (Golini and Kalchschmidt, 2011; Pagell,
2004). Apart from internal integration, recent research has inves-
tigated the link between external supplier integration and perfor-
mance; the results suggest a positive effect of supplier integration
on the buying ﬁrm's performance (Golini and Kalchschmidt, 2011;
Lawson et al., 2008; Leana and Pil, 2006; Villena et al., 2011; Zhao
et al., 2011) as well as a positive effect in the global sourcing
context (Zhao et al., 2011).

Dyadic success factors for global sourcing, such as external
integration between companies, have been widely researched, e.g.,
under a transaction cost economics view (Kotabe, 1994; Murray,
2001; Murray et al., 1995; Schneider et al., 2013) or the resource-
based view (Espino-Rodríguez and Padrón-Robaina, 2006). This
research has employed case studies (Forza, 2009), surveys
(Frohlich and Westbrook, 2001) and simulations. However, despite
a call for research from various scholars (Petersen et al., 2000;
Trent and Monczka, 2003b; Weber et al., 2010), the internal
prerequisites for a ﬁrm's global sourcing success have been largely


P. Horn et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 153 (2014) 54–65

55

under-researched (Hartmann et al., 2008), although the impor-
tance of the integration of various functions within the ﬁrm for
knowledge transfer and cooperation, e.g., for new product devel-
opment
(Moses and
Ahlstroem, 2009), and the general performance of the ﬁrm
(Maltz and Kohli, 1996) has been shown.

(Kahn, 1996), make-or-buy decisions

Previous studies have also explored the interplay of internal
and external integration in contexts such as product development
(Koufteros et al., 2005) and general corporate performance out-
comes (Droge et al., 2004). The results of these studies suggest that
there may be a positive link between the two types of integration.
However, it has not yet been shown how the joint effects of
internal and external integration inﬂuence global sourcing success.
Based on the prevailing literature, it cannot be stated a priori that
internal and external integration also contribute to global sourcing
success because global sourcing often incorporates special needs
and particular ﬁrm characteristics (Trent and Monczka, 2003b,
2005).

This research paper aims to demonstrate that global sourcing is
more than simply a set of tools designed to provide short-term
cost savings. Speciﬁcally, the inﬂuence of intensiﬁed integration
efforts is of interest. At the core of this research is the question of
whether a high level of
integration
contributes to a higher level of external integration (Koufteros et
al., 2005) in a global sourcing context. Consequently, this work
explores whether internal and external integration can serve as
antecedents for successful global sourcing.

internal cross-functional

Because integration usually involves various elements of social
interaction (Rabbiosi and Santangelo, 2013) and in line with prior
research on integration in supply chain management, social capital
theory has been chosen as the theoretical framework of the
present research (Krause et al., 2007; Villena et al., 2011; Zhang
and Huo, 2013). This leads, ﬁnally, to the main research question:
Are internal integration of the functions within the buying ﬁrm
and the accumulation of social capital prerequisites for external
supplier integration, ultimately leading to increased global sour-
cing success?

The paper is structured as follows. After a brief literature
review, our hypotheses regarding the relationship between social
capital and internal and external integration, as well as the role of
integration in the success of global sourcing, are presented. The
chosen method of empirical analysis, which involves a sample of
82 global sourcing purchasing projects,
is explained, and the
results of our survey are discussed. The paper concludes with a
discussion of the limitations of the research setting and some
suggestions for further research.

2. Theoretical considerations

2.1. Global sourcing and the internal – external integration link

Since the 1990s, global business transactions have been grow-
ing considerably faster than domestic economies (Bowersox and
Calantone, 1998), and multinational business has received increas-
ing attention (Schiele et al., 2011a). The clear focus for ﬁrms on
traditional western purchasing markets has been shown to lie in
the cost-saving aspects of global sourcing (Alguire et al., 1994;
Monczka and Giunipero, 1985; Spekman, 1991). While many
terms, some of which have been precisely deﬁned and some of
which have been used interchangeably, have been used to describe
global sourcing (Schiele et al., 2011a), the term “global sourcing” is
herein employed as an umbrella term for cross-border sourcing
aiming at cost savings.

As suggested in the literature,

integrated global sourcing
activities are usually more successful than sourcing activities that

focus on arm's-length transactions (Horn et al., 2013; Pagell, 2004;
Trent and Monczka, 2003a, b). As a consequence, integration has
recently received increased attention in the context of operations
management. In addition to pioneering publications such as that
of Trent and Monczka (2003b), which elaborates on integrated
global sourcing, a growing number of researchers have discussed
the beneﬁcial effects of internal integration (e.g. Foerstl et al.,
2013; Pagell, 2004; Quintens et al., 2006; Trautmann et al., 2009)
and external integration (e.g. Cousins and Menguc, 2006; Das et
al., 2006; Fabbe-Costes and Jahre, 2007; Wiengarten et al., 2014)
on operational performance. In contrast to publications that focus
on internal cross-functional integration or on integration with
external supply chain members, there has been a shift to research
settings that examine both types of integration (e.g. Droge et al.,
2004; Flynn et al., 2010; Kim, 2006; Koufteros et al., 2005;
Wiengarten et al., 2014; Yang et al., 2013; Zhao et al., 2013).
Nevertheless, despite the fact that the number of studies addres-
sing internal and external integration has increased considerably,
the proposed relationships among the effects and their modera-
tors and mediators remain undeﬁned, and a well-developed
suitable theoretical framework is lacking.

inter-organizational

In the reviewed literature, Schoenherr and Swink (2012)
provide evidence concerning the moderating effect of internal
integration on external integration, whereas Zhao et al. (2011)
show a moderating role of supplier integration in customer
integration. Gimenez and Ventura (2005) investigated Spanish
companies and found evidence for the existence of a positive
relationship between internal integration of the logistics function
with the functions of other departments such as marketing and
production and with external
integration.
However, Gimenez and Ventura (2005) assumed a bidirectional
effect, meaning that internal integration facilitates external inte-
gration and vice versa. In contrast, Schoenherr and Swink (2012)
emphasized the positive effect of internal
integration on the
relationship between external integration and delivery/ﬂexibility
performance. Their work broadly supports the ﬁndings of Droge
et al. (2004), who analyzed a sample of ﬁrst-tier suppliers from
North American automotive OEMs. Their results indicate that “(…)
the joint use of external and internal integration has synergistic
effects on ﬁrm performance outcomes” (Droge et al., 2004, p. 570),
implying that both types of integration deserve managerial atten-
tion. Still, Droge et al. (2004) conclude that the effects of interac-
tion between internal and external integration has to a large
extent been left unnoted, calling for further research. In a more
recent study, Zhao et al. (2011) argued that external integration
with market partners is positively inﬂuenced by internal func-
tional integration and relationship commitment.

The results cited above indicate that internal integration is
likely to exert an inﬂuence on external integration and on various
measures of performance. However, the relationship between
internal and external integration in purchasing and the mechan-
isms underlying this relationship are still ambiguous.
In an
attempt to close this gap, the present paper focuses on the link
between the two types of integration.

2.2. Social capital theory

Within a supply chain management context, the importance of
integration is emphasized in the literature (e.g. Fabbe-Costes and
Jahre, 2007; Hamprecht et al., 2005; Pagell, 2004). The view of the
positive effects of integration is not limited to an internal per-
spective (Pagell, 2004) but also covers external integration with
suppliers (Krause et al., 2007; Lawson et al., 2008). Because
integration refers to the process of interaction and collaboration
to achieve mutually acceptable outcomes (Pagell, 2004), we posit a
close linkage between social interaction and social capital and


56

P. Horn et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 153 (2014) 54–65

integration. The underlying idea is that buyer–supplier relation-
ships represent multi-organization social processes in which the
partners interact, exchange information, and form relationships
based on interdependencies, exchanges, and mutual problem-
solving (Hughes and Perrons, 2011). The positive conditions
necessary for the exchange of such resources depend upon the
development of social capital within these relationships (Hughes
and Perrons, 2011).

The concept of social capital has gained increasing attention in
the last decade (Krause et al., 2007; Lawson et al., 2008; Tsai and
Ghoshal, 1998), and it has been investigated in the context of
relationships between individuals and organizations (Ahuja, 2000;
Tsai, 2000; Tsai and Ghoshal, 1998). Scholars within the supply
chain management ﬁeld have also used this theory as a “theore-
tical lens” (e.g. Krause et al., 2007; Lawson et al., 2008; Min et al.,
2008). Despite these scientiﬁc efforts, our understanding of social
capital and its role in a ﬁrm's value creation remains to a large
extent unclear
(Hughes and Perrons, 2011). According to
Coleman's (1994) broadly shared view, social capital covers any
aspect of social structure that facilitates the creation of value and
supports the actions of individuals who belong to the social
structure under investigation (Seibert et al., 2001). Based on this
understanding, social capital can be deﬁned as “the sum of the
actual and potential resources embedded within, available through,
and derived from the network of relationships possessed by an
individual or social unit” (Nahapiet and Ghoshal, 1998, p. 243).
Put another way, the guiding idea of social capital is the recogni-
tion of another's goodwill towards a certain entity as a valuable
resource (Adler and Kwon, 2002).

Nahapiet and Ghoshal (1998) identify and delineate three
dimensions of social capital, namely cognitive, structural and
relational capital. The cognitive dimension includes shared inter-
pretations; these are comparable to codes or paradigms that
facilitate the understanding of the social system and its respective
goals in terms of norms, values, attitudes, and beliefs (Tsai and
Ghoshal, 1998; Uphoff and Wijayaratna, 2000). As emphasized by
Inkpen and Tsang (2005), shared culture and congruent goals are
substantive dimensions of cognitive capital (Villena et al., 2011). In
this context, “shared culture refers to the degree to which norms of
behavior govern relationships, whereas congruent goals represent the
degree to which parties share a common understanding and
approach to the achievement of common tasks and outcomes”
(Villena et al., 2011, p. 562). Hence, it can be expected that the
similarity of organizational cultures and also cultural differences
on an individual level inﬂuence the corporate success of alliances
(Parkhe, 1993). The reasons for this relationship are manifold. The
reasons often mentioned are, among others, constraints on unde-
sirable behavior in favor of collective interests (Coleman, 1994),
improved harmony, and the reduction of opportunistic behavior
(Ouchi, 1980).

The common understanding of structural social capital is that
of a certain pattern of connections between entities,
i.e., the
connections an individual or an organization has and how these
can be used (Burt, 1997; Villena et al., 2011). Hence, the presence
or absence of network ties between participants is an important
facet of this dimension (Nahapiet and Ghoshal, 1998). Depending
on the structural conﬁguration of the pattern, valuable resources
that can lead to competitive advantages (Barney, 1991) can be
accessed. For this reason, closure and density within the social
structure are of primary interest because they facilitate the
exchange of resources (Zaheer and Bell, 2005). In addition, various
scholars have suggested that partnering entities can foster the
exchange of reliable and diverse information (Guido et al., 2006;
Koka and Prescott, 2002; Villena et al., 2011). As a result,
particularly dense structures are assumed to be beneﬁcial insofar
as they permit reception of the right information at the right time

(Zaheer and Bell, 2005). Another potential beneﬁt of dense
relationship structures is that they make it possible to validate
information and therefore increase its reliability as well as its
diversity (Chen et al., 2009; Villena et al., 2011). For this reason,
social capital theory argues that structural social capital
is a
valuable resource both for relationships within organizations and
for relationships between them.

The relational dimension of social capital is ultimately based on
the notion of Granovetter and Swedberg (1992) concern-
ing embeddedness and refers to the relationships that people
have developed with each other over time through interac-
tions (Nahapiet and Ghoshal, 1998). Thus, relational social capital
reﬂects the view that sources of competitive advantage can be
based on relationships, extending the boundaries of the resource-
based view of the ﬁrm (Koufteros et al., 2010). In this regard, the
basis for learning and know-how transfer within a relationship is
based on mutual trust and interaction (Kale et al., 2000). Further-
more, because mutual trust and commitment play a major role in
the relational component (e.g. Lee and Cavusgil, 2006), the
relational dimension is delineated into trust and commitment.
As a result of relational capital, the risk of opportunistic behavior
as well as the possible leakage of critical knowledge is reduced
(Kale et al., 2000). Hence, relational capital can improve corporate
performance (Lawson et al., 2008).

It has been argued by scholars that there are certain relation-
ships and dependencies between the social capital dimensions (e.
g. Carey et al., 2011; Nahapiet and Ghoshal, 1998; Tsai and Ghoshal,
1998). To illustrate the associations between the social capital
dimensions, Tsai and Ghoshal (1998) state that structural capital
may stimulate the relational dimension of social capital. In this
context, structural social capital, which is represented by social
interaction ties, might induce trust and trustworthiness, leading to
the accumulation of relational capital (Tsai and Ghoshal, 1998).
This is reasonable assuming that trust between organizations or
functions can be seen as an agglomeration of trust between
individuals (Kale et al., 2000). Hence, this conclusion further
supports the idea that individual social interaction ties (structural
capital) are positively related to the emergence of relational
capital. Similarly, the cognitive dimension of social capital can
also be seen as an antecedent of relational capital. Prior research
has indicated that trust, as an essential ingredient of relational
capital, particularly emerges in relationships in which common
goals and values (cognitive capital) exist between the parties
(Carey et al., 2011). Thus, knowing about relevant norms and
acting in accordance to them is likely to breed trust between
partners (Carey et al., 2011; Nahapiet and Ghoshal, 1998).

Taking all aspects into consideration, we conclude that social
capital and its respective dimensions (structural, relational, and
cognitive) can be seen as beneﬁcial for an organization's perfor-
mance. We take this as the point of departure from which to
investigate the applicability of the social capital theory in the
domain of supply chain integration. Furthermore, in line with
Murray (2001), we assume that companies that possess a higher
level of external integration with suppliers in their global sourcing
activities are particularly successful. Similarly, internal integration
is expected to be indirectly beneﬁcial for the performance of global
sourcing organizations (Trautmann et al., 2009) due to the
mediating role of social capital
in this relationship. Thus, we
extend the research on integration and ﬁrm performance (e.g.
Schoenherr and Swink, 2012) by explicitly linking different forms
of integration to global sourcing success.

2.3. Hypotheses

Internal integration, also often called cross-functional integra-
tion, refers to “the magnitude of interaction and communication,


P. Horn et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 153 (2014) 54–65

57

the level of information sharing, the degree of coordination, and
the extent of joint involvement across functions” (Montoya-Weiss
et al., 2001, p. 65). Cross-functional integration can be beneﬁcial
for communication, interaction, information sharing and coordi-
nation between functions, leading to a collaborative and inter-
active forum for different functions within a ﬁrm (Cheng et al.,
2012; Hirunyawipada et al., 2010; Kahn, 1996; Montoya-Weiss et
al., 2001). This collaborative environment is likely to be facilitated
by the existence and accumulation of social capital (Leana and Pil,
2006; Sparrowe et al., 2001).

For a deeper understanding of the roles of individual social
capital dimensions and in line with prior research, we argue that
the development of relational capital within a ﬁrm is fostered by
the accumulation of cognitive and structural capital (Carey et al.,
2011; Tsai and Ghoshal, 1998). The rationale underlying this
argument is that common values and a shared vision may
encourage the development of trust, reducing tendencies to
opportunistic behavior (Panayides and Venus Lun, 2009) and
leading to the development of
(Tsai and
Ghoshal, 1998). Thus, the availability of common cognitive capital,
that is, the ability of participants to make sense of their joint
experiences, is seen as a precondition for the build-up of relational
capital (Carey et al., 2011; Nahapiet and Ghoshal, 1998).

relational capital

Similarly, the network of relationships, which is labeled struc-
tural capital, permits a ﬂow of information and knowledge, paving
the way for the beneﬁts of relational capital (Carey et al., 2011).
Previous research has shown that trust stems from social interac-
tion ties, particularly those developed over time. This leads to the
assumption that structural capital is beneﬁcial for the accumula-
tion of relational capital (Tsai and Ghoshal, 1998). To sum up, we
assume that there is a positive relationship between both cogni-
tive and structural capital and the development of relational
capital. Relational capital, in turn, is likely to be positively related
to successful internal integration. In this regard, Tsai and Ghoshal
(1998, p. 467) state: “When two parties begin to trust each other,
they become more willing to share their resources without worrying
that they will be taken advantage of by the other party.” Given the
above-explained connection between relational capital and inter-
nal integration, we hypothesize that there is a positive relationship
between relational capital and internal integration. As a result,
hypotheses H1 and H2 have been formulated:

(H1a) The existence of internal cognitive capital
related to the accumulation of internal relational capital.

is positively

(H1b) The existence of internal structural capital
related to the accumulation of internal relational capital.

is positively

(H2) Internal relational capital is positively related to internal
integration.

Once a cooperative environment has been developed within an
organization, various beneﬁcial effects can occur. Accordingly, it
can be expected that if a ﬁrm's structures and processes are
fragmented, the ﬁrm is less likely to possess the capabilities
needed to resolve potential conﬂicts and actively support integra-
tion with external market partners (Zhao et al., 2011). Hence, it is
not surprising that Gimenez and Ventura (2005) found a connec-
tion between a ﬁrm's ability to plan and work internally across
functions and its planning and working performance with external
supply chain partners. Because coordination of internal functions
can also facilitate coordination with external market partners,
some scholars argue that the establishment of a good relationship
in terms of information sharing with the supplier and other
functions can be seen as a precondition for successful supplier
integration (e.g. Hughes and Perrons, 2011; Ragatz et al., 2002;
Zhao et al., 2011). Therefore, we hypothesize a positive and direct

relationship between internal cross-functional
external supplier integration, as reﬂected in H3:

integration and

(H3) Cross-functional integration is positively related to external
supplier integration.

In addition to the direct relationship, we also expect the
existence of an indirect path between cross-functional integration
and supplier integration. Comparable to integration within the
organization, social capital is likely to exert a signiﬁcant inﬂuence.
Beyond the purely functional perspective, social aspects of the
buyer–supplier relationship have also begun to receive increasing
attention from practitioners as well as from scholars (e.g. Adler
and Kwon, 2002; Krause et al., 2007; Lawson et al., 2008).

In cross-functional integrated organizations, there is usually
extensive cooperation and communication between departments
(Rosenzweig et al., 2003; Sherman et al., 2000). In this collabora-
tive environment, it is likely that the buying organization and the
supplier can build up external social capital more easily than
in situations in which the levels of internal integration are rather
low (Caldwell and Hayes, 2007; Narasimhan and Kim, 2001).
Often,
integration incorporates the establishment of
cross-functional teams that provide an appropriate means of
creating structural ties between individuals and departments
(Ellegaard and Koch, 2012; Schoenherr and Swink, 2012; Vickery
et al., 2003). Put in another way, internal integration can support
the structural connections between individuals or functions in an
organization.

internal

Similarly, it can be argued that the same capabilities that are
necessary to create internal social and structural ties are likely to
be beneﬁcial to the accumulation of cognitive and structural
capital with external partners because “(…) internal integration
breaks down functional barriers and engenders cooperation in order
to meet the requirements of customers (…)” (Flynn et al., 2010, p.
60). In this context, it can be argued that internally well-integrated
organizations are experienced in managing social exchange pro-
cesses, i.e., those organizations are able to use social exchange
processes to encourage the communication of shared norms, goals,
and values with other organizations (Thompson and Fine, 1999).
As a consequence, H4a has been formulated.

Successful internal integration could also facilitate the creation
of structural capital with external partners. The underlying ratio-
nale of this relationship is that members of the supplier's organi-
zation can more easily ﬁnd their respective counterparts in the
buying organization when a dense network exists (Burt, 1997).
Even if the right person is not contacted on the ﬁrst attempt, it is
likely that in a well-integrated organization the employees know
each other's areas of expertise (Reagans and McEvily, 2003) and
thus can assist the supplier in ﬁnding the suitable contact person.
Therefore, it is hypothesized in H4b:

(H4a) Internal cross-functional integration is positively related to
the accumulation of external cognitive capital with suppliers.

(H4b) Internal cross-functional integration is positively related to
the accumulation of structural capital with suppliers.

There is evidence that social capital strengthens supplier
relations (e.g. Gerlach, 1992; Helper, 1990; Smitka, 1991; Uzzi,
1997), and research has shown that investments in supplier
development can lead to the build-up of social capital between
the buyer and the supplier (Krause et al., 2007; Villena et al., 2011).
The development of cognitive capital between the buyer and the
supplier creates the potential for alignment of their business
philosophies and fosters the negotiation of congruent goals
(Villena et al., 2011). On the other hand, the existence of structural
capital with the supplier makes it possible for the buying ﬁrm to


58

P. Horn et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 153 (2014) 54–65

beneﬁt greatly from the supplier's extent and diversity of informa-
tion, as well as for social ties to emerge (Leana and Pil, 2006). We
further argue that personal relationships developed with the
suppliers’ organization, i.e., the external relational capital (trust
and commitment) (Sambasivan et al., 2013; Villena et al., 2011),
mediate the relationship between cognitive/structural capital and
external integration (Carey et al., 2011; Tsai and Ghoshal, 1998;
Vijayasarathy, 2010). In line with Tessarolo (2007, p. 73), external
integration is deﬁned as follows: “External integration is a strategic
approach of the ﬁrm aimed at key boundary-spanning initiatives for
fostering high-level coordination between a ﬁrm and its suppliers
(…)”. To conclude, we hypothesize that in addition to the direct
link between internal cross-functional integration and external
integration with suppliers there is also a path consisting of the
three dimensions of social capital. As a result, H5 and H6 were
developed:

(H5a) External cognitive capital with suppliers is positively
related to the build-up of external relational capital with suppliers.

(H5b) External structural capital is positively related to the build-
up of external relational capital with suppliers.

(H6) External relational capital with suppliers is positively related
to external supplier integration.

In recent years, various scholars have investigated the link
between external supplier integration and performance (e.g.
Lawson et al., 2008; Leana and Pil, 2006). Most of this research
suggests that supplier integration is beneﬁcial to the buying ﬁrm's
performance at the project or ﬁrm level (van der Vaart and van
Donk, 2008). Furthermore, internal purchasing capabilities such as
the alignment of purchasing strategy with other functional stra-
tegies have been shown to be beneﬁcial for global sourcing success
(Hartmann et al., 2008). This supports the view that global
sourcing is “an advanced approach to sourcing and supply manage-
ment that involves integrating and coordinating common materials,
processes, designs,
technologies and suppliers across worldwide
buying, design and operating locations” (Trent and Monczka, 2005,
p. 24). We also expect a positive relationship due to the assump-
tion that the buying company can gain access to and leverage
resources through collaborative relationships with its suppliers
(Villena et al., 2011; Wagner, 2011), thereby beneﬁting from the
existence of social capital between the organizations. This leads to
H7, which is presented below. An overview of the proposed model
is given in Fig. 1.

(H7) External supplier integration is positively related to global
sourcing success.

3. Research methodology

3.1. Data collection

The aim of the paper is to investigate internal and external
supply chain integration and its links to global sourcing perfor-
mance. For the research at hand, a group of purchasers from the
central purchasing department of a multinational automotive
original equipment manufacturer (OEM) located in Germany were
surveyed. By pursuing this research approach, we were able to
beneﬁt from the experience of purchasers who operate under
comparable conditions in diverse industries.

A single-ﬁrm inductive research setting reduces confounding
factors from industry and ﬁrm differences. The automotive indus-
try was chosen for this study because it is of major importance in
the world economy (Taylor and Taylor, 2008) and because it is of
trend-anticipating character (Schiele et al., 2011a). The sampling
method used in the study is purposive judgment sampling, a form
of non-probability sampling, ensuring that the surveyed indivi-
duals were selected for conformity to a predetermined criterion, in
this case that the purchaser is responsible for acquiring a part in a
global sourcing context and that the purchaser is afﬁliated with
the buying company (Blumberg et al., 2008). Using this method, a
population of 186 purchasers involved in global sourcing activities
within the focal company was identiﬁed. It was assumed that the
relevant values, beliefs, and attitudes of this population are likely
to be normally distributed and that representative inferences
could thus be drawn from the data (Marshall, 1996). Because all
the purchasers surveyed worked in the same division of one large
OEM, it is reasonable to argue that all of them had passed through
a comparable socialization process that allowed them to become
acquainted with the companies’ guidelines for doing business. This
socialization process partly consisted of a three-month-long man-
datory corporate qualiﬁcation program for purchasers.

Purchasing projects were chosen at random from various
countries and from a variety of industries. The purchasing depart-
ment of the focal company is divided into ﬁve units, each
specializing in one speciﬁc group of items (commodities). The
survey was conducted among purchasers of electronics, interior
equipment, exterior equipment, powertrain, and metal commod-
ities. Each purchaser was asked in detail about his or her
experiences with a supplier for one speciﬁc item that she or he
sourced from a low-wage country. This ensured that relationships
between the automotive OEM and many different suppliers with
different
in other
words, the research setting covers relationships between a large
focal company and a diverse set of suppliers, generating increased
credibility and generalizability of the study.

industrial backgrounds were investigated;

Fig. 1. Summary of the hypotheses.


P. Horn et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 153 (2014) 54–65

59

To maintain anonymity, two emails were sent to the purcha-
sers. The ﬁrst email contained information about a certain item
purchased by that purchaser. The second email contained an
automatically generated code number as well as a link to an
online survey. If the system did not register an answer after 10
days, an automatically generated reminder email was sent to the
purchaser. If there was no response within an additional ten days,
follow-up calls were made to increase the response rate.

We achieved a ﬁnal sample size of 82, which represents a
response rate of approximately 44.1%. Response rates in the ﬁeld
have generally been low (o30%) (Forza, 2009; van der Vaart and
van Donk, 2008). Higher response rates have been linked to close
relationships of the researcher with the surveyed company (e.g.
Vickery et al., 2003). The questionnaire was provided in German;
to verify translation accuracy, the items on the questionnaire were
translated into German and then translated back into English by a
different researcher (Harkness et al., 2004). Pre-testing with
selected purchasers (Forza, 2009) resulted in minor adjustments
to the questionnaire.

3.2. Measures

Our measure generation process followed Churchill Jr (1979).
As a ﬁrst step, the domain of each construct was deﬁned and the
items to be included or excluded were stated. The second step
consisted of a search for appropriate scales (Roth et al., 2007).
Within the survey design, we employed proven measures for all
latent variables, measuring the items by means of ﬁve-point
Likert-type scales. Apart from the commitment measure, which
together with the trust measure forms the relational capital
construct, we used similar measures for all social capital con-
structs for internal and external social capital
to maximize
comparability. Cognitive capital was measured using the items
designed by Mohr and Spekman (1994). Structural capital was
measured according to Rindﬂeisch and Moorman (2001).

As introduced by Lee and Cavusgil (2006), relational capital
included items concerning trust and commitment. For commit-
ment on the supplier side, Kumar et al. (1994) measures were
used; commitment on the internal side was measured using the
items described by Rodríguez et al. (2007). Trust was measured
taking items from (Kaufman et al., 2006). We used a general
integration construct introduced by Monczka et al. (1998) for
supplier integration and (Rodríguez et al., 2007) for internal
integration.

According to van der Vaart and van Donk (2008, p. 51),
performance was measured at the project level to “acquire reliable,
less subjective, performance measures for the performance of a single
relationship”, following measures by Hoegl and Gemuenden (2001)
in combination with Tatikonda and Montoya-Weiss (2001) as an
alternative to overall and ﬁnancial performance measures, which

have been shown to be critical in many surveys (van der Vaart and
van Donk, 2008). As control variables, we included length of
relationship with the supplier for external social capital and
external integration and job tenure for internal social capital and
internal integration (Subramani, 2004).

3.3. Analysis approach and psychometric properties

The parameter estimates for the measurements and the struc-
tural model were obtained by partial least squares (PLS) path
modeling with latent variables (Fornell and Cha, 1994; Ringle et al.,
2005; Wold, 1982). The software package SmartPLS (Ringle et al.,
2005) was used to carry out a conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA)
and to develop a structured equation model. SmartPLS uses a
series of interdependent ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions
to minimize residual variances (Chin, 1998) and has been shown to
be suitable for estimating complex structural equation models and
particularly for predicting dependent endogenous variables (Chin,
1998; Henseler et al., 2009). The PLS approach is particularly
useful in cases involving small sample sizes and has been shown to
result in robust ﬁndings (Chin, 1998), one of the core reasons we
decided to apply this method. We used bootstrap re-sampling
(Nevitt and Hancock, 2001) with replacement using 1000 rounds
to assign measures of accuracy to our sample (Schiele et al.,
2011b). Missing values were dealt with by mean replacement.
The standardized path coefﬁcients associated with our structural
model are shown in Fig. 2.

The psychometric properties of the measurement instruments
were measured using Smart PLS and SPSS and included reliability,
convergent validity and discriminant validity (Burton et al., 2002;
Tenenhaus et al., 2005). Because all of our constructs are reﬂec-
tive in nature (Edwards and Bagozzi, 2000), we assessed internal
consistency and reliability using composite reliability (CR) (Fornell
and Larcker, 1981; Wetzels et al., 2009) with average variance
extracted (AVE) and with factor loadings (Edwards and Bagozzi,
2000; Hair et al., 2006). To assess the indicator reliability of the
model, the individual item loadings with their respective con-
structs were analyzed as a ﬁrst step. In all, seven items were
removed due to insufﬁcient factor loadings. In general, the items
well exceeded the 0.7 threshold (Chin, 1998; Henseler et al., 2009).
However, in line with Hulland (1999), we retained four items with
factor loadings of 0.6  .

With respect to convergent validity, each item strongly corre-
lates with the construct to which it is related. Thus, convergent
validity is satisfactory because all items load positively and with
signiﬁcant t-values on their respective constructs (t43.211). As
shown in Table 1, all values exceed the recommended thresholds
of 0.5 for AVE, 0.7 for CR (Edwards and Bagozzi, 2000; Fornell and
Larcker, 1981; Nunnally and Bernstein, 1994) and 0.7 for Cron-
bach's alpha (Nunnally and Bernstein, 1994).

Fig. 2. PLS results of the structural model.


60

P. Horn et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 153 (2014) 54–65

Table 1
Convergent validity, reliability assessment and intercorrelations.

Construct

AVEb

CRc

Cronb. αd

1. Ext_ Cog

2. Ext_ Integr

3. Ext_ Rel

4. Ext_ Str

5. GS_ Suc

6. Int_ Cog

7. Int_ Integr

8. Int_ Rel

9. Int_ Str

1. Ext_Cog
2. Ext_Integr
3. Ext_Rel
4. Ext_Str
5. GS_Suc
6. Int_Cog
7. Int_Integr
8. Int_Rel
9. Int_Str

0.58
0.74
0.60
0.66
0.60
0.77
0.64
0.64
0.67

0.85
0.90
0.90
0.85
0.92
0.93
0.90
0.91
0.86

0.76
0.82
0.86
0.74
0.91
0.90
0.86
0.88
0.75

0.76
0.60
0.58
0.63
0.34
0.44
0.31
0.49
0.43

0.86
0.76
0.70
0.45
0.30
0.27
0.23
0.31

0.77
0.70
0.36
0.28
0.23
0.34
0.33

0.81
0.30
0.38
0.37
0.39
0.45

aSquare root of AVE on the diagonal in bold.

b AVE ¼ average variance extracted; CR ¼ composite reliability; Cronb. α ¼ Cronbach's α.
c CR ¼ composite reliability.
d Cronb. α ¼ Cronbach's α.

0.78
0.24
-0.06
0.07
0.16

0.88
0.54
0.64
0.56

0.80
0.62
0.60

0.80
0.54

0.82

To assess discriminant validity for the constructs, we used the
Fornell–Larcker criterion (Fornell and Larcker, 1981), which sug-
gests that the AVE of a latent variable should be higher than the
squared correlations between that latent variable and other latent
variables. In this way, latent variables explain the variance of their
own indicators better than they explain the variance of other
latent variables. Table 1 shows that the square roots of the AVE
scores (presented in bold on the diagonal) are all larger than the
cross-correlation scores. Because the data were collected by means
of a questionnaire, Harman's one-factor test (Podsakoff and Organ,
1986) was used to check for common method variance (CMV),
which could inﬂuence the modeled relationships. All items were
loaded into a principal components factor analysis (PCA) with an
unrotated solution. If one general factor were to account for most
of the variance, CMV would pose a threat (Podsakoff and Organ,
1986).
In our study, the ﬁrst factor explained 32.53% of the
variance. Therefore, CMV is not a concern.

4. Findings

Predictive validity within the model

is medium to high.
Approximately half of the variance in relational capital within
the ﬁrm (45.6%) and in relational capital with the supplier (52.5%)
can be explained by cognitive and structural capital. The existence
of relational capital accounts for 38.9% of internal integration and
integration, and 20% of global sourcing
for 59.4% of external
project success is explained by external
integration with the
supplier. All signiﬁcant estimates have high statistical power with
t-values exceeding 2.576 (Table 2).

Hypothesis 1 states that cognitive (1a) and structural (1b)
capital positively inﬂuence relational capital. These hypotheses
are strongly supported: both paths are positive and signiﬁcant (β
0.481; t¼5.105/β 0.277; t¼2.774). In Hypothesis 2, we stated that
relational capital has a positive effect on supplier integration.
Again, the effect was positive and statistically signiﬁcant (β 0.623;
t¼10.434). No empirical support was found for Hypothesis 3,
which was based on the assumption that internal cross-functional
integration would lead to external integration with the supplier. In
the two-tailed test, the effect was small and not statistically
signiﬁcant (β 0.102; t¼1.599). We furthermore hypothesized a
positive relationship between internal cross-functional integration
and cognitive capital with the suppliers (H4a) and between
internal cross-functional integration and structural capital with
the suppliers (H4b). We found support for Hypothesis 4a (β 0.310;
t¼3.341) as well as for Hypothesis 4b (β 0.373; t¼4.113). Similar to
internal social capital, both cognitive and structural capital lead to
relational capital with the supplier, as suggested in Hypotheses 5a
(β 0.232; t¼2.593) and 5b (β 0.555; t¼7.003); both results are

statistically signiﬁcant and positive. We found strong support for
Hypothesis 6, which states that relational capital with the suppli-
integration with the suppliers (β 0.741;
ers leads to external
t¼15.656). In addition, the data suggest that external integration
is indeed positively related to global sourcing success, as stated in
Hypothesis 7 ( β 0.447; t¼5.371). Our two control variables, length
of relationship with the supplier and tenure within the job, had no
statistically relevant effect on our ﬁndings.

5. Discussion

The accumulation of cognitive and structural capital within an
organization has been shown to facilitate the build-up of relational
capital (Carey et al., 2011). Thus, the results of Tsai and Ghoshal (1998)
as well as those of Carey et al. (2011) concerning the relationships
between the social capital dimensions have been conﬁrmed. Addi-
tionally, the study presents empirical evidence for the existence of a
positive relationship between cross-functional integration and the
build-up of social capital with suppliers. One insight gained from the
results of the research at hand is that internal cross-functional
integration does not directly lead to successful external integration
with suppliers. This is somewhat surprising given that in a recent
study (Zhao et al., 2011) found a signiﬁcant relationship between
internal
integration and supplier integration. Our results instead
indicate the need for an accumulation of social capital with the
partnering organization (Villena et al., 2011) as a precondition for
successful external integration. Thus, external integration with sup-
pliers is a consequence of internal cross-functional integration and is
inﬂuenced by the social capital between the two organizations.
Hence, social capital plays a mediating role. This suggests that shared
norms and values, in connection with social ties, pave the way for
accessing resources associated with the relationships and that by
doing so they facilitate external integration. Thus, the apparently
simple link between internal integration and external integration is
shown to be more complicated than expected.

The external social capital dimensions and their relationships
to each other are congruent with the social capital relationships
that exist within the company. Interestingly, the strength of the
relationships differs. Whereas within the company the cognitive
dimension of social capital exerts a stronger positive inﬂuence on
the relational capital dimension, in the inter-organizational per-
spective this relationship is reversed; i.e., for the build-up of
relational capital with suppliers, external structural capital is more
beneﬁcial than external cognitive capital. One possible interpreta-
tion of this ﬁnding is that within a single company cognitive
capital in terms of shared values, attitudes, norms, etc. (Tsai and
Ghoshal, 1998; Uphoff and Wijayaratna, 2000) is more important
than the pattern of relationships between individuals or functions


P. Horn et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 153 (2014) 54–65

61

Table 2
Path coefﬁcients.

Path/hypothesis

Internal cognitive capital - internal relational capital (H1a)
Internal structural capital - internal relational capital (H1b)
Internal relational capital - internal cross-functional integration (H2)
Internal cross-functional integration - external integration with suppliers (H3)
Internal cross-functional integration - cognitive capital with suppliers (H4a)
Internal cross-functional integration - structural capital with suppliers (H4b)
Cognitive capital with suppliers - relational capital with suppliers (H5a)
Structural capital with suppliers - relational capital with suppliers (H5b)
Relational capital with suppliers - external integration with suppliers (H6)
External integration with suppliers - global sourcing success (H7)

*po0.05.
Two-tailed tests.
n.s. ¼ not signiﬁcant.

nn po0.01.

Path coefﬁcient

0.481
0.277
0.623
0.102
0.310
0.373
0.232
0.555
0.741
0.447

t-value

5.105**
2.774**
10.434**
1.599 n.s.
3.341**
4.113**
2.593**
7.003**
15.656**
5.371**

(Burt, 1997). In contrast, between organizations, the structural
dimension of social capital seems to be of higher value than the
cognitive one. A potential explanation of this ﬁnding could be that
the membership of an individual in an organization is already
equivalent to an initial endowment of structural capital in terms of
the individual's ties to other organizational members. On the other
hand, the existence of shared goals and visions (cognitive capital)
might act as a framework for the alignment of actions and
initiatives, facilitating exchange of and access to information that
lies in relationships (relational capital). In contrast,
in buyer–
supplier relationships, shared norms and values are indeed of
interest but are not as important as the presence of certain contact
points in the partnering company, which are the precondition for
the exchange of resources such as information and knowledge.
This interesting ﬁnding could potentially provide a new avenue for
future research on social capital in buyer–supplier relationships.
Furthermore, in line with scholars such as Lawson et al. (2008) and
Carey et al. (2011), it was conﬁrmed that external integration with
suppliers has a signiﬁcant positive impact on performance, which
we operationalized as global sourcing success.

Taking all aspects of our ﬁndings into consideration, we have
made a signiﬁcant contribution to the operations management
literature insofar as we investigated internal as well as external
organizational integration under a social capital lens. In addition,
integration was linked to global sourcing performance, and new
avenues for future research were identiﬁed. Thus, the knowledge
base of global sourcing has been extended.

In our data, we were not able to ﬁnd evidence for the existence of
“the dark side of buyer–supplier relationships”, the idea that cogni-
tive structural and relational capital can impede value creation in
buyer–supplier relationships, as proposed by Villena et al. (2011). The
main reasons posited for the presumed negative effects of too much
social capital were the reduced ability to make effective decisions as
well as increased opportunistic behavior by suppliers (Villena et al.,
2011). On the contrary, the overall results of our study emphasize the
high relevance of integration (internal and external) as well as social
capital in buyer–supplier relationships.

To conclude, our study expands the existing body of knowledge
regarding social capital theory with the following three points. First,
social capital theory has been used to explain internal as well as
external
integration in the global sourcing context. Second, we
showed that the strength of the relationships between the social
capital dimensions within the buying company differs from the
strength of the relationships between the buyer and the supplier.
Third, our data showed that there is no direct and signiﬁcant link
between internal cross-functional integration and external integration
with suppliers. Consequently, by investigating the internal perspective
as well as the external perspective of social capital and integration, we

have made valuable contributions to the ﬁeld and have paved the way
for further research in this domain, e.g., in the area dealing with the
differing effect strengths of the social capital dimensions.

Considering that global sourcing by deﬁnition already involves
various aspects of internal as well as external coordination and
integration (Trent and Monczka, 2005), the existence of a positive
relationship between external
integration with suppliers and
global sourcing success has been conﬁrmed. In the light of this
evidence, ﬁrms may wish to draw more attention to internal cross-
functional integration when facing problems in global sourcing.
Some ﬁrms may lack the maturity needed for global sourcing –
not in terms of language or cultural skills, but due to deﬁcits in
internal integration. Knowledge of this positive relationship can
support organizations in carefully developing their global sourcing
and integration strategies to realize improvement opportunities
and to shift toward globally integrated and coordinated sourcing
strategies (Samli et al., 1998; Trent and Monczka, 2005). Conse-
quently, integration is stimulated, potentially leading to improved
global sourcing success.

6.

Implications for managers

In the previous section, the theoretical

implications of our
ﬁndings were discussed. However, the results of the study also have
implications for management practice. Because social capital accu-
mulation and integration have been shown to be beneﬁcial for global
sourcing success, managers should facilitate integrative efforts
(Pagell, 2004; Trent and Monczka, 2003b; Zhao et al., 2011). In
contrast, when recommending procedures for increased global sour-
cing success, it is important to acknowledge that global competition
forces companies to act in an efﬁcient manner (Baily et al., 1995). For
this reason, it is often necessary for companies to focus on activities
that promise the most efﬁcient use of the resources invested.

In this context, the data suggest that it is reasonable to distin-
guish between internal and external perspectives. To facilitate
internal cross-functional
integration, managers could focus on
activities that support the accumulation of internal cognitive
capital because this dimension has been shown to be fairly
beneﬁcial for successful internal integration. As a consequence,
it is recommended that common goals and norms be clearly
communicated, particularly within organizations, to increase the
amount of cognitive capital.

Applying an external perspective, the data indicate that man-
agerial activities should further aim at creating structural capital
between organizations. While the results of our study suggest that
it may indeed be beneﬁcial to have similar norms, goals, and
values (cognitive capital) between organizations, structural social


62

P. Horn et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 153 (2014) 54–65

capital was shown to be especially conducive to successful
external integration. In accordance with these insights, clear paths
should be deﬁned among functions and individuals to create
possible contact points between the members of the organizations
and foster the build-up of structural capital. This approach might
also support the emergence of relational capital and thus allow
beneﬁting from the resources (e.g., knowledge and information)
that lie within the relationships, potentially leading to increased
organizational performance.

Taking these points into consideration, the results of our study
suggest that social capital can be an efﬁcient and effective tool that
practitioners can use to support their integrative efforts and to
increase corporate global sourcing success.

7. Conclusion

Based on the results of our survey, we conclude that internal
cross-functional integration can be seen as a precondition for
external integration with suppliers and global sourcing success.
Surprisingly, the direct relationship between internal and external
integration was not signiﬁcant, indicating a mediating role of the
three dimensions of social capital within this relationship. This
ﬁnding emphasizes the importance of social capital within the
ﬁrm as a facilitator for the development of social capital with
external market partners such as suppliers. Put another way,
internal integration is indeed beneﬁcial for external integration
under the condition of the presence of social capital.

Despite its contributions to the current body of knowledge, the
present study has some limitations. First, only subjective measures
were used to investigate the proposed model; this approach is,
however, common in social sciences (Dess and Robinson Jr, 1984).

Table 3
Measures.

Construct

Internal Cognitive Capital

(Mohr and Spekman, 1994)

Item

Second, a relatively small sample size (N¼82) was used to obtain
our data, which were gathered through purposive judgment sam-
pling within a large European automotive OEM. Despite the trend-
anticipating character of the automotive industry (Schiele et al.,
2011a), this could limit the generalizability of the ﬁndings.

Despite these limitations, the results of our study are still mean-
ingful because we carried out structural equation modeling in
connection with PLS, which has minimal requirements regarding
sample size, measurement scales, and residual distributions (Chin,
1998). Furthermore, van der Vaart and van Donk (2008) argue that
high response rates, as were achieved in our case, should increase
generalizability. Although our data were collected within only one
German automotive OEM, industry bias has been alleviated to some
extent by surveying the purchasers of
items from a variety of
industries such as plastics, metal and electronics in different countries.
In future research, this study could be used as a point of
departure from which to elaborate further on the relationship
between internal and external integration, which was not signiﬁ-
cant in our research setting. Furthermore, future studies could
investigate whether the impact of the social capital dimensions
and integration differs among industries. From a methodological
perspective, highly credible results could be obtained from long-
itudinal research settings in combination with secondary data, as
well as from in-depth case studies. In particular, studies involving
larger samples and diverse buying organizations from different
industries could provide an interesting avenue for future research
to enrich the ﬁndings of this study.

Appendix A. Measures

See Table 3

Internal Structural Capital

(Rindﬂeisch and Moorman, 2001)

Internal Relational Capital
Trust (Kaufman et al., 2006; Rodríguez

et al., 2007)

Commitment (Rodríguez et al., 2007)

Internal Integration (Rodríguez et al.,

2007)

External Cognitive Capital (Mohr and

Spekman, 1994)

Other departments participate in goal setting.
Other departments participate in planning activities.
We encourage other departments to come with suggestions for improvements.
Other departments participate in forecasting activities.

Our employees share close social relationships with the employees from other departments.
We like to spend time with employees from the other departments
We spent a long time working together with other departments.

When making decisions, other departments consider our business interest as well as their own.
We trust that other departments keep our best interest in mind.
Other departments are sincere and honest with us.
We believe the information, other departments provide.

My department is committed to the relationship with other departments.
We consider other departments as part of ours.

Our departments help each other to accomplish their tasks in the most effective way.
The departments try to achieve goals jointly.
The departments share ideas, information and/ or resources.
The departments work together as a team.
The departments take the project`s technical and operative decisions together.

We ask the supplier for advice and counsel.
We encourage the supplier to come with suggestions for iprovements.

Loading CRa

AVEb

0.773

0.913
0.900
0.825
0.877

0.837
0.875
0.73

0.798
0.816
0.874
0.797

0.68
0.803

0.816
0.798
0.773
0.904
0.708

0.687
0.778

0.856 0.667

0.912 0.635

0.9

0.644

0.846 0.579


P. Horn et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 153 (2014) 54–65

63

Table 3 (continued )

Construct

Item

We ask the supplier to take part in our forecasting activities.
The supplier is collaborative.

Our employees share close social relationships with the employees from the supplier.
We like to spend time with employees from the supplier.
We feel indebted to the supplier for what it has done for us.

When making decisions, the supplier considers our business interest as well as its own.
We trust that the supplier keeps our best interest in mind.
The supplier is sincere and honest with us.
We believe the information, the supplier provide.

We want to remain a customer of the supplier.
Our decision to remain customer of the supplier is also based on the attraction to the things that the
supplier represents as a company.

The supplier makes an effort to help us during emergencies.
When an agreement is made, we can always rely on the supplier to fulﬁll requirements.
Please indicate the overall degree of satisfaction concerning the collaboration with the supplier in
comparison to your most successful global sourcing project.

From the departments perspective one could be satisﬁed with how the project progressed.
Overall, the project was done in a cost-efﬁcient way.
From the companies perspective, the project goals were achieved.
The project was within schedule.
The original product performance objectives were met.
The original product unit-cost obejectives were met.
The original time to market objectives were met.
We received the planned and budgeded amount of goods.

External Structural Capital

(Rindﬂeisch and Moorman, 2001)

External Relational Capital
Trust (Kaufman et al., 2006; Rodríguez

et al., 2007)

Commitment (Kumar et al., 1994)

External Integration (Monczka et al.,

1998)

Sourcing Success (Hoegl and

Gemuenden, 2001;

Tatikonda and Montoya-Weiss, 2001)

a CR ¼ composite reliability.
b AVE ¼ average variance extracted.

Loading CRa

AVEb

0.851 0.656

0.897 0.595

0.895 0.741

0.924 0.604

0.792
0.781

0.882
0.766
0.778

0.827
0.888
0.854
0.787

0.663
0.627

0.84
0.851
0.89

0.846
0.717
0.889
0.702
0.802
0.748
0.754
0.742

References

Adler, P.S., Kwon, S.W., 2002. Social capital: prospects for a new concept. Acad.

Manag. Rev. 27, 17–40.

Ahuja, G., 2000. Collaboration networks, structural holes, and innovation: a long-

itudinal study. Adm. Sci. Q. 45, 425–455.

Alguire, M., Frear, C., Metcalf, L., 1994. An examination of the determinants of global

sourcing strategy. J. Bus. Ind. Market. 9, 62–74.

Baily, M.N., Gersbach, H., Scherer, F., Lichtenberg, F.R., 1995. Efﬁciency in manu-
facturing and the need for global competition. Brookings Papers on economic
activity. Microeconomics 1995, 307–358.

Barney, J., 1991. Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. J. Manag. 17,

99–120.

Blumberg, B., Cooper, D., Schindler, P., 2008. Business Research Methods: Second

European edition. McGraw-Hill Higher Education, Maidenhead, UK.

Bowersox, D.J., Calantone, R.J., 1998. Global logistics. J. Int. Mark. 6, 83–93.
Burt, R.S., 1997. The contingent value of social capital. Adm. Sci. Q. 42, 339–365.
Burton, G., Carrol, G., Wall, S., 2002. Quantitative Methods for Business and

Economics. Pearson Education, Harlow, UK.

Caldwell, C., Hayes, L.A., 2007. Leadership, trustworthiness, and the mediating lens.

J. Manag. Dev. 26, 261–281.

Carey, S., Lawson, B., Krause, D.R., 2011. Social capital conﬁguration, legal bonds and

performance in buyer-supplier relationships. J. Oper. Manag. 29, 277–288.

Carter, J.R., Maltz, A., Yan, T., Maltz, E., 2008. How procurement managers view low
cost countries and geographies. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 38, 224–243.
Chen, H.H., Lee, P.Y., Lay, T.J., 2009. Drivers of dynamic learning and dynamic
competitive capabilities in international strategic alliances. J. Bus. Res. 62,
1289–1295.

Cheng, T.C.E., Yip, F.K., Yeung, A.C.L., 2012. Supply riskmanagement via guanxi in the
Chinese business context: the buyer'sperspective. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 139, 3–13.
Chin, W.W., 1998. The Partial Least Squares Approach for Structural Equation

Modeling. Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ.

Churchill Jr, G.A., 1979. A paradigm for developing better measures of marketing

constructs. J. Mark. Res. 16, 64–73.

Coleman, J.S., 1994. Foundations of Social Theory. Belknap Press, Cambridge, MA.
Cousins, P.D., Menguc, B., 2006. The implications of socialization and integration in

supply chain management. J. Oper. Manag. 24, 604–620.

Das, A., Narasimhan, R., Talluri, S., 2006. Supplier integration – ﬁnding an optimal

conﬁguration. J. Oper. Manag. 24, 563–582.

Dess, G.G., Robinson Jr, R.B., 1984. Measuring organizational performance in the
absence of objective measures: the case of the privately‐held ﬁrm and
conglomerate business unit. Strateg. Manag. J. 5, 265–273.

Droge, C., Jayaram, J., Vickery, S.K., 2004. The effects of internal versus external
integration practices on time-based performance and overall ﬁrm performance.
J. Oper. Manag. 22, 557–573.

Edwards, J.R., Bagozzi, R.P., 2000. On the nature and direction of relationships

between constructs and measures. Psychol. Methods. 5, 155–174.

Ellegaard, C., Koch, C., 2012. The effects of low internal

integration between
purchasing and operations on suppliers’ resource mobilization. J. Purch. Supply
Manag. 18, 148–158.

Espino-Rodríguez, T., Padrón-Robaina, V., 2006. A review of outsourcing from the

resource-based view of the ﬁrm. Int. J. Manag. Rev. 8, 49–70.

Fabbe-Costes, N., Jahre, M., 2007. Supply chain integration improves performance:

the Emperor's new suit? Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 37, 835–855.

Flynn, B.B., Huo, B., Zhao, X., 2010. The impact of supply chain integration on
performance: a contingency and conﬁguration approach. J. Oper. Manag. 28,
58–71.

Foerstl, K.D., Hartmann, E., Wynstra, F., Moser, R., 2013. Cross-functional integration
and functional coordination in purchasing and supply management: antece-
dents and effects on purchasing and ﬁrm performance. Int. J. Oper. Prod.
Manag. 33 (4-4).

Fornell, C., Cha, J., 1994. Partial least squares. In: Bagozzi, R.P. (Ed.), Advanced

Methods of Marketing Research. Blackwell, Cambridge, MA, pp. 52–78.

Fornell, C., Larcker, D.F., 1981. Evaluating structural equation models with unob-

servable variables and measurement error. J. Mark. Res. 18, 39–50.

Forza, C., 2009. Surveys. In: Karlsson, C. (Ed.), Researching Operations Management.

Routledge, New York and London, pp. 85–161.


64

P. Horn et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 153 (2014) 54–65

Frohlich, M., Westbrook, R., 2001. Arcs of integration: an international study of

supply chain strategies. J. Oper. Manag. 19, 185–200.

Gerlach, M.L., 1992. Alliance Capitalism: The Social Organization of Japanese

Business. University of California Press, Berkeley, CA.
Gimenez, C., Ventura, E., 2005. Logistics-production,

logistics-marketing and
external integration: their impact on performance. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag.
25, 20–38.

Golini, R., Kalchschmidt, M., 2011. Moderating the impact of global sourcing on
inventories through supply chain management. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 133, 86–94.
Granovetter, M.S., Swedberg, R., 1992. The Sociology of Economic Life, CO.

Westview press, Boulder.

Guido, C., Luca, I., Giuseppe, Z., 2006. A situationalist perspective to competency

management. Hum. Resour. Manage. 45, 429–448.

Hair, J.F., Anderson, R.E., Tatham, R.L., Black, W.C., 2006. Multivariate Data Analysis,

6th ed.. Pearson, Upper Saddle River, NJ.

Hamprecht, J., Corsten, D., Noll, M., Meier, E., 2005. Controlling the sustainability of

food supply chains. Supply Chain Manag.: Int. J. 10, 7–10.

Harkness, J., Pennell, B.E., Schoua, G., A., 2004. Survey questionnaire translation and
assessment. In: Presser, S., Rothgeb, J.M., Couper, M.P. (Eds.), Methods for
Testing and Evaluating Survey Questionnaires. John Wiley and Sons, New York,
NY, pp. 453–473.

Hartmann, E., Bals, L., Kaiser, G., 2008. The impact of internal purchasing resources
and capabilities on low-cost country sourcing. Zeitschrift für Betriebswirtschaft
78, 31–54.

Helper, S., 1990. Comparative supplier relations in the U.S. and Japanese auto

industries: an exit/voice approach. Bus. Econ. Hist. 19, 153–162.

Henseler, J., Ringle, C.M., Sinkovics, R.R., 2009. The use of partial least squares path
modeling in international marketing. Advances in International Marketing 20,
277–319.

Hirunyawipada, T., Beyerlein, M., Blankson, C., 2010. Cross-functional integration as
a knowledge transformation mechanism: implications for new product devel-
opment. Ind. Market. Manag. 39, 650–660.

Hoegl, M., Gemuenden, H., 2001. Teamwork quality and the success of innovative
projects: a theoretical concept and empirical evidence. Organ. Sci. 12, 435–449.
Holweg, M., Reichhart, A., Hong, E., 2011. On risk and cost in global sourcing. Int. J.

Prod. Econ. 131, 333–341.

Horn, P., Schiele, H., Werner, W., 2013. The ugly twins: failed low-wage-country
sourcing projects and their expensive replacements. J. Purch. Supply Manag. 19,
27–38.

Hughes, M., Perrons, R.K., 2011. Shaping and re-shaping social capital in buyer-

supplier relationships. J. Bus. Res. 64, 164–171.

Hulland,

J., 1999. Use of partial

least squares (PLS) in strategic management

research: a review of four recent studies. Strateg. Manag. J. 20, 195–204.

Inkpen, A.C., Tsang, E.W.K., 2005. Social capital, networks, and knowledge transfer.

Acad. Manag. Rev. 30, 146–165.

Kahn, K.B., 1996. Interdepartmental integration: a deﬁnition with implications for

product development performance. J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 13, 137–151.

Kale, P., Singh, H., Perlmutter, H., 2000. Learning and protection of proprietary
J.

assets in strategic alliances: building relational capital. Strateg. Manag.
21 (217-137).

Kaufman, P., Jayachandran, S., Rose, R.L., 2006. The role of relational embeddedness

in retail buyers’ selection of new products. J. Mark. Res. 43, 580–587.

Kim, S.W., 2006. The effect of supply chain integration on the alignment between
corporate competitive capability and supply chain operational capability. Int. J.
Oper. Prod. Manag. 26, 1084–1107.

Koka, B.R., Prescott, J.E., 2002. Strategic alliances as social capital: a multidimen-

sional view. Strateg. Manag. J. 23, 795–816.

Kotabe, M., 1994. Global sourcing strategy: R&D, manufacturing, & marketing

interfaces. J. Glob. Mark. 7 (157-157).

Kotabe, M., Mudambi, R., 2009. Global sourcing and value creation: opportunities

and challenges. J. Int. Manag. 15, 121–125.

Kotabe, M., Omura, G., 1989. Sourcing strategies of European and Japanese multi-

nationals: a comparison. J. Int. Bus. Stud. 20, 113–130.

Koufteros, X., Vonderembse, M., Jayaram, J., 2005. Internal and external integration
for product development: the contingency effects of uncertainty, equivocality,
and platform strategy. Decisi. Sci. 36, 97–133.

Koufteros, X.A., Rawski, G.E., Rupak, R., 2010. Organizational integration for product
development: the effects on glitches, on‐time execution of engineering change
orders, and market success. Decis. Sci. 41, 49–80.

Krause, D.R., Handﬁeld, R.B., Tyler, B.B., 2007. The relationships between supplier
development, commitment, social capital accumulation and performance
improvement. J. Oper. Manag. 25, 528–545.

Kumar, N., Scheer, L.K., Steenkamp,

J.B.E.M., 1994. The effects of perceived

interdependence on dealer attitudes. J. Mark. Res. 32, 348–356.

Lawson, B., Tyler, B.B., Cousins, P.D., 2008. Antecedents and consequences of social

capital on buyer performance improvement. J. Oper. Manag. 26, 446–460.

Leana, C.R., Pil, F.K., 2006. Social capital and organizational performance: evidence

from urban public schools. Organ. Sci. 17, 353–366.

Lee, Y., Cavusgil, S.T., 2006. Enhancing alliance performance: the effects of
contractual-based versus relational-based governance. J. Bus. Res. 59, 896–905.
Maltz, E., Kohli, A., 1996. Market intelligence dissemination across functional

boundaries. J. Mark. Res. 33, 47–61.

Marshall, M.N., 1996. Sampling for qualitative research. Family Pract. 13, 522–526
Min, S., Kim, S.K., Chen, H., 2008. Developing social identity and social capital for

supply chain management. J. Bus. Logist. 29, 283–304.

Mohr, J., Spekman, R., 1994. Characteristics of partnership success: partnership
attributes, communication behavior, and conﬂict resolution techniques. Strateg.
Manag. J. 15, 135–152.

Monczka, R.M., Giunipero, L.C., 1985. International purchasing: characteristics and

implementation. Int. Exec. 27, 2–9.

Monczka, R.M., Petersen, K.J., Handﬁeld, R.B., Ragatz, G.L., 1998. Success factors in
strategic supplier alliances: the buying company perspective. Decis. Sci. 29,
553–577.

Montoya-Weiss, M.M., Massey, A.P., Song, X.M., 2001. Getting it together: temporal
coordination and conﬂict management in global virtual teams. Acad. Manag. J.
44, 1251–1262.

Moses, A., Ahlstroem, P., 2009. Nature of functional involvement in make or buy

decision processes. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 29, 894–920.

Murray, J.Y., 2001. Strategic alliance-based global sourcing strategy for competitive
advantage: a conceptual framework and research propositions. J. Int. Mark. 9, 30–58.
Murray, J.Y., Kotabe, M., Wildt, A.R., 1995. Strategic and ﬁnancial performance
implications of global sourcing strategy: a contingency analysis. J. Int. Bus. Stud.
26, 181–202.

Nahapiet, J., Ghoshal, S., 1998. Social capital, intellectual capital, and the organiza-

tional advantage. Acad. Manag. Rev. 23, 242–266.

Narasimhan, R., Kim, S.W., 2001. Information system utilization strategy for supply

chain integration. J. Bus. Logist. 22, 51–75.

Nassimbeni, G., 2006. International sourcing: empirical evidence from a sample of

Italian ﬁrms. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 103, 694–706.

Nevitt, J., Hancock, G.R., 2001. Performance of bootstrapping approaches to model
test statistics and parameter standard error estimation in structural equation
modeling. Struct. Equ. Model. 8, 353–377.

Nunnally, J.C., Bernstein, I.H., 1994. Psychometric Theory. McGraw, New York, NY.
Ouchi, W.G., 1980. Markets, bureaucracies, and clans. Adm. Sci. Q. 25, 129–141.
Pagell, M., 2004. Understanding the factors that enable and inhibit the integration

of operations, purchasing and logistics. J. Oper. Manag. 22, 459–487.

Panayides, P.M., Venus Lun, Y.H., 2009. The impact of trust on innovativeness and

supply chain performance. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 122, 35–46.

Parkhe, A., 1993. Strategic alliance structuring: a game theoretic and transaction

cost examination of interﬁrm cooperation. Acad. Manag. J. 36, 794–829.

Petersen, K.J., Prayer, D.J., Scannell, T.V., 2000. An empirical investigation of global

sourcing strategy effectiveness. J. Supply Chain Manag. 36, 29–38.

Podsakoff, P.M., Organ, D.W., 1986. Self-reports in organizational research: pro-

blems and prospects. J. Manag. 12, 531–544.

Quintens, L., Pauwels, P., Matthyssens, P., 2006. Global purchasing strategy:

conceptualization and measurement. Ind. Mark. Manag. 35, 881–891.

Rabbiosi, L., Santangelo, G.D., 2013. Parent company beneﬁts from reverse knowl-
edge transfer: the role of the liability of newness in MNEs. J. World Bus. 48,
160–170.

Ragatz, G.L., Handﬁeld, R.B., Petersen, K.J., 2002. Beneﬁts associated with supplier
integration into new product development under conditions of technology
uncertainty. J. Bus. Res. 55, 389–400.

Reagans, R., McEvily, B., 2003. Network structure and knowledge transfer: the

effects of cohesion and range. Adm. Sci. Q. 48, 240–267.

Rindﬂeisch, A., Moorman, C., 2001. The acquisition and utilization of information in

new product alliances: a strength-of-ties perspective. J. Mark. 65, 1–18.

Ringle, C.M., Wende, S., Will, A., 2005. SmartPLS 2.0 (beta).
Rodríguez, N.G., Pérez, M.J.S., Gutiérrez, J.A.T., 2007. Interfunctional climate and a
new product performance: dependence as a moderator. J. Bus. Ind. Mark. 22,
459–473.

Rosenzweig, E.D., Roth, A.V., Dean Jr, J.W., 2003. The inﬂuence of an integration
strategy on competitive capabilities and business performance: an exploratory
study of consumer products manufacturers. J. Oper. Manag. 21, 437–456.

Roth, A.V., Schroeder, R.G., Huang, X., 2007. Handbook of Metrics for Research in
Operations Management: Multi-item Measurement Scales and Objective Items.
Sage Publications, Inc, Thousand Oaks, CA.

Sambasivan, M., Siew-Phaik, L., Mohamed, Z.A., Leong, Y.C., 2013. Factors inﬂuen-
cing strategic alliance outcomes in a manufacturing supply chain: role of
alliance motives, interdependence, asset speciﬁcity and relational capital. Int. J.
Prod. Econ. 141, 339–351.

Samli, A.C., Browning, J.M., Busbia, C., 1998. The status of global sourcing as a
critical tool of strategic planning: opportunistic versus strategic dichotomy.
J. Bus. Res. 43, 177–187.

Schiele, H., Horn, P., Vos, B., 2011a. Estimating cost-saving potential from interna-
tional sourcing and other sourcing levers: relative importance and trade-offs.
Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 41, 315–336.

Schiele, H., Veldman, J., Huettinger, L., 2011b. Supplier innovativeness and supplier

pricing: the role of preferred customer status. Int. J. Innov. Manag. 15, 1–27.

Schneider, C.O., Bremen, P., Schönsleben, P., Alard, R., 2013. Transaction cost
economics in globalsourcing: assessing regional differences and implications
for performance. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 141, 243–254.

Schoenherr, T., Swink, M., 2012. Revisiting the arcs of integration: cross-validations

and extensions. J. Oper. Manag. 30, 99–115.

Seibert, S.E., Kraimer, M.L., Liden, R.C., 2001. A social capital theory of career

success. Acad. Manag. J. 44, 219–237.

Sherman, J.D., Souder, W.E., Jenssen, S.A., 2000. Differential effects of the primary
integration on product development cycle time.

forms of cross functional
J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 17, 257–267.

Smitka, M., 1991. Competitive Ties: Subcontracting in the Japanese Automotive

Industry. Columbia University Press, New York, NY.


P. Horn et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 153 (2014) 54–65

65

Sparrowe, R.T., Liden, R.C., Wayne, S.J., Kraimer, M.L., 2001. Social networks and the

Uzzi, B., 1997. Social structure and competition in interﬁrm networks: the paradox

performance of individuals and groups. Acad. Manag. J. 44, 316–325.

of embeddedness. Adm. Sci. Q. 42, 35–67.

Spekman, R., 1991. U.S. buyers’ relationships with Paciﬁc Rim sellers. Int. J. Purch.

van der Vaart, T., van Donk, D.P., 2008. A critical review of survey-based research in

Mater. Manag. 27, 1–10.

Steinle, C., Schiele, H., 2008. Limits to global sourcing? Strategic consequences of
dependency on international suppliers: cluster theory, resource-based view
and case studies. J. Purch.Supply Manag. 14, 3–14.

Subramani, M., 2004. How do suppliers beneﬁt from information technology use in

supply chain relationships? MIS Q. 28, 45–73.

Tatikonda, M.V., Montoya-Weiss, M.M., 2001. Integrating operations and marketing
perspectives of product innovation: the inﬂuence of organizational process
factors and capabilities on development performance. Manage. Sci. 47, 151–172.
Taylor, M., Taylor, A., 2008. Operations management research in the automotive

sector. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 28, 480–489.

Tenenhaus, M., Vinzi, V.E., Chatelin, Y.M., Lauro, C., 2005. PLS path modeling.

Comput. Stat. Data. Anal. 48, 159–205.

Tessarolo, P., 2007.

Is integration enough for fast product development?: an
empirical investigation of the contextual effects of product vision. J. Prod.
Innov. Manag. 24, 69–82.

Thompson, L., Fine, G.A., 1999. Socially shared cognition, affect, and behavior: a
review and integration. Personality and Social Psychology Review 3, 278–302.
Trautmann, G., Turkulainen, V., Hartmann, E., Bals, L., 2009. Integration in the global
sourcing organization - An information processing perspective. J. Supply Chain
Manag. 45, 57–74.

Trent, R.J., Monczka, R.M., 2003a. International purchasing and global sourcing -

what are the differences? J. Supply Chain Manag. 39, 26–36.

Trent, R.J., Monczka, R.M., 2003b. Understanding integrated global sourcing. Int. J.

Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 33, 607–629.

supply chain integration. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 111, 42–55.

Vickery, S.K., Jayaram, J., Droge, C., Calantone, R.J., 2003. The effects of an integrative
supply chain strategy on customer service and ﬁnancial performance: an
analysis of direct versus indirect relationships. J. Oper. Manag. 21, 523–539.

Vijayasarathy, L.R., 2010. Supply integration: an investigation of

its multi-

dimensionality and relational antecedents. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 124, 489–505.

Villena, V.H., Revilla, E., Choi, T.Y., 2011. The dark side of buyer–supplier relation-

ships: a social capital perspective. J. Oper. Manag. 29, 561–576.

Wagner, S.M., 2011. Supplier development and the relationship life-cycle. Int. J.

Prod. Econ. 129, 277–283.

Weber, M., Hiete, M., Lauer, L., Rentz, O., 2010. Low cost country sourcing and its
effects on the total cost of ownership structure for a medical devices
manufacturer. J. Purch.Supply Manag. 16, 4–16.

Wetzels, M., Odekerken-Schroder, G., Van Oppen, C., 2009. Using PLS path
modeling for assessing hierarchical construct models: guidelines and empirical
illustration. MIS Q. 33, 177–195.

Wiengarten, F., Pagell, M., Ahmed, M.U., Gimenez, C., 2014. Do a country's logistical
integration performance relationship?

capabilities moderate the external
J. Oper. Manag. 32, 51–63.

Wold, H., 1982. Soft modeling: the basic design and some extensions. Syst. Under

Indirect Obs. 2, 589–591.

Yang, J., Rui, M., Rauniar, R., Ikem, F.M., Xie, H., 2013. Unravelling the link between
knowledge management and supply chain integration: an empirical study. Int.
J. Logist. Res. Appl., 1–12.

Zaheer, A., Bell, G.G., 2005. Beneﬁting from network position: ﬁrm capabilities,

Trent, R.J., Monczka, R.M., 2005. Achieving excellence in global sourcing. Sloan.

structural holes, and performance. Strateg. Manag. J. 26, 809–825.

Manage. Rev. 47, 24–32.

Zhang, M., Huo, B., 2013. The impact of dependence and trust on supply chain

Tsai, W., 2000. The formation of intraorganizational linkages. Strat. Manag. J. 21,

integration. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 43, 544–563.

925–939.

Tsai, W., Ghoshal, S., 1998. Social capital and value creation: the role of intraﬁrm

networks. Acad. Manag. J. 41, 464–476.

Uphoff, N., Wijayaratna, C., 2000. Demonstrated beneﬁts from social capital: the
productivity of farmer organizations in Gal Oya, Sri Lanka. World Dev. 28,
1875–1890.

Zhao, L., Huo, B., Sun, L., Zhao, X., 2013. The impact of supply chain risk on supply
chain integration and company performance: a global investigation. Supply
Chain Manag. Int. J. 18, 115–131.

Zhao, X., Huo, B., Selen, W., Yeung, J.H.Y., 2011. The impact of internal integration
and relationship commitment on external integration. J. Oper. Manag. 29,
17–32.

