JMTM
26,1

80

Received 9 May 2012
Revised 25 December 2012
14 March 2013
13 August 2013
6 November 2013
Accepted 7 November 2013

The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
www.emeraldinsight.com/1741-038X.htm

An exploratory survey of green

supply chain management in
Chinese manufacturing small
and medium-sized enterprises

Pressures and drivers

Business School, Xi’an Jiaotong Liverpool University, Suzhou, China

School of Business and Communications, PSB Academy, Singapore, and

Xiangmeng Huang

Boon Leing Tan

Xiaoming Ding

Business School, Xi’an Jiaotong Liverpool University, Suzhou, China

Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this paper is to empirically investigate the pressures and drivers that have
been experienced by Chinese manufacturing small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in terms of green
supply chain management (GSCM).
Design/methodology/approach – The research framework and hypotheses are examined by
a questionnaire survey through e-mails conducted in China in 2011. The empirical analysis is based on
the data from 202 SME manufacturers in China. Validity and reliability of the items employed in the
research is assessed through Cronbach’s α test. Hypotheses for the identification of GSCM pressures
and drivers to SMEs as well as the differences that exist among different industrial sectors are tested
by adopting descriptive statistics analysis and analysis of variance test.
Findings – This study finds that Chinese manufacturing SMEs have been under pressures from
a variety of sources, including regulations, customers, suppliers and public awareness in terms of
GSCM. Besides, internal drivers are also an important encouragement for SMEs to consider GSCM.
Moreover, Chinese manufacturing SMEs from different industrial sectors show some differences in
experiencing pressures or being motivated by drivers.
Research limitations/implications – The main limitations to this paper are the relatively small
sample of SMEs and the potentially overlooked variables.
Practical implications – Chinese manufacturing SMEs and their larger customers, as well as
governments, are likely to obtain some implications from this study if they are willing to consider any
GSCM initiatives throughout the supply chain.
Originality/value – The paper clearly explores the GSCM pressures and drivers faced by the Chinese
manufacturing SMEs where the results may differ from the findings through the studies on large
enterprises or SMEs in other national context.
Keywords Supply chain management, Small- and medium-sized enterprises
Paper type Research paper

Journal of Manufacturing
Technology Management
Vol. 26 No. 1, 2015
pp. 80-103
© Emerald Group Publishing Limited
1741-038X
DOI 10.1108/JMTM-05-2012-0053

1. Introduction
The term “supply chain management” (SCM) is first introduced by Oliver and Webber
in the early 1980s (Delfmann and Albers, 2000) and it has traditionally been regarded as
a process of converting raw materials into final products which will then be transferred
to the end users. Besides the tangible product flow, some also stressed the intangible
value of the SCM which includes putting emphasis on market needs exchange, trust

