596814 JOMXXX10.1177/0149206315596814Journal of ManagementHirst et al.

research-article2015

Journal of Management
Vol. XX No. X, Month XXXX 1 –22
DOI: 10.1177/0149206315596814
© The Author(s) 2015
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav 

Exploitation and Exploration Climates’ Influence 

on Performance and Creativity: Diminishing 

Returns as Function of Self-Efficacy

Giles Hirst

Australian National University
Daan van Knippenberg

Erasmus University

Qin Zhou
University of York

Cherrie Jiuhua Zhu

Monash University

Philip Cheng-Fei Tsai

Wenzao Ursuline University of Languages

In response to calls for multilevel research examining individual and meso-level processes to 
understand how exploitation and exploration dynamics play out in teams, we propose that indi-
vidual in-role performance (cf. exploitation) and creativity (cf. exploration) are associated with 
team  exploitation  and  exploration  climate  respectively,  and  this  influence  is  moderated  by 
domain specific performance and creative self-efficacy respectively. Studying 317 engineers in 
70 teams across three national regions, we theorize and find domain-specific evidence that when 
individual self-efficacy is high, team climate has diminishing performance (exploitation climate 
× performance self-efficacy) and creative (exploration climate × creative self-efficacy) benefits. 
By simultaneously studying creativity and performance, our study helps understand the differ-
ences and communalities in the drivers of those outcomes in identifying both the domain-spe-
cific character of these influences and the similarity in how these influences play out.

Keywords:  creativity; performance; multilevel; team climate; self-efficacy

Acknowledgments: The authors are grateful for the support provided by the Australian Research Council (Grant 
ARC LP1010032). All authors contributed equally. 

Corresponding author: Giles Hirst, Research School of Management, Australian National University, Canberra, 
Australia. 

E-mail: giles.hirst@anu.edu.au

1


2 

  Journal of Management / Month XXXX

Employees need to demonstrate both high levels of performance and creativity for their 
firm to succeed and prosper (Gong, Zhou, & Chang, 2013; Miron, Erez, & Naveh, 2004). Yet 
we possess limited knowledge of the common and distinctive antecedents of employee per-
formance  and  creativity  (Gong  et  al.,  2013;  Gong,  Huang,  &  Farh,  2009).  Studying  both 
outcomes  simultaneously  enables  integrative  theory  building  and  also  speaks  to  the  chal-
lenge of simultaneously encouraging employee in-role performance and employee creativity 
through exploration or exploitation (March, 1991). In addressing this issue, we emphasize 
cross-level team influences, because teams are ubiquitous to organizations and individual 
performance and creativity are embedded in, and influenced by, the team context (e.g., Hirst, 
van Knippenberg, & Zhou, 2009).

In considering team-level influences, a key element in our analysis is recognizing that the 
differing priorities of creativity and in-role performance have strong parallels in the differing 
priorities emphasized for exploration (a focus on learning and innovation) and exploitation 
(a  focus  on  efficient  performance  on  more  routinized  tasks;  Lavie,  Stettner,  &  Tushman, 
2010; March, 1991). Just as employees strive for individual performance and creativity, the 
teams in which they work may place varying emphasis on exploration or exploitation goals 
as a means to achieve these outcomes (e.g., Beckman, 2006). We propose that such team 
orientations toward exploitation and exploration can be understood as aspects of team cli-
mate (cf. Anderson & West, 1998; Jansen, van den Bosch, & Volberda, 2006) that influence 
individuals by conveying the appreciation for, and importance of, efficient in-role perfor-
mance and exploratory creative activities respectively.

We also add an important qualification here, however, through an integration of this team 
climate  perspective  with  insights  from  social  cognitive  theory’s  study  of  self-efficacy 
(Bandura, 2001). Self-efficacy is a particularly relevant influence here because it not only 
affects individual performance and creativity (Gong et al., 2009), but also provides a frame 
of  reference  through  which  individuals  interpret  the  context  in  which  they  are  embedded 
(Richter, Hirst, van Knippenberg, & Baer, 2012). Key to our analysis in this respect is the 
notion that individuals with higher self-efficacy need less encouragement from the situation 
to pursue achievement goals (cf. Hirst et al., 2009). More specifically we propose that team 
climate more easily encourages the performance and creativity of individuals with higher 
self-efficacy, but also has diminishing returns in that an encouraging climate adds little to the 
performance or creativity of individuals with high self-efficacy beyond a certain point (cf. 
the notion that there are limits on the pay-off on self-efficacy; Lim & Choi, 2009; Vancouver 
& Kendall, 2006; Yeo & Neal, 2006). Thus, we show that team climate and individual self-
efficacy influences should be seen not as additive but rather as interacting to shape individu-
al’s achievement strivings.

Moreover,  by  simultaneously  studying  creativity  and  performance,  our  study  helps 
understand the domain-specific influences on these outcomes and parallels in how they can 
best be achieved. It speaks to repeated calls for multilevel research examining individual 
and meso-level processes to understand how exploitation and exploration dynamics play 
out in teams (e.g., Birkinshaw & Gupta, 2013; Junni, Sarala, Taras, & Tarba, 2013; Lavie 
et al., 2010). In addition, we extend self-cognitive theory by developing an understanding 
of the interplay of self-efficacy beliefs with the social context, highlighting that the context 
may  have  fewer  performance  and  creative  benefits  for  efficacious  employees.  Whereas 
such  contextual  influences  are  consistent  with  social  cognitive  theory  (Bandura,  2001), 


Hirst et al. / Cross-Level Antecedents of Performance and Creativity 

  3

they are so far essentially unexplored in the study of self-efficacy’s influence on creativity 
and performance.

Literature Review and Hypotheses

Employees’ in-role performance refers to how well the individual performs the actions 
specified  and  required  by  an  employee’s  job  description  (Janssen  &  van  Yperen,  2004). 
These mandated job performance requirements serve to make work behavior predictable so 
that essential organizational tasks can be completed to achieve unit and organizational goals 
(Campbell, McCloy, Oppler, & Sager, 1993; Motowidlo & Van Scotter, 1994). Although dif-
fering job functions place varying emphasis on creativity, creativity does not necessarily lead 
to successful job performance, nor does job performance equate to demonstrating creativity 
(Unsworth, 2001). Creativity, unlike the performance of prescribed procedures, processes, or 
targets, inherently involves dealing with uncertainty and unpredictability. Creativity at work 
involves the individual developing practical and new solutions to workplace challenges to 
provide  tangible  and  useful  outcomes  for  the  organization  (Amabile,  1996;  Ford,  1996; 
Oldham & Cummings, 1996; Shalley, 1991). Creative responses may also take the form of 
enhancements or innovations to procedures or “blue-sky” approaches to develop new and 
useful  procedures,  processes,  or  products. Thus  in-role  performance  (or  for  short:  perfor-
mance) in most job functions relates to core activities in an individual’s work behavior that 
are more likely to be predictable, routinized, and open to standardization. Creativity in com-
parison includes the development of new and useful approaches to resolve workplace prob-
lems and challenges and thus inherently holds elements of unpredictability and uncertainty 
that preclude routinization or standardization.

Whereas individual creativity and performance are largely studied in isolation from each 
other, research in exploration and exploitation has considered similar issues at a higher level 
of analysis (i.e., the team or organization; Lavie et al., 2010). Ever since March’s (1991) 
seminal research, studies have sought to understand the tension between a focus on maximiz-
ing efficiency and productivity (i.e., exploitation) and a focus on learning, creativity, and 
innovation (i.e., exploration). Teams may have substantial discretion in the extent to which 
they emphasize exploitation or exploration (Rosing, Frese, & Bausch, 2011). As such, they 
may  convey  both  a  message  as  to  the  desirability  and  appropriateness  of  a  focus  and  an 
emphasis on efficient performance or exploration to stimulate creativity, and thus stimulate 
these outcomes at the individual level.

The literature on exploitation and exploration describes performing one’s work efficiently 
by exploiting available resources as compared with exploring new activities as a basis for 
creative endeavors culminating in innovations (Gibson & Birkinshaw, 2004). Exploitation 
involves refinement, efficiency, and improvement that reduce variance and increase reliabil-
ity  and  control,  whereas  exploration  refers  to  search,  variation,  and  experimentation  that 
foster innovative processes (Beckman, Haunschild, & Phillips, 2004; Benner & Tushman, 
2003; Gupta, Smith, & Shalley, 2006). Building on this work, we propose that a team’s focus 
on exploitation or exploration can thus be understood as part of the team climate (Jansen  
et al., 2006)—a proposition that is mirrored in research on team orientations toward learning 
and  performance  (Alexander  &  van  Knippenberg,  2014;  Bunderson  &  Sutcliffe,  2003; 
DeShon, Kozlowski, Schmidt, Milner, & Wiechmann, 2004).


4 

  Journal of Management / Month XXXX

Accordingly, we define team exploitation climate as the extent to which shared percep-
tions of the team’s goals and activities emphasize efficiency, reliability, and timeliness, and 
prioritize the structured, ordered, and methodical completion of task work (Beckman et al., 
2004; Benner & Tushman, 2003; Lubatkin, Simsek, Ling, & Veiga, 2006; Patel, Messersmith, 
& Lepak, 2013). Teams that have a strong exploitation climate emphasize efficient imple-
mentation, production, and refining cost-effective practices. In comparison, we define team 
exploration  climate  as  the  shared  perception  of  the  extent  to  which  the  team  encourages 
broad search and discovery through trying new techniques, experimenting, and considering 
new or differing ways of solving applied problems (Lubatkin et al., 2006; Patel et al., 2013). 
Teams with a strong exploration climate view activities that involve experimentation, trying 
new approaches, and discovering new methods (Katila & Ahuja, 2002; Rosenkopf & Nerkar, 
2001) as of great importance, and prioritize creativity, risk taking, and innovation.

Whereas team climates may exert multilevel influences on individual performance and 
creativity, prior research illustrates that different individuals respond differently to common 
contextual influences (for a review, see van Knippenberg & Hirst, in press). Social cognitive 
theory articulates that self-efficacy not just is important for performance and creativity but 
may also moderate responses to contextual influences (Bandura, 2001). This, we propose, is 
exactly the role self-efficacy has in influencing the way individuals interpret and respond to 
team exploitation climate and team exploration climate. We propose that self-efficacy shapes 
individuals’ responses to these influences and thus forms an individual-level contingency of 
team climate’s cross-level influence. We argue that the mechanisms underlying this interac-
tive influence are similar for creativity and performance, yet uniquely tied to their domain-
specific climate and domain-specific self-efficacy.

Self-efficacy is a capacity judgment that is conceptually narrower in that it reflects beliefs 
more specifically tied to a particular domain of goal pursuit (Bandura, 1997). As a conse-
quence, self-efficacy specific to a given activity domain is most relevant in predicting and 
understanding achievement in that domain (Bandura, 1986; Tierney & Farmer, 2002). We 
argue this also applies to the distinction between performance and creativity. Creative self-
efficacy,  the  self-view  that  one  has  the  ability  to  produce  creative  outcomes  (Tierney  & 
Farmer, 2002), will be positively related to creativity. Conversely, performance self-efficacy, 
defined as an employee’s belief of being capable of using existing approaches, resources, and 
techniques to solve work challenges and get the job done, should be positively related to an 
employee’s  job  performance  (i.e.,  performance  self-efficacy  captures  what  the  term  self-
efficacy is often implied to denote, but to clarify the distinction with creative self-efficacy, 
we label this performance self-efficacy).

Team exploitation and exploration climates may encourage the pursuit of performance or 
creative goals respectively, but this is not to say that each individual team member will be 
affected equally by these influences. Social cognitive theory (Bandura, 2001) proposes that 
self-efficacy informs individuals’ responses to domain-relevant contextual factors. We pro-
pose that self-efficacy in a domain makes it easier for an individual to act on the encourage-
ment and facilitation provided by team climate in that domain. Accordingly, the moderating 
influence of self-efficacy in the relationship between team climate and achievement will also 
be domain-specific.

A further consideration is that the self-efficacy literature suggests that this moderating role 
comes with an additional complication at higher levels of self-efficacy. The issue here is that 


Hirst et al. / Cross-Level Antecedents of Performance and Creativity 

  5

whereas self-efficacy in a domain may stimulate both goal pursuit and persistence, high lev-
els of self-efficacy in some circumstances may invite overpersistent pursuits of unrealistic or 
risky goals, reducing the capacity to further attain a desired goal. In such settings where both 
self-efficacy and contextual encouragement are high, individuals are less hesitant to respond 
to social cues (i.e., team climate), suggesting that goal-directed activities in the domain are 
appreciated, expected, and supported, because they will have more confidence in their ability 
to engage in such activities successfully. As a result, the individual may deploy extensive 
resources and efforts toward particular strategies to achieve above the norm (Michel, 2011). 
Effort in itself is unlikely to diminish performance, but adopting a particular strategy or pat-
tern of behaviors as consequence of this effort will have fewer additional returns once the 
benefits of such an approach have been realized. Thus, strong team climate encouragement 
has less benefits for individual achievement for individuals with high levels of self-efficacy.
In  the  current  study,  we  bring  this  more  general  proposition  to  bear  on  self-efficacy’s 
moderating role facilitating the influence of team climate. We propose that when team cli-
mate is particularly conducive to pursuing a goal in a particular domain, high self-efficacy 
attenuates the benefits of the high degree of contextual encouragement and support. The net 
result then is that the team climate has diminishing returns for individuals with high self-
efficacy: As climate gets stronger, its positive influence diminishes, resulting in a curvilinear 
relationship. In contrast, lower levels of self-efficacy render individuals less certain of their 
own capacity and thus more responsive to increasing contextual encouragement from team 
climate.  For  these  individuals  increasing  contextual  encouragement  translates  to  greater 
achievement of these outcomes.

This analysis also implies that the relationship between team climate and achievement 
is  more  positive  for  individuals  with  high  rather  than  low  self-efficacy  at  more  modest 
levels of team climate (i.e., low to moderate). With more modest team climate encourage-
ment, higher self-efficacy will translate into a more focused effort in line with the contex-
tual encouragement without resulting in overcommitment or overutilization of particular 
strategies associated with high team climates. In sum, we propose a curvilinear relation-
ship between team climate and achievement for individuals with high self-efficacy that is 
complemented by a linear relationship between climate and achievement for individuals 
with low self-efficacy (i.e., for which more favorable climates offer encouragement and 
support  without  overinvestment  in  particular  approaches). As  will  be  evident  from  our 
emphasis on the domain-specific nature of team climate and self-efficacy, we propose that 
these influences are uniquely tied to the combination of team exploitation climate, perfor-
mance self-efficacy, and performance, and to the combination of team exploration climate, 
creative self-efficacy, and creativity. Having explained the overarching logic of our predic-
tions, we develop specific hypotheses drawing on our overarching conceptual analysis in 
the following sections.

Team Exploitation Climate, Performance Self-Efficacy, and Performance

Our analysis suggests that to understand the interplay of team climate and individual self-
efficacy in shaping individual performance, we have to consider the influences specific to the 
performance domain: team exploitation climate and performance self-efficacy. Moreover, we 
should  consider  performance  self-efficacy  as  a  factor  that  may  render  individuals  more 


6 

  Journal of Management / Month XXXX

receptive to the influence of team exploitation climate up to a point, but that at higher levels 
this will be associated with diminishing returns of team climate.

Team exploitation climate encourages and facilitates performance and performance self-
efficacy informs responses to such contextual stimulation. Performance self-efficacy is the 
sense of one’s ability to perform tasks efficiently and reliably. This self-belief reduces the 
threshold by which individuals act and sustain energy to engage in problem-solving activities 
and seek greater efficiency in task performance to deliver reliable performance outcomes. 
Put  differently,  individuals  with  higher  performance  self-efficacy  require  more  modest 
encouragement from the team exploitation climate to invest in efficient and focused in-role 
performance than individuals lower in performance self-efficacy. Accordingly, at more mod-
est levels of team exploitation climate, the relationship between climate and individual per-
formance is stronger for individuals with higher performance self-efficacy.

Importantly, however, following the further development of our analysis as outlined pre-
viously, this enhanced stimulation only holds up to a point. At higher levels of performance 
self-efficacy, self-efficacy itself is such a strong internal driver of performance that situa-
tional  influences  like  team  climate  yield  diminishing  returns  beyond  a  moderate  level  of 
encouragement  and  support. Thus  the  relationship  between  team  exploitation  climate  and 
individual performance is stronger for individuals with high performance self-efficacy than 
for  individuals  with  lower  performance  self-efficacy  in  the  range  from  weak  to  moderate 
team climate. Yet, stronger team climates do not linearly add to the performance of individu-
als with high performance self-efficacy, but rather show a weaker influence. In effect, this 
implies a curvilinear relationship for individuals with higher self-efficacy. In contrast, for 
individuals with lower performance self-efficacy, team exploitation climate may encourage 
activities focused on efficient in-role performance and because this self-efficacy does not 
provide a strong internal drive, this influence is linear from weak to moderate to strong cli-
mates (even when it is not as strong as it can be for individuals high in performance self-
efficacy at the more moderate parts of this range).

Hypothesis  1: Team  exploitation  climate  has  a  linear  positive  relationship  with  performance  for 
individuals  with  lower  performance  self-efficacy,  and  a  curvilinear  relationship  with  perfor-
mance for individuals with higher performance self-efficacy, such that this positive relationship 
has diminishing returns for higher levels of team exploitation climate.

Team Exploration Climate, Creative Self-Efficacy, and Creativity

Again drawing on our overarching theoretical framework that predicts domain-specific 
interactive influences of team climate and individual self-efficacy, we propose that for indi-
vidual creativity the interplay of team exploration climate and creative self-efficacy assumes 
center stage. For individuals with high creative self-efficacy the encouraging and facilitating 
influence of team exploration climate will have a positive relationship with creativity, and 
more so than for individuals with low creative self-efficacy, up to moderate climate levels. 
Individuals with an efficacious view of their creative capabilities will possess even at modest 
levels of team encouragement the impetus to explore and persist with challenging experi-
mental activities stimulating their creativity. In this context individuals have a sense of their 
ability to develop creative solutions to problems and some encouragement by the context 
stimulating them to engage in exploratory activities that seed creativity.


Hirst et al. / Cross-Level Antecedents of Performance and Creativity 

  7

Following  from  our  overarching  conceptual  analysis,  however,  at  higher  levels  team 
exploration climate will have diminishing creative returns for individuals with high levels of 
creative  self-efficacy.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  high  creative  self-efficacy  is  an  internal 
driver of creativity that benefits less from contextual encouragement beyond moderate lev-
els. The result is a curvilinear relationship of team exploration climate with individual cre-
ativity  for  individuals  with  high  creative  self-efficacy:  More  moderate  levels  of  climate 
provide clear encouragement for creativity for individuals high in creative self-efficacy, but 
there is diminishing creative value added of this contextual encouragement beyond modest 
levels.

Individuals  with  lower  creative  self-efficacy  in  comparison  will  be  less  encouraged  to 
engage in creative activities than individuals higher in creative self-efficacy at more moder-
ate levels of team exploration climate, but this stimulating influence of team climate is not 
subject to diminishing returns. That is, because their self-efficacy provides less of an internal 
drive, they are more susceptible to high levels of contextual encouragement than individuals 
with higher creative self-efficacy.

Hypothesis 2: Team exploration climate has a linear positive relationship with creativity for indi-
viduals with lower creative self-efficacy, and a curvilinear relationship with creativity for indi-
viduals with higher creative self-efficacy, such that this positive relationship has diminishing 
returns for higher levels of team exploration climate.

Method
Research Setting, Participants, and Procedure

These  data  were  collected  in  an  international  program  of  research  including Australia, 
Taiwan, and Mainland China to understand how to simultaneously encourage employee per-
formance and creativity. These regions had experienced significant economic growth over 
the  past  decade,  reporting  considerable  innovation  investment,  while  experiencing  chal-
lenges  sustaining  productivity  (Australia:  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and 
Development,  2011;  Taiwan  and  China:  International  Monetary  Fund,  2010).  We  studied 
engineers because their work involves both the development of creative solutions to prob-
lems  and  also  necessitated  the  efficient,  timely  delivery  of  work  according  to  pragmatic 
constraints. Participating organizations were in both the public and private sector across a 
broad range of industries including construction, industrial design, manufacturing, IT, and 
electronics. The teams were responsible for large projects such as construction, road building 
and design, developing new or refined manufacturing and electronics production processes 
as well as implementing new software processes including the development, modification, or 
upgrade of software. In all of these activities engineers needed to develop new and useful 
solutions to practical problems necessitating creativity. Unlike other work disciplines such as 
R&D, design, or artistic endeavors, there was a stronger emphasis on the timely and cost-
effective delivery of solutions. Thus creativity and performance were of comparable impor-
tance requiring creative workable solutions delivered according to particular time and cost 
parameters.

The sample consisted of 70 teams comprising 317 engineers. In all, 33%, 31%, and 36% 
of teams were from Australia, Taiwan, and China respectively, with an average 72% response 


8 

  Journal of Management / Month XXXX

rate. On average teams comprised 6 people, with the Chinese teams being slightly larger than 
the sample norms comprising 9 (M = 8.64) people. Of the sample, 75%, 18%, and 7% were 
classified as engineering staff, supervisors, and senior managers/executives respectively. In 
total, 65% of the sample was male. Individuals on average worked in their current depart-
ment and their organization for 3.5 and 5 years respectively. The bulk of the sample had ter-
tiary qualifications. Regarding education, 66% had undergraduate qualifications, 25% also 
held a postgraduate degree, 2% had completed a PhD, and one respondent held an MBA. The 
remainder had high school qualifications or had completed a degree at a technical college 
(these  colleges  commonly  teach  trade  skills  like  computer-aided  design  or  draftsperson 
drawing). Of the sample, 60%, 28%, and 9% were 20 to 29, 30 to 39, and 40 to 49 years of 
age  respectively. The  remaining  4%  were  50  years  or  more.  Engineering  staff  completed 
questionnaires providing demographic details and ratings of independent variables included 
in the study. These questionnaires also contained an individualized code that provided ano-
nymity but allowed the university researchers to match data. Program leaders were e-mailed 
a separate questionnaire to rate team members’ performance and creativity. Questionnaires 
were developed in English and then translated for Taiwanese engineers according to the pro-
cedures described by Brislin (1980). Minor modifications were made to the Taiwanese ques-
tionnaire to ensure the characters were consistent with the language used by engineers in 
Mainland China resulting in certain phrases being reworded.

Measures

Seven-point Likert-type scales were used (1 = very strongly disagree to 7 = very strongly 

agree).

Performance self-efficacy was adapted and developed from the constructs and items used 
by Kruglanski, Webster, and Klem (1993) and March (1991). The four items were as follows: 
“I am good at using existing approaches to solve problems,” “I have a knack for using exist-
ing knowledge to improve work practices and processes,” “I feel I am good at working to 
deadlines,”  and  “I  have  a  knack  of  making  use  of  available  resources  and  existing 
techniques.”

Creative self-efficacy was measured by the three-item measure developed by Tierney and 

Farmer (2002). A sample item is “I feel I am good at generating novel ideas.”

Team exploitation climate comprised four items adapted and developed from prior ambi-
dexterity research (Lubatkin et al., 2006; Patel et al., 2013). These items asked team mem-
bers to rate the extent to which the team viewed the following activities as important: “invests 
considerable energy to develop consistent and efficient methods and procedures,” “prefers to 
refine tried and tested methods,” “leverages existing methods and established approaches,” 
and “lowering costs is an important objective.”

Team exploration climate comprised four items where team members rated the extent to 
which the team viewed the following activities as important: “experiments with new approaches 
and methods,” “places importance in learning from each other,” “explores new ways of doing 
things (e.g., new construction methods, engineering approaches or analytical techniques),” and 
“sees experimentation and the use of exploratory techniques as very important.”

Employee performance was slightly adapted from Janssen and van Yperen’s (2004) in-
role  job  performance  scale. Thus  the  items  used  were  as  follows:  “always  completes  the 
duties specified in his/her job description,” “meets all the formal performance requirements 


Hirst et al. / Cross-Level Antecedents of Performance and Creativity 

  9

of the job,” “meets all responsibilities required by his/her job,” and “never neglects aspects 
of the job that he/she is obligated to perform.”

Creativity  was  measured  using  the  four-item  measure  reported  by  Baer  and  Oldham 

(2006). A sample item is “often comes up with creative solutions to problems at work.”

Control Variables 

Accounting for sample heterogeneity, we controlled for individual age band, country, and 
organizational tenure. As age had comparable intervals, we entered this as a continuous vari-
able. Dummy country variables were created (i.e., Australia and Taiwan).

Scale Validation and Aggregation Tests

To examine the questionnaire factor structure, we conducted confirmatory factor analysis 
(CFA) comparing the hypothesized six-factor model to a series of intuitively plausible alterna-
tive models: (a) a five-factor Model A combining team exploration and team exploitation cli-
mate; (b) a five-factor Model B combining creative self-efficacy and performance self-efficacy; 
(c) a five-factor Model C combining creativity and performance; (d) a two-factor Model A 
combining creativity and performance and combining creative self-efficacy, performance self-
efficacy, team exploration climate, and team exploitation climate; (e) a two-factor Model B 
combining creativity, creative self-efficacy, and team exploration climate, and combining per-
formance, performance self-efficacy, and team exploitation climate; (f) a one-factor model. 
Results of the CFA indicate that our hypothesized six-factor model had a good fit with the 
data, χ2 = 408.45, df = 215, p < .001, Tucker–Lewis index = .95, comparative fit index = .95, 
root mean square error of approximation = .05, standardized root mean square residual = .05. 
Furthermore, nested model comparisons showed that the hypothesized six-factor model had a 
significantly better fit than the five-factor Model A, Δχ2 = 57.32, Δdf = 5, the five-factor Model 
B, Δχ2 = 208.36, Δdf = 5, the five-factor Model C, Δχ2 = 605.15, Δdf = 5, the two-factor Model 
A, Δχ2 = 1241.70, Δdf = 14, the two-factor Model B, Δχ2 = 1899.46, Δdf = 14, and for the one-
factor model, Δχ2 = 2364.58, Δdf = 15, indicating the distinctiveness of the study variables. 
Using the methods described by Fornell and Larcker (1981), we tested the construct and dis-
criminant validities calculating the composite reliability and the average variance extracted 
(AVE). The results showed that the composite reliability for all variables exceeded the .70 
cutoff value indicating a satisfactory level of construct validity. Furthermore, the AVE for all 
variables except for exploitation (with an AVE value of .428) exceeded the .50 cutoff value 
indicating adequate discriminant validity. Within the exploitation scale all items, except one, 
“lowering costs is an important objective,” which loaded as .345, displayed adequate loadings 
(.676 to .775). Analyses conducted without this item replicated the study results. Thus the 
lower loading item did not alter study conclusions.

We examined whether the data justified aggregation of team-level constructs by calculat-
ing rwg(j) (James, Demaree, & Wolf, 1984) and ICCs (Bliese, 2000). Following LeBreton 
and Senter (2008) and Meyer, Mumford, Burrus, Campion, and James (2014), we calculated 
rwg(j)s using the uniform null distribution (high-end estimate) and slightly skewed distribu-
tion (low-end estimate) to account for potential rating biases present in our data. The resul-
tant  median  rwg(j)  values  for  exploration  and  exploitation  were  .89-.92  and  .87-.90 
respectively.  In  all,  90%  of  groups  for  exploration  and  77%  of  groups  for  exploitation 


10 

  Journal of Management / Month XXXX

Means, Standard Deviations, and Intercorrelations Among Study Variables: 
Individual-Level Analyses Below the Diagonal, Group-Level Analyses Above

Table 1

  1.  Organizational 

tenure
  2. Agea

  3. Taiwana

  4. Australiana

  5.  Performance 
self-efficacy
  6.  Creative self-

efficacy

  7.  Team 

exploitation

  8.  Team 

exploration

  9. Performance

10. Creativity

M 
(SD)

5.25 
(5.66)
2.46 
(.95)
.23 
(.42)
.12 
(.33)
5.48 
(.92)
5.12 
(.96)
5.24 
(.87)
5.44 
(.92)
5.45 
(.92)
4.75 
(1.14)

1

2

3

4

.71**

.28** –.06

.68**

.42** –.02

5

.17

.18

6

.23

7

.13

8

.08

9

.24*

.32**

.14

–.04

.04

10

.21

.10

.36**

.41**

–.47** –.21

–.18

–.12

–.34**

–.18

–11

.07

.07

.05

.03

.10

.11

–.21**

–.13*

.12*

–.10

.00

.04

.18

.08

–.29*

–.07

.04

(.84)

.57**

.38**

.32**

.16

.52**

(.80)

.37**

.38**

.05

.08

–.16** –.16**

.41**

.38** (.69)

.55**

.20

–.03

–.03

–.27** –.05

.37**

.34**

.63**

(.83)

.07

.15

.16

.07

.08

.17

.00

–.09

–.22** –.08

.20**

.03

.15**

.13*

(.92)

64**

–.01

–.02

–.17** –.01

.27**

.24**

.17**

.18**

.56** (.91)

Note: Employees N = 317, teams N = 70. Scale reliabilities are in parentheses and bold.
aThese variables are categorical variables.
*p < .05, two-tailed.
**p < .01, two-tailed.

achieved strong agreement in team members ratings (rwg > .70) (LeBreton & Senter, 2008). 
According  to  one-way  analysis  of  variance  exploitation  and  exploration  climate  differed 
between teams (p < .05). The ICC(1) and (2) based on this procedure were (.08, .28) for team 
exploitation and (.09, .32) for team exploration, indicating employees’ ratings of their respec-
tive team climates were accounted for by their team membership (Bliese, 2000). However, 
the values for ICC(2) were lower than ideal for both constructs. Taken together, the rwg(j) 
and ICCs statistics provide sufficient basis to support aggregation of constructs to the team 
level (Bliese, 2000; Kozlowski & Hattrup, 1992).

Results

Table 1 displays correlations among variables. Individual-level variables are below and 
aggregated variables above the diagonal. Given the nested nature of the data we used hierar-
chical linear modeling (HLM) to test our cross-level interaction hypotheses by estimating a 
series of random coefficient models (RCMs). To assess the suitability of the data to run RCM 
analysis we checked whether variance resided between groups (Liao & Rupp, 2005). For 
employee performance the analyses revealed that 45% of the variance in performance resided 


Hirst et al. / Cross-Level Antecedents of Performance and Creativity 

  11

Cross-Level Analyses for Employee Performance and Creativity

Table 2

Performance

Creativity

 

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

Model 5

Model 6

Organizational tenure
Age
Taiwan
Australia
Individual-level variables
  Performance self-efficacy
  Creative self-efficacy
Team variables
  Team exploitation climate 
  Team exploitation 

climate2 

  Team exploration climate
  Team exploration climate2
Cross-level interactions
  Team exploitation climate 

× Performance self-
efficacy

  Team exploitation 

climate2 × Performance 
self-efficacy

  Team exploration climate 

× Creative self-efficacy

  Team exploration climate2 

× Creative self-efficacy

  Deviance
  Pseudo-R2

.00 (.02)
.00 (10)
–.38 (.21)
–.13 (22)

.00 (.02)
.00 (.10)
–.32 (.27)
.07 (.28)

 .00 (.02)
–.01 (.10)
–.32 (.27)
 .07 (.28)

–.01 (.02)
–.06 (09)
–.12 (.24)
 .21 (.23)

–.01 (.02)
.06 (.09)
.11 (.26)
.47 (.26)

–.01 (.02)
.07 (.09)
.11 (.26)
.47 (.26)

.15 (.05)*
–.12 (.05)*

.15 (.05)**
–.12 (.05)*

.22 (.06)**
–.14 (.06)*

.14 (.09)
.12 (.08)

.14 (.09)
.12 (.08)

 .25 (.11)*
 .16 (.11)

.24 (.10)*
–.02 (.06)

 .24 (.10)*
–.02 (.06)

–.11 (.15)
–.09 (.10)

–.12 (.15)
–.09 (.10)

.18 (.11)
–.00 (.07)

 .18 (.11)
–.00 (.07)

.09 (.17)
–.15 (.11)

 .09 (.17)
–.15 (.11)

–.04 (.06)

–.08 (.04)*

 .04 (.06)

 .00 (.04)

–.08 (.09)

–.10 (.05)

 .09 (.07)

–.14 (.06)*

772.17
 .06

778.84
 .07

789.66
 .09

929.26
 .11

932.92
 .13

932.06
 .16

Note: Employees N = 317, teams N = 70. Standard errors are in parentheses.
*p < .05.
**p < .01.

between teams (to be explained by Level 2 variables), τ00 = .41, p < .001, ICC(1) = .45. For 
employee  creativity  the  analyses  revealed  that  30%  of  the  variance  in  creativity  resided 
between teams (to be explained by Level 2 variables), τ00 = .37, p < .001, ICC(1) = .30. These 
results warrant the use of RCM in our analysis. The ICC(1) for creative self-efficacy and 
performance  self-efficacy  was  .017,  F(69,  247)  =  1.322,  p  >  .05,  and  .061,  F(69,  247)  = 
1.431, p < .05, respectively. Thus, although both constructs are theoretically individual-level 
variables group membership exerted a certain degree of influence on both self-efficacy con-
structs. We group mean centered Level 1 variables except for dummy variables for nation, 
which were uncentered in testing the cross-level interaction, to partial out potential group-
level interactions (Enders & Tofighi, 2007).

Table 2 summarizes the results for the outcome variables of performance (Models 1, 2, 
and  3)  and  creativity  (Models  4,  5,  and  6)  respectively. To  test  the  hypotheses  we  first 


12 

  Journal of Management / Month XXXX

entered the control variables and the Level 1 variables including both measures of self-
efficacy (Models 1 and 4). In the second step we entered team-level variables including the 
linear  and  quadratic  terms  (Models  2  and  5).  In  the  following  step  we  entered  the  
linear and quadratic cross-level interactions of the relevant team orientation (Models 3 and 6).
Hypothesis 1 predicted that team exploitation climate has a linear positive relationship 
with  performance  for  individuals  with  lower  performance  self-efficacy,  and  a  curvilinear 
relationship  with  performance  for  individuals  with  higher  performance  self-efficacy  such 
that this positive relationship has diminishing returns for higher levels of team exploitation 
climate. Thus the relationship between team exploitation climate and performance varies as 
a function of the values of performance self-efficacy and team exploitation climate. As shown 
in Table 2 (Model 3), the coefficient for the interaction between the quadratic term of team 
exploitation climate and performance self-efficacy was significant ( γ = –.08, SE = .04, p = 
.03) indicating that performance self-efficacy moderated the curvilinear relationship between 
team exploitation climate and performance, providing preliminary support for Hypothesis 1. 
To better understand the nature of relationships with performance we conducted two types of 
tests of the slopes. In the first we compared the linear and quadratic terms of team exploita-
tion climate on performance under low and high performance self-efficacy. This enabled us 
to test for the significance of the linear and quadratic relationships under these conditions. In 
the second set of analyses we examined the slopes of individual performance on team exploi-
tation climate at low, medium, and high values of team exploitation climate in combination 
with low and high performance self-efficacy to determine the range of values of team exploi-
tation climate for which the relationships were positive, negative, or not different from zero. 
This enabled us to examine the slopes of these relationships at these particular points. These 
results are described following.

We  first  used  the  model  reported  in Table  2  (Model  3)  as  basis  to  construct  equations 
reflecting the relationship between team exploitation climate and performance for high and 
low performance self-efficacy. Following Aiken and West (1991), we first standardized both 
performance self-efficacy and team exploitation climate and then substituted the values for 
high performance self-efficacy (+1 SD) and low performance self-efficacy (–1 SD) respec-
tively. We then reran the HLM equation when performance self-efficacy was low and high 
respectively. The coefficients for the overall linear trend in the relationship between team 
exploitation climate on performance was positive but nonsignificant (γ = .12, SE = .10, p = 
.28) for high performance self-efficacy and significantly positive (γ = .25, SE = .10, p = .02) 
for low performance self-efficacy. In contrast, the quadratic coefficient that reflects the cur-
vilinearity of the relationship between team exploitation climate and performance was nega-
tive approaching significance (γ = –.10, SE = .06, p = .07) for high performance self-efficacy 
but positive and nonsignificant (γ = .02, SE = .08, p = .76) for low performance self-efficacy. 
As illustrated in Figure 1, a general linear positive relationship was observed between team 
exploitation climate and performance for low performance self-efficacy whereas a slightly 
inverted U pattern for performance on team exploitation climate was observed for high per-
formance self-efficacy.

To examine the gradient of the simple slopes under different team exploitation climate 
conditions for low and high performance self-efficacy following Aiken and West’s (1991) 
procedures, we defined team exploitation climate at high (+1 SD), medium (the mean), and 
low (–1 SD) levels reporting the corresponding slopes. For individuals low on performance 


Hirst et al. / Cross-Level Antecedents of Performance and Creativity 

  13

Interaction Between Performance Self-Efficacy and Team Exploitation Climate to 

Predict Employee Performance

Figure 1

5.50

5.00

4.50

4.00

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
P

3.50

Low

Team Exploitation Climate

Low Performance Self-
Efficacy
High Performance Self-
Efficacy

High

self-efficacy, the simple slope was positive under the three conditions of team exploitation 
climate, that is, when team exploitation climate was low (γ = .20, SE = .18, p = .28), medium 
(γ = .25, SE = .10, p = .02), and high (γ = .29, SE = .19, p = .13). For individuals high on 
performance self-efficacy, the simple slope of the regression curve was positive and signifi-
cant when team exploitation climate was low (γ = .31, SE = .17, p = .04), positive and non-
significant at the medium (γ = .12, SE = .10, p = .28), but became negative and nonsignificant 
when team exploitation was high (γ = –.10, SE = .23, p = .67). These results support the 
appearance of the relationship of performance on team exploitation climate having a general 
positive linear trend for low performance self-efficacy and tapering a diminishing gradient as 
team exploitation climate increases for high performance self-efficacy. Taken together these 
results provide support for Hypothesis 1.

Hypothesis  2  predicted  that  team  exploration  climate  has  a  linear  positive  relationship 
with  creativity  for  individuals  with  lower  creative  efficacy,  and  a  curvilinear  relationship 
with creativity for individuals with higher creative efficacy such that this positive relation-
ship has diminishing returns for higher levels of team exploration climate. Thus the relation-
ship  between  team  exploration  climate  and  creativity  depends  on  the  values  of  creative 
efficacy and team exploration climate. As shown in Table 2 (Model 6), the coefficient for the 
interaction term between the quadratic term of team exploration climate and creative self-
efficacy was significant (γ = –.14, SE = .06, p = .02), indicating that creative self-efficacy 
moderates the curvilinear relationship between team exploration climate and creativity, pro-
viding  preliminary  support  for  Hypothesis  2.  Like  the  procedures  described  for  the  prior 
interaction, we first standardized creative self-efficacy and team exploration climate and then 


14 

  Journal of Management / Month XXXX

Interaction Between Creative Self-Efficacy and Team Exploration Climate to Predict 

Employee Creativity

Figure 2

5.50

5.00

y
t
i
v
i
t
a
e
r
C

4.50

4.00

3.50

Low

Team Exploration Climate

Low Creative Self-Efficacy

High Creative Self-Efficacy

High

used the model reported in Table 2 (Model 6) as basis to construct two equations to examine 
the relationship between team exploration climate and creativity for high and low creative 
self-efficacy. The coefficients for the overall linear trend in the relationship between team 
exploration climate and creativity was positive nonsignificant (γ = .18, SE = .12, p = .18) for 
high creative self-efficacy but positive and significant (γ = .28, SE = .12, p = .02) for low 
creative self-efficacy. In contrast, the quadratic coefficient that reflects the nature of the cur-
vilinear relationship between team exploration climate and creativity was negative and sig-
nificant (γ = –.28, SE = .09, p < .001) for high creative self-efficacy but nonsignificant (γ = 
.11, SE = .10, p = .28) for low creative self-efficacy. As shown in Figure 2, we observed an 
overall positive linear pattern for the relationship between team exploration climate and cre-
ativity for individuals with low levels of creative self-efficacy but an inverted U curve pattern 
for individuals with high creative self-efficacy. As with the previous hypothesis, we further 
probed the simple slopes of creativity on team exploration climate at different levels of team 
exploration climate and creative self-efficacy. We first defined high (+1 SD above the mean), 
medium (the mean), and low (–1 SD below the mean) levels of team exploration climate and 
tested the corresponding simple slopes. The results showed that for employees low on cre-
ative  self-efficacy,  the  slopes  were  in  general  positive  under  the  three  conditions  of  team 
exploration, that is when team exploration was low (γ = .07. SE = .22, p = .74), medium (γ = 
.28, SE = .12, p = .02), and high (γ = .49, SE = .23, p = .04). For employees high on creative 
self-efficacy, the slope was positive when team exploration climate was low (γ = .74. SE = 
.21, p < .001), positive nonsignificant when team exploration was medium (γ = .18, SE = .12, 
p = .18), and became negative nonsignificant when team exploration was high (γ = –.38, 
SE  = .24,  p = .12). These results support the appearance of the relationship of individual 


Hirst et al. / Cross-Level Antecedents of Performance and Creativity 

  15

creativity on team exploration climate having a general positive linear trend for individuals 
low on creative self-efficacy and tapering a diminishing gradient as team exploration climate 
increases for those high on creative self-efficacy. Taken together these results provide sup-
port for Hypothesis 2.

As an additional check of our results we examined whether the hypothesized interactions 
could be observed with different interaction combinations. For example we examined the 
quadratic  interaction  between  exploitation  climate  and  creative  self-efficacy  on  employee 
performance or the quadratic interaction between exploration climate and performance self-
efficacy on employee creativity. These interactions that were not hypothesized were not sig-
nificant. These results provide inferred support for the two hypotheses illustrating that the 
interactions are specific to the particular outcome, above and beyond other possible nonhy-
pothesized relationships.

Discussion

Employee creativity and efficient in-role performance are core to organization success yet 
different domain-specific antecedents are required to achieve these outcomes. To provide a 
more complete understanding of individual efficacy in teams we examined how the interac-
tion of individual self-concept with the context influences individual performance and creativ-
ity respectively. Drawing on social cognitive theory we theorized and found that getting the 
best performance and creative results is not about more of “everything.” When individuals are 
low  on  self-efficacy,  team  climates  encouraging  exploitation  and  exploration  respectively 
deliver increasing performance and creative benefits. The situation is more complex for effi-
cacious individuals. Up to moderate levels increasing team encouragement of exploitation and 
exploration is associated with clear performance and creative returns. When team encourage-
ment for exploitation and exploration increases beyond this point, the returns on such encour-
agement  diminish  and  individuals  with  high  levels  of  self-efficacy  show  less  additional 
performance and creative returns.

Theoretical Implications

The main contribution of the current study lies in its identification of the curvilinear cross-
level interactions of domain-specific team climate and self-efficacy. Uncovering these inter-
active  influences,  complex  as  they  may  be,  contributes  to  the  advancement  of  theory  in 
individual creativity and performance in a number of ways.

Individual employees’ striving for achievement is subject to team climate influences 
that shape what is seen as appropriate and desirable. Our results demonstrate that team-
level and individual-level influences that by themselves are positive antecedents of per-
formance and creativity in combination yield diminishing returns. This puts a premium on 
considering  cross-level  team  climate  influences  on  creativity  and  performance. 
Consideration of either individual or team characteristics in isolation does not do justice 
to the complexities of achievement striving at work. Indeed, such a consideration would 
not be fully justified in the sense that it implies an additive model in which team-level 
influences  and  individual-level  influences  are  independent,  whereas  the  present  study 
shows that the one influence is contingent on the other. Viewed through this lens, the cur-
rent findings add support for the emerging focus on individual achievement striving as 


16 

  Journal of Management / Month XXXX

codetermined  by  individual  characteristics  and  the  team  context  (e.g.,  DeShon  et  al., 
2004; Hirst et al., 2009). As the first cross-level study examining domain-specific exploit-
ative and exploratory influences on individual performance and creativity we highlight 
the benefits of examining a broader range of contextual influences. Future research would 
be particularly valuable studying different team interventions such as how quotas drive 
exploitation or whether rewarding practices such as creative experimentation encourages 
exploration. Research may also compare the role of leadership behaviors such as initiat-
ing  structure  to  drive  exploitation  and  intellectual  stimulation  to  foster  exploration 
climates.

The present findings are important in demonstrating that creativity and performance are 
subject  to  similar  influences—the  interplay  of  team  climates  and  individuals’  beliefs  in 
their own capabilities—but that these influences should be understood in domain-specific 
terms. Individual creativity is affected by the interaction of team exploration climate and 
creative  self-efficacy,  not  of  team  exploitation  climate  and  performance  self-efficacy. 
Conversely, individual performance is influenced by the interaction of team exploitation 
climate  and  performance  self-efficacy  rather  than  of  their  counterparts  in  the  creativity 
domain. These findings underscore that at a more fundamental level there are important 
communalities in the factors governing creativity and performance, but at the same time 
they  also  highlight  the  domain-specificity  of  these  influences.  These  results  speak  to 
research examining how to align multiple performance outcomes (Gong et al., 2009; Gong 
et al., 2013). Such analyses are particularly important as they shed new light on how dif-
ferent  organizational  influences  can  even  lead  to  competition  between  outcomes  (Ozer, 
2011). Our study adds that although we found performance and creativity to be positively 
related  to  each  other,  the  antecedents  for  each  differed;  yet  the  mechanisms  to  achieve 
these outcomes were remarkably similar.

Third, the diminishing returns of the drive provided by the combination of a supportive 
climate and self-efficacy demonstrate “more is not necessarily better” where team climates 
and self-efficacy are concerned. This is no minor point as the basic proposition in the team 
climate and self-efficacy literatures still seems to be one of a uniformly positive influence 
of  supportive  climates  and  self-efficacy  respectively  (Bandura  &  Locke,  2003;  van 
Knippenberg,  Homan,  &  van  Ginkel,  2012),  even  when  there  is  growing  awareness  that 
such  conclusions  need  to  be  qualified  (Bunderson  &  Sutcliffe,  2003;  Eisenbeis,  van 
Knippenberg,  &  Boerner,  2008;  Schmidt  &  DeShon,  2010;  Vancouver,  More,  &  Yoder, 
2008). The more justified conclusion is that both supportive team climates and individual 
self-efficacy may provide important encouragement for the pursuit of creativity and perfor-
mance, but that for such encouragement there can be a “saturation point”—the encourage-
ment  cannot  and  should  not  be  assumed  to  always  translate  to  increasingly  successful 
pursuit of the achievement itself. Our analyses of these relationships illustrate that beyond 
such a saturation point the consequences of such a strategy are not significantly negative but 
rather  deliver  negligible  additional  returns  beyond  this  point.  Such  curvilinear  effects 
appeared particularly clear for creativity, and although we are cautious to draw too much 
from our analysis of slopes, appear only slightly attenuated for performance. This tenta-
tively suggests that the diminishing effects might be weaker in the case of more routine 
outcomes. Further research is required to examine the precise relationships evidenced by 
these curves under these specific conditions.


Hirst et al. / Cross-Level Antecedents of Performance and Creativity 

  17

The current analysis extends social cognitive theory (i.e., the conceptual home of the self-
efficacy  concept;  Bandura,  1986).  Whereas  contextual  moderation  has  been  hinted  at  by 
Bandura (2001), the present study is in fact the first to our knowledge to investigate it empiri-
cally and to more fully develop a conceptual analysis to guide this investigation. From that 
perspective, then, the present study breaks new ground for social cognitive theory and the 
study of self-efficacy by not only providing empirical evidence regarding moderating influ-
ences of the social context, but also advancing theory of social-contextual moderation.

In  a  related  vein,  creative  self-efficacy  actually  was  negatively  related  to  performance 
when performance self-efficacy was included in the model. This finding is consistent with 
the notion from research in exploration and exploitation that what motivates exploration may 
discourage  exploitation,  because  resources  invested  in  the  one  may  go  at  the  expense  of 
resources invested in the other (e.g., Gupta et al., 2006). Our analysis was not developed to 
address this issue, and we do not observe evidence for such a trade-off across the board (i.e., 
similar negative relationships for performance self-efficacy or team climate influences were 
not observed). We therefore do not believe it is appropriate to draw strong conclusions about 
this unhypothesized finding here. We do note, however, that a finding like this does speak to 
the importance of the simultaneous study of creativity and performance as it illustrates the 
factors conducive to the one may be disruptive to the other.

Implications for Practice

Investing  in  building  team  climate  and  self-efficacy  to  enhance  performance  or  foster 
creativity has greater pay off if these investments are domain-specific. There is no general 
“one-size-fits-all” supportive team climate or self-efficacy construct that is as effective in 
delivering efficient in-role performance or fostering creativity. Efforts to build team climate 
or self-efficacy thus should specifically target the precursors to the desired outcome. This 
means targeting team exploitation climate and performance self-efficacy to promote efficient 
performance or team exploration climate and creative self-efficacy in pursuit of creativity.

As individual self-efficacy displays strong main effects with domain relevant performance 
and  creative  outcomes  management  interventions  should  build  individual  self-concept 
through  coaching,  supportively  challenging  individuals’  hidden  negative  assumptions  and 
thinking traps, and providing a safe environment enabling employees to take on increasingly 
demanding challenges without fear of failure. For managers who have successfully enhanced 
employee self-efficacy the message is more complex. To a moderate degree it is important to 
encourage team exploitation and exploration climates by emphasizing the respective benefits 
of efficiency, for example by benchmarking expenditure decisions, tracking cost and time 
invested in program delivery as opposed to encouraging information searching, exploration, 
and experimentation strategies, for example by conducting industry analyses of good prac-
tice, building industry–university connections, or exploring technologies adopted by differ-
ent  industries.  This  means  once  a  leader  of  efficacious  employees  has  developed  team 
climates that encourage exploitation or exploration there are respectively fewer performance 
and creative benefits from continuing along this strategy. Such a finding differs from gener-
ally expected management practice and illustrates that climates that are high on exploitation 
have the most consistent positive relationship with performance for employees who are low 
on self-efficacy. Such contextual encouragement stimulates individuals low on performance 


18 

  Journal of Management / Month XXXX

self-efficacy to display greater performance than they would display based on their own self-
concept alone.

Limitations and Directions for Future Research

Due  to  its  cross-sectional  design,  the  current  research  does  not  allow  for  conclusions 
about causality. Even when experimental research in group dynamics and self-efficacy gives 
us some confidence that the assumptions about causality implied by our analysis would not 
be  unreasonable  here  (cf.  Bandura  &  Locke,  2003;  Cialdini,  Bator,  &  Guadagno,  1999), 
future research would ideally include field experimental designs that allow for such conclu-
sions about causality. As an aside, we may note that such research would also be useful to 
evaluate the effectiveness of interventions to be applied in practice.

Although our study examined the relationships between individual performance and cre-
ativity we did not examine the question of how such individual achievements translated to a 
greater team output. The question of how performance at lower levels influences larger strate-
gic  organizational  outcomes  is  an  important  and  under-researched  topic  and  not  least  one 
where  strong  assumptions  are  often  made  that  individual  performance  and  creativity  will 
inevitably translate into team and organizational benefits (Gong et al., 2013). It is one we 
highlight  needs  far  greater  research  for  understanding  both  how  individuals’  contributions 
enhance team performance as well as why some individual contributions are ignored, over-
looked, or fail to translate to collective outcomes. A further consideration is that our study 
examined interactions between measures of climate and self-efficacy relevant to exploitation 
and exploration, whereas it is more common for ambidexterity researchers (e.g., He & Wong, 
2004) to examine how these forces interact with each other. Rather than examining this ten-
sion, we strove to understand common influences on performance and creativity. The exploi-
tation and exploration interaction poses interesting directions for cross-level research in teams. 
For example one might wonder how teams manage conflict associated with implementing 
potentially competing goals or scarce resources. Likewise although ambidextrous practices 
predict a range of performance outcomes, psychological theory raises questions about whether 
such tensions may even result in goal conflict, or goal diffusion and consequent work overload 
(Locke, Smith, Erez, Chah, & Schaffer, 1994). Research reconciling these possible simultane-
ous positive and negative effects of ambidexterity would be of great value.

Our  team  climate  measures  derived  from  prior  research  (Lubatkin  et  al.,  2006;  Patel  
et al., 2013) and theory (i.e., Beckman et al., 2004; Benner & Tushman, 2003) distinguish-
ing exploitation from innovation to provide conceptual clarity and distinctiveness from cre-
ativity. Although this framing of exploitation follows well-established practice it certainly 
is not the only definition within the literature. Indeed the search for conceptual agreement 
on the dimensions of ambidexterity is one of the challenges to the cumulative progression 
of this literature (Birkinshaw & Gupta, 2013). Such an issue is a particular vexed one given 
that different industry sectors place varying emphasis on different priorities (e.g., lowering 
costs as opposed to meeting necessary reporting standards). The consequence is that ques-
tionnaire items tapping into these issues will have varying utility in these different contexts 
and these issues need to be considered carefully by future researchers in their selection of 
measures. We also acknowledge the lower than desired ICCs scores for the team climate 
measures which may have been due to the relatively small group sizes (LeBreton & Senter, 


Hirst et al. / Cross-Level Antecedents of Performance and Creativity 

  19

2008) or to the fact that teams worked across different sites and experienced membership 
changes reasonably frequently. In effect lower ICCs mean greater within group variance 
equating to a weaker contextual set of influences, which if anything is likely to attenuate 
group influences.

Another consideration is the generalizability of an engineering sample. Arguably, engi-
neering teams provide a context uniquely focused on delivering both efficient and creative 
outcomes, and a legitimate question is whether contextual influences therefore are relatively 
unique compared to other organizational settings. On the other hand, one might argue that 
through  attraction-selection-attrition  processes  (Schneider,  1987),  engineers  are  likely  to 
have a preference for both efficient performance and creative activities. Consistent with this 
view, the variance in our respondents’ self-efficacy beliefs was relatively low (i.e., reflecting 
the self-selection of employees), which as a consequence may result in understating of the 
relationships. Thus, there is merit in research replicating our study in heterogeneous work 
settings. Nonetheless we also note the results were based on data collected from different 
organizations across three regions, increasing our confidence in the generalizability of the 
results. Moreover, by testing our framework using a multicompany, multinational/regional 
sample, we provide evidence that an Anglo-European-derived theory is also useful for under-
standing behavior across different cultural settings (Drazin & Schoonhoven, 1996; Farmer, 
Tierney, & Kung-McIntyre, 2003).

Conclusion

While largely overlooked by the literature, managers often face the dual demands of seek-
ing high levels of performance and creativity—the challenge of balancing the drive for both 
exploitation  and  exploration.  When  leading  individuals  embedded  in  a  team  context  this 
requires an understanding of how individual characteristics interact with the team’s climate. 
Our study speaks to these issues and suggests that domain-specific influences are required to 
foster  both  individual  in-role  performance  and  creativity—with  the  important  caveat  that 
beyond a point these cross-level influences yield diminishing returns.

References

Aiken, L. S., & West, S. G. 1991. Multiple regression: Testing and interpreting interactions. Newbury Park, CA: 

Sage.

Alexander, L., & van Knippenberg, D. 2014. Teams in pursuit of radical innovation: A goal orientation perspective. 

Academy of Management Review, 39: 423-438.

Amabile, T. M. 1996. Creativity in context: Update to the social psychology of creativity. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Anderson, N., & West, M. A. 1998. Measuring climate for work group innovation: Development and validation of 

the team climate inventory. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 19: 235-258.

Baer, M., & Oldham, G. R. 2006. The curvilinear relation between experienced creative time pressure and creativ-
ity: Moderating effects of openness to experience and support for creativity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 
91: 963-970.

Bandura,  A.  1986.  Social  foundations  of  thought  and  action:  A  social  cognitive  theory.  Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ: 

Prentice Hall.

Bandura, A. 1997. Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: Freeman.
Bandura, A. 2001. Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspective. Annual Review of Psychology, 52: 1-26.
Bandura, A., & Locke, E. 2003. Negative self-efficacy and goal effects revisited. Journal of Applied Psychology, 

88: 87-99.


20 

  Journal of Management / Month XXXX

Beckman,  C.  M.  2006.  The  influence  of  founding  team  company  affiliations  on  firm  behaviour.  Academy  of 

Management Journal, 49: 741-758.

Beckman, C., Haunschild, P., & Phillips, D. 2004. Friends or strangers? Firm-specific uncertainty, market uncer-

tainty, and network partner selection. Organization Science, 15: 259-275.

Benner,  M.  J.,  &  Tushman,  M.  L.  2003.  Exploitation,  exploration,  and  process  management:  The  productivity 

dilemma revisited. Academy of Management Review, 28: 238-256.

Birkinshaw, J. M., & Gupta, K. 2013. Clarifying the distinctive contribution of ambidexterity to the field of organi-

zation studies. Academy of Management Perspectives, 27: 287-298.

Bliese, P. D. 2000. Within-group agreement, non-independence, and reliability: Implications for data aggregation 
and analysis. In K. J. Klein & S. W. J. Kozlowski (Eds.), Multilevel theory, research and methods in organiza-
tions: Foundations, extensions, and new directions: 349-381. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Brislin, R. W. 1980. Translation and content analysis of oral and written material. In H. C. Triandis & J. W. Berry 

(Eds.), Handbook of cross-cultural psychology, vol. 1: 389-444. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Bunderson, J. S., & Sutcliffe, K. M. 2003. Management team learning orientation and business unit performance. 

Journal of Applied Psychology, 88: 552-560.

Campbell, J. P., McCloy, R. A., Oppler, S. H., & Sager, C. E. 1993. A theory of performance. In N. Schmitt, W. C. 

Borman, & Associates (Eds.), Personnel selection in organizations: 35-69. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Cialdini, R. B., Bator, R. J., & Guadagno, R. E. 1999. Normative influences in organizations. In L. L. Thompson, J. 
M. Levine, & D. M. Messick (Eds.), Shared cognition in organizations: The management of knowledge: 195-
211. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

DeShon,  R.  P.,  Kozlowski,  S.  W.  J.,  Schmidt,  A.  M.,  Milner,  K.  R.,  &  Wiechmann,  D.  2004.  A  multiple-goal, 
multilevel model of feedback effects on the regulation of individual and team performance. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 89: 1035-1056.

Drazin, R., & Schoonhoven, C. B. 1996. Community, population, and organization effects on innovation: A multi-

level perspective. Academy of Management Journal, 39: 1065-1083.

Eisenbeis,  S.  A.,  van  Knippenberg,  D.,  &  Boerner,  S.  2008.  Transformational  leadership  and  team  innovation: 

Integrating team climate principles. Journal of Applied Psychology, 93: 1438-1446.

Enders, C. K., & Tofighi, D. 2007. Centering predictor variables in cross-sectional multilevel models: A new look 

at an old issue. Psychological Methods, 12: 121-138.

Farmer,  S.  M.,  Tierney,  P.,  &  Kung-McIntyre,  K.  2003.  Employee  creativity  in  Taiwan:  An  application  of  role 

identity theory. Academy of Management Journal, 46: 618-630.

Ford, C. 1996. A theory of individual creative action in multiple social domains. Academy of Management Review, 

21: 1112-1142.

Fornell, C. R., & Larcker, F. F. 1981. Structural equation models with unobservable variables and measurement 

error. Journal of Marketing Research, 18: 39-51.

Gibson, C. B., & Birkinshaw, J. 2004. The antecedents, consequences and mediating role of organizational ambi-

dexterity. Academy of Management Journal, 47: 209-226.

Gong,  Y.,  Huang,  J.  C.,  &  Farh,  J.  L.  2009.  Employee  learning  orientation,  transformational  leadership,  and 
employee creativity: The mediating role of employee creative self-efficacy. Academy of Management Journal, 
52: 765-778.

Gong, Y., Zhou, J., & Chang, S. 2013. Core knowledge employee creativity and firm performance: The moderating 

role of riskiness orientation, firm size, and realized absorptive capacity. Personnel Psychology, 66: 443-482.

Gupta, A. K., Smith, K. G., & Shalley, C. E. 2006. The interplay between exploration and exploitation. Academy of 

Management Journal, 49: 693-706.

He, Z.-L., & Wong, P.-K. 2004. Exploration vs. exploitation: An empirical test of the ambidexterity hypothesis. 

Organization Science, 15: 481-494.

Hirst, G., van Knippenberg, D., & Zhou, J. 2009. A cross-level perspective on employee creativity: Goal orientation, 

team learning behavior, and individual creativity. Academy of Management Journal, 52: 280-293.

International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2010. World economic and financial surveys. World economic outlook (WEO): 

Rebalancing growth. Washington, DC: IMF.

James, L. R., Demaree, R. B., & Wolf, G. 1984. Estimating within group interrater reliability with and without 

response bias. Journal of Applied Psychology, 69: 8-98.

Jansen, J. J. P., van den Bosch, F. A. J., & Volberda, H. W. 2006. Exploratory innovation, exploitative innovation, 
and performance effects of organizational antecedents and environmental moderators. Management Science, 
52: 1661-1674.


Hirst et al. / Cross-Level Antecedents of Performance and Creativity 

  21

Janssen, O., & van Yperen, N. W. 2004. Employees’ goal orientations, the quality of leader-member exchange, and 

the outcomes of job performance and job satisfaction. Academy of Management Journal, 47: 368-384.

Junni, P., Sarala, R., Taras, V., & Tarba, S. 2013. Organizational ambidexterity and performance: A metaanalysis. 

Academy of Management Perspectives, 27: 299-312.

Katila, R., & Ahuja, G. 2002. Something old, something new: A longitudinal study of search behavior and new 

product introductions. Academy of Management Journal, 45: 1183-1194.

Kozlowski, S. W. J., & Hattrup, K. 1992. A disagreement about within-group agreement: Disentangling issues of 

consistency versus consensus. Journal of Applied Psychology, 77: 161-167.

Kruglanski, A. W., Webster, D. M., & Klem, A. 1993. Motivated resistance and openness to persuasion in the pres-

ence or absence of prior information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65: 861-876.

Lavie, D., Stettner, U., & Tushman, T. 2010. Exploration and exploitation within and across organizations. Academy 

of Management Annals, 4: 109-155.

LeBreton, J. M., & Senter, J. L. 2008. Answers to 20 questions about interrater reliability and interrater agreement. 

Organizational Research Methods, 11: 815-852.

Liao, H., & Rupp, D. E. 2005. The impact of justice climate and justice orientation on work outcomes: A cross-level 

multi-foci framework. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90: 242-256.

Lim, H. S., & Choi, J. N. 2009. Testing an alternative relationship between individual and contextual predictors of 

creative performance. Social Behavior and Personality, 37: 117-136.

Locke, E. A., Smith, K. G., Erez, M., Chah, D. O., & Schaffer, A. 1994. The effects of intra-individual goal conflict 

on performance. Journal of Management, 20: 67-91.

Lubatkin, M. H., Simsek, Z., Ling, Y., & Veiga, J. F. 2006. Ambidexterity and performance in small- to medium-
sized  firms:  The  pivotal  role  of  top  management  team  behavioral  integration.  Journal  of  Management,  32: 
646-672.

March, J. G. 1991. Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning. Organization Science, 2: 71-87.
Meyer, R. D., Mumford, T. V., Burrus, C. J., Campion, M. A., & James, L. R. 2014. Selecting null distributions 

when calculating rwg: A tutorial and review. Organizational Research Methods, 173: 324-345.

Michel, A. A. 2011. Transcending socialization: A nine-year ethnography of the body’s role in organizational con-

trol and knowledge worker transformation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 56: 325-368.

Miron, E., Erez, M., & Naveh, E. 2004. Do personal characteristics and cultural values that promote innovation, 
quality, and efficiency compete or complement each other? Journal of Organizational Behavior, 25: 175-199.
Motowidlo, S. J., & Van Scotter, J. R. 1994. Evidence that task performance should be distinguished from contex-

tual performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79: 475-480.

Oldham, G. R., & Cummings, A. 1996. Employee creativity: Personal and contextual factors at work. Academy of 

Management Journal, 39: 607-634.

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2011. Gross domestic expenditure on R&D as 

a percentage of GDP. Science and technology analysis: Key tables from OECD. Paris: OECD.

Ozer, M. 2011. A moderated mediation model of the relationship between organizational citizenship behaviors and 

job performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 96: 1328-1336.

Patel, P. C., Messersmith, J. G., & Lepak, D. P. 2013. Walking the tightrope: An assessment of the relationship 
between high-performance work systems and organizational ambidexterity. Academy of Management Journal, 
56: 1420-1442.

Richter, A., Hirst, G., van Knippenberg, D., & Baer, M. 2012. Creative self-efficacy and individual creativity 
in teams: Cross-level interactions with team informational resources. Journal of Applied Psychology, 97: 
1282-1290.

Rosenkopf, L., & Nerkar, A. 2001. Beyond local search: Boundary-spanning, exploration, and impact in the optical 

disk industry. Strategic Management Journal, 22: 287-306.

Rosing, K., Frese, M., & Bausch, A. 2011. Explaining the heterogeneity of the leadership-innovation relationship: 

Ambidextrous leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 22: 956-974.

Schmidt,  A.  M.,  &  DeShon,  R.  P.  2010.  The  moderating  effects  of  performance  ambiguity  on  the  relationship 

between self-efficacy and performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 95: 572-581.

Schneider, B. 1987. The people make the place. Personnel Psychology, 40: 437-453.
Shalley, C. E. 1991. Effects of productivity goals, creativity goals and personal discretion on individual creativity. 

Journal of Applied Psychology, 76: 179-185.

Tierney,  P.,  &  Farmer,  S.  M.  2002.  Creative  self-efficacy:  Its  potential  antecedents  and  relationship  to  creative 

performance. Academy of Management Journal, 45: 1137-1148.


22 

  Journal of Management / Month XXXX

Unsworth, K. 2001. Unpacking creativity. Academy of Management Review, 2: 289-297.
Vancouver, J. B., & Kendall, L. N. 2006. When self-efficacy negatively relates to motivation and performance in a 

learning context. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91: 1146-1153.

Vancouver, J. B., More, K. M., & Yoder, R. J. 2008. Self-efficacy and resource allocation: Support for a nonmono-

tonic, discontinuous model. Journal of Applied Psychology, 93: 35-47.

van  Knippenberg,  D.,  &  Hirst,  G.  in  press.  A  cross-level  perspective  on  creativity  at  work:  Person-in-situation 
interactions. In C. E. Shalley, M. A. Hitt, & J. Zhou (Eds.), Oxford handbook of creativity, innovation, and 
entrepreneurship. New York: Oxford University Press.

van Knippenberg, D., Homan, A. C., & van Ginkel, W. P. 2012. Diversity cognition and climates. In Q. Roberson 

(Ed.), The Oxford handbook of diversity and work: 220-238. New York: Oxford University Press.

Yeo,  G.,  &  Neal,  A.  2006.  An  examination  of  the  dynamic  relationship  between  self-efficacy  and  performance 

across levels of analysis and levels of specificity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91: 1088-1101.

