The Effects of Human Resource Management Practices on 

Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines 

By  CASEY ICHNIOWSKI, KATHRYN SHAW, AND GIOVANNA PRENNUSHI* 

We investigate the productivity effects of innovative employment practices using 
data from a sample of 36 homogeneous steel production lines owned by 17 com- 
panies.  The productivity regressions demonstrate that lines using a set of inno- 
vative  work  practices,  which  include  incentive  pay,  teams,  flexible  job 
assignments, employment security, and training, achieve substantially higher lev- 
els  of productivity than do lines with the more traditional approach, which in- 
cludes  narrow job  definitions, strict  work  rules,  and  hourly pay  with  close 
supervision.  Our results are  consistent  with  recent theoretical models  which 
stress the importance of complementarities among work practices. (JEL J24, J5, 
L20, M11) 

This study presents new empirical evidence 
on  the productivity effects  of  alternative em- 
ployment practices using data that we have as- 
sembled  on  steel  finishing  processes.  The 
unique data set makes this study's estimates of 
productivity differentials due  to  employment 
practices particularly convincing  for several 
reasons. First, the data set is  restricted to ob- 
servations on one very specific type of manu- 
facturing  production  process.  This  narrow 
focus eliminates many sources of heterogeneity 
that confound  productivity  comparisons  in 

* Ichniowski: Graduate School  of  Business, 713  Uris 
Hall, Columbia University, New York, NY  10027; Shaw: 
Graduate School  of  Industrial Administration, Camegie 
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213; Prennushi: The 
World Bank,  1818 H  St., NW,  Washington, DC  20433. 
Principal coinvestigators Ichniowski and Shaw acknowl- 
edge  the valued support of  the Alfred P. Sloan Founda- 
tion's Steel Industry Center of Carnegie Mellon University 
and the Columbia University Center for Japanese Econ- 
omy and Business. We also gratefully acknowledg6 help- 
ful comments from Richard Cyert, Robert Gibbons, Zvi 
Griliches,  Daniel  Hamermesh, James  Heckman, Bengt 
Holmstrom, Paul Milgrom, and John Roberts. Valuable 
suggestions also were made by participants in the Amer- 
ican Economic Association meetings and in  seminars at 
Cornell University, the Massachusetts Institute of  Tech- 
nology,  Harvard University, the University of Michigan, 
the University of  Maryland, Columbia University, Ohio 
State  University,  Carnegie Mellon  University,  the  Na- 
tional Bureau of Economic Research, the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, and the Federal Reserve Board. 

more aggregate data and in more heterogeneous 
samples. Second, we develop a detailed model 
of  this particular production process based on 
personal visits to each work site. We estimate 
the productivity model using precise measures 
of productivity, capital equipment, employment 
practices, and other line-specific determinants 
of  productivity that we  collected  from each 
work site. Third, we obtain longitudinal data on 
each production line  to  estimate fixed-effects 
models that investigate changes in productivity 
within production lines due to changes in their 
employment practices. The primary limitation 
of the study is, of course, that it reflects work 
practices and performance outcomes in  only 
one industry. 

We  find consistent support for the conclu- 
sion that groups or clusters of complementary 
human resource  management (HRM)  prac- 
tices have large effects on productivity, while 
changes in individual work practices have lit- 
tle  or no  effect  on productivity. In Section I 
we  describe the unique sample and data as- 
sembled  for  this  study.  Section  II  identifies 
studies  in  the  incentive  contract  literature 
which stress the importance of complementar- 
ities among employment practices, while Sec- 
tion III develops  measures of  the production 
lines'  HRM practices. In Sections IV-VI  we 
present alternative econometric specifications 
of  the  productivity model  and the empirical 
estimates. Section VII offers a conclusion. 

291 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


292 

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 

JUNE 1997 

I.  Sample and Data 

A.  Sample Design 

Heterogeneity in production processes and 
outputs often limits the persuasiveness of em- 
pirical studies that make firm-level or plant- 
level  productivity comparisons. Therefore, in 
designing our model of  worker productivity, 
we  sought to minimize heterogeneity by col- 
lecting a unique data set on a sample of steel- 
making operations. Observations in the sample 
are not of  steel companies, divisions of  steel 
companies,  or  even  steel  mills.  Rather, the 
sample consists  of  observations on  one  very 
specific type of steel finishing process. 

Of the approximately 60  finishing lines  of 
this type in the United States, we  personally 
visited 45 lines owned by 21 companies at lo- 
cations ranging from New  York to Alabama 
to  California. We  conducted field interviews 
for one  to  three days at each site, collecting 
information on  HRM  practices,  the  perfor- 
mance of the finishing lines, the capital equip- 
ment used in the production processes, other 
inputs into the production process, and wage 
data. Four of  the 45  lines  could not provide 
performance data because they had been op- 
erating for only a few months. Of the remain- 
ing  41  lines,  36  lines  provided comparable 
monthly productivity data. 

This  study's  econometric  analysis  uses  a 
panel data set of  up to 2,190  monthly obser- 
vations on  the productivity of  these 36  steel 
finishing  lines  owned  by  17  different  steel 
companies. The sample includes multiple lines 
for major steel producers as well  as lines for 
smaller companies  that operate only  one  or 
two lines. The sample contains unionized lines 
as well as nonunion lines. According to com- 
pany and industry sources, the sample includes 
high and low performers and a wide range of 
HRM environments. 

B.  The Production Process and the 
Dependent Productivity Variable 

operations manager, or  superintendent. The 
basic production process is very similar in all 
lines. Steel input on each line is a roll (or coil) 
of flat-rolled steel weighing about 12 tons. The 
coil  is  loaded  at  the  beginning  of  the  line 
where the steel  strip is  welded to the end of 
the previous coil  on the line. The coil  then is 
unrolled so  that a  long,  continuous sheet of 
steel  threads its  way  through the  machinery 
that treats the steel.  After the finishing treat- 
ment, the steel strip is  then re-coiled and cut 
at the exit  end  of  the process. The  line  can 
operate continuously around the clock as coils 
are welded to one another. 

The productivity model for this production 
process is best understood within the context 
of an "engineering production function." The 
tonnage that comes off the line per month (Q) 
is  a function of  the tonnage loaded onto the 
therefore is a function of the width 
line-and 
(w)  and thickness or gauge  (g)  of  the steel 
the speed of the line (s),  and the 
strip-times 
hours it  is  running (h).  If  hS represents the 
maximum hours the line is  scheduled to run, 
then  the  potential  steel  output on  line  i  in 
month t  is  arithmetically determined by  the 
four key  technical parameters (w,  g,  s,  and 
hs),  and this can be expressed: 

(1) 

Potential Qit =  (wit,git,sit,W) 

where the quantity in parentheses in equation 
(1 )  is  the  volume  of  steel  through line  i  in 
month t, and w is an estimate of the density of 
steel. 

Since  the production parameters in  equa- 
tion  ( 1 )  are  determined  by  the  technical 
specifications  of  the  line's  equipment  and 
the  specifications  of  the  input coil's  width 
and gauge,  a line's  production in any month 
depends only on the number of hours the line 
actually runs: 

(2)  Actual Qit = 

( wit * git * Sit * h sit 

x  (1-dit), 

To understand how to model the production 
process  in  these  finishing lines  and how  to 
measure  the  lines'  performance, we  toured 
each line  with an experienced engineer, area 

fraction  of  total 
where  dit is  delays-the 
scheduled hours that are lost  because of  un- 
scheduled line  stops. Once the technological 
parameters  and product  mix  are specified, 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


VOL. 87 NO. 3 

ICHNIOWSKI ET AL:  EFFECTS OF HR MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 

293 

production depends solely on delays. Produc- 
tivity improves by increasing uptime, (1  -  dit). 
Production-line uptime is our primary mea- 
sure of  productivity, because uptime directly 
determines steel  output and because  uptime 
figures are especially comparable across com- 
panies. Uptime, Ui, =  1 -  di,, is the percent of 
scheduled operating time that the line actually 
runs. In the sample of 2,190  "line-month" ob- 
servations used in the empirical analysis, up- 
time  has  a  mean value  of  0.919,  a  standard 
deviation of  0.044,  and a  range of  0.398  to 
0.996.  In addition to this output measure, we 
will  provide results for the quality of  output, 
as measured by the percent of  tons produced 
that meet specific quality standards for the in- 
dustry.  We  focus  primarily,  however,  on 
productivity. 

C.  Control Variables in the 

Productivity Equation 

This  study's  focus  on  one  specific  pro- 
duction process  eliminates many  sources of 
heterogeneity in  productivity, but these pro- 
duction lines  are not identical. To  provide a 
thorough set of  controls for other sources of 
productivity  variation,  we  personally  in- 
spected each production line in the sample and 
discussed  with  engineering experts from the 
lines any technical features that affect uptime. 
Based on these discussions, we  were able to 
identify  and collect  a  comprehensive set  of 
data on technological features of the lines that 
affect their productivity. 

The uptime productivity equations include 
up to  25  controls for detailed features of  the 
line that affect uptime. These are controls for 
capital vintage (the year the line was built and 
its  square);  "learning curve"  effects  (time 
since  start-up of  the  line  and  its  square, a 
dummy for the first year of operations, and a 
monthly time counter for the start-up period); 
technical line  specifications (line  width, line 
speed,  and their squares);  specific  line  ma- 
chinery that reduces or increases the likelihood 
of  unscheduled downtime (a  dummy for the 
degree of computerization on the line and nine 
dummies for specific design features of equip- 
ment);  periods  of  unusually high  downtime 
(variables for quarters when new equipment is 

added to the line);  the quality of steel input (a 
ranking of  steel  quality from potential U.S. 
suppliers); and the extent of scheduled down- 
time for maintenance activities (the number of 
annual eight-hour maintenance shifts).  Ac- 
cording to our interviews and site inspections, 
unscheduled downtime  should  be  higher  in 
older lines, faster and wider lines, start-up pe- 
riods, lines with fewer computerized controls, 
periods when new equipment is installed, lines 
that perform less preventive maintenance, and 
lines with lower quality steel input. 

D.  Data on HRM Policies 

We  gathered human resource management 
data by  conducting  standardized interviews 
with HR managers, labor relations managers, 
operations managers of the finishing lines, su- 
perintendents, line workers, and union repre- 
sentatives  in  organized  lines.  We  collected 
supporting information from personnel files, 
personnel  manuals,  collective  bargaining 
agreements, and other primary source docu- 
ments. We used this information from the in- 
terviews and supporting documents to answer 
survey-type questions about the HRM prac- 
tices  and then to  construct a  detailed set  of 
HRM dummy variables. 

Table 1 provides the definitions of a subset 
of  representative  HRM variables  and their 
mean values for the panel data set. These vari- 
ables measure work practices in all major areas 
of personnel management, including compen- 
sation,  recruiting and selection,  team-based 
work organization, employment security, flex- 
ible job assignment, skills training, and com- 
munication procedures. We  also  include two 
traditional labor relations indicators: the union 
status of the line and a grievance rate variable. 

II.  Complementarities Among Work Practices 

Several empirical studies have examined the 
effects  on a firm's productivity of  individual 
work practices such as those listed in Table 1, 
including  profit sharing (Douglas  L.  Kruse, 
1993),  training (Ann Bartel, 1995),  or infor- 
mation sharing (Morris Kleiner and Marvin 
Bouillon,  1988).  However,  recent incentive 
contract theories argue that complementarities 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


294 

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 

JUNE 1997 

HRM variable name 

Mean 

Dummy variable description 

TABLE  1-DEFINITIONS  OF HRM VARIABLES 

1.  Incentive pay 

a. Profit sharing 

b. Line incentives 

2.  Recruiting and 

selection 

0.700 

0.186 

Is there a company profit-sharing plan covering the line workers? 

Are operators covered by a "nontraditional" incentive pay plan which 
applies across shifts of workers and which is sensitive to quality as 
well as quantity aspects of output? 

a. High screening 

0.085 

Was an extensive selection procedure used to hire new workers, including 

tests for personality traits needed for cooperative team environments 
and efforts to set clear expectations about required work behaviors of 
the new workers? 

3.  Teamwork 

a. High participation 

0.237 

Are a majority of operators involved in formal or informal work teams or 

other related problem-solving activities? 

b. Multiple teams 

c. Formal team practice 

0.130 

0.335 

Do operators participate in more than one problem-solving team? 

Are operators organized into formal work teams either on the line or for 
the purposes of problem-solving activities according to an established 
policy with at least some operators involved in team activities? 

4.  Employment security 

a. Employment security 

0.288 

Has the company committed to a goal of long-term employment security 

and offered employees a pledge of employment security? 

5.  Flexible job assignment 

a. Job rotation 

6.  Skills training 

a. High train 

b. Low train 

7.  Communication 

0.079 

Do operators rotate across jobs or tasks on the line? 

0.134 

0.208 

Have all operators on the line received off-the-job training? 

Have at least some operators received off-the-job training? 

a. Information sharing 

0.566 

b. Meet workers 

c. Meet union 

8.  Labor relations 

a. Union 

b. Low grievance 

0.508 

0.224 

0.917 

0.499 

Are operators and union representatives, if any, provided with financial 

information on a regular basis? 

Do line managers meet off-line with operators to discuss issues of 

concern, including issues related to performance and quality? 

Do union representatives and managers meet often to discuss concerns 

and cooperate in finding solutions to issues? 

Is the line a unionized operation? 

Is the grievance filing rate less than 12 per year? 

Notes:  Means reported in  column 2  refer to  the means for the main sample of  N  =  2,190  line-months used  in  the 
productivity models reported in Tables 4  and 5. For the meet union and low  grievance variables, we  assign nonunion 
lines a value of  1 for these two dummy variables because of regular meetings with worker representatives and low levels 
of  complaints in their formal or informal complaint or grievance procedures. The means of these two variables among 
the sample of union observations are 0.153  and 0.453, respectively. 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


VOL 87 NO. 3 

ICHNIOWSKI ET AL:  EFFECTS OF HR MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 

295 

often exist among a firm's employment prac- 
tices. For example, one employment practice, 
such as the use of problem-solving teams, may 
be  more effective  in  stimulating worker pro- 
ductivity when it  is  adopted in  concert with 
other work practices that give workers the in- 
centive  and the  ability  to  perform  well  in 
teams-practices 
such  as  incentive  pay, 
training, the flexible assignment of workers, or 
employment  security.  These  theories  argue 
that is important to analyze a firm's work pol- 
icies "not in isolation, but as part of a coherent 
incentive  system"  (Bengt  Holmstrom  and 
Paul Milgrom, 1994 p. 990; see also Milgrom 
and John Roberts, 1990, 1995; Eugene Kandel 
and Edward Lazear, 1992; George Baker et al., 
1994). 

According to these theories, interaction ef- 
fects  among HRM policies  are important de- 
terminants of  productivity. Firms realize the 
largest gains in productivity by adopting clus- 
ters of  complementary practices, and benefit 
little from making "marginal" changes in any 
one HRM practice. These theories also iden- 
tify  complementarities among  specific  prac- 
tices which span seven different HRM policy 
areas: incentive compensation plans, extensive 
recruiting and selection, work teams, employ- 
ment security, flexible job  assignment, skills 
training, and labor-management communica- 
tion.'  Taken as  a  whole,  these  theories also 
predict that adopting this entire complement 
of  practices  across  all  seven  HRM policy 

' As  examples,  Kandel and Lazear (1992)  show that 
teamwork  and  careful  employee  selection  will  make 
group-based incentive  pay  more  effective  by  reducing 
free-rider  problems.  Baker  et  al.  (1994)  show  that 
incentive pay plans based on objective performance mea- 
sures can  increase the effectiveness  of  policies,such  as 
work teams, which require subjective evaluations of em- 
ployees.  Holmstrom  and  Milgrom  (1994)  model  the 
complementarities  that  arise  when  workers  perform 
multiple tasks and no one practice induces optimal effort 
on  all  tasks.  Milgrom  and  Roberts  (1995)  argue that 
productivity-improvement teams are more effective when 
a firm adopts a set of complementary practices including 
employment  security,  flexible  job  assignments,  skills 
training, and communication procedures. For further dis- 
cussion of the predictions of these theories, see Ichniowski 
et al. (1995  pp. 2-7). 

areas  will  produce  the  highest  levels  of 
productivity.2 

If firms adopt work practices in a comple- 
mentary fashion, then empirical tests  should 
consider the  impacts of  groups of  practices 
rather than simply  the  effects  of  individual 
practices. The primary hypothesis investigated 
in the empirical work is: do  groups of  inno- 
vative HRM practices  increase productivity? 
The productivity effects of groups of innova- 
tive work practices also will  be compared to 
the effects  of  differences in  individual work 
practices. 

III. HRM Systems 

The argument that complementarities exist 
among HRM practices is  consistent with the 
evidence that HRM policy variables are highly 
correlated with each other in our steel sample. 
Out  of  78  possible  bivariate  correlations 
among the  13 HRM variables listed in Table 
1,  71  are positive  and 48  are positive  and 
significant.3 

Patterns in these correlations are consistent 
with the predictions of several authors. For ex- 
ample, Kandel and Lazear (1992)  show how 
careful employee recruiting and team meetings 
can make group incentive pay more effective. 
In our data, line-specific incentive pay plans 
(line  incentives  in  line  lb  of  Table  1)  are 

2 The overlap among the policies considered in the the- 
ories discussed in  footnote  1 implies that the most pro- 
ductive HRM system will have innovative work practices 
in all seven HRM areas. For example, Baker et al. (1994) 
consider complementarities between objective  incentive 
pay  and subjective performance appraisals or problem- 
solving teams. But Kandel and Lazear (1992)  argue that 
careful screening, indoctrination, and teamwork make ob- 
jective incentives more effective,  so these policies should 
be complements with policies like work teams, which re- 
quire subjective appraisals of  employees.  Milgrom and 
Roberts ( 1995) also consider work teams, but indicate that 
this policy will be more effective in combination with job 
security, job flexibility, training, and communication. 
' To construct the sample for calculating these corre- 
lations, we  allow one observation for each distinct com- 
bination of  HRM policies  experienced by a line. The 36 
production lines experienced a total of 54 different com- 
binations of the HRM practices listed in Table 1, and these 
54 observations comprise the sample for calculating cor- 
relations among the HRM practices. 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


296 

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 

JUNE 1997 

positively correlated with extensive recruiting 
(high screening, line 2a),  with team-based 
work structures (formal team practice, line 3c 
and multiple teams, line 3b), and with labor- 
management meetings (meet workers, line 7b 
and meet union, line 7c). Baker et al. (1994) 
argue that incentive pay based on objective 
measures will be complementary to incentive 
pay based on subjective evaluations of em- 
ployees. The data here show that the line in- 
centives variable also is positively correlated 
with "subjective" incentive pay plans such as 
"pay-for-knowledge" policies, and with the 
level of worker involvement in teams (high 
participation, line 3a). Finally, Milgrom and 
Roberts (1995)  argue that problem-solving 
teams will be more effective when firms also 
provide employment security, job flexibility, 
training, and communication procedures. In 
our sample, work team variables, the employ- 
ment security variable (line  4a),  the high 
screening variable, various measures of labor- 
management communication (information 
sharing, line 7a; meet workers; meet union), 
and job flexibility (job rotation, line 5a) are 
highly correlated.4 

This high degree of intercorrelation among 
HRM practices indicates that empirical mod- 
els that estimate the impact of any one HRM 
practice on productivity will yield biased co- 
efficients due to the omission of other HRM 
practices with which the one included prac- 
tice is correlated. One possible solution to this 
omitted variable problem would be to enter 
the entire set of potentially important HRM 
variables into the productivity equations. This 
approach, however, is confounded by the se- 
vere collinearity among the HRM practices, 
making any one coefficient uninterpretable, 
and would not directly test whether combi- 
nations of HRM practices are the critical de- 
terminants of productivity.5 To examine the 
importance of sets of highly correlated, and 

(1995  pp. 13-15). 

4 For the full set of  correlations, see Ichniowski et al. 
' Examining collinearity diagnostics (David A. Belsley 
et al.,  1980)  for our productivity model that includes all 
15 HRM variables listed in Table 1 reveals a clear case of 
what Belsley  et al. term "competing collinearity." 

presumably complementary, HRM practices, 
one must examine the effects  of  interactions 
among the practices. There are an insufficient 
number of  degrees  of  freedom to  test  a full 
set  of  interaction terms among  all  available 
HRM practice variables. And,  an expansive 
set  of  interaction terms still  would  be  con- 
founded by  collinearity  among practices, so 
we  seek  to  identify  common  clusters  of 
practices. 

A.  Identifying Systems of HRM Practices 

To  summarize the  overall  HRM  environ- 
ments of the work sites in our sample, we iden- 
tify the most common combinations of  HRM 
practices in these production lines. Specifically, 
we  examine an extensive set of  variables that 
describe the seven HRM policy  areas consid- 
ered in the theories discussed in Section II: sub- 
jective  and objective incentive compensation 
plans, extensive recruiting and selection, team- 
work,  employment  security, job  flexibility, 
training, and labor-management communica- 
tion.6 Combinations of  practices that exist  in 
our sample are referred to as "HRM systems." 
Table 2 reports four distinctive combinations 
of HRM practices identified by inspection of the 
distributions of the HRM variables. These four 
HRM systems map out a hierarchy from most 
"traditional" to most "innovative." 

*  HRM System 4 is the traditional system. 
It contains no innovative practices. Facilities 

6 To  provide as  rich a description as  possible  of  the 
overall HRM environment, we use more variables than the 
15 HRM practices in  Table  1. We  use  from one  to  six 
specific practices describing each of the seven HRM pol- 
icy  areas. These  other variables are dummies for inter- 
mediate  levels  of  recruiting  and  screening  activities; 
training in team problem-solving techniques and in statis- 
tical  process control methods; the presence of  informal 
work teams and local  union support for team activities; 
employee participation in developing standard work prac- 
tices; multiattribute gainsharing incentive plans; "pay-for- 
knowledge"  salary plans;  and combined  operator job 
classifications  and combined  maintenance  worker job 
classifications. In all, 26 HRM policy  variables are used 
to classify the lines' HRM environments. Because we are 
classifying lines according to their work practices, this set 
of  26  variables does  not include the union status or the 
grievance rate variables listed in Table 1. 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


VOL 87 NO. 3 

ICHNIOWSKI ET AL:  EFFECTS OF HR MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 

297 

TABLE  2-PROPORTION  OF PRODUCTION  LINES  WITH SPECIFIC  HRM  PRACTICES 

WITHIN  FOUR  HRM  SYSTEM  CATEGORIESa 

Practices in seven HRM 
policy areasb 

HRM 

System 1 

HRM 

System 2 

HRM 

System 3 

HRM 

System 4 

1.  Incentive pay 

a. Line incentives 

1.00 

0.31 

0.00 

0.00 

2.  Recruiting and selection 

a. High screening 

1.00 

0.15 

0.00 

0.00 

3.  Teamwork 

a. High participation 

b. Multiple teams 

c. Formal team practice 

4.  Employment security 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

0.85 

0.62 

1.00 

a. Employment security 

1.00 

0.23 

5.  Flexible job assignment 

a. Job rotation 

6.  Skills training 

a. High train 

b. Low train 

7.  Communication 

a. Information sharing 

b. Meet workers 

1.00 

0.15 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

0.69 

0.92 

0.54 

0.77 

0.10 

0.00 

1.00 

0.48 

0.03 

0.00 

0.07 

0.62 

0.72 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

a The sample for Table 2 is based on production lines and not production-line months. 
This sample includes 54 observations, and not just 36 production lines, because, for lines 
that switch HRM practices, it includes one observation for each different combination of 
HRM practices that the lines experience. 

b See Table 1 for definitions of HRM variables. 

with  this  system  have  close  supervision by 
foremen; strict work rules and narrow job re- 
sponsibilities; incentive pay based on quantity 
of  output and not quality of  output; no work 
teams; no practice of managers sharing finan- 
cial information or meeting regularly off-line 
with workers; no screening; and no off-line or 
other formal training. 

*  HRM System  3 is similar to the System 
4, except that these lines have introduced in- 
novative  practices  in  two  specific  areas. 
They  have  initiated  worker involvement  in 
teams  (though  few  have  a high  level  of  in- 
volvement)  and  they  have  enhanced  their 

labor-management  communication  prac- 
tices,  either by sharing financial information 
or  through  regular  meetings  between  line 
managers  and  workers  or  their  union 
representatives. 

incorporates 

*  HRM  System  2 

the 
information-sharing and work team practices 
associated with HRM System 3, but these lines 
also include two other innovative practices- 
extensive  skills  training and high  levels  of 
worker involvement in teams. While they may 
add one  or two  other innovative work prac- 
tices,  these lines  always lack one or more of 
the following  practices: extensive  screening, 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


298 

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 

JUNE 1997 

job  rotation  or reduced job  classifications, 
multiattribute incentive  pay,  or  employment 
security.7 

*  HRM System  1 incorporates innovative 
HRM practices in all HRM policy areas. Lines 
with this system have a multiattribute incentive 
pay plan or a  "pay-for-knowledge" incentive 
pay system; extensive screening of new workers, 
often lasting over one year; off-line training in 
technical skills and team problem solving; high 
levels  of  employee  involvement  in  multiple 
problem-solving teams; job  duties covering a 
wide range of tasks with workers often rotating 
across jobs; regular information sharing between 
workers and management; and an implicit em- 
ployment security pledge. 

In addition to identifying the common HRM 
systems by inspecting the distribution of HRM 
dummy variables in the sample, we  also use 
three statistical procedures to identify common 
HRM systems. The alternative statistical clas- 
sification procedures produce system classifi- 
cations  that overlap very  closely  with  those 
system  classifications  described above,  sug- 
gesting  that the classification of  lines'  HRM 
environments is robust with respect to differ- 
ent classification procedures.8 We will use the 
"systems"  reported in  Table 2  as  the basic 
HRM  measures  in  the  productivity  regres- 

7 A small number of lines have either high participation 
in  teams or extensive  training, but not both policies  to- 
gether. We  classify  these lines  as HRM System  2  or 3, 
depending on  how  extensive  the  HRM practices in  the 
other policy areas are. Our empirical results are virtually 
unaffected by how  we  categorize these few  "intermedi- 
ate" cases. 

8 Because HRM systems follow a hierarchy from a set 
of  very traditional to  more innovative practices, we  use 
three scaling  algorithms that create a  single  HRM  "in- 
novativeness"  index. Two  of  these three scaling proce- 
dures,  Nominate  scaling  and  Guttman  'scaling,  are 
described in  Keith Poole  and Howard Rosenthal (1991) 
and Edwin Ghiselli et al. (1981),  respectively. The third 
scaling procedure is  a simple 0-to-7  HRM index created 
by  ranking the lines  as  "high"  or  "low"  in  the seven 
HRM  policy  areas and then  adding up  the  number of 
"high"  rankings. For each of the three HRM indices, we 
develop  groupings of  distinctive HRM environments by 
looking for natural breakpoints in the index. For further 
discussion  of  these  classification procedures and of  the 
estimated effects  of these alternative HRM groupings on 

sions,  but also  present regression results in- 
troducing  HRM  systems  from  one  of  the 
alternative classification procedures to  illus- 
trate the similarity of  the results when HRM 
systems  are  measured  with  a  different 
procedure. 

B.  The Distribution and Average 
Productivities of HRM Systems 

Table 3 shows  the distribution of the data 
and  productivity  means  for  the  alternative 
HRM  systems.  While  most  lines  do  not 
change  their HRM systems  during the  data 
period,  13.8  percent  of  the  sample's  2,190 
observations are from lines that change their 
HRM  systems,  moving  from  the  more  tra- 
ditional Systems  4 and 3 to more innovative 
systems.  However,  no  line  adopted enough 
innovative  practices  to  switch  into  HRM 
System  1. All  HRM System  1 lines  are new 
lines that began operations with the full com- 
plement of innovative practices listed in Ta- 
ble  2.  No  lines  adopted  less  innovative 
systems. 

Table  3  presents mean  uptimes  for  lines 
with  different HRM  systems,  differentiating 
between the uptime levels  of  "stayers"  and 
"changers." The numbers along the diagonal 
of  Table  3  show  average  uptimes  for  the 
"stayers,"  or  for  lines  that did  not  change 
their HRM systems. According to the figures 
along the diagonal, these cross-sectional com- 
parisons show productivity differentials rela- 
tive  to  traditional  HRM  System  4  of  3.1 
percentage points for HRM System 3; 2.5 per- 
centage  points for  HRM  System  2;  and 4.1 
percentage points  for  HRM  System  1.  The 
numbers in the area above the diagonal in Ta- 
ble 3 show uptime levels  for "changers" be- 
fore and after the adoption of more innovative 
HRM systems. The average longitudinal up- 
time gains for lines adopting more innovative 
systems of HRM practices range from 1 to 2.5 
percentage points. 

productivity, see Ichniowski et al. (1995 pp. 19-22).  The 
four HRM systems developed from the Nominate classi- 
fication procedure are introduced in the productivity re- 
gressions in Table 4. 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


VOL. 87 NO. 3 

ICHNIOWSKI ET AL.: EFFECTS OF HR MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 

299 

TABLE  3-THE 

DISTRIBUTION  OF  SAMPLE  OBSERVATIONS  AND  AVERAGE  PRODUCrIVITIES  BY  HRM SYSTEM 

Starting HRM system 
HRM System 4 

HRM System 4 

Uptime in System 4 

0.899 
(0.036) 

[N=  782] 

HRM System 3 

HRM System 2 

HRM System 1 

Ending HRM system 

HRM System 3 
Uptime in System 3 

0.912 
(0.039) 

HRM System 2 
Uptime in System 2 

0.939 
(0.021) 

HRM System 1 

Prior uptime (Sys. 4) 

0.901 
(0.034) 

[N =  172] 

Uptime in System 3 

0.930 
(0.032) 

[N=  742] 

Prior uptime (Sys. 3) 

0.912 
(0.028) 

Prior uptime (Sys. 4) 

Uptime in System 2 

0.894 
(0.081) 
[N =  59] 

0.964 
(0.011) 

0.949 
(0.027) 
[N =  82] 

Prior uptime (Sys. 3) 

Uptime in System 2 

0.924 
(0.070) 

[N =  287] 

Uptime in System I 

0.940 
(0.041) 
[N =  77] 

Note: Standard deviations are in parentheses ( 

); sample size for cell is in brackets [ 

]. 

IV. Econometric Specifications and Estimates 

The uptime data displayed in Table 3 indi- 
cate that lines that upgrade their HRM system 
improve their uptime performance by  1 to 2 
percentage points. These mean differences do 
not, however, control for many other factors 
that can affect uptime gains, and they do not 
compare the uptime gains for HRM "chang- 
ers"  to  the uptime gains for those lines  that 
did not change their HRM practices.9 Further- 
more,  focusing  exclusively  on  the  uptime 
gains for changers makes no use of the infor- 
mation contained in the cross-sectional varia- 

9 A  comparison of  the  growth  in  uptime  for  HRM 
"changers" versus HRM "stayers" would correspond to 

tion in uptime and HRM practices across lines. 
The  primary objective  of  the  econometric 
analysis below is to make the best use of both 
the longitudinal and 
types of information-of 
cross-sectional differences in uptime-and  to 
compare  the  alternative  longitudinal  and 
cross-sectional estimators of  the productivity 
effects of HRM policies. 

the use of the "difference-in-differences" estimator used 
in  program evaluation  studies  (Orley  Ashenfelter  and 
David Card, 1985; Robert J. LaLonde, 1986).  Rather than 
present results using this estimator, we  move directly to 
the fixed-effects estimator in Table 4, which is equivalent 
to difference-in-differences with added control variables. 
The  significance  of  the  control variables makes  fixed- 
effects estimation more illuminating, and fixed-effects es- 
timation is  more readily applied to  unbalanced monthly 
panel data. 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


300 

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 

JUNE 1997 

TABLE  4-ESTiMATED 

PRODUCTIVITY  EFFECTS  OF HRM SYSTEMS  IN OLS  AND  FIXED-EFFECTS  MODELS 

(DEPENDENT  VARIABLE:  PERCENT  UPTIME) 

[N  =  2,1901 

OLS models without detailed 

technology controls3 

OLS models with detailed 

technology controlsh 

Fixed effects models" 

Classification of 
HRM systems 
from Table 2 

(la) 

0.097*** 
(0.007) 

0.038*** 
(0.004) 

0.011*** 
(0.002) 

0.246 

HRM system 

1. HRM System 1 

2. HRM System 2 

3. HRM System 3 

R2 

Classification of 
HRM systems 
from Nominate 

procedure 

(lb) 

0.1 14*** 
(0.006) 

0.057*** 
(0.004) 

0.029*** 
(0.003) 

0.283 

Classification of 
HRM systems 
from Table 2 

(2a) 

0.067*** 
(0.007) 

0.032*** 
(0.005) 

0.014*** 
(0.003) 

0.409 

Classification of  No controls for  With controls for 
HRM systems 
from Nominate 

prechange 
productivity 

prechange 
productivity 

procedure 

(2b) 

growth 

(3) 

growth 

(4) 

0.078*** 
(0.007) 

0.041*** 
(0.005) 

0.025*** 
(0.006) 

0.409 

- 

- 

0.035*** 
(0.008) 

0.025*** 
(0.006) 

0.066 

0.068*** 
(0.019) 

0.043*** 
(0.011) 

0.068 

"Control variables in columns (la)-(lb)  are: number of years line has been operating and years squared; year line was built and year 
built squared; dummy for start-up periods indicated by first 12 months of operations and I -to- 12 time trend for month of start-up operation; 
1-to-5 index of quality of steel input; and number of annual eight-hour scheduled maintenance shifts. 

'Control  variables in columns (2a)-(2b)  are: all controls listed in footnote a; dummy for type of customer; maximum speed of the line 
and speed squared; maximum width of  the line and width squared; nine dummies to indicate specific pieces of  equipment from start to 
finish of the line and a measure of the age of one piece of equipment at end of the line; a dummy to indicate high and low levels of computer 
control of line operations; and a variable to measure the value of major new equipment during its six-month installation period. For full set 
of coefficient estimates for the column (2b) model, see Appendix Table Al. 

'Results  for fixed-effects models are identical under different HRM classification procedures because all procedures identify the same 
lines as lines that switch HRM systems. There are no coefficient estimates for HRM System  1 in the fixed-effects model since no lines 
switched into this system. Other control variables in columns (3) and (4)  are: age of  line and age squared; dummy for start-up periods 
indicated by first 12 months of operations and I -to- 12 time trend for month of start-up operation; 1 -to-5 index of quality of steel input; age 
of  the end-of-the-line piece of equipment; and a variable to measure the value of  major new equipment during its six-month installation 
period. For full set of coefficients for the column (3) model, see Appendix Table Al. 

*** Significant at the 0.01  level. 

To estimate the effects of HRM practices or 
systems of HRM practices on the uptime pro- 
ductivity measure, we begin with the follow- 
ing simple model of a line's uptime: 

(3) 

Ui  =  y'Hit +  3'Xit +  eit. 

The  determinants of  productivity in  (3)  in- 
clude dummy variables for the HRM systems 
(Hit);  line  characteristics (Xi,),  such  as  the 
technological features of  the production pro- 
cess; and an error term that is temporarily as- 
sumed  to  be  independently  and identically 
distributed. 

A.  The Productivity Effects of Alternative 

HRM Systems 

Table 4  contains the estimates of  equation 
(3),  introducing first a limited set and then an 

extensive  set of technology controls to assess 
the sensitivity of the results to alternative spec- 
ifications. Columns ( la)  -  ( lb)  of Table 4 re- 
port estimates of the effects of HRM systems 
in a model with a basic set of controls for tech- 
nological determinants of line uptime. Results 
in  column  (la)  use  the HRM classifications 
shown  in  Table 2  to  identify the HRM sys- 
tems, while those in column (lb)  use the al- 
ternative  Nominate  statistical  classification 
procedure to identify the HRM systems (see 
footnote  8).  Columns  (2a)  and (2b)  also 
report results  for  the  two  alternative HRM 
system  definitions,  but these  specifications 
now  introduce all 25  controls for differences 
in technology and other inputs. 

These regression results reveal a hierarchi- 
cal pattern in the productivity differentials of 
HRM  systems:  lines  with  HRM  System  1 
have  the  highest  productivity,  followed  in 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


VOL. 87 NO. 3 

ICHNIOWSKI ET AL.: EFFECTS OF HR MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 

301 

order by lines with HRM Systems 2, 3, and 4. 
F-tests reveal that the difference between the 
coefficients on HRM Systems 1 and 2 and the 
difference between the coefficients  on  HRM 
Systems 2 and 3 are both significant at the 0.01 
level  in all models. The estimates of the pro- 
ductivity  effects  of  HRM  systems  are very 
similar  in the  alternative  specifications,  al- 
though the addition of the detailed technology 
controls reduces the estimated impact of alter- 
native HRM System  1 by some 3 percentage 
points. 

B.  Fixed-Effects Estimates of the 
Productivity Effects of Alternative 

HRM Systems 

In estimating the impact of HRM systems 
on productivity,  we  want to  avoid  any pos- 
sible  selection  bias arising from nonrandom 
selection  of  HRM practices.  The  ideal  data 
set would be experimental data in which the 
selection  of  HRM  practices  is  made  ran- 
domly.  However,  without  an  experimental 
design  that ensures random assignment,  we 
must use our nonexperimental data to mimic 
the desired experimental comparison. In this 
section  we  present fixed-effects  estimates in 
light  of  our concern with nonrandom selec- 
tion issues. 

The most likely reason for the nonrandom 
assignment of  the innovative HRM practices 
versus  the  less  innovative  practices  is  that 
"high-quality"  lines  choose  the  most  inno- 
vative  practices.  Thus,  we  introduce  an 
unobserved line-specific quality variable, ai, 
in our uptime regression. 

(4) 

Uit =  r'Hit +  f3'Xit +  ai  +  sit. 

Estimates of  y  in (3)  above will  be biased if 
the  controls  do  not  adequately  incorporate 
line-specific determinants of productivity that 
are correlated with choice  of  HRM systems; 
that is,  if ai  ?  0 and E(ai  -Hit) *  0. For ex- 
ample,  if  the  innovative  HRM  environment 
exists only in  "high-quality" lines (or H1it = 
1 if  ai  >  a mjin  where aCmin is  some threshold 
value of line quality),  then estimates of y are 
biased  if  ai  is  omitted. Because  the  sample 
contains longitudinal data and information on 

lines that changed their HRM systems, we can 
control for this potential source of bias with a 
fixed-effects  specification.  This  can be  ex- 
pressed as: 

(5) 

(Uit  -  Ui.) 

(Hit-  Hi.) 

+  f'(X it-  Xi.)  +  (-itei 

-) 

where the terms subscripted with  i 
indicate 
line-specific time-series means (for example, 
Ui.  =  E_T  UijlT). 

The  fixed-effects  results in  column (3)  of 
Table 4 eliminate the impact of all fixed line- 
specific  effects  (ai  )  and  also  introduce 
controls for any time-varying productivity de- 
terminants that were included in the column 
(2)  models. These results document positive 
effects  from  introducing  more  innovative 
HRM practices: relative to traditional System 
4, lines adopting the System 2 set of practices 
gain 3.5 percentage points of uptime, and lines 
adopting System 3 practices gain 2.5 percent- 
age points of uptime.'0 

C.  A Comparison of Fixed-Effects and 

Cross-Sectional Estimators 

The advantage of fixed-effects estimation is 
that  it  controls  for  any  selection  bias  that 
would result if different quality lines adopt dif- 
ferent HRM  practices. The  disadvantage of 
fixed-effects estimation is that it uses only the 
information from HRM  "changers"  in  esti- 
mating  the  effects  of  HRM  practices.  All 
cross-sectional  information is  eliminated  in 
the estimation. Recognizing that the informa- 
tion  from HRM changers is  limited because 
HRM  changes  are not  common  events,  the 
data-collection  protocol 
for  this  study 
was  developed  to  obtain convincing  cross- 
sectional productivity comparisons. First, we 
selected a specific production line that would 
be  comparable  across  different  companies. 
Second,  during plant visits  we  reviewed fea- 
tures of each line with experienced engineers 

0 There is only one set of fixed-effects results because 
the different methods for measuring HRM systems iden- 
tify the same set of lines as "HRM system switchers." 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


302 

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 

JUNE 1997 

to  identify technical  sources of  productivity 
variation. Finally,  we  collected  the  detailed 
vector of  control variables described in  Sec- 
tion I to account for the identifiable sources of 
productivity variation. If  this  vector of  pro- 
ductivity controls,  Xi,,  successfully  controls 
for  the  line-specific  sources  of  productivity 
variation that are correlated with HRM choice, 
then the estimates of  y  will  not be biased by 
the omission  of  ai  in  equation (3),  and the 
coefficients in the fixed-effects results should 
be comparable to those in the cross-sectional 
results containing detailed capital controls. 

The estimated productivity effects of HRM 
system variables in the fixed-effects model are 
virtually identical to those in the column (2b) 
specifications containing the detailed Xi, con- 
trols. In particular, t-tests cannot reject the hy- 
pothesis  that the  coefficients  on  the  HRM 
Systems 2 and 3 variables in the fixed-effects 
model are equal to the corresponding coeffi- 
cients in the column (2b)  model (see footnote 
11).  As shown in Table 3, no production line 
switches into HRM System  1, so  the column 
(3)  fixed-effects model contains no  estimate 
of the effects of HRM System 1. 

Additional specification tests  provide fur- 
ther evidence that the column (2)  OLS models 
already contain a thorough set of controls that 
adjust for  line-specific  determinants of  pro- 
ductivity. Not only are the coefficients on the 
HRM system variables very similar between 
the fixed-effects  and OLS specifications, but 
the coefficients  on  the control variables also 
are nearly equivalent between these two spec- 
ifications."  The  Appendix Table Al  reports 
the full set of coefficient estimates for both the 

column (2b)  OLS specification and the fixed- 
effects specification.'2 

D.  Introducing Differential Productivity 

Growth Rates 

The fixed-effects estimators will be inconsis- 
tent if  the adoption of  innovative HRM prac- 
tices is correlated with changes in productivity, 
such as declining productivity prior to adoption. 
For example, lines that experience a period of 
below-average  productivity  growth may  be 
more likely  to  adopt new  HRM practices. In 
this case, the estimate of  y  in the equation (4) 
fixed-effects model would measure only the ef- 
fects of adopting new HRM systems for those 
low-growth lines,  and not the effects of  new 
HRM systems for all lines. To control for this 
possibility, we expand the fixed-effects model 
to allow the growth rates in uptime to be dif- 
ferent for lines that switch HRM systems: 

(6) 

(Uit -  Ui.) 

= 

(Hit-Hi.) 

- 

+  f8'(Xit  -  xi.) 

+icP  (X 

-  X i)  +  (sit  - 

i.), 

where the two variables in X i are equal to the 
line  age  and  line  age-squared variables for 
changers measured prior to their HRM change, 
and are equal to zero at all other times. Thus, 
coefficient vector W8 represents the differential 
growth rate in productivity for changers, rel- 
ative to the base-level productivity growth rate 
for nonchangers, in  8.'3  The results of  esti- 

"We  calculate t-tests for the hypothesis that the coef- 
ficients on the Xi, variables in the fixed-effects model are 
equivalent  to  the  estimated  coefficients  in  the  cross- 
sectional model  of  column  (2b).  Each calculated t-test 
tests whether the difference in the estimated coefficients 
for the OLS and fixed-effects models is significantly dif- 
ferent from zero, given the estimated variance-covariance 
matrices for these two  models.  We  find that the coeffi- 
cients on the two HRM variables in the fixed effects  of 
column (3)  are insignificantly different from their values 
in the OLS in column (2b),  and five of the seven coeffi- 
cients on the control variables in column (3)  are insignif- 
icantly  different  from  those  in  column  (2b)  at  the 
5-percent level. 

2 The coefficients on the control variables in OLS and 
fixed-effects models are all signed in the expected direc- 
tion,  indicating  that lines  have  more  delays  with  less 
scheduled maintenance; lower  quality steel  input; older 
technologies; start-up periods for brand new lines; the in- 
troduction of  new pieces  of  equipment; and higher line 
speeds. 
" Equation (6)  controls for systematic differences be- 
tween the average growth rate in uptime for all lines and 
the growth rate in uptime among HRM switchers over the 
entire prechange period. An alternative model permits the 
adoption of a new HRM system to be a function of short- 
term declines in productivity just prior to adoption. If we 
reestimate the fixed-effect model and drop an equal num- 
ber of months before and after the HRM system changes, 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


VOL. 87 NO. 3 

ICHNIOWSKI ET AL.: EFFECTS OF HR MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 

303 

mating  equation  (6)  are  in  column  (4)  of 
Table 4.  The coefficients for this augmented 
fixed-effects model show somewhat larger ef- 
fects of changing to HRM System 3 or HRM 
System 2  than in the column (3)  model, in- 
dicating that lines  that switched  their HRM 
systems  had  somewhat  lower  productivity 
growth than average in the periods prior to the 
adoption of the new HRM systems.'4 

Note  finally  that  the  standard errors  on 
HRM coefficients may be underestimated due 
to serially correlated errors. We allow for the 
possibility  of  first-order serial correlation of 
the errors in equation (4)  (or sit  =  Psi(t - 1) + 
vit) and for first-order serial correlation in the 
fixed-effects models. When all the models in 
Table 4  were  reestimated allowing  for first- 
order serial correlation, the estimated standard 
errors increased only slightly. The magnitudes 
and levels  of  significance of  all estimated ef- 
fects  of  the HRM system variables virtually 
are identical to those presented in Table 4.15 

estimates  will  not  be  biased  by  differences  in  uptime 
growth  even  with  serial  correlation  in  the  errors 
(Ashenfelter and Card, 1985 p. 652).  We reestimate the 
model deleting observations for one or two quarters before 
and after any changes in HRM systems, and the results 
virtually are the same as those reported in column (3)  of 
Table  4.  We  suspect that changes in  uptime over  such 
short periods would not cause management to adopt new 
work policies,  so  we  focus  on the possibility of  longer- 
term declines in productivity growth. 
" We find evidence of a very modest three-month lag in 
the OLS  and fixed-effects uptime models. For example, 
when the fixed-effects uptime regression [Table 4, column 
(3)]  is reestimated with a lag of three months introduced 
in the HRM system variables, their coefficients rise by about 
0.005 (e.g., from 0.025 to 0.030 for HRM System 3). These 
lagged HRM variables provide a slightly better description 
of the changes in productivity due to the new HRM prac- 
tices than do the concurrent values of the HRM systems. In 
the  fixed-effects model, an F-test reveals that the three- 
month lags in HRM Systems 2 and 3 add explanatory power 
to  the  uptime model  already containing the  concurrent 
HRM system variables (F[2,2065]  =  3.64),  whereas the 
converse test concerning the addition of concurrent HRM 
system variables to a model that has the lagged HRM vari- 
ables is insignificant (F[2,2065]  =  1.17). 

' 5A  further consideration in estimating the productivity 
models is that the percent uptime variable is bounded by 
zero and one, suggesting the possibility of Tobit estima- 
tion.  We  do  not  pursue Tobit  estimation for  the  fixed- 

E.  The Magnitudes of the Estimated 
Productivity Effects of HRM Systems 

The magnitudes of the estimated effects of 
HRM systems on uptime are quite consistent 
across specifications in Table 4. The baseline 
fixed-effects model in column (3)  reports up- 
time differentials of 2.5 percentage points for 
HRM System 3 and 3.5 percentage points for 
HRM System  2,  and the estimates from the 
OLS models with detailed technology controls 
in  column  (2)  are insignificantly  different 
from  these  fixed-effects  estimates.  While 
fixed-effects estimates for the productivity dif- 
ferentials for  HRM  System  1  could  not  be 
calculated, the most conservative estimate of 
the productivity differential for HRM System 
1 in  any  OLS model  in  Table 4  is  6.7  per- 
centage points. Are uptime differentials of this 
magnitude economically important? 

Using  cost  data from one  small-scale line, 
we calculate that a conservative estimate of the 
effect  of  a  1-percentage-point increase in up- 
time on revenues net of any differences in pro- 
duction cost and any differences in the direct 
costs of the HRM policies would be approxi- 
mately $27,900 per month.'6 Using this value, 

effects models because the coefficient estimates of fixed- 
effects  Tobit models are not consistent: the nonlinearity 
of  the Tobit model  introduces an incidental parameters 
problem. However, when the OLS models are estimated 
as a Tobit with a mass point at one, the estimated coeffi- 
cients essentially are the same as the OLS estimates pre- 
sented in Table 4. Note that no lines have uptimes at the 
mass point of  one. A  double-sided Tobit with a  second 
mass point at zero is unnecessary since no lines have up- 
times close to zero. 

16 During a delay,  a line  loses  revenue from planned 
output, incurs fixed costs (which  exceed $5000 per hour 
in  some lines)  and some  "variable" costs  such as labor 
costs, but saves on other variable costs  such as the costs 
of  steel and energy inputs. Using a conservative estimate 
of the profit margin on a ton of steel and liberal estimates 
of the costs that would not be incurred during a delay, we 
calculate an increase of  $30,000  per month in operating 
income from a 1-percent increase in uptime. We then sub- 
tract $2,100 from this figure for the costs of the new HRM 
policies.  We calculate this estimate by using information 
from interviews to compare the costs of policies in HRM 
System 1 and HRM System 4. Higher costs of HRM Sys- 
tem  1 are due to the time production workers must meet 
off the line, additional HRM staff, consultants for ongoing 
training  and team  organization,  certain  fixed  costs  of 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


304 

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 

JUNE 1997 

we conservatively estimate that when one line 
in our sample changed from HRM System 4 
to  HRM  System  2  and  maintained  these 
changes for ten years, it increased its operating 
profits by well over $10 million dollars strictly 
as a result of the HRM changes."7 

V. Alternative Explanations 

The regression coefficients displayed in Ta- 
ble 4 imply that introducing innovative HIRM 
systems  increases  workers'  productivity. 
However, other factors that change over time 
within lines, such as changes in plant manage- 
ment or threats of job loss,  could be the true 
cause of the productivity increases. In this sec- 
tion, we estimate alternative specifications that 
consider these factors. 

A.  Management Quality 

If better managers are more likely to adopt 
innovative FIRM systems and to  adopt other 

developing these policies,  and costs  of  employment se- 
curity for wages paid for idle time (assuming that a line 
would be idle for two months every four years). We allow 
HRM System 1 to save on the salary of one foreman. As- 
suming a relatively short time horizon of  five years for 
amortizing fixed costs, the monthly difference in costs be- 
tween  HRM  Systems  4  and  1  is  about  $2,100  per 
percentage-point gain in uptime. The $27,900 estimate of 
the monthly revenue increase net of  the costs  of  HRM 
policies probably is an underestimate because larger-scale 
lines  will  have bigger revenue effects,  and increases in 
output quality (discussed in Section V below)  yield fur- 
ther revenue increases. 

17 Uptime at this line was consistently some 8 percent- 
age points higher after the change in HRM systems. The 
Table 4, column (3),  fixed-effects model indicates that 3.5 
percentage points of this gain can be attributed to the new 
HRM practices themselves. Uptime also increased at this 
line because it began using higher quality steel input near 
the time of  the HRM changes (see  Appendix Table Al, 
column 2,  line  5).  At  $27,900  per percentage point per 
month,  the  3.5-point  increase  in  uptime  implies  a 
$1,171,800  annual increase  in  operating profits and  a 
$12,889,800  increase (without discounting) over the  11 
years that this line  sustained the improved performance 
under the new HRM system. Even if this line operated 20 
percent below capacity during this period, the change in 
operating income from a 3.5-percentage-point increase in 
uptime over an 1 1-year period still would exceed $10 mil- 
lion. Increases in output quality after this line changed its 
HRM system further magnify the value of the more pro- 
gressive HRM systems. 

productivity-enhancing practices at the same 
time,  the  estimated HRM effects  will  suffer 
from omitted variable bias. We  collected ad- 
ditional data to provide two  tests of  this hy- 
pothesis. First, we reestimate the fixed-effects 
model  in  Table 4,  column  (3),  and include 
several  standard  measures  of  managerial 
quality-the 
tenure of  the line  manager, the 
tenure  of  the  site's  HR  manager,  and  the 
squares of these tenure variables. We also in- 
clude two dummies for whether the line has a 
new line manager or a new HR manager, be- 
cause the estimated effects of switching HRM 
systems may only reflect the effects of newly 
hired  managers who  change  HRM  policies 
upon their arrival. The inclusion of these vari- 
ables [Table 5, column (2)]  produces virtually 
no  change in the estimated HRM system co- 
efficients relative to our base-model estimates 
[Table 5, column ( 1 )].  Though only the fixed- 
effects results are reported in Table 5, results 
for the OLS model with detailed controls are 
essentially  equivalent to  these  results for all 
specifications displayed in Table 5. 

These measures of managerial quality may be 
incomplete if,  for example, "good"  managers 
adopt innovative HRM practices and also make 
other changes to achieve superior productivity. 
We therefore include in the fixed-effects model 
72 person-specific management dummies-one 
dummy for each period that a line's operations 
manager and HR manager remained unchanged. 
As shown in column (3)  of Table 5, the inclu- 
sion of  this vector of  person-specific manage- 
ment dummies increases the estimated effects of 
HRM Systems 2  and 3  compared to  the esti- 
mates from the baseline fixed-effects model in 
column (1)  of Table 5. Overall, the results in- 
dicate that the effects of the HRM system vari- 
ables  are  independent  of  any  managerial 
behaviors or philosophies that are specific to any 
individual manager. While higher-quality man- 
agers may eventually choose to adopt innovative 
HRM practices, the productivity effects  that 
arise are from the changes in the practices, not 
from the inherent quality of the manager. 

B.  Threat Effects 

Some lines may face serious threats of lay- 
offs  and plant shutdowns, and these  threats 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


VOL. 87 NO. 3 

ICHNIOWSKI ET AL:  EFFECTS OF HR MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 

305 

TABLE  5-ESTIMATED 

PRODUCTIVITY  EFFECTS  OF HRM SYSTEMS  IN FIXED-EFFECTS  MODELS  WITH CONTROLS  FOR 

TIME-VARYING  DETERMINANTS  OF PRODUCTIVITY 

(DEPENDENT  VARIABLE:  PERCENT  UPTIME) 

HRM system 

(1) 

(2) 

1. HRM System 2 

2. HRM System 3 

0.035*** 
(0.008) 

0.025*** 
(0.006) 

0.046*** 
(0.009) 

0.026*** 
(0.006) 

Time-varying controls 

3a. Technology 

controls' 

3b. Management 

tenure variablesh 

3c. Manager-specific 
dummy variables' 

3d. Shutdown threat 

variablesd 

3e. Year dummy 

variables 

F tests' 
R 2 

Yes 

No 

No 

No 

No 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

No 

No 

[N  =  2,190] 

(3) 

0.064*** 
(0.012) 

0.048*** 
(0.010) 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No 

No 

(4) 

0.034*** 
(0.009) 

0.025*** 
(0.006) 

(5) 

0.034*** 
(0.009) 

0.025*** 
(0.006) 

(6) 

0.052*** 
(0.014) 

0.044*** 
(0.011) 

Yes 

No 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No 

No 

No 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

F(6,2175)  =  9.074  F(72,2109)  =  3.95  F(2,2174)  =  7.27  F(13,2171)  =  5.93  F(93,2088)  =  4.03 

0.066 

0.090 

0.176 

0.072 

0.099 

0.199 

'The  technology variables are listed in footnote c to Table 4 [the Table 5, column (1), model replicates the Table 4, column (3), model]. 
h The management tenure variables are the tenures of the HR and line managers (and squared terms) and dummy variables for tenure less 

than three years for those managers. 

'The  management-specific dummy variables are 72 dummy variables equal to one for each specific HR manager and line manager team 

d The threat variables are the percent of the plant permanently shut down and a dummy for the recent use of layoffs. 
c The F-tests test the joint null hypothesis that the variables added in that column have coefficients that are significantly different from 

in place. 

zero. 

*** Significant at the 0.01 level. 

may  cause  employees  to  work  harder.  If 
"threatened"  lines  also  are  more  likely  to 
adopt new  HRM systems,  the coefficient on 
the HRM systems will pick up omitted threat 
effects.  Interviews at some  sites suggest that 
partial plant shutdowns were an important part 
of  the impetus for workers and managers to 
agree to adopt new work practices. To test the 
possibility  that the  HRM  variables serve  as 
proxies for threat effects, we  create two vari- 
ables measuring threat effects: the percentage 
of  the  site's  operations that are permanently 
shut down and a dummy variable equal to one 
when the line has a recent history of  layoffs. 
Inclusion of  these two variables in the fixed- 
effects model has little effect on the estimated 
HRM system coefficients as shown in column 
(4)  of Table 5. 

While threat effects  may have helped con- 
vince labor and management at certain sites to 

agree to new work practices, these threat vari- 
ables do not account for the estimated effects 
of HRM practices on productivity for several 
reasons. First, not all threatened lines changed 
their HRM practices, so  threat alone  cannot 
explain HRM effects.  Second,  even  in  lines 
where threats of  closure occurred along with 
the changes in HRM practices, these lines have 
sustained increases in  uptime long  after the 
threat of  closure has dissipated. Third, inno- 
vative HRM practices are widely  adopted by 
new  lines that have no threat of  closure, and 
the  practices are associated with  success  in 
these lines as well. 

C.  Worker's Pay 

Another possibility is that workers in lines 
with the more innovative HRM systems may 
be  working more productively because  they 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


306 

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 

JUNE 1997 

are paid more. To test this hypothesis, we col- 
lected wage  data from company records and 
from union contracts (1989  to-1993) and cou- 
pled these data with interview information to 
estimate average pay rates.'8 When we include 
wage  rate data, the sample size  falls  to  863, 
since the sample is limited to recent time pe- 
riods. The uptime model is reestimated for this 
sample with and without the average wage of 
production workers. The coefficient on the av- 
erage  wage  is  insignificant in  all  OLS  and 
fixed-effects models and, therefore, there are 
no  changes  in  the  coefficients  on  the  HRM 
variables  when  the  wage  variable  is  intro- 
duced.'9  Factors  that are exogenous  to  the 
current productivity of the finishing lines de- 
termine wages.20 

18 The average wage  data for production workers in- 
clude  incentive pay,  overtime pay,  shift pay,  and profit 
sharing. When these averages were not available for the 
production line, we used the union labor contracts to pre- 
dict average wages, combined with interview information 
on the average grade level,  average amount of overtime, 
and average incentive pay percentages (including profit 
sharing). Only two lines were unable to provide data for 
the calculation of average wages. Fringe benefit compen- 
sation is  omitted, and though it is  slightly higher in un- 
ionized lines than nonunion lines due to higher pensions 
and days off,  this omission does not appear to affect the 
results. First, wages continue to be insignificant determi- 
nants of uptime when the sample is restricted to unionized 
lines.  Second, union-nonunion differences in fringe ben- 
efits do not change with the timing of  "HRM changers," 
and wages continue to have no effects on uptime in fixed- 
effects models. 

19 The coefficients (standard errors) on the wage vari- 
able are 0.00016  (0.00079)  for the OLS model with de- 
tailed controls and 0.00168 (0.00172)  for the fixed-effects 
model. The coefficients on the HRM variables for the sub- 
sample having wage data (N  =  863)  are slightly smaller 
in magnitude than in the full sample, but they remain sig- 
nificantly different from zero. These results are unchanged 
when real wages replace nominal wages. 

20  Insignificant wage  effects  are not  surprising. First, 
wage  variation in  the  sample  is  small.  Second,  wage 
changes typically occur when national labor agreements 
are renegotiated, and these periods do not coincide with 
systematic changes in productivity. Third, wage changes 
also  do  not coincide  with changes in  HRM systems, so 
inclusion of  the wage  variable does  not  affect the esti- 
mated effects  of  HRM  systems  in  fixed-effects  uptime 
models. 

D.  Other Time-Varying Determinants 

of Productivity 

Finally,  we  reestimate  the  fixed-effects 
specification including a set of year dummies 
that may be correlated with any omitted time- 
varying determinants of productivity. Table 5, 
column (5),  reports results from this model. 
Although the year dummies show a pattern of 
increasing productivity over time, the effects 
of  HRM  System  2  and HRM  System  3  are 
again almost identical to the corresponding co- 
efficients in the baseline fixed-effects specifi- 
cation  in  column  (1).  Column  (6)  reports 
estimated  coefficients  on  the  HRM  system 
variables when the fixed-effect model includes 
year dummies and controls for all other time- 
varying variables considered in Table 5.  The 
estimated coefficients for the HRM Systems 2 
and 3 variables now are somewhat larger than 
they were in the baseline fixed-effects model 
of column (1). 

In sum, the Table 5 results do not provide 
any  evidence  that the  coefficients  on  HRM 
system variables are biased upward by omitted 
line-specific or time-varying factors. 

E.  Effects of HRM Systems 

on Product Quality 

The evidence shows positive significant ef- 
fects of HRM systems, but the value of these 
productivity effects will be diminished if they 
are achieved at the expense  of  reductions in 
the quality of output. We collected data on out- 
put quality as measured by the lines' monthly 
"prime-yield" rates -the  percent of total pro- 
duction that met the standards for designation 
as "prime" finished steel. With these data, we 
are able to test whether the uptime gains re- 
ported in Tables 4 and 5 are offset by any de- 
creases in the quality of steel production under 
the more innovative HRM systems. 

Table 6 presents estimates of the effects of 
HRM systems on prime-yield rates21 in mod- 

2' Because total steel production is the denominator of 
the prime-yield rate variable, these estimates are not af- 
fected  by  any effects  of  the HRM  system  variables on 
production and line delays. 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


VOL. 87 NO. 3 

ICHNIOWSKI ET AL.: EFFECTS OF HR MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 

307 

TABLE 6-ESTIMATED  EFFECTS OF HRM SYSTEMS ON QUALITY OF PRODUCTION IN OLS 

AND FIXED-EFFECTS MODELS 

(DEPENDENT VARIABLE: PERCENT PRIME YIELD) 

[N=  1,750] 

OLS models 

without detailed 

machinery controlsa 

HRM measure 
la.  HRM System 1 

lb.  HRM System 2 

ic.  HRM System 3 

(1) 

0.152*** 
(0.008) 
0.098*** 
(0.005) 
0.064*** 
(0.004) 

OLS models with 
detailed machinery 

controlsb 

(2) 

0.132*** 
(0.009) 
0.046*** 
(0.007) 
0.044*** 
(0.005) 

Fixed-effects 

modelsc 

(3) 

0.036*** 
(0.007) 
0.050*** 
(0.005) 

a  Control variables in column (1) are: number of years line has been operating and years 
squared; year line was built and year built squared; dummy for start-up periods indicated 
by first 12 months of operations and 1-to-12 time trend for month of start-up operation; 1- 
to-5 index of  quality of  steel input; number of  annual eight-hour scheduled maintenance 
shifts; and four dummies for slight differences in how prime yield is measured in different 
lines. 

b Control variables in column (2) are: all controls listed in footnote a; dummy for type 
of customer; maximum speed of the line and speed squared; maximum width of the line 
and width squared; nine dummies to indicate specific pieces  of  equipment from start to 
finish of the line and a measure of the age of one piece of equipment at end of the line; a 
dummy to indicate high and low levels of computer control of line operations; a variable 
to measure the value of major new equipment during its six-month installation period; and 
four dummies for slight differences in how prime yield is measured in different lines. 

c Control variables in column (3) are: age of line and age squared; dummy for start-up 
periods indicated by first 12 months of  operations and 1-to-12 time trend for month of 
start-up operation; 1-to-5 index of quality of  steel input; age of  the end-of-the-line piece 
of equipment; and a variable to measure the value of major new equipment during its six- 
month installation period. 

*** Significant at the 0.01 level. 

els that include controls for steel input quality, 
capital vintage,  machinery, scheduled main- 
tenance, and other controls included in the up- 
time  equations.22  The  same  hierarchical 

22 To  account for slight differences in the way prime 
yield  is  measured from line  to  line,  we  include in  the 
prime-yield regressions additional controls not included in 
the uptime regressions. Prime-yield models in Table 6 in- 
clude four dummy variables for the five slightly different 
ways that prime yield is calculated at different lines. For 
example, prime steel production might be expressed as a 
percentage of total tons of  steel at the exit end of the fin- 
ishing line or as a percentage of  total tons of  steel input 
on  the entry end of  the line.  These  dummy variables in 
OLS specifications are consistently significant with the ex- 
pected signs given the differences in the definitions. The 
definitions the lines used to calculate prime yield do not 
change over time, and so these variables drop out of  the 
fixed-effects models. 

pattern  observed  in  the  uptime  models  in 
Tables 4  and 5  is  evident in  the prime-yield 
models in Table 6. Lines with HRM System 1 
have  prime-yield  rates  that  considerably 
exceed the yields of lines with other HRM sys- 
tems. HRM Systems 2 and 3 produce compa- 
rable  gains  in  prime-yield  rates  relative  to 
HRM  System  4.  Fixed-effects  results  also 
demonstrate higher yield rates under more in- 
novative HRM practices.23 

23 The prime-yield regressions in OLS and fixed-effects 
models  were reestimated with corrections for first-order 
serial correlation. Standard errors in  these models  were 
only slightly larger than those in the Table 6 models. Mag- 
nitudes and levels  of significance of HRM system coeffi- 
cients are very similar to those reported in Table 6. 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


308 

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 

JUNE 1997 

F.  Why Don't All Lines Have the High- 

Productivity HRM Systems? 

Based on the relative stability of the coeffi- 
cients in the productivity regressions in Tables 
4 and 5, we conclude that the estimated produc- 
tivity effects of  innovative HIRM systems are 
largely independent of the adoption propensity. 
However, this conclusion would even be more 
persuasive if  we  could identify likely reasons 
why  some  lines  adopt  the  productivity- 
enhancing HRM systems and others do not. 

There are two  obvious explanations for the 
limited adoption: (1)  managers have had only 
limited knowledge about the performance ef- 
fects of  IIRM systems; and (2)  nonpecuniary 
barriers to change beyond the direct costs of the 
work practices limit adoption in  certain lines. 
During our fieldwork at the finishing lines, we 
found support for both of these explanations. 

When most steel mills were built, innovative 
practices were  not  in  use.  However, recently 
opened lines  at  "greenfield" sites, as well  as 
older lines that had been closed but were opened 
with new owners and workers, are adopting in- 
novative work practices. Knowledge about the 
potential productivity gains of innovative prac- 
tices  can  be  considered  to  be  analogous  to 
knowledge about the effects of a technological 
innovation.  While  mills  at many companies 
now  have  some  experience  with  new  work 
practices, many mills still have not adopted the 
productivity-improving innovation. In particu- 
lar, continuously operating lines  at "brown- 
field"  sites are still much more likely to have 
traditional HIRM practices. 

Our field  interviews revealed  two  sets  of 
reasons for the resistance to the new practices 
in the older lines despite the growing knowl- 
edge  about the productivity benefits of  new 
work practices. First, managers and produc- 
tion  workers at these  sites  have  irivested in 
skills and work relationships that would have 
to change substantially if  new  HRM systems 
were adopted. These costs of changing HRM 
practices do  not exist  in  new  lines  or in  old 
lines that are reopened by new owners.24 Sec- 

24 At  the same time, the age  and older technology of 
these lines are not responsible for the limited adoption of 

ond, the old continuously operating lines  are 
marked by greater mistrust between labor and 
management, and these lines must overcome 
this mistrust before the new work practices can 
be  effective.25 The  very  fact  that all  of  our 
"greenfield"  lines  adopted innovative prac- 
tices  suggests that it is  the transition costs of 
adoption that have limited adoption rates. 

Different  rates  of  adoption  across  lines, 
therefore,  are a function  of  differences  in 
these nonpecuniary costs of  adoption that af- 
fect the profitability of the practices, and not 
differences in expected productivity gains. In 
some  older  lines,  new  managers or  certain 
workers can champion the new work practices 
and overcome these  impediments to  change. 
In others, credible threats of plant closure mo- 
tivate existing workers and managers to adopt 
more productive work arrangements. At  the 
same time, factors like threat effects or work- 
ers who champion new practices do not appear 
to be  systematic determinants of  the produc- 
tivity  effects  of  innovative  FIRM practices. 
When old lines  do overcome these nonpecu- 
niary costs of switching policies, they experi- 
ence  significant productivity gains  from the 
innovative policies. The variation across lines 
and within lines  over time in these nonpecu- 
niary costs  of  adopting new  work  practices 

new work practices. Detailed controls in the productivity 
models for capital vintage do not eliminate the productiv- 
ity  effects  of  HRM  systems  for  several reasons. When 
older lines  in  the sample were shut down  and later re- 
opened by new owners, all adopted many new work prac- 
tices. And, as illustrated by the results of the fixed-effects 
models, some continuously operating older lines adopted 
new HRM systems that raised their productivity. 

25 Labor-management trust is  needed for many inno- 
vative HRM practices to be effective (Baker et al., 1994). 
Our  interviews  revealed  how  a  low  level  of  labor- 
management trust in older lines rendered ineffective new 
work practices  like  information sharing, productivity- 
improvement teams,  and employment security. For ex- 
ample, the manager at one older line observed: "It's just 
difficult to change attitudes in old plants with a history of 
tension and mistrust. We now share financial information 
with workers, but some workers still believe there are two 
sets  of  books."  At  another line,  a  supervisor  stated: 
"Workers out here don't believe that they have employ- 
ment security ... Since employment security is only a con- 
tractual guarantee, they know  that it  may  very well  go 
away in the next [union] contract." 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


VOL. 87 NO. 3 

ICHNIOWSKI ET AL.: EFFECTS OF HR MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 

309 

allows us to observe the different work prac- 
tices  in  this  technologically  homogeneous 
sample, and thus to estimate the impact of al- 
ternative HRM practices on productivity. 

VI.  Productivity Effects of Individual 

HRM Practices 

Tables 4-6  show significant positive effects 
of  innovative  systems  of  HRM practices on 
productivity and product quality. These mod- 
els  do  not,  however,  compare the  effects  of 
individual HRM practices to those of systems 
of practices and, therefore, do not provide ev- 
idence  on whether the individual work prac- 
tices  that  comprise  an  HRM  system  are 
complementary.  Complementarity  among 
work practices implies that the magnitude of 
the productivity effect of the system of HRM 
policies is larger than the sum of the marginal 
effects from adopting each practice. 

In Table 7 we compare the productivity ef- 
fects  of  HRM systems  with  the productivity 
effects  of  individual  work  practices.  When 
variables  for  individual  HRM  practices are 
added to the regressions containing HRM sys- 
tem dummies, the individual practices have no 
additional  impact  on  productivity.  In other 
words, the HRM system dummies capture the 
full productivity impact of the lines' HRM en- 
vironments; the estimated effect  of  any indi- 
is  zero. 
vidual  HRM  practice  essentially 
Specifically, columns ( la)  -  ( id)  show results 
from 15 separate productivity models that are 
the same as the OLS model in Table 4, column 
(2b),  except that each model also includes one 
additional variable which measures an individ- 
ual work practice. Similarly, columns (2a)- 
(2c)  show results from models which replicate 
the Table 4, column (3),  fixed-effects model, 
but each model in these columns also includes 
one additional variable for an individual HRM 
practice. 6in  nearly all models in the columns 

26 

26 All  OLS and fixed-effects  models in  Table 7  were 
reestimated with corrections for first-order serial correla- 
tion. Again, the magnitudes of all coefficients virtually are 
unaffected by  this  correction. Standard errors for  some 
coefficients  increase, but only  slightly.  The  significance 
levels  of  all HRM coefficients are similar in all cases to 
those shown in Table 7. 

(la)-(ld)  OLS models  and in  the columns 
(2a)  -  (2c)  fixed-effects  models,  the  coeffi- 
cients  on  the  variables measuring individual 
work practices are insignificant.27 

Columns (3)  and (4)  of Table 7 report re- 
sults from productivity models that introduce 
only the individual HRM practices without the 
HRM system variables. The coefficients on the 
individual practice variables in  the OLS and 
fixed-effects models without the HRM system 
dummies  are positive  and significant  with 
magnitudes ranging from  about  1  to  3  per- 
centage points.28 A comparison of the OLS co- 
efficients in column ( id)  with those in column 
(3)  and a comparison of the fixed-effects co- 
efficients in column (2c)  with those in column 
(4)  show  that the  effects  of  the  individual 
HRM practices in  models  without the HRM 
system dummies disappear once the HRM sys- 

27 While the work practices employed by lines with a 
given HRM system are highly similar, some work prac- 
tices do vary within HRM System 3 lines and within the 
HRM System 2 lines (see  Table 2).  Furthermore, in ad- 
dition  to  the  lines  that  changed  enough  practices  to 
"switch  systems"  (see  Table 3),  other lines change in- 
dividual HRM policies during the data period. The coef- 
ficients on the variables which measure individual HRM 
practices in the OLS estimates shown in column (Id)  are 
positive and significant in only two cases  (profit sharing 
in line  1 and low train in line  10),  where the effects still 
are very modest. As in Table 4, the HRM System 1 vari- 
able could not be included in fixed-effects models since 
no line switched into this category with the most innova- 
tive  HRM practices. Also,  some fixed-effects models of 
the effects of  individual HRM practices could not be es- 
timated because certain individual HRM policies  do not 
change in  any lines  in  the sample period. In the fixed- 
effects models which include the HRM system variables 
[columns (2a)  -  (2c)],  the only coefficient which is  sig- 
nificantly positive for an individual HRM variable is  the 
coefficient on the low  grievance variable (line  15),  sug- 
gesting that productivity-enhancing changes in HRM sys- 
tems are accompanied by a movement to an environment 
with little grievance activity, consistent with studies that 
have found an inverse relationship between grievance ac- 
tivity and productivity (Ichniowski, 1986). 

28  Fixed-effects  models  which  include  the  multiple 
teams (line 6) and information-sharing (line  11 ) variables 
could  be  estimated in  column  (4)  models  without the 
HRM  system  dummies because  these  variables change 
over  time  within  some  lines.  However,  within-line 
changes in these two variables are collinear with switches 
between certain HRM systems, and so the two correspond- 
ing fixed-effects models in columns (2a) -  (2c)  could not 
be estimated. 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


310 

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 

JUNE 1997 

TABLE 7-ESTIMATED  PRODUCTIVITY EFFECTS OF HRM SYSTEMS AND INDIVIDUAL HRM PRACTICES 

(DEPENDENT VARIABLE: PERCENT UPTIME) [N =  2,190a] 

OLS models with HRM system variables and 

with individual HRM practice variable' 

Fixed-effects models with HRM 

system variables and with 

individual HRM practice variable'd 

Fixed- 
effects 
OLS 
models 
models 
with only  with only 
individual 
individual 

HRM 

practice' 

HRM 

practice' 

Individual HRM 
practice included in 
models in the row 

1. Profit sharing 

Coef. on  Coef. on  Coef. on 
HRM 

HRM 

HRM 

System I 

System 2 

System 3 

Coef. on 
individual  Coef. on  Coef. on 
HRM 

HRM 

System 2 

System 3 

HRM 
practice 

Coef. on 
individual 

HRM 
practice 

Coef. on 
individual 

HRM 
practice 

Coef. on 
individual 

HRM 
practice 

(Ia) 

(Ib) 

(Ic) 

(Id) 

0.066*** 
(0.007) 

0.026*** 
(0.005) 

0.012*** 
(0.003) 

0.006** 
(0.003) 

(2a) 

- 

(2b) 

- 

(2c) 

- 

(3) 

0.007** 
(0.002) 

(4) 

- 

2. Line incentives 

0.068*** 
(0.007) 

0.032*** 
(0.005) 

0.014*** 
(0.003) 

-0.002 
(0.004) 

0.031*** 
(0.009) 

0.023*** 
(0.006) 

0.007 
(0.005) 

0.012*** 
(0.004) 

0.012*** 
(0.004) 

3. High screening 

0.068*** 
(0.015) 

0.032*** 
(0.005) 

0.013*** 
(0.003) 

-0.001 
(0.001) 

- 

- 

- 

0.029*** 
(0.004) 

4. High participation  0.095*** 

(0.009) 

0.052*** 
(0.006) 

0.019*** 
(0.004) 

-0.023** 
(0.004) 

0.058*** 
(0.010) 

0.028*** 
(0.006) 

-0.024*** 
(0.006) 

0.005* 
(0.003) 

-0.008* 
(0.005) 

5. Formal team 

practice 

0.062*** 
(0.008) 

0.027*** 
(0.006) 

0.012*** 
(0.004) 

6. Multiple teams 

7. Employment 

security 

8. Job rotation 

9. High train 

10. Low train 

0.060*** 
(0.011) 

0.026*** 
(0.008) 

0.014*** 
(0.009) 

0.047*** 
(0.010) 

0.023*** 
(0.005) 

0.008** 
(0.004) 

0.084*** 
(0.009) 

0.033*** 
(0.005) 

0.018*** 
(0.004) 

-0.021*** 
(0.006) 

0.004 
(0.003) 

0.008 
(0.009) 

0.011 
(0.004) 

0.034*** 
(0.013) 

0.025*** 
(0.008) 

0.001 
(0.006) 

0.014*** 
(0.003) 

0.011*** 
(0.004) 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

0.026*** 
(0.004) 

0.010* 
(0.006) 

0.025*** 
(0.003) 

0.010** 
(0.005) 

- 

0.068*** 
(0.008) 

0.033*** 
(0.006) 

0.014*** 
(0.003) 

-0.003 
(0.006) 

0.037*** 
(0.009) 

0.025*** 
(0.006) 

-0.006 
(0.007) 

0.016*** 
(0.004) 

0.001 
(0.007) 

0.054*** 
(0.009) 

0.021*** 
(0.007) 

0.013*** 
(0.003) 

0.013** 
(0.006) 

0.028*** 
(0.010) 

0.023*** 
(0.006) 

0.008 
(0.006) 

0.026*** 
(0.004) 

0.015*** 
(0.005) 

11. Information 

sharing 

0.077*** 
(0.011) 

0.038*** 
(0.007) 

0.017*** 
(0.004) 

-0.004 
(0.003) 

- 

- 

- 

12. Meet workers 

0.060*** 
(0.008) 

0.028*** 
(0.005) 

0.012*** 
(0.004) 

0.005 
(0.004) 

0.028*** 
(0.010) 

0.024*** 
(0.006) 

13. Meet union 

0.067*** 
(0.010) 

0.032*** 
(0.006) 

0.014*** 
(0.004) 

0.00003 
(0.004) 

0.031*** 
(0.009) 

0.025*** 
(0.006) 

14. Union 

15. Low grievance 

0.073*** 
(0.008) 

0.037*** 
(0.006) 

0.016*** 
(0,004) 

0.066*** 
(0.008) 

0.031*** 
(0.005) 

0.014*** 
(0.004) 

0.012 
(0.008) 

0.0003 
(0.003) 

- 

- 

0.013*** 
(0.002) 

0.010* 
(0.006) 

0.021*** 
(0.003) 

0.012*** 
(0.004) 

0.017*** 
(0.003) 

0.024** 
(0.012) 

-0.026*** 
(0.007) 

0.007 
(0.006) 

0.014 
(0.014) 

- 

0.013 
(0.013) 

0.008 
(0.010) 

0.022** 
(0.010) 

0.012*** 
(0.003) 

0.029*** 
(0.006) 

Notes: To interpret this table, note that each row represents up to four regressions. For example, in row 2 the coefficients in columns (la)-(  Id) are 
from one OLS regression containing three system variables and one individual practice variable (for line incentives); the coefficients in columns 
(2a)-(2c)  are from the comparable fixed-effects regression; the coefficient in column (3)  is from the OLS regression containing the one practice 
variable (line incentives) and no system variables; and the coefficient in column (4)  is the fixed-effects estimate comparable to column (3). 

Standard errors reported in parentheses. 
Other control variables included in the OLS models are those listed in footnote b to Table 4. 
Other control variables in the fixed-effects models are those listed in footnote c to Table 4. 
d No line switches into HRM System I and so the coefficient on HRM System I is not estimated in fixed-effects models. 

* Significant at the 0.10 Ilevel. 

** Significant at the 0.05 level. 

*** Significant at the 0.01  level. 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


VOL. 87 NO. 3 

ICHNIOWSKI ET AL:  EFFECTS OF HR MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 

311 

tem variables also are included. These results 
from Table  7  demonstrate that the  apparent 
positive effects of individual practices in mod- 
els without controls for HRM systems are bi- 
ased by the omission of other HRM practices 
with which the one  included practice is  cor- 
related. New  work  practices (such  as  work 
teams, quality circles, job  rotation, or infor- 
mation sharing) are often introduced together 
as part of a coherent system of practices; thus, 
the productivity effects of individual practices 
cannot be readily isolated.29 

To provide further evidence about the pos- 
sible complementarity of HRM practices, we 
test  whether  the  interactions  among  HRM 
practices that are measured implicitly by the 
four  HRM  system  dummies  are significant 
when they are added to a regression containing 
dummies for all the individual practices. Spe- 
cifically, we reestimate the OLS model corre- 
sponding to the Table 4, colunm (2b),  model, 
but  we  include  dummies  for  all  individual 
HRM policies in addition to the HRM system 
dummies. An F-test rejects the hypothesis that 
the HRM system variables add no explanatory 
power to  the model that already includes all 
individual  HRM  policies  entered separately 
(F[3,2134]  = 7.62).  Similarly, when we rees- 
timate the Table 4,  column (3),  fixed-effects 
model but include dummy variables for each 
of  the  individual HRM policies  that change 
over time in the sample period, an F-test re- 
jects  the  hypothesis  that the  HRM  systems 
variables  add  no  explanatory power  to  the 
model (F[2,2142]  =  5.40). 

The  evidence  shows  that systems of HRM 
practices  determine productivity and quality, 
while  marginal  changes  in  individual work 

29 The estimated negative coefficient on union status in 
the OLS model without the HRM system dummies [Table 
7,  column (3),  line  14]  also  reflects the more complex 
dynamics of how systems of HRM policies determine pro- 
ductivity. On average, union lines are less productive than 
nonunion lines in our sample. But not all union lines are 
less productive than the nonunion lines in the sample. The 
negative union coefficient in Table 7, column (3),  line 14, 
reflects the fact that a large number of  union lines have 
the low  productivity practices of HRM Systems 3 and 4, 
even though the lines in the most productive HRM System 
1 are unionized lines. Once the productivity models con- 
trol for the effect of HRM systems in columns ( la) -  ( ld), 
the union productivity effect becomes insignificant. 

practices have little effect. The preponderance 
of evidence in this study also is consistent with 
the conclusion that complementarities among 
innovative work practices are important. Note 
first that the positive  correlations among in- 
novative HRM practices show  that firms are 
likely  to  select  multiple innovative practices 
rather than  single  practices,  suggestive  of 
complementarities  among policies.  Second, 
the  productivity  regressions  reenforce  the 
view  that complementarities  are important, 
even  though the collinearity among practices 
inherently limits our ability to distinguish be- 
tween the impact of  individual practices and 
the impact of systems of practices. HRM sys- 
tem variables are shown to raise productivity 
substantially, and the effects  of  these system 
variables exceed  the effects  of  the full set of 
individual practices. Third, in extensive inter- 
views during our plant visits, operations man- 
agers offered numerous explanations as to why 
practices that are introduced in isolation have 
little effect on performance (Ichniowski et al., 
1995 pp. 36-37).  Finally, as described in Sec- 
tion V,  subsection F,  growing knowledge  of 
the effectiveness  of  sets  of  innovative work 
practices  has  led  steel  companies  to  adopt 
these practices in all "greenfield" sites, while 
high transition costs of adopting entirely new 
systems of  work practices have  slowed  their 
introduction at "brownfield" sites. 

VII. Conclusion 

This paper presents new evidence on the pro- 
ductivity effects of employment practices. The 
evidence, derived from unique monthly panel 
data on productivity and HRM practices in a 
homogeneous  sample  of  production  lines, 
shows  that innovative  HRM practices  raise 
worker productivity. Moreover, systems of in- 
novative HRM practices have large effects on 
production  workers'  performance,  while 
changes  in  individual employment practices 
have little or no effect. Thus, the preponderance 
of the evidence suggests that, in these steel fin- 
ishing lines, innovative employment practices 
tend to be complements, as is proposed in the 
recent theoretical work on  optimal incentive 
structures. That is,  workers' performance is 
substantially better under incentive pay plans 
that are coupled  with  supporting innovative 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


312 

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 

JUNE 1997 

work practices-such  as  flexible job  design, 
employee  participation  in  problem-solving 
teams, training to provide workers with multi- 

ple  skills, extensive screening and communi- 
it  is 
cation,  and employment security-than 
under more traditional work practices. 

APPENDIX 

TABLE  Al-FULL 

SET  OF COEFFICIENT  ESTIMATES  OLS  AND  FIXED-EFFECTS  UPTIME  MODELS 

[FOR COLUMNS  (2B) AND  (3) OF TABLE  4] 

Variable 

la.  HRM System 1 

lb.  HRM System 2 

lc.  HRM System 3 

2. Maintenance shifts per year 

3. Index of steel input quality 

4a. Year built 

4b. (Year built)2 

5a. Line age 

5b. (Line age)2 

6a. Dummy for start-up period 

6b. Time trend for start-up period 

7a. Equipment dummy la 

7b. Equipment dummy lb 

8a. Equipment dummy 2a 

8b. Equipment dummy 2b 

8c. Equipment dummy 2c 

9. Equipment dummy 3 

10. Equipment dummy 4 

11. Equipment dummy 5 

12. Age of dummy 5 equipment 

13. Equipment dummy 6 

14. Dummy for low computerization 

15a. Maximum line speed 

15b. (Maximum line speed)2 

OLS model with detailed controls 

Fixed-effects model 

0.035*** 
(0.008) 
0.025*** 
(0.006) 

0.005** 
(0.002) 

0.011*** 
(0.001) 
-0.0002*** 
(0.00002) 
-0.071*** 
(0.017) 
0.004** 
(0.002) 

-0.0018*** 
(0.0007) 

0.078*** 
(0.007) 
0.041*** 
(0.005) 
0.025*** 
(0.003) 
0.0002*** 
(0.00004) 
0.008*** 
(0.002) 
0.018*** 
(0.003) 
-0.0001*** 
(0.00002) 
0.0102*** 
(0.0011) 
-0.0002*** 
(0.00002) 
-0.043** 
(0.011) 
0.004** 
(0.001) 
0.032*** 
(0.004) 
0.019*** 
(0.003) 
-0.043*** 
(0.005) 
-0.017*** 
(0.005) 
-0.029*** 
(0.005) 
-0.003 
(0.002) 
-0.005 
(0.003) 
0.022*** 
(0.003) 
-0.0013*** 
(0.0002) 
-0.004 
(0.006) 
-0.015*** 
(0.003) 
-0.00067*** 
(0.00005) 

8.1  X  10-7*** 
(7 x  10-8) 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


VOL. 87 NO. 3 

ICHNIOWSKI ET AL.: EFFECTS OF HR MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 

313 

TABLE Al-Continued. 

OLS  model  with  detailed  controls 

Fixed-effects  model 

-0.0096*** 
(0.0011) 
0.00010*** 
(0.00001) 
-0.039*** 
(0.006) 

-3.1  x  10-6*** 

(9.9  x  10-7) 

0.376*** 
(0.075) 
0.409 

-2.9  x  10-6*** 

(9.6  x  10-7) 

0.073 

Variable 

16a.  Maximum  width 

16b.  (Maximum  width)2 

17.  Dummy  for  type  of  end  user 

18.  New  equipment  value  during 

six-month  installation 

19.  Intercept 

R2 

*  Significant  at the  0.10  level. 
**  Significant  at the  0.05  level. 
***  Significant  at the  0.01  level. 

REFERENCES 

Ashenfelter, Orley and Card, David. "Using the 
Longitudinal Structure of  Earnings to  Es- 
timate the  Effect  of  Training Programs." 
Review  of  Economics  and  Statistics,  No- 
vember 1985, 67(4),  pp. 648-60. 

Baker, George; Gibbons, Robert and Murphy, 
Kevin J. "Subjective Performance Measures 
in Optimal Incentive Contracts." Quarterly 
Journal  of  Economics,  November  1994, 
108(8),  pp. 1125-56. 

Bartel, Ann. "Training, Wage Growth, and Job 
Performance: Evidence  from  a  Company 
Database."  Journal of  Labor Economics, 
July 1995, 13(3),  pp. 401-25. 

Belsley, David A.; Kuh, Edwin and Welsch, Roy. 
Regression diagnostics.  New  York: Wiley, 
1980. 

Ghiselli, Edwin; Campbell, J. P. and Zedeck, S. 
Measurement theory for  the behavioral sci- 
ences.  San Francisco, CA: Freeman, 1981. 
Holmstrom, Bengt and Milgrom, Paul. "The 
Firm as  an  Incentive  System."  American 
Economic Review, September 1994, 84(4), 
pp. 972-91. 

Ichniowski, Casey. "The Effects  of  Grievance 
Activity  on  Productivity."  Industrial and 
Labor  Relations  Review,  October  1986, 
40(1),  pp. 75-89. 

Ichniowski, Casey; Shaw, Kathryn and Prennushi, 
Giovanna. "The Effects of Human Resource 
Management  Practices  on  Productivity." 

National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research 
(Cambridge,  MA)  Working  Paper  No. 
5333, November 1995. 

Kandel, Eugene and Lazear, Edward. "Peer 
Pressure and Partnerships." Journal of Po- 
litical Economy, August 1992, 100(4),  pp. 
801-17. 

Kleiner, Morris and Bouillon, Marvin. "Providing 
Business Information to  Production Work- 
ers: Correlates of Compensation and Profit- 
ability."  Industrial  and Labor Relations 
Review, July 1988, 41(4),  pp. 605-17. 

Kruse, Douglas L. Profit sharing: Does it make 
a  difference? Kalamazoo, MI: Upjohn In- 
stitute, 1993. 

LaLonde, Robert J.  "Evaluating  the  Econo- 
metric  Evaluations of  Training Programs 
with  Experimental Data."  American Eco- 
nomic Review, September 1986, 76(4),  pp. 
604-20. 

Milgrom, Paul and Roberts, John. "The  Eco- 
nomics of Modem Manufacturing." Amer- 
ican Economic Review, June 1990, 80(3), 
pp. 511-28. 

.  "Complementarities and Fit:  Strat- 
egy,  Structure, and Organizational Change 
in Manufacturing." Journal of Accounting 
and Economics, April  1995,  19(2-3),  pp. 
179-208. 

Poole, Keith and Rosenthal, Howard. "Patterns 
of Congressional Voting." American Jour- 
nal  of  Political  Science,  February 1991, 
35(1),  pp. 228-78. 

This content downloaded from 195.113.56.251 on Wed, 23 Sep 2015 20:05:07 UTC

All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

