Journal of Applied Psychology
2004, Vol. 89, No. 3, 395– 404

Copyright 2004 by the American Psychological Association
0021-9010/04/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0021-9010.89.3.395

Organizational Justice and Stress: The Mediating Role of

Work–Family Conflict

Timothy A. Judge and Jason A. Colquitt

University of Florida

This study examined the relationship between organizational justice and stress and whether work–family
conflict was a mediator of the relationship. Distributive, procedural, interpersonal, and informational
injustice were cast as stressors to explore their relationships with the stress levels of 174 faculty members
employed at 23 U.S. universities. The results revealed that procedural and interpersonal justice had the
strongest relationships with stress, and that these effects were mediated by work–family conflict. The
presence of justice seemed to allow participants to better manage the interface of their work and family
lives, which was associated with lower stress levels. These results were observed even when controlling
for job satisfaction and the presence of organizational work–family policies.

Issues of justice or fairness are a key concern to virtually all
individuals. In work settings, employees often gauge whether the
rewards they receive match their contributions to the organization
or the rewards received by their colleagues (J. S. Adams, 1965;
Leventhal, 1976). Employees also judge the fairness of the
decision-making procedures used by organizational representa-
tives, to see whether those procedures are consistent, unbiased,
accurate, correctable, and representative of worker concerns and
opinions (Greenberg, 1986; Leventhal, 1980; Thibaut & Walker,
1975). Finally, employees consider the interpersonal treatment
they receive as procedures are implemented by authority figures
(Bies & Moag, 1986; Greenberg, 1993).

Research on organizational justice has demonstrated that con-
cerns about fairness can affect the attitudes and behaviors of
employees (for reviews, see Colquitt & Greenberg, 2003; Cropan-
zano, Byrne, Bobocel, & Rupp, 2001; Cropanzano & Greenberg,
1997). Justice scholars have focused on distributive justice, the
perceived fairness of decision outcomes (J. S. Adams, 1965; Lev-
enthal, 1976), and procedural justice, the perceived fairness of
decision-making processes (Leventhal, 1980; Thibaut & Walker,
1975). More recent work has focused on interpersonal justice
(sincerity and respect) and informational justice (adequate, honest
explanations), which are often combined under the interactional
justice heading (Bies & Moag, 1986; Greenberg, 1993). These
justice dimensions have been linked meta-analytically to a variety
of outcomes, including satisfaction, commitment, citizenship, and
withdrawal (Colquitt, Conlon, Wesson, Porter, & Ng, 2001).

While the effects of justice dimensions have been widely dem-
onstrated, the theoretical mechanisms underlying those effects are
less clear. Some scholars have argued that fair treatment reaffirms
an employee’s sense of status and self-esteem while enhancing the

Timothy A. Judge and Jason A. Colquitt, Department of Management,

Warrington College of Business, University of Florida.

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Timothy
A. Judge, Department of Management, Warrington College of Business,
University of Florida, 211D Stuzin Hall, P. O. Box 117165, Gainesville,
FL 32611-7165. E-mail: tjudge@ufl.edu

395

perceived legitimacy of organizational authorities (Tyler & Blader,
2000). Others have suggested that justice acts as a proxy for trust
by providing employees an incentive to cooperate in the face of
uncertainty (Lind, 2001; Lind & Van den Bos, 2002; Van den Bos,
Lind, & Wilke, 2001). However, an emerging (but still untested)
explanation for justice effects casts unfairness as a stressor—as an
aspect of the work environment that causes employees to doubt
their ability to cope with work demands (Vermunt & Steensma,
2001). This perspective acknowledges that unfair treatment can
have a visceral— even physiological— effect on employees,
thereby disrupting work attitudes and behaviors.

The purpose of the present study was twofold. First, we exam-
ined the relationship between organizational justice and employee
perceptions of stress. The injustice as stressor perspective is quite
new, and stress has never been linked to all four justice dimen-
sions. Second, we explored the intervening mechanisms behind
potential justice–stress relationships. If employees believe that
their organizations treat
them fairly, why exactly should that
reduce perceptions of
stress? We examined one specific
mediator—work–family conflict—reasoning that fair employers
enhance the employee’s ability to juggle the role demands of their
personal and professional lives. The subsequent section of this
article reviews existing research on stress and work–family con-
flict before linking both to organizational justice. Specific hypoth-
eses are also presented.

Organizational Justice and Stress

In their “executive update” about stress on the job, DeFrank and
Ivancevich (1998) reported some sobering statistics about the
magnitude and effects of workplace stress. For example, 79% of
employees surveyed reported that the year prior was one of their
most stressful years ever and that work was the primary source of
that stress (HR Focus, 1996). Stress-related complaints have also
become a common source of Workers’ Compensation claims filed
by current and past employees (DeFrank & Ivancevich, 1998). The
authors concluded, “The potential ramifications of stress for com-
panies and their employees are so substantial that it is crucial that
managers act to aid their employees in the development of coping
skills and to reduce the excessive stress in the job itself ” (p. 55).


396

JUDGE AND COLQUITT

While its definition has long been debated, stress can generally
be defined as an aversive or unpleasant emotional and physiolog-
ical state resulting from adverse work experiences, particularly
experiences that are uncertain or outside the employee’s control
(Beehr & Bhagat, 1985; Hart & Cooper, 2001). The work expe-
riences that give rise to stress are often referred to as stressors,
while the effects of stress (in terms of health and employee
behavior) are referred to as strain (Hart & Cooper, 2001; Kahn &
Byosiere, 1992). Past research has examined several different
kinds of stressors, including aspects of the employee’s role, par-
ticular job demands and characteristics, and facets of the physical
work environment (Hart & Cooper, 2001; Kahn & Byosiere,
1992).

Other stressors are of a more interpersonal nature. For example,
Spector and Jex (1998) described the interpersonal conflict at
work stressor, which captures the degree to which other people are
rude to a given employee. Similarly, their organizational con-
straints stressor includes items tapping inadequate leadership or
lack of necessary information. Marshall and Cooper’s (1979)
model of work stressors included relationships with superiors and
a lack of social support, while Kohli (1985) focused on supervisory
misbehavior. Each of these stressors seems to be capturing, in part,
the interpersonal and informational facets of organizational justice.
Still other stressors seem to overlap with procedural justice.
Marshall and Cooper’s (1979) model includes lack of participation
and managers’ inability to delegate as stressors, while others have
focused on a lack of autonomy (Chesney et al., 1981). Thibaut and
Walker (1975) argued that influence was a vital component of
procedural justice, and Leventhal (1980) argued that procedures
should be representative of employees’ views and opinions. Both
assertions are violated when participation and autonomy are lack-
ing in supervisor–subordinate interactions.

Clearly there appears to be some conceptual overlap between
organizational justice and specific stressors examined in past re-
search. There are also theoretical reasons to expect a significant
relationship between justice and stress. Thibaut and Walker’s
(1975) instrumental model suggests that procedural justice is val-
ued because it makes long-term outcomes more controllable and
predictable. Similarly, uncertainty management theory suggests
that all forms of justice are valued because they provide informa-
tion needed to navigate uncertain work situations (Lind & Van den
Bos, 2002; see also their earlier work on fairness heuristic theory:
Lind, 2001; Van den Bos et al., 2001). Lind and Van den Bos
summarized the key tenet of the theory by writing, “What appears
to be happening is that people use fairness to manage their reac-
tions to uncertainty, finding comfort in related or even unrelated
fair experiences and finding additional distress in unfair experi-
ences” (p. 216).

In all of these models, justice has the ability to reduce the
uncertainty and lack of control that are at the heart of feelings of
stress. In fact, the stress mechanism appears (at least implicitly) in
many of the models in the justice domain. For example, equity
theory posits that individuals evaluate distributive justice by com-
paring their ratio of inputs to outcomes with those of relevant
comparison others (J. S. Adams, 1965; J. S. Adams & Freedman,
1976; Greenberg, 1982; Walster, Berscheid, & Walster, 1973).
Walster et al. summarized the key prediction of the theory by
stating, “When individuals find themselves participating in ineq-
uitable relationships, they become distressed. The more inequita-

ble the relationship, the more distress individuals feel” (p. 153). A
more recent review by Mowday and Colwell (2003) provided a
more succinct summary: “Inequitable treatment causes tension or
distress, and people are motivated to do something about it” (p. 68)
Thus, equity theory includes a stress mechanism, though this
mechanism is rarely measured in tests of the theory and may be
accompanied by other mediating variables (Greenberg, 1984).

Theoretical treatments of other justice dimensions also invoke
stress constructs. For example, referent cognitions theory argues
that procedural injustice creates several forms of distress, includ-
ing resentment, ill will, hostility, and outrage (Folger, 1993).
Uncertainty management theory also notes the linkage between
unfair experiences and perceptions of distress (Lind & Van den
Bos, 2002). Bies’s (2001) most recent discussion of interpersonal
and informational justice noted that the richness of those con-
structs comes more in discussing injustice than justice. Bies quoted
Cahn (1949) to make this distinction, with Cahn writing that
justice “brings to mind some ideal relation or static condition” (p.
13), whereas injustice involves “those affections of the viscera and
abnormal secretions of the adrenals that prepare the human animal
to resist attack” (p. 24).

Although the theoretical grounding for a justice–stress relation-
ship seems sound, there are few tests of this linkage. In fact, we are
not aware of any studies that have linked justice dimensions to
perceptions of stress. Three studies, however, have linked various
forms of justice to measures of strain. Tepper’s (2000) study of a
random sample of city residents linked three different justice
dimensions— distributive, procedural, and interactional—to de-
pression and emotional exhaustion. Elovainio, Kivimaki, and
Helkama (2001) linked two justice dimensions—procedural and
relational—to occupational strain (consisting of nervousness, de-
pression, and difficulties concentrating). Other work has found
significant relationships between health complaints and distribu-
tive as well as procedural justice (De Boer, Bakker, Syroit, &
Schaufeli, 2002). On the basis of these results, and the theoretical
grounding presented previously, we predicted that all four dimen-
sions of organizational justice (distributive, procedural, interper-
sonal, and informational) would be negatively related to stress.
Thus, our hypotheses have adopted a four-dimensional conceptu-
alization of organizational justice, consistent with recent reviews
of the literature (Colquitt et al., 2001; Colquitt & Greenberg,
2003). However, we should note that the four-dimensional struc-
ture is still new to the literature, and other taxonomies espouse a
three-factor structure that combines interpersonal and informa-
tional justice into an interactional (or quality-of-treatment) factor
(e.g., Tyler & Blader, 2000). One secondary contribution of this
article is to further evaluate the merits of the four-factor view. We
therefore predicted the following hypotheses:

Hypothesis 1: The four dimensions of organizational justice
will be negatively related to perceptions of stress. Specifi-
cally, (a) distributive justice, (b) procedural justice, (c) inter-
personal justice, and (d) informational justice will be nega-
tively related to perceptions of stress.

The Mediating Role of Work–Family Conflict

Besides examining the magnitude of the justice–stress linkage,
we were interested in exploring the causal mechanisms that might


JUSTICE AND STRESS

397

underlie the relationship. Why might fair employers be associated
with less “stressed out” employees? One possibility lies in the
domain of work–family conflict. One of the most commonly
examined role variables in the stressor domain is role conflict, in
which the demands of one role are incompatible with the demands
of another (Kahn, Wolfe, Quinn, Snock, & Rosenthal, 1964).
Work–family conflict represents one specific form of role conflict
that appears in virtually every listing of key stressors in reviews of
the literature (DeFrank & Ivancevich, 1998; Hart & Cooper, 2001;
Kahn & Byosiere, 1992).

Research on work–family conflict has increased over the past
decade as the most typical American household has become one in
which both the husband and the wife work outside of the home.
Two forms of conflict can arise in such situations: work3family
conflict, demands interfere with family responsibilities, and
family3work conflict, family obligations interfere with work
(Kossek & Ozeki, 1998). Both forms of conflict have been asso-
ciated with strain. For example, Goff, Mount, and Jamison (1990)
found that work–family conflict was related to higher absenteeism
levels. Frone (2000) linked work–family conflict to psychiatric and
substance abuse disorders. Additionally, both forms of work–
family conflict appear to be negatively associated with turnover
intentions and physical symptoms (Netemeyer, Boles, & McMur-
rian, 1996). It also appears that the negative effects of work–family
conflict may be greater for women and for older workers, at least
in terms of career satisfaction (Martins, Eddleston, & Veiga,
2002).

The antecedents of work–family conflict can be divided into
several categories. One category can be defined as responsibilities
and expectations. Work demands induce work3family conflict
(Higgins, Duxbury, & Irving, 1992) and, by the same token, family
responsibilities lead to family3work conflict (Wiersma & Van
den Berg, 1991). One source of demands is time, in that time spent
in one role is time that cannot be spent in another. For example,
Gutek, Searle, and Klepa (1991) found that hours spent with
family predicted family3work conflict and hours spent at work
predicted work3family conflict (see also Major, Klein, & Ehrhart,
2002). Another category of antecedents is psychological demands.
Frone, Russell, and Cooper (1992) tested a complex causal model
that found, among other things, that job stressors (work pressure
and role ambiguity) contributed to greater work3family conflict.
A third category of antecedents is most relevant to the present
study. Organizational policies and activities is a category referring
to actions that organizations can take to ease work–family conflict.
For example, Thomas and Ganster (1995) found that flexible
schedules and supervisor support were related to lower levels of
work–family conflict, and Allen (2001) found that employees’
perceptions of whether their organizations were family supportive
negatively predicted work–family conflict. Organizations differ
markedly in their responsiveness to work–family issues (Milliken,
Martins, & Morgan, 1998), so the experience of work–family
conflict across organizations may be tied, in part, to this organi-
zational responsiveness.

One way that organizations can be responsive to work–family
concerns is by promoting justice in the workplace. Grandey (2001)
recently argued that “the justice literature is particularly relevant to
our understanding of how well family friendly policies work” (p.
145). Grandey argued that organizations with unfair policies and
practices would probably be seen as contributing to the interfer-

ence of work with family life. We are aware of only one study in
the literature that included work–family conflict and a measure of
multiple justice dimensions. Tepper’s (2000) study revealed sig-
nificant correlations between three justice dimensions and
work3family conflict, though he did not interpret these correla-
tions because they were not the focus of the study. Other studies
have linked work–family conflict to more global evaluations of
fairness (Grover, 1991; Kossek & Nichol, 1992; Parker & Allen,
2001), providing additional empirical support for a linkage be-
tween organizational justice and work–family conflict.

Leventhal’s (1980) justice judgment model can provide theoret-
ical grounding for a relationship between organizational justice
and work–family conflict. Leventhal suggested that decision mak-
ing in organizations is a complex, multistaged process that in-
cludes the selection of the decision-making agents, setting of
ground rules, gathering of information, structuring of appeals, and
creation of change mechanisms. Organizations can promote justice
by ensuring that all of these stages consider employee views and
input and are unbiased, consistent, based on accurate information,
correctable, and ethical (Leventhal, 1980).

Organizations that consider the views and input of employees
are likely to be more responsive to work–family concerns when
they arise. That responsiveness should benefit from the gathering
of accurate information, possibly through attitude surveys or
record keeping of benefit plan choices and feedback. Indeed,
Grandey (2001) noted that an accurate needs analysis with com-
panywide participation is a vital component of responsiveness to
work–family issues. Milliken et al. (1998) provided empirical
support for this assertion by showing that organizational respon-
siveness was correlated with the gathering of information through
surveys and interviews. Moreover, organizations that prioritize
ethicality in decision making should be more likely to respond to
such information with good faith efforts to improve the situation.
While Leventhal’s (1980) model does not explicitly consider
interpersonal or informational justice, both should be vital to
fostering a family-friendly workplace. Any organizational attempts
to improve work–family issues will be neutralized if employees’
supervisors are not supportive of them (Grandey, 2001). Kossek,
Colquitt, & Noe (2001) showed that work–family conflict was
significantly associated with the climate created by employee
supervisors. If supervisors encouraged employees to share their
work–family concerns (rather than sacrifice family issues for
work), conflict levels tended to be lower. Such support requires
supervisors to communicate work–family responses to the work-
force and allows employees to utilize all of the options available to
them (Grandey, 2001).

The role of distributive justice and work–family conflict is less
clear. On the one hand, concerns that organizational outcomes do
not match one’s contributions would seem to exacerbate any
tensions resulting from the work–family interface. Moreover, an
organization may become more responsive to employee concerns
as a form of compensation for high-quality effort or job perfor-
mance. In contrast, Grandey (2001) argued that organizations do
not address work–family issues to reward meritorious perfor-
mance, instead arguing “family friendly policies may contradict
equity rules, and in general, may be viewed as an unfair practice”
(p. 154). This suggests that distributive justice—when cast in
terms of equity—may fail to reduce work–family conflict. Recall,


398

JUDGE AND COLQUITT

however, that Tepper’s (2000) study did yield a significant nega-
tive relationship between the two variables.

In summary, there are reasons to expect relationships among
three (and perhaps all four) organizational justice dimensions and
work–family conflict. We therefore advanced the following two
predictions:

Hypothesis 2: The four dimensions of organizational justice
will be negatively related to perceptions of work3family
conflict. Specifically, (a) distributive justice, (b) procedural
justice, (c) interpersonal justice, and (d) informational justice
will be negatively related to perceptions of work3family
conflict.

Hypothesis 3: The negative relationships among the four
dimensions of organizational justice and stress will be par-
tially mediated by perceptions of work3family conflict.

Method

Participants and Procedure

Participants were faculty employed at 23 universities in the United
States. The potential pool of participants was obtained by randomly sam-
pling from the e-mail directories of faculty at these universities. Univer-
sities were selected for inclusion based on two criteria: (a) diversity in
geography, size, and status (national vs. regional universities) and (b)
availability of an online e-mail database so that e-mail addresses could be
accessed. The locations of universities were Northwest/Rocky Mountain
(n ⫽ 4), Southwest (n ⫽ 3), Midwest (n ⫽ 6), Southeast (n ⫽ 5), and
Northeast/Atlantic Coast (n ⫽ 5). Because the size of the universities
varied dramatically, sampling was not equal across the 23 universities.
Names were randomly sampled from the entire e-mail directories, so,
except for sampling error, the participants should have been randomly
sampled across departments and ranks. Five hundred individuals were sent
e-mail messages describing the nature of the study and soliciting their
participation. Three hundred and twenty-two individuals indicated their
willingness to participate in the study. These individuals were sent a cover
letter, an informed consent form, and a Time 1 survey (and a significant-
other survey—see next paragraph) with a postage-paid return envelope.
Code numbers were written on each survey so that they could be matched
on return. Participants were offered a $10 honorarium in return for their
participation and were assured that
their responses were completely
confidential.

Included with the focal employee survey was another survey for a
significant other (spouse or cohabitating partner). The significant-other
survey had its own postage-paid return envelope; focal employees were
instructed to give the survey and attached envelope to the significant other.
Significant others, in turn, were instructed to complete the survey away
from the focal employee and to return it in the envelope. Significant others
were not offered an inducement for completing the short survey.

Two hundred and thirty-four individuals returned useable self-report
surveys at Time 1, which translated into an effective response rate of 47%.
Listwise deletion reduced the sample size to 212 individuals who had
complete data on all of the Time 1 variables. Including the significant other
surveys reduced the sample size to 201 individuals who had complete data
on all Time 1 variables. Fifty-eight percent of the sample were men, and
91% were Caucasian. The average participant was 43 years old and had one
child (range: 0 – 6 children).

Approximately 6 months later, participants who completed the Time 1
survey were sent a second survey that assessed their job satisfaction,
work–family conflict, and stress. The time period of 6 months was chosen
because it allowed the possibility of change in attitudes from Time 1 to

Time 2 (and eliminated transient sources of inflation) while not prolonging
the study unduly. The response rate to this survey was 76% (n ⫽ 177). One
hundred seventy-four individuals had complete data on all Time 1 (self and
significant other) and Time 2 variables.

Measures

All variables were rated on a 1–5 scale, with responses ranging from 1
(strongly disagree [or never for the stress scale]) and 5 (strongly agree [or
very often for the stress scale]). All items were averaged to form overall
scales. Except for job satisfaction (completed by a significant other at Time
1), all measures were completed by the focal employee at either Time 1
(justice perceptions: number and use of work–family policies) or at both
Time 1 and Time 2 (stress: work3family conflict).

Organizational justice perceptions. Organizational justice perceptions
were measured using the four-dimensional measure created and validated
by Colquitt (2001). Items referenced work–family policies, decisions, and
procedures. Distributive justice was measured with four items (e.g., “Is the
availability of work–family assistance appropriate for the work you have
completed?” and “Does the availability of work–family assistance reflect
what you have contributed to the university?”). Procedural justice was
measured with seven items (e.g., “Have the work–family policies been
applied consistently?” and “Have the work–family policies been based on
accurate information?”). Interpersonal justice was measured with four
items, in reference to the individual who has enacted the work–family
policies (e.g., “Has he or she treated you in a polite manner?” and “Has he
or she refrained from improper remarks or comments?”). Informational
justice was measured with five items (e.g., “Has he or she explained
work–family policies and issues thoroughly?” and “Has he or she tailored
his or her communications to your specific work–family needs?”). The
reliabilities of the distributive, procedural, interpersonal, and interactional
dimensions were ␣ ⫽ .84, ␣ ⫽ .84, ␣ ⫽ .96, and ␣ ⫽ .90, respectively.
Given that the Colquitt (2001) measure is relatively new, we conducted
a confirmatory factor analysis of the measure to verify the fit of a four-
dimensional conceptualization. This analysis showed an acceptable fit for
a four-factor solution: ␹2(164, N ⫽ 214) ⫽ 318.30, p ⬍ .001; ␹2/df ⫽
1.94); root-mean-square residual (RMSR) ⫽ .07; Comparative Fit Index
(CFI) ⫽ .95; Incremental Fit Index (IFI) ⫽ .95. The average standardized
item loadings onto each of the factors were as follows: distributive jus-
tice ⫽ .65, procedural justice ⫽ .77, interpersonal justice ⫽ .92, and
informational justice ⫽ .81. Of importance, the four-dimensional structure
provided a better fit to the data than a three-factor model collapsing
interpersonal and informational justice, ␹2(167, N ⫽ 214) ⫽ 947.90, p ⬍
.001; ␹2/df ⫽ 5.68; RMSR ⫽ .19; CFI ⫽ .75; IFI ⫽ .75, and the difference
in the fit of the two models was statistically significant: ␹2⌬(3, N ⫽ 214) ⫽
629.60, p ⬍ .001. These results provide some support for the four-
dimensional structure used in our hypotheses.

3

Work

Stress. Stress was measured with the Perceived Stress Scale (Cohen,
Kamarck, & Mermelstein, 1983), a 13-item scale that measures stress
experienced in the last month. Example items include the following: “In the
last month, how often have you felt nervous and ‘stressed’?” and “In the
last month, how often have you found that you could not cope with all the
things that you had to do?’ Focal employees evaluated these items at Time
1 (␣ ⫽ .87) and at Time 2 (␣ ⫽ .88).
family conflict. Work3family conflict was measured with the
four-item scale developed and validated by Gutek et al. (1991). The scale
has been used in other work–family conflict research (G. A. Adams, King,
& King, 1996; Judge, Boudreau, & Bretz, 1994). The four items are as
follows: “After work, I come home too tired to do some of the things I’d
like to do,” “On the job I have so much work to do that it takes away from
my personal interests,” “My family or friends dislike how often I am
preoccupied with my work while I am at home,” and “My work takes up
time that I’d like to spend with family or friends.” In the present study, the
reliability of the work3family conflict scale was ␣ ⫽ .82 at Time 1 and
␣ ⫽ .83 at Time 2.


JUSTICE AND STRESS

Control Variables

Overall job satisfaction. Overall job satisfaction was assessed as a
control variable, given its significant correlations with organizational jus-
tice, work–family conflict, and stress. Overall job satisfaction was mea-
sured with the five-item Brayfield and Rothe (1951) measure, completed
by the focal employee at Time 2 (␣ ⫽ .93) and the focal employee’s
significant other at Time 1 (␣ ⫽ .84). The five items are as follows: “Most
days I am enthusiastic about my work,” “I feel fairly satisfied with my
present job,” “Each day at work seems like it will never end” (reverse
scored), “I find real enjoyment in my work,” and “I consider my job rather
unpleasant” (reverse scored).

Number and use of work–family policies. Given that organizational
policies may alter work–family conflict levels, we also controlled for the
number and use of various work–family policies in the respondents’
organizations. The particular work–family policies identified on the survey
were based on several sources (Grover & Crocker, 1995; Milliken et al.,
1998) and were adapted to those policies thought to be most appropriate for
university contexts. Twelve specific work–family policies (e.g., parental/
maternity leave, elder care, part-time work, job sharing, flextime, flexible
benefits, college savings programs, work at home, child-care assistance,
employee assistance program, wellness/health program, and work–family
seminars) were identified. Individuals were first asked to indicate whether
their university had such a policy by circling “Yes,” “No,” or “?” (if they
did not know). Scores on the measure were summed so that for each policy
in which “Yes” was circled, one point was added. If a policy was not
present or the individual was unsure, no points were added. Thus, scores
ranged from 0 to 12. Although we treated scores on this variable at the
individual level of analysis, within universities, individuals did agree in
their evaluations of whether the university offered the policies. Specifi-
cally, across the 12 work–family policies, agreement ranged from 70.4%
(paternal/maternal leave) to 88.8% (child-care assistance), with an average
of 81.3%. In terms of the use of work–family policies, individuals were
asked to list which, if any, of the 12 policies they had used. Use of
work–family policies is therefore simply the number of policies that the
individual listed.

Results

Descriptive statistics and intercorrelations among the study vari-
ables are provided in Table 1. We tested our hypotheses using
structural equation modeling. Because different sources of data
were obtained, two different structural models were tested. Spe-
cifically, one model related the exogenous variables (the four
justice dimensions and work–family policies) measured at Time 1

399
to the endogenous variables (work3family conflict, stress, and job
satisfaction) measured at Time 2. The second model utilized Time
1 measures of all constructs, but utilized significant-other reports
of job satisfaction. Similar results across these two model speci-
fications would provide evidence that the results were not due to
same-source bias and were robust over time. We used LISREL 8
to test the models (Jo¨reskog & So¨rbom, 1993), with variables
treated as directly observed and measurement error being corrected
by multiplying the variances of the variables by 1 ⫺ ␣. Although
not depicted in the model, the justice dimensions were allowed to
be correlated with each other and with the two work–family policy
variables. A noncausal association between job satisfaction and
stress was estimated.

have

justice

negative

influences

significant

The structural equation modeling results testing the hypothe-
sized model with longitudinal data are provided in Figure 1. The
figure shows that most, but not all, of the hypothesized links in the
model were supported. Specifically, procedural justice and inter-
personal
on
work3family conflict, and work3family conflict, in turn, has a
significant negative influence on stress (even when controlling for
job satisfaction). The fit statistics for this model suggested an
adequate fit to the data (see Table 2). An alternative model,
estimated with Time 1 data and with significant-other reports of
job satisfaction, also fit the data well (see Table 2 and Figure 2).
The results are consistent with the previous model; no link that was
significant in the longitudinal model became nonsignificant in this
model. Of the control variables, job satisfaction had significant
relationships with both work3family conflict and stress, but the
work–family policy variables were not related to work3family
conflict.

Hypothesis 1 predicted that the four dimensions of organiza-
tional justice would be negatively related to stress. Table 3 pre-
sents the total, direct, and indirect effects of the four justice
dimensions on the endogeneous variables in the model. The total
effects match the standardized regression coefficients derived from
regressing an endogeneous variable on the four justice dimensions.
As shown in Table 3, procedural and interpersonal justice were the
only dimensions with significant total effects on stress (⫺.21 and
⫺.13, ps ⬍ .01, respectively). Distributive and informational jus-
tice did not have significant total effects on stress (.05 and .04,
respectively). Thus, Hypothesis 1 received partial support.

Table 1
Means, Standard Deviations, and Intercorrelations of Study Variables

Variable

M

SD

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

1. Distributive justice (T1)
2. Procedural justice (T1)
3. Interpersonal justice (T1)
4. Informational justice (T1)
5. Work3family conflict (T1)
6. Work3family conflict (T2)
7. Stress (T1)
8. Stress (T2)
9. Job satisfaction (T2)
10. Job satisfaction (sig. other)
11. Number work–family policies
12. Use of work–family policies

10.95
19.03
17.35
15.09
11.97
11.59
34.89
34.51
37.12
19.55
3.54
1.15

(.96)
.42

(.84)
.21
.53

(.84)
.61
.26
.57

3.96
5.78
3.77
5.56
(.90)
3.78 ⫺.16 ⫺.22 ⫺.25 ⫺.24
3.60 ⫺.13 ⫺.26 ⫺.21 ⫺.16
7.40 ⫺.14 ⫺.15 ⫺.21 ⫺.18
7.18 ⫺.08 ⫺.16 ⫺.13 ⫺.11
6.12
3.87
3.00
.88

.40
.21
.29
.20
.06
.25
.28 ⫺.05

.16
.18
.22
.13

(.82)
.69
.55
.49

(.83)
.42
.53

(.87)
.66

(.88)
.28 ⫺.31 ⫺.29 ⫺.38 ⫺.42
.17 ⫺.16 ⫺.17 ⫺.30 ⫺.28
(.84)
.18 ⫺.15 ⫺.03 ⫺.01 ⫺.05 ⫺.12 ⫺.02
.04 ⫺.04 ⫺.06 ⫺.08
.11

.01 ⫺.08

(.93)
.56

—
.21 —

Note. Reliabilities (alpha) are on the diagonal. Correlations greater than .13 are significant at the .05 level. T1

⫽ Time 1; T2

⫽ Time 2; Sig. ⫽ significant.


400

JUDGE AND COLQUITT

Figure 1. Results for self-report, longitudinal model.
** p ⬍ .01.

Hypothesis 2 predicted that the four justice dimensions would
be negatively related to work3family conflict. Table 3 illustrates
that procedural and interpersonal justice were also the only dimen-
sions with significant total effects on work3family conflict (⫺.34
and ⫺.19, p ⬍ .01, respectively). Distributive and informational
justice did not have significant total effects on work3family
conflict (.08 and .07, respectively). Thus, Hypothesis 2 also re-
ceived partial support.
Hypothesis 3 predicted that the relationships between the justice
dimensions and stress would be mediated by work3family con-
flict. As shown in Table 3, the significant procedural and inter-
personal total effects were completely indirect based on our model,
as they were transmitted through the mechanism of work3family
conflict. Our mediation prediction would be supported if the fit of
the model would not be improved by the addition of direct paths
from the two justice variables to stress. As expected, the addition
of these paths did not improve model fit. For example, with the

Table 2
Fit Statistics for Structural Models

Model

Significant

Statistic

Longitudinal

␹2
␹2/df
Goodness of Fit Index
Adjusted Goodness of Fit Index
Root-mean-square residual
Root-mean-square error of approximation
Normed Fit Index
Non-Normed Fit Index
Comparative Fit Index
Incremental Fit Index

36.02
1.80
.96
.91
.07
.07
.90
.92
.95
.96

other

25.01
1.25
.97
.94
.06
.04
.94
.98
.99
.99

Note. For longitudinal model, n ⫽ 174; for significant-other report
model, n ⫽ 201. Both models have 20 degrees of freedom.

Figure 2. Results using significant-other (sig. other) reports of job
satisfaction.
* p ⬍ .05.

** p ⬍ .01.

self-report longitudinal model, the chi-square dropped by only
1.86 (ns), and the other standardized fit statistics (e.g., root mean
square error of approximation, root-mean-square-residual, Ad-
justed Goodness-of-Fit Index, and Non-Normed Fit Index) were
virtually unchanged. The same pattern of results was observed
with the model utilizing significant-other reports of job satisfac-
tion. Hypothesis 3 was therefore supported—the effects of the
organizational
justice dimensions on stress were mediated by
work3family conflict.

Table 3
Direct, Indirect, and Total Effects of Organizational
Justice Dimensions

Justice dimension

Total

Distributive

Procedural

Work3family conflict
Job satisfaction
Stress
Work3family conflict
Job satisfaction
Stress
Work3family conflict
Job satisfaction
Stress
Work3family conflict
Job satisfaction
Stress

Informational

Interpersonal

.08
⫺.03
.05

⫺.34**
.12**
⫺.21**

⫺.19**
.07*
⫺.13**

.07
⫺.03
.04

Effect

Direct

.08
—
—

⫺.34**

—
—

⫺.19**

—
—

.07
—
—

Indirect

—
⫺.03
.05

—
.12**
⫺.21**

—
.07*
⫺.13**

—
⫺.03
.04

Note. Dashes indicate data are not applicable. The effects are controlling
for the other effects in the models. Job satisfaction is included as a control
variable given its significant relationship with justice, work3family con-
flict, and stress.
* p ⬍ .05.

** p ⬍ .01.


JUSTICE AND STRESS

401

Discussion

As noted at the outset, the effects of organizational justice on
key business outcomes have been well documented. Less attention
has been given to the theoretical mechanisms that explain justice
relationships. One potential mechanism is stress, as organizational
injustice could be viewed as a “stressor”—an aspect of the work
environment that causes employees to doubt their ability to cope
with work demands (Vermunt & Steensma, 2001). With that in
mind, the present study made two primary theoretical contribu-
tions. First, by linking multiple justice dimensions to stress, we
provided empirical support for the injustice as stressor perspective.
This perspective provides another explanation for organizational
justice effects, complementing attitudinal mediators such as social
exchange perceptions, status and esteem, and trust as well as
legitimacy (Cropanzano, Rupp, Mohler, & Schminke, 2001; Lind,
2001; Tyler & Blader, 2000). Second, by examining work–family
conflict as a mediator of the stress effect, we began to explore
exactly how and why justice acts as a stressor. Given that the
justice–stress relationship remains relatively untested, explaining
any significant relationships is critical.

It is important to note that procedural and interpersonal justice
were the primary drivers of justice effects, as only they had unique
effects on stress perceptions. The strong effects for procedural
justice are consistent with theories that link the variable with
uncertainty and control. For example, Thibaut and Walker (1975)
argued that procedural justice would be valued because it makes
long-term outcomes more controllable and predictable. Fairness
heuristic theory suggests that procedural justice is particularly
valuable when uncertainty is present and decisions about whether
to cooperate with others are unclear (Lind, 2001; Van den Bos et
al., 2001). When one acknowledges that uncertainty and lack of
control are definitional components of the stress construct (Beehr
& Bhagat, 1985), the reason for the strong procedural effects
becomes clear.

The effects for interpersonal justice are consistent with models
of stress that contain interpersonal stressors such as conflict with
coworkers,
inadequate leadership, supervisory misbehavior, or
lack of leader support (Kohli, 1985; Marshall & Cooper, 1979;
Spector & Jex, 1998). In a recent review of the construct, Bies
(2001) observed that interpersonal injustice is a “hot and burning”
experience associated with “intense and personal pain” (p. 90).
Indeed, Spector and Jex argued that interpersonal stressors may be
one of the most powerful stressors. Unfair treatment from one’s
supervisor should create the same sense of uncertainty and lack of
control as procedural justice, and those feelings should persist as
long as that dyadic linkage remains intact.

In addition to linking justice dimensions to stress, our study was
the first to examine a mediator of that relationship. We reasoned
that organizations that treated their employees fairly would be
more responsive to work–family issues, lowering work3family
conflict. Our results demonstrate that the relationships between
procedural and interpersonal justice and stress were completely
mediated by work3family conflict. The procedural effect can be
explained using Leventhal’s (1980) justice judgment model, as
organizations that consider the views and inputs of employees
gather accurate policy information (whether through surveys or
record keeping) and emphasize that ethical procedures should be

more responsive to work–family issues (Grandey, 2001; Milliken
et al., 1998).
The interpersonal justice effect reinforces the important role
played by the supervisor with respect to work3family conflict. In
most university contexts, it is the supervisor (the department chair)
who is responsible for approving and implementing work–family
policies such as parental leave, part-time work schedules, and so
on. Even in cases in which they are not directly responsible for the
development of the policy, they are often the faculty member’s
first point of contact in accommodating an individual. More gen-
erally, beyond formal work–family policies, the department chair
interacts with faculty when work–family issues arise (e.g., arrang-
ing to cover a class when a dependent is ill). In these circum-
stances, it can be argued that it is especially important that the
department chair is sympathetic to and understanding of an indi-
vidual’s concerns and needs.

While we did not make differential predictions for the four
justice dimensions a priori, it is worthwhile to speculate about why
distributive and informational justice had relatively weaker effects
in our study. One potential explanation is the relative interpret-
ability of the four justice dimensions. Lind and Van den Bos’s
(2002; Van den Bos, Lind, Vermunt, & Wilke, 1997) research on
both fairness heuristic theory and uncertainty management theory
note that justice dimensions have stronger effects when they are
more interpretable. Both theories discuss a “substitutability
effect” in which the more interpretable forms of justice substi-
tute for the less interpretable forms when creating global fair-
ness perceptions (Lind, 2001; Lind & Van den Bos, 2002; Van
den Bos et al., 2001).

One could argue that the two dimensions with the strongest
effects in our study—interpersonal and procedural—are also the
most interpretable. Van den Bos et al. (1997) argued that distrib-
utive justice can be difficult to judge because it requires knowing
information on the outcomes of others. Moreover, distributive
information is often encountered after procedural
information
(Van den Bos et al., 1997). Taken together, these differences can
be used to explain why procedural effects are sometimes stronger
than distributive effects (Lind, 2001; Lind & Van den Bos, 2002;
Van den Bos et al., 2001). The relative interpretability of the
interactional facets has received less attention. However, it seems
clear that insincere, disrespectful, or improper treatment can easily
be perceived. In contrast, employees may be uncertain whether
key
and
comprehensively.

explained

decisions

honestly

truly

have

been

The interpretability of justice dimensions should affect the mag-
nitude of their stress effects. Consider the transactional model of
stress articulated by Lazarus and colleagues (e.g., Lazarus, Delon-
gis, Folkman, & Gruen, 1985; Lazarus & Folkman, 1984). The
transactional model argues that responses to stressors are governed
by a multistep appraisal process. In primary appraisal,
the
individual evaluates whether an event has implications for his
or her well-being. In secondary appraisal, the individual eval-
uates what actions can be taken for those events that could harm
well-being. It may be that more interpretable justice dimensions
become more stressful (and generate stronger conflict percep-
tions) because the appraisal of those dimensions is clear and
straightforward.


402

Practical Implications

JUDGE AND COLQUITT

stress

levels

(DeFrank & Ivancevich,

These results offer several practical implications. Stress levels
appear to be on the rise, and work is the primary source of
individual
1998).
Work3family conflict continues to become a key source of stress
as most families now include two wage earners who must balance
work and family roles. Organizations that can help those employ-
ees manage those roles, and experience less stress, should gain
competitive advantage by reducing Workers’ Compensation
claims, medical expenses, and withdrawal while maintaining high
levels of job performance (Hart & Cooper, 2001).

One means of responding to employees’ work–family concerns
is by ensuring that work–family policies are created in a just
manner. Employee surveys can provide an accurate picture of
where needs lie, as can record keeping of benefit plan choices and
feedback. The next step is to create procedures that are represen-
tative of all groups’ concerns and are consistent across persons and
time. However, our results emphasize that the leader who enacts
those procedures must be supportive— even the best parental leave
procedure cannot overcome supervisors who forbid their employ-
ees from using it. Fortunately, past research has shown that leaders
can be trained to act in a more just manner, improving the attitudes
and behaviors of their subordinates (Cole & Latham, 1997; Skar-
licki & Latham, 1996, 1997).

Limitations

Of course, this study possesses some limitations that should be
noted. Some links in our models were vulnerable to same-source
bias. However, we should point out that one of our models relied
on longitudinal data separated by 6 months, removing any transient
causes of same-source bias. Another model relied on cross-
sectional data with significant-other reports for job satisfaction,
with the results remarkably consistent across models. Still, these
data do not allow us to draw causal inferences. The links in the
hypothesized model follow a presumed causal order, such that
justice leads to work3family conflict, which leads to job satis-
faction and stress. Though longitudinal data facilitate causal infer-
ences, the requirements for strong causal inference (James, Mu-
laik, & Brett, 1982) make it unwise to draw strong causal
conclusions despite support for the model.

Suggestions for Future Research

Despite these limitations, our study offers several suggestions
for future research. For example, we followed Kossek and Ozeki’s
(1998) advice to measure work–family conflict with a scale that
differentiates between work3family and family3work conflict.
We should note that family3work conflict was not in the model
because the theoretical context of this study was at work (and,
therefore, the impact of the home on work) rather than at home (the
impact of work on home). Future research could develop a model
predicting family3work conflict by examining justice as it is
experienced in the home. For example, Grote and Clark (2001)
examined the fairness of the division of household labor. Others
could explore a wider variety of justice dimensions to compare the
stress implications of organizational versus home-based justice.

Further research is also needed to replicate the effects of the four
justice dimensions on perceived stress. Are there contexts in which
distributive and informational justice become significant anteced-
ents of stress perceptions or when procedural and interpersonal
justice become less critical? Such research could also begin to
compare the injustice-as-stressor perspective with other mecha-
nisms that explain justice effects, including social exchange, status
and esteem, and trust as well as legitimacy (Cropanzano, Rupp, et
al., 2001; Lind, 2001; Tyler & Blader, 2000). Are stress percep-
tions a more powerful mediator than these mechanisms? Exploring
such questions can help scholars explain exactly why justice is
such an important concern in organizations.

References

Adams, G. A., King, L. A., & King, D. W. (1996). Relationships of job and
family involvement, family social support, and work–family conflict
with job and life satisfaction. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81, 411–
420.

Adams, J. S. (1965). Inequity in social exchange. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.),
Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 267–299). New
York: Academic Press.

Adams, J. S., & Freedman, S. (1976). Equity theory revisited: Comments
and annotated bibliography. In L. Berkowitz & E. Walster (Eds.),
Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 9, pp. 43–90). New
York: Academic Press.

Allen, T. D. (2001). Family-supportive work environments: The role of
organizational perceptions. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 58, 414 –
435.

Beehr, T. A., & Bhagat, R. S. (1985). Human stress and cognition in

organizations: An integrated perspective. New York: Wiley.

Bies, R. J. (2001). International (in)justice: The sacred and the profane. In
J. Greenberg & R. Cropanzano (Eds.), Advances in organization justice
(pp. 89 –118). Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.

Bies, R. J., & Moag, J. F. (1986). Interactional justice: Communication
criteria of fairness. Research on Negotiations in Organizations, 1, 43–
55.

Brayfield, A. H., & Rothe, H. F. (1951). An index of job satisfaction.

Journal of Applied Psychology, 35, 307–311.

Cahn, E. (1949). The sense of justice. New York: New York University

Press.

Chesney, M. A., Sevelius, G., Black, G., Ward, M., Swan, G., & Rosen-
man, R. (1981). Work environment, Type A behavior, and coronary
heart disease risks. Journal of Occupational Medicine, 23, 551–555.

Cohen, S., Kamarck, T., & Mermelstein, R. (1983). A global measure of
perceived stress. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 24, 385–396.
Cole, N. D., & Latham, G. P. (1997). Effects of training in procedural
justice on perceptions of disciplinary fairness by unionized employees
and disciplinary subject matter experts. Journal of Applied Psychology,
82, 699 –705.

Colquitt, J. A. (2001). On the dimensionality of organizational justice: A
construct validation of a measure. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86,
386 – 400.

Colquitt, J. A., Conlon, D. E., Wesson, M. J., Porter, C. O., & Ng, K. Y.
(2001). Justice at the millennium: A meta-analytic review of 25 years of
organizational justice research. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 425–
445.

Colquitt, J. A., & Greenberg, J. (2003). Organizational justice: A fair
assessment of the state of the literature. In J. Greenberg (Ed.), Organi-
zational behavior: The state of the science (pp. 165–210). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Cropanzano, R., Byrne, Z. S., Bobocel, D. R., & Rupp, D. E. (2001). Moral
virtues, fairness heuristics, social entities, and other denizens of organi-
zational justice. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 58, 164 –209.


JUSTICE AND STRESS

403

Cropanzano, R., & Greenberg, J. (1997). Progress in organizational justice:
Tunneling through the maze. In C. L. Cooper & I. T. Robertson (Eds.),
International review of industrial and organizational psychology (pp.
317–372). New York: Wiley.

Cropanzano, R., Rupp, D. E., Mohler, C. J., & Schminke, M. (2001). Three
roads to organizational
justice. In G. R. Ferris (Ed.), Research in
personnel and human resource management (pp. 1–113). New York:
Elsevier Science.

De Boer, E. M., Bakker, A. B., Syroit, J. E., & Schaufeli, W. B. (2002).
Unfairness at work as a predictor of absenteeism. Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior, 23, 181–197.

DeFrank, R. S., & Ivancevich, J. M. (1998). Stress on the job: An executive

update. Academy of Management Executive, 12, 55– 66.

Elovainio, M., Kivimaki, M., & Helkama, K. (2001). Organizational justice
evaluations, job control, and occupational strain. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 86, 418 – 424.

Folger, R. (1993). Reactions to mistreatment at work. In K. Murnighan
(Ed.), Social psychology in organizations: Advances in theory and
research (pp. 161–183). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Frone, M. R. (2000). Work–family conflict and employee psychiatric
disorders: The national comorbidity survey. Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, 85, 888 – 895.

Frone, M. R., Russell, M., & Cooper, M. L. (1992). Antecedents and
outcomes of work–family conflict: Testing a model of the work–family
interface. Journal of Applied Psychology, 77, 65–78.

Goff, S. J., Mount, M. K., & Jamison, R. L. (1990). Employer supported
child care, work/family conflict, and absenteeism: A field study. Per-
sonnel Psychology, 43, 793– 809.

Grandey, A. A. (2001). Family friendly policies: Organizational justice
perceptions of need-based allocations. In R. Cropanzano (Ed.), Justice in
the workplace: From theory to practice (pp. 145–173). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Greenberg, J. (1982). Approaching equity and avoiding inequity in groups
and organizations. In J. Greenberg & R. L. Cohen (Eds.), Equity and
justice in social behavior (pp. 389 – 435). New York: Academic Press.
Greenberg, J. (1984). On the apocryphal nature of inequity distress. In R.
Folger (Ed.), The sense of injustice: Social psychological perspectives
(pp. 167–186). New York: Plenum Press.

Greenberg, J. (1986). Determinants of perceived fairness of performance

evaluations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 71, 340 –342.

Greenberg, J. (1993). Stealing in the name of justice: Informational and
interpersonal moderators of theft reactions to underpayment inequity.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 54, 81–103.
Grote, N. K., & Clark, M. S. (2001). Perceiving unfairness in the family:
Cause or consequence of marital distress? Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 80, 281–293.

Grover, S. L. (1991). Predicting the perceived fairness of parental leave

policies. Journal of Applied Psychology, 76, 247–255.

Grover, S. L., & Crocker, K. J. (1995). Who appreciates family-responsive
human resource policies: The impact of family-friendly policies on the
organizational attachment of parents and non-parents. Personnel Psy-
chology, 48, 271–288.

Gutek, B. A., Searle, S., & Klepa, L. (1991). Rational versus gender role
explanations for work–family conflict. Journal of Applied Psychology,
76, 560 –568.

Hart, P. M., & Cooper, C. L. (2001). Occupational stress: Toward a more
integrated framework. In N. Anderson, D. S. Ones, H. K. Sinangil, & C.
Viswesvaran (Eds.), Handbook of industrial, work, and organizational
psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 93–114). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Higgins, C. A., Duxbury, L. A., & Irving, R. H. (1992). Work–family
conflict in the dual-career family. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 51, 51–75.

James, L. R., Mulaik, S. A., & Brett, J. M. (1982). Causal analysis:

Assumptions, models, and data. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

Jo¨reskog, K. G., & So¨rbom, D. (1993). LISREL 8 user’s reference guide.

Chicago: Scientific Software.

Judge, T. A., Boudreau, J. W., & Bretz, R. D. (1994). Job and life attitudes

of male executives. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79, 767–782.

Kahn, R. L., & Byosiere, P. (1992). Stress in organizations. In M. D.
Dunnette & L. M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial and organiza-
tional psychology (Vol. 3, pp. 571– 650). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting
Psychologists Press.

Kahn, R. L., Wolfe, D. M., Quinn, R. P., Snock, J. D., & Rosenthal, R. A.
(1964). Organizational stress: Studies in role conflict and ambiguity.
New York: Wiley.

Kohli, A. K. (1985). Some unexplored supervisory behaviors and their
influence on salespeople’s role clarity, specific self-esteem, job satis-
faction, and motivation. Journal of Marketing Research, 22, 424 – 433.
Kossek, E. E., Colquitt, J. A., & Noe, R. A. (2001). Caregiving decisions,
well-being, and performance: The effects of place and provider as a
function of dependent type and work–family climates. Academy of
Management Journal, 44, 29 – 44.

Kossek, E. E., & Nichol, V. (1992). The effects of on-site child care on
employee attitudes and performance. Personnel Psychology, 45, 485–
509.

Kossek, E. E., & Ozeki, C. (1998). Work–family conflict, policies, and the
job–life satisfaction relationship: A review and directions for organiza-
tional behavior– human resources research. Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, 83, 139 –149.

Lazarus, R. S., Delongis, A., Folkman, S., & Gruen, R. (1985). Stress and
adaptational outcomes: The problem of confounded measures. American
Psychologist, 40, 770 –779.

Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, and coping. New

York: Springer.

Leventhal, G. S. (1976). The distribution of rewards and resources in
groups and organizations. In L. Berkowitz & W. Walster (Eds.), Ad-
vances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 9, pp. 91–131). New
York: Academic Press.

Leventhal, G. S. (1980). What should be done with equity theory? New
approaches to the study of fairness in social relationship. In K. J. Gergen,
M. S. Greenberg, & R. H. Willis (Eds.), Social exchange: Advances in
theory and research (pp. 27–55). New York: Plenum.

Lind, E. A. (2001). Thinking critically about justice judgments. Journal of

Vocational Behavior, 58, 220 –226.

Lind, E. A., & Van den Bos, K. (2002). When fairness works: Toward a
general theory of uncertainty management. In B. M. Staw & R. M.
Kramer (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (Vol. 24, pp. 181–
222). Boston: JAI Press.

Major, V. S., Klein, K. J., & Ehrhart, M. G. (2002). Work time, work
interference with family, and psychological distress. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 87, 427– 436.

Marshall, J., & Cooper, C. (1979). Work experiences of middle and senior
managers: The pressure and satisfaction. International Management
Review, 19, 81–96.

Martins, L. L., Eddleston, K. A., & Veiga, J. F. (2002). Moderators of the
relationship between work–family conflict and career satisfaction. Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 45, 399 – 409.

Milliken, F. J., Martins, L. L., & Morgan, H. (1998). Explaining organi-
zational responsiveness to work–family issues: The role of human re-
source executives as issue interpreters. Academy of Management Jour-
nal, 41, 580 –592.

Mowday, R. T., & Colwell, K. A. (2003). Employee reactions to unfair
outcomes in the workplace: The contributions of Adams’ equity theory
to understanding work motivation. In L. Porter, G. Bigley, & R. M.
Steers (Eds.), Motivation and work behavior (7th ed., pp. 222–254). Burr
Ridge, IL: McGraw-Hill.

Netemeyer, R. G., Boles, J. S., & McMurrian, R. (1996). Development and


404

JUDGE AND COLQUITT

validation of work–family conflict and family–work conflict scales.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 81, 400 – 410.

Parker, L., & Allen, T. D. (2001). Work/family benefits: Variables related
to employees’ fairness perceptions. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 58,
453– 468.

Skarlicki, D. P., & Latham, G. P. (1996). Increasing citizenship behavior
within a labor union: A test of organizational justice theory. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 81, 161–169.

Skarlicki, D. P., & Latham, G. P. (1997). Leadership training in organiza-
tional justice to increase citizenship behavior within a labor union: A
replication. Personnel Psychology, 50, 617– 633.

Speaking of stress. (1996, May). HR Focus, 12.
Spector, P. E., & Jex, S. M. (1998). Development of four self-report
measures of job stressors and strain: Interpersonal conflict at work scale,
organizational constraints scale, quantitative workload inventory, and
physical symptoms inventory. Journal of Occupational Health Psychol-
ogy, 3, 356 –367.

Tepper, B. J. (2000). Consequences of abusive supervision. Academy of

Management Journal, 43, 176 –190.

Thibaut, J., & Walker, L. (1975). Procedural justice: A psychological

analysis. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Thomas, L. T., & Ganster, D. C. (1995). Impact of family-supportive work
variables on work–family conflict and strain: A control perspective.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 80, 6 –15.

Tyler, T. R., & Blader, S. L. (2000). Cooperation in groups: Procedural

justice, social identity, and behavioral engagement. New York: Psychol-
ogy Press.

Van den Bos, K., Lind, E. A., Vermunt, R., & Wilke, H. A. M. (1997).
How do I judge my outcome when I do not know the outcome of others?
The psychology of the fair process effect. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 72, 1034 –1046.

Van den Bos, K., Lind, E. A., & Wilke, H. A. M. (2001). The psychology
of procedural and distributive justice viewed from the perspective of
fairness heuristic theory. In R. Cropanzano (Ed.), Justice in the work-
place: From theory to practice (Vol. 2, pp. 49 – 66). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Vermunt, R., & Steensma, H. (2001). Stress and justice in organizations:
An exploration into justice processes with the aim to find mechanisms to
reduce stress. In R. Cropanzano (Ed.), Justice in the workplace: From
theory to practice (Vol. 2, pp. 27– 48). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Walster, E., Berscheid, E., & Walster, G. W. (1973). New directions in
equity research. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 25,
151–176.

Wiersma, U. J., & Van den Berg, P. (1991). Work– home role conflict,
family climate, and domestic responsibilities among men and women in
dual-earner families. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 21, 1207–
1217.

Received September 11, 2002
Revision received June 18, 2003

Accepted June 23, 2003 䡲

Wanted: Old APA Journals!

APA is continuing its efforts to digitize older journal issues for the PsycARTICLES database.
Thanks to many generous donors, we have made great strides, but we still need many issues,
particularly those published in the 1950s and earlier.

If you have a collection of older journals and are interested in making a donation, please e-mail
journals@apa.org or visit http://www.apa.org/journals/donations.html for an up-to-date list of the
issues we are seeking.

