Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology (1999), 72, 71–81 Printed in Great Britain
Ó 1999 The British Psychological Society

71

Self-esteem as a moderator: A comparison of

global and organization-based measures

Steve M. Jex*

Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin Oshkosh, USA

Tina C. E lacqua

A merican Institutes for Research, USA

This study examined whether self-esteem moderates the relationship between role
stressors and both psychological and physical strains. Unlike previous studies,
however, both global and organization-based self-esteem measures were utilized.
Based on previous research, it was hypothesized that moderator eVects would be
most prevalent using the organization-based measure when both stressors and
strains were measured from an organizational frame of reference. When both
stressors and strains were not measured from an organizational
frame of
reference,
that an organization-based self-esteem measure would
not necessarily produce more moderator eVects. Overall, results showed some
support for moderator eVects. However, these diVered very little as a function
of
self-esteem in
occupational stress research are discussed.

self-esteem measurement.

the study of

Implications

it was

felt

for

The detrimental eVects of role stressors (e.g. role ambiguity, role con ict) have
been well documented in the occupational stress literature (Fisher & Gitelson,
1983; Jackson & Schuler, 1985; Jex & Beehr, 1991; King & King, 1990). However,
as Jackson & Schuler (1985) pointed out, there is enough variation in the eVects of
role stressors to suspect that there are variables which moderate their eVects. Thus,
the emphasis of recent role stressor research has shifted toward identifying such
moderators.

One moderator which has received attention recently is self-esteem, which is
de ned as ‘the favorability of individuals’ characteristic self evaluations’ (Brockner,
1988, p. 11). The focus of much organizational self-esteem research has been on
what is termed ‘global’ self-esteem, or one’s self-evaluations over all areas of life.
Since global self-esteem has been shown to be stable over time, and shapes many
aspects of a person’s behaviour, it is generally considered to be a personality trait
(Brockner, 1988; Ganster & Schaubroeck, 1991; Rosenberg, 1965).

*Requests for reprints should be addressed to Steve M. Jex, Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin
Oshkosh, 800 Algoma Blvd, Oshkosh, WI 54901, USA.


72

Steve M. Jex and Tina C. E lacqua

The theoretical basis for examining self-esteem as a moderator of the eVects of
role stressors has come primarily from Brockner’s (1983) plasticity hypothesis,
which states that low self-esteem individuals are more in uenced by the environ-
ment than those with high self-esteem. Since role stressors occur in the organiz-
ational environment,
it is reasonable to assume on the basis of the plasticity
hypothesis that individuals with low self-esteem would be aVected by them more
than those with high self-esteem.

An additional theoretical base pointing to self-esteem as a moderator of role
stressors comes from the coping literature. Speci cally, it has been shown that
individuals with low self-esteem tend to use more passive forms of coping than
their high self-esteem counterparts (Kinicki & Latack, 1990). This makes low
sef-esteem individuals more vulnerable to the eVects of role stressors, because
coping with role con ict may require considerable eVort on the part of employees
(Hall, 1972). The same is probably true for role ambiguity, although Hall’s (1972)
model deals only with role con ict.

Empirical research has provided some support for the moderating eVects of
self-esteem, although there has been some inconsistency. For example, Mossholder,
Bedeian & Armenakis (1981, 1982) found that self-esteem moderated the relation-
ships between role ambiguity and satisfaction and between role con ict and
performance. Self-esteem, however, did not moderate relations between role
ambiguity and performance and between role con ict and satisfaction. More
recently, Ganster & Schaubroeck (1991) found that the relationship between role
con ict and somatic complaints among  re ghters was strongest for those with low
self-esteem. No moderator eVects were found for role ambiguity.

is

Pierce, Gardner, Cummings & Dunham (1989) pointed out that past self-esteem
research may be inconsistent because researchers have used global measures of
self-esteem. Based on previous work by Tharenou (1979) and Epstein (1979),
Pierce et al. argued that in organizational settings measures of self-esteem need to
be consonant with other organization-based measures. This
simply because
stressors and outcomes are often measured with scales that make reference to the
organizational setting.

Based on this argument, Pierce et al. (1989) developed a measure of organization-
based self-esteem (OBSE) which they de ned as ‘the self-perceived value that
individuals have of
themselves as organizational members acting within an
organizational context’ (Pierce et al., 1989, p. 625). This is essentially a domain-
speci c analogue of global self-esteem which depends on employees’ perceived
level of competence across a variety of organizational tasks. In this respect, it is
similar to self-eYcacy (Bandura, 1982). However, Pierce et al. point out that
‘organization-based self-esteem diVers from perceptions of self-eYcacy because it
re ects an individual’s
self-perceived competence within an organization and
self-eYcacy re ects a belief that self-perceived competence can be translated into
actions that will result in successful performance’ (p. 625).

Pierce, Gardner, Dunham & Cummings

(1993) examined whether OBSE
moderated the impact of role stressors, work environment support, and supervisory
support on both job performance and job satisfaction. They found that OBSE
produced strong moderated eVects. Based on these results, they suggested that, in


73
future, occupational stress research examining the moderating eVects of self-
esteem, the use of OBSE merits serious consideration.

Self-esteem

While Pierce et al.’s (1993) suggestion is logical, there are two reasons why more
research on this issue is needed. First, Pierce et al. did not directly compare OBSE
with global self-esteem. Thus, it is unknown whether these two types of self-esteem
have the same impact on stressor–strain relations. Such a direct comparison would
help occupational stress researchers to evaluate the utility of OBSE.

Second, Pierce et al. (1993) examined only two outcome variables, namely
satisfaction and performance. Based on previous occupational stress research (e.g.
Jex & Beehr, 1991), it would also be useful to examine OBSE as a moderator of
relations between stressors and both psychological strain (i.e. depression) and
health (Ganster & Schaubroeck, 1991). Since these measures are often not measured
from an organizational frame of reference, this would help researchers evaluate
whether OBSE is aso useful in situations where both stressors and strains are not
measured from an organizational frame of reference. The inclusion of health is
particularly important in light of Ganster & Schaubroeck’s (1991)  ndings using
global self-esteem.

The current study
The current study examined whether self-esteem moderated relations between role
stressors (role ambiguity and role con ict) and both psychological (frustration and
depression) and physical (physical symptoms) strains. However, unlike past studies
of moderator eVects, we used measures of both global self-esteem and OBSE.
Thus,
to the literature on the moderating eVects of
self-esteem by (1) directly comparing the prevalence of moderator eVects using
both global and organization-based self-esteem measures; (2) replicating Ganster &
Schaubroeck’s (1991) study examining self-esteem as a moderator of the relations
between role stressors and employee health; and (3) examining additional employee
strains.

study contributes

this

Based on Pierce et al. (1993), it was hypothesized that for the psychological strain
frustration, the OBSE measure would produce more consistent moderator eVects
than the global measure. This
is because frustration was measured from an
organizational frame of reference (e.g. ‘Being frustrated comes with the job’). For
depression and physical symptoms, however, it was unclear whether self-esteem
measurement would make a diVerence in moderator eVects. This was because none
of
the items on the scales measuring these variables made reference to the
workplace.

Participants

Method

Data were collected from two non-overlapping samples of employees. To obtain the  rst sample, 202
female clerical employees of a medium-sized midwestern university were contacted and asked to
participate in the study. Of these, 150 (74%) agreed to participate and provided complete data. Ages


74

Steve M. Jex and Tina C. E lacqua

in the sample ranged from 22 to 64, with an average of 42 years of age. Job tenure ranged from less
than one year to 28 years, with an average of 10 years.

To obtain the second sample, approximately 200 part-time students who were pursuing graduate
degrees at the same university were contacted and asked to participate in the study. Of these 200, 152
(76%) agreed to participate and provided complete data. Respondents represented a variety of
occupations, but were mainly managerial/ professional employees. Ages ranged from 21 to 58, with an
average of 35 years of age. Job tenure ranged from less than one year to 34 years, with an average of
7 years. Males made up 55% of this sample.

Measures
Role stressors. Role ambiguity was measured with a four-item scale taken from Beehr, Walsh & Taber
(1976). CoeYcient alpha for this scale was .86. Role con ict was measured with Rizzo, House &
Lirtzman’s (1970) eight-item scale. CoeYcient alpha for this scale was .80.
Psychological strains. Frustration with one’s job was measured with a three-item scale taken from Peters,
O’Connor & Rudolf (1980; coeYcient alpha = .77). Depression was measured with a 10-item scale
taken from Quinn & Shephard (1974; coeYcient alpha = .86), which was based on a 20-item scale
developed by Zung (1965). Respondents were asked to indicate how they felt at work during the
previous 30-day period. However, as stated earlier, the items made no reference to the workplace.
Physical strain. Respondents were presented with a list of 17 physical symptoms taken from Spector,
Dwyer & Jex (1988). They were asked to indicate (1) whether they had experienced each symptom
during the past 30 days, and (2) whether each symptom was serious enough to warrant a visit to a
physician. Based on these responses, two separate indices were created: symptoms (no doctor) and
symptoms (doctor). The symptoms (doctor) index was not used in any of the analyses because it was
not related to any other variables.
Global self-esteem. Rosenberg’s (1965) 10-item scale was used to measure global self-esteem (coeYcient
alpha = .89). This scale has been used in several past studies investigating the moderating eVects of
self-esteem (e.g. Ganster & Schaubroeck, 1991; Jex, Cvetanovski & Allen, 1994).
Organization-based self-esteem (OBSE ). Pierce et al.’s (1989) 10-item scale was used to measure OBSE
(coeYcient alpha = .95). In completing this scale, respondents were asked to respond to these items
in terms of the messages they receive from their supervisors and other employees. Pierce et al.
provided evidence of the construct validity of this scale by proposing and testing a rather extensive
nomological network of relations. Most of the relations in this network were supported, thus
providing support for the construct validity of their measure.

Results

Correlations
Correlations among all variables are presented in Table 1. Consistent with previous
research, high levels of both role stressors were associated with high levels of
frustration, depression, and symptoms (no doctor). Both self-esteem measures were
signi cantly related to all stressors and strains. The only noticeable diVerence
between the two self-esteem measures was that OBSE was more strongly related to
role stressors than was global self-esteem. Global self-esteem was signi cantly
correlated with OBSE (r = .44, p< .05), which was reasonably consistent with the
correlation of .54 reported by Pierce et al. (1989).

Moderated regression analysis
A three-step hierarchical regression procedure was used (Cohen & Cohen, 1983) to
assess moderator eVects. For each outcome, three demographic variables (tenure,


Self-esteem

75

Table 1. Intercorrelations among all variables

Variable

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

1. Role ambiguity
2. Role con ict
3. Frustration
4. Depression
5. Sympt. (ND)
6. Sympt. (D)
7. GSE
8. OBSE

(.86)
.46**
.31**
.37**
.21*
.00
.14*
.34**

(.80)
.53**
.42**
.26*
.02
.16*
.32**

(.77)
.50**
.28*
.01
.20*
.24*

(.86)
.50** (NA)
.03
.49**
.53**

.11
.27*
.31**

(NA)

.05 (.89)
.08
.44**

(.95)

*p< .05; **p< .01; both two-tailed.
Notes. N = 251–296. Reliabilities for each scale are in parentheses.
Key. Sympt. (ND)= symptoms
organization-based self-esteem; NA = not applicable.

(no doctor); sympt. (D)= symptoms

(doctor); GSE = global self-esteem; OBSE =

gender, age) were entered as a set in step 1. Tenure and age were controlled because
both may aVect both the stressors one is exposed to, and reactions to these
stressors (Mayes, Barton & Ganster, 1991). Gender may also impact exposure to
stressors (Jick & Mitz, 1985) and reports of strain (Heinisch & Jex, 1997). In step
2, the main eVects of role stressors and self-esteem were assessed. Entering both
role stressors together was done because of their intercorrelation (r = .46), and
since this approach has been used in past research (Ganster & Schaubroeck, 1991).
Finally, in step 3 the interaction terms were entered. A separate set of analyses was
done for each self-esteem measure.

Table 2 contains regression results for the impact of global self-esteem. As can
be seen, global self-esteem was a signi cant predictor of all three outcomes. Table
2 also shows that global self-esteem moderated the relation between role stressors
and both depression (D R2 = .02) and symptoms
(no doctor). Follow-up tests
(Cohen & Cohen, 1983, p. 313; Finney, Mitchell, Cronkite & Moos, 1984) indicated
that the relationship between role ambiguity and depression was somewhat stronger
and more positive for those reporting low global self-esteem, as expected. Contrary
to expectations,
the relationship between role con ict and depression was
somewhat stronger and more positive among those reporting high levels of
global self-esteem. However, even at high levels of role con ict, those with high
self-esteem still reported lower levels of depression than their low self-esteem
counterparts. As expected, the relationship between role ambiguity and symptoms
(no doctor) was stronger and more positiv e among those reporting low levels
of global
the relation between role con ict and
symptoms (no doctor) was stronger and more positiv e among those reporting high
self-esteem. This is similar to the eVect described above.

self-esteem. Furthermore,

All of the moderator eVects described in Table 2 were repeated in a separate
regression procedure in which OBSE and its interactions with role stressors were
controlled. The purpose of this analysis was to determine whether the moderating

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

76
Table 2. Regression testing the interaction between role stressors and global self-
esteem in predicting psychological strains and physical symptoms

Steve M. Jex and Tina C. E lacqua

Depression

Frustration

Sympt. (ND)

Variable

R2

adj

D R2

B

R2

adj

D R2

B

R2

adj

D R2

Step 1

Tenure
Sex
Age
Step 2
RA
RC
GSE
Step 3

RA 3 GSE
RC3 GSE

.02

.03*

.30**

.38**

.41**

.02*

.00

.01

.32**

.33*

.32**

.01

.00
.28**
.01*

.15**
.12**
.40**

.10*
.12*

.00

.02

.13**

.13**

.15**

.03**

.01
.12
.01

.09
.50**
.13*

.07
.03

B

.01
.19
.01

.08
.24**
.19**

.15**
.11†

*p< .05; **p< .01; both two-tailed; †p< .10, two-tailed.
Note. Unstandardized regression coeYcients are based on the last step in the regression procedure. Depression:
constant= 2
.08; sympt. (ND): constant= .03; RA = role ambiguity; RC= role con ict;
GSE = global self-esteem.

.07; frustration: constant= 2

eVects of GSE were due shared variance with OBSE, or whether they were due to
speci c variance in GSE. The result of this analysis was that most of the eVects
reported in Table 2 were diminished. The only moderator eVect remaining was that
between role con ict and depression (D R 2 = .02). The form of this interaction
remained the same.

Table 3 contains regression results for the impact of OBSE. As can be seen,
OBSE had a main eVect on depression and symptoms (no doctor), but not on
frustration. The pair of interactions between OBSE and role stressors did not
explain additional variance in either psychological strain. However, for depression,
the interaction between role ambiguity and OBSE approached signi cance
( p< .06). As expected, the relation between role ambiguity and depression was
stronger and more positive for those reporting low self-esteem, which essentially
mirrored the eVect found for global self-esteem. OBSE also moderated relations
between both role stressors and symptoms (no doctor) (D R2 = .03). Speci cally, the
relationship between role ambiguity and symptoms (no doctor) was positive among
those reporting low levels of OBSE and negative for those with high OBSE. The
relationship between role con ict and symptoms (no doctor) was stronger and
more positive among those reporting high OBSE but essentially non-existent
among those with low OBSE. This pattern is again quite similar to the eVect found
for global self-esteem.

When the moderating eVects of OBSE were tested after controlling for global
self-esteem and its interactions with role stressors, none of the moderator eVects
observed in Table 3 remained statistically signi cant.

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

77
Table 3. Regression testing the interaction between role stressors and organization-
based self-esteem in predicting psychological strains and physical symptoms

Self-esteem

Depression

Frustration

Sympt. (ND)

Variable

R2

adj

D R2

B

R2

adj

D R2

B

R2

adj

D R2

B

Step 1

Tenure
Sex
Age
Step 2
RA
RC
GSE
Step 3

RA 3 OBSE
RC3 OBSE

.02*

.03*

.37**

.35**

.37**

.01

.00

.01

.31**

.32**

.31**

.00

.01
.29**
.01

.08**
.25
.41**

.11†
.06

.00

.02

.13**

.14**

.15**

.03*

.01
.12
.01

.09
.51**
.05

.03
.05

.01
.20
.01

.04
.20**
.24**

.14*
.17*

*p< .05; **p< .01; both two-tailed; †p< .06, two-tailed.
Note. Unstandardized regression coeYcients are based on the last step in the regression procedure. Depression:
constant= 2
.09; sympt. (ND): constant= .02; RA = role ambiguity; RC= role con ict;
OBSE = organization-based self-esteem.

.16; frustration: constant= 2

Discussion

The results of this study provide some support for the moderating eVects of
self-esteem. Speci cally, relations between role ambiguity and both depression and
symptoms (no doctor) were strongest for those reporting low levels of global
self-esteem. Role ambiguity was also most strongly related to depression and
symptoms (no doctor) among those reporting low OBSE. This pattern of results
is consistent with Brockner’s
(1983) plasticity hypothesis and replicates prior
research. However, based on the variance accounted for by the moderating eVects,
it must be noted that neither self-esteem measure had a dramatic eVect.

Neither self-esteem measure moderated relations between role stressors and
frustration or symptoms (doctor). According to Kuiper & Olinger (1989), environ-
mental stressors are more likely to lead to depression among individuals who are
unsure of their self-worth, which is likely to be the case when self-esteem is low. It
is possible that stressors would not necessarily lead to more frustration among such
individuals since the focus of
this response is more outward. The failure of
self-esteem to moderate relations between role stressors and symptoms (doctor)
could very well have been due to range restriction, since very few respondents
reported these.

While it would have been desirable for these results to have been stronger, it is
encouraging that both self-esteem measures moderated the relationship between
role ambiguity and both depression and symptoms (no doctor) in the same manner.
Other than Ganster & Schaubroeck (1991), the present study is the only one which
has investigated whether self-esteem moderates relations between stressors and

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

78
employee health. Thus future investigations of the impact of stressors on employee
health should examine self-esteem as a potential moderator.

Steve M. Jex and Tina C. E lacqua

Somewhat surprisingly, both self-esteem measures moderated the eVects of role
con ict in exactly the opposite manner one would have expected on the plasticity
hypothesis. This  nding could be due to the composition of the present sample.
For example, Tsui, Ashford, St Clair & Xin (1995) found that the most eVective
strategies for dealing with discrepant role expectations were (1) exerting extra eVort
and (2) explaining decisions. Their sample, however, consisted entirely of mid-level
executives who were likely to be in a position to exert considerable control over
their job demands. Since the present sample consisted of a large number of clerical
employees, many respondents may have had far less control over mediating their
competing job demands. As a result, role con ict may have been more distress ing
for those with high self-esteem for two reasons. First, these individuals simply may
have felt that they deserved better. Second, the more active coping strategies used
by high self-esteem individuals may have been frequently thwarted due to their lack
of control. Perhaps in future investigations of self-esteem, it would be useful to
include some assessment of perceived control.

Of course it is also possible that this pattern of results may simply be due to a
‘ceiling eVect’. Compared to those with high self-esteem, individuals with low
self-esteem reported rather high numbers of physical symptoms even at very low
levels of role con ict. Thus, increases in role con ict may not raise symptom levels
much higher. Since high self-esteem individuals reported fewer symptoms at low
levels of role con ict, increases in role con ict may have had a greater impact.
Clearly, more research is needed on this
issue, especially since Ganster &
Schaubroeck (1991) found that self-esteem moderated the impact of role con ict in
a manner consistent with the plasticity hypothesis.

Global versus organization-based self-esteem
The results of this study suggest that when typical strain variables are investigated,
self-esteem need not be measured from a frame of reference that is consonant with
stressors in order to  nd moderator eVects. In fact, in the only analysis where both
stressors and strain (frustration) were measured from an organizational frame of
reference, neither self-esteem measure produced moderator eVects. On the other
hand, when strains were not measured from an organizational frame of reference
(depression, physical symptoms), both self-esteem measures produced moderate
eVects and these were quite similar. With outcomes such as job satisfacton and job
performance, however,
it may still be better to use OBSE when investigating
moderator eVects (Pierce et al., 1993).

Thus, one way to interpret our  ndings is that the moderating eVects of OBSE
generalize to situations where only one of two variables is measured from an
organizational frame of reference. Unfortunately, as was shown in the regression
analysis, the moderating eVects of OBSE essentially disappeared when all of the
eVects of global self-esteem were controlled. It was also the case that controlling
for all of the eVects of OBSE severely weakened (but did not eliminate) the
moderating eVects of global self-esteem.


is

it

Based on these  ndings,

Self-esteem
79
rather questionable whether OBSE oVers
occupational stress researchers much beyond current measures of global self-
esteem. This conclusion, however,
is necessarily tentative because one must
consider the concept of OBSE separate from the measurement of OBSE. Consider
the following items from the Pierce et al. (1989) scale: ‘I count around here’, ‘I am
important around here’, and ‘I am valuable around here’. One could argue that
these items go beyond one’s perceived level of competence on organizational tasks,
and perhaps re ect attitudes towards organizational policies. This suggests that
further work may be needed on the construct validity of this measure.

L imitations and practical implications
Perhaps the most serious limitation of the present study is that all variables were
obtained through self-report measures. A second limitation worth noting is sample
size. While sample size in this study was close to 300, this still may have not
provided the statistical power necessary to detect more moderator eVects, since
they are typically small. Future researchers examining moderator eVects should be
aware of the importance of employing large sample sizes.

The most obvious practical implication of this study is that individuals with high
self-esteem stand a better chance of handling jobs with ambiguous role require-
ments. A related implication is that eVorts to enhance role clarity will serve more
of a stress-reducing function for those with low self-esteem. The counter-intuitive
 ndings with respect to role con ict have some practical
implications as well.
Speci cally, where role con ict is an unavoidable part of a job, it may be better to
have someone with lower self-esteem occupying such a position. This recommen-
dation is necessarily tentative because other research has not replicated this  nding
and,
individuals with low self-esteem tend not to perform as well
in general,
(Brockner, 1988).

Acknowledgements

The authors wish to thank Deanne Heinisch for her assistance in data collection. We would also like
to acknowledge the assistance of Paul Egli, Brad Kruse and Kelley Schmidt in the analysis of the data.
This paper was presented at the APA/ NIOSH conference ‘Work, Stress, and Health ’95: Creating
Healthier Workplaces’, September 1995, Washington, DC.

References

Bandura, A. (1982). The self-eYcacy mechanism in human agency. A merican Psychologist, 37, 122–147.
Beehr, T. A., Walsh, J. T. & Taber, T. D. (1976). Relationship of stress to individually and
organizationally valued states: Higher order needs as a moderator. Journal of A pplied Psychology, 61,
41–47.

Brockner, J. (1983). Low self-esteem and behavioral plasticity: Some implications. In L. Wheeler &

P. R. Shaver (Eds), Review of personality and social psychology, 4. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

Brockner, J. (1988). Self-esteem at work: Research, theory and practice. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Cohen, J. & Cohen, P. (1983). A pplied multiple regression/ correlation for the behavioral sciences, 2nd ed.

Hillsdale, NJ: E rlbaum.


80

Steve M. Jex and Tina C. E lacqua

Epstein, S. (1979). The stability of behavior: 1. On predicting most of the people much of the time.

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 1097–1126.

Finney, J. W., Mitchell, R. E ., Cronkite, R. C. & Moos, R. H. (1984). Methodological

issues in
estimating main and interactive eVects: Examples from the coping/ social support and stress  eld.
Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 25, 85–98.

Fisher, C. D. & Gitelson, R. (1983). A meta-analysis of the correlates of role con ict and ambiguity.

Journal of A pplied Psychology, 68, 320–333.

Ganster, D. C. & Schaubroeck, J. (1991). Role stress and worker health: An extension of the plasticity

hypothesis of self-esteem. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 6, 349–360.

Hall, D. T. (1972). A model of coping with role con ict: The role behavior of college educated

women. A dministrative Science Quarterly, 17, 417–486.

Heinisch, D. A. & Jex, S. M. (1997). Negative aVectivity and gender as moderators of the relationship

between work-related stressors and depressed mood at work. Work and Stress, 11, 46–57.

Jackson, S. E. & Schuler, R. S. (1985). A meta-analysis and conceptual critique of research on role
ambiguity and role con ict in work settings. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 36,
16–78.

Jex, S. M. & Beehr, T. A. (1991). Emerging theoretical and methodological issues in the study of
work-related stress. In G. Ferris & K. M. Rowland (Eds), Research in personnel and human resources
management, vol. 9, pp. 311–365. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Jex, S. M., Cvetanovski, J. & Allen, S. J. (1994). Self-esteem as a moderator of the impact of

unemployment. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 9, 69–80.

Jick, T. D. & Mitz, L. F. (1985). Sex diVerences in work stress. A cademy of Management Review, 10,

408–420.

King, L. A. & King, D. W. (1990). Role con ict and role ambiguity: A critical assessment of construct

validity. Psychological Bulletin, 107, 48–64.

Kinicki, A. J. & Latack, J. C. (1990). E xplication of the construct of coping with involuntary job loss.

Journal of V ocational Behavior, 36, 339–390.

Kuiper, N. A. & Olinger, L. J. (1989). Stress and cognitive vulnerability for depression: A self-worth
stress,

in the investigation of psychological

contingency model. In R. W. Neufeld (Ed.), A dvances
pp. 367–391. New Y ork: Wiley.

Mayes, B. T., Barton, M. E. & Ganster, D. C. (1991). An exploration of the moderating eVect of age
on job stressor-employee strain relationships. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 6, 289–308.

Mossholder, K. W., Bedeian, A. G. & Armenakis, A. A. (1981). Role perceptions, satisfaction, and
performance: Moderating eVects of self-esteem and organizational level. Organizational Behavior and
Human Performance, 28, 224–234.

Mossholder, K. W., Bedeian, A. G. & Armenakis, A. A. (1982). Group process–work outcome
relationships: A note on the moderating impact of self-esteem. A cademy of Management Journal, 25,
575–585.

Parkes, K. R. (1990). Coping, negative aVectivity, and the work environment: Additive and interactive

predictors of mental health. Journal of A pplied Psychology, 75, 399–409.

Peters, L. H., O’Connor, E. J. & Rudolf, C. J. (1980). The behavioral and aVective consequences of
performance-relevant situational variables. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 25, 79–96.
Pierce, J. L., Gardner, D. G., Cummings, L. L. & Dunham, R. B. (1989). Organization-based
self-esteem: Construct de nition, measurement, and validation. A cademy of Management Journal, 32,
622–648.

Pierce,

J. L., Gardner, D. G., Dunham, R. B. & Cummings, L. L. (1993). Moderation by
organization-based self-esteem on role condition–employee response relationships. A cademy of
Management Journal, 36, 271–288.

Quinn, R. P. & Shephard, L. J. (1974). Quality of employment survey. Ann Arbor, MI: University of

Michigan, Institute for Social Research.

Rizzo, J. R., House, R. J. & Lirtzman, S. I. (1970). Role con ict and ambiguity in complex

organizations. A dministrative Science Quarterly, 15, 150–163.

Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


Self-esteem

81

Spector, P. E., Dwyer, D. J. & Jex, S. M. (1988). Relations of stress to aVective, health, and
performance outcomes: A comparison of multiple data sources. Journal of A pplied Psychology, 73,
11–19.

Tharenou, P. (1979). Self-esteem at work: A review of the literature. Journal of V ocational Behavior, 15,

1–29.

Tsui, A. S., Ashford, S. J., St Clair, L. & Xin, K. R. (1995). Dealing discrepant expectations: Response

strategies and managerial eVectiveness. A cademy of Management Journal, 38, 1515–1543.

Zung, W. R. K. (1965). A self-rating depression scale. A rchives of General Psychiatry, 12, 63–70.

Received 7 A ugust 1996; revised version received 29 May 1997

