Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 323 – 340

Firm market orientation and salesperson customer orientation:

interpersonal and intrapersonal influences on customer service and

retention in business-to-business buyer–seller relationships

Eli Jonesa,*, Paul Buschb, Peter Dacinc

aDepartment of Marketing, College of Business Administration, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204-6283, USA

bDepartment of Marketing, Lowry Mays College and Graduate School of Business, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77845, USA

cDepartment of Marketing, Queens University, Canada

Abstract

The authors examine the influence of a firm’s market orientation and salesperson customer orientation on buyer – seller relationships. Data
from a national manufacturer’s sales force and retail trade customers were used to test the influence of sales managers’ perceptions on
salesperson attitudes toward a firm’s market orientation and its salesperson customer orientation. The impact of salesperson attitudes on
customers’ perceptions of service delivery and their propensity to switch suppliers was also examined. The results suggest that a firm’s
market orientation positively influences salesperson work attitudes. Sales managers influence salesperson customer orientation through their
organizational commitment, and salesperson customer orientation influences industrial customers’ switching intentions.
D 2002 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Firm market orientation; Salesperson customer orientation; Business-to-business

Over the last decade, the market orientation concept has
been the subject of considerable scholarly research. Typ-
ically, the unit of analysis is the organization and is centered
around top management’s emphasis on collecting and dis-
seminating market
increasing
interdepartmental connectedness within the firm, and cre-
ating a customer-oriented organizational culture in which
customer satisfaction is essentially at
the core of every
decision for every employee (cf. Caruana et al., 1997;
Jaworski and Kohli, 1993; Kohli and Jaworski, 1990;
Narver and Slater, 1990).

information to employees,

In a separate but related literature stream, researchers
posit that a salesperson’s customer orientation positively
affects customer responses (cf. Saxe and Weitz, 1982). The
unit of analysis for this research is the individual. A
customer orientation is defined as a selling behavior in
which salespeople assist customers to satisfy their long-term
wants and needs versus a sales orientation, which places the

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-713-743-4582.
E-mail address: eli-jones@uh.edu (E. Jones).

selling organization and/or salespersons before the custom-
ers (Michaels and Day, 1985; Saxe and Weitz, 1982).
Currently, there is little published research addressing the
impact of both the firm’s and the salesperson’s orientations
on customer service and retention.

These are important voids in the literature. For a market
orientation to be truly effective, employees must implement
the firm’s market orientation strategy and customers must
realize the benefits of a market-oriented firm. A number of
researchers note the need to incorporate employees’ and
customers’ perceptions into a general
theory of market
orientation. Indeed, the behaviors and attitudes of a firm’s
boundary-spanning employees (e.g., salespeople) should
significantly influence the customers’ perceptions of the
firm’s service delivery (cf. Heskett et al., 1997). The
behaviors and attitudes of salespeople are, in turn, influ-
enced by their perceptions of the firm’s market orientation
and their interaction with sales managers, thus, highlighting
the importance of examining market orientation from the
sales force’s perspective.

In sum, implicit in the market orientation literature to
date is the idea that a critical
test of a firm’s market
orientation is the extent to which the sales force perceives

0148-2963/02/$ – see front matter D 2002 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.
PII: S 0 1 4 8 - 2 9 6 3 ( 0 2 ) 0 0 4 4 4 - 7


324

E. Jones et al. / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 323–340

the firm as being concerned with satisfying customers’
needs and implements the firm’s market-oriented strategy.
Given the importance of market orientation to the marketing
discipline, the need for specific research on the effects of
perceived market orientation on salesperson attitudes and
behaviors toward customers is accentuated.

The purpose of this study is to address gaps in the
existing literature by examining front
line employees’
(e.g., salespeople and sales managers) perceptions of the
firm’s market orientation-first expressed by Jaworski and
Kohli (1993) – and the influence of the firm’s market and
sales force’s customer orientations on the buyer – seller
relationship. We extend the previous research by conducting
a triadic analysis that evaluates perceptions across three
participants in the service delivery process: sales manager,
salesperson, and customer. These are the key interfaces in
buyer – seller relationships. Because it has become increas-
ingly important for firms to adopt effective teamwork to
enhance performance (cf. Kolb, 1995), we include the sales
managers’ perceptions. We expect
that sales managers
significantly influence salesperson attitudes and behaviors
toward customers despite the limited literature on the
subject (cf. Richmond et al., 1993). Thus, the model tested
reflects sales managers’ perceptions on salespersons’ per-
ceptions of the firm’s market orientation and the sales-
persons’ customer orientation, salespersons’ attitudes
toward the job and customer, and salespersons’ attitudes
on customers’ perceptions of service delivery and their
propensity to switch suppliers. Studying the interactions
between sales managers and salespeople and between sales-
people and customers is important
if we are going to
advance our knowledge of sales and social relations (cf.
Cronin, 1994).

This research is useful to top managers and sales man-
agers because it illuminates the issue of whether a market
orientation strategy formed at the top of an organization
actually affects those who implement
the strategy. The
research findings also shed light on the impact that sales
managers’ perceptions and behaviors have on salespersons’
perceptions.

The study is organized as follows. First, we provide a
brief review of the literature on market orientation, customer
orientation, salesperson role ambiguity and conflict, and
customers’ perceived quality of service and propensity to
switch. Next, we state specific hypotheses pertaining to the
influence of sales managers on salespeople. Our hypotheses
are then tested in a business-to-business context using a
sample of sales managers and salespeople taken from a
national consumer packaged goods organization and its
customers – retail outlet purchasing managers. The hypo-
theses are presented in clusters according to the three
separate interfaces evaluated in this study: the sales man-
ager – salesperson, the salesperson – role, and the salesper-
son – customer interfaces. The paper concludes with a
discussion of the relevance of the findings to managers
and future research directions.

1. Conceptual background

1.1. Market orientation

A renewed interest in understanding organizations’ stra-
tegic orientations toward satisfying customers’ needs exists
in the popular press and academic literature (Deschpande et
al., 1993; Hartline and Ferrell, 1996; Kohli and Jaworski,
1990; Narver and Slater, 1990; Parasuraman, 1987). Cor-
responding interest in understanding organizational influen-
ces on employee motivation to satisfy customers’ needs also
exists (Apasu et al., 1987; Beatty, 1988; Berry, 1995; Case,
1996; Hartline and Ferrell, 1996; Mohr-Jackson, 1993). One
of the predominant constructs to emerge from this interest is
market orientation.

The marketing concept is the philosophical foundation of
a market orientation (Jaworski and Kohli, 1993). Marketing
scholars describe a market orientation as a firm’s organiza-
tion-wide generation of market intelligence, dissemination
of the intelligence across departments, and organization-
wide responsiveness to the market intelligence (Jaworski
and Kohli, 1993; Kohli and Jaworski, 1990). Jaworski and
Kohli (1993) and Kohli and Jaworski (1990) state that
superior customer value can best be achieved by struc-
turing organizational activities based on customer-focused
information generated by and disseminated throughout the
organization.

Since 1990, market orientation has been a research
priority for the Marketing Science Institute. Furthermore,
the subject of market orientation, in one form or another, has
influenced the theory and practice of marketing strategy for
nearly forty years (e.g., Kotler, 1998; Levitt, 1969; Slater
and Narver, 1994; Webster, 1988a,b). Empirical support for
a direct link between a firm’s market orientation and its
business performance has been confirmed in various studies
in the United States, regardless of the organizational form
that the firm may take (Caruana et al., 1997; Jaworski and
Kohli, 1993; Narver and Slater, 1990; Ruekert, 1992). Yet,
there is still a dearth of empirical research regarding market
orientation and its influence on salespersons’ attitudes
toward their job and customers. This is a concern because
the salesperson is the primary contact point for the custom-
ers, and s/he is directly responsible for implementing the
firm’s strategies. As a company representative, the salesper-
son is essentially ‘‘the company’’ to the customers (Crosby
et al., 1990) and reflects the firm’s values, ultimately
affecting the level of customer service delivered.

Conceptual and empirical research on the consequences
of a market orientation suggests that a firm’s market
orientation should lead to greater employee commitment
to the organization, enhanced customer satisfaction, and
increased business profitability (cf. Jaworski and Kohli,
1993). In comparison,
less empirical research has been
published on the relationship between market orientation
and employee job attitudes than on the link between market
orientation and business performance (Jaworski and Kohli,


E. Jones et al. / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 323–340

325

Fig. 1. Firm market orientation and salesperson customer orientation: interpersonal and intrapersonal influences on customer service and retention.

1993; Menguc, 1996; Siguaw et al., 1994 are notable
exceptions). For instance, Jaworski and Kohli (1993) find
empirical support for the link between market orientation
and employee commitment in their study involving senior
managers; however, they call for additional research using
‘‘lower level’’ employees’ perceptions. Deshpande and
Webster (1989) call for research using customers’ percep-
tions of the firm’s customer (market) orientation.

In Section 2, we begin to investigate the sales managers’
influence on salespersons’ perceptions. Specifically, our
model posits relationships among several important sales
manager- and salesperson-level constructs, such as the sales
manager’s perceptions of a firm’s market orientation, his/her
customer orientation and organizational commitment, as
well as the salesperson’s perceptions of the firm’s market
orientation, his/her customer orientation and attitudes
toward the job and customer. Then, we extend our model
to include the customers’ assessment of service quality and
their propensity to switch suppliers (see Fig. 1).

tion, and their attitudes toward the job. Whereas extant
studies typically investigate individual relationships bet-
ween only a few of these constructs, we posit and test a
model investigating all relationships simultaneously.

The model posits that sales managers influence sales-
persons’ perceptions of a firm’s market orientation, as well
as their customer orientation, role conflict and role ambi-
guity. We include role ambiguity, role conflict, job satisfac-
tion, and organizational commitment in the model because
previous studies suggest that the job attitudes of salespeople,
as service providers, ultimately affect work outcomes such
as service delivery and customers’ perceptions of service
quality (e.g., Schneider, 1980; Shamir, 1980). The sales
manager’s customer orientation is positively related to the
salesperson’s customer orientation. Likewise, the sales man-
ager’s perception of the firm’s market orientation is pos-
itively related to the salesperson’s perception of the firm’s
market orientation.

2.1. The sales manager – salesperson interface

2. A model of firm market orientation and salesperson
customer orientation on customer service and retention

Fig. 1 presents our conceptual model of the sales man-
agers’ influence on individual salespeople’s perceptions of
the firm’s market orientation, their own customer orienta-

In this section, we examine the interface between the
sales manager and the salesperson. In particular, we focus
on the influence of three main factors: the sales manager’s
perception of the firm’s market orientation, the sales man-
ager’s assessment of his/her own customer orientation, and
the sales manager’s organizational commitment on salesper-


326

E. Jones et al. / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 323–340

son perceptions. These relationships have not been exam-
ined heretofore; however, this hypothesized sequence of
events can be explained by three theories.

First, Social Exchange Theory is used. Social Exchange
Theory posits that individuals engage in reciprocal behav-
iors and support those who provide benefits (Adams, 1965).
Therefore, when a sales manager exhibits customer-oriented
behavior, the salesperson is likely to reciprocate or imitate
the behavior.

Second, prominent in the development of sales manag-
ers’ influence on salespeople is Shamir et al.’s (1998)
motivational theory of charismatic leadership, which posits
that leaders’ exemplary behaviors affect followers’ attitudes
and perceptions. Furthermore, Palich and Hom (1992)
suggest that leader behavior has a direct effect on subordi-
nates’ perceptions.

Third, learning theory applies to our first three hypo-
theses. Such learning theories as associative shifting
(Guthrie, 1935; Thorndike, 1932) postulate that followers
learn from leaders’ behaviors. These theories suggest that
the sales manager’s behavior is critical in influencing the
salespersons’ perspectives of the values orientation toward
the customer and servicing the customer.

Hoffman and Ingram (1992) argue that

the service
providers derive benefits from both the extrinsic (i.e., pay)
and intrinsic (i.e., the work itself, co-workers, supervision,
and promotion) aspects of the job. In comparing the
effectiveness of extrinsic and intrinsic rewards, Hoffman
and Ingram (1992) find that the intrinsic factors are pos-
itively and significantly correlated with customer orientation
of service providers, and play a more significant role than do
extrinsic rewards in developing customer-oriented behav-
iors. Sales managers directly control
the two intrinsic
aspects of the job examined in this study, supervision and
promotion. As such, one can infer that sales managers play a
vital role in enhancing customer orientation among sales-
persons.

The sales manager’s customer orientation is usually
exhibited through the level of meaningful support she/he
offers to facilitate the salespeople’s efforts to provide
superior customer service. This support can be through
rewards and sanctions. Burke et al. (1992) define supervis-
ory support as the degree to which employees perceive that
supervisors offer employees support, encouragement, and
concern. An important means of supervisory facilitation is
through the provision of key resources, such as equipment
and training. Churchill et al. (1993) argue that sales man-
agers who tailor their style and approach to the needs of
subordinates and the kinds of tasks they must perform can
directly facilitate a salesperson’s effectiveness. A lack of
facilitation offered by sales managers results in the inability
of salespeople to execute tasks in desirable ways, which in
turn diminishes their customer-oriented behaviors. There-
fore, the sales manager’s customer orientation is critical in
enhancing the salesperson’s customer orientation. Thus, we
hypothesize the following:

H1: The sales manager’s customer orientation positively
influences the salesperson’s customer orientation.

The sales manager plays a crucial role in transmitting
organizational values from the highest levels of the organ-
ization to the organization’s operating levels (e.g., the sales-
person). As defined by Jones et al. (1996), leader behavior is
the nature and quality of the interactions between the sales
manager and the salesperson. In addition, Shamir et al. (1998)
note that a leader is often seen as a representative character
who embodies a unit’s identity and values. Organizational
commitment is the strength of an individual’s identification
with and involvement in an organization (cf. Mowday et al.,
1979). It is a belief in the organization’s goals and values. We
believe that the sales manager’s organizational commitment
is particularly important in a market-oriented firm, because
leadership theory suggests that the leaders’ commitment
influences followers’ perceptions.

In a related stream of literature, several scholars have
argued for the key role of managerial commitment as a
means of increasing the employees’ customer service ori-
entation. Mohr-Jackson (1993) argues that managers must
manifest a personal and affective commitment to improve
the firm’s service quality. George (1990) argues that man-
agers who exhibit organizational commitment are more
likely to take initiatives that help the firm and its employees
deliver superior service quality. George (1990) and Zeithaml
et al. (1988) posit that managers should increase their own
commitment to service in order to manage boundary span-
ning service employees’ commitment to service.

Ahmed and Parasuraman (1994) and Hartline and Ferrell
(1996) examine a construct that stems from organizational
commitment: management’s commitment to service quality,
which encompasses ‘‘the conscious choice of quality ini-
tiatives as operational and strategic options for the firm, and
engaging in activities such as providing visible quality
leadership and resources for the adoption and implementa-
tion of quality initiatives’’ (Hartline and Ferrell, 1996, p.
57). Based on these theoretical arguments, we hypothesize
that the sales manager’s commitment to the market-oriented
organization, which, by definition,
is customer-oriented,
likely means that
the manager provides visible service
quality leadership and resources to help their salespeople
deliver superior service to customers, that is, to facilitate the
process of employees becoming more customer-oriented.
Therefore, in addition to the customer-oriented behaviors of
sales managers, the organizational commitment portrayed
by the sales manager is also expected to enhance the
salesperson’s customer orientation. Thus,

H2: The sales manager’s organizational commitment po-
sitively influences the salesperson’s customer orientation.

The behavior of the sales manager is likely to be
influenced by his/her perceptions of the organization’s
market orientation. When a sales manager displays behav-


E. Jones et al. / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 323–340

327

iors consistent with the firm’s market orientation in his/her
interaction with the salespersons, the salespeople are likely
to associate the sales manager’s behavior to what the firm
values, thereby enhancing the salespersons’ perception of
the firm’s market orientation.

Recent research has shown an interpersonal influence
of market orientation. For example, reference group theory
is used to explain the impact of suppliers’ market orienta-
tion on distributors’ market orientation (Siguaw et al.,
1998). Similarly, in the present research, we use reference
group theory to explain the influence of the sales manag-
er’s perception of the firm’s market orientation and its
impact on the salesperson’s perception of
the firm’s
market orientation. Reference group theory posits two
primary functions: normative and comparative. Sales man-
agers serve as a normative reference group for salespeople
when the salespeople conform to norms established by the
sales manager in order to maintain an effective working
relationship with sales management. Furthermore, sales-
people often aspire to become managers; therefore, sales-
people can use sales managers as a comparative reference
group, comparing their own (salespersons’) attitudes and
behaviors as a benchmark or guide for acceptable behav-
ior.

Prominent in the development of the market orienta-
tion literature is a ‘‘trickle down’’ theory, which states
that market orientation emanates from the organization’s
leadership and filters down through the organization
(Kohli and Jaworski, 1990; Narver and Slater, 1990).
Other scholars have supported the position that a firm’s
market orientation is based on its leaders’ attitudes, which
are an integrated part of the corporate culture (Deshpande
and Webster, 1989) that permeates the organization (cf.
Gronroos, 1983, 1990).

A third line of reasoning is the organization-wide con-
gruency nature. Webster (1991, p. 342) states: ‘‘Employees,
from the top-level executives to the operational-level work-
ers, should have basically the same or consistent attitudes
toward the marketing orientation of the firm.’’ Thus, we
hypothesize the following:

H3: The sales manager’s perception of the firm’s market
orientation positively influences the salesperson’s percep-
tion of the firm’s market orientation.

2.2. Salesperson – role interface

In this section, we investigate intrapersonal relationships
concerning the salesperson’s perceptions. Several research-
ers have found a strong association between market orienta-
tion and the organizational commitment of employees
(Jaworski and Kohli, 1993; Siguaw et al., 1994). Beatty
(1988) argues that a company’s demonstrated employee-
and customer-oriented values serve to enhance the employ-
ee’s attachment and commitment to the firm. Siguaw et al.
(1994) find a strong correspondence between the market

orientation of the firm and the salesperson’s customer
orientation and job attitudes.

level

the distributors’ commitment

Siguaw et al. (1998), in analyzing the channel relation-
ship, argue that
is
strengthened by that of market-oriented suppliers because
of the latter’s efforts in devoting considerable resources to
satisfy the former’s needs. The results of Siguaw et al.’s
(1998) study support
their hypothesis that a supplier’s
market orientation affects its distributor’s market orientation
and commitment to the relationship. Likewise, we propose
that the market-oriented firm is likely to devote considerable
resources (in terms of training, market information, and
incentives) to facilitate the salesperson’s role in satisfying
customer needs. These efforts are perceived favorably by
the salespersons thus enhancing their commitment to the
organization. Therefore, it follows that

H4: The greater the firm’s market orientation, as perceived
by the salesperson, the greater is the salesperson’s organiza-
tional commitment.

Siguaw et al.’s (1994) study also suggests that the degree
to which a firm is perceived to be market-oriented directly
influences the sales force’s attitudes toward customers. The
authors argue that the firm’s market orientation significantly
influences the salesperson’s customer orientation because
the firm controls the resources to influence the behaviors
and responses of its salespeople to customer needs. These
resources include its recruitment, training, evaluation, and
reward systems, which are significant factors in encouraging
salespersons’ customer orientation.

Beatty (1988) argues that the perception employees have
about the extent to which their firm values employees and
customers influences their actual behaviors. Williams and
Attaway (1996) posit that the salesperson’s customer ori-
entation is influenced and potentially determined by the
organization’s culture. Williams and Attaway (1996) find
that the higher the level of the selling firm’s supportive
organizational culture, the higher is the level of the sales-
person’s customer-oriented behavior. The authors define the
supportive culture as analogous to a customer-oriented
culture. Similarly, Kelley (1992) finds direct and positive
relationships between organizational socialization, organiza-
tional climate, and service providers’ customer-oriented
behaviors. Kelley’s (1992) study supports Williams and
Attaway’s (1996) findings. On balance, empirical evidence
indicates that the firm’s market orientation plays a signific-
ant role in molding the salesperson’s customer orientation.
Thus, we hypothesize the following:

H5: The greater the firm’s market orientation, as perceived
by the salesperson, the greater is the salesperson’s customer
orientation.

Nonis et al. (1996) state that role stress arises when the
salespersons’ beliefs concerning the roles that they play as


328

E. Jones et al. / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 323–340

boundary spanners contradict the organization’s established
rules and procedures. The two role stress variables that
Nonis et al. (1996) analyze are role conflict and role ambi-
guity. Role conflict occurs when a salesperson perceives
incompatibility between expectations of two or more role
set members, i.e., boss, customers, peers, family, etc. (Walker
et al., 1975).

Because of their boundary-spanning roles,

industrial
salespeople are intrinsically customer-oriented and inclined
to act in the best interest of their customers. Supporting this
argument, Saxe and Weitz (1982) and Hoffman and Ingram
(1991) find empirical evidence that indicates the majority of
salespeople practice customer-oriented, rather than selling-
oriented, behavior. Siguaw et al. (1994) find empirical
evidence that demonstrates that a highly market-oriented
organization reduces the contradictory demands placed on
customer-oriented salespeople, thereby lowering their levels
of role conflict. The authors find empirical evidence to
support their hypothesis that the higher the market orientation
of the firm as perceived by the salesperson, the lower is the
salesperson’s role conflict. Siguaw et al. (1994) propose that
the firm’s market orientation indicates the level of meaningful
support provided to salespeople, the capability of salespeople
to provide superior value to customers, and a philosophical
orientation to help guide salesperson’s conduct.

Babin and Boles (1996) explain that customer-oriented
salespeople experience greater role conflict when they are not
able to execute tasks in customer-friendly ways because of a
lack of (organizational) support. Babin and Boles (1996)
propose that providing key resources, such as equipment and
training, is critical in facilitating employees’ performance.
Rizzo et al. (1970) argue that a sales force that lacks this
support generally experiences role conflict. The reason is that
customer-oriented salespeople are not able to satisfy the
customers’ needs when they lack firm support. Thus, the
salesperson’s perception of the lack of supportive resources
because of the firm’s lower market orientation results in
greater role conflict, leading to the following hypothesis:

H6: The greater the firm’s market orientation, as perceived
by the salesperson,
the lower is the salesperson’s role
conflict.

Role ambiguity, as defined by Singh (1993) and others,
is the result of uncertainty regarding the standards by
which job performance is judged to be adequate. The
salesperson is unsure not only of what should be done
and how, but also which job functions are most important
to the various role partners (Behrman and Perreault, 1984;
Walker et al., 1972). Babin and Boles (1996) define role
ambiguity as a reflection of employees’ uncertainty con-
cerning appropriate actions in commonly occurring job
situations.

Nonis et al. (1996) concur with other researchers (Teas,
1983; Walker et al., 1977) that, as with role conflict, role
ambiguity is inherent in the salesperson’s job. The reason

proposed by Nonis et al. (1996) is that the large role set
associated with the boundary-spanning salesperson’s role
involves interaction with multiple role partners. This, in
turn, contributes to salespersons’ perceptions of uncertainty
about role expectations and role performance.

Kohli and Jaworski (1990) and Siguaw et al. (1994)
propose that market-oriented firms decrease employees’ role
ambiguity by providing clear, well-defined guidelines to
salespeople to reduce uncertainties about the amount of
effort they should exert on market-oriented tasks. Siguaw et
al.’s (1994) empirical findings support their hypothesis that
the higher the market orientation of the firm, the lower is the
role ambiguity for the salesperson.

In theory, market-oriented firms build systems to provide
effective and timely communications that permeate all levels
of the organization. Thus, there is less uncertainty regarding
the firm’s expectations of the salesperson’s role. Babin and
Boles (1996) argue that
if an employee perceives that
important
information concerning performance expecta-
tions, methods for fulfilling those expectations, and other
day-to-day events relating to performance are not distributed
widely, role ambiguity increases. Therefore, we hypothesize
the following:

H7: The greater the firm’s market orientation, as perceived
by the salesperson,
the lower is the salesperson’s role
ambiguity.

Locke (1976) defines job satisfaction as a pleasurable or
positive emotional state resulting from the appraisal of one’s
job or job experiences. Siguaw et al. (1994) propose that a
high market orientation can be inferred as the preferred
organizational orientation from the salespersons’ perspec-
tives. The authors argue that, ‘‘when the salesperson per-
ceives the firm as being attentive to customer needs and
satisfaction, and aware of competitor strategies to deliver
superior value and coordinate market-related activities
throughout the firm, the organization is clearly striving to
support the sales force and reduce the difficulties associated
with a sales position’’ (p. 113). This supportive organiza-
tional culture encourages salespeople to be more customer-
oriented and reduces the level of role stress, which results in
greater job satisfaction for the salespeople. The empirical
finding by Siguaw et al. (1994) supports this idea that the
higher the market orientation of the firm, the higher the job
satisfaction of the sales force.

The salesperson’s perception of the firm’s market ori-
entation may be derived from his/her observations of the
management’s attitudes and behaviors. Kirmeyer and Lin
(1987) propose that employees’ perceptions of a supportive
management
team are likely to influence employee job
satisfaction directly. Babin and Boles’s (1996) findings
indicate that employee perceptions of supervisory support
are related directly and positively to job satisfaction. The
authors conclude that this finding is consistent with organ-
izational climate literature, wherein employees’ perceptions


E. Jones et al. / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 323–340

329

of supportive management practices influence feelings of
personal well being directly.

According to Churchill et al. (1976) and Jaworski and
Kohli (1991), supervisory behaviors (i.e., the nature and
quality of the interactions that sales managers maintain with
salespeople) significantly influence salesperson job satisfac-
tion. Similarly, Churchill et al. (1976) attribute the effect of
greater job satisfaction to increased communication, which
is a vital characteristic of a market-oriented firm. Brown and
Peterson (1993) find supporting evidence that suggests that
managerial focus on supervisory behaviors (e.g., encour-
aging sales managers to show greater consideration, initiate
greater structure, provide greater recognition of achieve-
ments, and communicate more frequently) may be effective
in improving salesperson satisfaction. Thus,

H8: The greater the firm’s market orientation, as perceived
by the salesperson,
the greater is the salesperson’s job
satisfaction.

Research that examines the relationship between sales-
person’s customer orientation and role stress is sparse.
Siguaw et al. (1994) conceptualize customer orientation as
antecedent to job attitudes (i.e., role conflict, role ambiguity,
job satisfaction, and organization commitment). They pos-
tulate that the firm’s market orientation affects the sales-
person’s customer orientation, which in turn affects his/her
job attitudes. However, the authors find that the customer
orientation of the salesperson is unrelated to his/her job
attitudes.

Walker et al. (1972) argue that customers expect sales-
people to satisfy their unique needs. Also, customers apply
pressure to achieve conformity with their expectations. It is
plausible that the more customer-oriented the salespeople
are, the more effort they will exert to satisfy the needs of the
customer because this is congruent with their own motiva-
tion as well as the firm’s expectations. As a result, they will
experience less role conflict. In terms of role ambiguity, the
more customer-oriented the salespeople are, the more they
will perceive their main role as that of fulfilling the
customers’ needs. Therefore, they will perceive less conflict
and ambiguity with regard to their job functions and
performance. Thus,

H9: The greater the salesperson’s customer orientation, the
lower is the salesperson’s role conflict.

H10: The greater the salesperson’s customer orientation, the
lower is the salesperson’s role ambiguity.

2.3. The salesperson – customer interface

In this section, we examine the impact of salesperson
behavior and work attitudes on two important customer
variables. Using existing theories, we link salesperson job
satisfaction to customers’ perceived service quality and

salesperson customer orientation to customers’ propensity
to switch suppliers. These relationships have not been
examined in the marketing literature heretofore.

Atuahene-Gima (1995) defines service quality as the
activities by the firm to enhance the intangible aspects of
the organization, such as delivery, expertise, and appearance
of contact personnel and the sales force. This definition
underscores the salesperson’s role as a service provider
through his/her interactions with customers. Indeed, Bitner
(1990) argues that during the service encounter, employee
(salesperson) behavioral performance is the service, as
customers perceive it.

Several authors have hypothesized that satisfied cus-
tomer – contact employees are more likely to engage in
behaviors that assist customers (cf. Locke and Latham,
1990; Weatherly and Tansik, 1993). Heskett et al. (1997)
find a strong relationship between employee satisfaction and
customer satisfaction in their service profit chain study. The
‘‘Satisfaction Mirror’’ suggests that this relationship is self-
reinforcing in service settings, wherein satisfied customers
contribute to employee satisfaction and vice versa. Heskett
et al. (1997) explain that satisfied employees tend to be
more loyal and productive, thus, providing better service
quality and enhancing customer satisfaction.

Schneider (1980) finds evidence that job satisfaction is a
primary reason why employees deliver good service. In
recent research, Hoffman and Ingram (1992) find support
for the notion that overall
job satisfaction is positively
correlated with customer-oriented behavior, and Hartline
and Ferrell’s (1996) results show that employee job sat-
isfaction increases customers perceived service quality.
Thus, consistent with prior research, we posit the following:

H11: Salesperson job satisfaction increases the customer’s
perception of service quality.

Keaveney (1995) notes that customer switching behavior
damages market share and profitability of service firms, yet
this topic has remained virtually unexplored in the market-
ing literature. It is vital to examine the customer’s switching
behavior because empirical evidence has shown that the
costs of acquiring new customers may exceed investments
made in retaining and/or building relationships with existing
ones (Berry, 1995). In addition, switching decreases loyalty
and a customer once lost
is hard to regain (Diehl and
Gillman, 1997). The aforementioned studies examine
switching behavior on the part of consumers. In contrast,
we focus on customer propensity to switch in a business-to-
business industrial context. Here, we examine whether the
salesperson’s customer orientation, as perceived by the
customers, can influence the customer’s propensity to
switch suppliers.

Research has shown that employee’s attitudinal and
behavioral responses can affect customers’ perceptions of
the service encounter and their judgments of service quality
(Bitner, 1990). Crosby et al. (1990) suggest that the sales-


330

E. Jones et al. / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 323–340

if not

person is essentially ‘‘the company’’ because the salesper-
son is the primary,
the sole, contact point for
customers. Therefore, the quality of the salesperson – cus-
tomer relationship is directly influenced by the salesperson.
Humphreys and Williams (1996) propose that customer
orientation focuses not only on what buyers receive (tech-
nical product attributes) but also on how buyers and sellers
interact (interpersonal process attributes). The authors find
that
interpersonal process attributes of the total market
offering can be significant determinants of customer sat-
isfaction, which in turn underscore the significant effect of
salespersons behavior in optimizing customer value and
satisfaction. Kohli and Jaworski (1990) posit a positive
relationship between the firm’s market orientation and
customer satisfaction, whereas Siguaw et al. (1994, p.
113) posit the following: ‘‘The degree to which a firm is
perceived to be market-oriented is a direct and significant
factor in determining the manner in which the sales force
will behave in interactions with customers.’’ This statement
suggests that the firm’s market orientation influences the
customer orientation of the salesperson, which ultimately
determines the customer’s response. Accordingly, we pro-
pose that the higher the salesperson’s customer orientation,
the lower the customer’s propensity to switch suppliers.
Stated formally,

H12: Salesperson customer orientation reduces the custom-
er’s propensity to switch suppliers.

3. Data analysis and results

3.1. Data collection and samples

We collected data to test our hypotheses by means of a
survey. We chose the survey method because survey
research is best adapted to obtaining personal and social
facts, beliefs, and attitudes (Kerlinger, 1973). Our samples
consist of a national consumer goods manufacturer’s sales
force and retail trade customers. The salespeople work in the
consumer goods channel and are trade salespeople (see
Weitz et al., 1998). Members of this sales force sell directly
to grocery retail accounts and are responsible for selling,
delivering, stocking, and maintaining shelf, display, and
backroom stock. We obtained the permission and assistance
of the manufacturer in garnering the cooperation of the sales
force for this study. Two weeks before the initial mailing of
the surveys, an executive of the firm sent a letter to the
homes of each sales manager and salesperson notifying him/
her of the purpose and importance of the research, and that a
survey was forthcoming.

First, we mailed packets containing a cover letter, a copy
of the survey, a Scantron scoring form, and a stamped return
envelope to the home of each salesperson, which reinforced
the confidentiality of the research process. Our letter
explained the data collection process and assured the

respondents of confidentiality. Each salesperson completed
the survey in private and returned it directly to the first
author. There were three mailings to encourage responses.
Each time, we mailed a questionnaire and a follow-up letter
to nonrespondents. Of the 544 members of the sales force,
284 salespeople returned a completed survey—a 52%
response rate. The salespeople provided their team numbers,
which we used to match the salespeople with the appropriate
sales managers.

Out of 40 sales managers who were sent a questionnaire,
34 completed a survey similar to the one that their sales-
people completed—an 85% response rate. Again, we mailed
packets containing a cover letter, a copy of the survey, a
scantron scoring form, and a stamped return envelope to the
home of each sales manager, and each sales manager
completed the survey in private and returned it directly to
the first author.

The manufacturer provided a list of retail

trade cus-
tomers (retail store buyers) by sales territory, which we
used to randomly select customers to participate in the
study. On average, each salesperson calls on approxi-
mately 12 customers. We selected at least one customer
for each salesperson and mailed packets containing a
cover letter, a copy of the survey, a scantron scoring
form, and a stamped return envelope to each customer’s
store. The envelopes were addressed to the store man-
ager, and the cover letter asked the store manager to
forward the survey to the person in the store with the
buying authority and the most contact with salespeople.
Again, we reinforced the confidentiality of the research
process. Our letter explained the data collection process
and assured the respondents of confidentiality. Each
customer completed the survey and returned it directly
to the first author. Customers were asked to identify the
salesperson by name, which allowed us to match cus-
tomers to salespeople. 74 of 284 customers returned a
completed survey, yielding a 26% response rate. 51 of
the 74 surveys returned were usable.

72 percent of the sales managers in the sample had been
with the selling company for 10 or more years, 38% of the
salespeople reported 15 or more years, and 22% said 5 to
less than 10 years with the company. 88 percent of the
customers reported being customers of the selling company
for 5 to less than 10 years and 47% of the customers
reported a contact frequency with the salesperson of at least
once a week.

After obtaining data from these three sources (sales
managers, salespeople, and retail
trade customers), we
formed 51 triads. Each triad consisted of a sales manager
matched with the appropriate salesperson matched with at
least one of the salesperson’s customers. With this study
design, we are able to focus on the dynamics that make up
individual transactions (Churchill et al., 1985). Again, the
need for studying the interactions between sales managers
and salespeople, and between salespeople and customers,
has been emphasized in the literature (cf. Cronin, 1994). The


E. Jones et al. / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 323–340

331

Table 1
Definitions of the variables in the model

Variable

Definition

Market orientation

Customer

orientation

Role conflict

Role ambiguity

Job satisfaction

Organizational
commitment

Service quality

Propensity to

switch suppliers

The organizational culture that most effectively
and efficiently creates necessary behaviors for the
creation of superior value for buyers and, thus,
continuous superior performance for the business
(cf. Narver and Slater, 1990).
The degree to which salespeople engage in
customer-oriented selling by trying to help their
customers make purchase decisions that will
satisfy customer needs (cf. Saxe and Weitz, 1982).
The degree of incongruent expectations related to
one’s role performance (cf. Rizzo et al., 1970).
The lack of clarity of role expectations and the
degree of uncertainty related to one’s role
performance (cf. Rizzo et al., 1970).
Feeling or affective responses toward components
of the work situation (cf. Smith et al., 1969).
The strength of an individual’s identification with
and involvement in an organization (cf. Mowday
et al., 1979).
Customer perceptions of service (cf. Leonard
et al., 1990).
An unfavorable behavioral intention stemming from
customers perceiving service performance to be
inferior (cf. Zeithaml et al., 1996). See also
Keaveney (1995).

results that we report in this paper are based upon examining
these 51 triads.

3.2. Operationalizations of the variables

Table 1 contains the definitions of each variable in the
model. The operationalization of each construct consisted of
multi-item scales based on scales typically used in the
literature. When necessary, we calculated a score for a
construct by averaging, without weighting,
the scores
obtained for each scale. Previous researchers calculate
scores in this manner (cf. Mowday et al., 1979; Rizzo et
al., 1970; Saxe and Weitz, 1982; Siguaw et al., 1994). They
also find that averaging across items can capture the
domains of each construct better than each individual item
(cf. Brown and Peterson, 1993; Hartline and Ferrell, 1996).
A discussion of each construct follows.

To measure market orientation, we adapted Narver and
Slater’s (1990) scale, which measures the firm’s orientation
toward the customer, its competitors, and its interfunctional
coordination. Their scale contains 15 Likert items geared
more toward top managers of firms. Prefacing the scale is
the question, ‘‘To what extent does your business firm
engage in the following practices?’’ Each item in the scale
is measured on a seven-point scale, ranging from 1 (the firm
does not engage in the practice at all) to 7 (the firm engages
in the practice to a great extent). The scale includes
questions about the firm’s commitment
to understanding
and serving customers. Our modified version of Narver and

Slater’s (1990) scale has 10 items and is more appropriate
for ‘‘lower level’’ employees (e.g., salespeople) to answer.
In other words, we eliminated questions pertaining to what
only top managers could answer (e.g., ‘‘Top managers
discuss competitor’s strategies’’ and ‘‘Functional integration
is a part of strategy making’’).

The measure of customer orientation was taken from
Saxe and Weitz’s (1982) Sales Orientation – Customer Ori-
entation Scale (SOCO Scale). This scale measures the
degree to which a salesperson engages in customer-oriented
selling (i.e., the degree to which salespeople practice the
marketing concept by trying to help their customers make
purchase decisions that satisfy customer needs). The SOCO
Scale consists of 24 items related to specific actions a
salesperson might take when interacting with buyers. Items
are scored on a nine-point scale ranging from true for none
of my customers—NEVER to true for all my customers—
ALWAYS.

We measured role conflict and role ambiguity using the
role perception scales developed by Rizzo et al. (1970).
[The Rizzo, House, and Lirtzman (RHL) scales are widely
used in personal selling research. Although some sales
researchers have criticized the RHL scales on the basis of
face validity, the consensus is that the scales are appropriate
for studies where the interest is in global or general role
conflict and role ambiguity (McGee et al., 1989; Netemeyer
et al., 1990; Shepherd and Fine, 1994). This criterion is
applicable to the present study]. Collectively, role conflict
and role ambiguity represent the two key elements in a sales
representative’s role stress (Behrman and Perreault, 1984).
The role conflict scale consists of seven items and the role
ambiguity scale contains six items. For each scale, partic-
ipants responded to a series of statements about job activ-
ities using a seven-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (very
false) to 7 (very true).

We used the Minnesota Satisfaction Questionnaire
(MSQ; Weiss et al., 1967) to measure job satisfaction.
Each item in this scale is measured on a five-point Likert
scale ranging from 1 (very dissatisfied) to 5 (very sat-
isfied). The MSQ has an extensive history of psychometric
analysis.

The measure of organizational commitment was taken
from Mowday et al. (1979) Organizational Commitment
Questionnaire (OCQ). The scale contains 15 Likert items
scored on a scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly
agree).

For the customer data, we asked an overall service
quality question measured on a scale of 1 to 9 (1 = low,
9 = high). Propensity to switch was also measured on a nine-
point scale (1 = low, 9 = high). This scale was adapted from
the behavioral consequences of service quality scale (Zei-
thaml et al., 1996). Customers were asked an overall
question (‘‘To what extent would you switch to another
manufacturer if you experienced a problem with service?’’)
and three specific questions (‘‘To what extent would you do
more business with the company in the next few years?’’


332

E. Jones et al. / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 323–340

Table 2
Means, standard deviations and Pearson correlations

Measures

Mean S.D. MMO MCO MOC

SMO

SCO

RC

RA

JS

OC

CSQ

CPTS

5.6
Mgr. market orientation (MMO)
5.9
Mgr. customer orientation (MCO)
3.9
Mgr. organizational commitment (MOC)
5.5
S/P market orientation (SMO)
5.8
S/P customer orientation (SCO)
3.1
S/P role conflict (RC)
2.2
S/P role ambiguity (RA)
3.7
S/P job satisfaction (JS)
3.9
S/P organizational commitment (SOC)
Customer service quality (CSQ)
7.2
Customer propensity to switch supplier (CPTS) 7.6
Coefficient a values are reported along the diagonal.

a P < .01.
b P < .05.

(.77)
.033
.618b

0.40
(.93)
0.25
.244
(.79)
.538a
0.23
.250
1.2
.018
.068
.117
0.61
.045
(.74)
.072   .261   .328b   .367a
1.2   .325b
.047   .028   .068   .594a   .144
0.78
.265
0.58
.183
0.56
1.5
.144
.162   .053   .204   .065   .290b
1.9

.563a
.540a
.060

.074
.016
.271

.199
.050
.042

(.90)
.000

(.74)
.409a

(.69)
.129   .564a   .581a (.90)
.158   .429a   .383a
.757a
.170   .187   .096
.103
.086   .085   .170 (.71)
.070

(.86)
.120 (n/a)

.180

‘‘Do less business with the company in the next few years?’’
and ‘‘Consider the [selling] company as the preferred
supplier?’’).

4. The structural model

Consistent with accepted scale-development procedures
for assessing reliability and validity, we analyzed the meas-
urement scales with a principal component factor analysis

(Churchill, 1979; Gerbing and Anderson, 1988). The coef-
ficient a values were near or above .70. The descriptive
statistics of each construct appear in Table 2.

We began our analysis with a path analytic approach
the
using structural equations modeling (SEM) to test
relationships in Fig. 1. We ran the theoretical model (Fig.
1) with just the appropriate structural parameters free to
estimate. This procedure provided a simultaneous test of the
interrelationships among the variables in our model in a
statistically efficient manner (cf. Hair et al., 1992).

Fig. 2. Firm market orientation and salesperson customer orientation: interpersonal and intrapersonal influences on customer service and retention.


E. Jones et al. / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 323–340

333

The theoretical model, with the appropriate structural
parameters free to estimate, yielded the following fit stat-
istics. The chi-square statistic was small (c2 = 51.1, df = 37,
P=.06). The relative chi-square (c2/df) equals 1.38—a ratio
in the range of 1 – 2 is indicative of an acceptable fit between
the theoretical model and the sample data (Carmines and
McIver, 1981, p. 80). The goodness-of-fit statistics were
GFI=.85, IFI=.90, CFI=.89, and TLI=.84. The RMSEA,
which is a measure of the residuals, equaled .09. The
PRATIO (the parsimony ratio)=.67. The Akaike information
criterion (AIC; Akaike, 1973, 1987) is 109.1, and the
Browne-Cudeck criterion (BCC; Browne-Cudeck, 1989) is
127.4. On balance, these fit indices suggest an acceptable
model. Therefore, we did not reject the model and continued
with the analysis (see Fig. 2). Next, we discuss the path
coefficients. Table 3 depicts the results discussed in Section 5.

Table 3
Maximum likelihood estimates of structural parameters and model fit
statistics

Hypotheses

Hypothesized paths

Standardized
coefficients

t-values

Hypothesis 3

Hypothesis 2

Hypothesis 1

Hypothesis 6

Hypothesis 5

Hypothesis 4

Sales manager’s customer
orientation! (+) salesperson’s
customer orientation
Sales manager’s organizational
commitment! (+) salesperson’s
customer orientation
Sales manager’s perception of
market orientation! (+)
salesperson’s perception of
market orientation
Salesperson’s perception of
market orientation! (+)
organization commitment
Salesperson’s perception of
market orientation! (+)
customer orientation
Salesperson’s perception of
market orientation! (   )
role conflict
Salesperson’s perception of
market orientation! (   ) role
ambiguity
Salesperson’s perception of
market orientation! (+) job
satisfaction
Salesperson’s customer
orientation! (  ) role conflict
Hypothesis 10 Salesperson’s customer
orientation! (  ) role
ambiguity
satisfaction! (+) customer’s
perception of service quality
orientation! (  ) customer’s
propensity to switch suppliers

Hypothesis 12 Salesperson customer

Hypothesis 11 Salesperson job

Hypothesis 7

Hypothesis 8

Hypothesis 9

n/s

.26

n/s

.54

n/s

  .37

  .60

.56

  .37
  .14

n/s

  .29

1.6

4.5

  3.0

  5.3

4.8

  5.3
  1.3

  2.1

c2 = 51.1 ( P=.06), goodness-of-fit index=.85, incremental fit index=.90,
Tucker – Lewis index=.84, root mean square error approximation=.09.
Hypothesis 2 is significant at .10; Hypothesis 4 at .01; Hypothesis 6 at .05;
Hypotheses 7 – 9 at .01; Hypothesis 10 at .10; and Hypothesis 12 at .05.

4.1. Sales manager – salesperson interface

In Hypothesis 1, we predicted that the sales manager’s
customer orientation would positively affect the salesper-
son’s customer orientation. This path is not significant
(t = 0.78); Hypothesis 1 is not supported. Hypothesis 2
predicts that the sales manager’s organizational commitment
positively influences the salesperson’s customer orientation.
This path is significant (b=.26, t = 1.6, P < .10); Hypothesis
2 is supported. Hypothesis 3 suggests that the sales man-
ager’s perception of the firm’s market orientation positively
influences the salesperson’s perception of the firm’s market
orientation. This path is not significant (t = 0.13). We do not
accept Hypothesis 3.

Regarding the interface between the sales manager and
salesperson, the results of Hypothesis 2 suggest that the
sales manager can significantly influence the orientation of
the salesperson’s attitude and behavior toward the customer
through the sales manager’s commitment
to the sales
organization. This finding is consistent with the leadership
theories cited earlier in the paper.

4.2. Salesperson – role interface

Hypotheses 4 – 10 address the intrapersonal relationships
among the salesperson constructs. Specifically, we looked at
the separate influences of the orientation of the firm and the
salesperson’s individual orientation toward the customer
(i.e., a customer orientation) on salesperson job attitudes.

Hypothesis 4 predicts that the firm’s market orientation,
as perceived by the salesperson, would increase the sales-
person’s organizational commitment. This path is significant
(b=.54,
t = 4.5, P < .01); Hypothesis 4 is supported. In
Hypothesis 5, we predicted that the firm’s market orienta-
tion, as perceived by the salesperson, would increase the
salesperson’s customer orientation. This path is not signific-
ant (t = 0.03); Hypothesis 5 is not accepted. Hypothesis 6
suggests that
the salesperson’s perception of the firm’s
market orientation lowers the salesperson’s role conflict;
t =  2.7, P < .05).
Hypothesis 6 is supported (b =  .37,
Hypothesis 7 predicts that the salesperson’s perception of
the firm’s market orientation lowers the salesperson’s role
ambiguity; Hypothesis 7 is supported (b =  .60, t =  5.3,
P < .01). Hypothesis 8 suggests that the salesperson’s per-
ception of the firm’s market orientation increases the sales-
person’s job satisfaction; Hypothesis 8 is supported (b=.56,
t = 4.8, P < .01). Hypothesis 9 predicts that the salesperson’s
customer orientation would reduce the salesperson’s role
conflict; Hypothesis 9 is supported (b =   .37,
t =  3.0,
P < .01). Hypothesis 10 suggests that
the salesperson’s
customer orientation would also reduce the salesperson’s
role ambiguity. This hypothesis is supported (b =   .14,
t =  1.30, P < .10).

In sum, the results suggest that the perceived market
orientation of the firm does not affect the salesperson’s
customer orientation; however, it does serve an important


334

E. Jones et al. / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 323–340

role: it raises the salesperson’s organizational commitment
and job satisfaction, and reduces perceived ambiguous and
conflictual demands associated with the sales job. These
results support previous conclusions that a firm’s market
orientation has positive effects on salesperson job attitudes
(cf. Siguaw et al., 1994; Menguc, 1996). Also, in addition to
the firm’s market orientation, the salesperson’s customer
orientation lowers perceived conflictual and ambiguous
demands from role partners.

4.3. Salesperson – customer interface

Finally, based on our literature review, we present the
hypotheses concerning the interaction between the salesper-
son and the customer. In Hypothesis 11, we predict that
salesperson job satisfaction increases customer-perceived
service quality. The coefficient is in the right direction;
however, this hypothesis is not supported (b=.10, t=.73);
Hypothesis 11 is not supported. Hypothesis 12 predicts that
the salesperson’s customer orientation would reduce the
customer’s propensity to switch suppliers; Hypothesis 12
is supported (b =  .29, t =  2.1, P < .05).

The results from Hypothesis 11 suggest that the sales-
person’s job satisfaction does not affect the customer’s
perception of service quality. This finding differs from
Heskett et al.’s (1997) conceptualization of the service profit
chain and from Hartline and Ferrell’s (1996) results. How-
ever, note that Hartline and Ferrell (1996) analyze the
relationship between customer contact employees’ job sat-
isfaction and hotel guests’ perceptions of service quality. In
our study, the customers are supermarket store managers.
Perhaps in a direct selling situation (i.e., selling to and serving
consumers), the contact employee’s job satisfaction is a more
important determinant of customers’ perceived service qual-
ity; in a business-to-business context, the customer’s percep-
tion of service quality is influenced by a more varied and
complex set of factors than that of a consumer context.

The results from Hypothesis 12 suggest that the sales-
person’s customer orientation plays an important role in
retaining customers. Taken together, Hypotheses 2, 5, and
12 highlight the importance of the sales manager’s organ-
izational commitment on the salesperson’s orientation
toward serving customers (i.e., customer orientation) and,
more than the firm’s market orientation, the sales manager’s
commitment to the selling organization significantly influ-
ences the salesperson’s customer orientation, which ulti-
mately affects customer loyalty. Next, we discuss the
theoretical and managerial implications of this study.

5. Implications

The current study addresses the call for more empirical
research concerning the effects of market orientation (cf.
Han et al., 1998; Jaworski and Kohli, 1993; Siguaw et al.,
1998; Slater and Narver, 1997). In particular, we sought to

add to the conceptual and empirical research on market
orientation’s influence on salespersons’ customer orienta-
tion and job attitudes and customers’ perceptions of service
and loyalty. It is our contention that, since salespeople are
‘‘the eyes and ears’’ of the company, researching sales-
persons’ perceptions of the firm’s strategic—in this case,
market-orientation is critical to improving customer service
and retention.

We formed triads of sales managers, salespeople, and
customers from survey data. This allowed us to examine
three critical interfaces in buyer – seller relationships: the
sales manager – salesperson, the salesperson – role, and the
salesperson – customer interfaces. Borrowing from market
orientation, social exchange,
leadership, and reference
group theories (Adams, 1965; Kohli and Jaworski, 1990;
Narver and Slater, 1990; Schriesheim, 1978), we posited
that the firm’s market orientation and the sales managers’
customer orientation influence salespersons’ attitudes and
behaviors toward the customer and ultimately customers’
perceptions of service and propensity to switch suppliers.

Our results inform the issue concerning sales manager
and company influences on the work attitudes and behav-
ior of salespeople. The results indicate that
the sales-
persons’ perceptions of the firm’s market orientation do
serve an important role by raising the salesperson’s organ-
izational commitment and job satisfaction, and reducing
perceived ambiguous and conflictual demands associated
with the sales job. These results support previous con-
clusions that a firm’s market orientation has positive
effects on salesperson job attitudes (cf. Siguaw et al.,
1994; Menguc, 1996). Thus, it appears that the nurturing,
supportive environment of a firm that focuses on the
customer (cf. Hartline and Ferrell, 1996; Jaworski and
Kohli, 1993; Siguaw et al., 1994; Menguc, 1996) does
influence salespersons’ perceptions of their work but not
salesperson customer orientation. As well, the sales man-
ager’s customer orientation does not influence salesperson
customer orientation. Instead, the sales manager’s organ-
izational commitment seems to influence the salesperson’s
customer orientation positively. More importantly,
the
salesperson’s customer orientation lowers perceived con-
flictual and ambiguous demands from role partners and
reduces the customer’s propensity to switch suppliers. This
finding is a point of departure from Siguaw et al.’s (1994)
suggestion that salesperson customer orientation does not
relate to salesperson job attitudes.

It

is interesting that we did not find that

the sales
manager’s perception of the firm’s market orientation sig-
nificantly influences the salesperson’s perception of the
same. This implies that salespeople perceive the actions of
the firm separately from the actions of the sales manager. In
other words, to the salesperson the sales manager represents
a part of the firm and its strategic intentions, but the firm and
its sales managers are distinct entities—both are important;
both influence salesperson perceptions but with very differ-
ent results.


E. Jones et al. / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 323–340

335

One overarching theme of this research is,

if sales-
people perceive their firm to be highly market-oriented,
then they infer that the firm supports their efforts to meet
customer needs by giving clear guidance and direction.
This in turn reduces perceptions of ambiguous and incom-
patible demands and increases job satisfaction and com-
mitment to the organization. The firm’s market orientation
does not influence the salesperson’s customer orientation,
but the sales manager’s organizational commitment does
affect the salesperson’s customer orientation. These find-
ings underscore the importance of having sales managers
on the front line who are committed to the organization’s
goals of serving and satisfying customers.

In terms of theoretical contributions, we have added to

the existing literature in several important ways.

(1) We expanded and tested some limits of market
orientation’s influence on salesperson perceptions and
behavior.

(2) We found support for sales manager organizational
commitment being theoretically linked to salesperson cus-
tomer orientation.

(3) We also found that a strong salesperson’s customer
orientation tends to reduce the buyers’ switching behavior in
a business-to-business context.

(4) Some research has suggested that salesperson role
conflict and ambiguity are inherent parts of the sales job
with which salespeople must cope (see Babakus et al., 1996;
Sager, 1994; Singh, 1993). However, our research suggests
that the combination of a market orientation, which provides
clear and consistent direction for the sales force, as well as
management’s commitment to the organization’s goals of
serving customers are related to lower levels of salesper-
sons’ role conflict and ambiguity.

This last finding is supported by Berry (1995, p. 62): ‘‘A
customer service strategy is a mission. . . A mission is
galvanizing; it is a goal, a direction, a calling. It binds
people in an organization together in a common purpose. A
true mission focuses people’s efforts.’’

Finally, a large body of evidence supports the notion that
satisfied employees usually work more effectively than
frustrated ones and therefore job satisfaction influences
customer responses (cf. Gross and Etzioni, 1985; Ostroff,
1992). However, our data did not show support for the
hypothesis that salesperson job satisfaction leads to custom-
ers’ perceived service quality. Again, this finding differs
from Heskett et al.’s (1997) conceptualization of the service
profit chain and from Hartline and Ferrell’s (1996) results.
There are a few plausible explanations for this result.

The result, of course, could be due to a small sample size,
which masked the true effect. Another explanation for the
lack of a positive relationship between salespersons’ job
satisfaction and customers’ perceived service quality is that
some salespeople may achieve job satisfaction by limiting
the demands placed upon them to provide extraordinary
customer service. In other words, perhaps salespeople can
be satisfied with such job-related factors as pay, co-workers,

and supervision, but they develop defense mechanisms for
avoiding and/or minimizing the demands placed upon them
by customers.

A third plausible explanation for this particular finding is
that most of the studies in this research area test the impact
of employee satisfaction on consumers’ perceptions, not
industrial customers’ perceptions. We suggested that per-
haps in a direct selling situation (i.e., selling to and serving
consumers), the contact employee’s job satisfaction is a
more important determinant of customers’ perceived service
quality than in a business-to-business context. Future
research should investigate the relationship between sales-
person work attitudes and customers’ perceptions of service
quality. An examination of whether selling context moder-
ates the employee job satisfaction – customer-perceived ser-
vice quality relationship is warranted. A more refined
analysis of job satisfaction and customer-perceived service
quality would provide useful insight into the relationship.

From a managerial perspective, the results of our study,
first of all, highlight the importance of a firm’s market
orientation on salesperson job attitudes. Firms can help
salespeople reduce role conflict and ambiguity and increase
job satisfaction and organizational commitment by dem-
onstrating a commitment to customers, generating market
information, disseminating the information to the sales force,
and creating a cooperative spirit among departments in the
selling organization (i.e., creating a market orientation).

Second, this research illustrates the importance of sales
managers recognizing the impact of their organizational
commitment on salespersons’ attitudes toward customers.
Salespeople seem to be able to sense the sales manager’s
commitment to the organization, which can affect the
salesperson’s behavior toward customers and, ultimately,
customer retention. Thus, sales managers must lead by
example, being careful to show their commitment to the
market-oriented organization’s goals and values. In a mar-
ket-oriented firm, sales managers should emphasize the
importance of keeping customer satisfaction at the core of
all sales and service initiatives.

Third, while conveying market information to the sales
force, the challenge is for managers to provide the climate
with the ‘‘right’’ amount of emphasis on the long-term
horizon while attaining necessary, short-term goals. A sales-
person’s customer orientation can go a long way toward
retaining customers, but the organization’s front line lead-
ership—sales managers—must do more than communicate
the firm’s goals of creating customer value. They must
create an environment
that nurtures and facilitates the
process of satisfying customers, and demonstrate a commit-
ment to the organization and its customers. Top managers
can help sales managers foster the nurturing environment
that is mandatory in today’s fast-paced, rapidly changing,
highly competitive business world.

Finally, the results of our study point to the importance of
proper staffing. Because the employee – customer interface
is the most important determinant of customers’ responses


336

E. Jones et al. / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 323–340

(cf. Hartline and Ferrell, 1996), market-oriented firms must
seek to hire customer-oriented salespeople. By recruiting
customer-oriented salespeople, firms can ensure that cus-
tomers’ needs are satisfied and interactions are mutually
rewarding between salespersons and customers. Such high-
quality salesperson – customer relationships help to reduce
customers’ propensities to switch suppliers. More research is
needed to help firms identify customer-oriented salespeople.
With regard to the limitations of our study, the primary
limitation concerns the issue of external validity, particularly
generalizability, which stems from the use of a sales force
from a single company at a single time. This may have led
to sampling artifacts and ignored the potential temporal
dynamics of the relationships. Therefore, generalizations
beyond the specific context of this research (i.e., business-
to-business salespeople employed at a particular firm) must
be guarded.

logy—was appropriate in this instance. Our use of sales
managers and salespeople from a single company at a single
point in time gave us a richer, deeper understanding of the
sales force’s perceptions of the firm’s market orientation, its
influence on salespeople’s job attitudes, and customers’
perceptions of service and loyalty. It is important to note
that the unit of analysis was at the individual level, not the
organizational level. Surveys are appropriate in this type of
attitudinal research (Kerlinger, 1973). Obviously, more
studies using samples drawn from various industries are
needed. For future research, we suggest testing for conver-
gent findings using multiple methodologies across different
sales settings.

Acknowledgements

We acknowledge this limitation but believe that

the
selected research design—cross-sectional, survey methodo-

The authors wish to thank Judy Siguaw, PhD, Cornell
and Steve Brown, PhD, University of Houston for their

Appendix A. Factor analysis

Factor 1

Factor 2

Factor 3

Factor 4

Factor 5

Factor 6

Sales managers’ perceptions of the firm’s market orientation
MgMrk01
MgMrk02
MgMrk03
MgMrk04
MgMrk05
MgMrk06
MgMrk07
MgMrk08
MgMrk09
MgMrk10

0.72
0.61
0.81
0.16
0.16
0.78
0.96
0.59
0.45
0.84

0.63
0.70
0.42
0.93
0.84
0.41

0.50
0.70
0.36

0.67
0.24
0.83
  0.32
0.56
  0.11
  0.71
0.70
0.92

Sales managers’ customer orientation
MgCust01
MgCust02
MgCust03
MgCust04
MgCust05
MgCust06
MgCust07
MgCust08
MgCust09
MgCust10
MgCust11
MgCust12
MgCust13
MgCust14
MgCust15
MgCust16
MgCust17
MgCust18
MgCust19
MgCust20

  0.73
0.31
0.27
  0.30

0.29
  0.24

Sales managers’ organizational commitment
MgOrgCm01
MgOrgCm02
MgOrgCm03

0.89
0.81
  0.12

0.60
0.15
0.33
0.11
  0.42
  0.13
  0.29
0.53
  0.13
0.93
  0.52

0.91
  0.21

0.10
0.51
  0.32

  0.27
  0.11

0.82

0.14
0.14
0.49
0.14

  0.76

0.22
  0.37

0.66
0.85

0.38

0.40

0.39

0.43
0.71
  0.62

0.15
  0.10
  0.21

0.86
0.66
  0.11
0.15
  0.11
0.19
  0.22

  0.11
0.61

  0.82
  0.11
  .26
0.79
0.22

  0.26
  0.11
  0.21
0.30
0.20
0.32
  0.12
0.50

  0.21

  .13
0.20
0.80
0.27
  0.11

0.84
  0.34
  0.28


E. Jones et al. / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 323–340

337

Appendix A (continued)

Factor 1

Factor 2

Factor 3

Factor 4

Factor 5

Factor 6

Sales managers’ organizational commitment
MgOrgCm04
MgOrgCm05
MgOrgCm06
MgOrgCm07
MgOrgCm08
MgOrgCm09
MgOrgCm10
MgOrgCm11
MgOrgCm12
MgOrgCm13
MgOrgCm14
MgOrgCm15

0.79
0.49
0.56
  0.14
0.63
0.68
0.87
0.45
0.44
0.49
0.73
0.80

  0.22
0.60
0.74
0.38
0.21
  0.41
  0.32
0.69
  0.77
0.64

Salespersons’ perceptions of the firm’s market orientation
Mrk01
Mrk02
Mrk03
Mrk04
Mrk05
Mrk06
Mrk07
Mrk08
Mrk09
Mrk10

0.87
0.89
0.86
0.83
0.87
0.83

0.13
0.24
0.28
0.39
0.29
0.29
0.94
0.72
0.43
0.58

0.46
0.66
0.62

Salespersons’ customer orientation
Cust01
0.19
  0.12
Cust02
Cust03
  0.11
Cust04
0.34
Cust05
0.67
Cust06
0.20
Cust07
Cust08
  0.29
Cust09
0.49
Cust10
0.77
Cust11
Cust12
0.41
Cust13
0.81
Cust14
Cust15
Cust16
Cust17
Cust18
Cust19
Cust20

0.21
  0.15
0.11
0.66
0.19
0.17

Salespersons’ role conflict
Rcon01
Rcon02
Rcon03
Rcon04
Rcon05
Rcon06
Rcon07

Salespersons’ role ambiguity
Ramb01
Ramb02
Ramb03
Ramb04

0.43
0.81

0.76
0.30

0.71

0.33
0.42
0.43
0.70

  0.12

0.16
0.26

0.14

0.26
0.68

0.17
0.78
0.45

0.77

0.63
0.11

0.29
0.20

0.72
0.91
0.38

0.76
  0.78
0.33

0.30
0.19
  0.27
0.34
  0.44
  0.11
  0.14
  0.13
  0.47

0.79
0.68
0.44
0.31
0.24
0.19

0.27

0.39

0.68

0.13
  0.12
  0.14

  0.20

  0.38
  0.48

0.64
  0.39
0.20

0.39
0.24
0.41
  0.43

0.27
0.15

0.66
0.46
0.24
  0.20
  0.44
0.12
  0.17

0.62
0.80
0.23

0.26
0.22

0.69
  0.11
0.88
0.26
0.21

0.30

0.23
0.25
0.65
  0.11
0.11
0.34
0.69

0.27
0.54
  0.20

0.17

0.16
  0.13
0.45

0.12
0.29
  0.10

0.70
  0.14
  0.14

  0.37
0.18
0.16
0.26
0.23
0.78

(continued on next page)


338

E. Jones et al. / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 323–340

Appendix A (continued)

Factor 1

Factor 2

Factor 3

Factor 4

Factor 5

Factor 6

Salespersons’ role ambiguity
Ramb05
Ramb06

0.96
0.96

Salespersons’ job satisfaction
JobSat01
JobSat02
JobSat03
JobSat04
JobSat05
JobSat06
JobSat07
JobSat08
JobSat09
JobSat10
JobSat11
JobSat12
JobSat13
JobSat14
JobSat15
JobSat16
JobSat17
JobSat18
JobSat19
JobSat20

0.14
0.63
0.77
0.25
0.12

0.19
0.78
0.31
0.72
0.29
0.58
0.18
0.43
0.45
0.27
0.14
0.51
0.79

0.80
0.79

Salespersons’ organizational commitment
OrgCom01
OrgCom02
OrgCom03
OrgCom04
OrgCom05
OrgCom06
OrgCom07
OrgCom08
OrgCom09
OrgCom10
OrgCom11
OrgCom12
OrgCom13
OrgCom14
OrgCom15

0.56
0.55
0.72
0.42
0.44

0.26
0.26
0.30

0.79
0.20

0.39
  0.15
0.17

0.11

0.92
0.22

0.32
0.21
0.19
0.35
0.28
0.11
  0.24

0.44
0.79
  0.13
  0.12

0.25
0.11
0.14
  0.39
  0.40
  0.36

0.14
  0.11
  0.19

0.49
  0.16
0.50
0.15
0.80
0.84
0.12

0.12
0.38
0.62
0.25
0.64
0.21
0.44
0.60

0.56
0.30

0.20
0.84
0.27
0.55
0.18

0.50
0.51
0.21

0.73
  0.31
0.10
0.14

0.14

0.26

0.11
0.89
0.18

0.68
0.17
0.23

0.24
0.52
0.43
0.57

0.24
0.30

0.24

0.32

0.23
0.43

0.83

0.44
0.33
0.89

0.40
  0.11

0.45
0.25
0.27
0.35

0.20
0.23

0.84
0.34
0.11

  0.39
0.17
0.24
0.30

0.21
0.80
0.25

0.67
0.15
  0.14

Customers’ propensity to switch
PTS01
PTS02
PTS03

0.18
0.89
0.90

helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper. Thanks
also to Sean Peng and Eva Maddox for their contributions.

References

Adams J. Inequity in Social Exchange. Adv Exp Soc Psychol 1965;2:

267 – 99.

Ahmed I, Parasuraman A. Environmental and positional antecedents of
management commitment to service quality: a conceptual framework.
In: Swartz TA, Bowen DE, Brown SW, editors. Advances in services
marketing and management, vol. 3. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press; 1994.
p. 69 – 93.

Akaike H. Information theory and an extension of the maximum likelihood
principle. In: Petrov BN, Csaki F, editors. Proceedings of the 2nd in-
ternational symposium on information theory. Budapest: Akademiai
Kiado; 1973. p. 267 – 81.

Akaike H. Factor analysis and AIC. Psychometrika 1987;52:317 – 32.
Apasu Y, Ichikawa S, Graham J. Corporate culture and sales force manage-
ment in Japan and America. J Pers Sell Sales Manage 1987;7(Novem-
ber):51 – 62.

Atuahene-Gima K. An exploratory analysis of the impact of market orien-
tation on new product performance: a contingency approach. J Prod
Innov Manag 1995;12(September):275 – 93.

Babakus E, Cravens DW, Johnston M, Moncrief WC. Examining the role of
organizational variables in the salesperson job satisfaction model. J Pers
Sell Sales Manage 1996;16(Summer):33 – 46.


E. Jones et al. / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 323–340

339

Babin BJ, Boles JS. The effects of perceived co-worker involvement and
supervisor support on service provider role stress, performance and job
satisfaction. J Retail 1996;72(Spring):57 – 75.

employees: an empirical
52 – 70.

investigation. J Mark 1996;60(October):

Heskett JL, Sasser WE, Schlesinger LA. The service profit chain. NY: Free

Beatty SE. An exploratory study of organizational values with a focus on

Press; 1997.

people orientation. J Retail 1988;64(Winter):405 – 25.

Hoffman KD, Ingram TN. Creating customer-oriented employees: the case

Behrman DN, Perrault Jr WD. A role stress model of the performance and

in home health care. J Health Care Mark 1991;11(June):24 – 32.

satisfaction of industrial salespersons. J Mark 1984;48(Fall):9 – 21.

Hoffman KD, Ingram TN. Service provider job satisfaction and customer-

Berry LL. On great service. New York: Free Press; 1995.
Bitner MJ. Evaluating service encounters: the effects of physical surround-

ings and employee responses. J Mark 1990;54(April):69 – 82.

Brown SP, Peterson RA. Antecedents and consequences of salesperson job
satisfaction: meta-analysis and assessment of causal effects. J Mark Res
1993;30(February):63 – 77.

Browne MW, Cudeck R. Single sample cross-validation indices for cova-

riance structures. Multivariate Behav Res 1989;24:445 – 55.

Burke MJ, Borucki CC, Hurley AE. Reconceptualizing psychological cli-
mate in a retail service environment: a multiple-stakeholder perspective.
J Appl Psychol 1992;77(October):717 – 29.

Carmines EG, McIver JP. Analyzing models with unobserved variables. In:
Bohrnstedt GW, Borgatta EF, editors. Social measurement: current is-
sues. Beverly Hills: Sage; 1981. p. 65 – 115.

Caruana AB, Ramaseshan B, Ewing MT. The link between market orien-
tation and performance in the Australian public sector. Asian J Mark
1997;6(December):41 – 52.

Case J. Corp Cult 1996;18(November):42 – 53.
Churchill GA. A paradigm for developing better measures of marketing

constructs. J Mark Res 1979;16(February):64 – 73.

Churchill GA, Ford NM, Walker OC. Organizational climate and job
satisfaction in the salesforce. J Mark Res 1976;13(November):323 – 32.
Churchill GA, Ford NM, Steven WH, Walker OC. The determinants of
salesperson performance: a meta analysis. J Mark Res 1985;22(May):
103 – 18.

Churchill GA, Ford NM, Walker OC. Sales force management. 4th ed.

Homewood, IL: Richard D. Irwin; 1993.

oriented performance. J Serv Mark 1992;6(2):68 – 78.

Humphreys MA, Williams MR. Exploring the relative effects of sales-
person interpersonal process attributes and technical product attributes
on customer satisfaction. J Pers Sell Sales Manage 1996;16(Sum-
mer):47 – 57.

Jaworski BJ, Kohli AK. Supervisor feedback: alternative types and their
impact on salespeople’s performance and satisfaction. J Mark Res
1991;28(May):190 – 201.

Jaworski BJ, Kohli AK. Market orientation: antecedents and consequences.

J Mark 1993;57(July):53 – 70.

Jones E, Kantak DM, Futrell CM, Johnston MW. Leader behavior, work
attitudes, and turnover of salespeople: an integrative study. J Pers Sell
Sales Manage 1996;16(Spring):13 – 23.

Keaveney SM. Customer switching behavior in service industries: an ex-

ploratory study. J Mark 1995;59(April):71 – 82.

Kelley SW. Developing customer orientation among service employees. J

Acad Mark Sci 1992;20(Winter):27 – 36.

Kerlinger FN. Foundations of behavioral research. 2nd ed. New York: Holt,

Rinehart and Winston; 1973.

Kirmeyer SL, Lin T-R. Social support: its relationship to observed commu-
nication with peers and superiors. Acad Manage J 1987;30(1): 138 – 51.
Kohli AK, Jaworski BJ. Market orientation: the construct, research propo-

sitions, and managerial implications. J Mark 1990;54(April):1 – 18.

Kolb JA. Leader behaviors affecting team performance: similarities and
differences between leader/member assessment. J Bus Commun 1995;
32(July):233 – 48.

Kotler P. Marketing management. 9th ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice

Cronin JJ. Analysis of the buyer – seller dyad: the social relations model. J

Hall; 1998.

Pers Sell Sales Manage 1994;14(Summer):69 – 77.

Leonard LB, Valarie AZ, Parasuraman A. Five imperatives for improving

Crosby LA, Evans KR, Cowles D. Relationship quality in services sell-
ing: an interpersonal influence perspectives. J Mark 1990;54(July):
68 – 81.

Deschpande R, Farley JU, Webster Jr FE. Corporate culture, customer
orientation, and innovativeness in Japanese firms: a quadrad analysis.
J Mark 1993;57(January):23 – 37.

service quality. Sloan Manage Rev Summer 1990;31(4):29 – 38.

Levitt T. The marketing mode. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1969.
Locke EA. The nature and causes of job satisfaction. In: Dunnette M,
editor. Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology. Chicago:
Rand McNally; 1976. p. 1297 – 350.

Locke EA, Latham GP. A theory of goal setting and task performance.

Deshpande R, Webster Jr FE. Organizational culture and marketing: defin-

Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall; 1990.

ing the research agenda. J Mark 1989;53(January):3 – 15.

Diehl K, Gillman R. Why your customers switch. Public Util Fortn 1997;

135(April):37 – 40.

George WR. Internal marketing and organizational behavior: a partnership
in developing customer – conscious employees at every level. J Bus Res
1990;20(January):63 – 70.

Gerbing DW, Anderson JC. An updated paradigm for scale development
incorporating unidimensionality and its assessment. J Mark Res 1988;
25(May):186 – 92.

Gronroos C. Strategic management and marketing in the service sector.
Marketing Science Institute Working Paper Series, Report No. 83-
104. Cambridge, MA: Marketing Science Institute; 1983.

Gronroos C. Relationship approach to marketing in service contexts: the
marketing and organizational behavior interface. J Bus Res 1990;
20(January):3 – 11.

McGee GW, Ferguson Jr CE, Seers A. Role conflict and role ambiguity:
do the scales measure these two constructs? J Appl Psychol 1989;74
(1989):815 – 8.

Menguc B. The influence of market orientation of the firm on sales force
behavior and attitudes: further empirical results. Int J Res Mark 1996;
13(July):277 – 91.

Michaels RE, Day RL. Measuring customer orientation of salespeople:
a replication with industrial buyers. J Mark Res 1985;22(November):
443 – 6.

Mohr-Jackson I. Comparing total quality with market orientation: an in-
depth interview approach. In: Varadarajan R, Jaworski B, editors. AMA
winter educators’ conference proceedings. Chicago: American Market-
ing Association; 1993. p. 427 – 32.

Mowday RT, Steers RM, Porter LW. The measurement of organizational

commitment. J Vocat Behav 1979;14:224 – 7.

Gross E, Etzioni A. Organizations in society. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Pren-

Narver JC, Slater SF. The effect of a market orientation on business profit-

tice-Hall; 1985.

Guthrie ER. The psychology of learning. New York: Harper and Row; 1935.
Hair Jr JF, Anderson RE, Tatham RL, Black WC. Multivariate data anal-

ysis. New York: Macmillan; 1992.

Han JK, Kim N, Srivastava RK. Market orientation and organizational per-
formance: is innovation a missing link? J Mark 1998;62(October):
30 – 45.

ability. J Mark 1990;54(October):20 – 35.

Netemeyer RG, Johnston M, Burton S. Analysis of role conflict and role
ambiguity in a structural equations framework. J Appl Psychol 1990;
75(April):148 – 57.

Nonis SA, Sager JK, Kumar K. Salespeople’s use of upward influence
tactics (UITs) in coping with role stress. J Acad Mark Sci 1996;24
(Winter):44 – 56.

Hartline MD, Ferrell OC. The management of customer – contact service

Ostroff C. The relationship between satisfaction, attitudes, and per-


340

E. Jones et al. / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 323–340

formance: an organizational
963 – 74.

level analysis. J Appl Psychol 1992;

Slater SF, Narver JC. Deloping a customer value-based theory of the firm.

J Acad Mark Sci 1997;25(Spring):162 – 7.

Palich LE, Hom PW. The impact of leader power and behavior on leader-
ship perceptions: a LISTREL test of an expanded categorization
theory of leadership model. Group Organ Manage 1992;17(Septem-
ber):279 – 96.

Smith PC, Kendall LM, Hulin CL. The measurement of satisfaction in work
and retirement: a strategy for the study of attitudes. Chicago: Rand
McNally; 1969.

Teas RK. Supervisory behavior, role stress, and the job satisfaction of

Parasuraman A. Customer oriented corporate cultures are crucial to services

industrial salespeople. J Mark Res 1983;20(February):84 – 91.

marketing success. J Serv Mark 1987;1(Summer):39 – 46.

Thorndike EL. The fundamentals of learning. New York: Teachers College,

Richmond VP, Wagner JP, McCroskey JC. The impact of perceptions of
leadership style, use of power, and conflict management style on or-
ganizational outcomes. Commun Q 1993;31(Winter):27 – 36.

Rizzo JR, House RJ, Lirtzman SI. Role conflict and ambiguity in complex

organizations. Adm Sci Q 1970;15(June):150 – 63.

Ruekert RW. Developing a market orientation: an organizational strategy

perspective. Int J Res Mark 1992;9(August):225 – 45.

Sager JK. A structural model depicting salespeople’s job stress. J Acad

Mark Sci 1994;22(January):74 – 84.

Saxe R, Weitz BA. The SOCO scale: a measure of the customer orientation

of salespeople. J Mark Res 1982;19(August):343 – 51.

Schneider B. The service organization: climate is crucial. Organ Dyn

1980;9(Autumn):52 – 65.

Schriesheim CA. Development, validation, and application of new leader-
ship behavior and expectancy research instruments. Doctoral disserta-
tion, College of Administrative Science, Ohio State University; 1978.
Shamir B. Between service and servility: role conflict in subordinate service

Columbia University; 1932.

Walker Jr OC, Churchill Jr GA, Ford NM. Reactions to role conflict: the

case of the industrial salesman. J Bus Adm 1972;3(Spring):25 – 36.

Walker Jr OC, Churchill Jr GA, Ford NM. Organizational determinants of
the industrial salesmen’s role conflict and ambiguity. J Mark 1975;39
(January):32 – 9.

Walker Jr OC, Churchill Jr GA, Ford NM. Motivation and performance
in industrial selling: present knowledge and needed research. J Mark
Res 1977;14(May):156 – 68.

Weatherly KA, Tansik DA. Managing multiple demands: a role – theory
examination of the behaviors of customer contact service workers.
In: Swartz TA, Bowen DE, Brown SW, editors. Advances in services
marketing and management, vol. 2. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press; 1993.
p. 279 – 300.

Webster Jr FE. Comment by Frederick E. Webster Jr. J Mark 1988a;

52(October):48a – 51a.

Webster Jr FE. The rediscovery of the marketing concept. Bus Horiz 1988b;

roles. Hum Relat 1980;33(October):741 – 56.

31(May – June):29b – 39b.

Shamir B, Zakay E, Breinin E, Popper M. Correlates of charismatic leader
behavior in military units: subordinates’ attitudes, unit characteristics,
and superiors appraisals of leader performance. Acad Manage J 1998;
41(August):387 – 409.

Shepherd CD, Fine LM. Role conflict and role ambiguity reconsidered. J

Pers Sell Sales Manage 1994;14:57 – 65.

Siguaw JA, Brown G, Widing II RE. The influence of the market orienta-
tion of the firm on sales force behavior and attitudes. J Mark Res 1994;
31(February):106 – 16.

Siguaw JA, Simpson PM, Baker TL. Effects of supplier market orientation
on distributor market orientation and the channel relationship: the dis-
tributor perspective. J Mark 1998;62(July):99 – 111.

Singh J. Boundary role ambiguity: facets, determinants, and impacts. J

Mark 1993;57(April):11 – 3.

Slater SF, Narver JC. Market orientation, customer value, and superior

Webster C. A note on cultural consistency within the service firm: the
effects of employee position on attitudes toward marketing culture. J
Acad Mark Sci 1991;19(Fall):341 – 6.

Weiss DJ, Dawis RV, England GW, Lofquist LH. Manual for the Min-
nesota Satisfaction Questionnaire, Minnesota Studies in Vocational
Rehabilitation, vol. 12. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota; 1967.
p. 1 – 119.

Weitz B, Castleberry S, Tanner J. Selling: building partnerships. New York:

McGraw-Hill; 1998.

Williams MR, Attaway JS. Exploring salespersons’ customer orientation as
a mediator of organizational culture’s influence on buyer – seller rela-
tionships. J Pers Sell Sales Manage 1996;16(Fall):33 – 52.

Zeithaml VA, Berry LL, Parasuraman A. A communication and control pro-
cesses in the delivery of service quality. J Mark 1988;52(April):35 – 48.
Zeithaml VA, Berry LL, Parasuraman A. The behavioral consequences of

performance. Bus Horiz 1994;37(March – April):22 – 8.

service quality. J Mark 1996;60(April):31 – 46.

