 
 
Sure Everyone Can Be Replaced... but at What Cost? Turnover as a Predictor of Unit-Level
Performance
Author(s): K. Michele Kacmar, Martha C. Andrews, David L. Van Rooy, R. Chris Steilberg
and  Stephen Cerrone
Source: The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 49, No. 1 (Feb., 2006), pp. 133-144
Published by: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/20159750
Accessed: 02-08-2017 22:57 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms

Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access
to The Academy of Management Journal

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:57:34 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 ? Academy of Management Journal
 2006, Vol. 49, No. 1, 133-144.

 SURE EVERYONE CAN BE REPLACED . . . BUT AT WHAT
 COST? TURNOVER AS A PREDICTOR OF UNIT-LEVEL

 PERFORMANCE
 K. MICHELE KACMAR
 University of Alabama
 MARTHA C. ANDREWS

 University of North Carolina Wilmington

 DAVID L. VAN ROOY
 Burger King Corporation
 R. CHRIS STEILBERG

 Ryder System, Inc.

 STEPHEN CERRONE

 JPMorgan Chase

 Most turnover research positions employee turnover as the dependent variable and
 focuses on identifying its antecedents. In this study, we viewed turnover as a key
 predictor in determining unit-level performance. Specifically, a structural model was
 developed and tested that links managerial and employee turnover with performance
 through efficiency. We tested the model using a sample of 262 BURGER KING?
 restaurants. Results demonstrate that efficiency, measured as customer "wait time,"
 mediates the relationships of both management and crew turnover to both sales and
 profit, and efficiency, measured as food waste, does not mediate the relationship of
 turnover to sales or profit.

 Over the past 50 years, organizational researchers
 have devoted a great deal of attention to the study
 of employee turnover (Allen, Shore, & Griffeth,
 2003; March & Simon, 1958; Mobley, 1977). Much
 of this research has focused on turnover as an out
 come of a sequential process that begins with job

 This article was improved by the insightful comments
 supplied by John Delery, Mark Gavin, Dave Ketchen,
 James Price, and Jason Shaw. We wish to thank Brian
 Nagy for his data collection efforts. Stephen Cerrone and
 Chris Steilberg were employed at Burger King when the
 study was conducted. An earlier version of this paper
 was awarded Best Paper in the Human Resources Track
 at the 2004 Southern Management Association Meetings.

 BURGER KING? is a registered trademark of Burger
 King Brands, Inc. and is used with permission. The
 BURGER KING? Restaurant System consists of company
 owned restaurants that are operated by Burger King Cor
 poration and restaurants that are independently owned
 and operated by franchisees. All of the BURGER KING?
 restaurants used in the study were company-owned res
 taurants in the United States. The views expressed in this
 article are the views of the authors and do not necessarily
 reflect the views or policy of Burger King Corporation.

 dissatisfaction (e.g., Horn & Griffeth, 1991; Mobley,
 1977). Although a number of researchers have sug
 gested that some turnover is healthy for an organi
 zation (Price, 1977; Shaw, Gupta, & Delery, 2005),
 the predominant view underlying turnover re
 search is that the phenomenon is disruptive and
 expensive (Mueller & Price, 1989; Staw, 1980) and
 that understanding the causes of turnover is essen
 tial in order to reduce it.

 Various attempts to measure the costs associated
 with turnover have demonstrated the importance of
 turnover research. Researchers have often esti
 mated the costs to organizations of recruiting, se
 lecting, and training new hires (Sagie, Birati, &
 Tziner, 2002). One industry plagued by exorbitant
 turnover is the food service industry, where turn
 over rates often exceed 100 percent annually (Zu
 ber, 2001). Costs associated with turnover in the
 U.S. fast-food industry have been estimated at $500
 to $3,600 per crew member1 (White, 1995), with
 total industry costs of retraining exceeding $4.3

 1 "Crew member" refers to any nonmanagerial em

 ployee working in a fast-food restaurant.

 133

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:57:34 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 134 Academy of Management Journal February

 billion per year. Reasons cited for leaving jobs in
 this industry include poor management, low com
 pensation, and wanting to improve one's quality of
 life (White, 1995).

 Recently, reduced turnover has been examined
 as one outcome of "high-involvement human re
 source systems," which can ultimately be linked
 with organizationally valued outcomes, including
 performance measures such as sales and profit
 (Batt, 2002; Huselid, 1995). However, this line of
 research fails to explain the mechanism by which
 reduced turnover leads to improved sales and
 profit. Although early researchers suggested turn
 over leads to inefficiencies, thereby reducing organ
 izational performance (Price, 1977; Staw, 1980),
 little if any research has empirically linked turn
 over, efficiency, and performance (e.g., Shaw et al.,
 2005).

 Therefore, the present study was designed to be
 gin fleshing out the mediating links between turn
 over and unit-level performance. In doing so, we
 fill a gap in the literature by theoretically and em
 pirically identifying efficiency as a mediator in the
 relationship between employee turnover and unit
 level performance. For the purpose of the present
 study, we defined turnover as the number of em
 ployees who leave an organization annually. Effi
 ciency refers to the ratio of output to input (Fabri
 cant, 1969). More specifically, in the food service
 industry, measures of efficiency include customer
 wait time (i.e., how long customers wait for service)

 and food waste. Finally, unit-level performance is
 equated with effectiveness, or the degree to which
 stated goals are achieved (i.e., sales and profit).

 A PROPOSED MODEL OF THE RELATIONSHIP

 BETWEEN TURNOVER AND UNIT-LEVEL

 PERFORMANCE

 Three fundamental research questions motivated
 our study: (1) Does turnover affect unit-level per
 formance? (2) If turnover does affect unit-level per
 formance, are there any mediating mechanisms? (3)
 What is the value of a stable workforce? Utilizing a
 knowledge-based view of organizations as an un
 derlying framework, we developed and tested a
 structural model of the relationship between man
 agement and employee turnover and performance
 through efficiency. Figure 1 depicts our proposed
 model.

 As our model shows, we view the relationship
 between turnover and performance as fully medi
 ated by efficiency. Further, in line with previous
 research (Glebbeek & Bax, 2004), and as our time
 lags show, we believe that the turnover-efficiency
 link is more immediate than the efficiency-perfor
 mance link. In essence, we suggest that turnover
 results in immediate efficiency disruptions as there
 will be too few experienced staff members to serve
 customers. However, it is only after efficiency is
 poor for a sustained period of time that perfor
 mance is affected. That is, we view performance as

 Conceptual Model of the Impact of Turnover on Unit-Level Performance

 FIGURE 1

 HI

 Management
 Turnover,
 Time 1

 H4

 Customer
 Wait Time,

 Timel

 H6

 Sales,
 Time 2

 Crew
 Turnover,
 Timel

 H3

 Food Waste,

 Timel

 H8

 Profit,
 Time 2

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:57:34 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 2006 Kacmar, Andrews, Van Rooy, Steilberg, and Cerrone 135

 a marathon rather than a sprint. For example, inef
 ficient stores may have a good month or two owing
 to a special promotion that lets them close perfor
 mance gaps. However, over time inefficient stores
 will post more poor than good months, creating
 significant performance differences between them
 selves and efficient stores. Thus, we argue that the
 immediate impact of turnover is felt through re
 duced efficiency and that this impact is eventually
 evident in performance.
 We examined the relationships posited in Figure
 1 using a sample of 262 BKC-owned BURGER KING
 restaurant locations. In addition to the knowledge
 based view of organizations, we drew upon related
 literature in the areas of social exchange (Eisen
 berger, Huntington, Hutchinson, & Sowa, 1986) and
 strategic choice (Child, 1972). The rationale for
 each of the links in Figure 1 is explained below.

 MANAGEMENT AND CREW TURNOVER

 Theories of social exchange are often used to
 explain why employees express loyalty to their or
 ganizations or supervisors (Settoon, Bennett, & Li
 den, 1996; Shore & Barksdale, 1998). Social ex
 change theory is based on the norm of reciprocity
 that essentially suggests employees will feel obli
 gated to reciprocate rewards received from a donor
 (Gouldner, 1960). In order to pay back their debt,
 they must remain with their organizations. Simi
 larly, leader-member exchange (LMX) theory
 (Dansereau, Graen, & Haga, 1975) acknowledges the
 relationship between employees and their manag
 ers as an exchange relationship in which employ
 ees reciprocate fair treatment from their managers
 by working hard to fulfill their managers' requests
 (Settoon et al., 1996). Further, employees recipro
 cate with feelings of commitment toward their
 managers and organization (Liden, Wayne, & Spar
 rowe, 2000; Shore & Wayne, 1993), and these feel
 ings produce a need or desire to remain with the
 organization (Gerstner & Day, 1997). However, if a
 manager with whom an employee has bonded
 leaves the organization, these feelings of commit
 ment may be reduced. In this case, the psycholog
 ical contract the employee has formed with the
 manager is broken (Rousseau, 1995), and the norm
 of reciprocity no longer exists. When the manager
 leaves the organization, the employee experiences
 a reduced sense of indebtedness and no longer feels
 compelled to remain with the organization. Thus,
 following social exchange theory, we predict:

 Hypothesis 1. Management turnover is posi
 tively related to crew turnover.

 TURNOVER AND EFFICIENCY

 The relationship between turnover and effi
 ciency can be explained in terms of Grant's (1996)
 knowledge-based theory of organizations. A key
 tenet of this theory is that firms that successfully
 create, maintain, and apply job-relevant knowledge
 will perform better in the marketplace than firms
 that do not. Two key aspects of this theory are
 knowledge transfer and coordination. Kim stated,
 "The mental models in individuals' heads are
 where a vast majority of an organization's knowl
 edge (both know-how and know-why) lies" (1993:
 44). Thus, knowledge transfer pertains to the
 knowledge that exists within individuals and how
 it is transferred between individuals. Explicit
 knowledge is that which is written, easily commu
 nicated, and often contained in policies, proce
 dures, or rules within organizations (Grant, 1996).
 Explicit knowledge is common in the food service
 industry, in which employees follow detailed in
 structions for food preparation and customer ser
 vice. Tacit knowledge is not easily articulated and
 is acquired through practice.
 An example of tacit knowledge gained in the
 fast-food environment is the ability to anticipate
 when another batch of fries will be needed on the
 basis of the length of the customer line. Training
 manuals explain how to make fries, not when. After
 gaining experience behind the counter, crew mem
 bers can anticipate the need to drop a basket of fries
 in the fryer by recognizing that nearly every cus
 tomer orders fries and that one basket of fries serves
 three to five customers. Thus, when a queue forms,
 tacit rather than explicit knowledge tells the crew
 member when it is time to cook fries. Tacit knowl
 edge also occurs in the grill area. For example, food
 preparation taught in training differs from how it is
 actually performed on the job. Training materials
 indicate that one must weigh ingredients to ensure
 consistency across product. However, with practice
 one can judge how much lettuce should be placed
 on a sandwich without weighing the lettuce, mak
 ing a grill person more efficient over time. These
 are examples of procedures not learned in training,
 but rather as a result of experience and working
 with other experienced employees (Dobbs, 2000).
 As tacit knowledge increases, so does the speed
 component of efficiency.
 While employees are learning their roles, it is
 likely that mistakes will be made. Filled orders that
 do not meet customer requests must be thrown
 away and replaced with the correct orders. This
 process increases waste and hence, raises food
 costs. As employees gain experience, their speed
 should improve, and the number of bad orders (i.e.,

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:57:34 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 136 Academy of Management Journal February

 those that do not meet customer specifications and
 must be thrown away) should diminish. The food
 service industry generally has standardized opera
 tions (strict operating policies and procedures), yet
 rampant turnover can prevent restaurants from op
 erating at peak efficiency, as at any point in time
 someone on the floor is likely to be new to the job
 and lacks both explicit and tacit knowledge. Hence,
 efficiency is reduced as constant turnover increases
 waste and slows service time (Carbone, 1995).

 Hypothesis 2. Crew turnover is related to
 longer customer wait time.
 Hypothesis 3. Crew turnover is related to
 higher food waste.

 Although knowledge transfer is important for
 training new employees, knowledge transfer in its
 purest form may lead to inefficiencies, since it is
 unnecessary for each individual to have a full
 working knowledge of every other organization
 member's tasks (Berman, Down, & HrH, 2002;
 Grant, 1996). Knowledge integration or coordina
 tion provides a better way to utilize the specialized
 talents of members of the work team. Such coordi
 nation is accomplished through rules and direc
 tives, sequencing, and routines (Grant, 1996). Rou
 tines are relatively automatic patterns of behavior
 that support team member interactions with little
 or no verbal communication (Winter, 1986). Estab
 lishing routines is critical for success in fast food
 restaurants (Leidner, 1993). Building and motivat
 ing smooth work teams may be especially challeng
 ing for new managers as they are less familiar with
 each individual's work habits and abilities. Creat
 ing schedules that satisfy current employees, as
 well as training new employees, may be difficult
 for managers who themselves are "learning the
 ropes." Frequent managerial turnover can limit the
 ability of a work team to function in a synchronized
 manner, as a new manager may be less adept at
 building and motivating a team (Berman et al.,
 2002). This notion is consistent with Staw's (1980)
 suggestion that the higher the level at which turn
 over occurs in the organizational hierarchy, the
 greater the possibility of operational disruptions.
 Thus, it is likely that changes in management can
 also reduce efficiency.

 Hypothesis 4. Manager turnover is related to
 longer customer wait time.
 Hypothesis 5. Manager turnover is related to
 higher food waste.

 EFFICIENCY AND PERFORMANCE

 Contingency theory suggests that organizational
 performance is a result of the fit between internal
 attributes of an organization and external demands
 of its environment (Lawrence & Lorsch, 1967). Past
 research has shown that organizations with good
 performance experience a closer fit with relevant
 parts of their environments than organizations with
 poor performance (Burton, Lauridson, & Obel,
 2002; Lawrence & Lorsch, 1967). In the food service
 industry, consumers and competitors represent the
 environment (Lawrence & Lorsch, 1969). Internal
 attributes of these organizations include goal orien
 tation, time horizon, reliance on formal rules and
 communication channels, and interpersonal style
 (Lawrence & Lorsch, 1969). In restaurants, it can be
 argued that consistency is crucial to meeting cus
 tomer expectations, and heavy reliance on formal
 rules, policies, and procedures would be expected.
 The more an organization is structured to meet the
 demands of consumers, the better the organization
 will perform.

 The coalignment of an organization and its envi
 ronment is achieved through strategic choice
 (Miles & Snow, 1978). Child (1972) argued that a
 firm has an interactive relationship with its envi
 ronment and does not necessarily react to it.
 Rather, managers of the firm in part create the en
 vironment through strategic choices (i.e., major de
 cisions). In the food service industry, strategic
 choices may involve products, markets, and oper
 ations. For example, one goal of the fast-food in
 dustry is prompt service. Indeed, evidence suggests
 that a six-second reduction in transaction speed
 results in a 1 percent increase in revenue (Ankeny,
 2001). Accordingly, many of the decisions made in
 the fast-food industry have the sole purpose of de
 creasing customer wait time. A decade ago, point
 of-sale (POS) systems and touch screens were inte
 grated into many restaurants. The introduction of
 these systems was vital in improving communica
 tion between the counter and the kitchen (Duro
 cher, 1993). A more recent innovation undertaken
 by the major fast-food companies (Burger King, Mc
 Donald's, and Wendy's) was to install a credit card
 system that requires no signature or personal iden
 tification number (PIN). Their reluctance to accept
 credit cards in the past stemmed from concerns about
 slower service times and bottlenecks (Liddle, 2003).
 The service quality literature suggests timely re
 sponsiveness to customer demands is an important
 aspect of perception of service quality (Hightower,
 Brady, & Baker, 2002; Houston, Bettencourt, &
 Wenger, 1998; Katz, Larson, & Larson, 1991). Both
 customer retention and profitability have been pos

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:57:34 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 2006 Kacmar, Andrews, Van Rooy, Steilberg, and Cerrone 137

 itively related to perceptions of service quality
 (Zeithaml, 2000). Speed of service often has been
 operationalized as customer wait time and has been
 empirically linked with perceptions of service
 quality (Houston et al., 1998).

 Two primary determinants of efficiency in the
 fast-food industry are speed of service and food
 waste. Since production efficiencies stem from
 increased output relative to input or reduced in
 put relative to output (Fabricant, 1969), organi
 zations that can shorten wait times while holding
 down food waste will realize higher performance
 than those with longer wait times and higher levels of
 waste.

 Hypothesis 6. Customer wait time is negatively
 related to sales.

 Hypothesis 7. Customer wait time is negatively
 related to profit.

 Hypothesis 8. Food waste is negatively related
 to profit.

 METHODS

 Sample and Data Collection Procedures

 Our data were collected from 262 of the 583
 (45%) corporately owned BURGER KING? restau
 rants over a two-year period representing the com
 pany's 2001 and 2002 fiscal years. Restaurants in
 cluded in this study were located in the continental
 United States and had complete data over the two
 year period. If a restaurant did not have data for all
 periods (if, for instance, a restaurant was closed for
 a one-month remodeling), it was excluded from the
 analyses. No other qualifiers were used for restau
 rant selection. Data were collected via the POS
 system installed in each restaurant. This system
 measures sales as they occur. In addition, it allows
 managers to record the employee entrances and
 departures (turnover actions) that occur in their
 restaurant. The POS system feeds all of the data to
 a central database that is routed to the BKC restau
 rant support center.

 Measures

 Turnover. Crew turnover was the monthly per
 centage of turnover of hourly employees in fiscal
 2001. We obtained this value by dividing the num
 ber of terminations by the average hourly employee
 restaurant headcount during that same period.
 Management turnover, measured using the same
 formula as crew turnover, represented the monthly
 turnover of salaried employees. To create the spec
 ified time lags for the turnover rates, we split the

 fiscal year in half for both crew and management,
 measuring average turnover for the first six months
 of fiscal 2001. Crew turnover included only volun
 tary job departures (voluntary turnover) as prelim
 inary results indicated that voluntary and involun
 tary turnover produced different results,2 but only
 voluntary turnover was consistent with our theo
 retical arguments. However, we were unable to dis
 tinguish between voluntary and involuntary turn
 over for managers as the data were unavailable.
 Blending the two types of turnover, while not ideal,
 is not unprecedented (Glebbeek & Bax, 2004; Koys,
 2001; McElroy, Morrow, & Rude, 2001; Simons &
 Roberson, 2003).

 Efficiency. Efficiency was measured in two
 ways. The first measure was customer wait time,
 the period of time from when a customer ordered
 to the delivery of food. To assess wait time, we
 used scores assigned to each restaurant by mys
 tery shoppers, who are employees of outside
 agencies retained by BKC. These shoppers clan
 destinely rate the restaurants on a number of
 relevant metrics determined by BKC. One of
 these metrics is wait time, which was timed and
 recorded by the mystery shoppers. Each restau
 rant received at least one mystery shopper per
 month. Thus, all restaurants received a minimum
 of 12 mystery shopper scores for the year, and we
 averaged these scores to obtain customer wait
 time for fiscal year 2001. The second measure of
 efficiency was the average food waste for fiscal
 2001. We determined this value by comparing
 food inventory at the beginning of the month
 with monthly sales to determine the inventory
 carried over at the end of the month. For exam
 ple, if a store had 100 WHOPPER? patties at the
 beginning of the month and sold 75 WHOPPERS?
 during that month, then 25 patties should have
 remained in inventory at the end of the month. If
 fewer than 25 remained, some WHOPPERS? had
 been prepared and wasted rather than sold. Thus,
 the more closely the depleted food inventory
 matched sales, the less waste and the more effi
 cient the store.

 Performance. Financial performance was mea
 sured in two ways. First, gross monthly sales were
 collected from each of the 262 stores via the POS
 system. We combined the monthly sales to obtain
 average sales for fiscal 2002. Profit, a second mea
 sure of performance, was measured using an index
 referred to as restaurant operating profit before oc
 cupancy (ROPO), calculated by adjusting gross
 sales for expenses such as utilities, advertising, re

 2 These analyses are available from the first author.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:57:34 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 138 Academy of Management Journal February

 pairs, maintenance, labor and fringe benefits, and
 cost of sales. ROPO was measured for the same
 period and averaged in the same fashion as sales.
 For the sake of clarity and consistency with other
 literature, we refer to this measure of operating
 profit before occupancy as profit.

 Control variables. We included two control vari
 ables in our analyses. The first was restaurant site
 quality. BKC assigns each restaurant a value based
 on a formula that rates key issues associated with
 restaurant location. For example, restaurants with
 easy access, locations on busy corners, or locations
 with a high volume of foot traffic score higher than
 stores that do not have these attributes. We linked
 site quality to both management and crew turnover
 as well as both performance measures, as we sus
 pected that stores with high site quality ratings are
 more attractive to both managers and crew and
 generate higher sales and profit. Our second control
 variable was size, measured as a store's number of
 employees. This measure was used as a control for
 both sales and profit.3

 Analyses

 We used structural equation modeling to test our
 hypotheses, employing the software AMOS 5.0 (Ar
 buckle, 2003) to estimate all models. We refer to
 several fit statistics to provide an accurate overall
 picture of model fit (Bollen & Long, 1993). These
 include the overall chi-square value, the compara
 tive fit index (CFI), the normed fit index (NFI), and
 the root-mean-square error of approximation
 (RMSEA).

 RESULTS

 We began by transforming Figure 1 into the struc
 tural model shown in Figure 2. This model was
 estimated first and served as our baseline model for
 comparison purposes (model 1). To confirm that
 our hypothesized time lags were appropriate, we
 tested the model without lags (Glebbeek & Bax,
 2004). Specifically, the model was estimated with
 values for all variables from fiscal 2001 (model 2)
 and then again with fiscal 2002 values (model 3).
 Table 1 shows results from these models. As the
 RMSEA shows, neither of these models fitted the
 data as well as the hypothesized model, indicating
 support for our use of a lagged model. We also
 tested our assumption that turnover had no imme

 3 We explored including local unemployment rate as a
 control variable, but found it to have little explanatory
 power.

 diate effect on efficiency by substituting fiscal 2001
 efficiency in our baseline model with fiscal 2002
 efficiency and reestimating the model (model 4).
 Again, results supported our contention, as the
 links between turnover and efficiency became in
 significant. Finally, we explored the length of time
 it took for inefficiencies to appear in the financial
 performance indicators. After first demonstrating
 that measuring financial performance in the same
 fiscal year as turnover and efficiency was not ap
 propriate, we tested two additional performance
 time frames for fiscal 2002: the first six months
 (model 5) and the last six months (model 6). Al
 though the chi-square and RMSEA for model 6
 were slightly lower than those for the other two
 models, we viewed the results for all three models
 as essentially interchangeable. To create the stron
 gest measure of performance, one including all pos
 sible seasonal fluctuations in sales, we measured
 performance for the full year.

 Having established that our time lags were appro
 priate, we then examined our assumption of a fully
 mediated model. To do this we estimated two par
 tially mediated models for comparison purposes. In
 one model we added direct paths from manage
 ment turnover to performance (model 7), and in the
 other we added direct links from crew turnover to
 performance (model 8). Results provided in Table 1
 show that the difference in the chi-squares of the
 partially and fully mediated models was not signif
 icant and that none of the new paths were signifi
 cant. Although the nonsignificant chi-square differ
 ence tests suggest that the models are
 interchangeable, the fact that the additional paths
 were not significant suggests that full rather than
 partial mediation is the most appropriate depiction
 of the relationships in the model. These analyses
 help answer the first two questions motivating our
 study in that they show turnover does affect unit
 level performance and that efficiency mediates the
 relationship of performance to turnover.

 Next we explored the specific links in the model
 to determine whether our hypotheses were sup
 ported. The correlations in Table 2 offered prelim
 inary support for most of our hypotheses. As ex
 pected, management turnover was positively and
 significantly correlated with crew turnover (Hy
 pothesis 1) and customer wait time (Hypothesis 4),
 but not food waste (Hypothesis 5). Crew turnover
 was positively and.significantly related to both ef
 ficiency measures (Hypotheses 2 and 3). In addi
 tion, both efficiency measures were negatively and
 significantly correlated with both performance
 measures (Hypotheses 6-8). Next, we examined the
 links in Figure 2 to further test our hypotheses.

 Of control variables, restaurant site quality was

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:57:34 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 2006

 Kacmar, Andrews, Van Rooy, Steilberg, and Cerrone

 139

 Standardized Path Loadings of the Impact of Turnover on Unit-Level Performance

 FIGURE 2

 Significant Paths -
 Insignificant Paths .

 not significantly related to either measure of turn
 over, but the paths from site quality to sales and
 performance were both significant. As expected,
 size (number of employees) was significantly re
 lated to sales and profit. As for the predicted rela
 tionships, management turnover was positively
 and significantly related to crew turnover, demon
 strating support for Hypothesis 1. Crew turnover
 was significantly related to both wait time and food
 waste, indicating support for Hypotheses 2 and 3.
 On the other hand, management turnover was pos
 itively and significantly related to wait time but not
 to food waste. Thus, Hypothesis 4 was supported,
 but Hypothesis 5 was not.

 Moving on to the efficiency-performance link, we
 found that customer wait time was significantly
 and negatively related to both sales and profit, find
 ings lending support for Hypotheses 6 and 7. The
 second efficiency variable, food waste, was not sig
 nificantly related to profit, so no support for Hy
 pothesis 8 was provided.

 Finally, we address the third question that moti
 vated our study: What is the value of a stable work
 force? This value can be estimated in multiple
 ways. One way is to examine the indirect effects
 shown in Figure 2. Specifically, one can multiply
 and then sum the path coefficients that represent
 the indirect effects on each of the ultimate depen
 dent variables to determine what percentage
 change in the standard deviation of performance
 (i.e., sales or profit) corresponds to a one-standard
 deviation change in turnover (Kenny, 1979). In our
 case, the indirect effect of turnover on sales is -.15,
 with crew turnover being responsible for ?.07 and
 management turnover being responsible for -.08.
 This indirect effect represents 33 percent of the
 total effect of crew turnover. Examining the indi
 rect effects for profit leads to similar results. The
 indirect effect of turnover on profit is -.16 (-.08
 for crew and -.08 for management), which repre
 sents 23 percent of the total effect of management
 turnover.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:57:34 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 140

 Academy of Management Journal

 February

 Fit Statistics for the Hypothesized and Alternative Models3

 TABLE 1

 RMSEA

 Path
 Loading

 Model

 1. Hypothesized modelb
 2. All variables at time 1
 3. All variables at time 2
 4. Turnover at time 1, all other variables at time 2

 Crew turnover -? Wait time
 Management turnover ?> Wait time
 Crew turnover ?? Food waste
 Management turnover -> Food waste

 5. Performance as first six months of fiscal 2002
 6. Performance as last six months of fiscal 2002
 7. Direct effects from management turnover to

 X2

 21.04
 40.54
 60.26
 36.82

 df W d/di

 .05 11
 .00 11
 .00 11
 .00 11

 NFI CFI

 .98
 .96
 .94
 .96

 .99
 .97
 .95
 .97

 24.39
 17.53
 19.47

 .05
 .09
 .02

 11
 11
 9

 1.57

 .98
 .98
 .98

 .99
 .99
 .99

 .06
 .10
 .13
 .10

 .07
 .05
 .07

 performance

 Management turnover -> Sales
 Management turnover -> Profit

 8. Direct effects from crew turnover to

 performance

 Crew turnover ?? Sales
 Crew turnover ?? Profit

 an = 262.
 b Baseline model, depicted in Figure 2.

 15.26

 .08

 5.78

 .99

 .99

 .052

 .01
 .10
 .09
 .02

 .05
 .06

 .10
 .09

 TABLE 2

 Correlations among Variables41

 Variable

 1. Management turnover15
 2. Crew turnoverb
 3. Wait timec
 4. Food waste0
 5. Salesd
 6. Profitd
 7. Site quality
 8. Sized

 .33***
 .33***
 .11
 .11
 .13*
 .08
 .05

 .37***
 .19**
 .20***
 .19**
 .13*
 .02

 .30***
 -.24***
 -.25***
 -.16*
 .06

 -.23***
 -.24***
 -.15*
 -.09

 .96***
 .46***
 .64***

 .43***
 .57***

 .30*

 a n = 262 (two-tailed). Means and standard deviations are not reported as these values were proprietary.
 b First six months of fiscal 2001.
 c Fiscal 2001.
 d Fiscal 2002.
 * p < .05
 **p < .01
 ? < .001

 A second way in which the value of a stable
 workforce can be estimated is by determining the
 cost of hiring replacements for all of the employees
 who have left. According to White (1995), the in
 dustry-wide cost of hiring a replacement crew
 member is estimated to be at least $500. Coupling
 this cost with the industry average crew turnover
 rate of 123 percent and the average number of em
 ployees per store of 50 (Zuber, 2001), the average
 cost of crew turnover would be $30,500 a year (61
 new hires multiplied by $500). We believe consid
 ering both the indirect and direct costs of crew

 turnover clearly demonstrates the value of a stable
 workforce.4

 DISCUSSION

 In the present study, we sought to answer three
 important research questions: (1) Does turnover af
 fect unit-level performance? (2) If turnover does

 4 We would like to thank two of our reviewers for

 suggesting these approaches.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:57:34 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 2006 Kacmar, Andrews, Van Rooy, Steilberg, and Cerrone 141

 affect unit-level performance, are there any medi
 ating mechanisms? (3) What is the value of a stable
 workforce? The answer to our first question is yes,
 as our study illustrated that turnover does indeed
 impact unit-level performance in terms of both
 sales and profit. Exactly how this happens is the
 focus of our second question, concerning media
 tion. We learned that efficiency, measured in terms
 of customer wait time, mediated the relationship of
 turnover with unit-level performance. A link be
 tween turnover and performance has often been
 inferred, but our results identify and operationalize
 efficiency to explain this link. Turning to our third
 question, we found that a stable workforce allowed
 units to be efficient, and that efficiency led to stron
 ger performance. In food service, an industry char
 acterized by relatively standardized operations, a
 stable workforce makes a firm more competitive.
 We believe three theories?social exchange theory,
 the knowledge-based view of organizations, and
 strategic choice?help explain our results.

 Our results indicate managerial turnover is pos
 itively and immediately related to crew turnover.
 Given the level of attractiveness of working in food
 service and the often short duration of employment
 in the industry, employees are more likely to de
 velop loyalty to their manager than to their organ
 ization. As social exchange theory suggests, if a
 manager leaves an organization, his or her employ
 ees no longer feel obligated to remain. This idea is
 also consistent with Mueller and Price's (1989) as
 sertion that managerial turnover causes disruption
 and reduces behavioral commitment. Our results
 confirm their suggestion that "the greater this dis
 ruption in a work unit, the more likely members
 will question the viability of that work unit as the
 place they wish to work" (Mueller & Price, 1989:
 393).

 Crew turnover was related to reduced effi
 ciency in the form of longer customer wait times
 and higher food waste. These links provide em
 pirical support for the knowledge-based view of
 organizations, including its assumptions of
 knowledge transfer and coordination (Grant,
 1996). Specifically, the observed negative rela
 tionship between crew turnover and efficiency
 suggests that employees are more likely to gain
 both the tacit and explicit knowledge required to
 efficiently perform their jobs as their organiza
 tional tenure increases. Practitioner accounts
 from the quick-service food industry echo this
 view, maintaining that a stable and well-trained
 workforce results in a better customer experience
 (Zuber, 2001). Interestingly, management turn
 over produced different results than crew turn
 over. Specifically, management turnover was

 positively and significantly related to customer
 wait time, but not food waste. It appears that the
 central and most important role of a manager is to
 provide an environment in which employees can
 perform quickly. Managers who have experience
 working with their crews are in a better position
 to accomplish this task.

 Finally, our results support the contention that
 customer wait time has a significant and direct
 effect on performance measured in terms of sales in
 the fast-food industry. In keeping with theories of
 strategic choice (Miles & Snow, 1978), the industry
 has created consumer expectations of receiving
 quality food fast, and "fastness" continues to be a
 primary determinant of revenues (Ankeny, 2001). It
 is difficult for inexperienced crew members to
 work at the speed customers expect. Customer wait
 time was negatively and significantly related to
 profit, indicating that slow service resulting from
 high crew turnover rates can significantly reduce
 store profits.

 Strengths and Weaknesses

 We draw your attention to four strengths in the
 present study. First, our results demonstrate what
 quick-service food operators have asserted for
 years: that speed is an essential component of effi
 ciency and a key factor in successful performance.
 Second, the data were longitudinal. This has been
 noted as an important feature in turnover research
 as the impact of turnover on outcomes may or may
 not be immediate (Glebbeek & Bax, 2004; Mueller &
 Price, 1989). Further, longitudinal data allowed us
 to more rigorously test the causality implied in our
 model. Third, by identifying and testing alternative
 models, we were able to dismiss several plausible
 alternative explanations of our data. Finally, all of
 the measures were based on actual data from 262
 functioning BURGER KING? restaurants, a method
 that represents a departure from other studies that
 have relied on key informants' recollection of data
 or whose results were based on fewer units. More
 over, the standardization of product, marketing, fa
 cility, and procedures in these restaurants elimi
 nated sources of extraneous variance, notably
 improving our ability to isolate the researched
 variables.

 However, the study is not without limitations.

 Most importantly, the data were collected from
 one company doing business in one industry.
 Even though the company that supplied the data
 is clearly a leader in its industry, the industry
 may be considered unique. For instance, many of
 the restaurant employees work on a part-time
 basis. Accordingly, many of these individuals

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:57:34 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 142 Academy of Management Journal February

 may not view their job as a career, but more as a
 temporary stop along the way to their desired
 career path. Sentiments like these are evident in
 the extraordinarily high turnover rates that
 plague this industry. Although this feature made
 the data especially attractive for a study of turn
 over issues, the results may not generalize to
 organizations outside the food service industry.
 Additionally, there were two data-reporting con
 straints that we could not overcome because of
 lack of availability. First, although we segmented
 crew turnover into voluntary and involuntary, we
 were unable to do so with management turnover.
 Second, the efficiency measures were only avail
 able as average yearly values. However, we do not
 feel that these data constraints undermine the
 contribution of the study.

 Managerial Implications

 The results of the present study have several
 important implications for managers and human
 resource professionals. First, since crew stability
 is strongly linked to management stability, atten
 tion should be paid to improving the procedures
 for selecting restaurant managers. Once key at
 tributes of successful career managers have been
 located, selection procedures can be developed
 that isolate these characteristics in management
 applicants. Effectively cloning long-term manag
 ers who run profitable restaurants should lower
 management turnover rates, which will ulti
 mately increase performance through lower crew
 turnover and shorter wait times. However, hiring
 talent is just the first step. Food service organi
 zations also need to find ways of improving the
 work environment in order to retain their talent.
 As the main reasons cited for leaving jobs in the
 food service industry include poor management,
 low compensation, and wanting to improve one's
 quality of life (White, 1995), action steps should
 be taken to improve each of these areas. Addi
 tionally, since customer wait time has been iden
 tified as a prominent precursor to sales and
 profit, it may be worthwhile for managers to im
 prove and reward this aspect of work. For in
 stance, spot rewards could be given to managers
 and crew at locations that consistently meet or
 exceed efficiency expectations. Another ap
 proach would be to conduct team-building exer
 cises for new employees to help them quickly
 learn tacit knowledge and develop the skills re
 quired to provide efficient service. Creating a
 stable team may be as important in the fast-food
 industry as it is in sports. Teammates who have
 worked together for some time will be able to

 predict each others' moves, anticipate problems,
 cover and compensate for each other, and work
 seamlessly when things get busy, mitigating
 losses due to inefficiencies.

 In summary, we believe that this study makes an
 important contribution to the organizational turn
 over literature. By positioning turnover as an ante
 cedent rather than a final outcome in our model, we
 were able to answer three important research ques
 tions: (1) Does turnover affect unit-level perfor
 mance? (2) If turnover does affect unit-level perfor
 mance, are there any mediating mechanisms? and
 (3) What is the value of a stable workforce? As
 illustrated above, the answers to these questions
 have important implications for both research and
 practice. Our investigation is clearly only a first
 step in exploring the turnover-efficiency-perfor
 mance relationship, but our hope is that these find
 ings will motivate others to continue this promis
 ing line of inquiry.

 REFERENCES

 Allen, D. G., Shore, L. M., & Griffeth, R. W. 2003. The role
 of perceived organizational support and supportive
 human resource practices in the turnover process.
 Journal of Management, 29: 99-118.

 Ankeny, J. 2001. Hungry? Why wait? Upstart, 2(8): 12.
 Arbuckle, J. L. 2003. AMOS 5.0. Chicago: Smallwaters

 Corporation.

 Batt, R. 2002. Managing customer services: Human re
 source practices, quit rates, and sales growth. Acad
 emy of Management Journal, 45: 587-597.

 Berman, S. L., Down, J., & Hill, C. W. 2002. Tacit knowl

 edge as a source of competitive advantage in the
 national basketball association. Academy of Man
 agement Journal, 45: 13-31.

 Bollen, K. A., & Long, J. S. 1993. Testing structural

 equation models. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

 Burton, R. M., Lauridsen, J., & Obel, B. 2002. Return on

 assets loss from situational and contingency misfits.
 Management Science, 48: 1461-1485.

 Carbone, L. 1995. Less employee turnover: The hidden

 keys to profitability. Nation's Restaurant News,
 29(12): 50.

 Child, J. 1972. Organization structure, environment, and

 performance: The role of strategic choice. Sociology,
 6: 1-22.

 Dansereau, F., Graen, G, & Haga, W. 1975. A vertical
 dyad approach to leadership within formal organi
 zations. Organizational Behavior and Human Per
 formance, 13: 46-78.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:57:34 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 2006 Kacmar, Andrews, Van Rooy, Steilberg, and Cerrone 143

 Dobbs, K. 2000. Simple moments of learning. Training,

 37(1): 52.

 Durocher, J. 1993. Vital links. Restaurant Business,

 92(7): 176-181.

 Eisenberger, R., Huntington, R., Hutchinson, S., & Sowa,

 D. 1986. Perceived organizational support. Journal
 of Applied Psychology, 71: 500-507.

 Fabricant, S. 1969. A primer on productivity. New York:

 Random House.

 Gerstner, C. R., & Day, D. V. 1997. Meta-analytic review
 of leader-member exchange theory: Correlates and
 construct issues. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82:
 827-844.

 Glebbeek, A. C, & Bax, E. H. 2004. Is high employee
 turnover really harmful? An empirical test using
 company records. Academy of Management Jour
 nal, 47: 277-286.

 Gouldner, A. W. 1960. The norm of reciprocity: A pre
 liminary statement. American Sociological Re
 view, 25: 161-178.

 Grant, R. M. 1996. Toward a knowledge-based theory of
 the firm. Strategic Management Journal, 17: 109
 122.

 Hightower, R, Brady, M. K., & Baker, T. L. 2002. Inves
 tigating the role of the physical environment in he
 donic service consumption: An exploratory study of
 sporting events. Journal of Business Research, 55:
 697-707.

 Horn, P. W., & Griffeth, R. W. 1991. Structural equation
 modeling test of a turnover theory: Cross-sectional
 and longitudinal analyses. Journal of Applied Psy
 chology, 76: 350-366.

 Houston, M. B., Bettencourt, L. A., & Wenger, S. 1998.
 The relationship between waiting in a service queue
 and evaluations of service quality: A field theory
 perspective. Psychology and Marketing, 15: 735
 753.

 Huselid, M. A. 1995. The impact of human resource
 management practices on turnover, productivity,
 and corporate financial performance. Academy of
 Management Journal, 38: 635-672.

 Katz, K. L., Larson, B. M., & Larson, R. C. 1991. Prescrip
 tion for the waiting-in-line blues: Entertain, en
 lighten, and engage. Sloan Management Review,
 32(2): 44-51.

 Kenny, D. A. 1979. Correlation and causality. New

 York: Wiley.

 Kim, D. H. 1993. The link between organizational and
 individual learning. Sloan Management Review,
 35(1): 37-50.

 Koys, D. J. 2001. The effects of employees' satisfaction,
 organizational citizenship behavior, and turnover on
 organizational effectiveness: A unit-level, longitudi
 nal study. Personnel Psychology, 54: 101-114.

 Lawrence, P. R., & Lorsch, J. W. 1967. Organization and

 environment. Boston: Division of Research, Harvard
 Business School.

 Leidner, R. 1993. Fast food, fast talk: Service work and
 the routinization of everyday life. Berkeley: Uni
 versity of California Press.

 Liddle, A. J. 2003. Fast feeders tap quicker charge-card
 methods to boost sales. Nation's Restaurant News,
 37(7): 8-10.

 Liden, R. C, Wayne, S. J., & Sparrowe, R. T. 2000. An
 examination of the mediating role of psychological
 empowerment on the relations between the job, in
 terpersonal relationships, and work outcomes. Jour
 nal of Applied Psychology, 85: 407-416.

 March, J. G, & Simon, H. A. 1958. Organizations. New

 York: Wiley.

 McElroy, J. C, Morrow, P. C, & Rude, S. N. 2001. Turn

 over and organizational performance: A comparative
 analysis of the effects of voluntary, involuntary, and
 reduction-in-force turnover. Journal of Applied Psy
 chology, 86: 1294-1299.

 Miles, R. E., & Snow, C. C. 1978. Organizational strat

 egy, structure, and process. New York: McGraw
 Hill.

 Mobley, W. H. 1977. Intermediate linkages in the rela

 tionship between job satisfaction and employee
 turnover. Journal of Applied Psychology, 62: 237
 240.

 Mueller, C. W., & Price, J. L. 1989. Some consequences of
 turnover: A work unit analysis. Human Relations,
 42: 389-402.

 Price, J. L. 1977. The study of turnover. Ames: Iowa State

 University Press.

 Rousseau, D. M. 1995. Psychological contracts in organ
 izations: Understanding written and unwritten
 agreements. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

 Sagie, A., Birati, A., & Tziner, A. 2002. Assessing the

 costs of behavioral and psychological withdrawal: A
 new model and an empirical illustration. Applied
 Psychology: An International Review, 51(1): 67
 89.

 Settoon, R. P., Bennett, N., & Liden, R.C. 1996. Social

 exchange in organizations: Perceived organizational
 support, leader-member exchange, and employee
 reciprocity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81:
 219-227.

 Shaw, J. D., Gupta, N., & Delery, J. E. 2005. Alternative
 conceptualizations of the relationship between vol
 untary turnover and organizational performance.
 Academy of Management Journal, 48: 50-68.

 Shore, L. M., & Barksdale, K. 1998. Examining degree of
 balance and level of obligation in the employment
 relationship: A social exchange approach. Journal of
 Organizational Behavior, 19: 731-744.

 Shore, L. M., & Wayne, S. J. 1993. Commitment and
 employee behavior: Comparison of affective commit

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:57:34 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 144 Academy of Management Journal February

 ment and continuance commitment with perceived
 organizational support. Journal of Applied Psychol
 ogy, 78: 774-780.

 Simons, T., & Roberson, Q. 2003. Why managers should
 care about fairness: The effects of aggregate justice
 perceptions on organizational outcomes. Journal of
 Applied Psychology, 88: 32-443.

 Staw, B. M. 1980. The consequences of turnover. Journal

 of Organizational Behavior, 1: 253-273.

 Winter, S. G. 1986. The research program of the behav

 ioral theory of the firm: Orthodox critique and evo
 lutionary perspective. In B. Filad & S. Kaish (Eds.),
 Handbook of behavioral economics, vol. A: 151
 188. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

 Zeithaml, V. A. 2000. Service quality, profitability and
 the economic worth of customers: What we know
 and what we need to learn. Journal of the Academy
 of Marketing Science, 28: 67-85.

 White, G. L. 1995. Employee turnover: The hidden drain

 on profits. HR Focus, 72(1): 15-18.

 Zuber, A. 2001. A career in foodservice?Cons: High
 turnover. Nation's Restaurant News, 35: 147-148.

 K. Mich?le (Micki) Kacmar (mkacmar@cba.ua.edu) is a
 professor and the Durr-Fillauer Chair of Business Ethics
 at the University of Alabama. She received her Ph.D. in
 human resource management from Texas A&M Univer
 sity. Her general research interests fall in the areas of
 impression management, organizational politics, ethics,
 and work-family conflict.
 Martha C. Andrews (andrewsm@uncw.edu) is an associ
 ate professor in the Department of Management and Mar
 keting at the University of North Carolina Wilmington.
 She received her Ph.D. from Florida State University, in
 management. Her current research interests include or
 ganizational politics, justice, ethics, and employee
 turnover.

 David Van Rooy (dvanrooy@hotmail.com) is employed
 in the Talent and Organization Development Department
 at Burger King Corporation. He received his Ph.D. in
 industrial/organizational psychology from Florida Inter

 VW

 /?MA

 -M?

 national University. His research interests include emo
 tional intelligence, personality assessment, and models
 of organizational performance.

 Chris Steilberg (chris_steilberg@ryder.com) is a senior
 director of talent and organization development at Ryder
 Systems, Inc. He earned his Ph.D. in industrial/organiza
 tional psychology from the Georgia Institute of Technol
 ogy. His primary research interests include HR strategic
 planning; talent management, with a particular interest
 in executive succession and development; and organiza
 tion development.

 Stephen Cerrone (stephen.j.cerrone@chase.com) is exec
 utive vice president of human resources for Retail Finan
 cial Services at JP Morgan Chase. He holds a Ph.D. in
 industrial/organizational psychology from the University
 of Houston. He has also served as an adjunct faculty
 member at the University of Houston and, most recently,
 at the University of Miami.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 22:57:34 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

