This PDF is a selection from an out-of-print volume from the National Bureau
of Economic Research

Volume Title: When Public Sector Workers Unionize

Volume Author/Editor: Richard B. Freeman and Casey Ichniowski, eds.

Volume Publisher: University of Chicago Press

Volume ISBN: 0-226-26166-2

Volume URL: http://www.nber.org/books/free88-1

Publication Date: 1988

Chapter Title: Unionism and Licensing of Public School Teachers: Impact
on Wages and Educational Output

Chapter Author: Morris M. Kleiner, Daniel L. Petree

Chapter URL: http://www.nber.org/chapters/c7914

Chapter pages in book: (p. 305 - 322)


11 

Unionism and Licensing of 
Public School Teachers: 
Impact on Wages and 
Educational Output 
Morris M. Kleiner and Daniel  L. Petree 

Teacher  union  chief  Albert  Shanker is  urging education leaders to 
join him in an effort to create a tough new national exam for entry 
to  the  profession.  Asked  if  the  test  was  really  a  way  to help  his 
members get higher pay and status, Shanker said: “I confess (it is). 
And you might also get the same quality and standards that go with 
(professionalism) .” 

Associated  Press,  16 April  1985 

As this statement by the leader of the American Federation of Teachers 
(AFT) suggests,  teachers unions  seek to  increase the  quality  of  the 
educational system as well as to raise the earnings of its members. Are 
they successful in improving the quality  of education? How important 
is occupational licensure as a tool for improving the quality of education 
and  raising  wages  compared  to  collective  bargaining  and  the  other 
activities of public  sector unions? 

To answer these questions we will  examine in this paper the extent 
to which unionism leads to stronger licensing statutes for teachers, and 

Morris M. Kleiner is professor of industrial  relations and public affairs at the Hubert 
H. Humphrey  Institute of Public Affairs  and Industrial Relations Center,  University of 
Minnesota,  and  a  research  economist  of the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research. 
Daniel  L.  Petree is instructor at Rockhurst College, Kansas City, and director of labor 
management relations programs for Kansas City, Missouri. 

The authors wish  to thank  Steven Allen,  John  Delaney, Ronald  Ehrenberg, Richard 
Freeman,  Nancy  Johnson,  Richard  Murnane,  participants  at  a  University  of  Kansas 
Human Resources Seminar, and the editors for comments on earlier drafts.  In addition, 
we want to especially  thank Shelley Skie for her assistance with the statistical analysis. 
The following  organizations provided  data or other  helpful  assistance for  this  study: 
National  Education Association, American Federation of Teachers, Scholastic Aptitude 
Testing Service, and Richard Sawyer from the American College Testing  Service. 

305 


306  Morris M.  KleinedDaniel L.  Petree 

alters teacher wages and student test scores directly and through pro- 
visions to license  schoolteachers. We  analyze the experience of  U.S. 
states from  1972-82-a 
decade when  school enrollments and the de- 
mand  for teachers  declined  (Murnane  1985). This decline  led  to in- 
creased  teacher layoffs,  fewer  opportunities to  move  across  school 
districts, fewer transfers to better schools, and a  decline in  teachers’ 
real earnings  of  over  10 percent (O’Neil  1984). As a consequence of 
these  developments, entrance  into  the  profession  was  reduced:  the 
number of  students graduating  with  education degrees declined from 
177,000 in  1971 to 101,000 in  1982, and the number meeting minimum 
licensing requirements fell from 317,254 in  1971-72  to 140,639 in 1980-81. 
Further, the number of first-year college students planning  to choose 
teaching  as an occupation fell from  19.3 percent to 4.7 percent (Con- 
dition of  Education  1983). 

Comparing  states with  greater and lesser unionization  we  find that 
collective  bargaining  coverage is  associated with  higher  salaries  for 
public school teachers and generally, though not uniformly, higher ed- 
ucational  performance as measured  by  student  test  scores and  high 
graduation rates.  Fixed-effects  analysis  of the effects of unionism on 
teacher wages and student performance yield greatly reduced estimated 
effects of unionism on wages but continue to show substantial teacher 
union impacts on student performance. We also find that unionization 
and licensure are complementary for schoolteachers in the sense that 
more heavily unionized states have more stringent licensing laws. With 
collective bargaining  held fixed, however,  we find no impact for rigid 
licensing statutes on pay and uncertain effects on student achievement 
scores. Hence, licensure does not appear to be an important route by 
which  teacher unionism affects the education marketplace. 

We present our analysis in three stages. First, we briefly review past 
findings on the relation between teacher unionism, licensure, and wage 
and educational performance outcomes. Then we describe our data and 
present our empirical results.  Finally, we offer a general interpretation, 
with caveats, of our findings. 

11.1  Past  Work 

There exists a substantial literature on the impact of teacher unions 
on wages, but relatively little analysis of the role of licensing provisions 
as an intervening  route for the union  wage effect or of the impact of 
teacher unions on the output of the educational system. As a prelude 
to our analysis  it will  be useful  to briefly  review  past  findings on the 
issues of concern. 

With respect to the effect of teacher unions on pay  there is a wide 
variation  in  the estimated impact, depending on the unit  of analysis, 


307 

Unionism  and Licensing of  Public  School Teachers 

which  ranges  from states and  school districts to individual  teachers, 
and differs in the period of time covered (see the summary in Freeman 
1986). From the late  1960s through the early  1970s studies using state- 
level data showed a range of estimates from 2 percent to 9 percent for 
the  impact  of  teachers  unions  on  pay  (Kaspar  1970;  Brown  1975). 
Studies that used the school district  as the level of analysis estimated 
effects that varied from  1  percent (Landon and Baird  1971) to 12-14 
percent  (Schmenner  1973). Analyses  for the  1980s covering  districts 
and individuals suggest a greater impact of unions on wages.  For ex- 
ample, Baugh and Stone (1982) find union wage effects that range from 
12 to 21  percent. Apparently, for reasons having to do with changes in 
union  power  and  in  conditions  in  the  teaching  market  (union  wage 
effects are often larger in declining rather than booming markets (Lewis 
1963)), the impact  of  unions  on wages  appears to have  increased  for 
teachers in the period covered by our study. 

In contrast to the well-documented impact of unions on wages, past 
studies have not systematically analyzed the relation between unionism 
and licensure or between licensure and wages. Much of the theoretical 
literature on the effect of licensing treats its impact on societal welfare, 
with ambiguous results  (Leland 1980), rather than directly  addressing 
its effect on wages or performance. In this framework licensing is seen 
as a means to protect the public from an inability to judge the quality 
of services delivered  by  specialists,  given that it is unlikely  that spe- 
cialists  will  act  strictly  in  the  interest of  the  consumer  (Jensen and 
Meckling  1976; Williamson  1964). At the same time, however,  it is to 
the advantage of teachers (as well as other groups) to use licensing to 
limit supply and extract economic rents (Stigler 1975). In the education 
market the fact that governments employ teachers as well as determine 
licensing laws creates further complexities,  as it is not in the govern- 
ment’s interest to restrict  supply and drive up costs. Given these con- 
siderations, we expect licensing laws for teachers to affect the teachers 
market in two ways: assuring the meeting of minimum quality standards 
that  improve performance (Ehrenberg  1973; Frey  1975)  and  raising 
wages by limiting supply. 

Relatively few studies have examined the impact of teacher unionism 
or licensing  on student performance. To  the extent that unions  raise 
the  quality  of  teaching  through  licensing,  improve the  operation of 
schools by forcing administrators to behave more efficiently, or improve 
the quality of teachers by creating professional standards and reducing 
turnover, unions  will  have  positive  effects  on the productivity  of the 
educational  system, as has been found to occur in some parts of man- 
ufacturing (Freeman and Medoff 1984). To the extent that unions simply 
reduce teacher resources by  raising costs, they  are likely  to have the 
opposite impact. We  are aware of  only two studies that  provide  em- 


308  Morris M.  KleinedDaniel L.  Petree 

pirical evidence on which of these effects dominates. Eberts and Stone 
(1986) use test scores on  14,000 fourth graders in selected school dis- 
tricts to evaluate the impact of  unionization  on performance and find 
that when other socioeconomic factors are controlled for, scores are 7 
percent  higher in union districts.  In a study published after the work 
for  this  paper  was  completed,  Kurth  reports  the  opposite  result:  a 
negative relation between union strength and SAT scores across states 
and time. This finding, however,  appears to be due to the absence of 
any  trend  or  regional  controls  in  the  regressions,  in  contrast  to  the 
work  that  we  report  in  this paper. As  for the  impact  of  licensing on 
student performance, we do not know of  any studies. The few studies 
that  have  attempted  to examine the  impact of  licensing on  output  in 
other fields, such as dentistry (Holen  1978) or medical and legal spe- 
cialties (Carroll and Gaston  1981), find no systematic relation between 
licensing provisions and performance, suggesting that it is not easy to 
uncover a licensing productivity  relation, if  one exists. 

In sum, while existing work provides us with reasonable expectations 

about the wage effects of teaching unions, the other issues under study- 
the impact of unions on licensure and the impact of unions and licensing 
on  performance-are 
rarely  explored,  with  existing  studies  yielding 
uncertain  results. It is this  “hole”  in the literature that motivates our 
study. 

11.2  Data and Analysis 

To estimate the impact of teacher unionism on wages, licensing laws, 
and  student  performance  we  have  obtained  state-level data  for  the 
1972-82  period.  We  chose states as units of  observation for four rea- 
sons. First, licensing of public school teachers in the United States is 
implemented  on a state-by-state  basis,  so that  states are  the  natural 
unit for studying licensure. Second, we have reasonably  good data on 
unionization  and collective  bargaining coverage at the  state level for 
the entire period. Third, we are able to obtain student test scores by 
states for  the  period,  providing  us  with  a  critical  outcome  variable. 
Fourth,  we  can use  the  state data to develop a longitudinal or fixed- 
effects analysis that examines how within-state changes in unionization 
produce changes in the outcomes under  study. Recent work  in labor 
economics has stressed the importance of checking cross-section find- 
ings with longitudinal data to control for potential unmeasured variables 
that can bias cross-section results (Freeman  1984). 

Table  11.1  lists  the  key  variables  in  our  analysis  and  gives  their 
source,  mean,  and  standard  deviation  for  all  states  in  the  1972-82 
period. Lines 1-3 give the independent variables reflecting unionization 
and licensing. We  use the percent of teachers who are members of the 


309 

Unionism  and Licensing of  Public School Teachers 

Table 11.1 

Means and Standard Deviations of  Key Independent and 
Dependent  Variables 

Mean 

(std dev) 

Key 
I .  
2. 

3. 

Independent Variables 
Percent of teachers organized 
Percent of teachers with 
collective bargaining contracts 
State-set licensing statutes 

Dependent Variables 

4.  Average state SAT score 
5.  Average state ACT score 
6.  State graduation rate 
7.  Average state teacher pay 

.86 
.65 

.45 

95 1 
18.80 
.75 
12,235 

Sources: 
Line  1:  NEA membership data obtained from NEA and  National Council of  State Ed- 
ucation Associations (Washington, D.C.), Profiles ofState Associations, various editions. 
AFT membership provided by the union with confidential computer printout. To get the 
percentage organized, we divided by  the number of teachers in the state. 
Line 2: Calculated from U.S. Bureau of the Census, Survey and Census of Governments, 
various editions. 
Line 3: Obtained by  reading relevant state legal statutes. 
Line 4:  Obtained from Educational Testing Service. 
Line 5: Obtained from American College Testing Service. For reasons of confidentiality, 
the ACT tabulated means for us and performed the various regressions reported  here. 
Line 6:  U.S.  Bureau of the Census, U . S .  Statistical  Abstract. 
Line 7 :  National  Education Association  and  National  Council  of  State Education  As- 
sociations (Washington, D.C.), Profiles  of State Associations, various editions. 

AFT  or National  Education  Association  (NEA) and  the  percent  of 
teachers covered  by  a  collective  bargaining  contract to measure the 
strength  of  unionism  in  a  state. Because not  all teacher union  locals 
bargain  collectively it is generally believed that having a contract is a 
more  desirable measure (see Lewis, this  volume, chap.  6). Still, the 
percent union  may reflect the political power of the union in lobbying 
or campaigning  for  outcomes,  leading  us  to examine  each  of  these 
variables in our analysis. To measure the strength of state licensing of 
teachers we  use a  dummy variable  that takes on the  value  1 if  state 
statutes make licensing subject to specific kinds of education, experi- 
ence, and a statewide examination. The means and standard deviations 
in  table  11.1  show an average across states of 86 percent of teachers 
in the AFT or the NEA with, however, considerable dispersion among 
states; a  smaller but  still  high  percentage covered  by  collective  bar- 
gaining  of  65  percent;  and  45  percent  of the  states having  what  we 
categorize  as a strong teacher-licensing  statute. 


310  Morris M.  KleinedDaniel L.  Petree 

Lines  4-7  relate  to  our primary  dependent  variables:  the  average 
earnings of schoolteachers in a state, and the average Scholastic Aptitude 
(SAT) and American College Testing (ACT) scores of students, which 
we  obtained from  special  tabulations of  test results from the  Educa- 
tional Testing Service in Princeton, New Jersey and from the American 
College Testing Service in  Iowa City, Iowa. Although  only about  27 
percent of high school students take either of these exams, the exams 
are  the  most  widely administered  national  measures  of  performance 
available (Dynarski 1985). To evaluate the effects of  unionism and li- 
censing on lower educational achievers, we also examine the percent- 
age of  students who graduate from high school. 

In addition  to these variables  our calculations include diverse con- 
trols  for a  range  of  factors  that  might  be  expected  to  affect  teacher 
salaries or educational performance across states: real (price-deflated) 
expenditures per student, nonwage expenditures per student; per capita 
personal income; the percentage  of  high  school graduates  in  a  state; 
the percentage of students attendin:  private schools; the average wage 
in manufacturing; average public school enrollment; the percentage of 
minority  students in a state; and the average age and experience (es- 
timated as age  - years of schooling  - 5 years) of teachers in a state, 
calculated from  the  Current  Population  Surveys as a measure of  the 
human capital of teachers in a state, and an indicator of the favorable- 
ness of  state labor law toward teacher collective bargaining. ' 
As  our analysis covers an eleven-year period  (1972-82),  there are 
555  state-by-year  observations  for  most  variables,  though  there  are 
some missing values for some states and years in  several cases. In all 
of  our empirical  work  we  pool  the  cross  sections for the  years  and 
include year dummy variables to allow for any year effects. In addition, 
in  some  calculations we  add  state dummy  variables  as independent 
variables,  changing  the  structure  of  the  analysis from  cross-section 
comparisons to a fixed-effects longitudinal design.  We  deal first with 
the  relation  between  unionism  and  licensing,  and  then  analyze  the 
impact of the two variables on outcomes. 
11.2.1  Teacher Unionism and Licensing 

To see whether unionization in a state is associated with stronger or 
weaker licensing laws we estimated a logistic equation linking the pres- 
ence of a strong statewide licensing policy to the proportion of teachers 
who are members of organizations, or to the proportion who are cov- 
ered  by  collective  bargaining and  by  various  control  variables  using 
our complete pooled cross-section data set.* The results of  these cal- 
culations  reveal  the  expected positive  relation  between  unionization 
and licensing statutes. In our logit analysis of the impact of the extent 
of union membership on statewide licensing statutes, the membership 


311 

Unionism  and Licensing of Public School Teachers 

variable  obtained  a positive  and  significant coefficient of  1.34 with  a 
standard error of  .57. This implies that an increase in union density of 
10 percentage points would raise the probability of having a statewide 
statute by about 4 percentage points. In our logit analysis of the impact 
of  the extent of collective bargaining coverage, we obtained a similar 
positive and significant coefficient for that variable: .91 with a standard 
error of .44. These results indicate that in states where teachers unions 
are stronger, legislatures pass more rigorous licensing statutes. This is 
consistent with the Shanker quote with which we began this paper. 
11.2.2  Unionization and Wages Across States 

Given that unionization appears to increase the strength of licensing 
provisions,  the  next  question to investigate is whether  licensing and 
unionism  affect  outcomes.  We  consider  first their  impact  on  wages. 
Our wage analysis takes two forms. First, we regress the log of teacher 
pay in a state on the percentage of  teachers in a teacher organization 
or on the percentage of teachers covered by collective bargaining, the 
licensing dummy  variable, and  various  controls.  Second, to remove 
the influence of  any persistent  state effect over time, we add dummy 
variables for states and thus estimate the impact of  the variables  in a 
fixed-effects model. Table 11.2 summarizes the results of these regres- 
sions in  terms  of  the  estimated  coefficients  on  the  unionism  and  li- 
censing  variables.  The  cross-section  regressions  show  moderate 
unionization effects, which are higher for the collective bargaining cov- 
erage variable than for the union membership variable. The regression 

Table  11.2 

Coefficient Estimates and Standard Errors for the  Effects  of 
Unionization  on Log of Teacher Wages 

Independent Variables 

Cross-Section Analysis 

Fixed-Effects Analysis 

Percent members 

.04 

Percent covered by 

contracts 

State licensing 

State dummies 

R2 

.O1 
(.02) 
no 
.65 

Notes: Cross-section regressions include the following control variables: manufacturing 
wage,  index  of  legal  environment  in  the  state toward  collective  bargaining,  age  and 
experience of teachers, year dummies, and  three-region dummies.  Fixed-effect regres- 
sions include the same control variable as the cross-section regressions. The R* are not 
reported  as they are extraordinarily high  with  the state dummy variables. 


312  Morris M.  KleinedDaniel L.  Petree 

with  percentage  union  membership also shows a  modest  impact for 
licensing laws. However, when we replace membership with collective 
bargaining  coverage the coefficient  on licensing becomes smaller and 
remains insignificant. The implication is that collective bargaining rather 
than licensing was the means by which teacher unions affected wages 
in the period.  Note, finally, that our cross-state results  are within the 
same range  as the earlier  estimates of  the effect  of teacher unionism 
on pay using  states data cited in section  11.1. 

The results of the fixed-effects analysis are more surprising, as they 
show that state dummy variables  absorb any union  wage effect.  This 
does not  mean  that  unionization  has  no  effect  on teacher wages, as 
longitudinal  analyses  tend  to  understate  union  wage  effects  due  to 
measurement error (Freeman  1984). Rather, it  indicates  that the lon- 
gitudinal  test  is  in  fact a relatively  stringent  one, as it  eliminates  all 
cross-state  variation  and  general  time-series  variation  to  focus  on 
changes  within  states over  time.  The  fixed-effects  wage  results  do, 
however, provide us with a measuring rod for assessing ensuing fixed- 
effects  analyses  of  the  relation  between  unionism  and  educational 
performance. 
11.2.3 

Unionization,  Test  Scores, and Graduation Rates 

The most  controversial  issue that  we  address in  this  paper  is  the 
impact of unionism and licensing on the quality of educational  perfor- 
mance. Is educational performance better or worse in states with stronger 
teacher unionization  and/or licensing than  in other states? 

To answer this question we have regressed  the average level of the 
SAT and ACT standardized test scores and the proportion of students 
who graduate high school, on the percentage of teachers who are union 
members and the percentage of teachers who are covered by collective 
bargaining and various control variables.  These variables include: the 
percent minority in the state (because of the tendency of minorities to 
score lower on standardized  tests); the studentkeacher ratio; nonwage 
expenditures per  student  (to reflect  resources  for public  education); 
and  the  proportion of  high  school graduates in  the state and  the per 
capita income  (to reflect  the  educational  and  income  background  of 
students).  We  exclude measures  of  the  physical  capital  in  the  state 
school  systems  because  prior  studies have  not  shown an  impact of 
physical  capital  on outcomes (Brown and  Saks  1975). As before  we 
have  calculated  both  cross-section  and fixed-effects  estimates of  the 
impact of unionism and licensing on o ~ t c o m e s . ~  

Table 11.3 presents the results of our cross-section analysis. Columns 
1 and 2 record the coefficients and standard errors on the unionization 
and licensing  variables when the SAT is the measure of performance, 
columns 3 and 4 treat the ACT test scores, while columns 5 and 6 relate 


313 

Unionism  and  Licensing of  Public School Teachers 

Table  11.3 

Coeficients  and Standard Errors for the Cross-Section  Impact of 
Unionism and Licensing on Student Achievement  Scores and 
Graduation Rates 

Dependent  Variables 

SAT 

ACT 

Graduation Rate 

Independent  Variables 

(1) 

(2) 

Percent  members 

Percent  covered by 

contracts 

State licensing 

R2 
Sample size 

49.09 
(13.66) 

- 20.96 
(4.45) 
.54 

490 

- .40 
(10.92) 
- 19.75 
(4.49) 
.53 

490 

(3) 

.35 
(.25) 

.33 
(.08) 
.58 
446 

(4) 

1.06 
(.20) 
.30 
(.08) 
.63 
446 

( 5 )  

5.67 
(1.26) 

1.25 
(.41) 
.56 
490 

(6) 

3.27 
(1.01) 
1.38 
(.41) 
.55 
490 

Note: All regressions include the following control variables: studentheacher ratios, nonwage 
expenditures per student, percent  minority, per capita income, percentage of population who 
are high school graduates, index of the legal environment for collective bargaining, experience 
of teachers.  Estimates using  selectivity  bias  controls also were  estimated  and  are available 
from the authors (Murnane et. al.,  1985). 

to state graduation  rates. With test scores as the dependent variables, 
the coefficients on union membership are positive and significant. With 
mean values of 951 for the SAT and of 18.8 for the ACT, the coefficients 
imply unionization  impacts on the order of  6-8  percent for increases 
in  unionization from 0 to  1 .OO  and elasticities  of test scores to union- 
ization of about 0.5 to 0.7. These are of similar magnitude to the impacts 
estimated by Eberts and Stone on individual students (Eberts and Stone 
1986). By contrast, the coefficients on the percentage of teachers cov- 
ered by  union  contracts are insignificant in  the  SAT calculations  and 
smaller and less significant in the ACT calculations than the coefficients 
on  the  percentage  of  teachers  who  are  union  members.  With  state 
graduation rates  as the dependent variable,  both  union  variables  are 
accorded  significant positive  effects. In  sum, the general  impression 
from the table is that unionism  is associated with  better performance 
of  the  school  system, but  varies  with  the measure of  union  strength 
and outcome. 

The estimated coefficients on our licensing dummy variable, by con- 
trast,  present  a  less  clear  pattern.  In  columns  1  and  2  licensing  is 
estimated  to  reduce  SAT  scores,  whereas  in  columns  3  and  4  it  is 
estimated to raise them, and in columns 5 and 6 it is estimated to raise 
graduation rates. Given the negative results with the SAT variable,  we 
are reluctant to make any firm conclusion about the impact of licensing 
on outcomes. 


314  Morris M. KIeinedDaniel  L.  Petree 

To test further the impact of unionization and licensing on educational 
outcomes we  performed  a fixed-effects  analysis, adding state dummy 
variables to our regressions. These dummy variables pick up the impact 
of any omitted state factor that has a constant effect on outcomes over 
time.  Including them can greatly  reduce the estimated  effect of  inde- 
pendent variables on outcomes, as we saw with our wage analysis. The 
results  of these calculations  are given in table  11.4, which follows the 
same format as table  1 1.3. The majority of the results here confirm the 
positive effect of teacher unionism on test scores: both the percentage 
of teachers who are union members and the percentage who are covered 
by  collective  bargaining  contracts are estimated to raise  test  scores, 
with the difference between the coefficients  on the two variables con- 
siderably less than in the cross-section regressions.  Roughly, unionism 
has a 3 percent impact on performance in these calculations. The results 
with  respect  to graduation  rates  are  more  ambiguous, as the  union 
membership variable is estimated to have a modest positive effect while 
the collective bargaining variable has a modest negative effect on grad- 
uation. As for licensing, inclusion of the state dummy variables reverses 
the  negative  relation  between licensing  statutes and  SAT  scores and 
the positive relation between licensing and graduation rates, while leav- 
ing the positive relation between licensing and the ACT scores virtually 
unchanged. As the estimated impact of licensing appears to vary with 

Table 11.4 

Coefficients and Standard Errors for the Fixed-Effect Impact of 
Unionism and Licensing on Student Achievement Scores and 
Graduation Rates 

Dependent Variables 

SAT 

ACT 

Graduation Rate 

Independent Variables 

(1) 

(2) 

Percent members 

Percent covered by 

contracts 

State licensing 

State dummy 

variables 
Sample size 

18.86 
(5.76) 

4.70 
(3.60) 
yes 

27.47 
(6.92) 
6.33 
(3.57) 
Yes 

(3) 

.I9 
(.I21 

.28 
(.08) 
yes 

(4) 

.I5 
(.34) 
.30 
(.07) 
yes 

( 5 )  

1.30 
(.W 

1.25 
(34) 
yes 

(6) 

- .83 
(1.06) 
-1.18 

(54) 
Yes 

490 

490 

446 

446 

490 

490 

Nore:  All  regressions  include  the  following control  variables:  studentkeacher ratios, 
nonwage expenditures per student, percent minority, per capita income, percentage of 
population who are high school graduates, index of the legal environment for collective 
bargaining, experience of  teachers. 


315 

Unionism and Licensing of Public School Teachers 

the outcome measure and estimating technique, we feel that the most 
sensible conclusion  is that our evidence is ambiguous on the effect of 
licensing on outcomes. 
11.2.4  Unionism and Educational  Process Variables 

To see whether we can delineate, at least in part, some of the ways 
in  which  unionization  may  affect outcomes, we  examine the relation 
of unionism  and  licensing to two educational  process variables  likely 
to play a role in the performance of the system-studentheacher 
ratios 
and nonwage  expenditures per student-and 
between those variables 
and  outcomes. Table  11.5 shows the results  of the two sets of calcu- 
lations in terms of the estimated  impacts of unionization and licensing 
on studentkeacher ratios and on nonwage expenditures per student and 
of  those variables  on test  scores and  graduation  rates.  Columns  1-4 
show that unionization is associated with higher studentkeacher ratios 
and greater nonwage expenditures per student, while  licensure is as- 
sociated  with  lower  studentkeacher ratios  and has ambiguous  effects 
on nonwage expenditures, depending on the unionization measure. The 
impact  of  unionization  on  studentheacher ratios  presumably  reflects 
the standard labor demand response to higher union-induced wages: a 
decline in employment. Columns 5-7  show that higher studentkeacher 
ratios are associated with lower test scores and lower graduation rates, 
while nonwage spending per pupil has no noticeable effect on the SAT, 
a positive  effect on the ACT, and a negative  effect on the graduation 
rate.  Since unionization  tends to raise  the studentkeacher ratios, the 
implication  is  that  unions  reduce  rather  than  improve  performance 
through  this  route.  The  ambiguous  effects  of  nonwage  spending  on 
outcomes also rules out the union effect on this variable as a potential 
route of impact. In short, our state data are not rich enough to enable 
us to determine the educational  process variables  by which  unionism 
improves student test scores and reduces dropout rates among states. 
In order to examine further the impact of unionization and licensing 
on  outcomes, and  to  help  us  interpret our  econometric  results,  we 
conducted telephone  interviews  with  union  and  government officials 
in ten states with varying degrees of teacher unionization, ranging from 
Mississippi, which has long outlawed bargaining, to New York, where 
unionization is strong.  The general opinion of these officials  was that 
teacher  unionism  increases  wages  through  political  and  bargaining 
means. There were, by  contrast, conflicting opinions on the effect of 
teachers unions on educational  quality.  Our interviews  suggested that 
unionized  school districts have lower turnover, greater teacher voice 
on the job, and greater standardization of work activity, which  might 
contribute positively  to productivity.  With  respect to licensing,  some 
respondents suggested that the weak or ambiguous effects that we have 


Table 11.5 

Regression Coefficients and Standard Errors for the Relation of  Unionism and Licensing to “Educational 
Resource Variables’’ and of  the Resource Variables to Outcomes 

Dependent Variables 

StudentReacher 

Expenditures Per 

Ratio 

Student 

NonWage 

(1) 

1.22 
(.48) 

- .35 
(. 16) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

93.97 
(52.42) 

- 37.38 
(17.07) 

1.48 
(.38) 
- .33 
(.16) 

158.41 
(40.85) 
35.54 
(16.81) 

Independent Variables 

Percent  members 

Percent  covered  by contracts 

State licensing 

StudentiTeacher Ratio 

Non-wage expenditure per pupil 

R2 

.53 

.54 

.54 

.53 

SAT 

~~ 

(5) 

ACT 

(6) 

Graduation 

Rate 

(7) 

-7.62 
(1.33) 
,001 
(.012) 
.55 

- .04 
(.03) 
.0005 
( . o w  
.47 

- .90 

- ,004 
(.001) 
.58 

Note: All  regressions  include the  following control  variables: percent  minority,  relative  per  capita  income,  year  and  regional 
dummies. 


317  Unionism and Licensing of Public  School Teachers 

found are due to differences  in the  market for schoolteachers across 
states,  since  state and  local  education  officials  relax  licensing  con- 
straints in response to the condition of the market. 

11.3  Conclusions 

Our  cross-state analysis  suggests  that  greater teacher unionism  is 
associated with better performance of students across states, consistent 
with  the  analysis  of  individual  students  by  Eberts  and  Stone.  The 
relatively  strong relation  between unionism and  student performance 
found in the longitudinal  analysis, compared to the negligible  relation 
between unionism and wages there, is our strongest piece of evidence 
that teacher unionization is in fact a positive factor in education. Our 
inability  to  show empirically  how  unionization  improved  outcomes, 
and the sensitivity of the cross-section  results  to the measure of out- 
comes and unionization represent the major weaknesses in our findings. 
At a minimum, however, our study rejects any claim that unionization 
contributed to  the decline  in  student achievement scores during  the 
1970s and  early  1980s. With  respect  to licensing,  given  the  modest 
statutes in existence during the period, it is perhaps not surprising that 
we  obtained  ambiguous  effects  in  the  statistical  analysis.  Recent 
strengthening of licensing laws and pressures to increase entry require- 
ments for  schoolteachers may  result  in  greater and  more  consistent 
effects of licensure in the future. 

Finally,  while  our analysis  provides  some evidence of  the relation 
between unionization and education, there are several important ques- 
tions that we did not address. First, from the perspective of economics, 
what was the effect of teacher unionization on the earnings of graduates 
as opposed  to  on  their  test  scores?  Second,  how  do  licensing  and 
unionization  affect  students who  do not  take college  entrance exams 
or are on the verge  of  dropping  out? Third, would  we obtain similar 
longitudinal  results  with  more  disaggregate  school  district  data over 
time to those reported for states? More evidence on these issues would 
enhance our knowledge of the role of unions in education. 

Notes 

1.  These  variables  are  obtained  as follows: percent  population  graduated 
high  school,  percent  students  in  private  school,  per  capita  income,  student/ 
teacher  ratio, percent  minority  students. All  are from the  U.S. Bureau of the 
Census  Statistical  Abstract,  various  editions.  Mean  experience  of  teachers 
(age  - education  -  5  years)  is  tabulated  from  annual  Current  Population 


318  Morris M. KleinedDaniel L. Petree 

Surveys. The index of labor laws for collective bargaining in education is from 
the NBER  Public Sector Law data set. 

2.  In these calculations we controlled for: enrollment, percent  minority,  per 
capita income,  nonwage  expenditures, the  legal  environment, the percent  of 
students in private  schools, age of  teachers, and  year dummies. 
3. These calculations  included  the  same controls as in note 2. 

References 

Bacharach, Samuel, D. A.  Lipsky,  and  J.  B.  Shedd.  1984. Paying for better 

teaching. Ithaca, N.Y.:  Organizational Analysis  and Practice. 

Baugh, William, and Joe Stone. 1982. Teachers, unions and wages in the 1970’s: 
Unionism  now pays.  Industrial  and Labor Relations  Review 35(3):368-76. 
Brown, Byron W., and Daniel M. Saks. 1975. The production  and distribution 
of  cognitive skills within  schools.  Journal  of Political Economy  83(3):57 1 - 
95. 

Brown, T.  A.  1975. Have collective negotiations increased  teachers’ salaries? 

Journal  of Collective Negotiations 4( 1):53-65. 

Carroll,  Sydney,  and  Robert  J.  Gaston.  1981. Occupational  restrictions  and 
the quality of services received: Some evidence. Southern Economic Journal 
47(4) : 959-76. 

Condition  of  education.  1983. U.S.  Department  of  Education,  Washington, 

Delaney,  John  T.  1986.  Impasses and  teacher  contract  outcomes. Industrial 

D.C. 

Relations  25( 1)45-55. 

Dynarski,  Mark.  1985. The  Scholastic  Aptitude  Test:  Participation  and  per- 

formance. University  of  California, Davis Working Paper  Series, no.  258. 

Eberts, Randall, and Joe Stone. 1984. Unions and  the public schools. Mass.: 

Lexington Books. 

1986. Unions and productivity in the public sector: The effect of teacher 

unions  on student achievement.  Mimeo. 

Ehrenberg,  Ronald.  1973.  Heterogeneous labor,  minimum  hiring  standards, 
and  job  vacancies  in  public  employment.  Journal  of  Political  Economy 
8 1 : 1442-50. 

Freeman, Richard B. 1984. Longitudinal Analyses of the effects of trade unions. 

Journal  of  Labor Economics  2( I):  1-26. 

1986. Unionism comes to the public sector. Journal  of  Economic Lit- 

-. 

-. 

erature 24(1):41-134. 

Basic  Books. 

Freeman,  Richard  B., and  J.  Medoff.  1984.  What do unions  do? New  York: 

Frey,  Donald.  1975. Wage determination  in public  schools and  the effects of 
unionization.  In  Labor  in  the public  and nonprofit  sectors, ed. D.  S. Ham- 
ermesh,  183-219.  New Jersey: Princeton  University  Press. 

Holen, Arlene.  1978. The economics of dental licensing. Final report submitted 

to the Department of Health  and Human  Services. 

Jensen,  M.  C.,  and  W.  H.  Meckling.  1976. Theory  of  the  firm:  Managerial 
behavior,  agency costs and ownership structure. Journal  of  Financial  Eco- 
nomics 3:305-60. 

Kasper,  Hirschel.  1970. The effects of  collective bargaining  on public  school 

teachers’ salaries.  Industrial  and Labor Relations  Review  24( l):57-71. 


319 

Unionism and Licensing of Public School Teachers 

Kleiner,  Morris  M., and  C.  Krider.  1979.  Determinants of  negotiated  agree- 
ments for public  school teachers. Educational Administration Quarterly  15 
( 13):66-82. 

Kurth, Michael.  1987. Teacher unions and excellence in education: An analysis 

of the decline in SAT scores. Journal  o f l a h o r  Research 8 (4):351-65. 

Landon, J.  H., and  R. N.  Baird.  1971. Monopsony in  the market for public 

school teachers. American Economic  Review 51(5):996-71. 

Leland, Hayne, 1980. Minimum-quality standards and licensing in markets with 
asymmetric information.  In  Occupational  licensure  and  regulation,  ed.  S. 
Rottenberg,  265-84.  Washington,  D.C.:  American  Enterprise Institute  for 
Public Policy  Research. 

Lewis, H. G. 1963. Unionism andrelative wages in the  UnitedStates. Chicago: 

University of Chicago Press. 

McFadden,  Daniel.  1974. Conditional  logit  analysis of qualitative  choice be- 
havior.  In  Frontiers  in  econometrics, ed. P.  Zarembka,  105-42.  New  York: 
Academic  Press. 

Murnane, Richard J.  1985. An economist’s  look at federal and state education 
policies.  In American domestic Priorities: A n  economic appraisal, ed. John 
M. Quigley and Daniel Rubinfeld,  1-30.  Berkeley:  University  of California 
Press. 

Murnane, Richard J., S. Newstead, and R. J. Olsen.  1985. Comparing public 
and private schools: The puzzling role of selectivity bias. Journal ufBusiness 
and Economic  Statistics  3  (1):23-35. 

O’Neil, David  A.  1984. Education in the United States,  1940-1983.  Washing- 

ton, D.C.:  U.S.  Bureau of the Census. 

Orazem,  Peter.  1984.  Black  white  differences  in  schooling  investment  and 
human capital production  in segregated schools. Working paper,  Iowa State 
University. 

Schmenner, R.  W.  1973. The determination  of municipal employee wages. Re- 

view  of Economics and Statistics  55( l):83-9O. 

Stigler, George. 1975. The citizen and the state: Essays on regulation. Chicago: 

University  of Chicago Press. 

U.S.  Bureau of the Census. Statistical Abstract, various editions. Washington, 

Williamson, 0. E. 1964. The economics of discretionary  behavior: Managerial 

objectives in  a  theory  o f t h e 3 r m .  Englewood  Cliffs, N.J.:  Prentice-Hall. 

Zarkin, Gary A.  1985. Occupational  choice:  An application to the market for 

public  school teachers. Quarterly Journal  of Economics  (May):409-46. 

D.C. 

Randall W.  Eberts and Joe A. Stone 

COmmeIlt 
Kleiner  and Petree explore the effects of  teacher unions  and  teacher 
licensing on various aspects of the operation of public schools: teacher 
wages,  allocation  of  school  resources, and  student  performance.  Al- 
though  substantial work has been  done on teacher unions and  public 

Randall  W.  Eberts  is assistant  vice  president and  economist  at  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of Cleveland. Joe A. Stone is W.  E. Miner Professor of Economics at the University 
of  Oregon. 


320  Morris M.  KleinedDaniel L.  Petree 

schools, very  little attention has been  given to the effect of licensing 
on school effectiveness. The authors argue that both institutions should 
be considered simultaneously  since each potentially  can raise  wages 
and affect student achievement. 

The relationship between teacher collective bargaining and licensing, 
on the one hand, and teacher salaries, on the other, is easy to under- 
stand.  Studies of  teacher  unions  show that  collective  bargaining  in- 
creases teacher salaries an average of  15 percent. Kleiner and Petree’s 
results for teacher unions support these estimates. However, they find 
no evidence that licensing affects wages. 

The link between unions and licensing, on the one hand, and student 
performance, on the other, is much more subtle. While education takes 
place  primarily  in  the  classroom,  contract  negotiations  and  teacher 
certification and licensing are determined at the district or state level. 
For  unionization  and  licensing  to  affect  student  achievement,  they 
must enter the classroom. The obvious primary carrier of these effects 
is  the teacher. To  register  a  significant effect, these institutions  must 
significantly affect various teacher characteristics and/or basic aspects 
of the classroom environment:  class size; the time teachers spend on 
instruction  and preparation; the  age, experience, and  educational  at- 
tainment of  the teaching force; classroom organization; just  to name 
a few. 

We  already know  something about the  effect  of  unions  on  student 
achievement from our own work (Eberts and Stone, 1984, Unions and 
Public  Schools). Although  our  data  sets  and  methodology  differ  in 
various respects (most importantly, Kleiner and Petree use state-level 
aggregates of student test scores while we use individual student data), 
it is interesting to compare the two sets of results. We find that teachers 
covered  by  collective  bargaining  face  smaller  classes; they  find  the 
opposite.  We  find  that  teachers  represented by  unions  are more  ex- 
perienced; they find that these teachers are less experienced, although 
their estimates are statistically insignificant. We find that resources are 
diverted  away  from  school  activities  not  related  to teacher salaries, 
presumably  to finance  higher  salaries; they find that nonwage  expen- 
ditures  per  student go  up.  Finally,  we  both  find  a  significant  union 
productivity gain. However, we may also disagree here as well because 
of the difference in  test  score measures. By using  SAT and  ACT test 
scores,  Kleiner  and  Petree’s estimates  tend  to  include  only  above- 
average  achievers.  Although  we  find  a 7  percent  union  productivity 
gain  for the average  elementary student, holding  constant  school  re- 
sources and teacher and student characteristics, we find the opposite 
effect for above-average achievers, who are typically the students tak- 
ing SAT and ACT tests. 


321 

Unionism  and  Licensing  of  Public  School Teachers 

Why  do our two sets of  results  differ  so substantially?  In  addition 
to the fact that we use different data sets and look at students in different 
grades, there are a number of more detailed issues that may contribute 
to the differences. Kleiner and Petree specify a production function for 
student achievement with  expenditures per student as an input. This 
equation resembles a short-run, minimum-cost function normalized on 
output rather than a production function. Moreover, without specifying 
a  production  function, Kleiner  and  Petree are  unable  to account for 
other important educational  inputs. 

Another significant difference  between the  two studies is the level 
of  aggregation  of  the  respective data  sets.  Kleiner  and  Petree  argue 
that the use  of aggregate  state data on student achievement is appro- 
priate  because licensing  is a  state function  and  union  organization  in 
public  schools is  strongly  conditioned  by  state bargaining  laws.  The 
arguments for  treating  licensing  and  union  organization  at  the  state 
level may  be correct, but one can use disaggregate data on individual 
students and schools and still also use state licensing variables as ex- 
planatory  variables.  The appropriate level  of  aggregation for  one in- 
dependent  variable  should  not  determine  the  appropriate  level  of 
aggregation for the dependent and other independent variables. 

We  also have concern over several details of the empirical analysis. 
The pooling of time-series and cross-section  data in the estimates with 
no attention to dynamics, for example, suggests that licensing, union- 
ization, and  other  independent variables  have  immediate  effects  on 
student test scores. In reality,  however,  these effects are likely to ac- 
cumulate over time and take place over a protracted period. There is 
also the issue of selection bias in the SAT and ACT test scores. These 
tests are taken  by  only a  fraction  of  students in  each  state, and this 
fraction varies substantially from state to state. It is difficult to separate 
the true effect of unionization from the spurious relationship between 
unionization  and  the  students  who  took  the  test.  Finally,  the  use of 
uni’on  membership  as a  measure of  unionization  for  teachers  means 
that some effect of unionization is expected in states with union mem- 
bers but with explicit prohibitions of collective bargaining by teachers. 
Presumably,  such  teachers  should  be  treated  differently  than  union 
members in states that permit formal collective  bargaining. 

In short, many of the differences  in  results  and methodologies  can 
be traced to the problem of data collection.  It is very  difficult  to find 
data that meet all the needs of a project of this magnitude. Nonetheless, 
Kleiner and  Petree direct  our attention to a  neglected  but  important 
issue: the interaction  of teacher unions with the legal  structure of the 
industry and their collective influence on the operation of public schools. 


This Page Intentionally Left Blank

