Industrial Marketing Management 38 (2009) 732–742

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Industrial Marketing Management

Corporate reputation and customer behavioral intentions: The roles of trust,
identiﬁcation and commitment ☆
Hean Tat Keh ⁎, Yi Xie 1
Department of Marketing, Guanghua School of Management, Peking University, Beijing 100871, PR China

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 28 March 2007
Received in revised form 12 December 2007
Accepted 12 February 2008
Available online 8 April 2008

Keywords:
Corporate reputation
Customer trust
Customer identiﬁcation
Customer commitment
Behavioral intentions

How does corporate reputation inﬂuence customer behavioral intentions? This article proposes a model with
customer trust, customer identiﬁcation and customer commitment as the key intervening factors between
corporate reputation and customer purchase intention and willingness to pay a price premium. We test
the model by using data from 351 customers of three Chinese B2B service ﬁrms. Results indicate that
corporate reputation has positive inﬂuence on both customer trust and customer identiﬁcation. Customer
commitment mediates the relationships between the two relational constructs (customer trust and customer
identiﬁcation) and behavioral intentions. Customer identiﬁcation and customer commitment relate closely,
but they are distinct constructs in the B2B setting.

© 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

It takes 20 years to build a reputation and ﬁve minutes to ruin it.
If you think about that, you'll do things differently. Warren Buffett

1. Introduction

The issue of corporate reputation grabs headlines. For example,
Fortune magazine conducts an annual ranking of the most admired
companies. A survey conducted by PRWeek Magazine reveals that
almost 75% of the CEOs interviewed expressed concern about threats
to their organizations' corporate reputation (Capozzi, 2005). While
good corporate reputation takes a long time to build, it is easily
dismantled. The rise and fall of Enron is a prominent example of the
creation, use of and destruction of a corporate reputation.

According to the resource-based view of the ﬁrm, corporate re-
putation can be considered to be a valuable strategic resource that
contributes to a ﬁrm's sustainable competitive advantage (Dierickx
& Cool, 1989; Capozzi, 2005). The formation of a good reputation is a
long-term process inside an organization, thus it is an intangible
asset that is difﬁcult for competitors to imitate. While some studies
document a positive relationship between corporate reputation and

☆ The authors are listed in alphabetical order. We are grateful to Helen Lin, Jimmy Xue
and Jill Zhang for their research assistance during the data collection for this study. We
also thank the editor and three anonymous reviewers for their helpful feedback and
encouragement.

⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +86 10 6275 6281; fax: +86 10 6275 1470.

E-mail addresses: htkeh@gsm.pku.edu.cn (H.T. Keh), xieyi1@gsm.pku.edu.cn (Y. Xie).

1 Tel.: +86 10 5276 7726.

0019-8501/$ – see front matter © 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.indmarman.2008.02.005

ﬁnancial performance (e.g., Podolny, 1993; Fombrun, 1996; Roberts
& Dowling, 1997, 2002) and try to explain the underlying mecha-
nisms and consequences of corporate reputation (e.g., Cretu & Brodie,
2007; Dowling, 2006), existing research in the marketing litera-
ture says little about whether corporate reputation can contribute to
interorganizational relationship marketing, which we address in this
study. Speciﬁcally, we postulate that three important relational
factors—customer trust, customer identiﬁcation and customer com-
mitment—are the bridges between corporate reputation and custo-
mer behavioral intentions.

The present research proposes a model that adds to the literature
in three ways. First, the model explores the underlying mechanism by
which corporate reputation inﬂuences customer behavioral inten-
tions. This increases our understanding of how corporate reputation
contributes to competitive advantage by building relational beneﬁts.
Second, the model incorporates customer identiﬁcation into the B2B
context and examines corporate reputation and customer trust as
antecedents of customer identiﬁcation. Third, the constructs of iden-
tiﬁcation and commitment have traditionally been confused in terms
of conceptualization and measurement, giving rise to concerns re-
garding the discriminant validity between them (Edwards, 2005). This
study distinguishes identiﬁcation from commitment both concep-
tually and operationally, thus providing a solution to the debate on
construct redundancy.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the
literature to understand the main constructs. Section 3 presents a
research framework and testable hypotheses, followed by a descrip-
tion of the data, data analysis, and discussion of our ﬁndings. Finally,
Section 4 summarizes the contributions and concludes with the
limitations of this study and suggestions for future research.


H.T. Keh, Y. Xie / Industrial Marketing Management 38 (2009) 732–742

733

2. Theoretical background

2.1. Corporate reputation

The concept of corporate reputation draws academic attention
from the management, economics, sociology, and marketing areas
(Brown, Dacin, Pratt, & Whetten, 2006). In general, researchers con-
ceptualize corporate reputation from either an economics perspec-
tive that regards corporate reputation as insiders' or/and outsiders'
expectations and estimations of speciﬁc organizational attributes (e.g.,
Weigelt & Camerer, 1988), or builds from institutional theory that
characterizes it as a global impression reﬂecting the perception of a
collective stakeholder group—for example, customers, employees, and
investors (Deephouse, 2000; Fombrun & Shanley, 1990; Olins, 1990).
Consistent with the institutional view, we deﬁne corporate reputation
as an overall evaluation of the extent to which a ﬁrm is substantial-
ly “good” or “bad” (Weiss, Anderson, & MacInnis, 1999; Roberts &
Dowling, 2002).

In order to have a well-rounded understanding of reputation, we
need to examine both its antecedents and consequences. In the
context of MBA education, Rindova, Williamson, Petkova, and Sever
(2005) ﬁnd resource signals (quality of inputs and quality of pro-
ductive assets), certiﬁcations from institutional intermediaries (media
rankings and certiﬁcations of achievement) and afﬁliation with high-
status institutions to be key antecedents of organizational reputation.
However, the narrow research context limits the generalizability of
their model. In another study, Carmeli and Tishler (2005) investigate
the roles of product quality and customer satisfaction in predicting
reputation.

Past research indicates that corporate reputation has a positive
effect on ﬁnancial performance (e.g., Podolny, 1993; Fombrun, 1996;
Roberts & Dowling, 1997). In addition, a favorable corporate reputation
can greatly beneﬁt ﬁrms in other ways, including (1) delaying rival
mobility in the industry, (2) charging price premium on customers, at
least in highly uncertain markets, (3) attracting higher-quality and
larger amounts of investments from the stock market, (4) maintaining
a high spirit among employees, (5) enjoying a cost advantage due
to less contracting and monitoring costs with suppliers and lower
remuneration rate among employees, and (6) supporting and en-
hancing new product introduction and recovery strategies in the
event of a crisis (Benjamin & Podolny, 1999; Carmeli & Tishler, 2005;
Fombrun & Shanley, 1990; Fombrun, 1996; Rindova et al., 2005;
Roberts & Dowling, 2002).

Yet, a good reputation is not a cure-all. In a recent study, Page and
Fearn (2005) suggest that while a bad reputation makes building
brand equity difﬁcult, a good reputation does not guarantee strong
brands. Having strong corporate reputation has a downside, par-
ticularly when ﬁrms get into trouble. Rhee and Haunschild (2006)
illustrate the liability of good reputation through a study of product
recalls in the U.S. automobile industry. Speciﬁcally, their ﬁndings
reveal that ﬁrms with good reputation suffer more than those with
poor reputation when they make mistakes, which may be due to the
contrast effect from disconﬁrmation of high expectation (Herr, 1989).

2.2. Customer commitment and trust

Commitment and trust are central factors that contribute to suc-
cessful relationship marketing because of their ability to lead indirectly
to cooperative behavior and produce outcomes that promote efﬁ-
ciency, productivity and effectiveness (Morgan & Hunt, 1994).

From its root in social exchange theory (Cook & Emerson, 1978),
commitment is one of the key concepts in relationship marketing
research (Dwyer, Schurr, & Oh, 1987; Hennig-Thurau, Gwinner, &
Gremler, 2002). Commitment is an exchange party's long-term
desire to maintain a valuable ongoing relationship with another
(Moorman, Zaltman, & Deshpande, 1992; Morgan & Hunt, 1994).

Berry and Parasuraman (1991) suggest that, in the services marketing
area, relationships are built on the basis of mutual commitment.
Following the literature, we deﬁne customer commitment as an
exchange partner's willingness to maintain an important enduring
relationship (Garbarino & Johnson,1999; Hennig-Thurau et al., 2002).
The literature recognizes trust as a prerequisite to building cus-
tomer relationships and as a preceding state for the development of
commitment (Garbarino & Johnson, 1999; Morgan & Hunt, 1994).
Morgan and Hunt (1994) note that trust will occur when one party has
conﬁdence in an exchange partner's reliability and integrity. Because
of its salience in the context of uncertainty, trust plays a critical
role for service providers and B2B marketers (Hennig-Thurau et al.,
2002; Moorman et al., 1992). In particular, Berry and Parasuraman
(1991, p. 144) note that “effective services marketing depends on the
management of trust because the customer typically must buy a
service before experiencing it.” In this study, we deﬁne customer trust
as the customer's overall perception towards the ability (i.e., skills and
competencies of the trustee), benevolence (i.e., the extent to which a
trustee is perceived as being willing to take the other party's interests
into account when making decision), and integrity (i.e., the truster's
belief that the trustee is honest and fulﬁlls its promises) of the pro-
vider (Mayer, Davis, & Schoorman, 1995).

2.3. Customer identiﬁcation

Customer identiﬁcation is an important but underutilized con-
struct (Bhattacharya, Rao, & Glynn, 1995; Bhattacharya & Sen, 2003).
Customer identiﬁcation helps explain the relationship between em-
ployees and their organization (Berger, Cunningham, & Drumwright,
2006; Kramer, 1999), as well as the relationship between customers
and their consumed brands (Underwood, Bond, & Baer, 2001). In
particular, brand researchers suggest that customer identiﬁcation
with a brand community (i.e., specialized, non-geographically bound
community, based on a structured set of social relations among
admirers of a brand) will exert inﬂuence on brand-related purchase
behaviors and community duration (Algesheimer, Dholakia, &
Herrmann, 2005).

Based on social

identity theory and organizational

identiﬁca-
tion theory, Bhattacharya and Sen (2003) suggest that some of the
strongest customer–company relationships occur when customers
identify with the companies that satisfy one or more of their key self-
deﬁnitional needs (e.g., self-continuity, self-distinctiveness and self-
enhancement). The underlying premise is that people typically go
beyond their personal identity to develop a social identity with the
hope of articulating their sense of self (Brewer, 1991) and that people
may also identify with organizations even when they are not formal
members of those organizations (Pratt, 1998; Scott & Lane, 2000).

Organizations are entities with their own image, personality and
identity (Melewar & Karaosmanoglu, 2006; Mokhiber & Weissman,
2003; Simoes, Dibb, & Fisk, 2005). Therefore, organizational custo-
mers also have the need for self-deﬁnition and may express them-
selves through developing social identifying relationships. Products,
services, brands, and companies are key components of an individual's
social identity, and constitute valid targets for identiﬁcation among
relevant customers because of their roles in self-referral and self-
deﬁnition (Kleine, Klein, & Keman, 1993; Underwood et al., 2001).
Analogously, in the B2B market environment, transaction partners
comprise a signiﬁcant part of organizational customers' social identity
and form suitable identiﬁcation targets.

Customer–company identiﬁcation is a distinct concept from
customers' identiﬁcation with a company's brand, its target markets
and its prototypical consumer. To illustrate, when companies imple-
ment a multi-brand strategy for all products or services (e.g., P&G) or
operate in a wide range of business areas (e.g., GE), customers' iden-
tiﬁcation towards a company will differ greatly from their identiﬁ-
cation towards its speciﬁc brand. A company with high customer


734

H.T. Keh, Y. Xie / Industrial Marketing Management 38 (2009) 732–742

identiﬁcation can beneﬁt through customers' loyalty to existing prod-
ucts, willingness to try new products, spreading positive word-of-
mouth, and resilience to negative information associated with the
company (Bhattacharya & Sen, 2003).

In spite of the desirable beneﬁts of customer identiﬁcation and
its critical role in building and maintaining “deep, committed, and
meaningful relationships” (Bhattacharya & Sen, 2003, p. 76), empirical
research is scarce on the existence, nature, antecedents and con-
sequences of customer identiﬁcation towards companies (Cardador &
Pratt, 2006; Einwiller, Fedorikhin, Johnson, & Kamins, 2006). One
exception is Ahearne, Bhattacharya, and Gruen's (2005) study, in
which they identify both antecedents (i.e., construed external image
of the company, perceived salesperson characteristics and perceived
company characteristics) and consequences (i.e., customer extra-role
behaviors and customer product utilization) of customer–company
identiﬁcation. In particular, addressing customer identiﬁcation in the
B2B context is meaningful.

2.4. Behavioral intentions

Customer behavioral intentions are signals of actual purchasing
choice, and thus are desirable to monitor (Zeithaml, Berry, & Parasura-
man, 1996). There are different ways of operationalizing behavioral
intentions in the literature. For example, Bansal, Irving, and Taylor
(2004) investigate the role of consumer commitment on switching
intentions. Mittal, Kumar, and Tsiros (1999) measure customers'
intention to recommend, and ﬁnd an asymmetric as well as dynamic
crossover effect of product and service satisfaction in determining
customer intentions towards product manufacturers and service
providers. Zeithaml et al. (1996) suggest a multidimensional behavioral
intention structure based on the Servqual scale. Each method has its
own advantages and weaknesses, the choice among which may well
depend on speciﬁc research purposes.

This study focuses on two speciﬁc behavioral intentions—purchase
intention and willingness to pay a price premium of existing custom-
ers, which have direct and critical inﬂuences on brand and organiza-
tional performance (Ailawadi, Neslin, & Lehmann, 2003; Zeithaml
et al., 1996). The behavioral intentions of existing customers in the B2B
market are particularly salient as it is more difﬁcult to attract new
customers due to the higher risk and complexity of organizational

buying decisions (Katrichis, 1998). A customer exhibiting higher
purchase intentions and willingness to pay a price premium is more
likely to stay longer with the supplier ﬁrm and have lower sensitivity
to price changes. In particular, researchers are recognizing the cri-
tical role of price premium as a favorable characteristic of customer
commitment as well as an important contributor to ﬁrm revenue
(e.g., Bendixen, Bukasa, & Abratt, 2004; Kumar, Bohling, & Ladda,
2003).

3. Research framework and hypotheses

Building on the preceding literature review, the following model
links a ﬁrm's corporate reputation, through three relational constructs
(customer trust, customer identiﬁcation and customer commitment),
to customer purchase intention and willingness to pay a price pre-
mium (see Fig. 1).

3.1. Corporate reputation and customer trust

Highly reputable companies are likely to gain customer trust in three
ways. First, both economic and institutional perspectives of reputa-
tion recognize its valuable role in reducing the uncertainty stakehold-
ers encounter when they evaluate ﬁrms (Benjamin & Podolny, 1999;
Rindova et al., 2005), because positive corporate reputation is based on
superior performance over a certain period of time. As conﬁdence is an
important factor in the creation of relational trust (Morgan & Hunt,
1994), high reputation can strengthen customers' conﬁdence and reduce
risk perceptions when they make judgment on organizational per-
formance and quality of products or services. Thus customers are
more likely to perceive companies with highly favorable reputations as
trustworthy. Second, customers are more likely to perceive companies
with good reputations by several
interrelated features—credibility,
reliability, responsibility, and trustworthiness (Fombrun, 1996), as well
as perceived quality and prominence (Rindova et al., 2005), which can
enhance customers' expectation of corporate capability in providing
excellent products or services, and integrity in fulﬁlling formal contracts
or announced promise. In particular, during the initial stages of the
relationship when there has been no previous transaction between
both parties, a good reputation signals the seller's competence and/or
goodwill (Campbell,1999). As a result, buyers may base their trust on the

Fig. 1. Conceptual model and results (Model 1).


H.T. Keh, Y. Xie / Industrial Marketing Management 38 (2009) 732–742

735

seller's reputation to evaluate the cost and beneﬁt of transacting with
this seller (Barone, Manning, & Miniard, 2004).

Finally, corporate reputation is often viewed as a “fragile resource,”
which requires considerable time and investment to develop but is
easily destroyed (Hall, 1993). Thus, reputable companies are expected
to behave well and are less likely to engage in negative behaviors,
which strengthen customers' conﬁdence in their integrity and re-
liability. For example, Doney and Cannon (1997) ﬁnd that conﬁdence
in the supplier's reputation is one of the important cognitive process-
es through which industrial buyers develop trust in a supplier ﬁrm.
Accordingly, we propose that:

H1. Corporate reputation relates positively to customer trust.

3.2. Corporate reputation and customer identiﬁcation

Customers identify with an organization based on their perceptions
of its deﬁning characteristic or perceived identity (Dutton, Dukerich, &
Harquail, 1994). Corporate reputation is such a key characteristic. A
critical antecedent of customer identiﬁcation is the attractiveness of
the corporate identity, which in turn depends on identity similarity,
identity distinctiveness and identity prestige (Bhattacharya & Sen,
2003). Corporate reputation has a positive inﬂuence on the develop-
ment of customer identiﬁcation because of its ability to underscore
identity attractiveness of the focal company.

Several explanations may account for the perception of highly re-
putable companies as being attractive. First, companies with high repu-
tation tend to have superior ﬁnancial proﬁtability, products or services,
and frequent media coverage, which subsequently enhance their rela-
tive advantage and distinctive identity in the marketplace, which in turn
contribute to their identity attractiveness. Second, as favorable reputation
directly denotes high prestige, corporate reputation is directly related to
identity attractiveness of the company (Bergami & Bagozzi, 2000).
According to social identity theory, buyers are willing to identify or build
connection with highly-regarded sellers, just as individual customers are
willing to identify with reputable companies, which can facilitate their
self-deﬁnition process and satisfy the need for self-distinctiveness and
self-enhancement (Pratt, 1998; Bhattacharya & Sen, 2003). In a recent
study, Ahearne et al. (2005) ﬁnd that the external image of a company,
which is similar and closely related to reputation, plays an important role
in leading to customer–company identiﬁcation. Accordingly:

H2. Corporate reputation relates positively to customer identiﬁcation.

3.3. Customer trust, customer commitment and behavioral intentions

Morgan and Hunt (1994) suggest that commitment involves vul-
nerability, thus parties are motivated to seek trustworthy partners.
The ﬁndings by Moorman et al. (1992) indicate that trust in their
service providers signiﬁcantly inﬂuences customer commitment to
the relationship. Achrol (1991) also claims that trust is among the
major determinants of relationship commitment. The positive rela-
tionships between relational constructs (i.e., trust and commitment)
and favorable behaviors are well-documented in the marketing litera-
ture (e.g., Morgan & Hunt, 1994; Hennig-Thurau et al., 2002). In par-
ticular, Doney and Cannon (1997) indicate that the buying ﬁrm's
trust in a supplier ﬁrm is positively related to the buying ﬁrm's an-
ticipation of future interaction with the supplier. Commitment has
been shown to be positively related to favorable intentions such as
repeat purchases, making recommendations, acts of price insensitivity
and cross-buying (Musa, Pallister, & Robson, 2005). In addition, there
is also evidence indicating that the linkage between trust and
behavioral intentions is often fully or partially mediated by commit-
ment (e.g., Morgan & Hunt, 1994; Garbarino & Johnson, 1999; Hennig-
Thurau et al., 2002; Bansal et al., 2004). This leads to the following
hypotheses:

H3. Customer trust relates positively to (a) purchase intention and (b)
willingness to pay a price premium.

H4. Customer commitment mediates the relationship between
customer trust and (a) purchase intention and (b) willingness to pay
a price premium.

3.4. Customer trust, customer identiﬁcation and customer commitment

Mutual trust is a key characteristic of successful social exchanges,
both between persons and between organizations. Thus, companies
consider building a trustworthy identity among the various stake-
holders—customers, investors and other bodies—as a crucial task. To
communicate their self-deﬁnition and enhance their self-esteem,
customers are likely to identify with trustworthy organizations. In
identifying with the trusted party characterized as being competent,
benevolent and honest, customers tend to portray a similar proﬁle to
them. That a buyer will perceive a linkage between its self-identity and
its seller when the buyer distrusts the seller is difﬁcult to imagine.
Bhattacharya and Sen (2003) propose that the extent to which con-
sumers perceive the company identity as trustworthy will determine
their response to it. Further, as a key factor in building long-term and
close relationships (i.e., committed relationships), trust should also be
an antecedent of identiﬁed relationships. Thus, we propose that:

H5. Customer trust relates positively to customer identiﬁcation.

Favorable consequences of customer identiﬁcation include custo-
mers being more loyal, more likely to try new products or services,
spread positive word-of-mouth about the company and being resilient
to negative information associated with it (Bhattacharya & Sen, 2003;
Einwiller et al., 2006). Ahearne et al. (2005) ﬁnd that identiﬁcation
impacts both in-role behavior (i.e., product utilization) as well as extra-
role behavior (i.e., citizenship) even when the effect of brand perception
is controlled. Besides purchase intention, we explore the effect of
customer identiﬁcation on willingness to pay a price premium. The
reasoning is that customers who identify with a company are more likely
to be proud of the association, and they make extra effort to advocate the
company (i.e., citizenship) as well as being less sensitive to higher prices
for the products or services of their identiﬁed company.

H6. Customer identiﬁcation relates positively to (a) purchase inten-
tion and (b) willingness to pay a price premium.

Organizational identiﬁcation and commitment are closely relat-
ed and easily confused constructs, as they both describe the strong
linkage between the individual and the organization. Cheney and
Tompkins (1987) differentiate these two concepts by noting that
“identiﬁcation is the appropriation of identity and commitment is the
binding to action” (p. 8) and they explicitly suggest commitment as an
outcome of an individual's identiﬁcation with a collective over time. In
a similar vein, Edwards (2005) argues that identiﬁcation is limited to a
speciﬁc subjective state of the individual, while commitment is a more
inclusive construct, encompassing certain psychological states that
would occur subsequently if a person identiﬁes with an organization.
Studies on the interaction between employees and their organiza-
tions provide evidence for the role of organizational identiﬁcation as a
determinant of employee commitment (Wiener, 1982; Pratt, 1998).
The marketing literature also indicates that identiﬁcation is a key
factor for building customer commitment (Fullerton, 2005). For
example, in the context of channel management, Morgan and Hunt
(1994) indicate that higher shared values between retailers and their
suppliers increase retailers' commitment toward the ongoing rela-
tionship. As a result, we expect that customer identiﬁcation can en-
hance customer commitment. Furthermore, while both commitment
and identiﬁcation can affect behavioral intentions, as commitment
is a more immediate antecedent to action, we posit that customer


736

H.T. Keh, Y. Xie / Industrial Marketing Management 38 (2009) 732–742

commitment plays a mediating role between customer identiﬁcation
and behavioral intentions.

H7. Customer commitment mediates the relationship between
customer identiﬁcation and behavioral intentions.

4. Methods

4.1. Sample and data collection

An empirical study examines the model in the B2B context as
previous research indicates that ﬁrms tend to build customer rela-
tionships at an organizational level. A focal ﬁrm's organizational
customers are more likely to depend on the name of the ﬁrm than on
a speciﬁc brand name in making purchase decisions (Rao, Agarwal, &
Dahlhoff, 2004). Data were collected in the following manner. First,
the study obtained support and assistance from three Chinese com-
panies in different B2B service industries. The ﬁrst company (Firm A)
is a well-known, publicly-listed, computer network ﬁrm. The second
company (Firm B) is a state-owned ﬁrm providing professional
translation services. The third company (Firm C) is a medium-sized
Sino-foreign joint venture whose trading businesses are located in
Shenzhen and Hong Kong. The distinct backgrounds of the three focal
companies provide adequate variation in the measurement of
corporate reputation.

The three focal ﬁrms then provided their customer lists as well as
telephone numbers of key contact persons in customer organizations
who played critical roles in determining the ongoing relationships
between the service providers and their customers. Three trained
research assistants telephoned the key informant of each customer–
company to explain the purpose of this research and elicit their coop-
eration. Respondents were assured that their identities would remain
anonymous and that only aggregated results would be reported. The
expected incentive for participation in this survey was that the ﬁnd-
ings would help advance managerial knowledge related to corporate
reputation and customer relationships. Out of a total of 996 contacts,
353 customer companies agreed to participate in this study. The
questionnaires were sent to these cooperative informants by mail or e-
mail. After a week, a total of 208 responses were received, and with
follow-up calls the remaining 145 responses were received. However,
two of them were unusable due to missing data. The ﬁnal sample for
analysis consisted of 351 observations (203 organizational customers
of Firm A, 68 of Firm B and 80 of Firm C). The overall response rate is
35.2% (Firm A 40.4%, Firm B 29.1%, and Firm C 30.7%).

The ﬁrst part of the questionnaire describes the objectives of
our study and instructed respondents on how to answer the ques-
tions. To reduce potential common method bias, this research assures
respondents that their answers as well as the names of the involved

Table 1
Measurement items for trust and commitment in this study.

companies will be used anonymously and for academic purposes only,
and requests that respondents answer the questions as accurately
as possible (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Lee, & Podsakoff, 2003). The
next section consists of items relating to the main constructs of this
research, such as the corporate reputation of the focal company, and
the respondent company's identiﬁcation towards the focal company,
whose order is counter-balanced in the questionnaire. Finally, the
respondents indicate the background proﬁles of their companies. The
customer companies in the sample cover a wide range of industries,
which avoids industry bias. Industries represented included both
manufacturing (e.g., automobile parts, garment, pharmaceutical,
electronic equipment, toys and heavy machinery) and non-manufac-
turing (e.g., telecommunications, banking and insurance, logistics,
advertising, supermarket retailing, hotel, real estate development,
restaurant, tourism, IT and education) sectors. The respondents were
mainly males (58%), and over half of them were middle-level man-
agers or above in their companies (52%). A multi-t test on responses of
the key constructs between managers and non-manager respondents
indicates that none of the key constructs was signiﬁcantly different
between the two groups. In addition, the respondents have been
with their companies for more than 5 years, on average. Thus, the
respondents were able to give authoritative comments on issues of
interest.

4.2. Measures

All measures were adopted or adapted from previous research.
To ensure conceptual equivalence and word-clarity, we conducted
translation and back-translation. The translated questionnaire was
evaluated by two bilingual faculty members to examine its face and
content validities. Before the main study, 26 MBA students having
similar backgrounds with people in the sample were recruited to
pretest the questionnaire in order to avoid vague concepts and keep
the questions as simple, speciﬁc, and concise as possible (Podsakoff
et al., 2003). Feedback from this process was used to improve the
measuring instrument. All the items were measured using a seven-
point scale (1 = “strongly disagree,” 7 = “strongly agree”).

Corporate reputation was measured using the scale adopted from
Weiss et al. (1999). For the variable of customer identiﬁcation, we
adapted the well-established measurement of organizational identi-
ﬁcation (Mael & Ashforth, 1992) and selected the relevant items to
measure organizational customer identiﬁcation towards the focal
company.

In the literature, researchers have used both the unidimension-
al (e.g., Garbarino & Johnson, 1999; Hennig-Thurau et al., 2002) and
multidimensional views of commitment (e.g., Gundlach, Achrol, &
Mentzer, 1995; Bansal et al., 2004), as well as the unidimensional
(e.g., Mayer et al., 1995; Selnes & Sallis, 2003) and multidimensional

Variables

Customer trust

Customer commitment

Items

1 We trust that the focal company is competent at what they are doing.
2 My company feels generally that the focal company is trustworthy.
3 My company feels generally that the focal company is of very high integrity.
4 My company feels generally that the focal company is very responsive to customers.
5 My company feels generally that the focal company will respond with understanding in the event of problems.
1 My company does not feel a strong sense of “belonging” to the focal company.a
2 It would be very hard for my company to leave the focal company right now, even if we wanted to.
3 The company deserves my company's loyalty.
4 It would not be too costly for my company to leave the focal company in the near future.a
5 My company would not leave the focal company right now because we have a sense of obligation to them.
6 My company have too few options to consider leaving the focal company.
7 My company does not feel like “part of the family” with the company.a

Source

Selnes and Sallis (2003)
Selnes and Sallis (2003)
Sirdeshmukh, Singh, and Sabol (2002)
Sirdeshmukh, Singh, and Sabol (2002)
Selnes and Sallis (2003)
Bansal et al. (2004)
Bansal et al. (2004)
Bansal et al. (2004)

Bansal et al. (2004)
Bansal et al. (2004)
Bansal et al. (2004)

Italicized items are deleted in the ﬁnal analysis due to low factor loadings.

a Reverse coded item.


H.T. Keh, Y. Xie / Industrial Marketing Management 38 (2009) 732–742

737

Table 2
Final measurement items.

Variables

Items

Corporate reputation

1 The focal company is a highly-regarded company.
2 The focal company is a successful company.
3 The focal company is a well-established company.

Customer commitment 1 My company does not feel a strong sense of “belonging” to the focal company.a

2 It would be very hard for my company to leave the focal company right now, even if we wanted to.
3 The company deserves my company's loyalty.
4 It would not be too costly for my company to leave the focal company in the near future.a
5 My company would not leave the focal company right now because we have a sense of obligation to them.
1 This organization's successes are my company's successes.
2 My company is very interested in what others think about the focal company.
3 If a story in the media criticized this organization, my company would feel embarrassed.
4 When someone praises the focal company it feels like a compliment of my company.
1 We trust that the focal company is competent at what they are doing.
2 My company feels generally that the focal company is trustworthy.
3 My company feels generally that the focal company is of very high integrity.
4 My company feels generally that the focal company is very responsive to customers.
1 My company will buy most of relevant products/services from the focal company in the future.
2 My company will consider the focal company the ﬁrst choice from which to buy products/services.
3 My company will do more business with the focal company in the next few years.
1 My company will continue to do business with the focal company even if its prices increase somewhat.
2 My company will pay a higher price than competitors charge for the beneﬁts currently received from the focal company.

Customer
identiﬁcation

Customer trust

Purchase intention

Price premium

a Reverse coded item.

AVE Factor loadings

Alpha

in CFA

.76

.65

.71

.81

.74

.83

.86
.86
.90
.77
.76
.88
.77
.83
.64
.89
.92
.88
.83
.93
.95
.87
.85
.88
.84
.89
.93

.91

.90

.90

.94

.89

.90

views of trust (e.g., Kingshott, 2006). Multidimensional operationali-
zations can reﬂect different sources of the construct, while unidimen-
sional operationalizations regard the construct as an overall judgment.
In this research, we took an overall perspective and operationalized
customer trust and customer commitment unidimensionally. Four
items adapted from Sirdeshmukh, Singh, and Sabol (2002) and Selnes
and Sallis (2003) were used to measure customer trust, which captured
the three components of ability, benevolence, and integrity. Commit-
ment was measured using ﬁve items from Bansal et al. (2004) and
Allen and Meyer (1990), which included affective, continuance and
normative components (see Table 1 for detailed measurement items
for trust and commitment).

Finally, purchase intention was measured using items from Zeithaml
et al. (1996) and Doney and Cannon (1997), and willingness to pay a
price premium was measured using items from Zeithaml et al. (1996).
After deletion of items that have low item-to-total loadings or high-
cross loadings in the conﬁrmatory factory analysis, all remaining mea-
ures had Cronbach alphas greater than the cut-off point of .7 suggested
by Nunnally (1978) (see Table 2), indicating that the measures for the
main constructs exhibited good internal consistency.

5. Analysis and results

5.1. Model estimation

Before testing the hypotheses, the study examined a correlation
matrix of the composite scales for the key constructs, as shown in
Table 3. The signs of the bivariate correlations indicated patterns
consistent with the expected relationships. To test the hypotheses, the
analysis employs structural equation modeling with the maximum
likelihood estimation method, using the framework Fig. 1 shows as
the base model (model 1). To explore the mediating role of customer
commitment between the two relational constructs and behavioral
intentions, the analysis follows Baron and Kenny's (1986) procedures
and compares model 1 (with customer commitment as the intermediate
variable) against model 2 (without the linkages between customer trust/
identiﬁcation and customer commitment). Speciﬁcally, model 1
suggests that customer trust and customer identiﬁcation can inﬂuence
behavioral intentions indirectly through customer commitment, which
is indicated by the linkages between customer trust/customer identi-
ﬁcation and customer commitment; while model 2 suggests that

customer trust and customer identiﬁcation have only direct effects on
behavioral intentions, as indicated by the lack of connections between
customer trust/customer identiﬁcation and customer commitment. If
the comparison results suggest that relationships between the two
relational constructs and behavioral intentions are more signiﬁcant and/
or stronger in model 2 than in model 1, then the mediating role of
commitment is supported (Baron & Kenny, 1986).

5.2. Construct validity

The analysis follows Anderson and Gerbing's (1988) two-step
approach for structure equation modeling, whereby the estimation
of a conﬁrmatory measurement model precedes the simultaneous
estimation of the measurement and structural models. Therefore, the
analysis evaluated the convergent and discriminant validities of the
focal constructs by estimating a six-factor conﬁrmatory measurement
model, in which all the six constructs were latent variables and each
item loaded only onto its latent construct. The latent constructs are
allowed to correlate with each other, and the measurement items and
their error items are allowed to be uncorrelated. The model indicates
an acceptable ﬁt of the data (χ2=551.75, df =174, p b.001; CFI=.99;
TLI=.98; IFI=.99; NFI=.98; and RMSEA=.08), conﬁrming the uni-
dimensionality of the measures (Anderson & Gerbing, 1988).
In
addition, all indicators loaded signiﬁcantly onto the respective latent
constructs (p b.001) with the values varying from .64 to .95, and the
average variance extracted (AVE) indices all exceeded the recom-
mended standard of .5 (see Table 2), thus conﬁrming good convergent
validity (Bagozzi & Yi, 1988).

Table 3
Correlations and descriptive statistics of key constructs.

1

2

3

4

5

6 Mean (S.D.)

1
.45(⁎⁎) 1

1. Corporate reputation
2. Customer commitment
3. Customer identiﬁcation .42(⁎⁎)
.61(⁎⁎)
4. Customer trust
.56(⁎⁎)
5. Purchase intention
.41(⁎⁎)
6. Price premium

.73(⁎⁎) 1
.55(⁎⁎)
.79(⁎⁎)
.74(⁎⁎)

.45(⁎⁎) 1
.68(⁎⁎)
.67(⁎⁎)

.65(⁎⁎) 1
.47(⁎⁎)

.76(⁎⁎) 1

5.30 (1.07)
4.63 (1.24)
4.48 (1.35)
5.44 (1.07)
4.93 (1.19)
4.55 (1.44)

⁎⁎ Correlation is signiﬁcant at the .01 level (2-tailed).


738

H.T. Keh, Y. Xie / Industrial Marketing Management 38 (2009) 732–742

To assess the discriminant validity of the measures, chi-square
tests for all the constructs in pairs (15 tests) are conducted to de-
termine whether the restricted model (correlation ﬁxed as 1) was
signiﬁcantly worse than the unrestricted model (correlation esti-
mated freely). All chi-square differences, except that between
customer identiﬁcation and purchase intention which was marginally
signiﬁcant (p=.065), were signiﬁcant (p b.05), providing acceptable
evidence of discriminant validity for the measures (Anderson &
Gerbing, 1988). We are interested in the discriminant validity between
customer identiﬁcation and customer commitment. Results of the
speciﬁc chi-square difference test for customer identiﬁcation and
customer commitment (Δχ2 [1]= 11.8, p b.001) indicated that these
two closely-related constructs differed signiﬁcantly. In addition, the
AVE is greater than the squared correlation of any pair of two
constructs,
further supporting the discriminant validity of the
constructs (Fornell & Larcker, 1981). For example, the squared
correlation between customer identiﬁcation and purchase intention
(.46) is less than the AVE of customer identiﬁcation (.71) and the AVE
of behavioral
intention (.74), which provides some evidence for
discriminant validity between these two constructs.

In testing for the existence of common method bias, Harman's one-
factor method was used. An exploratory analysis of the data indicated
the absence of a single factor accounting for the majority of variance
among the measures, thus common method bias was not a problem in
this study (Podsakoff & Organ, 1986). In summary, all measures have
good construct validities and desirable psychometric properties.

5.3. Hypotheses testing

Before pooling the data, the analyses included MANOVAs on all the
measures and there were signiﬁcant differences in some measure-
ment items among the three focal companies. Therefore, two dummy
ﬁrm variables were used to represent the origin of the respondents
and the three focal companies were coded as ﬁrm A (1,0), ﬁrm B (0,0)
and ﬁrm C (0,1). Compared with ﬁrm B, ﬁrm A has higher score on
corporate reputation (r =.189, p b.001) and customer identiﬁcation
(r =.334, p b.001), and lower score on customer trust (r =−.212,
p b.001) and purchase intention (r =−.081, p b.01), while ﬁrm C has
higher score on customer identiﬁcation (r =.260, p b.001) and lower
score on purchase intention (r=−.068, p b.05).

The method includes regressing the dummy variables, along with
key antecedents indicated in the conceptual framework, onto all
constructs when estimating the structural model (Atuahene-Gima &
Murray, 2004). Through this procedure, the origin of the respon-
dents was controlled for, which enabled us to pool the data collected
from customers of the three focal companies together. The analysis
proceeds to examine the overall model ﬁt. While the chi-square
statistic (χ2=863.19, df =209, p b.001) is signiﬁcant, all the baseline
comparison indices (CFI=.98, NFI=.97, IFI=.98, RFI=.96, TLI=.97, and
RMSEA=.10) indicate an acceptable ﬁt of the data, as shown in Fig. 1.
The results show that corporate reputation has positive direct
effects on both customer trust (r =.68, p b.001) and customer iden-
tiﬁcation (r =.16, p b.01), in support of H1 and H2. Comparing the
values of the two coefﬁcients, it appears that corporate reputation has
greater inﬂuence on customers' perception of corporate trustworthi-
ness than on customers' judgment about whether to identify with a
company. In addition, corporate trust is positively related to customer
identiﬁcation (r=.36, p b.001), which supports H5.

H3 and H6 examine the impact of customer trust and customer
identiﬁcation on the two behavioral intentions. The estimation re-
sults of model 2 (see Fig. 2) reveal that corporate trust has positive
effect on purchase intention (r =.37, p b.001) and moderate effect on
price premium (r =.09, p b.05), whereas customer identiﬁcation has
signiﬁcant effect on purchase intention (r=.31, p b.001) and price
premium (r =.38, p b.001), respectively. Thus, both H3 and H6 are
supported.

To test H4 and H7, that is, the mediating role of commitment in the
linkages between customer trust and behavioral intentions, as well as
between customer identiﬁcation and behavioral
intentions, we
compare the standardized path coefﬁcients of the two models with
and without the mediating relationships. According to Baron and
Kenny (1986), with the addition of a mediator (customer commitment)
into the model, the contribution of a previously signiﬁcant indepen-
dent variable (in model 2) should drop signiﬁcantly (in model 1)
for partial mediation and become insigniﬁcant for full mediation.
Therefore, we compare the results in Figs. 1 and 2 to assess H4 and H7.
First, Fig. 2 shows that the overall model ﬁt of model 2 (χ2=1165.75,
df =211; CFI=.96, NFI=.96, IFI=.96, RFI=.94, TLI=.95 and RMSEA=.11) is
dissatisfactory and worse than that of model 1 (Δ χ2 [2] =302.56,
p b.001), which suggests that the mediating role of customer

Fig. 2. Results of Model 2 (without the linkages between trust/identiﬁcation and commitment).


H.T. Keh, Y. Xie / Industrial Marketing Management 38 (2009) 732–742

739

commitment cannot be neglected. In addition, the results of model 2
indicate that customer trust, customer identiﬁcation and customer
commitment all have signiﬁcant positive impact on both purchase
intention and price premium, respectively (all p's b.05). When cus-
tomer trust and customer identiﬁcation are linked to customer com-
mitment (as in model 1), the standardized path coefﬁcients between
trust/identiﬁcation and behavioral intentions are all affected to varying
extents. Speciﬁcally, the positive effect of customer trust on purchase
intention remains signiﬁcant, but the strength decreases from .37 to
.25, whereas the positive effect of customer trust on price premium is
fully mediated by customer commitment and becomes insigniﬁcant in
model 1. The linkages between customer identiﬁcation and behavioral
intentions become insigniﬁcant and drop to nearly zero.

Sobel tests are conducted to further support the mediating role of
customer commitment in the linkages between customer trust/
customer identiﬁcation and the two behavioral intentions (Baron &
Kenny, 1986). Results show that the mediating effect of customer
commitment on the relationship between customer trust and price
premium and relationships between customer identiﬁcation and the
two behavioral intentions are signiﬁcant (Z's equal to 8.07, 7.70, and
6.73 respectively, p b.05), while the mediating effect of customer
commitment on the connection between customer trust and purchase
intention is marginally signiﬁcant (Z equals to 1.89, p=.06). This
implies that customer commitment (1) fully mediates the relationship
between customer identiﬁcation and both behavioral intentions, and
(2) fully mediates the relationship between customer trust and price
premium, and partially mediates the relationship between customer
trust and purchase intention. Therefore, H4 receives partial support
and H7 receives full support.

In addition, customer commitment relates positively to corporate
trust (r =.24, p b.001) and customer identiﬁcation (r =.75, p b.001).
Although previous research indicates that trust is a key antecedent of
commitment, our results reveal that customer identiﬁcation has
relatively stronger inﬂuence on customer commitment, which further
conﬁrms the notion that identiﬁcation and commitment are closely-
related constructs.

To assess whether corporate reputation inﬂuences the two
behavioral intentions through the paths of customer trust, customer
identiﬁcation and customer commitment, we compare the direct effect
of corporate reputation on purchase intention and price premium
when the three relational constructs are included and when they are
not. The results indicate that the incorporation of the three relation-
al constructs reduces the direct effect of corporate reputation on
purchase intention from .67 (p b.001) to .24 (p b.001) and the direct
effect of corporate reputation on price premium from .50 (p b.001) to
insigniﬁcance (r =.06, p N.1).

The analyses include estimating a competing model by adding a
linkage between corporate reputation and customer commitment in
model 1. The results do not show improvement in the model ﬁt
(χ2= 861.05, df =208, p b.001; CFI =.98, NFI=.97,
IFI =.98, RFI=.96,
TLI=.97, and RMSEA=.10) compared to our original model (Δχ2 [1]=
2.14, p N.05), and the relationship between corporate reputation and
customer commitment is small and insigniﬁcant (r =.08, p N.05).
Therefore, the additional linkage is unwarranted and the analysis
validates the parsimonious model.

6. Discussion and implications

The study investigates the underlying mechanism through which
corporate reputation inﬂuences customer behavioral intentions. Much
of previous research on corporate reputation emphasizes the direct
effects of corporate reputation on behavioral intentions or on cor-
porate ﬁnancial performance, and our study provides an explanation
for the process. The results indicate that companies with favorable
reputations beneﬁt from building trust and identiﬁcation among
customers, which, in turn, positively inﬂuence customer commitment.

Moreover, customer commitment plays a mediating role between the
other two relational constructs and behavioral intentions.

A reputable corporate name conveys various signals to the market
(Fombrun & Shanley, 1990). Customers are more likely to believe that
highly-regarded companies are competent, act honestly in their daily
operations, and consider interests of both parties in the relationship
when making decisions, which contribute to the trustworthiness of
these ﬁrms. Customers are also more willing to associate themselves
with companies of high repute, as part of self-articulation and self-
enhancement. As such, the development of a favorable corporate
reputation is important for relationship-oriented ﬁrms. Due to the
signiﬁcance of relationship marketing in industrial ﬁrms, internal-to-
the-relationship reputation is especially critical for them. It would be
myopic for industrial ﬁrms to gain favorable reputation from only
investors and the general public but neglect their perceived reputation
among customers. This implies that highly-regarded companies can
beneﬁt from their reputable names, and should carefully manage
important relational resources resulting from having a good
reputation.

By conducting surveys, managers can know if corporate reputation
leads to attitudinal and psychological inﬂuences on their customers,
and regular measurements of customer commitment can reveal the
effectiveness of corporate reputation on attracting favorable beha-
viors. These processes are more complex for industrial ﬁrms, because
the purchase decisions of customers are usually determined by groups
of individuals in buying centers rather than by a single person.
Members in the buying center may hold various perceptions towards a
focal supplier and emphasize different criteria in making evaluation
and selection. Therefore, it is important to know whether corporate
reputation is important for all buying center members or for whom it
is important, the gate keeper or the ﬁnal decision-maker.

As for the effects of the three relational constructs on behavioral
intentions, we ﬁnd that the two behavioral intentions have varying
sensitivities to relational strength, and willingness to pay a price
premium is founded on closer customer–company relationships. Spe-
ciﬁcally, the results in Fig. 2 (model 2 without linkages between trust/
identiﬁcation and commitment) imply that customer trust has much
stronger effect on purchase intention than on price premium, while
customer identiﬁcation, which represents a close bonding between
customers and companies, has larger inﬂuence than customer trust
on price premium. In addition, the results in Fig. 1 (model 1 with
commitment as a mediator) reveal that trust still has signiﬁcant in-
ﬂuence on purchase intention even after controlling for the effect of
commitment, while customer commitment is the only signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on price premium. Customers who have deep trust in their
providers tend to continue the relationship, while only customers who
are strongly committed towards their suppliers are willing to pay
higher prices.

This ﬁnding is consistent with the notion that there are differ-
ent stages in a relationship, from “strangers” to “acquaintances” to
“friends” to “partners” (Johnson & Selnes, 2004). When the relation-
ship between the customer and the supplier evolves from strangers to
partners, customers may experience reputation-based certainty, then
trust-based repurchase intention, and ﬁnally identiﬁcation/commit-
ment-based willingness to pay price premium. Therefore, the ability
to attract price premium from customers can be regarded as an in-
dicator of an industrial ﬁrm's relationship quality with its customers
in general. A buying ﬁrm's inclination to continue its present re-
lationship with a supplier does not necessarily mean that it is also
willing to pay higher prices for the supplier's offerings. Managers
of reputable companies should have a good understanding of their
companies' relationships with key customers.
In managing rela-
tionships, it is worthwhile for ﬁrms to cultivate trust, identiﬁcation
and commitment gradually among their customers, and subsequent-
ly maintain high-quality relationships. In addition, there are also
different levels of favorable relationships. For example, customers


740

H.T. Keh, Y. Xie / Industrial Marketing Management 38 (2009) 732–742

regarding the supplier as a preferred vendor tend to have higher
expectations and demands in terms of “inputs” and “outputs” from
each side during successful transactions, compared with those re-
garding the supplier merely as an authorized vendor. Although it is
generally difﬁcult for ﬁrms to charge a higher price, especially when
faced with rigorous competition, preferred vendors are more likely
to succeed in asking for higher prices from their customers than
authorized vendors, and also less likely to suffer from negative per-
ceptions. This may be attributed to the different norms underlying the
key relational constructs in the relationships.

This study also contributes to the organizational identiﬁcation liter-
ature by empirically showing that the identiﬁed psychological state
toward suppliers is closely related to, but distinct from, commitment (see
also Brown, Barry, Dacin, & Gunst, 2005). In order to successfully manage
organizational identiﬁcation, Cardador and Pratt (2006) suggest three
basic mechanisms: relational, behavioral and symbolic. The present
research, in the context of industrial business market, empirically
conﬁrms the relational mechanism by linking customer–company
identiﬁcation with two relational factors (i.e., trust and commitment),
as well as the behavioral mechanism by identifying its direct effect (in
model 2) and indirect effect (in model 1) on customer behavioral
intentions. The results show that corporate reputation and trust are
critical antecedents of customer identiﬁcation toward companies.

Much of previous research on relationship marketing in the
industrial context highlights the role of trust in building customer
commitment and inducing favorable behaviors (e.g., Morgan & Hunt,
1994; Kumar et al., 2003). However, this study indicates that the
relationship between identiﬁcation and commitment is stronger than
the relationship between trust and commitment, which implies that
identiﬁcation is a more immediate antecedent of commitment. In
other words, customers identifying with the supplier are more likely
to be committed to it and maintain the relationship than customers
who simply trust it, due to the shared identity and similar value
system. Therefore, managers should realize that trust is fundamental
to buying–selling relationships, while identiﬁcation is more effective
to retaining customers. Actions that facilitate identiﬁcation building
among customers deserve special attention and efforts. For example,
when suppliers design marketing programs aimed at reinforcing
customer loyalty, besides offering additional beneﬁts and showing
trustworthiness, it is also meaningful to communicate organizational
identity and create the notion of identiﬁcation among customers.

As perceived prestige, similarity and uniqueness of organizational
image all contribute to the development of customer identiﬁcation,
suppliers should monitor their internal-to-the-relationship reputa-
tion, which is probably more important than the market's perception.
In addition, a thorough understanding of the nature of customers'
identity building will enable suppliers to position themselves stra-
tegically. For example, comparable operational procedures may en-
hance customer belief that the supplier has functional identity similar
to themselves, while compatible organizational cultures would faci-
litate smoother communication and intimate relationships between
the buyer and the seller.

The Chinese context of this study also provides other interesting
implications. As China transitions into a more international market,
native and western management philosophies coexist, interplay and
jointly guide market behaviors. The Chinese business thinking is
signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by two kinds of indigenous cultural forces,
namely the Chinese stratagems and Confucianism (Fang, 1999). As an
old Chinese saying—“the marketplace is just like the battleﬁeld”—
indicates, the Chinese stratagems are often applied in solving a variety
of business issues, and help Chinese entrepreneurs to obtain material
and psychological advantages over their opponents. It will be more
difﬁcult for organizations that regard Chinese stratagems as the
dominant principle in treating business partners and implementing
market activities to form identiﬁed relationships with their partners.
It is possible that the higher reputation its partner has, the more

threats the company will perceive, which may partially account for
the variance in customer identiﬁcation towards similarly reputable
companies.

The Confucian tradition in Chinese culture, which emphasizes the
importance of interpersonal relationships (i.e., Guanxi), avoidance of
conﬂict and the concept of face (i.e., Mianzi), highlights the key roles
of individual and social trustworthiness in the Chinese B2B context
(Fang, 1999). Different from relationship marketing characterized by
impersonal and universalistic relationships, Guanxi involves personal
and particularistic relationships and serves as a major determinant of
success in the Chinese B2B market (Wang, 2007). This implies that a
ﬁrm's identity in a Chinese business network is largely based on the
business' social network, while a ﬁrm's identity in a western business
network is mainly dependent on its own operations. Therefore, social
identities of the top management and other key personnel are critical
to their corporate identity in the Chinese market and should be
carefully managed. Our ﬁndings indicate a strong relationship be-
tween organizational reputation and customer trust, which may be
attributable to: (1) respondents are inclined to give a more favorable
evaluation of partner ﬁrms' reputation due to the notion of Mianzi,
and (2) companies are more likely to have a superior perception of the
extent to which the partner is generally “good” or “bad” because of the
harmonious cooperative atmosphere formed through interpersonal
efforts. Therefore, adding constructs reﬂecting connections and trust
at the individual level may strengthen the explanatory power of the
proposed price-premium model in the Chinese B2B market.

When interpreting the ﬁndings of this research, we also need to
take the cross-cultural variance into account. National culture can
impact the linkage between relationship strength and behavioral
intentions in the B2B settings. For example, comparing responses from
ﬁrms in the United States and Latin America, Hewett, Money, and
Sharma (2006) ﬁnd that the uncertainty avoidance dimension of
national culture moderates the effect of relationship strength on
repurchase intention. Similarly, the high level of uncertainty avoid-
ance in Chinese culture may strengthen the relationships between
customer commitment and purchase intention and price premium in
our study.

7. Limitations and future research

Although most of our hypotheses are supported, this study has a
few limitations that present opportunities for further research. First,
the survey research may lead to self-generated validity, which refers
to the effect of the questionnaire structure on indicated correlations
among constructs due to respondents' observation of relationships
among measures (Feldman & Lynch, 1988). Second, the study assesses
responses of customer companies towards only three focal companies
in B2B service industries. Although the three focal companies as
well as their customers have different proﬁles in terms of ﬁrm size,
business type and reputation, the external validity of these ﬁndings
requires additional studies involving other industries and countries
for further substantiation. Third, other antecedents and consequences
of corporate reputation (e.g., perceived product/service quality, and
customer satisfaction) can be included in future studies to form a
more comprehensive framework, and provide additional insights into
the development, management and beneﬁts of corporate reputation.
Fourth, the survey method employed in this study is unable to elicit
respondents' thoughts in situations with suppliers holding different
levels of reputation and trustworthiness. Therefore, further research
can use qualitative approaches such as focus group, which can pro-
vide complementary ﬁndings to the results of this study. Fifth, as
respondents in this study are merely required to indicate the extent
to which they are likely to pay a price premium for their sup-
pliers, conjoint experiments or choice experiments would be useful in
examining variations in price preference among highly, medium and
lowly reputable suppliers. Sixth, the effect of respondent companies'


H.T. Keh, Y. Xie / Industrial Marketing Management 38 (2009) 732–742

741

management style (native style, western style or mixture of the two)
is not taken into account in our analysis, which may make a difference
in the results and should be investigated in future studies. Finally, the
lack of multidimensional items for measuring commitment and trust,
which constrains our operationalizations, is also a limitation of this
study.

Other interesting directions for future research relate to customer
identiﬁcation. Beyond corporate reputation and trust, future research
can incorporate other antecedents or factors inﬂuencing the attrac-
tiveness of corporate identity (e.g., identity similarity and corporate
innovativeness). Since the study is among the initial ones in exam-
ining organizational identiﬁcation in the marketing literature, further
testing in other contexts should enable us to validate and reﬁne the
customer identiﬁcation measure.

References

Achrol, R. S. (1991). Evolution of the marketing organization: new forms for turbulent

environments. Journal of Marketing, 55(4), 77−93.

Ahearne, M., Bhattacharya, C. B., & Gruen, T. (2005). Antecedents and consequences of
customer–company identiﬁcation: expanding the role of relationship marketing.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 90(3), 574−585.

Ailawadi, K. L., Neslin, S. A., & Lehmann, D. R. (2003). Revenue premium as an outcome

measure of brand equity. Journal of Marketing, 67(4), 1−17.

Algesheimer, R., Dholakia, U. M., & Herrmann, A. (2005). The social inﬂuence of brand
community: evidence from European car clubs. Journal of Marketing, 69(3), 19−34.
Allen, N., & Meyer, J. P. (1990). The measurement and antecedents of affective, continu-
ance and normative commitment to the organization. Journal of Occupational
Psychology, 63(1), 1−18.

Anderson, J. C., & Gerbing, D. W. (1988). Structural equation modeling in practice:
a review of recommended two-step approach. Psychological Bulletin, 103(3),
411−423.

Atuahene-Gima, K., & Murray, J. Y. (2004). Antecedents and outcomes of marketing

strategy comprehensiveness. Journal of Marketing, 68(4), 33−46.

Bagozzi, R. P., & Yi, Y. (1988). On the evaluation of structural equation models. Journal of

the Academy of Marketing Science, 16(1), 74−94.

Bansal, H. S., Irving, G. P., & Taylor, S. F. (2004). A three-component model of customer
commitment to service providers. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
32(3), 234−250.

Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable distinction in
social psychological research: conceptual, strategic and statistical considerations.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51(6), 1173−1182.

Barone, M. J., Manning, K. C., & Miniard, P. W. (2004). Consumer response to retailers'

use of partially comparative pricing. Journal of Marketing, 68(3), 37−47.

Bendixen, M., Bukasa, K. A., & Abratt, R. (2004). Brand equity in the business-to-business

market. Industrial Marketing Management, 33(5), 371−380.

Benjamin, B. A., & Podolny, J. M. (1999). Status, quality, and social order in the California

wine industry. Administrative Science Quarterly, 44(3), 563−589.

Bergami, M., & Bagozzi, R. P. (2000). Self-categorization, affective commitment and
group self-esteem as distinct aspects of social identity in the organization. British
Journal of Social Psychology, 39(4), 555−577.

Berger, I. E., Cunningham, P. H., & Drumwright, M. E. (2006). Identity, identiﬁcation, and
relationship through social alliance. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
34(2), 128−137.

Berry, L. L., & Parasuraman, A. (1991). Marketing services. New York: Free Press.
Bhattacharya, C. B., Rao, H., & Glynn, M. A. (1995). Understanding the bond of identiﬁcation:
an investigation of its correlates among art museum members. Journal of Marketing,
59(4), 46−57.

Bhattacharya, C. B., & Sen, S. (2003). Consumer–company identiﬁcation: a framework
for understanding consumers' relationships with companies. Journal of Marketing,
67(2), 76−88.

Brewer, M. B. (1991). The social self: on being the same and different at the same time.

Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 17(5), 475−482.

Brown, T. J., Barry, T. E., Dacin, P. A., & Gunst, R. F. (2005). Spreading the word: investigating
antecedents of consumers' positive word-of-mouth intentions and behaviors in a
retailing context. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 33(2), 123−138.

Brown, T. J., Dacin, P. A., Pratt, M. G., & Whetten, D. A. (2006). Identity, intended image,
construed image, and reputation: an interdisciplinary framework and suggested
terminology. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 34(2), 99−106.

Campbell, M. C. (1999). Perceptions of price unfairness: antecedents and consequences.

Journal of Marketing Research, 36(2), 187−199.

Capozzi, L. (2005). Corporate reputation: our role in sustaining and building a valuable

asset. Journal of Advertising Research, 45(3), 290−293.

Cardador, M. T., & Pratt, M. G. (2006). Identiﬁcation management and its bases: bridging
management and marketing perspectives through a focus on afﬁliation dimensions.
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 34(2), 174−184.

Carmeli, A., & Tishler, A. (2005). Perceived organizational reputation and organizational
industrial enterprises. Corporate

investigation of

performance: an empirical
Reputation Review, 8(1), 13−30.

Cheney, G., & Tompkins, P. K. (1987). Coming to terms with organizational identiﬁcation

and commitment. Central States Speech Journal, 38, 1−15.

Cook, K. S., & Emerson, R. M. (1978). Power, equity and commitment in exchange

networks. American Sociological Review, 43(5), 721−739.

Cretu, A. E., & Brodie, R. J. (2007). The inﬂuence of brand image and company reputation
where manufacturers market to small ﬁrms: a customer value perspective. Indus-
trial Marketing Management, 36(2), 230−240.

Deephouse, D. L. (2000). Media reputation as a strategic resource: an integration of mass
communication and resource-based theories. Journal of Management, 26(6), 1091−1112.
Dierickx, I., & Cool, K. (1989). Asset stock accumulation and sustainability of competitive

advantage. Management Science, 35, 1504−1511.

Doney, P. M., & Cannon, J. P. (1997). An examination of the nature of trust in buyer–seller

relationships. Journal of Marketing, 61(2), 35−51.

Dowling, G. (2006). How good corporate reputations create corporate value. Corporate

Reputation Review, 9(2), 134−143.

Dutton, J. E., Dukerich, J. M., & Harquail, C. V. (1994). Organizational image and member

identiﬁcation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 39(34), 239−263.

Dwyer, F. R., Schurr, P. H., & Oh, S. (1987). Developing buyer–seller relationships. Journal

of Marketing, 51(2), 11−27.

Edwards, M. R. (2005). Organizational identiﬁcation: a conceptual and operational

review. International Journal of Management Reviews, 7(4), 207−230.

Einwiller, S. A., Fedorikhin, A., Johnson, A. R., & Kamins, M. A. (2006). Enough is enough!
When identiﬁcation no longer prevents negative corporate associations. Journal of
the Academy of Marketing Science, 34(2), 185−194.

Fang, T. (1999). Chinese business negotiating style. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Feldman, J. M., & Lynch, J. G., Jr. (1988). Self-generated validity and other effects of
measurement on belief, attitude, intention, and behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology,
73(3), 421−435.

Fombrun, C. J. (1996). Reputation: realizing value from the corporate image. Boston:

Harvard Business School Press.

Fombrun, C., & Shanley, M. (1990). What's in a name? Reputation building and cor-

porate strategy. Academy of Management Journal, 33(2), 233−258.

Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. F. (1981). Evaluating structural equation models with unobservable

variables and measurement error. Journal of Marketing Research, 18(1), 39−50.

Fullerton, G. (2005). How commitment both enables and undermines marketing

relationships. European Journal of Marketing, 39(11/12), 1372−1388.

Garbarino, E., & Johnson, M. S. (1999). The different roles of satisfaction, trust, and

commitment in customer relationships. Journal of Marketing, 63(2), 70−87.

Gundlach, G. T., Achrol, R. S., & Mentzer, J. T. (1995). The structure of commitment in

exchange. Journal of Marketing, 59(1), 78−92.

Hall, R. (1993). A framework linking intangible resources and capabilities to sustainable

competitive advantage. Strategic Management Journal, 14(8), 607−618.

Hennig-Thurau, T., Gwinner, K. P., & Gremler, D. D. (2002). Understanding relationship
marketing outcomes: an integration of relational beneﬁts and relationship quality.
Journal of Service Research, 4(3), 230−247.

Herr, P. M. (1989). Priming price: prior knowledge and context effects. Journal of

Consumer Research, 16(1), 67−75.

Hewett, K., Money, R. B., & Sharma, S. (2006). National culture and industrial buyer–
seller relationships in the United States and Latin America. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 34(3), 386−402.

Johnson, M. D., & Selnes, F. (2004). Customer portfolio management: toward a dynamic

theory of exchange relationships. Journal of Marketing, 68(2), 1−17.

Katrichis, J. M. (1998). Exploring departmental level interaction patterns in organiza-

tional purchasing decisions. Industrial Marketing Management, 27(2), 135−146.

Kingshott, R. P. J. (2006). The impact of psychological contracts upon trust and
commitment within supplier–buyer relationships: a social exchange view. Indus-
trial Marketing Management, 35(6), 724−739.

Kleine, R. E., Klein, S. S., & Keman, J. B. (1993). Mundane consumption and the self: a

social identiﬁcation perspective. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 2(3), 209−235.

Kramer, R. M. (1999). Trust and distrust in organizations: emerging perspective,

enduring questions. Annual Review of Psychology, 50, 569−598.

Kumar, V., Bohling, T. R., & Ladda, R. N. (2003). Antecedents and consequences of
relationship intention: implications for transaction and relationship marketing.
Industrial Marketing Management, 32(8), 667−676.

Mael, F., & Ashforth, B. E. (1992). Alumni and their alma mater: a partial test of the
Journal of Organizational

identiﬁcation.

reformulated model of organizational
Behavior, 13(2), 103−123.

Mayer, R. C., Davis,

J. H., & Schoorman, D. F. (1995). An integrative model of

organizational trust. Academy of Management Review, 20(30), 709−734.

Melewar, T. C., & Karaosmanoglu, E. (2006). Seven dimensions of corporate identity: a
categorization from the practitioners' perspectives. European Journal of Marketing,
40(7/8), 846−862.

Mittal, V., Kumar, P., & Tsiros, M. (1999). Attribute-level performance, satisfaction, and

behavioral intentions over time. Journal of Marketing, 63(2), 88−101.

Mokhiber, R., & Weissman, R. (2003). Multiple corporate personality disorder: the 10

worst corporations of 2003. Multinational Monitor, 24(12), 9−21.

Moorman, C., Zaltman, G., & Deshpande, R. (1992). Relationships between providers and
users of market research: the dynamics of trust within and between organizations.
Journal of Marketing Research, 29(3), 314−328.

Morgan, R. M., & Hunt, S. D. (1994, July). The commitment–trust theory of relationship

marketing. Journal of Marketing, 58, 20−38.

Musa, R., Pallister, J., & Robson, M. (2005). The role of perceived value, perceived equity
and relational commitment in a disconﬁrmation paradigm framework: an initial
assessment in a “relationship-rich” consumption environment. Advances in
Consumer Research, 32(1), 349−357.

Nunnally, J. C. (1978). Psychometric theory, 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Olins, W. (1990). Corporate identity: making business strategy visible through design.

Boston: Harvard Business School Press.


742

H.T. Keh, Y. Xie / Industrial Marketing Management 38 (2009) 732–742

Page, G., & Fearn, H. (2005). Corporate reputation: what do consumers really care

about? Journal of Advertising Research, 45(3), 305−313.

Podolny, J. M. (1993). A status-based model of market competition. American Journal of

Sociology, 98(4), 829−871.

Simoes, C., Dibb, S., & Fisk, R. P. (2005). Managing corporate identity: an internal

perspective. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 33(2), 153−168.

Sirdeshmukh, D., Singh, J., & Sabol, B. (2002). Consumer trust, value, and loyalty in

relational exchanges. Journal of Marketing, 66(1), 15−37.

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Lee, J., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2003). Common method
biases in behavioral research: a critical review of the literature and recommended
remedies. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88(5), 879−903.

Underwood, R., Bond, E., & Baer, R. (2001). Building service brands via social identity:
lessons from the sports marketplace. Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 9(1),
1−12.

Podsakoff, P. M., & Organ, D. W. (1986). Self report in organizational research: problems

and prospects. Journal of Management, 12(4), 531−544.

Pratt, M. G. (1998). To be or not to be: central questions in organizational identiﬁcation.
In David A. Whetten, & Paul C. Godfrey (Eds.), Identity in organizations: building
theory through conversations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Rao, V. R., Agarwal, M. K., & Dahlhoff, D. (2004). How is manifest branding strategy
related to the intangible value of a corporation? Journal of Marketing, 68(4),
126−141.

Rhee, M., & Haunschild, P. (2006). The liability of good reputation: a study of product

recalls in the U. S. automobile industry. Organization Science, 17(1), 101−117.

Rindova, V. P., Williamson, I. O., Petkova, A. P., & Sever, J. M. (2005). Being good or being
known: an empirical examination of the dimensions, antecedents, and conse-
quences of organizational reputation. Academy of Management Journal, 48(6),
1033−1049.

Roberts, P. W., & Dowling, G. R. (1997). The value of a ﬁrm's corporate reputation: how
reputation helps attain and sustain superior proﬁtability. Corporate Reputation
Review, 1(1), 72−76.

Roberts, P. W., & Dowling, G. R. (2002). Corporate reputation and sustained superior

ﬁnancial performance. Strategic Management Journal, 23(12), 1077−1093.

Scott, S. G., & Lane, V. R. (2000). A stakeholder approach to organizational identity.

Academy of Management Review, 25(1), 43−62.

Selnes, F., & Sallis, J. (2003). Promoting relationship learning. Journal of Marketing, 67(3),

80−95.

Wang, C. L. (2007). Guanxi vs. relationship marketing: exploring underlying differences.

Industrial Marketing Management, 36(1), 81−86.

Weigelt, K., & Camerer, C. (1988). Reputation and corporate strategy: a review of recent

theory and applications. Strategic Management Journal, 9(5), 443−454.

Weiss, A. M., Anderson, E., & MacInnis, D. J. (1999). Reputation management as a

motivation for sales structure decisions. Journal of Marketing, 63(4), 74−89.

Wiener, Y. (1982). Commitment in organizations: a normative view. Academy of

Management Review, 7(3), 418−428.

Zeithaml, V. A., Berry, L. L., & Parasuraman, A. (1996). The behavioral consequences of

service quality. Journal of Marketing, 60(2), 31−46.

Hean Tat Keh (PhD, University of Washington) is an Associate Professor of Marketing
at the Guanghua School of Management, Peking University. His research on services
marketing, brand management, strategic marketing, and cross-cultural studies has
been published in J. of Retailing, Marketing Letters, J. of Advertising, J. of International
Marketing, J. of Business Venturing, etc.

Yi Xie is a PhD candidate in the Department of Marketing, Guanghua School of
Management, Peking University. Her current research interests include corporate
associations, customer-brand relationship management, customer trust repair and
cross-cultural consumer psychology and behavior.

