Journal of Business Research 55 (2002) 481 – 493

Partnering with foreign businesses: perspectives from Chinese firms

Yadong Luo*

Department of Management, School of Business Administration, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL 33124-9145, USA

Received 13 January 2000; received in revised form 20 May 2000; accepted 27 June 2000

Abstract

This study examines what Chinese firms are looking for from foreign partner contributions. It identifies strategic, organizational, and
financial attributes that are important to Chinese business satisfaction with the performance of international cooperative ventures (ICVs). It
finds that a foreign partner’s strategic attributes, namely technological capability, foreign market power, and international marketing
expertise, and its organizational attributes, including managerial skills and organizational reputation, are positively associated with ICV
performance as perceived by Chinese firms. By contrast, financial attributes are not important to Chinese partners. Different from foreign
firms in organizational contingencies and institutional constraints, Chinese firms are asymmetrical with foreign firms in terms of strategic
needs for ICV formation and partner selection criteria. They select foreign partners based upon market expansion and knowledge acquisition
considerations rather than transaction cost concerns. D 2002 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Partner selection; Chinese firms; Joint ventures

When MNEs expand globally through the establish-
ment of international cooperative ventures (ICVs), which
is now a pervasive and prominent way to enter a target
foreign market and achieve a global competitive advan-
tage (Hamel, 1991; Parkhe, 1993), partner selection
becomes fundamental
to the success of ICVs and the
fulfillment of parental goals (Geringer, 1991). Accord-
ingly,
this issue has been intensively and rigorously
examined in ICV literature (e.g., Beamish, 1987; Buckley
and Casson, 1988; Geringer, 1991; Hamel et al., 1989;
Luo, 1997; Mohr and Spekman, 1994; Park and Ungson,
1997; Parkhe, 1991; Saxton, 1997). While these studies
shed light on the importance of interpartner fit (syner-
getic or complementary effects) and partner selection
criteria,
they mostly address the issue from the foreign
partner perspective.

This is a deficiency in the literature because foreign and
local partners markedly differ in their economic rationale
and strategic objectives for ICV establishment (Beamish,
1987; Contractor and Lorange, 1988; Kogut, 1988; Parkhe,
1991) and in the organizational background and competi-
tive strengths that may contribute to ICV evolution (Hamel,

* Tel.: +1-305-284-4003; fax: +1-305-284-3655.
E-mail address: yadong@miami.edu (Y. Luo).

1991; Tallman and Shenkar, 1994; Yan and Gray, 1994).
These differences lead to idiosyncratic needs underlying
partner selection. That is, foreign and local investors have
different selection criteria in choosing ICV partners. Var-
ious institutional and regulatory environments facing these
two different groups amplify this difference (Luo, 1997).
The heterogeneity in cultural distance to an ICV and
monitoring costs over the venture further propels differ-
ences in strategic requirements from partner contribution
and commitment (Barkema et al., 1997; Park and Ungson,
1997). The difference in partner selection criteria can be a
source of competence complementarity (Hamel, 1991),
organizational indivisibility (Buckley and Casson, 1988),
and interfirm diversity (Parkhe, 1991).

The Chinese ICV study is an important subfield in ICV
literature. There have been dozens of articles in recent years
addressing this issue from various perspectives such as or-
ganizational control (Beamish, 1993; Yan and Gray, 1994),
ownership arrangement (Pan, 1996; Shan, 1991), entry
strategies (Lardy, 1995; Pan, 1996), and performance impli-
cations (Osland and Cavusgil, 1996; Shenkar, 1990). Sev-
eral previous studies suggest that characteristics of Chinese
firms do affect interpartner fit and ICV performance, as
perceived by foreign companies. There is, however, a dearth
of understanding about how Chinese firms perceive the
strategic and organizational attributes of foreign companies.

0148-2963/02/$ – see front matter D 2002 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.
PII: S 0 1 4 8 - 2 9 6 3 ( 0 0 ) 0 0 1 7 8 - 8


482

Y. Luo / Journal of Business Research 55 (2002) 481–493

The objective of this study is, thus, to examine the effect
of foreign partner attributes on ICV performance as per-
ceived by Chinese partners. We assess three categories of
attributes, namely strategic (i.e., technological capability,
market power, and marketing expertise), organizational (i.e.,
managerial skills, international experience, and corporate
reputation), and financial (cost control, capital allocation,
and asset management). Strategic and organizational attri-
butes tend to be deficient in Chinese firms, and therefore
complement
their strategic need to improve efficiency.
Financial attributes, however, may or may not be important
to Chinese firms because these firms are less concerned
about minimizing transaction and production costs within a
transitional socialist economic system. Thus, our secondary
objective is to validate whether strategic and organizational
attributes as possessed by foreign companies are more
critical to ICV performance than are financial attributes in
the perception of Chinese managers. These efforts may help
us appreciate the perspectives of Chinese firms on resource
exchange and evaluation of resources, which are central
concerns of ICV studies.

1. Theoretical development

1.1. Theory on Chinese firms

As the world’s largest emerging economy and fastest-
growing market, China is the second largest foreign direct
investment (FDI) recipient in the world. Despite several
economic ups and downs, China has been successful in
attracting FDI and directing it to help promote the national
economy. Transfixed by a vast emerging economy with over
1.3 billion consumers, foreign investors had pumped
US$265.50 billion in actual FDI from 1979 to the end of
1998, involving the establishment of about 235,000 foreign-
invested enterprises (China Statistical Yearbook, 1999). A
total of 62.22% of these investments were in the form of
ICVs in 1998 (China Statistical Yearbook, 1999). In many
ways, China is taking steps toward a market economy,
creating tremendous opportunities for foreign businesses.
The average growth rate of industrial sales and profits has
reached 32% and 25%, respectively, over the past 5 years.
More than 200 million Chinese have purchasing power in
excess of an annual US$1000 today (World Bank, 1999). At
the same time that finding competent foreign companies is
important to Chinese firms, knowing Chinese firms’ needs
is imperative to ensure payoffs for foreign firms.

The ever greater roles played by markets and pecuniary
incentives, and the increasing decision-making authority of
localities, enterprises, and individuals, have been central
elements of China’s economic reforms. China may be seen
today as on its way to establishing a socialist market
economy in which state and collective ownership forms
are predominant. It is also well along the path to a radical
transformation of property rights,
including a de facto

private agriculture, massive foreign investment, stock mar-
kets, and the growth of private enterprise (Naughton, 1995).
As in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, eco-
nomic reform initiatives in China seek to increase produc-
tivity by introducing elements of market-oriented policies
and institutions into an economy formerly dominated by
state planning. China remains in a transformative stage from
redistribution to market coordination, which shifts sources
of power and privilege to favor direct producers (firms)
relative to redistributors (governments). This shift, in gen-
eral, improves incentives for direct producers, stimulates the
growth of private markets, and provides entrepreneurs with
an alternate path for socioeconomic mobility (Child, 1994).
A widely implemented contract obligation system in which
general managers of state-owned enterprises contractually
pledge to fulfill the financial and operational goals set by the
upper-level governmental authorities in exchange of full
autonomy and profit sharing, further increases managerial
discretion, and reduces the bureaucratic costs embedded in
hierarchical firms. Accordingly, their economic rationality
and managerial discretion escalate (Guthrie, 1997). Con-
sidering the dominance of state (fully owned by the state
government) and collective (dominantly owned by a com-
munity government in town or district) enterprises in the
Chinese economy, as well as in partnerships with foreign
businesses,
these are the types referred to as ‘‘Chinese
firms’’ in this study.

Despite the progress discussed above, Chinese firms
involved in ICVs are still institutionally constrained (Peng
and Heath, 1996). They are only quasi-marketized during
economic transformation (Nee, 1992), meaning that they are
hybrid between hierarchical and market institutions. Prop-
erty rights ambiguity and the incentive asymmetry between
government and management imply that these firms are
unable to stand alone, operate independently, and isolate
themselves from constant governmental hindrance (Groves
et al., 1994). Transaction costs become less important to top
managers when ambiguous property rights provide them an
easy channel to acquire compensation from the state for
their operating losses (Boisot and Child, 1988). Although
the government seeks to fiscally delink firms from state or
local governments,
the soft budgeting system remains
effective (Walder, 1992). This implies that firms, irrespec-
tive of performance, are financially protected in various
ways under the umbrella of the national fiscal system
(Guthrie, 1997). Hyper-unemployment pressure,
in the
absence of a well-developed social welfare system, makes
the central government preoccupied by sociopolitical stabi-
lity and therefore unable to harden the budget system and
eliminate fiscal support. A large number of firms now
operate in industries undergoing structural transformation,
an inevitable consequence propelled by long lasted market
imperfections under previous planning regime. To minimize
social disturbance, this transformation is not entirely deter-
mined by the market force but accompanied with govern-
mental
levers

intervention, especially the use of fiscal


Y. Luo / Journal of Business Research 55 (2002) 481–493

483

including subsidies. Since no governmental agency can
discern exactly which loss is induced by the old planning
system and which is not, losses incurred because of mis-
management are likely to be subsidized. Under this soft
budgeting system, managers are not very cost-sensitive.

Under such constraints, increased managerial discretion
spurs firm expansion rather than minimization of transac-
tion costs. After suffering from low productivity, poor
technology, lack of organizational skills, and isolation from
the outside world for over two decades, firms are choosing
the ICV as a popular strategic vehicle and effective organi-
zational choice for fulfilling their needs to expand and
redress organizational deficiencies. To maximize the value
of expansion, Chinese firms look for productive resources
and capabilities from foreign partners that can satisfy their
strategic needs. Interfirm resource complementarity is
important only when they believe that foreign firm con-
tributions will meet their demands. While transaction cost
reduction may not be their major rationale for forming
ICVs, interpartner learning is a critical motivation. Having
been designated or appointed by the upper level govern-
ment, the political careers of top managers rely upon firm
growth in general and market and size expansion in
particular (Naughton, 1992). They attach greater importance
to maximizing expansion value rather than minimizing
transaction cost, through improving organizational deficien-
cies, strategic weaknesses, and corporate image so that firm
expansion flourishes. Chinese managers thus view the ICV
as a means by which they acquire foreign technologies and
partner knowledge to stimulate their expansion. Because it
is difficult, if not impossible, to find other Chinese firms
that can provide what they need, they turn to collaborating
with foreign firms rather than employing conventional
expansion strategies such as acquisitions, mergers, or joint
ventures with other local firms.

This behavior is further compounded by the institutional
externalities facing Chinese firms. A critical difference in
economic reforms between China and the former Soviet
Union and Eastern Europe resides in governmental policies
that support domestic firms acquiring knowledge from
Western businesses. While the former Soviet Union and
Eastern European countries did not distinguish institution-
ally between firms investing in ICVs from other local firms
during their economic transitions, the Chinese government
has continuously provided preferential treatment such as
lower income taxes (or longer tax breaks), favorable finan-
cing terms, priority of access to scarce resources and
infrastructure, and exemption from value-added taxes to
those firms collaborating with foreign companies that bring
advanced technology and superior organizational skills to
ICVs. These institutional privileges stimulate the efficiency
and effectiveness of acquiring and absorbing foreign knowl-
edge for local partners. They also shorten the political
distance between firm and state priorities.

Heterogeneous organizational dynamics and different
institutional constraints between ICV parties give rise to

various rationales underlying venture formation and asym-
metric considerations behind partner selection (Harrigan,
1988; Park and Ungson, 1997). The criteria for selecting
foreign partners by Chinese firms should differ from select-
ing Chinese partners by foreign companies, as identified in
the literature (e.g., Luo, 1997). Luo (1998) proposes that
ICV partner attributes can be categorized into three clusters:
strategic (operation-related), organizational (cooperation-
related), and financial (cash flow-related). These, in turn,
affect strategic fit, organizational fit, and financial fit
between foreign and local partners. He further suggests that
every category of local partner attribute is important to
foreign companies who seek profitability, stability, and
sustainability in a dynamic host market. We argue that these
three categories may not all necessarily be important to
Chinese firms, given their substantially different rationales
and needs.

Specifically, when Chinese firms are little concerned
with transaction costs, the financial attributes of foreign
partners become insignificant. This is because the minimi-
zation of transaction and production costs is more dependent
on financial
than other attributes. Financial attributes
directly affect cost control, expense reduction, asset alloca-
tion, and working capital management,
thus impacting
transaction cost economies. If partner selection is driven
by transaction cost reduction, a partner’s financial capabil-
ities can help improve a venture’s investment analysis,
financing policy, accounting budget, tax avoidance, liquidity
control, debt management, and cash flow balance. These
attributes become unimportant, however, if a firm is not
concerned with minimizing these costs and risks. When
firms are motivated to acquire foreign knowledge for
expansion, they will naturally attach a higher importance
to a foreign investor’s strategic and organizational qualifica-
tions (Inkpen and Beamish, 1997). Superior strategic attri-
butes committed by a foreign partner can improve a local
partner’s operational skills and competitive resources (Ger-
inger, 1991),
technological, and production capabilities
(Dyer, 1997), and market power and competitive position
(Hamel, 1991). The superior organizational attributes con-
tributed by a foreign company may help spur a local
partner’s managerial efficiency (Tallman and Shenkar,
1994), organizational
legitimacy (Kostova and Zaheer,
1999), and corporate reputation (Hamel et al., 1989). This
suggests that Chinese firms look for strategic or organiza-
tional attributes but not financial competency in choosing
foreign partners. In the absence of a theoretical or empirical
foundation, this argument is raised as a research question to
be tested:

Question 1: Do Chinese firms seek strategic and
organizational attributes rather than financial attributes
in potential foreign partners?

Market expansion in both domestic and international
domains represents the central, predominant element of
firm expansion through international cooperation for Chi-


484

Y. Luo / Journal of Business Research 55 (2002) 481–493

nese firms. This implies that firms aim not merely to
learn and acquire foreign technologies but also to obtain
and benefit from foreign partner capabilities and resources
involved in market development. Market expansion in
international territories is of particular importance because
Chinese firms investing in ICVs are politically required
and financially encouraged to export
ICV products to
their foreign partner’s home or other international markets
(Lardy, 1995). At minimum, the export must be sufficient
to allow the ICV to balance its foreign exchange expen-
diture with foreign exchange earnings. The more the firm
exports, the greater the benefits in terms of tax reductions
or refunds, lower financing costs, and priority of access to
scarce resources, as offered by the central or
local
governments. Institutionally, expanding a firm by extend-
ing its market domain to worldwide is preferred to local
market expansion by the government. It ensures that state
socialism will be able to generate foreign exchange
import strategically vital materials, and imple-
reserves,
ment
this bounded
rationality, Chinese managers will choose appropriate
foreign partners based on how well they meet strategic
and organizational criteria that stimulate market expansion
across borders and are able to upgrade technological or
managerial skills.

its export-orientation policy. Under

1.2. Importance of strategic attributes

Strategic attributes involve operation-related competen-
cies that bolster firm growth and sustain a competitive
advantage (Geringer, 1991; Luo, 1998). If strategic attri-
butes are complementary between partners,
they can
create operational synergies for partnerships (Parkhe,
1993). These synergies may translate into increased
financial and market performance of ICVs (Luo, 1997).
From the perspective of Chinese firms, a foreign partner’s
technological capabilities,
foreign market power, and
international marketing expertise are important strategic
attributes to look for. This is because these attributes
make up for deficiencies in Chinese firms that need to be
improved through international collaboration. Despite cost
advantages, Chinese products have been short on compe-
titiveness in the global marketplace for decades, largely
attributable to lack of innovation and technological cap-
abilities (Rawski, 1994). In contrast to foreign companies
that often aim at market penetration in China, many
Chinese firms are eager to export more to international
markets. Thus, a foreign partner’s position and power in
the home and international markets becomes particularly
crucial
to its Chinese counterpart. Since Chinese firms
lack international presence, experience, and distribution
channels,
the success of their export strategies signifi-
cantly depends on their partners’ marketing expertise
when dealing with international distribution and promo-
tion. A foreign company that
is equipped with these
superior attributes is expected to promote ICV perfor-

mance that
Chinese partner’s satisfaction with its goal
behind ICV formation.

is defined in this study as the degree of a
fulfillment

1.2.1. Technological capability

improvement

Under the former centrally planned regime, firms did not
have to dedicate themselves to research and development
(R&D) because all outputs were marketed within a geo-
graphically dispersed but nationally integrated redistributive
system controlled by the government (Nee, 1989). When
they began to target international markets after they were
permitted and encouraged to export, Chinese firms started
realistically pursuing technological
through
ventures with foreign firms, particularly those from indus-
trialized countries, to compensate for their weaknesses in
product differentiation and process innovation (Shenkar,
1990). At the organizational level, most Chinese firms do
not have an R&D division. At
the
technological capability to produce consumer products is
low, attributable to the absence of well-established com-
mercialization and intellectual property rights systems (Jef-
ferson and Xu, 1991). A foreign partner’s advanced
technological competence helps improve a Chinese firm’s
operational weakness and stimulate its product and process
innovation in domestic or international markets. Such
competence will directly contribute to ICV performance
as perceived by a Chinese partner, and indirectly enhance
the Chinese partner’s technological development. ICV per-
formance as perceived by Chinese firms is thus likely to be
a positive function of a foreign partner’s technological
skills. Therefore:

the national

level,

Hypothesis 1: A foreign partner’s technological cap-
ability will be positively associated with a Chinese firm’s
satisfaction with ICV performance.

1.2.2. Foreign market power

This study defines a foreign partner’s market power as its
competitive strength and position in its home or international
market. Because export businesses have been monopolized
by a few state-controlled foreign trade corporations since
1949, most Chinese firms do not have knowledge and
experience about foreign markets. The market power of
foreign partners in home or international markets becomes
a key asset for increasing foreign exchange yields for
Chinese firms. Strong power often implies a firm’s strong
industrial background, superior market position, and well-
established networks with suppliers and buyers. It also gives
the firm an ability to shape market competition and transac-
tion value. Because such power is an organizationally
embedded strategic asset, it elevates a foreign firm’s bargain-
ing power stemming from its resources on which a Chinese
firm depends (Pfeffer and Salancik, 1978; Yan and Gray,
1994). As long as this dependence remains, a Chinese firm
will behave collaboratively, which is often conducive to ICV
performance (Osland and Cavusgil, 1996). When a foreign


Y. Luo / Journal of Business Research 55 (2002) 481–493

485

firm maintains strong market power, it tends to make a strong
commitment to helping export ICV products. This provides
the firm with an additional opportunity to enhance joint or
private profits and its own bargaining power through lever-
aging existing competencies. From the view of Chinese
firms, high market power of foreign counterparts fulfills
their needs and helps drive up ICV performance. Therefore:

Hypothesis 2: A foreign partner’s foreign market power
will be positively associated with a Chinese firm’s
satisfaction with ICV performance.

1.2.3. International marketing expertise

This study refers to marketing expertise as a foreign
firm’s ability to customize, promote, and distribute products
in its home or international markets. When Chinese firms
use ICVs as a platform for creating foreign exchange earn-
ings, the marketing expertise of foreign partners becomes
critical. Before establishing ICVs, most Chinese partners did
not have any distribution networks or marketing skills
necessary for entering the global market. Although they
excel in production promotion in China, such knowledge is
not transferable across borders, especially between devel-
oping and developed nations (Porter, 1986). Chinese firms
must rely on their foreign partners’ marketing experience to
boost ICV exports. As ICV products made in China are
often new to international markets, marketing efforts must
be undertaken to substitute for the disadvantage of product
newness in a highly competitive environment. The impor-
tance of a foreign partner’s marketing expertise is further
amplified when an ICV’s product quality and customer
responsiveness are considered. Chinese ICV products are
often less competitive in international markets than those
made by their major rivals from industrialized countries
(Nolan, 1996). They have the liability of foreignness in
reaching and satisfying the end-users of their exports. To
compete in this context, the marketing expertise equipped
by foreign partners is likely to be a determinant of ICV
performance as perceived by Chinese companies. This
expertise also helps improve marketing effectiveness in
the Chinese market. Therefore:

efficient way to ameliorate low productivity, poor manage-
ment, and outmoded administration in Chinese businesses
(Rawski, 1994; Shenkar and Von Glinow, 1994). Under the
former redistribution structure of state socialism, manage-
rial skills had little significance because top managers
lacked both the power and incentives to enhance organiza-
tional efficiency. This deficiency immensely deters firm
growth and business evolution during economic reform
(Walder, 1992). Having been isolated from the outside
world for decades, Chinese firms engaged in ICVs are
critically concerned with their partners’
international
experience and organizational reputation. These attributes
are perceived by Chinese firms as stimulating their own
reputations in both domestic and foreign markets. When
this is achieved, top managers are much more likely to be
politically promoted, which is often their predominant
incentive (Groves et al., 1994).

1.3.1. Managerial skills

Poor managerial skills have hindered product competi-
tiveness and operational efficiency and have been a big
headache for both firms and the state for decades (Jefferson
et al., 1992). A Chinese firm with better organizational and
managerial skills tends to be more innovative, productive,
and adaptive (Jefferson and Xu, 1991) and grows faster than
others (Nolan, 1996). Thus, a foreign investor’s contribution
of advanced managerial skills is strategically complemen-
tary with its Chinese partner’s organizational needs and
dynamics (Lardy, 1995). This increases interpartner organi-
zational fit, which may, in turn, generate synergetic rents as
perceived by Chinese firms. Managerial skills are reflected
not only in human resource management skills, effective
organizational structure, active participation by employees,
and managerial efficiency, but also in the blending of
cultures and management styles between partners (Tallman
and Shenkar, 1994). Thus, a foreign partner’s managerial
skills also have strong implications for interfirm collabora-
tion and conflict resolution (Khanna et al., 1998). This
reinforces Chinese business satisfaction with ICV perfor-
mance. Therefore:

Hypothesis 3: A foreign partner’s international market-
ing expertise will be positively associated with a Chinese
firm’s satisfaction with ICV performance.

Hypothesis 4: A foreign partner’s managerial skills will
be positively associated with a Chinese firm’s satisfac-
tion with ICV performance.

1.3. Importance of organizational attributes

1.3.2. International experience

A foreign partner’s managerial skills,

international
experience, and corporate reputation are expected to be
fundamental
to ICV success as perceived by Chinese
firms. This is because these competencies are particularly
complementary to the strategic needs of Chinese firms and
stimulate improvement of organizational weaknesses.
Acquiring organizational competencies from foreign part-
ners and then integrating them with China-specific
dynamics have been recognized as the most effective and

International experience includes not only transnational
and regional experience but also experience in operations in
China and cooperation with Chinese firms. International
experience affects the organizational fit between partners in
the early stages of collaboration and the changes of fit over
time as the venture evolves (Ring and Van de Ven, 1994). A
Chinese partner can avail itself of a foreign firm’s experi-
ence to learn more about international operations as well as
business strategies concerning these operations. A foreign
party’s experience can also add value to an ICV’s reputation


486

Y. Luo / Journal of Business Research 55 (2002) 481–493

and product image in both host and international markets.
More importantly, accumulated experience and increased
familiarity with different national cultures are conducive to
overcoming mistrust, attenuating opportunism, and facilitat-
ing cooperation (Mohr and Spekman, 1994). Since the
business atmosphere and commercial practices in China
vary substantially from those in other countries, a foreign
investor with considerable international experience will be
seen as culturally knowledgeable and cooperative by a
Chinese partner. This, in turn, facilitates effective commu-
nication and mutual trust between partners. Therefore:

Hypothesis 5: A foreign partner’s international experi-
ence will be positively associated with a Chinese firm’s
satisfaction with ICV performance.

1.3.3. Organizational reputation

This study defines organizational reputation comprehen-
sively as a corporate reputation in the home and host
country, international market, and industry. Superior orga-
nizational reputation implies a superior product brand,
customer loyalty, or corporate image (Saxton, 1997). It is
an important intangible asset sustaining competitive advan-
tages (Prahalad and Hamel, 1990) and represents both an
internal resource and a means to secure external resources
(Pfeffer and Salancik, 1978). Having long suffered from
counterfeiting and inferior products, Chinese consumers
tend to be loyal to ICV products that are jointly made by
prestigious foreign companies. This reputation represents a
critical distinctive competency fostering an ICV’s competi-
tive advantage and enhancing a Chinese partner’s reputation
in the local market. Internationally, a foreign firm’s organi-
zational reputation can help promote ICV exports and
foreign exchange gains, and stimulate brand image and firm
expansion. This reputation is a form of relational or social
capital
that can add additional value to Chinese firm
satisfaction. It escalates trust and fosters relationship build-
ing with business community and government agencies both
domestically and internationally. Therefore:

Hypothesis 6: A foreign partner’s organizational reputa-
tion will be positively associated with a Chinese firm’s
satisfaction with ICV performance.

2. Research methods

A nationwide mail survey of general or deputy general
managers representing the Chinese party in Sino – foreign
joint ventures was undertaken in 1998. Our sample list was
drawn from the Directory of Foreign-Invested Industrial
Enterprises, compiled by MOFTEC, China, in 1996, and the
Almanac of China’s Foreign Economic Relations and Trade
(1993 – 1996). We sent the questionnaires to 500 randomly
selected manufacturing ICVs, each 3 years or longer in
operation, with a geographical focus on the Yangtze River
Delta (Shanghai, Jiangsu, and Zhejiang provinces) and the

Pearl River Delta (Guandong and Fujian provinces). These
ventures had all been established by non-private Chinese
parents (state- or collective-owned). Questionnaires were
sent
through an independent contractor (a distinguished
international business professor in China). These regions
are major hosts of foreign investment; they represented 61%
of the total value of FDI nationwide at the end of 1995.
Nevertheless, future research should use more representative
samples (especially including those in northern cities such
as Beijing and Tianjing) to examine the behavior and
rationale of Chinese firms. In a pilot test, the preliminary
Chinese version of the questionnaire was sent to fourteen
senior managers representing Chinese parties in ICVs in
Nanjing. They were asked to identify any ambiguities in the
terms, concepts, or issues raised. Face-to-face interviews
were later conducted. The questionnaire was adjusted based
on their comments. After three rounds of reminders, there
were 122 complete responses, including 109 equity ICVs
and 13 contractual ICVs. A total of 70 were formed by state
firms and 52 by collective enterprises. As for the geogra-
phical distribution, 41 were from Jiangsu, 29 from Shang-
hai, 23 from Guandong, 17 from Zhejiang, and 12 from
Fujian. The foreign sources of investment mainly originated
from the US, UK, Japan, Germany, Hong Kong, France,
Italy, Taiwan, Australia, and Singapore.

In order to alleviate the possibility of ‘‘politically cor-
rect’’ responses to our survey, we left
the respondents
unidentified. Previous research has found that when guar-
anteed anonymity managers in China are more willing and
likely to provide accurate information (Adler et al., 1989).
In order to provide triangulations with some of the mail
survey results and between respondents within the same
company,
twenty senior Chinese managers in ICVs in
Nanjing (two from each firm) were interviewed semi-struc-
turally and asked to identify the strength of foreign partner
attributes and other questionnaire items right after the
questionnaires were collected. The reported results demon-
strated a high consistency with their answers on the ques-
tionnaires and between the two interviewees from each firm
(correlations are all at P < .0001).

The possibility of non-response bias was checked
based on information obtained from the Directory of
Foreign-Invested Industrial Enterprises and 22,000 Busi-
nesses in P.R.C. (published by China International Busi-
ness Investigation in 1996). From these resources, we
were able to compare some firm attributes between
responding and non-responding firms,
identified from
the code number we had stamped on each questionnaire.
The mean differences between respondents and non-
respondents with respect
to the number of employees,
length of operations, sales, and net profit were tested
using an unpaired t test. The results demonstrated that all
t statistics were insignificant.
to check the
representativeness of the sample, the mean of the project
size of the sample firms was compared with those of the
population nationwide, using information obtained from

In order


Y. Luo / Journal of Business Research 55 (2002) 481–493

487

the China Statistical Yearbook (1996). The t test results
were insignificant, suggesting no significant bias from the
population in terms of investment size. To further ensure
the reliability of responses from sample firms, we fol-
lowed the post-hoc procedural method suggested by
Podsakoff and Organ (1986). In early 1999, we sent the
same questionnaires to 29 randomly selected senior man-
agers who had responded to the early round. The correla-
tion analysis of 22 responses exhibited strong consistency
in surveyed items between the two different periods (all at
P < .0001). After completing all these post-hoc procedural
methods, a statistical remedy was finally employed. We
conducted Harman’s one-factor test where all variables
revealed in the questionnaire were entered into a factor
analysis. The results uncovered that neither a single factor
emerged nor there was a general factor that could account
for the majority of the covariance in these variables.

2.1. Variable measurement

As detailed in Appendix A, each attribute in the
strategic, organizational, and financial categories was
defined as a multidimensional construct measured by
respondent assessments of their foreign partners’ actual
strength in relevant aspects of that attribute. What Appen-
dix A shows is the resulting measurement after modifica-
tion based on the content validity check conducted during
our pilot test with fourteen ICV Chinese managers. We did
this by asking them to judge the extent
to which the
relevant dimensions of each attribute reflected the content
of that attribute. Those dimensions rated  2 on a five-
point Likert scale were deleted in the final version of the
questionnaire. In addition, the convergent validity of each
attribute was examined using a confirmatory factor analy-
sis. The test indicated that standardized factor loadings of
all of the observed dimensions measuring every attribute
were significant at least at the .05 level. Construct relia-
bility for every attribute ranged from .76 to .93, all
exceeding the level of .70 as recommended by Hair et al.
(1992, p. 460). In aggregating the scores of individual
dimensions to arrive at attribute scores, we used the stan-
dardized factor loadings, found in the confirmatory factor
analysis, as weights.

This study defined ICV performance as a multidimen-
sional construct measured by the Chinese informant’s
assessment of an ICV’s fulfillment in such areas: domestic
sales, export growth, risk diversification, profitability, and
knowledge acquisition. We chose these dimensions
because they had been recognized as major strategic goals
underlying ICV formation for most firms (Arino, 1996;
Contractor and Lorange, 1988; Luo, 1997; Yan and Gray,
1994). Although knowledge acquisition does not look like
a typical financial
it must be included in the
performance framework. This is because Chinese partners
are often dissatisfied with the performance of those part-
nerships that are more dependent on a foreign party’s

indicator,

technological capabilities (Osland and Cavusgil, 1996).
Thus, examining the importance of foreign partner attri-
butes in the perception of Chinese firms necessitates the
inclusion of Chinese managers’ actual satisfaction with
knowledge acquisition. Additionally, since the perceptual
importance of each of these dimensions differs between
Chinese firms and foreign companies, and probably among
Chinese businesses themselves, the performance construct
was measured by the average of the responses, on a seven-
point Likert scale, to the satisfaction with each of these
five dimensions, weighted by the importance of each
dimension, also on a seven-point Likert scale, as perceived
by the same respondent (see Appendix A). As far as this
importance, the result shows considerably high means of
knowledge acquisition (m = 5.89, S.D. = 1.17) and export
growth (m = 5.86, S.D. = 1.03), marginally high mean of
domestic sales (m = 3.88, S.D. = 1.26), and low means of
risk diversification (m = 2.24, S.D. = 0.78) and profitability
(m = 2.78, S.D. = 0.74). These descriptive statistics from the
sample firms confirm our early argument concerning
Chinese firms’ rationales underlying ICV formation. That
is, they are mainly driven by market expansion (particu-
larly foreign market) and knowledge acquisition, rather
than minimizing transaction costs and risks. If knowledge
acquisition is a vehicle to accomplish ultimate financial or
market performance (Osborn and Hagedorn, 1997),
it
seems to be a critical means for achieving market expan-
sion rather than financial performance.

In examining the ICV performance predicted by foreign
partner attributes, we controlled for relevant factors in the
model. First,
the industry effect may shape operation
outcomes and influence organizational needs. This variable
was measured as the geometric average of the 3-year profit
of an industry in which an ICV operated during 1995 –
1997. The data were obtained from the 3-year editions of
the China Statistical Yearbook compiled and published by
the State Statistical Bureau. Second, the type of an ICV (a
dummy variable: 1 if equity; 0 if otherwise, i.e., contrac-
tual) may affect the underlying rationale of ICV formation
and partner selection criteria. Third, governmental inter-
vention over ICV formation and operations, measured by
the respondent’s assessment on a five-point Likert scale,
may impact either the partner selection process or subse-
quent operations. Lastly, the ownership of Chinese firms (a
dummy variable: 1 if state-owned; 0 if otherwise, based on
the survey information) was included because it may be
associated with different incentive structures, which may,
in turn, influence managerial needs that have to be fulfilled
by partner attributes.

3. Analysis and results

Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics and Pearson
correlation matrix pertaining to all variables involved in
this study. Overall, the level of foreign partner attributes as


Table 1
Descriptive statistics and Pearson correlation (N = 122)

Variables

Mean

S.D.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

1. ICV performance
2. Technological capacity
3. Market power
4. Marketing expertise
5. Managerial skills
6. International experience
7. Organizational reputation
8. Cost reduction
9. Capital allocation
10. Asset management
11. Industry growth
12. Chinese ownership
13. Government intervention
14. ICV form

4.73
4.77
4.41
4.47
4.45
3.69
4.87
4.97
4.88
5.13
9.24
0.57
5.18
0.90

1.03
1.24
1.19
1.06
0.96
1.02
1.04
1.12
1.13
1.18
3.61
0.50
0.75
0.30

.48***
.56**
.45***
.41***
.19*
.31***
.16
.21*
.20*
.18*
  .15
  .32***
  .01

.46***
.37***
.24**
.15
.21*
  .06
.02
.15
.03
  .08
.05
  .14

.27***
.13
.17
.18*
  .08
.11
.06
.11
  .07
.09
  .15

.21*
.19*
.09
.12
.07
.10
.07
  .13
.06
  .09

.18*
.26**
.20*
.25**
.29***
.03
  .12
.11
  .06

* P < .05.
** P < .01.
*** P < .001.

.28***
.11
.09
.12
  .08
  .04
.10
  .06

.13
.07
.13
  .04
  .09
.02
  .08

.24**
.30***
.16
  .06
.07
  .01

.23**
.08
  .06
.05
  .04

.16
  .21*
.12
.01

  .02
.22*
  .03

.20*
  .01

  .06

4
8
8

Y

.

L
u
o

/

J
o
u
r
n
a
l

o
f

B
u
s
i
n
e
s
s

R
e
s
e
a
r
c
h

5
5

(
2
0
0
2
)

4
8
1
–
4
9
3


Y. Luo / Journal of Business Research 55 (2002) 481–493

489

perceived by Chinese firms is moderately above the mean
on seven-point Likert scale. Most strategic and organiza-
tional attributes are significantly correlated with Chinese
partner satisfaction at P < .001 level, whereas financial
attributes are either insignificantly or only moderately
correlated with this satisfaction. In order to assess the
importance of proposed attributes in relation to Chinese
partner satisfaction, we conducted a standardized multiple
regression in which various categories of attributes are both
individually and collectively tested (Table 2). VIF (variance
inflation factors) values in Table 2 models range from 1.11
to 3.22, which implies the non-existence of a multicolli-
nearity threat among all predicting variables. A modified
Kolmogorov – Smirnov test was performed to validate the
assumption of normality of each variable in these models.
The results (.05 – .08, P > .10) confirmed the validity of the
normality of all relevant variables.

As shown in Table 2, all strategic attributes possessed by
foreign partners (technological capability, foreign market
power, and international marketing expertise) are signifi-
cantly and positively associated with Chinese partner satis-
faction at P < .05 or lower in both before (Model 1) and after
controlling for other factors (Model 4). Similarly, the two
organizational attributes, namely, managerial skills and or-
ganizational reputation have a strong and favorable influence
on satisfaction from Chinese businesses (Models 2 and 4).

Table 2
Perceived foreign partner attributes and ICV performance: standardized
multiple regression (N = 122)a

Model 1

Model 2 Model 3 Model 4

Strategic attributes
Technological capability
Market power
Marketing expertise

.32***
.29**
.28**

Organizational attributes
Managerial skills
International experience
Organizational reputation

Financial attributes
Cost control
Capital allocation
Asset management

.25**
.14
.22*

Control variables
Industry growth
Chinese ownership
Government intervention   .26***   .21**
ICV form

.03
  .05

.11
  .06

.13*

.09

Model F
P <
Adjusted R2

24.31

20.85

.001
.56

.001
.38

a The entries in the table are the standardized bs.
* P < .05.
** P < .01.
*** P < .001.

.31***
.16*
.18*

.21*
.13
.28**

.14
.19
.09

.08
.09
.07

.04
  .07
  .16*
.12

11.33
.01
.17

  .03
  .15
  .27***
  .05

27.07

.001
.69

is insignificantly
International experience, nevertheless,
related to ICV performance. It suggests that Chinese firms
do not highly value this experience in relation to their
private payoffs. Such experience may not necessarily be
able to help ICVs achieve their strategic goals, given that
these ventures mostly seek long-term economic benefits
from local demand growth and that Chinese firms are
generally more familiar with this local market than are
foreign partners. Moreover, this experience may not neces-
sarily mirror market power in international markets, which
is sought by Chinese firms, because this power depends
more on product, process, and managerial innovations in a
competitive environment (Porter, 1986). Foreign partners
with little experience but distinctive competitive advantages
can also fulfill the needs of both ICVs and Chinese firms in
generating foreign exchange earnings. The above results
lead support to our early hypotheses except Hypothesis 5.
As Table 2 shows, financial attributes of foreign partners
including cost control, capital allocation, and asset manage-
ment are not important to ICV performance as perceived by
Chinese partners (Models 3 and 4). When firms are not con-
cerned with minimizing transaction costs and financial risks,
partner attributes in financial aspects become insignificant.
In this case, no financial synergies and cash flow optimiza-
tion benefits accrue for both parties and the venture itself.
For a truly private business in a competitive environment, the
success of long-term firm expansion and growth is in fact
influenced by its financial capability of cost reduction,
capital allocation, and asset utilization. For state or collective
enterprises surrounded by a quasi-protected institutional
environment, however, the ‘‘expansion’’ they are concerned
is primarily market-based rather than efficiency-driven, and
essentially shortsighted rather than long-run-based.

The above results answered our early research question,
that is, Chinese firms seek strategic and organizational
attributes rather than financial attributes in potential foreign
partners. Different categories of attributes are not necessarily
homogeneous in terms of the importance in relation to a
Chinese partner’s satisfaction with ICV performance. Chi-
nese firms perceive foreign partner competence in the
strategic and organizational aspects as significantly critical
to achieving their goals from ICV formation. Financial
attributes are not fundamental factors affecting their satisfac-
tion. As far as the statistically explanatory power is con-
cerned, the strategic category (R2 = .56) has a greater impact
on ICV performance than the organizational category
(R2 = .38, see Table 2).

Among the control variables, governmental intervention
over ICV formation and operations is found to be signifi-
cantly and negatively related to Chinese partner satisfaction
with ICV performance (see Table 2). Previous studies agree
that host governmental
intervention often hampers ICV
development from the point of view of foreign businesses
(Beamish, 1993; Shenkar, 1990). This study shows that,
even from the perspective of Chinese firms, such interven-
tion hurts ICV performance. How to use market or fiscal


490

Y. Luo / Journal of Business Research 55 (2002) 481–493

levers in lieu of administrative interference to boost FDI and
monitor subsequent activities seems to be an important
lesson for the Chinese government and perhaps those in
other transition economies as well. Other control variables
including the ownership type of a Chinese firm (state vs.
collective) and the form of an ICV (EJV vs. CJV) are
insignificantly related to a Chinese firm’s satisfaction.

4. Discussion and conclusion

This study explores which attributes of foreign partners
importantly affect Chinese business satisfaction with per-
formance of ICVs in China. It diagnoses three categories of
firm attributes, namely, strategic, organizational, and finan-
cial. The analysis of 122 sample ICVs supports our research
question. That
is, Chinese firms select foreign partners
based upon organizational learning considerations and the
need to acquire knowledge from partner firms, rather than
transaction cost concerns. It validates a related assumption
that strategic (technological capability, market power, and
marketing expertise) and organizational (managerial skills
and organizational reputation) attributes of foreign firms are
strongly associated with Chinese partner satisfaction with
ICV performance whereas financial attributes (cost control,
capital allocation, and asset management) are not. These
strategic and organizational competencies accommodate the
organizational needs of Chinese firms and improve the
internal deficiencies largely caused by a bureaucratic, cum-
bersome, centrally planned regime lasted for decades. These
findings about Chinese perspectives differ from previous
studies that observed the significance of strategic, organiza-
tional, and financial attributes of Chinese partners to foreign
business satisfaction (e.g., Luo, 1998). Further, needed
attributes under strategic or organizational categories are
asymmetrical between Chinese and foreign partners. For
foreign firms, Chinese partners’ organizational form,
absorptive capacity, industrial experience, and foreign ex-
perience were found to affect ICV performance (Luo, 1997).
This study shows that Chinese firms pursue different attri-
butes (e.g., managerial and technological skills, marketing
expertise, and reputation) and perceive differently the
importance of common attributes such as industrial and
international experience. This concludes that Chinese firms
have idiosyncratic needs from partner contributions and
maintain asymmetric rationales behind partner selection
and ICV formation. Chinese firms are primarily expan-
sion-driven rather than focused on minimizing transaction
costs or maximizing profits.

Asymmetric needs and criteria underlying partner selec-
tion between foreign and local firms can be attributed
mainly to different organizational dynamics and various
environmental contingencies. In contrast with foreign com-
panies, the majority of Chinese partners are either state-
owned or collectively owned. Different ownership structures
have variable influences on managerial motivation, agency

cost, administrative autonomy, decision power, growth
strategy, and strategic orientation. The absence of a power-
ful market mechanism for both output and production
factors dispels external competition and propels internal
inertia amongst Chinese firms. The soft budgeting system
that financially links the state and firms attenuates organiza-
tional incentive, discretion, and the power to operate effi-
ciently and effectively. Incomplete structural transformation
sometimes fosters discriminatory governmental policies
toward different firms and possibly weakens innovation
and adaptation for some firms. Under these constraints,
Chinese firms commonly lack technological and organiza-
tional skills to cope with an increasingly competitive envir-
onment both domestically and internationally. Because
extending the local market to the international domain and
creating foreign exchange earnings are governmentally pre-
ferred and institutionally encouraged strategies, Chinese
firms need foreign partners’ market power, marketing
expertise, business experience, and corporate image, all
pertinent to international operations, to redress their organi-
zational deficiencies and stimulate goal achievement.

Knowing what local firms need from foreign firms may
enrich our understanding of interfirm complementarity
dynamics, particularly in terms of which dimensions of
knowledge are complementary between foreign firms in
the developed world and local businesses in a developing
country. Relative to vigorous studies in the literature on
interpartner learning from the perspective of foreign firms
(e.g., Hamel, 1991; Inkpen and Beamish, 1997; Luo, 1997;
Osborn and Hagedorn, 1997; Saxton, 1997), our under-
standing of this issue from the local firm perspective is
inadequate and incomplete. This study shows that Chinese
firms attach utmost value to their partners’ technological
and organizational skills that can spur their goal achieve-
ment in firm expansion. Because foreign exchange earnings
underlie the major motivations of both the state and firms,
local firms are more concerned with market expansion
internationally than domestically. This explains why they
highly value those attributes that raise product or marketing
effectiveness in the international market. This concern may
differ critically from the goal of many foreign companies
that are pursuing market positions and business expansion
within the Chinese market. Some foreign investors do not
want
to see this backfire in their home yards or other
established international markets, which could happen if
ICV exports increase competition with parental products in
the same market. Resource complementarity rather than
goal complementarity enhances the likelihood of ICV
success in China (Osland and Cavusgil, 1996; Luo, 1997).
While resource complementarity boosts joint profitability,
goal congruence improves ICV stability (Inkpen and Beam-
ish, 1997; Yan and Gray, 1994). Foreign firms should verify
not only whether their capabilities satisfy or fit Chinese
business needs, and vice versa, but also if their objectives
agree with those of their counterparts, and, if not, whether
they can tolerate this.


Y. Luo / Journal of Business Research 55 (2002) 481–493

491

Knowing the performance implications of foreign partner
attributes as perceived by local firms may enable us to
identify important sources of resource dependence and
bargaining power that foreign businesses can employ to
improve their position in skewing negotiation outcomes,
controlling venture operations, protecting intellectual prop-
erty rights from uncompensated leakage, and exploring
more benefits from financial and operational synergies.
The technological and organizational capabilities contribu-
ted by foreign companies are generally markedly superior to
those of local firms. Because of limited absorptive cap-
ability and a weak infrastructure for technological ad-
vancement, Chinese partners hardly become major rivals
competing for foreign firms’ innovative products after
dissolution of ICVs. It is hence advisable for foreign firms
to contribute strategic and organizational resources, such as
those we found above, to venture operations. This can in-
crease the likelihood of both parties receiving a payoff and
foreign firms achieving private rents if they successfully
transform their superior resources into greater bargaining
power and organizational control.

From both the theoretical and practical view points, the
management
literature needs to pay more attention to
examining Chinese firms, especially their strategic behavior,
economic rationales, and business policies. In essence,
current studies on Chinese domestic firms remain in the
infant phase, lagging behind practice, and several other
disciplines such as sociology and economics. Just as trans-
action cost theory cannot necessarily be applied to explain-
ing Chinese firm rationales for partner selection, other
theories or paradigms in management may not be general-
izable to Chinese firms as well. Now with a half million
enterprises in various industrial sectors, Chinese firms are
playing an increasingly important part in shaping the world
economy. This study suggests that Chinese firms are expan-
sion-driven, rather than focused on maximizing returns or
minimizing costs. Thus, the key assumptions of an eco-
nomic perspective may not hold in analyzing these firms.
Moreover, the assumption of a complete market mechanism
in Western theories apparently does not hold true in China,
which undermines the applicability of these theories to this
context. The differences of Chinese firms in terms of
property rights ownership, organizational forms,
institu-
tional protection, and hardness of the fiscal-budget system
increase the complexity of applying existing theories to
Chinese firm behavior and strategies. The constant changes
of the institutional environment and unexpected dynamics
of structural transformation additionally heighten this com-
plexity. This study represents only one effort to appreciate
this issue from the partner selection perspective. When
China joins WTO (World Trade Organization) and takes
further steps toward a market economy, local firms will face
stronger competitive pressure in most industries. It will then
be important
to discern whether our findings can hold
longitudinally, especially if Chinese firms will be more
cost-sensitive, and whether Chinese and foreign firms will

become more convergent in economic rationales and stra-
tegic behaviors.

Appendix A. Selected items from the questionnaire

Part 1: General information
1. Major industry and products
2. Ownership of Chinese parent (state vs. collective)
3. Degree of governmental hindrance and intervention
over your ICV formation and operation (five-point
Likert scale)

Part 2: Strategic attributes: As a senior manager
representing the Chinese party, how do you rate the
foreign partner’s actual strength in each of the following
areas (seven-point Likert scale: 1 very weak – 7
very strong)?

1. Technological capability

a. product development and innovation skills
b. process design and innovation skills
c. technological development skills
d. quality control skills
e. transparency of technology transfer

2. Foreign market power

a. quantity and diversity of customers
b. economy of scale
c. competitiveness in home and international markets
d. market share in home and international markets
e. ability and efficiency of product differentiation

3. International marketing expertise

a. distribution channels in home and international markets
b. product promotion skills
c. customer service
d. customer loyalty
e. relationships with home and international distributors,

wholesalers, or retailers

Part 3: Organizational attributes: As a senior manager
representing the Chinese party, how do you rate the foreign
partner’s actual strength in each of the following areas
(seven-point Likert scale: 1 very weak – 7 very strong)?

1. Managerial skills

a. human resource management skills
b. effectiveness of organizational structure
c. level of employee participation in management
d. managerial and administrative efficiency
e. blending of cultures and management styles with partners

2. International experience

a. experience in transnational operations
b. experience in investment and operations in Asia


492

Y. Luo / Journal of Business Research 55 (2002) 481–493

c. experience in investment and operations in China
d. experience in cooperation with Chinese firms
e. experience in the industry in which the ICV

was established

3. Organizational reputation

a. organizational reputation in the home country
b. organizational reputation in the international market
c. organizational reputation in the Chinese market
d. organizational reputation in the industry
e. organizational reputation in interfirm cooperation

Part 4: Financial attributes: As a senior manager represent-
ing the Chinese party, how do you rate the foreign partner’s
actual strength in each of the following areas (seven-point
Likert scale: 1 very weak – 7 very strong)?

1. Ability to reduce cost

a. cost control ability
b. expense reduction
c. tax avoidance ability

2. Ability to allocate and utilize capital

a. ability to allocate and use working capital
b. financing ability
c. ability to use and control debts

3. Ability to manage assets

a. ability to manage accounts receivables and cash flows
b. ability to manage inventory and fixed assets
c. ability to manage intangible assets

Part 5: Performance: From the perspective of the
Chinese party you represent, how do you rate
(Q1) the importance, and (Q2) your satisfaction with actual
fulfillment, of the following aspects of an
ICV’s performance (both on a seven-point Likert scale:

1. very low – 7 very high)?

a. domestic sales and local market expansion
b. export growth and foreign market expansion
c. risk diversification
d. profitability
e. knowledge acquisition from foreign partner

P

P

(D2i D1i)/

Performance =
D1i where D2i is the score
of the response to Q2 for performance dimension i; D1i is
the score of the response to Q1 for dimension i; i = 1,2. . .5.

References

Adler N, Campbell N, Laurent A. In search of appropriate methodology:
from outside the People’s Republic of China looking in. J Int Bus Stud
1989;20:61 – 74.

Arino A. Measures of collaborative venture performance: an analysis of
construct validity. Working Paper No 96/2, University of Navarra, 1996.

Barkema HG, Shenkar O, Vermeulen F, Bell JH. Working abroad, working
with others: how firms learn to operate international joint ventures.
Acad Manage J 1997;40:426 – 42.

Beamish PW. The characteristics of joint ventures in the People’s Republic

of China. J Int Mark 1993;1(2):29 – 48.

Beamish PW. Joint ventures in LDCs: partner selection and performance.

Manage Int Rev 1987;27:23 – 37.

Boisot M, Child J. The iron law of fiefs: bureaucratic failure and the prob-
lem of governance in the Chinese economic reforms. Admin Sci Q
1988;33:507 – 27.

Buckley PJ, Casson MC. The theory of cooperation in international
business. In: Contractor F, Lorange P, editors. Cooperative strategies
in international business. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1988.
pp. 31 – 4.

Child J. Management in China during the age of reform. New York: Cam-

bridge Univ. Press, 1994.

China statistical yearbook. Beijing, China: China National Statistical Bu-

reau, 1996.

Contractor F, Lorange P. Why should firms cooperate? Strategy and eco-
nomic basis for cooperative ventures. In: Contractor F, Lorange P, edi-
tors. Cooperative strategies in international business. Lexington, MA:
Lexington Books, 1988. pp. 1 – 11.

Dyer JH. Effective interfirm collaboration: how firms minimize transac-
tion costs and maximize transaction value. Strategic Manage J 1997;
18:535 – 56.

Geringer JM. Strategic determinants of partner selection criteria in interna-

tional joint ventures. J Int Bus Stud 1991;23:41 – 62.

Groves T, Hong Y, McMillan J, Baughton B. Autonomy and incentives in

Chinese state enterprises. Q J Econ 1994;109(1):193 – 209.

Guthrie D. Between markets and politics: organizational response to reform

in China. Am J Sociol 1997;102(5):1258 – 303.

Hair JF, Anderson RE, Tatham RL, Black WC. Multivariate data analysis

with readings. New York: Macmillan, 1992.

Hamel G. Competition for competence and inter-partner learning within
international strategic alliances. Strategic Manage J 1991;12:83 – 104
(Special issue).

Hamel G, Doz Y, Prahalad CK. Collaborate with your competitors — and

win. Harv Bus Rev 1989;67:133 – 9.

Harrigan KR. Joint ventures and competitive strategy. Strategic Manage J

1988;9:141 – 58.

Inkpen AC, Beamish PW. Knowledge, bargaining power, and the in-
stability of international joint ventures. Acad Manage Rev 1997;22:
177 – 202.

Jefferson GH, Xu W. The impact of reform on socialist enterprises in
transition: structure, conduct, and performance in Chinese industry.
J Comp Econ 1991;15:45 – 64.

Jefferson GH, Rawski TG, Zheng Y. Growth, efficiency, and convergence
in China’s state and collective industry. Econ Dev Cult Change 1992;
40:239 – 66.

Khanna T, Gulati R, Nohira N. The dynamics of learning alliances: com-
petition, cooperation and relative scope. Strategic Manage J 1998;19:
193 – 210.

Kogut B. Joint ventures: theoretical and empirical perspectives. Strategic

Manage J 1988;9:319 – 32.

Kostova T, Zaheer S. Organizational legitimacy under conditions of com-
plexity: the case of the multinational enterprise. Acad Manage Rev 1999;
24:64 – 81.

Lardy NR. The role of foreign trade and investment in China’s economic

transformation. China Q 1995;144:1065 – 82.

Luo Y. Partner selection and venturing success: the case of joint ventures
with firms in the People’s Republic of China. Organ Sci 1997;8(6):
648 – 62.

Luo Y. Joint venture success in China: how should we select a good

partner? J World Bus 1998;33(2):145 – 66.

Mohr J, Spekman R. Characteristics of partnership success: partnership
attributes, communication behavior, and conflict resolution techniques.
Strategic Manage J 1994;15:135 – 52.


Y. Luo / Journal of Business Research 55 (2002) 481–493

493

Naughton B. Hierarchy and the bargaining economy: government and en-
terprise in the reform process. In: Lieberthal KG, Lampton DM, editors.
Bureaucracy, politics, and decision making in post-Mao China. Berke-
ley, CA: University of California Press, 1992. pp. 245 – 79.

Pfeffer J, Salancik GR. The external control of organizations. New York:

Harper & Row, 1978.

Podsakoff PM, Organ DW. Self-reports in organizational research: pro-

blems and prospects. J Manage 1986;12(4):531 – 44.

Naughton B. Growing out of the plan: Chinese economic reform 1978 –

Porter ME. Competition in global industries. Boston, MA: Harvard Busi-

1993. New York, NY: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1995.

ness School Press, 1986.

Nee V. A theory of market transition: from redistribution to markets in state

Prahalad CK, Hamel G. The core competence of the corporation. Harv Bus

socialism. Am Sociol Rev 1989;54:663 – 81.

Rev 1990;90:79 – 91.

Nee V. Organizational dynamics of market transition: hybrid forms, property

Rawski TG. Chinese industrial reform: accomplishments, prospects, and

rights, and mixed economy in China. Admin Sci Q 1992; 37:1 – 27.

implications. Am Econ Rev 1994;84:271 – 5.

Nolan P. Large firms and industrial reform in former planned economies:

Ring PS, Van de Ven AH. Developmental process of cooperative interor-

the case of China. Cambridge J Econ 1996;20:1 – 29.

ganizational relationships. Acad Manage Rev 1994;19:90 – 118.

Osborn RN, Hagedorn J. The institutionalization and evolution dynamics of
interorganizational alliances and networks. Acad Manage J 1997;40:
261 – 78.

Saxton T. The effects of partner and relationship characteristics on alliance

outcomes. Acad Manage J 1997;40:443 – 61.

Shan W. Environmental risks and joint venture sharing arrangements. J Int

Osland GE, Cavusgil ST. Performance issues in U.S. – China joint ventures.

Bus Stud 1991;22:555 – 78.

Calif Manage Rev 1996;38(2):156 – 71.

Shenkar O. International joint ventures’ problems in China: risks and re-

Pan Y. Influences on foreign equity ownership level in the joint ventures in

medies. Long Range Plann 1990;23(3):82 – 90.

China. J Int Bus Stud 1996;27(1):1 – 26.

Park S-H, Ungson GR. The effect of national culture, organizational com-
plementarity, and economic motivation on joint venture dissolution.
Acad Manage J 1997;40:279 – 307.

Shenkar O, Von Glinow MA. Paradoxes of organizational theory and re-
search: using the case of China to illustrate national contingency. Man-
age Sci 1994;40(1):56 – 71.

Tallman S, Shenkar O. A managerial decision model of international co-

Parkhe A. Interfirm diversity, organizational learning, and longevity in

operative venture formation. J Int Bus Stud 1994;25:91 – 114.

global strategic alliances. J Int Bus Stud 1991;22:579 – 601.

Walder AG. Property rights and stratification in socialist redistributive

Parkhe A. Strategic alliance structuring: a game theoretic and transaction
cost examination of interfirm cooperation. Acad Manage J 1993;36:
794 – 829.

Peng MW, Heath PS. The growth of the firm in planned economies in
transition: institutions, organizations, and strategic choice. Acad Man-
age Rev 1996;21:492 – 528.

economies. Am Sociol Rev 1992;57:524 – 39.

World Bank. Global economic prospects and the developing countries.

Washington, DC: World Bank, 1999.

Yan A, Gray B. Bargaining power, management control, and performance
in United States – China joint ventures: a comparative case study. Acad
Manage J 1994;37:1478 – 517.

