 
 
Political Behavior, Social Responsibility, and Perceived Corruption: A Structuration
Perspective
Author(s): Yadong Luo
Source: Journal of International Business Studies, Vol. 37, No. 6, Three Lenses on the
Multinational Enterprise: Politics, Corruption and Corporate Social Responsibility (Nov.,
2006), pp. 747-766
Published by: Palgrave Macmillan Journals
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/4540382
Accessed: 02-08-2017 23:16 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms

Palgrave Macmillan Journals is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend
access to Journal of International Business Studies

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Journal of International Business Studies (2006) 37, 747-766
 © 2006 Academy of International Business All rights reserved 0047-2506 $30.00
 www.jibs.net

 Political behavior, social responsibility, and
 perceived corruption: a structuration
 perspective

 Yadong Luo

 Department of Management, University of
 Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA

 Correspondence: Y Luo, Department of
 Management, School of Business
 Administration, University of Miami,
 414 Jenkins Building, Coral Gables,
 FL 33124-9145, USA.
 Tel: +1 305 284 4003;
 Fax: +1 305 284 3655;
 E-mail: yadong@miami.edu

 Abstract
 This study unites the three lenses - political behavior, corporate social
 responsibility, and corruption - and evaluates the way in which multinational
 enterprises (MNEs) manage political and social forces in a foreign emerging
 market. Using the theory of structuration as the conceptual foundation, we
 propose that an MNE's propensity to cooperate with the host government is
 positively related to its philanthropic contribution and resource accommoda-
 tion, whereas its propensity to be assertive with the host government is
 positively associated with its emphasis on ethics and organizational credibility.
 We argue that when perceived corruption in the business segment increases,
 an MNE's propensity to cooperate and be assertive with the government
 decreases, its focus on ethics heightens, and its philanthropic contribution
 diminishes. As to the three-way interactions, when perceived corruption in the
 business segment increases, MNEs that focus more on ethics have a greater
 propensity to use arm's length bargaining to deal with the government,
 whereas those focusing less on ethics have a greater propensity to use social
 connections to deal with the government. Our analysis of sample MNEs in
 China generally supports these propositions.
 Journal of International Business Studies (2006) 37, 747-766.
 doi: I 0. I 057/palgrave.jibs.8400224

 Keywords: political behavior; social responsibility; corruption; emerging market

 Introduction
 Today, multinational enterprises (MNEs) operate in an environ-
 ment where their relationships with host governments are critical
 yet complex. Their corporate social responsibility (CSR) is heigh-
 tened to reflect changing public attitudes about their social
 obligations, and resisting worldwide corruption is difficult if these
 MNEs do not actively participate in fighting it. More then ever
 before, MNEs are now expected to account for all aspects of their
 performance - not just their financial results, but their political and
 social performances, their political behavior in dealing with host
 governments, and their CSR in dealing with global stakeholders.
 The three lenses of politics, CSR, and corruption have each been
 richly yet separately articulated in numerous fields (e.g., econom-
 ics, law, political science, sociology, ethics, management and
 international business), but their integration is still largely
 unexplored. This integration is critical to MNEs, especially those

 Received: 24 August 2005
 Revised: 20 February 2006
 Accepted: 20 April 2006
 Online publication date: 24 August 2006

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Political behavior, social responsibility, and perceived corruption Yadong Luo

 748

 active in foreign emerging markets, because poli-
 tics, corruption, and CSR are intertwined in such a
 manner that political or government corruption
 pervades in many emerging economies (Rodriquez
 et al., 2005), and CSR must address ethical practices
 in dealing with local political agencies and in
 curtailing corruption (Tanzi, 1998; Carroll, 2004).
 The main objective of this study is, therefore, to

 examine how the three lenses are interrelated from
 an organizational MNE perspective: that is, how an
 MNE's political behavior, CSR activities, and the
 corrupt environment the MNE perceives in a foreign
 emerging market influence one another. Knowing
 such interrelationships (two-way and three-way) is a
 prerequisite to governing and monitoring govern-
 mental relations, CSR, and anticorruption within an
 integrated system. MNEs that integrally and cohe-
 sively combine the three issues or lenses may foster
 international executives to come up with more
 effective solutions and/or to reduce the adminis-
 trative costs in managing political and social issues.
 Because each of the three lenses is a complex
 organizational issue (Hillman and Keim, 2001;
 Luo, 2004; Grosse and Behrman, 2005), the present
 study delimits its scope on several foci to realisti-
 cally fulfill our ambitious objective.

 alize assertiveness or cooperativeness and assess
 how these means are associated with CSR and
 perceived corruption. Arm's length bargaining
 concerns the extent to which an MNE uses only
 open, impersonalized, and formal legitimate means
 to deal with a host country government with which
 the relationship is dominated by contentious
 bargaining. An MNE's bargaining power arises from
 its distinctive resources on which a government
 depends. Social connections, on the other hand,
 involve the extent to which an MNE uses informal,
 personalized, and social networks and ties to deal
 with government officials for business purposes.

 Third, in terms of the MNE's CSR activities in a
 host country, we focus on four aspects and see how
 they are related to politics and corruption:
 (1) philanthropic contribution (the level of an

 MNE's commitment, typically made through
 charitable donations, to a host country's social
 and public needs, such as education, pollution
 control, healthcare and infrastructure);

 (2) ethical codes (the extent to which various codes

 of conduct and corporate policies pertaining to
 major stakeholders in a host country are
 formulated, disclosed, implemented, and mon-
 itored);

 First, as for politics, this study focuses on the two
 particular dimensions that describe the way MNE-
 host government relations can be managed: asser-
 tiveness (the extent to which an MNE deals with a
 government on the MNE's own initiative, does not
 evade conflicts with the government, influences
 governmental policies based on its bargaining
 power, and gains control during negotiations with
 officials) and cooperativeness (the extent to which an
 MNE interdependently and complementarily works
 with a government to create an improved environ-
 ment in which business can grow). Note that
 cooperativeness and assertiveness are not two
 opposite ends, but rather two political dimensions
 that coexist. Based on these two coexisting dimen-
 sions, Gladwin and Walter (1980) illustrate five
 political responses for MNEs to consider: integra-
 tion (high cooperativeness and high assertiveness),
 domination (low cooperativeness but high asser-
 tiveness), avoidance (low cooperativeness and low
 assertiveness), accommodation (high cooperative-
 ness but low assertiveness), and compromise (mid-
 cooperativeness and mid-assertiveness).

 Second, to further probe how assertiveness and
 cooperativeness are actually achieved, we examine
 the two specific means or approaches (arm's length
 bargaining and social connections) used to materi-

 journal of International Business Studies

 (3) organizational credibility (an MNE's trust-

 worthiness in the eyes of the indigenous
 stakeholders, often resulting from corporate
 reputation in transparency, accountability,
 integrity and service, or product quality); and
 (4) resource accommodation (the extent to which
 an MNE's invested resources are complementary
 to a host country's economic and social devel-
 opment needs).

 Although each of these aspects emphasizes different
 stakeholders and activities, together they address
 social responsibility vis-d-vis the local economy,
 society and the environment, as well as towards the
 local business stakeholders such as suppliers, cus-
 tomers, officials, and employees (Conference
 Board, 2005).

 We use Giddens's theory of structuration

 (Giddens, 1983, 1984, 1995) to develop our frame-
 work and hypotheses. This theory provides a micro-
 level conception of 'which institutions act where
 and how', a perspective that acknowledges the
 mutual constitution of structure (e.g., governmental
 policies and social images) and actors (e.g., organi-
 zations or their managers). Giddens (1984) argues
 that such changeable structural properties of poli-
 tical or social systems are both the medium and the

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Political behavior, social responsibility, and perceived corruption Yadong Luo

 749

 outcome of the practices that they recursively
 organize. Meanwhile, the theory acknowledges
 what Giddens (1984) called unintended conditions,
 such as corruption, as structural constraints that
 organizations cannot fundamentally change but to
 which they must react. Following this logic, we
 develop a framework in which MNEs must reflex-
 ively monitor their political behaviors and CSR
 actions to deal with the existing political and
 social systems wherein they can economically
 and ethically thrive. In this process, however,
 perceived corruption influences their political
 behaviors and CSR actions. This framework and
 the hypotheses derived from it are detailed below,
 followed by our research method, results, and
 discussion sections.

 interdependently and complementarily works with
 a host government (at central and/or local levels)
 for some common goals or gains from which both
 the MNE and the government benefit. For example,
 when an MNE builds a foreign R&D lab in an
 emerging market while the host government
 provides financial support, tax benefits, hiring
 support, and other preferential treatments, coop-
 erativeness increases. Assertiveness captures the
 extent to which an MNE dominates in the process
 of relationship development with a host govern-
 ment. Instead of being a passive follower in this
 process, an assertive MNC launches its own initia-
 tives in the process, does not avoid conflicts with
 the government, and seeks to influence, rather than
 simply comply with, governmental policies. Asser-
 tiveness is similar to Weidenbaum's (1980) 'proac-
 tiveness', which defines a firm's public policy
 shaping undertaking to achieve its specific political
 objectives.

 Several studies, notably Doz and Prahalad (1980),

 A structuration perspective of politics, CSR,
 and corruption

 Concepts of the three lenses
 This study addresses one aspect of 'politics' - the
 MNE-host government relationship. A wealth of
 knowledge already exists, concluding that the
 MNE's governmental relations are critical to inter-
 national expansion and firm growth because host
 governments can forcefully influence parameters of
 investment, production, localization, and manage-
 ment (Fagre and Wells, 1982; Poynter, 1985; Ring
 et al., 1990; Boddewyn and Brewer, 1994; Dunning,
 1997; Eden and Lenway, 2001). A process view of
 MNE-government relations suggests that the inter-
 action between MNEs and host governments is a
 complex, dynamic, and interdependent process in
 which MNEs can improve their relationships with
 governments (Boddewyn, 1988; Luo, 2001). A given
 government is not exogenous to the economy;
 instead, laws and an institutional environment can
 be shaped by an organization, because MNEs can
 internalize government decision-makers (Kobrin,
 1982; Grosse and Behrman, 1992; Dunning, 1993;
 Boddewyn and Brewer, 1994). This view is consis-
 tent with the structuration theory we introduce
 later. In other words, political decisions can affect
 an MNE's economic returns, and these decisions
 themselves are determined by some conditioning
 factors that reflect an MNE's political efforts.

 An MNE's organizational behaviors in developing

 MNE-government relations are reflected in two
 dimensions: cooperativeness and assertiveness, as
 advocated by Gladwin and Walter (1980). Coopera-
 tiveness captures the extent to which an MNE

 Gladwin and Walter (1980), Kim (1988), Luo
 (2001), and Pearce and Doh (2005), suggest that
 an MNE's political response to host governments
 (whether assertive or cooperative) is made through
 either a structural approach (i.e., arm's length
 bargaining) or a social approach (i.e., social con-
 nections), or both. In other words, social connec-
 tions and arm's length bargaining are the two
 specific approaches or means by which an MNE
 realizes its assertiveness or cooperativeness when
 dealing with governments. Hillman and Hitt (1999)
 similarly propose transactional and relational
 approaches to political strategy. In their scheme, a
 transactional approach exists where firms await the
 development of an important public policy issue
 before building a strategy to affect this issue,
 whereas a relational approach attempts to build
 relationships across issues and over time so that
 when public policy issues arise that affect their
 operations, the contacts and resources needed to
 influence this policy are already in place. Arm's
 length bargaining and social connections are
 parallel to transactional and relational approaches,
 respectively, and are labeled as such to reflect that
 they are two specific means by which assertive and
 cooperative political dimensions are realized. For
 instance, in order to get its projects ratified by the
 government more quickly, an assertive MNE may
 aggressively use all possible measures to bargain
 and use all possible social connections to lobby the
 government. Similarly, a cooperative MNE may
 contribute resources that are encouraged by a

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Journal of International Business Studies


 Political behavior, social responsibility, and perceived corruption Yadong Luo

 750

 government for a specific project in order to
 sharpen its legitimacy while developing social
 connections with various levels of a government,
 hoping to improve its MNE-government relation-
 ship.

 Global CSR is an important part of an MNE's
 corporate governance because it helps satisfy the
 needs of its global stakeholders. CSR refers to a
 company's configuration of social responsibility,
 social responsiveness, policies, programs, and
 observable outcomes as they are related to the
 company's relationship with society (Wood, 1991).
 As they globalize, MNEs must address social,
 environmental, and economic demands from sta-
 keholders, as well as financial demands from
 shareholders. Hence, CSR reflects an MNE's obliga-
 tion to conduct worldwide business in a way that
 safeguards the welfare of society (both at home and
 abroad) while pursuing its own interest (Donaldson
 and Dunfee, 1999; Eden and Lenway, 2001; Hill-
 man and Keim, 2001). There are many ways to
 improve an MNE's CSR, but the main building
 blocks of global CSR improvement include:

 (1) philanthropic contribution;
 (2) resource accommodation;
 (3) ethical codes; and
 (4) organizational credibility (Carroll, 2004; Con-

 ference Board, 2005; Wood, 1991).

 corrupt practices. For instance, bribery is culturally
 ingrained as an acceptable practice in some coun-
 tries, such as Mexico, and kickbacks are common in
 selling activities in China (Transparency Interna-
 tional, 2004). Although this study is not designed
 to address specific ways to resist foreign corruption,
 it does intend to explore how an MNE's political
 behavior and CSR efforts should cope appropriately
 with perceived corruption in a host country's
 specific business segment and region. An MNE's
 political behavior in an emerging market is insepar-
 able from perceived corruption because political or
 governmental corruption is often the main origin
 or cause of widespread corruption in the whole
 society (LaPalombra, 1994; Ackerman, 1999). Like-
 wise, an MNE's CSR activities in an emerging
 market are linked to this perceived corruption
 because the CSR design, especially the formulation
 of ethical codes and corporate policies relating to
 procurement and project acquisition, is aimed in
 part at resisting corruption.

 Linking the three lenses: a theory of structuration
 Unlike the institutional theory advocating the
 mimicking effect, where firms have to passively
 follow institutional rules or norms, structuration
 theory argues that an organization's political con-
 duct and CSR activities can recursively shape
 stakeholder-related structural properties so as to
 create a more congenial social and political climate
 in which to achieve both economic returns
 and organizational legitimacy and sustainability
 (Giddens, 1984, 1995). Social institutions, including
 stakeholders such as governments and commu-
 nities, are part of social systems through which
 social structure (also known as structured properties
 of society) such as rules and resources is instan-
 tiated and applied in daily life. The central concept
 in structuration theory is 'practical consciousness',
 which encompasses both political and social con-
 sciousness motivating organizations or their agents
 to enhance organizational legitimacy and sustain-
 ability. Whereas political consciousness motivates
 private organizations to deal with governments
 properly, social consciousness encourages them to
 attach greater importance to CSR (Davis and
 Thompson, 1994; Riley, 1983). This theory argues
 that the organization of social practices is funda-
 mentally recursive in the sense that social structure
 is both the medium and the outcome of the
 practices it recursively organizes (Giddens, 1983:
 21; 1984: 16-18). If most actors in society are more
 socially and politically conscious, there will be a

 The notion of CSR assumes that business and
 society are interwoven rather than being distinct
 entities. Therefore, society has certain expectations
 as to what are appropriate business behaviors and
 outcomes (Weaver et al., 1999; McWilliams and
 Siegel, 2001). Such expectations are generally more
 salient for international firms because MNEs have
 been stereotyped in the past as exploiters of host
 countries' resources, especially in developing coun-
 tries (Logan et al., 1997).

 Lastly, corruption in emerging markets is ubiqui-

 tous, significantly raising transaction costs for
 MNEs operating in these markets (Ackerman,
 1975). Properly coping with corruption in a foreign
 market is both important and difficult (Doh et al.,
 2003). Illicit acts in a corrupt environment not only
 damage corporate governance and reputation and
 impede efforts to develop corporate integrity, but
 also jeopardize the firm's CSR actions, and conse-
 quently have strong legal, ethical, and organiza-
 tional repercussions. However, curtailing illicit
 behaviors in a corrupt environment is not easy
 because MNEs are confronted with significantly
 varying norms, laws, and standards concerning

 Journal of International Business Studies

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Political behavior, social responsibility, and perceived corruption Yadong Luo

 751

 stronger structuration, meaning greater reproduc-
 tion and improvement of social behaviors and
 institutional order embedded in social structure, a
 process that is always recursive.

 Structuration theory is useful to explain MNEs'
 political and social actions in a foreign emerging
 market. Emerging markets are economically, politi-
 cally, and socially transformational, with some
 structural parameters constantly shifting and chan-
 ging. Although MNEs cannot influence every
 structural parameter, they are still powerful in
 influencing a host government's policies and rules
 via politics, and in affecting the MNEs' social and
 public images in the local community via CSR. This
 power arises from an MNE's bargaining strength,
 which is derived from its unique resources on
 which a local economy depends, its political and
 social consciousness to cope with heightened
 interdependence with indigenous stakeholders
 (government and community), and its ability to
 change or influence some structural forces during
 an emerging economy's market and social transi-
 tion. According to structuration theory, actors not
 only continuously monitor the flow of their
 activities and expect others to do the same for their
 own but they also routinely monitor social, ethical,
 and physical aspects of the context in which they
 move (Giddens, 1984: 5-6). By continuously and
 recursively sharpening their practical consciousness
 and actions, competent agents such as MNEs shape
 the political and social conditions under which
 they thrive. For instance, a number of MNEs, such
 as Xerox, Cisco, Nokia, and Motorola, aggressively
 and successfully persuaded the Chinese govern-
 ment to change the old technical standard in their
 respective industries and to mandate all companies
 in the industries to comply with new standards
 introduced by these MNEs. In this case, via their
 aggressive pursuit of politics, MNEs changed one
 structural parameter, namely the industrial norm or
 standard, to make it more conducive to industry-
 wide innovation.

 The fundamental logic behind structuration

 theory is that a business organization's central
 motivation in the social structure is to become an
 ethically responsible and organizationally compe-
 tent entity (Giddens, 1995). To this end, it must
 continuously sharpen its rationalization or practi-
 cal consciousness of action. Such consciousness
 further drives up the reflexive monitoring of
 actions needed to improve its own legal, ethical,
 and financial soundness (Whittington, 1992;
 Bryant and Jary, 2001). Through organizations'

 individual and collective efforts (agents in the
 group are anticipated to do the same), practical
 and ethical consciousness can curtail or resist
 'unacknowledged consequences' (e.g., favoritism
 in the business society) that would otherwise
 increase transaction costs or hinder legitimate firm
 growth for all members in the group. According to
 Giddens (1983), when unacknowledged conse-
 quences are reduced through individual and col-
 lective consciousness in a recursive manner,
 business organizations can better prosper owing to
 reduced risk effect, punishment effect, and cost
 effect. CSR is one major manifestation of such
 consciousness in the social and ethical aspect
 (Barley and Tolbert, 1997), and it improves organi-
 zations' image in society, which in turn nurtures
 business evolution (Sarason, 1995). This image
 effect is even more important to MNEs because
 they face liabilities of foreignness (Zaheer, 1995).

 Structurationists (e.g., Riley, 1983; Whittington,
 1992; Sarason, 1995; Pozzebon, 2004) clearly hold
 that political consciousness (via politics) and social
 consciousness (via CSR) are impeded in part by
 what Giddens (1984: 5) called 'unintended condi-
 tions of action'. Corruption in society is a major
 example of these conditions (Ackerman, 1999).
 They view such unintended conditions as a struc-
 turally embedded constraint that agents cannot
 fundamentally change but to which they must
 react. Reflexive monitoring of action or conduct
 occurs largely as a result of the presence and impact
 of such unintended or unacknowledged conditions.
 If unintended conditions such as corruption are
 long established in a society's history, tradition, or
 culture, this structural constraint will be more
 material or exert a greater negative impact, requir-
 ing actors to be more reflexive and retrospective in
 monitoring their conduct if they want to keep up
 their practical consciousness (Giddens, 1984: 176).
 Subsequent to unintended or unacknowledged
 conditions of action in the theory of structuration
 are unintended or unacknowledged consequences
 of action as noted above. Because of the conse-
 quences of this nature, actors must recursively
 revise their motivation, rationalization, and course
 of action as well as monitor their new actions. This
 implies that political and social consciousness will
 be implemented through a set of revised actions
 responsive to structurally embedded corruption.
 These views enable us to develop the following
 hypotheses that predict specific relationships
 between politics, CSR, and corrupt environment
 for MNEs in a foreign emerging market.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Journal of International Business Studies


 Political behavior, social responsibility, and perceived corruption Yadong Luo

 752

 Politics and corruption
 First, we anticipate that an MNE's political behavior
 is contingent upon corruption in such a way that
 its cooperativeness and assertiveness with host
 governments both decrease if corruption in that
 particular industry and region is higher, as per-
 ceived by its country managers. This does not mean
 that MNEs do not indulge in political behavior in
 corrupt environments; instead, it means that, as a
 continuous rather than dichotomous construct,
 cooperativeness or assertiveness with governments
 may be lower in response to higher corruption.
 Indeed, MNEs that maintain legitimacy seek to
 distance themselves from political corruption (a
 common phenomenon in emerging markets where
 politicians and officials dominate in corrupt activ-
 ities). Giddens (1995) states that political con-
 sciousness is an important part of practical
 consciousness for business actors who can partly
 alleviate the hazardous effects of unintended con-
 ditions or consequences of action by curbing the
 connectiveness with the origin of such unintended
 conditions. Thus perceived high corruption in the
 host country business segment abates an MNE's
 desire to cooperate with host governments. Coop-
 eration in this environment may be seen as
 'collusion' in the eye of the public (Goldsmith,
 1999; Lambsdorff, 2002). This image effect has
 strong organizational implications. For instance,
 many consumers around the world purchase pro-
 ducts according to corporate image. When a
 company is seen as colluding with corrupt govern-
 ments, consumers will quickly form a stereotype
 that the company is poorly managed, produces
 defective products, and is incapable of ensuring
 customer service (Schleifer and Vishny, 1993).

 An MNE's assertiveness may also lessen in the

 wake of higher corruption in the business segment
 as perceived by country managers. By the same
 logic of the 'distance' effect, assertive MNEs will
 have a reduced desire to engage in and bargain with
 corrupt governments. Bargaining with corrupt
 governments for legitimate business purposes often
 produces higher costs, takes much longer to get
 things done, and requires many additional human
 resources (Ackerman, 1999). Therefore, as argued
 by Schleifer and Vishny (1993), dealing with highly
 corrupt governments in an assertive, bargaining-
 type fashion is tantamount to resource misalloca-
 tion. It may also generate more unintended con-
 sequences because of the unpredictability of
 corrupt officials' behavior and the non-transparent
 decision-making process by governmental agencies.

 It is hence logical to heighten the avoidant, rather
 than assertive, orientation to deal with highly
 corrupt governments, as suggested by Gladwin
 and Walter (1980: 61). We thus predict:

 H1: When perceived corruption in the business
 segment increases, an MNE's propensity to coop-
 erate with host governments decreases.

 H2: When perceived corruption in the business
 segment increases, an MNE's propensity to be
 assertive with host governments decreases.

 CSR and corruption
 MNEs operating in foreign emerging markets have
 been increasingly aware of, and attending to,
 widespread corruption in business sectors (Logan
 et al., 1997). To organizationally respond to increas-
 ing country corruption, MNEs often put a focus on
 ethical codes of conduct with which their foreign
 employees must comply (Doh et al., 2003). Struc-
 turation theory suggests that agents' endeavors
 play an important role in preserving legitimacy
 and rationality in an unintended environment
 such as corruption (Bryant and Jary, 2001;
 Pozzebon, 2004). Suchman (1995) also presents a
 similar view that organizational commitments at
 various levels, from executive leadership to corpo-
 rate culture, or from individual employees' respon-
 sibility to comply with ethical standards, are critical
 to organizational citizenship and corporate perfor-
 mance. Ethical codes contain general precepts and
 mandate specific practices, providing provisions
 that deal with legalities and ethical concerns and
 detail sanctions. Hence, these codes make informa-
 tion and expectations about legal and ethical
 behaviors clearer. They also increase the likelihood
 of detection, ensure the punishment of transgres-
 sions, reward desired behaviors, and discipline
 those who engage in offshore business illegalities
 (Carroll, 2004). The codes help increase foreign
 employees' awareness of corporate policy and enlist
 their support in the fight against corruption in a
 host country. They also draw a distinction between
 the acceptable quid quo pro or networking, which is
 often necessary to develop business relationships in
 an emerging market, and corrupt practices (Con-
 ference Board, 2002; Luo, 2004). Following the
 logic of structuration, we expect that when per-
 ceived corruption in the business environment
 segment increases, organizations will more strongly
 emphasize ethical codes to reflexively control and

 Journal of International Business Studies

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Political behavior, social responsibility, and perceived corruption Yadong Luo

 753

 monitor their agents' conduct in such an environ-
 ment.

 Meanwhile, we anticipate that an MNE's philan-
 thropic contributions may decrease in response to
 increased perceived corruption in a business envir-
 onment segment. As one of the building blocks of
 CSR (Wood, 1991), philanthropic contribution is
 contingent upon agents' action-consequence ana-
 lysis in an unintended environment (Giddens,
 1995). Giddens (1984: 27) points out that if an
 agent expects unintended consequences to arise
 from managerial discretion, such consequences
 may form new conditions of action in the form of
 feedback, which may in turn reduce an agent's
 incentive to continually undertake such actions.
 Consistent with this logic, philanthropic contribu-
 tions may decrease when an MNE's executives do
 not see that such contributions can help improve
 organizational citizenship and benefit the local
 community where highly corrupt political and
 governmental bodies may embezzle such contribu-
 tions. According to Transparency International
 (2004), it is not uncommon to see political and
 governmental organizations in developing and
 emerging economies where corruption is common
 frequently swallow up philanthropic funds donated
 by international organizations and multinational
 corporations. Thus, in an environment perceived as
 corrupted by managers, MNEs are likely to reduce
 their philanthropic commitments owing to the
 fear of political and governmental embezzlement.
 Two other CSR activities, namely resource accom-
 modation and organizational credibility, are not
 likely to be influenced by corruption but by an
 MNE's strategic needs and governance require-
 ments, respectively. MNEs deploy critical resources
 to host operations to gain competitive advantages
 and overcome liabilities of foreignness even when
 local corruption is high (a situation in most
 emerging markets today). Similarly, organizational
 credibility is mainly an 'internal' product, deter-
 mined largely by a company's own initiatives and
 mandates for global citizenship, reputation, and
 governance. According to the above discussion, we
 posit:

 H3: When perceived corruption in the business
 segment increases, an MNE's focus on ethical
 codes increases.

 H4: When perceived corruption in the business
 segment increases, an MNE's philanthropic con-
 tribution decreases.

 Politics and CSR
 Giddens's (1984) structuration theory acknowl-
 edges the mutual constitution of structure and
 actors. Considering this dual view, Giddens (1995)
 suggests that structures, such as political institu-
 tions or governmental regulations, cannot be
 separated from the concrete micro-level social
 action in which they are implicated. Actors such
 as MNEs have the freedom to determine their
 assertiveness and cooperativeness with host gov-
 ernments. Their assertiveness with governments
 tends to increase when the MNE's bargaining power
 is relatively high and when interest interdepen-
 dence and relations are relatively weak (Gladwin
 and Walter, 1980). Since political consciousness
 and CSR influence each other in such a way that
 governments are one of the major stakeholders in
 the framework of CSR (Giddens, 1995; Bryant and
 Jary, 2001), an MNE's assertiveness with govern-
 ments can be interrelated with its CSR focus. A
 higher assertiveness with governments generally
 implies that the MNE depends less on governments
 and other local stakeholders that control resources,
 or that the MNE is less vulnerable to local
 stakeholders' actions. In this situation, an MNE is
 likely to focus on ethical codes and organizational
 credibility rather than on philanthropic contribu-
 tion and resource accommodation. Such foci are in
 line with the MNE's assertive political behavior in
 that ethical codes and organizational credibility are
 both relatively 'internal' efforts to improve an
 MNE's CSR, and depend less on complying with
 the stakeholders' demands. Conversely, philanthro-
 pic contribution and resource accommodation
 require appropriate alignment with external stake-
 holders' social or economic needs.

 We infer that an MNE's cooperativeness with host

 governments will be positively associated with its
 CSR focus on philanthropic contribution and
 resource accommodation. Cooperative behavior in
 dealing with governments often arises when inter-
 est interdependence is high and relations are
 positive. This means that a company needs to
 positively respond to a host country's social and
 economic needs if it intends to develop and
 maintain the interdependence and good relation-
 ships with governments (Barley and Tolbert, 1997).
 In order to do that, philanthropic contribution is a
 major means to accommodate a host country's
 social needs, and contributing resources to projects
 that are complementary to the needs of the local
 economy is a major instrument in aiding a host
 country's economic development. Consequently, it

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Journal of International Business Studies


 Political behavior, social responsibility, and perceived corruption Yadong Luo

 754

 is expected that, as an MNE's cooperativeness with
 governments increases, its CSR focus on philan-
 thropic contribution and resource accommodation
 will increase as well. Note that the above discussion
 and hypotheses H5 and H6 below are not meant to
 suggest that these relationships are causal in one
 direction. Instead, we suggest that they are posi-
 tively linked, reinforcing each other at the same
 time. Also note that, if an MNE is both cooperative
 and assertive with a government, its CSR focus may
 include all of the four building blocks: ethical
 codes, organizational credibility, resource accom-
 modation, and philanthropic contribution. In sum,
 we suggest that

 because the indigenous stakeholders and the public
 may portray these MNEs as being independent and
 distant from corrupt governments. Socially con-
 scious MNEs may fear that social connections,
 including personal relationships between country
 managers and government officials, may create a
 public image that their executives may collude with
 corrupt officials. Once a company is perceived by
 the public or market as corrupt, it is difficult for it
 to survive and grow. Indeed, the corruption-per-
 formance link is often a vicious cycle: corruption
 hurts firm performance; poorly performing firms
 tend to use more bribery as the prescription to cure
 their 'illness'; and increased bribery further
 increases costs and plagues their corruption, there-
 by decreasing performance.

 H5: An MNE's propensity to be assertive with a
 host government is positively associated with its
 CSR focus on (a) ethical codes and (b) organiza-
 tional credibility.

 H6: An MNE's propensity to be cooperative with a
 host government is positively associated with its
 CSR focus on (a) philanthropic contribution and
 (b) resource accommodation.

 Corruption, politics, and CSR
 Giddens's structuration theory (Giddens, 1984,
 1995) holds that an actor's political consciousness
 and social consciousness, together constituting
 what is called 'practical consciousness', can jointly
 interact with structural parameters and work
 together to alleviate unintended consequences.
 We thus expect that an MNE's politics and CSR
 may mutually interact to deal with unintended
 corruption conditions. Specifically, we expect that
 MNEs focusing more on ethical conduct are likely
 to increase their propensity to use arm's length
 domination, whereas MNEs focusing less on ethical
 conduct are likely to increase their use of social
 connections (e.g., guanxi in Chinese) when dealing
 with host governments.

 When perceived corruption in the host country's
 business segment becomes more ubiquitous, MNEs
 that focus more on ethical standards are likely to
 use arm's length bargaining when dealing with
 corrupt governments. Ethical codes ostensibly
 bring the behavior of employees into conformity.
 They constitute an organizational control system
 that encourages shared ethical aspirations and
 compliance. MNEs that are socially conscious and
 compliant will logically deal with governments in
 an arm's length fashion (Riley, 1983). This interac-
 tion style reinforces organizational legitimacy

 In contrast, MNEs that focus less on ethical

 standards and are less socially conscious may prefer
 social connections as the specific approach to deal
 with governments when perceived corruption esca-
 lates. Social connections, which are not necessarily
 illicit or illegitimate, may be seen by the executives
 in these MNEs as a shortcut to obtain government
 support or secure resources controlled by the
 government. In the eyes of these executives, in an
 environment where formal institutional constraints
 such as laws are weak and intellectual property
 rights protection is limited, informal channels such
 as those embodied in interpersonal ties with officials
 and politicians may be seen as an important force to
 get governmentally controlled things accomplished.
 The executives who care less about ethical codes
 may view social connections with officials as being
 more important than legal or ethical standards
 when high environmental uncertainty and market
 complexity are present (which is typical in a foreign
 emerging market). Therefore, we hypothesize that

 H7: When perceived corruption in the business
 segment increases, MNEs that focus more on ethics
 will increase their propensity to use arm's length
 bargaining when dealing with a host government.

 H8: When perceived corruption in the business
 segment increases, MNEs that focus less on ethics
 will increase their propensity to use social con-
 nections when dealing with a host government.

 Research methods

 Data
 To test the aforementioned hypotheses, this study
 uses a sample of MNEs investing and operating in

 Journal of International Business Studies

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Political behavior, social responsibility, and perceived corruption Yadong Luo

 755

 China, the world's largest emerging market. Given
 China's sheer consumer size, phenomenal econom-
 ic growth, and increased market openness, succeed-
 ing in China has not surprisingly become a top
 priority for many corporations that see such success
 as a prime opportunity to achieve global leadership
 financially, legally, and ethically. At present, China
 is the world's largest foreign direct investment (FDI)
 destination and the largest production center for
 global manufacturers, attracting an average of $140
 million in foreign capital per day.

 However, according to Transparency Interna-

 tional (2004), China is also a highly corrupt nation,
 ranking 71st out of 146 countries surveyed. Its
 corruption perceptions index (CPI) was 3.4 in 2004
 (the same as Saudi Arabia and Syria), well below the
 full score of 10 (least corrupted). In addition,
 China's bribe payers index in the business sectors
 was the second worst among 21 nations surveyed
 (only slightly better than Russia) in 2002 (Transpar-
 ency International, 2002), scoring 3.5 out of 10
 (zero perceived propensity to pay bribes). Politi-
 cally, the communist regime fosters the big and
 multilevel government system, which in turn leads
 to strong governmental control over MNE opera-
 tions on the one hand, and nurtures widespread
 political corruption on the other.

 Our data came from a survey as well as from
 archival sources. This survey was conducted from
 February to May 2005 and targeted top executives
 (CEOs or general managers) of MNEs' subsidiaries in
 China. These top executives responded to questions
 concerning their company background and vari-
 ables relating to politics, corruption, and CSR. The
 questionnaire was initially cross-checked by several
 management professors in China and in the US,
 and was further tested for instrument validity by 12
 top executives. On the basis of feedback from
 scholars and executives, we revised questions or
 terms that were considered inaccurate or inap-
 propriate.

 Sample MNEs investing in China were selected
 from the CD-ROM Directory of Foreign-Invested
 Enterprises compiled by the Ministry of Commerce
 in China. These enterprises operate in the manu-
 facturing and service industries. Our sample was
 limited to those operating in the east coast
 provinces (Zhejiang, Jiangsu, Shangdong, and
 Shanghai) because of the difficulty in reaching
 other provinces during the survey period. None-
 theless, FDI in these four regions accounts for about
 one-third of total FDI in the nation, and all four
 regions have consistently been among the so-called

 'Top Six' provinces attracting FDI (the other two
 being Guandong and Fujian). With this geographi-
 cal limit, we selected a random sample of 350 MNE
 units in China (one unit from one MNE). After one
 reminder we collected 126 questionnaires, repre-
 senting a 36% response rate. The sample firms
 originated mainly from Europe (48), the US (29),
 Asia (30), and other countries (19), with 70 wholly
 owned subsidiaries and 56 majority-owned joint
 ventures (minority-owned joint ventures were not
 included in our sample choice). On average, sample
 firms had operated in China for 8.82 years, had 735
 employees, and had $14.23 million in investment
 capital. Their annual sales in the Chinese market
 averaged $18.26 million, with $6.52 million in
 export sales. Over the past three years, their
 average return on investment was 13.41%, and
 their sales growth was 20.96%. We verified the non-
 response bias on the basis of the information
 obtained from the aforementioned Directory. The
 mean differences between responding and non-
 responding firms along major investment attributes
 such as total investment, registered capital, country
 of origin, and age were contrasted using a t-test. The
 results showed that all t-test statistics were non-
 significant.

 Measurement
 Appendix A details the items used to measure the
 major survey variables. The respondents were asked
 to refer to the most recent three years as the time
 frame to answer these survey items. To measure the
 perceived corruption in the specific business seg-
 ment in which an MNE unit operates, we referred to
 Transparency International's survey items that
 measured perceived corruption and bribery indices
 (2002). The two political dimensions, assertiveness
 and cooperativeness, were operationalized by the
 items referenced in Gladwin and Walter's (1980)
 concepts. As to the two political means, social
 connection was measured by the items similar to
 those in Luo (2001), and arm's length bargaining
 was measured by the items referenced in Oliver's
 (1991) similar concept. As China does not yet have
 independent CSR rating agencies, like KLD (Kinder,
 Lydenberg and Domini & Co. Inc.) in the United
 States, that provide CSR scores for various compa-
 nies, this study used survey-based items to measure
 the four building blocks of CSR. Consistent with
 Schwartz (2004), an ethics code was measured not
 only by the existence of a code of ethics but also by
 including code process (i.e., creation, implementa-
 tion, and administration). To properly measure

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Journal of International Business Studies


 * Political behavior, social responsibility, and perceived corruption Yadong Luo
 756

 m tinformation from the above Directory. Cultural

 organizational credibility, we reviewed the litera- (3) project size (accumulated investment in US$
 ture on corporation reputation and developed the million);
 items as suggested by Mahon and Wartick (2003). (4) local sales (US$ million); and
 Although we could not find any direct reference to (5) cultural distance.
 measuring phila nthropic contribution, Logan Among them, subunit form, length of operations,
 et al.'s (1997) discussion on philanthropic commit- and investment size were measured based on the
 ment provided the insights into the content of thise re
 commitment, to which we referred. Lastly, follow- distance was measured using Kogut and Singh
 ing Logan et al. (1997) and Luo (2001), we (1988) composite index and Hofstede's latest
 developed the items used to measure resource
 developed the items used to measure resource dataset (Hofstede, 2001: 500-502), which contains
 levels of Cronbach c's and communality scores, individualit masculinit
 respectively, validated the internal consistency andy y, y,
 item appropriateness of the above survey variables.
 Each of these survey variables was measured by a
 linear combination (arithmetic average) of scores of Results
 its sub-items pertaining to the same common Table 1 reports descriptive statistics and a Pearson
 variable. correlation matrix for all variables used in this

 accommodation. As shown in Appendix A, high five cultural dimensions including power distance,

 distance was measured using Kogut and Singh's

 We were fully aware of the informants' possible study. To test bilateral links between politics,

 response bias in answering the above items, and corruption, and CSR, we used structural equation
 tried to remedy this limitation in several ways. First, modeling (SEM) analysis and structured the path
 we extensively reviewed the literature on politics, based on the directions proposed by the hypoth-
 corruption, and ethics and sought to use the items eses. As Figure 1 shows, four groups of paths were
 already validated by previous studies. Second, we tested:
 semi-structurally interviewed 14 respondents
 immediately after the survey to check their (1) links from politics to CSR;
 response accuracy. The results displayed a high () links from corruption to politics;
 consistency between the respondents' interview (3) links from corruption to CSR; and
 reports and their survey answers (correlation (4) links from corruption to control variables.
 reports and their survey answers (correlation
 fls>0.90). Third, we conducted a global factor Overall, the model statistics (maximum likelihood
 analysis in which all survey variables in Appendix estimation under covariance structure analysis)
 A were included in the same model. The results suggest a good fit of the proposed model with the
 suggested that the latent structure remained stable data. As Figure 1 shows, the model has a X2 value of
 and item loadings held together in proposed 95.23 (P<0.001), together with above-threshold
 variables, rather than in any single or a few levels on four goodness-of-fit indices (GFI=0.94;
 dominant variables (Appendix B). The rotated NFI=0.92; AGFI=0.90; CFI=0.93). When we split
 factor analyses reported in this appendix clearly the total sample randomly in half and reran the
 indicated a factor loading structure consistent with SEM, the major results (path directions and sig-
 the proposed variables. Finally, 1 month after the nificance) remained unchanged from Figure 1,
 survey, we sent the same questionnaire to deputy further suggesting that the results in this figure
 general managers of 30 sample firms whose general are not due to chance.
 managers (CEOs) had responded to our survey As Figure 1 shows, an MNE's cooperativeness with
 earlier. From the 16 returned responses, we found a host government is significantly and negatively
 a significant consistency between the two infor- associated with the corruption it perceives in
 mants from each firm (correlation fs ranges from its host country business segment (fP=-0.45,
 0.78 to 0.95). P<0.001), a result supporting H1. However, its

 In testing all models that verify the hypotheses, assertiveness with a government is not significantly
 we controlled for several variables. These include: related to this perceived corruption, despite its

 (1) MNE subunit form (1 if wholly owned; 0 This result, which does not support H2, indicates

 otherwise); that sample MNEs in China do not necessarily

 negative coefficient as hypothesized (P=-0.07).

 (2) subunit age or length of operations (number of reduce their assertiveness in response to increased

 years in China); corruption in the business segment in which they

 Journal of International Business Studies

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Political behavior, social responsibility, and perceived corruption Yadong Luo
 757

 Table 1 Descriptive statistics and Pearson correlation matrix

 Variable Mean St. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13

 dev

 1. Perceived 2.25 1.18

 corruption

 2. Assertiveness 4.05 0.86 -0.11
 3. Cooperativeness 4.63 0.97 -0.30*** 0.25**
 4. Social 4.18 0.91 0.12 0.19* 0.Q34***

 connections

 5. Arm's length 3.37 0.90 0.30*** 0.22** 0.08 -0.44***

 bargaining

 6. Ethics codes 5.58 1.12 0.31*** -0.04 -0.02 0.04 -0.03
 7. Organizational 4.77 1.13 0.08 0.20* 0.39*** 0.12 0.19* 0.21*

 credibility

 8. Philanthropic 4.08 0.84 -0.26** 0.06 0.33*** 0.22** 0.09 0.13 0.20*

 contribution

 9. Resource 4.29 0.68 -0.17* 0.17* 0.45*** 0.18* -0.12 0.03 0.49*** 0.27**

 accommodation

 10. Subunit form 0.56 0.50 0.02 -0.19* -0.14 -0.19* 0.23* 0.03 -0.07 0.04 -0.07
 11. Subunit age 8.82 4.69 -0.24** -0.29*** 0.16 0.24** 0.06 0.05 0.15 0.09 0.23** 0.08
 12. Project size 14.2 6.36 0.20* 0.02 0.05 0.02 0.01 -0.03 0.03 0.06 -0.04 -0.18* 0.30***
 13. Cultural 6.11 3.94 0.17* -0.06 -0.09 -0.11 0.08 0.15 -0.05 0.06 -0.07 0.01 0.06 0.17*

 distance

 14. Local sales 18.3 7.01 0.04 0.08 0.21* 0.22* -0.01 0.02 0.19* 0.09 0.03 -0.13 0.14 0.24** 0.18*

 N=126. *P<0.05; **P<0.01; ***P<0.001.

 operate. This may be related to the fact that ment-controlled resources. Cooperativeness, on the
 assertiveness is still necessary to deal with an other hand, is significantly and positively asso-
 emerging economy government that controls mar- ciated with both philanthropic contribution
 ket access and other resources that MNEs need, (#=0.24, P<0.05) and resource accommodation
 despite high levels of business sector corruption as (Pl=0.19, P<0.05): this finding corroborates H6a
 perceived by MNEs. and H6b.

 Figure 1 also shows that an MNE's focus on In Figure 1, there are also some interesting results

 ethical codes is significantly and positively respon- not included in our hypotheses. First, an MNE's
 sive to perceived corruption (R=0.35, P<0.01), propensity to use arm's length bargaining to deal
 while its focus on philanthropic contribution to with a government is positively related to perceived
 the host country society is moderately and nega- corruption. This implies that our sample MNEs in
 tively related to corruption (P=-0.16, P<0.10). China have a higher propensity to use the structur-
 These results generally support H3 and H4. That is, al (formal) approach to deal with corrupt govern-
 as perceived corruption increases, an MNE's focus ment agencies in this country, and that as perceived
 on ethical codes increases and its focus on philan- corruption in the business segment increases, these
 thropic contribution decreases. As to the relation- companies do not shy away from continually
 ship between politics and CSR, the SEM analysis dealing with these government agencies via arm's
 shows that assertiveness is positively linked to length bargaining. Second, an MNE's organiza-
 ethical codes (/=0.31, P<0.01) but not to organiza- tional credibility and resource accommodation are
 tional credibility (/=0.11). This lends support to not associated with perceived corruption. Unlike
 H5a but not to H5b. The rejection of H5b implies ethical codes and philanthropic commitment,
 that MNEs maintain their assertiveness with gov- which are influenced by corruption, a company's
 ernments regardless of the MNE's credibility in the organizational credibility and resource accommo-
 host country. MNEs with lower credibility may still dation are not significantly associated with per-
 be assertive if they have greater bargaining power ceived corruption. As this study's data and its
 vis-d-vis governments or are less reliant on govern- analysis cannot tell the causality between

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 journal of International Business Studies


 Political behavior, social responsibility, and perceived corruption Yadong Luo

 758

 Politics CSR

 0.19*(H6 1 .0

 connections contribution

 Social e0.45 H Philanthropic

 -0.06

 Arm's-length -0.13 Resource
 bargaining 0.27** accommodation

 in the business segment

 -0.11 -0.26** 0.19* 0.17 -0.09

 Subunit Subunit Project Cultural Local

 form i L age size distance 2 sales

 Model evaluation with goodness-of-fit measures:

 Chi-square: 95.23, p<.001
 Goodness-of-fit index (GFI): 0.94
 Bentler & Bonett's normed fit index (NFI): 0.92
 Adjusted goodness-of-fit (AGFI): 0.90
 Comparative fit index (CFI): 0.93

 Figure 1 Path coefficients of structural equation analysis of politics, corruption, and CSR (N=126). P<0.10; *P<0.05; **P<0.01;
 ***P<0.001. (1) In this figure, we report only the path coefficients relating to our hypotheses and several additional coefficients
 relating to the causal effect of perceived corruption on politics, CSR, and control variables. Table 2 exhibits more effects that are not
 reported in this figure. (2) We checked the reverse effects of H5a and H5b (ethics and credibility - assertiveness) and H6a and H6b
 (philanthropy and resource -- cooperativeness) and found the results similar to those reported above.

 corruption and these two CSR activities, it may be the hierarchical moderated regression method.
 possible that organizational credibility and resource Model 2 in Table 2 shows that the interaction term
 accommodation are determined by other factors between corruption and ethics (after using the
 (such as a company's internal control, strategic mean centering technique) is significant (1j=0.28,
 objectives, and capability possession) that come P<0.01) in relation to arm's length bargaining, and
 into play before perceived corruption takes effect, adding this interaction term significantly increases
 Lastly, several control variables, including subunit the model power (AR2=O.04, hierarchical F=6.24,
 age, project size, and cultural distance, are also P<0.01). The result preliminarily suggests that,
 related to perceived corruption. Specifically, MNEs when ethical codes are higher, there will be a
 with a larger investment in China, from countries stronger link between perceived corruption and an
 that are more culturally distant from China, or with MNE's propensity to use arm's length bargaining to
 a shorter length of operations in the country, tend deal with a host government. Models 3 and 4,
 to perceive higher corruption in their business however, do not show any significant interaction
 segment. , effect between corruption and ethics in relation to
 To test the three-way interactions among politics, social connections.
 corruption, and CSR, we first investigated the In this situation, we further analyzed the possible
 interaction effect of perceived corruption (X1) and interaction effect by using a subgroup regression
 ethical codes (X2) on arm's length bargaining and approach as suggested by Sharma et al. (1981). In
 social connections, as H7 and H8 proposed, using this subgroup analysis, we divided the sample into

 Journal of International Business Studies

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Political behavior, social responsibility, and perceived corruption Yadong Luo

 759

 Table 2 An interacted association among politics, corruption, and ethics: moderated regression analysis (N=126)

 Variable Arm's length bargaining Social connections

 Model I Model 2 Model 3 Model 4

 Perceived corruption (X1) 0.37 (0.06)*** 0.35 (0.07)*** -0.08 (0.06) -0.07 (0.06)
 Ethical codes (X2) 0.04 (0.07) 0.03 (0.07) 0.12 (0.08) 0.13 (0.07)
 X1 x X2 0.28 (0.07)** -0.13 (0.07)

 Control variables

 Subunit form 0.22 (0.12)** 0.23 (0.11)** -0.20 (0.14)* -0.19 (0.14)*
 Subunit age -0.04 (0.02) -0.04 (0.02) 0.26 (0.02)** 0.24 (0.02)**
 Project size -0.06 (0.01) -0.07 (0.01) 0.07 (0.01) 0.07 (0.01)
 Cultural distance 0.18 (0.03)t 0.17 (0.03)t -0.16 (0.02)t -0.17 (0.02)t
 Local sales -0.04 (0.01) -0.03 (0.01) 0.17 (0.01)t 0.17 (0.01)t
 Model F 4.11 *** 4.74*** 3.09** 3.21**
 R2 0.21 0.25 0.16 0.17
 AR2 0.04 0.01
 Hierarchical F 6.24** 1.40

 The entries in the table are standardized regression coefficients with standard errors in parentheses. The mean centering technique was used for the
 interaction term.
 tp<0.10; *P<0.05; **P<0.01; ***P<0.001.

 Table 3 An interacted association among politics, corruption, and ethics: subgroup regression analysis

 Variable High ethics group (N=76) Low ethics group (N=50)

 Arm's length bargaining Social connections Arm's length bargaining Social connections

 Perceived corruption 0.53 (0.07)*** -0.09 (0.11) 0.23 (0.10)* 0.26 (0.14)*
 Subunit form 0.30 (0.14)** -0.23 (0.14)* 0.21 (0.24)* -0.19 (0.24)t
 Subunit age 0.05 (0.02) 0.27 (0.02)** 0.03 (0.02) 0.28 (0.02)**
 Project size 0.02 (0.01) 0.06 (0.01) 0.04 (0.01) 0.07 (0.01)
 Cultural distance 0.22 (0.02)* -0.27 (0.02)** 0.1 3 (0.03) -0.10 (0.04)
 Local sales 0.03 (0.01) 0.14 (0.01) 0.08 (0.01) 0.25 (0.01)*
 Model F 4.58*** 3.10** 2.13t 3.33**
 R2 0.44 0.26 0.11 0.28

 The entries in the table are standardized regression coefficients with standard errors in parentheses.
 tp< .1 o; *P< 0.05; **P< 0.01; ***P< 0.001.

 two groups based on the mean of ethical codes respond to corruption, whereas MNEs in the high-
 (-=5.58). As shown in Table 3, there is a signifi- ethics group instead use arm's length bargaining.
 cantly stronger relationship between perceived These results generally support H7 and H8.
 corruption and arm's length bargaining in the Finally, Table 4 reports some results on firm
 high-ethics group (-=0.53, P<0.001; N-76) than attributes (control variables) in relation to politics
 in the low-ethics group (fl=0.23, P<0.05; N=50). and CSR. Assertiveness with governments and
 Moreover, there is a significant and positive philanthropic contribution tend to be higher for
 relationship between perceived corruption and MNEs that have a larger investment in China.
 social connections in the low-ethics group Moreover, as MNE subunits become older, their CSR
 (f-0.26, P<0.05), but such a relationship is not activities all reach a higher level. Interestingly,
 present in the high-ethics group (P=-0.09). This MNEs that are newer in China appear to be more
 means that MNEs in the low-ethics group have a assertive (f=-0.25, P<0.01), but older units in
 greater propensity to use social connections to China are more cooperative with governments

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 journal of International Business Studies


 * Political behavior, social responsibility, and perceived corruption Yadong Luo
 760

 Table 4 Firm attributes and politics and CSR: standardized regression analysis

 Variables Politics CSR

 Assertiveness Cooperativeness Ethical code Organizational Philanthropic Resource

 credibility contribution accommodation

 Subunit form -0.12 (0.13) -0.06 (0.14) 0.02 (0.08) -0.01 (0.17) 0.08 (0.13) -0.06 (0.12)
 Subunit age -0.25 (0.01)** 0.34 (0.02)*** 0.17 (0.01)* 0.20 (0.02)* 0.16 (0.01)t 0.23 (0.01)**
 Project size 0.17 (0.01)* 0.03 (0.01) 0.11 (0.01) 0.03 (0.01) 0.18 (0.00)* 0.01 (0.00)
 Cultural -0.10 (0.02) -0.15 (0.02)t 0.22 (0.01)* 0.16 (0.02)t 0.02 (0.02) -0.07 (0.01)
 distance
 Local sales 0.11 (0.01) 0.27 (0.01)** 0.10 (0.01) 0.25 (0.00)* 0.06 (0.00) 0.06 (0.00)
 Model F 3.72** 5.51*** 2.24* 2.74* 0.80 1.75
 R2 0.1 3 0.19 0.08 0.10 0.04 0.07

 The entries in the table are standardized regression coefficients with standard errors in parentheses.
 tP<0.10; *P<0.05; **P<0.01; ***P<0.001.

 (fl=0.34, P<0.001). This is consistent with the social connections (Table 2) and the level of
 result in Table 2 that subunit age is positively cooperativeness with governments and organiza-
 associated with social connections. It suggests that, tional credibility (Table 4). The causality here,
 over time, MNEs increasingly adapt to China's however, merits future investigation.
 strong social and personal connection culture and
 use these connections to fortify their cooperative Discussion and conclusion
 ties with governments. The reason why newer This study attempted to address politics, corrup-
 investors are more assertive (or older ones are less tion, and corporate social responsibility for MNEs
 assertive) remains to be further examined, and one in an integrated framework underpinned by Gid-
 may probe the extent to which an assertive dens's structuration theory. This theory realizes the
 approach to dealing with the Chinese government mutual constitution of structural properties of
 may or may not fit the unique political culture social systems and actors facing such properties.
 there, where saving officials' face is extremely As Giddens (1984: 22) argues, actors have the
 critical. capacity for reflexive monitoring of their circum-

 Second, cultural distance is negatively related to stances and, owing to unintended or undesired
 cooperativeness but positively associated with conditions that are largely beyond the control of
 ethical codes and organizational credibility actors (such as foreign corruption), new situations
 (Table 4); it is also negatively related to social may be defined and created in which new types of
 connections and positively linked to arm's length social action are needed. Recursive and reflexive
 bargaining (Table 2). This implies that MNEs monitoring of conduct in politics and CSR is jointly
 originating from more culturally distant countries determined by an MNE's desire for organizational
 (e.g., Europe and the United States) are more likely legitimacy and contextual improvement and by
 to use arm's length methods, less likely to empha- unintended conditions (e.g., corruption) of the
 size social connections, and more attended to environment. Building upon this logic, we
 ethical code and organizational credibility than hypothesized several two-way and three-way inter-
 those from culturally similar countries (e.g., Asia). relationships between politics, corruption, and
 Third, although wholly owned subsidiaries and CSR, including:
 joint ventures do not differ in terms of assertiveness
 and cooperativeness, nor with respect to their CSR (1) when perceived corruption in the business
 activities (Table 4), the wholly owned form is segment increases, an MNE's propensity to be
 positively related to the probability of using arm's cooperative and assertive with a host govern-
 length bargaining and negatively related to the ment decreases;
 probability of using social connections in dealing (2) when perceived cooperation in the business
 with governments as opposed to joint ventures segment increases, an MNE's focus on ethical
 (Table 2). Lastly, MNE subunits' local sales are codes increases but its focus on philanthropic
 positively associated with the propensity to use contribution decreases;

 Journal of International Business Studies

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Political behavior, social responsibility, and perceived corruption Yadong Luo
 761

 (3) an MNE's propensity to be assertive with a host Second, this study established two-way and three-

 government is positively associated with its CSR way links among politics, corruption, and CSR,
 focus on ethical codes and organizational cred- theoretically and empirically. While these links
 ibility; may seem intuitive, research on these links is

 (4) an MNE's propensity to be cooperative with a lacking. We demonstrated that foreign corruption

 host government is positively associated with its as perceived by MNE country managers does affect
 CSR focus on philanthropic contribution and their political conduct, such as cooperativeness
 resource accommodation; and (inversely) and arm's length orientation (posi-

 (5) when perceived corruption in the business tively), when dealing with a host government.
 segment increases, MNEs that focus more on Perceived corruption also propels these managers to
 ethics will increase their propensity to use arm's focus more on ethical codes while reducing their
 length bargaining when dealing with a host incentive to philanthropically contribute to society.
 government, whereas those focusing less on Politics and CSR are also interrelated such that
 ethics will increase their propensity to use social MNEs that are more assertive with governments
 connections when dealing with a host govern- tend to emphasize ethical codes, while MNEs that
 ment. are more cooperative with governments tend to be

 more committed to philanthropic and resource

 Our analysis of 126 sample MNEs in China contributions. These three lenses interact in the
 generally supported the above propositions, except manner that more socially conscious MNEs focus
 that an MNE's assertiveness with a government was on an arm's length approach to deal with govern-
 related neither to perceived corruption nor to ments, whereas less socially conscious MNEs focus
 organizational credibility. on social connections to deal with governments,

 Our efforts may have certain implications for when perceived corruption heightens. This finding
 international business research, especially on poli- confirms that MNEs use both political and social
 tics and ethics. First, this study might be the first levers to adjust to unintended foreign corruption.
 endeavor to apply structuration theory to the Third, this study tried to include and unveil
 management of political and social forces for multiple political variables and multiple CSR vari-
 MNEs. In fact, we noticed that this sociological ables to accommodate the complex process of
 theory could have a greater potential and contribu- managing political and social forces in a host
 tion than we actually elaborated on in this study. country. Cognizant of the fact that many MNEs
 For instance, due to the limit of our research design may be simultaneously cooperative and assertive
 and dataset, we could not examine the extent to with a host government, concurrently use both
 which MNEs' political conduct and CSR activities structural (arm's length) and social (relational ties)
 had actually improved a host government's poli- approaches to deal with local officials, or jointly
 tical transparency and accountability in managing employ all four building blocks of CSR included
 inbound FDI, or enhanced ethical standards and here, we used the 'propensity' method of measure-
 norms followed by the majority of firms in the ment, allowing us to diagnose the complex
 business segment in which MNEs are active. The combinations of political and social behaviors.
 theoretical insights of this question can be easily For example, if an MNE is both assertive and
 addressed by the structuration perspective. This cooperative with officials, it will use ethical codes,
 theory argues that actors such as MNEs do not philanthropic contribution, and resource accom-
 merely passively react to structural properties such modation; if it is only assertive, it will solely focus
 as politics and corruption in a host country but on ethical codes; if it is only cooperative, it will
 more importantly shape and change structural emphasize resource accommodation and philan-
 properties or business systems of which they are a thropic contribution.
 part through their own practices (e.g., political Finally, this study reported that MNEs' political
 behavior and CSR) that they recursively organize, and social behaviors significantly differed accord-
 Socially conscious MNEs not only introspectively ing to their ethical level, suggesting the importance
 monitor the flow of their own activities, such as of ethics in modifying such behaviors. For instance,
 political behavior and CSR activities, but also in the low-ethics group, firms tend to use social ties
 expect others to do the same and intend to improve to respond to increased corruption, and using social
 the political, social, and economic parameters of ties is positively related to local sales. However, in
 the context in which they operate. the high-ethics group, firms do not rely on social

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 journal of International Business Studies


 * Political behavior, social responsibility, and perceived corruption Yadong Luo
 762

 connections nor are such connections significantly This study is not without limitations. It examined
 associated with their local sales. Also, in the high- perceived corruption conditions in the business
 ethics group, MNEs from more culturally distant environment but did not address how MNEs should
 countries to China tend to focus on arm's length internally curb bribery and corruption at the firm
 domination and avoid social connections to deal level, the latter being a critical issue for MNEs active
 with officials; this pattern, however, does not in foreign emerging markets. Because of our data
 appear in the low-ethics group. constraints, the causality among politics, corrup-

 The practical implications of this study reside tion, and CSR is inconclusive. This can be redressed
 mainly in the ways to manage politics, corruption, in the future by using longitudinal information
 and CSR in a foreign emerging market such as that measures these variables on a varying time
 China. This study proposed four building blocks of basis. An even better data source would be time-
 CSR (ethical codes, organizational credibility, phi- series archival information, which could not only
 lanthropic contribution, and resource accommoda- pinpoint the directional path linking these vari-
 tion) and two political dimensions (assertiveness ables but also obviate the survey response biases,
 and cooperativeness) that determine a firm's poli- such as the common method variance and the
 tical strategy, together with two specific means social cognitive bias. Using a larger sample obtained
 (social connections and arm's length bargaining) to from multiple emerging markets could also allow us
 fulfill these dimensions. It established the align- to conduct a more robust investigation containing
 ments between politics and corruption, between more variables in the analysis and comparing
 CSR and corruption, between politics and CSR, and politics, corruption, and CSR along different macro-
 among politics, corruption, and CSR. These align- or national-level parameters. Finally, this study did
 ments may help international executives to inte- not analyze the performance effect of the two-way
 grate politics, CSR, and foreign corruption. In a and three-way configurations among politics, cor-
 typical emerging market, politics, corruption, and ruption, and CSR. The ultimate purpose of these
 CSR are interlocked because government agencies configurations is to improve an MNE's business
 are one key stakeholder in an MNE's CSR framework performance in financial, legal, and ethical terms.
 and one major origin of widespread corruption. An Thus a future endeavor that examines how con-
 MNE's CSR system may be deficient unless it tributory the appropriate alignments among the
 effectively addresses politics and anti-corruption. three-lenses (politics, corruption, and CSR) are to
 This study shows that MNEs with different ethical economic returns, organizational legitimacy, and
 standards not only react differently to perceived social recognitions is warranted. It is worthwhile to
 corruption but also present different political beha- verify the impact of political activities and CSR
 viors (structural vs social approaches) when dealing activities on MNE performance and to assess the
 with a host government. The two-way and three- role of corruption as a moderator.
 way configurations among politics, corruption, and
 CSR documented above may help executives devel- Acknowledgements
 op a unified platform that effectively manages We thank Professors Amy Hillman, Lorraine Eden, and
 political and social forces in foreign countries. three anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments.

 References
 Ackerman, S.R. (1975) 'The economics of corruption', Journal of Bryant, G.A. and jary, D. (2001) The Contemporary

 Public Economics 4(1): 187-203. Giddens: Social Theory in a Globalization Age, New York:

 Ackerman, S.R. (1999) Corruption and Government:, Cambridge: Palgrave.

 Cambridge University Press. Carroll, A. (2004) 'Managing ethically with global stakeholders:

 Barley, S.R. and Tolbert, P.S. (1997) 'Institutionalization and a present and future challenge', Academy of Management

 structuration: studying the links between action and institu- Executive 18(2): 114-120.
 tion', Organization Studies 18(1): 93-118. Conference Board (2002) Company Programs for Resisting

 Boddewyn, J.j. (1988) 'Political aspects of MNE theory', Journal Corrupt Practices: a Global Study, Research Report 1279-00-

 of International Business Studies 19(3): 341-363. RR. New York: The Conference Board.

 Boddewyn, J.j. and Brewer, T.L. (1994) 'International-business Conference Board (2005) Corporate Citizenship Reporting: Best
 political behavior: new theoretical directions', Academy of Practices. Research Report 1367-05-RR. New York: The
 Management Review 19(1): 119-143. Conference Board.

 Journal of International Business Studies

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Political behavior, social responsibility, and perceived corruption Yadong Luo

 763

 Davis, G.F. and Thompson, T.A. (1994) 'A social movement Logan, D., Delwin, R. and Regelbrugge, L. (1997) Global
 perspective on corporate control', Administrative Science Corporate Citizenship: Rationale and Strategies, Washington,
 Quarterly 39(1): 141-173. DC: The Hitachi Foundation.

 Doh, J., Rodriguez, P., Uhlenbruck, K., Collins, J. and Eden, L. Luo, Y. (2001) 'Toward a cooperative view of MNC-host

 (2003) 'Coping with corruption in foreign markets', Academy government relations: building blocks and performance
 of Management Executive 17(3): 114-128. implications', Journal of International Business Studies 32(3):

 Donaldson, T. and Dunfee, W.T. (1999) 'When ethics travel: the 401-420.

 promise and peril of global business ethics', California Luo, Y. (2004) 'An organizational perspective of corruption',
 Management Review 41(4): 45-63. Management and Organization Review 1(1): 119-154.

 Doz, Y.L. and Prahalad, C.K. (1980) 'How MNCs cope with host Mahon, J.F. and Wartick, S.L. (2003) 'Dealing with stakeholders:

 government intervention', Harvard Business Review 58(2): how reputation, credibility and framing influence the game',
 149-157. Corporate Reputation Review 6(1): 19-36.

 Dunning, J.H. (1993) 'Governments and Multinational Enter- McWilliams, A. and Siegel, D. (2001) 'Corporate social respon-

 prises: From Confrontation to Cooperation?', in L. Eden and E. sibility: a theory of the firm perspective', Academy of Manage-
 Potter (eds.) Multinationals in the Global Political Economy, ment Review 26(1): 117-128.
 London: Macmillan, pp. 59-83. Oliver, C. (1991) 'Strategic responses to institutional processes',

 Dunning, J.H. (1997) Governments, Globalization and Interna- Academy of Management Review 16(1): 145-179.

 tional Business, Oxford University Press: Oxford. Pearce, J.A. and Doh, J.P. (2005) 'The high impact of collaborative
 Eden, L. and Lenway, S. (2001) 'Multinationals: the janus face of social initiatives', Sloan Management Review 46(3): 30-39.

 globalization', Journal of International Business Studies 32(3): Poynter, T.A. (1985) Multinational Enterprises and Government
 383-400. Intervention, New York: Saint Martin's Press.

 Fagre, N. and Wells, L.T. (1982) 'Bargaining power of multi- Pozzebon, M. (2004) 'The Influence of a structurationist view on

 nationals and host governments', Journal of International strategic management research', Journal of Management
 Business Studies 13(1): 9-24. Studies 41(2): 247-272.

 Giddens, A. (1983) Profiles and Critiques in Social Theory, Riley, P. (1983) 'A structurationist account of political cultures',

 Giddens, A. (1995) Politics, Sociology and Social Theory, Stanford Rodriquez, P., Uhlenbruck, K. and Eden, L. (2005) 'Government

 Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. Administrative Science Quarterly 28(3): 414-437.

 Giddens, A. (1984) The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Ring, P.S., Lenway, S. and Govekar, M. (1990) 'Management of
 Theory of Structuration, Berkeley, CA: University of California the political imperative in international business', Strategic
 Press. Management Journal 11(2): 141-151.
 University Press: Stanford, CA. corruption and the entry strategies of multinationals', Academy

 Gladwin, T.N. and Walter, I. (1980) 'How multinationals can of Management Review 30(2): 383-396.

 manage social and political forces', Journal of Business Strategy Sarason, Y. (1995) 'A model of organizational transformation:
 1(1): 54-69. the incorporation of organizational identity into a structura-

 Goldsmith, A.A. (1999) 'Slapping the grasping hand: correlates tion theory framework', Academy of Management Best Paper

 of political corruption in emerging markets', American Journal Proceedings, 47-51.
 of Economics and Sociology 58(4): 866-883. Schleifer, A. and Vishny, R.W. (1993) 'Corruption', Quarterly

 Grosse, R. and Behrman, J.N. (1992) 'Theory in International Journal of Economics 108(3): 599-617.

 Business', Transactional Corporations 1(1): 93-126. Schwartz, M.S. (2004) 'Effective corporate codes of ethics:

 Grosse, R. and Behrman, J.N. (2005) International Business: perceptions of code users', Journal of Business Ethics 55(4):

 Government Relations in the 21st Century, Cambridge: Cam- 321-337.
 bridge University Press. Sharma, S., Durand, R.M. and Gue-Arie, 0. (1981) 'Identifica-

 Hair, J.F., Anderson, R.E., Tatham, R.L. and Black, W.C. (1992) tion and analysis of moderator variables', Journal of Marketing

 Multivariate Data Analysis, New York: Macmillan. Research 18(3): 291-300.

 Hillman, A.J. and Hitt, M.A. (1999) 'Corporate political strategy Suchman, M.C. (1995) 'Managing legitimacy: strategic and

 formulation: a model of approach, participation, and strategy institutional approaches', Academy of Management Review
 decisions', Academy of Management Review 24(4): 825-842. 20(3): 571-610.

 Hillman, A.J. and Keim, G.D. (2001) 'Shareholder value, Tanzi, V. (1998) Corruption Around the World: Causes, Con-

 stakeholder management and social issues: what's the bottom sequences, Scope, and Cures. IMF Working Paper 98/63.
 line?' Strategic Management journal 22(2): 125-140. Washington, DC: IMF.

 Hofstede, G. (2001) Culture's Consequences: Comparing Values, Transparency International (2002) TI Bribe Payers Index, 2002,

 Behaviors, Institutions, and Organizations Across Nations, Berlin: Transparency International Secretariat.
 Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Transparency International (2004) TI Corruption Perceptions

 Kim, W.C. (1988) 'The effects of competition and corporate Index 2004, Berlin: Transparency International Secretariat.

 political responsiveness on multinational bargaining power', Weaver, G., Trevino, L. and Cochran, P. (1999) 'Integrated and
 Strategic Management Journal 9(2): 289-295. decoupled corporate social performance: managerial commit-

 Kobrin, S.j. (1982) Managing Political Risk Assessment: Strategic ments, external pressures, and corporate ethical practices',

 Responses to Environmental Changes, Berkeley, CA: University Academy of Management Journal 42(5): 539-552.
 of California Press. Weidenbaum, M. (1980) 'Public policy: no longer a spectator

 Kogut, B. and Singh, H. (1988) 'The effect of national culture in sport for business', Journal of Business Strategy 3(4): 46-53.
 the choice of entry mode', Journal of International Business Whittington, R. (1992) 'Putting Giddens into action: social
 Studies 19(3): 411-432. systems and managerial agency', Journal of Management

 Lambsdorff, J.G. (2002) 'Making corrupt deals: contracting in Studies 29(6): 693-712.

 the shadow of the law', Journal of Economic Behavior and Wood, D. (1991) 'Corporate social responsibility revisited',
 Organization 48(2): 221-241. Academy of Management Review 16(4): 691-718.

 LaPalombra, J. (1994) 'Structural and institutional aspects of Zaheer, S. (1995) 'Overcoming the liability of foreignness',

 corruption', Social Research 61(2): 325-350. Academy of Management Journal 38(2): 341-363.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Journal of International Business Studies


 *W Political behavior, social responsibility, and perceived corruption Yadong Luo
 764

 Appendix A:
 Selected survey items
 Items Cronbach Communality

 a estimatea

 Perceived corruption (five-point Likert scale from 1 =very unlikely to 5=very likely) 0.75
 (1) Please indicate how likely companies in China's business sector or industry in which your company 0.90

 operates are to pay or offer bribes to political organizations (e.g., governmental or judicial agencies) to
 achieve corporate gains.

 (2) Please indicate how likely companies in China's business sector or industry in which your company 0.92

 operates are to pay or offer bribes to industrial or administrative departments (e.g., departments of
 commerce or telecommunications) to achieve corporate gains.

 (3) Please indicate how likely companies in China's business sector or industry in which your company 0.91

 operates are to pay or offer bribes to public and market service institutions (e.g., banks, customs
 offices, or auditing firms) to achieve corporate gains.

 (4) Please indicate how rampant private businesses in the sector or industry in which your company 0.93

 operates have engaged in bribery and corruption.

 (5) Please indicate how rampant the bribery and corruption activities are in the region (province and city) 0.91

 in which your company is located

 Politics: assertiveness (seven-point Likert scale from 1=not true at all to 7=very true) 0.65
 (1) When our company deals with the local government (i.e., the host government at central or regional 0.82

 levels), we always approach it on our own initiative and take ourselves as the dominant side.

 (2) When our company deals with industrial administrative departments, we always approach them on 0.83

 our own initiative and take ourselves as the dominant side.

 (3) When conflicts with the local government or industrial departments arise, we never avoid the conflicts 0.87

 but instead always forcefully bargain with or persuade these institutions.

 (4) We always believe, and take aggressive steps to fulfill, that governmental policies that impact our 0.75

 operations can be changed by our influence and power.

 (5) We always believe that concession or compromise is not helpful to our company when dealing with 0.67

 the local government.

 Politics: cooperativeness (seven-point Likert scale from 1 =not true at all to 7=very true) 0.80
 (1) Overall, the relationship between our company and the local government has been interdependent 0.87

 and collaborative.

 (2) We always believe that a cooperative relation with the local government is a necessary condition for 0.88

 firm growth and we take steps to implement such cooperation.

 (3) We always believe, and encourage, a win-win relationship between our company and the local 0.75

 government.

 (4) We always believe that a cooperative relation with the local government benefits both sides and can 0.85

 generate some synergetic gains and we encourage such cooperation.

 (5) In dealing with the local government, we often look at the issues from both our and the government's 0.84

 perspective, rather than solely our own.

 Politics: social connections (seven-point Likert scale from 1 =very low to 7=very high) 0.74
 (1) Please indicate how strongly your company's top managers have developed personal or social ties with 0.82

 government officials at the central or regional levels.

 (2) Please indicate the extent to which the ties from the above question have been used for your own 0.76

 organizational goals.

 (3) Please indicate how strongly your company's top managers have developed personal or social ties with 0.78

 officials in industrial administrative departments in charge.

 (4) Please indicate the extent to which the ties from Question 3 have been used for your own 0.77

 organizational goals.

 Politics: arm's length contracting (seven-point scale from 1 =not true at all to 7=very true) 0.72
 (1) We approach the local government and contact its officials only when our company has formal 0.76

 business issues that need to be discussed.

 (2) We always deal with the local government and its officials in a professional manner. 0.83
 (3) Our power in bargaining with the local government or influencing its decisions comes only from our 0.77

 company's investments and commitments to local government needs.

 (4) We do not include the guanxi factor when dealing with the local government. 0.80

 Journal of International Business Studies

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Political behavior, social responsibility, and perceived corruption Yadong Luo

 765

 Appendix A: Continued

 Items Cronbach Communality

 a estimatea

 CSR: ethics codes (seven-point Likert scale from 1=not true at all to 7=very true) 0.77
 (1) Our company has established a set of transparent, comprehensive, and stringent codes of conduct 0.91

 aiming at resisting bribery, corruption, and other illicit acts in the host country.

 (2) Throughout the company, every manager and employee has strictly implemented the above codes of 0.95

 conduct.

 (3) Our company has established an ethics compliance department or division that specifically handles the 0.84

 improvement, training, and enforcement of the above codes of conduct.

 CSR: organizational credibility (seven-point scale from 1 =not true at all to 7=very true) 0.68
 (1) Our company always attaches the utmost value to, and takes actual steps in, enhancing corporate 0.80

 image and reputation.

 (2) Our company always honors our promises regarding product and/or service offerings and is dedicated 0.96

 to adapt to the local consumers' needs.

 (3) Relying on its honesty and credibility, our company has maintained good and stable relationships with 0.92

 local suppliers, distributors, and other business partners.

 CSR: philanthropic contribution (seven-point scale from 1 =not true at all to 7=very true) 0.76
 (1) Each year our company allocates some portion of retained earnings to charitable organizations. 0.83
 (2) Our company always recognizes its social responsibility and participates in building schools, aiding 0.87

 poor regions, improving local sanitation, and other local needs.

 (3) Each year our company uses some portion of retained earnings to help the local community to 0.64

 consummate the local infrastructure (e.g., transportation and telecommunication) and environmental
 protection.

 CSR: resource accommodation (seven-point scale from 1 =not true at all to 7=very true) 0.75
 (1) The resources (e.g., technology, skills, capital, or equipment) we invested in local project(s) are always 0.82

 complementary to the host country's economic development needs.

 (2) The resources (e.g., technology, skills, capital, or equipment) we invested in local project(s) are always 0.87

 responsive to the local government's call and consistent with governmental preference.

 (3) The resources (e.g., technology, skills, capital, or equipment) we invested in local project(s) always 0.80

 help improve the host industry's technological and managerial levels.

 aCommunality estimate tells the amount of variance an original variable (or item) shares with all other variables (or items) included in the analysis (see
 Hair et al., 1992: 224).

 Appendix B:
 Factor loadings (varimax rotation) of survey variables

 Factor 1 Factor 2 Factor 3 Factor 4 Factor 5 Factor 6 Factor 7 Factor 8 Factor 9

 Corruption 1: government -0.02 0.94 0.06 -0.08 0.03 0.01 -0.02 0.02 0.08
 Corruption 2: industrial department 0.08 0.95 0.12 -0.07 0.04 -0.06 0.03 0.02 0.07
 Corruption 3: public institutions 0.07 0.91 0.16 -0.15 0.05 0.04 0.11 0.15 0.04
 Corruption 4: private sector 0.04 0.92 0.22 -0.14 0.01 0.10 0.04 0.10 0.04
 Corruption 5: local region 0.08 0.93 0.10 -0.10 -0.08 0.05 -0.06 0.01 0.02
 Assertiveness 1: political organ 0.44 0.08 0.30 -0.13 0.09 0.64 -0.02 0.18 0.24
 Assertiveness 2: administrative 0.47 0.13 0.29 -0.15 0.06 0.60 0.06 0.14 0.31
 Assertiveness 3: bargain 0.46 0.08 0.20 -0.03 -0.06 0.73 -0.09 -0.05 0.17
 Assertiveness 4: influence policy 0.16 0.14 0.16 -0.05 0.41 0.62 0.02 -0.06 0.26
 Assertiveness 5: no compromise 0.03 0.14 0.04 -0.16 0.36 0.76 -0.17 0.02 -0.02
 Cooperativeness 1: interdependence 0.90 -0.01 -0.07 -0.06 0.12 0.13 0.05 0.12 -0.06
 Cooperativeness 2: firm growth 0.89 0.04 -0.08 -0.05 0.07 0.10 0.21 0.13 0.08
 Cooperativeness 3: win-win 0.70 0.13 -0.03 -0.03 0.09 0.53 0.11 -0.09 -0.06
 Cooperativeness 4: synergetic gains 0.89 0.05 -0.06 0.07 0.08 0.21 0.19 0.10 -0.15
 Cooperativeness 5: mutual lenses 0.88 -0.04 -0.05 -0.06 0.11 -0.06 -0.02 0.06 0.15

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Journal of International Business Studies


 * Political behavior, social responsibility, and perceived corruption Yadong Luo
 766

 Appendix B: Continued

 Factor 1 Factor 2 Factor 3 Factor 4 Factor 5 Factor 6 Factor 7 Factor 8 Factor 9

 Social connection 1: politicians 0.43 0.13 0.33 -0.04 0.20 0.12 0.68 -0.03 -0.01
 Social connection 2: using ties I 0.32 0.18 0.22 0.02 0.18 0.13 0.73 0.11 0.21
 Social connection 3: with officials 0.13 -0.04 -0.02 0.05 0.10 0.40 0.80 0.01 -0.05
 Social connection 4: using ties II 0.08 0.10 0.45 -0.07 0.22 0.30 0.59 0.01 -0.22
 Arm's length 1: formal business -0.20 0.21 0.73 0.18 0.03 -0.01 0.22 0.16 0.11
 Arm's length 2: business-to-business -0.41 0.23 0.73 0.09 0.02 0.13 0.04 0.15 -0.09
 Arm's length 3: formal bargaining -0.17 0.28 0.77 0.10 0.02 -0.04 0.13 0.32 0.05
 Arm's length 4: no guanxi 0.24 0.28 0.74 -0.15 0.08 0.08 0.23 0.04 0.15
 Ethics code 1: establishing 0.07 -0.16 -0.04 0.93 0.16 -0.07 0.01 0.01 0.06
 Ethics code 2: implementing 0.03 -0.20 0.01 0.94 0.13 -0.06 0.01 -0.01 0.02
 Ethics code 3: compliance -0.14 -0.16 0.24 0.80 -0.03 0.15 0.03 -0.03 -0.33
 Credibility 1: corporate image 0.09 0.05 -0.02 0.18 0.20 -0.01 0.36 0.22 0.72
 Credibility 2: product offering 0.24 0.06 -0.18 0.15 -0.10 0.05 0.48 0.09 0.70
 Credibility 3: stable relations 0.28 0.13 -0.18 0.05 0.01 0.07 0.42 0.02 0.74
 Philanthropy 1: social needs 0.21 -0.07 0.16 0.11 0.81 -0.10 0.16 0.23 0.12
 Philanthropy 2: aid contribution 0.12 -0.01 0.14 0.11 0.86 0.02 0.01 0.15 0.19
 Philanthropy 3: local infrastructure 0.05 0.09 0.15 0.10 0.78 0.17 0.11 -0.01 -0.22
 Resource 1: complementarity 0.47 0.01 0.15 -0.07 0.17 0.03 -0.14 0.68 0.03
 Resource 2: responsiveness 0.37 -0.03 0.21 0.01 0.06 -0.22 0.1 3 0.73 -0.01
 Resource 3: social usefulness 0.33 0.13 -0.08 0.01 0.21 0.27 0.07 0.62 0.39

 Factor variance 6.12 4.95 3.65 2.75 2.72 2.70 2.27 1.99 1.93

 About the author
 Yadong Luo (PhD, Temple University) is Professor include global corporate strategy, foreign direct
 of Management and the Emery Findlay Distin- investment, international joint ventures, multina-
 guished Chair at the School of Business Adminis- tional corporations in emerging markets, and
 tration, University of Miami. His research interests management in transition economies.

 Accepted by Lorraine Eden, Amy Hillman, Peter Rodriguez and Donald Siegel, Guest Editors, 20 April 2006. This paper has been with the author for two
 revisions.

 journal of International Business Studies

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 23:16:54 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

