See	discussions,	stats,	and	author	profiles	for	this	publication	at:	https://www.researchgate.net/publication/273167498

The	effects	of	green	supply	chain	management
on	the	supplier’s	performance	through	social
capital	accumulation

Article		in		Supply	Chain	Management	·	January	2015

DOI:	10.1108/SCM-01-2014-0009

CITATIONS
8

1	author:

READS
465

Su-Yol	Lee
Chonnam	National	University

23	PUBLICATIONS			850	CITATIONS			

SEE	PROFILE

Some	of	the	authors	of	this	publication	are	also	working	on	these	related	projects:

A	study	on	CSR	in	the	Korean	Parcel	Logistics	Industry	View	project

The	Supply	Chain	Environmental	Management	Initiative	of	South	Korea	View	project

All	content	following	this	page	was	uploaded	by	Su-Yol	Lee	on	11	May	2015.

The	user	has	requested	enhancement	of	the	downloaded	file.


The  effects of green supply chain 

management on  the supplier's performance 

through social  capital  accumulation 

College  of  Business  Administration,  Chonnam  National  University,  Gwangju,  South  Korea 

Su-Yol Lee 

Abstract 
Purpose - This paper aims to  examine the effects of green supply chain  management (GSCM) on  environmental and  operational performances with 
a perspective of social  capital  accumulation  in the supply chain.  The  roles  of structural capital and  relational  social  capital  in  GSCM  were  empirically 
explored. 
Design/methodology/approach - A  research  model  was  developed  to  investigate  the  effects  of  GSCM  on  a  supplier's  environmental  and 
operational  performances  through  structural  and  relational  social  capitals.  Using  an  exploratory  factor  analysis,  the  study  identified  the  structural 
and  relational  dimensions  of  social  capital  and  the  environmental  and  operational  performance  dimensions  of  supplier's  performance.  The 
hypotheses  were  tested  on  data  of 207  responses  collected  from  supplying  firms  in  South  Korea,  using  structural  equation  modeling. 
Findings - The  paper  finds  that  GSCM  contributes  to  the  environmental  and  operational  performance  improvements  of the  supply  chain  through 
social  capital  accumulation.  Relational  capital,  in  particular,  plays  a  more  important  pivoting  role  in  the  relationships  between  GSCM  and 
environmental  and  operational  performances. 
Practical  implications - The  findings of this paper provide useful insights about how supply chain  members should integrate environmental issues 
into  supply  chain  management  practices  that  would  enhance  social  capital  accumulation  to  foster  stronger  operational  and  environmental 
performances  throughout the  entire supply  chain. 
Originality/value - This  research  is one of the  few studies that explore the  effects  of GSCM  on  performance by explicitly considering social  capital 
as  an  important  intervening  variable.  By  applying  social  capital  theory,  this  study  provides  theoretical  underpinning  for  furthering  the  GSCM 
literature. 

Keywords  Environmental  performance,  Operational  performance,  Green  supply  chain  management,  Social  capital, 
Structural  equation  modeling 

Paper type  Research  paper 

1. 	 Introduction 
Firms  have  increasingly  reexamined  their  supply  chains  in 
response  to  a  number  of  environmental  challenges  such  as 
global  environmental  regulations,  green  consumerism  and 
climate  change.  In  fact,  firms  might  face  a  wide  range  of 
environmental  risks  associated  with 
their  supply  chains 
(Handfield el al., 2005). A number of firms have changed their 
managerial  behavior 
toward  greener  supply  chains  by 
introducing  envirorunental  audits  and  certification  schemes 
(ISO  14001  and  SA  8000[1)),  as  well  as  providing  their 
suppliers  with  environmental  support  (Wu  et  a.1.,  2012)  and 
fostering  environmental  collaboration  (Caniato  el  al.,  20 12; 
Vachon  and  Klassen,  2006). 

As  such  green  supply  chain  management  (GSCM)  practices 
have 
have 
characterized  GSCM practices,  examined internal  and  external 

throughout 

researchers 

industries, 

diffused 

The  current  issue  and  full  text  archive  of this  journal  is  available  on 
Emerald  Insight at:  www.emeraldinsight.comI1359-8546.han 

drivers  of  GSCM  and  assessed  performance  outcome.  The 
existing  GSCM  research,  however,  has  limitations  for  some
aspects.  First,  organizational  theories  need  to  be  applied  to 
GSCM studies in explicit ways because those theories provide a 
valuable  source  of  theoretical  underpinning  for  deepening
research in the literature  (Sarkis er al., 2011) . Howeve,r, much of
the literature on the applications and  uses of theory in GSCM
research  have  been  relatively  recent,  and,  thus,  a  substantial
opportunity  exists  for  an  extension  of  GSCM  research
utilizing  the  myriad organizational theories.  Second, while  an
increasing  number of studies have  examined  the  relationship
between  GSCM  and  overall  supply  chain  performance
(Seuring  and  Muller,  2008), 
relationship  remains 
inconclusive.  This  suggests  that  GSCM  research  should
consider  the  identification  of intervening  variables  to  better
explain  the  direction  of  this  relationship  (i.e.  positive  vs
negative).  Third,  helping  suppliers  recognize  the  importance 
of addressing  envirorunental  issues  and  supporting  them  in 
implementing  their  own  improvement  initiatives  represent  a 

this 

I 

_  •• 

Supply Chain ManilgCI,nen(:  An  Imcm.ationai Journal 

20/ 1  (2015)  42-55 

c Emerald Group Pubhshing Limiled  (lSSN  1359-8346) 
(DOl  IO.110B!SCM-Ol-20H-0009J 	

Received  9 December 2013 
Revised  7 January 2014 
25  May 2014 
12 September 2014 
2  October 2014 
Accepted  2  October 2014 

42 


Green supply chain management 

Su-Yol Lee 

Supply Chain  Management An  International Journal 

Volume  20 . Number  1  .  2015  .  42-55 

today  (Age ron  el  af.,  2012). 
major  agenda  facing  firms 
However, 
the  number  and  scope  of  GSCM  studies 
considering both monitoring and collaboration approaches, in 
particular  empirical  studies,  remain  limited  (Vachon  and 
Klassen,  2008). 

the 

Given  these  gaps  in  the  literature,  this  study  aimed  to 
examine  the  effects  of  GSCM  on  the  environmental  and 
operational  performances  of the  supply  chain  by  considering 
social  capital  accumulation as  a mediating role.  The research 
questions  of  this  study  can  be  specified:  Does  GSCM 
influence  the  accwnulation  of  social  capital  in  the  supply 
chain?  Does  social  capital  contribute  to  the  improvements  of 
environmental  and  operational  performances  of  the  supply 
chain?  Overall,  does  social  capital  play  a  critical  role  to 
the  effects  of  GSCM  on  environmental  and 
mediate 
operational  performances?  To  explore 
relationship 
between  GSCM  and  supply  chain  performance,  this  study 
utilizes  social  capital  theory  for  some  reasons.  First,  social 
capital  theory  has  been  paid  increasing  attention  in  supply 
chain management studies  (Carey el af.,  20 11; Lawson  a  a1., 
2008;  Krause el  af.,  2007). This  theory  can  be  applied  to  the 
GSCM studies  because  GSCM  is  essentially  an  extension  of 
SCM by integrating environmental issues into SCM practices. 
Second,  GSCM  and  social  capital  can  be  understood  to  be 
fundamentally  parallel  to  one  another.  Social  capital 
is 
accumulated  through  a  process  of  firms  building  social 
relationships  in  ongoing  networks.  GSCM  is  essentially  a 
reciprocal  program  among  supply  chain  partners,  thereby 
facilitating  the  embeddedness  of  parmer  firms  in  a  supply 
chain.  Third,  social  capital  or  social  embeddedness  are 
believed 
theoretical 
underpinning  for  strengthening  research  in  GSCM  (Sarkis 
el a/.,  2011) . 

to  be  promising  and 

important 

o 
'" 

and 

this, 

this  paper  makes 

operational  performances 

This  paper  developed  a  research  model  by  combining 
GSCM  research  and  social  capital  theory  and  empirically 
validated  hypotheses  using  survey.  The  structural  equation 
model (SEM) depicting the effects ofGSCM on the supplier's 
environmental 
through 
structural  and  relational  social  capital  was  empirically  tested 
on  data  of 207  responses  collected  from  supplying  firms  in 
South  Korea.  By  doing 
three 
contributions.  First, this  paper utilizes social capital  theory in 
an  explicit  way  to  explore  the  relationship  between  GSCM 
practices  and  performance.  Little  attention  has  been  paid  to 
social  capital  in  the  GSCM  literature  (\Xfu  el al.,  2012). This 
paper  is  one  of  the  few  studies  to  explore  GSCM  from  a 
perspective  of social  capital.  Second,  this  study  suggests  and 
validates  a mediating role of social  capital in  the  relationships 
between  GSCM  and  the  environmental  and  operational 
performances.  Social  capital  is  believed  as  one  of important 
underlying  variables  to  connect  GSCM  and  performance 
outcome. By doing this,  this paper provides a better explanation 
of  the  effects  of  GSCM  on  performance.  Third,  the  paper 
clarified  GSCM  practices  and  developed  measurement  by 
considering  both  monitoring  and  collaboration  aspects  of 
GSCM. This study  also  provides  an  empirical  analysis  of those 
relationships  among  GSCM,  social  capital  and  environmental 
and operational performances  through SEM. The results  of the 
analysis indicate that GSCM has positive effects on the supplier's 
environmental  and  operational  performances  through  social 

capital  accwnulation.  Relational  social  capital,  in  particular, 
plays a more important pivoting role in the relationships between 
GSCM and environmental and operational performances. 

The  rest  of  this  paper  is  organized  as  follows:  Section  2 
briefly reviews  previous research on GSCM  and social capital 
theory.  Section  3  discusses  the  research  framework  and 
hypotheses.  Section  4  describes  the  research  method,  and 
Section  5  presents the  results  and discussion  of the  empirical 
analysis. Section 6 concludes with the theoretical and practical 
implications  of  the  study,  as  well  as  with 
this  study's 
limitations  and  some  suggestions  for  future  research. 

2.  Theoretical  background 
This section provides a brief review of social capital theory and 
previous  research  on GSCM. 

issues 

including 

integrate  environmental 

2.1  Green supply chain tnanagetnent 
GSCM is  generally understood as  a set of managerial practices 
that 
into  supply  chain 
management  to  ensure  environmental  compliance  and  to 
foster  environmental  capability  of  the  entire  supply  chain 
(Caniato  eL  a1.,  2012;  Paulraj,  2011;  Sarkis  et  a1.,  2011) . 
Researchers  have  examined  GSCM  by  characterizing  it  as 
green  purchasing  (Min  and  Galle,  2001)  and  green  supply 
chain  practices  (Green  er  a1.,  2012; Lee  and Klassen,  2008). 
Zhu  and  Sarkis  (2004)  proposed  a  broader  perspective  of 
practices, 
internal  environmental  management, 
green  purchasing,  investment  recovery,  eco-design  practices 
and  cooperation  with  supply  chain  parmers.  The  GSCM 
literature  has  clearly 
identified  regulatory  and  customer 
demands  prompt  GSCM  practices  in  a  focal  firm,  but  these 
practices diffuse  along  the entire supply chain through buyers 
as  "secondhand"  regulations  (Lee  and  Klassen,  2008;  Hall, 
2000) .  A  supply  chain's  awareness  of  environmental  issues 
and  its  efforts  to  improve  its  environmental performance  are 
triggered  and  motivated  mainly  by  buyers'  policies  and 
activities  in  terms  of monitoring and supporting the  supplier. 
Green e! a1.  (2000) provided empirical evidence that regulations 
improving  environmental 
played 
performance,  followed  by 
the  environmental  pressure  of 
customers.  Not  all  firms  are  exposed  to  the  same  types  of 
pressure  or  to  the  same  extent.  In  general,  environmental 
pressures are often passed along to suppliers from downstream 
firms.  Lee cl af.  (2014) have observed some large buying firms 
such as  Benetton in the  apparel industry and Samsung SDI in 
the electronics industry placed a more stringent environmental 
requirement onto their suppliers  than  that they received from 
the  market while  they were  responding  to new environmental 
regulations  such  as  European  Union's  (EU's)  RoHS  and 
REACH  directives[2]. 

strongest 

role 

the 

in 

Collectively,  GSCM  practices  can  be  classified  into  two 
distinct  but  complementary  approaches:  monitoring  and 
collaboration approaches  (Vachon and Klassen,  2006, 2008) . 
the  gathering  and 
Monitoring-based  practices 
involve 
processing  of  supplier  information, 
the  establishment  of 
supplier  assessment  criteria  and 
the  evaluation  of  the 
environmental  performance  of suppliers  and  their  products . 
Many  large  firms  have  adopted  green  procurement  policies. 
For  instance,  many  firms  in  the  automobile  and  electricaV 
to 
electronics 

industries  have 

their  suppliers 

required 

43 


Green supply chain  management 

Su-Yol Lee 

Supply Chain  Management An  International Journal 

Volume  20  . Numbe,  J  • 2015  . 42-55 

full 

their 

compliance  with 

environmental 
guarantee 
regulations  such  as 
the  RoHS  and  WEEE  directives [3) 
(Caniaro et at.,  2012; Lee  and  Cheong, 2012; Paulraj,  2011). 
Suppliers  have  been  required  to  implement  environmental 
management systems  (EMSs)  and  validate  them  by  securing 
international  certifications  such  as  ISO  14001.  In  addition, 
some  major  suppliers  of  high-volwne  materials,  parts  and 
components  have  been 
to  submit  material 
composition data on each product, including carbon footprint 
data. 

requested 

In  contrast,  collaboration-based  GSCM requires  the  direct 
involvement of buyers in their suppliers to improve the latter's 
green  perfonnance.  Collaboration  tends  ro  focus  more  on 
building  the  supplier's  potential  and  capability  than  on 
achieving  short-tenn  results  (Vachon  and  Kla~sen,  2006). 
This  approach  encompasses  a  broad  range  of  activities, 
including  training  and  education  programs,  information  and 
experience  sharing,  and  technical  and  financial  assistance  to 
implement various  EMSs and  achieve  related  certifications  in 
the  environmental  area  (Wu  ef  al.,  2012;  Zim  ec  at. .,  2008; 
Vachon and  Klassen,  2006;  Zhu  and Sarkis,  2004). 

2.2 Social capital 
Social  capital  is  usually  understood  as  a  valuable  asset  that 
stems from  access  to  resources  made  available  through  social 
relationships  (Granovetter,  1992).  Social  capital  theory  has 
provided  a  theoretical  perspective  to  examine  the  advantage 
gained  by  firms  through  their  social  networks.  Nahapiet  and 
Ghosal  (1998)  proposed  three  dimensions  of social  capital: 
cognitive,  structural  and  relational.  The  cognitive  dimension 
of social  capital  refers  to  the  shared  goals,  vision  and  values 
between actors in a  social network,  which provides  the parties 
with  shared  representations,  interpretations,  and  systems  of 
meaning (Tsai and Ghosal,  1998). Cognitive capital facilitates 
the  development  of  common  understanding  and  collective 
ideologies, outlining appropriate ways for buyers and suppliers 
to  coordinate  their  exchange  and  share  each  other's  thinking 
processes  (De  Carolis  and  Saparito,  2006).  However,  it  is 
challenging  to  operationally  separate  the  cognitive  dimension 
from  the structural and  relational  dimensions, and,  therefore, 
the latter two types of social capital are often considered in the 
literature  based  on  Granovetter's  distinction  between 
structural and relational  embeddedness (Lawson ec  al .. , 2008). 
Following this perspective, the study focuses on structural and 
relational  dimensions  of social  capital. 

Structural social capital refers to  the  pattern  of connections 
between actors that is, who you reach and how you reach them 
(Nahapiet  and  Ghosal,  1998).  Structural  social  capital  has 
been examined along a range  of perspectives, including social 
ties  or  network  characteristics  (Inkpen  and  Tsang,  2005; 
Zaheer and Bell, 2005), as information and knowledge sharing 
(Lawson et at.,  2008) and as the strength of social interactions 
(Krause  at  al.,  2007;  Oh  et  al.,  2004) .  First,  supply  chain 
partners need  to create a  social  network  structure with  dense 
interactions  and  multiple  connections  to  enhance  continued 
communication.  Frequency  and 
interaction  of  multiple 
contacts  at  different  levels  and  various  functions  act  as 
conduits  for  information  and  resource  flows  providing  the 
time,  opportunity  and  motivation 
the 
relationship  of  the  parties  (Yu  ec  at.,  2006).  Second, 

strengthen 

to 

44 

behavior 

behavioral 

opportunistic 

transparency,  while 

communication quality, the extent ofinfonnation sharing, and 
participating  in  planning  and  goal  se[[ing  are  all  important 
aspects of structural social  capital (Koka and Presco[[,  2002). 
Information  sharing  encourages  the  openness  of interaction 
simultaneously 
and 
discouraging 
information 
asymmetries  in 
the  relationship.  Third,  the  strength  of 
interactions  are  usually  operationalized  as  purposefully 
designed organizational social events, team building exercises, 
joint  problem  solving  workshops  and  cross-functional  team 
(C:trey ac  al.,  20 II; Krause et al.,  2007). Such interaction ties 
facilitate  cooperation  in  the  supply  chain.  In  sum,  structural 
social  capital  recognizes  the  advantages  derived  from  the 
configuration  of 
the  network  of  contacts,  continued 
communication,  information  sharing  and  social  interaction 
ties. 

and 

and 

reduces 

through 

repeated 

transaction 

enhance  behavioral 

The relational dimension refers to trUSt,  obligations, respect 
and  friendship  present  in  personal  relationships  between 
actors  (Nahapiet and  Ghosal,  1998). Trust is  one of essential 
elements ofrelational social capital (Inkpen and Tsang, 2005). 
Trust  built 
the 
expectation  of  opportunistic  behavior,  encourage  open 
communication 
transparency 
between parties (Dyer and Singh,  1998). Similarly friendship, 
respect  and  reciprocity  are  also  developed  through  repeated 
transactions  and  a  long-term relationship  (Kale  et  at.,  2000). 
Relational  social  capital  creates  a  mutual  confidence  that  the 
parties  would  not  exploit  the  other's  vulnerability,  and  thus 
builds  reciprocity  norms  that  serve  to  transfonn  buyers  and 
suppliers  from  self-centered  partners  into  members  of  a 
relationship  with  shared  value  and  a  sense  of the  common 
good  (Villena  et  al. ,  2011).  In  summary,  relational  social 
long-term  and  partnership  based 
capital 
relationships 
trust,  respect,  friendship  and 
reciprocity over  time,  and  thus  facilitate  cooperative behavior 
while  reduce  transactions  costs. 

that  develop 

focuses  on 

3.  Hypothesis  development 
This  section  suggests  a  research  framework  and  a  total  of 
seven  hypotheses  on 
relationships  among  GSCM, 
structural and  relational social capital  and  environmental and 
operational performances. 

the 

a 

can 

and 

thus 

reach 

3.1  GSCM and social capital 
GSCM  is  essentially  a  reciprocal  program  requiring  mutual 
recognition  by  supply  chain  partners.  Through  a  transparent 
evaluation  of perfonnance  and  an  effective  feedback  system  for 
GSCM, supply chain partners can share common environmental 
common  philosophical 
goals 
understanding. This is  because such an evaluation and feedback 
to  become  aware  of  their 
process  can  enable  suppliers 
performance  level  and  the  buyer's  performance  expectations  in 
terms  of environmental  as  well  as  economic areas.  GSCM  also 
emphasizes  open and  frequent  communication  and  the  level  of 
information  sharing  can  increase  through  the  product's  carbon 
footprint 
composition.  Better  mutual 
understanding and an open channel of communication regarding 
to  environmental requirements  can minimize  potential  conflicts 
between  the  supply  chain  parties  (\1(I u  and  Ragatz,  20 I 0)  and, 
thus, increase  the  strength of relationships. 

chemical 

and 


_______G_r_e_e_n_s_u'--pp'-.I~ychain  man._a..:g'-.e_m_e_n_t______ _ 

Supply Chain  Management: An  International Journal 

Su- Yol Lde 

Volume  10  .  Number  1  . 2015  . 42-55 

GSCM practices focus more on developing future technical, 
product  development,  and  management  capabilities  than  on 
improving  current  quality,  cost  and  environment  (\X'atts  and 
Hahn,  1993;  Vachon  and  Klassen,  2006;  Lee  and  Klassen, 
2008).  The  greater  the  extent  and  scope  of support  or  joint 
activities,  the  more likely  the buyer is  to  perceive its  suppliers 
as partners than as contractors (Krause and Ellram,  1997) and 
thus to  move  toward  a closer relationship  (Nyaga  "I at.,  2010; 
Joshi  and  Stump,  1999).  Similarly,  suppliers  are  likely  to 
perceive buyers' direct involvement and joint events, including 
training,  education  and  technical  assistance,  as  a  signal  of 
long-term commitment and  partnership (Krause  er  at.,  2007) 
and,  therefore, social  capital is  likely  to  be  easily  accumulated 
through  GSCM practices. 

Based on the above discussion, this study tests the following 

hypothesis: 

Hla.  GSCM  is  directly  and  positively  related  to  the  level  of 

o 
N 

structural social  capital. 

Hlb. 	 GSCM  is  directly  and  positively related  to  the  level  of 

relational  social  capital. 

3.2  Social capital and the environmental and 
operational performances  of suppliers 
This study posits that social capital has considerable influence 
on supplier's environmental and  operational performances by 
mediating  the  effect  of the  buyer's  GSCM  practices.  When 
trust  are  built  based  on  a 
strong  interaction 
long-term-based  relationship,  suppliers  are 
to  be 
motivated  to  generate  new  ideas,  find  new  solutions,  work 
together  to  solve  complex  problems  and  improve 
their 
environmental  as  well  as  economic performances. 

ties  and 

likely 

Few  studies  have  examined  the  effects  of social  capital  on 
environmental  performance  in  explicit  ways.  Recently,  WIl 
el <It.  (2012) considered social  capital as  one  of drivers for  the 
adoption  of  GSCM  practices.  They  did  not  examine  the 
effects of structural and relational dimensions of social capital 
in  an  explicit  way.  Their  work,  however,  provided  a 
meaningful  implication  about  the  possibility  of  the  positive 
relationship  between  social  capital  and  GSCM practices. 

and  demands 

the  use  of  material 

Improvements in environmental performance require a high 
level  of technical expertise in production and  product design. 
For  example,  the  life  cycle  assessment  is  highly  technical  in 
nature 
science. 
Environmentally  conscious  product  design  skills  such  as 
"design  for  the  environment",  "cradle-to-cradle"  design  and 
"servicizing"  are  built  on  solid  conventional  capabilities  such 
as  engineering skills, design  expertise and  product knowledge 
(Parmigiani  et  al.,  20 II).  Suppliers  are  not  likely  to  possess 
sufficient  information,  know-how  and  knowledge  to  address 
these  emerging  environmental  issues  in  their  products  and 
operations. Social capital such as communication, information 
sharing  and  joint  activities  can  facilitate  knowledge  transfer 
(Modi  and  Mabert,  2007),  which  helps  suppliers  to  address 
those  limitations  and improve  their  environmental  capability 
and performance  (Parmigiani  et at.,  2011). 

Long-term  and  trust-based  relationships  with  suppliers 
increase  the  suppliers'  commitment  and  provide  them  with 
more  incentives  to  improve  their  environmental  capabilities. 
In  summary,  communication,  information  sharing,  trust  and 

45 

through  a  strong  relationship 
knowledge  transfer  formed 
(Krause  el al.,  2007; Ireland  and  Webb,  2007)  can  provide  a 
basis 	
to 
environmental  challenges  (Parmigiani  el  a.i.,  2011)  and  thus 
improve  the  environmental performance  of the  supplier. 

the  development  of 

innovative  solutions 

for 

Based on the above discussion, this paper tests the following 

hypotheses: 

H2a. 	 Structural  social  capital  is  positively  related  to  the 

supplier's  environmental performance. 

H2b. 	 Relational  social  capital  is  positively  related  to  the 

supplier's  environmental performance. 

In  terms  of  operational  performance,  a  number  of  SCM 
studies have provided support for the notion that social capital 
plays  a  critical  role  in  driving  performance  improvements  in 
supply chains (Carey ec at.,  2011; Lawson e! al.,  2008; Krause 
el  al.,  2007) .  Structural  social  capital,  operationalized  as 
communication  and  information  exchange,  allows  for  better 
planning, goal  setting and problem  solving,  and  thus leads  to 
improvements  in  buyer  and  supplier  performances  (Lawson 
CI  al.,  2008).  Social  interactions  such  as  technical  exchanges 
help  to  improve  supply  chain  performance  (Kotabe  el  at., 
2003).  Similarly,  relational  social  capital  also  helps  improve 
performance  within  buyer  and  supplier  relationships.  For 
instance,  trust,  friendship,  respect  and  reciprocity  contribute  to 
improving relationship performance by reducing the expectation 
of opportunistic behavior and decreasing monitoring costs (Dyer 
and  Singh,  1998).  Relational  social  capital  also  provides  the 
buyer  and  supplier  with  incentives  to  engage  in  value-added 
initiatives,  and  increases  the  willingness 
to  explore  new 
opportunities  (Kale  ec  at.,  2000).  There  are  a  large  number of 
empirical  evidence  of the  benefits  of relational  social  capital  in 
terms  of 
flexibility,  productivity 
performance (Lawson e! at., 2008; Cousins e! aI., 2006; Dyer and 
Chu,  2003)  and  innovation  performance  (Carey  el  al.,  2011; 
Capaldo,  2007).  In  summary,  social  capital  fostered  by 
information sharing, frequent communication, and joint problem 
solving  events  as  weU  as  trust,  partnership  and  familiarity  can 
provide supply chain members with opportunities to improve its 
operational  performance(Nyaga  el  at.,  2010;  Daugherty  e!  al., 
2006;  \X'hipple  and Frankel,  2000). 

improved  quality,  cost, 

H3a. 	 Structural  social  capital  is  positively  related  to  the 

supplier's  operational  performance. 

H3b. 	 Relational  social  capital  is  positively  related  to  the 

supplier's  operational performance. 

3.3  Environmental performance and operational 
performance 
A number of studies have provided evidence and explanations of 
firm 
the  positive  correlations  between  environmental  and 
performance (Russo and Fouts,  1997; Klassen and McLaughlin, 
1996).  However,  it  should  be  noted  that  previous  empirical 
studies  have  generally  produced  mixed  results  indicating 
trade-offs or some ambiguity between environmental and firm 
performance,  fostering  an  ongoing  debate  (Corbett  and 
Klassen,  2006).  Several  explanations  for  the  mixed empirical 
results  have  been  suggested.  Inconsistency 
in  how  key 
variables  are  defined  and  measured  across  studies can be  one 


Green  supply chain  management 

Su- Yol  Lee 

Supply Chain Management An  International Journal 

Volume  20  . Number  I  . 2015  . 42- 55 

and 

self-reported  data 

explanation  (Peloza,  2009).  With  regard  (0  environmental 
performance,  several  different  approaches  (0  operationalize  and 
measure  the  performance  have  been  used  such  as  third-parry 
assessments  (e.g.  KLD  environmental  ratings),  a  more  direct 
measure  (e.g.  the  US  Environmental  Agency's  Toxics  Release 
Inventory) 
(e.g.  questionnaires). 
Furthermore, the measures have  been extended  to  encompass a 
product-related, 
wide 
organizational-related  and  supply  chain-related  environmental 
performance 
as  well  as  manufacturing 
(Lee  and  Klassen,  2008).  Another 
process-related  one 
explanation for the mixed results is  that the relationship between 
environmental strategy (or environmental performance) and firm 
performance is very likely recursive in nature and highly complex 
in  any  case  (Russo and Minto,  2012, p . 37). 

(or  capabilities) 

of  dimensions 

range 

such 

as 

Despite  such  mixed  empirical  results,  there  are  multiple 
persuasive theoretical logics  underlying the relationship between 
environmental  performance  and  economic  performance.  First, 
in  operations  and  supply  chains,  a  win  - win  view  is  often 
exemplified  by  (Otal  quality  management  (TQM)  and  lean 
manufacturing,  which  perceive  that  quaJity  management,  lean 
production,  and  environmental  management 
(e.g.  waste 
reductions,  efficient  and  effective  input  use  and  control  of 
internal  processes)  are  fundamentally  parallel  (0  one  another 
(Curkovic  el  aL,  2008;  Corbett  and  Klassen,  2006).  An 
increasing  number  of  studies  have  provided  support  for  this 
notion  by  presenting  empirical  evidence  that  environmental 
improvements can enhance delivery performance and reduce the 
cost of goods (Carter CI al. , 2000)  as well  as  improve net income 
and reduce  overall  costs  (King and Lenox, 2002; Melnyk el al., 
2003; Rao and Holt, 2005). Second, the  concept of "innovation 
offsets"  has  been  widely  used  (0  explain  win  - win  scenarios. 
Porter  and  van  der  Linde  (1995)  stated  that  the  benefit  of 
environmental  management  exceeds  its  cost  because  it  can 
facilitate  innovation  and  thus  reduce  the  cost  of pollution.  In 
addition,  innovation-driven  environmental  improvements  can 
reduce regulatory  costs. Third,  an  increase  in  the environment­
friendly  demand  for  products  can  explain  win  - win  scenarios 
(Hanna  and  Newman,  1995) .  Brands  have 
increasingly 
demanded  higher product standards from  their suppliers in  the 
terms  of environmental  and  safety  quality. In  this  regard,  those 
suppliers  who  can  guarantee 
their  green  capability  and 
performance  are  more likely  to  win  contracts. 

Based  on  the  above  discussion,  this  study  proposes  the 

following  hypothesis: 

H4. 	 The supplier' s environmental performance is  positively 

related  to  its  operational performance . 

Overall,  this  study examines  the effects  of GSCM on supplier 
environmental  and  operational  performance  by  considering 
the  mediating  role  of social  capital.  Figure  1  visualizes  the 
relationships  between  these  constructs  as  an  antecedent, 
consequences  and  an  intervening fac(Or. 

4.  Research  methodology 
4.1  Survey 
The  theoretical constructs  used  in  this study such as  GSCM, 
social  capital,  environmental  performance  and  operational 
performance were adopted from  previous research . This study 

Figure  1 Research  model 

Greell  SCM 
(GSCM) 

Strucrural 

H2o 

Hla  .. 

.  Social Capital 
./ 

'  f:l3a 

/ 

lIl b / 

HI/) 	

Relational 

.. Social Capital 

/

V 


/ 


H3" 

Supplier's 

\ 

Envirolmlcntal 
".  Penormallce  / 

/  Supplier's 
'1>-,  Operational

Performance ./ 

in 

they  dealt  with 

developed measurement scales by selectively combining items 
that  were  used  and  validated 
the  previous  studies 
(Appendix) .  The  survey  instrument  was  pre-tested  with 
managers  of  six  suppliers  in  Korea .  These  managers  were 
well-acquainted  with  the  GSCM practices  of their customers 
because 
their  customers'  environmental 
requirements  and  conventional  quality,  cost  and  delivery 
demands.  Their  feedback  was  used  to  improve  format  and 
clarity of the  survey.  All  items are perceptual measure  using  a 
7-point  Likert  scale.  Firm  size  was  considered  as  a  control 
variable  that  was  measured  in  terms  of  the  number  of 
employees.  Collectively,  the  survey  included  measurement 
scales  of  GSCM,  structural  and  relational  social  capital, 
environmental  and  operational  performance  and firm  size. 

4. 1.1  Greell  supply  chain  managemel1l 
This  study  developed  seven  items  for  GSCM  by  combining 
items  adapted  and  modified  from  previous  research  on GSCM 
(Giovanni,  2012;  Green  el  al. ,  2012;  Zhu el aI.,  2008; Lee and 
Klassen,  2008;  Vachon  and  Klassen,  2006,  2008) .  This 
seven-item 
approaches 
(environmental  criteria  for  supplier  evaluations,  environmental 
management  system  certification,  auditing,  environmental 
information  sharing,  educational  and  technical  assistance  and 
environmental  collaboration) . 

reflected 

scale 

also 

twO 

the 

4.1.2  Social capilal 
This  study  designed  two  scales  to  measure  the  level  of social 
capital  in  terms  of the  structural  and  relational  social  capital 
dimensions.  First,  four  items  were  developed  for  structural 
social  capital  based  on  the  relevant  previous  studies  (Villena 
el  .11. ,  20 I I;  Carey  "I  of. ,  20 I I;  Lawson  CI  01.,  2008;  Krause 
el  .,1. ,  2007).  These  items  reflected  information  sharing, 
frequent  interactions,  joint  problem-solving  and  knowledge 
transfer.  Second,  four  items  were  used  to  measure relational 
social  capital  by  adopting  those  items  used  in  the  literature. 
These  items  include  mutual  trust,  mutual respect,  long-term 
partnership  and  family-like  atmosphere  (Villena  el  al.,  2011; 
Carey el al., 2011; Lawson el af..• 2008; Chen " I  .11.,2004; Kale 
el .11.,  2000). 

4.1 .3  Environmental peifonnance 
A  perceptual  scale  consisting  of six  to  measure  the  supplier's 
environmemal  performance  was  developed. This  study  utilized 
self-reported  perceptual  measurement  because  the  third-party 
assessments  (e.g.  KLD)  or  a  direct  measure  (e .g.  TRl)  of the 
sample were not available. Among the six items, twO were relared 
to  product-related  environmental  performance,  reflecting  the 
ability  to  develop  green  product  (Chen,  2008)  and  provide 

46 


Green supply chain management 

Su-Yol Lee 

Supply  Chain  Management An  International Journal 

Volume  20  .  Numb"  1  .  2015  . 42--55 

environmentally  conscious  products  to  the  customer  (Lee  and 
Klassen,  2008).  The  other 
to 
operations-related  environmental  performance  in  terms  of the 
input  of materials  and  energy,  and  the  output  of waste  and 
emission,  which  were  commonly  used  in  the  literature  (Green 
ec al.,  2012;  Giovanni,  2012; Paulraj,  201  1; Zhu  ec  al.,  2008) . 

items  were 

related 

four 

4.1.4  Opemtional perfolmance 
This  study  measured  the  su pplier's  operational  performance 
with  perceptual measures. Previous  studies of operations  and 
SCM have reached a general consensus on  a list of competitive 
priorities  that can serve  primary performance goals for supply 
chain  parmers, including quality,  cost,  delivery and flexibility 
(Krause  ec  al.,  2007;  Ward  ec  al.,  1998).  In  addition, 
productivity,  new  prod uct  development  and  customer 
satisfaction  were  included  in  this  scale. 

4.2 Sample 
The  data  were  collected  via  a  survey  sent  to  850  supplying 
firms  (business-to-business  [B2B)  firms) ,  sampled  from  a 
database  of 
the  Korea  Small  and  Medium  Business 
Administration.  This  study  targeted  a  single  well-informed 
respondent  who  was  well-acquainted  with 
buyers' 
requirements  and  collaborative  activities  in  economic  and 
environmental areas,  such as  the  CEO  or  the senior manager 
in-charge of sales,  quality assurance,  production  or planning . 
Each  firm  was  first  contacted  by  telephone  to  request  its 
participation  in  the  survey,  and  for  those  willing  firms,  and 
asked  for  appropriate  respondents.  The  questionnaire  was 
then mailed, faxed  or e-mailed  to potential respondents.  One 
week  after  sending  the  questionnaire,  non-respondents  were 
reminded  by  telephone  and  asked  again 
to  submit  the 
completed questionnaire . The survey was  conducted  in  2011 
and  248  responses  were  collected  (a  29.2  per  cent  response 
rate) . Table I  provides  a  summary  of the  respondents . 

Non-respondent  bias  was  assessed  b y  comparing 

the 
responses  that  were  returned  before  the  reminder  call  with 
those  were  returned after the  call.  For this,  20 items from  the 
survey  were  randomly  selected  and  conducted  a  I-test  to 
examine  any  differences  in  responses  between  early  and  late 
respondents  (11,  =  143,  n z  =  lOS).  No  significant  difference 
was  found  at  the  95  per cent confident interval,  indicating no 
difference between the sample and the population. In total, 41 
responses  were  excluded  from  further  analysis  because  they 
were  business-to-consumer  (B2C)  firms  or  had  missing  data . 
Common  method  variance  (CMV)  was  also  examined  by 
using  the  Harmon's  single-factor  approach.  If CMV exists,  a 
single  factor  will  emerge  from  a  factor  analysis  of all  survey 
items  or  one  general  factor  will  account  for  most  of  the 
common variance in the data (Pods ako ff et ai. , 2(03). A factor 
analysis  revealed  five  distinct  factors  with  the  eigenvalue­
greater-than-one  criterion  that  accounted  for  67  per  cent  of 

the variance  and the first factor accounted for only 28 per cent 
of the  variance .  The  results  suggested  absence  of the  CMV 
problem . 

4.3  Validity  of the measurement model 
This  study  tested  the  measurement  model  for  its  reliability, 
validity,  and  unidimensionality.  Before  collecting  data,  this 
study established the content validity of the  survey through an 
extensive literature review, discussions with both practitioners 
and academic  experts  in  the  area,  and  a  pretest of the  survey 
with  the  interviewees.  This  section  addresses  the  issue  of 
construct validity. 

II  shows 

The study conducted  an  exploratory factor  analysis  (EFA) 
and a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) to evaluate construct 
validity  (Ville na  et  al.,  2011).  First,  an  EFA  for  GSCM 
provided  one  factor,  representing  all  of  seven  items  were 
loaded  on  one  dimension.  Second,  this  study  conducted  an 
EFA  for  social  capital,  and  as  expected,  the  study  identified 
the  two  dimensions:  structural  and  relational  social  capital. 
Third,  an  EFA  was  also  carried  out  for  environmental 
performance and confirmed one dimension. Then, a CFA was 
conducted  to  evaluate  the  unidimensionality  of the  variables. 
T ab le 
loading .  Each 
indicator's  estimated  loading  on  its  posited  construct  was 
significant.  The  CFA 
the 
unidimensionality  and  convergent  validity  of the  constructs. 
Table  III  shows  the  correlations between the  latent variables . 
Discriminant validity was  assessed by  examining whether the 
average  variance  extracted  for  items  exceeded  the  average 
shared variance  (square  of off-diagonal  correlations)  between 
two  constructs  (Fornell  and  Larcker,  1981).  All  constructs 
satisfied 
indicating  sufficient  discriminant 
validity.  For  sufficient  reliability,  Cronbach's  alpha  should 
exceed 
threshold  of  0.7  for  all 
constructs. 

results  provide  support 

the  generally  accepted 

the  standardized 

this  criterion, 

fa ctor 

for 

4.4  Structural model 
This  study  used  SEM  to  estimate  the  relationships  between 
the  latent  constructs  simultaneously.  The  model  was  te sted 
based  on  a  covariance  matrix  implemented  using  LISREL 
8.33 Goreskog and Sorbom,  1996).  As  shown in Table IV, the 
results  for  the  fit  indices  indicate  a  reasonable  fit  (Hu  and 
Bentler,  1999; Browne  and  Cudek,  1993). 

5.  Results  and  discussion 
As  shown  in  Figure  2,  GSCM  had  direct  positive  relationships 
with  structural  social  capital  (path  coefficient  =  0.70  and  c = 
7.83)  and  relational  social  capital  (path  coefficient  =  0.58  and 
t  =  7 .18).  Both  structural  and  relational  social  capital  had  a 
significant  effect  on  the  environmental  performance  of  the 
supplier  (path  coefficient  =  0.22  and  c  =  2.59  and  path 

Table  I Summary  of  responses 
Industry 

Machinery  and  materials 

Sample  size 
Respondents 
Sales  (in  million  USD) 
Number  of  employees 

335 
77 
19.3 
93 

Electrical  and  electronics 

Telecommunications 

Chemical 

Total  (mean) 

134 
22 
21.3 
103 

100 
43 
16.1 
67 

850 
248 
17.3 
83 

281 
106 
12.5 
68 

47 


Green  supply  chain  manag"m"nt 

Su- Y ol  Lee 

Supply  Chain  Management: An  tnternational Journal 


Volume  20  . Number  I  . 2015  . 42- 55 


Table  II  Constructs'  reliability  and  validity 

Figure  2  Standardized  parameter  estimates  for  structural  model 

Construct 

Item 

loading  AVE 

Composite  Cronbach's 
reliability 

alpha 

0.65 

0.93 

0.93 

o 70" 

." Soc, aJ  CapII.1  • 
(Structural)  .; 

0 22' 

Green SCM 
(GSCM ) 

•  •••  t  •  • 

. -0 03 

. 0.45" 

'­

'" 
i Environmenral 
PerfoJTllance
'. 

': 
) 

0.46" 

0.58" 

.social Capllal 
(Relatio"al) 

0.37" 

Operational 
Performance 

0.64 

0.87 

0.87 

Noles:  'p < 0.05,  "p < O.OJ 

o 
N 

GSCM 

Structural 
capital 

Relational 
capital 

GSCMOl 
GSCM02 
GSCM03 
GSCM04 
GSCM05 
GSCM06 
GSCM07 
SCapitalOl 
SCapital02 
SCapital03 
SCapital04 
RCapitalOI 
RCapital02 
RCapital03 
RCapital04 

Environmental  EperfOI 
performance 
Eperf02 
Eperf03 
Eperf04 
Eperf05 
Eperf06 
OperfOI 
Operational 
performance  Operf02 
Operf03 
Operf04 
Operf05 
Operf06 
Operf07 

0.80 
0.81 
0.78 
0.86 
0.89 
0.77 
0.71 
0.74 
0.83 
0.78 
0.83 
0.87 
0.82 
0.89 
0.82 
0.80 
0.81 
0.71 
0.79 
0.79 
0.79 
0.86 
0.85 
0.65 
0.82 
0.65 
0.75 
0.83 

0.73 

0.91 

0.91 

0.61 

0.90 

0.90 

0.61 

0.91 

0.91 

Table  III  Correlation  matrix 

Variable 

Mean  SD 

2 

3 

4 

5.01 

5.02 

(0.64) 

1.28  0.5r­

1.23  0.50-­

4.75  1.36  (0.65) 

GSCM 
Structural 
capital 
Relational 
capital 
Environmental 
performance 
Operational 
(0.61) 
performance 
Notes:  The 
lower  half  of  the  matrix  shows  estimated  correlations 
between  latent  variables,  and  figures  along  the  diagonal  in  brackets 
indicate  the  AVE; 

1.03  0.48"  0.43"  0.55-­

0.39-·  0.51"  0.6r­

., P <  0.01 

5.34  0.91 

(0.61) 

(0.73) 

0.29-­

0.61'­

4.62 

coefficient  =  0.45  and  t  =  5.36,  respectively).  Relational  social 
capital  was  positively  associated  with  operational  performance 
(path  coefficient  = 0 .37  and  t  =  4.63)  while  structural  social 
capital  did  not  have  a  significant  effect  on  the  operational 
performance of the supplier. Lastly, environmental performance 
had  significant  effects  on  operational  performance 
(path 
coefficient =  0.46 and  t  =  5.29). Noteworthy is  that GSCM had 
a  significant indirect effect  on supplier operational performance 
along  strUctural  and  relational  social  capital  between  the  buyer 
and supplier relationships  (Table V) . 

5.1  Research implications 
The  results  provide  strong  support  for  the  argwnent  that 
GSCM  can  increase  social  capital  of the  supply  chain  (HI; 
Figure  2).  As  a  reciprocal  program  between  supply  chain 
partners,  GSCM  focuses  on  frequent  communication  and 
shared  goals  and  deepens  mutual  understanding  and 
motivates  the  buyer's  direct  involvement  and  collaboration. 
Such reciprocal practices  such  as  information and  knowledge 
sharing  and  social  interaction  ties  are  known  as  prerequisites 
for  structural  social  capital  (Lawson  et  ai.,  2008 ; Inkpcn  and 
T sang,  2005).  GSCM  plays  an  important  role  in  fostering 
mutual  trust,  respect  and  reciprocity  of  the  supply  chain 
partners .  These  are  essential  elements  of  relational  social 
capital  (Nahapiet  and  Ghosal,  1998;  Inkpen  and  Tsang, 
2005).  Collectively,  the  results  of this  study  strongly  suppOrt 
the notion  that structural social  capital  (e.g. social interaction 
ties)  and  relational  social  capital  (e .g.  mutual  trust  and 
commitment)  can  be  much  easily  accwnulated 
through 
GSCM  practices  between  supply  chain  partners.  Suppliers 
tend  not 
stringent  environmental 
requirements (Lee el  ,Ii. ,  ~O 14).  However,  the results indicate 
that  suppliers  might  willingly  accept  buyers ' 
tougher 
requirements  for  environmental  performance  because  they 
considered  this  as  a  signal  of a  long-term  partnership,  which 
increasing  social  capital.  As  a  result,  GSCM  is  believed  to 
foster  bener  mutual  understanding  and  an  open  channel  of 
communication  regarding 
issues  and, 
therefore,  minimizes  potential  conflicts  and  increase  the 

to  welcome  buyers' 

to  environmental 

Table  IV  Fit  of  the  structural  model 

Fit  indices 

Desirable  or  marginal  range 
Measurement  model 
Structural  model 

X' 

616.72 
623 .12 

X'/d.f. 

s  3.0 
1.86 
1.87 

RMSEA 

s  0.08 
0.067 
0.067 

GFI 

;;,  0.80 
0.81 
0.81 

IFI 

> 0.90 
0.93 
0.92 

NNFI 

;;,  0.90 
0.92 
0.90 

CFI 

;;,  0.90 
0.93 
0.92 

SRMR 

s  0.08 
0.063 
0.080 

48 


Green supply chain  management 

Su- Yol  Lde 

Supply  Chain  Management: An  International Journal 

Volume  20  . Number  1  .  2015  . 42-·55 

Table  V Comparison  of  the  effects  of  structural  and  relational  capital 
on  performance 

Environmental 
performance 

Operational  performance 

Direct 

Indirect  Total  Direct 

Indirect  Total 

0.22 

0.45 

0.22 

-0.03 

0.10 

0.45 

0.37 

0.10 

0.07 

0.47 

Social 
capital 

Structural 
capital 
Relational 
capital 

to 

and 

The 

social 

capital 

facilitate  envirorunental  knowledge 

strength  of relationships  (i.e.  social  capital)  (Wu  and  Ragatz 
Wl~. 
' 
The  results  empirically  verify  a  significant  positive  effect  of 
social  capital on environmental performance (H2; Figure  2). To 
date,  a  few  studies  have  explored  how  social  capital  influences 
envirorunental  performance  in  the  supply  chain .  This  study 
provides  evidence  that  social  capital  including  information 
sharing,  frequent  interactions,  collaborative  problem-solving, 
mutual  trust  and  respect  and  partnership-oriented  relationship 
improves  the  envirorunental  performance  of the  supply  chain. 
Suppliers,  in  particular  small- and  medium-sized  suppliers,  are 
usually suffering from  lack of information, resources, knowledge 
and know-how to address emerging envirorunental issues in their 
products  and  operations  (Parmigiani  c!  al.,  201  1;  Lee  and 
Klassen,  2008).  Both structural and  relational  social  capital are 
likely 
transfer  and 
envirorunental investment (Cheng e! al.,  2008), thereby fostering 
the  envirorunental  capability  of the  supply  chain.  This positive 
environmental 
relationship  between 
performances is  much in  line  with  supply chain  theories such as 
supplier development (Krause er al., 2007) that argue the positive 
effects  of social  capital on knowledge  transfer and performance. 
results  provide  evidence  supporting  a  positive 
relationship  between  relational  social  capital  and  operational 
performance  (H3b;  Figure  2),  which  is  very  consistent  with 
previous  studies  and  social  capital  theory  in  the supply  chain 
(Carey  e!  aI.,  201  I; Lawson  e!  al.,  2008).  However,  support 
was  not  found  for  the  positive  and  direct  effect  of structural 
social  capital  on  operational  performances  ( H3a;  Figure  2). 
The reason  behind this result may be twofold . First,  the  effect 
of  relational  social  capital  on  operational  performance  was 
predominant and that the effect of structural social capital was 
not shown  to be significant.  Second, structural and  relational 
social  capital  might  influence  each  other.  This  study  did  not 
consider  the  relationship  between  two  dimensions  of social 
capital  in  the  research  model;  however,  some  of  previous 
studies  examined  a  mediating  role  of relational  social  capital 
between 
operational 
performances. In this relationship, structural social capital was 
not shown to have a direct and significant effect on operational 
performance  (Carey c l  <11.,  2011). 
for  H4, 
environmental 

the  positive  and  direct 
operational 
relationship 
performances  (FigUl'e  2) .  This  result  is  very  consistent  with 
the  findings  of previous  studies  acknowledging  a  win  - win 
scenario between environmental and economic benefits in the 
supply  chain  (Zhu  and  Sarkis,  2004) .  Collectively,  it  is  a 
noteworthy  is  that  GSCM  increases  the  supplier  operational 

Support  was  found 
between 

structural 

capital 

social 

and 

and 

through 

through 
performance 
envIronmental  performance .  This  study  found  a  strong 
support  for  the  role  of social  capital  in  mediating  GSCM  to 
supplier operational  performance  (Table  V). 

capital 

social 

and 

The results highlight the importance of social capital that as 
a  mediating  role  in  increasing  the  supplier's  envirorunental 
and operational performances . Social capital provides a bener 
understanding  about how  GSCM  practices  can  contribute  to 
higher  environmental  and  operational  performances  of  the 
supplier.  Noteworthy  is  that  relational  social  capital  plays  a 
more cnncal medIating role  between GSCM and  the  supplier 
performance  compared  to  structural  social  capital  (Table V). 
The  total  effects  of relational  social  capital on  environmental 
(0.45)  and  operational  performance  (0.47)  are  larger  than 
those  of structural social  capital (0.22 and 0 .07, respectively). 

5.2  Practical implications 
The results  of a series of rigorous tests  also provide important 
guidelines for  managers  of suppliers  and  buyers  who  wish  to 
foster  stronger  operational  and  environmental  performances 
throughout  the supply chain . 

First,  the  results  suggest  that  GSCM  can  enhance  social 
capital  accumulation  among  supply  chain  partners,  and  thus 
Increase 
environmental  and  operational  performances . 
Managers  should  recognize  the  positive  effects  of GSCM  on 
communication,  mutual  understanding,  goal  congruence, 
shared  philosophies  and  benefit  sharing  as  a  source  of 
collaborative  advantage  (Cao  and  Zhang,  2011;  Tuten  and 
Urban,  200 I ) .  GSCM  eventually  brings  all  supply  chain 
partners benefits . Noteworthy is that each GSCM practice has an 
impact  on  social  capital  accumulation  at  different 
levels. 
T able  VI  illustrates  that  collaboration-based  GSCM  practices 
have  more 
than 
monitoring-based  GSCM  practices .  Providing  envirorunental 
information 
joint  greener  product 
development (GSCM05, GSCM06 and GSCM07, respectively) 
are  shown  to  be  more  significantly  associated  with  structural 
social  capital 
such  as 
environmental performance evaluation  and  the  requirements  of 
EMS implementation and a more envirorunent-friendly product. 

than  monitoring-based  practices 

effects  on 

significant 

assistance 

capital 

social 

and 

and 

Table  VI  Correlations  between  GSCM  practices  and  social  capital 

GSCM  practice 

Monitoring-based GSCM 
GSCMOl  Environmental  performance 
evaluation  of  the  supplier 
GSCM02  EMS  requirement 
GSCM03  Environmental  audit 
GSCM04  Environmental-friendlier 
product  requirement 

Collaboration- based  GSCM 
GSCM05  Providing  environmental 
information 
GSCM06  Providing  environmental 
assistance 
GSCM07  Joint  development of 
environmental-conscious  products 

Structural 

capital 

Relational 

capital 

0.40 
0.41 
0.44 

0.45 

0.53 

0.57 

0.55 

0.43 
0.42 
0.39 

0.44 

0.50 

0.44 

0.32 

49 


<=> 
N 
C 
:::I "' c: 
~ 

Green  supply chain  management 

Su- Yol  L" 

Supply  Chain  Management An  International  Journal 

Volume  20  .  Number  1  . 20 15  . 42-55 

With  regard  to  relational  social  capital,  a  GSCM  practice  to 
provide  suppliers  with  relevant  environmental 
information 
(GSCMOS)  has  the  greatest  effect.  The  results  provide  an 
important implication  that firms  need  to  focus  more  on  suppOrt 
and collaboration when attempting to enhance social capital with 
their suppliers. 

plays  a  more  important  pivoting  role  between  GSCM  and 
supply chain performance . The findings  of this  paper provide 
useful guidance for supply chain managers considering how to 
design  and  manage 
to  enhance 
environmental and operational capabilities of the entire supply 
chain . 

supply  chains 

their 

issues 

Second, 

integrating  environmental 

into  supplier 
development  practices  is  advisable.  Supplier  development  is 
generally  W1derstood  as  any  activity  initiated  by  a  buyer  to 
improve  the  capability  or performance  of its  suppliers  (Krause 
ct  ai.,  2007,  1998).  GSCM  practices  also  aim  to  foster  the 
supplier's  environmental  capability.  The  research  model  of this 
study  suggests  little  difference  between  GSCM  and  supplier 
development because  both  of them  use  formal  and  transparent 
supply/supplier selection processes, audits and engage in suppOrt 
and collaborative activities.  GSCM practices do not build on an 
entirely  new set of skills.  Therefore, GSCM could be  easily and 
quickly 
into  supplier 
development  program.  This  parallel  also  implies  that  efforts  to 
foster  greener  SCM  practices  should  enhance  firms'  capability 
for  continuous  improvements in  the  supply  chain  (Sharma  and 
Vredenburg,  1998;  I-Iamprecht  ~t aI. , 2005). 

implemented  when 

integrated 

is 

it 

firms 

rely  on 

increasingly 

Finally,  the  results  suppOrt  a  win  - win  scenario  between 
environmental  and  operational  benefits  in  the  supply  chain 
(Zhu  and Sarkis,  2004; Carter ~t al.,  2000).  Suppliers' efforts 
to  increase  environmental  performance  may  facilitate  their 
organizational  learning,  which,  in  turn,  should  enhance  their 
operational  performance.  As  purchased  materials  and 
components  today  account  for  the  largest  share  of  total 
company  expenditure, 
their 
suppliers  for  gaining  and  sustaining  competitiveness .  Firms 
also look to  their supply partners to provide goods that ensure 
environmental  performance  and  quality,  COSt  and  delivery 
performance  of 
for  higher 
environmental  and  operational  performances  to  suppliers 
tends to be transferred along an upstream supply chain, which 
initiates  improvements  and  innovations.  Similarly,  improved 
environmental and operational performances at any echelon of 
a  supply  chain  moves  along  a  downstream  supply  chain. 
Collectively,  the  positive  performance  outcomes  that  accrue 
for 
the  buyer  or  supplier  as  a  result  of  social  capital 
accumulation  diffuse  throughout  to  benefit  the  entire  supply 
chain. 

their  products .  Demand 

6.  Conclusion 
This  study provides a  better understanding of GSCM and its 
effects on environmental and operational performances with a 
perspective of social capital accumulation in the  supply chain . 
This paper is one of the few  studies that consider social capital 
theory in GSCM. By doing this, this study provides theoretical 
underpinning for  furthering  the  GSCM literature . The results 
highlight  the  critical  role  of GSCM  and  the  mediating  and 
amplifying 
the 
environmental  and  operational  performances  of  the  entire 
supply  chain  beyond  the  dyad.  First,  GSCM  contributes  to 
the accumulation of social capital in the supply chain. Second, 
social  capital  improves  the  environmental  and  operational 
performances of the  supply chain . Third,  GSCM  has positive 
relationships  with  supply  chain  performance  through  social 
capital  accumulation.  Relational  social  capital,  in  particular, 

role  of  social  capital 

increasing 

in 

Despite  the  academic  and  practical  contributions  of  this 
study abovementioned, this study has some limitations. Some 
directions  for  future  research  are  suggested .  First,  this  study 
relied  exclusively  on  self-reported  data .  Future  work  should 
increase  the  generalizabiliry  of this  study's  findings  by  using 
less-biased data. For instance, future research should consider 
multiple  respondents  from  each  participating  firm.  Second, 
this  study  considered  only  the  environmental  issues  in  the 
supply  chain.  Sustainability  or  corporate  social  responsibility 
issues  including  social  and  environmental  dimensions  in  the 
supply chain need to be addressed in  the future studies . Third, 
the  results  of  this  study  may  be  generalizable  to  firms  in 
emerging  economies  such  as  China,  Vietnam  and  Indonesia . 
However,  the  extent  and  strength  of particular  relationships 
may  vary  across  countries,  and  contextual  differences  may 
matter.  Future  research  should  investigate  how  institutional 
differences  influence  the  relationships  among  GSCM,  social 
capital and environmental and operational performances. The 
studies  also  should  be  conducted  across  various  industrial 
sectors  such  as  construction,  power  and  textile  where  few 
studies  are  available.  To  provide  a  rich  description  of  the 
findings  of this  study,  research-motivated  case  studies will  be 
encouraged. 

Notes 

ISO  14001  is  one  of  ISO  14000  family  standards  that 
address various aspects of environmental  management. It 
sets out the criteria for an EMS and can be certified to ISO 
14000 (www .iso.org/isolisoI4000) . The SA8000 standard 
is  an  auditable  social  certification  standard  based  on  the 
United  Nations  (UN)  Declaration  of  Human  Rights, 
conventions  of  the  International  Labor  Organization 
(ILO)  and  UN and  national  law  (www.sa-intl.org) . 

2 	 The RoHS directive  shorts for  Directive on the  restriction 
of the  use  of certain hazardous substances in electrical and 
electronic  equipment;  The  REACH  directive  shorts  for 
Directive  on  registration,  evaluation,  authorization  and 
restriction  of chemicals. 

3 	 The  WEEE  directive  shorts  for  Directive  on  waste  of 

electrical  and  electronic  equipment. 

References 

Ageron,  B .,  Gunasekaran,  A .  and  Spalanzani,  A.  (2012), 
"Sustainable  supply  management :  an  empirical  study", 
Inteman'onal Joumal 0/ Production  Economics, Vol.  140 No . 1, 
pp.  168- 182. 

Browne,  M.W.  and  Cudek,  R.  (1993),  "Alternative  ways  of 
assessing  model  fit",  in  Bollen,  K.A.  and  Long, J,S.  (Eds), 
Testing  Smtcrural  Equation  Models,  Sage,  Newbury  Park, 
CA, pp.  136-162. 

Caniato,  F.,  Caridi,  M .,  Crippa,  L.  and  Moretto,  A.  (2012), 
" Environmental  sustainability  in  fashion  supply  chains :  an 

50 


Green  supply  chain  management 

SU-y,,/ Lee 

Supply  Chain Management:  An  International Journal 

Volume 20  . Number  1  .  2015  . 42···55 

exploratory  case  bases  research",  Internarional  Journal  of 
Production  Economics,  Vol.  135  No.2,  pp.  659-670. 

Cao, M . and  Zhang,  Q.  (20 II ),  "Supply chain collaboration: 
impact on  collaborative advantage  and  firm  performance ", 
Journal  of  Operations  Manage mem,  Vol.  29  No.3, 
pp.  163-180. 

Capaldo,  A.  (2007),  "Network structure  and  innovation:  the 
leveraging  of  a  dual  network  as  a  distinctive  relational 
capabiliry",  Straeegic  Managemem Joumal,  Vol.  28  No.6, 
pp.  585-608. 

Carey,  S .,  Lawson,  B.  and  Krause,  D.R  (2011),  "Social 
capital  configuration,  legal  bonds  and  performance  in 
buyer-supplier 
Journal  of  Operations 
Managemene,  Vol.  29  No.4, pp.  277-288. 

relationships", 

Carter,  C.R.,  Kale,  R 

(2000), 
"Environmental  purchasing  and  firm  performance:  an 
empirical  investigation",  Transponation  Research  E,  Vol.  36 
No.3, pp.  219-228. 

and  Grimm,  C.M. 

Chen, I.J. and Paulraj, A.  (2004), "Towards a theory of supply 
chain  management:  the  constructs  and  measurements", 
J ournal  of  Operacions  Managemem,  Vol.  22  No.2, 
pp.  119-150. 

Chen,  Y.  (2008),  "The  driver  of green  innovation  and  green 
image - green core competence", Journal of Business  Eehics, 
Vol.  81  No.3, pp.  531-543 . 

Cheng, J-H.,  Yeh,  C-H.  and  Tu,  C-W.  (2008),  "Trust  and 
knowledge  sharing  in  green  supply  chains",  Supply  Chain 
Managemem:  An  Imemarional  Journal,  Vol.  13  No .4, 
pp.  283-295. 

Corben,  C.l  and  Klassen,  R.D .  (2006),  "Extending  the 
horizons:  environmental  excellence  as  key  to  improving 
operations",  ManufaceUllng 
Service  Operaeions 
Managemene,  Vol.  8  No.  I, pp.  5-22. 

& 

Cousins,  P.D.,  Handfield,  RB .,  Lawson,  B. 

and 
Peterson,  KJ .  (2006),  "Creating  supply  chain  relational 
capital:  the  impact  of  formal  and  informal  socialization 
processes",  Journal  of  Operarions  Managemem,  Vol.  24 
No.6, pp . 851-863. 

Curkovic,  S.,  Sroufe,  R 

(2008), 
"Measuring TQEM returns  from  the application of quality 
frameworks", Business Strategy alld the Envircmmem,  Vol.  17 
No.2, pp.  93-106. 

and  Landeros,  R 

Daugherty,  PJ.,  Richey,  RG.,  Roath,  A.S.,  Min,  S ., 
Chen,  H .,  Arndt,  A.D.  and  Genchev,  S.E.  (2006),  "Is 
collaboration  paying  off  for  firms)",  Business  Horizons , 
Vol.  49  No.  I,  pp.  61-70. 

De  Carolis,  D .M.  and  SaparilO,  P .  (2006),  "Social  capital, 
cognition,  and  entrepreneurial  opportunities :  a  theoretical 
framework",  Entrepreneurship  Theory  and  Pracrice,  Vol.  30 
No.  I,  pp.  41-56. 

Dyer, J.  and Chu, W.  (2003), "The role  of trustworthiness  in 
reducing  transaction  costs  and  improving  performance: 
empirical  evidence  from  the  United  States,  Japan,  and 
Korea",  Organizarion  Sdence,  Vol.  14  No.  I,  pp .  57-68. 

Dyer,  J.H .  and  Singh,  H .  (1998),  "The  relational  view: 
cooperative  strategy  and  so urces  of  interorganizational 
competitive  advantage",  Academy  of Management  Review, 
Vol.  23  No . 4,  pp.  660-679 . 

Fornell,  C.  and  Larcker, D.F.  (1981),  "Evaluating structural 
and 

equation  models  with 

unobservable 

variables 

S1 

measurement error", Journal of Markerillg  Research,  Vol.  18 
No.  I, pp.  39-50. 

Giovanni,  P.D. 

(2012), 

external 
environmental management contribute to  the  triple  bo[[om 
line?",  International  Joumal  of  Operations  and  Production 
Managemem,  Vol.  32  No.3, pp .  265-290. 

internal 

"Do 

and 

Granove[[er,  M.S .  (i 992),  "Economic  institutions  as  social 
constructions:  a  framework  for  analysis",  Acta  Sociologica, 
Vol.  25  No.  I,  pp.  3-11. 

Green,  K,  Monon,  B.  and  New,  S .  (2000),  "Greening 
organization", Organization and E'lVironmem, Vol.  13  No.2, 
pp . 206-225 . 
Green,  KW. 

Jr.,  Zelbst,  P.J.,  Meacham,  land 
Bhadauria, V.S.  (2012),  "Green supply chain  management 
practices: 
impact  on  performance",  Supply  Chain 
Managemem:  An  Imemarional  Journal,  Vol.  17  No.3, 
pp.  290-305. 

Hail,  l 

(2000),  "Environmental  supply  chain  dynamics", 

Journal of Cleaner  Producrion,  Vol.  8  No .  6,  pp.  455-471. 

Hamprecht, J.,  Corsten, D., Noll,  M.  and Meiser, E .  (2005), 
"Conu·olling  the  sustainability  of  food  supply  chains", 
Supply Chain Managemem: An ImernaeionalJournal, Vol.  10 
No .  I,  pp.  7-10. 

Handfield,  R.B.,  Sroufe,  R 

(2005), 
"Integrating  environmental  management  and  supply  chain 
strategies",  Business  Strategy  and  the  El1vironmem,  Vol.  14 
No.  I, pp.  1-19. 

and  Walton,  S. 

Hanna,  M.D.  and  Newman,  W.R  (1995),  "Operations  and 
environment:  an  expanded  focus  for  TQM",  Imernatiol1al 
Journal of Qualley  &  Reliability Managemem,  Vol.  12 No . 5, 
pp.  38-53. 

Hu,  L.  and  Bentler,  P .M.  (1999),  "Cutoff  criteria  for  fit 
indexes 
in  covariance  structural  analysis:  conventional 
criteria  versus  new  alternatives",  Smlcl!/ral  Equacion 
Modeling,  Vol.  6  No.  I, pp.  I -55. 
Inkpen,  A.C.  and  Tsang,  E .W .K 

(2005),  "Social  capital, 
networks, and knowledge transfer", Academy of Managemem 
Review,  Vol.  30  No.  I,  pp.  146-165. 
lW. 

"Strategic 
entrepreneurship :  creating  competitive  advantage  through 
streams  of innovation",  Business  Horizons,  Vol.  50  No.  I, 
pp.  49-59. 

Ireland,  R.D. 

and  Webb, 

(2007), 

Joreskog,  K.G.  and  Sorbom,  D.  (1996),  LISREL  8:  User's 

Refermce  Guide,  SS1,  Chicago . 

Joshi, A.W. and  Stump,  R .L.  (1999),  "The contingent  effect 
of specific asset investments on joint action in manufacturer 
- supplier relationships:  an empirical test of the moderating 
role  of reciprocal asset investments, uncertainty, and trust", 
Journal of ehe  Academy of Marketing  Science,  Vol.  27  No .  3, 
pp . 291-305. 

Kale, P., Singh, H. and Perlmuner, H.  (2000), "Learning and 
protection  of  proprietary  assets 
in  strategic  alliances: 
building  relational  capital",  Strategic  Managemem Joumal, 
Vol.  21  No.3, pp .  217-237. 

King,  A.  and  Lenox,  M .  (2002),  "Exploring  the  locus  of 
reduction ",  Managemem  Science, 

profitable  pollution 
Vol.  48  No .  2,  pp.  289-299. 

Klassen, RD. and McLaughlin, c.P.  (1996), "The impact of 
performance", 

environmental  management 
Management Science,  Vol.  42  No .8, pp.  1199-1214. 

firm 

on 


Green supply chain  management 

Su-Yol L« 

Supply Chain  Management:  An  International Journal 

Volume  20  .  Number 1  .  2015  .  42-55 

Koka,  B.R.  and  Presco((, ].E.  (2002),  "Strategic  alliances  as 
a  multidimensional  view",  Strategic 

social 
Management Journal,  Vol.  23  No.9, pp.  795-816. 

capital: 

o 
N 

Kocabe,  M.,  Manin,  X.  and  Domoeo,  H.  (2003),  "Gaining 
from  venical partnerships:  knowledge  transfer,  relationship 
duration, and supplier performance improvemem in  the US 
and Japanese aueomotive  industries",  Strategic  Management 
Journal,  Vol.  24 No.4, pp.  293-316. 

Krause,  D.R  and  Ellram,  L.M.  (1997),  "Success  faccors  in 
supplier  development",  International  Journal  of  Physical 
Distribution  &  Logistics  Management,  Vol.  27  No.1, 
pp.  39-52. 

Krause,  D.R.,  Handfield,  R.B.  and  Scannell,  TV.  (1998), 
"An  empirical 
investigation  of  supplier  development: 
reactive  and  strategic  processes",  Journal  of  OperatjollS 
Management,  Vol.  17  No.1, pp.  39-58. 

Krause,  D.R, Handfield,  RB.  and  Tyler,  B.  (2007),  "The 
relationships between supplier development, comminuem, social 
capital accumulation and perfonnance improvement", Jownal of 
Operations Management,  Vol.  25  No.2, pp.  528-545. 
Lawson,  B.,  Tyler,  B.B.  and  Cousins,  P.D. 

(2008), 
"Antecedents  and  consequences  of social  capital  on  buyer 
performance 
Journal 
of  Operations 
Management,  Vol.  26  No.3, pp.  446-460. 

improvemem", 

Lee,  S.  and  Cheong,  1.  (2012),  "Sustainable  supply  chain 
management in  the Korean automotive industry", in  Madu, 
C.N.  and  Kuei,  C.  (Eds),  Handbook  of  Sustain ability 
Management,  World Scientific Publishing, Hackensack, NJ, 
pp.  609-624. 

Lee, S . and Klassen,  R.D.  (2008),  "Drivers and enablers that 
foster environmental management capabilities in small- and 
medium-sized  suppliers  in  supply  chains",  Producrion  and 
Operations  Management,  Vol.  17  No.2, pp.  573-586. 

"The 

Lee, S., Klassen,  R.D.,  Furlan, A., Vi nelli, A.  and  Furlan, A. 
transferring 
(2014), 
supply  chain", 
environmental 
International  Journal  of  Production  Economics,  Vol.  156, 
pp.  39-51 

requirements  along  a 

bullwhip 

effect: 

green 

Melnyk, S., Sroufe, Rand Calamone, R  (2003),  "Assessing 
the  impact  of  environmental  management  systems  on 
corporate  and  environmemal  performance",  Journal  of 
Operations  Management,  Vol.  21  No.3, pp.  329-351. 

Min, H. and Galle, W.P. (2001), "Green purchasing practices 
International  Joumal  of  Operations  & 

of  US 
Productt~n Management,  Vol.  21  No.9, pp.  1222-1238. 

firms", 

Modi, S.B. and Maben, V.A.  (2007), "Supplier development: 
improving 
through  knowledge 
transfer", Journal of Operations  Management,  Vol.  25  No.2, 
pp.  42-64. 

supplier  performance 

Nahapiet,  J.  and  Ghosal,  S. 

(1998),  "Social  capital, 
the  organizational  advamage", 
intellectual  capital,  and 
Academy  of  ManagemelH  Review,  Vol.  23  No.2, 
pp.  242-266. 

Nyaga,  G.N.,  Whipple,  ].M.  and  Lynch,  D.F.  (2010), 
"Examining  supply  chain  relationships:  do  buyer  and 
supplier perspectives on collaborative  relationships  differ)", 
l\1anagement,  Vol.  28  No.2, 
Journal  of  Operations 
pp.101-114. 

Oh, 	 H.,  Chung,  M.-H.  and  Labianca,  G.  (2004),  "Group 
social  capital  and  group  effectiveness:  the  role  of informal 

52 

socializing  ties",  Academy  of Management Journal,  Vol.  47 
No.6, pp.  860-896. 

Parmigiani,  A.,  Klassen,  RD.  and  Russo,  M.V.  (2011), 
"Efficiency meets  accoumability:  performance  implications 
of  supply  chain  configuration,  comrol,  and  capabilities", 
Journal  of  Operott'on  ManagemelH,  Vol.  29  No.3, 
pp.212-223. 

Paulraj, A.  (20 II), "Understanding the relationships between 
imernal resources and capabilities, sustainable supply chain 
managemem  and  organizational  sustain ability",  Journal  of 
Supply  Chain  Management,  Vol.  47  No.1, pp.  19-37. 

Peloza,  ].  (2009),  "The  challenge  of  measuring  financial 
impacts from investments in corporate social performance", 
Journal  of Management,  Vol.  35  No.6, pp.  1518-1541. 

Podsakoff,  P.M.,  MacKenzie,  S.B.,  Lee, 

and 
in 
Podsakoff,  N.P. 
behavioral  research:  a  critical  review  of the  literature  and 
recommended  remedies",  Journal  of  Applied  Psychology, 
Vol.  88  No.5, pp.  879-903. 

(2003),  "Common  method  bias 

].Y. 

Poner,  M.E.  and  van  der  Linde,  C.  (1995),  "Green  and 
the  stalemate",  Harvard  Business 

competitive:  ending 
Review,  Vol.  73  No.5, pp.  120-134. 

Rao, P.  and  Holt, D.  (2005), "Do green supply chains lead eo 
competitiveness and economic performance?", International 
JOllrnal  of  Opel'Ott'ons  &  Production  IHanagement,  Vol.  25 
No.9, pp.  898-916. 

Russo,  MV.  and  Fouts,  P.A.  (1997),  "A  resource-based 
perspective  on  corporate  environmental  performance  and 
profitability",  Academy  of  Management  Joumal,  Vol.  40 
No.1, pp.  534-559. 

Russo, M.V. and Mineo, A.  (2012), "Competitive strategy and 
the  environmem:  a  filed  of inquiry emerges",  in  Bansal,  P. 
and  Hoffman,  A.J.  (Eds),  The  Oxford Handbook  of Business 
and  the  Natlll'Ol  Environment,  Oxford  University  Press, 
Oxford, p.  37. 

Sarkis,  J.,  Zhu,  Q.  and  Lai,  K.  (2011),  "An  organizational 
theoretic 
review  of  green  supply  chain  management 
literature",  International  JOllrnal  of  ProduCt/:on  Economics, 
Vol.  130  No.1, pp.  1-15. 

Seuring, S.  and Muller, M.  (2008), "From a  literature  review 
to  a  conceptual  framework  for  sustainable  supply  chain 
management", Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol.  16 No.  15, 
pp.  1699-1710. 

Sharma, S.  and Vredenburg, H.  (1998),  "Proactive corporate 
of 
environmental 
competitively valuable organizational capabilities", Strategic 
Managemem Journal,  Vol.  19  No.8, pp.  729-754. 

development 

strategy 

and 

the 

Tsai,  W.  and  Ghosal,  S.  (1998),  "Social  capital  and  value 
the  role  of  intrafirm  networks",  Academy  of 

creation: 
ManagememJollrnal,  Vol.  41  No.4, pp.  464-476. 

Tuten, T.L. and Urban, D.J.  (2001), "An expanded model of 
business-eo-business  partnership  foundation  and  success", 
IHarketing  Management,  Vol.  30  No.2, 
Industt'ial 
pp.  149-164. 

Vachon,  S.  and  Klassen,  R.D.  (2006),  "Extending  green 
practices  across  the  supply  chain:  the  impact  of upstream 
and  downstream 
International  Journal  of 
Operations  &  Productt'oll  Management,  Vol.  26  No.7, 
pp.  795-821 

imegration", 


Green  supply  chain  management 

Su-Yol  L"e 

Supply  Chain  Management  An  International Journal 

Volume 10  .  Number  J  • 2015  . 42--55 

methodologies", 
Journal 
Economics,  Vol.  124 No.1 ,  pp .  252-264. 

Intemational 

of  Production 

Bowen, F.E., Cousins, P .D ., Lamming, RC . and Faruk, A.C. 
(200 1),  "The  role  of  supply  management  capabilities  in 
green  supply",  Production  and  Operations  Management, 
Vol.  10  No .2, pp.  174-189 . 

Chhabara,  R  (2010),  " Supply  chain  briefing  part  1:  ethical 
sourcing - the responsible chain gang",  Ethical Corporation, 
July-August,  pp .  12- 13 . 

de  Brito,  M.P.,  Carbon,  V.  and  Blanquart,  C.M.  (2008), 
"Towards  a  sustainable  fashion  retail  supply  chain  in 
Europe:  organisation  and  performance", 
International 
J ourl/al  of  Productioll  E conomics,  Vol. 
I 14  No.2, 
pp .  534-553 . 
Guide,  V.D .R 

(2006), 
" Closed-loop  supply chains :  an  introduction  to  the  feature 
issue ",  Production  and  Operations  Managemem,  Vol.  15 
No . 3,  pp .  345-350. 

Jr.  and  Wassenhove,  L.N.V. 

Hahn,  c.K. ,  Watts,  C.A.  and  Kim,  K.Y.  ( 1990),  "The 
supplier  de velopment  program :  a  conceptual  model", 
Illlernational J ournal of Purchasing aTld Maten'al Managemem, 
Vol.  26  No .2,  pp .  2-7. 

Howes,  R .,  Skea,  1.  and  \1(l helan,  B.  (1997),  Clean  and 
in 

Competitive'  M oriv arirlg  Env ironmental  Performan ce 
Indll stry,  Earthscan,  London. 

Ketchen,  D.J .  Jr.  and  Hult,  G .T.M .  (2007),  "Bridging 
organizational  theory  and  supply  chain  management :  the 
case  of  best  value  supply  chains",  J ournal  of  Operations 
Managem ent,  Vol.  25  No.2, pp .  573-580 . 

Klass en,  RD .  and  Vereecke,  A.  (20 12),  "Social  issues  in 
risk 
supply 
(opportunity),  and  performance",  International  J ournal  of 
Produceion  Economics,  Vol.  140,  pp .  103-115. 

responsibility, 

capabilities 

chains: 

link 

Pedersen,  E.R.  and  Andersen,  M .  (2006),  "Safeguarding 
corporate  social  responsibility  (C SR) 
in  global  supply 
chains :  how 
In 
buyer-supplier relationships" ,Journal of  Public Affair, Vol.  6 
Nos  3/4,  pp.  228-240. 

codes  of  conduct 

are  managed 

Shi,  V.G .,  Koh,  S.c.L.,  Baldwin,  J.  and  Cucchiella,  F . 
(20 I 2),  "Natural  resource  based  green  supply  chain 
management",  Supply  Chain  Management:  All  International 
J ournal,  Vol.  17  No .  1,  pp.  54-67 . 

Srivastava, S .K.  (2007) ,  "Green supply-chain management: a 
state-of-the-art  literature  review",  Int.erna tional  J ournal  of 
Management  Reviews,  Vol.  9  No .  I,  pp .  53-80 . 

(20 12), 

Wong,  C.W .Y.,  Lai,  K. ,  Shang, 

IC-C.,  Ju,  C .-S.  and 
Leung,  T.K .P . 
the 
moderating role of environmental management capability of 
suppliers 
performance ", 
In ternationalJournal of Production  Econ omics, Vol.  140 No.1, 
pp . 283-294. 

"Green  operations  and 

on  manufacturing 

firm 

Vachon,  S.  and  Klassen,  R .D .  (2008),  "Environmental 
m anagement  and  manufacturing  performance:  the  role  of 
collaboration  in  the  supply  chain",  International J Ollrnal  of 
Produceion  Economics,  Vol.  I I 1  No.2,  pp .  299-315 . 

ViJlena,  V.H .,  Revilla,  E .  and  Choi,  T .Y.  (201 I),  "The dark 
relationships :  a  social  capital 
side  of  buyer-supplier 
perspective",  Journal  of  Operations  Management,  Vol.  29 
No.  6,  pp .  561-576 . 

Ward,  P .,  McCreery,  J.K.,  Ritzman,  L.P .  and  Sharma,  D . 
operations 
29  No.4, 

Scier/ ces,  Vol. 

(1998 ), 
"Competitive 
management",  Decision 
pp.l035-1046 . 

priorities 

in 

o 
N 

Waus,  C.A.  and  Hahn,  c.K. 

(1993 ),  "The  supplier 
development  program : an  empirical  analysis",  Intemational 
J ournal  of  Purchasing  and  Material  Management,  Vol.  29 
No . 2,  pp.  11-17 . 

Whipple,  J.M.  and  Frankel,  R .  (2000) ,  "Scrategic  alliance 
success  factors",  J ournal  of  Supply  Chain  Managemelll, 
Vol.  36  No.3, pp.  21-28. 

Wu, G.-c.,  Ding, ].-H . and  Chen, P .-S.  (2012), "The effects 
of  GSCM  drivers  and  institutional  pressures  on  GSCM 
practices 
industry", 
International  Journal  of  Production  Economics,  Vol.  135, 
pp . 6 18-636. 

textile  and  apparel 

in  Taiwan's 

in 

WU,  S.J.  and  Ragatz,  G .L.  (2010),  "The  role  of integrative 
capabilities 
In  new  product 
development: 
integration  perspective", 
International  Journal  of  Manufa cll/ring  Technology  and 
Management,  Vol.  19  Nos  1/2,  pp . 82-1 01. 

a  knowledge 

involving 

suppliers 

Yu,  C.M .J.,  liao,  T .J.  and  lin,  Z .D .  (2006),  "Formal 
governance  mechanism s,  relational  governance  mechanisms, 
and cransaction-specific invescrnents  in  supplier-manufacturer 
relationships",  Industrial  Marketing  Management,  Vol.  35 
No.2, pp.  128-139. 

Zaheer,  A.  and  Bell,  G.G .  (2005),  "Benefiting  from  network 
position:  firm  capabilities,  scructural  holes,  and  performance", 
Strategic  ManagememJoumal, Vol.  26  No.9,  pp.  809-825. 

Zhu,  Q.  and  Sarkis,  J. 

(2004),  "Relationships  between 
operational  practices  and  performance  among  early 
adopters  of  green  supply  chain  management  practices  in 
Chinese  manufacturing  enterprises",  J oumal of Operations 
Management,  Vol.  22,  pp.  265-289. 

Zhu,  Q .,  Sarkis, 1.  and  Lai,  K.  (2008) ,  "Confirmation  of a 
measurement  model  for  green  supply  chain  management 
practices 
Intematiol/al 
of 
Production  Resea rch,  Vol.  4 3,  pp .  3401-3420. 

implementation" , 

J ournal 

Further reading 

Bai,  C.  and  Sarkis, J.  (2010),  "Integrating sustainability into 
rough  set 

supplier  selection  with  grey  system  and 

53 


p 
~ 

0 

N c 
~ '" .@ 

00 
0 
N 
N 

.;;: 
>­
f-
Vi 
c.:g; 
~ 
....l ..: z 
0 
1= 
..: 
Z 
~ 
<: 

Z " 
~ :c 
u 
» 
~ 
-0 
" -0 

~ 

0 c "8 

Green supply chain  management 

Su- Yol  Lee 

Supply Chain  Management: An  International Journal 

Volume  20 .  Numb"  I  . 2015  .  42- 55 

Appendix 

Table  AI  Questionnaire  items 

Construct 

GSCM 

Structural  capital 

Relational  capital 

Environmental  performance 

Item 
code 

Items 

Reference 

To  what  extent  do  you  agree  or  disagree  with 
each  of  the  follOWing  statements  (1  =  not  at  all, 
4  = moderately and  7 =  very  much)?  During  the 
last  two  years,  our  major  customer. 
assessed  our  environmental  performance  through 
a formal  and  green  procurement  process 
demanded  us  to  establish  an  environmental 
management  systems 
conducted  environmental  audits  on  a regular  basis 
demanded  us  to  develop  environmental-friendlier 
products 
provided  us  with  relevant  and  helpful  information 
on  how  to  comply  with  its  environmental 
requirements 
provided  us  with  technical,  managerial  and 
financial  assistance  to  address  environmental 
issues 
and  our  firm  jointly  developed  environment-
conscious  products 
To  which  extent  do  you  agree  or  disagree  with 
each  of  the  following  statements  (1  = not  at  all, 
4  = moderately and  7 =  very  much)?  Our  major 
customer  and  our  firm. 
are  sharing  relevant  and  timely  information 
are  interacting  in  a frequent  and  intensive  manner 
are  solving  problems  jointly 
are  sharing  and  transferring  knowledge  and  know-
how  each  other 
To  which  extent  do  you  agree  or  disagree  with 
each  of  the  following  statements  (1  =  not  at  all, 
4  =  moderately and  7 =  very  much)? 
Our  major  customer  and  our  firm  trust  each  other 
Our  firm  has  a family-like  relationship  with  our 
major  customer 
Our  major  customer  and  our  firm  respect  each 
other 
Our  major  customer  considers  us  as  a long-term 
partner 
For  each  of  the  items  listed  below,  how  does  your 
firm  compare  with  primary  competitors'  (1  =  far 
worse  than  competitors,  4  =  about  the  same  as 
competitors  and  7 =  far  better  than  competitors) 
Environmental  performance  of  products 
More  environmentally  friendly  product 
development 
Consumption  of  raw  materials 
Consumption  of  energy 
Disposal  of solid  waste 
Emission  01  pollutants  (e.g.  S0"  NO,  and  CO, ) 

GSCMOl 

GSCM02 

GSCM03 
GSCM04 

GSCMOS 

GSCM06 

GSCM07 

SCapitalOl 
SCapital02 
SCapital03 
SCapital04 

RCapitalOl 
RCapital02 

RCapital03 

RCapital04 

EperfOl 
Eperf02 

Eperf03 
Eperf04 
EperfOS 
Eperf06 

54 

Giovanni  (2012)',  Klassen  and  Vachon  (2006)' 

Klassen  and  Vachon  (2006)',  lhu  et  al., 
(2008)',  Green  et  at.  (2012)a 
lhu  et  al.  (2008)a,  Green  et  al. (2012)a 
Lee  and  Klassen  (2008)b 

Lee  and  Klassen  (2008)b 

Lee  and  Klassen  (2008)b 

Giovanni  (2012)b,  Klassen  and  Vachon  (2006, 
2008)b 

Krause  et  al. (2007)a 
Villena  et al. (2011 la,  Lawson  et al.  (2008)a 
Carey  et al.  (2011)a 
Krause  et al.  (2007)' 

Carey  et al.  (2011 la,  Villella  et  al. (2011 la, 
Lawson  et al.  (2008)", Kale  et  at.  (2000)" 

Chen  et al.  (2004)a 

Chen  (2008)b,  Lee  and  Klassen  (2008)b 
Chen  (2008)b,  Lee  and  Klassen  (2008)b 

Chell  (2008)b 
Giovanni  (2012)",  Green  et al.  (2012)a, 
Paulraj,  2011',  lhu  et  al.  (2008)" 

(continued) 


Green  supply chain  management 

Supply  Chain  Management An  International Journal 

Volu",e  20  . Number  J  . 2015  . 42- 55 

Table  AI 

Construct 

Operational  performance 

Item 
code 

Items 

Reference 

For  each  of  the  items  listed  below,  how  does  your 
firm  compare  with  primary  competitors'  (1  =  far 
worse  than  competitors,  4  =  about  the  same  as 
competitors  and  7 =  far  better  than  competitors) 
Product  quality 
On-time  delivery 
Production  costs 
Ability  to  change  output  volume 
Time  to  develop  new  products 
Total  productivity 
Perceived  customer  satisfaction 

Operf01 
Operf02 
Operf03 
Operf04 
OperfOS 
Operf06 
Operf07 

Krause  et  ai,  (2007)',  Ward  et al.  (199 8)' 

Notes:  3  adapted  and  modified  from  the  reference; 

b developed  based  on  the  arguments  of  the  reference 

o 

(" 

Corresponding  author 
Su-Yol Lee  can be  contacted  at:  leesuyol@chonnam.ac.kr 

F or instru ctions  on  how  (0  order  rep rints  of [his  arricle,  please  visit  our wehsite: 
www.erncrnldgt"ouppuhlishing.eomllicen'ingireprinrs .hnn 
Or contact  us  for  further  details:  perrnissions@emc,·aldinsight.com 

55 

View publication stats
View publication stats

