University of Nebraska - Lincoln
DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln

Management Department Faculty Publications

Management Department

5-2008

More evidence on the value of Chinese workers’
psychological capital: A potentially unlimited
competitive resource?
Fred Luthans
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, fluthans1@unl.edu

James Avey
Central Washington University, aveyj@cwu.edu

Rachel Clapp-Smith
University of Nebraska - Lincoln, rachel.smith@purduecal.edu

Weixing Li
University of Nebraska-Lincoln

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/managementfacpub

Part of the Business Administration, Management, and Operations Commons, International

Business Commons, Labor Relations Commons, Management Sciences and Quantitative Methods
Commons, and the Organizational Behavior and Theory Commons

Luthans, Fred; Avey, James; Clapp-Smith, Rachel; and Li, Weixing, "More evidence on the value of Chinese workers’ psychological
capital: A potentially unlimited competitive resource?" (2008). Management Department Faculty Publications. 133.
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/managementfacpub/133

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Management Department at DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln. It has
been accepted for inclusion in Management Department Faculty Publications by an authorized administrator of DigitalCommons@University of
Nebraska - Lincoln.


Published in The International Journal of Human Resource Management 19:5 (May 2008),  
pp. 818–827; doi:10.1080/09585190801991194 
Copyright © 2008 Taylor & Francis. Used by permission
Published online May 7, 2008.

digitalcommons.unl.edu
digitalcommons.unl.edu

More evidence on the value of Chinese workers’ 
psychological capital: A potentially unlimited  

competitive resource?

Fred Luthans,1 James B. Avey,2 Rachel Clapp-Smith,1 and Weixing Li1

1 University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA; 
2 Central Washington University, Washington, DC, USA

Corresponding author — F. Luthans, fluthans1@unl.edu

Abstract: 
As China continues its unprecedented economic growth and emergence as a world power, new solutions 
must be forthcoming to meet the accompanying challenges. We propose a positive approach to Chinese 
HRM that recognizes, develops and manages the psychological capital (PsyCap) of workers. After pro-
viding a brief overview of hope, efficacy, optimism, resilience and overall PsyCap in today’s Chinese 
context, the results of a follow-up study provide further evidence that the PsyCap of Chinese workers 
is related to their performance. The implications that this evidencebased value of Chinese workers’ 
psychological capital has for China now and into the future concludes this study. 
Keywords: China, employee, human resource management (HRM), performance, psychological capital

China’s fast-paced economic growth never ceases to amaze and simultaneously worry both the Chi-
nese, and rest of the world’s, economists, politicians and business people. Hovering around 10% 
growth over the past 5 years, there seems little doubt that the Chinese economy is poised to sur-
pass the United States in terms of purchasing power (Economist 2007) and has already become 
the world’s second largest exporter behind Germany, but ahead of both Japan and the US. While 
these statistics have gained the attention of global corporations for several years (e.g., over 400 of 
the Fortune Global 500 are doing business in China), there is increasing concern among Chinese 
leaders, and with outside investors, whether such a booming economy can be sustained, let alone 
continue to grow. Most of the concern and focus has been on keeping up with advancing technol-
ogy and the need for financial capital and some passing interest in environmental protection and 
transparency. Very little attention has been devoted to the virtually unlimited human resources 
of China. Instead of concentrating only on the obvious technological and economic challenges and 
trying to fix the weaknesses such as pollution, transparency and piracy, the time has come to take 
a positive approach by recognizing and leveraging Chinese human resources for contribution to 
sustained growth and competitive advantage. 

Despite having very different employee obligations than most countries in the world, both pri-
vate and state-owned Chinese enterprises need to update their understanding and effective prac-
tice of human resource management (HRM). Chinese employees are becoming increasingly mobile 

818


M o r e  e v i d e n c e  o n  t h e  v a l u e  o f c h i n e s e  w o r k e r s’  p s y c h o l o g i c a l  c a p i t a l    

 819

and the market economy embedded in a socialist political system (i.e. ‘one country–two systems’) 
poses challenges for the employer/employee contract. Most notable, state-owned enterprises (SOEs) 
are frequently criticized for inefficiencies largely due to the obligation they have to maintain what 
amounts to a surplus of human resources. In order to gain a competitive advantage under such 
unique and trying circumstances, SOEs must better leverage this excess human capital for a higher 
return and competitive advantage. The same is true for private enterprises operating in China. 
Simply competing on the basis of low-cost labour is no longer sufficient in a China that is now in 
the mainstream of the global economy with increasing wages and competition for talent (i.e. the 
so-called ‘War for Talent’ is reaching a China front). 

Using results of an exploratory study conducted a few years ago, that found a significant re-
lationship between Chinese factory workers’ ‘psychological capital’ (or simply PsyCap) and their 
performance outcomes (see Luthans, Avolio, Walumbwa and Li 2005) as a point of departure, the 
purpose of this study is to determine if the now more refined core construct of PsyCap’s impact on 
performance can be updated and better understood. If similar results are obtained, then there is 
additional evidence and even more confidence in the value of such a positive approach to manag-
ing and leveraging Chinese human resources for sustaining and gaining competitive advantage 
into the future. After first providing a brief overview of the current Chinese context for manag-
ing human resources and what is meant by psychological capital in relation to this context, the 
study methods, results, and implications of the role that PsyCap may have in Chinese HRM and, 
in turn, the country’s future path in the global economy conclude the study. 

The Chinese context for HRM 

Today’s environment facing Chinese organizations’ human resource management is a unique di-
lemma: How can a market-oriented economy function within the current boundaries and recent 
history of a socialist political system? In other words, Chinese HRM must operate within the 
constraints and challenges of a country with two seemingly conflicting systems. Gross domestic 
product growth rates do not provide evidence for hindered economic growth under the dual sys-
tems. However, the ghosts of the not too distant past (e.g., the Communist and Cultural Revo-
lution Eras) are often used to explain the inefficiencies of especially the state-owned enterprises 
(e.g., see Chen 2004). In addition, China’s rapid rise in the world economy has left the society as a 
whole, and the human resources of organizations in particular, experiencing considerable uncer-
tainty and stress (Gifford 2007). 

In the last 25 years, the Chinese economy has shifted such that SOEs accounted for 80% of the 
country’s GDP in 1978, but as of 2003, they accounted for only 17%. However, SOEs still employ 
half of the nation’s workforce (much greater than the entire US workforce) and still over half of 
China’s industrial assets (Desvaux, Wang and Xu 2004). To address some of the inefficiencies as-
sociated with SOEs, the Chinese government adopted a reform approach during the 1980s that 
has increased managers’ autonomy, implemented forms of financial incentives, and made reduc-
tions in some unneeded workers (Chen 2004). Although such measures have improved productiv-
ity, the profitability of SOEs remains a problem. While privatization of smaller SOEs has occurred 
over the last few years, complete privatization is unrealistic given the social responsibilities (i.e. 
employment opportunities) that SOEs carry on behalf of the state. Thus, the major challenge fac-
ing Chinese HRM as well as the entire country is how to leverage and effectively manage its un-
limited human resources to meet the goals of both the economic and political systems. 

We propose that this daunting challenge facing China and its organizations today may be 
helped by not just lamenting on the negative conflict between the two systems or trying to fix the 


820 

l u t h a n s  e t  a l.  i n I n t e r n a t I o n a l J o u r n a l  o f H u m a n r e s o u r c e m a n a g e m e n t 19 (2008)   

weaknesses inherent in the rapid change and growth, but instead taking a positive approach. 
A positive HRM approach aimed at better understanding, development, and effective manage-
ment of China’s strength of unlimited, and still largely untapped, human resources may be a 
key solution. As evidenced in this issue, increased attention is finally being given to Chinese 
HRM. Our contribution is to provide increasing evidence of the value of the positive psycholog-
ical capital of Chinese human resources. We next provide the meaning and role that this re-
cently emerging core construct of positive psychological capital can play and then present the 
results of a follow-up study that provides additional evidence that the PsyCap of Chinese work-
ers relates to their performance. 

The meaning of positive psychological capital 

Over the past few years, increasing recognition has been given to the value of positivity in hu-
man resource management. Particular attention has been given to how to strengthen the psy-
chological resources of employees and improve their performance. Positive psychology (e.g., see 
Seligman and Csikszentmihalyi 2000; Synder and Lopez 2002), positive organizational behav-
iour (Luthans 2002; Luthans 2003; Wright 2003; Luthans and Youssef 2007; Nelson and Cooper 
2007); positive organizational scholarship (Cameron, Dutton and Quinn 2003), and positive emo-
tions (Fredrickson 1998, 2000) have all provided evidence that individuals flourish when the fo-
cus shifts from fixing what is wrong with people to strengthening what is right. The application of 
this positive movement to the workplace in general, andhumanresource management in particu-
lar, can be found in psychological capital or, simply, PsyCap (see Luthans and Youssef 2004; Lu-
thans, Youssef and Avolio 2007b). 

Since we first introduced the notion of psychological capital in relation to the Chinese work-
force a few years ago (see Luthans et al. 2005), theory, research and application have greatly ex-
panded. For example, PsyCap is now recognized to go beyond just human capital (i.e. what em-
ployees know, their education and experience). PsyCap represents who employees are (i.e. their 
psychological self) and what they can become. PsyCap is defined as: ‘An individual’s positive psy-
chological state of development that is characterized by: (1) having confidence (self-efficacy) to take 
on and put in the necessary effort to succeed at challenging tasks; (2) making a positive attribu-
tion (optimism) about succeeding now and in the future; (3) persevering toward goals and, when 
necessary, redirecting paths to goals (hope) in order to succeed; and (4) when beset by problems 
and adversity, sustaining and bouncing back and even beyond (resiliency) to attain success’ (Lu-
thans et al. 2007b, p. 3). An expanding body of research demonstrates that PsyCap is both open 
to development (e.g., see Luthans, Avey, Avolio, Norman and Combs 2006; Luthans, Avey and 
Patera 2008) and has performance impact (Luthans, Avolio, Avey and Norman 2007a). As indi-
cated, a few years ago our exploratory study utilizing some of the components of PsyCap (hope, 
optimism and resiliency, but our model now also includes efficacy) found a relationship with the 
performance of a sample of Chinese factory workers (Luthans et al. 2005). We feel the time has 
now come to extend this initial finding with the now more fully developed and tested PsyCap core 
construct (e.g., see Luthans et al. 2007a, 2007b) and solidify the contribution it can make to the 
future of Chinese HRM. 

As defined above, PsyCap is a core construct that consists of hope, efficacy, optimism, and resil-
iency. To gain clearer insight into how the PsyCap of Chinese workers can be better understood 
and then developed, leveraged and managed for competitive advantage, it is first necessary to clar-
ify the contribution of each component state in relation to the Chinese context. 


M o r e  e v i d e n c e  o n  t h e  v a l u e  o f c h i n e s e  w o r k e r s’  p s y c h o l o g i c a l  c a p i t a l    

 821

The role of hope 
In positive psychology, hope is comprised of two dimensions: willpower and pathways (Snyder 2000; 
Snyder, Feldman and Taylor 2000; Snyder and Lopez 2002). Willpower is the expectancy and mo-
tivation individuals have for attaining a desired goal. Pathways complement this willpower by 
providing psychological resources that help find multiple alternative pathways to the goal. This 
alternative pathways thinking helps individuals achieve goals despite the presence of obstacles. 
Applying the hope of human resources in organizations in China, the willpower dimension fa-
cilitates them to recognize and set goals that lead either anSOE or a private firm to attain de-
sired performance outcomes. As China has been found to be relatively high in power distance 
and social collectivism (House, Hanges, Javidan, Dorfman and Gupta 2004), such goals may be 
identified by either an individual organizational leader and/or by the group of workers. However, 
each of the individual employees must internalize such goals to drive their own behaviour and 
make them personally relevant. In order to achieve the desired goals, particularly in a rapidly 
changing environment such as China is currently experiencing, individuals will make a greater 
contribution and be more effective when they utilize the alternate pathways dimension of hope. 
This is because they will have the resources to recognize and immediately implement alterna-
tive options to achieving goals. This hope factor of PsyCap is further strengthened when com-
plemented by the confidence or efficacy to succeed at workplace activities, especially in the fast 
changing Chinese organizations. 

The role of efficacy 
Self-efficacy is the positive belief or confidence in one’s ability to perform specific tasks (Bandura 
1997). It has been found to be a universal state, although it manifests itself differently in various 
contexts (Bandura 2002). For instance, even in cultures with a high degree of group collectivism, 
such as in China, individuals utilize their efficacy to assess their ability to contribute to and exe-
cute workplace activities. However, the area in which efficacy varies across cultures is the man-
ner in which it is developed. For example, it has been found that individuals from countries with 
a level of collectivism tend to develop efficacy more readily in a group context (Earley 1994). 

This confidence component of PsyCap has been clearly shown to relate work-related perfor-
mance in the US (Stajkovic and Luthans 1998) and in other cultures (Earley 1994; Luthans, Zhu 
and Avolio 2006; Luthans and Ibrayeva 2006). Human resource management practices that de-
velop efficacy will be more successful in the Chinese context by utilizing a group training tech-
nique. In Bandura’s (1997) conceptualization of self-efficacy, optimism is a critical component to 
more successfully apply to specific tasks. Optimism, therefore, is still another psychological state 
that strengthens the effectiveness of hope and efficacy and contributes to the overall core con-
struct of PsyCap.

The role of optimism 
Optimism is characterized by a positive explanatory style. When individuals experience instances 
of optimism, they tend to internalize positive events and externalize negative events (Seligman 
and Schulman 1986; Seligman 1998). As a result, optimists will have more positive expectancies of 
outcomes from specific events. Therefore, a higher level of optimism should aid Chinese employees 
in having more positive expectations of outcomes in the fast-paced, changing work environments. 
In his description of today’s China, Gifford (2007) explains that a tremendous optimism is ap-
parent in the booming business centres such as Shanghai. However, other portions of the coun-


822 

l u t h a n s  e t  a l.  i n I n t e r n a t I o n a l J o u r n a l  o f H u m a n r e s o u r c e m a n a g e m e n t 19 (2008)   

try, once one leaves the development and futuristic technology of Shanghai, are more depressed 
and worried about the future of China. Such a lack of optimism in the polluted industrial centres 
in provinces west of Shanghai may deeply affect the performance of employees. Thus, to improve 
performance, human resource managers may need to focus on developing positive expectancies (i.e. 
optimism). Such optimism for future outcomes and the role they may have for individuals, fami-
lies and the greater Chinese society will be further reinforced when combined with the fourth rec-
ognized component of PsyCap – resiliency. 

The role of resiliency 
Resiliency is the capacity to bounce back from adverse or stressful situations (Masten, Best and 
Garmezy 1990; Masten 2001; Luthans 2002). Within the Chinese context, although rapidly devel-
oping business centres such as Shanghai may have a more positive outlook for the future, both 
developed and less developed regions of the country have undergone and will continue to undergo 
tremendous change at an unprecedented rate. This change, regardless of how positively or neg-
atively it is perceived, as we have indicated is creating considerable stress and uncertainty that 
can be debilitating in the absence of resiliency. 

At one time thought to be very rare and even ‘magical’, resiliency is now recognized to be a psy-
chological capacity that all individuals possess (Masten 2001), but it needs to be developed and 
unleashed. In other words, everyone seems to have the potential for resiliency and what varies is 
their ability to call on this resource in times of stress (positive or negative) or adversity. The power 
of resilience is that once activated, it not only allows individuals to bounce back, but it also allows 
them to flourish even beyond their previous equilibrium state. Thus, by developing resilience, in 
conjunction with hope, efficacy and optimism, Chinese human resources may overcome the stress 
and uncertainty they are facing now and especially in the future. 

Overall PsyCap 
The four components – hope, efficacy, optimism and resiliency – that meet the PsyCap inclusion 
criteria of being based on theory, research and valid measurement and open to development (i.e. 
state-like) with performance impact (Luthans 2002; Luthans and Youssef 2007; Luthans et al. 
2007b), on the surface appear very similar. However, there is now considerable evidence, both con-
ceptually (e.g., Bandura 1997; Snyder 2000, 2002; Luthans et al. 2007b) and empirically (Mag-
aletta and Oliver 1999; Carifio and Rhodes 2002; Bryant and Cvengros 2004), that they are in-
dependent constructs. However, as seen in the definition of PsyCap given earlier, there is also a 
common underlying linkage of positivity and striving to succeed among the components and em-
pirical evidence supporting PsyCap as a core construct (Luthans et al. 2007a). Specifically, over-
all PsyCap has been found to predict performance better than the individual components (Lu-
thans et al. 2005, 2007a). 

Applying PsyCap to the Chinese context, we propose that the mindset of Chinese human re-
sources needs to be changed to cope with the unique one-country, two-systems context. As China 
deals with a market-oriented economy and a socialist system, as well as the global competitive 
requirements and pressures as a member of the WTO, both SOEs and private firms must find 
new, we propose positive, approaches to HRM. These new approaches are needed not only to 
help employees maintain their present level of performance, but to help bounce them beyond 
current levels to overcome the inefficiencies at SOEs and the uncertainties and stress of em-
ployment in private firms. Based on the above foundation and our preliminary findings from 


M o r e  e v i d e n c e  o n  t h e  v a l u e  o f c h i n e s e  w o r k e r s’  p s y c h o l o g i c a l  c a p i t a l    

 823

the earlier study (Luthans et al. 2005), we hypothesize that the positive psychological capital 
of Chinese workers will have a positive relationship on their performance in both the SOE and 
private firm in our sample. We turn next to the methods used to test this hypothesis and the re-
sults and implications. 

Methods 

In this study, 456 workers from both the largest copper refining SOE and largest private cop-
per refining factory in China using the same technological processes completed survey instru-
ments in Mandarin Chinese. The survey instrument included demographic questions and the 
12-item Psychological Capital Questionnaire (PCQ-12, see Luthans et al. 2007b for the full 24-
item measure). Additionally, the worker’s supervisor rated their performance on a multi-item 
measure on a scale of 1–10. A Chinese member of the research team familiar with the two or-
ganizations supervised the data collection. He gave a brief orientation on site to the study par-
ticipants and supervisors in terms of the procedure for filling out the questionnaires and as-
sured them of confidentiality and that the results would be used for basic research only. Of the 
456 participants in the two firms, there were 367 males and 86 females (three individuals did 
not indicate gender). The average age was 39.8 years with an average work experience of 9.42 
years. Of the participants, 46% had not completed high school, 41% had completed high school 
and no more, and 11% had completed the equivalent of a Bachelor’s degree. Since the technolog-
ical process and demographics of the two firms were not significantly different, they were com-
bined into one sample for the analyses. 

All scales were translated into Mandarin Chinese using back translation methodology (Brislin 
1970, 1980). That is, the questionnaire was first translated from the original language (English) 
into the Mandarin Chinese by a bilingual native Chinese linguist. Next, the translated Chinese 
language version was “back translated” into English by a second bilingualist. Finally, the trans-
lated English version was compared to the original and any discrepancies were resolved by mu-
tual agreement between the two linguists. As indicated, positive psychological capital was mea-
sured with a reduced version (12 items) of the original 24-item PCQ (Luthans et al. 2007b). This 
12-item PCQ included 3 items for efficacy, 4 items for hope (2 agentic capacity, 2 pathways think-
ing), 2 items for optimism and 3 items for resilience. Although the reliability of this translated 
12-item PCQ (α = .68) was not as high as has been found in multiple American samples using the 
original 24-item version (e.g., see Luthans et al. 2007a), it was still very close to the standard ac-
ceptable levels. In fact, a meta-analysis of Cronbach’s alpha indicates that .60 is reasonable (Pe-
terson 1994) and other researchers’ published findings using back translations similarly fell just 
short of the .70 alpha level (e.g., see Sagie 1998; Van Vegchel, De Jonge and Landsbergis 2005) 
and specifically with a Chinese translation (Hui and Law 1999). 

Performance was measured with a 5-item scale that supervisors rated each of their employees. 
This approach has been used in a number of studies that have tested the relationship of PsyCap 
and its components with performance (Luthans et al. 2005; Youssef and Luthans 2007). Example 
items of this instrument were ‘Please rate his/her contribution to the organization’s mission and 
goals’ and ‘Please rate his/her overall job-related ability’. This performance scale had an internal 
reliability of α = .92. The demographic variables were measured by self-report. Specifically, em-
ployees were asked to list their work experience, education, age and gender. 


824 

l u t h a n s  e t  a l.  i n I n t e r n a t I o n a l J o u r n a l  o f H u m a n r e s o u r c e m a n a g e m e n t 19 (2008)   

Study results 
All means, standard deviations and correlations of the study variables are shown in Table 1. The 
workers’ PsyCap, tenure and education were all significantly related to manager rated perfor-
mance. To determine the meaningfulness of the relationship between PsyCap and performance, a 
regression analysis was conducted. Specifically, tenure, education, gender and age were entered 
into Step 1 of a linear regression model. Next, PsyCap was entered into Step 2 to determine the 
extent to which PsyCap predicted performance above and beyond the demographic variables. 

As seen in Table 2, tenure positively predicted performance while age negatively predicted 
manager rated performance. In Step 2 of this regression model, PsyCap predicted variance in the 
performance dependent variable above and beyond the covariates (β = .26, p < .001). In addition, 
PsyCap explained an additional 7% variance in the performance outcome. 

Discussion 

The purpose of this study was to conduct a follow-up investigation of the potentially powerful role 
that positive psychological capital may play in Chinese HRM. As evidenced in this sample, which 
included workers from both state-owned and private enterprises, as was found in an earlier explor-
atory study (Luthans et al. 2005), positive PsyCap does indeed seem to be a significant and unique 
predictor of employee performance. For example, while the widely recognized human capital com-
ponent of work experience was found to be an important predictor of performance, adding psycho-
logical capital to the model significantly increased the amount of variance explained in the per-
formance outcome, although work experience continued to be a significant independent variable. 

Mean (S.D.)   PsyCap   Performance  

Table 1. Means, standard deviations and bivariate correlations of study variables. 
 
PsyCap  
Performance  
Education  
Tenure  
Age  
Gender  
**p < .01

4.33 (.46)  
7.01 (1.13)  
1.69 (.82)  
9.42 (7.44)  
39.79 (8.95) 
.18 (.39)  

1.00 
.25**  
.11**  
.01  
.05  
.04  

1.00 
.15**  
.39**  
2.04  
2.06  

1.00 
.06  
2.40**  
2.03  

Education  

1.00 
.26**  
.09  

Tenure  

Age  

Gender 

1.00 
.03  

1.00 

Table 2. Performance predictors. 

 
 
Education  
Tenure  
Age  
Gender  
PsyCap  
ΔR2  
* p < .05 ; ** p < .01

                     Performance 
Step 1  

β 

.093  
.392**  
2.079  
2.034  
.260** 
.07**

Step 2 

β
.048 
.407** 
–.119* 
–.044 


M o r e  e v i d e n c e  o n  t h e  v a l u e  o f c h i n e s e  w o r k e r s’  p s y c h o l o g i c a l  c a p i t a l    

 825

This finding suggests that PsyCap complements and adds value to the traditional human cap-
ital view of HRM rather than replaces it. Both human capital (e.g., work experience) and psycho-
logical capital accounted for separate and meaningful components of performance. In effect, by 
considering both human capital and psychological capital, there may be a more comprehensive 
and effective approach to Chinese HRM. 

Before exploring the specific implications, as in any research there are certain methodological 
limitations to the study that must be noted. However, there are strengths that are also impor-
tant to note. Specifically, this study does not suffer from common method variance or the impact 
when the independent and dependent variables are collected with the same method, at the same 
time, and from the same person. In this study the participant workers completed the independent 
variable(s) and their immediate supervisor completed the performance evaluation. However, in 
terms of limitations, first, the 12-item PsyCap scale was slightly below the threshold of generally 
accepted reliability at .68, indicating that further refinement of the Chinese translated measure 
may be required. Specifically, back translation methodology, while helpful, does not guarantee 
the meaning of items across cultures, only that they were, as far as possible, accurately trans-
lated grammatically and linguistically. Therefore, future research should include a more rigorous 
approach than back translation when studying PsyCap in Chinese organizations. In addition, fu-
ture studies may consider item response theory on the individual items of the PCQ when apply-
ing them in contexts such as Chinese organizations. 

Implications and conclusion 

There are multiple implications and conclusions from this study for Chinese HRM. First, the un-
limited human resource potential of China would seem to be an overwhelming opportunity for any 
investor or manager who understands the Chinese environment. As found in the first study and 
reinforced in this study, the performance of Chinese workers, and likely subsequent profitability 
of their organizations, may at least in part depend on the ability to select and especially develop 
and manage workers who are generally higher in PsyCap. Recent research (Luthans et al. 2007a) 
provides evidence that PsyCap is less stable (i.e. more ‘state-like’) than personality traits, sug-
gesting that PsyCap is more open to be developed and managed. On the other hand, PsyCap was 
also found to be more stable than emotions, suggesting it does not fluctuate in the short term, e.g., 
from hour to hour. Therefore, by hiring employees who are predisposed to being higher in PsyCap 
and coupling this human resource selection practice with HRD programmes targeted toward de-
veloping employees’ hope, optimism, efficacy and resilience (i.e. their PsyCap), Chinese organiza-
tions could enhance performance and over time their competitive advantage. This developmental 
attribute of PsyCap is critical. Not only may private firms hire and train based on PsyCap, but 
importantly SOEs that have an obligation to current employees to keep them on the payroll, may 
also develop their PsyCap in order to leverage them as a value-added resource, rather than just 
a costly liability. 

In addition to the practical implications for performance improvement, another major impli-
cation for the current transition going on in China today was the lack of significant difference in 
the relationship between PsyCap and performance in the SOE and the private firm in the same 
industry using the same technological processes. Thus, regardless of a state-owned or private or-
ganizational context, PsyCap appears to be a meaningful predictor of individual performance. 
In particular, this result provides empirical evidence that SOEs may utilize the human resource 
management practice of developing PsyCap in their workers in order to overcome the challenges 
of surplus labour. 


826 

l u t h a n s  e t  a l.  i n I n t e r n a t I o n a l J o u r n a l  o f H u m a n r e s o u r c e m a n a g e m e n t 19 (2008)   

Still another important implication of the study results is the uniquely important role that pos-
itivity in general and PsyCap in particular may play in using HRM to meet China’s unique and 
difficult challenges. In a country that has, in recent decades, fostered the collective mindset, dis-
couraged individualism, and generally avoided enabling individual hope, confidence, optimism and 
resilience, this positive approach in general, and using PsyCap in HRM in particular, can have 
intuitive, and importantly from two empirical studies, evidence-based appeal to the Chinese at 
all levels – political, economic, and social. As more Chinese take on individualistic mindsets and 
the society as a whole continues to recover from the Maoist reforms of the Cultural Revolution, 
such positivity provides a means to integrate market-oriented individualistic thinking and behav-
iours with a collectivistic, socialist tradition. In sum, as China continues to emerge as a world eco-
nomic leader, developing and managing this untapped positivity and PsyCap in their unlimited 
human resources may become the ‘tipping point’ for Chinese organizations and the country as a 
whole. This approach to HRM may allow the Chinese to continue to, and even better to, compete 
with Western corporations and adhere to the requirements and pressures of the WTO and full en-
trance into the global economy. 

In conclusion, results from previous research and this study suggest that Chinese HRM may 
make a significant contribution to the great challenges facing China today. Chinese HRM needs to 
recognize, develop and manage the psychological capital of their unlimited human resources. Al-
though economic, technological, political and social challenges certainly lie ahead, and the nega-
tive conflict of the two systems–one country and the fallout of rapid growth are certainly realities 
that must be addressed, the time seems right also to take a positive approach and emphasize Chi-
na’s strength of unlimited, untapped human resources. We propose, and our research supports, 
that the psychological capital of Chinese workers may indeed be a potentially unlimited competi-
tive resource for China now and in the future. 

References

Bandura, A. (1997), Self-efficacy, The Exercise of Control, New York: Freeman. 
Bandura, A. (2002), “Social Cognitive Theory in Cultural Context,” Applied Psychology: An International Review, 51, 

269–290. 

ogy, 23, 273–302. 

Berrett-Kohler. 

Brislin, R. (1970), “Back-translation for Cross-Cultural Research,” Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 1, 185–216. 
Brislin, R. (1980), “Translation and Content Analysis of Oral and Written Material,” in Handbook of Cross- Cultural Psy-

chology, (Vol. 2), eds. H.C. Triandis and J.W. Berry, Boston: Allyn and Bacon, pp. 389–444. 

Bryant, F.B., and Cvengros, J.A. (2004), “Distinguishing Hope and Optimism,” Journal of Social and Clinical Psychol-

Cameron, K.S., Dutton, J.E., and Quinn, R.E. (eds.) (2003), Positive Organizational Scholarship, San Francisco, CA: 

Carifio, J., and Rhodes, L. (2002), “Construct Validities and Empirical Relationships between Optimism, Hope, Self-Ef-

ficacy, and Locus of Control,” Work, 19, 125–136. 

Chen, J.J. (2004), “Corporatization of China’s State-owned Enterprises and Corporate Governance,” Corporate Owner-

ship and Control, 1, 82–93. 

Quarterly, special edition, 96–105. 

ence Quarterly, 39, 89–117. 

Desvaux, G., Wang, M., and Xu, D. (2004), “Spurring Performance in China’s State-owned Enterprises,” The McKinsey 

Economist (2007), “Still no. 1,” July, 11. 
Earley, C.P. (1994), “Self or Group? Cultural Effects of Training on Self-efficacy and Performance,” Administrative Sci-

Fredrickson, B.L. (1998), “What Good Are Positive Emotions?,” Review of General Psychology, 2, 300–319. 
Fredrickson, B.L. (2000), “Why Positive Emotions Matter in Organizations, Lessons From the Broaden-and- Build Model,” 

Psychologist-Manager Journal, 4, 131–142. 

Gifford, R. (2007), China Road: A Journey into the Future of a Rising Power, New York: Random House. 


M o r e  e v i d e n c e  o n  t h e  v a l u e  o f c h i n e s e  w o r k e r s’  p s y c h o l o g i c a l  c a p i t a l    

 827

House, R.J., Hanges, P.J., Javidan, M., Dorfman, P.W., and Gupta, V. (2004), Culture, Leadership, and Organizations, 

The GLOBE Study of 62 Societies, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Hui, C., and Law, K.S. (1999), “A Structural Equation Model of the Effects of Negative Affectivity, Leadermember Ex-
change, and Perceived Job Mobility on In-role and Extra-role Performance,” Organizational Behaviour and Human 
Decision Processes, 77, 3–21. 

Luthans, F. (2002), “The Need for and Meaning of Positive Organizational Behaviour,” Journal of Organizational Be-

haviour, 23, 695–706. 

Luthans, F. (2003), “Positive Organization Behaviour (POB), Implications for Leadership and HR Development and Mo-
tivation,” in Motivation and Leadership at Work, eds. R.M. Steers, L.W. Porter and G.A. Begley, New York: McGraw-
Hill/Irwin, pp. 187–195. 

Luthans, F., Avey, J.B., and Patera, J.L. (2008), “Experimental Analysis of aWeb-based Intervention to Develop Positive 

Psychological Capital,” Academy of Management Learning and Education, 8, in press. 

Luthans, F., Avey, J.B., Avolio, B.J., Norman, S.M., and Combs, G.M. (2006), “Psychological Capital Development, To-

ward a Micro-intervention,” Journal of Organizational Behaviour, 27, 387–393. 

Luthans, F., Avolio, B.J., Avey, J.B., and Norman, S.M. (2007a), “Psychological Capital, Measurement and Relationship 

with Performance and Satisfaction,” Personnel Psychology, 60, 541–572. 

Luthans, F., Avolio, B.J., Walumbwa, F.O., and Li, W. (2005), “The Psychological Capital of Chinese Workers, Exploring 

the Relationship with Performance,” Management and Organization Review, 1, 247–269. 

Luthans, F., and Ibrayeva, E.S. (2006), “Entrepreneurial Self-efficacy in Central Asian Transition Economies, Quantita-

tive and Qualitative Analyses,” Journal of International Business Studies, 37, 92–110. 

Luthans, F., and Youssef, C.M. (2004), “Human, Social, and Now Positive Psychological Capital Management, Investing 

in People for Competitive Advantage,” Organizational Dynamics, 33, 143–160. 

Luthans, F., and Youssef, C.M. (2007), “Emerging Positive Organizational Behaviour,” Journal of Management, 33, 

Luthans, F., Youssef, C.M., and Avolio, B.J. (2007b), Psychological Capital, Developing the Human Competitive Edge, 

Luthans, F., Zhu, W., and Avolio, B.J. (2006), “The Impact of Efficacy on Work Attitudes across Cultures,” Journal of 

321–349. 

Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

World Business, 41, 121–132. 

Magaletta, P.R., and Oliver, J.M. (1999), “The Hope Construct, Will and Ways, Their Relations with Self– Efficacy, Op-

timism and Well-being,” Journal of Clinical Psychology, 55, 539–551. 

Masten, A.S. (2001), “Ordinary Magic, Resilience Processes in Development,” American Psychologist, 56, 227–239. 
Masten, A.S., Best, K.M., and Garmezy, N. (1990), “Resilience and Development, Contributions from the Study of Chil-

dren Who Overcome Adversity,” Development and Psychopathology, 2, 425–444. 

Nelson, D., and Cooper, C.L. (eds.) (2007), Positive Organizational Behaviour, Accentuating the Positive at Work, Thou-

sand Oaks, CA: 

Sage. Peterson, R. (1994), “A Meta-analysis of Cronbach’s Coefficient Alpha,” Journal of Consumer Research, 21, 381–391. 
Sagie, A. (1998), “Employee Absenteeism, Organizational Commitment and Job Satisfaction, Another Look,” Journal of 

Vocational Behaviour, 52, 156–171. 

Seligman, M.E.P. (1998), Learned Optimism, New York: Pocket Books. 
Seligman, M.E.P., and Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000), “Positive Psychology,” American Psychologist, 55, 5–14. 
Seligman, M.E.P., and Schulman, P. (1986), “Explanatory Style as a Predictor of Productivity and Quitting Among Life 

Insurance Agents,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50, 832–838. 

Snyder, C.R. (2000), Handbook of Hope, San Diego, CA: Academic Press. 
Snyder, C.R. (2002), “Hope Theory, Rainbows in the Mind,” Psychological Inquiry, 13, 249–276. 
Snyder, C.R., Feldman, D.B., and Taylor, J.D. (2000), “The Roles of Hopeful Thinking in Preventing Problems and En-

hancing Strengths,” Applied & Preventive Psychology, 9, 249–269. 

Snyder, C.R., and Lopez, S.J. (eds.) (2002), Handbook of Positive Psychology, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Stajkovic, A., and Luthans, F. (1998), “Self-efficacy and Work-related Performance, A Meta-analysis,” Psychological Bul-

letin, 44, 580–590. 

Van Vegchel, S., De Jonge, J., and Landsbergis, P.A. (2005), “Occupational Stress in (Inter)action, The Interplay Between 

Job Demands and Job Resources,” Journal of Organizational Behaviour, 26, 535–560. 

Wright, T.A. (2003), “Positive Organizational Behaviour: An Idea Whose Time Has Truly Come,” Journal of Organiza-

tional Behaviour, 24, 437–442. 

Youssef, C.M., and Luthans, F. (2007), “Positive Organizational Behaviour in the Workplace: The Impact of Hope, Opti-

mism, and Resiliency,” Journal of Management, 33, 774–800.

