Green Supply Chain Management Practices and Performance 

Purpose  –  This  study  examines  the  deployment  of  pro-active  and  re-active  practices  in  the 

implementation  of  Green  Supply  Chain  Management  (GSCM)  and  analyzes  their  impact  on 

environmental,  economic,  and  intangible  performance  by  considering  business  strategy  as 

organizational focus. 

Design/methodology/approach – Data were collected from a sample of 190 ISO 14001 certified 

manufacturing companies in Thailand and used to test the research hypotheses.  Factor analysis 

was used to examine the construct validity while multivariate linear regression was usedd to test 

criteria validity.  

Findings – The threat of Legislation and regulation (re-active practices) was a consideration that 

resulted  in  companies  enhancing  their  environmental,  economic,  and  intangible  performance.  

Reverse  logistics  practices  (pro-active  practices)  had  low  levels  of  adoption  and  do  not  have  a 

significantly impact on GSCM performance.     

Research  limitations  –  This  study  did  not  consider  some  aspects  of  organizational  culture 

interaction between key customers/suppliers in the supply chain. 

Practical  implications  –The  results  of  this  study  suggest  that  organizations  need  to  be  aware 

that pursuing a low cost strategy may impact negatively on their ability to invest in GSCM. 

Originality/value  –  This  study  is  the  first  attempt  to  explore  GSCM  implementation  by 

considering business strategy and institutional drivers in the same context. 

Keywords:   Green supply chain management, performance, institutional theory 

Paper type:   Research paper 

1 


1.  Introduction 

Environmental  concerns  and  the  inclusion  of  green  practices  within  the  supply  chain  is  a 

subject that has become topical in academic literature.  This interest is mirrored by the increasing 

interest in the environment and climate change and the efforts by governments and organizations 

around the world to minimize their impact on the environment.  According to Sarkis (2012), the 

integration of environmental issues and supply chain management (SCM) has become a thriving 

subfield over the past two decades.  Despite its increasing popularity in industrialized countries, 

there  are  still  several  areas  of  green  supply  chain  management  (GSCM)  that  require  further 

research  particularly  as  greening  the  supply  chain  has  been  identified  as  a  key  issue  of 

sustainable  SCM  (Large  and  Thomsen,  2011;  Kenneth  et  al,  2012).    GSCM  has  also  begun  to 

gain  popularity  in  emerging  economy  countries  such  as  China  and  Malaysia.    For  example, 

Eltayeb  et  al.  (2011)  studied  the  outcomes  of  green  supply  chain  initiatives  among  ISO14001 

certified firms in Malaysia, whereas Zailani et al. (2012), carried out a study on GSCM research 

in Malaysia to analyze the impact of internal and external forces on environmental performance.  

However,  studies  in  the  context  of  other  emerging  economy  countries,  including  Thailand,  are 

still relatively rare. 

Hence,  this  study  examines  the  deployment  of  green  supply  chain  practices  and  evaluates 

associated  outcomes.    The  motivation  for  the  research  is  three-fold.  First,  although  there  are 

several  studies  that  examine  the  relationships  between  GSCM  practices  and  organizational 

performance  (Eltayeb  et  al.,  2011;  Sang  et  al,  2012),  there  is  a  dearth  of  studies  that  have 

considered  these  relationships  within  the  context  of  organizational  or  business  strategy.    Testa 

and  Iraldo  (2010)  identified  this  gap  and  proposed  the  need  to  consider  the  impact  of  business 

strategy  in  the  deployment  of  GSCM  initiatives.    Second,  most  studies  (Zhu  et  al.,  2005;  De 

Giovanni and Vinzi, 2012; Green et al., 2012) have examined the outcomes of GSCM within the 

context  of  tangible  measures  such  as  environmental,  operational,  and  economic  performance.  

Consequently,  research  on  intangible  outcomes  of  GSCM  practices  is  limited  (Eltayeb  et  al., 

2011).  Third, as manufacturing moves to Asia, awareness of green operations or sustainability 

has become important but relevant studies in Asian countries are not many (Lin et al., 2011; Zhu 

and  Sarkis,  2007;  Arlbjørn  and  Lu¨thje,  2012).    In  particular,  within  the  context  of  South  East 

Asia, if GSCM is to be widely implemented, links between practices and performance need to be 

2 


identified and so there is need for more GSCM research in the sub-region (Rao, 2002; Rao and 

Holt, 2005). 

This  study  also  examines  the  deployment  of  GSCM  and  regulatory  practices  and  analyzes 

their impact on environmental, economic and intangible performance using business strategy as a 

control  variable.    The  dimensions  of  business  strategy  considered  are  low  cost  leadership,  and 

quality  and  time-based  strategy.    The  evaluation  of  intangible  performance  includes  perception 

measures of both internal (employees) and external (customers and suppliers) stakeholders.  This 

study,  therefore,  makes  a  significant  contribution  to  on-going  research  that  relate  green 

practices/regulatory  practices  to  performance  outcomes  by  the  inclusion  of  a  different  set  of 

outcomes  within  the  context  of  business  strategy.    Furthermore,  data  was  collected  from  a 

developing country with an increasing global business presence but of which very little GSCM 

research has been carried out. 

2.  Literature Review 

2.1 Adoption of GSCM: Institutional Theory Perspective 

Several  organizational  theories  including  resource-based  view,  transaction  cost  economics, 

agency,  network  theory  and  institutional  theory  have  been  used  to  understand  how  companies 

adopt,  assimilate,  and  develop  operations  strategy  initiatives  such  as  total  quality  management 

(Anderson  et  al,  1999),  lean  manufacturing  (Ketokivi  and  Schroeder,  2004),  Six  Sigma 

(Braunscheidel et al, 2011), and supply chain management/green supply chain management (Zhu 

et al, 2005, Zhu et al, 2010; Lee and Cheong, 2011; Zailani et al, 2012) successfully.  Within the 

context  of  GSCM,  actors  in  the  supply  chain  operate  in  a  way  that  fulfills  both  customer  and 

legal  requirements.    Hence,  pressures  from  government  agencies  and  national/international 

regulators  will  influence  the  adoption  of  environmentally  responsible  behavior  (Delmas  and 

Toffel  2004;  Rivera  2004;  Zailani  et  al,  2012).    Narasimhan  and  Carter  (1998)  found  that 

companies have institutionalized environmental practices because of pressure from external and 

internal  forces  as  well  as  an  awareness  of  the  consequences  of  non-compliance  with 

environmental  imperatives.    If  companies  have  a  legitimate  concern  for  the  environment  and 

there is social approval, then environmental practices will be deployed more rapidly throughout 

the  supply  chain  (Carter  et  al.  2007).    There  are  several  studies  that  have  been  carried  out  in 

developed  countries  that  show  how  organizations  have  been  driven  by  institutional  norms  to 

3 


enhance competitive advantage by adopting environmental practices or GSCM.  Zhu et al (2007) 

and Sarkis et al (2011) reviewed a number of studies that considered institutional theory as a key 

driver in adopting GSCM and found that companies were mainly influenced by external drivers.  

These drivers include:  

(i) 

legislation  and  regulation  issued  by  governments  including,  the  applicability  of 

Waste  of  Electronics  and  Electrical  Equipment  (WEEE)  in  August  2005,  Kyoto 

Protocol’s  Clean  Development  Mechanism  (CDM)  in  2008  -  2012,  Climate 

Change  Act  (in  the  UK)  in  2008,  American  Clean  Energy  Bill  (USA)  in  2009, 

Restriction of Hazardous Substance (RoHS) in July 2006; and  

(ii) 

customer requirements such as the Sustainable Packaging Program  at Wal-Mart, 

Consumer  Electronics  Recycling  Program  at  Best  Buy,  Zero  Carbon  Store 

Program at Tesco, Leadership in Environmental Performance at Toyota in 2004, 

and Go Green Dealer Program at Ford in 2010 respectively.  

A  research  challenge  identified  in  their  study  is  to  understand  heterogeneous  responses  to 

GSCM implementation from institutional pressures exist.  Therefore, this theory still needs to be 

studied  and  particularly  so  in  emerging  economy  countries.    Therefore,  it  is  proposed  that  the 

institutional  norms  in  emerging  economy  countries  where  manufacturing  has  been  outsourced 

(Ferdows,  1997),  will  be  different  from  results  of  previous  studies  conducted  in  developed 

countries.   

2.2 GSCM Practices 

It  is  important  to  note that  the  growth  in  adoption of  green practices is,  in part, due to  the 

effect of institutional pressures driven by market and regulatory demands (Curkovic et al, 2000; 

Srivastava,  2007;  Kumar  and  Putnam,  2008).     According  to  Zhu  and  Sarkis  (2007),  economic 

performance  remains  the  top  priority  for  manufacturers  and,  in  particular,  those  in  developing 

economies.  Not  surprisingly,  there  are  several  studies  that  have  attempted  to  link  GSCM 

practices  with  organizational  performance.  While  some  studies  such  as  Zhu  and  Sarkis  (2004), 

Rao and Holt (2005) and Green et al. (2012) found positive relationships between environmental 

practices and organizational performance, other studies such as Giovanni  and Vinzi (2012) and 

Huang et al. (2012) showed that there is no significant relationship between such practices and 

4 


organizational  performance.  Yet  other  studies  including  Azevedo  et  al.  (2011)  and  Wu  and 

Pagell (2011) found a combination of positive and other relationships. 

The evidence from the literature, therefore, is that there is a lack of consensus on the impact 

of  GSCM  on  performance  outcomes.    This  conflict  was  recognized  and  discussed  in  different 

studies including those by Eltayeb et al., (2011) and Zhu et al. (2012).  Zhu et al. (2012) argued 

that the conflicting findings have the potential to become a barrier for organizations that intend 

to  implement  GSCM.    Based  on  the  literature  examined,  this  study  suggests  three  plausible 

sources  of  the  inconsistency.  First,  the  type  of  green  supply  chain  practices  implemented  can 

impact  performance  differently  (Azevedo  et  al.,  2011).    Secondly,  there  is  a  variety  of 

performance measures in use and this variation leads to complex relationship between practices 

and outcomes (Zhu et al., 2012).  Lastly, implementing GSCM practices in different settings can 

result in different performance outcomes (Koh et al., 2012). 

In common with some of these findings, Murphy and Poist (2003) mentioned that there is a 

lack of unified framework about green practices.  This lack of uniformity is clear in the literature. 

While some studies such as Diabat and Govindan (2011) argued that GSCM practices comprise 

green  design,  reducing  energy  consumption,  reusing/recycling  material  and  packaging,  reverse 

logistics  and  environmental  collaboration  in  the  supply  chain,  others  such  as  Wu  et  al.  (2011) 

claimed  that  green  practices  include  cleaner  production,  number  of  patents,  internal  service 

quality, green design, green purchasing and green innovation.   Zhu et al. (2005) suggested that 

green  practices  include  the  sale  of  excess  inventory,  sale  of  scrap  and  used  material, 

environmental  auditing  programs,  commitment  from  senior  managers  and  total  quality 

environment management.  

This  study  investigated  the  impact  of  both  pro-active  and  re-active  practices  in  the 

implementation  of  GSCM.    These  include  (i)  pro-active  practice  –  green  purchasing  practices, 

eco-design  practices,  reverse  logistics  practices,  and  (ii)  re-active  practice  –  legislation  and 

regulation.  Also, the study separated eco-design into product-related and packaging related eco-

design  practices.  The  study  categorized  green  performance  measures  into  environmental 

performance,  economic  performance,  and  intangible  performance  and  included  two  control 

variables,  low  cost  business  strategy  and  quality/time-based  business  strategy  -  to  explain  the 

variation in performance due to a firm’s strategic focus.   To increase the reliability and validity 

5 


of  the  survey  instrument,  multiple  indicators  were  used  to  measure  each  construct.    These 

measured items are discussed in the next section. 

2.1.1  Green Purchasing Practices 

The  adoption  of  green  purchasing  is  one  of  the  commonly  accepted  dimensions  of  GSCM 

practice.    According  to  Lee  (2008),  a  buying  organization  with  a  green  supply  chain  initiative 

will  pay  attention  to  green  practices  of  their  suppliers,  especially  the  small  and  medium-sized 

enterprises.    In  order  to  ensure  that  suppliers  meet  their  environmental  objectives,  the  buying 

firm may deploy collaboration-based activities that include training, environmental  information 

sharing  and  joint  research.    Other  organizations  may  adopt  a  less  collaborative  approach  by 

simply  demanding  that  their  suppliers  adopt  environmental  systems  such  as  ISO  14001.  

According  to  Heras-Saizarbitoria  et  al.  (2011)  and  Vachon  (2007),  external  motivators  and 

particularly, customer pressure are key drivers of the adoption of ISO 14001.   Other aspects of 

green purchasing that have been discussed in  the literature include the facilitation of recycling, 

reuse and resource reduction (Large and Thomsen, 2011; Diabat and Givindan, 2011).  There is 

also evidence that some organizations adopt a compliance and evaluative approach to the GSCM 

practices of their suppliers.  This involves evaluation of suppliers based on environmental criteria 

and  a  requirement  for  suppliers  to  develop  and  maintain  some  form  of  environmental 

management system (EMS) (Sarkis, 2012; Zhu et al., 2005; Large and Thomsen, 2011, Min and 

Galle, 2001). 

2.1.2  Eco-Design Practices 

The  importance  of  eco-design  was  identified  by  Buyukozkan  and  Cifci  (2012)  when  they 

revealed that about 80% of product-related impacts on the environment can be influenced during 

design.    Eco-design  practices  fall  into  two  main  categories  –  product-related  design  and 

packaging-related design.  With respect to product design, Min and Galle (2001) suggested that 

cost saving opportunities at the beginning of the supply chain tend to be greater and that buying 

organizations need to actively seek for opportunities to utilize recycled and reused components.  

However,  Wu  et  al.  (2011)  stressed  that  the  environmental  impacts  of  a  product  occur  at  all 

stages  of  its  lifecycle  and  they  identified  lifecycle  assessment  as  a  commonly  used  attribute  of 

GSCM.  Building on the theme of lifecycle impacts, Field and Sroufe (2007) noted that one of 

the sources of recycled materials is post-consumer waste while Zhu et al. (2005) suggested that it 

6 


is possible to sell or reuse products or their contents.  The implication is that it is important for 

organizations to ensure that their products comprise contents that can be reused or recycled.  This 

study  measured  product  related  eco-design  by  the  proportion  of  the  focal  firm’s  products  that 

contain recycled or used materials, the use of lifecycle assessment to evaluate the environmental 

load of products, and ensuring that recyclable or reusable contents are designed into the products. 

With respect to packaging related eco-design, a discussion of GSCM practices by Zhu et al. 

(2005) suggested that organizations and their suppliers should collaborate to ensure that they use 

green packaging for their products.  Other studies have identified elements of green packaging to 

include  ensuring  that  packaging  is  reusable  and  recyclable  (Large  and  Thomsen,  2011;  Carter 

and Carter, 1998), minimizing waste by reducing packaging (Walker et al., 2008), and avoidance 

of hazardous material (Buyukozkan and Cifci, 2012).   

2.1.3  Reverse Logistics Practices 

Recognition  of  the  strategic  importance  of  reverse  logistics  has  been  described  as  a 

significant  trend  in  GSCM  and  it  has  been  shown  that  efficient  reverse  logistics  networks  can 

provide  lucrative  economic  benefits  and  improve  organizational  competitiveness  (Buyukozkan 

and  Cifci,  2012;  Murphy  and  Poist,  2003).    Although  the  influence  of  reverse  logistics  on 

greening the supply chain  is  significant,  development  of the reverse logistics function typically 

lags  other  aspects  of  GSCM  (Xie  and  Breen,  2012).    Moreover,  according  to  Lau  and  Wang 

(2009),  the  development  of  reverse  logistics  is  at  an  infant  stage  in  most  developing  countries 

although  such  countries  are  increasingly  responsible  for  a  large  proportion  of  the  world 

manufacturing. They further stated that most studies on reverse logistics have been carried out in 

developed  countries.    Reverse  logistics  practices  that  have  been  identified  in  previous  studies 

include product returns and remanufacturing (Olorunniwo and Li, 2010), recovery, recycling and 

reuse  (Field  and  Sroufe,  2007)  and  redistribution  (Das,  2012).  These  practices  apply  to  final 

products,  their  components  (Das,  2012),  and  packaging  material  (Field  and  Sroufe,  2007).  

Furthermore, from the perspective of the focal  organization in  a supply chain,  reverse logistics 

activities apply to both the upstream and the downstream supply chain (Lau and Wang, 2009).   

2.1.4  Legislation and Regulatory Practices 

The  involvement  of  governmental  agencies  and  other  regulatory  bodies  in  GSCM  is  well 

documented  in  literature.    Chung  and  Wee  (2011)  and  Sheu  (2011)  noted  that  effective  green 

7 


regulation and incentive programs have been developed as a result of government intervention in 

several countries.  Chen and Sheu (2009) went further to suggest that relevant public policies are 

central to substantiating the greening of the supply chain.  Lu et al. (2007) and Hitchcock (2012) 

noted that legislation and regulatory practices are manifested in different ways  such as PPW in 

2004,  WEEE  and  RoHS  in  2003,  and  EUP  in  2005.    Lu  et  al.  (2007)  noted  that  many 

organizations are making efforts  to  accelerate the greening of their supply  chain  in  response to 

stringent  legislation and  regulation.  These efforts include proactively  addressing environmental 

and social concerns in advance of regulation (Zailani et al. 2012). 

2.3 Performance Measures in Implementing GSCM Practices 

The house of sustainable SCM proposed by Teuteberg and Wittstruck (2012) identified three 

dimensions of performance – environmental, economic and social. The study, therefore, differed 

from others on GSCM performance as most of these studies focused primarily on environmental, 

operational and economic performance (Zhu et al., 2005; Azevedo et al. 2011; De Giovanni and 

Vinzi,  2012;  Green  et  al.,  2012).    The  importance  of  a  social  dimension  to  GSCM  had  been 

discussed  in  the  literature,  primarily  in  relation  to  developed  economies.    Eltayeb  et  al.  (2011) 

argued that intangible outcomes such as company  image, product  image, employee satisfaction 

and  customer  loyalty  or  satisfaction  had  not  received  much  attention  as  outcomes  of  GSCM 

despite studies such as Testa and Iralado (2010) and Xie and Breen (2012) asserting that GSCM 

can  result  in  improved  brand  image,  better  relations  with  stakeholders  and  improved  personnel 

motivation. 

Zailani  et al. (2012) measured social performance in terms of  product image and company 

image  with  customers  and  community  stakeholders.    This  study  adopted  the  performance 

measure intangible performance based on Eltayeb et al (2011) rather than the social performance 

proposed  by  Teuteberg  and  Wittstruck  (2012)  as  the  socio-economic  and  market  conditions  of 

this study are more aligned with the former.  Based on literature, this study measured intangible 

performance  in  terms  of  product  image,  customer  loyalty  and  satisfaction  and  company  image 

with  suppliers,  customers  and  employees.    The  study  also  measured  economic  performance  in 

terms  of  reduced  cost  and  increased  profitability  (Lin  et  al.,  2011;  Green  et  al.,  2012),  and 

environmental  performance  in  terms  of  reduction  in  air  emission,  energy  consumption, 

hazardous material, material usage and compliance to environmental standards (Zhu et al., 2012 

8 


and 2008; Rao, 2002). While the relationship between practices and economic and environmental 

performance  in  developed  economies  has  been  extensively  discussed  in  literature  (Azevedo  et 

al.,  2011,  Xie  and  Breen,  2012),  the  relationships  between  green  practices  and  intangible 

performance, especially in developing economy countries, remains relatively unexplored. 

2.4 Business Strategy 

This  study  examines  the  intricate  relationship  between  green  practices  and  organizational 

performance within the context of the business strategy adopted by organizations.  This context 

has not been given much attention by previous studies even though a few studies have alluded to 

the  importance  of  understanding  the  role  of  business  strategy.    Buyukozkan  and  Cifci  (2012) 

suggested that green supply chain evaluation needs to ‘make sense from a business perspective’ 

and  they  identified  cost,  quality,  delivery  and  flexibility  as  key  dimensions  that  could  be 

considered.  Testa and Iraldo (2010) also noted the importance of using environmental practices 

that  reflect  an  organization’s  business  strategy  while  Wu  and  Pagell  (2010)  wrote  that 

organizations  need  to  balance  their  business  model  and  environmental  issues.  Several  studies 

have  examined  the  business  strategies  of  organizations  and  their  basis  for  competing  in  their 

respective  markets.    Cost,  quality,  reliability  and  flexibility  have  often  been  identified  as 

competitive  priorities  for  many  organizations  (Kathuria,  2000;  Ferdows  and  De  Meyer,  1990; 

Ward and Duray, 2000; Boyer and Lewis, 2002).  With particular reference to Thailand, a study 

by Phusavat and Kanchana (2007) found that quality was the most important competitive priority 

for  manufacturers.    Delivery  was  also  identified  as  an  important  competitive  priority.  

Surprisingly, however, cost  was not  highly ranked as a competitive priority even though South 

East  Asian  countries  are  considered  to  be  low-cost  manufacturing  countries.  This  study 

considered low cost strategy and quality and time-based strategy as relevant control variables. 

3.  Research Framework and Hypotheses 

The research framework and associated hypotheses are shown in Figure 1.   

____________________________ 

Insert Figure 1 

____________________________ 

9 


The authors believe that the implementation of GSCM practices and their potential impacts 

on  the  outcome  variable  may  be  influenced  by  organizational  strategy.    According  to  Min  and 

Galle  (2011),  adopting  GSCM  practices  will  involve  set-up  costs  that  an  organisation  without 

significant  financial  resources  may  be  unable  to  afford.    The  implication  is  that  organizations 

with  a  low-cost  focused  strategy  may  find  it  difficult  to  adopt  GSCM  practices  and  this  may 

impact  the outcomes achieved.  In addition  to  a cost-based strategy, organisation strategies also 

commonly focus on quality and time (Ward and Duray, 2000; Boyer and Lewis; 2002; Phusavat 

and Kanchana, 2007).  This study suggests that these strategies may also impact on the adoption 

of GSCM practices and their outcomes since such practices cannot be removed from the overall 

strategic  direction  of  the  organization.    The  following  set  of  hypotheses  argue  that  a  firm’s 

business  strategy  is  significantly  associated  with  environmental,  economic  and  intangible 

performance.    For  example,  a  low-cost  strategy  precludes  a  firm  from  investing  heavily  in 

environment  improvement,  so  the  relationship  should  be  negatively  related.    It  is  therefore 

proposed that: 

H1:  A low-cost business strategy is inversely associated with environmental performance. 

H2:  A low-cost business strategy is inversely associated with economic performance. 

H3:  A low-cost business strategy is inversely associated with intangible performance. 

H4:  A quality and time-based business strategy is positively associated with environmental 

performance. 

H5:  A  quality  and  time-based  business  strategy  is  positively  associated  with  economic 

performance.  

H6:  A  quality  and  time-based  business  strategy  is  positively  associated  with  intangible 

performance. 

The use of performance outcomes to evaluate  GSCM initiatives has been acknowledged in 

previous  studies  (Zhu  et  al.,  2005;  Azevedo  et  al.  2011;  Green  et  al.,  2012).    According  to 

Buyukozkan and Cifci (2012), it is important to use environmental and non-environmental-based 

measures to evaluate green supply chains.  This is because in addition to enabling the greening of 

the  supply  chain,  the  initiative  needs  to  be  sensible  when  viewed  from  a  business  perspective.  

The  potential  impacts  of  different  GSCM  practices  have  also  been  discussed  in  literature.  

10 


According  to  Kumar  et  al.  (2012),  GSCM  practices  provide  the  potential  for  cost  savings, 

improved  efficiency  and  attracting  new  suppliers  and  customers.    They  further  explained  that 

specific  reasons  for  adopting  GSCM  practices 

included 

improved  brand  reputation, 

compensating  for  global  warming  and  increasing  energy  and  commodity  prices  as  well  as 

improved  supply  chain  integration.    On  the  basis  of  this  and  of  the  earlier  discussion  on 

performance  measures  in  the  literature  section,  the  hypotheses  in  this  study  are  based  on  three 

environmental and non-environmental outcomes. 

This study aims to examine whether different green supply chain practices can impact on all 

three  dimensions  of  outcomes  that  have  been  identified.    For  example,  according  to  Koh  et  al 

(2012), eco-product design implies effective use of materials and waste reduction.  Reduction of 

waste  can  lead  to  better  costs  for  the  organisation  and  better  use  of  materials  can  positively 

impact  environmental  performance  while  eco-designed  products  can  lead  to  improved  brand 

image.    A  similar  argument  applies  to  eco-packaging  design  which  is  typified  by  reusable  and 

recyclable  packaging,  waste  minimization  by  means  of  reduced  packaging  and  reduction  or 

elimination  of  hazardous  material  in  packaging  (Carter  and  Carter,  1998;  Walker  et  al.,  2008; 

Large  and  Thomsen,  2011;  Buyukozkan  and  Cifci,  2012).  Similarly,  regulatory  practices 

typically involve the reduction or elimination of hazardous materials in products and packaging 

and  well  as  the  adoption  of  recycling,  reuse  and  environmentally-friendly  disposal  (Lu  et  al., 

2007;  Hitchcock,  2012)  and  these  can  all  impact  cost,  company/brand  image  and  the 

environment.  The following set of hypotheses argue that  GSCM practices significantly predict 

the  level  of  environmental,  economic  and  intangible  performance  of  a  firm.    It  is,  therefore, 

proposed that: 

H7:  Green purchasing has a positive impact on environmental performance. 

H8:  Product-related eco-design has a positive impact on environmental performance. 

H9:  Packaging-related eco-design has a positive impact on environmental performance. 

H10:  Reverse logistics has a positive impact on environmental performance. 

H11:  Legislation and regulation have a positive impact on environmental performance. 

 

H12:  Green purchasing has a positive impact on economic performance. 

11 


H13:  Product-related eco-design has a positive impact on economic performance. 

H14:  Packaging-related eco-design has a positive impact on economic performance. 

H15:  Reverse logistics has a positive impact on economic performance. 

H16:  Legislation and regulation have a positively impact on economic performance. 

 

H17:  Green purchasing has a positive impact on intangible performance. 

H18:  Product-related eco-design has a positive impact on intangible performance. 

H19:  Packaging-related eco-design has a positive impact on intangible performance. 

H20:  Reverse logistics has a positive impact on intangible performance. 

H21:  Legislation and regulation have a positive impact on intangible performance. 

 

4.  Research Design, Analyses and Results 

4.1 Research Instrument Design 

The  survey  instrument  was  adapted  from  Zailani  et  al.  (2012).    In  the  original  survey 

instrument used in Zailani et al. (2012), the authors noted that there were few large-scale studies 

in  the  area  of  eco-design,  its  drivers  and  effect  on  environmental  outcomes.    Hence,  they 

included  the  few  available  measures  and  constructed  new  items  in  their  survey  instrument.  

Similar to Zailani et al. (2012), this study uses a five-point Likert scale ranging from 1 = “low” 

to  5  =  “high”  in  the  survey  instrument  to  quantify  the  existence  of  each  measure.  The 

questionnaire was double-translated from English to Thai and then back to English before being 

sent to prospective respondents. This was done to ensure that the content was consistent with the 

original  version.  The  process  was  facilitated  by  the  research  team  which  consisted  of  a  native 

Thai speaker. 

To  assess  the  coercive  mechanisms  that  force  firms  to  adopt  GSCM  initiatives,  items  that 

reflect legislation, regulation, and customer pressures, both newly constructed and adapted from 

Carter and Carter (1998), Carter and Ellram (1998), and Darnall (2006) were used.  Zailani et al. 

(2012)  introduced  some  new  items  to  assess  green  supply  chain  practices.    Eco-design  is  the 

12 


environmentally  conscious  design  of  a  product  and  its  packaging  to  reduce  adverse 

environmental  effects  throughout  its  entire  life.    The  seven  measured  items  were  adapted  from 

Sarkis (1998) and Zhu et al. (2007).  These items were grouped into product related eco-design 

(three items) and packaging-related eco-design (four items). 

The  fifteen  GSCM  performance 

items  were  grouped 

into 

three  broad  groups—

environmental  (5  items),  economic  (4  items),  and  intangible  (6  items)  performance.    Specific 

items  come  from  Zhu  et  al  (2007)  and  Rao  (2002).    Environmental  performance  measures  the 

actual  impacts  of  green  supply  chain  initiatives,  such  as  compliance  with  environmental 

standards,  reduced  air  emissions,  decreased  resource  consumption,  and  lower  consumption  of 

hazardous materials. Economic performance measures the general improvement in profitability, 

and  reduction  in  production  and  material  costs.    Intangible  performance  measures  the  firm’s 

performance  in  customer  satisfaction,  loyalty,  product  and  the  firm’s  image.    Respondents 

indicated the performance outcomes on a five-point Likert scale (1 = “low,” 5 = “high”), based 

on the achievements in the past three years as a result of their GSCM initiatives.  

4.2 Sampling Procedure 

In order to ensure that GSCM initiatives had been adopted and implemented at the firm level 

by respondent organizations, the sampled population was limited to companies who had received 

ISO  14001  Environmental  Management  System  (EMS)  certification  in  Thailand.    The  list  of 

these  companies  was  obtained  from  Thai  Industrial  Standards  Institute  (TISI)  (available  at 

www.tisi.co.th). Previous studies show that experience in implementing ISO 14001 EMS scheme 

leads  companies  to  implement  green  supply  chain  initiatives  (Darnall  et  al.;  2008;  Zhu  et  al.; 

2008).  Data was collected from the sample companies by sending the survey instrument to their 

EMS  project  management  department  and  specifically,  the  Environmental  Management 

Representative (EMR).   

The  instrument  was  pre-tested  by  experts  in  the  implementation  of  GSCM  in  Thailand.  

These  experts  were  five  ISO  14001  assessors,  six  EMS  consultants,  and  three  academics  with 

research interests in this area.  Thereafter, a one-day round table meeting was conducted among 

the  experts  to  validate  all  green  supply  chain  initiatives  indicated  in  the  instrument  and  to 

confirm that the survey was relevant within the context of Thai industry.  The final version of the 

survey instrument was sent to 502 companies listed in the TISI database in October 2011.  One 

13 


hundred and ninety (190) valid responses were returned indicating a 37.85% response rate. Table 

1 shows the respondents’ profile. 

____________________________ 

Insert Table 1 

____________________________ 

 

4.3 Non-response bias 

To test for non-response bias, the responses of early and late waves of returned surveys were 

compared based on the assumption that the opinions of late respondents are representative of the 

opinions of the theoretical non-respondents (Rogelberg and Stanton, 2007). The result of t-tests 

yielded  no  statistically  significant  differences  between  early-wave  and  late-wave  groups, 

suggesting that non-response bias was not a problem. 

5.  Results 

5.1 Factor analysis and descriptive statistical analysis 

Table  2  shows  results  from  the  study.    The  internal  consistency  of  the  constructs  was 

verified by using Cronbach’s  and the results indicate that all the values are above 0.7 and this 

confirms  that  the  constructs  are  acceptable  (Cronbach,  1951).  The  indicators  for  the  Green 

Purchasing construct explain 63.74% of the total variance in the data.  The values for the other 

constructs  are  as  follows:  Product-Related  Eco-Design  (66.17%);  Packaging-Related  Eco-

Design 

(65.55%);  Reverse  Logistics 

(64.30%);  Legislation  &  Regulation 

(70.35%); 

Environmental  Performance  (71.91%);  Economic  Performance  (75.22%),  and  Intangible 

Performance  (75.02%)  respectively.  Factor  loadings  for  all  indicators  are  above  0.7  with  the 

exception of B3 (ensure purchased materials contain green attributes) which had a factor loading 

of 0.697. 

A  Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin  Measure  of  Sampling  Adequacy  (KMO)  value  close  to  1  indicates 

the sum of partial correlations is relatively compact, and factor analysis should yield distinct and 

reliable factors. Kaiser (1974) recommends KMO values of greater than .50 as acceptable.  Table 

2 shows that KMO values for all the eight constructs are higher than .50, hence suggesting that 

14 


factor analysis is appropriate for the data.   Bartlett’s Sphericity Test checks the null hypothesis 

that  the  correlation  matrix is  an  identity  matrix  (i.e.,  all  correlation  coefficients  are  zero).    The 

Bartlett’s tests for all eight constructs reject the null hypothesis at  = 5% to reaffirm that factor 

analysis is appropriate for the data. 

____________________________ 

Insert Table 2 

____________________________ 

Table  2  also  shows  the means  for  each  of  the  constructs’  components.  With  respect  to  the 

practices,  it  is  clear  that,  on  average,  the  Reverse  Logistics  construct  contains  the  weakest 

practices  followed  by  the  Product-Related  Eco-Design  construct.  The  strongest  practices  are 

found  in  the  Legislation  &  Regulation  construct,  followed  by  Packaging-Related  Eco-Design 

practices  and  finally  by  Green  Purchasing  practices.    The  suggestion,  therefore,  is  that  Thai 

Manufacturers pay greatest attention to and are driven primarily by legislation, regulation and the 

need to reflect green practices in the design of packaging material.  In contrast there is much less 

focus  on  reverse  logistics,  implying  that  collecting  and  ensuring  recycling  of  used  products  or 

packaging  is  not  seen  as  much  of  a  priority  in  contrast  to  other  practices.    Similarly,  the 

manufacture of products that use recyclable contents that are themselves recyclable or reusable 

(Product-Related  Eco-Design)  is  not  as  highly  practiced  when  compared  to  most  other  green 

supply chain practices. 

With respect to the performance constructs, all three constructs show relatively high levels 

of  attainment  although,  on  average,  economic  performance  was  slightly  weaker  than  the  other 

two constructs. The implication is that many that manufacturers are attaining a positive image of 

their organizations and products in the perceptions of employees, suppliers and customers while 

simultaneously,  reducing  their  consumption  and  air  pollution  and  also  complying  with 

environmental standards. 

5.2 Multivariate Linear Regression Model 

A multivariate general linear regression model was used to test the study’s hypotheses. The 

first sets of hypotheses examined whether business strategy has an impact on firm performance 

as indicated in H1 to H6. The results show that a low-cost strategy has negative relationships with 

15 


all three dimensions of  performance but  none of these relationships are statistically significant. 

As a result of these relationships not being statistically significant, the research failed to support 

H1  to  H3.  In  contrast,  the  results  indicate  that  a  quality  and  time-based  strategy  is  positively 

related  to  environmental  performance  (H4),  economic  performance  (H5),  and  intangible 

performance (H6). Therefore, these three hypotheses are supported 

The second set of hypotheses (H7 to H21) examined the relationships between green supply 

chain  practices  and  the  three  dimensions  of  performance.  The  results  from  table  3  show  that 

environmental performance is positively related to green purchasing practices ( = .169) as well 

as legislation and regulation ( = .211). Consequently,  the findings support H7 and  H11. H12 to 

H16 examined the relationships between green supply chain practices and economic performance 

and the results suggest that economic performance is positively related to packaging-related eco-

design  practices  (  =  .170)  as  well  as  legislation  and  regulation  (  =  .162).  Consequently,  the 

findings support H14 and H16. H17 to H21 examined the relationships between green supply chain 

practices  and  intangible  performance.  The  results  show  that  there  are  positive  relationships 

between product-related  eco-design practices  ( = 150), packaging-related eco-design practices 

(  =  .192),  legislation  and  regulation  (  =  .160)  and  intangible  performance.  Therefore,  the 

findings  support  H18,  H19,  and  H21  respectively.  All  other  hypotheses  are  not  supported  by  the 

finding from the study. Considering H11, H16 and H21, it is interesting to note that legislation and 

regulation  are  positively  related  to  all  dimensions  of  performance  while  reverse  logistics 

practices  are  not  significantly  associated  with  any  of  the  dimensions  of  performance.  Table  4 

summarizes the final decision on whether the proposed hypotheses are supported or not. 

 

____________________________ 

Insert Table 3 

____________________________ 

____________________________ 

Insert Table 4 

____________________________ 

16 


 

5.3 Correlation Analysis of Environmental Performance, Economics Performance, and Intangible 

Performance 

The  study  also  examined  whether  there  are  significant  relationships  between  the  green 

supply  chain  performance  dimensions  as  indicated  in  previous  studies  (De  Giovanni  and 

Esposito, 2012).  As indicated in Table 5, all three dimensions of GSCM performance are related 

to  each other.   Environmental  performance is significantly correlated to  economic performance 

(Pearson  Correlation  =  0.505)  and  intangible  performance  (Pearson  Correlation  =  0.705)  while 

economic  performance  is  correlated  to  intangible  performance  (Pearson  Correlation  =  0.600). 

These imply that the performance dimensions of GSCM are highly correlated to each other and 

that GSCM  practices that have an effect  on one  dimension of performance are likely to  have a 

secondary effect on other dimensions. 

____________________________ 

Insert Table 5 

____________________________ 

 

6.  Discussion 

The  findings  from  this  study  clearly  show  the  importance  of  legislation  and  regulation  to 

GSCM  implementation  by  Thai  manufacturers.  The  fear  of  legislation  associated  with 

compliance with environmental standards and regulations is clearly the most important driver for 

these  organizations.    The  authors  believe  that  these  are  defensive  and  reactionary  drivers  of 

practice  and  performance.    The  fact  that  the  legislative  and  regulatory  drivers  are  the  only 

practices  associated  with  all  three  dimensions  of  performance  further  confirm  their  levels  of 

importance  and  the  perceptive  priority  in  which  they  are  held  by  Thai  manufacturers.    In 

contrast,  the  level  of  adoption  of  reverse  logistics  is  relatively  low  and  it  is  not  significantly 

associated with any of the dimensions of performance. There may indeed be many varied reasons 

why the adoption of reverse logistics is low.   For example, manufacturers may believe that the 

cost of putting in place a reverse logistics infrastructure is prohibitive compared to the gains that 

they foresee. It may also be possible that, depending on the product, reverse logistics is seen as 

17 


impractical  or  it  may  well  be  that  the  culture  of  recycling  is  not  deeply  entrenched  in  Thai 

society.  Thai  manufacturers  have  either  failed  to  recognize  the  role  that  recycling  can  play  in 

improving  their  performance  or  have  decided  to  ignore  it  in  favor  of  other  green  supply  chain 

practices.    A  study  by  Lau  and  Wang  (2009),  suggested  that  reverse  logistics  adoption  in  the 

Chinese  electronics  industry  suffer  from  lack  of  enforceable  laws,  prohibitive  high  cost  of 

investment  and  low  public  awareness  of  environmental  protection.    This  study  would  suggest 

that  these  factors  may  also  be  applicable  in  Thailand.    In  particular,  the  high  priority  given  to 

legislation  and  regulation  in  contrast  to  reverse  logistics  and  product  related  eco-design  would 

suggest that there are no regulations to motivate adoption of the latter two.  It would also suggest 

that  a  reactive  approach  to  green  supply  chain  practices  is  more  dominant  than  a  proactive 

approach. 

Previous  studies  have  found  a  link  between  green  supply  chain  practices  and  financial 

performance and it has also been suggested that the processes that reduce waste and cut costs can 

not  only  improve  financial  performance  but  can  also  improve  environmental  performance 

(Curkovic  et  al.,  2000;  Wu  and  Pagell,  2011).    It  has  also  been  suggested  that  economic 

performance is the primary priority for manufacturers in developing countries (Zhu and Sarkis, 

2007).    However,  the  fact  that  Thai  manufacturers  only  positively  associate  packaging  related 

eco-design  and  legislation  and  regulations  with  economic  performance  suggests  a  failure  to 

understand  the  interlinked  nature  of  green  supply  chain  practices  and  how  practices  such  as 

product-related eco-design (e.g. using recycled materials, ensuring products are recyclable) and 

reverse  logistics  can  not  only  impact  environmental  and  intangible  performance,  but  can  also 

impact  economic  performance.    This  interlinked  nature  was  also  confirmed  in  the  paper  by 

Kumar et al (2012).  Furthermore, there is a disconnect between the high levels of attainment in 

intangible  performance  and  the  relatively  high  levels  of  adoption  on  green  purchasing  and  it 

appears that Thai manufacturers have not recognized or fully exploited the positive impact that 

green purchasing practices can have on their products and their corporate image.   

The  study  also  found  significant  positive  relationships  between  a  quality  and  time-based 

strategy  and  all  three  dimensions  of  performance  but  no  significant  relationships  were  found 

between  a  low  cost  strategy  and  any  of  the  dimensions  of  performance.    The  indication  is  that 

organizations  that  choose  a  low-cost  strategy  are  unlikely  to  invest  in  the  adoption  of  green 

supply  chain  practices  as  a  route  to  improving  performance.    Clearly,  putting  in  place  the 

18 


infrastructure to implement green practices would require resources that may not be available to 

a low-cost organization or that may be reflected in product pricing and thereby negating the low-

cost  strategy.   On the other hand, organizations that have a quality  and time-based strategy  are 

much more likely to link green supply chain practices with their strategy.   It can be argued, for 

example, that producing products or using packaging that is recycled/recyclable and that avoids 

hazardous  material  requires  a  certain  level  of  inherent  quality  development  and  time-focused 

processes and infrastructure to facilitate the logistics of recycling. 

7.  Conclusions and Managerial Implications  

This  study  has  examined  pro-active  and  re-active  practices  in  implementing  green  supply 

chain  and  its  association  with  performance  among  Thai  manufacturers.  It  has  found  that 

legislation and regulation is regarded as a priority and is a key driver of environmental, economic 

and intangible performance while reverse logistics has relatively low adoption levels and was not 

significantly linked with  any of the dimensions of performance.    The study  has also  found that 

manufacturers that pursue a low cost strategy are less likely to adopt the green practices that will 

lead to a positive association with the three dimensions of performance examined in this study.  

Conversely, organizations that adopt a quality and time-based strategy are more likely to invest 

in green supply chain practices that will lead to a significant positive association with the three 

dimensions  of  performance.  The  study  has  also  argued  that  Thai  manufacturers  appear  to  have 

failed  to  understand  the  potential  link  between  some  green  supply  chain  practices  and  some 

dimensions of performance.  It can therefore be suggested that if this link is properly understood 

and  prioritized,  the  manufacturers  may  place  more  emphasis  on  pro-active  green  supply  chain 

practices  (as  opposed  to  reactive  practices  driven  by  legislation  and  regulation)  and  thereby 

improve their performance levels even more.  There are clearly developmental issues still to be 

considered  in  the  Thai  manufacturing  industry  within  the  context  of  green  supply  chain 

management. 

This  study  has  significant  managerial  implications  for  Thai  manufacturing  industry  and 

potentially other developing countries. First, Thai manufacturers need to understand the potential 

positive  impact  that  green  supply  chain  practices  can  have  on  different  dimensions  of 

performance and consequently, be more pro-active in their adoption of such practices.  Secondly, 

the country’s authorities need to recognize the impact of legislation and regulation on the actions 

19 


of  manufacturers  and  consider  how  this  can  be  utilized  to  further  enhance  green  supply  chain 

practices e.g. recycling and reuse of products and packaging.  Thirdly, organizations need to be 

aware  that  pursuing  a  low  cost  strategy  may  impact  on  their  ability  to  invest  in  green  supply 

chain  practices  and  this  not  only  precludes  them  from  gaining  the  associated  benefits  but  may 

leave them vulnerable and exposed to future legislation and regulations. 

Academically, there is a need to understand the missing links between some of the GSCM 

practices and some of the dimensions of performance considered in  this study.   There is  also  a 

need to examine infrastructure and strategies for reverse logistics in developing countries such as 

Thailand. 

Acknowledgement 

This  work  was  supported  by  the  Higher  Education  Research  Promotion  and  National 

Research University Project of Thailand, Office of Higher Education Commission. The authors 

would  like  to  thank  the  Faculty  of  Engineering,  Thammasat  University  for  supporting  this 

research project. 

References 

Anderson, S.W., Daly J.D. and Johnson M.F.  (1999), “Why firms seek  ISO 9000 certification: 

regulatory  compliance  or  competitive  Advantage?”,  Production  and  Operations 

Management, Vol. 8 No. 1, pp. 28-43. 

Arlbjørn  J.S.,  and  Lu¨thje  T.  (2012),”Global  operations  and  their  interaction  with  supply  chain 

performance”, Industrial Management & Data Systems, Vol. 112 No. 7, pp. 1044-1064 

Azevedo, S., Carvalho, H., and Machado, V. (2011), “The influence of green practices on supply 

chain performance: A case study”, Transportation Research Part E, Vol. 47, pp. 850-871. 

Boyer, K. and Lewis, M. (2002), “Competitive priorities: investigating the need for trade-offs in 

operations strategy”, Production and Operations Management, Vol. 11 No. 1, pp. 9-20. 

Braunscheidel  M.J.,  Hamister  J.W.,  Suresh  N.C.,  Star  H.  (2011),  “An  institutional  theory 

perspective  on  Six  Sigma  adoption”,  International  Journal  of  Operations  &  Production 

Management, Vol. 31 No. 4, pp. 423-451. 

20 


Buyukozkan, G. and Cifci, G. (2012), “Evaluation of green supply chain management practices: 

a fuzzy ANP approach”, Production Planning and Control, Vol. 23 No. 6, pp. 405-418. 

Carter,  C.R.  and  Carter,  J.R.  (1998),  “Inter-organizational  determinants  of  environmental 

purchasing: initial evidence from the consumer products industries”, Decision Sciences, Vol. 

29 No. 3, pp. 659-684. 

Carter,  C.R.  and  Ellram,  L.M.  (1998),  “Reverse  logistics:  a  review  of  the  literature  and 

framework  for  future  investigation”,  Journal  of  Business  Logistics,  Vol.  19  No.  1,  pp.  85-

102. 

Carter  J.C.,  Smeltzer  L.,  and  Narasimhan  R.  (2000),  “Human  resource  management  within 

purchasing management: Its relationship to total quality management success”, The Journal 

of Supply Chain Management, Vol. 36 No. 2, pp. 52-62. 

Chen,  Y.  and  Sheu,  J-B.  (2009),  “Environmental  regulation  pricing  strategies  for  green  supply 

chain management”, Transportation Research Part E, Vol. 45, pp. 667-677. 

Chung, C-J.and Wee, H-M. (2011), “Short life-cycle deteriorating product remanufacturing in a 

green  supply  chain  inventory  control  system”,  International  Journal  of  Production 

Economics, Vol. 129, No.1, pp. 195-203. 

Cronbach, L.J. (1951), “Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests”, Psychometrika, Vol. 

16, pp. 297-334. 

Curkovic,  S.,  Melnyk,  S.,  Handfield,  R.,  Calantone,  R.  (2000),  “Investigating  the  linkage 

between  total  quality  management  and  environmentally  responsible  manufacturing”,  IEEE 

Transactions on Engineering Management, Vol. 47 No. 4, pp. 444– 464. 

Darnall, N. (2006), “Why firms mandate ISO 14001 certification”, Business & Society, Vol. 45 

No. 3, pp. 354-381. 

Das,  K.  (2012),  “Integrating  reverse  logistics  into  the  strategic  planning  of  a  supply  chain”, 

International Journal of Production Research, Vol. 50, No. 5, pp. 1438-1456. 

De  Giovanni,  P.  and  Esposito  Vinzi,  V.  (2012),  “Covariance  versus  component-based 

estimations  of  performance  in  green  supply  chain  management”,  International  Journal  of 

Production Economics, Vol. 135, No.2, pp. 907-916. 

21 


Delmas  M.,  and  Toffel,  M.W.  (2004),  “Environmental  management  practices:  an  institutional 

framework”, Business Strategy and the Environment, Vol. 13, pp. 209-222. 

Diabat, A. and Govindan, K. (2011), “An analysis of the drivers affecting the implementation of 

green supply chain management”, Resources, Conservation and Recycling, Vol. 55, pp. 659-

667. 

Eltayeb, T., Zailani, S. and Ramayah, T. (2011), “Green supply chain initiatives among certified 

companies  in  Malaysia  and  environmental  sustainability:  Investigating  the  outcomes”, 

Resources, Conservation and Recycling, Vol. 55, pp. 495-506. 

Ferdows,  K.  (1997),  Making  the  most  of  foreign  factories,  Harvard  Business  Review,  March-

April, pp. 73-88. 

Ferdows, K. and De Meyer, A. (1990), “Lasting improvements in manufacturing performance: in 

search of a new theory”, Journal of Operations Management, Vol. 9 No. 2, pp. 168-183. 

Field, J. and Sroufe, R. (2007), “The use of recycled materials in manufacturing: implications for 

supply  chain  management  and  operations  strategy”,  International  Journal  of  Production 

Research, Vol. 45 No. 18/19, pp. 4439 – 4463. 

Green, K., Zelbst, P., Meacham, J. and Bhadauria, V. (2012), “Green Supply Chain Management 

Practices:  Impact  on  performance”,  Supply  Chain  Management-An  International  Journal, 

Vol. 17 No.3, pp. 1-44.  

Heras-Saizarbitoria,  I.,  Landín,  G.  and  Molina-Azorín,  J.  (2011),  “Do  drivers  matter  for  the 

benefits  of  ISO  14001?”,  International  Journal  of  Operations  &  Production  Management, 

Vol. 31 No. 2, pp. 192-216. 

Hitchcock,  T.  (2012),  “Low  carbon  and  green  supply  chains:  the  legal  drivers  and  commercial 

pressures”, Supply Chain Management-An International Journal, Vol. 17 No. 1, pp. 98-101. 

Huang, Y-C., Wu, Y- C. and Rahman, S. (2012), “The task environment, resource commitment 

and  reverse  logistics  performance:  evidence  from  the  Taiwanese  high-tech  sector”, 

Production Planning and Control, Vol. 23, No. 10-11, pp. 851-863 

Kaiser, H. F. (1974), “An index of factoral simplicity”, Psychometnka, Vol. 39, pp. 31-36. 

22 


Kathuria, R. (2000), “Competitive priorities and  managerial  performance:  a taxonomy of small 

manufacturers”, Journal of Operations Management, Vol. 18 No. 6, pp. 627-641. 

Kenneth  W.  G.,  Jr,  Zelbst  P.J.,  Bhadauria  V.  S.,  and  Meacham  J.  (2012),  “Do  environmental 

collaboration 

and  monitoring 

enhance  organizational  performance?”, 

Industrial 

Management & Data Systems, Vol. 112 No. 2, pp. 186-205 

Ketokivi,  M.A.  and  Schroeder,  R.G.  (2004),  “Strategic,  structural  contingency  and  institutional 

explanations in the adoption of innovative manufacturing practices”, Journal of Operations 

Management, Vol. 22 No.1, pp. 63-89.  

Koh, S.C.L., Gunasekaran, A. and Tseng, C.S. (2012), “Cross-tier ripple and indirect effects of 

directives  WEEE  and  RoHS  on  greening  a  supply  chain”,  International  Journal  of 

Production Economics, Vol. 140.No.1, pp.305-317. 

Kumar,  S.  and  Putnam,  V.  (2009),  “Cradle  to  cradle:  Reverse  logistics  strategies  and 

opportunities across three industry sector”, International Journal of Production Economics, 

Vol. 115 No. 2, pp. 305-315. 

Kumar, S., Teichman, T. and Timpernagel, T. (2012), “A green supply chain is a requirement for 

Profitability”, International Journal of Production Research, Vol. 50, No. 5, pp. 1278-1296. 

Lee, S. M., Kim, S.T., and Choi, D. (2012), “Green supply chain management and organizational 

performance”, Industrial Management & Data Systems, Vol. 112, No. 8, pp. 1148 – 1180. 

Lee K-H and Cheong I-M. (2011),”Measuring a carbon footprint and environmental practice: the 

case of Hyundai Motors Co. (HMC)”, Industrial Management & Data Systems, Vol. 111 No. 

6, pp. 961-978 

Large,  R.O.  and  Thomsen,  C.G.  (2011),  “Drivers  of  green  supply  management  performance: 

Evidence from Germany”, Journal of Purchasing & Supply Management, Vol. 17, No. 3, pp. 

176-184. 

Lau,  K.  and  Wang,  Y.  (2009),  “Reverse  logistics  in  the  electronic  industry  of  China:  a  case 

study”, Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, Vol. 14 No. 6, pp. 447-465. 

23 


Lee,  S-Y.  (2008),  “Drivers  for  the  participation  of  small  and  medium-sized  suppliers  in  green 

supply chain initiatives”, Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, Vol. 13 No. 

3, pp. 185-198. 

Lin, R-J., Chen, R-H.and Nguyen, T-H. (2011), “Green supply chain management performance 

in  automobile  manufacturing  industry  under  uncertainty”,  Procedia-Social  and  Behavioral 

Sciences, Vol. 25, pp. 233-245. 

Lu,  L.,  Wu,  C.  and  Kuo,  T-C.  (2007),  “Environmental  principles  applicable  to  green  supplier 

evaluation by using multi-objective decision analysis”, International Journal of Production 

Research, Vol. 45 No. 18/19, pp. 4317-4331. 

Min, H. and Galle, W. (2001), “Green purchasing practices of US firms”, International Journal 

of Operations and Production Management, Vol. 21 No. 9, pp. 1222-1238. 

Murphy,  P.  and  Poist,  R.  (2003),  “Green  perspectives  and  practices:  a  ‘comparative  logistics’ 

study”, Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, Vol. 8 No. 2, pp. 122-131. 

Narasimhan  R.,  and  Carter  J.R.  (1998),  “Environmental  supply  chain  management”,  Research 

Monograph, Center for Advanced Purchasing Studies, Tempe, AZ. 

Olorunniwo,  F.  and  Li,  X.  (2010),  “Information  sharing  and  collaboration  practices  in  reverse 

logistics”, Supply Chain Management-An International Journal, Vol. 15 No. 6, pp. 454-462. 

Phusavat,  K.  and  Kanchana,  R.  (2007),  “Competitive  priorities  of  manufacturing  firms  in 

Thailand”, Industrial Management & Data Systems, Vol. 107, No. 7, pp. 979-996. 

Rao, P. (2002), “Greening the supply chain:  a new initiative in South East Asia”, International 

Journal of Operations and Production Management, Vol. 22 No. 6, pp. 632-655. 

Rao,  P.  and  Holt,  D.  (2005),  “Do  green  supply  chains  lead  to  competitiveness  and  economic 

performance?”,  International  Journal  of  Operations  and  Production  Management,  Vol.  25 

No. 9, pp. 898-916. 

Rivera,  J.  (2004),  “Institutional  pressures  and  voluntary  environmental  behavior  in  developing 

countries:  evidence  from  the  Costa  Rican  hotel  industry”,  Society  and  Natural  Resources, 

Vol. 17, pp. 779–797. 

24 


Rogelberg,  S.G.  and  Stanton,  J.M.  (2007),  “Understanding  and  dealing  with  organizational 

survey nonresponse”, Organizational Research Methods, Vol. 10, pp. 195-209. 

Sarkis, J. (1998), “Evaluating environmentally conscious business practices”, European Journal 

of Operational Research, Vol. 107, No.1, pp.159-174. 

Sarkis,  J.  (2012),  “A  boundaries  and  flows  perspective  of  green  supply  chain  management”, 

Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 202-216. 

Sarkis  J.,  Zhu  Q.,  Lai  K.H.  (2011),  “An  organizational  theoretic  review  of  green  supply  chain 

management literature”, International Journal of Production Economics, Vol. 130, No.1, pp. 

1-15. 

Sheu,  J-B.  (2011),  “Bargaining  framework  for  competitive  green  supply  chains  under 

governmental financial intervention”, Transportation Research Part E, Vol. 47, pp. 573-592. 

Srivastava, K. S. (2007), “Green supply-chain management: a state-of-the-art literature review”, 

International Journal of Management Reviews, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 53-80. 

Testa,  F.  and  Iraldo,  F.  (2010),  “Shadows  and  lights  of  GSCM  (Green  Supply  Chain 

Management):  determinants  and effects  of these  practices based on a multinational  study”, 

Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 18, No. 10-11, pp. 953-962. 

Teuteberg,  D.  and  Wittstruck,  F.  (2012),  “Understanding  the  Success  Factors  of  Sustainable 

Supply  Chain  Management:  Empirical  Evidence  from  the  Electrics  and  Electronics 

Industry”, Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management, Vol. 19 No. 3, 

pp. 141-158. 

Vachon,  C.  (2007),  “Green  supply  chain  practices  and  the  selection  of  environmental 

technologies”, International Journal of Production Research, Vol. 45 No. 18/19, pp. 4357-

4379. 

Walker, H., Di Sisto, L. and McBain, D. (2008), “Drivers and barriers to environmental supply 

chain  management  practices:  Lessons  from  the  private  and  public  sectors”,  Journal  of 

Purchasing and Supply Management, Vol. 14, No.1, pp. 69-85. 

25 


Ward,  P.  and  Duray,  R.  (2000),  “Manufacturing  strategy  in  context:  environment,  competitive 

strategy  and  manufacturing  strategy”,  Journal  of  Operations  Management,  Vol.  18  No.  2, 

123-138. 

Wu,  K-J.,  Tseng,  M-L,  and  Vy,  T.  (2011),  “Evaluation  the  drivers  of  green  supply  chain 

management practices in uncertainty”, Procedia – Social and Behavioral Sciences, Vol. 25, 

pp. 384-397. 

Wu,  Z.  and  Pagell,  M.  (2011),  “Balancing  priorities:  Decision-making  in  sustainable  supply 

chain management”, Journal of Operations Management, Vol. 29, No. 6, pp. 577-590. 

Xie, Y. and Breen, L. (2012), “Greening community pharmaceutical supply chain in UK: a cross 

boundary approach”, Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, Vol. 17 No. 1, 

pp. 40-53. 

Zailani,  S.H.M.,  Eltayeb,  T.K.,  Hsu,  C.C.,  and  Tan,  K.C.  (2012),  “The  impact  of  external 

institutional  drivers  and  internal  strategy  on  environmental  performance”,  International 

Journal of Operations & Production Management, Vol. 32 No. 6, pp. 721-745. 

Zhu,  Q.  and  Sarkis,  J.  (2004),  “Relationships  between  operational  practices  and  performance 

among  early  adopters  of  green  supply  chain  management  practices 

in  Chinese 

manufacturing  companies”,  Journal  of  Operations  Management,  Vol.  22,  No.  3,  pp.  265-

289. 

Zhu,  Q.  and  Sarkis,  J.  (2007),  “The  moderating  effects  of  institutional  pressures  on  emergent 

green  supply  chain  practices  and  performance”,  International  Journal  of  Production 

Research, Vol. 45 No. 18/19, pp. 4333-4355. 

Zhu, Q., Sarkis, J. & Lai, K. (2007), “Green supply chain management: pressures, practices and 

performance within the Chinese automobile industry”, Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 

15 No.11/12, pp. 1041-1052. 

Zhu, Q., Sarkis, J. and Geng, Y. (2005), “Green supply chain management in China: pressures, 

practices  and  performance”,  International  Journal  of  Operations  and  Production 

Management, Vol. 25 No. 5, pp. 449-468. 

26 


Zhu,  Q.,  Sarkis,  J.  and  Lai,  K-H.  (2008),  “Confirmation  of  a  measurement  model  for  green 

supply  chain  management  practices  implementation”,  International  Journal  of  Production 

Economics, Vol. 111 No. 2, pp. 261-273. 

Zhu,  Q.,  Sarkis,  J.  and  Lai,  K-H.  (2012),  “Examining  the  effects  of  green  supply  chain 

management  practices  and  their  mediations  on  performance  improvements”,  International 

Journal of Production Research, Vol. 50, No. 5, pp. 1377-1394.  

Zhu  Q.,  Geng  Y.,  Fujita  T.,  and  Hashimoto  S.  (2010),  “Green  supply  chain  management  in 

leading  manufacturers:  Case  studies  in  Japanese  large  companies”,  Management  Research 

Review, Vol. 33 No.4, pp. 380-392. 

 

27 

