30

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 52, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2005

The Impact of New Product Development

Acceleration Approaches on Speed and Proﬁtability:

Lessons for Pioneers and Fast Followers

Fred Langerak and Erik Jan Hultink

Abstract—This paper investigates the impact of nine new
product development (NPD) acceleration approaches (supplier
involvement, lead user involvement, speeding up activities and
tasks, reduction of parts and components, training and rewarding
of employees,
implementation of support systems and tech-
niques, stimulating interfunctional cooperation, emphasis on the
customer, and simpliﬁcation of organizational structure) on devel-
opment speed and new product proﬁtability. Our ﬁndings from
233 manufacturing ﬁrms show that lead user involvement and
training/rewarding of employees increase both development speed
and proﬁtability. Supplier involvement, speeding up activities and
tasks, and a simpliﬁcation of the organizational structure also
enhance development speed, while an emphasis on the customer
has an additional positive impact on new product proﬁtability.
Both new product speed and proﬁtability increase ﬁrm ﬁnancial
performance. Our results further show that pioneers and fast
followers should not select the same NPD acceleration approaches
as the speed and proﬁtability impact of the majority of the acceler-
ation approaches depends on the new product strategy of the ﬁrm.
These results are important as they provide guidance for pioneers
and fast followers regarding which NPD acceleration approaches
to select in order to enhance speed and proﬁtability and, hence,
ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance.

Index Terms—Cycle time reduction, ﬁrst mover advantages, new
product development (NPD) acceleration approaches, new product
strategy, time-to-market.

“There are two kinds of ﬁrms—the quick and the dead.”
(President of Intel).

I. INTRODUCTION

N EW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT (NPD) speed is crit-

ical because product life cycles are shrinking and obsoles-
cence is occurring more quickly than in the past, while competi-
tion has also intensiﬁed [55]. To grow, it has become imperative
for ﬁrms to move products to market faster [9], [21], [62]. Firms
such as Xerox, Motorola, and Compaq are often cited as exam-
ples of ﬁrms that compete on time to market. Firms that succeed

Manuscript received April 1, 2003; revised August 1, 2004. Review of this

manuscript was arranged by Department Editor A. S. Bean.

F. Langerak is with the Department of Marketing Management, Rotterdam
School of Management, Erasmus University Rotterdam, NL-3000 DR
Rotterdam, The Netherlands (e-mail: f.langerak@fbk.eur.nl).

E. J. Hultink is with the Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering, Delft
University of Technology, NL-2628 CE Delft, The Netherlands (e-mail:
e.j.hultink@io.tudelft.nl).

Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TEM.2004.839941

in developing and marketing new products faster than competi-
tors can obtain ﬁrst mover advantages [5], [23], [32]. They may
command higher prices, and then garner dominant market share
and customer loyalty. Signiﬁcant cost beneﬁts can also accrue
from compressing NPD cycle time [53]. Not surprisingly, the
interest in techniques to accelerate NPD has remained steadfast
for its strategic importance [18].

Research by the Product Development and Management As-
sociation (PDMA) on NPD practices reveals that ﬁrms have
made substantial progress in reducing NPD cycle times [20].
This reduction is often achieved through the implementation
of speciﬁc acceleration techniques. Academics have in the past
decade widely published on these techniques, e.g., [5], [17],
[39], [43], [46], and [48]. However, a closer look at this body
of research reveals that there is limited empirical evidence as
to if and how the use of acceleration techniques impacts NPD
speed and proﬁtability [12]. In addition, the current body of lit-
erature has not yet investigated if ﬁrms with different strategies
should implement the same NPD acceleration techniques to in-
crease speed and proﬁtability. This is unfortunate given the po-
tentially sweeping effects of the appropriate acceleration tech-
niques on NPD cycle time, and the importance of capitalizing
on ﬁrst mover advantages.

The purpose of the present study is to ﬁll a part of this gap
in extant knowledge by investigating the impact of a compre-
hensive list of 47 acceleration techniques on development speed
and proﬁtability. Whereas, the study of the effectiveness of indi-
vidual techniques is important, Millson et al. [43], Nijssen et al.
[48], and Dröge et al. [12] suggest that the study of acceleration
approaches (i.e., groups of techniques) can lead to a better un-
derstanding of the determinants of NPD cycle time reduction.
Therefore, we grouped the 47 individual techniques into nine
NPD acceleration approaches and examine the impact of these
approaches on NPD speed and proﬁtability. As the ability to ac-
celerate NPD and to capitalize on ﬁrst mover advantages is in-
creasingly viewed as a key to competitive advantage, we also
investigate the impact of NPD speed and proﬁtability on ﬁrm
ﬁnancial performance. We ﬁnally respond to Langerak et al.’s
[34] suggestion to address the potential intricacies of the rela-
tionships between the acceleration approaches and speed/prof-
itability for ﬁrms with different innovation strategies. Therefore,
we also examine how new product strategy moderates the effects
of the acceleration approaches on speed and proﬁtability.

This paper makes four primary contributions to the NPD and
technology management literatures. First, this paper focuses on
a comprehensive list of 47 techniques that belong to nine NPD

0018-9391/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE


LANGERAK AND HULTINK: IMPACT OF NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT ACCELERATION APPROACHES ON SPEED AND PROFITABILITY

31

acceleration approaches. To date, research has either been re-
stricted to ﬁve groups that fail to explicate the individual tech-
niques that belong to each cluster [48], or to a limited number
(i.e., 14) of explicit techniques clustered into four NPD accel-
eration approaches [12]. Second, this paper investigates the im-
pact of nine acceleration approaches on both development speed
and proﬁtability. This is important because faster NPD can ei-
ther lower the development costs [53], or raise the development
costs due to the hidden costs of accelerated NPD [9]. No study
has, to our knowledge, jointly considered development speed
and proﬁtability. Third, this paper investigates the impact of de-
velopment speed and new product proﬁtability on ﬁrm ﬁnancial
performance. No other study has yet investigated these contin-
gencies empirically. Finally, we investigate which acceleration
approaches are effective for ﬁrms with different new product
strategies.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. First,
we review the literature on NPD acceleration techniques. Then,
we present the conceptual framework and the proposed relation-
ships. Next, we explain the research design and review the ﬁnd-
ings from a sample of 233 manufacturing ﬁrms. In the ﬁnal sec-
tions, we will discuss the results and managerial implications,
and propose suggestions for further research.

II. NPD ACCELERATION APPROACHES

Millson et al. [43] developed the earliest knowledge on the
use of techniques to accelerate NPD by suggesting a hierarchy
of approaches. Each approach is composed of similar tech-
niques aimed at: 1) simplifying NPD operations; 2) eliminating
unnecessary NPD activities; 3) paralleling NPD activities;
4) eliminating delays in the NPD process; and 5) speeding
up NPD operations. They conclude that if these ﬁve NPD ap-
proaches are employed in a thoughtful manner, “a ﬁrm’s time to
develop important new products can be signiﬁcantly reduced”
[43, p. 67]. Unfortunately, they fail to empirically investigate if
the ﬁve NPD acceleration approaches reduce development time
and improve proﬁtability.

Nijssen et al. [48] provided the ﬁrst empirical support for the
contention that the implementation of Millson et al.’s [43] accel-
eration approaches has a positive effect on development speed.
However, like Millson et al. [43], they do not specify the in-
dividual techniques that belong to each NPD acceleration ap-
proach. As a result, it is not evident which individual techniques
new product teams can adopt to accelerate NPD and to capitalize
on ﬁrst mover advantages.

To nullify this omission, Dröge et al. [12] speciﬁed a set
of fourteen individual techniques and investigated their impact
on NPD cycle time reduction. They found that only three (i.e.,
computer aided design and engineering, group technology, and
cross-functional teams) techniques reduced NPD cycle time.
Following Millson et al. [43], they subsequently clustered the
14 techniques into four groups: 1) human resource management;
2) synergistic integration; 3) supplier closeness; and 4) design
manufacturing interface, and investigated the impact of each
group on NPD cycle time. Their rationale was that the study
of approaches to accelerate NPD leads to a better understanding
of the determinants of NPD cycle time reduction. Dröge et al.

[12] found that two of the four approaches (i.e., synergistic in-
tegration and supplier closeness) were signiﬁcantly related to
development speed. This is an important ﬁnding because the
composition of these two approaches, in terms of the individual
techniques, is also known. This allows new product teams to se-
lect and adopt individual techniques from these two approaches
that help to accelerate NPD. As such, Dröge et al. [12] pro-
vided important empirical knowledge on the effectiveness of
NPD acceleration approaches of which the exact composition
was known (i.e., in terms of individual techniques that belong
to each approach).

There are, however, many more techniques that new
product teams can use to accelerate NPD besides the 14 that
Dröge et al. [12] speciﬁed. Langerak et al. [34], for example,
identiﬁed 50 individual techniques that teams can adopt to
achieve cycle time reduction. To better understand the use
of these techniques they formed nine NPD acceleration ap-
proaches by clustering similar techniques aimed at: 1) supplier
involvement; 2) lead user involvement; 3) speeding up activities
and tasks; 4) reduction of parts and components in the new
product; 5) training and rewarding employees; 6) implementing
support systems and techniques; 7) stimulating cross-functional
cooperation; 8) emphasizing value for customers; and 9) simpli-
fying the organizational structure. To expose a logical sequence
of implementation they used a technique called laddering to
uncover the objectives that ﬁrm strive for by adopting each
NPD acceleration approach. They found that new product teams
implement the acceleration approaches not just to accomplish
development speed, but also to attain other strategic objectives,
such as cost reduction and customer value creation. Langerak
et al. [34] did not empirically investigate the impact of the nine
NPD acceleration approaches on development speed. This is
unfortunate as it would better inform new product teams about
the effectiveness of the NPD acceleration approaches. Not
surprisingly, Langerak et al. [34], therefore, suggest that there
is an opportunity to move the research ﬁeld forward by empiri-
cally testing the impact of the NPD acceleration approaches on
development speed and on other strategic NPD objectives such
as proﬁtability.

III. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK AND PROPOSITIONS

Our literature review led to the development of a conceptual
framework, shown in Fig. 1, that guided our research. This
framework shows that we expect the NPD acceleration ap-
proaches to increase new product speed and proﬁtability. We
also expect that increased development speed and improved
new product proﬁtability enhances ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance.
In addition, we investigate whether new product strategy mod-
erates the impact of the acceleration approaches on NPD speed
and proﬁtability.

A. Effect of the NPD Acceleration Approaches on Speed and
Proﬁtability

Appendix A describes the primary mechanisms through
which the nine NPD acceleration approaches affect devel-
opment speed and proﬁtability. This overview suggests that
the main reasons for implementing the NPD acceleration


32

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 52, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2005

Fig. 1. Conceptual framework.

approaches can be classiﬁed as: 1) competitive advantage,
such as ﬁrst-to-market beneﬁts [15], [59]; 2) costs reductions
through simpliﬁcation, the elimination of delays and/or steps,
and parallel processing [43], [53]; and 3) enhanced new product
proﬁtability through higher initial prices, greater market share,
and customer loyalty [12]. For example, Gupta et al. [23] and
Lieberman and Montgomery [35] found that ﬁrms that succeed
in developing new products at high speed can be ﬁrst to market
and reap pioneering advantages. With regard to development
costs, Crawford [9] has questioned whether it is always appro-
priate to accelerate NPD because of the potentially hidden costs
of accelerated NPD. However, Rosenau [53] reports that faster
NPD can lower developments costs. Gonzáles and Palacios
[18] concur, noting that a short NPD cycle time is associated
with lower development costs. With regard to enhanced prof-
itability, Menon et al. [41] argue that ﬁrms with the ability to be
consistently ﬁrst-to-market are likely to be perceived in a more
positive light by customers. Finally, pioneers can beneﬁt from
early entry by using a skim pricing strategy for a new product,
while still delivering superior customer value until competition
can match its source of advantage [60]. Therefore, these ﬁrms
achieve high initial margins and garner dominant market share
and customer loyalty. Together, these ﬁndings suggest that the
implementation of the nine acceleration approaches enhances
development speed and proﬁtability. Thus, we hypothesize the
following.

The greater the use of the NPD acceleration ap-
proaches, the higher a) development speed and b) new
product proﬁtability.

B. Effect of Speed and Proﬁtability on Firm Financial
Performance

tages including higher margins, increased market share, estab-
lishing industry standards, and locking up distribution channels.
Nonetheless, many of the key beneﬁts of ﬁrst mover advantages
are located within the organization. They are associated with
higher levels of ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance, because procedures
and programs required for achieving high development speed
also reduce overheads and boost productivity [41]. Moorman
and Miner [45] found that emphasizing cycle time reduction al-
lowed for a convergence of planning. A short cycle time affords
more learning loops. That is, ﬁrms that adopt time-to-market
goals learn faster than their competitors since they have more
opportunities to complete the full business cycle associated with
the product [41]. They also mention that the adoption of a speed
orientation involves measures that are easily communicated and
widely understood.

Short NPD cycles are also associated with higher produc-
tivity and lower levels of inventory and working capital [11].
Meyer [42] argues that quick turn around times provide all levels
of organizational participants with frequent positive feedback
and aid in motivating the entire ﬁrm. Literature on the motiva-
tional effects of outcome feedback corroborates this viewpoint
[30]. A speed orientation involves the adoption of performance
goals and schedules. Research in organizational behavior pro-
vides strong evidence in favor of the notion that adoption of
performance goals improves employee productivity [36]. More-
over, empirical investigations show that when goal-setting and
feedback are used simultaneously, they have a synergistic effect
on performance and productivity [14]. Finally, Ittner and Lar-
cker [29] found a positive relationship between NPD cycle time
and ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance for the computer industry. Ac-
cordingly, we hypothesize the following.

Most ﬁrm beneﬁts of accelerating NPD are also related to ﬁrst
mover advantages. Meyer [42] lists a number of spillover advan-

The higher development speed, the higher the ﬁrm’s
ﬁnancial performance.


LANGERAK AND HULTINK: IMPACT OF NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT ACCELERATION APPROACHES ON SPEED AND PROFITABILITY

33

An important part of the NPD-literature has identiﬁed new
product performance as an important driver of ﬁrm ﬁnancial
performance [22], [28], [44]. The rationale for new product per-
formance becoming increasingly important for ﬁrm ﬁnancial
performance is that ﬁrms are confronted with increased levels
of competition, rapidly changing market environments, higher
rates of technical obsolescence and shorter product life cycles
[19]. In these conditions new products serve to accommodate
the uncertainties that a ﬁrm faces in its entrepreneurial envi-
ronment [10]. Empirical research also reveals the importance
of new product performance for ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance. For
example, Grifﬁn [20] reports that best practice ﬁrms realize 49%
of their sales from products developed and launched in the last
ﬁve years and that new product performance accounts for one
fourth of the variability in organizational performance. Simi-
larly, Terwiesh et al. [57] report that new product proﬁtability
explains, depending upon the market context, between 30% and
70% of organizational proﬁtability variance. Thus, we hypoth-
esize the following.

The higher new product proﬁtability, the higher the
ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial performance.

C. Moderating Effect of New Product Strategy

In the structure-conduct-performance paradigm the market
environment affects ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance through the con-
duct or behavior of the ﬁrm [61]. In this paradigm, it is the ﬁrm’s
strategy that incorporates, articulates and reﬂects on the man-
agement’s perceived market environment and which shapes the
organization’s behavior [37]. Management communicates and
implements the direction and focus of the strategy by speci-
fying performance goals, criteria and actions. Strategy, perfor-
mance goals, and marketing activities have contingent relation-
ships [63]. Managers choose a strategy to excel on a particular
dimension of performance, and execute each strategy by the
most appropriate activities. Strategy, as a general direction of
a management’s response based on ﬁltered environmental in-
formation, therefore, can conceivably explain the varying mag-
nitudes of relationships between performance measures, such
as development speed and proﬁtability, and speciﬁc activities
by the ﬁrm, such as the use of NPD acceleration approaches (cf.
[38]). This reasoning implies that the degree to which the NPD
acceleration approaches are related to development speed and
new product proﬁtability will vary across new product strategies
as these strategies (e.g., pioneering versus following) differ in
the extent to which they emphasize the performance dimension
of capitalizing on ﬁrst mover advantages. Thus, we hypothesize
the following.

The impact of the use of the NPD acceleration ap-
proaches on a) development speed and b) new product
proﬁtability is greater for pioneers than for all later
entrants.

IV. METHODOLOGY

In line with current practice in the marketing and NPD liter-
atures, our quantitative scale development, data collection, and
scale validation phases were preceded by a qualitative research

phase, in which a literature review was conducted and free-form
interviews were held with ﬁve academics and six new product
team managers to assess the appropriateness of Langerak et al.’s
[34] overview of 50 NPD acceleration techniques. Our qualita-
tive research revealed that three techniques (i.e., using limited
roll outs, project champions and Total Quality Management)
were not considered appropriate for accelerating NPD or were
highly ﬁrm speciﬁc. After puriﬁcation, a total of 47 techniques
remained as input for the survey.

A. Sample and Data Collection

Our sample consisted of 600 manufacturing ﬁrms with in-
dependent R&D, production, and marketing/sales departments
in the primary metal, fabricated metal, machinery equipment,
electrical equipment, transportation equipment, and measuring
instruments industries (SIC-codes 33–38). Through a telephone
presurvey, we identiﬁed 528 ﬁrms with: 1) a new product that
had been in the market for at least 12 months and that was
representative of the ﬁrm’s product development program and
2) a knowledgeable informant. A total of 344 (65.2%) knowl-
edgeable informants willing to cooperate with the research re-
ceived a personalized letter explaining the purpose of the study,
a questionnaire, and preaddressed, postage paid envelopes. Non-
respondents received a reminder letter and a second question-
naire. These efforts yielded 233 usable responses, a response
rate of 44.1% (67.7% of those who received a questionnaire).

A routine check for respondent bias and industry bias in-
dicated no signiﬁcant differences in the mean responses on
any construct across respondents with different functional
backgrounds and across ﬁrms from different industries. We
used Armstrong and Overton’s [1] time-trend extrapolation
procedure to test for nonresponse bias. In comparing early (ﬁrst
quartile) and late (fourth quartile) respondents, no signiﬁcant
differences emerged in the mean responses on any of the
constructs. Together, these results suggest that respondent bias,
industry bias, and nonresponse bias were not a major problem.
Table I shows the sample characteristics.

B. Measure Development and Pretesting

We generated a pool of items for each construct using liter-
ature search and interviews with academics and practitioners.
Pretests of these items occurred in two phases: 1) face-to-face
interviews with four academics and 2) face-to-face interviews
with eight new product team managers. At each stage, partici-
pants identiﬁed items that were confusing, tasks that were dif-
ﬁcult to respond to, and any other problems they encountered.
We revised or eliminated problematic items, and developed new
ones. By the end of the second phase of pretesting the practi-
tioners reported no concerns, and the questionnaire was, there-
fore, ready for ﬁnal administration.

C. Measures

All responses were recorded on a ﬁve point scale unless men-
tioned, otherwise. To measure the extent of use of the NPD ac-
celeration techniques, we developed 47 items by drawing upon
Langerak et al. [34]. The respondents were asked to rate the new
product team’s use of each technique during the development


34

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 52, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2005

TABLE I

SAMPLE CHARACTERISTICS (n = 233)

of a representative new product that the ﬁrm introduced in the
market at least 12 months ago. We speciﬁcally targeted products
that were representative of the ﬁrm’s NPD program. The time
interval of 12 months was chosen to ensure that they had sufﬁ-
cient data on new product performance. We anchored the extent
of use scale by “extremely low use or omitted altogether” (1)
and “extremely high use” (5).

We measured development speed using two items based on
Dröge et al. [12]. We deﬁned development speed as “the ability
to minimize the time it takes to develop new products.” We asked
respondents to rate how well the new product had performed on
new product development time relative to 1) similar products
that their ﬁrm developed in the past and 2) relative to competi-
tors that had developed similar products. We anchored the scale
by “very much slower” (1) and “very much faster” (5).

We used two items adapted from Grifﬁn and Page [22] to
measure new product proﬁtability. We asked respondents to rate
how satisﬁed they were about the new product’s performance
with regard to 1) the degree to which the new product met proﬁt
goals and 2) the degree to which the new product met margin
goals. We anchored the scales by “not at all satisﬁed” (1) and
“highly satisﬁed” (5).

We used two items adapted from Naman and Slevin [47] to
measure ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance. These items have a positive
effect on the ﬁrm’s economic value. We asked respondents to
rate how satisﬁed they were about their ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial perfor-
mance over the last year relative to major competitors on prof-
itability and ROI/IRR. We anchored the scales by “not at all
satisﬁed” (1) and “highly satisﬁed” (5).

As control variables, we measured two ﬁrm characteristics
(i.e., R&D expenditures and ﬁrm size) and one market character-
istic (i.e., market turbulence) by means of one item each. These
ﬁrm and market characteristics have a recognized inﬂuence on
ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance.

We measured new product strategy by asking respondents to
indicate which one of four timing strategies they used for the in-
troduction of their representative new product. The four strate-
gies offered were: ﬁrst to market [pioneer], fast follower, late
follower, and laggard. These measures have been used exten-
sively in the literature [33] and [35]. Laggards lack, in sharp
contrast to pioneers, fast followers and late followers, a con-
sistent strategic behavioral pattern and simply respond to envi-
ronmental pressures when forced to do so [37], [38]. Because
of this ambiguous behavior among laggards, only the three vi-
able strategy types (i.e., pioneer, fast follower, and late follower)
were purposed to be used for the test of moderating effects. This

also implies that the response categories of late followers and
laggards cannot be lumped into a single category. The laggard
type was only included as a response category in the question-
naire to screen ﬁrms with no strategic behavioral pattern. The
response frequencies for each strategy type were 75 (32.2%) pi-
oneers, 95 (40.8%) fast followers, 44 (18.9%) late followers, and
19 (8.2%) laggards. Given the response pattern among the viable
strategy types, we only used the pioneers and fast followers to
test for moderating effects. The size of the late followers cat-
egory was too small to be included in our test for moderating
effects using regression analysis [24].

D. Unidimensionality, Reliability, and Validity

We considered each acceleration approach as an individual
reﬂective multi-item scale consisting of similar techniques that
ﬁrms can use to accelerate NPD. The grouping of the techniques
belonging to each individual approach was based on previous
research by Langerak et al. [34]. We adopted this approach be-
cause the ratio between our sample size and the number of ac-
celeration techniques was insufﬁcient to simultaneously submit
all techniques to a test for unidimensionality, reliability and
validity [56].

To obtain unidimensionality for all reﬂective multi-item
scales, we calculated the interitem correlations and corrected
item-to-total correlations for each item, taking one scale at a
time. We eliminated items for which these correlations were
not signiﬁcant
. Principal axis factoring explored the
unidimensionality of each puriﬁed scale using an eigenvalue
of 1.0 and factor loadings of 0.25 as the cutoff points [56].
Computing reliability coefﬁcients explored the reliability of
each puriﬁed, unidimensional scale. When the coefﬁcient alpha
was smaller than 0.7, we removed the item with the lowest
corrected item-to-total correlation until meeting the 0.7 level.
The deleted items are marked in Appendix B.

We additionally investigated the convergent validity within
each scale by performing a series of conﬁrmatory factor
analyses taking one scale at a time [4]. The criterion of all
factor loadings being signiﬁcant at the 0.05 level was used
as indicator of convergent validity [3]. We assessed the dis-
criminant validity between the scales by examining the 95%
conﬁdence intervals (plus or minus 1.96 standard errors)
around all pairwise latent-trait correlations [2]. The results
show that discriminant validity is obtained because none of
the conﬁdence intervals encompasses 1.0. Table II shows the
means, standard deviations, Cronbach alpha’s, and intercon-
struct correlations.


LANGERAK AND HULTINK: IMPACT OF NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT ACCELERATION APPROACHES ON SPEED AND PROFITABILITY

35

MEANS, STANDARD DEVIATIONS, CRONBACH ALPHA, AND INTERCONSTRUCT CORRELATIONS

TABLE II

EFFECT OF NPD ACCELERATION APPROACHES ON SPEED AND PROFITABILITY#

TABLE III

Together the results of the tests indicated a sufﬁcient degree
of unidimensionality, reliability and validity. Based on this evi-
dence, we formed the constructs by averaging the responses to
each item in a particular scale. After we formed the constructs,
we submitted the constructs to be used as independent variables
to a varimax rotated principal components analysis to overcome
potential problems due to multicollinearity [24].

V. RESULTS

A. Impact of the NPD Acceleration Approaches on Speed and
Proﬁtability

and

To test

, we used multiple regression analysis.
Table III reveals that the models explain 43% and 35% of the
variance in speed and proﬁtability, respectively. The results
reveal that the NPD acceleration approaches of “supplier in-
,
volvement”
, “training and
“speeding up activities and tasks”

, “lead user involvement”

, and “simpliﬁcation of
rewarding of employees”
have positive effects on
organizational structure”
development speed. “Implementation of support systems and
, and “stimulating interfunctional
techniques”
have negative effects on develop-
coordination”
ment speed. The “reduction of part and components” and an
“emphasis on the customer” have no effect on development
speed. Thus, we ﬁnd partial support for

.

Table III further shows that “lead user involvement”

, “training and rewarding of employees”

, and
have positive effects on
,
, and “im-

“emphasizing the customer”
proﬁtability. “Speeding up activities and tasks”
“reduction of part and components”
plementation of support systems and techniques”
have negative effects on proﬁtability. “Supplier involvement,”
“stimulating interfunctional cooperation,” and “simpliﬁcation
of the organizational structure” have no effect on proﬁtability.
Thus, we ﬁnd partial support for

.


36

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 52, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2005

EFFECT OF SPEED AND PROFITABILITY ON FIRM FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE

TABLE IV

B. Effects of Speed and Proﬁtability on Firm Financial
Performance

and

To test

, we also used multiple regression anal-
ysis. Table IV reveals that the model explains 34% of the vari-
ance in ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance. The results indicate that
and new product proﬁtability
development speed
have positive effects on ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance.

The two ﬁrm-speciﬁc control variables of ﬁrm size
and R&D expenditure
also have positive effects on
ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance. Market turbulence has no effect on
ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance. Thus, our results provide support
for

and

.

C. Moderating Effect of the New Product Strategies of
Pioneering and Fast Following

and

To test

, we used multiple regression analysis for
the subgroups of pioneers and fast followers, as suggested by
Sharma et al. [54]. Late followers and laggards were, for reasons
explained earlier, left out of the test for the moderating effect of
new product strategy. This accounts for the differences in the
results reported in Table III in comparison to those in Table V.
These differences will be discussed in the additional analysis
section.

The results in Table V reveal that the models used to test for
the moderating effect of the new product strategies of pioneering
and fast following explain between 67% and 76% of the vari-
ance in development speed and between 56% and 79% in prof-
itability. We used a Chow-test to test for the equality between the
coefﬁcients in the regression equations for the different strategic
types [50]. The results indicate that the coefﬁcients in the re-
gressions with the dependent variables of, respectively, devel-
and new product
opment speed
are unequal for pio-
proﬁtability
.
neers and fast followers. Thus, we ﬁnd support for
Table V shows that “lead user involvement,” “training and
rewarding of employees,” and “stimulating interfunctional
cooperation” have positive effects on development speed for
, as well as
both pioneers
fast followers
. “Supplier
involvement” and “simpliﬁcation of organizational structure”
have a positive effect on development speed for pioneers
, but a negative effect for fast followers
. In contrast, the “reduction of
parts and components” has a positive effect on speed for fast
, but a negative effect for the pioneers
followers

and

. “Speeding up activities and tasks” has a posi-
and “implementing support
tive impact on speed
systems and techniques” has a negative impact on speed for
, while both approaches are not
the pioneers
signiﬁcantly related to speed for the followers. Finally, an
“emphasis on the customer” is negatively related to speed for
both pioneers

and fast followers

.

This “emphasis on the customer” is, however, the only ap-
proach that positively impacts new product proﬁtability both
for the pioneers

, as well as the followers

. “Training and rewarding of employees” and “stimulating
interfunctional cooperation” have a positive impact on prof-
, but a neg-
itability for the followers
. In
ative effect for the pioneers
contrast, “implementing support systems and techniques” has
,
a positive impact on proﬁtability for the pioneers
. For the
but a negative effect for the followers
followers, “lead user involvement” and “reduction of parts and
components” have a positive effect
and “speeding up activities and parts” have a negative effect
while these three approaches are
on proﬁtability
not signiﬁcantly related to proﬁtability for the pioneers. Finally,
“supplier involvement” and “simpliﬁcation of the organizational
structure” have a negative effect on proﬁtability for both pi-
oneers

and fast followers

.

VI. ADDITIONAL ANALYSIS FOR LATE FOLLOWERS

The size of the late followers category was, as previously
mentioned, too small to be included in our test for the mod-
erating effect of new product strategy using regression analysis
[24]. To extract some meaning from the study for late followers
and to explain the differences in the results reported in Tables III
and V, we additionally performed a correlation analysis between
development speed, new product proﬁtability, and the nine ac-
celeration approaches for ﬁrms with this type of new product
strategy.

The results reveal that “supplier involvement,” “lead user in-
volvement,” “speeding up activities and tasks,” “emphasis on
customer,” and “simpliﬁcation of the organizational structure”
are positively
associated with development speed
. The

“stimulation of interfunctional coordination” is negatively

associated with new product proﬁtability

.
The ﬁndings with regard to the positive association of “emphasis
on customers” and the negative association of “stimulating inter-
functional coordination” are the most interesting, because they
differ from the results found for pioneers and fast followers. For
these strategy types “emphasis on customer” has a negative and
“interfunctional coordination” a positive effect on development
speed. These opposing ﬁndings explain the differences in the
results reported in Tables III and V with regard to the effect of
these two acceleration approaches on development speed.

The correlation analysis also reveals that “supplier involve-
ment,” “training and rewarding of employees,” “emphasis on
customer,” and “simpliﬁcation of the organizational structure”


LANGERAK AND HULTINK: IMPACT OF NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT ACCELERATION APPROACHES ON SPEED AND PROFITABILITY

37

EFFECT OF NPD ACCELERATION APPROACHES ON SPEED AND PROFITABILITY FOR PIONEERS AND FAST FOLLOWERS#

TABLE V

are positively
associated with new product prof-
itability
. The “reduc-
tion of parts and components” is negatively
associ-
ated with new product proﬁtability
. The ﬁndings
with regard to the positive associations of “supplier involve-
ment” and the “simpliﬁcation of the organizational structure”
are the most noteworthy, because they oppose the results found
for pioneers and fast followers. For these strategy types “sup-
plier involvement” and the “simpliﬁcation of the organizational
structure” have negative effects on new product proﬁtability.
These contrasting results explain the differences in the ﬁndings
in Tables III and V with regard to the impact of these two accel-
eration approaches on new product proﬁtability.

VII. DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS

The aim of this study was to investigate the inﬂuence of nine
acceleration approaches on NPD speed and proﬁtability. We
also examined the impact of speed and proﬁtability on ﬁrm
ﬁnancial performance. In addition, we studied the moderating
effect of the new product strategies of pioneering and fast
following on the relationships between the NPD acceleration
approaches, and speed and proﬁtability. The discussion and
implications section is again organized around the hypothesized
relationships.

A. Effect of the NPD Acceleration Approaches on Speed and
Proﬁtability

Our results show that ﬁve out of nine NPD acceleration
approaches (i.e., supplier involvement, lead user involvement,
speeding up activities and tasks, training and rewarding of
employees, and simpliﬁcation of the organizational structure)
increase development speed. Implementing support systems
and techniques and stimulating interfunctional coordination
decrease development speed. The results further show that three
approaches (i.e., lead user involvement, training and rewarding
of employees, and an emphasis on the customer) improve
new product proﬁtability, while three other approaches (i.e.,

speeding up activities and tasks, reduction of parts and compo-
nents, and implementation of support systems and techniques)
decrease new product proﬁtability.

An important ﬁrst conclusion is, therefore, that not all NPD
acceleration approaches suggested to improve speed and prof-
itability are effective. The implication is that new product teams
must carefully select which NPD acceleration approaches are
useful to achieve their NPD objectives expressed in terms of
speed or proﬁtability. This is especially imperative, because
our results also reveal that the use of only two approaches
(i.e., lead user involvement and training and rewarding of
employees) simultaneously improves speed and proﬁtability.
This ﬁnding is important, because although it has been argued
that certain acceleration practices that improve speed also save
costs and, hence, improve proﬁtability, such a relationship
has not been tested empirically [53]. The ﬁndings also reveal
that the adoption of one approach (i.e., speeding up activi-
ties and tasks) improves development speed, but aggravates
proﬁtability. This ﬁnding is consistent with rival theories that
suggest a tradeoff between development speed and proﬁtability
because of possible hidden costs of accelerated NPD [9]. Thus,
new product teams should realize that speed can contribute
to proﬁts, as well as to disaster. An example of the latter was
Ashton Tate, the now-defunct maker of dBase software. When
the Windows operating system was ﬁrst released, Ashton Tate
scrambled to port its software and ended up shipping a product
so defective that developers rejected it, dealers returned it, and
Ashton Tate went into a free fall from which it never recovered.
Shareholders lost almost $700 million in value, and the dBase
technology was eventually sold at auction for a few hundred
thousand dollars.

A second important conclusion is, therefore, that there is, de-
pending upon which NPD acceleration approaches ﬁrms intend
to adopt, a potential tradeoff between proﬁtability and speed.
This is acknowledged by A. Wellener, business development
manager for Goodrich Aerospace by stating that “If you speed
, it adds to time and it adds to cost.”
it up and make a mistake
[49]. The implication is that new product teams should tailor


38

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 52, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2005

the implementation of the apt acceleration approaches to their
NPD objectives, because the adoption of NPD acceleration ap-
proaches can have mutually exclusive, reinforcing, or contradic-
tory effects on speed and proﬁtability. Thus, new product teams
will need to think carefully about whether speed or proﬁtability
is more important for the new product that is developed and
marketed. This recommendation represents a departure from the
widely accepted notion that time is money in NPD.

B. Effect of Speed and Proﬁtability on Firm Financial
Performance

This paper provides empirical conﬁrmation that development
speed contributes to ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance. This is an im-
portant ﬁnding because although numerous researchers have
posited a relationship between development speed and ﬁrm ﬁ-
nancial performance [21], [41], to date only a few have found
empirical evidence to support this contention, e.g., [29]. The
conclusion is, therefore, that pursuing shorter development cy-
cles provides performance beneﬁts to a ﬁrm. The implication
is that an emphasis on cycle time reduction, through the im-
plementation of the appropriate NPD acceleration approaches,
increases the overall ﬂexibility of a ﬁrm’s processes, reduces
costs, and improves services to end users [11]. This provides
product development teams with a rationale for putting effort
into shortening cycle times through the implementation of the
appropriate NPD acceleration approaches.

Our study also shows that new product proﬁtability con-
tributes to ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance. This ﬁnding is in
agreement with previous studies that have posited the impor-
tance of new product proﬁtability for ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance
[25], [28]. The conclusion is, therefore, that the adoption of the
proper approaches to accelerate NPD is vital to ﬁrm ﬁnancial
performance through improved new product proﬁtability. This
ﬁnding also reafﬁrms that ﬁrms cannot depend on their current
product offerings only to meet their sales and proﬁt objec-
tives. For this reason, new products are referred to as “secret
weapons,” at Manco Inc., Avon, OH, and preemptive strikes to
be ﬁrst-to-market and capitalize on ﬁrst-mover advantages are
encouraged [49].

The overall implication of our ﬁnding that speed and prof-
itability improve ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance is that effective
management of the various NPD acceleration approaches is a
matter of strategic signiﬁcance that has repercussions for an
organization’s performance and competitive position. Thus,
management should encourage new product teams to adopt
suitable acceleration approaches to improve ﬁrm ﬁnancial per-
formance through increased new product speed and improved
proﬁtability. This is important because new product teams must
learn how to implement these approaches, which can be difﬁ-
cult, because they require changes in organizational structures,
processes, and activities [18]. Moreover, implementing these
approaches takes time and, therefore, teams should not expect
to implement these approaches instantly and obtain immediate
results.

C. Moderating Effect of the New Product Strategies of
Pioneering and Fast Following

Our results provide support for the notion that the new
product strategies of pioneering and fast following inﬂuence
the impact of speciﬁc NPD acceleration approaches on de-
velopment speed. The results of the test for the moderating
effect of show that pioneers can use six acceleration approaches
(i.e., supplier involvement, lead user involvement, speeding
up activities and tasks, training and rewarding employees,
stimulating interfunctional coordination, and simpliﬁcation of
the organizational structure) to reduce NPD cycle time, while
fast followers can only implement four approaches (i.e., lead
user involvement, reduction of parts and components, training
and rewarding of employees, and stimulating interfunctional
coordination) effectively. A comparison of the speed impact
of the NPD acceleration approaches for both strategy types
shows that the effectiveness of three approaches (i.e., lead
user involvement, training and rewarding of employees and
interfunctional coordination) is independent upon the ﬁrm’s
new product strategy. The impact on development speed of the
other approaches depends on the ﬁrm’s new product strategy.

Our results also show that new product strategy inﬂuences
the impact of certain NPD acceleration approaches on new
product proﬁtability. Pioneers can use only two NPD acceler-
ation approaches (i.e., implementation of support systems and
techniques, and emphasis on customer) to improve proﬁtability,
while fast followers can implement ﬁve approaches (i.e., lead
user involvement, reduction of parts and components, training
and rewarding of employees, stimulating interfunctional co-
ordination, and emphasis on the customer). A comparison
of the proﬁt impact of the acceleration approaches between
both strategy types shows that the effectiveness of only one
NPD acceleration approach (i.e., emphasis on customer) is
independent upon the ﬁrm’s new product strategy. The impact
on new product proﬁtability of the other approaches depends
on the ﬁrm’s new product strategy.

An important conclusion with regard to these ﬁndings, es-
pecially if we also keep the ﬁndings from our additional anal-
ysis with regard to late followers in mind, is that new product
strategy is a major factor internal to organizations that deter-
mine the speed and proﬁtability effectiveness of adopting spe-
ciﬁc NPD acceleration approaches. This ﬁnding does not sug-
gest that the external environment is not important with regard
to the implementation decision, because the ﬁrm’s new product
strategy incorporates, articulates and reﬂects on management’s
perceived market environment [37], [61], [63]. The implica-
tion is that the ﬁrm’s new product strategy, as a response to
the market environment, should guide the new product team’s
decision with regard to which NPD acceleration approaches
to use to increase development speed or improve new product
proﬁtability.

VIII. SUMMARY

To summarize, this papers message is that ﬁrms should
implement the appropriate NPD acceleration approaches to


LANGERAK AND HULTINK: IMPACT OF NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT ACCELERATION APPROACHES ON SPEED AND PROFITABILITY

39

achieve the distinct NPD objectives of development speed and
new product proﬁtability. Moreover, our research provides
empirical conﬁrmation that speed and proﬁtability yield signif-
icant improvements in ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance. Our results
also suggest that the inﬂuence of the apposite NPD acceleration
approaches on development speed and new product proﬁtability
depends on the ﬁrm’s new product strategy.

IX. LIMITATIONS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH

As with any research, our study possesses certain caveats
that should be addressed in future research. First, although
the study used data on industrial products from ﬁrms in dif-
ferent industries, the hypothesized relationships need testing
with other independent samples. This is especially important
because the products included in our sample do not fully rep-
resent the complete range of industrial products. Second, our
data were collected using the key informant approach, which
precludes a thorough analysis of validity and measurement
error issues. An alternative may be to use multiple respondents

from new product teams in future research. Third, out study
used a single new product that was representative of the ﬁrm’s
NPD-program. Future research might also consider using
data on multiple new products embedded within the ﬁrms’
NPD-program. Such a methodology would also enable us to
use multilevel modeling techniques to test the hypotheses.
Finally, because of the cross-sectional nature of this study,
causal inferences need to be conﬁrmed by longitudinal studies.
Besides issues arising from the limitations of this study,
we have deﬁned three other avenues for future research. First,
systematic research should be conducted that focuses on how
the NPD acceleration approaches that have a positive effect on
speed and proﬁtability are best implemented. Second, future
research could investigate whether the effectiveness of the
NPD acceleration approaches depends on the organizational
structure of the NPD-process. Third, future research may also
look at the impact of NPD acceleration approaches on market
penetration time. Finally, it may be interesting to establish a
logical and purposeful order of implementation of the NPD
acceleration approaches.

DESCRIPTION OF THE NINE NPD ACCELERATION APPROACHES

APPENDIX A


40

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 52, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2005

USE OF INDIVIDUAL TECHNIQUES WITHIN EACH ACCELERATION APPROACH

APPENDIX B


LANGERAK AND HULTINK: IMPACT OF NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT ACCELERATION APPROACHES ON SPEED AND PROFITABILITY

41

REFERENCES

[1] J. S. Armstrong and T. S. Overton, “Estimating nonresponse bias in mail

surveys,” J. Market. Res., vol. 14, pp. 396–402, Aug. 1977.

[2] R. P. Bagozzi and Y. Youjae, “On the evaluation of structural equation

models,” J. Acad. Market. Sci., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 74–94, 1988.

[3] R. P. Bagozzi, Y. Yi, and L. W. Phillips, “Assessing construct validity in
organizational research,” Admin. Sci. Quart., vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 421–458,
1991.

[4] H. Baumgartner and C. Homburg, “Applications of structural equation
modeling in marketing and consumer research: A review,” Int. J. Res.
Market., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 139–161, 1996.

[5] E. Carmel, “Cycle time in packages software ﬁrms,” J. Proc. Innov.

Manage., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 110–123, 1995.

[6] K. B. Clark and T. Fujimoto, Product Development Performance:
in the World Auto In-

Strategy, Organization, and Management
dustry. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 1991.

[7] R. Cordero, “Managing for speed to avoid product obsolescence:
A survey of techniques,” J. Proc. Innov. Manage., vol. 8, no. 4, pp.
283–294, 1991.

[8] A. Craig and S. Hart, “Where to now in new product development re-

[28] E. J. Hultink, A. Grifﬁn, H. S. J. Robben, and S. Hart, “In search of
generic launch strategies for new products,” Int. J. Res. Market., vol. 15,
no. 3, pp. 269–285, 1998.

[29] C. D. Ittner and D. F. Larcker, “Product development cycle time and
organizational performance,” J. Market. Res., vol. 34, pp. 13–23, Feb.
1997.

[30] B. J. Jaworski and A. K. Kohli, “Supervisory feedback: Alternative types
and their impact on salespeople’s performance satisfaction,” J. Market.
Res., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 190–201, 1991.

[31] E. H. Kessler and A. K. Chakrabarti, “Speeding up the pace of new
product development,” J. Proc. Innov. Manage., vol. 16, no. 3, pp.
231–247, 1999.

[32] T. D. Kuczmarksi, Managing New Products. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:

Prentice-Hall, 1992.

[33] M. Lambkin, “Order of entry and performance in new markets,”

Strategic Manage. J., vol. 9, pp. 127–140, 1988. special issue.

[34] F. Langerak, E. Peelen, and E. Nijssen, “A laddering approach to the use
of methods and techniques to reduce the cycle time of new-to-the-ﬁrm
products,” J. Proc. Innov. Manage., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 173–182, 1999.

[35] M. B. Lieberman and D. B. Montgomery, “First mover advantages,”

Strategic Manage. J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 41–58, 1988.

search,” Eur. J. Market., vol. 26, no. 11, pp. 1–49, 1992.

[36] E. A. Locke and G. P. A. Lathman, Theory of Goal Setting and Task

[9] C. M. Crawford, “The hidden costs of accelerated product development,”

Performance. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1990.

J. Proc. Innov. Manage., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 188–199, 1992.

[10] F. Damanpour, K. A. Szabat, and W. M. Evan, “The relationship be-
tween types of innovation and organizational performance,” J. Manage.
Studies, vol. 26, pp. 587–601, Nov. 1989.

[11] P. S. Davis, C. C. Dibrell, and B. D. Janz, “The impact of time on
the strategy-performance relationship: Implications for managers,” Ind.
Market. Manage., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 339–347, 2002.

[12] C. Dröge, J. Jayaram, and S. K. Vickery, “The ability to minimize the
timing of new product development and introduction: An examination of
antecedent factors in the North American automobile supplier industry,”
J. Proc. Innov. Manage., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 24–40, 2000.

[13] B. Dumaine, “How managers can succeed through speed,” Fortune, vol.

13, pp. 102–104, Feb. 1989.

[14] P. C. Earley, G. B. Northcraft, C. Lee, and T. R. Lituchy, “Impact of
process and outcome feedback on the relation of goal setting to task
performance,” Acad. Manage. J., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 87–105, 1990.

[15] A. P. Emmanuelides, “Determinants of product development time: A
framework for analysis,” Acad. Manage. Best Paper Proc., pp. 342–346,
1991.

[16] D. J. Flint, “Compressing new product success-to-success cycle time:
Deep customer value understanding and idea generation,” Ind. Market.
Manage., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 305–315, 2002.

[17] B. Gold, “Approaches to accelerating product and process development,”

J. Proc. Innov. Manage., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 81–88, 1987.

[18] F. J. M. Gonzáles and T. M. B. Palacios, “The effect of new product
development techniques on new product success in Spanish ﬁrms,” Ind.
Market. Manage., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 261–271, 2002.

[19] A. Grifﬁn, “The effect of project and process characteristics on product
development cycle time,” J. Market. Res., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 24–35,
1997a.

[20]

, “PDMA research on new product development practices:
Updating trends and benchmarking best practices,” J. Proc. Innov.
Manage., vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 429–458, 1997b.

[21] A. Grifﬁn, “Product development cycle time for business-to-business

products,” Ind. Market. Manage., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 291–304, 2002.

[22] A. Grifﬁn and A. L. Page, “PDMA success measurement project: Rec-
ommended measures for product development success and failure,” J.
Proc. Innov. Manage., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 478–496, 1996.

[23] A. K. Gupta, K. Brockhoff, and U. Weisenfeld, “Making trade-offs in
the new product development process: A German/US comparison,” J.
Proc. Innov. Manage., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 11–18, 1992.

[24] J. F. Hair, R. E. Anderson, R. L. Tatham, and W. C. Black, Multivariate

Data Analysis. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1998.

[25] J. K. Han, N. Kim, and R. K. Srivastava, “Market orientation and orga-
nizational performance: Is innovation a missing link?,” J. Market., vol.
62, pp. 30–45, Oct. 1998.

[26] J. L. Hartley, B. J. Zirger, and R. R. Kamath, “Managing the buyer-
supplier interface for on-time performance in product development,” J.
Oper. Manage., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 57–70, 1997.

[27] J. W. Henke, R. A. Krachenburg, and T. F. Lyons, “Cross-functional
teams: Good concept, poor implementation,” J. Proc. Innov. Manage.,
vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 216–229, 1993.

[37] K. Matsuno and J. T. Mentzer, “The effects of strategy type on the market
orientation-performance relationship,” J. Market., vol. 64, pp. 1–16, Oct.
2000.

[38] S. W. McDaniel and J. W. Kolari, “Marketing strategy implications of
the miles and snow strategic typology,” J. Market., vol. 51, pp. 19–30,
Oct. 1987.

[39] E. F. McDonough, “Faster new product development: Investigating the
effect of technology and characteristics of the project leader and team,”
J. Proc. Innov. Manage., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 241–250, 1993.

[40] E. F. McDonough and G. Barczak, “Speeding up new product develop-
ment: The effects of leadership style and source of technology,” J. Proc.
Innov. Manage., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 203–211, 1991.

[41] A. Menon, J. Chowdhury, and B. A. Lukas, “Antecedents and outcomes
of new product development speed: An interdisciplinary conceptual
framework,” Ind. Market. Manage., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 317–328, 2002.
[42] C. Meyer, Fast Cycle Time: How to Align Purpose, Strategy, and Struc-

ture of Speed. New York: Free Press, 1993.

[43] M. R. Millson, S. P. Raj, and D. Wilemon, “Survey of major approaches
for accelerating new product development,” J. Proc. Innov. Manage., vol.
9, no. 1, pp. 53–69, 1992.

[44] M. M. Montoya-Weiss and R. J. Calantone, “Determinants of new
product performance: A review and meta-analysis,” J. Proc. Innov.
Manage., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 397–418, 1994.

[45] C. Moorman and A. S. Miner, “The convergence of planning and exe-
cution: Improvization in new product development,” J. Market., vol. 62,
no. 3, pp. 1–20, 1998.

[46] P. A. Murmann, “Expected development time reductions in the German
mechanical engineering industry,” J. Proc. Innov. Manage., vol. 11, no.
3, pp. 236–252, 1994.

[47] J. C. Naman and D. P. Slevin, “Entrepreneurship and the concept of ﬁt: A
model and empirical tests,” Strategic Manage. J., vol. 14, pp. 137–153,
Feb. 1993.

[48] E. Nijssen, A. R. Arbouw, and H. R. Commandeur, “Accelerating new
product development: A preliminary empirical test of a hierarchy of im-
plementation,” J. Proc. Innov. Manage., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 99–109, 1995.
[49] R. Osborne, “New product development—Lesser royals,” Industry-

Week.com, Apr. 2002.

[50] R. S. Pindyck and D. L. Rubinfeldt, Econometric Models & Economic

Forecasting, 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998.

[51] J. C. Polakoff, “Reducing manufacturing costs by reducing cycle time,”

Corp. Controller, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 62–64, 1991.

[52] M. D. Rosenau, “Faster new product development,” J. Proc. Innov.

Manage., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 150–163, 1988.

[53]

, Faster New Product Development: Getting the Right Product to

the Market Quickly. New York: AMACOM, 1990.

[54] S. Sharma, R. M. Durand, and O. Gur-Arie, “Identiﬁcation and anal-
ysis of moderator variables,” J. Market. Res., vol. 18, pp. 291–300, Aug.
1981.

[55] J. D. Sherman, W. E. Souder, and S. A. Jenssen, “Differential effects of
the primary forms of cross functional integration on product develop-
ment cycle time,” J. Proc. Innov. Manage., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 257–267,
2000.


42

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 52, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2005

[56] J. B. E. M. Steenkamp and H. C. M. Van Trijp, “The use of LISREL in
validating marketing constructs,” Int. J. Res. Market., vol. 8, no. 4, pp.
283–299, 1991.

[57] C. Terwiesh, C. Loch, and M. Niederkoﬂer, “When product development
performance makes a difference: A statistical analysis in the electronics
industry,” J. Proc. Innov. Manage., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 3–15, 1998.

[58] S. Thomke and E. von Hippel, “Customers as pioneers: A new way to

create value,” Harvard Bus. Rev., vol. 80, no. 4, pp. 74–81, 2002.

[59] G. L. Urban and J. R. Hauser, Design and Marketing of New Products,

2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1993.

[60] M. Vandenbosch and T. Clift, “Dramatically reducing cycle times
through ﬂash development,” Long Range Planning, vol. 35, no. 6, pp.
567–589, 2002.

[61] J. M. Vernon, Market Structure and Industrial Performance: A Review

of Statistical Findings. Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon, 1972.

[62] J. T. Vesey, “Time-to-market: Put speed in product development,” Ind.

Market. Manage., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 151–158, 1992.

[63] O. C. Walker and R. W. Ruekert, “Marketing’s role in the implementa-
tion of business strategies: A critical review and conceptual framework,”
J. Market., vol. 51, pp. 15–33, Jul. 1987.

[64] S. C. Wheelwright and K. B. Clark, Revolutionizing Product Develop-
ment: Quantum Leaps in Speed, Efﬁciency, and Quality. New York:
Free Press, 1992.

[65] Z. Zhu, P. H. Meredith, and S. Makboonprasith, “Deﬁning critical ele-
ments in JIT implementation: A survey,” Ind. Manage. Data Syst., vol.
94, no. 5, pp. 3–10, 1994.

Fred Langerak received the M.Sc. and Ph.D.
degrees in economics and business from the Rot-
terdam School of Economics, Erasmus University of
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Currently, he is an Associate Professor of
Marketing Strategy at
the Rotterdam School of
Management, Erasmus University. His papers have
been published in such journals as the Journal of
Product Innovation Management, the International
Journal of Research in Marketing, R&D Manage-
ment, and the Journal of Strategic Marketing and
Industrial Marketing Management. His research interests include new product
development, market orientation, and increasing returns.

Dr. Langerak is a member of the American Marketing Association. He is on
the Editorial Review Board of the Journal of Product Innovation Management

Erik Jan Hultink received the M.Sc. degree in
economics from the University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, and the Ph.D. degree
from Delft University of Technology, Delft, The
Netherlands.

the Faculty of

Currently, he is a Professor of New Product
Marketing at
Industrial Design
Engineering, Delft University of Technology. His
papers have been published in such journals as the
International Journal of Research in Marketing, the
Journal of High Technology Management Research,
the Journal of Product Innovation Management, and in the PDMA Handbook of
New Product Development. His research interests include new product launch,
smart products, and new product success measures.

Dr. Hultink is a member of the Product Development Management Organiza-
tion. He is on the Editorial Review Board of the Journal of Product Innovation
Management.

