The impact of customer participation on NPD

performance: the mediating role of

inter-organisation relationship

Ming-Ji James Lin and Chin-Hua Huang

Department of Business Administration, National Central University, Taoyuan, Taiwan

Abstract
Purpose – Customer participation has been recognised as a critical factor in successful new product development (NPD). However, there is scant
empirical evidence on how customer participation affects NPD performance. This research attempts to provide a framework to interpret how inter-
organisational relationships mediate the impact of customer participation on NPD performance based on marketing, innovation management and social
networks literature.
Design/methodology/approach – An empirical study of 179 high-tech ﬁrms in Taiwan is analysed by structural equation modelling.
Findings – The results indicate that the impacts of customer participation as an information resource and customer participation as a co-developer on
NPD performance are mediated by inter-organisational relationships.
Practical implications – The results offer a guideline for high-tech ﬁrms that decide to involve customers in NPD activities. In order to improve
efﬁciency and effectiveness, this research suggests that ﬁrms build inter-organisational relationships with customers to foster knowledge sharing,
cooperation, and problem solving. However, ﬁrms should be aware that product innovativeness may be hindered by such close collaborative
relationships.
Originality/value – The research demonstrates that the contributions of customer participation may not be regarded as inevitable. The authors
conﬁrm that research for investigating the linkage between customer participation and NPD performance should consider the mediating roles of inter-
organisational relationships, which may help resolve the conﬂicting results obtained by researchers on the contributions of customer participation. In
addition, the results show that the establishment of close customer-supplier relationships during NPD cooperation is a key success factor for both
efﬁciency and effectiveness, but has the opposite effect on product innovativeness.

Keywords Business-to-business marketing, Networks, Effectiveness, Efﬁciency, Product innovation, New product development, Co-operation,
Customer relationship management

Paper type Research paper

An executive summary for managers and executive
readers can be found at the end of the article.

1. Introduction

New product development (NPD) for a ﬁrm is imperative for
survival in today’s hyper competition markets, and involving
customers in NPD activities is increasingly considered a must
(Chen et al., 2008; Hausman et al., 2005). Customer
participation means the degree to which the customer is
involved in a manufacturer’s NPD activity, which we focus on
in the business-to-business (B2B) market. Many studies have
shown that customer participation positively affects NPD
performance in such areas as time acceleration (Carbonell
et al., 2009), cost reduction (von Hippel, 1998) and product
quality improvement (Tsai, 2009). However, this body of
research does not explain how ﬁrms beneﬁt from customer

The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/0885-8624.htm

participation and why many development projects fail to
produce the desired results.

Though customer participation in NPD offers many
beneﬁts,
it also creates potential problems. The major
problem is that customer willingness to share knowledge
may risk leaking sensitive knowledge to rivals (Dyer and
Hatch, 2006); particularly for ﬁrms whose knowledge is a
source of their dominance. Once ﬁrms perceive that their
knowledge resources are jeopardised by knowledge spillovers,
they may decide not to share valuable knowledge. Other
problems include the difﬁculty of articulating more advanced
needs (Bonner, 2010) and the problems with transferring vital
knowledge to others due to the complex and unstructured
nature of such tacit knowledge (Ganesan et al., 2005).

Nambisan (2002) argued that the most important reason
customers have played a limited role in NPD may be the poor
connectivity between customers and manufacturers. In social
network theory, strong network ties are more likely enhance
the transfer of knowledge because of their closeness, trust and
mutual reciprocity (Granovetter, 1973). Such ties enable
customers to not only convey sensitive knowledge but also to
better know how to transmit knowledge (Ganesan et al.,

Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing
28/1 (2013) 3– 15
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited [ISSN 0885-8624]
[DOI 10.1108/08858621311285679]

Received 24 September 2010
Revised 7 February 2011
Accepted 12 September 2011

3

