The Impacts of IT Capability on Internet-enabled Supply and 

Demand Process Integration, and Firm Performance in 

Manufacturing and Services 

 

Hefu Liu*, Qian Huang, Shaobo Wei, Liqiang Huang (forthcoming), “The impacts of 

IT capabilities on the Internet-enabled Supply and Demand Integration, and Firm 

Performance in Manufacturing and Services”, International Journal of Logistics 

Management 

 

ABSTRACT 

Purpose – The purpose of this paper is to derive a model to examine how IT 

capability affects Internet-enabled supply and demand process integration, which will 

eventually improve firm performance. In addition, the moderating effects of industry 

type in the research framework are explored. 

Design/methodology/approach –Data were obtained from a survey administered to 

261 firms in the manufacturing and services industry in China. The structural equation 

modeling approach is used to test the hypotheses. The study further applied the t-test 

to compare the path coefficiencies between manufacturing and service. 

Findings –Results from the survey indicate that Internet-enabled supply and demand 

process integration is affected by IT capability, and can directly impact firm 

performance. The results further indicate that manufacturing and services firms may 

benefit from IT capability in different ways. 


Originality/value –The current paper contributes knowledge on the value-realizing 

mechanism of Internet-enabled supply chain integration from a resource-based view. 

It presents a multidimensional explanation of the relationships among IT capability, 

Internet-enabled supply chain integration, and firm performance. 

Keywords - IT capability, IT operational capability, IT transformational capability, 

Internet-enabled supply chain integration, higher-order organizational capability. 

Paper type– Research paper 


1.  Introduction 

Due  to  globalization  and  the  diffusion  of  Internet  applications,  integrating  supply 

chain  processes  over  the  Internet  is  becoming  a  main  theme  of  supply  chain 

management  (SCM)  (Flynn  et  al.,  2010;  Liu  et  al.,  2013a;  Ralston  et  al.,  2013; 

Rosenzweig, 2009). It is suggested that the Internet could provide an open, real-time, 

global  platform  for  a  firm  to  access  to  a  wide  range  of  channel  partners  (anytime, 

anyplace,  anyone,  almost)  at  a  lower  cost  (Giménez  &  Lourenço,  2008;  Ke  et  al., 

2009;  Zhu  et  al.,  2006).  Supply  chain  integration  (SCI)  in  e-business  thus  could 

enable  the  firm  to  overcome  the  tradeoffs  of  low-cost,  rich-content,  real-time,  and 

broad  channel  deployment,  and  eventually  to  derive  competitive  advantage  that  the 

firm cannot achieve individually (Giménez & Lourenço, 2008; Lee & Whang, 2004; 

Liu et  al., 2010; Rosenzweig, 2009). In this view, researchers and practitioners have 

held a view that a greater level of integration in e-business would lead to better firm 

performance  (Frohlich  &  Westbrook,  2001;  Rosenzweig,  2009).  However,  although 

the benefits of SCI have been well touted theoretically (Frohlich, 2002; Lee & Whang, 

2004; Rosenzweig, 2009), few studies have investigated the antecedents of SCI in e-

business.  

In the existing literature, Information Technology (IT) is often mentioned as a key 

driver for successful SCM implementation (Bagchi & Skjoett-Larsen, 2003; Hall et al., 

2012;  Li  et  al.,  2009).  The  literature  indicates  that  most  successful  collaborative 

relationships  are  developed  when  firms  and  their  partners  both  equip  with  IT 

capability (Liu et al., 2013b; Rai et al., 2012). IT capability reflects a firm’s ability to 


assemble,  integrate,  and  deploy  IT  resources to meet  business  needs (Kim  &  Lee, 

2010; Ravichandran & Lertwongsatiem, 2005; Ray et al., 2005). This ability enables 

the  firm  to  diffuse  IT  applications  in  business  processes  efficiently,  as  well  as  to 

extensively  use  IT  to  support  the  execution  of  business  strategies  and  value-chain 

activities (Li  et  al.,  2009;  Rai  et  al.,  2006;  Rai  et  al.,  2012).   It  is  suggested  that  IT 

capability,  as  part  of  a  firm’s  resource  portfolio,  could  ensure  the  firm  to  deploy 

appropriate  IT  applications  effectively,  and  overcome  the  technological  constraints 

related  to  SCI (Devaraj  et  al.,  2007).  It  is,  therefore,  not  surprising  that  many  firms 

such  as  Cisco,  General  Electric,  Wal-Mart,  and  Dell  are  trying  to  develop  efficient 

strategies  that  leverage  their  IT  capability  to  facilitate  SCI  to  achieve  superior  firm 

performance.   

Although  the  promising  and  optimistic  views  of  the  significance  of  IT  capability 

with  respect  to efficient  and effective  SCM, evidences to  date indicate that applying 

IT  capability  to  the  management  of  a  supply  chain  to  achieve  superior  firm 

performance is not an easy step in industry (Devaraj et al., 2007; Hall et al., 2012; Rai 

et al., 2006). Indeed, some empirical research shows that IT capability cannot provide 

the  expected  performance  benefits  in  managing  a  supply  chain  (Ray  et  al.,  2005; 

Tippins & Sohi, 2003; Wu et al., 2006). It is suggested that “the role and articulation 

of  the  underlying  mechanisms`  through  which  IT  capabilities  improve  firm 

performance  remain  unclear”  (Mithas  et  al.  2011  p.238).  Given  that  firms  make 

increasingly  large  investments  in  IT,  how  best  to  reap  the  benefits  of  specific  IT 

capability  and  how  environmental  factors  affect  such  a  value-related  process  is 


becoming a vital concern for researchers and practitioners (Ray et al., 2005; Tippins 

& Sohi, 2003; Wu et al., 2006).  

The  aim  of  this  study  is  to  extend  the  current  understanding  of  how  IT  capability 

affects Internet-enabled SCI, which will eventually improve firm performance from a 

resource-based  view  (RBV).  Specifically,  we  will  investigate  the  influence  of  two 

Internet-enabled  SCI  dimensions  (i.e.,  the  integration  of  demand  processes  and  of 

supply processes) on firm performance. According to the RBV, these two dimensions 

of process integration interact as a higher-order organizational capability that is firm 

specific and difficult to duplicate across the typical operations of different firms (Rai 

et al., 2006; Wu et al., 2006). These two dimensions can further apply to the use of the 

Internet to overcome the tradeoffs between low cost, rich content, real-time data, and 

broad  deployment  across  the  supply  chain,  which  are  faced  by  traditional 

marketplace-based  competition  (Frohlich,  2002;   arc  a-Dastugue  &  Lambert,  2003; 

Lancioni et  al.,  2003). Scholars thus  indicate that  these two forms  of integration not 

only  streamline  the  flow  of  information,  materials,  and  finances  across  the  supply 

chain  in  order  to  obtain  a  sustained  competitive  advantage,  but  also  they  help  firms 

reap the full benefits of IT capability (Esper et al., 2010; Frohlich & Westbrook, 2002; 

Osmonbekov et al., 2009; Vaart & Donk, 2008). 

The  current  study  further  explores  the  role  of  two  IT  capability,  namely  IT 

operational  capability  and  IT  transformational  capability  that  affect  Internet-enabled 

SCI.  The  existing  literature  indicates  that  IT  operational  and  transformational 

capability  which  differ  with  respect  to  IT  applications  deployment,  are  the  two 


fundamental components of IT competence (Ravichandran & Lertwongsatiem, 2005; 

2000).    IT  operational  capability  focuses  on  deploying  IT  applications  to  provide 

reliable  and  consistent  IT  support  to  current  business,  and  IT  transformational 

capability emphasizes deploying new IT applications to transform firms to create new 

business opportunities (Ravichandran & Lertwongsatiem, 2005; 2000). It is suggested 

that  these  two  IT  capability  reflect  the  different  mechanisms  by  which  IT  resource 

deployment facilitates organizational capability such as SCI (Devaraj et al., 2007; Li 

et al., 2009; Rai et al., 2006; Wu et al., 2006). Hence, investigating these two types of 

IT capability simultaneously may shed new light on the benefits of IT capability and 

help resolve the problem of the current inconsistencies found in the extant literature. 

Finally, we propose to use industry type as a moderator in our research model. As 

indicated by Rosenzweig  (2009) and Vaart and Donk (2008), failing to fully consider 

the  industry  environment  in  which  firms  compete  could  incur  mixed  findings  about 

the relationship between supply chain integration and firm performance. Industry type 

has  been  presented  as  a  surrogate  variable  comprising  a  set  of  comprehensive  and 

relevant  constructs,  such  as  organizational  capabilities,  business  environment, 

business  strategy,  and  technology  adoption  (Neirotti  and  Paulucci  2011).  This 

indicates that different industry types suggest different business objectives, interests, 

models, and environments all of which would impact the benefit-realizing capacity of 

a  particular  strategy  (Frohlich  &  Westbrook,  2002;  Johansson  &  Olhager,  2006). 

Frohlich and Westbrook (2002), for example, propose that manufacturing and services 

industries may be different enough to affect their need for improving performance by 


specific  channel  management  capability.    Also,  Zhu  and  Sarkis  (2004)  suggest 

industry  type  as  being  the  potential  moderator  of  the  relationship  between  supply 

chain management and firm performance. As such, incorporating industry type in this 

study is consistent with the themes appearing in strategy and organizational literature, 

and  is  helpful  to  understand  the  relationships  between  Internet-enabled  supply  chain 

integration and firm performance. 

 

2.  Theoretical background and research model 

RBV  conceptualizes  a  firm  as  being  comprised  of  a  bundle  of  resources,  and 

“defines strategic assets as rare, valuable, imperfectly imitable, and non substitutable 

resources”  (Yeung,  2008  p.493).  It  further  indicates  that  a  firm’s  competitive 

advantage  lies  in  the  application  of  higher-order  organizational  capability,  which  is 

enhanced  by  its  organizational  resources  (Barney,  2007;  Rai  et  al.,  2006).  Higher-

order organizational capability reflects the firm’s heterogeneous and immobile ability 

which  could  integrate,  build,  and  reconfigure  resources  that  are  embedded  in 

organizational processes designed to respond to market changes (Barney, 2007; Rai et 

al., 2006; Teece, 2007; Teece et al., 1997).  

Accordingly,  the  relationships  between  IT  capability,  SCI,  and  firm  performance 

can  be  grounded  in  RBV.  Specifically,  IT  capability,  as  part  of  a  firm’s  resource 

portfolio,  could  facilitate  the  configurations  and  complementarity  of  resources  both 

within  and  across  organizational  boundaries  (Kim  &  Lee,  2010;  Ravichandran  & 

Lertwongsatiem, 2005; Ray et al., 2005). It could be blended with interorganizational 


processes 

to  develop  higher-order  organizational  capability  for 

transferring 

information, sensing market conditions, and coordinating operations across the supply 

chain  (Devaraj  et  al.,  2007;  Li  et  al.,  2009;  Rai  et  al.,  2006).  For  example,  IT 

capability  could  provide  an  environment  conducive  to  enhancing  the  integration  or 

alignment  of  supply  or  demand  processes  across  the  supply  chain,  which  eventually 

impact firm performance.  

Following the RBV, the literature indicates that a firm’s ability to integrate supply 

chain  processes,  such  as  demand  processes  and  supply  processes,  could  act  as  a 

critical higher-order organizational capability (Devaraj et al., 2007; Flynn et al., 2010; 

Kim, 2009; Li et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2010; Rai et al., 2006; Vaart & Donk, 2008). It 

is  suggested  that  “processes  consist  of  multiple  interdependent  and  interlocking 

activities within the value chain that are difficult to collectively duplicate and compete 

against, making them a logical battle ground for competitive advantage” (Esper et al., 

2010  p.5).  Accordingly,  Internet-enabled  SCI,  which  is  difficult  for  competitors  to 

imitate,  would  allow  firms  to  achieve  superior  benefits  along  with  a  sustainable 

competitive  advantage  in  a  given  market.  This  study  thus  investigates  how  IT 

capability  impacts  firm  performance  through  shaping  higher-order  organizational 

capability of Internet-enabled supply and demand process integration. 

 

2.1. Internet-enabled supply and demand process integration 

The construct of Internet-enabled SCI embodies the nature of the processes that are 

shared between firms in the supply chain process and the integration that is supported 


by the Internet. Internet-enabled demand and supply process integration thus refers to 

the extent to which a firm strategically collaborates demand and supply side processes, 

respectively, with channel partners based on the application of the Internet (Devaraj et 

al., 2007; Esper et al., 2010; Frohlich & Westbrook, 2002). Specifically, demand side 

processes  refer  to  the  processes  followed  both  inside  and  outside  of  a  firm  for 

generating  and  maintaining  demand,  such  as  the  processes  of  marketing,  sales,  and 

customer  relationship  management.  In  contrast,  supply  side  processes  reflect  the 

processes inside and outside of the firm that are responsible for fulfilling the activities 

of supporting and supplying the products and services, which consists of inbound and 

outbound logistics (Esper et al., 2010; Flynn et al., 2010; Frohlich & Westbrook, 2002; 

Jüttner et al., 2010).  

Given the power of the Internet to provide open, real-time, and global connections, 

firms are increasingly infusing the Internet into demand and supply processes ( arc  a-

Dastugue  &  Lambert,  2003;  Ke  et  al.,  2009;  Lancioni  et  al.,  2003;  Lee  &  Whang, 

2004; Liu et al., 2010; Osmonbekov et al., 2009). In contrast to traditional Electronic 

Data  Interchange  (EDI)  systems,  the  Internet  has  enhanced  features  that  make  the 

integration  of  fragmented,  silo-oriented  supply  chain  processes  more  flexible  and 

affordable to smaller business (Devaraj et al., 2007; Ke et al., 2009; Zhu et al., 2006). 

The  Internet  enables  firms  to  conduct  information  exchange  and  channel  processes 

coordination,  such  as  sales,  promotion,  procurement,  customer  service,  and  delivery 

schedule,  without  the  constraints  of  time  and  space  ( arc  a-Dastugue  &  Lambert, 

2003;  Lancioni  et  al.,  2003;  Lee  &  Whang,  2004;  Zhu  et  al.,  2006).  Therefore, 


scholars increasingly regard Internet-enabled channel integration as being the new era 

of SCM (Frohlich & Westbrook, 2001; Lee & Whang, 2004). 

However,  scholars  also  indicate  that  firms  may  vary  in  the  intensity  of  Internet-

enabled  SCI  “depending  upon  the  degree  of  Internet-based  demand  integration  and 

the degree of Internet-based supply integration in their strategy. These strategies can 

range from little or no Internet-based integration to total integration from customers to 

suppliers”  (Devaraj  et  al.,  2007  p.1202).  This  indicates  that  considering  the 

dimensions of supply and demand process integration simultaneously is important for 

understanding how the supply chain process integration operates (Flynn et al., 2010). 

As  Figure  1  shows,  the  current  study  will  investigate  the  influence  of  two  IT 

capabilities  on  the  Internet-enabled  supply  process  integration  and  the  Internet-

enabled  demand  process  integration  simultaneously,  and  then  study  the  impact  of 

these two SCI on firm performance.  

 

 

Insert Figure 1 here. 

2.2.  The  relationship  between  Internet-enabled  supply  and  demand  process 

integration and firm performance 

The  improvement  in  firm  performance  through  supply  and  demand  process 

integration  has  been  well  documented  (Esper  et  al.,  2010;  Frohlich  &  Westbrook, 

2002; Kim, 2009; Vaart & Donk, 2008). The literature also indicates that by infusing 

the  Internet  into  channel  processes,  firms  may  apply  the  integration  of  supply  and 


demand  processes  based  on  open,  agile,  global,  and  real-time  connections  and 

linkages in  the supply chain to improve customer responsiveness  and  manufacturing 

performance  flexibly  (Frohlich  &  Westbrook,  2001;  Lee  &  Whang,  2004).  This 

means  that  Internet-enabled  integration  allows  firms  to  provide  easier  access  to 

information,  develop  more  flexibility  to  respond  to  market  changes,  provide  global 

customer service, reduce service costs, and shorten product cycles, which are critical 

for firm performance (Devaraj et al., 2007; Frohlich & Westbrook, 2002). 

Internet-enabled  supply  process  integration  could  improve  upstream  partners’ 

understanding  and  anticipation  of  a  firm’s  needs  (Flynn  et  al.,  2010).  Specifically, 

with the aid of the Internet, firms could exchange real-time information about supply 

processes, schedules, capabilities, and activities with upstream partners globally. This 

exchange leads to an improved understanding of ordering and shipping processes that, 

in  turn,  can  minimize  the  possibility  of  logistical  errors  (Osmonbekov  et  al.,  2009). 

Firms  thus  could  effectively  decrease  the  number  of  out-of-stock  items,  reduce 

expediting  costs,  and  increase  responsiveness,  thereby  improving  performance 

(Frohlich,  2002;  Lee  &  Whang,  2004).  Further,  supply  process  integration  could 

decrease  inter-firm  conflict  and  disagreements  (Osmonbekov  et  al.,  2009;  Vaart  & 

Donk, 2008). It thus can increase the upstream partners’ commitment to making their 

resources  complementary  to  those  of  other  firms  to  coordinate  the  supply  chain 

processes (Rosenzweig, 2009; Vaart & Donk, 2008). With complementary resources, 

firms  easily  shorten  the  critical  path  for  fulfillment  activities  of  supporting  and 


supplying  the  necessary  products  and  services  (Esper  et  al.,  2010;  Frohlich  & 

Westbrook, 2002).  

 

H1a:  A  firm’s  Internet-enabled  supply  process  integration  is  positively  related  to  its 

performance. 

 

Internet-enabled  demand  process  integration  may  enhance  firm  performance 

through improving the accuracy of demand information (Flynn et al., 2010; Frohlich 

& Westbrook, 2002; Osmonbekov et al., 2009; Rollins et al., 2012). Specifically, by 

using the  Internet  to  detail the timing,  amount, and content of downstream  partners’ 

activities,  this  integration  could  provide  firms  with  improved  visibility  of  demand 

processes  and  customer  needs  (Osmonbekov  et  al.,  2009;  Rosenzweig,  2009).  This 

demand-related  information  further  enables  firms  to  better  organize  and  align  their 

mutually dependent activities with those of downstream partners, and then to monitor 

collaboration efforts with greater efficiency and effectiveness (Frohlich, 2002; Lee & 

Whang, 2004; Osmonbekov et al., 2009; Rollins et al., 2012). Further, the integration 

provides  an  efficient  and  interdependent  coordination  mechanism,  which  could  help 

firms reduce product design and production planning time and cost as well as detect 

demand  changes  more  quickly,  thereby  allowing  them  to  be  more  responsive  to 

customer needs (Flynn et al., 2010; Frohlich, 2002).  

 


H1b: A firm’s Internet-enabled demand process integration is positively related to its 

performance. 

 

2.3. IT operational capability 

IT operational capability reflects a firm’s ability to provide reliable and consistent 

IT  support  to  current  business.  It  involves  using  IT  applications  to  solve  current 

business  problems  and  provides  a  focus  on  efficiency,  consistency,  and  process 

control. Further, IT operational capability could measure the extent to which a firm’s 

IT  function  helps  business  operations  be  free  from    disruptions  due  to  IT-related 

failures (Bharadwaj, 2000; Ravichandran & Lertwongsatiem, 2005; Ray et al., 2005). 

It provides firms with the opportunity to efficiently operate specific IT applications to 

develop  and  build  other  organizational  capabilities  (Bharadwaj,  2000;  Wade  & 

Hulland, 2004).  

IT  operational  capability  can  enhance  Internet-enabled  supply  chain  process 

integration by maintaining and operating reliable information systems (Devaraj et al., 

2007;  Li  et  al.,  2009;  Osmonbekov  et  al.,  2009;  Rai  et  al.,  2006).  As  Vinum  and 

Skjoldager  (2001)  contends,  reliable  information  systems  enable  the  integration  of 

demand  or  supply  processes  not  only  at  a  technical  level,  but  also  at  an  application 

and business management level. Specifically, IT operational capability allows firms to 

update  current  IT  infrastructure,  integrate  disparate  data  sources,  and  resist  system 

failure to ensure that they achieve reliable IT support to operate integrated demand or 

supply processes at the technical level (Kumar, 2004; Li et al., 2009; Rai et al., 2006). 


Reliable  and  consistent  IT  support  also  helps  firms  overcome  the  technological 

constraints  of  Internet  implementation,  which  eventually  facilitates  infusing  the 

Internet  into  the  integration  of  supply  and  demand  processes  (Osmonbekov  et  al., 

2009; Zhu et al., 2006).  

Further,  IT  operational  capability  facilitates  the  flow  of  information  for  demand 

forecasts,  production  schedules,  delivery  services,  and  inventory  maintenance  that 

dictate  the  pattern  of  supply  and  demand  processes  at  a  business  management  level 

(Li  et  al.,  2009). Rai  et  al.  (2006) argue that  through an integrated  IT infrastructure, 

firms  overcome  the  limitation  of  supply  chain  fragmentation  which  could  constrain 

information  flows  and  activity  coordination,  thereby  realizing  supply  and  demand 

process  integration.  This  indicates  that  based  on  consistent  IT  support,  firms  could 

easily  overcome  the  problem  of  disparate  and  fragmented  business  processes  at  the 

management level, and then integrate demand and supply processes more effectively.  

 

H2a:    A  firm’s  IT  operational  capability  is  positively  related  to  its  Internet-enabled 

supply process integration. 

H2b:  A  firm’s  IT  operational  capability  is  positively  related  to  its  Internet-enabled 

demand process integration. 

 

2.4. IT transformational capability 

IT  transformational  capability  refers  to  a  firm’s  ability  to  use  IT  applications  to 

transform 

itself 

to  create  new  business  opportunities 

(Ravichandran  & 


Lertwongsatiem, 2005). This ability reflects the differences of breadth and complexity 

of  IT-enabled  changes  that  firms  could  achieve,  and  of  the  firms’  transformation 

speed,  such  as  the  ability  to  accomplish  IT-enabled  changes,  both  within  and  across 

organizational  boundaries  (Armstrong  &  Sambamurthy,  1999;  Liang  et  al.,  2007; 

Tarafdar  &  Gordon,  2007).  Therefore,  in  contrast  to  IT  operational  capability,  IT 

transformational capability focuses on search, innovation, and discovery  when trying 

to create new business opportunities via diffusing advanced IT applications to support, 

shape,  and  enable  new  organizational  processes  (Armstrong  &  Sambamurthy,  1999; 

Ravichandran & Lertwongsatiem, 2005). 

As it helps firms to efficiently redesign business processes via IT applications, IT 

transformational  capability  would  be  important  for  Internet-enabled  demand  and 

supply  process  integration  (Kearns  &  Sabherwal,  2006;  Yusuf  et  al.,  2004). 

Specifically,  IT  transformational  capability  enables  firms  to  embed  IT-related 

innovative  ideas  and  values  into  business  processes  both  within  and  across  firms 

(Kearns & Sabherwal, 2006). It thus could facilitate the introduction of complex IT-

enabled  modifications  such  as  digitization  in  key  business  coordination  activities  in 

supply chain management (Rai et al., 2006; Ranganathan et al., 2004). For example, it 

could  help  firms  digitize  their  information  flow  between  customers  via  advanced  IT 

applications such as customer relationship  management. The digitization ensures the 

teaming  and  free  flow  of  information,  and  then  extends  the  reach  and  range  of 

coordination  with  respect  to  demand  processes,  thereby  leading  to  high  demand 

process integration (Kearns & Sabherwal, 2006; Yusuf et al., 2004).  


Further,  IT  transformational  capability  allows  firms  to  react  to  the  changes  in 

channel  process  integration  with  both  flexibility  and  speed.    It  is  suggested  that  this 

ability could facilitate improving manufacturing/operational flexibility and enhancing 

supplier or customer linkages (Armstrong & Sambamurthy, 1999). For example, firms 

could  use  this  ability  to  quickly  deploy  IT  resources  to  respond  to  the  changes 

incurred by the integrated supply or demand processes, and then ensure the success of 

the  new  Internet-enabled  channel  networks  and  business  models  (Frohlich  & 

Westbrook,  2001;  Lee  &  Whang,  2004).  This  process  thus  indicates  that  IT 

transformational  capability  could  help  firms  effectively  react  to  the  new  business 

opportunities  and  the  challenges  of  achieving  better  demand  and  supply  process 

synchronization  and  coordination  across  the  supply  chain  (Ke  et  al.,  2009; 

Ranganathan et al., 2004).  

 

H3a:  A  firm’s  IT  transformational  capability  is  positively  related  to  its  Internet-

enabled supply integration. 

H3b:  A  firm’s  IT  transformational  capability  is  positively  related  to  its  Internet-

enabled demand integration. 

 

2.5. The difference between manufacturing and services firms 

We postulate that the relationships among IT capability, Internet-enabled supply chain 

integration,  and  firm  performance  are  contingent  on  the  type  of  industry  in  which 

firms operate. Specifically, we categorized firms as being a manufacturing industry or 


a  services  industry  based  on  whether  firms  manufactured  physical  products  or 

provided  services  (Liu  et  al.,  2010;  Mitra  &  Singhal,  2008).  Previous  research  has 

shown that manufacturing and services firms differ in terms of the level of IT use and 

the need for efficient supply and demand management (Frohlich & Westbrook, 2002; 

Lee  &  Xia,  2006).  According  to  Frohlich  and  Westbrook  (2002),  services  and 

manufacturing firms  may  be different  with  respect  to the characteristics  of customer 

participation, 

intangibility, 

inseparability  of  production  and  consumption, 

heterogeneity, perishability, and labor intensity.  Some scholars also  indicate that the 

intangibility  of  services  could  highlight  the  greater  importance  of  customer 

relationships  for  service  firms  in  developing  a  competitive  advantage  than  for 

manufacturing  firms  (Perrien  &  Ricard,  1995).  In  this  view,  services  firms  require 

higher  levels  of  direct  customer  participation  as  compared  to  manufacturing  firms, 

and  hence  services  firms  would  pay  more  attention  to  demand  management  to 

improve their performance at the general level (Frohlich, 2002).  

Accordingly,  due  to  the  different  levels  of  inherent  information  intensity, 

manufacturing and services firms would have differing needs for IT innovations (Lee 

&  Xia,  2006).  For  example,  manufacturing  firms  may  focus  on  the  use  of  e-

procurement,  including  the  use  of  the  Internet  in  the  purchasing  process  to  support 

upstream  sourcing,  product  selection  with  on-line  catalogues,  tendering,  and  order 

tracking and fulfillment, for supplier integration. Service firms may emphasize the use 

of  e-commerce,  which 

includes  electronic 

tools  for  content  or  knowledge 

management, order management/tracking, and sharing information about requests for 


quotations and for customer integration (Hong et al., 2010; Neirotti & Paulucci 2011). 

This  difference  could  dictate 

the 

importance 

level  of  IT  operational  and 

transformational capability which, in turn, causes the impacts of IT capability on the 

Internet-enabled supply and demand process integration to vary in the manufacturing 

and services industries.  

 

H4.The  relationship  among  IT  capability,  the  Internet-enabled  supply  and  demand 

process  integration,  and  firm  performance  will  differ  for  manufacturing  and 

services firms. 

 

3. Research method 

3.1. Sampling and data collection 

To test the research model, we conducted a survey study in China because China is 

such a great powerhouse for global economics. More and more multinational firms 

are operating either alone or collaboratively in China, and more Chinese firms are 

becoming significant players in the international supply channels. To compete 

domestically and internationally, firms located in China are increasingly dependent on 

IT, especially inter-organizational systems designed to link with their supply chain 

partners across the world (Das et al., 2006; Wang et al., 2006). In this view, China is 

becoming an ideal setting to conduct supply chain research . This survey was 

conducted in four cities: Shanghai, Nanjing, Suzhou, and Hefei, all of which are 

located in the largest economic area of China:  the Yangtze River delta. The key 


informants were senior executives of manufacturing and services firms, such as CEOs, 

senior vice presidents of operations management, or chief technology officers. These 

executives were knowledgeable about the related issues being examined in this 

research, such as supply chain management and Internet technologies. Further, they 

had the opportunity to be in direct contact with their supply chain partners. This 

contact gave them an opportunity to get to know their partners and their respective 

environments well. It is clear that senior or middle management executives have the 

power and opportunity to either make or affect their firms’ operations and executive 

decisions, such as those decisions regarding supply chain relationships. 

We  randomly  chose  1,000  firms  based  on  the  lists  provided  by  local  Industrial 

Park  Administrators,  and  sent  them  invitations  to  participate  in  our  survey.  Finally, 

we  sent  600  questionnaires  to  senior  executives  who  agreed  to  participate  in  the 

survey. After discarding  the incomplete questionnaires,  we  had a total of  261 useful 

questionnaires and a response rate of approximately 26.1%. Followed Armstrong and 

Overton (1977), we tested for the potential non-response bias. Through comparing the 

Chi-squares  of  the  key  measures  of  the  responses  from  the  first  25%  of  the 

respondents  and  those  of  the  final  25%,  we  found  that  there  were  no  significant 

differences between these two groups on these items. This indicates that non-response 

bias was not serious in this study. Table I shows the demographic information of the 

samples taken. 

 

Insert Table I here. 


3.2. Measures 

We developed measurement items based on previously validated measures in the 

extant literature. All items were assessed using 5-point Likert scales, ranging from 

“strongly disagree” to “strongly agree.” To test content validity of the questionnaire, 

we first interviewed nine executives from electronics, IT product and services, finance 

and banking, and the automotive industry. Valuable feedback on the instrument, with 

respect to both the appropriateness and sensitivity of the measurement items was 

collected. Further, we invited three researchers from the areas of information systems 

and operations management to review the questionnaire. Some revisions, such as 

clarifying the items and the wordings, changing the format of the questionnaire and 

re-sequencing the questions, were made based on their comments and suggestions. 

Given that this research was to be conducted in China, we finally translated the 

instrument into Chinese after completing the original English version. The translation 

followed the translation committee approach suggested by previous research (Van de 

Vijver & Leung, 1997). Specifically, we first translated the questionnaire into Chinese 

and then back-translated it to English to ensure an equivalence of meaning between 

the English and Chinese versions. 

In this study, four measurement items for  IT operational capability were adapted 

from  Sarah  et  al.  (2007)  and  Bhatt  and  Grover  (2005).  We  modified  the  scales  to 

reflect  the  extent  to  which  a  firm’s  information  systems  were  designed  to  support 

business  relationship  easily,  how  they  were  organized  and  integrated  to  allow  for 

rapid  changes  as  well  as  the  degree  to  which  they  were  compatible  and  scalable. 


Similarly, the scales of IT transformational capability were adapted from Liang et al. 

(2007) and Lee (2007). We adapted four items to measure a firm’s ability to explore 

new IT resources to achieve business opportunities. Specifically, we assessed whether 

the firm had the ability to constantly explore new innovative opportunities related to 

IT,  to  explore  new  IT  resources  for  future  products/service,  to  explore  new  IT 

resources for future business models, and to embed IT applications in management.  

We developed four  items for  the  Internet-enabled supply  process  integration and 

Internet-enabled demand process integration based on the work of Osmonbekov et al. 

(2009),  Frohlich  and  Westbrook  (2002),  and  on  the  observations  made  during  our 

interviews. Specifically, four items about Internet-enabled supply process integration 

tested the  extent to  which the firm  integrated supply side processes, such  as  sharing 

information about inventory status and planned order, making joint plans with respect 

to inventory requirements, and coordinating procurement via the Internet with channel 

partners.  Similarly,  four  items  about  Internet-enabled  demand  process  integration 

measured the degree to which the firm integrated the various demand side processes, 

such as the joint development of demand forecasts, joint plans for service support as 

well as joint plans for the introduction of new products/services and rollover via the 

Internet with channel partners.  

Further,  we  measured  firm  performance 

through 

testing 

the  executives’ 

perceptions  of  their  company’s  operational  performance  relative  to  that  of  key 

competitors.  In  the  existing  literature,  business  performance  has  been  considered  a 

multi-dimensional construct (Venkatraman, 1989; Nakata et al., 2008). However, SCI 


scholars  normally  focused  on  the  operational  benefits  of  supply  chain  integration 

(Devaraj  et  al.  2007, Wong et  al.  2011). According to  Rosenzweig  et  al. (2003) and 

Devaraj  et  al.  (2007),  the  benefits  of  integration  must  be  translated  into  operational 

performance first, rather the multiple measures of business performance. In this study, 

we used six items which were adapted from Rai  et al. (2006) and Ravichandran and 

Lertwongsatiem  (2005)  to  assess  how  well  the  firm  responded  to  new  marketplace 

demands  and  met  customer  requirements  in  terms  of  the  speed  of  delivering 

products/service,  responding  to  demand  changes,  entering  new  markets,  promoting 

new  products/services,  confirming  customer  orders,  and  addressing  customer 

complaints as compared to key competitors.  

For the moderator of industry type, we treated it as a dummy variable, such that 1 

indicates manufacturing industry, and 0 represents service industry, based on whether 

the  firm  manufactured  physical  products  or  provided  services.  We  further  included 

three  control  variables  as  follows:  firm  size,  IT  department  size,  and  ownership. 

Specifically,  firm  size  was  measured  based  on  the  number  of  full-time  employees. 

Given that information technology (IT) support is necessary for the eSCMS adoption 

decision, we treated the size of the IT department of the target firm as another control 

variable, which was measured by the number of employees in the IT department. The 

control  variable  of  Ownership  types  was  test  based  on  the  categorization  of  state-

owned, privately owned, and foreign-controlled types. 

 


4. Analysis and Results 

4.1. Common method bias 

Given that all data were perceptual and collected from a single source at one point 

in time, we used Harmon’s one-factor test to assess common method bias. The results 

revealed five constructs  with eigenvalues greater than 1.0, accounting for 69.12% of 

the  variance,  while  the  first  construct  explained  17.35%  of  the  variance.  Thus, 

common  method  bias  was  not  a  serious  concern  for  this  study  (Carr,  2007). 

Meanwhile, we compared the fit between the one-factor model and the measurement 

model to further ensure that common method bias was not serious. The fit of the one-

factor model (χ2= 2258.92, d.f. = 209) was considerably inferior to (p < 0.01) the fit of 

the proposed model (χ2= 541.71, d.f. = 199). This result further supported the fact that 

common method bias would not impact the results of this study. 

4.2. Measurement model 

We  employed  the  Partial  Least  Squares  (PLS)  approach  to  analyze  the  data.  This 

approach 

is  suitable  for  predictive  research,  especially  for  research  under 

development  that  has  not  been  tested  extensively  (Teo  et  al.,  2003).  Its  demands  on 

measurement scales, sample size, and residual distributions are minimal (Ehie, 2010). 

Specifically, this approach combines the assessment of both the measurement model 

and  the  structural  model,  and  assesses  the  relationships  between  constructs  and  the 

relationships  between  the  constructs  and  their  measurement  items  simultaneously 

(Barroso & Picón, 2012).  


We  tested  the  reliability,  convergent  validity,  and  discriminant  validity  of  the 

measurements. The results showed that all of the items’ loadings were up 0.70 criteria. 

As Table II shows, the values of Cronbatch alpha ranged from 0.727 to 0.803, which 

indicated  the  reliability  of  our  measurement  are  good.  Meanwhile,  composite 

reliability ranged from 0.882 to 0.913, which were above the 0.70 recommended level. 

Further,  each  construct’s  Average  Variance  Extracted  (AVE)  scores  ranged  from 

0.626 to 0.725, which were up 0.50 criteria (Fornell & Larcker, 1981). These results 

indicated  that  convergent  validity  of  our  measurement  instrument  was  good.  On  the 

other hand, we compared the relationship between the correlations among constructs 

and  the  square  root  of  AVEs  to  assess  the  items’  discriminant  validity.  The  results 

presented in Table  III indicated that the square root of AVEs for each construct  was 

greater than the correlations between constructs, which confirms discriminant validity. 

Insert Table II here. 

Insert Table III ere. 

 

Further, since  the three inter-construct  correlations in  Table  III  were higher than the 

benchmark  value  of  0.60,  we  conducted  a  multicollinearity  test.  Our  results  showed 

that the highest Variance Inflation Factors (VIFs) was 2.189 and the lowest tolerance 

value was 0.531, which indicated that multicollinearity was not a significant problem 

in our dataset.  


 

4.3. Structural model 

In  Figure  2,  we  presented  the  results  of  the  structural  model  analysis  of  the  full 

sample  (n=261).  The  model  explained  19.4  to  31.4  percent  of  the  variance,  and  the 

results of the path coefficients showed that all the path coefficients were positive and 

significant, which supported H1 to H3. Specifically, both the Internet-enabled supply 

process (b= 0.240, p< 0.01) and the demand process (b= 0.284, p< 0.01) integrations 

have  significant  and  positive  influences  on  firm  performance,  which  supported  H1a 

and  H1b.  Further,  the  path  coefficients  from  IT  operational  capability  to  Internet-

enabled supply process (b= 0.271, p< 0.01) and demand process (b= 0.323, p< 0.01) 

integration  are  both  significant,  which  supported  H2a  and  H2b.  In  addition,  IT 

transformational  capability  was  found  to  significantly  impact  both  the  Internet-

enabled  supply  process  (b=  0.219,  p<  0.01)  and  the  demand  process  (b=  0.300,  p< 

0.01) integration. Thus, H3a and H3b were supported.  

 

 

Insert Figure 2 here. 

Further,  to  assess  the  moderating  effects  of  industry  type,  we  tested  the  research 

framework on the manufacturing and services subsamples, respectively. In this study, 

the  categorization  of  manufacturing  and  services  industry  was  based  on  whether  a 

firm manufactured physical products or provided services (Liu et al., 2010).  As Table 

IV shows, in the service subsample, the model explained 16.1 to 32.8 percent of the 


variance.  Meanwhile,  the  path  coefficients  from  IT  operational  capability  to  the 

Internet-enabled  supply  process  (b=  0.240,  p<  0.05)  and  demand  process  (b=  0.336, 

p<  0.01)  integration  were  both  significant,  and  the  IT  transformational  capability 

significantly  impacted  the  Internet-enabled  supply  process  (b=  0.213,  p<  0.05)  and 

demand  process  (b=  0.312,  p<  0.01)  integration  too.  Yet,  the  results  showed  that 

Internet-enabled supply process integration (b= 0.165) did not significantly affect firm 

performance. Conversely, in the manufacturing subsample, the model explained 27.6 

to  31.1  percent  of  the  variance.  The  results  suggested  that  both  IT  operational  and 

transformational  capability  can  significantly  impact  the  Internet-enabled  supply  (b= 

0.360, p< 0.01 for operational  capability  and b=  0.213, p< 0.05 for transformational 

capability)  and  demand  process  integration  (b=  0.317,  p<  0.01  for  operational 

capability and b= 0.294, p< 0.01 for transformational capability). Yet, we did not find 

a  significant  relationship  between  Internet-enabled  demand  process  integration  and 

firm performance (b= 0.224).  

We  further  used  the  same  method  as  Huang  et  al.  (2010)  to  compare  the  path 

coefficiencies  between  manufacturing  and  service  subsample.  Table  IV  shows  the  t-

values  for  each  comparison.  The  results  showed  that  the  Internet-enabled  supply 

process  integration  has  stronger  influence  on  firm  performance  in  manufacturing 

industry than in service industry (t= 9.336, p<0.01). Comparably, the Internet-enabled 

demand process integration has weaker impact on firm performance in manufacturing 

industry than in service industry (t= -8.126, p<0.01). Further, the results showed that 

only  the  relationship  between  IT  operational  capability  and  Internet-enabled  supply 


process  integration  has  significant  difference  between  manufacturing  and  service 

industry  (t=9.627,  p<0.01).  The  other  relationships  between  the  IT  capability  and 

supply chain process integration were different insignificantly between manufacturing 

and service.   

 

 

Insert Table IV here. 

5. Discussions and implications 

5.1 Discussion 

Our  findings  with  respect  to  the  effects  of  IT  capability,  Internet-enabled  supply 

chain process integration, and firm performance are not only consistent with those of 

prior  studies,  but  also  offer  new  insights  into  the  association  between  IT  capability 

and operations management. Specifically, the analysis results of the full sample show 

that a firm’s high-order organizational capability, namely its  Internet-enabled supply 

process  and  demand  process  integration,  can  directly  improve  firm  performance. 

These finding are consistent with prior operations management studies (e.g., Frohlich 

&  Westbrook,  2002;  Li  et  al.,  2009).  Also,  the  results  indicate  that  Internet-enabled 

supply  and  demand  process  integration  could  be  significantly  impacted  by  both  IT 

operational  and  transformational  capability.  These  findings  are  consistent  with  what 

been proposed by previous research in information systems (e.g., Devaraj et al., 2007; 

Rai et al., 2006; Wu et al., 2006).  

Further,  our  findings  indicate  that  between  manufacturing  and  services  firms,  the 


relationships  between  Internet-enabled  supply  and  demand  process  integration  and 

firm performance would vary. Specifically, manufacturing firms’ performance would 

not  be  significantly  impacted  by  Internet-enabled  demand  process  integration  and 

service  firms’  performance  would  not  be  significantly  affected  by  Internet-enabled 

supply  process  integration.  The  different  levels  of  emphasis  on  supply  and  demand 

management  between  manufacturing  and  services  firms  may  be  the  potential 

explanation  for  these  findings  (Frohlich  &  Westbrook,  2002).  Specifically,  many 

manufacturing firms, especially firms located in the Yangzi River Delta of China, are 

manufacturing  factories  of  Original  Equipment  manufacturers  (OEM),  such  as 

Flextronics, Acer, Solectron, Asus, and so on. This characteristic indicates that these 

firms  normally  did  not  interact  with  customers  directly,  but  were  instead  generally 

focused on manufacturing. As such, Internet-enabled demand process integration may 

have  not  been  so  important  for  their  performance  improvement,  and  applying  IT  to 

such process integration would not be their primary focus.  

On  the  other  hand,  the  finding  of  the  insignificant  relationship  between  Internet-

enabled  supply  integration  and  performance  for  services  firms  is  consistent  with 

Frohlich  and  Westbrook  (2002),  which  suggested  that  compared  to  manufacturing 

firms, services firms lag in adopting supply-related IT applications. Further, services 

firms have a high level of direct customer participation in the service process. As such, 

service  firms  likely  would  pay  less  attention  to  Internet-enabled  supply  process 

integration  which  requires  them  to  infuse  the  Internet  applications  into  supply 

processes to improve firm performance. 


 Further,  partners’  IT  readiness  may  be  another  reason  for  the  non-significant 

influences  of  Internet-enabled  supply  and  demand  process  integration  on  firm 

performance mentioned above. According to Wiengarten et al. (2010), to achieve the 

benefits  of  e-business  integration,  the  e-business  readiness  of  partners  is  necessary. 

However,  the  readiness  of  partners  for  e-business  varies  across  industry  types.  For 

example,  partners  of  manufacturing  firms  normally  emphasize  the  use  of  e-business 

for supply integration whereas partners of service firms focus on the use of e-business 

for  demand  integration  (Hong  et  al.,  2010;  Neirotti  &  Paulucci  2011).  This  would 

limit  the  benefit  received  by  manufacturing  firms  from  Internet-enabled  demand 

integration  and  prevent  service  firms  from  reaping  the  benefits  of  Internet-enabled 

demand integration.    

Finally,  we  find  that  IT  operational  capability  has  stronger  influence  on  Internet-

enabled supply process integration for manufacturing than for service. This finding is 

consistent  with  our  hypothesis.  However,  the  results  showed  that  the  relationships 

between IT transformational capability and Internet-enabled SCI are not significantly 

different between manufacturing and service. These findings are inconsistent with our 

hypotheses and the existing literature which indicates that manufacturing and service 

does differ in terms of the level of IT use (Frohlich & Westbrook, 2002; Lee & Xia, 

2006). Our findings help us understand that although manufacturing and service have 

different business objectives, interests, models, and environments, the influence of IT 

capability on Internet-enabled SCI are in the same way and at the same level.  

 


5.2 Limitations and implications 

It  is  important  to  evaluate  this  study’s  results  and  contributions  in  light  of  its 

limitations.  First,  while  IT  operational  capability  and  IT  transformational  capability 

are  critical  for  firm  performance,  other  forms  of  IT  capability  may  affect  firm 

performance  too.  Future  research  can  extend  our  study  by  examining  the  effects  of 

other  IT capabilities on firm  performance. Second,  while operational  performance is 

the  first  benefit  of  supply  chain  integration,  business  performance  is  also  the 

important benefit of supply chain integration. Future research can enrich the findings 

of  our  study  by  investigating  the  multi-dimensional  firm  performance,  which 

including operational and business performance (Venkatraman, 1989 and Nakata et al., 

2008). Third, the use of perceptual measures of firm performance is another limitation. 

Although  the  subjective  perceptual  measures  have  been  found  to  strongly  correlate 

with  objective  measures  (Sheehan  et  al.,  2007),  collecting  objective  data,  especially 

on  firm  performance,  would  provide  more  convincing  research  results.  Fourth,  the 

demography  of  the  respondents  in  this  study  may  limit  the  generalizability  of  our 

findings. We collected data from senior executives in the Yangzi River Delta of China. 

Given  that  most  manufacturing  firms  are  factories  of  OEM  in  this  area,  we  suggest 

that future research should collect data from different settings. Finally, our study used 

a  cross-sectional  research  design.  However,  IT  transformational  capability  is  still 

developing  and  normally  focuses  on  long-term  IT  implementation,  such  as  future 

products/services  and  future  business  processes.  Using  a  cross-sectional  study  to 

assess its various role in manufacturing and services firms would be difficult. Thus, a 


longitudinal  study  may  enrich  our  understanding  of 

the 

function  of 

IT 

transformational capability. 

Nevertheless,  this  study  makes  four  theoretical  contributions.  First,  this  research 

enriches  the  body  of  literature  on  operations  management,  especially  that  of  supply 

chain  management.  It  also  incorporates  information  systems  with  operations 

management by providing new insights into the business value of IT operational and 

transformational capability in the supply chain context. Second, this study reveals the 

influence of IT capability on firm performance by empirically exploring the impact of 

IT  capability  on  higher-order  organizational  capability.  Specifically,  it  indicates  that 

both IT operational and transformational capability are critical to developing Internet-

enabled  supply  and  demand  process  integration.  As  such,  it  empirically  extends  the 

application  of  the  resource-based  view  perspective  and  provides  new  avenues  for 

future  research  that  would  investigate  the  capability-enhancing  role  of  IT  within  the 

supply chain management context. Third, this research also explores the influences of 

Internet-enabled  supply  and  demand  process  integration  on  firm  performance.  It 

suggests  that  both  Internet-enabled  demand  and  supply  process  integration  can 

directly  impact  firm  performance.  In  so  doing  it  extends  the  existing  operations 

management literature on the relationship between supply chain integration and firm 

performance.  Finally,  this  study  also  adds  an  industrial  perspective  to  supply  chain 

management and  IT business value literature. Specifically, this research explores  the 

relationships  between  IT  capabilities,  supply  and  demand  process  integration,  and 

firm  performance  in  the  context  of  manufacturing  and  services  firms.  The  findings 


indicate  that  manufacturing  and  services  firms  could  reap  the  benefits  of  IT 

capabilities  in  different  ways.  For  example,  manufacturing  firms  would  achieve  the 

benefits of IT capabilities through  Internet-enabled supply process integration, while 

service firms would benefit from Internet-enabled demand process integration. 

    This  research  also  has  practical  implications.  First,  this  research  provides  insights 

into  the  importance  of  IT  operational  capability  and  IT  transformational  capability 

with respect to firm performance. We suggest that managers should not only establish 

IT  operational  capability  to  develop  reliable  information  systems,  but  also  should 

embed new IT applications within and across organizational boundaries to transform 

firms to IT-enabled organization. This means that firms should not only maintain the 

stability of information systems to support their current business operations, but also 

they should explore new IT resources to explore new business opportunities. Second, 

the  research  provides  managers  with  specific  guidelines  for  realizing  the  business 

value of IT investment in the management of a supply chain. That is, managers need 

to  apply  IT  capability  to  higher-order  organizational  capability,  namely  Internet-

enabled  supply  and  demand  process  integration,  so  that  their  firms  can  reap  the 

benefits  of  IT  capability.  Third,  we  suggest  that  managers  should  consider  industry 

type when they attempt to reap the business value of IT investment. For services firms, 

managers  should  focus  on  applying  Internet-enabled  demand  process  integration  to 

improve  firm  performance.  Similarly,  managers  in  manufacturing  firms  should 

depend  on  applying  Internet-enabled  supply  process  integration  to  improve  firm 

performance. 


 

References 

Armstrong,  C.  P.,  &  Sambamurthy,  V.  (1999),  "Information  technology  assimilation  in  firms:  The 

influence  of  senior  leadership  and  IT  infrastructures".  Information  Systems  Research,  10(4), 

pp. 304-327. 

Armstrong, J. S., & Overton, T. S. (1977), "Estimating Nonresponse Bias in Mail Surveys". Journal of 

Marketing Research, 14(3), pp. 396-402. 

Bagchi, P. K., & Skjoett-Larsen, T. (2003), "Integration of information technology and organizations in 

a supply chain". International Journal of Logistics Management, 14(1), pp. 89-108. 

Barney, J. B. (2007).  Gaining and Sustaining Competitive Advantage. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice 

Hall. 

Barroso, C., & Picón, A. (2012), "Multi-dimensional analysis of perceived switching costs". Industrial 

Marketing Management, In press(0), pp. 

Bharadwaj, A. S. (2000), "A resource-based perspective on information technology capability and firm 

performance: An empirical investigation". MIS Quarterly, 24(1), pp. 169-196. 

Bhatt,  G.  D.,  &  Grover,  V.  (2005),  "Types  of  information  technology  capabilities  and  their  role  in 

competitive  advantage:  an  empirical  study".  Journal  of  Management  Information  Systems, 

22(2), pp. 253-277. 

Carr,  C.  L.  (2007),  "The  FAIRSERV  model:  Consumer  reactions  to  services  based  on  a 

multidimensional evaluation of service fairness". Decision Sciences, 38(1), pp. 107-130. 

Das, A., Narasimhan, R., & Talluri, S. (2006), "Supplier integration-finding an optimal configuration". 

Journal of Operations Management, 24, pp. 563-582. 


Devaraj,  S.,  Krajewski,  L.,  &  Wei,  J.  C.  (2007),  "Impact  of  eBusiness  technologies  on  operational 

performance: The role of production information integration in the supply chain".  Journal of 

Operations Management, 25(6), pp. 1199-1216. 

Ehie,  I.  C.  (2010),  "The  impact  of  conflict  on  manufacturing  decisions  and  company  performance". 

International Journal of Production Economics, 126(2), pp. 145-157. 

Esper,  T.  L.,  Ellinger,  A.  E.,  Stank,  T.  P.,  Flint,  D.  J.,  &  Moon,  M.  (2010),  "Demand  and  supply 

integration:  A  conceptual    framework  of  value  creation  through  knowledge  management". 

Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 38, pp. 5-18. 

Flynn, B. B., Huo, B., & Zhao, X. (2010), "The impact of supply chain integration on performance: A 

contingency and configuration approach". Journal of Operations Management, 28(1), pp. 58-

71. 

Fornell,  C.,  &  Larcker,  D.  F.  (1981),  "Evaluating  Structural  Equation  Models  with  Unobservable 

Variables and Measurement Error". Journal of Marketing Research, 18(1), pp. 39-50. 

Frohlich,  M.  T.  (2002),  "E-integration  in  the  supply  chain:  Barriers  and  performance".  Decision 

Sciences, 33(4), pp. 537-556. 

Frohlich, M. T., & Westbrook, R. (2001), "Arcs of integration: an international study of supply chain 

strategies". Journal of Operations Management, 19(2), pp. 185-200. 

Frohlich, M. T., & Westbrook, R. (2002), "Demand chain management in manufacturing and services: 

web-based integration, drivers and performance".  Journal of Operations Management, 20(6), 

pp. 729-745. 

 arc  a-Dastugue, S. J., & Lambert, D. M. (2003), "Internet-enabled coordination in the supply chain". 

Industrial Marketing Management, 32(3), pp. 251-263. 


Giménez,  C.,  &  Lourenço,  H.  R.  (2008),  "E-SCM:  internet's  impact  on  supply  chain  processes". 

International Journal of Logistics Management, 19(3), pp. 309-343. 

Hall,  D.  J.,  Skipper,  J.  B.,  Hazen,  B.  T.,  &  Hanna,  J.  B.  (2012),  "Inter-organizational  IT  use, 

cooperative  attitude,  and  inter-organizational  collaboration  as  antecedents  to  contingency 

planning effectiveness". International Journal of Logistics Management, 23(1), pp. 50-76. 

Hong, P. C., Dobrzykowski, D. C., Vonderembse, M. A. (2010), " Integration of supply chain IT and 

lean  practices  for  mass  customization:  Benchmarking  of  product  and  service  focused 

manufacturers",  Benchmarking: An International Journal, 17 (4), pp.561 - 592.  

Huang, Q., Davison, R. M., & Gu, J. (2011), "The impact of trust, guanxi orientation and face on the 

intention  of  Chinese  employees  and  managers  to  engage  in  peer-to-peer  tacit  and  explicit 

knowledge sharing". Information Systems Journal, 21(6), pp. 557-577. 

Jüttner,  U.,  Christopher,  M.,  &  Godsell,  J.  (2010),  "A  strategic  framework  for  integrating  marketing 

and supply chain strategies". International Journal of Logistics Management, 21(1), pp. 104-

126. 

Johansson,  P.,  &  Olhager,  J.  (2006),  "Linking  product-process  matrices  for  manufacturing  and 

industrial  service  operations".  International  Journal  of  Production  Economics,  104(2),  pp. 

615-624. 

Ke, W., Liu, H., Wei, K. K., Gu, J., & Chen, H. (2009), "How do mediated and non-mediated power 

affect  electronic  supply  chain  management  system  adoption?  The  mediating  effects  of  trust 

and institutional pressures". Decision Support Systems, 46(4), pp. 839-851. 


Kearns,  G.  S.,  &  Sabherwal,  R.  (2006),  "Strategic  alignment  between  business  and  information 

technology:  A  knowledge-based view of behaviors, outcome, and consequences".  Journal  of 

Management Information Systems, 23(3), pp. 129-162. 

Kim,  D.,  &  Lee,  R.  P.  (2010), "Systems  Collaboration  and  Strategic  Collaboration:  Their  Impacts  on 

Supply  Chain  Responsiveness  and  Market  Performance".  Decision  Sciences,  41(4),  pp.  955-

981. 

Kim,  S.  W.  (2009), "An  investigation  on  the  direct  and  indirect  effect  of  supply  chain  integration  on 

firm performance". International Journal of Production Economics, 119, pp. 328-346. 

Kumar,  R.  (2004),  "A  framework  for  assessing  the  business  value  of  information  technology 

infrastructure". Journal of Management Information Systems, 21(2), pp. 11-32. 

Lancioni,  R.,  Schau,  H.  J.,  &  Smith,  M.  F.  (2003),  "Internet  impacts  on  supply  chain  management". 

Industrial Marketing Management, 32(3), pp. 173-175. 

Lee,  G.,  &  Xia,  W.  (2006),  "Organizational  size  and  IT  innovation  adoption:  A  meta-analysis". 

Information & Management, 43, pp. 975-985. 

Lee,  H.  L.,  &  Whang,  S.  (2004).  e-Business  and  Supply  Chain  Integration  (Vol.  62).  New  York: 

Springer. 

Lee,  O.  (2007).  IT-enabled  organizational  agility  and  firms'  competitive  success.  City  University  of 

Hong Kong, Hong Kong.    

Li, G., Yang, H., Sun, L.,  &  Sohal,  A. S. (2009), "The impact of IT implementation on supply chain 

integration  and  performance".  International  Journal  of  Production  Economics,  120(1),  pp. 

125-138. 


Liang,  H.,  Saraf,  N.,  Hu,  Q.,  &  Xue,  Y.  (2007),  "Assimilation  of  enterprise  systems:  the  effect  of 

institutional pressures and the mediating role of top management".  MIS Quarterly, 31(1), pp. 

59-87. 

Liu,  H.,  Ke,  W.,  Wei,  K.  K.,  Gu,  J.,  &  Chen,  H.  (2010),  "The  role  of  institutional  pressures  and 

organizational  culture  in  the  firm's  intention  to  adopt  Internet-enabled  supply  chain 

management systems". Journal of Operations Management, 28(5), pp. 372-384. 

Liu,  H.,  Ke,  W.,  Wei,  K.  K.,  &  Hua,  Z.  (2013a),  "Effects  of  supply  chain  integration  and  market 

orientation on firm performance: Evidence from China". International Journal of Operations 

& Production Management, 33(3), pp. 322-346. 

Liu, H., Ke, W., Wei, K. K., & Hua, Z. (2013b), "The impact of IT capabilities on firm performance: 

The  mediating  roles  of  absorptive  capacity  and  supply  chain  agility".  Decision  Support 

Systems, 54(3), pp. 1452-1462. 

Mitra,  S.,  &  Singhal,  V.  (2008),  "Supply  chain  integration  and  shareholder  value:  Evidence  from 

consortium based industry exchanges". Journal of Operations Management, 26(1), pp. 96-114. 

Nakata,  C.,  Zhu,  Z.  and  Kraimer,  M.  L.  (2008),  "The  Complex  Contribution  of  Information 

Technology  Capability  to  Business  Performance".  Journal  of  Managerial  Issues,  20  (4),  pp. 

485-506,422-423. 

Neirotti,  P.,  &  Paolucci,  E.  (2011),  "  Assessing  the  importance  of  industry  in  the  adoption  and 

assimilation of IT: Evidence from Italian enterprises". Information & Management, 48 (7), pp. 

249-259. 


Osmonbekov, T., Bello, D. C., & Gilliland, D. I. (2009), "The impact of e-business infusion on channel 

coordination, conflict and reseller performance". Industrial Marketing Management, 38(7), pp. 

778-784. 

Perrien, J., & Ricard, L. (1995), "The Meaning of a Marketing Relationship - a Pilot-Study". Industrial 

Marketing Management, 24(1), pp. 37-43. 

Rai,  A.,  Patnayakuni,  R.,  &  Seth,  N.  (2006),  "Firm  performance  impacts  of  digitally  enabled  supply 

chain integration capabilities". MIS Quarterly, 30(2), pp. 225-246. 

Rai, A., Pavlou, P. A., Im, G., & Du, S. (2012), "Interfirm IT capability profiles and communications 

for cocreating relational value: evidence from the logistics industry". MIS Quarterly, 36(1), pp. 

233-262. 

Ralston,  P.  M.,  Grawe,  S.  J.,  &  Daugherty,  P.  J.  (2013),  "Logistics  salience  impact  on  logistics 

capabilities  and  performance".  International  Journal  of  Logistics  Management,  24(2),  pp. 

136-152. 

Ranganathan,  C.,  Dhaliwal,  J.  S.,  &  Teo,  T.  S.  H.  (2004),  "Assimilation  and  diffusion  of  web 

technologies  in  supply-chain  management:  An  examination  of  key  drivers  and  performance 

impacts". International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 9(1), pp. 127-161. 

Ravichandran,  T.,  &  Lertwongsatiem,  C.  (2005),  "Effect  of  information  systems  resources  and 

capabilities  on  firm  performance".  Journal  of  Management  Information  Systems,  21(4),  pp. 

237-276. 

Ravichandran,  T.,  &  Lertwongsatien,  C.  (2000).  Strategic  Implications  of  Information  Systems 

Resources  and  Capabilities:  A  Competence-Based  Model.  Paper  presented  at  the  AMCIS 

2000 Proceedings. 


Ray, G., Muhanna, W. A., & Barney, J. B. (2005), "Information technology and the performance of the 

customer service process: A resource-based analysis". MIS Quarterly, 29(4), pp. 625-652. 

Rollins, M., Bellenger, D. N., & Johnston, W. J. (2012), "Does customer information usage improve a 

firm's  performance  in  business-to-business  markets?".  Industrial  Marketing  Management,  in 

press(0), pp. 

Rosenzweig, E. D. (2009), "A contingent view of e-collaboration and performance in manufacturing". 

Journal of Operations Management, 27(6), pp. 462-478. 

Rosenzweig,  E.  D.,  Roth,  A.  V.,  Dean  Jr, J.  W.  (2003), " The  influence  of  an  integration  strategy  on 

competitive  capabilities  and  business  performance:  An  exploratory  study  of  consumer 

products manufacturers", Journal of Operations Management, 21 (4), pp. 437-456. 

Saraf,  N.,  Langdon,  C.  S.,  &  Gosain,  S.  (2007),  "IS  application  capabilities  and  relational  value  in 

interfirm partnerships". Information Systems Research, 18(3), pp. 320-339. 

Sheehan, C., Cooper, B., Holland, P., & De Cieri, H. (2007), "The relationship between HRM avenues 

of  political 

influence  and  perceived  organizational  performance".  Human  Resource 

Management, 46(4), pp. 611-629. 

Tarafdar,  M.,  &  Gordon,  S.  R.  (2007),  "Understanding  the  influence  of  information  systems 

competencies  on  process  innovation:  A  resource-based  view".  Journal  of  Strategic 

Information Systems, 16, pp. 353-392. 

Teece,  D.  J.  (2007),  "Explicating  dynamic  capabilities:  The  nature  and  microfoundations  of 

(sustainable) enterprise performance". Strategic Management Journal, 28(13), pp. 1319-1350. 

Teece,  D.  J.,  Pisano,  G.,  &  Shuen,  A.  (1997),  "Dynamic  capabilities  and  strategic  management". 

Strategic Management Journal, 18(7), pp. 509-533. 


Teo,  H.  H.,  Wei,  K.  K.,  &  Benbasat,  I.  (2003),  "Predicting  Intention  to  Adopt  Interorganizational 

Linkages: An Institutional Perspective". MIS Quarterly, 27(1), pp. 19-49. 

Tippins, M. J., & Sohi, R. S. (2003), "IT competency and firm performance: Is organizational learning 

a missing link?". Strategic Management Journal, 24(8), pp. 745-761. 

Vaart, T. v. d., & Donk, D. P. v. (2008), "A critical review of  survey-based research in  supply chain 

integration". International Journal of Production Economics, 111, pp. 42-55. 

Van de Vijver, F.,  &  Leung,  K. (1997).  Methods and data analysis for cross-cultural  research: Sage 

Publications, Inc. 

Venkatraman,  N.  (1989),  "Strategic  orientation  of  business  enterprises:  the  construct,  dimensionality 

and measurement". Management Science, 35 (3), pp. 942-962 

Vinum, T., & Skjoldager, N. (2001). State-of-the-Art Electronic-based Supply Chain Management and 

the  Development  of  an  e-Supply  Chain  Strategy  Optimization  Model.  Copenhagen: 

Copenhagen Business School. 

Wade, M., & Hulland, J. (2004), "Review: The resource-based view and information systems research: 

Review, extension, and suggestions for future research". MIS Quarterly, 28(1), pp. 107-142. 

Wang, E. T. G., Tai, J. C. F., & Wei, H.-L. (2006), "A virtual integration theory of improved supply-

chain performance". Journal of Management Information Systems, 23(2), pp. 41-64. 

Wiengarten,  F.,  Fynes,  B.,  Humphreys,  P.  et  al.  (2010),  "Assessing  the  value  creation  process  of  e-

business along the supply chain".  Supply Chain Management, 16 (4), pp. 207-219. 

Wong,  C.  Y.,  Boon-itt,  S.,  Wong,  C.  W.  Y.  (2011),  "  The  contingency  effects  of  environmental 

uncertainty on the relationship between supply chain integration and operational performance". 

Journal of Operations Managmeent, 29 (6), pp. 604-615. 


Wu,  F.,  Yeniyurt,  S.,  Kim,  D.,  &  Cavusgil,  S.  T.  (2006),  "The  impact  of  information  technology  on 

supply  chain  capabilities  and  firm  performance:  A  resources-based  view".  Industrial 

Marketing Management, 35, pp. 493-504. 

Yeung,  A.  C.  L.  (2008),  "Strategic  supply  management,  quality  initiatives,  and  organizational 

performance". Journal of Operations Management, 26(4), pp. 490-502. 

Yusuf,  Y.  Y.,  Gunasekaran,  A.,  Adeleye,  E.  O.,  &  Sivayoganathan,  K.  (2004),  "Agile  supply  chain 

capabilities:  Determinants  of  competitive  objectives".  European  Journal  of  Operational 

Research, 159(2), pp. 379-392. 

Zhu,  K.,  Kraemer,  K.  L.,  Gurbaxani,  V.,  &  Xu,  S.  X.  (2006),  "Migration  to  open-standard 

interorganizational  systems:  Network  effects,  switching  costs,  and  path  dependency".  MIS 

Quarterly, 30, pp. 515-539. 

Zhu, Q. H., & Sarkis, J. (2004), "Relationships between operational practices and performance among 

early  adopters  of  green  supply  chain  management  practices  in  Chinese  manufacturing 

enterprises". Journal of Operations Management, 22(3), pp. 265-289. 

 

 


 

   
Industry 

Manufacturing Industry 
Mechanical equipment 
Electronics and electrical 
Household application 
Chemistry 
Textiles and apparel 
Automobile 

Services Industry  
       Finance 
       Retailing 

Telecommunication 
Real estate 
Logistics 
Information technology 

Ownership 

State-Owned 
Privately-Owned 
Foreign-Controlled 

Number of Employees 

≤ 100 
101-500 
500-1000 
1000-2000 
More than 2000 

Number of IT Employees 

≤ 5 
6-10 
11-25 
More than 25 

N 

112 
27 
23 
15 
20 
15 
12 
149 
38 
22 
20 
20 
26 
23 

104 
75 
82 

45 
62 
39 
20 
95 

103 
46 
16 
96 

Percentage 

42.91% 
10.34% 
8.81% 
5.75% 
7.66% 
5.75% 
4.60% 
57.09% 
14.56% 
8.43% 
7.66% 
7.66% 
9.96% 
8.82% 

38.85% 
28.73% 
31.42% 

17.24% 
23.76% 
14.94% 
7.66% 
36.40% 

39.47% 
17.62% 
6.13% 
36.78% 

Table I. Demographic information of samples (n=261)


 

Constructs                      

Items 

Alpha 

Reliability 

    AVE 

Cronbatch 

Composite 

IT operational capability 

IT transformational capability 

Internet-enabled supply integration 

Internet-enabled demand Integration 

Firm performance 

4 

4 

4 

4 

6 

0.830 

0.791 

0.819 

0.727 

0.783 

0.882 

0.653 

0.913 

0.725 

0.902 

0.697 

0.895 

0.681 

0.909 

0.626 

Table II. Results of confirmatory factor analysis


 

 

 

1. IT operational 

capability 

2. IT transformational 

capability 

3. Internet-enabled 

supply integration 

4. Internet-enabled 

demand integration 

Mean 

S.D 

Full  Services  Manu.  Full 

Services  Manu. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

3.474  3.498  3.442  0.876  0.844  0.919  0.808 

 

3.628  3.648  3.603  0.937  0.911  0.974  0.615  0.851 

 

 

3.296  3.143  3.603  1.034  1.073  0.947  0.405  0.385  0.835 

 

 

 

3.265  3.283  3.241  0.910  0.914  0.908  0.508  0.499  0.672  0.825 

 

 

 

 

5. Firm performance 

3.747  3.681  3.834  0.742  0.792  0.663  0.359  0.429  0.453  0.469  0.791 

6. Firm size 

7. Ownership 

-- 

-- 

-- 

-- 

8. IT department size 

-- 

-- 

-- 

-- 

-- 

-- 

-- 

-- 

-- 

-- 

-- 

-- 

-- 

-- 

Note: The diagonal elements are the square root of the AVE. 

Table III.  Results of correlation testing 

0.233  0.222  0.101  0.074  0.068 

-- 

0.067  0.030  0.229  0.180  0.161  -0.034 

-- 

0.319  0.363  0.106  0.136  0.130  0.693  -0.126 

-- 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


  

Relationship 

Internet-enabled supply integration  

firm performance 

Internet-enabled demand integration 

 firm performance 

IT operational capability  Internet-

enabled supply integration 

IT operational capability  Internet-

enabled demand integration 

IT transformational capability  

Internet-enabled supply integration 

IT transformational capability  

Internet-enabled demand integration 

R2: Internet-enabled supply 

integration 

R2: Internet-enabled demand 

integration 

R2: Firm performance 

Manufacturing 

Service 

(N: 112) 

(N: 149) 

0.316** 

0.165 

0.224 

0.357** 

0.360** 

0.240* 

0.317** 

0.336** 

0.230* 

0.213* 

0.294** 

0.312* 

0.293 

0.161 

0.311 

0.328 

0.276 

0.273 

Path difference 

b= 0.151, 

t=9.336, p<0.01 

b= -0.133,  

t=-8.126, p<0.01 

b= 0.120, 

t=9.627, p<0.01 

b= -0.018,  

t=-1.519, p>0.10 

b= 0.017, 

t=1.287, p>0.10 

b= -0.018,  

t=-1.519, p>0.10 

 

 

 

Table IV. Comparison of path coefficiencies  


IT operational 

capability 

 

H2a 

Internet-enabled 

supply integration 

 

H2b 

H3a 

IT transformational 

H3b 

capability 

Internet-enabled 

demand integration 

 

Figure 1.  The research framework 

Control variables 

-- Ownership 

-- Firm Size 

-- IT department Size 

Firm  

performance 

 

H1a 

H1b 

 

 


IT operational 

capability 

 

H2a: 0.271** 

Internet-enabled 

supply integration 

0.194 

Control variables 

-- Ownership 

-- Firm Size 

-- IT department Size 

H2b: 0.323** 

H1a: 0.240** 

n.s. 

Firm  

performance 

0.264 

H3a: 0.219** 

H1b: 0.284** 

IT transformational 

H3b: 0.300** 

capability 

Internet-enabled 

demand integration 

0.314 

* p<0.05; ** p<0.01 

With full sample (n=261) 

 

 

Figure 2.  The PLS results of the model with full sample 


 

 

Appendix 

Measurement items 

Constructs and measurement 

IT Operational Capability 

The manner in which the components of our information systems are organized 

and integrated allows for rapid changes.  

Loading 

 

0.82 

Our information system is designed to support new business relationships easily. 0.80 

Our information systems are highly compatible. 

Our information systems are highly scalable. 

IT Transformational Capability 

We continuously examine the innovative opportunities IT can provide for 

competitive advantage 

0.77 

0.88 

 

0.89 

We continuously explore new IT applications for future products/services 

0.87 

We continuously explore new IT applications for future business processes 

0.89 

We use IT applications in our management at a high degree 

Internet-enabled Supply Process Integration  

We share the inventory level information with our key channel partner via the 

Internet  

We share the planned order information with our key channel partner via the 

Internet 

We and our key partners develop joint plans on inventory requirements via the 

Internet. 

0.73 

 

0.85 

0.85 

0.83 

 

48 


 

We and our key partners coordinate procurement via the Internet (e.g., online 

order placement: place and track orders with suppliers; allow suppliers to submit 

0.81 

bids online). 

Internet-enabled Demand Process Integration 

We and our key partners develop joint development of demand forecasts via the 

Internet. 

We and our key partners develop joint plans on new product/service 

introduction and rollover via the Internet. 

 

0.81 

0.86 

We and our key partners develop joint plans on service support via the Internet.  0.84 

We and our key partners coordinate new product/service introduction via the 

Internet. 

Firm Performance  

(Compared with our key competitors, we have better performance in) 

Decrease in rapid respond to market demand change product/service delivery 

cycle time 

Rapid response to market demand change 

Rapid entering new market 

Rapid bring new products/services to the market 

Rapid confirmation of customer orders  

Rapid handling of customer complaints 

0.78 

 

0.78 

0.79 

0.80 

0.81 

0.80 

0.76 

Note: All items use five-point Likert scales anchored at 1 (strongly disagree) and 5 (strongly 

agree). 

 

 

 

49 

