Pergamon

doi:10.1016/S0263-2373(03)00020-3

European Management Journal Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 258–269, 2003
 2003 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain
0263-2373/03 $30.00 + 0.00

Customer-focused
Technology and
Performance in Small and
Large Banks

JOHANNES LIEBACH LU¨ NEBORG, McKinsey and Company, Copenhagen
JØRN FLOHR NIELSEN, University of Aarhus

Drawing on resource-based views on information
systems impact, this study explores the path to
relationship-marketing performance through the
application of new technology in the broad sense.
Based on survey data from 278 retail banks in
Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden the paper
analyzes differences due to size in the use of Inter-
net-banking and customer-relationship manage-
ment. The ﬁndings mainly indicate that the positive
effects of using customer-focused technology are
strongest in small banks. Large banks generally
have the most sophisticated applications but they
do not outperform small banks. Small banks seem
to have reached a sufﬁcient
technological level
through inter-ﬁrm cooperation.
 2003 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd.

Keywords: Customer-relationship management,
Internet-banking, Market orientation, Performance,
Relationship marketing, Resource-based view,
Technology

Introduction

The banking sector continues to experience consoli-
dation and it has long been claimed that organiza-
tional size is the key to reaping the beneﬁts, in terms
of economies of scale and scope in the banking indus-
try. The beneﬁts from scale are especially apparent
in the area of technology where the combination of
increasing cost of development and demands from
users should provide a competitive advantage to
large banks. This development has increased press-
ure on small- and medium-sized banks and industry

analysts continue to predict the extinction of small-
and medium-sized banks.

However, when considering the actual state of the
banking industry in a number of countries, it is not
clear to what extent size really drives performance,
as predicted by simple economic reasoning and
industry analysts. Performance may in reality
depend on a large number of ﬁrm speciﬁc factors –
besides scale – which may dominate any effect from
scale and/or moderate this factor.

In this paper we consider a range of factors, which
contribute to ﬁnancial success and customer satisfac-
tion and consider how different banks cope with dif-
ferent barriers to improve ﬁnancial and customer ori-
ented performance.

The research question guiding the paper is:

How does the link between technological resources and
performance depend on organizational size?

Drawing on resource-based views, we explore the
resource – performance linkages in the area of cus-
tomer relations and specify two levels of perform-
ance on which these links can be measured. Based on
this speciﬁcation we examine how the path to ulti-
mate performance may depend on organizational
size. The point of departure is the different views on
size found in literature on strategy, innovation, and
impact of information systems. Thus Schumpeter
(1942) claimed that size favors innovation while other
studies point
to bureaucratization (cf. Haveman,
1993) and structure – conduct – performance studies
illustrate the link between ﬁrm size, market power

258

European Management Journal Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 258–269, April 2003


and pricing behavior. In particular, this paper con-
siders the challenges of linking resources and organi-
zational contingencies to performance, and shows
how a careful consideration of the relevant perform-
ance measure inﬂuences conclusions (March and Sut-
ton, 1997).

The empirical context – Nordic retail banking – offers
signiﬁcant variation in both organizational strategies
and ﬁrm size. The ﬁrms range from having only a
few employees to tens of thousands. Furthermore,
given the importance of small- and medium sized
businesses in Europe in general, and in Scandinavia
in particular, this research has potentially important
implications for both theory development and the
link from theoretical analysis to practitioner advice.

The paper sets out to address issues concerning the
path to relationship-marketing performance through
the application of new technology in the broad sense.
Based on survey data from retail banks in Denmark,
Finland, Norway and Sweden the paper explores dif-
ferences due to size. The ﬁndings mainly indicate
that the positive effects of using customer-focused
technology are strongest in small banks. Finally, we
address the limitations of our ﬁndings and discuss
their implications for further implementation of cus-
tomer-related technologies.

Theoretical Background and Hypotheses

Resources and Performance

A key organizational factor in the organization and
strategic management literature is the notion of ﬁrm
resources (Wernerfelt, 1984). The resource-based
view argues that performance depends on internal
resources and knowledge, and that resourceful ﬁrms
will outperform less well-endowed organizations.
Lately, however, scholars have emphasized other less
positive effects from a rich resource base such as less
inclination to engage in adaptive strategic change
(Kraatz and Zajac, 2001).

Given the high importance of information technology
in the banking industry – the ﬁnancial sector is the
biggest single investor in IT (Hitt et al., 1999) – any
effect from resources is likely to be detectable in this
industry. In a matched-sample analysis, Bharadwaj
(2000) shows that ﬁrms with high IT capability tend
to outperform a control sample of ﬁrms on a variety
of proﬁt and cost-based performance measures. We
intend to go beyond examining this direct effect and
also consider how ﬁrms less rich in resources may
compensate for the lack thereof by other means.

For a long time it has been predicted that small banks
in particular will come under pressure in the new
deregulated, technology-dominated and competitive
age. Both commercial and retail customers were

INTERNET BANKING

expected to demand a broad range of products that
only the large banks would be able to provide. New
technology in the form of home-banking and Inter-
net-banking would reinforce this challenge. Through
comprehensive mergers and acquisitions the Nordic
banking sector seems to have adjusted to the new
conditions. The new large banks have embraced e-
banking enthusiastically and are leading Europe in
the ﬁeld of Internet-banking (Brown-Humes, 2000).

New information technology plays an important role
in recent developments of customer focusing, and
customer-relationship management
is often con-
sidered as a strictly technical issue. However, it has
to be stressed that in our analysis the concept ‘tech-
nology of customer focusing’ is used in a broad sense
as the activities, equipment, and knowledge that may
be used to identify and serve proﬁtable customer seg-
ments. Organization-wide perspectives are needed to
explore the path to retaining and enhancing customer
relationships, which in turn are assumed to lead to
proﬁtability.

Such a wide perspective is provided by theories on
market-driven organizations. These organizations
stress outside-in capabilities, which are connected to
superior market sensing, customer linking, and chan-
nel bonding (Day, 1994). Related to this perspective
is the literature on market orientation and though
evidence is still sparse, market orientation seems to
have some impact on market-related performance (cf.
Jaworski and Kohli, 1993; Pitt et al., 1996; Selnes et
al., 1996).

Given that information technology is an area of high
importance in the ﬁnancial services, and that ﬁrms
continue to struggle to keep service offerings aligned
with customer demands, this reasoning may lead to
the assumption that ﬁrms with signiﬁcant internal
resources in the form of knowledge and expertise
will outperform competitors with a lower resource
stock (Dierickx and Cool, 1989). This assumption
may, however, be too simplistic, as there is no evi-
dence of smaller, less resource-rich ﬁrms systemati-
cally under-performing their larger competitors. A
potential explanation is the surge in inter-organiza-
tional arrangements and notably the fact that the
Nordic retail banking industry is characterized by a
number of industry alliances through which ﬁrms are
able to pool technology components, applications
and knowledge. Such arrangements provide a
division of labor that level the playing ﬁeld and
reduce the importance of ﬁrm-speciﬁc assets, since
the services provided by the industry alliances
becomes a public good for ﬁrms in the sector.

The direct effect based on the theory underlying the
resource-based view and studies such as Bharadwaj
(2000) leads to the following direct effect:

H1: Performance is positively associated with the presence
of internal knowledge and expertise.

European Management Journal Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 258–269, April 2003

259


INTERNET BANKING

However, the strongly institutionalized traditions for
cooperation may moderate this impact so that an
environment characterized by a cooperative spirit
moderates this impact from ﬁrm speciﬁc resources.
We have identiﬁed two drivers behind this argu-
ment; one can be traced directly to the question of
traditions and institutionalized behavior
(Oliver,
1997), while the second driver is an economic argu-
ment regarding factor markets. Thus, ﬁrms do not
only compete to attract and satisfy customers, they
also compete for resources and capabilities (Loasby,
transfer of
1998) vehicles for inter-organizational
technology and knowledge,
strategic
alliances, and industry alliances among several ﬁrms
will likely resemble a factor market from which the
ﬁrm can source knowledge and technology without
having the full rent associated herewith appropriated
by suppliers of these services.

such as

To capture the inﬂuence of inter-ﬁrm cooperation,
which can both be seen as an alternative way to get
resources and a way to reinforce the value of internal
resources, we suggest:

H2: Participation in industry alliances and cooperative
arrangements is positively associated with performance.

Size as Advantage or Disadvantage – as
Reinforcer or Moderator

In addition to the substitution effect between internal
resources and network resources (Dyer and Singh,
1998), it is also likely that size will have an impact
on the value of resources. Thus, while large ﬁrms are
able to beneﬁt from internal resources and leverage
these into a competitive advantage, smaller ﬁrms
may well be forced to rely on a partnering strategy,
because their size may not allow them to rely on
internal capacities, as these are sub-scale compared
to minimum-efﬁcient scale.

The size-as-reinforcement argument is in line with
Powell and Dent-Micallef (1997) who ﬁnd that IT
mainly contributes to a competitive advantage if
deployed parallel with
complementary
resources – such resources could be connected to size.

other

Large organizations are generally assumed to operate
at lower unit costs than their smaller counterparts.
Scale effects are found in almost any cost element and
it is evident that large banks need less marketing and
computer systems cost per transaction than small
banks. Large corporations can afford to develop
internal resources and core competences in tech-
nology and services and invest in sophisticated infra-
structure, including ﬁnancial control systems. How-
ever, large size does not ensure beneﬁts of scale. Size
only provides an opportunity for scale economies
and may not be achieved without adequate strategies
and actions (Abell and Hammond, 1979).

H3A: Size will be positively associated with the correlation
between internal resources and performance.

Small organizations have well-known advantages.
Several organizational researchers have argued that
‘Small is beautiful’ because problems of coordination
and motivation may be smaller in small organiza-
tions. The organizations may be more ﬂexible and
customer oriented and their employees are presumed
to perceive a closer link between their actions and
organizational performance.

Thus from a resource-based view size may also be
seen as a moderator as formulated in Hypothesis H3B
which is the competing hypothesis to Hypothesis
H3A.

H3B: Size will be negatively associated with the correlation
between internal resources and performance.

In a similar way inter-ﬁrm cooperation may play dif-
ferent roles in organizations of different sizes.

A large bank may act as a strong partner who is able
to take advantage of inter-ﬁrm cooperation as a
vehicle to innovation and superior performance. As
shown by Pennings and Harianto (1992) information
technology experiences and inter-ﬁrm networking is
conducive to innovation. Hence,

H4A: Size will be positively associated with the correlation
between inter-ﬁrm cooperation and performance.

In a small bank inter-ﬁrm cooperation may be used
to compensate for lack of internal resources. Inter-
ﬁrm cooperation may be necessary to achieve an
acceptable level of technology, because they are not
themselves able to make expensive investments in IT
knowledge and develop new applications. Thus we
formulate Hypothesis H4B, the competing Hypothesis
to H4A:

H4B: Size will be negatively associated with the correlation
between inter-ﬁrm cooperation and performance.

Different Levels of Performance

In fact,
the distinction between large and small
organizations is not easily made and the unit of
analysis is important. Organizations can be designed
to capture the advantages of being both large and
small. For example, large organization employees in
small self-contained units may behave indepen-
dently. Small organizations may get the scale beneﬁts
and professional support through industry network.
Thus adequate structures and the increasing use of
sophisticated information technology are making it
possible for organizations to capture the best of both
worlds (Lawler, 1997).

Furthermore, evidence suggests that size in itself is
no certain predictor of superior overall organiza-

260

European Management Journal Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 258–269, April 2003


tional performance. A previous review of empirical
studies concluded that there is no clear, systematic
relationship between organization size and perform-
ance (Dalton et al., 1980). This conclusion may partly
be explained by the fact that size is connected to com-
plexity, making it difﬁcult to isolate the explanatory
power of organization size. It is worth noting, how-
ever, that the review mentioned also concluded that
at the subunit level of analysis there is some evidence
of an inverse relationship between subunit size and
performance (Dalton et al., 1980).

Consequently, more speciﬁc relations must be ana-
lyzed in order to understand the link to performance.
Size may blur the link between resources, activities
and organizational performance. From the resource-
based view size may be regarded as having an
indirect impact and being an antecedent to organiza-
tional resources. In the information system literature
there is evidence of large ﬁrms being more sophisti-
cated and allocating more resources to their IS func-
tion (Raymond, 1990). There is, however, only a mod-
erate positive
and
innovation, when administrative and process inno-
vations are in focus (Damanpour, 1992, 1996), and
some recent studies in manufacturing companies ﬁnd
that size is negatively related to innovation (Chandy
and Tellis, 1998; Srirojanant and Thirkell, 1998; Høst
et al., 2001). At a more speciﬁc level we still expect
large ﬁrms to possess greater IT knowledge, which
in turn positively affects the adoption of new organi-
zational features including Internet-banking appli-
cations, which in turn positively affects more ulti-
mate performance measures.

relationship between size

When analyzing relationships between organiza-
tional contingencies such as resources and size and
organizational performance, it is important to con-
sider which contingencies may reasonably be linked
to which, and how this may be inﬂuenced by organi-
zational size. The lack of these considerations may
partly explain the mixed picture of relations between,
for example, organizational resources and size. Thus,
as a range of factors inﬂuences organizational per-
formance, broad performance measures may be dif-
ﬁcult to link to individual resources or contingencies.
A remedy to this problem may be considering a ser-
ies of measures linking different organizational lev-
els.

levels

Apparently, the problems of identifying the relative
advantage of being small or large is closely connected
to the concept of performance, which may be ana-
lyzed at different
and from different
approaches – and usually with ambiguous results.
‘Most
studies of organization performance are
incapable of identifying the true causal relations
among performance variables and other variables
correlated with them...’ (March and Sutton, 1997, p.
702). Obviously, it is very difﬁcult to explain ultimate
proﬁtability measures, but researchers keep trying,
because overall organizational measures are of gen-
eral importance.

INTERNET BANKING

Often researchers have to focus on more speciﬁc mea-
sures. Thus, several dependent variables are used in
studies of the success of information systems but
only a few steps are taken in assessing the impact of
information systems on organizational performance
(DeLone and McLean, 1992). Using speciﬁc concepts
related to department, group or even individual per-
formance causes the number of criteria to increase
radically, but it seems to be a necessary step to
obtaining valid research results (Dalton et al., 1980).
Such work provides the basis for formulating more
comprehensive models, for example connecting spe-
ciﬁc concepts of information system quality to usage
and user satisfaction, which in turn could be associa-
ted with organizational impact (DeLone and McLean,
1992). In line with this, recent research on the impact
of information systems indicates that superior IT
capability leads to increased ﬁrm performance, but
in order to identify the full chain of variables con-
necting IT capability to performance, additional
research is still required (Bharadwaj, 2000).

In line with this reasoning we introduce a ﬁrst level
stage of performance and split Hypothesis 1 into

H1∗: First level performance (Use of customer-focusing
technology) is positively associated with the presence of
internal knowledge and expertise.

H5: Second level performance (Customer-relationship
performance) is positively associated with ﬁrst level per-
formance (Use of customer-focusing technology).

Accordingly, we specify our hypotheses on size as a
reinforcer or moderator of the correlation (H3A and
H3B respectively) by splitting these hypotheses into
H3A∗/H3B∗ which deal with the step to a ﬁrst level
performance (use of customer-focusing technology)
and H3C/H3D which deal with the step to second
level performance. Hence:

H3A∗: Size will be positively associated with the correlation
between internal resources and ﬁrst level performance (Use
of customer-focusing technology).

H3B∗: Size will be negatively associated with the correlation
between internal resources and ﬁrst level performance (Use
of customer-focusing technology).

H3C: Size will be positively associated with the correlation
between ﬁrst level performance (Use of customer-focusing
technology) and second level performance (Customer-
relationship performance).

H3D: Size will be negatively associated with the correlation
between ﬁrst level performance (Use of customer-focusing
technology) and second level performance (Customer-
relationship performance).

Our hypotheses are summarized and connected in
the model in Fig. 1.

European Management Journal Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 258–269, April 2003

261


INTERNET BANKING

Figure 1 Model of Resources, Size and Performance

Empirical Background and Measures

parative methods (Richins and Verhage, 1987; Hui
and Triandis, 1986).

The Sample

Nationwide surveys in Denmark, Finland, Norway
and Sweden form the main part of the empirical basis
for this article. During the Fall of 2000, questionnaires
were sent
to all banks with more than four
employees. In order to ﬁnd well-informed and com-
parable respondents, the marketing managers and IT
managers were identiﬁed in advance by phone calls
to head ofﬁces. Also, using two types of respondents
should remedy the common-respondent bias or one-
informant problem on performance measures.

A total of 41 per cent of the IT managers who were
central informants in the analysis in this paper com-
pleted the questionnaire. The response level of the
IT managers further varied across countries with a
response rate of 56 per cent in Denmark, 57 per cent
in Norway, 43 per cent in Sweden and 28 per cent in
Finland. The numbers of returned questionnaires
were 69, 78, 40 and 91 respectively. If the small Finn-
ish cooperative banks that could partly be considered
as branches of the same corporation were excluded,
the overall Nordic response rate increases to 50 per
cent. Our non-response analysis showed that small
companies were signiﬁcantly underrepresented in
the resulting sample. Sample size will be lower in
some of the analysis because observations with miss-
ing values were deleted. A short proﬁle of
the
respondents is given in Table 1 below.

As data were collected from Denmark, Finland, Nor-
way, and Sweden, standardization has been an
important methodological issue. The same data col-
lection procedure has been employed simultaneously
in all countries (within two months). Language dif-
ferences are small between Danish, Norwegian, and
Swedish, but to ensure an adequate translation, the
questionnaires were formulated in English and Dan-
ish and then translated into each of the other Nordic
languages in order to avoid the interpretation prob-
lems stressed in the literature on cross-cultural com-

Measures

orientation

Due to the explorative nature of our study and new
elements at resource level, ﬁrst level performance
and customer-relationship performance, we only use
few measures previously proven to be reliable. Only
the market
construct MARKOR
developed and tested by Kohli et al. (1993) is used
without any changes. Although, we are indebted to
the development of constructs from the empirically-
oriented
views
(Bharadwaj, 2000) market orientation and innovation
(Kohli, 1993; Han et al., 1998), relationship marketing
(Sheth and Parvatiyar, 1995), and on related strategic
management (Day, 1994), more speciﬁc measures are
used whenever possible. Furthermore, when percep-
tual measures are used in measuring performance,
we use two respondents from the same organization,
which moderates the one-informant problem.

resource-based

literature

on

The measuring instruments are shown in Appendix
1. The items on market orientation are measured on
5-point Likert-scales ranging from ‘strongly agree’ to
‘strongly disagree’. Performance measures at
the
second level are based on 5-point scales ranging from
‘worse than competitors’ to ‘better than competitors’
and include items on Internet-bank attractiveness (1
item), relationship-marketing performance (4 items),
sales performance (2 items) and ﬁnancial perform-
ance (2 items). These performance measures are
found to be both comparable and valid in a study of
banks, where respondents are normally well infor-
med on actual market-related performance. Face val-
idity of the self-reported measure on second level
performance was supported by signiﬁcant corre-
lations between IT manager responses and market-
ing-manager responses on each item (P ⬍ 0.0001).

IT knowledge is a three-item construct capturing
expertise in interactive media, information analysis,

262

European Management Journal Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 258–269, April 2003


INTERNET BANKING

Table 1 Proﬁle of Respondents (‘IT Managers/IT Responsible’)a

Danish

Small
banks

N
Seniority, years (means) 10.0
IT specialized positionsb 50%

19

Finnish

Small
banks

59
17.0
n.a.

Large
banks

50
16.1
80%

Norwegian

Swedish

Large
banks

29
12.0

Small
banks

29
13.2
28%

Large
banks

48
13.4
83%

Small
banks

18
14.1
50%

Large
banks

21
17.5
71%

a‘Small banks’: less than 25 employees.’ Large banks’: 25 or more employees
bPercentage indicated by reported position – based on 94 answers to a survey question

(Cronbach’s alpha =
and software development
0.8495). Internet-bank attractiveness is a one-item
construct measured by the same scale as customer-
relationship performance.

The construct Internet-banking adoption is based on
reports on the emerging implementation of six appli-
cations, and it measures the degree of sophistication
in Internet-banking offered to customers. This is in
principle close to the innovation construct used by
Han et al. (1998).

How Far Have the Nordic Banks Come?

There are signiﬁcant differences as to what degree
organizations have applied new information techno-
logies to improve the service offered to customers.
This is reﬂected in our results. There are, however,
also remarkable similarities across organizations of
different sizes and across countries. Thus, 85 per cent
of the 278 Nordic retail banks in our study offer an
Internet-banking solution to their customers. Inter-
nationally, the Nordic countries are generally very
advanced and some of the large banks are considered
world leaders in Internet-banking (Brown-Humes,
2000). Globally, Finland has the highest share of cus-
tomers using the Internet to access and conduct per-
sonal banking, while Denmark and Sweden are on
par with the US, and Norway slightly lower.

The present survey shows not only how far organiza-
tions have come with respect to technology usage,
but also that technology is widely used to gather
information on customers and on the volume of busi-
ness derived from the individual customer relation-
ship. Thus
customer-relationship management,
including customer-proﬁtability analysis and cross-
selling focus, seems to be a top priority across the
board.

If we disregard the level of sophistication, there
seems to be little difference between small and large
banks regarding the extent to which they offer Inter-
net-banking – 83 per cent of the small (with less than
25 employees) and 89 per cent of the large banks offer
the basic option. Compared to the US this is interest-
ing, as only 7 per cent of smaller US banks (less than

100 M. USD in assets) offered this option in the Fall of
1999 – one year prior to this survey (Furst et al., 2000).

Findings

In the ﬁrst part of our data analysis we compared
performance indicators and the possible explanatory
variables by analyzing how they correlated with size.
The result of this analysis is shown in Table 2.

These results do not show that small banks are out-
performed by their larger counterparts. There are no
signiﬁcant differences due to size in any of the
second level performance indicators. However, large
banks have more internal resources such as IT knowl-
edge and they have adopted more Internet-banking
applications and customer-relationship management
technology. On front-line support, which is based on
a measure favoring formal reporting systems large
banks also get a signiﬁcantly higher score.

Although we expected small banks to be more
involved in inter-ﬁrm cooperation this is hardly the
case. The connection is insigniﬁcant, but this result
does not exclude the possibility that banks of differ-
ent sizes use inter-ﬁrm cooperation for different pur-
poses.

The results in Table 2 indicate, that the acceptable
state of Internet banking among smaller banks in the
Nordic countries is due to a highly institutionalized
cooperative environment where small- and medium-
sized banks jointly own IT service providers. Any-
way, small banks seem to use different paths to per-
formance compared to the medium-sized and large
banks. The larger the bank, the more sophisticated
control systems and applications.

In the next part of our data analysis we found some
support for our basic argument of the causal chain
underlying the model in Figure 1. As shown in Table
3 signiﬁcant correlations between IT knowledge and
all ﬁrst level performance indicators are strongly in
support of Hypothesis H1∗. There is also support for
the hypothesized association between ﬁrst level per-
formance and relationship-marketing performance

European Management Journal Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 258–269, April 2003

263


INTERNET BANKING

Table 2 Performance Indicators and Antecedents: Size-Correlatesa

Resources/antecedents
IT Knowledge
Inter-ﬁrm cooperation
First level performance
Internet-banking adoption
Adoption of CRM
Frontline-support
Market orientation
Second level performance
Internet-bank attractiveness
Relationship-marketing performance
Sales performance
Financial performance

N

259
278

263
267
272
233

259
261
273
267

Rank-order correlations with sizeb

0.32 (P ⬍ 0.001)
⫺0.02 (P = 0.60)

0.17 (P = 0.001)
0.11 (P = 0.03)
0.34 (P ⬍ 0.001)
0.04 (P = 0.40)

0.16 (P = 0.003)
0.06 (P = 0.25)
⫺0.07 (P = 0.16)
0.01 (P= 0.92)

aSize-groupings: (1) Less than 25 employees (2) Between 25 and 99 employees (3) 100 or more employees
bKendall tau b-coefﬁcients based on grouped variables

Table 3 Size and Technology-Performance Correlations

Relationships

Rank-order correlationsa

Resources/capabilities/antecedents

Performance indicators

Small banks Larger banks All
(N⬎122)

(N⬎133)

(N⬎233)

First Level performance
IT Knowledge
IT Knowledge
IT Knowledge
IT Knowledge
Inter-ﬁrm cooperation
Inter-ﬁrm cooperation
Inter-ﬁrm cooperation
Inter-ﬁrm cooperation
Second Level performance
IT knowledge
IT knowledge
IT knowledge
Inter-ﬁrm cooperation
Inter-ﬁrm cooperation
Inter-ﬁrm cooperation
Internet-bank adoption
Internet-bank adoption
Internet-bank adoption
Adoption of CRM
Adoption of CRM
Adoption of CRM
Frontline-support
Frontline-support
Frontline-support
Market Orientation
Market Orientation
Market Orientation

Internet-banking adoption
Adoption of CRM
Frontline-support
Market Orientation
Internet-banking adoption
Adoption of CRM
Frontline-support
Market Orientation

Internet-bank Attractiveness
Relationship-marketing performance
Sales performance
Internet-bank Attractiveness
Relationship-marketing performance
Sales performance
Internet-bank Attractiveness
Relationship-marketing performance
Sales performance
Internet-bank Attractiveness
Relationship-marketing performance
Sales performance
Internet-bank Attractiveness
Relationship-marketing performance
Sales performance
Internet-bank Attractiveness
Relationship-marketing performance
Sales performance

0.38∗∗
0.06
0.30∗∗
0.29∗∗

⫺0.09
⫺0.05
⫺0.00
⫺0.16

0.26∗∗
0.20∗
⫺0.07
⫺0.12
⫺0.23∗∗
⫺0.04

0.32∗∗
0.30∗∗
0.24∗∗
0.31∗∗
0.21∗
0.10
0.25∗∗
0.27∗∗
0.01
0.32∗∗
0.43∗∗
0.05

0.04
0.24∗∗
0.14
0.26∗∗
0.11
0.14
⫺0.02
⫺0.07

⫺0.09
0.21∗
⫺0.06
⫺0.02
0.05
0.06
0.21∗
0.05
⫺0.09
⫺0.03

0.26∗∗
0.05
0.13
0.25∗∗
0.04
0.15
0.34∗∗
0.14

0.24∗∗
0.19∗∗
0.29∗∗
0.29∗∗
0.01
0.05
0.01
⫺0.11

0.12
0.22∗∗

⫺0.07
⫺0.06
⫺0.10
0.00
0.29∗∗
0.20∗
0.09
0.16∗∗
0.24∗∗
0.07
0.25∗∗
0.27∗∗
0.02
0.24∗∗
0.39∗∗
0.04

aKendall tau b-coefﬁcients based on grouped variables
∗P ⬍ 0.05
∗∗P ⬍ 0.01

264

European Management Journal Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 258–269, April 2003


including internet-bank attractiveness, partly sup-
porting H5. Only sales performance seems to be unre-
lated to the use of technology labeled ﬁrst level per-
formance.

In our further analysis we took a closer look at single
steps in the path to performance in order to explore
how size may modify associations between ante-
cedents and performance variables. As shown in
Table 3 the correlations between IT knowledge and
ﬁrst
level performance (Internet-bank adoption,
front-line support, and market orientation) are
strongest
in the small banks. Thus this analysis
mainly indicates support to hypotheses H3B∗ while
mainly rejecting H3A∗. Only the correlation between
IT knowledge and adoption of customer relationship
management is positively associated with size, indi-
cating some support to H3A∗.

The step from ﬁrst level performance to second level
performance shows a similar modiﬁcation due to
size. The results of this analysis (shown in the lower
part of Table 3) mainly indicate support of Hypoth-
esis H3D and a rejection of Hypothesis H3C. In small
banks signiﬁcant correlations indicate that Internet-
bank adoption, adoption of customer relationship
management, frontline support, and market orien-
tation all have a positive impact on Internet-bank
attractiveness and relationship-marketing perform-
ance. In the medium-sized/large banks correlations
are weaker in almost every case. There is, however,
one notable exception. Adoption of
customer-
relationship management seems to have a stronger
impact on relationship marketing performance in the
larger organizations partly rejecting Hypothesis H3D
(and supporting H3C).

clear, because

On inter-ﬁrm cooperation the results in Table 3 are
less
the underlying connection
between inter-ﬁrm cooperation is insigniﬁcant as
shown in Table 2. However, there is an indication of
some support of H4C in the sense that the negative
correlation between inter-ﬁrm cooperation and ﬁrst
(and second) level performance in small banks are
moderated in large banks. The results may still reﬂect
that small banks tend to compensate for lack of
resources and large banks are able to achieve a higher
level of performance through inter-ﬁrm cooperation.

Discussion

INTERNET BANKING

As a study of the impact of information systems, it
seems to support research that has identiﬁed IT-
related resources as a potential
for competitive
advantage (Mata et al., 1995), and research that has
recognized the importance of including cross-func-
tional capabilities, new product-development capa-
bilities, and customer-support capabilities in IT-
related resources (Bharadwaj, 2000). For example, our
study seems to strongly support the assumption that
market orientation contributes to customer-related
performance.

The results can be seen as a conﬁrmation of the view
that information technology does not unequivocally
determine organization and social arrangements
(Child and Loveridge, 1990). Broader perspectives
are needed to understand and to prescribe the man-
ner in which new technologies are introduced into
the organization. Technological advance implies stra-
tegic and organizational possibilities at several stages
in the adoption and implementation processes, and
it seems necessary to analyze these processes all the
way. The explaining factors may vary through the
processes and it is dangerous to treat technology
adoptions as the only indicator of performance.

As expected, large banks often have sophisticated
Internet-banking applications. However, this does
not seem to affect market-related performance in a
measurable way.

The weak inﬂuence of size may be explained by the
fact that several small banks have achieved a basic
offer of Internet-banking, which some customers ﬁnd
sufﬁcient. Furthermore, the resources connected to
size may partially be captured by the variable IT
knowledge.

The inﬂuence of inter-ﬁrm cooperation is more com-
plex. When inter-ﬁrm cooperation seems to be with-
out any inﬂuence at all, the explanation may be that
the positive inﬂuence on innovation is outweighed
by a compensation effect connected to the fact that
some resource-weak banks need outside help to
reach a basic level of Internet banking or customer-
relationship management. If we consider the indi-
cations of reinforcement, in the sense that there is less
negative correlation between inter-ﬁrm cooperation
and performance in large banks, the overall result
could reﬂect that larger organizations have an advan-
tage in engaging in inter-ﬁrm cooperation, but the
advantage evens out if these engagements are aug-
mented.

In line with the purpose of this study our results
explain how small, medium-sized and large banks
may differ in the way they use technology – in the
broad sense – to achieve performance. Overall, the
study draws on resource-based views but may also
be categorized as a study of the impact of infor-
mation systems or customer-relationship manage-
ment.

Implications for Practitioners

The moderate effect of offering sophisticated Inter-
net-banking applications may reﬂect a general ﬁrst
mover dilemma. It is dangerous to enter into new
activities too late in the game, but if the ﬁrm enters

European Management Journal Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 258–269, April 2003

265


INTERNET BANKING

the innovation may be unsuccessful
too early,
because the design is
insufﬁciently developed
(Pennings and Harianto, 1992). In the Internet-bank-
ing context these problems of early adoption may be
intensiﬁed by the fact that after the most enthusiastic
customers have gone on-line, the banks have to turn
to more reluctant customers, who are probably more
sensitive to user-friendly interfaces. It may be very
proﬁtable for the banks to survey these marginal
Internet-bank customers’
incentives. Our ﬁndings
indicate that, to these customers, user-friendly and
attractive websites are more important than multiple
applications. If customer loyalty is the issue, some
degree of personalized linking is unavoidable.

To small banks the lesson from the emerging Inter-
net-banking is quite clear. They have to offer an Inter-
net-banking solution but not necessarily a very soph-
isticated one. Indeed, the small banks should use the
technology to support service encounters, not to
automate them. The principles of customer relation-
ship management seem to have an unquestionable
positive impact on performance in small banks,
though their systems may be less formalized and less
computerized than systems in large organizations.
This is in line with micro-level studies that indicate
the beneﬁts of supporting front-line employees with
performance-related information to secure proﬁt-ori-
ented behavior at
(Flohr
Nielsen and Petersen, 1999).

the service encounter

Large banks may have an advantage by engaging in
inter-ﬁrm cooperation but a diminishing advantage
when the engagement is above a certain level. Conse-
quently a balanced view of network cooperation
could be appropriate, as also suggested by Kraatz
and Zajac (2001).

Limitations and Directions for Future
Research

Measuring performance is difﬁcult. Furthermore,
using cross-sectional and retrospective data about the
possible
causes of organizational performance
always involves some hazards. For example, per-
formance information itself colors subjective memor-
ies, perceptions and weighting of possible causes of
performance.
consider performance
important and are inﬂuenced by conventional stories
about the causes of good and poor performance
(March and Sutton, 1997).

Informants

We will claim to have dealt with some of these prob-
lems, although our study is not without limitations.
As a single-industry study it provides an opportunity
for using less general and more relevant items, thus
modifying problems of comparison and perception.
Further use of less obtrusive measures would even
be possible. At the same time, problems of generaliz-

ation and problems of small variation in the inde-
pendent variables may be reinforced. Especially in
this sector, the competitive shaping and diffusion of
practice reduce the variation in highly effective prac-
tices and make it difﬁcult to identify explaining fac-
tors.

Thus, the limitations suggest different avenues for
additional research. Methods could be improved by
taking a closer look at measures related to infor-
mation systems support, organizational issues, and,
not least, performance. Only a few steps have been
taken to develop more
for
explaining performance and they also indicate a pat-
tern in which organizational developments, such as
empowerment, play a crucial role (Flohr Nielsen et
al., 2001).

rigorous models

However, it may take more than reﬁnement of the
structured methods. To understand the mechanisms
that lead to superior performance in small organiza-
tions compared to large, both organizational and
technological capabilities need more attention, for
example, to give insight into the interaction between
personal and technological initiatives. Ideally, this
requires both longitudinal and qualitative sup-
plementing studies. To generalize the results, future
studies should be made in other industries heavily
inﬂuenced by web-technologies. Internationally the
studies could include non-Scandinavian countries.

Conclusion

Small Nordic banks are not outperformed because of
new technology. In contrast, this study indicates that
small banks are able to keep or strengthen their com-
petitive position by the use of new technology.

A general ﬁnding of this study is that many initiat-
ives originate in the Nordic banks and savings banks,
organizations are becoming more market oriented,
and market orientation in turn leads to better per-
formance. Still, the impact on proﬁtability is not per-
fectly clear. On the other hand, there is a signiﬁcant
impact on performance measures such as sales, mar-
ket share and the establishing of customer relation-
ships, which are expected to become proﬁtable.

In an international perspective, the Nordic banks are
up-front in their use of new technology and there
may be a distinctive Scandinavian path to superior
performance. Swedish banks in particular seem to
indicate a customer focus, which is based on compre-
hensive empowerment of the employees working
with customer service combined with support from
systems that provide the employees with updated
and clear information about
the market and the
results achieved.

The differences between small and large banks are

266

European Management Journal Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 258–269, April 2003


the large
generally not signiﬁcant. As expected,
banks have the most developed Internet-banking fea-
tures but almost all banks are able to offer an Inter-
net-banking solution. Small banks and savings banks
seem to have been very effective in using inter-
organizational cooperation in their development of
new technology. Still, large banks have developed
sophisticated systems able to identify proﬁtable cus-
tomer segments and to support
their front-line
employees with customer-focused reporting. The
small banks seem to perceive less need to introduce
more sophisticated reporting systems. Nevertheless,
even among the group of small banks, such systems
appear to be associated with superior performance
as well.

Appendix 1

Performance Measures

In general performance measures range from ‘hard’
proﬁtability measures such as ROA to soft indi-
cations such as job satisfaction. In our study we dis-
tinguish between different stages or levels of impact,
according to how close the antecedent and conse-
quences are.

INTERNET BANKING

sidered the use of or is already applying the follow-
ing technologies/functions’):

❖ All customer information consolidated in one sin-

❖ Complete view of individual customers’ use of

❖ Complete view of individual customer’s relation-

gle database

your ﬁrm’s website

ship with the bank

[Scale: Not considered (1), Considered (2), Planned
(3), Under implementation (4), Implemented (5), Suc-
cessfully implemented (6)].

Frontline-support (v150)
Frequent reporting to customer service employees of
their
ﬁrm’s
revenue/proﬁtability

contribution

individual

the

to

[Item scale: Not considered (1), Considered (2),
Planned (3), Under implementation (4), Implemented
(5), Successfully implemented (6)].

Market Orientation (MARKOR)
An index
based on the MARKOR-construct
developed by Kohli et al. (1993), i.e. an average of the
Intelligence generation-score (6 items), the Intelli-
gence dissemination score (5 items), and the Respon-
siveness score (11 items).

First Level Performance

Second Level Performance

Internet-banking adoption
(adoption of
based on an average on the score on these items:

Internet-banking applications)

Index

(‘Please indicate to what extent your ﬁrm has con-
sidered the use of or is already applying the follow-
ing technologies/functions’):

Internet-banking

❖ On-line securities trading
❖ E-commerce on website offering third party pro-

ducts and services

❖ Cell-phone banking – basic information services
❖ Cell-phone banking – advanced, interactive ser-

❖ Product and service ordering via website
❖ Website integrated/connected with other IS sys-

vices

tems

[Scale: Not considered (1), Considered (2), Planned
(3), Under implementation (4), Implemented (5), Suc-
cessfully implemented (6)].

Adoption of Customer Relationship Management
Features (CRM)
Index based on an average of the score on these
items:

(‘Please indicate to what extent your ﬁrm has con-

Internet-bank Attractiveness
How well have the objectives of establishing an
attractive Internet-banking solution been met during
the past two years? (1 item)

[5-point scale ranging from ‘Worse than competitors’
to ‘Better than competitors’]

Relationship-marketing Performance
❖ Keeping existing customers

Focusing on proﬁtable customer groups
Sale of new products
Securing quality in customer services

[5-point scale ranging from ‘Worse than competitors’
to ‘Better than competitors’]

Sales Performance
❖ Winning new customers
Increase in market share

[5-point scale ranging from ‘Worse than competitors’
to ‘Better than competitors’]

Financial Performance
❖ Last year’s proﬁts on the banking activities
❖ Limiting losses on loans

[5-point scale ranging from ‘Worse than competitors’
to ‘Better than competitors’]

European Management Journal Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 258–269, April 2003

267

❖
❖
❖
❖
❖

INTERNET BANKING

References

Abell, D.F. and Hammond, J.S. (1979) Strategic Market Plan-
ning: Problems and Analytic Approaches. Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Bharadwaj, A.S. (2000) A resource-based perspective on infor-
mation technology capability and ﬁrm performance: an
empirical investigation. MIS Quarterly 24, 169–196.

Brown-Humes, C. (2000) E-vikings spearhead online revol-
ution - Financial Times Survey: Nordic Banking and Fin-
ance. Financial Times, 13 October.

Chandy, R. and Tellis, G. (1998) Organizing for radical pro-
duct innovation: the overlooked role of willingness to
cannibalize. Journal of Marketing Research 35, 474–487.

Child, J. and Loveridge, R. (1990) Information Technology in
a Microelectronic Future.

European Services: Towards
Blackwell, Oxford.

Dalton, D.R., Todor, W.D., Spendolini, M.J., Fielding, G.J. and
Porter, L.W. (1980) Organization structure and performance:
a critical review. Academy of Management Review 5, 49–64.

Damanpour, F. (1992) Organizational size and innovation.

Organization Studies 13, 375–402.

Damanpour, F. (1996) Organizational complexity and inno-
vation: developing and testing multiple contingency
models. Management Science 42, 693–716.

Day, G. (1994) The capabilities of market-driven organiza-

tions. Journal of Marketing 58, 37–52.

DeLone, W.H. and McLean, E. (1992) Information systems
success: the quest for the dependent variable. Information
Systems Research 3, 60–95.

Dierickx, I. and Cool, K. (1989) Asset stock accumulation and
sustainability of competitive advantage. Management
Science 35, 1504–1514.

Dyer, J.H. and Singh, H. (1998) The relational view: coperative
strategy and sources of interorganizational competitive
advantage. Academy of Management Review 23, 660–679.
Flohr Nielsen, J. and Pedersen, C.P. (1999) The consequences
and limits of empowerment in ﬁnancial services. Work-
ing Paper, School of Economics and Management, Uni-
versity of Aarhus, Forthcoming in Scandinavian Journal
of Management.

Flohr Nielsen, J., Høst, V., Jaensson, J.-E., Kock, S. and Selnes,
F.
(2001) Market orientation in nordic banks: does
nationality matter? Working Paper, School of Economics
and Management, University of Aarhus, Forthcoming in
European Journal of Marketing.

Furst, K., Lang, W. and Nolle, D.E. (2000) Internet Banking:

Developments and Prospects.

Han, J.K., Kim, N. and Srivastava, R.K. (1998) Market orien-
tation and organizational performance: is innovation a
missing link. Journal of Marketing 62, 30–45.

Haveman, H.A. (1993) Organizational size and change: diver-
siﬁcation in the savings and loan industry after deregu-
lation. Administrative Science Quarterly 38, 20–50.

Hitt, L.M., Frei, F.X. and Harker, P.T. (1999) How ﬁnancial
ﬁrms decide on technology. In: Robert E. Litan and
Anthony M. Santomero (Eds) The Brooking-Wharton Pap-
ers on Financial Services.

Høst, V., Mols, N.P. and Flohr Nielsen, J. (2001) The adoption
of internet-based marketing channels. Homo Oeconomicus
17, 463–488.

Hui, C.H. and Triandis, H.C. (1986) Measurement in cross-
cultural psychology: a review and comparison of stra-
tegies. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 16, 131–152.

Jaworski, B.J. and Kohli, A.K. (1993) Market orientation: ante-
cedents and consequences. Journal of Marketing 57, 53–70.
Kohli, A.K., Jaworski, B.J. and Kumar, A. (1993) MARKOR: a
Journal of Marketing

measure of market orientation.
Research 30, 467–477.

Kraatz, M.S. and Zajac, E.J.

(2001) How organizational
resources affect strategic change and peformance in tur-
bulent environments: theory and evidence. Organization
Science 12, 632–657.

Lawler, E.E. III (1997) Rethinking organizational size. Organi-

zational Dynamics 26, 24–35.

Loasby, B.J. (1998) The organization of capabilities. Journal of

Economic Behavior and Organization 35, 139–160.

March, J.G. and Sutton, R.I. (1997) Organizational Perform-
ance as a dependent variable. Organization Science 8,
698–706.

Mata, F.J., Fuerst, W.L. and Barney, J.B. (1995) Information
technology and sustained competitive advantage: a
resource-based analysis. MIS Quarterly 19, 487–505.

Oliver, C. (1997) Sustainable competitive advantage: combin-
ing institutional and resource-based views. Strategic
Management Journal 18, 697–713.

Pennings, J.M. and Harianto, F. (1992) The diffusion of tech-
nological innovation in the commercial banking indus-
try. Strategic Management Journal 13, 29–46.

Pitt, L., Caruana, A. and Berthon, P.R. (1996) Market orien-
tation and business performance: some European evi-
dence. International Marketing Review 13, 5–18.

Powell, T.C. and Dent-Micallef, A. (1997) Information tech-
nology as competitive advantage: the role of human,
business, and technology resources. Strategic Management
Journal 18, 375–405.

Raymond, L. (1990) Organizational context and information
systems success: a contingency approach. Journal of Man-
agement Information Systems 6, 5–20.

Richins, M.L. and Verhage, B.J. (1987) Assertiveness and
aggression in marketplace exchanges. Journal of Cross-
Cultural Psychology 18, 93–105.

Schumpeter, J.A. (1942) Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy.

Harper, New York.

Selnes, F., Jaworski, B.J. and Kohli, A.K. (1996) Market orien-
tation in United States and Scandinavian companies: a
cross-cultural study. Scandinavian Journal of Management
12, 139–157.

Sheth, J.N. and Parvatiyar, A. (1995) Relationship marketing
in consumer markets: antecedents and consequences.
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 23, 255–271.

Srirojanant, S. and Thirkell, P.C. (1998) Relationship market-
ing and its synergy with web-based technologies. Journal
of Market-Focused Management 3, 23–46.

Wernerfelt, B. (1984) A resource-based view of the ﬁrm. Stra-

tegic Management Journal 5, 171–180.

268

European Management Journal Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 258–269, April 2003


Company,

JOHANNES
LIEBACH
LU¨ NEBORG, McKinsey
and
Ved
Stranden
14, DK-1061
Copenhagen, Denmark. E-
mail:
johannes
luneborg@mckinsey.com

Johannes Liebach Lu¨neborg
is an executive of McKinsey
and Company in Copen-
hagen and a doctoral gradu-
ate of Aarhus University. His research centres on tech-
nology acquisition, innovation, and performance in the
banking industry.

INTERNET BANKING

JØRN FLOHR NIELSEN,
School of Economics and
Management, Department
of Management, University
of Aarhus, Building 322,
C,
DK-8000
Denmark. E-mail:
jﬂohr@
econ.au.dk

Aarhus

Jørn Flohr Nielsen is Associ-
ate Professor of Organiza-
tion at
the University of
Aarhus. His research interests include organizational
aspects of service management, customer relationship
management and new information technology.

European Management Journal Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 258–269, April 2003

269

