娀 Academy of Management Journal
2009, Vol. 52, No. 2, 314–335.

CHARACTER, CONFORMITY, OR THE BOTTOM LINE?

HOW AND WHY DOWNSIZING AFFECTED

CORPORATE REPUTATION

E. GEOFFREY LOVE
MATTHEW KRAATZ
University of Illinois

The aim of this study is to illuminate reputational change processes and identify the
underlying theoretical mechanisms. We draw upon extant literature to develop three
distinct explanations for reputational change, respectively emphasizing criteria of
organizational “character,” symbolic conformity, and technical efficacy. We evaluate
these explanations by examining the reputational consequences of corporate downsiz-
ing. Our results show that downsizing exerted a strong, negative effect on reputation,
consistently with the character explanation. However, significant moderation of this
negative effect by other factors, including stock market reaction and downsizing’s
overall prevalence, indicates the need for a multitheoretical approach to reputational
change.

Corporate reputation is an important asset (or
liability) bestowed upon a firm by external audi-
ences (Fombrun, 1996). Observers form opinions
that coalesce and adhere to organizations, affecting
their future outcomes for better or worse (Roberts &
Dowling, 2002). Much prior research has noted that
these reputational ascriptions are enduring and
“sticky” (Fombrun & Van Riel, 2004; Schultz,
Mouritsen, & Gabrielsen, 2001). It is because of this
stickiness that reputation (which can be defined as
a subjective evaluation of a firm’s overall quality
relative to its peers) is widely seen as a valuable
resource (Fombrun, 1996; Roberts & Dowling,
2002). However, reputation, like other “stock” vari-
ables, is amassed and depleted through temporal
“flow” sequences. Audiences do tend to reproduce
a firm’s reputation over time, yet they also change
their evaluations, sometimes quite significantly.
This study focuses on these changes and on firm
actions that may precipitate them. In so doing, it
seeks to identify the underlying mechanisms re-
sponsible for reputational change.

Because of the asset-like qualities of reputation,
much theory has focused on its sociological or eco-
nomic foundations, and empirical studies have

We wish to thank Ruth Aguilera, Kevin Corley, David
Deephouse, John Dencker, Don Lange, and Jim Westphal,
as well as seminar participants at the University of Illi-
nois and Purdue University, for their helpful comments
on earlier versions of this study. We also thank the Har-
vard Business School division of research for research
funding, and Abhijeet Vadera for research assistance.
Both authors contributed equally to the article.

tended to examine its relationship with other stock-
like variables (Davies, Chun, Da Silva, & Roper,
2003; Dowling, 2001; Fombrun, 1996; Fombrun &
Shanley, 1990; Fombrun & Van Riel, 2004; Fryxell
& Wang, 1994; Rindova, Williamson, Petkova, &
Sever, 2005). Relatively less work has addressed
important and at least partially distinct theoretical
questions about reputational ebbs and flows and
the actions that may cause them (for exceptions, see
Flanagan and O’Shaughnessy [2005], Staw and Ep-
stein [2000], and Williams and Barrett [2000]). Im-
portant issues also remain open on the “audience
side” of reputational change processes. Although
reputation is, in an important sense, possessed by
an organization, the reality of reputational change
reminds us that it must be granted by external
audiences on an ongoing basis. However, prior re-
search has provided incomplete and sometimes
conflicting insights about what might lead people
to change their opinions of a firm’s overall quality.
It is known that audiences grant reputation in re-
sponse to various “signals” that firms send, but it is
not known which of the many (and sometimes con-
flicting) signals that a firm conveys are the most
likely to be received and to enhance or damage its
existing reputation. The basic evaluative logic that
people use in interpreting these signals and adjust-
ing reputations is also not clearly understood. For
instance, do they reward firms whose actions favor
their parochial interests and values, or do they tend
to apply more universalistic criteria? We believe
that these issues are practically, as well as theoret-
ically, important ones. Although constructing a
good reputation is no doubt a critical strategic prob-

Copyright of the Academy of Management, all rights reserved. Contents may not be copied, emailed, posted to a listserv, or otherwise transmitted without the copyright holder’s express
written permission. Users may print, download or email articles for individual use only.

314


2009

Love and Kraatz

315

lem, firms also need to find ways to improve their
existing reputations and avoid unintentionally
damaging them. Thus, research that examines
“reputational flows” identifies corporate actions
that precipitate those flows, and probes the under-
lying mechanisms responsible for
reputational
change can help provide such knowledge.

In response to this perceived need, in this study
we identify and examine three distinct explana-
tions for reputational change. Each suggests that
reputation granters tend to respond to particular
signals and to employ a distinct evaluative logic as
they encode a firm’s actions into its reputation. We
distilled these explanations from three overarching
perspectives that exist within the broader literature
on reputation. One of these casts corporate reputa-
tion as a reflection of organizational “character”
(Davies et al., 2003; Dowling, 2001; Fombrun,
1996). A second emphasizes the importance of
symbolic conformity with cultural expectations
(Rao, 1994; Staw & Epstein, 2000). The third sug-
gests that reputation is largely reducible to techni-
cal efficacy concerns (e.g., financial performance)
(Brown & Perry, 1994; Fryxell & Wang, 1994; Sha-
piro, 1982, 1983). Although these three perspec-
tives have been used primarily as accounts of rep-
utation’s foundations (as is consistent with the
central tendency in the literature), each also sug-
gests a possible mechanism through which reputa-
tional change may occur.

We looked for evidence of these three proposed
mechanisms by examining the reputational conse-
quences of corporate downsizing among Fortune
100 firms throughout the period 1985–94. In par-
ticular, we looked at how firms’ adoption of this
practice affected their standing in Fortune’s “Most
Admired Companies” rankings. This context is a
particularly appropriate one in which to address
the questions raised above, for at least three rea-
sons. First, downsizing in the study period was a
controversial practice that sent multiple and con-
flicting signals to reputation-granting audiences. It
conveyed, for instance, an obvious concern with
efficiency and shareholder value creation. But it
also signaled opportunism. Firms that violated
commitments to employees might not be trusted to
keep their commitments to other constituencies in
the future. Both of these signals are highly conse-
quential within the alternative accounts of reputa-
tional change that we distill. Second, the audiences
who ascribe Fortune reputations (stock analysts
and peer firm executives) are known to share eco-
nomic interests and cultural beliefs that distinguish
them from other firm constituencies and may lead
them to approve of downsizing firms. Their actual
responses to the practice would thus provide valu-

able insight into how (and how much) people’s
parochial interests and beliefs color their reputa-
tional judgments. Finally, we were able to examine
downsizing in conjunction with other signals that
also have strong and theoretically founded effects
on reputational change. In particular, our analysis
included powerful measures of contemporaneous
change in firm performance and performance pros-
pects (e.g., annual changes in profitability, changes
in market capitalization, changes in analysts’ earn-
ings forecasts). Including these measures allowed
us to assess the degree to which downsizing’s ef-
fects on reputation are distinct from those of per-
formance change and to examine how downsizing
interacted with performance factors in producing
reputational change during the study period.

In our study, we elaborate the three aforemen-
tioned explanations for reputational change. Next,
we use these three accounts in developing two sets
of hypotheses about downsizing’s overall effect on
reputation. Our first set of hypotheses (1a, 1b, and
1c) posits competing predictions about downsiz-
ing’s main effect (positive, negative, null). These
hypotheses are in one-to-one correspondence with
the three theoretical explanations themselves.
Our purpose in testing these hypotheses is to iden-
tify the “dominant mechanism” most responsible
for explaining downsizing’s reputational conse-
quences. The second set of hypotheses identifies
factors that may moderate downsizing’s main ef-
fect, regardless of its direction or strength. Though
reputation granters may be primarily attentive to a
particular signal that downsizing sends, they may
also respond to other, secondary signals that ac-
company it and employ multiple evaluative logics
in ascribing reputations.

LITERATURE REVIEW AND THEORY

Looking into the literature, we can identify at
least
three distinct perspectives on reputation.
While these perspectives have been primarily de-
veloped as accounts of reputation’s foundations
(as is consistent with the core focus of the liter-
ature), each can also be used to generate predic-
tions about reputational change and the mecha-
nisms through which it occurs. More specifically,
these perspectives suggest distinct insights into
the types of actions likely to enhance (or damage)
reputations, the types of signals that reputation-
granting audiences attend to, and the basic evalua-
tive logic that audiences use in updating their repu-
tational assessments.


316

Academy of Management Journal

April

Organizational Character

One central theme in the reputation literature is
the idea that audiences assign positive reputations
to firms that appear to possess desirable character
traits (Davies et al., 2003; Dowling, 2001; Fombrun,
1996; Fombrun & Van Riel, 2004; Markham, 1972).
Two key premises appear to underlie this influen-
tial account of reputation. The first is that people
tend to anthropomorphize organizations (Davies et
al., 2003; Dowling, 2001)—that is, they view organ-
izations as coherent and purposive social entities
(i.e., as conscious actors or “wholes”) rather than
mere social aggregates or collectivities (Hamilton &
Sherman, 1996; Whetten & Mackey, 2002). The sec-
ond premise is that constituencies are especially
concerned with organizations’ suitability as ex-
change partners and thus tend to admire firms that
appear to possess character traits such as trustwor-
thiness and reliability (Fombrun, 1996). These
traits are particularly valued because they provide
a basis for predicting a firm’s future behavior (i.e.,
the likelihood that it will honor its obligations)
(Fombrun, 1996; Fombrun & Van Riel, 2004). From
this perspective, organizational actors that make
clear commitments and uphold them over time are
expected to garner admiration and reciprocal com-
mitment. In contrast, firms that appear opportunis-
tic or unreliable are expected to be less well re-
puted. The idea that constituencies strongly value
trustworthiness and reliability also figures promi-
nently in several other literatures, including those
on social exchange theory (Blau, 1964; Homans,
1958), the old institutionalism (Selznick, 1957,
1969), stakeholder theory (Freeman, 1984; Jones,
1995), organizational ecology (Hannan & Freeman,
1984), and game theory (Weigelt & Camerer, 1988).
Microlevel research has also emphasized the posi-
tive effects of displayed commitment and the neg-
ative reactions that opportunism can provoke.
Scholars have argued that individuals react to such
displays at an emotional and preconscious level
(Frank, 1988; Haidt, 2007; Hauser, 2006; Nesse,
2001).

This perspective points to one specific mecha-
nism through which reputations may change. Spe-
cifically, it suggests that audiences will evaluate
corporate actions as indicators of a firm’s underly-
ing character. In other words, they will view ac-
tions as occasions for attributing traits to the organ-
ization and for revising their existing character
attributions. Corporate actions that send signals re-
garding the firm’s trustworthiness and credibility
are likely to be particularly germane to these revi-
sions. For example, when firms make critical deci-
sions that are consistent with their espoused values

and historical commitments, audiences should
hold them in higher esteem. Conversely, corporate
decisions perceived as connoting opportunism, un-
reliability, or a lack of integrity should damage
reputations to the extent that this “organizational
character mechanism” drives reputational change.1

Symbolic Conformity

A second perspective offers a very different way
to think about the sources and dynamics of reputa-
tion. In this view, reputational assessments are
shaped by an organization’s symbolic conformity
with external, socially constructed standards and
categories that are less universal and more context-
specific than those featured in the character per-
spective (Rao, 1994; Staw & Epstein, 2000). Schol-
ars employing a symbolic conformity perspective
see organizations and evaluators as mutually em-
bedded within larger cultural systems (Rao, 1994:
31). Accordingly, they come to share understand-
ings and expectations about the structures and
practices that are locally appropriate and culturally
desirable. These shared understandings are thought
to lead firms to adopt culturally correct practices
and to affect constituent audiences’ evaluations as
well. Specifically, audiences are expected to confer
good reputations on firms that exemplify cultural
stipulations and ideals and to penalize firms that
fail to display appropriate symbols. From this
perspective, an organization’s cultural
fitness
(rather than its apparent traits as a social actor) is
the primary criterion for audience approval and
esteem.

This second perspective draws on neoinstitu-
tional theory, which holds that organizations are
situated within broader institutional environments
and focuses especially on the cultural processes
that operate within such environments (or “fields”)
(DiMaggio & Powell, 1983; Meyer & Rowan, 1977;
Scott, 2001). This perspective emphasizes that or-
ganizations often adopt structures and practices in
response to field-level pressures and suggests that

1 Importantly, this line of argument does not imply
that corporate actions provide a window into a firm’s
essential traits (or even that firms possess essential
traits). Anthropomorphizing organizations may be an irra-
tional approach to judgment, and audiences may fall
victim to the fundamental “attribution error” in applying
it (Ross, 1977). They may also read too much into actions
that provide little indication of the firm’s real propensi-
ties and predispositions (Ross, 1977; Winter & Uleman,
1984). The point here is that people tend to apply these
criteria and to look for such traits, regardless of whether
firms actually “possess” them.


2009

Love and Kraatz

317

they gain legitimacy and support in return for this
conformity (Ruef & Scott, 1998; Tolbert & Zucker,
1983; Westphal, Gulati, & Shortell, 1997). Although
the concepts of legitimacy and reputation cannot be
equated, scholars have productively used this per-
spective to study reputational processes (cf. Deep-
house & Carter, 2005; King & Whetten, forthcoming;
Rao, 1994; Staw & Epstein, 2000).

A specific implication of this perspective is that
audiences will evaluate corporate actions as sym-
bolic indicators of a firm’s cultural fitness and ad-
just their reputational assessments accordingly. A
study by Staw and Epstein (2000) provides a com-
pelling example of this proposed “symbolic confor-
mity mechanism.” They found that firms enhanced
their reputations by adopting various popular man-
agement practices (e.g., total quality management,
employee empowerment, and teams). They argued
that this effect occurred because these practices
embodied the normative values and cultural beliefs
of the audiences who ascribed the reputations. In-
terestingly,
this reputational enhancement oc-
curred even though the practices did not appear to
improve corporate financial performance.

Technical Efficacy

A third distinct argument is that reputations are
tightly coupled to consequences and tangible or-
ganizational outputs. At the core of this view is the
idea that reputation reflects a firm’s ability to fulfill
evaluating audiences’ material needs. The perspec-
tive thus leads to predictions that strong reputa-
tions accrue to firms that, for example, produce
superior products and services or deliver superior
financial results (Shapiro, 1982, 1983). Within this
view, firms are seen not as anthropomorphized so-
cial actors or as inhabitants of a shared culture, but
more as a means to audiences’ parochial ends. Em-
pirical research showing that perceptions of prod-
uct quality strongly affect consumers’ reputational
assessments (Fombrun & Van Riel, 2004) has sup-
ported this perspective. Studies showing that fi-
nancial performance exerts a powerful (perhaps
overwhelming)
judg-
ments made by stock analysts and peer executives
(Brown & Perry, 1994; Fryxell & Wang, 1994) have
provided even stronger support.

influence on reputational

This third perspective implies a “technical effi-
cacy mechanism” that may account for reputational
change. Specifically, it suggests that audiences will
alter reputations in response to observed changes
in valued organizational outputs. The direction and
degree of reputational change should correspond
with these performance changes. A “strong form”
of this argument implies that reputational change

their

effectively reduces to performance change and that
firm actions (such as downsizing) are actually epi-
phenomenal to the process. In empirical terms,
these actions’ reputational effects should be null
once relevant, observable outcome changes are ad-
equately accounted for. A “weak form” of this ar-
gument is that actions may themselves affect repu-
tation, but only because of
(believed)
implications for technical efficacy. This argument
converges with the strong form in sharing the as-
sumption that reputation granters are fundamen-
tally concerned with performance, broadly defined.
However, it also suggests that audiences are likely
to view some firm actions as signals of expected
future performance in their own right and to re-
spond to them accordingly. As such, their reputa-
tional judgments are expected to be more loosely
coupled to the observable performance changes
that either accompany or result from a given firm
action.2 Table 1 summarizes these three accounts of
reputational change.3

STUDY CONTEXT AND HYPOTHESES

Downsizing has been defined as the intentional
reduction of personnel in an effort to improve effi-
ciency or effectiveness (Freeman & Cameron, 1993).
Downsizing gained notice in the early 1980s as
large U.S. industrial firms began to reduce person-
nel in ways that were clearly distinct from tradi-
tional practices such as furloughs and layoffs
(Kiechel, 1985; Nielsen, 1985; Tomasko, 1987). His-
torically, personnel reductions had been capacity-
balancing actions most often taken in response to
lowered demand during business downturns (Free-
man & Cameron, 1993; McKinley, Mone, & Barker,
1998). Though such reductions often affected many
employees, they were typically temporary and pre-
dominantly affected production personnel at spe-

2 Although this weak-form technical efficacy argument
is theoretically distinct, it becomes entangled with the
other two mechanisms we have posited when we attempt
to move it into the empirical realm. Audiences who are
“ultimately” concerned with performance may still visi-
bly react to displays of trustworthiness and/or symbolic
conformity.

3 The reputation literature also describes other per-
spectives and mechanisms, notably those that emphasize
the quality of a firm’s external associations and those
that suggest prominence and visibility are important
components of reputation (Deephouse, 2000; Rindova et
al., 2005). We have elaborated on the character, confor-
mity, and efficacy perspectives because of their promi-
nence in the literature and their direct relevance to our
specific study context.


318

Academy of Management Journal

April

Summary of Different Accounts of Reputational Change

TABLE 1

Mechanism

Organizational Character

Symbolic Conformity

Technical Efficacy

Basis of organizational

Perceived trustworthiness and

Conformity to cultural rules,

Delivery of outputs valued by audiences

appeal/esteem

reliability.

norms, and beliefs that
exist at the field level.

(products, services, financial
performance).

Assumptions about

Prospective exchange partner

Coparticipant in larger

“Needy” and narrowly focused on

audience

looking forward into
uncertain future.

cultural system, or field.

quality and quantity of desired organi-
zational outputs.

Evaluative logic used

Firm anthropomorphized and

judged on attributed
character.

Evaluators employ logic of
cultural appropriateness;
piecewise evaluation of
firm’s actions.

Evaluators employ instrumental logic;

firm evaluated on the basis of outputs
produced.

Attributes of reputation-

Reveal and affirm character;

enhancing actions
(signals)

signal trustworthiness,
reliability, commitment.

Symbolize conformity with
cultural rules, norms, and
beliefs.

Strong form: Actions are

epiphenomenal.

Weak form: Actions increase technical

efficacy on dimensions valued by
audience.

Attributes of reputation-

Apparent opportunism;

Deviate from cultural rules,

Strong form: Actions are

damaging actions
(signals)

inconsistency with past
commitments.

norms and beliefs.

epiphenomenal.

Weak form: Actions decrease technical

efficacy on dimensions valued by
audience.

Theoretical roots and

Old institutionalism,

Neoinstitutionalism, symbolic

Utilitarian theories in economics and

relationships

stakeholder theory, game
theory; attribution theory;
evolutionary psychology.

interactionism.

other social sciences.

cific sites (Thurow, 1986). In contrast, downsizing
efforts often had a more strategic intent, aiming to
“permanently” improve companywide efficiency
and effectiveness through changes such as reducing
bureaucracy and layers of management (Budros,
2002; McKinley et al., 1998). Many downsizings
were of unprecedented scope and scale, involving
thousands of employees, including managers (Bau-
mol, Blinder, & Wolff, 2003).

Although the downsizing trend started among
heavy manufacturing firms, it subsequently spread
widely and rapidly. By the beginning of our study
period in 1985, downsizing had already been im-
plemented in hundreds of firms (Nielsen, 1985),
including 24 percent of the firms in our sample. By
the end of the study period in 1994, most large
firms reported that they had downsized at least
once during the past five years (AMA, 1994). Over-
all, the Fortune 100 firms we study downsized their
workforces by millions of employees during the
1980s and 1990s (Nohria, Dyer, & Dalzell, 2002).
Downsizing decisions were explained with refer-
ence to a variety of specific circumstances and gen-

eral logics. Notable among these were the need to
respond to increasing global competition (Lamertz
& Baum, 1998; Useem, 1993) and the accompany-
ing characterization of large U.S. firms as “fat” and
overstaffed (Thurow, 1986; Tomasko, 1987). Early
downsizings were most often initiated in reaction
to performance declines, but proactive downsiz-
ings became common by the end of the 1980s
(Budros, 2004; McKinley et al., 1998).

Downsizing’s Overall Effects on Reputation:
Competing Hypotheses

Organizational character mechanism. The or-
ganizational character explanation for reputational
change suggests that audiences will view downsiz-
ing as an occasion for trait attribution. The question
they are likely to ask is what downsizing says about
the character of a firm as a whole, particularly its
trustworthiness and reliability. Downsizing should
have a negative effect on reputational change, to the
extent that this perspective’s proposed mechanism
is dominant. By downsizing, firms broke commit-


2009

Love and Kraatz

319

ments and reneged on implicit “psychological con-
tracts” with their employees (see Cappelli, Bassi,
Katz, Knoke, Osterman, & Useem, 1997; De Meuse
& Tornow, 1990; Heckscher, 1995; Noer, 1993).
Though downsizing was perfectly legal and widely
advocated as an efficient business practice, it con-
noted opportunism and signaled that a firm was an
untrustworthy actor that might not be counted on
to meet its commitments in the future. Employees
clearly interpreted downsizing as a betrayal and
characterized downsizers as untrustworthy (see
Brockner, Grover, Reed, DeWitt, & O’Malley, 1987;
Gordon, 1996; New York Times, 1996; Noer, 1993).
Many writers, critics, and politicians shared this
interpretation and broadcast the same message (see
De Meuse & Tornow, 1990; Gordon, 1996; New
York Times, 1996). Downsizing also conveyed
many other signals, of course, and it is possible that
the analysts and peer executives who ascribed For-
tune reputations were more responsive to those
signals. Nonetheless, to the extent that organiza-
tional character considerations drive people’s repu-
tational evaluations, we should expect even these
audiences to negatively react to downsizing firms.
Analysts and executives were not personally be-
trayed by downsizing, and they may have had little
empathy with displaced employees, but a firm’s
dealings with that particular constituency may
have sent an important signal concerning its likely
behavior in future dealings with them. There is also
some empirical support for the proposition that
downsizing might negatively affect
reputation.
Specifically, Flanagan and O’Shaughnessy (2005)
showed that layoffs (rather than downsizings) had a
negative effect on reputation, in an analysis of a
different sample during a later time period than the
one we examine here. We discuss their study in
more detail below and also elaborate its differences
from our own. Thus, we propose:

Hypothesis 1a. Downsizing negatively affects a
firm’s ascribed reputation.

Symbolic conformity mechanism. If the sym-
bolic conformity mechanism is dominant, reputa-
tion-granting audiences will likely attend to differ-
ent signals and thus respond quite differently to
downsizing firms than they will if another mecha-
nism is dominant. Specifically, they should evalu-
ate the practice of downsizing on the basis of its
consistency with their own cultural values and be-
liefs, and they should reward downsizing firms to
the extent that they conform with those sector-
specific prescriptions (Staw & Epstein, 2000). This
mechanism is also a plausible one, because down-
sizing was deeply consistent with the expressed
and revealed beliefs of the analysts and peer exec-

utives who ascribe Fortune reputations. Downsiz-
ing decisions were uniformly presented as efforts
to improve the corporate bottom line, and it is
known that these two audiences particularly value
efficiency and financial performance. More im-
portantly, members of these audiences vocally ad-
vocated downsizing and publicly praised down-
sizing firms during our study period (Kiechel,
1985; Useem, 1993). Analysts and institutional in-
vestors were particularly vocal in their support,
with some even pressuring corporate boards to re-
place executives who resisted their entreaties to
downsize (Nohria et al., 2002; Useem, 1993, 1996).
Additionally, several prominent executives (nota-
bly Jack Welch at General Electric and Al Dunlap at
Scott Paper) publicly sang downsizing’s praises, por-
traying it as crucial to improving large American
firms’ competitiveness (see Tichy & Sherman, 1993).
Popular models of corporate management that per-
vaded American business culture during the 1985–94
study period appear to have further increased down-
sizing’s symbolic value. In particular, the shareholder
value model (Davis, Diekmann, & Tinsley, 1994;
Jensen & Meckling, 1976; Useem, 1993) and the “lean
and mean” model (cf. Budros, 2002; Kiechel, 1985;
Peters & Waterman, 1982) both portrayed the practice
as central to effective management in general, and to
improved efficiency and effectiveness specifically.
The former did so by emphasizing that downsizing,
through reducing purportedly excessive managerial
overhead, was an important technique used to align
corporate staffing levels with shareholder interests
(Thurow, 1986; Useem, 1993, 1996). The latter did so
by suggesting that downsizing, as a core part of efforts
to flatten the corporate pyramid and eliminate bu-
reaucratic work, was a powerful means to the meta-
phorically appealing end of a “healthy” and “lean”
organization (Budros, 2002; McKinley et al., 1998).

A final supporting indicator of downsizing’s cul-
tural standing is its widespread (and growing) use
during the study period. As noted, hundreds of firms
(including 24 percent of our sample) had downsized
at the outset of our study period (1985), and the vast
majority of the sample downsized in the subsequent
decade. The notion that the prevalence of a practice
reflects its cultural appropriateness is widely ac-
cepted in neoinstitutionalism, from which the sym-
bolic conformity mechanism is drawn (Edelman,
1992; Tolbert & Zucker, 1983; Westphal et al., 1997).
Indeed, previous research on downsizing itself has
concluded that the practice acquired legitimacy as it
spread (Lamertz & Baum, 1998; Love, 2000; McKinley
et al., 1998). Although these prior studies have not
specifically shown that downsizing firms gained in-
creased approval by employing the practice, this pre-
diction is quite consistent with their basic logic. It is


320

Academy of Management Journal

April

also consistent with prior research that has directly
shown that firms can improve their reputations by
adopting popular management practices (Staw & Ep-
stein, 2000). Taken together, these diverse indicators
provide powerful evidence concerning downsizing’s
symbolic appropriateness within the particular cul-
tural milieu of analysts and executives, despite the
controversy that surrounded the practice in the broader
popular discourse. To the extent that the symbolic
conformity mechanism is dominant, we should
thus expect downsizing to positively affect firm
reputation:

Hypothesis 1b. Downsizing positively affects a
firm’s ascribed reputation.
Technical efficacy mechanism. The technical
efficacy explanation also provides insights into
downsizing’s likely effects. The strong form of this
account, which we articulated above, posits that
reputational change effectively reduces to perfor-
mance change. In other words, the argument is that
downsizing has no independent effect on reputa-
tional change after contemporaneous, observable
measures of performance change are sufficiently
accounted for. Buttressing this prediction is the
argument of prior research that corporate reputa-
tions (particularly Fortune reputations) are domi-
nantly driven by financial performance (Brown &
Perry, 1994; Fryxell & Wang, 1994). This research
provides no obvious reason to predict that down-
sizing and like actions would, in themselves, affect
a firm’s reputation. Thus, we propose:4

Hypothesis 1c. Downsizing has no effect on a
firm’s ascribed reputation, after contempora-
neous performance changes are accounted for.

Moderating Effects: Complementary Hypotheses

Though tensions clearly exist between the three
explanations we have posited, there is no reason to

4 The weak form of the technical efficacy argument
might also be used to predict a direct effect of downsizing
on reputational change. However, it is not possible to
develop such a hypothesis without first making strong
assumptions concerning the beliefs of audiences about
downsizing’s technical efficacy (i.e., whether they be-
lieve it is performance-enhancing or not). Developing a
weak-form hypothesis also clearly requires one to as-
sume that audiences look beyond available performance
data in ascribing reputation. Thus, any hypothesis devel-
oped from this argument would be significantly entan-
gled with those flowing from the prior two perspectives.
Therefore, we focus exclusively upon the strong form
argument in testing the technical efficacy perspective.
We reconsider the weak form as we interpret and discuss
our results at the end of this article.

presume a zero-sum relationship between them.
Reputation granters may be primarily attentive to a
particular signal that downsizing sends, yet they
are also likely to respond to other, secondary sig-
nals that accompany it and may employ multiple
evaluative logics in ascribing reputations. With this
in mind, we also develop hypotheses that explore
the three mechanisms’ conjoint operation and seek
to identify complementarities among them.

The moderating effect of market reaction. Even
if reputational change does not reduce to changes
in technical efficacy, as Hypothesis 1c posits (that
is, even if audiences respond to actions that signal
trustworthiness and/or cultural conformity), there
is still reason to predict that the technical efficacy
of such actions will be consequential in determin-
ing their reputational consequences. One particular
performance measure that seems quite likely to
moderate a downsizing’s reputational effect is the
stock market’s initial reaction to it (i.e., the “excess
returns” [Brown & Warner, 1985] associated with
it). The reputation-granting audiences in our study
are known to be highly attentive to the short-term
movements in stock prices, and research has estab-
lished that equity market valuations strongly influ-
ence reputations in general (Brown & Perry, 1994;
Fombrun & Shanley, 1990). Thus, excess returns
associated with downsizing may condition what-
ever independent effects the practice has on repu-
tation. Market reactions may be important moder-
ators not only because they are an important
outcome (i.e., because they create and destroy
wealth), but also because they serve as a summary
judgment of a firm’s decisions. In other words, the
stock market may act as a sort of “information in-
termediary” (Pollock & Rindova, 2003) that helps
reputation-granting audiences interpret and evalu-
ate various corporate actions.

Hypothesis 2. Short-term market reaction to
downsizing positively moderates its effects on
a firm’s ascribed reputation.

The moderating effect of recent firm perfor-
mance. As we mentioned earlier, a salient and
controversial feature of downsizing is that firms
often cut personnel during good financial times
(McKinley et al., 1998). If the organizational char-
acter mechanism is operative, we should expect
these “proactive” downsizings to be less well re-
ceived (even if the character mechanism is not
dominant overall). Firms that downsized without
apparent financial need (for instance, while perfor-
mance was improving) may have appeared to be
particularly opportunistic and untrustworthy (Gor-
don, 1996). In contrast, downsizing firms that were
manifestly in trouble may have been partially ex-


2009

Love and Kraatz

321

empted from their implied commitments to their
employees and thus less likely to incur reputa-
tional damage. Declining performance may have
made their obligations to financial constituencies
more salient. Two observations made by corporate
executives during the study period lend substantial
plausibility to this prediction. One longtime Ford
executive stated, “When you’ve just reported a $1.5
billion net loss, nobody wonders why you have to
cut back.” In contrast, another executive noted that
“the toughest thing to explain is why you see a
need to trim your sails [i.e., downsize] when your
markets are booming” (both quotations are from
Fisher [1988: 42]). Research on organizational trust
itself, which has shown that extenuating circum-
stances can justify actions normally connoting op-
portunism (Kramer & Tyler, 1996), also supports
this hypothesis.

Hypothesis 3. Recent changes in a firm’s per-
formance negatively moderate downsizing’s ef-
fects on the firm’s ascribed reputation.

The moderating effect of prior reputation. An
additional implication of the organizational char-
acter perspective is that a firm’s prior reputation
should affect audiences’ interpretations of its ac-
tions. To the extent that good reputations are sticky
and enduring assets amassed through a history of
making and meeting commitments, we should ex-
pect them to mitigate any reputational damage that
downsizing may otherwise cause. People should be
inclined to give the benefit of the doubt to firms
with a record of “good behavior” and to be less
quick to attribute opportunism on the basis of a
single strategic decision. The same logic implies
that marginal firms lacking a strong history of reli-
ability may suffer greater reputational damage from
downsizing. This prediction would not seem to
follow from the conformity or efficacy perspec-
tives, both of which cast reputation as somewhat
more tightly coupled to recent signals and less af-
fected by a particular firm’s historical pattern of
behavior.

Hypothesis 4. Prior reputation positively mod-
erates downsizing’s effects on a firm’s ascribed
reputation.

The moderating effect of downsizing’s preva-
lence. Downsizing’s growing cultural appropriate-
ness may have also moderated its reputational con-
sequences, even if
the symbolic conformity
mechanism did not dominate overall. Downsizing
was not uncommon at the outset of our study, and
it enjoyed significant cultural support even then
(Kiechel, 1985; Love, 2000). However, the practice
diffused widely and gained increasing cultural

standing and acceptance across our study period
(McKinley et al., 1998). The idea that a practice’s
prevalence is a telling indicator of its symbolic
appropriateness is well established in previous
reputational scholarship (Staw & Epstein, 2000)
and in the broader body of neoinstitutional re-
search (cf. DiMaggio & Powell, 1983; Tolbert &
Zucker, 1983, 1996). Building on this logic, we
would expect audience response to downsizing
firms to become more favorable (or less negative) as
a function of the practice’s increasing prevalence
over time:

Hypothesis 5. Downsizing’s prevalence posi-
tively moderates its effects on a firm’s ascribed
reputation.

A close corollary of Hypothesis 5 is that down-
sizing’s growing prevalence will make local perfor-
mance contingencies less consequential as moder-
ators of its reputational effects. As the practice
spreads and acquires growing symbolic value, it
should be seen as more universally appropriate,
and audiences should attend less to the firm-spe-
cific factors that initially justified its use (Tolbert &
Zucker, 1983; Westphal et al., 1997). Therefore, the
moderating effects discussed in Hypotheses 2 and 3
(stock market reaction and recent performance
changes, respectively) should dissipate as the num-
ber of sample firms that have previously downsized
increases. Thus, we propose:

Hypothesis 6. Downsizing’s prevalence weak-
ens the moderating effects of the performance
contingencies specified in Hypotheses 2 and 3.

Cultural differences between audiences. Down-
sizing’s reputational consequences may be moder-
ated not only by cross-temporal variation in its
cultural appropriateness, but also by cultural vari-
ation across audiences. In the larger scheme, exec-
utives and analysts are remarkably similar audi-
ences (when compared with consumers,
labor
groups,
the media, political organizations, aca-
demic observers, etc.). They are clearly within the
same field or cultural milieu. For this reason, it
makes much sense to group them together, as we
have done thus far and as other reputation re-
searchers have also done (Fombrun & Shanley,
1990; Staw & Epstein, 2000). Nonetheless, these
audience groups have potentially important cul-
tural differences. We have noted that many analysts
vocally advocated downsizing and even publicly
celebrated downsizing firms. Although the practice
also enjoyed cultural support from many prominent
executives, there was much expressed ambivalence
within this group (Nohria et al., 2002; Useem, 1996).
Further, the financial community appeared to em-


322

Academy of Management Journal

April

brace the shareholder value model (which legiti-
mated downsizing) more rapidly and unequivocally
than managers (Useem, 1996). This was perhaps to be
expected, given that analysts’ roles culturally consti-
tute them as shareholder representatives (Zucker-
man, 1999). In contrast, executives’ roles are much
more complex; executives are simultaneously embed-
ded in multiple institutional domains and must an-
swer to both investors and a range of nonfinancial
stakeholders. For these reasons, downsizing should
be seen as a more unambiguously appropriate symbol
from the cultural perspective of stock analysts. There-
fore, analysts should react more positively (or less
negatively) to the firms employing the practice:

Hypothesis 7. Downsizing has a more positive
(less negative) effect on a firm’s reputation as
ascribed by stock analysts than on its reputa-
tion as ascribed by peer firm executives.

METHODS AND DATA

Sample and Study Period

Our sample was the 100 largest industrial firms
in the United States as identified by Fortune. This
sample is particularly appropriate because these
highly visible firms are closely monitored by cor-
porate audiences and were among those most af-
fected by downsizing (Baumol et al., 2003). We
sampled the Fortune 100 as of 1977 because this
year clearly predated the start of the downsizing
trend. We subsequently collected comprehensive
data on all downsizings conducted by these firms
through 1994. The Fortune survey “Most Admired
Companies” was not initiated until 1983, and full
data necessary for testing our hypotheses did not
become available until 1985. Thus, our study ex-
amines downsizing’s effects on reputation during
the period 1985–94. This period incorporates much
of downsizing’s diffusion. In 1985, 24 percent of
our sample firms had downsized, and by 1994 over
70 percent had done so. Within this sample and
time frame, the Fortune survey data were available
for an average of 71 firms each year, and data for all
variables was available for 616 firm-years.5 Our
analytical approach, described below, enables us to
treat the rankings of analysts and peer firm execu-
tives independently within the same data set. Thus,
our final data set contains two distinct observations
in each firm-year, for a total of 1,232 observations.

Theoretical Variables

Dependent measure. We used the Fortune sur-
vey, “Most Admired Companies,” to assess reputa-
tional change. Fortune annually surveys several

thousand securities analysts and executives who
rate firms in the industries that they cover or
work in. Respondents evaluate the ten largest
firms in their industry on eight disparate dimen-
sions. The dimensions are management quality,
product quality, innovativeness, value as a long-
term investment, financial soundness, ability to
attract, develop, and retain personnel, community
and environmental responsibility, and use of cor-
porate assets. Fortune averages these eight items
into a single reputation score for each firm and
publishes these scores in their annual “most ad-
mired companies” rankings. These rankings re-
flect observers’ beliefs about a firm’s overall, sub-
jective appeal relative to its peers, in keeping
with the definition of reputation we use (Fom-
brun, 1996). Although Fortune reputations do not
capture the opinions of all relevant publics, the
audiences who ascribe them are knowledgeable
and influential ones. Much prior research has
employed the Fortune survey in studying corpo-
rate reputation (e.g., Brown & Perry, 1994; Fom-
brun & Shanley, 1990; Roberts & Dowling, 2002;
Staw & Epstein, 2000). Our theory takes explicit
account of its known idiosyncrasies (for instance,
the specific audiences it surveys and its well-
known association with financial performance).
Although prior research on Fortune reputations
has focused on observers’ ratings of firms (raw
scores), we used within-industry rankings of firms
as our dependent measure. This approach is partic-
ularly advantageous, given that Fortune-ascribed
reputations are highly relational, as is the broader
concept of reputation itself. In its annual reputation
issue, Fortune uses firms’ raw reputation scores to
create reputational hierarchies within industries.
Further, the rating process itself also has a rela-
tional character, in that respondents are only given
the opportunity to rate comparable firms (i.e., the
ten largest firms in a given industry). To facilitate
interpretation, we created inverted ranking scores
that range from 10 for the top-ranked firm in the
industry in a particular year to 1 for the lowest.
Thus, covariates that enhance reputation have pos-
itive signs. Because of our interest in possible dif-
ferences between audiences, we disaggregated an-
alysts’ and executives’ rankings and included each
group’s ranking as a separate observation. Given
our core concern with reputational flows, we in-
cluded the prior year’s ranking in all models. Con-
sequently, the coefficients in our models reflect the
independent variables’ effects on year-to-year repu-
tational change.

Independent variables. We constructed a di-
chotomous indicator of downsizing, which is our
main independent variable. Large publicly held


2009

Love and Kraatz

323

firms typically announce significant personnel re-
ductions and describe their key features. Accord-
ingly, we searched full-text articles of the New York
Times, the Wall Street Journal, and several wire
services for announcements of companywide per-
sonnel reductions that aimed to improve efficiency
or effectiveness, consistently with the definition
and distinctive features of downsizing introduced
earlier. To avoid including announcements affect-
ing very small numbers of employees, we required
that the personnel reductions affect at least 1 per-
cent of employees.5 After applying this screen, we
found qualifying downsizing events in 103 of the
firm-years for which Fortune survey and other data
were available. We subsequently dropped 12
events that were announced in December, as these
appeared to have occurred after the annual (late
autumn) Fortune survey. This procedure left us
with 91 firm-years wherein downsizings were
announced.

All subsequent hypotheses (Hypotheses 2–7) pos-
ited moderating relationships and were therefore
tested using interaction terms. To assess whether
short-term stock market reaction to downsizing mod-
erated its effects on reputation (Hypothesis 2), we
interacted the downsizing indicator with a measure
of stock market reaction (“downsizing ⫻ stock mar-
ket reaction”). We assessed market reactions using
the standard excess market
returns approach
(Brown & Warner, 1985). This approach measures
the change in a specific firm’s stock price, net of
broader market movements, during a short window
of a few days surrounding an event (here, the
downsizing announcement). We constructed a be-
ta-adjusted measure of excess returns as described
by Brown and Warner (1985: 28), using data from
the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP)
and an 11-day event window (day ⫺5 to ⫹5)
around a downsizing announcement. Excess re-
turns measured across other windows (3 days and 1
day) produced similar results.

To examine whether recent firm performance
changes moderated downsizing’s effect on reputa-
tion (Hypothesis 3), we interacted the downsizing
indicator with a measure of change in profitability
(“downsizing ⫻ profitability change”). We mea-

5 We operationalized downsizing dichotomously rather
than continuously, as was consistent with our theoretical
emphasis on the event as a discrete signal. However, we
also estimated models in which we replaced the dichoto-
mous downsizing indicator with a (logged) measure of a
downsizing’s announced size. All hypotheses that received
support in the analysis presented here also received sup-
port in this alternative analysis (results are available from
the authors upon request).

sured change in profitability as the difference be-
tween return on book assets in the downsizing year
(t) and in the prior year (t ⫺ 1). Hypothesis 3 pre-
dicts a negative coefficient based on the idea that
declines in profitability would provide a justifica-
tion for downsizing. It posits that increasing prof-
itability would have the opposite effect, as observ-
ers would see the practice as less necessary for
financially healthy firms.

Hypothesis 4 predicts that prior

reputation
would ameliorate downsizing’s effect on firm rep-
utation. We tested this hypothesis with the interac-
tion term “downsizing ⫻ prior ranking,” in which
prior ranking is measured in the previous year. To
aid interpretation, we centered the prior ranking
variable before multiplying it by the downsizing
indicator (Jaccard, Turrisi, & Wan, 1990). Note that
we did not center the stock market reaction or
profitability change variables, because their values
(particularly their zero points) have substantive
meaning, and because their means were already
close to zero (Jaccard et al., 1990).

To assess whether the prevalence of downsizing
moderated its reputational consequences (Hypoth-
esis 5), we constructed the interaction term “down-
sizing ⫻ prevalence.” Prevalence is the percentage
of firms in the sample that had downsized in prior
years (including between 1977 and 1985). As with
prior ranking, we centered this variable. To assess
the corollaries of the prevalence hypothesis de-
scribed in Hypothesis 6, we used triple interaction
terms, “downsizing ⫻ profitability change ⫻ prev-
alence” and “downsizing ⫻ stock market reac-
tion ⫻ prevalence,” respectively. Hypothesis 6 pre-
dicts that the moderating effects in Hypotheses 2
and 3 will dissipate as prevalence increases. There-
fore, it predicts a positive coefficient for the first
triple interaction term and a negative coefficient for
the second.

To assess whether analysts and executives re-
sponded differently to downsizing firms (Hypothesis
7), we constructed an indicator variable, analysts. We
multiplied this binary term by the downsizing indi-
cator (for “downsizing ⫻ analysts”).

Control Variables

Prior ranking. Because of our central concern
with how observers change their reputational rank-
ings from one year to the next, we included a (cen-
tered) prior year’s ranking in all models. This pro-
cedure had the effect of specifying the model itself
as one of reputational change.

Contemporaneous performance change mea-
sures. The strong form of the technical efficacy
argument states that reputational change effectively


324

Academy of Management Journal

April

it

reduces to performance change. This argument is
the basis for Hypothesis 1c, which predicts that
downsizing will have a null effect on reputational
change after contemporaneous performance changes
are adequately accounted for. To test Hypothesis 1c,
we included three measures of contemporaneous per-
formance change. The first measure, market capital-
ization change t ⫺ 1 to t, captures changes in a firm’s
total market valuation in the current year. More
specifically,
reflects the annual percentage
change in the market value of equity and the book
value of debt (t ⫺ 1 to t). The second measure,
profitability change t ⫺ 1 to t, captures change in re-
turn on assets between the current and the prior year.
This variable is also the base term for the downsizing
by profitability change term (Hypothesis 3). The third
measure, earnings expectations change t ⫺ 1 to t, cap-
tures changes in analysts’ estimates of the firm’s next
fiscal year performance. We constructed this measure
using the IBES (Institutional Broker’s Estimate Sys-
tem) database. Using all earnings estimates provided
by analysts during a specific year, we tallied the num-
ber of upward revisions, subtracted the number of
downward revisions, and divided the resulting num-
ber by the total number of earnings estimates pro-
vided. This measure varies between 1 (if all earnings
estimates are upward revisions) and ⫺1 (if all esti-
mates are downward revisions). Although changes in
earnings expectations do not reflect performance per
se, they are particularly meaningful because they re-
flect analysts’ changing beliefs about a firm’s future
technical efficacy and thus go beyond directly observ-
able measures of current performance. Financial the-
ory similarly suggests that changes in market capital-
ization reflect future performance expectations, in
addition to being outcomes in their own right.

Performance change measures in the prior
year. We included the same three measures of per-
formance change for each prior year, on the as-
sumption that changes in reputation may lag be-
hind performance increases or decreases. These
measures (market capitalization change t ⫺ 2 to t ⫺ 1,
change in ROA t ⫺ 2 to t ⫺ 1, and earnings expecta-
tions change t ⫺ 2 to t ⫺ 1) allowed us to account more
completely for the effects of performance change in
producing reputational change, as was necessary
for testing Hypothesis 1c.

Additional performance measures. We in-
cluded three other performance measures that have
been found to be important predictors of Fortune
reputation in prior studies (Brown & Perry, 1994;
Fombrun & Shanley, 1990). Specifically, we con-
trolled for (1) average ROA for the current and two
preceding years (average ROA three years), (2) av-
erage sales growth over the same period (average
sales growth three years), and (3) a logged measure

of firm size (sales-based). Though these measures do
not directly or exclusively capture performance
change, we included them in order to provide the
strongest possible test of Hypothesis 1c.

A final control variable, announcement in prior
December, is a dummy variable set equal to 1 for
firm-years in which a firm had announced a down-
sizing in the prior December. As noted above, we
excluded December events from our downsizing
indicator.

ANALYSIS

We used rank-ordered logistic regression analy-
sis to test our hypotheses (see Allison & Christakis,
1994; Beggs, Cardell, & Hausman, 1981). This ana-
lytic technique has two advantages. First, it is spe-
cifically designed for situations such as ours, in
which the dependent variable is raters’ relative
ranking of objects within a group (firms in an in-
dustry, in our case). We have explained the theo-
retical advantages of focusing on rankings. The
technique is also advantageous because it allows
separate rankings from multiple raters (in our case,
analyst and executive groups) to be incorporated
into the same model. It has been used, for example,
to explore multiple human resource managers’ rel-
ative rankings of the same job candidates (vanBeek,
Koopmans, & vanPraag, 1997), and to explain dif-
ferent consumers’ relative rankings of competing
products (e.g., Hausman & Ruud, 1987).

Although we are confident of the appropriateness
of this somewhat novel approach, its use presents
some issues that require brief discussion. Since the
dependent variable is a relative ranking within a
group, variables that are invariant within groups (e.g.,
those that define the groups) are controlled for by
construction. It is neither necessary nor possible to
include such variables in rank-ordered logistic regres-
sion models. In our analysis, a “group” is a particular
industry, as assessed by a particular audience in a
particular year (e.g., firms in the automobile industry,
as assessed by analysts in 1987). Thus, all of our
models implicitly control for industry, year, and
rater. The result is quite similar to that occurring in
fixed-effects models, wherein between-group vari-
ance is “fixed” in the intercept term. The group struc-
ture of the data has important implications for testing
interactions in rank-ordered logistic regression mod-
els. Specifically, base terms for some interactions can-
not (and need not) be included because construction
of the groups controls for them (see Allison and
Christakis [1994] and Beggs et al. [1981] for further


2009

Love and Kraatz

325

discussion).6 Given the relative novelty of the rank-
ordered logistic regression technique, we also tested
our hypotheses using more conventional fixed-effect
models. These models, which are presented in the
Appendix, reveal substantively identical results.

Because of the panel structure of our data, the
possibility also exists that within-industry rankings
for firms will not be independent across years. We
compensated for this possibility by estimating stan-
dard errors using the Huber-White sandwich (ro-
bust) technique and by adjusting the standard er-
rors for correlations within industry-year groups
using STATA’s cluster option.

RESULTS

Table 2 presents descriptive statistics and corre-
lations. Table 3 presents results from the rank-
ordered logistic regressions. Model 1 of Table 3
examines downsizing’s main effect on reputational
rankings. The downsizing coefficient in model 1 is
significant (p ⬍ .001) and negative. Thus, Hypoth-
esis 1a is supported. The ⫺.71 coefficient indicates
that downsizing firms lost more than two-thirds of
a position in the Fortune rankings, on average.

This finding is clearly supportive of Hypothesis 1a
and directly at odds with Hypothesis 1b (which pre-
dicted a positive effect); its implications for Hypoth-
esis 1c (which predicted a null effect, after contem-
poraneous performance change is accounted for)
requires more discussion. First, it is important to note
that model 1 includes all the measures of contempo-
raneous performance change that we described above
(changes in market capitalization, profitability, and
earnings expectations). We included these measures
for both the current and prior year. Model 1 also
includes other performance measures featured in
prior reputation research. Our finding of a strong
downsizing effect net of these factors casts serious
doubt upon the argument that reputational change
effectively reduces to performance change and upon
the related idea that the audiences who ascribe For-
tune reputations are single-mindedly concerned with
financial outcomes. These findings also cast doubt
upon the weak form of the technical efficacy argu-
ment, though they cannot rule it out. It remains pos-

6 Consider the downsizing ⫻ analysts interaction used
to test Hypothesis 7 as one example. Analysts does not
vary within a given industry-rater-year group; it is always
1 or 0 for any such group. Thus, constructing the rank-
ings implicitly controls for this variable, and its indepen-
dent effect on rankings cannot be modeled. However, it is
possible to examine its interactive effects because the
downsizing ⫻ analysts term does vary within groups (as
a result of variance in the downsizing variable itself).

sible to argue that evaluators penalized downsizing
firms because they believed downsizing would ulti-
mately harm performance, or because they saw it as a
signal of
looming financial problems. However,
changes in their beliefs about firms’ future perfor-
mance prospects should have been well reflected in
earnings expectations changes and stock price
changes. This is particularly true for analysts.7

Models 2 through 6 in Table 3 test hypotheses
subsequent to Hypothesis 1 by separately adding
interaction terms to model 1. Model 2 examines
whether stock market reaction to downsizing posi-
tively moderated the practice’s main effect on firm
reputation, as was posited in Hypothesis 2. The
coefficient for the interaction of downsizing and
stock market reaction is highly significant (p ⬍
.001) and positive, supporting Hypothesis 2. This
moderating effect is substantial. A market reaction
to a downsizing that is one standard deviation
above the mean (⫹5.3%) is associated with a rank-
ing loss of only 0.30, whereas a market reaction one
standard deviation more negative than the mean
(⫺8.6%) is associated with a much larger ranking
loss of 1.11. The downsizing coefficient (⫺0.61) is
the practice’s estimated main effect when the stock
market reaction to the downsizing is zero. This
coefficient is only slightly reduced from its ⫺0.71
value in model 1. Thus, although our test of Hy-
pothesis 2 affirms the idea that downsizing’s tech-
nical efficacy moderated its reputational conse-
quences, it simultaneously provides further evidence
that its effects cannot be reduced to performance
concerns.

Model 3 examines whether recent changes
in a firm’s performance moderate downsizing’s

7 We conducted two additional analyses that also ad-
dress the potential validity of the weak-form technical
efficacy argument. First, we analyzed downsizing’s effect
in the absence of performance controls and found a co-
efficient of ⫺0.86. The relatively modest decrease in the
size of this coefficient when financial controls are in-
cluded (to ⫺0.71, as in model 1) suggests that perfor-
mance factors did not dominate audiences’ evaluations
of downsizing firms. Second, we ran supplementary
models that controlled for a firm’s future (i.e., postdown-
sizing) performance, in addition to prior and contempo-
raneous performance. If downsizing firms as a group had
relatively poor economic prospects that were not suffi-
ciently accounted for by our other controls, we reasoned
that these prospects would be realized in future years.
We included measures of firm performance in each of the
three years following the downsizing year and found that
the main effect of downsizing remained essentially un-
changed. This finding also undermines the idea that per-
formance expectations can explain downsizing’s overall
effect on reputation.


9
1

8
1

7
1

6
1

5
1

4
1

3
1

2
1

1
1

0
1

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

.

d
.
s

n
a
e
M

e
l
b
a
i
r
a
V

a
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C
d
n
a

2

E
L
B
A
T

,
s
n
o
i
t
a
i
v
e
D
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
S

,
s
n
a
e
M

0
1

.

0
2

.

4
0
⫺

.

6
2

.

8
2

7
3

.

.

2
1

8
1

.

.

6
0

8
2

.

.

8
0

8
1

.

.

3
1

.

3
0
⫺

.

8
0

.

3
1
⫺

.

7
0

.

7
0
⫺

.

6
0

.

6
0
⫺

.

4
0

.

3
0
⫺

.

0
0

3
1

.

.

0
1
⫺

8
0
⫺

.

.

3
3

.

1
2

.

8
2

.

7
2

.

9
0

.

4
1

.

1
4

.

5
0
⫺

.

1
0
⫺

.

4
0

.

1
0
.

7
1
.

5
4
.

5
0
.
⫺

2
0
.

3
1
.
⫺

7
0
.
⫺

3
0
.
⫺

9
0
.

0
1
.

0
0
.

9
0
.

1
3
.

3
2
.

4
3
.

1
0
.

6
1
.
⫺

4
0
.
⫺

0
1
.
⫺

7
0
.
⫺

2
0
.

7
0
.
⫺

4
0
.
⫺

6
0
.
⫺

3
0
.
⫺

7
1
.
⫺

3
0
.
⫺

1
1
.
⫺

1
0
.
⫺

4
0
.
⫺

1
1
.
⫺

6
0
.

3
0
.

3
0
.
⫺

4
0
.
⫺

1
0
.

7
0
.
⫺

4
0
.

2
0
.

4
0
.
⫺

3
0
.

4
0
.

8
1
.
⫺

1
0
.

4
0
.
⫺

3
1
.

2
0
.

3
0
.

7
3
.

6
0
.
⫺

2
1
.

1
0
.

5
0
.

7
0
.

9
0
.

0
0
.

8
0
.

0
1
.
⫺

3
0
.

6
0
.
⫺

1
0
.

5
0
.
⫺

4
0
.

8
0
.
⫺

2
0
.

2
0
.
⫺

3
0
.
⫺

9
0
.

8
0
.

2
0
.
⫺

5
0
.
⫺

6
0
.
⫺

4
0
.
⫺

4
0
.

3
0
.

1
1
.

1
0
.
⫺

7
0
.
⫺

3
0
.

8
0
.
⫺

6
0
.

4
0
.

3
1
.
⫺

9
0
.

0
0
.

3
0
.

5
2
.
⫺

8
1

.

7
2
⫺

.

1
0

.

1
0
⫺

.

5
0

8
2

.

.

0

0

0
0
0

0

3
0

0
⫺

.

.

1
2
⫺

.

6
0

.

5
0
⫺

.

4
9

6
3

2
7

.

.

.

2

0

2

0
7

5
1

4
2

.

.

.

5

0

0
⫺

g
n
i
k
n
a
r

y
r
t
s
u
d
n
i
-
n
i
h
t
i

W

k
c
o
t
s
⫻
g
n
i
z
i
s
n
w
o
D

g
n
i
z
i
s
n
w
o
D

0
0

.

5
3

.

7
0

.

1

0
0
0

.

0

4
2
⫺

.

3
0
⫺

.

3
0

.

0

2
0
0

.

0
⫺

e
g
n
a
h
c

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
t
i
f
o
r
p

r
o
i
r
p
⫻
g
n
i
z
i
s
n
w
o
D

n
o
i
t
c
a
e
r

t
e
k
r
a
m

⫻
g
n
i
z
i
s
n
w
o
D

e
c
n
e
l
a
v
e
r
p
⫻
g
n
i
z
i
s
n
w
o
D

t
e
k
r
a
m
⫻
g
n
i
z
i
s
n
w
o
D

e
c
n
e
l
a
v
e
r
p
⫻
n
o
i
t
c
a
e
r

⫻
e
g
n
a
h
c

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
t
i
f
o
r
p

⫻
g
n
i
z
i
s
n
w
o
D

g
n
i
k
n
a
r

8
0
.

7
2
.
⫺

3
0
.

9
0
.
⫺

5
0
.

6
0

.

2
0

.

0
0

.

0
0

.

0

5
0
.
⫺

6
1
.
⫺

4
1
.
⫺

8
6

.

6
0
⫺

.

6
2

.

0

7
0

.

0

’
s
t
s
y
l
a
n
a
⫻
g
n
i
z
i
s
n
w
o
D

e
c
n
e
l
a
v
e
r
p

6
4
.

6
0
.
⫺

1
2
.
⫺

4
0
.

5
0
.

2
2
.

0
0
.

0
1
.

3
0
.
⫺

3
0
.
⫺

1
0
.
⫺

4
0
.

1
0
.
⫺

6
0
.

6
0
.

5
0

.

1
1
⫺

.

5
1
⫺

.

6
0
⫺

.

1
0
.
⫺

9
0
⫺

.

7
0
.

1
0
.

6
0
.

1
0
.

4
0
.
⫺

2
0
.
⫺

5
2
⫺

.

6
1
⫺

.

7
0
⫺

7
1
⫺

.

.

8
0

1
0

.

.

8
8

1
0

.

.

3
9

4
0

.

.

2

0

0
0

0

2
0
0

0
⫺

.

.

0
0

.

3
1

.

5
1

.

2
1

.

6
1

.

4
0

.

0

2
2

.

0

4
2

.

0

7
1

.

0

6
1

.

0

2
0
0

.

0
⫺

7
0

.

0

7
0

.

0

7
0

.

0
⫺

7
0

.

0
⫺

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l
a
t
i
p
a
c

1
⫺

t

o
t

2
⫺

t

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l
a
t
i
p
a
c

t

o
t

1
⫺

t

e
g
n
a
h
c

t
e
k
r
a
M

e
g
n
a
h
c

t
e
k
r
a
M

e
g
n
a
h
c

1
⫺

t

o
t

2
⫺

t

s
n
o
i
t
a
t
c
e
p
x
e

s
g
n
i
n
r
a
E

s
n
o
i
t
a
t
c
e
p
x
e

s
g
n
i
n
r
a
E

t

o
t

1
⫺

t

e
g
n
a
h
c

g
n
i
k
n
a
r

r
o
i
r
P

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
t
i
f
o
r
P

g
n
i
k
n
a
r

t

o
t

1
⫺

t

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
t
i
f
o
r
P

e
g
n
a
h
c

3
3

6
2

.

.

4
3

0
0

.

.

6
0

8
0

.

.

0

0

5
1

1
0

.

.

0

0

1
⫺

t

o
t

2
⫺

t

s
r
a
e
y

3

,

A
O
R
e
g
a
r
e
v
A

,

h
t
w
o
r
g

s
e
l
a
s

e
g
a
r
e
v
A

e
g
n
a
h
c

5
8

4
1

.

.

0

0

0
3

2
0

.

.

9

0

r
o
i
r
p

n
i

t
n
e
m
e
c
n
u
o
n
n
A

e
z
i
s

m

r
i
F

s
r
a
e
y

3

,

.
2
3
2
1
⫽
n
a

r
e
b
m
e
c
e
D

.

.

.

1

2

3

.

4

.

5

.

.

6

7

.

8

.

9

.

.

0
1

1
1

.

2
1

.

3
1

.

4
1

.

5
1

.

6
1

.

.

7
1

8
1

.

.

9
1

0
2


)
6
3

.

0
(

*
*
0
9

.

0

)
6
3

.

0
(

*
3
8
0

.

)
5
3
0
(

.

*
6
8
0

.

)
2
3
0
(

.

*
*
9
9
.
0

)
3
3
.
0
(

*
*
2
0
.
1

)
2
3
.
0
(

*
*
8
9
.
0

)
3
3
.
0
(

*
*
4
0
.
1

)
5
3
.
0
(

*
3
8

.

0

)
2
3

.

0
(

*
*
9
9

.

0

)
6
4
0
(

.

0
6
0

.

)
6
4

.

0
(

8
5
0

.

)
7
4
0
(

.

9
5
0

.

)
2
5
0
(

.

8
5
.
0

)
0
5
.
0
(

7
5
.
0

)
2
5
.
0
(

6
5
.
0

)
0
5
.
0
(

8
4
.
0

)
9
4
.
0
(

7
6

.

0

)
2
5

.

0
(

8
5

.

0

)
3
6

.

0
(

*
*
0
8

.

1

)
5
6
0
(

.

*
*
1
8
1

.

)
4
6
0
(

.

*
*
0
8
1

.

)
8
6
0
(

.

*
0
7
.
1

)
6
6
.
0
(

*
*
4
7
.
1

)
8
6
.
0
(

*
0
7
.
1

)
7
6
.
0
(

*
*
5
7
.
1

)
8
6
.
0
(

*
2
6

.

1

)
9
6

.

0
(

*
8
6

.

1

.

)
8
5
0
(
*
*
*
6
6

.

2

)
4
5

.

0
(

*
*
*
4
5
2

.

)
5
5

.

0
(
*
*
*
6
5
2

.

)
6
4
0
(

.

*
*
*
5
0
.
2

)
4
4
.
0
(

*
*
*
5
1
.
2

)
8
4
.
0
(

*
*
*
2
1
.
2

)
9
4
.
0
(

*
*
*
7
2
.
2

)
3
4
.
0
(

*
*
*
0
2

.

2

)
4
4

.

0
(

*
*
*
5
0

.

2

.

)
4
9
0
(
*
*
*
2
3
6

.

)
8
8
0
(

.

*
*
*
6
9
5

.

.

)
8
8
0
(
*
*
*
7
9
5

.

.

)
9
9
0
(
*
*
*
5
0
.
6

)
7
9
.
0
(
*
*
*
1
1
.
6

)
5
9
.
0
(

*
*
*
4
1
.
6

)
5
9
.
0
(

*
*
*
1
9
.
5

)
1
9
.
0
(

*
*
*
0
2

.

6

)
6
9

.

0
(

*
*
*
9
0

.

6

)
4
0
1
(

.

5
5

.

0

)
2
0
1
(

.

1
5
0

.

)
3
0
1
(

.

0
5
0

.

)
2
0
1
(

.

9
5
.
0

)
0
0
.
1
(

6
5
.
0

)
1
0
.
1
(

8
6
.
0

)
3
0
.
1
(

5
7
.
0

)
2
0
.
1
(

2
5

.

0

)
1
0

.

1
(

4
6

.

0

.

)
0
1
0
(
*
*
*
4
3
0

.

)
7
6
0
(

.

.

1
1
0
⫺

)
0
1

.

0
(

)
3
5
0
(

.

*
*
*
5
3

.

0

.

5
1
0
⫺

)
0
1

.

0
(

)
5
5
0
(

.

*
*
*
4
3
0

.

.

2
2
0
⫺

)
0
1

.

0
(

)
6
6
0
(

.

*
*
1
3
.
0

4
2
.
0
⫺

)
0
1
.
0
(

)
9
6
.
0
(

*
*
0
3
.
0

1
3
.
0
⫺

)
0
1
.
0
(

)
2
6
.
0
(

*
*
1
3
.
0

2
2
.
0
⫺

)
1
1
.
0
(

)
4
6
.
0
(

*
*
3
3
.
0

5
2
.
0
⫺

)
1
1
.
0
(

)
1
6
.
0
(

*
*
*
4
3

0

.

.

8
1

0
⫺

)
0
1

)
7
6

.

.

0
(

0
(

*
*
1
3

0

4
2

0
⫺

.

.

9

l
e
d
o
M

8

l
e
d
o
M

7

l
e
d
o
M

6

l
e
d
o
M

5

l
e
d
o
M

4

l
e
d
o
M

3

l
e
d
o
M

2

l
e
d
o
M

1

l
e
d
o
M

s
i
s
e
h
t
o
p
y
H

a
s
g
n
i
k
n
a
R
e
n
u
t
r
o
F

3

E
L
B
A
T

y
r
t
s
u
d
n
I
-
n
i
h
t
i

W
n
o

g
n
i
z
i
s
n
w
o
D

f
o

e
c
n
e
u
l
f
n
I

f
o

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A
n
o
i
s
s
e
r
g
e
R
c
i
t
s
i
g
o
L

d
e
r
e
d
r
O
-
k
n
a
R

f
o

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

)
6
2
0
(

.

†
4
4
0
⫺

.

)
5
2
0
(

.

†
2
4
0
⫺

.

)
5
2
0
(

.

†
2
4
0
⫺

.

)
4
2
0
(

.

†
2
4
.
0
⫺

)
4
6
1
(

.

*
*
8
7
3

.

)
0
8
1
(

.

*
0
6
3

.

)
5
7

.

1
(

*
7
5
3

.

)
1
7
.
1
(

*
5
0
.
3

)
6
0

.

0
(
*
*
*
0
2
0

.

)
5
0

.

0
(

*
*
*
2
2

.

0

.

)
5
0
0
(
*
*
*
0
2
0

.

)
4
0
.
0
(

*
*
*
2
2
.
0

)
2
2
3
(

.

*
*
*
8
0
1
⫺

.

)
0
4
(

.

.

*
*
5
1
1
⫺

)
2
4
(

.

.

*
*
9
1
1
⫺

)
5
.
3
(

*
*
*
9
.
1
1
⫺

)
2
0

.

0
(
*
*
*
8
0
0

.

)
8
1
0
(

.

*
*
*
9
5
0
⫺

.

.

)
2
0
0
(
*
*
*
9
0
0

.

)
9
1

.

0
(

*
*
7
5
0
⫺

.

)
7
1
0
(

.

)
2
0
0
(

.

*
*
*
8
0
0

.

*
*
*
2
6
0
⫺

.

)
9
1

.

0
(

*
*
0
5
.
0
⫺

)
7
1
.
0
(

*
*
*
0
8
.
0
⫺

)
8
1
.
0
(

*
*
3
8
.
0
⫺

)
3
1
.
0
(

*
*
*
6
7
.
0
⫺

)
3
1
.
0
(

)
2
0
.
0
(

*
*
*
1
6

*
*
*
6
0

.

.

0

0
⫺

.

)
4
0
0
(
*
*
*
7
7
0

.

.

)
6
6
4
(

*
4
9
7

.

)
1
2

.

2
(

3
3
3

.

)
1
2
0
(

.

1
2
0

.

)
4
0

.

0
(

)
5
2
2
(

.

*
*
*
7
7

.

0

4
4
3

.

)
4
0

.

0
(

)
6
2
2
(

.

*
*
*
7
7

.

0

0
6
3

.

)
4
0
0
(

.

)
3
1
2
(

.

*
*
*
7
7
.
0

2
6
.
0

)
4
0
.
0
(

)
8
1
.
2
(

*
*
*
7
7
.
0

7
7
.
0

)
4
0
.
0
(
*
*
*
5
7
.
0

)
0
2
.
2
(

6
9
.
0

)
4
0
.
0
(

)
2
2
.
2
(

*
*
*
8
7
.
0

8
1
.
3

)
4
0
.
0
(

)
4
1
.
2
(

*
*
*
7
7

3
5

.

.

0

0

)
4
0

)
7
1

.

.

0
(

2
(

*
*
*
7
7

0

6
5

.

.

)
4
1

.

0
(

*
*
*
1
7

.

0
⫺

1

2

3

4

5

7

)
7
7
1
(

.

.

0
9
0
⫺

)
4
7
1
(

.

.

6
9
0
⫺

)
4
7
1
(

.

.

5
0
1
⫺

)
9
5

.

1
(

5
6
.
0

)
6
5
.
1
(

1
5
.
0

)
2
5
.
1
(

5
5
.
0

)
2
6
.
1
(

8
1
.
0
⫺

)
2
5
.
1
(

7
2

.

0

)
6
5

.

1
(

4
6

.

0

t

o
t

b
n
o
i
t
c
a
e
r

t
e
k
r
a
m

k
c
o
t
s
⫻
g
n
i
z
i
s
n
w
o
D

⫻
g
n
i
z
i
s
n
w
o
D

g
n
i
z
i
s
n
w
o
D

e
g
n
a
h
c

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
t
i
f
o
r
p

r
o
i
r
p
⫻
g
n
i
z
i
s
n
w
o
D

b
g
n
i
k
n
a
r

’
s
t
s
y
l
a
n
a

⫻
g
n
i
z
i
s
n
w
o
D

b
e
c
n
e
l
a
v
e
r
p

⫻
g
n
i
z
i
s
n
w
o
D

g
n
i
k
n
a
r

1
⫺

t

o
t

2
⫺

t

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l
a
t
i
p
a
c

e
g
n
a
h
c

t
e
k
r
a
M

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l
a
t
i
p
a
c

t
e
k
r
a
M

t

o
t

1
⫺

t

e
g
n
a
h
c

s
n
o
i
t
a
t
c
e
p
x
e

1
⫺

t

o
t

2
⫺

t

e
g
n
a
h
c

e
g
n
a
h
c

s
g
n
i
n
r
a
E

t

o
t

1
⫺

t

s
n
o
i
t
a
t
c
e
p
x
e

s
g
n
i
n
r
a
E

1
⫺

t

o
t

,

h
t
w
o
r
g

2
⫺

t

e
g
n
a
h
c

,

A
O
R
e
g
a
r
e
v
A

s
e
l
a
s

e
g
a
r
e
v
A

s
r
a
e
y

3

r
e
b
m
e
c
e
D
r
o
i
r
p

n
i

t
n
e
m
e
c
n
u
o
n
n
A

s
r
a
e
y

3

e
z
i
s

m

r
i
F

g
n
i
k
n
a
r

r
o
i
r
P

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
t
i
f
o
r
P

1
⫺

t

e
g
n
a
h
c

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
t
i
f
o
r
P

e
h
T

.
s
l
e
d
o
m
e
s
e
h
t

n
i

r
a
e
p
p
a

t
o
n

o
d

)
y
l
t
c
e
r
r
o
c
(

y
e
h
t

,
y
l
t
n
e
u
q
e
s
n
o
C

.
a
t
a
d

e
h
t

f
o

e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s

p
u
o
r
g

e
h
t

h
g
u
o
r
h
t

r
o
f

d
e
l
l
o
r
t
n
o
c

e
r
a

s
g
n
i
t
a
r

’
s
t
s
y
l
a
n
a

d
n
a

e
c
n
e
l
a
v
e
r
p

.
t
n
e
v
e

g
n
i
z
i
s
n
w
o
d

a

f
o

e
c
n
e
s
e
r
p

e
h
t

s
e
i
l
p
m

i

n
o
i
t
i
n
i
f
e
d

s
’

m
r
e
t

s
i
h
t

s
a

,

n
o
i
t
c
a
e
r

t
e
k
r
a
m
k
c
o
t
s

r
o
f

m
r
e
t

e
s
a
b

o
n

o
s
l
a

s
i

e
r
e
h
T

.
l
i
a
t
e
d

e
r
o
m
n
i

s
i
h
t

s
e
s
s
u
c
s
i
d

t
x
e
t

r
o
f

e
h
t

s

m
r
e
t

e
s
a
b

e
h
T
b

f
o

n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A

0
1

.

5
0

.

1
0

.

1
0
0
.

⬍
p

†

⬍
p
*

⬍
p
*
*

⬍
p
*
*
*

.

2
1
4
7
4
⫺

.

5
5
5
7
4
⫺

.

7
0
6
7
4
⫺

5
7
.
1
9
4
⫺

2
4
.
0
9
4
⫺

8
7
.
7
8
4
⫺

6
2
.
8
8
4
⫺

5
3

.

8
8
4
⫺

9
4

.

2
9
4
⫺

d
o
o
h
i
l
e
k
i
l
-
g
o
L

.
s
e
s
e
h
t
n
e
r
a
p

n
i

e
r
a

s
n
o
i
t
a
i
v
e
d

d
r
a
d
n
a
t
S

,

.
2
3
2
1
⫽
n
a

.
s
e
s
a
c

r
e
h
t
o

n
i

s
t
s
e
t

d
e
l
i
a
t
-
o
w

t

,

n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d

d
e
t
c
i
d
e
r
p

e
h
t

n
i

s
a
w

t
n
e
i
c
i
f
f
e
o
c

g
n
i
t
l
u
s
e
r

e
h
t

d
n
a

e
d
a
m

s
a
w
s
i
s
e
h
t
o
p
y
h

a

e
r
e
h
w
s
t
s
e
t

d
e
l
i
a
t

e
n
O


328

Academy of Management Journal

April

Estimated Change in Industry Ranking after Downsizing

FIGURE 1

Year of Downsizing

85 

86 

87 

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

0.00 

–0.20 

–0.40 

Estimated
Change in
Ranking   

–0.60 

–0.80 

–1.00 

–1

.20 

–1

.40 

reputational impact. The coefficient for the inter-
action of downsizing with performance change is
negative and highly significant (p ⬍ .001). This
result strongly supports Hypothesis 3, which pre-
dicted that reputation-granting audiences will eval-
uate a downsizing firm less negatively if its recent
performance was declining, and vice versa. The
size of the coefficient indicates that a one standard
deviation drop in ROA during the downsizing year
(i.e., an ROA decline of 3.5%) is associated with a
0.42 (11.9 ⫻ 3.5%) reduction in downsizing’s im-
pact on a firm’s ranking. This reduction is substan-
tial—it is more than half the average ranking loss
(0.71, from model 1) sustained by firms in our
sample.

Model 4 examines whether a firm’s prior reputa-
tional ranking conditioned the main effect of down-
sizing. The coefficient for this interactive term
(downsizing ⫻ prior ranking) supports Hypothesis
4, which posited a positive moderating effect.
Highly ranked firms experienced less reputational
damage from downsizing. Each one-position in-
crease in prior ranking was associated with a 0.23
reduction in ranking loss. Thus, a downsizing firm
ranked two positions above the mean in its indus-
try is predicted to experience a 0.25 loss in reputa-
tion (0.71 ⫺ 0.46 ⫽ 0.25), and a firm ranked two
positions below the mean will experience a 1.17

loss (0.71 ⫹ 0.46 ⫽ 1.17). The magnitude of this
effect is considerable, and its direction is also note-
worthy. The simple logic of regression to the mean
might predict that high-ranked firms would expe-
rience greater loss merely because they have further
to fall. Model 4 does not support this prediction.

Model 5 assesses whether downsizing’s prevalence
moderated its reputational impact. The coefficient for
the downsizing by prevalence term is both positive
and significant, supporting Hypothesis 5. Downsiz-
ing’s effects on corporate reputation became strik-
ingly less negative as the practice spread over time,
with the predicted ranking loss changing from ⫺1.33
(p ⬍ .001) in 1985 to only ⫺0.25 (n.s.) in 1994 (sig-
nificance levels given are from similar models with
the zero point of the prevalence term shifted to 1985
and 1994, respectively). Figure 1 presents a graphical
representation of this shift.

Model 6 tests Hypothesis 7, which predicts that
analysts’ evaluations of downsizing firms will be
more positive than those of executives. The coeffi-
cient for the interaction of downsizing and analysts
(⫺0.42) indicates that, contrary to prediction, ana-
lysts’ reactions were more negative than execu-
tives’ were. The downsizing coefficient in model 6
(at ⫺0.50) now represents the average postdown-
sizing change in executives’ rankings (as they are
the omitted class), whereas the average change in


2009

Love and Kraatz

329

Estimated Change in Industry Ranking after Downsizinga

FIGURE 2

Year of Downsizing

85 

86

87

88

89

90

91

92 

93

94

Downsizing firm with recent profitability decline (80th percentile case: ROA 
down 4.2%)
Downsizing firm with recent profitability increase (20th percentile case: ROA 
up 1.4%)

Estimated
Change in
Ranking   

0

–0.4

–0.8

–1.2

–1.6

–2

a Note that the ROA percentage amounts reflect the 80th and 20th percentile case of downsizing firm-years within the sample, rather

than the sample as a whole.

analysts’ rankings is the sum of the two coefficients
(⫺0.42 ⫹ ⫺0.50 ⫽ ⫺0.92). It is necessary to be
cautious in interpreting these results, however, as
this effect was not hypothesized and as the ⫺0.42
coefficient is only marginally significant (p ⬍ .09
under the appropriate post hoc two-tailed test).
However, given analysts’ vocal advocacy of down-
sizing, the fact that they were marginally more neg-
ative than executives is perhaps less important
than the fact that they were negative, in general.

Model 7 simultaneously incorporates the five in-
teraction variables from models 2 through 6. The
results change little when these interactions are
simultaneously estimated. This model also serves
as a baseline for models 8 and 9. These two models
incorporate triple interaction terms as a test of Hy-
pothesis 6’s prediction that the moderating effects
of stock market reaction and recent firm perfor-
mance changes will dissipate as downsizing grows
more prevalent. Model 8 shows an insignificant
coefficient
for the downsizing by market reac-
tion by prevalence term, indicating no support for
Hypothesis 6 where stock market reaction is con-
cerned. Audiences apparently continued to incor-
porate stock market reactions into their evalua-
tions, even as downsizing became widespread.
However, model 9 shows a positive and significant

coefficient for the triple interaction term downsiz-
ing by profitablility change by prevalence, support-
ing Hypothesis 6. Figure 2 graphically illustrates
this finding.
It shows that recent performance
changes strongly moderated downsizing’s reputa-
tional impact early in the study period, but had
essentially no moderating effect by 1994, when
downsizing had become widespread.

DISCUSSION

Our purpose in this study was threefold. We set
out to examine reputational flows, to identify firm
actions that precipitate them, and to elucidate the
underlying theoretical mechanisms responsible for
reputational change. We identified three prominent
perspectives in previous research (reputation as
character, as symbolic conformity, and as technical
efficacy) and used them to develop distinct expla-
nations for reputational change. Each of the three
accounts offered its own insights about the types of
actions likely to enhance or damage reputation,
about the types of signals reputation-granting audi-
ences attend to, and about the core evaluative logic
they use in evaluating a firm and encoding its ac-
tions into its reputation. We used these three ex-
planations to develop both competing and comple-


330

Academy of Management Journal

April

mentary hypotheses about downsizing’s effects on
reputation. Three competing hypotheses (Hypoth-
eses 1a–1c) sought to identify the “dominant mech-
anism” behind downsizing’s reputational conse-
quences. In our subsequent integrative hypotheses,
we posited moderating relationships and drew
upon multiple theoretical explanations, working
from the idea that audiences may attend to second-
ary signals and employ multiple logics.

Our study’s core finding is that downsizing ex-
erted a significant, negative effect on year-to-year
reputational change. Downsizing firms lost an av-
erage of over two-thirds of a position (0.71) in in-
traindustry rankings, net of all control variables.
This core finding is strongly supportive of the char-
acter explanation, according to which audiences
highly value trustworthiness and respond nega-
tively to opportunistic acts. At one level, this effect
is not particularly surprising or noteworthy. The
reputation-as-character perspective is well estab-
lished in the literature and clearly leads to predic-
tion of this result. However, this central finding is
more remarkable when we observe it through the
lens of the other two perspectives we elaborated.
Downsizing fairly clearly signaled a lack of com-
mitment to constituencies, but this was neither the
only message it conveyed nor the most obviously
relevant one. Similarly, although it is not theoreti-
cally surprising that some people attributed oppor-
tunism to downsizing firms, it is quite surprising
that these particular evaluators appeared to do so.
Downsizing enjoyed a very high level of symbolic
appropriateness within the cultural milieu of ana-
lysts and executives, and many prominent figures
in this field explicitly advocated it. Nonetheless,
members of this field lowered their opinions about
the overall quality of the firms that adopted the
practice. As our results show, this effect cannot
be attributed to downsizings’ observable perfor-
mance antecedents or consequences. It appears to
be largely independent of performance factors.

Our study’s overall pattern of results also sug-
gests a theoretical contribution that belies the
simplicity and intuitiveness of its main finding.
Although analysts and executives clearly took char-
acter into account in adjusting the reputations of
downsizing firms, it was not the only signal they
considered, and they did not weight it equally in all
times and all cases. As Figure 1 shows, downsizing
had a strongly negative effect at the outset of the
study period: this effect almost completely dissi-
pated by 1994. This large decrease in effect suggests
that changing cultural norms may play a key role in
determining what counts as an opportunistic act.
Though downsizing never acquired the positive
reputational valence posited under the symbolic

conformity explanation, it did appear to shed its
negative connotations as it became more and more
ubiquitous. Proactive downsizings also appeared to
become more acceptable over time, in keeping with
the symbolic conformity logic of Hypothesis 6.
Stock market reaction to downsizing events also
strongly conditioned their effects on reputation.
Downsizers with excess returns that were one stan-
dard deviation above the mean lost only 0.30 places
in their intraindustry rankings, on average. In
contrast, those with excess returns one standard
deviation below the mean lost an average of 1.11
positions. Downsizing’s increasing symbolic ap-
propriateness did not mitigate this effect, contrary
to Hypothesis 6. Thus, it is evident that our audi-
ences did take downsizing’s technical efficacy into
account, if only as a secondary criterion. This find-
ing suggests that
the reputational damage that
results from violating commitments may be sub-
stantially meliorated provided that the violation pro-
duces valued results for evaluators. But it is impor-
tant to note that this mitigation is far from complete.
Controlling for market reaction only slightly reduces
the main effect of downsizing on reputation. Further,
negative performance consequences appear to exac-
erbate reputational damage from opportunism.

Our tests of moderating hypotheses also revealed
additional support for the character account of
reputational change. Notably, we found that proac-
tive downsizings exerted a more negative effect on
reputation, while declining performance mitigated
damage. These findings are consistent with the
character perspective, which suggests that violating
commitments is more permissible in the presence
of a clear need, but particularly problematic in its
absence. Our finding that downsizing exerted less
damage on highly reputed firms is also consistent
with the character perspective, as articulated in the
rationale for Hypothesis 4. Finally, the character
perspective is also at least implicitly bolstered by
the observed lack of support for Hypothesis 7,
which posited that the idiosyncratic cultural be-
liefs and parochial interests of analysts would
cause them to react more favorably to downsizers.
This finding seems to suggest that our two audi-
ences applied similar logics and responded to the
same signals.8

8 Arguments can also be made that analysts and exec-
utives may attend to different signals and employ dis-
tinct evaluative logics in ascribing reputations. For ex-
ample, analysts may be more focused on financial
outcomes than executives are. If so, the technical efficacy
mechanism might be relatively more influential in shap-
ing analysts’ reputational ascriptions, and the organiza-


2009

Love and Kraatz

331

It is necessary to give separate attention to the
technical efficacy account
in interpreting our
study’s overall pattern of results. According to the
strong form of this perspective, reputational change
effectively reduces to performance change. This ar-
gument implies that downsizing and other like ac-
tions are themselves epiphenomenal. Their effects
on reputation should be null, once observable mea-
sures of performance change are accounted for. We
believe our results very effectively refute this argu-
ment. We found that downsizing exerted a strong
and independent effect after we had controlled for
the powerful measures of performance change dis-
cussed above.

The weak form of this argument is considerably
more difficult to evaluate. It merely implies that
audiences will respond positively to actions that
they believe will enhance future performance. We
neither claim nor aspire to refute this interpreta-
tion; however, we do wish to make two important
comments about it. First, it hinges on the notion
that audiences have beliefs about the efficacy of
particular practices that are, at least to some extent,
independent of observable performance data. Sec-
ond, it becomes deeply entangled with other expla-
nations when one attempts to apply it empirically.
The beliefs about the efficacy of a practice held by
evaluators who are “ultimately concerned” with
performance may form as a direct result of the
cultural processes featured in the symbolic confor-
mity perspective. Similarly, these evaluators may
revile opportunistic firms because they believe
they are likely to be bad investments or business
partners. It is because of these complexities that we
focused on the strong-form argument in developing
our competing hypotheses. That argument has clear
empirical implications that are readily separable
from the other two. Some of our results might be
interpreted as consistent with the weak-form expla-
nation. However, we are reluctant to embrace the
latter, because it says nothing about the ultimate
source of beliefs regarding downsizing’s efficacy,

tional character mechanism might be relatively less so.
We did not develop hypotheses along these lines, in part
because the rationales for them are somewhat inter-
twined between the different theoretical perspectives.
However, we did perform additional analyses to explore
this issue empirically. We found that analysts and exec-
utives were not differentially responsive to stock market
reaction (Hypothesis 2) or to recent firm performance
changes (Hypothesis 3) associated with downsizings.
These (non-)results provide further evidence that the two
audiences applied similar logics and responded to the
same signals (analyses are available from the authors
upon request).

and because it makes assumptions about actors’
motivations that we cannot directly verify. Neither
of the other two explanations denies that evaluators
are concerned with technical efficacy. But they do
not reduce reputational judgments to narrow self-
interest, and they have the added advantage of pro-
viding insights about why audiences might believe
downsizing is or is not efficacious.

Our study, clearly aimed at the reputation liter-
ature, may also have some significant implications
for the large literature on downsizing and person-
nel reductions more generally. Several prior stud-
ies have concluded that firms often downsized to
gain financial constituents’ support (Useem, 1993,
1996) and have further emphasized that the prac-
tice gained substantial
legitimacy as it spread
(Lamertz & Baum, 1998; McKinley et al., 1998). Our
findings seem to introduce an interesting and
ironic wrinkle into this account. Specifically, they
suggest that while firms may have offered downsiz-
ing as a symbol of their cultural conformity and
propriety, it was typically received in a very differ-
ent spirit. Flanagan and O’Shaugnessy’s (2005) re-
cent study of the (negative) reputational effects of
personnel reductions may provide further evidence
of this irony. These authors studied a different sam-
ple of firms over a later time period and focused on
layoffs, rather than on the more specific phenom-
ena of downsizing. Nonetheless, their results were
similar in some basic ways to ours, further support-
ing the idea that audiences may react negatively to
actions undertaken with the apparent intention of
winning their favor.9

Our study’s findings may be significantly context-
bound. Downsizing was obviously a controversial
practice and a somewhat unique one. Although other
firm decisions may also evoke strong emotional re-

9 Flanagan and O’Shaughnessy (2005) did not explic-
itly engage the institutional literature on downsizing’s
diffusion and legitimation, and they also did not con-
sider the reputation as character perspective that our
study centrally features and supports. Rather, they of-
fered an explanation that approximates the weak-form
technical efficacy view. Specifically, they suggested that
audiences responded negatively to layoffs because they
believed that layoffs typically have negative performance
results. It is also important to emphasize the critical
distinction between downsizing and layoffs. We identi-
fied over 1,000 layoff events in collecting data for this
study. Fewer than 10 percent of these met our criteria for
a downsizing (firmwide, permanent, affecting ⬎1 percent
of employees, strategically oriented versus capacity bal-
ancing). Our theoretical and empirical efforts have fo-
cused specifically on this narrower category of events
and would not apply to layoffs, in general.


332

Academy of Management Journal

April

sponses, it is likely that technical efficacy and sym-
bolic conformity concerns play a more central role in
determining the reputational consequences of many
organizational actions. Future research might produc-
tively examine how changes in corporate governance,
mergers, new product launches, and/or the formation
of strategic alliances affect reputational change. Such
studies could shed further light upon reputational
flows, the actions that precipitate them, and the
mechanisms underlying reputational change. We be-
lieve that our study may provide a useful method-
ological and theoretical template for such research. It
highlights the benefits of fully dynamic designs that
examine the time-contingent effects of particular ac-
tions. It also demonstrates the gains to be realized by
bringing distinct perspectives on reputational change
to bear in the effort to explain the effects of a given
action. Future studies employing this template may
substantially further reputation scholarship and help
bridge the gap between reputation theory and related
theoretical perspectives, most notably the institu-
tional analysis of organizational legitimacy.

REFERENCES

Allison, P. D., & Christakis, N. A. 1994. Logit models for
sets of ranked items. In P. V. Marsden (Ed.), Socio-
logical methodology, vol. 24: 199 –228. Malden,
MA: Wiley.

AMA. 1994. 1994 American Management Association
survey on downsizing and assistance to displaced
workers. New York: American Management Associ-
ation.

Baumol, W. J., Blinder, A. S., & Wolff, E. N. 2003. Down-
sizing in America: Reality, causes, and conse-
quences. New York: Sage.

Beggs, S., Cardell, S., & Hausman, J. 1981. Assessing the
potential demand for electric cars. Journal of Econo-
metrics, 17: 1–19.

Blau, P. M. 1964. Exchange and power in social life.

New York: Wiley.

Brockner, J., Grover, S., Reed, T., DeWitt, R., & O’Malley,
M. 1987. Survivors’ reactions to layoffs: We get by
with a little help for our friends. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 32: 526 –541.

Brown, B., & Perry, S. 1994. Removing the financial per-
formance halo from Fortune’s “Most Admired Com-
panies.” Academy of Management Journal, 37:
1347–1359.

Brown, S. J., & Warner, J. B. 1985. Using daily stock
returns: The case of event studies. Journal of Finan-
cial Economics, 14: 3–31.

Budros, A. 2002. The mean and lean firm and downsiz-

ing: Causes of involuntary and voluntary downsizing
strategies. Sociological Forum, 17: 307–342.

Budros, A. 2004. The causes of early and later organiza-
tional adoption: The case of corporate downsizing.
Sociological Inquiry, 74: 355–380.

Cappelli, P., Bassi, L., Katz, H., Knoke, D., Osterman, P.,
& Useem, M. 1997. Change at work. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Davies, G., Chun, R., Da Silva, R., & Roper, S. 2003.
Corporate reputation and competitiveness. Lon-
don: Routledge.

Davis, G. F., Diekmann, K. A., & Tinsley, C. H. 1994. The
decline and fall of the conglomerate firm in the
1980s—The deinstitutionalization of an organization-
al form. American Sociological Review, 59: 547–
570.

De Meuse, K. P., & Tornow, W. W. 1990. The tie that
binds— has become very, very frayed! Human Re-
source Planning, 13(3): 203–213.

Deephouse, D. L. 2000. Media reputation as a strategic
resource: An integration of mass communication and
resource-based theories. Journal of Management,
26: 1091–1112.

Deephouse, D. L., & Carter, S. M. 2005. An examination
of the differences between organizational legitimacy
and organizational reputation. Journal of Manage-
ment Studies, 42: 329 –360.

DiMaggio, P. J., & Powell, W. W. 1983. The iron cage
revisited: Institutional isomorphism and collective
rationality in organizational fields. American Socio-
logical Review, 48: 147–160.

Dowling, G. R. 2001. Creating corporate reputations:
Identity, image, and performance. New York: Ox-
ford University Press.

Edelman, L. B. 1992. Legal ambiguity and symbolic struc-
tures: Organizational mediation of civil rights law.
American Journal of Sociology, 97: 1531–1576.

Fisher, A. B. 1988. The downside of downsizing. For-

tune, May 23: 42– 47.

Flanagan, D. J., & O’Shaughnessy, K. C. 2005. The effect
of layoffs on firm reputation. Journal of Manage-
ment, 31: 445– 463.

Fombrun, C. J. 1996. Reputation: Realizing value from
the corporate image. Boston: Harvard Business
School.

Fombrun, C., & Shanley, M. 1990. What’s in a name?
Reputation building and corporate strategy. Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 33: 233–258.

Fombrun, C. J., & Van Riel, C. B. M. 2004. Fame and
fortune: How successful companies build winning
reputations. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Edu-
cation.


2009

Love and Kraatz

333

Frank, R. H. 1988. Passions within reason: The strategic

role of emotions. New York: W. W. Norton.

ganizations: Frontiers of theory and research.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Freeman, R. E. 1984. Strategic management: A stake-

holder approach. Boston: Pitman.

Freeman, S. J., & Cameron, K. S. 1993. Organizational
downsizing—A convergence and reorientation frame-
work. Organization Science, 4: 10–29.

Fryxell, G. E., & Wang, J. 1994. The Fortune Corporate
Reputation Index—Reputation for what? Journal of
Management, 20(1): 1–14.

Gordon, D. M. 1996. Fat and mean: The corporate
squeeze of working Americans and the myth
of managerial “downsizing.” New York: Martin
Kessler.

Haidt, J. 2007. The new synthesis in moral psychology.

Science, 316: 998.

Hamilton, D. L., & Sherman, S. J. 1996. Perceiving per-
sons and groups. Psychological Review, 103: 336 –
355.

Hannan, M. T., & Freeman, J. 1984. Structural inertia and
organizational change. American Sociological Re-
view, 49: 149 –164.

Hauser, M. D. 2006. Moral minds: How nature designed
our universal sense of right and wrong. New York:
HarperCollins.

Hausman, J. A., & Ruud, P. A. 1987. Specifying and
testing econometric models for rank-ordered data.
Journal of Econometrics, 34: 83–104.

Heckscher, C. 1995. White-collar blues: Management
loyalties in an age of corporate restructuring. New
York: Basic Books.

Homans, G. C. 1958. Social behavior as exchange. Amer-

ican Journal of Sociology, 63: 597– 606.

Jaccard, J., Turrisi, R., & Wan, C. K. 1990. Interaction
effects in multiple regression. Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.

Jensen, M. C., & Meckling, W. M. 1976. Theory of the
firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and owner-
ship structure. Journal of Financial Economics, 3:
305–360.

Jones, T. M. 1995. Instrumental stakeholder theory: A
synthesis of ethics and economics. Academy of
Management Review, 20: 404 – 437.

Kiechel, W. 1985. Managing a downsized operation. For-

tune, July 22: 155–157.

King, B. G., & Whetten, D. A. In press. Rethinking the
relationship between reputation and legitimacy: A
social actor conceptualization. Corporate Reputa-
tion Review, 11(3): 192–207.

Lamertz, K., & Baum, J. A. C. 1998. The legitimacy of
organizational downsizing in Canada: An analysis
of explanatory media accounts. Canadian Journal
of Administrative Sciences, 15: 93–107.

Love, E. G. 2000. Changing technical and institutional
influences on adoption of an administrative practice:
Downsizing at large U.S. firms, 1977–1995. Acad-
emy of Management Best Papers Proceedings.

Markham, V. 1972. Planning the corporate reputation.

London: Bloomsbury.

McKinley, W., Mone, M. A., & Barker, V. L. 1998. Some
ideological foundations of organizational downsiz-
ing. Journal of Management Inquiry, 7: 198 –212.

Meyer, J. W., & Rowan, B. 1977. Institutional organiza-
tions: Formal structure as myth and ceremony.
American Journal of Sociology, 83: 440 – 463.

Nesse, R. M. 2001. Natural selection and the capacity for
subjective commitment. In R. M. Nesse (Ed.), Evolu-
tion and the capacity for commitment: 1– 44. New
York: Sage.

New York Times. 1996. The downsizing of America.

New York: Random House.

Nielsen, J. 1985. Special report: Management layoffs

won’t quit. Fortune, October 28: 46 – 49.

Noer, D. M. 1993. Healing the wounds: Overcoming the
trauma of layoffs and revitalizing downsized or-
ganizations. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Nohria, N., Dyer, D., & Dalzell, F. 2002. Changing for-
tunes: Remaking the industrial corporation. New
York: Wiley.

Peters, T. J., & Waterman, R. H. 1982. In search of excel-
lence: Lessons from America’s best-run compa-
nies. New York: Harper & Row.

Pollock, T. G., & Rindova, V. P. 2003. Media legitimation
effects in the market for initial public offerings.
Academy of Management Journal, 46: 631– 642.

Rao, H. 1994. The social construction of reputation—
Certification contests, legitimation, and the survival
of organizations in the American automobile indus-
try, 1895–1912. Strategic Management Journal, 15:
29 – 44.

Rindova, V. P., Williamson, I. O., Petkova, A. P., & Sever,
J. M. 2005. Being good or being known: An empirical
examination of the dimensions, antecedents, and
consequences of organizational reputation. Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 48: 1033–1049.

Roberts, P. W., & Dowling, G. R. 2002. Corporate reputa-
tion and sustained superior financial performance.
Strategic Management Journal, 23: 1077–1093.

Kramer, R. M., & Tyler, T. R. (Eds.). 1996. Trust in or-

Ross, L. 1977. The intuitive psychologist and his short-


334

Academy of Management Journal

April

comings: Distortions in the attribution process. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social
psychology, vol. 10: 173–220. New York: Academic
Press.

Ruef, M., & Scott, W. R. 1998. A multidimensional model
of organizational legitimacy: Hospital survival in
changing institutional environments. Administra-
tive Science Quarterly, 43: 877–904.

Schultz, M., Mouritsen, J., & Gabrielsen, G. 2001. Sticky
reputation: Analyzing a ranking system. Corporate
Reputation Review, 4(1): 21– 41.

Scott, W. R. 2001. Institutions and organizations (2nd

ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Selznick, P. 1957. Leadership in administration. Evans-

ton, IL: Row, Peterson.

Selznick, P. 1969. Law, society and industrial justice.

New York: Russell Sage.

Shapiro, C. 1982. Consumer information, product qual-
ity, and seller reputation. Bell Journal of Econom-
ics, 13: 20 –35.

1997. Shopping at the labour market: A real tale of
fiction. European Economic Review, 41: 295–317.

Weigelt, K., & Camerer, C. 1988. Reputation and corpo-
rate strategy—a review of recent theory and applica-
tions. Strategic Management Journal, 9: 443– 454.

Westphal, J. D., Gulati, R., & Shortell, S. M. 1997.
Customization or conformity? An institutional and
network perspective on the content and conse-
quences of TQM adoption. Administrative Sci-
ence Quarterly, 42: 366 –394.

Whetten, D. A., & Mackey, A. 2002. A social actor
conception of organizational identity and its im-
plications for the study of organizational reputa-
tion. Business and Society, 41: 393– 414.

Williams, R. J., & Barrett, J. D. 2000. Corporate philan-
thropy, criminal activity, and firm reputation: Is there
a link? Journal of Business Ethics, 26: 341–350.

Winter, L., & Uleman, J. S. 1984. When are social judg-
ments made? Evidence for the spontaneousness of
trait inferences. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 47: 237–252.

Shapiro, C. 1983. Premiums for high quality products as
returns to reputations. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, 98: 659 – 679.

Zuckerman, E. W. 1999. The categorical imperative: Se-
curities analysts and the illegitimacy discount.
American Journal of Sociology, 104: 1398 –1438.

Staw, B. M., & Epstein, L. D. 2000. What bandwagons
bring: Effects of popular management techniques on
corporate performance, reputation, and CEO pay.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 45: 523–556.

Thurow, L. C. 1986. White-collar overhead. Across the

Board, 23(11): 24 –32.

Tichy, N. M., & Sherman, S. 1993. Control your destiny
or someone else will: How Jack Welch is making
General Electric the world’s most competitive cor-
poration. New York: Doubleday.

Tolbert, P. S., & Zucker, L. G. 1983. Institutional sources
of change in formal structure of organizations: The
diffusion of civil service reform. Administrative Sci-
ence Quarterly, 28: 22–39.

Tolbert, P. S., & Zucker, L. G. 1996. The institutionaliza-
tion of institutional theory. In S. Clegg & C. Hardy
(Eds.), Handbook of organization studies: 174 –190.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Tomasko, R. M. 1987. Downsizing: Reshaping the cor-
poration for the future (updated ed.). New York:
AMACOM.

Useem, M. 1993. Executive defense: Shareholder power
and corporate reorganization. Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press.

Useem, M. 1996. Investor capitalism: How money man-
agers are changing the face of corporate America.
New York: Basic Books.

vanBeek, K. W. H., Koopmans, C. C., & vanPraag, B. M. S.

APPENDIX

Alternative Analysis

We conducted an alternative analysis in which the
dependent variable was the raw Fortune ratings, rather
than the intraindustry rankings that we used in our
main analyses. We used the conventional fixed-effects
modeling approach in these analyses. The models in-
clude the same variables as the best-fitting model in
Table 3 (model 9) and also include dummy variables
for each year. We modeled executives’ and analysts’
ratings separately in models 1 and 2 and combined
them into a single dependent variable in model 3. This
combined score is the one that Fortune actually pub-
lished for each firm. Accordingly, the n in all three
models is 616, rather than the 1,232 in Table 3. The
downsizing by analyst interaction is also omitted, as it
cannot be estimated without separate observations for
the two groups.

All three models produce results very similar to the
main analyses. All hypotheses that were supported in
Table 3’s analyses receive at least marginally significant
support in the first two models of Table A1. These same
hypotheses were all supported at the p ⬍ .05 level in the
third (published ratings) model. The striking similarities
between the two sets of analyses provide strong evidence
that the findings of our rank-ordered logistic regression
models are robust.


2009

Love and Kraatz

TABLE A1

335

Cross-Sectional Time Series Fixed-Effects Models of Influence of Downsizing on

Fortune Reputational Ratingsa

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Variables

Hypothesis

Executives’
Ratings Only

Analysts’

Ratings Only

Combined

(Published) Ratings

1
2
3
4
5
6

Downsizing
Downsizing ⫻ stock market reaction
Downsizing ⫻ profitability change
Downsizing ⫻ prior ranking
Downsizing ⫻ prevalence
Downsizing ⫻ profitability change ⫻ prevalence
Prior ranking
Profitability change t ⫺ 1 to t
Profitability change t ⫺ 2 to t ⫺ 1
Market capitalization change t ⫺ 1 to t
Market capitalization change t ⫺ 2 to t ⫺ 1
Earnings expectation change t ⫺ 1 to t
Earnings expectation change t ⫺ 2 to t ⫺ 1
Average ROA, 3 years
Average sales growth, 3 years
Firm size
Announcement in prior December
n

⫺0.18*** (0.04)
0.009** (0.005)
⫺2.31** (0.95)
(0.04)
0.07*
0.46†
(0.35)
16.6*
(8.3)
0.66*** (0.03)
1.36** (0.52)
⫺0.14
(0.47)
0.17*
(0.07)
0.27*** (0.06)
0.28*
(0.11)
0.52*** (0.12)
2.48*** (0.57)
(0.25)
0.31
⫺0.19*
(0.08)
⫺0.07
(0.10)
616

⫺0.30*** (0.06)
0.010†
(0.007)
⫺1.73†
(1.33)
(0.05)
0.12*
(0.48)
0.81*
28.9**
(11.4)
0.49*** (0.03)
(0.71)
1.07
⫺0.39
(0.64)
0.28**
(0.10)
0.32*** (0.09)
0.81*** (0.16)
0.48*** (0.16)
2.84*** (0.77)
(0.34)
(0.11)
(0.14)

⫺0.19
⫺0.04†
0.17

⫺0.21*** (0.04)
0.011** (0.005)
⫺2.27** (0.95)
0.20*** (0.05)
(0.34)
0.74*
22.3**
(8.1)
0.66*** (0.03)
(0.51)
1.25*
⫺0.04
(0.46)
0.18** (0.07)
0.27*** (0.06)
0.48*** (0.11)
0.48*** (0.11)
2.28*** (0.56)
(0.25)
0.06
⫺0.15†
(0.08)
0.04
(0.10)

616

616

a One-tailed tests where a hypothesis was made and the result was in the expected direction, two-tailed tests otherwise. Year dummies

included but not shown.

† p ⬍ .10
* p ⬍ .05
** p ⬍ .01
*** p ⬍ .001

E. Geoffrey Love (glove@illinois.edu) is on the faculty at
the College of Business, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign. He received his Ph.D. in organizational be-
havior from Harvard University. His research interests
focus on organizational reputation and status, the role of
categories
in institutional processes, organizational
downsizing, and organizational change.

Matt Kraatz (kraatz@illinois.edu) is an associate profes-
sor in the Department of Business Administration at the
University of Illinois. His research interests include or-
ganizational adaptation, governance, identity, reputa-
tion, and other institutional processes. He received his
Ph.D. from the Kellogg Graduate School of Management
at Northwestern University.


