The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/0263-5577.htm

Green supply chain management
and organizational performance

Management Department, University of Nebraska-Lincoln,

Sang M. Lee

Lincoln, Nebraska, USA

Sung Tae Kim

International Business Department, SolBridge International School of Business,

Daejeon, South Korea, and

Donghyun Choi

Management Department, University of Nebraska-Lincoln,

Lincoln, Nebraska, USA

Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this study is to explore green supply chain management (GSCM) practices
and their relationship with organizational performance. More speciﬁcally, this research explores the
effect of GSCM efforts and other organizational factors on ﬁrm performance of small and medium
enterprises (SMEs) that serve as suppliers to large customer ﬁrms in the electronics industry.
Design/methodology/approach – This study developed a research model relating GSCM practice
and business performance through three organizational variables (employee satisfaction, operational
efﬁciency, and relational efﬁciency) as moderators. Statistical analyses were based on the data
collected, through survey questionnaires, from 223 SMEs in the electronics industry in Korea.
Reliability, validity, and goodness-of-ﬁt of the research model were tested by the widely accepted
statistical tools. To test the hypotheses relating GSCM practice implementation and business
performance, structural equation modeling was used.
Findings – The most anticipated ﬁnding of the study was a direct link between GSCM practice
implementation and business performance. However, no statistical signiﬁcance was found. Instead,
signiﬁcant indirect relationships were found between GSCM practice implementation and business
performance through mediating variables of operational efﬁciency and relational efﬁciency. This
result indicates that business performance will be improved when GSCM enhances operational
efﬁciency and operational efﬁciency.
Research limitations/implications – Research on GSCM is still at the early stage. Further
reﬁnement of the questionnaire is needed. Generalizability of the ﬁndings is also limited because of
data collected from electronics ﬁrms in Korean. This study shed several important insights. The
ﬁndings of this study are generally consistent with prior studies in other parts of the world. SMEs in
the Korean electronics industry believe that GSCM practices help generate new opportunities to attract
clients in addition to complying with the buyer ﬁrms’ demand. It was also found that implementation
of GSCM practices help improve operational and relational efﬁciencies of supplier ﬁrms.
Originality/value – Few empirical studies have been done in GSCM based on the conceptual footing
of resource dependence theory. Also, this study was conducted from the supplier’s perspective in
examining the weaknesses of SME suppliers. Thus, the authors emphasize the importance of support
from large buying ﬁrms for improving SME suppliers’ green management capabilities.

Keywords Green supply chain management, Electronics industry, Small and medium enterprises,
Business performance, Small to medium-sized enterprises, Supply chain management, Republic of Korea

Paper type Research paper

IMDS
112,8

1148

Received 13 January 2012
Revised 9 April 2012
Accepted 9 April 2012

Industrial Management & Data
Systems
Vol. 112 No. 8, 2012
pp. 1148-1180
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
0263-5577
DOI 10.1108/02635571211264609

