This article was downloaded by: [131.193.251.47] On: 02 August 2017, At: 14:36
Publisher: Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)
INFORMS is located in Maryland, USA

Management Science

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://pubsonline.informs.org
Performance Assessment of the Lead User Idea-
Generation Process for New Product Development

Gary L. Lilien, Pamela D. Morrison, Kathleen Searls, Mary Sonnack, Eric von Hippel,

To cite this article:
Gary L. Lilien, Pamela D. Morrison, Kathleen Searls, Mary Sonnack, Eric von Hippel,  (2002) Performance Assessment of
the Lead User Idea-Generation Process for New Product Development. Management Science 48(8):1042-1059. https://
doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.48.8.1042.171

Full terms and conditions of use: http://pubsonline.informs.org/page/terms-and-conditions

This article may be used only for the purposes of research, teaching, and/or private study. Commercial use

or systematic downloading (by robots or other automatic processes) is prohibited without explicit Publisher
approval, unless otherwise noted. For more information, contact permissions@informs.org.

The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy, completeness, merchantability, fitness
for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Descriptions of, or references to, products or publications, or
inclusion of an advertisement in this article, neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee, endorsement, or
support of claims made of that product, publication, or service.

© 2002 INFORMS

Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages

INFORMS is the largest professional society in the world for professionals in the fields of operations research, management
science, and analytics.
For more information on INFORMS, its publications, membership, or meetings visit http://www.informs.org


Performance Assessment of the Lead

User Idea-Generation Process
for New Product Development

Gary L. Lilien • Pamela D. Morrison • Kathleen Searls

Mary Sonnack • Eric von Hippel

Smeal College of Business Administration, Pennsylvania State University,

University Park, Pennsylvania 16802

Faculty of Commerce and Economics, University of New South Wales, Sydney NSW 2052, Australia

Strategic Services, ASI Associates, 333 N. Washington Avenue, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55401

3M Company, 7840 Mississippi Lane, Brooklyn Park, Minnesota 55444-2152

MIT Sloan School of Management, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
G5L@psu.edu • pamm@unsw.edu.au • ksearls@asiassociates.com

mds44@mninter.net • evhippel@mit.edu

Traditional idea generation techniques based on customer input usually collect informa-

tion on new product needs from a random or typical set of customers. The “lead user
process” takes a different approach. It collects information about both needs and solutions
from users at the leading edges of the target market, as well as from users in other markets
that face similar problems in a more extreme form. This paper reports on a natural experi-
ment conducted within the 3M Company on the effect of the lead user (LU) idea-generation
process relative to more traditional methods. 3M is known for its innovation capabilities—
and we ﬁnd that the LU process appears to improve upon those capabilities. Annual sales
of LU product ideas generated by the average LU project at 3M are conservatively projected
to be $146 million after ﬁve years—more than eight times higher than forecast sales for the
average contemporaneously conducted “traditional” project. Each funded LU project is pro-
jected to create a new major product line for a 3M division. As a direct result, divisions
funding LU project ideas are projecting their highest rate of major product line generation
in the past 50 years.
(New Product Development; Lead Users; Idea Generation)

Introduction

1.
Many ﬁrms generate new product ideas based on
information collected from current or potential users.
What distinguishes such “customer-focused” pro-
cesses across companies is the kind of information
they collect and the respondents from whom they
collect it. Traditional market research techniques col-
lect information from users at the center of the target
market. The “lead user” (LU) process takes a differ-
ent approach, collecting information about both needs

and solutions from the leading edges of the target
market and from markets facing similar problems in
a more extreme form.

The research question we address in this paper is:
How does the LU process actually perform relative
to more traditionally used methods? We are moti-
vated to explore this matter by accumulating evi-
dence that ideas generated by traditionally used pro-
cesses are rarely breakthroughs, tending instead to
be marginal contributors to ﬁrms’ product portfolios

Management Science © 2002 INFORMS
Vol. 48, No. 8, August 2002 pp. 1042–1059

0025-1909/02/4808/1042$5.00
1526-5501 electronic ISSN

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 14:36 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
LILIEN, MORRISON, SEARLS, SONNACK, AND VON HIPPEL

Performance Assessment of Lead User Data

(Eliashberg et al. 1997). This evidence has heightened
interest in nontraditional techniques in general, and in
novel idea-generation techniques in particular (Gold-
enberg et al. 2001). Our research involves a natural
experiment conducted within 3M divisions to quan-
titatively compare outcomes produced by LU idea-
generation projects with those of projects using more
conventional approaches.

The LU method as conducted at 3M involves iden-
tifying and learning from lead users both within the
target market and in “advanced analog” markets that
have similar needs in a more extreme form. We ﬁnd
that this method generates breakthrough new prod-
ucts at a higher rate than methods traditionally used
at 3M. Annual sales for the average funded LU project
idea was forecast by management to be $146 million
in year ﬁve—more than eight times higher than pro-
jected sales for contemporaneous traditional projects.
Funded ideas from a total of only ﬁve LU idea-
generation projects were conservatively projected to
yield $730 M in incremental annual sales for 3M.

In §2 of this paper, we review the literature on idea
generation and the LU method. In §3 we present our
research setting, qualitative pilot research, and our
research hypotheses. In §4, we describe our quantita-
tive research methods. In §5 we present our ﬁndings.
In §6 we discuss the implications of the study, and in
§7 we offer suggestions for further research.

2. Background and

Literature Review

Despite the strategic importance of effective new
product development as a source of competitive
advantage, most new product development activi-
ties fail to achieve their anticipated level of market
success. Thus, Eliashberg et al. (1997) report on a
survey of 154 senior marketing ofﬁcers of U.S. cor-
porations, 79% of whom believe their new product
development process could be signiﬁcantly improved.
A major complaint they identiﬁed was that most of
the products developed tended to be marginal con-
tributors to the ﬁrm’s portfolio, rarely involving very
new or “breakthrough” ideas. Eliasberg et al. then
assess the range of market research methods that

might enhance the output of new product develop-
ment processes, classifying them by type of product
sought (radically new vs. marginally new) and nature
of the research method (traditional vs. nontraditional).
They point out that traditional marketing research
methods obtain information from respondents at the
center of the market—respondents whose thinking
is limited by their current experience and environ-
ment. They also note that these traditional methods
have generally failed to produce radical new product
breakthroughs, leading to interest in nontraditional
methods.

A review of marketing literature on techniques and
tools used to generate ideas for new products and
services makes clear two major points of difference
between methods traditionally used and the LU idea-
generation method: the kind of respondents from
whom information is collected and the type of infor-
mation that is collected. What we will term “tradi-
tional” idea-generation methods have two character-
istics in common. First, traditional methods obtain
data from representative users or customers at or
near the center of the intended target market. Sec-
ond, they obtain need information only, and assign
the task of generating ideas for solutions leading to
new products to manufacturers (Grifﬁn 1997, Haman
1996, Rangaswamy and Lilien 1997, Eliashberg et al.
1997, Lonsdale et al. 1996). In contrast, LU idea-
generation methods collect information on both needs
and ideas for solutions from “lead users.” Lead users
are deﬁned as users of a given product or service
type that combine two characteristics: (1) They expect
attractive innovation-related beneﬁts from a solution
to their needs and so are motivated to innovate,
and (2) they experience needs for a given innova-
tion earlier than the majority of the target market
(von Hippel 1986).

It is possible that traditional methods’ focus on
representative users is a cause of their apparently
poor ability to generate ideas for “breakthroughs”—
deﬁned here as new product ideas that form the basis
for an entire new line of products or services. Classical
research on problem solving shows that subjects are
strongly constrained by their real-world experience,
an effect called “functional ﬁxedness.” Thus, those
who use an object or see it used in a familiar way

Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 8, August 2002

1043

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 14:36 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
LILIEN, MORRISON, SEARLS, SONNACK, AND VON HIPPEL

Performance Assessment of Lead User Data

are blocked from using that object in a novel way
(Dunker 1945, Birch and Rabinowitz 1951, Adam-
son 1952). Furthermore, the more recently objects or
problem-solving strategies have been used in a famil-
iar way, the more difﬁcult subjects ﬁnd it to employ
them in a novel way (Adamson and Taylor 1954). This
ﬁxedness effect is also displayed in innovation prac-
tice (Allen and Marquis 1964).

If familiarity with existing product attributes and
uses interferes with the ability to conceive of novel
attributes and uses, then representative target-market
customers, users of today’s products, would seem to
be poorly situated to envision novel needs or solu-
tions. In contrast, lead users would seem to be better
situated in this regard—they “live in the future” rela-
tive to representative target-market users, experienc-
ing today what representative users will experience
months or years later.

As was proposed by von Hippel (1986), LU idea-
generation studies can identify and learn from lead
users, both within and well beyond intended target
markets. Lead users found outside of a target market
often encounter even more extreme conditions on a
trend relevant to that target market. They may, there-
fore, be forced to develop solutions that are novel
enough to represent “breakthroughs” when applied
to the target market. For example, auto manufac-
turers seeking to improve auto efﬁciency by reduc-
ing weight with lighter, stronger materials might ﬁnd
breakthroughs in the aerospace industry, which faces
a very similar problem in an even more extreme form.
The second major difference between traditional
marketing research idea-generation methods and lead
users’ methods is that the former only collect data
on needs from users or customers. Manufacturer-based
product developers then have the task of creating
ideas for new products and services based upon that
need data. Tools used to support ideation include
brainstorming (Rossiter and Lilien 1994, Hargadon
1996) focus groups, customer visits (McQuarrie 1998),
conjoint analysis and “channeled ideation” (Golden-
berg et al. 1999).

The value of assigning idea generation to manu-
facturers, as is traditionally done, is not supported
by research. As Goldenberg et al. (2001) point out,
“(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) the marketing literature has paid little attention

to the way an idea is generated as a possible pre-
dictor of its success.” (p. 71). They themselves ﬁnd
that ideas based on solution spotting (where the solu-
tion either precedes traditional market research or
where the solution and the need are spotted simulta-
neously) are superior to those associated with prior
need assessment (need spotting). Similar results are
reported by Finke et al. (1992).

Two ﬁndings from innovation research also sup-
port the potential utility of the LU approach. The
ﬁrst shows that users rather than manufacturers are
often the initial developers of—the “idea generators”
for—what later become commercially signiﬁcant new
products and processes (e.g., Enos 1962, Freeman
1968, von Hippel 1988, and Shaw 1985). The second
ﬁnding shows that innovation by users tends to be
concentrated among lead users of those products and
processes (Urban and von Hippel 1988, Morrison et al.
2000, Shah 1999, Luthje 2000).

2.1. The LU Idea-Generation Process
In general overview, the LU process involves four
major phases.

Phase 1: Goal Generation and Team Formation.
A ﬁrm provides an ideation-goal for the project and
forms a LU project team. Teams typically are com-
posed of three to ﬁve experienced people from mar-
keting and technical departments, with one member
serving as project leader. Team members typically
spend 12 to 20 hours per week on a project. Typi-
cal project duration is four to six months. During the
initial project phase, the LU project team works with
relevant key company stakeholders to select the gen-
eral market it will target and the type and level of
innovation desired.

Phase 2: Trend Research. During Phase 2, LU
teams focus on identifying and deeply understand-
ing important market and technical trends in the
ﬁeld being explored. Team members begin by review-
ing conventional information sources. Next, they sys-
tematically identify and interview leading experts in
the marketplace that they are exploring—people who
have a broad view of emerging technologies and
leading-edge applications in that ﬁeld or ﬁelds. They
then select an important trend or trends as the central
focus of further project work.

1044

Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 8, August 2002

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 14:36 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
LILIEN, MORRISON, SEARLS, SONNACK, AND VON HIPPEL

Performance Assessment of Lead User Data

Phase 3: LU Pyramid Networking. In Phase 3,
unique to the LU process, the project team engages
in a “pyramid” networking exercise to identify and
learn from users at the leading edge of the important
trends selected for as a study focus. They identify lead
users both in the target market and in other markets
that face similar needs in an even more extreme form,
and learn from those lead users about needs and
solutions they are encountering at the leading edge.
The pyramid networking technique, a modiﬁed ver-
sion of the “snowballing” technique, relies on the fact
that people with a strong interest in a topic or ﬁeld
tend to know people more expert than themselves: For
example, good computer science professionals tend to
know the identity of computer scientists who are even
more skilled than they are (von Hippel et al. 1999).

Phase 4: LU Workshop and Idea Improvement.
In the fourth and ﬁnal phase of a LU project, activ-
ity centers around a LU workshop in which invited
lead users work with company personnel to improve
the preliminary concepts generated in Phase 3—and
sometimes to generate entirely new concepts. Typi-
cally, 10 to 15 people attend this workshop, of which
a third may come from the ﬁrm sponsoring the study.
Participants ﬁrst work in small groups, then work as a
whole to design ﬁnal concepts that ﬁt the company’s
needs. Thereafter, the entire group evaluates the con-
cepts in terms of technical feasibility, market appeal,
and management priorities.

2.2. The LU Method Track Record
The three empirical studies of LU idea-generation
processes published to date all utilized inputs from
users at the leading edge of the target market, and
all reported developing concepts for valuable, “next
generation” products. Thus, Urban and von Hippel
(1988) evaluated the LU idea-generation method in
a laboratory setting in the ﬁeld of computer-aided
systems for the design of printed circuit boards—
PC-CAD. They followed the four-phase LU process
described earlier, drawing information from a sample
of 136 lead and representative users identiﬁed within
the PC-CAD market. The new products that emerged
from LU need and solution data were greatly pre-
ferred by potential users compared to product con-
cepts generated by more traditional methods.

Herstatt and von Hippel

(1992) documented a
seeking to develop a new line of
LU project
pipehangers—hardware used to attach pipes to the
ceilings of commercial buildings. Hilti, a major global
manufacturer of construction-related equipment and
products, conducted the project. The ﬁrm introduced
a new line of pipehanger products based on the LU
concept, and a poststudy evaluation has shown that
this line has become a major commercial success for
Hilti, according to private communication from the
ﬁrst author.

Olson and Bakke (2001) report upon two LU studies
carried out by Cinet, a leading IT systems integrator
in Norway, for the ﬁrm’s two major product areas—
desktop PCs, and Symfoni application GroupWare. In
both studies, data collection focused on lead users
in the target markets. These projects were very suc-
cessful, providing most of the ideas incorporated into
next-generation products. However, one year after
their LU method trial, the ﬁrm had reverted to its
traditional pattern of learning from suppliers rather
than customers, indicating the difﬁculties of changing
traditional practices within ﬁrms.

3. Research Goals, Setting, Pilot

Research, and Hypotheses

Past evaluations of the LU process assessed projects
utilizing input from lead users at the leading edge
of target markets and reportedly produced concepts
for valuable “next-generation” products. Our research
seeks to extend these ﬁndings in two ways. First,
we investigate whether LU projects that identify and
learn from lead users from ﬁelds in advance of the lead-
ing edge of target markets develop concepts for new
products that are more valuable—i.e., are more likely
to produce “breakthroughs” that set the basis for new
product lines. Second, we want to compare the effec-
tiveness of the LU procedure in a ﬁeld setting against
procedures used by non-LU teams in the same setting.

3.1. Research Setting
Following Cook and Campbell (1979), we sought a
ﬁeld situation that could closely approximate a pre-
post/test-control situation, with at least quasi-random

Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 8, August 2002

1045

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 14:36 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
LILIEN, MORRISON, SEARLS, SONNACK, AND VON HIPPEL

Performance Assessment of Lead User Data

assignments to treatment cells, satisfying three con-
ditions. First, the site should be one for which inno-
vation has historically been strategically important.
This condition would ensure that the LU intervention
would not signal a concurrent increase in the strategic
incentive to innovate, a change that might improve
innovation performance independent of any effect
caused by the method itself. Second, the site must be
using both LU methods seeking lead users beyond the
target market and traditional idea-generation meth-
ods, which could act as a control within the same
organizational units in parallel with the LU method.
Third, the site must have data on a sufﬁcient num-
ber of projects utilizing both LU and traditional idea-
generation processes to permit statistical distinction
between the effect of the methods from other ﬁrm-or
industry-speciﬁc characteristics. (Henceforth, we will
use the term “non-LU” methods to refer to the range
of more mainstream methods 3M has traditionally
employed for idea generation.)

At the time of our study, we found that 3M satisﬁed

these three requirements as follows:

(1) 3M has historically been known for, and has
always placed major emphasis on,
innovation. As
they note in their 1999 Annual Report, “For nearly
100 years, 3M has grown by pioneering innovative
technologies and products(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) . Innovation remains the
driving force of 3M culture and growth.” (3M, Annual
Report, 1999. p. 12.)

(2) 3M ﬁrst began using the LU method in one divi-
sion in 1996. All 3M LU projects involved searches
for lead users both within and beyond intended tar-
get markets. By May 2000, idea-generation projects
using the LU method had been carried out in several
divisions, each of which was at the same time also
employing more traditional idea-generation methods.
These divisions therefore could play the role of exper-
imental units.

(3) By May 2000, 3M had completed seven LU
projects and had funded further development of the
ideas generated by ﬁve of these. The divisions carry-
ing out LU projects also had 42 contemporaneously
funded projects available for study. These compari-
son projects used a range of non-LU idea-generation
processes, described later.

While 3M cooperated in our study and permitted
access to company records and to new product devel-
opment team members, the ﬁrm did not offer us a
controlled experimental setting. Rather, the organiza-
tion agreed to serve as an environment for a natural
experiment where we as researchers would have to
account for any naturally occurring differences after
the fact.

3.2. Pilot Research and Hypotheses
We conducted an inductive, qualitative research phase
at 3M to generate more speciﬁc research hypothe-
ses and associated measurements. Our approach uti-
lizes a research tradition informed by both ethno-
graphic (Douglas 1986, Willis 1981, Lave 1988, Van
Maanen 1988, and Workman 1993) and grounded the-
ory (Glaser and Strauss 1967) perspectives, and incor-
porated three goals:

(1) Develop trust-based relationships between 3M new
product development professionals and researchers. To
implement this goal, we began our grounded research
activities only after obtaining strong top manage-
ment support and permissions for access to conﬁ-
dential company data. These permissions enabled our
research team to develop unguarded and informal
relationships with 3M product development teams.

(2) Allow data and the ﬁeld to drive theory creation.
Product developers throughout the ﬁrm shared their
time and helped us understand how innovative prod-
uct concept generation is practiced, understood, and
communicated at 3M. Their insights were an impor-
tant input into hypothesis formulation (Wenger 1998).
(3) Use ﬁeldwork to drive measurement development.
We studied the variables and scales used internally by
3M related to new product development and resourc-
ing decisions and integrated them with those we
acquired from the academic literature. To the extent
possible, our measures incorporated the types of data
customarily collected by 3M.

In the course of our grounded research at 3M, we
speciﬁcally sought balance between LU and non-LU
participants. We interviewed more than 20 managers
and related new product development professionals
in several 3M divisions. These internal experts rep-
resented the technical/scientiﬁc side of new prod-
uct development (the professional group historically

1046

Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 8, August 2002

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 14:36 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
LILIEN, MORRISON, SEARLS, SONNACK, AND VON HIPPEL

Performance Assessment of Lead User Data

most credited as being the source of the company’s
innovative product offerings) and the business side
(including marketing professionals). Research team
members also observed and participated in LU train-
ing sessions and studied relevant internal company
documentation.

Our ﬁeldwork showed that all LU teams were
taught the same process by the same small group of
coaches working from the same set of written train-
ing materials. We also found that both instruction and
project team practice drove 3M teams to and then
beyond the leading edges of the target market to iden-
tify and learn from lead users in “advanced analog”
markets.

Three clear concerns about the LU process emerged
during the course of our interviews. First, some inter-
viewees expressed concern that ideas developed via
the LU process might have low “organizational ﬁt”
with the 3M technical, production, and market envi-
ronment, and hence, be less likely to be judged wor-
thy of funding by 3M management. If this concern
proved correct, it would represent a major barrier to
gaining actual marketplace beneﬁt from any break-
through ideas generated by the LU method. Second,
some managers expressed a concern that a process
built upon distilling new ideas from LU needs and
prototype solutions would result in ideas that could
not be effectively patented by 3M, a major draw-
back to the method if true. Third, many LU partici-
pants expressed concern about the greater time and
effort involved in the LU idea generation method rel-
ative to alternative approaches, and the impact of that
time and effort on managers’ willingness to use the
method.

Following our grounded research, we generated
ﬁve hypotheses. Hypotheses 1 and 2 measure basic
outputs, and their motivation derives from the liter-
ature cited earlier. Hypotheses 3–5, derived from our
grounded theory approach, express the three major
concerns of interviewees, described above, in hypoth-
esis form.

Hypothesis H1. LU methods will generate ideas with

greater commercial potential than will non-LU methods.

Hypothesis H2. LU methods identifying and learning
from lead users outside of the target market will increase

the overall rate at which the organization generates major
new product lines.

Hypothesis H3. Projects

from LU methods will
exhibit a lower level of organizational “ﬁt” than will non-
LU projects.

Hypothesis H4. Ideas generated by LU methods will
be less protectable by patent or other means of intellectual
property protection than will ideas generated by non-LU
methods.

Hypothesis H5. LU methods will cost more in money
and time than non-LU methods to generate ideas forming
the basis for funded projects.

4. Research Samples, Data
Collection Instruments,
and Methods
4.1. Research Samples
We sought samples of development projects in 3M
divisions that differed with respect to their use of the
LU process, but that were in other respects as simi-
lar as possible to those from the LU process. Where
unavoidable differences did exist between our sam-
ples, we attempt to err in the conservative direction
to ensure that we do not overly favor the outcomes of
the LU process. We control for the impact of division-
related variables by selecting projects only from divi-
sions that were carrying out both LU and non-LU
projects. Within these divisions, we selected two types
of samples.

Cross-Sectional Sample. Our ﬁrst sample con-
sists of “funded ideas.” The earliest stage involving
3M critical management review is the initial request
for funding; a “funded idea,” therefore, has received
careful review and positive evaluations from 3M
divisional managers and has received, at a minimum,
initial funding within the 3M product development
system. Our sample of funded ideas was a complete
census of all ideas receiving funding in the 3M divi-
sions that funded both LU and non-LU project ideas

Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 8, August 2002

1047

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 14:36 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
LILIEN, MORRISON, SEARLS, SONNACK, AND VON HIPPEL

Performance Assessment of Lead User Data

during our data collection period of February 1999–
May 2000. We identiﬁed funded ideas via divisional
records and generated a sample of ﬁve funded ideas
developed by LU studies (“LU ideas”) and 42 funded
ideas developed by other, more traditional, divisional
processes (“non-LU ideas). This process controls for
variation over time in criteria that management might
apply to the funding decision.

We next had to address the issue of possible differ-
ences between project stafﬁng and performance incen-
tives. To explore possible staff differences, we com-
pared the backgrounds, personalities, and skills of LU
project participants with those in non-LU groups via
a survey. We found that those stafﬁng LU and non-
LU groups were not signiﬁcantly different in terms
of job level, years employed at 3M, rate of career
advancement, and other background variables. How-
ever, they did differ signiﬁcantly on two self-reported
skill dimensions. LU project participants gave them-
selves signiﬁcantly higher ratings with respect to gen-
eral marketing/sales skills (the means differed by
0.72 points on a 5-point scale, p < 0(cid:1)03). Also, non-
LU project participants gave themselves signiﬁcantly
higher ratings on technology skills (the means dif-
fered by 0.62 points on a 5-point scale, p < 0(cid:1)05). In
addition, LU group participants differed signiﬁcantly
from non-LU group participants on one of four Myers
Briggs scales: They rated signiﬁcantly higher on the
extrovert/introvert dimension (the means differed by
11 points on a 100-point scale, p < 0(cid:1)08).

The differences noted are a potential source of
concern with respect to the validity of our natural
experiment on the impact of the LU idea-generation
process. Perhaps 3M LU project teams could gen-
erate better ideas simply because they contained
more skilled (and extroverted) marketing researchers.
However, a more detailed look suggests that this is
unlikely. Although the difference was statistically sig-
niﬁcant, LU team members ranked themselves on
average only 15% higher on the marketing/sales skills
scale than did non-LU team members. In addition,
the overlap between conventional marketing research
skills and the activities prescribed for LU teams is
low—and the skill level differences reported did not
correlate signiﬁcantly with differences in the activities

the team members reported carrying out during their
projects.1

We next sought differences in the motivation of
LU and non-LU team members to achieve a break-
through and found none. Our interviews with 3M
management revealed that concerns about corporate
growth and margins had led to intense pressure being
put on all personnel at the levels of LU and non-LU
team members to achieve new “breakthrough” prod-
ucts and product lines. We could ﬁnd no evidence
that there was any difference in a priori attractiveness
of the areas of focus between LU and non-LU teams.
Managers said that there was no difference, and a con-
tent analysis of formal annual performance goals set
for the individual LU and non-LU team members in
the one division that allowed us access to this data,
supported their views that equivalent opportunities
for and pressure for breakthroughs existed for all.

it

teams,

Even given equivalent

incentives being applied
to LU and non-LU project
is possible
that Hawthorne or placebo effects were impacting
these teams differentially. (For our purposes here, the
Hawthorne effect can be described as “I do better
because extra attention is being paid to me or to my
performance.” The placebo effect can be described as
“I expect this process will work and so I will strive
to get the results that have been described to me.”)
While such effects are possible, our ﬁeldwork sug-
gests that neither effect was likely to positively and
differentially affect the performance of teams using
the LU method. At 3M, as at most companies, high-
proﬁle activities are burdened by high management
attention paid to those activities, resulting in more

1 To explore this matter, we ﬁrst ran a principal component analysis
on a battery of 21 product development activities. We then used
the ﬁrst principal component (representing twice the variance of
the second principal component) as a summary measure of criti-
cal product development capabilities, and regressed it against LU
vs. non-LU training, using background, personality, and skills as
covariates. We found that the LU vs. non-LU training explained the
bulk of the variance on this factor, with none of the covariates noted
above statistically signiﬁcant. While some of these covariates did
explain signiﬁcant variance in the other principal components, as
those components are of much less importance than the ﬁrst com-
ponent, the impact of those covariates can be regarded as minor
overall.

1048

Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 8, August 2002

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 14:36 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
LILIEN, MORRISON, SEARLS, SONNACK, AND VON HIPPEL

Performance Assessment of Lead User Data

frequent reporting and restricted horizons. Also, our
qualitative research showed that at 3M, employees
generally view new processes introduced to the com-
pany with skepticism rather than with the expectation
that they will perform well.

With respect

to the intended difference under
study—use of LU methods within projects—all LU
teams employed an identical LU process taught to
them with identical coaching materials and with
coaching provided by members of the same small
set of internal 3M coaches. In accordance with tradi-
tional 3M practice, idea generation leading to funded
non-LU projects was an internal process using infor-
mal methods and carried out by marketing and lab
personnel. Non-LU teams used data sources for idea
generation that varied from project to project and
included market data collected by outside organiza-
tions, data from focus groups with major customers
and from customer panels, and information from lab
personnel. Non-LU teams never reported collecting
information from lead users—they collected market
information only from target markets. We refer to
these traditional 3M idea-generation practices as non-
LU idea-generation practices.

In sum, while not satisfying the random assign-
ment criterion for experimental design, these samples
appear to satisfy the “rough equivalence” criteria in
test and control conditions associated with natural or
quasi experimentation.

Longitudinal Sample. Preliminary analysis of the
outcomes of the LU process showed that LU teams
were generally developing ideas for major new prod-
uct lines, suggesting that it was important to gen-
erate an additional sample of non-LU comparison
projects. As major new product lines generally emerge
rarely, we chose this second sample to consist of all
major new product lines introduced to the market-
place between 1950–2000 by the 3M divisions that had
executed one or more LU studies. (1950 was as far
back as we could go and still ﬁnd company employ-
ees who could provide some data about the innova-
tion histories of these major product lines.) Following
the advice of 3M controllers (and in line with Stalk
et al. 1996), we operationalized the concept of major
product lines as those that were separately reported

upon in divisional ﬁnancial statements. In 1999 in the
3M divisions we studied, sales of individual major
product lines ranged from 7% to 73% of total divi-
sional sales. Major product lines at 3M tend to be long
lived: We were able to identify only two in our sam-
pled divisions that had been discontinued after being
initiated in the period 1950–2000. Each major prod-
uct line showed similar patterns of strong growth and
good proﬁt margins.

Our sample of major product lines developed via
non-LU methods contains 21 cases that met our crite-
ria and that had been developed and funded by the
divisions executing LU studies during the 1950–2000
period. We will compare data on these non-LU major
product lines with data related to the ﬁve funded
ideas developed by LU methods that produced
outcomes meeting the criteria for major product
lines.

The data for our longitudinal sample of major prod-
uct lines is neither as complete nor likely to be as
accurate as were the data collected for our cross-
sectional sample. Speciﬁcally, we have no data on
the characteristics of the personnel involved in major
product line developments prior to 1997, nor do we
have data on incentives applied to or any speciﬁcs
regarding idea-generation methods used by these per-
sonnel. The data collected for our longitudinal sam-
ples depends upon the recall of a small number
of informants (usually one or two) for each case.
While these informants had been actual participants
in the projects they were describing, the accuracy of
the reports is questionable (and might even involve
upwardly biased recall of the degree of past inno-
vation successes), as, in many cases, the innovations
they described were made decades earlier. An addi-
tional concern is that conditions within 3M and also
within the general U.S. and world economies have
varied signiﬁcantly over the 50-year analysis time
frame.

In sum, the quasi-experimental ﬁeld setting for this
research involves several potential threats to valid-
ity and generalizability of ﬁndings. While we believe
that these threats are small in the case of our cross-
sectional sample, they are more signiﬁcant in the case
of our longitudinal sample.

Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 8, August 2002

1049

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 14:36 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
LILIEN, MORRISON, SEARLS, SONNACK, AND VON HIPPEL

Performance Assessment of Lead User Data

4.2. Data Collection Instruments
We developed two data collection instruments for use
during our study, as follows:

Outcomes Survey. We developed a New Prod-
uct Idea Description Form from measures used in
previous academic research: novelty of ideas, original-
ity/newness of customer needs, and potential for prolifer-
ating into an entire product line from the New Product
Creativity scale (Moorman and Miner 1997); company
sales/market share from the new idea in year 5, and prob-
ability of business success from NPD Success Criteria
(Grifﬁn and Page 1996); and global market potential
for all competitors from Cooper (1993). We supple-
mented these measures with items revealed during
the exploratory phase of the research, including sev-
eral in general use within 3M, as part of their internal
new product idea-assessment procedure. We carefully
pretested all items and reﬁned them during prelimi-
nary instrument development meetings with partici-
pating staff at 3M. (The Appendix lists the data items
collected for each idea.)

Process Survey. We developed a process instru-
ment to measure individual skills in idea-generation
activities, personality traits, and individual char-
acteristics such as job level, time in the job, and
R&D/marketing/accounting/manufacturing
exper-
tise. We developed items for the individual skills
identiﬁed in the literature to be associated with
generating new product ideas (Thomas 1993) and
supplemented those items with skills identiﬁed from
interviews with LU team leaders and their primary
LU trainer. We measured personality traits using
a Web-based version of Myers-Brigg’s Personality
Inventory (www.personalitypage.com).

4.3. Data Collection Methods
We began our quantitative data collection with face-
to-face meetings with each LU project team leader.
In these meetings we asked each project leader to:
(a) identify and recruit the members of their team
as respondents; (b) identify and recruit appropri-
ate respondents within the same division to pro-
vide non-LU idea method data; and (c) describe the
new product development goals and outputs from
the LU project, provide organizational information

about their division, and provide process informa-
tion. We then contacted the respondents identiﬁed
in (a) and (b) above. The respondents from non-LU
idea-generation methods provided detailed informa-
tion both on funded ideas as well as on process data.
Respondents returned all (100%) of the Idea Descrip-
tion Forms for LU projects and 79% for non-LU
projects, and 94% of the process instruments for LU
projects and 86% for non-LU projects. These response
rates are sufﬁciently high to suggest that validity
checks for nonresponse bias are not needed (Malhotra
1996).

We collected data on major new product ideas
developed early in the 1950–2000 period through
in-depth interviews
conducted with long-tenure
employees in each of the LU study divisions who
had a good knowledge of their division’s and product
line histories. We converted all historical dollar ﬁg-
ures to 1999 dollar equivalents using U.S. consumer
price index data (Council of Economic Advisors 2000).

5. Analysis and Results
We performed two sets of analysis: a cross-sectional
analysis of the census of all contemporaneous funded
ideas (that is, currently funded ideas in the data
collection period February 1999–May 2000), and an
intertemporal analysis of major product lines, for
which we will compare the LU results with a 50-year
history of major product line development at 3M.

In several of our analyses, we compare forecast
data (projected sales for a line of products not yet
launched) with actual, historical sales. To develop a
conservative basis for these comparisons, we explored
both the general literature and 3M historical data.
In the general literature, Armstrong’s (2001) review
on forecast bias for new product introduction indi-
cates that forecasts for new product sales are gener-
ally optimistic, but that upward bias decreases as the
magnitude of the sales forecast increases. Coller and
Yoln (1998) review the literature on bias in accuracy
of management earnings forecasts and ﬁnd that little
systematic bias occurs. Tull’s (1967) model calculates
$15 million in revenue as a level above which fore-
casts actually become pessimistic on average.

We collected data from ﬁve 3M division controllers
responsible for authorizing investment expenditure

1050

Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 8, August 2002

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 14:36 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
LILIEN, MORRISON, SEARLS, SONNACK, AND VON HIPPEL

Performance Assessment of Lead User Data

for developing new ideas into products and also
obtained data from a 1995 internal study that com-
pared such forecasts with actual sales. We combined
this information to develop a distribution of forecast
errors for a number of 3M divisions, as well as over-
all forecast errors across the full corporation. Those
errors range from forecast/actual of +30% (overfore-
cast) to −13% (underforecast). Based on the infor-
mation just described, and in consultation with 3M
management, we chose a 25% sales-forecast deﬂator
to apply to all projected sales data in the analysis
that follows. That deﬂator is consistent with 3M’s his-
torical experience and, given Tull’s (1967) ﬁndings,
should provide conservative sales projection ﬁgures.2

5.1. Cross-Sectional Findings: Comparison of

Contemporaneously Funded Ideas
Generated by LU and Non-LU Methods

We compared all “funded ideas” generated by LU and
non-LU methods during the time period of our data
collection (February 1999 to May 2000). Table 1 pro-
vides a census of all funded ideas during the noted
period in the ﬁve divisions that funded LU ideas.
During that time, ﬁve ideas generated by LU projects
were being funded along with 42 ideas generated by
non-LU idea-generation methods.

From Table 1, we see that LU ideas are signiﬁ-
cantly more novel than are ideas generated by non-
LU methods, they address more original/newer cus-
tomer needs, have signiﬁcantly higher market share,
have greater potential to develop into an entire prod-
uct line, and are more strategically important. We also
ﬁnd that the LU ideas have projected annual sales in
Year 5 that are eight times higher than those of ideas
generated by non-LU methods—an average of $146
million versus an average of $18 million in forecast
annual sales. Thus, we ﬁnd support for Hypothesis 1:
LU methods do appear to generate ideas with greater

2 We ﬁnd no reason to apply a different deﬂator to LU vs. non-
LU project sales projections. Even if LU project personnel were for
some reason more likely to be optimistic with respect to such pro-
jections than non-LU project personnel, that would not signiﬁcantly
impact our ﬁndings. In addition, over 60% of the total dollar value
of sales forecasts made for LU projects were actually made by per-
sonnel not associated with those projects (outside consulting ﬁrms
or business analysts from other divisions).

Table 1

LU vs. Non-LU Funded Ideas (Census)

LU ideas
(cid:1)n = 5(cid:3)2

Non-LU ideas
(cid:1)n = 42(cid:3)3

Sig.

9.6

8.3
68%

$146m
10.0
22%
80%
9.6
7.1

6.8

5.3
33%

$18m
7.5

24.0%
66%
7.3
6.7

0.01

0.09
0.01

0.00
0.03
0.70
0.24
0.08
0.80

Factors related to

value of idea

Novelty compared

with competition1

Originality/newness of

customer needs addressed1

% market share in Year 5
Estimated sales in Year 5

(deﬂated for forecast error)

Potential for entire product family1
Operating proﬁt
Probability of success
Strategic importance1
Intellectual property protection1

Factors related to

organizational ﬁt of idea

Fit with existing distribution channels1
Fit with existing manufacturing

8.8

8.0

0.61

capabilities1

Fit with existing Strategic Plan1

0.92
0.24
1These items were measured using a 10-point rating scale, where 10 =

7.8
9.8

6.7
8.4

high, 1 = low.

2Funded LU ideas: all are for major product lines.
3Funded non-LU ideas: one is for a major product line, 41 are incremental

ideas.
commercial potential than do non-LU methods in this
sample (p < 0(cid:1)005).

We also found that LU ideas differed in kind from
those ideas produced by non-LU methods. Non-LU
methods produced mainly funded ideas for prod-
uct improvements and extensions to existing product
lines, while the LU method produced funded ideas
that ﬁt 3M divisional criteria for major product lines.
Those ideas produced projected sales that fell within
(and sometimes exceeded) the proportion of divi-
sional sales accounted for by existing individual divi-
sional major product lines: projected sales ﬁve years
after introduction for funded LU ideas, conservatively
deﬂated as discussed above, ranged from 25% to over
300% of current total divisional sales. Table 2 shows
the qualitative difference in the type of product (incre-
mental vs. major product line/breakthrough) that the
LU process has been generating. Using a chi-square

Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 8, August 2002

1051

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 14:36 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
LILIEN, MORRISON, SEARLS, SONNACK, AND VON HIPPEL

Performance Assessment of Lead User Data

Table 2

Idea Types Generated by LU and Non-LU Methods

Incremental

Major product line

LU method
Non-LU method

0
41

5
1

test, the probability of this outcome occurring by
chance is p < 0(cid:1)005, supporting Hypothesis 2.

To illustrate what the “major product line” innova-
tions that the LU process teams generated at 3M were
like, we brieﬂy describe four:

(1) A new approach to the prevention of infec-
tions associated with surgical operations. The new
approach replaces the traditional “one size ﬁts all”
approach to infection prevention with a portfolio of
patient-speciﬁc measures based upon each patient’s
individual biological susceptibilities. This innovation
involves new product lines plus related business and
strategy innovations made by the team to bring this
new approach to market successfully and proﬁtably.
(2) Electronic test and communication equipment
that, for the ﬁrst time, enables physically isolated
workers such as telecommunication equipment repair
people to carry out their problem-solving work as a
team. Linked workgroup members can contribute to
the solution of a problem being worked upon by a
single, physically isolated worker in real time.

(3) A new approach (implemented via novel equip-
ment) to the application of commercial graphics ﬁlms
that cuts the time of application from 48 hours to
less than 1 hour. (Commercial graphics ﬁlms are used,
for example, to cover entire truck trailers, buses, and
other vehicles with advertising or decorative graph-
ics.) The LU team ideas involve technical innovations
plus related channel and business model changes to
help diffuse the innovation rapidly.

(4) A new approach to packaging fragile items in
shipping cartons to replace current packaging mate-
rials such as foamed “plastic peanuts.” The new
product lines implementing the approach are more
environmentally friendly and much faster and more
convenient for both shippers and package recipients
than are present products and methods.

Following Hypothesis 3, our qualitative interview-
ees proposed that the apparently more ambitious
outcomes from the LU process would be less com-
patible with key organization-ﬁt criteria than would

non-LU ideas. The last three items in Table 1 address
this issue: We ﬁnd no statistical difference in quality
of ﬁt of LU and non-LU ideas with respect to existing
divisional distribution channels, manufacturing capa-
bilities, or divisional strategic plans. Hence, we cannot
reject the Null Hypothesis H3 that LU and non-LU
major product lines are equal on these critical dimen-
sions of organizational ﬁt (p > 0(cid:1)10).

In line with Hypothesis 4, interviewees proposed
that ideas generated by the LU method would be less
protectable by patents than would ideas generated
by other methods. A single item in Table 3 tests this
hypothesis and we cannot reject the Null Hypothesis
H4 that LU and non-LU major product lines are equal
on intellectual property protection (p > 0(cid:1)10).

Finally, we hypothesized (H5(cid:5)

that LU idea-
generation methods would cost more in time and
money than would idea-generation methods used in
our sample of comparison projects. This hypothesis is
supported by our data. An audit of idea development
time shows that the generation of a funded LU idea
consumed 154 (sd. = 82) person days on average. In
contrast, generation of an average non-LU idea con-
sumed an average of 60 (sd. = 43) person days, reject-
ing the hypothesis of equality of these two means at
the p < 0(cid:1)05 level. Using internal 3M data for aver-
age costs of professional development personnel, we
obtained a total cost of approximately $100,000 per
funded LU project (including additional costs associ-
ated with the LU training) versus $30,000 for non-LU
projects. After accounting for the different probabil-
ity of success for LU projects (Table 1: 80% for LU
projects vs. 66% for the census of non-LU projects),
we determined that 3M pays about $80,000 more, on
average, for a successful LU project than it does for a
successful non-LU project.

5.2. Longitudinal Findings: Major Product

Line Ideas Generated by LU
and Non-LU Methods

We now compare the major product line ideas gener-
ated by the LU method with those generated earlier—
during the period 1950–2000—by the 3M divisions in
our study using non-LU methods. The 3M divisions
we studied produced 21 major product lines during
the 1950–2000 period. During the 1997–2000 period,

1052

Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 8, August 2002

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 14:36 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
LILIEN, MORRISON, SEARLS, SONNACK, AND VON HIPPEL

Performance Assessment of Lead User Data

they produced ﬁve of those major product lines using
LU methods and two using non-LU methods. Exam-
ples of major product lines generated by non-LU
methods in our 1950–2000 sample include:

(1) Scotch tape: A line of transparent mending
tapes that was a major success in many household
and commercial applications.

(2) Disposable patient drapes for operating room
use: A pioneering line of disposable products for the
medical ﬁeld now sold in many variations.

(3) Box-sealing tapes: The ﬁrst type of tape strong
enough to reliably seal corrugated shipping boxes,
it replaced stapling in most “corrugated shipper”
applications.

(4) Commercial graphics ﬁlms: Plastic ﬁlms capa-
ble of withstanding outdoor environments that could
be printed upon and adhered to vehicles. This prod-
uct
line changed the entire approach to outdoor
signage.

Our sample of ideas for new major product lines
provides additional tests of H1 through H4. However,
that sample does not permit an alternative means to
test Hypothesis 5, as we have no data on the costs
of idea generation for major product lines developed
prior to 1997. We begin with alternative tests for H1,
the hypothesis that LU methods will generate ideas
with greater commercial potential than will non-LU
methods. Here we consider an alternative to H1, call
it H1A, that focuses on major new product lines only.
H1A proposes that ideas for major product lines devel-
oped by LU methods will have greater commercial
potential than those generated by non-LU methods.
To proceed, we make the following two assumptions:

Assumption 1. Returns from all major product lines
that have emerged at 3M using methods other than the LU
method can be considered as draws from the same proba-
bility distribution.

Assumption 2. Revenue projections for LU major
product lines are biased to the same degree on average as
historical projections have been for other major product
lines.

Assumption 1 allows us to compare the major prod-
uct lines from the LU method with all major product
lines in these divisions during the prior four decades.
Assumption 2 allows us to use historical 3M ﬁgures

on major product line forecast error to adjust the fore-
casts from the LU data. Following Assumptions 1
and 2 for major product lines introduced to mar-
ket in 1994 or earlier we used as a reference “actual
sales ﬁve years after introduction (including loss/gain
from sales of related products in the division).” 3M
management maintains such records and the ﬁve-year
sales goal is part of 3M’s project justiﬁcation process.
To provide comparable data, we translated all sales
data into 1999 dollars. Following Assumption 2 for
the major product line ideas generated from the LU
process (and for two major product line ideas recently
generated by non-LU processes), we have forecasts
of ﬁve-year sales vs. actual ﬁgures for the historical
major product lines.

After deﬂation of the forecasts as discussed earlier,
we ﬁnd that the average “sales in Year 5” for LU
major product lines (n= 5), is $146m, while the similar
ﬁgure for major product lines generated by non-LU
methods (n = 16, as we were able to obtain detailed
data on only 16 of the 21 non-LU major product lines)
is $62m. (Table 3).

We next test whether the mean LU major product
line yields higher sales than those derived from non-
LU sources. At the p = 0(cid:1)05 level we reject the hypoth-
esis that these values are equivalent (Table 4), provid-
ing support for H1A, conditional on Assumptions 1
and 2. Table 4 also provides proﬁles of the 5 LU major
product lines and the 16 non-LU major product lines
for which we were able to collect data on the mat-
ters listed in that table. We ﬁnd that the ideas for

Table 3

What Is a Major (New) Product Line (MNPL) Worth?

LU MNPL ﬁve-year sales

forecasts∗

1997–2000 (n = 5)

Non-LU MNPL ﬁve-year sales

forecasts and actual∗
1950–2000 (n = 16)

Mean
Median
Range

$146m
$124m

$62m
$38m

$67.5m–$232.5m

$11.7m–$276m

Note. Five-year sales forecasts for all major product lines commercialized
in 1994 or later (ﬁve LU and two non-LU major product lines) have been
deﬂated by 25% in line with 3M historical forecast error experience (see text).
Five-year sales ﬁgures for major product lines commercialized before 1994
are actual historical sales data. This data has been converted to 1999 dollars
using the Consumer Price Index from the Economic Report of the President
(Council of Economic Advisors 2000).

Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 8, August 2002

1053

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 14:36 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
LILIEN, MORRISON, SEARLS, SONNACK, AND VON HIPPEL

Performance Assessment of Lead User Data

Table 4

Dimensions of Difference Between LU Major (New) Product
Lines (MNPL) and Non-LU Major Product Lines

Figure 1

Major Product Lines Generation Rate in 3M Divisions Under
Study on a Four-Year Rolling Basis (1950–2000)

Lead User
MNPLs
(n = 5)

Non-LU MNPLs

(n = 16)

Novelty compared with competition∗
Originality/newness of customer

needs addressed∗

% market share in Year 5
Estimated sales in Year 5

(deﬂated for forecast error)

Potential for entire product family∗
Operating proﬁt
Probability of success
Strategic importance∗
Intellectual property protection∗
Fit with distribution channels∗
Fit with manufacturing capabilities∗
Fit with Strategic Plan∗

9.6

8.3
68%

$146m
10.0
22%
80%
9.6
7.1
8.8
7.8
9.8

8.0

7.9
61%

$62m
9.4
27%
87%
8.5
7.4
8.4
6.7
8.7

Sig.

0.21

0.78
0.76

0.04
0.38
0.41
0.35
0.39
0.81
0.77
0.53
0.32

Note. These items noted with an asterisk were measured using a 10-point
rating scale, where 10 = high, 1 = low.

major new product lines developed by LU and non-
LU methods are relatively similar on most dimensions
examined. However, as a comparison with the data in
Table 1 shows, both are very different from our sam-
ple of currently funded ideas that were generated by
non-LU methods.

To test the hypothesis that the LU method produces
major new product line ideas at a higher rate than
do non-LU methods (H2(cid:5) we look at the entire four-
year period during which the LU process was imple-
mented at 3M and compare it (on a rolling basis) with
all other four-year periods during 1950–2000. The
average rate of major product line development dur-
ing this half-century for the divisions studied was 1.64
per four-year period. As Figure 1 shows, the highest
rate achieved over a four-year period was seven major
product lines, and this result was achieved during the
1997–2000 period during which the LU process was
implemented by those divisions. During this period,
ﬁve of the seven major product lines developed were
generated by LU methods. Non-LU methods gener-
ated ﬁve or more major product lines in two of the
47, four-year rolling periods.

We next look at three comparisons: (1) LU output
vs. pre-1997 output; (2) LU output vs. non-LU output,

 

d
e
t
a
r
e
n
e
G
s
L
P
N
M
o
N

 

'

1
1
1
1

6

4

2

0

0

6

9

23

5

5

10

15

20

25

Frequency of Occurrence

Note. Development of seven major (new) product lines (MNPLs) within a
four-year period has occurred only once in the last half century—during the
period corresponding to the use of the LU method.

1997–2000; and (3) pre-1997 output vs. all post-1997
output in the divisions studied. For Comparison (1),
assume that 3M generates major product lines at a
(constant) rate that represents the null hypothesis of
no difference in rate of major product line genera-
tion over time. Using the four-year data in Figure 1,
that rate is 1.64 major product lines per four-year
period for non-LU methods. Then, a formal test of
our Hypothesis H2 is: “What is the likelihood that
a process that generates (cid:7) = 1(cid:1)64 events on average
per study period could generate ﬁve (or more) in a
period?” (1997–2000 for LU). Using an assumption of
a Poisson generation process (Grassman 1981), we cal-
culate that P(5 or more (cid:5)(cid:7) = 1(cid:1)64) = 0(cid:1)025, providing
support for H2 (rejecting the null hypothesis at the
0.05 level).

For Comparison (2), if we compare the 1997–2000
period (ﬁve major product lines for LU methods vs.
two major product lines for non-LU methods), we get
P(5 or more (cid:5)(cid:7)= 4×0(cid:1)5= 2(cid:1)0) = 0(cid:1)052, again providing
support for H2. For Comparison (3), if we consider
the LU method an organizational intervention (Mills
1999), we can compare the post-1997 period for 3M
(blending both LU and non-LU ideas) with the results
of the previous regime. These results give seven major
product lines (ﬁve LUs and two non-LUs) in the four-
year 1997–2000 period, versus the historical average
(adjusted to account for four fewer intervals and two
fewer major product lines) of 1.79, giving P(7 or more

1054

Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 8, August 2002

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 14:36 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
LILIEN, MORRISON, SEARLS, SONNACK, AND VON HIPPEL

Performance Assessment of Lead User Data

(cid:5)(cid:7) = 1(cid:1)79) = 0(cid:1)003. Thus, all three approaches provide
support for H2: We ﬁnd that the rate of major new
product line generation using the LU process is signif-
icantly higher than the rate historically seen at 3M in
the 1950–2000 period using non-LU idea-generation
processes.

Finally, we

can perform additional

tests of
Hypotheses 3 and 4 by referring back to Table 4. We
investigated earlier how major product line ideas gen-
erated by the LU method differed from those gen-
erated by non-LU methods. We reject the hypothe-
sis (H3(cid:5) regarding a signiﬁcant difference between LU
and non-LU major product lines on dimensions of
organizational “ﬁt” (see the last three rows of Table 4).
Also, we reject the hypothesis (H4(cid:5) that ideas gen-
erated by LU methods will be signiﬁcantly less pro-
tectable by patent or other means of intellectual prop-
erty protection than will ideas generated by non-LU
methods.

6. Discussion
Our study of LU idea-generation projects at 3M has
yielded several interesting empirical ﬁndings. From
our cross-sectional sample, we have seen that ideas
generated by LU processes had forecast sales in Year 5
that were more than eight times higher than the sales
of the contemporaneously funded projects: $146 mil-
lion annual sales on average versus $18 million. We
also found that funded projects emerging from 3M
LU studies had signiﬁcantly higher novelty (usually
being judged “new to the world”), addressed more
original newer customer needs, and also had signif-
icantly higher forecasted market share in Year 5 (on
average, 68% vs. 33% for non-LU ideas) than did
those from more conventional methods.

With respect to ﬁndings from our longitudinal sam-
ple, we found both sets of ideas to be relatively sim-
ilar in most respects, but forecast sales from major
new product ideas generated by LU methods were
signiﬁcantly higher than sales forecasts for products
generated by non-LU methods. We also found that
the rate of introduction of products forecast to grow
into a major new product line was signiﬁcantly higher

after use of the LU method began at 3M in 1997.
The key ﬁnding here is not the rate itself: Clearly, the
rate of major new product line ideas resulting from
LU projects will go up or down depending upon the
number of LU projects funded by management, but
rather that ideas for major new product lines seem
to be consistently produced by LU idea-generation
projects—at least as 3M practices this method. This
outcome differs from the outcomes of earlier studies
of LU projects that reported generating ideas for valu-
able next-generation products rather than for break-
throughs. We speculate that this difference in out-
comes is due to the 3M practice of identifying and
learning from lead users outside and well in advance
of the target market, a speculation that requires fur-
ther investigation.

In the case of both the cross-sectional and longitu-
dinal samples, we found that funded “breakthrough”
ideas generated via the LU process offered as good
a ﬁt to existing divisional goals and competencies as
did ideas generated by traditional methods. Insights
from our grounded research leads us to suggest that
this is because both LU and non-LU team develop-
ers at 3M know that ideas with “good ﬁts” have a
greater chance of acceptance and funding. They there-
fore work to select and shape the ideas they propose
to achieve that ﬁt.

We also found that LU ideas involved as high a
level of intellectual property protection as did the
ideas generated by non-LU methods. On the face of
it, this ﬁnding seems puzzling: How can 3M expect
to protect ideas that lead users have developed and
probably revealed elsewhere? Our ﬁeldwork suggests
an answer. LU studies at 3M did not ﬁnd complete
ideas for breakthrough products from single lead
users. Instead, LU project teams assessed ideas from
a number of lead users and used Phase 4 of the LU
process to combine those ideas. For example, a 3M
LU study designed to identify better ways to prevent
infections associated with surgery created a break-
through product concept by combining insights from,
among others, an expert in wound healing, a lead-
ing veterinary surgeon, and a specialist in theatrical
makeup with special expertise in adhering materi-
als to skin. These compound ideas were then novel

Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 8, August 2002

1055

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 14:36 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
LILIEN, MORRISON, SEARLS, SONNACK, AND VON HIPPEL

Performance Assessment of Lead User Data

intellectual property that could be protected by 3M.
(In 3M’s LU process, lead users retain rights to ideas
generated prior to Phase 4 LU workshops, but assign
rights to ideas generated at LU workshops to 3M.)

Finally, note that LU projects can and do fail.
Because we restricted membership in both our cross-
sectional and longitudinal samples to funded ideas,
we did not include any LU or non-LU ideas that
failed to cross this initial evaluation hurdle. We do
know, however, that only ﬁve of the seven LU projects
initiated during our period of study at 3M gener-
ated ideas that were considered worthy of funding
by management. We have no data about the num-
ber of non-LU idea-generation projects failing to cross
this hurdle, but our ﬁeldwork suggests that the non-
LU failure rate was at least as high as the LU failure
rate.

that

Relying most heavily upon our cross-sectional
results, we suggest
the question that moti-
vated this study is answered in the afﬁrmative:
The LU idea-generation method does appear to
generate better results than traditional methods. It
therefore appears to merit further investigation and
development.3

3 3M top management seems to share this assessment as two quotes
collected during our ﬁeldwork suggest:

We were using traditional methods of marketing
research in our division, and were able to achieve
our corporate growth targets. However, we found that
traditional techniques are not able to identify newly
emerging breakthroughs in a rapidly-moving ﬁeld
like Telecoms. Now the LU process has been made the
centerpiece of our new idea generation activities for
product breakthroughs, and we have an abundance
of radical new ideas. The challenge now is ﬁnding
resources for all of them. –Roger Lacey, VP of 3M
Telecoms Division.
This is probably the best process I’ve seen for replicat-
ing what originally made this company great. What
made 3M was our people going out and creating solu-
tions with leading-edge customers. I think that, for a
period of time, we lost a lot of that. It’s very hard to
create a process that will do it. But this [the LU Pro-
cess] is the closest that I’ve seen (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) I’m glad that it’s
being adopted across the company.—Bill Coyne, 3M
Senior VP of R&D.

7. Suggestions for Future Research
The LU paradigm opens up a number of research
opportunities, including: (1) further empirical study
of the process in other organizations, (2) new method
development regarding how to identify users hold-
ing leading-edge information of commercial value;
(3) new methods to obtain information from lead users
and build that information into commercially viable
new product and service offerings, and (4) designing
and studying the organizational metrics and struc-
tures that lead to successful implementation of new
processes like the LU method.

With respect to Opportunity 1, we suggest that it
would be useful to conduct empirical research tracing
key elements of new ideas generated to speciﬁc inputs
and individuals, including lead users both inside and
outside the target market. Such research could deter-
mine whether there is a causal relationship between
seeking information from lead users in advanced ana-
log markets and the likelihood of identifying ideas
for new products and services that will be “break-
throughs” for the target market.

With respect to Opportunities 2 and 3, consider
that in the traditional idea-generation paradigm, idea
generation involves ﬁrst identifying and quantifying
the intensity of needs shared by many users and
then having internal manufacturer personnel
look
that users will ﬁnd respon-
for a novel product
sive to those general needs. The LU idea-generation
paradigm assumes that key elements of the desired
creative idea for a breakthrough already exist among
leading-edge users, with the problem being to ﬁnd
it and develop its potential. In other words, the key
challenge in the traditional paradigm is idea genera-
tion, and in the LU paradigm it is idea search.

The LU process analyzed here utilizes a network-
ing procedure to identify and learn from a few care-
fully selected lead users both within and outside the
target market. Other possibilities exist for mining LU
information that also deserve exploration, drawing
on emerging evidence that LU innovation is not rare.
Empirical studies of user innovation in four very
different areas show a signiﬁcant fraction of users,
ranging from 10% to 36%, reporting that they have

1056

Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 8, August 2002

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 14:36 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
LILIEN, MORRISON, SEARLS, SONNACK, AND VON HIPPEL

Performance Assessment of Lead User Data

developed or modiﬁed products.4 In light of this evi-
dence, methods to process information from many
lead users simultaneously could be developed and
explored.

Concerning Opportunity 4, note that even given
the apparent successes at 3M, diffusion and further
implementation is a challenge within the ﬁrm. Recall
that Olson and Bakke (2001) reported on the lack
of extensive implementation of the LU method at

Cinet in spite of demonstrated success, and suggest
that it is “necessary to pressure or reward personnel
in order to make permanent changes in established
routines” (p. 380). Resistance to innovation within
corporations is a well-known phenomenon. Studies of
how to address that resistance and make successful
new corporate practices “stick” are clearly important.
In sum, we hope that these results will stimulate
other researchers to explore and develop what we
see as a promising paradigm for the idea-generation
phase of new product and service development.

4 9.8% of users of outdoor consumer products reported innovat-
ing for own use (Luthje 2000); 26% of users of library information
systems reported innovating for own use (Morrison et al. 2000);
24.3% of users of printed circuit CAD software reported innovating
for own use (Urban and von Hippel 1988); 36% of users of pipe
hanger hardware reported innovating for own use (Herstatt and
von Hippel 1992).

Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge comments and suggestions by
John Roberts and Christophe Van den Bulte, and appreciate the
support of Penn State’s Institute for the Study of Business Markets
and MIT’s Innovation Lab.

Appendix:

Idea Description Form

We are interested in information about:

This new product idea has the following characteristics:

Novelty: Relative to competition our product/service will be
Originality/newness of customer needs addressed
Global market potential (all competitors) in $ millions
% Our company’s global market share in Year 5
Estimated company sales in Year 5: $ millions
Proﬁt potential (estimated % proﬁt-operating income before taxes—5 years after introduction)
Probability of business success (% chance of overall success)
Estimated LOSS on sales of related products/services for this business unit in 5 years (loss due to new

product/service replacing existing product/service sales)

Estimated GAIN on sales of related products/services for this business unit in 5 years (gain due to increased

sales of related existing products/services for this business unit)
Fit with this business unit’s current sales and distribution channels
Fit with this business unit’s current manufacturing capabilities
Fit with current strategic plan of our business unit
Strategic importance to our business unit, regardless of ﬁt with current plans
Importance of projected intellectual property protection obtained
Potential to proliferate into an entire product line

10-point scale, 1 = low, 10 = high
10-point scale, 1 = low, 10 = high

$

$

$

$

M
%
M
%
%
M

M

10-point scale, 1 = low, 10 = high
10-point scale, 1 = low, 10 = high
10-point scale, 1 = low, 10 = high
10-point scale, 1 = low, 10 = high
10-point scale, 1 = low, 10 = high
10-point scale, 1 = low, 10 = high

Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 8, August 2002

1057

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 14:36 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
LILIEN, MORRISON, SEARLS, SONNACK, AND VON HIPPEL

Performance Assessment of Lead User Data

References
Adamson, R. E. 1952. Functional ﬁxedness as related to problem
solving: A repetition of three experiments. J. Experiment. Psych.
44(4) 288–291.
,
elapsed time and to set. J. Experiment. Psych. 47(2) 122–126.

, D. W. Taylor. 1954. Functional ﬁxedness as related to

Allen, T. J., D. G. Marquis. 1964. Positive and negative biasing sets:
The effects of prior experience on research performance. IEEE
Trans. Engrg. Management EM-11(4) 158–161.

Armstrong, J. S., ed. 2001. Principles of Forecasting: A Handbook for

Researchers and Practitioners. Kluwer, Norwell, MA.

Birch, H. G., H. J. Rabinowitz. 1951. The negative effect of previous
experience on productive thinking. J. Experiment. Psych. 41(2)
121–125.

Coller, M., T. L. Yohn. 1998. Management forecasts: What do we

know? Financial Analysts J. 54(1) 58–62.

Cook, T. D., D. T. Campbell. 1979. Quasi-Experimentation: Design and

Analysis Issues. Houghton-Mifﬂin, Boston, MA.

Cooper, R. G. 1993. Winning at New Products: Accelerating the Process

Council of Economic Advisors. 2000. Economic Report of the Presi-

from Idea to Launch. Addison Wesley, Reading, MA.
dent. (cid:7)www.access.gpo.gov/usbudget/fy2001/erp.html(cid:8).

Douglas, M. 1986. How Institutions Think. Syracuse University Press,

Syracuse, NY.

Dunker, K. 1945. On problem-solving. Lynne S. Lees, trans Psych.

Monographs 58(5) (Whole No. 270).

Eliashberg, J., G. L. Lilien, V. Rao. 1997. Minimizing technologi-
cal oversights: A marketing research perspective. R. Garud,
P. Nayyar, Praveen Rattah, Z. B. Shapira, eds. Technologi-
cal Innovation: Oversights and Foresights. Cambridge University
Press, New York, 214–230.

Enos, J. L. 1962. Petroleum Progress and Proﬁts: A History of Process

Innovation. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Finke, R. A., T. B. Ward, S. M. Smith. 1992. Creative Cognition. MIT

Press, Cambridge, MA.

Freeman, C. 1968. Chemical process plant: Innovation and the

world market. National Inst. Econom. Rev. 45(August) 29–57.

Glaser, B. G., A. L. Strauss. 1967. The Discovery of Grounded
Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research. Aldine de Gruyter,
Hawthorne, NY.

Goldenberg, J., D. R. Lehmann, D. Mazursky. 2001. The idea itself
and the circumstances of its emergence as predictors of new
product success. Management Sci. 47(1) 69–84.
, D. Mazursky, S. Solomon. 1999. Toward identifying the
inventive templates of new products: A channeled ideation
approach. J. Marketing Res. 34(2) 200–210.

Grassman, W. K. 1981. Stochastic Systems for Management. North

Holland, New York.

Grifﬁn, A. 1997. Drivers of NPD Success: The 1997 PDMA Report.
Product Development & Management Association, Chicago,
IL.
, A. L. Page. 1996. PDMA success measurement project: Rec-
ommended measures for product development success and
failure. J. Product Innovation Management 13 478–496.

Haman, G. 1996. Techniques and tools to generate breakthrough
products. M. D. Rosenau Jr., ed. PDMA Handbook of New Prod-
uct Development. John Wiley and Sons, New York, 167–178.

Hargadon, A. 1996. Brainstorming groups in context: Effectiveness
in a product design ﬁrm. with R. I. Sutton. Admin. Sci. Quart.
41 685–718.

Herstatt, C., E. von Hippel. 1992. From experience: Developing new
product concepts via the lead user method: A case study in a
“low tech” ﬁeld. J. Product Innovation Management. 9(3) 213–221.
Lave, J. 1988. Cognition in Practice: Mind, Mathematics and Culture in

Everyday Life. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Lonsdale, R. T., N. M. Noel, S. F. Stasch. 1996. Classiﬁcation of
sources of new product ideas. M. D. Rosenau Jr., ed. PDMA
Handbook of New Product Development. John Wiley and Sons,
New York, 179–194.

Luthje, C. 2000. Characteristics of innovating users in a consumer
goods ﬁeld: An empirical study of sport-related product con-
sumers. Working paper, MIT Sloan School of Management,
Cambridge, MA.

Malhotra, N. 1996. Marketing Research: An Applied Orientation, 2nd

ed. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

McQuarrie, E. F. 1998. Customer Visits: Building a Better Market Focus.

Sage, Newbury Park, CA.

Mills, T. C. 1999. The Econometric Modeling of Financial Time Series.

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Moorman, C., A. S. Miner. 1997. The impact of organizational mem-
ory on new product performance and creativity. J. Marketing
Res. 34(February) 91–106.

Morrison, P. D., J. H. Roberts, E. von Hippel. 2000. Determinants
of user innovation and innovation sharing in a local market.
Management Sci. 46(12) 1513–1527.

Olson, E. L., G. Bakke. 2001. Implementing the lead user method
in a high technology ﬁrm: A longitudinal study of intentions
versus actions. J. Product Innovation Management. 18(2) 388–395.
Rangaswamy, A., G. L. Lilien. 1997. Software tools for new product

development. J. Marketing Res. 34(1) 177–184.

Rossiter, J. R., G. L. Lilien. 1994. New “brainstorming” principles.

Austral. J. Management. 19(1) 61–72.

Shah, S. 1999. Sources and patterns of innovation in a consumer
products ﬁeld: Innovations in sporting equipment. Working
Paper #410 (May), MIT Sloan School of Management, Cam-
bridge, MA.

Shaw, B. 1985. The role of the interaction between the user and the
manufacturer in medical equipment innovation. R&D Manage-
ment. 15(4) 283–292.

Stalk Jr., G., D. K. Pecaut, B. Burnett. 1996. Breaking compromises,

breakaway growth. Harvard Bus. Rev. (September–October.)

Thomas, R. J. 1993. New Product Development: Managing and Fore-

casting for New Product Success. Wiley, New York.

Tull, D. 1967. The relationship of actual and predicted sales and

proﬁts in new product introductions. J. Bus. 40 233–250.

1058

Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 8, August 2002

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 14:36 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
LILIEN, MORRISON, SEARLS, SONNACK, AND VON HIPPEL

Performance Assessment of Lead User Data

Urban, G. L., E. von Hippel. 1988. Lead user analyses for the
development of new industrial products. Management Sci. 34(5)
569–582.

Van Maanen, J. 1988. Tales of the Field: On Writing Ethnography. The

, S. Thomke, M. Sonnack. 1999. Creating breakthroughs at 3M.
Harvard Business Review 77 (September-October) 47–57.

Wenger, E. 1998. Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning and Iden-

tity. Cambridge University Press, New York.

University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Willis, P. 1981. Learning to Labor. Morningside Edition, Columbia

von Hippel, E. 1986. Lead users: A source of novel product con-

University Press, New York.

cepts. Management Sci. 32(7) 791–805.
. 1988. The Sources of Innovation. Oxford University Press,
New York.

Workman, J. P. Jr. 1993. Marketing’s limited role in new product
development in one computer systems ﬁrm. J. Marketing Res.
33(4) 405–421.

Accepted by Ralph Katz; received September 2001. This paper was with the authors 3 months for 2 revisions.

Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 8, August 2002

1059

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 14:36 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 