The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/0025-1747.htm

Pressures affecting green supply

chain performance

Sang M. Lee and Jin Sung Rha

Department of Management, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln,

Nebraska, USA

Donghyun Choi

Department of Management, Kansas State University, Manhattan,

Kansas, USA, and
Yonghwi Noh

College of Business Administration, Myongji University, Seoul, South Korea

Abstract
Purpose – This study aims to empirically investigate the relationship between the directions of
pressures affecting green supply chain management (GSCM) and supply chain (SC) performance.
Design/methodology/approach – This research is based on a survey because there is no archival
database providing detailed information on GSC practices and performance. A survey questionnaire
was developed to collect research data, based on the GSC literature and a pilot study in the ﬁeld. The
authors developed hypotheses based on two theories: institutional theory and the resource-based view
(RBV). Conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) and structural equation modeling (SEM) were used to test
the hypotheses with SPSS (16.0) and AMOS (5.0).
Findings – The results conﬁrmed the importance of implementing environmental SC practices to
sustain organizations’ competitive advantage and performance. Increased SC ﬂexibility helped reduce
resources, through decreased cost factors and improved output. Enterprises with environmental SC
policies tended to increase SC ﬂexibility and, hence, enhanced proﬁts.
Originality/value – This paper applies organizational
theories to GSCM by extending the
institutional-versus-internal-pressure construct to the way enterprises implement GSC strategies for
sustainable SC.

Keywords Green supply chain management, Supply chain ﬂexibility, Supply chain performance,
Supply chain management, Environmental management

Paper type Research paper

1. Introduction
Supply chain management
(SCM) plays a central role in the ﬁrm’s global
competitiveness. A supply chain (SC) is a network of buyers and suppliers (Choi
and Hong, 2002) which focuses on how a ﬁrm coordinates its partner organizations’
processes, technology, and capabilities to improve its competitive advantage (Farley,
1997). Previous studies on SCM focused on diverse topics including inventory control,
risk management, sustainable SCM, SC network and the like. Many researchers and
practitioners have attempted to ﬁnd the factors that affect SCM either positively or
negatively. In particular, green supply chain management (GSCM) has emerged as an
important topic within the domain of sustainable SCM, which includes environmental
management and producing goods or service ethically and fairly along the SC (Walker
and Jones, 2012).

Pressures
affecting GSC
performance

1753

Management Decision
Vol. 51 No. 8, 2013
pp. 1753-1768
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
0025-1747
DOI 10.1108/MD-12-2012-0841

