Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 284–293

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Int. J. Production Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijpe

The role of customer integration in extended producer responsibility:
A study of Chinese export manufacturers
Kee-hung Lai a,n, Christina W.Y. Wong b,1, Y.H. Venus Lun a,2
a Department of Logistics and Maritime Studies, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong
b Business Division, Institute of Textiles and Clothing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 22 May 2012
Accepted 13 June 2013
Available online 5 September 2013

Keywords:
Environmental Management
Manufacturing
China
Empirical
Export

Extended producer responsibility (EPR) is increasingly emphasized by manufacturing enterprises to
improve eco-efﬁciency and to satisfy the growing environmental requirements expected in the market.
This trend is salient for export-oriented manufacturers mandated to comply with environmental
regulatory requirements before entry is granted for their products in the requisite overseas countries.
Drawing on the contingency theory, we examine the EPR practices undertaken by export-oriented
manufacturers and the market and ﬁnancial performance outcomes when such practices are character-
ized with low and high levels of customer integration in their implementation. Survey data collected
from 134 manufacturing exporters in China show positive association of EPR practices with the
performance outcomes. Using split group analysis, we found performance differences between the high
and low manufacturer groups in customer integration for their EPR practices implementation.
Particularly, the high customer integration group achieves better market performance whereas the
low group weak in customer integration reap greater ﬁnancial beneﬁts. Managers need to understand
the role of customer integration and the ﬁnancial and market performance implications of implementing
EPR practices to align with their performance goals and to build their supply chain system capabilities in
the age of global complexity.

& 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1.

Introduction

Extended producer responsibility (EPR) originated from Europe
as a policy concept aimed at extending producers' responsibility
for their products to the post-consumption stage of their product
life with the presumption that manufacturers have the capability
to reduce environmental impacts (OECD, 2001). The policy objec-
tive is to shift the burden of the waste management costs resultant
from products at the end of their lifecycle from local tax payers
back to those original manufacturers offering products in the
market. There are two major impetuses for governments to
promote EPR for environmental protection. The ﬁrst motivation
relates to the relief of ﬁnancial burdens by local governments on
waste management. Second, by providing incentives to reduce
consumption of primary resources, manufacturers are encouraged
to utilize more secondary materials and undertake product design
changes for reducing disposal and waste in production activities
(Link and Naveh, 2006). This EPR concept emphasizes the principle

n Corresponding author. Tel.: þ852 2766 7920; fax: þ852 2330 2704.
E-mail addresses: mike.lai@polyu.edu.hk, khunglai@gmail.com (K.-h. Lai),
tcchris@polyu.edu.hk (C.W.Y. Wong), lgtvlun@polyu.edu.hk (Y.H. Venus Lun).
1 Tel.: þ852 2766 6415.
2 Tel.: þ852 2766 7415.

0925-5273/$ - see front matter & 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2013.06.028

of waste prevention by manufacturers with supporting practices
such as recycling, reprocessing, and reusing the components and
materials with residual values. An important goal of EPR is to
reduce disposal, waste, and consumption of resources by encoura-
ging manufacturers to use sustainable materials and design
products for recycling. This policy-oriented environmental initia-
tive has led to the response by many industries such as automobile
(Milanez and Buhrs, 2009; Wang and Ming, 2011) and electronics
(Khetriwal et al., 2009a) to establish industry standards as refer-
ence for manufacturers to develop corresponding solutions for
mitigating disposal and waste of reusable materials or components
caused by their industrial activities. This policy trend for extending
the environmental responsibility to upstream producers suggests
that EPR practices can be a feasible way for manufacturing
enterprises to seek more sustainable forms of development by
improving their overall eco-efﬁciency.

In recent years, we have seen growing concern on environ-
mental degradation in emerging countries (e.g., China) due to their
rapid industrialization and fast growing consumption pattern. As a
popular policy instrument, EPR mandates manufacturers to treat
or dispose their products at the end-of-life with the potential to
protect the environment and reduce costs incurred from develop-
ing landﬁll. The aim is to reduce waste generation at the source,
encourage environmentally-friendly product design, and support


K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 284–293

285

achievement of the public goal on 3Rs pertaining to reduction,
recycling, and reuse in materials management. On the managerial
side, manufacturers remain unsure how EPR can be applied as an
organizational practice to improve their ﬁnancial and market
performance. The literature on EPR tends to focus on anecdote
from governmental views with a conﬁne to policy implications
(Khetriwal et al., 2009a) as well as the effect on manufacturers'
businesses and consumer prices (Atasu et al., 2009; Webster and
Mitra, 2007). The importance of EPR for managing wastes in
consumption based society is recognized, yet its pursuit as key
management practices by manufacturers to achieve ﬁnancial and
market performance goals remains an inchoate ﬁeld of study. This
paper adds knowledge to this important topic by investigating
various EPR practices including recycle, reprocess, reuse, inspec-
tion and separation of parts, adoption of modular design, and
cannibalization as well as their links with performance outcomes.
Speciﬁcally, we empirically test the EPR practices–performance
relationship to ascertain the business value of EPR, providing
managerial insights into the contributions of EPR practices to
manufacturers' performance goals.

Another study objective is to investigate the role of customer
integration in the performance outcomes of EPR implementation.
While EPR emphasizes managing the post-use products, it impli-
citly assumes that customers would fulﬁll their responsibility
voluntarily by returning the end-of-life products to the product
manufacturers where participation by the former is presumably
beneﬁcial to the latter (Forslind, 2005). Although end consumer
participation has been acknowledged as a critical success factor of
EPR implementation (e.g., Nicol, 2007), there is no empirical
evidence regarding whether the integration of customer participa-
tion by manufacturer determines the performance results of
organizational EPR efforts. In particular, there is a knowledge gap
on the role of customer integration in the EPR-performance link.
Customer integration is concerned with participation of customers
in the product return process and their attention and efforts made
to facilitate the manufacturers' EPR practices. Integrating with
customers is an important part of EPR for manufacturers to meet
the performance objectives. This is particularly salient for export-
oriented manufacturers mandated to comply with environmental
regulatory requirements before their products are allowed for
distribution and sales in the requisite overseas countries. In this
study, producer is sampled in scope as product manufacturers
with overseas customers targeted as the primary market for their
output items. Undertaking EPR may incur costs because organiza-
tional efforts are needed to coordinate with customers, fulﬁll
customer expectations to carry out environmental audits, and
manage the retrieval of usable products. Prior analytical studies
have found that such customer integration may lead to excess or
shortage of returned products, which makes inventory manage-
ment difﬁcult for manufacturers (Guide et al., 2000). In a similar
vein, the economic and social costs of disposal for excessively
returned products, particularly those classiﬁed as unsuitable for
remanufacturing, can be high. Based on the contingency theory
with empirical evidence, we examine the market and ﬁnancial
impact of EPR practices implementation under different levels of
customer integration with managerial insights on the business
value of EPR practices and implementation. While the importance
of EPR for manufacturing operations and its performance beneﬁts
are recognized in view of the escalating public quest for environ-
ment protection, the literature pays scant attention to the EPR
practices–performance link and the role of customer integration in
the process. To address this research void, this study seeks to
answer the following research questions:

Question 1: Do EPR practices bring performance beneﬁts to
manufacturing enterprises?

Question 2: What is the role of customer integration on the
implementation of EPR practices by manufacturers? In what
ways does customer integration affect the EPR practices–
performance relationship?

Answering these two research questions make two important
contributions to the literature. This study is one of the ﬁrst studies
to empirically examine the EPR-performance link. The results shed
light on the value of EPR practices for manufacturers to undertake
their environmental responsibility and seek performance gains.
Considering the customer role for manufacturing enterprises to
build their supply chain system capability, this study advances
knowledge on how integrating customers in the implementation
of EPR practices differentiate their market and ﬁnancial perfor-
mance outcomes.

2. Research background and hypothesis development

2.1. Conceptualization of EPR

In this study, we deﬁne EPR as management practices including
take-back, recycling, and ﬁnal disposal of products that are helpful
for manufacturing enterprises to relieve the environmental bur-
dens bought by their products. While EPR focuses on utilizing
reusable materials and components by incorporating modular
design and capturing residual values from returned products,
EPR is different from the notion of green supply chain manage-
ment, green purchasing, and corporate environmental manage-
ment. Green supply chain management
focuses on inter-
organizational efforts in managing the supply chain processes to
reduce adverse environmental impact from purchasing of materi-
als, production, to distribution of ﬁnished products (Sarkis et al.,
2011). Green purchasing can be considered as one of the major
processes of green supply chain management. As EPR manages
residual values of returned products, green purchasing takes
account of organizational sourcing decision with a focus on
reducing use of environmentally unsustainable materials by devel-
oping purchasing policy, deﬁning environmental objectives, and
monitoring performance of suppliers (Chen, 2005; Wu et al.,
2008). Lastly, EPR is different from the concept of organizational
environmental management that is conﬁned to organizational
efforts and practices to reduce their adverse environmental impact
through product and process stewardship with an emphasis on
reducing liability and costs (Nicol, 2007). In comparison to the
environmental management standard on ISO 14000 which is
about process control with environmental consideration, EPR is
concerned with the management practices by manufacturing
enterprises on product take-back, recycling, and ﬁnal disposal to
reduce harms caused by their products to the environment.

One major goal of EPR is to mitigate the environmental
damages by reducing disposal to landﬁll at the end of a product
life. There are also economic values of EPR practices for manu-
facturers to collect and process the returned products through
which to capture the residual values by remanufacturing, repro-
cessing, recycling, and reusing the reusable components. The
return product streams cover packaging, electrical appliances
and electronics, batteries, used oil, tires, and end-of-life vehicles.
A major element of any EPR policy is the take-back requirement
mandating individual manufacturers to collect and treat the
resultant waste. Alternatively, product manufacturers are charged
with ﬁnancial obligations for these take-back activities. It is highly
desirable that manufacturers incorporate environmental consid-
eration at the product design stage to facilitate their subsequent
take-back activities. This product stewardship emphasis improves
and expedites the treatment of returned products (Subramanian


286

K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 284–293

et al., 2009) because the responsible manufacturers need to
inspect dissembled parts, separate reusable parts, recycle, repro-
cess, and reuse the reusable parts in the product take-back process
(Chung and Wee, 2008). This collection of EPR practices is
expected to enhance the producer's ability to competently satisfy
both the international and local requirements on environmental
protection.

Many manufacturing enterprises in emerging countries (e.g.,
China and Brazil) produce items targeted at global markets. At the
same time, they must comply with related EPR legislations
enforced by different governments, e.g., European Community
Directives on Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE),
if approval is necessary for their products to enter the market. For
regulatory compliance, manufacturing exporters are required to
provide a program or system of collecting and processing their
products sold in the markets. Such requirement aims at mitigating
the environmental damages caused by manufacturers through
closing the supply chain loop of their products (Lai and Wong,
2012; Lai et al., 2012). To undertake this extended responsibility
needs organizational effort for coordination with downstream
customers, e.g., retailers and distributors, to collect the returned
products for fulﬁlling the collection, recovery, and recycling
regulatory objectives imposed by the local market. It is crucial
that products are designed and made in such a way that makes it
easy for the original manufacturers to recycle and remanufacture
the reusable components throughout the product life cycle.

2.2. Chinese manufacturing and EPR

There is an increasing trend for China-made products entering
international markets in recent decades and servicing the global
production demands. This internationalization trend of Chinese
manufacturing enterprises is noteworthy because they are often
found to be less environmentally conscious and responsible
relative to their developed-country counterparts. The commensu-
rate emissions that are generated during the manufacturing
processes have caused substantial environmental problems and
resource scarcity within China. There are also serious environ-
mental concerns such as air and water pollution, global warming,
and ozone depletion attributable to China's increasing economic
prowess.

While the Chinese manufacturing export expands, the environ-
mental burdens brought by China-made products will be worsen-
ing. Such development highlights the important need of EPR
practices by Chinese manufacturers to meet the growing environ-
mental requirements in international markets while relieving the
damages caused to the natural environment. This shift of environ-
mental responsibility to upstream manufacturers will accelerate
because a growing number of governments (e.g., the Chinese
government) have incorporated EPR into their environmental
policy. Meanwhile, the Chinese government is promoting the
development of a circular economy so as to alleviate the contra-
diction between rapid economic growth and shortage of resources
(Zhu et al., 2010). The development of a circular economy requires
economic systems to operate according to the materials, water,
and energy cycling principles in support of natural systems. Such
principles are characterized with eco-systemic self-sustaining
properties emphasizing recycling of essential materials and
energy, improvement of capacity for the wastes by one entity to
be used as a resource by another entity, and development of self-
organization capacities. This development approach as circular
economy is prompted by the Chinese government as a national
strategy to achieve sustainability, particularly as excessive
resources consumption and pollution are critical hurdles compro-
mising continuous economic growth of the country. Under this
environmental initiative, the manufacturing industry is a targeted

sector for the management of environmental protection and
resource issues encountered in China.

As a viable means for Chinese manufacturers to resolve both
the domestic and international pressures for preserving the
environment, EPR practices are also a valuable organizational
mechanism for performance beneﬁts and alignment with public
expectation on environmental protection and resource conserva-
tion. For an EPR initiative to succeed, the importance of supply
chain coordination for managing the life-cycle of environmental
performance of products should not be neglected (Subramanian
et al., 2009). Manufacturers need to understand the role of
customer integration in supply chain coordination for environ-
mental
initiatives to be successfully implemented (Zhu et al.,
2011). Recent research has also highlighted the essence of custo-
mer integration for a greener supply chain (Wong et al., 2011).

2.3. EPR and performance

Success in addressing environmental issues may provide oppor-
tunities to add business value and gain market acceptance. Recent
studies also suggest that practicing EPR can improve the performance
of enterprises with less environmental damage (Subramanian et al.,
2009). One appeal for practicing EPR is that it enables manufacturers
to internalize costs relating to environmentally-friendly products
with the assumption that products are designed in such a way
that components remain at the end of the product's life and there
are opportunities for recycling and disposal for the used products.
For instance, if electronic appliances were collected and contents
such as rare earth materials in component parts are extracted for
recycling, the need to consume virgin materials for manufacturing
new units will be reduced. Products manufactured this way can gain
market attraction, especially for environmentally-conscious custo-
mers, due to less waste generation and long-term residues damaging
the environment. Building an environmentally responsible corporate
image can be difﬁcult for competitors to imitate as it helps gain
customers' conﬁdence in the environmental impact of the products
and encourage customer patronizing the products (Fombrun, 1996).
Manufacturers also receive more business opportunities and are in a
superior position to negotiate for better terms of exchange when
trading and collaborating with international partners that emphasize
waste prevention and disposal to their local market (Ginsberg and
Bloom, 2004), meaning improved ability to access international
markets. Moreover, the adoption of modular design in EPR and the
recovery of reusable parts for reuse in repairing, refurbishing, or
remanufacturing of other products can be helpful for shortening the
product manufacturing lead time. Modular design is part of the EPR
practices that allows disassembly of components by manufacturers
for product take-back, recycling, and disposal of their products. The
modularity allows manufacturers to assemble a product from a set of
smaller modules designed in an independent way which can func-
tion collectively as a whole (Baldwin and Clark, 1997). The modular
product design is beneﬁcial for organizational ﬂexibility and mana-
ging systems in the supply chain (Sanchez and Mahoney, 1996). Such
product stewardship also brings performance beneﬁts to manufac-
turing enterprises in pollution reduction and ﬁnancial gains due to
cost saving (Wong et al., 2012). The recycling or reusing the usable
components from returned products also reduces the lead time of
new product development due to decreased needs of sourcing for
new supplies. The faster processing is beneﬁcial for manufacturers to
develop market advantage because of enhanced efﬁciency. For
example, Levi Strauss's returns-processing system, known as R.I.S.E.
(returns, irregulars, samples, exit strategy) helps shorten the time
needed to process returned products from weeks to days by sorting
the returned products and shipping them to different locations for
reprocessing or resell (Anon, 2001). These EPR practices are valuable
for manufacturers to establish a green corporate image and gain


K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 284–293

287

acceptance in the marketplace and hence better chances of selling
products in the international market. Therefore, we expect that:

H1. Manufacturers implementing EPR practices more intensively
tend to achieve better market performance.

The eco-efﬁciency achieved through EPR can reduce consump-
tion of materials and decrease waste production; thus, the costs
for materials acquisition and waste treatment can be lowered. The
product stewardship emphasis on EPR serves to reduce environ-
mental burden with less use of hazardous and nonrenewable
materials for product manufacturing. Although the implementa-
tion of EPR requires collaboration with downstream partners to
perform such activities as product collection, disassembly, and
inspection, EPR contributes business value by attracting and
retaining environmentally conscious customers. Adoption of mod-
ular design as part of EPR promotes recycling and reuse of product
components with eco-design as well as the adoption of recyclable
parts and packaging for cost savings by reducing inventory
investment and cost of disposal. EPR practices such as inspection
of disassembled parts and separation of reusable parts are useful
for recovery of assets and cost containment concerning returned
products and hence reduction of materials acquisition costs and
inventory requirements. For example, as part of Gap's “solid waste
and recycling program”, it uses less corrugated cardboard and
utilizes recyclable materials for their containers. Doing so helps
reduce cardboard waste by 57,000 t and saves US$20 million per
year. There are also ﬁnancial performance beneﬁts of EPR practices
on recycling, reuse, reprocessing, and recovery to save disposal
costs and generate revenue from resale. Such green practices are
also helpful for generating revenues by capturing reusable com-
ponents to be sold at after-market (Barnett and Salomon, 2006;
Linton and Jayaraman, 2005). For example, to avoid disposal, IKEA
uses its returned/damaged products as spare parts or restores
them to saleable condition at reduced price. These practices allow
the manufacturers to disassemble component parts for capturing
residual values of returned products from the market and lessen
consumption of new inputs by utilizing reusable parts recovered
from returned products. A focus on EPR helps manufacturers
reduce the risk of creating waste and excessive consumption of
virgin materials, which not only improve cost savings (Hindo and
Arndt, 2006), but also avoid regulation violation. Accordingly, we
anticipate that:

H2. Manufacturers implementing EPR practices more intensively
tend to achieve better ﬁnancial performance.

2.4. Moderating role of customer integration

The contingency theory views a ﬁrm as an open system, where
its performance is affected by the environment (Van de Ven and
Drazin, 1985). The alignment of organizational processes with the
business environment determines how a ﬁrm performs (Thompson,
1967). The organizational process is endogenous that is decided and
controlled by ﬁrms, whereas the business environment is exogen-
ous that ﬁrms have relatively less control over the conditions
(Astley and Van de Ven, 1983). This contingency theoretic view
suggests that the performance of EPR practices is dependent not
only on how well a ﬁrm handles the returned products, but also the
level of customer integration in support of the processes.
In
managing the supply chain as a system, it is important to involve
related parties including customers to achieve such supply chain
system capabilities on lean and agility for greater cost reduction and
shorter lead-time (Gunasekaran et al., 2008). The development of
such capabilities through implementing EPR practices and to
achieve the desired ﬁnancial and market performance outcomes
should pay attention to the performance contingencies inﬂuenced

by the related parties. While customer integration in EPR demands
commitment from not only manufacturers but also their respective
customers, the contingency theory provides a theoretical ground to
examine the ﬁnancial and market performance implications of EPR
when the practices are implemented with customer integration
that is relatively less controllable by manufacturers.

We argue that the performance outcomes of implementing EPR
practices are attributable to the match between its strategic action
and its situational conditions. Implementation of EPR practices is
considered a strategic action beneﬁcial to the performance of
manufacturers. Nevertheless, they should not ignore customer
integration as the situational condition that affects the EPR
practices–performance link. According to the contingency theory,
manufacturers need a match with customer integration to bring
the performance beneﬁts of EPR practices. The success of EPR
practices needs cooperation from downstream customers for
product take-back, recycling, and ﬁnal disposal. Hence, the EPR
practices–performance relationship can be contingent on how
well customers consider their responsibility to retrieve usable
products from the markets, carry out environmental audits of the
focal manufacturers, and take part in product return programs.
Furthermore, there are marketing and ﬁnancial perspectives on
the role of customer integration in the implementation of EPR
practices. The ﬁrst perspective implies customer perception and
participation in the product return program, highlighting their
interest in EPR and the related efforts. With an emphasis on EPR,
manufacturers can develop a reputation of being environmentally
responsible and committed (Rindova et al., 2005; Roberts and
Dowling, 2002). Such corporate reputation is valuable for manu-
facturers to improve their public image, obtain customer support,
and enter international markets with strict EPR regulations.
Customer integration allows better market access to manufac-
turers with which they can expedite lead time of product manu-
facturing due to additional source of materials and components.
Such integration also provides market information on the latest
environmental protection requirements and expectations, enabling
manufacturers to strategize their EPR program to better meet the
market needs. The increased customer integration can therefore be
helpful for improving corporate image and organizational positioning
in the marketplace. Thus, according to the contingency theory, the
relationship between EPR and performance depends on the extent to
which ﬁrms integrate with their customers in the implementation of
ERP practices.

H3. The positive relationship between implementing EPR prac-
tices and the market performance of
the manufacturers is
strengthened when customer integration in the implementation
is at a high level.

From the ﬁnancial perspective, customer integration introduces
uncertainty to the implementation of EPR practices by manufac-
turers. Customer integration increases uncertainty in their environ-
mental efforts because the amount and delivery time of returned
products is highly dependent on customer willingness to cooperate
and facilitate the EPR practices (Guide et al., 2003; Subramanian
et al., 2009). These uncertainties can introduce excessive or short-
age of returned products that increase the difﬁculty of managing
inventory and hence administrative and operational tasks (e.g.,
documentation) to satisfy customer requirements and monitor the
performance outcomes of implementing EPR. Customer integration
in EPR may raise customers' scrutiny in the performance outcomes
of EPR practices as customers consider themselves as part of an EPR
program with high expectation on the resultant environmental
improvement. As such, customer integration may incur costs to
manufacturers because extra organizational efforts are required to
handle uncertainties of incoming inventory and satisfy evolving


288

K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 284–293

Customer 
Integration   

H3

H4 

EPR practices 

H1 

H2 

Market 
performance   

Financial 
performance     

Fig. 1. Research framework.

customer expectations. Hence, we propose the following relation-
ship. Fig. 1 depicts the research framework guiding this study.

H4. The positive relationship between implementing EPR prac-
tices and the ﬁnancial performance of the manufacturers is
weakened when customer integration in the implementation is
at a high level.

3. Methodology

3.1. Sample characteristics and data collection

As this study investigates EPR practices and the role of
customer integration in their implementation that are highly
relevant to the manufacturing industry, the sample organizations
for this study were drawn from the global manufacturing base –
China – that produces and exports manufactured items world-
wide. With the global presence of China-made products, customer
integration through such means as taking part in a product return
program and carrying out environmental audits of Chinese man-
ufacturers plays an important role in the success of any EPR
program. Also, China's fast progression of industrialization has
aroused international concerns on its pollution causing health
issues ranging from birth defects and pre-mature death (Liu and
Diamond, 2005) and turning grasslands to deserts. The desertiﬁ-
cation problem in China created the nation's worst sandstorm in
March 2010, which caused serious air pollution in the inland and
nearby regions (e.g., Hong Kong, Taiwan,
Japan, and Korea)
(Wassener, 2010). Moreover, there is a global trend of enterprises
implementing sustainable sourcing and procurement. The pollu-
tion problems in China have raised serious international doubt of
the environmental efforts of China's manufacturing exporters in
mitigating their impact on the environment, where the country's
economic development can be threatened (Kahn and Yardley,
2007). With the Chinese government striving for improvement
in environmental conditions and active participation in interna-
tional dialog to mitigate climate change, it is timely and appro-
priate to investigate EPR practices of manufacturing exporters in
China and how the implementation of these practices are related
to their ﬁnancial and market performance. Drawing study sample
from the manufacturing industry in China improves generaliz-
ability of ﬁndings to other emerging economies particularly those
position manufacturing as a pillar industry contributing to their
economic development.

To collect data related to EPR practices, we randomly drew a
sample of Chinese manufacturers from the database Dun & Bradstreet.
In the sampling process, we did not target speciﬁc manufacturing
industries with the aim to improve the generalizability of our study

ﬁndings. The database provided contact information and job title of
senior executives, company name, address, phone number, and
company proﬁle. We obtained objective data on annual sales volume
and company size in terms of number of employees from the database
as control variables. Based on the position title of senior executives
available in the database, we identiﬁed a qualiﬁed key informant who
is knowledgeable in environmental management practices in each
sample ﬁrm. Their ability in responding to the survey is ensured with
direct contact prior to the questionnaire administration. The senior
executives were asked to suggest an appropriate manager by provid-
ing his/her name and contact information, if they feel the manager is
relatively more knowledgeable. To improve the response rate and
reduce common method variance, respondents were assured that
their answers are only reported in aggregate with others, and their
identity and company details are kept conﬁdential.

A total of 800 sample manufacturers from the database were
contacted. In the ﬁrst wave of mailing, a survey package enclosing
the questionnaire, self-addressed pre-paid reply envelop, and a
cover letter explaining the purpose of this study, were mailed to
each key informant. We made follow-up calls or sent emails two
days after the initial mailing to seek acknowledgment of the
survey package and to emphasize the importance of
their
responses to this study. Two weeks after the follow-up calls and
emails, we sent another survey package to the non-respondents
with a cover letter to stress the importance of their response and
solicit their participation. We made follow-up telephone calls or
sent emails, and dispatched a third survey package to the non-
respondents two weeks subsequent to the second mailing. We
concluded our data collection three weeks after the ﬁnal mailing
and received 134 completed questionnaires,
representing a
response rate of 16.75%. We eliminated six returns due to
signiﬁcantly missing data, resulting in an effective response rate
of 16% which is comparable to other survey-based management
studies (e.g., Delmas and Toffel, 2008).

3.2. Bias issues

We took three steps to determine whether common method
variance (CMV) posed a serious threat to this study. First, we
collected data from different sources. The executives provided
information about the strategic elements of this study, such as
extended producer responsibility, market performance, ﬁnancial
performance, and customer integration, while information on
company size and annual sales volume were obtained from the
database Dun & Bradstreet. Second, we applied Harmon's one-factor
test to assess whether a single latent factor would account for all
the theoretical constructs. We conducted chi-square difference test
on a single-factor model and the hypothesized four-factor model to
assess CMV. The one-factor model yielded a chi-square value of
480.78 (df¼102). A signiﬁcant difference between the chi-square
values of the two models (Δχ2¼330.53; Δdf¼3, po0.001) indi-
cated that the ﬁt in the one-factor model was signiﬁcantly worse
than it was in the measurement model. This provided preliminary
evidence that CMV was not a problem in this study. Third, we
followed the procedures recommended by Lindell and Whitney
(2001) and popular in the literature (Craighead et al., 2011) to
evaluate whether the potential CMV is serious. We used the type of
organizational ownership (i.e., publicly-owned vs. privately-owned)
as the marker variable to perform the CMV analysis because the
marker variable is theoretically unrelated to the dependent vari-
ables (i.e., ﬁnancial and market performance). The ownership type
is not signiﬁcantly correlated to ﬁnancial performance with p¼0.95
and market performance with p¼0.43. The correlations between all
constructs in the measurement model and the ownership type are
summarized in Table 1. In addition, the partial correlations between
the constructs are signiﬁcant after partialing out the effect of CMV,


K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 284–293

289

Table 1
Correlation, Cronbach's alpha, composite reliability, average variance extracted, and
common method bias analysis.

EPR
practices

Market
performance

Financial
performance

Customer
integration

EPR practices

Market performance

0.87a
0.89b
0.50c

0.28d
0.28e

Financial performance 0.36
0.36

Customer integration

Type of ownership
(marker variable)

0.38
0.36

0.12

0.79
0.81
0.54

0.64
0.64

0.26
0.27

 0.05

0.90
0.90
0.59

0.19
0.20

0.01

0.84
0.84
0.57

0.18

All correlations are signiﬁcant at po0.05, except values in italics.

a Cronbach's alpha.
b Composite reliability.
c Average variance extracted.
d Correlation between the constructs.
e Correlation corrected for common method bias.

and the partial correlations are reported in Table 1. We concluded
that the measurement model possessed reasonable ﬁt with the
data, the constructs exhibited both convergent and divergent
validity, and CMV did not pose serious threat to the interpretation
of our study results.

3.3. Measurement development

In China,

A structured survey instrument was developed to measure
manufacturers' practices of EPR, their customer integration, and
their market and ﬁnancial performance. We conducted exploratory
qualitative studies to understand the environmental-based opera-
tions management issues and problems by interviewing executives
in Chinese manufacturers. We explored the key practices that were
implemented in their EPR program. One example showing the
need for EPR-based operations is the WEEE Directive (Waste
Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive) in Europe, which
mandates collection, recycling and recovery of electrical goods.
This environmental regulatory requirement leads manufacturing
enterprises to manage product's cycle life for compliance. Their
adoption of EPR practices couple with the trend for environmental
there is also Chinese WEEE version
protection.
(
) where a list of manufactured items are
subject to take-back and recycling requirements and manufac-
turers need to undertake measures to showcase their EPR
(
). Based on the conceptualization of EPR, the inter-
view results, and the EPR literature, EPR is concerned with
manufacturers' responsibility in managing the environmental
impacts of the lifecycle of their products spanning product modular
design to the processes involved in capturing the residual values of
returned products. This product cycle loop extends beyond a mere
take-back system to incorporate product design from upstream
through to end use in downstream in the management processes.
EPR is therefore operationalized to assess the extent of such EPR
practices as adoption of modular design,
inspection of disas-
sembled parts, separation of re-usable parts, recycle, reprocess,
reuse, and recover reusable parts and reuse them in repairing,
refurbishing, or remanufacturing of other products, that were
implemented by the manufacturers to mitigate the environmental

impact of the products made by them. In addition, we adopted the
existing measurement evaluating customer integration (Carter and
Carter, 1998; Chen, 2005), market performance(Venkatraman and
Ramanujam, 1986), and ﬁnancial performance (Autry et al., 2001;
Ayres et al., 1997; Wong et al., 2012) from the literature. Customer
integration refers to customer participation in the EPR initiative of
the focal manufacturer. Market performance evaluates improve-
ments in lead time, market position, sales opportunity, and
corporate image in the marketplace; while ﬁnancial performance
generally assesses cost saving and revenue increase of the manu-
facturers due to EPR practices implementation. The measurement
items were amended with practitioner inputs to reﬂect the
manufacturing and environmental management context. The mea-
surement issues, the survey administration procedures, and dis-
cussion of potential bias problems are also reported in a related
study (Lai et al., 2013). The ﬁnal measurement scales are summar-
ized in Appendix A.

4. Analysis and results

4.1. Measurement models

We evaluated the measurement properties of the theoretical
constructs by conducting conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) with
AMOS 18.0 on four variables,
including EPR practices, market
performance, ﬁnancial performance, and customer integration.
Following the guidelines by Gerbing and Anderson (1988) and
consistent with other organizational-level latent construct ana-
lyses (e.g., Nadkarni and Narayanan, 2007; Williams, 2007), we
used maximum likelihood estimation with sample covariance
matrix as input in the CFA.

We assessed the unidimensionality of the constructs by Cron-
bach's alpha. The alpha values were well above the threshold value
of 0.70 in the range of 0.79–0.90, indicating that the construct
measures are sufﬁciently reliable. As shown in Table 1, composite
reliability coefﬁcients of the four latent constructs were in the
range from 0.81 to 0.90, suggesting internal consistency for each
set of observed variables in its respective latent construct (Fornell
and Larcker, 1981). The four-factor measurement model exhibits
a good ﬁt with the data (χ2¼248.20, df¼162; CFI¼0.93; RMSEA¼
0.06; IFI¼0.94; TLI¼0.92). All items loaded signiﬁcantly on their
respective constructs at po0.05 level with standardized factor
loadings exceeding 0.52, providing evidence of convergent validity
in our measures. In addition, the average variance extracted is
larger than the recommended minimum value of 0.50 (Fornell and
Larcker, 1981), indicating strong convergent validity. Composite
reliability, Cronbach's alpha, and average variance extracted are
summarized in Table 1.

We followed Fornell and Larcker's (1981) guidelines, which are
widely adopted by other researchers (e.g., Delmas and Toffel,
2008; Murillo-Luna et al., 2008), to examine discriminant validity
of our study measurement. We compared the average variance
extracted (AVE) of each construct with the highest variance that
each construct shares with the other constructs in the model. The
AVE for each construct is greater than the highest shared variance,
suggesting that all constructs exhibit discriminant validity.
In
addition, we examined discriminant validity by comparing the
chi-square difference for all pairs of constructs (Anderson and
Gerbing, 1988). Since the chi-square values for the unconstrained
models, where each pair of constructs co-varies freely, are sig-
niﬁcantly lower than the constrained models (with the estimated
correlation for each pair of constructs constrained to one), the
presence of discriminant validity for all the constructs is evidenced.
We assessed convergent validity by examining the signiﬁcance of
loading of each measurement item on its theoretical respective


290

K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 284–293

construct using CFA. The results as shown in Appendix A indicate
that the loadings of the measurement items loaded signiﬁcantly on
their respective constructs. These results suggest convergent valid-
ity of the measurement scales.

4.2. The structural model

The structural model used to test the hypotheses consisted of
the three factors validated in the measurement model, excluding
the moderating variable (i.e., customer integration). The model ﬁt
measures indicated acceptable agreement with the covariance in
the data (χ2¼150.25; df¼99; CFI¼0.95; RMR¼0.06; IFI¼0.95;
TLI¼0.94). We found that EPR practices were positively associated
with market (β¼0.29, po0.05) and ﬁnancial (β¼0.21, po0.05)
performance, providing support for H1 and H2. The hypothesis
test results for H1 and H2 are summarized in Table 2.

4.3. Moderating effect of customer integration

Another aim of this study is to determine the importance of
customer integration in EPR practices of manufacturers. Speciﬁ-
cally, what are the performance outcomes if manufacturers have a
high versus low customer integration in the implementation?
Following the procedures proposed by Byrne (2004), we used
multi-group analysis within AMOS 18.0 to assess the structural
model at a high versus low customer integration in the imple-
mentation of EPR practices. We divided the sample into high
(n¼63) and low (n¼65) customer integration groups with median
split. The multi-group analysis was conducted in four steps. First,
we developed a model where the structural parameters vary freely
across the two groups to form a baseline model (Model 1). The

Table 2
Structural equation modeling results of Hypotheses1 and 2.

Paths

Structural model: H1 and H2

Standardized estimate

EPR practices-Market performance
EPR practices-Financial performance

0.29
0.21

baseline model has a value of χ2¼292.89 with df¼198. Second, the
structural parameters were constrained to be equal across the two
groups (Model 2), generating an estimated covariance matrix for
each group and an overall chi-square value for the sets of sub-
models as part of a single structural system. The constrained
model has the value of χ2¼316.99 with df¼217. Third, the
moderator effects were tested by assessing whether statistical
differences exist between the two chi-square values. We con-
ducted a χ2difference test to compare the constrained model
(Model 2) with the unconstrained one (Model 1). The χ2difference
M1¼24.10 with df¼19 at po0.05, which is
test results in χ2
statistically signiﬁcant. A signiﬁcant change in the chi-square value
indicates the moderator effect of customer integration, such that
invariance is found attributable to customer integration.

M2 χ2

Then, we examined the moderator effect of customer integration
on the paths in our research model by assessing the equality across
two groups using a chi-square difference test between a model with
a speciﬁc path set to be equal across two groups (a constrained
model) and a model where path coefﬁcient varies freely (a baseline
model). For example, to test H3, we constrained the EPR practices-
market performance path equally across the high and low customer
(df¼ 199)¼301.08. The
integration groups, and obtained the χ2
(Δdf¼ 1)¼8.19 (po0.05) suggests that across the two groups, the
Δχ2
EPR practices-market performance path is not equal. The path
coefﬁcient is higher and signiﬁcant (β¼0.36, po0.05) than that
under high customer integration (See Table 3). The results support
H3, indicating that the positive relationship between EPR practices
and market performance is stronger when customer integration is
high than when it is low. The results shown in Table 3 revealed that
the EPR practices-ﬁnancial performance path is signiﬁcantly differ-
ent across the high- and low-customer integration groups. The study
ﬁndings also lend support for H4 that the EPR practices-ﬁnancial

SE

0.07
0.07

t-value

2.77
2.47

p

0.01
0.01

Hypothesis

Conclusion

H1
H2

Supported
Supported

Table 3
Multi-group analysis results of H3 and H4.

Models

High vs. low customer integration

χ2

292.89
316.99

301.08
297.67

df

198
217

199
199

χ2/df

1.48
1.46

1.51
1.50

IFI

0.91
0.90

0.90
0.91

TLI

0.90
0.89

0.90
0.90

CFI

0.91
0.80

0.90
0.91

χ2difference test

Δχ2¼24.10, Δdf¼19 po0.05
Δχ2¼8.19, Δdf¼1 po0.05
Δχ2¼4.78, Δdf¼1 po0.05

1. Baseline model
2. Constrained model
3. Constrained paths:
3a. EPR practices-Market performance
3b. EPR practices-Financial performance

Path Coefﬁcients

Paths

High customer
integration (n¼63)

Low customer
integration (n¼65)

EPR practices-Market performance

EPR practices-Financial performance

0.36a
(2.09)n
0.17
(1.32)

0.19
(1.34)
0.25
(2.04)n

t-values are in brackets.

a Path coefﬁcients.
n po0.05.

Hypothesis

Conclusion

H3

H4

Supported

Supported


K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 284–293

291

performance path is stronger and signiﬁcant when there is a low
level of customer integration (β¼0.25, po0.05) than when there is a
higher level of customer integration (β¼0.17, p40.05).

5. Discussion and implications

Today's globalized business situation has caused China to face
numerous social and economic pressures. China's integration into
the world's economy began three decades ago. There has been
substantial growth experienced in the Chinese economy after its
entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO). This economic
integration made China, particularly for those of the manufactur-
ing exporters, depend more upon international trade. In light of
the escalating international community quest for product take-
back, Chinese manufacturers begin to integrate EPR practices into
their operations to satisfy the market expectation. One major
concern for manufacturing enterprises to undertake EPR practices
relates to the performance beneﬁts.
It also remains unclear
whether customers play a role in the EPR practices–performance
link, in particular how ﬁrms may reap the beneﬁts of EPR through
customer integration. The study results suggest that the integra-
tion of customers on EPR practices to recycle, reprocess, and reuse
their products can improve their market acceptance but also incur
expenses due to the costs for coordinating the related activities.

While prior studies and real-life cases have shown the success
of EPR in reducing waste and disposal that is beneﬁcial to the
environment and community (Khetriwal et al., 2009b; Mont,
2002; Tsai and Hung, 2009), we examine the ﬁnancial and market
impact of implementing EPR practices from the organizational
perspective. This research advances knowledge on the business
value of EPR practices, providing references for manufacturers to
decide on whether to adopt EPR practices and the implications for
market as well as ﬁnancial performance. The study ﬁndings
provide implications and contribution to environmental-based
operations management. First, we examine a list of practices
related to EPR for the reference of manufacturing enterprises to
evaluate the different aspects of EPR practices implementation in
their operations. The list of practices provides useful references for
manufacturers to plan implementation actions and better prepare
themselves for environmental regulatory compliance particularly
in those countries strict in EPR related regulations. Second, this
study lays an important ground for the contingency theoretic
perspective of EPR for environmental-based operations manage-
ment by providing empirical evidence that customer integration
inﬂuence the relationship between EPR practices and the market
and ﬁnancial performance outcomes. Although it is often impli-
citly assumed that customer integration is valuable to bring
performance for environmental management efforts,
involving
customers for EPR practices is important for Chinese manufac-
turers to gain market performance. This study contributes to the
contingency theory by providing empirical evidence on the mod-
erating role of customer integration on the performance outcomes
of EPR practices of manufacturing enterprises. Such customer
integration in EPR practices enables manufacturers to develop an
environmentally responsible corporate image, and increases
opportunities of accessing international markets. The study results
indicate the beneﬁts of integrating with customers in the imple-
mentation of EPR practices. Manufacturers seeking to establish
market position with their EPR practices need to strengthen
customer integration in their environmental initiatives. Towards
this end, manufacturers may consider to reinforce customer
awareness on their responsibility to retrieve usable products from
the markets. A more proactive way is to invite customers as part of
their environmental audits and product return program to
strengthen their support in the EPR program. This study provides

insights into the role and importance of customers in EPR
implementation. The participation and involvement of customers
enable manufacturers to market their products internationally by
addressing overseas environmental regulations. In addition, taking
back used or end-of-life products allow manufacturers to gain
information regarding usage pattern and design ﬂaws of their
products, which are helpful for improving product design, sig-
niﬁcantly shortening the lead time for new product development.
On the other hand, we found that EPR practices implementa-
tion by Chinese manufacturers characterized with lower level of
customer participation are associated with better ﬁnancial perfor-
mance. This dark side of customer integration for EPR practices
implementation implies that ﬁrms need to develop a mechanism
to better coordinate EPR practices with customers for reducing
inventory investment and the costs in handling returned products.
This is in line with the prior literature that ﬁrms may not be able to
achieve ﬁnancial performance at the outset of their environmental
management efforts (Zhu et al., 2010). It requires organizational
effort to develop a coordination system with their supply chain
partners to streamline cross-ﬁrm processes in order to reduce
costs (Zhu et al., 2011). Managers need to control the cost of
coordinating product returns from customers in order not to
compromise the ﬁnancial performance gains from the EPR prac-
tices implementation. In doing so, they may consider a collection
mechanism for product returns by customers to reduce the
uncertainties of returned resources and hence the buffer inventory
investment. It is also useful to establish a network along the
supply chain to improve the effectiveness in handling the returned
products and lower the expenses related to customer enquiries
and efforts duplication in the handling of returned resources.
Manufacturers that have implemented or intend to implement
ERP practices should pay attention to the coordination aspects of
the implementation with customer integration to achieve both the
market and ﬁnancial performance.

6. Limitations and future research directions

This study has a number of limitations that require caution in
interpretation which are left for future research. First, this study is
conducted in China, which is a major global manufacturer causing
environmental concerns due to its rapid industrial development
while it emerges as a key economy. Although China represents one
of the major manufacturing countries and provides insights into
the value of EPR practices for manufacturing enterprises, future
research may consider extending to other emerging countries,
such as India, Vietnam, and Brazil, to improve the generalizability
of the ﬁndings. Second, the data collected for this research is cross-
sectional. Future studies may consider applying longitudinal
research design to ascertain the causal direction of the associa-
tions between EPR, market performance, ﬁnancial performance,
and customer integration and in other industrial contexts such as
retailing and transport logistics (Hilmola, 2011; Lai et al., 2010,
2013; Wong et al., 2012). Third, in addition to customer integra-
tion, it is possible that there are other operational and relational
characteristics in a supply chain that may affect the performance
results of EPR (Wong et al., 2009; Yang et al., 2008, 2009). This
study lays ground for future research to explore contingencies that
may affect the EPR implementation outcomes. Future studies may
consider factors such as buyer-supplier relationship and informa-
tion technologies use in facilitating EPR practices to achieve
desired performance. The motivators and readiness driving sus-
tainability development via EPR practices also warrants further
research investigation (Gunasekaran and Spalanzani, 2012; Law
and Gunasekaran, 2012). In addition to the contingency factors, it
is also worthwhile to examine how the competitive capabilities of


292

Table A1

K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 284–293

Construct name

Measurement items

Extended producer responsibility

practices

(Goodness-of-ﬁt indices:χ2¼36.6,

df¼14 po0.001; CFI¼0.94;
IFI¼0.94; TLI¼0.91)

Please indicate the extent to which your ﬁrms performs the
following practices to your products (1¼not at all, 5¼to a great extent):
 Adoption of modular design
 Inspection of disassembled parts
 Separation of re-usable parts
 Recycle
 Reprocess
 Reuse
 Cannibalization – recover reusable parts and reuse them in repairing,

refurbishing, or remanufacturing of other products

Market performance
(Goodness-of-ﬁt indices:χ2¼6.5, df¼2,

po0.05; CFI¼0.98; IFI¼0.98;
TLI¼0.93)

Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following statements on
performance impacts after adopting the practices (1¼strongly disagree, 5¼strongly agree)
 Signiﬁcantly improved lead time
 Improved position in marketplace
 Improved chances of selling products in international markets
 Improved our corporate image

Financial performance
(Goodness-of-ﬁt indices:χ2¼30.9,

df¼5, po0.001; CFI¼0.93;
IFI¼0.94; TLI¼0.90)

Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following statements on
performance impacts after adopting the practices (1¼strongly disagree, 5¼strongly agree)
 Decrease in disposal costs
 Increase in revenue from resale
 Effectiveness in handling recovery of assets related to our returned products
 Effectiveness in handling cost containment related to our returned products
 Reduction in inventory investment

Customer integration

(Goodness-of-ﬁt indices: n/a)

Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following
statements that describe the customers of your company (1¼strongly disagree, 5¼strongly agree)
 Customers consider that it is our responsibility to retrieve usable products from the markets
 Our customers carry out environmental audits of our ﬁrm
 Our customers take part in our product return program

Standard
loadings
(po0.05)

0.64
0.68
0.68
0.75
0.79
0.75
0.64

0.43

0.68
0.92
0.80

0.78

0.75

0.82

0.82

0.86

0.78
0.65
0.86

organizations including quality, cost, ﬂexibility, delivery, and
innovativeness mediate the EPR practices–performance link.
Further research in this direction will advance knowledge on
whether EPR practices can help nurture competitive capabilities
of organizations and the indirect performance effects of EPR
practices through developing such capabilities. It is also possible
that environmental management practices such as EPR practices
will lead to environmental performance ﬁrst before the market
and ﬁnancial outcomes can be realized (Yang et al., 2011).
Examining how environmental performance improvement due to
EPR practices inﬂuences the bottom-line outcomes and the
strength of the performance effect will deepen our understanding
on the environmental value of
implementing EPR practices.
Fourth, while this study examines the EPR practices of export-
oriented manufacturers, this study did not take account of differ-
ences in regulations and market expectations of different export-
ing countries. There is also a strong research need to understand
the implications of EPR-related regulations in different countries
from an operations perspective (Atasu and Van Wassenhove,
2012). Future research may consider such differences to gain
understanding on how these may affect the performance results
of EPR practices.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to the guest editor Professors Angappa Guna-
sekaran and Paul Hong and the anonymous reviewers for their
useful comments on earlier versions of this paper. This study is
funded by a grant from the Research Grants Council of The Hong
Kong Special Administration Region, China (GRF PolyU 5449/10H).

Appendix A. Measurement constructs and items

See Table A1

References

Anderson, J.D., Gerbing, D.W., 1988. Structural equation modeling in practice. A
review and recommended two-step approach. Psychological Bulletin 103 (3),
411–423.

Anonymous, 2001. Levi Strauss gets a Leg up on Reverse Logistics, IIE Solutions.
Astley, W.G., Van de Ven, A.H., 1983. Central perspectives and debates in organiza-

tion theory. Administrative Science Quarterly 28, 245–273.

Atasu, A., Van Wassenhove, L.N., 2012. An operations perspective on product take-
back legislation for e-waste: theory, practice, and research needs. Production
and Operations Management 21 (3), 407–422.

Atasu, A., Van Wassenhove, L.N., Sarvary, M., 2009. Efﬁcient take-back legislation.

Production and Operations Management 18 (3), 243–259.

Autry, C.W., Daugherty, P.J., Richey, R.G., 2001. The challenge of reverse logistics in
catalog retailing. International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics
Management 31 (1), 26–37.

Ayres, R., Ferrer, G., van Leynseele, T., 1997. Eco-efﬁciency, asset recovery, and

remanufacturing. European Management Journal 15 (5), 557–574.

Baldwin, C.Y., Clark, K.B., 1997. Managing in an age of modularity. Harvard Business

Review 75 (5), 84–&..

Barnett, M.L., Salomon, R.M., 2006. Beyond dichotomy: the curvilinear relationship
between social responsibility and ﬁnancial performance. Strategic Management
Journal 27 (11), 1101–1122.

Byrne, B.M., 2004. Testing for multigroup invariance using AMOS graphics: a road
less traveled. Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal 11 (2),
272–300.

Carter, C.R., Carter, J.R., 1998. Interorganizational determinants of environmental
purchasing: initial evidence from the consumer products industries. Decision
Sciences 29 (3), 659–684.

Chen, C.-C., 2005. Incorporating green purchasing into the frame of ISO 14000.

Journal of Cleaner Production 13 (4), 927–933.

Chung, C.-J., Wee, H.-M., 2008. Green-component life-cycle value on design and
reverse manufacturing in semi-closed supply chain. International Journal of
Production Economics 113 (2), 528–545.


K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 147 (2014) 284–293

293

Craighead, C.W., Ketchen, D.J.J., Dunn, K.S., Hult, G.T.M., 2011. Addressing common
method variance: Guidelines for survey research on information technology,
operations, and supply chain management. IEEE Transactions on Engineering
Management 58 (3), 578–588.

Delmas, M.A., Toffel, M.W., 2008. Organizational responses to environmental
demands: opening the black box. Strategic Management Journal 29 (4),
1027–1055.

Fombrun, C., 1996. Reputation: Realizing Value from the Corporate Image. Harvard

Business School Press, Boston.

Fornell, C., Larcker, D.F., 1981. Evaluating structural equation models with unob-
served variables and measurement errors. Journal of Marketing Research 18 (1),
39–50.

Forslind, K.H., 2005. Implementing extended producer responsibility: the case of
Sweden's car scrapping scheme. Journal of Cleaner Production 13 (4), 619–629.
Gerbing, D.W., Anderson, J.C., 1988. An updated paradigm for scale development
Journal of Marketing

incorporating unidimensionality and its assessment.
Research 25 (2), 186–192.

Ginsberg, J.M., Bloom, P.N., 2004. Choosing the right green marketing strategy. MIT

Sloan Management Review 46 (1), 79–84.

Guide Jr., V.D.R., Jayaraman, V., Srivastava, R., Benton, W.C., 2000. Supply chain
Interfaces 30 (3),

for recoverable manufacturing practices.

management
125–142.

Guide, V.D.R.J., Jayaraman, V., Linton, J.D., 2003. Building contingency planning for
Journal of Operations

closed-loop supply chains with product recovery.
Management 21, 259–279.

Gunasekaran, A., Lai, K.H., Cheng, T.C.E., 2008. Responsive supply chain: a compe-
Journal of

titive strategy in a networked economy. Omega-International
Management Science 36 (4), 549–564.

Gunasekaran, A., Spalanzani, A., 2012. Sustainability of manufacturing and services:
investigations for research and applications. International Journal of Production
Economics 140 (1), 35–47.

Hilmola, O.-P., 2011. North Eurpoean companies and major Eurasian countries –
future outlook on logistics ﬂows and their sustainability. International Journal
of Shipping and Transport Logistics 3 (1), 100–121.

Hindo, B., Arndt, M., 2006. Everything old is new again. Business Week 3999 (1),

65–70.

Kahn, J., Yardley, J., 2007. As China Roars, Pollution Reaches Deadly Extremes. The

New York Times, Beijing.

Khetriwal, D.S., Kraeuchi, P., Widmer, R., 2009b. Producer responsibility for e-waste
management: key issues for consideration—Learning from the Swiss experi-
ence. Journal of Environmental Management 90 (1), 153–165.

Lai, K.-H., Cheng, T.C.E., Tang, A., 2010. Green retailing and its success factors.

California Management Review 52 (2), 6–31.

Lai, K.H., Lun, Y.H.V., Wong, C.W.Y., Cheng, T.C.E., 2013. Measures for evaluating
green shipping practices implementation. International Journal of Shipping and
Transport Logistics 5 (2), 217–235.

Lai, K.H., Wong, C.W.V., 2012. Green logistics management and performance: some
exporters. Omega-

empirical
International Journal of Management Science 40 (3), 267–282.

from Chinese manufacturing

evidence

Lai, K.H., Wong, C.W.Y., Cheng, T.C.E., 2012. Ecological modernisation of Chinese
export manufacturing via green logistics management and its regional implica-
tions. Technological Forecasting and Social Change 79 (4), 766–770.

Lai, K.H., Wu, S.J., Wong, C.W.Y., 2013. Did reverse logistics practices hit the triple
bottom line of Chinese manufacturers? International Journal of Production
Economics http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2013.1003.1005.

Law, K.M.Y., Gunasekaran, A., 2012. Sustainability development in high-tech
manufacturing ﬁrms in Hong Kong: motivators and readiness. International
Journal of Production Economics 137 (1), 116–125.

Lindell, M.K., Whitney, D.J., 2001. Accounting for common method variance in

cross-sectional designs. Journal of Applied Psychology 86 (1), 114–121.

Link, S., Naveh, E., 2006. Standardization and discretion: does the environmental
standard ISO14001 lead to performance beneﬁts. IEEE Transactions on Engi-
neering Management 53 (3), 508–519.

Linton, J.D., Jayaraman, V., 2005. A conceptual framework for product life extension.

International Journal of Production Research 43 (9), 1807–1829.

Liu, J., Diamond, J., 2005. China’s environment in a globalization world. Nature 435

(7046), 1179–1186.

Milanez, B., Buhrs, T., 2009. Extended producer responsibiltiy in Brazil: the case of

tyre waste. Journal of Cleaner Production 17 (5), 608–615.

Mont, O.K., 2002. Clarifying the concept of product-service system. Journal of

Cleaner Production 10 (3), 237–245.

Murillo-Luna, J.L., Garces-Ayerbe, C., Rivera-Torres, P., 2008. Why do patterns of
environmental response differ? A stakeholders' pressure approach. Strategic
Management Journal 29 (11), 1225–1240.

Nadkarni, S., Narayanan, V.K., 2007. Strategic schemas, strategic ﬂexibility, and ﬁrm
performance: the moderating role of industry clockspeed. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal 28 (3), 243–270.

Nicol, S., 2007. Policy options to reduce consumer waste to zero: comparing
product stewardship and extended producer responsibility for refrigerator
waste. Waste Management and Research 25 (3), 227–233.

OECD, 2001. Extended Producer Responsibility: A Guidance Manual for Govern-

ments, OECD, Paris.

Rindova, V.P., Williamson, I.O., Petkova, A.P., Sever, J.M., 2005. Being good or being
known: an empirical examination of the dimensions, antecedents, and con-
sequences of organizational reputation. Academy of Management Journal 48
(6), 1033–1049.

Roberts, P.W., Dowling, G.R., 2002. Corporate reputation and sustained superior

ﬁnancial performance. Strategic Management Journal 23 (12), 1077–1093.

Sanchez, R., Mahoney, J.T., 1996. Modularity, ﬂexibility, and knowledge manage-
ment in product and organization design. Strategic Management Journal 17,
63–76.

Sarkis, J., Zhu, Q.H., Lai, K.H., 2011. An organizational theoretic review of green
Journal of Production

International

supply chain management literature.
Economics 130 (1), 1–15.

Subramanian, R., Gupta, S., Talbot, B., 2009. Product design and supply chain
coordination under extended producer responsibility. Production and Opera-
tions Management 18 (3), 259–277.

Thompson, J.D., 1967. Organizations in Action. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Tsai, W.H., Hung, S.J., 2009. Treatment and recycling system optimisation with
activity-based costing in WEEE reverse logistics management: an environ-
mental supply chain perspective. International Journal of Production Research
47 (19), 5391–5420.

Van de Ven, A.H., Drazin, R., 1985. The Concept of Fit in Contingency Theory. JAI

Press, New York.

Venkatraman, N., Ramanujam, V., 1986. Measurement of business performance in
strategy research: a comparison of approaches. Academy of Management
Review 11 (4), 801–814.

Wang, X., Ming, C., 2011. Implementing extended producer responsibility: vehicle

remanufacturing in China. Journal of Cleaner Production 19 (5), 680–686.

Wassener, B., 2010. Hong Kong Issues Warning Air Pollution Sets Record. The New

York Times Company, New York.

Webster, S., Mitra, S., 2007. Competitive strategy in remanufacturing and the
Journal of Operations Management 25 (6),

take-back laws.

impact of
1123–1140.

Williams, C., 2007. Transfer in context: replication and adaptation in knowledge

transfer relationships. Strategic Management Journal 28 (9), 867–889.

Wong, C.W.Y., Lai, K.-H., Ngai, E.W.T., 2009. The role of supplier operational
adaptation on the performance of IT-enabled transport logistics under envir-
onmental uncertainty. International Journal of Production Economics 122 (1),
47–55.

Wong, C.W.Y., Lai, K.H., Cheng, T.C.E., Lun, Y.H.V., 2012. The roles of stakeholder
support and procedure-oriented management on asset recovery. International
Journal of Production Economics 135 (2), 584–594.

Wong, C.W.Y., Lai, K.H., Lun, Y.H.V., Cheng, T.C.E., 2012. A study on the antecedents
of supplier commitment in support of logistics operations. International Journal
of Shipping and Transport Logistics 4 (1), 5–16.

Wong, C.W.Y., Lai, K.H., Shang, G., Lu, C.S., Leung, T.K.P., 2012. Green operations and
the moderating role of environmenta management capability of suppliers on
manufacturing ﬁrm performance. International Journal of Production Econom-
ics 140 (1), 283–294.

Wong, C.Y., Boon-itt, S., Wong, C.W.Y., 2011. The contingency effects of environ-
mental uncertainty on the relationship between supply chain integration and
operational performance. Journal of Operations Management 29 (6), 604–615.
Wu, S.J., Melnyk, S.A., Calantone, R.J., 2008. Assessing the core resources in the
environmental management system from the resource perspective and the
contingency perspective. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 55 (2),
304–315.

Yang, J., Wang, J., Wong, C.W.Y., Lai, K.-H., 2008. Relational stability and alliance

performance in supply chain. Omega 36 (4), 600–608.

Yang, J., Wong, C.W.Y., Lai, K.-H., Ntoko, A.N., 2009. The antecedents of dyadic
quality of performance and its effect on buyer-supplier relationship improve-
ment. International Journal of Production Economics 102 (1), 243–251.

Yang, M.G., Hong, P., Modi, S.B., 2011. Impact of lean manufacturing and environ-
mental management on business performance: an empirical study of manu-
facturing ﬁrms.
Journal of Production Economics 129 (2),
251–261.

International

Zhu, Q.H., Geng, Y., Lai, K.H., 2010. Circular economy practices among Chinese
manufacturers varying in environmental-oriented supply chain cooperation
and the performance implications. Journal of Environmental Management 91
(6), 1324–1331.

Zhu, Q.H., Geng, Y., Lai, K.H., 2011. Environmental supply chain cooperation and its
effect on the circular economy practice-performance relationship among
Chinese manufacturers. Journal of Industrial Ecology 15 (3), 405–419.

