Int. J. Production Economics 164 (2015) 445–453

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Int. J. Production Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijpe

Sharing environmental management information with supply
chain partners and the performance contingencies
on environmental muniﬁcence
Kee-hung Lai a,n, Christina W.Y. Wong b,1, Jasmine Siu Lee Lam c,2
a Department of Logistics and Maritime Studies, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong
b Business Division, Institute of Textiles and Clothing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong
c Division of Infrastructure Systems & Maritime Studies, School of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 26 March 2014
Accepted 6 December 2014
Available online 16 December 2014

Keywords:
Environmental management
Information sharing
Supply chain partners
Performance contingency

The literature on production economics has highlighted the importance of information exchange with
supply chain partners for achieving performance gains. In addition to managing information to enable
product ﬂows, trading enterprises increasingly emphasize environmental management information
(EMI) sharing with their upstream suppliers and downstream customers to satisfy their environmental
quests. This study seeks to investigate the performance value of EMI sharing with supply chain partners
in a trading context from the resources dependence perspective. Using survey responses collected from
210 trading ﬁrms in Hong Kong, we ﬁnd that EMI sharing with suppliers can bring cost and
environmental performance, but not proﬁt related beneﬁts. The cost and environmental performance
beneﬁts due to EMI sharing with suppliers are more salient when the trading ﬁrms operate at high
environmental muniﬁcence. On the other hand, the results show positive effects in proﬁt and cost
performance when the trading ﬁrms disclose EMI with their customers. Nevertheless, such sharing with
customers brings no environmental related beneﬁts. Managers should understand the performance
effects of EMI with supply chain partners and formulate action plans considering environmental
muniﬁcence to increase their performance success.

& 2014 Published by Elsevier B.V.

1.

Introduction

As the environmental awareness of the business community
increases, trading enterprises have begun to recognize the need for
environmental management information (EMI) sharing with their
supply chain partners to compete for performance. In supply chain
management (SCM), information exchange is considered key to
managing physical product ﬂows and improving cost and service
performance of enterprises (Wu et al., 2014). Research in produc-
tion economics have also been conducted to understand the use of
information technology to facilitate logistics activities such as
cargo tracking, warehousing, and shipment notice handling, in
support of product movement in the supply chain (Gunasekaran
and Ngai, 2012). While there are research studies on inter-

n Corresponding author. Tel.: þ852 2766 7920.
E-mail addresses: mike.lai@polyu.edu.hk (K.-h. Lai),
1 Tel.: þ852 2766 6415.
2 Tel.: þ65 6790 5276.

tcchris@polyu.edu.hk (C.W.Y. Wong), sllam@ntu.edu.sg (J.S.L. Lam).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2014.12.009
0925-5273/& 2014 Published by Elsevier B.V.

organizational information systems for managing the supply chain
(Humphreys et al., 2001), a literature search using ABI/INFORM
and Science Direct ﬁnds limited research studies speciﬁcally
addressing EMI and the performance value of the information
sharing with supply chain partners. One recent study examines the
level of in-company environmental management on externally-
oriented environmental management, which involves information
exchange between suppliers and customers for cooperation
(Grekova et al., 2014). Nevertheless, the study focuses on the
dynamics between internal and external environmental manage-
ment without providing an analysis on the performance value of
environmental information sharing. The lack of research in this
area is surprising given that environmental management and
information sharing are pertinent to SCM. A study investigating
food supply chain found that different partners use and perceive
environmental information differently. The lack of EMI can com-
promise their collaborative efforts for green SCM practices and
ability to achieve sustainable competitive advantage (Soler et al.,
2010). As environmental management requires efforts beyond
individual ﬁrms to encompass supply chain partners, developing


446

K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 164 (2015) 445–453

the capability on EMI is critical for enterprises to sustain their
business with a balance on protecting the environment (O’Rourke,
2014).

This study seeks to ﬁll this research gap on EMI and the
performance links from the resources dependence perspective
with three contributions. First, we empirically investigate the links
between EMI sharing of trading ﬁrms with their supply chain
partners (customers and suppliers) and the proﬁt, cost, and
environmental performance outcomes. Second, the performance
contingencies of EMI sharing with customers and suppliers under
high and low levels of environmental muniﬁcence are examined.
Third, we advance theoretical knowledge and provide managerial
insights on the performance value of EMI for SCM.

1.1. Conceptualization of EMI sharing and the performance value

and

practices

In environmental management studies on manufacturing
operations, collaboration with supply chain partners is considered
as an essential factor to succeed in the supply chain. Zhu et al.
(2011) examined the role of environmental supply chain coopera-
tion in inﬂuencing the relationship between implementing envir-
onmental management-based
performance
outcomes of manufacturing enterprises. Their results highlight
the need for supply chain coordination to gain success. In the
coordination, one of the neglected areas for manufacturers is EMI
sharing with their supply chain partners. To reduce information
asymmetry, it is desirable for ﬁrms to communicate their environ-
mental management practices and performance to outside stake-
holders including customers and suppliers to improve supply
chain coordination (Ramanathan et al., 2014). Doing so can also
help establish an environmentally friendly corporate image and
convey a signal to supply chain partners that their operations are
environmentally friendly and responsible.

In the literature, there are studies examining the role of informa-
tion technologies (IT) to achieve environmental sustainability (Cai
et al., 2013). By the use of IT, ﬁrms can better reduce environmental
damages and lessen impact on the environment by allowing people to
manage the life cycle of their products and services (Elliot, 2011).
While the importance of information sharing for SCM has been
recognized for long time (Humphreys et al., 2001), the environmental
management dimension has not received due research attention.
Indeed, generation and dissemination of corporate environmental
information is considered crucial for ﬁrms to prevent environmental
damages caused by production activities, products, and their uses.
Such information can be broadly classiﬁed into four categories. They
include organizational information for use internally (e.g., documented
environmental goals and activities), organizational information for use
externally (e.g., mandatory environmental reporting submitted to
authorities and stakeholders), information related to products for
use internally (e.g., key performance indicators for evaluating product
performance), and information related to products for use externally
(e.g., eco-labels and environmental claims) (Erlandsson and Tillman,
2009). While these four environmental management information
categories are generic, they help to increase the awareness that EMI
sharing should not be conﬁned to internal operations of enterprises
but rather extend to cover external partners including suppliers and
customers for greater effectiveness.

EMI sharing is important not only for coordinating a supply
chain and improving corporate reputation, but also for confor-
mance to international regulations on environmental protection.
For instance, ﬁrms exporting to the European Union must fulﬁll
the European Union Directive that controls the use of azo-dyes
(e.g., aromatic amines, blue colorant, and formaldehyde, etc.) in
their textiles and garments in order for their products to enter the
market. This EPR policy concept aims at extending producers'
responsibility for their products to the post-consumption stage

with an emphasis on waste prevention with supporting practices
such as recycling, reprocessing, and reusing the components and
materials with residual values. In closing the supply chain loop of
their products, ﬁrms need EMI sharing to work with their
upstream suppliers and downstream customers to mitigate the
environmental damages caused by their products (Lai et al., 2014).
Toward achieving this end, EMI sharing is important for suppliers
to understand and contribute to eco-design for 3Rs pertaining to
reduction, recycling, and reuse in materials management through-
out the life cycle of products. As achievement of the 3Rs empha-
sizes use of standardized materials and adoption of modular
design, it is important to communicate these requirements at
the product design stage involving suppliers for inputs. EMI
sharing with suppliers contributes to eco-design in such a way
that product components can be easily disassembled for recycling
and reuse with the environmental burdens lessened. Firms also
need EMI sharing to better engage suppliers for eco-design to
facilitate the subsequent take-back activities. On the other hand,
sharing of EMI with customers is critical to involve the latter in the
product return process. In coordination with customers for pro-
duct take-back, recycling, and ﬁnal disposal, it is highly dependent
on customer willingness to participate. Sharing of EMI is helpful to
obtain customer support, improve corporate image, and enhance
organizational positioning in the marketplace. Indeed, the impor-
tance of incorporating environmental consideration in logistics
and SCM has been increasingly recognized in recent years (Jabbour
et al., 2014).

This study aims to investigate the performance values of EMI
sharing with suppliers and customers and the performance con-
tingencies with high and low levels of environmental muniﬁcence
facing the focal trading ﬁrms. We use the resources dependence
theory (RDT) to examine the contingency of the EMI sharing-
performance link on environmental muniﬁcence. The RDT theory
argues that ﬁrms are dependent on their operating environment
and collaborative activities with other actors in the environment
to succeed (Ulrich and Barney, 1984; Pfeffer and Salancik, 1978).
This theory highlights the importance of interactions of ﬁrms with
other parties for resources under their operating environment.
While the literature tends to link coercive practices and win-lose
approach regarding resources dependence in relationship man-
agement, this study argues from a collaboration perspective that
ﬁrms and their supply chain partners (suppliers and customers)
seek to create value for each other in EMI for performance
beneﬁts. Rather than working in an adversarial manner, ﬁrms will
work collaboratively with their supply chain partners in their
environmental management initiatives in terms of resources for
performance. Speciﬁcally, this study seeks to answer the following
two research questions:

Question 1: Is EMI sharing with supply chain partners asso-
ciated with better performance outcomes for trading ﬁrms on
cost, proﬁt, and environmental performance?
Question 2: To what extent the environmental muniﬁcence
faced by trading ﬁrms inﬂuence their EMI sharing and perfor-
mance outcomes?

1.2. EMI sharing with suppliers and performance

EMI is deﬁned in this study as management information related to
the practice of environmental management in organization. Sharing
EMI requires behavioral actions to involve supply chain partners for
environmental management. For instance, providing suppliers with
EMI for planning and communicating with the standards and require-
ments. On customer side, such actions include providing customers
with information on environmentally-friendly products and taking


K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 164 (2015) 445–453

447

their opinions when developing form position on environmental
management issues. The goal of EMI sharing with supply chain
partners is to enhance the ability of ﬁrms to develop environmentally
friendly and responsible products and processes. The value of sharing
information for SCM has been recognized in the literature with such
performance beneﬁts as reduced cost, better responsiveness, and
improved services (Huo et al., 2014). The literature has also identiﬁed
the contingencies inﬂuencing the success of
inter-organizational
information implementation for supply chain management which
include asymmetry, reciprocity, efﬁciency, stability, and legitimacy
covering the partner ﬁrms (Humphreys et al., 2001). Enterprises take
different SCM initiatives with their suppliers including collaborative
planning, forecasting, and replenishment (CPFR) and vendor manage-
ment inventory (VMI) to enhance information ﬂows for faster
decision-making and to improve the efﬁciency of their supply chain
activities (Lee et al., 2000). The CPFR and VMI are joint practices which
allow continuous inventory update and hence better ability to satisfy
emerging requirements along the supply chain. According to the RDT,
ﬁrms can better compete if they are able to exploit the dependence of
their partner ﬁrms or the dependency of their partners on them for
access to the required resources. Through information sharing with
suppliers, activities on inventory control, order processing, transporta-
tion, and delivery can be better organized for planning and efﬁciency,
reducing bullwhip effect in the supply chain (Lee et al., 1997). Such
dependence on the sharing of EMI with suppliers can be viewed as
assets of ﬁrms geared towards value creation in their environmental
management efforts. For example, apparel company Esprit organizes
workshops with suppliers sharing the company's ongoing efforts on
sourcing sustainable products for ﬁnding new solutions. Therefore, we
suggest that

H1. The sharing of EMI with suppliers by ﬁrms is positively
associated with their (a) proﬁt-related performance, (b) cost-
related performance, and (c) environmental-related performance.

In a market characterized with plentiful opportunities, ﬁrms
are motivated to share information with their partners for
enhanced ability to capture opportunities for market growth
(Shou et al., 2013). For environmental management practices such
as eco-design and green purchasing, supplier involvement is
essential for these practices to gain success. In eco-design, supplier
inputs on materials and part components determine the resources
consumption in making the products and whether the products
can be reused, recycled, and recovered after use. The product
stewardship can also be helpful for ﬁrms to minimize waste in the
product development processes and reduce pollution (Bocken
et al., 2014). With respect to green purchasing, ﬁrms must provide
design speciﬁcations to their suppliers such that the latter under-
stand the environmental requirements of the items requested by
the former. These environmental-based management practices
need cooperation by suppliers and EMI sharing with them for
communication and management control to achieve the environ-
mental and productivity objectives.

Under a highly muniﬁcent environment, there will be more
business opportunities and resources for a ﬁrm to grow. Environ-
mental muniﬁcence reﬂects the extent to which a business
environment can sustain the business growth of a ﬁrm (Dess
and Beard, 1984; Starbuck, 1976). For the development of envir-
onmentally friendly products and processes, sharing of EMI with
suppliers is an important part for these initiatives to deliver the
outcomes. With abundant resources, ﬁrms can better expand their
capability to involve suppliers and integrate environmental con-
cerns in their operations to fulﬁll the environmental quest of the
community. The growing market will also allow ﬁrms to allocate
resources for greening their upstream supply network to satisfy
the emerging requirements from environmentally conscious

customers. The value of EMI sharing will be more salient when
ﬁrms are presented with more capability and resources to pursue
environmental management initiatives.

According to the RDT, member ﬁrms in the supply chain should
be dependent and collaborative with others to gain longer-term
performance rather than seeking short-term beneﬁts at
the
expense of partner ﬁrms. The RDT assumes that ﬁrms are unable
to be fully self-sufﬁcient and they need to depend on the resources
from outside parties to survive in the competition. When the
market is muniﬁcent, ﬁrms are economically motivated to colla-
borate with others for enhancing their ability to exploit market
opportunities. While environmental management practices such
as reverse logistics (Lam and Gu, 2013) and ISO 14000 standard
adoption (de Jong et al., 2014) are beneﬁcial for the bottom-line of
ﬁrms, their successful implementation depends on the resources
contribution by partner ﬁrms from the RDT perspective (Sarkis
et al., 2011).
Information sharing can facilitate environmental
management particularly for practices such as eco-design and
product stewardship where the implementation requirements
must be communicated to obtain the needed supplier inputs. In
the face of growing market opportunities, both ﬁrms and their
suppliers have incentives to collaborate which are important for
environmental management practices implementation. As the
environmental management capability of suppliers can inﬂuence
the success of green operations of ﬁrms (Wong et al., 2012), the
growth opportunities in a muniﬁcent environment will promote
the beneﬁts of sharing of EMI with suppliers. By sharing EMI, there
will be more open communication and information visibility for
ﬁrms to embark on green initiatives with their suppliers and
better capture market growth opportunities. The muniﬁcent
environment highlights the salience of the sharing of EMI with
suppliers for ﬁrms to exploit rich resources in the market to
increase proﬁt, reduce cost, and improve environmental perfor-
mance from their environmental management practices. Accord-
ingly, we propose that

H2. The positive association between the sharing of EMI with
suppliers and (a) proﬁt-related performance, (b) cost-related per-
formance, and (c) environmental-related performance is strength-
ened when the environmental muniﬁcence facing ﬁrms is high.

1.3. EMI sharing with customers and performance

According to the RDT, customer participation can be viewed as
critical resources for environmental management practices imple-
mentation such as product returns and reverse logistics (Chan,
2005). Firms seek to gain support from their customers and
interact with them to reduce the implementation constraints
and uncertainty by EMI sharing. Another motivation for ﬁrms to
disclose their EMI is to enhance their corporate accountability to
stakeholders on environmental protection (Liu and Anbumozhi,
2009). For the sharing, ﬁrms can utilize third-party certiﬁcation for
their products or processes (e.g.,
ISO 14000 certiﬁcation) or
proactively publicize their environmental achievements (e.g., sav-
ings in virgin resources and energy consumption in annual
corporate report). For example, apparel company Zara publicizes
its environmental target and achievement of reducing in-store
energy consumption by 20% to stakeholders and customers. As
such, ﬁrms would enhance their green marketing proﬁle which
contributes to customer acquisition and retention, and encourage
customer participation in their environmental management
efforts. Correspondingly, trading ﬁrms' economic and environ-
mental performances could be improved (Chan, 2005). Hence,
we hypothesize that


448

K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 164 (2015) 445–453

H3. The sharing of EMI with customers by ﬁrms is positively
associated with their (a) proﬁt-related performance, (b) cost-
related performance, and (c) environmental-related performance.

The RDT suggests that ﬁrms need to respond to their external
environment and better manage customer relationships to capture
the resources and market opportunities particularly when the
environment is highly muniﬁcent. For environmental manage-
ment, customer participation and their recognition are important
for ﬁrms to fulﬁll their extended producer responsibility on
product return and cycling (Lai et al., 2014). When the market is
growing, ﬁrms will have more resources to establish an envir-
onmentally friendly corporate image and satisfy the green con-
cerns of customers to maximize their sales opportunities in the
market. To this end, ﬁrms need to communicate their environ-
mental achievements with customers and entice their support and
participation as resources to successfully carry out environmental
management. As customer involvement is a critical resource that
ﬁrms can depend for success, sharing of EMI with customers will
serve the performance interest of environmental management
implementation. Furthermore, the sharing of EMI by ﬁrms with
their customers provides the latter with the resources they are
lacking to evaluate the greening efforts of the former, favorably
shaping customers views and preferences to the ﬁrms. Through
the sharing of EMI and customer involvement, the environmental
management initiatives of ﬁrms can beneﬁt from performance
improvement. As such, we propose that

H4. The positive association between the sharing of EMI with
customers and (a) proﬁt-related performance, (b) cost-related
performance, and (c) environmental-related performance is
strengthened when the environmental muniﬁcence facing the
ﬁrms is high.

2. Research methodology

2.1. Sample and data collection

We collected the data for this study from senior executives in
the positions of directors and managers in the ﬁelds of SCM,
environmental management, and operations management. The
textiles and apparel trading industry in Hong Kong was selected as
the sample frame for three reasons. First, Hong Kong has been one
of the top ﬁve apparel trading countries since 2009 (Saha, 2012).
The trading ﬁrms have been actively working with manufacturers
in Asia and retailers around the world to deliver apparel to
different markets. These trading ﬁrms are likely to face various
environmental regulations related to textiles and apparel produc-
tion, consumption, and disposal. Thus, sharing environmental
information with apparel manufacturers and retailers becomes
crucial for these trading ﬁrms to sustain businesses. Second, Hong
Kong textiles and apparel trading industry plays a major role in
global apparel trade in support for China's textiles and apparel
manufacturers that account for approximately 24% of global
apparel trade. As NGOs and customers accused brands and
retailers (e.g., Nike, Adidas, and H&M) of sourcing Chinese pro-
ducts made in an environmentally irresponsible manner (Barboza,
2011; Watts, 2011), the trading ﬁrms in Hong Kong play a crucial
part in monitoring and managing the Chinese manufacturers'
environmental conduct. Third, serving as intermediates for world-
wide retailers to source from China, Hong Kong textiles and
apparel trading ﬁrms are likely to exhibit different supply chain
characteristics, such as demand uncertainty. Sampling these ﬁrms
can improve the generalizability of the study ﬁndings.

We took a sample of 1000 ﬁrms randomly from the directory of
Dun & Bradstreet. The sampled ﬁrms mainly belong to the Standard

Industrial Classiﬁcation (SIC) code 513 (i.e., apparel, piece goods,
and notions) and 23 (i.e., apparel and other ﬁnished products
made from fabrics and similar materials). Three rounds of survey
mailings were conducted as follows. In the ﬁrst round of the
mailing, a survey package comprising a questionnaire, a self-
addressed pre-paid return envelope, and a cover invitation letter
explaining the signiﬁcance of the study, was sent to the target
respondents. After ﬁve days of this ﬁrst round of mailing, we made
follow-up calls to the target respondents seeking their acknowl-
edgment of the receipt of the survey with an emphasis on the
importance of their participation in this study. Two weeks after
the follow-up calls, we sent a replacement survey package to the
non-respondents. Another replacement survey package was to the
non-respondents three weeks after the second mailing. As a result
of the three-round of mailings, we received 210 responses in total,
yielding an effective response rate of 21%, which is comparable to
prior environmental management studies (Wong, 2013; Melnyk
et al., 2003).

2.2. Measurement development

We conducted an extensive literature review and adopt items
used in previous studies to improve the validity and reliability of
our measurement scales. Speciﬁcally, the items for evaluating EMI
were adopted and modiﬁed from previous scales with an environ-
mental management information focus, reﬂecting the behaviors of
ﬁrms in sharing EMI with their suppliers and customers in
managing the supply chain. The source of the measurement scales
is summarized in Appendix A. We have amended the measure-
ments to better ﬁt the context of this study. To ensure the target
respondents understand the semantic meaning of the measure-
ment, we invited a panel of practitioners and academics to review
the wordings and expression of the measurement items to ensure
that they interpret the statements consistently. The measurement
items were slightly revised based on their feedback. We then
conducted a pilot test with a group of 30 managers. They are
required to respond the extent to which environmental manage-
ment information is shared with suppliers and customers on a
ﬁve-point Likert scale (1¼very little to 5¼to a great extent). The
managers are also asked for an evaluation of the various perfor-
mance measures of their ﬁrms in terms of the level of performance
improvement achieved in the past two years as a result of the
implementation of environmental management practices relative
to the industry's average on Likert scale of 1¼signiﬁcantly above
average to 5¼signiﬁcantly below average. The managers are also
asked to assess their business environment by indicating the
extent to which the various market factors that reﬂect environ-
mental muniﬁcence affect their company on a scale of 1¼not at all
and 5¼to a great extent.

The pilot test resulted in six reﬂective measurement models:
environmental management information sharing with suppliers,
environmental management information sharing with customers,
proﬁt-related performance, cost performance, environmental perfor-
mance, and environmental muniﬁcence. In addition to these inde-
pendent, dependent, and moderating variables, we include ﬁrm size
in terms of number of employees as control variable. Firm size may
affect the scales of performance outcomes of information sharing as
larger ﬁrms tend to have resources for developing electronic linkages
with supply chain partners, thus they are more efﬁcient in dissemi-
nating information (Zhu, 2004; Wong et al., 2011).

2.3. Measurement validation

To validate the measurements, we performed conﬁrmatory
factor analysis (CFA) using AMOS 20.0 to assess the psychometric
properties of the measurement structures employing maximum


K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 164 (2015) 445–453

449

likelihood estimation with covariance. The CFA results summar-
ized in Table 1 show that the goodness-off-ﬁt indices are all
above the recommended threshold. Cronbach's alpha and compo-
site reliability of all the constructs are greater than .70, which
indicate reliability of the measurement instrument (Nunnally,
1984). Moreover, we assess the convergent validity of the mea-
surement scales by conducting another CFA using maximum
likelihood estimation. As summarized in Appendix A, the loadings
of all the measurement items are signiﬁcant (po.05) with effect
size ranging from .63 to .93 on their respective constructs, which
suggest
constructs
(Anderson and Gerbing, 1988). Furthermore, average variance
extracted (AVE) of each construct also exceeds the recommended
threshold of
indicating convergent validity (Fornell and
Larcker, 1981). Table 2 summarizes the means, standard devia-
tions, and correlations of all the constructs. The bivariate correla-
tions between the independent, dependent, and moderating
variables range from .33 to .68 at po.01, which indicate acceptable
criterion validity. The square root of AVE of all the constructs is
greater than the correlation between any pair of them as shown in
Table 2, showing that discriminant validity is satisfactory (Fornell
and Larcker, 1981).

convergent validity of

theoretical

.50,

the

2.4. Non-response bias

Following Armstrong and Overton (1977), we performed a test
of non-response bias by using the extrapolation method. We ﬁrst
compare the early and late responses and the results showed no
statistical differences across the variables at po.05, which
provides preliminary evidence that non-response bias is not an
issue. We then conducted a t-test to examine whether there is
signiﬁcant difference across the variables between the early

Table 1
Goodness-of-ﬁt indices, Cronbach's alpha, composite reliability, and AVE.

respondents and those that initially rejected to participate but
later responded. The t-test results indicate no signiﬁcant differ-
ence at po.05. These results suggest that non-response bias is
not an issue in this study.

2.5. Common method variance

While the data was collected from one informant, common
method variance (CMV) might be an issue to the validity of the study
results. We took a few steps to minimize and detect if CMV is a
problem. First, in the data collection process, we segmented the
questions that belong to the independent and dependent variables
into different sections in the questionnaire (Podsakoff et al., 2003).
Second, in addition to primary business performance data that are
solicited from respondents, we collected secondary business perfor-
mance data to triangulate performance results. From the Dun &
Bradstreet directory, we collected secondary business performance
data in terms of sales estimator that is computed statistically by a
statistical-valid model on such key variables as employee size, industry
benchmarking, years established, paid up capital, organization struc-
ture, government published statistics, and so forth. The secondary
business performance data is used to compare with the perceptual
annual sales data collected from respondents using t-test. The t-test
result indicates there is no difference with p4.05 signiﬁcance level
between the primary and secondary source of sales data, indicating
that CMV is not an issue. Third, we carried out Harman's one-factor
test to assess if the covariance is accounted by one factor. The factor
analysis results indicate that no one factor accounts for the majority of
the variance. The independent and dependent variables load on
different factors, where the ﬁrst factor accounts for less than 40% of
the total variance, providing further evidence that CMV is not an issue
of this study.

Recommended
threshold

Sharing EMI with
suppliers

Sharing EMI with
customers

Proﬁt
performance

Cost
performance

Environmental
performance

Environmental
muniﬁcence

χ2
df
CFI
IFI
TLI
RMR
Cronbach's

alpha
Composite

reliability

.90
.90
.90
.08
.70

.70

5.04
2
.97
.97
.91
.04
.92

.92

–
–
–
–
–
–
.87

.87

9.07
2
.99
.98
.96
.02
.90

.89

–
–
–
–
–
–
.87

.87

102.73
20
.93
.93
.90
.03
.94

.94

50.84
9
.93
.93
.90
.04
.91

.91

AVE

.63
CFI¼comparative ﬁt index; IFI¼incremental ﬁt index; TLI¼Tucker–Lewis index; RMR¼root mean square residual; AVE¼average variance extracted.

.50

.69

.67

.70

.59

.74

Table 2
Correlations, means, and standard deviations.

A. Sharing EMI with suppliers
B. Sharing EMI with customers
C. Proﬁt performance
D. Cost performance
E. Environmental performance
F. Environmental muniﬁcence
G. Firm size (control)

Mean

2.85
3.15
2.67
2.87
3.24
2.94
2.55a

SD

1.01
.94
.75
.79
.63
.76
1.50

A

.86
.68nn
.44nn
.47nn
.49nn
.33nn
.11

B

.83
.44nn
.44nn
.42nn
.58nn
.11

C

D

E

F

.82
.68nn
.52nn
.58nn
.03

.84
.57nn
.62nn
.08

.77
.44nn
.09

.79
.02

Square root of AVE is on the diagonal.

nn Correlation is signiﬁcant at the .01 level (two-tailed).
a 1¼1–10; 2¼11–50; 3¼51–100; 4¼101–500; 5¼ 4500 number of employees.


450

K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 164 (2015) 445–453

2.6. Hypotheses testing

To test the hypotheses as displayed in Fig. 1, we developed a
structural equation model with maximum likelihood estimation
using AMOS 20.0. The ﬁt of the structural model is good with CFI,
TLI, IFI equal to or above the recommended threshold of .90, and
RMSEA below .08 (χ2¼506.49, df¼200, po.01; TLI¼.90; CFI¼.91;
RMSEA¼.07; IFI¼.91). The R2 of the environmental, cost, and
proﬁt performance are 32%, 31%, and 25%, respectively, which are
similar to prior studies (Klassen and McLaughlin, 1996; Gilley
et al., 2000). The statistical results indicate that sharing EMI with
suppliers has a positive and signiﬁcant relationship with both cost
(β¼.35, t¼2.86, po.01) and environmental performance (β¼.41,
t¼3.31, po.001). However, sharing information with suppliers
does not affect proﬁt-related performance (β¼.21, t¼1.67, p4.05).
On the other hand, EMI sharing with customers has a positive and
signiﬁcant relationship with proﬁt (β¼.32, t¼2.44, po.05) and
cost (β¼.24, t¼2.39, po.05) performance. However, EMI sharing
with customers is not associated with environmental performance
(β¼.18, t¼1.52, p4.05).

To examine the moderating effect of environmental muniﬁ-
cence, a two-group model is developed by dividing the sample
into high (n¼117) and low (n¼93) environmental muniﬁcence
groups based on its mean composite score. Using AMOS 20.0, we
conducted multi-group analyses to investigate whether the per-
formance impacts of sharing EMI with suppliers and customers are
different under high and low levels of environmental muniﬁcence.
As summarized in Table 3, a signiﬁcant difference in the χ2
statistics (Δχ2¼73.4, Δdf¼55, po.05) between the baseline
model (i.e., the structural model parameters are varied freely
across the high and low environmental muniﬁcence groups) and
constrained model (i.e., the structural model parameters are
constrained to be equal across the two environmental muniﬁcence
groups), suggesting there is variance of the high and low environ-
mental muniﬁcence groups. The equality of the paths between the
high and low environmental muniﬁcence groups is then tested by
χ2 different test. Signiﬁcant χ2 differences (po.05) are found in
the relationships of sharing EMI with suppliers and performance
outcomes in terms of proﬁts, cost, and environmental perfor-
mance, indicating environmental muniﬁcence moderates the rela-
tionships. Speciﬁcally, the results showed that the relationship

between sharing EMI with suppliers and proﬁt is strengthened
under the high environmental muniﬁcence group (β¼.36, t¼2.45,
po.05). Similarly, sharing EMI with suppliers improves cost
(β¼.39, t¼2.68, po.05) and environmental performance (β¼.57,
t¼3.87, po.05) under a highly muniﬁcent environment. On the
other hand, the χ2 difference tests suggest invariance of the
relationships between sharing of EMI with customers and the
performance results in terms of proﬁts, costs, and environmental
performance. The insigniﬁcant χ2 difference indicates that these
relationships are not moderated by environmental muniﬁcence.

3. Discussion and implications

The research ﬁndings generate several important theoretical
and practical implications. First, EMI sharing with customers and
suppliers is positively associated with cost performance. For
instance, by having information exchanges with customers and
suppliers on environmentally-friendly products and production
methods, ﬁrms are able to conduct better planning by incorporat-
ing the environmental concerns of these supply chain partners.
The information sharing enables coordination among supply chain
partners to achieve environmental goals at a lower cost (Azevedp
et al., 2011). This study provides empirical evidence on the
connection between EMI sharing and cost, which is a fundamental
ﬁnancial performance indicator to any businesses. On one hand,
the ﬁnding is consistent with the theoretical conjectures of the
green SCM literature that external coordination with supply chain
partners leads to cost effective outcomes (Zhu et al., 2011). On the
other hand, our research adds on the major economic value of EMI
from the RDT perspective. Information sharing is a useful resource
that upstream and downstream supply chain partners depend on
for cost reduction. Managers need to understand the importance
of communicating with suppliers on the standards and require-
ments and to involve them in environmental management plan-
ning and goal-setting activities. The EMI sharing with suppliers
can beneﬁt trading ﬁrms on cost reduction in energy saving and
waste disposal allowing suppliers to make informed decisions and
provide the right inputs. Sharing of EMI with customers is also
helpful for cost reduction in terms of time for products and

Profit performance

Cost performance

Environmental
performance

Sharing environmental
management
information with
suppliers

Sharing environmental
management
information with
customers

H1a

H1b

H1c

H3a

H3b

H3c

H2a c H4a c

Environmental
munificence

Fig. 1. Research framework.


K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 164 (2015) 445–453

451

Table 3
Results of multi-group analyses – environmental muniﬁcence.

Hypothesis description

Baseline model
Constrained modela

χ2

df

χ2/df RMR IFI CFI Δχ2 Δdf p

High muniﬁcence Low muniﬁcence Hypothesis

686.33 396 1.73 .07
759.73 451 1.68 .10

.91 .90
.89 .89 73.4 55 o.05

Constrained path
690.25 397 1.74 .07
Sharing EMI with suppliers-proﬁt
690.41 397 1.74 .07
Sharing EMI with suppliers-cost
692.41 397 1.74 .07
Sharing EMI with suppliers-environmental performance
686.33 397 1.73 .07
Sharing EMI with customers-proﬁt
Sharing EMI with customers-cost
686.86 397 1.73 .07
Sharing EMI with customers-environmental performance 686.33 397 1.73 .07

.91 .90 3.92
.91 .90 3.88
.91 .90 4.53
.91 .90 0
.91 .90 .53
.91 .90 0

1 o.05 .36nb (2.45)c
1 o.05 .39nn (2.68)
1 o.05 .57nnn (3.87)
1 n.s
1 n.s
1 n.s

.04 (.28)
.13 (.89)
.07 (.48)

.21 (1.02)
.43n (2.25)
.27 (1.44)
.05 (.30)
.05 (.31)
.08 (.32)

Supported
Not supported
Supported
Not supported
Not supported
Not supported

a Factor loading, covariance, variance, and measurement errors constrained equal.
b Standardized coefﬁcient.
c t-Value.
nnn po.001
nn po.01
n po.05

services to reach markets due to customer awareness of the
offering by the sharing.

Second, EMI sharing with suppliers contributes positively to
environmental performance, but not proﬁt-related performance.
Suppliers play both an operational function and a strategic role in
inﬂuencing a manufacturer's production, process, and service deliv-
ery. By communicating EMI such as environmental standards and
requirements, suppliers can align their own production, process, and
service delivery with these environmental requirements. For exam-
ple, in terms of new product development, manufacturers can share
and discuss the green design of the products with suppliers (Tseng
and Chiu, 2013). Suppliers can use more environmentally-friendly
materials and packaging to fulﬁll the higher environmental stan-
dards. In other words, trading ﬁrms can hardly enhance environ-
mental performance on their own. They should work together with
suppliers in order to achieve eco-efﬁciency. However, our research
ﬁnding does not show a signiﬁcant relationship between sharing of
EMI with suppliers and the proﬁt performance. It may be due to the
reason that suppliers are upstream supply chain partners who are
more related to the inputs on manufacturing products and processes,
rather than markets and sales. Based on the empirical evidence, the
performance value of sharing of EMI with suppliers is evidenced in
environmental performance. The performance impact is more salient
on a highly muniﬁcent environment where the abundance of
resources in industry allows ﬁrms to crystallize the value of EMI
sharing with suppliers and to achieve reduction in resources con-
sumption, pollution, and environmental accidents. The research also
uncovers more on suppliers' role in green SCM.

Third, EMI sharing with customers contributes positively to proﬁt
performance, but not environmental performance of manufacturing
enterprises. Firms are often market oriented, addressing market needs
by acquiring information from customers. When products are mar-
keted, it is effective to communicate with customers on the products'
eco-features. Economic beneﬁts that can be obtained include green
branding, customer acquisition, and customer retention (Lee and Lam,
2012). Therefore, it is likely that market share and proﬁtability are
increased. Although sharing of EMI with customers enables efﬁcient
marketing and customer communication, we receive no support that
it contributes to environmental performance of the focal ﬁrms. This
result is somewhat consistent from the prior literature which shows
that ﬁrms need to possess environmental management capabilities to
make use of the information shared with and collected from custo-
mers in order to achieve environmental performance (Wong, 2013).
EMI sharing entails a deeper relationship and coordination with
supply chain partners, in this case the customers. Our results reveal
that sharing of EMI with customers is helpful to enhance ﬁrms' proﬁt

and cost performance. If ﬁrms wish to strengthen their environmental
performance, they are recommended to take an extra step to develop
environmental management capabilities (e.g., environmental innova-
tiveness and adaptability). These empirical results lead to a better
understanding on environmental information management and con-
tribute to theory building on this topic.

Fourthly, the cost and environmental performance beneﬁts are
more signiﬁcant when the ﬁrms operate at high environmental
muniﬁcence in sharing EMI with suppliers. However, results suggest
that the performance beneﬁts of EMI sharing with customers are not
moderated by environmental muniﬁcence such as investment and
marketing opportunities. The ﬁndings show that the performance
beneﬁts associated with sharing of EMI with suppliers are more
sensitive to changes in environmental muniﬁcence than sharing of
EMI with customers. In particular, while cost beneﬁts can be obtained
from both supplier EMI sharing and customer EMI sharing, the
empirical ﬁndings provide evidence that the extent of cost beneﬁts
is different with environmental muniﬁcence for supplier EMI sharing.
It is interesting to note the lack of performance signiﬁcance as well as
the performance invariance for EMI sharing with customers when
environmental muniﬁcence is modeled. One plausible reason can be
customer pressures for ﬁrms to demonstrate their corporate social
responsibility in sharing environmental management so as to stay in
business regardless of the muniﬁcence conditions. Further investiga-
tion is needed to understand how customer pressures matter and the
types of pressures (e.g., coercive and normative) for EMI sharing with
customers and the performance outcomes. The study advances
knowledge to the literature by bridging the gap in research on EMI
and the performance links from the resources dependence theory
perspective. Managers need to understand the dependence of EMI
sharing with supply chain partners and the performance beneﬁts to
increase the success of their environmental management initiatives.
Timely and accurate EMI sharing beyond organizational boundary is
an important resource for coordination of green SCM activities that
the involved parties depend on for achieving triple bottom-line goals
in their environmental management initiatives.

4. Conclusions and future research directions

This study has made contributions to understand the performance
impact of EMI sharing from the RDT perspective under high and low
levels of environmental muniﬁcence. Speciﬁcally, EMI sharing with
suppliers can bring cost and environmental performance and such
performance effects are strengthened under the high environmental
muniﬁcence condition. There are also proﬁt and cost performance


452

Table A1

K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 164 (2015) 445–453

Construct name [scale] (source)

Measurement items

Loadingsa

Sharing EMI with suppliers (Yang et al., 2009)

Sharing EMI with customers (Klassen and Whybark, 1999)

Proﬁt performance (Montabon et al., 2007)

Cost performance (Montabon et al., 2007)

Environmental performance (Montabon et al., 2007)

Environmental muniﬁcence [1¼very little to 5¼to a great

extent] (Sutcliffe and Huber, 1998)

a Loadings are signiﬁcant at po.05.

We provide suppliers with any environmental management information that might help
them to plan for our company's needs.
We communicate our environmental standards and requirements clearly and accurately to
suppliers.
Environmental management information exchanges between suppliers and our company
occur timely and/or frequently.
We include our major suppliers in our environmental management planning and goal-
setting activities.

We provide customers with information on environmentally-friendly products/and or
production methods.
We voluntarily disclose our company's environmental performance information to
customers (e.g., emission levels, audit results).
We take customers' opinions into consideration when developing our formal position on
environmental management issues.

Increase in return on investment.
Increase in market share.
Increase in total proﬁt from products/services.
Increase in proﬁt from environmentally-friendly products/services.

Cost reduction in energy savings.
Cost reduction in waste disposal.
Reduction in time-to-market for products/services.

Reduction in hazardous/harmful materials used in manufacturing products/service
delivery.
Reduction in the use of electricity.
Reduction in total fuel consumption used in transportation of products/services.
Reduction in total packaging materials used.
Reduction in air emissions.
Reduction in solid waste disposal.
Reduction in waste water drainage.
Reduction in frequency of environmental accidents.

Demand for the products of our industry is growing and will continue to grow.
The investment or marketing opportunities for ﬁrms in our industry are favorable at the
present time.
The opportunities for ﬁrms in our industry to expand the scope of their existing products/
markets are favorable.
In our industry, sales have been growing and are likely to grow.
The total value of assets for the ﬁrms within our industry is increasing.
Capital expenditures in our industry are growing and will continue to grow.

.83

.88

.87

.86

.73

.87

.88

.76
.86
.93
.70

.89
.94
.65

.63

.75
.79
.73
.81
.88
.81
.78

.68
.88

.86

.81
.82
.67

beneﬁts for disclosing EMI with customers. Academically, this study is
novel to the literature on examining the value of EMI sharing for
supply chain management and the performance contingencies on
environmental muniﬁcence. Practically, managers are provided with
insights on the importance of EMI sharing with their supply chain
partners. Company policy and planning should be developed to
facilitate EMI sharing for managing the supply chain considering the
environmental muniﬁcence conditions to improve the chance of
performance success.

There are some limitations of this research which can be directions
for further research on this topic. It attempts to explain the perfor-
mance impact of sharing EMI with suppliers and customers under
different levels of environmental muniﬁcence. However, this explana-
tion is hardly complete. Although a muniﬁcent business environment
is an important condition that would have different impacts on supply
chain initiatives and relationships between supply chain partners, it is
not the only contingency environmental factor that would affect the
EMI–performance relationships. Future research may consider other
contingency factors ranging from business environment (e.g., com-
plexity of supply chain network and environmental regulations),
supply chain partner relational conditions (e.g., inter-organizational
trust and stability), to internal organizational and operational condi-
tions (e.g., organizational structure and product type) and third party
certiﬁcation (e.g., ISO standards) (Lo et al., 2013).

This study was conducted using a large-scale research design in
the apparel trading industry. Although the use of single industry

data allows us to avoid differences due to product type and supply
chain characteristics of different industries, it decreases the gen-
eralizability of the ﬁndings. Therefore, future research may con-
sider other industries to improve the generalizability of the
ﬁndings. Research using other methodologies, such as in-depth
case studies, is also recommended. This can provide an under-
standing of the contextually embedded reasons of the study
ﬁndings.

Only the performance outcomes of two dimensions of EMI
sharing are examined in this study. While sharing of EMI amongst
internal functions may affect the implementation of environmen-
tal management practices, future study may investigate the shar-
ing of EMI across functions and with internal stakeholders
(i.e., employees) and their impacts on the various performance
outcomes. Also, to gain further understanding of environmental
management in a supply chain context, future study may investi-
gate the sharing of knowledge and risk of environmental manage-
ment and their inﬂuence on the various performance outcomes. It
is also a good topic for future research to identify and deﬁne
different areas of EMI sharing (e.g., products, processes, policies,
standards) and how these various aspects of EMI sharing are
associated with performance outcomes.

We obtained secondary performance data to overcome the
problem of common method variance. However, the performance
outcomes of the research model were perceptual. Future study
may consider collecting objective ﬁnancial and environmental


K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 164 (2015) 445–453

453

data to further examine the economic and environmental value of
EMI sharing.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank the guest editor and two
anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments provided
to the earlier versions of this article. This research is partially
supported by the Research Grants Council of The Hong Kong
Special Administration Region (PolyU 152170/14E) and The Hong
Kong Polytechnic University (G-UC40).

Appendix A. Measurement instruments

See Table A1.

References

Anderson, J.D., Gerbing, D.W., 1988. Structural equation modeling in practice.

A review and recommended two-step approach. Psychol. Bull. 103, 411–423.

Armstrong, J.S., Overton, R.S., 1977. Estimating nonresponse bias in mail surveys.

J. Mark. Res. 14, 396–402.

Azevedp, S.G., Carvalho, H., Machado, V.C., 2011. The inﬂuence of green practices on
supply chain performance: a case study approach. Transp. Res. Part E 47,
850–871.

Barboza, D., 2011. Apple Cited as Adding to Pollution in China. The New York Times

[Online]. Available: 〈http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/02/technology/apple-
suppliers-causing-environmental-problems-chinese-group-says.html?
_r=1&scp=1&sq=china%20environmental%20&st=cse〉.

Bocken, N.M.P., Short, S.W., Rana, P., Evans, S., 2014. A literature and practice review

to develop sustainable business model archetypes. J. Clean. Prod. 65, 42–56.

Cai, S., Chen, X., Bose,

I., 2013. Exploring the role of

IT for environmental
sustainability in China: an empirical analysis. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 146, 491–500.
Chan, R.Y.K., 2005. Does the natural-resource-based view of the ﬁrm apply in an
emerging economy? A survey of foreign invested enterprises in China. J. Manag.
Stud. 42, 625–672.

De Jong, P., Paulraj, A., Blome, C., 2014. The ﬁnancial

impact of

ISO 14001

certiﬁcation: top-line, bottom-line, or both? J. Bus. Eth. 119, 131–149.

Dess, G.G., Beard, D.W., 1984. Dimensions of organizational task environments.

Adm. Sci. Q. 29, 52–73.

Elliot, S., 2011. Transdisciplinary perspectives on environmental sustainability: a
resource base and framework for IT-enabled business transformation. MIS Q.
35, 197–236.

Erlandsson, J., Tillman, A.M., 2009. Analysing inﬂuencing factors of corporate
information collection, management and communication.

environmental
J. Clean. Prod. 17, 800–810.

Fornell, C., Larcker, D.F., 1981. Evaluating structural equation models with unob-

served variables and measurement errors. J. Mark. Res. 18, 39–50.

Gilley, K.M., Worrell, D.L., Davidson, W.N.I., El-Jelly, A., 2000. Corporate environ-
mental initiatives and anticipated ﬁrm performance: the differential effects of
process-driven versus product-driven greening initiatives.
J. Manag. 26,
1199–1216.

Grekova, K., Bremmers, H.J., Trienekens, J.H., Kemp, R.G.M., Omta, S.W.F., 2014.
Extending environmental management beyond the ﬁrm boundaries: an
empirical study of Dutch food and beverage ﬁrms. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 152,
174–187.

Gunasekaran, A., Ngai, E.W.T., 2012. The future of operations management: an

outlook and analysis. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 135, 687–701.

Humphreys, P.K., Lai, M.K., Sculli, D., 2001. An inter-organizational information

system for supply chain management. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 70, 245–255.

Huo, B.F., Zhao, X.D., Zhou, H.G., 2014. The effects of competitive environment on
supply chain information sharing and performance: an empirical study in
China. Prod. Oper. Manag. 23, 552–569.

Jabbour, A.B.L.D., Jabbour, C.J.C., Latan, H., Teixeira, A.A., DE oliveira, J.H.C., 2014.
Quality management, environmental management maturity, green supply
chain practices and green performance of Brazilian companies with ISO
14001 certiﬁcation: direct and indirect effects. Transp. Res. Part E – Logist.
Transp. Rev. 67, 39–51.

Klassen, R.D., Mclaughlin, C.P., 1996. The impact of environmental management on

ﬁrm performance. Manag. Sci. 42, 1199–1214.

Klassen, R.D., Whybark, D.C., 1999. Environmental management in operations: the

selection of environmental technologies. Decis. Sci. 30, 601–631.

Lai, K.H., Wong, C.W.Y., Lun, Y.H.V., 2014. The role of customer integration in
extened producer responsibility: a study of Chinese export manufacturers. Int.
J. Prod. Econ. 147, 284–293.

Lam, J.S.L., Gu, Y.M., 2013. Port hinterland intermodal container ﬂow optimisation
with green concerns: a literature review and research agenda. Int. J. Shipp.
Transp. Logist. 5, 257–281.

Lee, C.K.M., Lam, J.S.L., 2012. Managing reverse logistics to enhance sustainability of

industrial marketing. Ind. Mark. Manag. 41, 589–598.

Lee, H.L., Padmanabhan, V., Whang, S.J., 1997. Information distortion in a supply

chain: the bullwhip effect. Manag. Sci. 43, 546–558.

Lee, H.L., So, K.C., Tang, C.S., 2000. The value of information sharing in a two-level

supply chain. Manag. Sci. 46, 626–643.

Liu, X.B., Anbumozhi, V., 2009. Determinant factors of corporate environmental
information disclosure: an empirical study of Chinese listed companies.
J. Clean. Prod. (17), 593–600.

Lo, C.K.Y., Wiengarten, F., Humphreys, P., Yeung, A.C.L., Cheng, T.C.E., 2013. The
impact of contextual factors on the efﬁcacy of ISO 9000 adoption. J. Oper.
Manag. 31, 229–235.

Melnyk, S.A., Sroufe, R.P., Calantone, R., 2003. Assessing the impact of environ-
mental management systems on corporate and environmental performance.
J. Oper. Manag. 21, 329–351.

Montabon, F., Sroufe, R., Narasimhan, R., 2007. An examination of corporate
reporting, environmental management practices and ﬁrm performance. J. Oper.
Manag. 25, 998–1014.

Nunnally, J., 1984. Psychometric Theory. McGraw-Hill, New York.
O’Rourke, D., 2014. The science of sustainable supply chains. Science 344,

1124–1127.

Pfeffer, J., Salancik, G.R., 1978. The External Control of Organizations: A Resource

Dependence Perspective. Harper & Row, New York.

Podsakoff, P.M., Mackenzie, S.B., Lee, J.Y., Podsakoff, N.P., 2003. Common method
biases in behavioral research: a critical review of the literature and recom-
mended remedies. J. Appl. Psychol. 88, 879–903.

Ramanathan, U., Bentley, Y., Pang, G., 2014. The role of collaboration in the UK green
supply chains: an exploratory study of the perspectives of suppliers, logistics
and retailers. J. Clean. Prod. 70, 231–241.

Saha, C., 2012. Global market scenario of textile and clothing trade. Online Clothing

Study.

Sarkis, J., Zhu, Q.H., Lai, K.H., 2011. An organizational theoretic review of green

supply chain management literature. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 130, 1–15.

Shou, Z.G., Yang, L.H., Zhang, Q.Y., Su, C.T., 2013. Market muniﬁcence and inter-ﬁrm
information sharing: the moderating effect of speciﬁc assets. J. Bus. Res. 66,
2130–2138.

Soler, C., Bergstrom, K., Shanahan, H., 2010. Green supply chains and the missing
link between environmental information and practice. Bus. Strategy Environ.
19, 14–25.

Starbuck, W.H., 1976. Organizations and Their Environments. Rand McNally,

Chicago.

Sutcliffe, K.M., Huber, G.P., 1998. Firm and industry as determinants of executive

perceptions of the environment. Strateg. Manag. J. 19, 793–807.

Tseng, M.L., Chiu, A.S.F., 2013. Evaluating ﬁrm's green supply chain management in

linguistic preferences. J. Clean. Prod. 40, 22–31.

Ulrich, D., Barney, J.B., 1984. Perspectives in organizations – resource dependence,

efﬁciency, and population. Acad. Manag. Rev. 9, 471–481.

Watts, J., 2011. Western Firms Linked to China Pollution. The Guardian [Online].

Available: 〈http://taipeitimes.com/News/editorials/archives/2011/07/17/
2003508418〉.

Wong, C.W.Y., 2013. Leveraging environmental information integration to enable
J. Supply Chain

environmental management capability and performance.
Manag. 49, 114–136.

Wong, C.W.Y., Lai, K.-H., Cheng, T.C.E., 2011. Value of information integration to
internal and external contingencies.

supply chain management: role of
J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 28, 161–200.

Wong, C.W.Y., Lai, K.H., Shang, G., Lu, C.S., Leung, T.K.P., 2012. Green operations and
the moderating role of environmenta management capability of suppliers on
manufacturing ﬁrm performance. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 140, 283–294.

Wu, I.L., Chuang, C.H., Hsu, C.H., 2014. Information sharing and collaborative
behaviors in enabling supply chain performance: a social exchange perspective.
Int. J. Prod. Econ. 148, 122–132.

Yang, J., Wong, C.W.Y., Lai, K.-H., Ntoko, A.N., 2009. The antecedents of dyadic
quality of performance and its effect on buyer–supplier relationship improve-
ment. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 102, 243–251.

Zhu, K., 2004. The complementarity of information technology infrastructure and
e-commerce capability: a resource-based assessment of their business value.
J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 21, 167–202.

Zhu, Q.H., Geng, Y., Lai, K.H., 2011. Environmental supply chain cooperation and its
effect on the circular economy practice–performance relationship among
Chinese manufacturers. J. Ind. Ecol. 15, 405–419.

