Int. J. Production Economics 146 (2013) 106–117

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Int. J. Production Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijpe

Did reverse logistics practices hit the triple bottom line
of Chinese manufacturers?
Kee-hung Lai a,1, Sarah J. Wu b,2, Christina W.Y. Wong c,n
a Department of Logistics and Maritime Studies, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong
b Gabelli School of Business, Fordham University, Bronx, NY 10458, USA
c Business Division, Institute of Textiles and Clothing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 13 February 2012
Accepted 3 March 2013
Available online 14 March 2013

Keywords:
Triple bottom line
Manufacturing
China
Reverse logistics

Reverse logistics (RL) practices represent an important and emerging trend in China's manufacturing
practices. An increasing number of Chinese manufacturers have integrated RL practices in their
operations to develop sustainable competitive advantage. There are six broad aspects of practicing RL
which include waste management, recycling, reuse, reprocessing, materials recovery, and design for RL.
The literature remains unclear, in particular Chinese manufacturing context, as to how these RL practices
are related to organizational bottom line with respect to operational, ﬁnancial, and social performance
outcomes. Using survey data collected from Chinese export-oriented manufacturers, we applied
seemingly unrelated regressions to determine if these six RL practices contribute to these three
performance parameters simultaneously. The theory of production frontier is used to characterize the
RL practices adoption and the performance implications. Our results indicate that the adoption of RL
practices by Chinese manufacturers generates substantial environmental and ﬁnancial gains, but not
social beneﬁts. This study extends the frontier of managerial knowledge for Chinese manufacturers by
highlighting the emerging trends in RL practices and providing evidence on the business value of
adopting RL practices.

& 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1.

Introduction

China's success in manufacturing was primarily based on low
labor cost. This cost advantage attracts companies from developed
countries to relocate their production base to China or outsource
production function to their Chinese manufacturer counterparts.
After three decade of development based on low cost structure,
there comes to a concern on the sustainability of such manufactur-
ing practice in China. The rapid economic growth in the country will
eventually lead Chinese manufacturers to lose their cost advantages
as what was experienced in Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore, and
South Korea.

The country is also experiencing environmental degradation at
catastrophic level due to industrial pollution where manufacturing
is a major source and a solution is urgently needed. The increasing
resources depletion together with the detrimental environmental
burden due to productive activities have pressurized the Chinese

n Corresponding author. Tel.: þ852 2766 6415.
E-mail addresses: mike.lai@polyu.edu.hk (K.-h. Lai),

jiwu@fordham.edu (S.J. Wu), tcchris@polyu.edu.hk,
tcchris@inet.polyu.edu.hk (C.W.Y. Wong).

1 Tel.: þ852 2766 7920.
2 Tel.: þ1 718 817 4156; fax: þ1 718 817 5544.

0925-5273/$ - see front matter & 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2013.03.005

government to develop and implement stricter regulatory policies
such as the Chinese version of RoHS (i.e., Restriction of Hazardous
Substances). These, in turn, have prompted many Chinese manu-
facturers to recognize the importance of ecological modernization,
which stresses implementing innovative management practices to
mitigate the environmental damage from the pursuit of proﬁtable
growth (Lai et al., 2012).

Serving as the global factory, Chinese manufacturers are increas-
ingly expected to respond to the environmental quest of the interna-
tional community to mitigate the damages caused by their produced
items to other countries through better life cycle management of their
merchandises from sourcing and manufacturing to distribution and
disposal. In particular, export-oriented manufactures in China are
encountering various institutional and operational pressures that
prompt their adoption of green practices. For instance, regulations
on environmental protection such as the Waste Electrical and Electro-
nic Equipment (WEEE) and the End of life Vehicle (ELV) Directive in
Europe as well as the local Cleaner Production Promotion Law and the
Saving Energy Law are pressuring Chinese manufacturers to become
more accountable for residual and ﬁnal products, long after the ﬁnal
product is sold and in the hands of the customers. This regulatory
pressure on environmental protection is particularly salient for
Chinese manufacturers seeking to compete in the global market.
The different stakeholders in the international community including


K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 146 (2013) 106–117

107

customers, suppliers, and environmental groups expect manufacturers
to reduce harms caused to the natural environmental by their
products and operations.

To tackle all these challenges and pursue sustainable develop-
ment, Chinese manufacturers need to build other competitive
advantages in their operations system. Increasingly, they realize
that a production system should not be a one-way system; rather
it is a two-way closed loop. In fact, in many instances, manufac-
turers need to handle returned products which can be resulted
from damaged or defective shipments, incorrect delivery, over-
stocks, and customer return due to dissatisfaction. Reverse logis-
tics (RL) is one of the innovative practices helpful for Chinese
manufacturers to improve business performance while preserving
the environment in the locality and the global community. It is a
viable environmentally friendly management approach helpful for
Chinese manufacturers to better utilize resources, reduce wastes,
improve efﬁciency, and meet the social expectation for environ-
mental conservation (Lai and Wong, 2012).

One example to illustrate RL practices in Chinese manufacturing is
the Haier group, a multinational consumer electronics and home
appliances enterprise located in Qingdao. This company is proactive
in various environmental management initiatives, for instance, green
product development. With government's support, Haier launched a
project to demonstrate how to handle end-of-life product manage-
ment issues, including a site with an annual capacity to process
200,000 used electronic products (Park et al., 2010). In 2007, a total
of RMB $80 million (approx. US$12 million) was invested to
construct the Haier recycling centre in Qingdao where 15% of the
cost contributed by the government for this project. It was estimated
that about 200,000 used home appliances, including TV sets, air
conditioners and washing machines can be recycled per year in this
center (Yang et al., 2008). This recycling center of Haier is classiﬁed as
a “National-level wasted home appliances recycling demonstration
site”(
) and is the
ﬁrst
“Environmental protection education demonstration site”
(

) of China.

Theoretically, adopting and implementing RL represent an
attempt to develop new and innovative ways for environmental
protection without compromising their capability to compete.
Though anecdotal stories like Haier Group are encouraging, many
Chinese manufacturers remain hesitant in investment decision on
RL. One possible obstacle to diffuse RL among Chinese manufac-
turers can be uncertainty on its triple bottom-line beneﬁts. The
triple bottom-line essentially captures the intersection of social,
economic, environmental, and social goals from the microeco-
nomics standpoint. This study targets to evaluate how far Chinese
manufacturers go along the line of sustainable development,
providing insights of where to put more efforts speciﬁcally on RL
to improve their chance for long-term success.

2. Conceptualization of reverse logistics

RL is a management approach whereby adopting companies can
become more environmentally efﬁcient through recycling, reusing,
and reducing the amount of materials used (Carter and Ellram, 1998).
In the manufacturing context, it is deﬁned as the process by which
a manufacturer systematically takes back previously shipped pro-
ducts or parts from the point-of-consumption for possible recycling,
remanufacturing, or disposal (Dowlatshahi, 2010). RL is helpful for
extending the life of materials and products and hence reducing
environmental burdens from industrial operations (Jayaraman and
Luo, 2007). It involves the management of goods ﬂowing from their
ﬁnal destination back to the point of origin with the objective to
recover value or reduce waste (Rogers and Tibben-Lembke, 2001).
Conventionally, manufacturers create value in the sequence from

inbound logistics to operations, outbound logistics, marketing and
sales, and ﬁnally to service in the value chain (Porter, 1985). Nowa-
days, manufacturers are expected to assume the responsibility for
environmental protection with particular respect to handling their
end-of-life-cycle products, which requires collection, product recov-
ery, or proper disposal (Zhu et al., 2008b).

In recent years, there is a stream of research examining ways to
develop manufacturing competencies (Koufteros et al., 2007) and
that RL is found to improve the proﬁtability of manufacturers
(Weeks et al., 2010). Using RL, manufacturers can systematically
retrieve previously shipped products or parts from the consump-
tion point back to the factory for possible product recycling. This
management approach provides an alternative use of resources in
a cost-effectively and ecologically friendly manner by extending a
product's normal life beyond its traditional usage.

According to Flapper et al. (2005), the types of RL in a close-loop
supply chain can be classiﬁed as production-related, distribution-
related, use-related, and end-of life. There are obsolete materials,
production scraps, and production defects below preset quality
levels in the production-related stage that require RL for handling
the returned materials. During distribution, there can be commer-
cial returns of products that are sold with a return option, wrong
deliveries as the products are refused by customers because they
are delivered too early or too late, or otherwise not conforming
to speciﬁcation, and product recalls resulting from safety problems
(e.g., food and automobile). A product currently in use may also
need RL due to warranties and repair services. At the end-of-life
stage, products are returned to the distributors or the original
manufacturers because their components and materials can be
valuable for reuse in other products, e.g., rare materials in electronic
appliances. Previous research has also recognized the importance
of greening the supply chain and the environmental management
of product life cycle (Guide and Li, 2010; Klassen and Whybark,
1999; Zhu et al., 2010).

The concept of RL should be explored and integrated as a viable
option in the product life cycle from product design to manufacturing
to shipment to the ultimate consumers. In many instances, manu-
facturers need to deal with returned products, which may be the
result of damaged or defective shipments, incorrect shipments, over-
stocks, and customer returns due to dissatisfaction, and take advan-
tage of their residual value. Regulations on environmental protection
are also pressing manufacturing enterprises to become more accoun-
table for residual and ﬁnal products, long after the ﬁnal product is
sold and in the hands of the customers (Zhu et al., 2010).

Since the entry of China into the World Trade Organization
(WTO) in November 2002, Chinese manufacturers have been
increasingly confronted with competitive challenges including fast
changing international customer tastes, technology acceleration,
and environmental-based trade barriers in their operations envir-
onment. The different stakeholders in the international community
including customers, suppliers, and environmental groups also
expect them to reduce damages caused to the natural environment
by their products and operations. On the policy side, the Chinese
government has increasingly emphasized corporate and industrial
environmental measures through promoting the development of
a circular economy in the country (Zhu et al., 2010). To tackle these
challenges, Chinese manufacturers need to continuously develop
new and innovative ways for environmental protection without
compromising their capability to compete. There is growing interest
on adopting RL in the manufacturing sector to gain cost efﬁciency
while preserving the environment (Kenne et al., 2012).

Better inventory control, reduced waste disposal cost as well as
improved customer service and corporate image have been identiﬁed
as potential beneﬁts that may accrue to enterprises competent in RL
(Carter and Ellram, 1998; Chan and Chan, 2008; Marien, 1998).
Previous studies have also identiﬁed the strategic importance of


108

K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 146 (2013) 106–117

RL (Autry, 2005). By adopting RL, enterprises can be a differentiator
through which they are able to achieve market advantages such as
building a loyal customer base and attracting new ones (Jayaraman
and Luo, 2007). Using an activity-based management methodology
framework, Presley et al. (2007) investigated the design and devel-
opment of the strategic sustainability evaluation framework consid-
ering economic, environmental, and social dimensions for selection
of reverse logistics service providers. Recently, Jack et al. (2010) found
that resource commitments and contractual obligations positively
inﬂuence RL capabilities and cost savings subsequently.

Even though there are potential economic beneﬁts of RL, ﬁrms’
traditional preoccupation with forward logistics, desires to “hide”
inventory mistakes, low awareness of the magnitude of potential
beneﬁts, and lack of a holistic approach to deal with RL activities are
barriers limiting allocation of resources to support its implementation
(Daugherty et al., 2001; Krumwiede and Sheu, 2002). Rogers and
Tibben-Lembke (2001) reported a list of signiﬁcant difﬁculties curtail-
ing the implementation of RL. These factors include the importance
of RL relative to other issues, company policies, lack of RL information
systems, competitive issues, management inattention, personnel
resources, ﬁnancial resources, and legal issues. Stock (2001) also
pointed out the possibility that some companies are unaware of the
value of RL to proﬁtability and customer service, nor the beneﬁts
associated with efﬁcient product returns. It is still not uncommon for
companies to consider product returns as extra expenses incurred on
top of their traditional forward logistics activities.

Following Elkington's (1998, 2004) idea of triple bottom line, Carter
and Rogers (2008) suggests that organizational sustainability, at
a broader level, consists of three components: the natural environ-
ment, society, and economic performance. The triple bottom line
essentially reﬂects the intersection of social, environmental, and
economic performance; a simultaneous consideration of the balance
among economic, environmental, and social goals from the micro-
economics standpoint. The literature on RL has explored the total
supply chain view that considers the production, transportation and
distribution of products to customers for the success of RL programs
(Das and Chowdhury, 2012) and the links with JIT (Chan et al., 2010)
and third party logistics (Min and Ko, 2008) in implementation. Yet, it
has not addressed the critical question—whether companies adopting
RL can balance and improve their performance outcomes in multiple
dimensions? This question is particularly timely and important to
Chinese manufacturers as they need to develop other competitive
advantages than cost. As such, this study aims to empirically
investigate whether Chinese manufacturers adopting RL actually
achieve better performance in these three performance dimensions
simultaneously. Put alternatively, has the win–win situation been
achieved by adopting RL?

The answer to this question will also help clarify and begin to
resolve the debate surrounding the relationships between environ-
mental and social performance on the one hand, and economic
performance on the other. As pointed out by Hoffman and Bazerman
(2005), the key to resolving this debate is the recognition that social
and environmental behaviors could be proﬁt-compatible. When
parties acknowledge this simple fact, it becomes easier to convince
companies to adopt environmental and social initiatives that are
mutually beneﬁcial.

3. Theoretical development and hypotheses

The conventional economic view suggests that any environmental
improvement achieved by a ﬁrm transfers costs previously incurred
by society back to the ﬁrm (Friedman, 1962; McGuire et al., 1988).
Many scholars believe that environmental and social initiatives are
costly undertakings. For instance, Walley and Whitehead (1994)
stated that “win–win situations occur rarely as they are likely

overshadowed by the total cost of a company's environmental
program. Hence, environmental performance was expected to be
negatively
ultimately, ﬁnancial
performance.

operational

linked

and

to

Counter to this perspective, others have identiﬁed strategies in
which environmental management can improve ﬁrm-level ﬁnancial
performance and overall competitiveness (Porter and van der Linde,
1995; Reinhardt, 1999). Poor environmental performance can even
reduce a ﬁrm's market valuation (Klassen and McClaughlin, 1996;
Konar and Cohen, 2001). Clarke (1994) indicated it is necessary to
adopt a broader approach that focuses on basic change in products,
services, and business strategies that offer opportunity ﬁnancially as
well as ecologically. He believed that win–win situations will
increasingly arise as energy process inevitably increase and as greater
transparency allows stakeholders to see further along a supply chain.
Though synergy is expected to enhance the corporate image,
competitive advantage and marketing exposure, many organizations
still look upon green initiatives as involving trade-offs between
environmental and economic performance outcomes (Klassen and
McClaughlin, 1996). The link between environmental management
and ﬁnancial performance has been discussed for more than three
decades, the results reported by empirical studies are often conﬂict-
ing or ambiguous, fostering an ongoing debate in the literature
(Corbett and Klassen, 2006).

To reconcile the contradictory perspective, Porter and van der
Linde (1995) argued that it is a static view to believe that there
exists an inherent and ﬁxed trade-off between social beneﬁts and
ﬁrms’ private cost for “being green”. That is, if technology, products,
processes, and customer needs remain constant, that compliance to
regulation raises cost and reduces competitiveness would be
inevitable. However, companies operate in the dynamic environ-
ment where they continuously ﬁnd innovative solutions to reduce
the total cost of a product or increase its value. Such innovation
requires companies to use inputs more productively – from raw
materials to energy to labor – to offset the cost of improving
environmental
impact and avoid the impasse. Ultimately, this
enhanced resource productivity allows a company to become more
competitive. Porter and van der Linde's argument can be further
elaborated by the theory of production frontier (TPF) since innova-
tion is a major force to push the production frontier outward and
opens up the opportunity to improve performance in multiple
dimensions.

3.1. Theory of production frontier

In economic theory, a production frontier (PF) is deﬁned as the
maximum output that can be produced from any given set of inputs
under technical considerations (Samuelson, 1947). Schmenner and
Swink (1998) extended PF to the ﬁeld of operations management by
expanding “output” to include all dimensions of manufacturing
performance (e.g., cost, product range, quality) and extending
“technical considerations” to include all choices affecting the design
and operations of a manufacturing unit. As such, a PF is deﬁned as
the maximum performance that can be achieved by a manufactur-
ing unit given a set of operating choices. Two types of PFs put
constraints on a plant's performance. The asset frontier (AF) is
formed by choices in plant design and investment. The operating
frontier (OF) is formed and altered by changes in the choices in
plant operations. Therefore, each plant's performance is immedi-
ately bounded by its policies and procedures (i.e., OF) but ultimately
bounded by its AF. Both frontiers are movable, however, shifting AF
occurs less frequently than moving OF because it normally requires
large capital investments and radical changes to the physical plant.
Consequently, we focus on the movement of OF in this study.

Schmenner and Swink (1998) differentiated two types of bene-
ﬁcial movement of OF within the performance space: improvement


K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 146 (2013) 106–117

109

Cost

A
Improvement

A1

A2

Betterment

Asset Frontier

Performance

Fig. 1. Assets frontier and operating frontier (adapted from Schmenner and Swink
(1998)).

and betterment. Improvement (from A to A1 in Fig. 1) is deﬁned as
“increased plant performance in one of more dimensions without
degradation in any other dimensions” (p. 109), which can be
achieved by increasing utilization or efﬁciency so as to bring
performance up to a pre-determined standard (i.e., closer to its
OF). Betterment (from A1 to A2 in Fig. 1), on the other hand, refers
to “altering manufacturing operating policies (e.g., adoption of best
practices) in ways that move or change the shape of the OF”
(p. 109). They used TPF to argue that if a plant is far from the AF,
it has the potential
to simultaneously provide higher levels
of performance in multiple dimensions, and that pursuing one
performance dimension is not at the sacriﬁce of another.

3.2. Hypotheses development

Applying the TPF to the context of RL, we can argue that ﬁrms
adopting RL could gain performance in multiple dimensions
through both improvement and betterment. First of all, adopting
RL can be viewed as an endeavor to push the current OF outward
the same way as JIT, TQM, and AMT do. These programs have been
shown to dramatically enhance performance with little change in
the amount or type of physical assets employed. By incorporating
RL into a ﬁrm's forward supply chain, the ﬁrm can recapture value
and recover asset from returned products (Guide, 2000) that push
the OF outward. In addition, ﬁrms could learn while practicing RL
and knowledge will be accumulated, disseminated over time, and
stored in their procedures and rules as well as their less formal
norms and social and communication patterns (Barney, 1991;
March, 1991). This process transforms generic input factors into
ﬁrms’ idiosyncratic capabilities/competencies that enable ﬁrms to
coordinate activities and make use of
their resources more
effectively (Amit and Schoemaker, 1993). The more a capability is
utilized, the more it can be reﬁned and the more sophisticated and
difﬁcult to imitate it becomes. As such, the developed capability
also could move a ﬁrm's OF outward and approach its AF.

Meanwhile, a ﬁrm can enjoy the beneﬁt of improvement from
removing inefﬁciencies in transformation processes. As resources
are used to generate desirable products and/or services, waste is
implicitly produced as by products during each step of the inte-
grated supply chain process. For example, packaging is used to
protect products from damage but becomes an undesired item once
products are consumed. The economic waste is a sign that resources
have been used incompletely, inefﬁciently, or ineffectively. In addi-
tion, increased global competition, growing focus on environment-
alism, shorter product life cycle, and potential revenue from resale
encourage ﬁrms to process product returns at the end of their ﬁrst
use for recycling, reuse, refurbishing, remanufacturing, or remarket-
ing (Srivastava, 2007; Toffel, 2004). This results in reverse logistics
where product returns represent a valuable resource to enhance
resale revenue or reduce materials costs (Jayaraman and Luo, 2007).

Therefore, RL represents a way to improve resource productivity by
reducing and eliminating waste. This new view of waste as resource
inefﬁciency evokes the quality revolution of the 1980s. Today defects
are seen as a sign of inefﬁcient product and process design, not as an
inevitable byproduct of manufacturing. The idea was a breakthrough
which motivates companies to build quality into the entire process
and use innovation to improve quality while actually lowering cost.
Environmental issues are a natural extension of quality since waste
often reveals ﬂaws in the product design or production process.
While TQM deﬁnes defects in terms of customer requirements
(Lai and Cheng, 2005), the environmental perspective tells us to
deﬁne defects in terms of societal concerns. Where “zero defects”
was a central tenet of TQM, “zero waste” is a signiﬁcant step beyond
because waste is generated within a process or while using or
disposing a product (Lai and Cheng, 2009). Any operational system
that can minimize inefﬁciencies is also more environmentally
sustainable (Corbett and Klassen, 2006). Put alternatively, taking
care of various kinds of waste improves resource efﬁciency and
makes a ﬁrm closer to its production frontier.

Beyond these theoretical arguments, Porter and van der Linde
(1995) provided several examples of how environmental conditions
encouraged ﬁrms to use resources more efﬁciently and become
more productive as a result. Hart (1995) provided a more detailed
discussion of how a focus on environmental performance can be
a competitive resource for ﬁrms. Larson et al. (2000) invoked the
Schumpeterian notion of “creative destruction” to explain how
ﬁrms, when forced to adopt a new perspective such as sustain-
ability, become more innovative and end up discovering new goods
and services. Wu and Dunn (1995) gave examples of how logistics
managers can help preserve the environment while simultaneously
meeting cost and efﬁciency objectives. Chan and Chan (2008) found
in the Hong Kong mobile phone industry that ﬁrms implement
RL systems to recapture value and recover asset, develop it as a
strategic weapon, and be good corporate citizenship. For Chinese
manufacturing, recognized the importance of ecological moderni-
zation with green supply chain management of Chinese manufac-
turers to green their operations (Zhu et al., 2011). Combining the
prior arguments and empirical evidence, we propose the following
hypothesis:

H. Reverse logistics practices can simultaneously improve the environ-
mental, ﬁnancial, and social performance of Chinese manufacturers.

Speciﬁcally, we will test this hypothesis through several major
RL activities. Carter and Ellram (1998) proposed a pyramid of RL
practices. Resource reduction should be the ultimate goal in the
RL process—minimizing materials used in a product and minimizing
waste and energy achieved through the design of more environ-
mentally efﬁcient products. Once the resource reduction option has
been exhausted, the ﬁrm should attempt to maximize reuse,
followed by recycling. Disposal should be the last option. In a survey
study, Rogers and Tibben-Lembke (2001) listed the most common
ways to get rid of returned products—resold “as is”, remanufacturing
or refurbishing, recycling or landﬁll, repackaging, recovering primary
materials. Stock (2001) stated that RL includes a combination of
activities such as recycling, refurbishing, and repair as well as waste
disposal. Prahinski and Kocabasoglu (2006) summarized four dis-
position alternatives—reuse/resell, product upgrade (repackaging,
repair, refurbish or remanufacturing), materials recovery (canniba-
lization and recycling), and waste management (incineration and
landﬁlling the product). Reviewing the above literature together
with our ﬁeld observations from Chinese manufacturers, we identify
various RL practices and broadly classify them into six categories:
waste management, recycling, reuse, materials recovery, reprocess,
and design for RL. The general hypothesis can be split into the
following set of detailed hypotheses for testing.


110

K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 146 (2013) 106–117

Waste is increasingly an environmental problem due to the rapid
increase in production and consumption. There are wastes generated
throughout a product life cycle when the product is discarded as
useless or unwanted. In this regard, waste management is applied
by companies to improve their materials ﬂows and to satisfy the
requirements of different stakeholders (Heidrich et al., 2009). In
a study of small- and medium-sized manufacturing enterprises, solid
waste management activities are found to beneﬁt their performance
(Sarkis and Dijkshoorn, 2007).
In China, the ZTE corporation,
a telecommunication equipment and network solution provider,
pays attention to wastewater and solid wastes generated from
operations, industrial processes and sanitation facilities in compli-
ance with laws, regulations, and customer requirements. These
wastes are to be characterized, monitored, controlled, and treated
prior to discharge or disposal. We argue that waste management
practices on incineration and landﬁlling can improve the perfor-
mance of Chinese manufacturers.

H1. Chinese manufacturers adopting waste management practices
can simultaneously improve their environmental, ﬁnancial, and social
performance.

Recycling refers to the collection of used materials that can be
disassembled and remanufactured into new products. In doing so,
the wastes for landﬁll resulting from used products can be reduced
with scarce natural raw materials better utilized. For example, Nike
works with its materials suppliers to recycle factory wastes for new
footwear manufacturing. Such practice enables Nike to cut down
its waste disposed to landﬁll from 25% in 2007 to 13% in 2009, while
beneﬁt from reduced purchase and consumption of new raw
materials. The recycling of copper in support of sustainable devel-
opment and the environmental protection is another such example
on the value of recycling (Gomez et al., 2007). In China, Lenovo
emphasizes close-loop recycling where the company recycles plastics
from both end of life IT and non-IT sources to produce new products.
Therefore, the practices on recycling used materials and collection of
returned products can bring improvement beneﬁts to Chinese
manufacturers:

H2. Chinese manufacturers that adopt recycling practices can simulta-
neously improve their environmental, ﬁnancial, and social performance.

Reuse refers to collecting products or packaging materials to be
cleaned, reﬁlled, and reused such as empty bottles for milk and beer.
There are salvageable materials that can be reclaimed with opportu-
nities for manufacturers to generate more revenue. It is therefore
beneﬁcial for manufacturers to separate reusable products and part
components and reuse them many times before their ﬁnal disposal or
taking them to landﬁll. One example is the reuse of secondary
packaging materials, which are used for shipment purpose. The reuse
of packaging materials can bring economic beneﬁts to manufactures
with the materials used repeatedly several times requiring less
resources consumption. We have also seen the use of wood pallets
repeatedly for shipment purpose. A study also found that increased
reuse of products can reduce consumption of new products and
materials, simultaneously reducing costs for consumers and deriving
more value from existing products (Thomas, 2003). Further to
recycling, Lenovo is committed to product reuse which offers asset
recovery services and product take back and recycling programs.
In 2011, this company managed the processing of 12,700 metric tons
of customer returned computer equipment. For these returns, they are
mainly reused as products or parts, recycled as materials, incinerated
with waste to energy recovery. This line of reasoning suggests that:

H3. Chinese manufacturers that reuse their products can simulta-
neously improve their environmental performance, ﬁnancial, and social
performance.

Due to the value for reclaim, products should not be disposed
to landﬁll unless all their reusable, remanufacturing, or recycling
potentials are fully exploited. The object of product recovery is to
capture the economic as well as ecological value of used products
or materials for reducing wastes before their disposal (Thierry
et al., 1995). Product recovery is a useful practice for closing the
loop in the supply chain through which products are collected,
reprocessed, and later redistributed to the customers (Beamon and
Fernandes, 2004). One example is Tianzhong Electromechanical
Company that collects used copiers for remanufacturing and sells
them to emerging markets. This remanufacturing practice reduces
new resources consumption for producing copiers, extends the
lifespan of electronic goods, and beneﬁts the environment and
economy. Due to the increasing number of vehicles, disposal of
used tires is a signiﬁcant environmental issue. Recovery of used
tires is an example to show the value of product recovery in
reducing resources consumption and damages caused to the
environment (Sasikumar et al., 2010). Recovering materials from
returned products means lower frequency of product disposal and
hence higher economic beneﬁts for ﬁrms and social beneﬁts for
the environment. Another example to illustrate is the recovery of
materials (e.g. copper) from discarded electric products such as
printed circuit board (PCB) and air conditioners by Huaxin Green
Spring Environmental Protection Company in Beijing. There are
also opportunities for manufacturers to reduce costs in production,
improve corporate reputation, and satisfy the escalating customer
request on environmental protection (Toffel, 2004). Product recov-
ery practices on disassembly,
inspection of dissembled parts,
recovery of reusable parts and their reuse in repairing, refurbish-
ing, or remanufacturing of other products should allow manufac-
turers to reap productivity and environmental gains. Accordingly,
we suggest that

H4. Chinese manufacturers that recover materials from returned
products can simultaneously improve their environmental, ﬁnancial,
and social performance.

Manufacturers need to process many returned products even
though they do not deal with consumers directly. These returns
can be in the form of excessive stocks, end-of-season items, unsold
or damaged goods, products that have been recalled, products sold
with return option, and packaging materials for product shipment.
With reprocessing, there are potentials to recover certain original
value of the returned products. Manufacturers can choose to
refurbish, remanufacture, repair, and reprocess returned products
such as selling them to discounters or using them for spare parts.
For example, Xerox reprocesses its reusable components and tests
them for assuring their quality in conformance to the company's
performance standards. The process of reuse, recovery, and repro-
cessing resulted in savings of over $80 million started in 1993.
In China, ZTE corporation also ensures the safe handling, move-
ment, storage, use, recycling, and disposal of hazardous substances
if they pose harms to the environment. Other than the considera-
tion for customer satisfaction, reprocessing of returned products to
speciﬁc quality would help manufactures to establish an envir-
onmentally friendly image to the public with an environmental
strategy to minimize waste. As such, we propose that:

H5. Chinese manufacturers that reprocess returned products to
speciﬁc quality could simultaneously improve their environmental
performance, ﬁnancial performance as well as social performance.

Eco-design of product has been considered an essential part of
environmental management programs by manufacturing companies
(Zhu et al., 2008a). This aspect of the design for RL emphasizes use of
standardized materials and adoption of modular design. The envir-
onmental damage caused by any product or materials should be


K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 146 (2013) 106–117

111

mitigated at the design stage in such a way that product compo-
nents are easy for disassembly for reuse and recycling. Pioneering
companies have learnt that making product returns proﬁtable relies
on design for RL (Krikke et al., 2004). In this way, manufacturers are
able to disassemble component parts for capturing residual values
of returned products due to the use of standardized materials and
modular design. For instance, TCL, a white electronic home appli-
ance manufacturer emphasizes energy consumption, health, and
safety issues. All the color TV manufactured are energy-saving
products with certiﬁcation consuming less than 3 W on sleeping
mode. In recent years, the company uses optical injection technol-
ogy with special high-gloss materials. Doing so helps reduce spray
and other highly polluting processes and achieve zero-emission of
waste water, gas and oil residue, lowering pollution and resources
consumption per unit of output. The company also uses advanced
disassembling technologies to transform solid wastes from used
household appliances into renewable resources to provide raw
materials and establish a circular economy-based manufacturing
chain for its business. It has been argued that eco-designs necessary
to close the loop in the supply chain (Zhu et al., 2008b). Design for
RL is meant to address product functionality while simultaneously
minimizing life-cycle environmental impact. Therefore, we hypothe-
size that:

H6. Chinese manufacturers that adopt design for RL could simul-
taneously improve their environmental, ﬁnancial, and social
performance.

4. Research methodology

& Bradstreet. In China, reverse logistics is at the beginning stage for
manufacturing operations, not comparable to the maturity level by
their western counterparts. We purposely chose to study export-
oriented manufacturers as they are pioneers in RL practices due to
the pressures induced by their international customers (Zhu et al.,
2012). It is appropriate to study the export manufacturers to ensure
sampling validity in sample selection that the respondent Chinese
manufacturers possess operational RL practices in their activities.

We used a key-informant survey design and collected the execu-
tive names, and their respective company name, address, and phone
number to facilitate our primary data collection. We sent a survey
package, including the questionnaire, prepaid self-addressed reply
envelop, and a cover letter explaining the research to each target
informant. We followed up the mailing by phoning or emailing
the informants to ask for their receipt of the package, to reiterate the
research objectives, and to highlight the importance of their reply.
We waited for 2 weeks for the informants to reply and sent out the
second mailing of survey package to the ones who had not replied.
We repeated the follow-up phone calls and emails 2 weeks after the
second mailing, and sent out the third survey package to the
non-respondents after 2 weeks. The data collection was concluded
3 weeks after the last mailing. The survey resulted in 134 returned
questionnaires, representing the response rate of 16.7%. However, six
returned questionnaires have signiﬁcant missing data, resulting in
an effective response rate of 16%, which is comparable with other
environmental-related studies having executives as informants
and survey-based environmental research (Wong et al., 2012b; in
press). The proﬁle of the responded Chinese manufacturers is
summarized in Appendix A.

4.1. Sample and data collection

4.2. Common method biasand non-response bias

The six hypotheses are tested by survey data collected from a
sample of Chinese manufacturers during 2008–2010. We are inter-
ested in evaluating the performance implications of RL practices in
China for a number of reasons. First, China's manufacturing industry
has been important in providing a wide variety of products to
markets in different countries. While environmental protection
becomes an international issue, many countries impose regulations
ranging from restricting materials used in products to mandating
extended producer responsibility to take back end-of-life products.
The implementation of RL can be useful for Chinese manufacturers to
improve their performance by having access to these markets.
Second, due to inﬂation, the cost of supplies increases continuously.
RL serves as an opportunity that allows Chinese manufacturers to
save costs in sourcing new materials by retrieving resalable products
and recovering reusable components and parts (Martin et al., 2010).
Third, China has been criticized for giving rise to serious environ-
mental issues due to its rapid pace of industrialization and irrespon-
sible environmental operations of manufacturers.

Following the procedures of questionnaire development by
Gerbing and Anderson (1988), we ﬁrst conducted exploratory inter-
views with 35 executives of Chinese manufacturers to understand
RL practices in the industry. The interview revealed that RL practices
become increasingly important for manufacturers to compete.
Second, based on an extensive review of previous literature and
the interviews ﬁndings, we developed the measurement items and
pretested the survey instrument with six executives and ﬁve
academics in the discipline to assess the relevancy, phrasing, and
comprehensiveness of the measurement. We reﬁned the measure-
ment and conducted a pilot test to 30 executives. Using the data
collected from the pilot test, we conducted an exploratory factor
analysis to purify the scales and further reﬁned the survey instru-
ment to ﬁnalize the questionnaire.

To administer the mass survey, we randomly drew a sample of
800 export-oriented Chinese manufacturers from the database Dun

There is potential of common method bias in this study due to
data collection from a single informant and we took two tests to
check for such possibility. We followed Podsakoff et al. (2003) and
conducted Harmon's one-factor using the exploratory factor analy-
sis on all the measurement items in the ﬁnalized questionnaire.
The results show that the measurement items clustered into more
than one factor, with eigenvalue greater than 1.0. Moreover,
we tested if a marker variable, which is a variable that is not
theoretically related to any variable in the study, is related to the
variables in this study. We used “ﬁrm ownership type” as the
marker variable. The results show that “ﬁrm ownership type” is not
signiﬁcantly related to the variables in the study, providing evidence
that common method variance is not a serious issue in this study.
We followed Armstrong and Overton (1977) to check for potential
of non-response bias. First, we used the extrapolation method and
compared the responses between the ﬁrst and second mailings.
We found that the ﬁrst and second mailings have shown no statistical
difference at po0.05. Second, we compared the ﬁrm size (i.e., number
of employees) between the respondent and non-respondent ﬁrms
using the objective data we have collected from the directory.
The t-test results indicate no signiﬁcant difference between the two
groups at po0.05. These results collectively suggest that non-
response bias did not seem to be a problem in this study.

4.3. Construct measurements

Following the discussion in the prior section, we speciﬁcally
examine six constructs of RL practices. The measurement for each
of them (as shown in Table 1) covers the major activities in each
practice based upon the literature review and our expert interview
results. As such, the way that the constructs are developed indicates
they are formative and composite in nature, that is, the measurement
items inﬂuence the construct and the construct is a combination of
the measurement items (Bollen and Lennox, 1991). The respondents


112

K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 146 (2013) 106–117

Table 1
Constructs and measurements of reverse logistics practices.

Constructs

Measurements

Factor Loadings

Reliabilitya

% of variance explained

Please indicate the extent to which your ﬁrm performs the following revere logistics practices to your products(1—not at all, 2—little, 3—moderate, 4—some, 5—to
a great extent)

Waste management

Incineration—burning to ash
Landﬁlling

Recycle

Reuse

Reprocess

Collection of returned products recycle

Reuse
Separation of reusable products
Separation of reusable parts

Refurbish
Remanufacture
Repair
Reprocess

Materials recovery

Disassembly

Inspection of dissembled parts
Recover reusable parts and reuse them in repairing, refurbishing,
or remanufacturing of other products

Design for RL

Use of standardized materials
Adoption of modular design

0.87
0.87

0.85
0.85

0.94
0.93
0.80

0.91
0.88
0.83
0.78

0.90

0.98
0.78

0.87
0.87

0.69

0.61

0.87

0.87

76.36

72.09

79.97

72.40

0.80

71.43

0.66

74.87

a Cronbach α is presented for constructs with more than two measurement items. Otherwise, correlations are presented.

were asked to indicate the extent to which their organizations
perform the following practices to their products from 1—not at all
to 5—to a great extent. Constructs’ unidimensionality and reliability
were checked in SPSS via factor analysis and reliability analysis as
shown in Table 1. Mean values of constructs were extracted for the
later regression analysis.

The impact of RL practices on performance is examined via three
aspects—environmental performance, ﬁnancial performance, and
social performance. We use operational performance as a proxy
for environmental performance for two major reasons. First, those
decisions that inﬂuence environmental performance also have
a direct impact on operational performance as they are related to
resource productivity. For instance, changing a product design to
make it easy for disassembly will reduce waste, and it will also open
up an opportunity to improve product quality. Second, environ-
mental performance inﬂuenced by operational decisions may vary
dramatically across companies. Some manufacturing sectors such as
automobiles generate much air emission, and other sectors such as
chemicals discharge much polluted water. Consequently, it is not
feasible to develop reﬂective measures for environmental perfor-
mance. In contrast, operational performance can be relatively easily
measured by the standard dimensions.

The constructs and measurements for performance are sum-
marized in Table 2. The respondents were asked to indicate the
extent to which their organizations perform in operational, ﬁnan-
cial, and social performance after adopting RL. Social performance,
operational performance and ﬁnancial performance were checked
for unidimensionality and reliability in SPSS via factor analysis and
reliability analysis (Table 2). Mean values were extracted for each
performance dimension in the later regression analysis.

4.4. Regression model

Since we test whether RL practices could achieve the win–win
situation along multiple performance aspects, performance variables
were viewed as a system. That is, any operations decision could
generate an impact on any of the performance variables. As such, we
employed seemingly unrelated regressions (SUR), which was ﬁrst

proposed by Zellner (1962). SUR is a class of multivariate regression
with correlated error terms. Originally applied in micro-economic
contexts, SUR is now widely used in many research areas (Wang and
Kockelman, 2007).

A distinctive feature of SUR models is that they comprise several
regression equations, each having its own dependent variable and
potentially different sets of exogenous explanatory variables. Each
equation is a valid linear regression on its own and can be estimated
separately, which is why the system is called seemingly unrelated.
Yet, in fact, the error terms across the equations are assumed to
be correlated. Normally, the model can be estimated equation-by-
equation using standard ordinary least squares, and consistent
estimates can be obtained. But in SUR models the error terms from
different equations are correlated. Moreover, according to the
general theory of the least square method, which takes covariances
of errors into account, such systems should be solved as a whole set
of equations. Otherwise, the minimal variance of the errors in
estimated regression parameters cannot be achieved, that is, they
are generally not as efﬁcient as the SUR estimates, which amounts
to feasible generalized least squares with a speciﬁc form of the
variance–covariance matrix (Lado et al., 2004).

In this study, three regression models were run simultaneously
for each RL practice construct with the control variables. The SUR
models can be expressed in a general form as:

8><
>:

social performance ¼ β0 þβ1RLþβ2 employeesþβ3 sales
operations performance ¼ γ0 þγ1RLþγ2 employeesþγ3 sale
financial performance ¼ φ0 þφ1RLþφ2 employeesþφ3 sale,

where RL represents each of the six reverse logistics practices.

We only consider the impact of each RL on performance in each
set of SUR because of two reasons. First, each manufacturer may
choose to use or focus on different sets of RL practices but not all of
them are based on its product, process, major markets, or compe-
titive environment. Some are more concerned about the individual
effect of RL rather than the overall effect. Second, since some
manufacturers may use more than one of them at the same time
there could be high correlations among RL practices. We would run


K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 146 (2013) 106–117

113

Table 2
Constructs and measurements of performance dimensions.

Constructs

Measurements

Factor loadings

Reliabilitya

% of variance explained

Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with the statements on performance impacts after adopting reverse logistics practices. (1—strongly

disagree, 3—neutral, 5—strongly agree)

Operational performance

Financial performance

Signiﬁcantly improved product quality
Signiﬁcantly improved lead time
Improved position in marketplace
Developed better products
Reduced waste in production
Improved chances of selling products in international markets

Decrease of disposal costs
Increase of revenue from resale
Effective in handling recovery of assets related to our returned products
Effective in handling cost containment related to our returned products
Reduction of inventory investment

Social performance

Improve our ﬁrm's service quality
Improve our corporate image

0.83
0.83
0.88
0.87
0.78
0.82

0.84
0.81
0.85
0.86
0.88

0.93
0.93

0.91

69.74

0.90

71.70

0.85

87.18

a Cronbach α is presented for constructs with more than two measurement items. Otherwise, correlations are presented.

into multicolinearity if all of them were included in the regression
model as a set of independent variables.

In order to assess the actual contribution from RL practices to
performance, we control the effect from the size of the company to
performance. Though they are not the interest of the study, control
variables are believed to have an inﬂuence to the dependent variables.
For instance, large companies tend to be more proﬁtable and have
more slack resources to deploy for the implementation of adminis-
trative innovations, such as quality management (Kull and Wacker,
2010; Naor et al., 2010), mass customization (Huang et al., 2010), and
in our case, reverse logistics. One could argue that performance
disparity largely come from the size of the company, but not from the
adoption of RL practices. With control variables in the regression
model, we can clearly separate the performance impacts between the
size of the company and RL practices.

Size of the company is operationalized by annual sales and the
number of employees (Ettlie, 1995; Donaldson, 2001). Since they
suffered from a severe non-normality problem, LOG transforma-
tion has been conducted for correction and both of them sig-
niﬁcantly improved.

5. Major results and discussions

Correlation among the RL constructs and performance con-
structs was reported in Table 3. As can be seen, RL practices are
highly correlated.

SUR were performed in STATA. Table 4 reports the SUR results of
six RL practices on performance outcome variables. The results can
be summarized in three different patterns. First, practicing waste
management cannot improve a manufacturer's operational and
ﬁnancial performance and may even hurt its social performance.
H1 was not supported. Second, recycle, reprocess, and recovery
practices improve operations and ﬁnancial performance but have
not contributed to the improvement of social performance. Thus,
H2, H4, and H5 were partially supported. Third, reuse practices and
design for RL not only improve operations performance and
ﬁnancial performance substantially, but also enhance social perfor-
mance (po0.1). As such, H3 and H6 were supported. Control
variables were not signiﬁcant in most of the cases.

Overall, the ﬁndings indicate that RL practices except waste
management practices could positively inﬂuence a manufacturing
enterprise's environmental and ﬁnancial performance. In addition,
reuse and design for RL could generate a signiﬁcant positive perfor-
mance impact in all three performance dimensions, which strongly

supports the idea of triple bottom line.The results are discussed based
on these observed patterns.

First, the results from Table 4 showed that only practicing waste
management cannot improve a manufacturer's operational and
ﬁnancial performance and may even hurt its social performance.
That means waste management is the last resort in RL practice. In the
past, manufacturers have not had much incentive to refurbish
returned products. Returns were a liability to be disposed of as
cheaply as possible, often by sending them to the local landﬁll.
Increasing restrictions on what can be placed in a landﬁll and the cost
of landﬁlling have made disposal a less attractive option. Meanwhile,
the rate at which products become obsolete has also increased and
manufacturers generate more unsalable products. Throwing away
substantial amounts of these items is a costly and unacceptable
option to undertake. Therefore, manufacturers need to proactively
look for ways to recover more value from those products or avoid
generating waste in the system in order to boost their performance.
Second, the results also demonstrated strong evidence that
recycle, reprocess, and recovery practices improve operations and
ﬁnancial performance but have not contributed to the improvement
of social performance. Though we did not ﬁnd these practices hit the
triple bottom line, the results were still promising because manu-
facturers are hesitant to adopt RL practices due to the potential
negative impact on their ﬁnancial performance.Our ﬁndings will
mitigate this concern and encourage more manufacturing enterprises
to seriously consider many of the RL options due to the improved
resource productivity and better resource utilization. The ﬁndings
also complement the conclusions from many existing studies.
For example, Derwall et al. (2005) found that ﬁrms with environ-
mentally responsible practices consistently experience better stock
market performance than others, a phenomenon that cannot be
explained in the usual risk-return paradigm of capital market theory
but that is consistent with this notion of recurrent but unpredictable
beneﬁts. Corbett and Klassen (2006) conjectured that the beneﬁt to
operations management theory and practices of adopting an envir-
onmental perspective are subject to the “law of the expected
unexpected side beneﬁts”. That is, adopting an environmental
perspective is beneﬁcial but that these beneﬁts usually materialize
in unexpected forms and hence are usually greater after the fact than
can be accurately predicted in advance. This is consistent with
Crosby's (1979) claim that “quality is free”.

Surprisingly, recycle, reprocess and recovery practices were not
found to improve social performance. It seems that RL inﬂuences
ﬁnancial performance in a different way on social performance.
The ﬁnancial performance is affected by RL in a variety of ways.


114

K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 146 (2013) 106–117

Table 3
Correlation among the major constructs.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

1. Waste management
2. Recycle
3. Reuse
4. Reprocess
5. Material recovery
6. Design for RL
7. Operational performance
8. Financial performance
9. Social performance
10. Annual sales
11. Total employees

n po0.05.
nn po0.01.

1
0.35**
0.42**
0.41**
0.62**
0.27**
0.09
0.10
0.15
0.04
0.03

1
0.67**
0.58**
0.59**
0.49**
0.22*
0.27**
0.16
0.05
0.06

1
0.73**
0.64**
0.65**
0.33**
0.34**
0.16
0.08
−0.06

Table 4
SUR results of reverse logistics practices on performance.

1
0.69**
0.54**
0.20*
0.26**
0.05
0.12
−0.10

1
0.48**
0.17
0.22**
0.02
0.07
−0.09

1
0.26**
0.23**
0.17
0.02
−0.16

1
0.46**
0.46**
0.11
0.04

1
0.64**
0.22*
0.14

1
0.19*
0.19*

1
0.57**

1

Hypothesis

Independent variables

Dependent variables

Social performance

Operational performance

Financial performance

H1

H2

H3

H4

H5

H6

The impact of waste management

The impact of recycle practice

The impact of reuse practice

The impact of reprocess practices

The impact of recovery practice

The impact of design for reverse logistics

Waste management
Employee
Sales

Recycle
Employee
Sales

Reuse
Employee
Sales

Reprocess
Employee
Sales

Recovery
Employee
Sales

Design for RL
Employee
Sales

−0.16 (0.04)
1.00 (0.17)
0.22 (0.28)

0.07 (0.22)
0.88 (0.23)
0.21 (0.33)

0.11 (0.09)
1.22 (0.10)
0.13 (0.53)

0.03 (0.61)
1.17 (0.12)
0.16 (0.47)

0.01 (0.95)
0.97 (0.19)
0.21 (0.32)

0.13 (0.03)
1.38 (0.06)
0.12 (0.57)

0.09 (0.26)
−0.16 (0.82)
0.22 (0.28)

0.14 (0.015)
−0.28 (0.69)
0.22 (0.28)

0.22 (0.001)
0.06 (0.93)
0.14 (0.48)

0.12 (0.06)
0.07 (0.92)
0.15 (0.47)

0.12 (0.09)
−0.01 (0.99)
0.18 (0.38)

0.17 (0.003)
0.20 (0.78)
0.16 (0.44)

0.08 (0.29)
0.34 (0.63)
0.34 (0.09)

0.17 (0.002)
0.18 (0.78)
0.34 (0.08)

0.23 (0.001)
0.63 (0.35)
0.24 (0.20)

0.17 (0.005)
0.72 (0.30)
0.22 (0.26)

0.1 6(0.02)
0.55 (0.43)
0.28 (0.15)

0.15 (0.006)
0.72 (0.30)
0.27 (0.17)

Note: Coefﬁcients are reported with p-value in the parentheses.

When waste is minimized as part of environmental management,
it results in better utilization of natural resources, improved efﬁciency
and higher productivity, and reduced operating costs. It could also
usher in tremendous marketing advantage, and leads to improved
revenue,
increased market share, and new market opportunity.
Similarly, greening of production process results in minimization of
pollution, a form of inefﬁciency, re-use of materials, and recycling
initiatives. This leads to savings in raw materials, water and energy
usage and thus brings competitive and economic performance.
However, social performance related to corporate image may be
more inﬂuenced by marketing function instead of operations func-
tion. Manufacturers need to effectively communicate with their
stakeholders regarding what kinds of RL practices they actually use
and what the positive impacts are. Otherwise, RL practices may fail to
improve social performance.

Last, the results indicated that reuse practices and design for RL
not only improve operations performance and ﬁnancial perfor-
mance substantially, but also enhance social performance (po0.1).
That is, implementing these practices does not preclude achieving
one goal at the expense of the other and manufacturing enterprises
could reach the triple bottom line. Tibben-Lembke (2002) under-
lined that development is an excellent time to begin considering the
RL implications of the product's design. In recent years, much has

been learned about the importance of considering the manufactur-
ing and logistics implications of design decisions, which has given
rise to the ﬁelds of design for manufacturing and design for logistics.
For instance, automakers such as BMW are paying attention in their
design process to how cars can be disassembled at the end of their
life, known as design for disassembly. Using postponement strategy
as design for logistics, computer makers such as Hewlett-Packard
reduce unused shipment space, save transportation costs, and lower
the carbon footprint generated in the shipment process.

Reuse seems to be a superior practice than recycle, reprocess, and
recovery practice. While recycling gives discarded materials a new
life after some chemical or physical processes, reuse employs the
same item multiple times in its original form so that little is discarded
(Wu and Dunn, 1995). As such, reuse is a more cost effective and
ecologically friendly practice by extending products’ normal
life
cycles. Moreover, this practice can be easily identiﬁed by the
customers and link with corporate image since it keeps the original
form of the product. For instance, Kodak single-used camera can be
reused nine times. Customers when buying this type of camera have
already realized that this is a reused product. In contrast, customers
are not aware of whether a product used is a recycled item (whether
a can of Coca-cola uses recycled can), whether a company extracts
valuable items from returned products and use it in the production.


K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 146 (2013) 106–117

115

Likewise, customers may not know products that have gone through
reprocess (e.g., remanufacturing, refurbish, repair) when making
a purchase. As discussed before, to improve social performance, a
manufacturer may need to strengthen its ability to inform customers
about its RL practices.

6. Conclusions and limitations

According to Prahinski and Kocabasoglu (2006), research on RL is
important because: (1) there is a high volume of product returns
where some industries need to handle returns at over 50% of their
sales; (2) the potential to generate revenue from sales in secondary
and global markets from previously discarded products is promising;
(3) business enterprises are increasingly required to effectively man-
age their entire life of the product due to regulatory requirements
in the European Union and the United States; (4) the responsibility
to take back products containing hazardous wastes is increasingly
requested by consumers; (5) environmental alternatives such as
repackaging, remanufacturing, and recycling become more sustainable
due to limited and expensive landﬁll capacity. Many business enter-
prises such as BMW, General Motors, and Hewlett-Packard have
realized the beneﬁt of adopting RL where these enterprises have their
manufacturing operations in China. For instance, recognizing the value
of product recovery, BMW has set a direction to design a “totally
reclaimable” automobile, in which all the components can be recov-
ered, reconditioned, and reused. With RL, this carmaker can reap the
dual beneﬁts of cost reduction due to purchasing less new compo-
nents and improved corporate image as a socially responsible business
(Thierry et al., 1995). Alternatively, enterprises that are less attentive to
RL may lose the opportunity to earn revenue from product recycling
or remanufacturing, while risking damages to their corporate and
brand image (Jayaraman and Luo, 2007).

Yet, the literature of RL is more descriptive and anecdotal (Carter
and Ellram, 1998; Wu and Dunn, 1995), with case studies being
widely used (Lau and Wang, 2009). Little empirical work has
addressed reverse process (Prahinski and Kocabasoglu, 2006). Many
examine only relatively narrow aspects, lacking a holistic view of RL
(Pokharel and Mutha, 2009). Dowlatshahi’s review (2005) indicated
that many of studies on RL are general, piece-meal, and practitioner-
oriented, and did not provide an in-depth analysis and integration
of RL topics. This study contributes to the existing body of knowledge
in the following ways. First, it provides a theoretical framework to
examine the performance implications of RL practices. Particularly,
it draws on the TPF to build the argument for the impacts of RL on
environmental, social, and economical performance outcomes. Sec-
ond, it investigates a broad range of RL activities in manufacturing
enterprises and that the performance implications of the RL practices
in different performance dimensions are shown.

The results provide Chinese manufacturers with empirical evi-
dence on the business value of adopting RL. As China is gradually
losing its cost advantage in production, this study shows that a
potential new competitive advantage could be built upon RL prac-
tices for sustainable economic development. Recycle, reuse, recovery,
reprocess, and design for RL all demonstrate favorable impact to
environment and ﬁnancial performance. This study also provides
important guidelines for manufacturing enterprises in adopting RL
practices. A manufacturer may hurt its image by only implementing
the very basic RL practices such as waste management. Product
design has to be integrated with RL to reap performance improve-
ment all around.

There are several limitations of our study ﬁndings that should be
cautious in interpretation. Nevertheless, these issues provide fertile
ground for future studies to extend this line of research. First, the SUR
models provide a snapshot of the RL-performance links for Chinese
manufacturers. A longitudinal study will be a useful complement to

understand how the different RL practices evolve and contribute
performance beneﬁts to manufacturer adopters in the longer term.
Further research can also extend by investigating the success stories
or factors of Chinese manufacturers on their RL practices. There can
also be richer insights if this investigation is extended to other
industrial contexts such as retailing (Lai et al., 2010) and shipping and
transport logistics (Ng et al., 2013; Wong et al., 2012a). Second, export
and trade in the international market is an important driver for
Chinese manufacturers to implement environmental management
practices such as RL. In many instances, Chinese manufacturers are
coerced to comply with environmental regulations before their
products are allowed entry into foreign markets such as the
European Community Directive on Waste Electrical and Electronic
Equipment (WEEE) for product take-back obligation. Further studies
may examine the relative emphases of individual RL activities in
implementation and their performance contributions under changing
regulatory environmental requirements for international
trade.
The factors that prompt manufacturers to pursue RL or not and their
underlying considerations can be investigated. Third, there can be
contingent factors on management practices such as just-in-time
principles and quality assurance determining the outcomes of RL
activities. It is useful to investigate how these other management
practices collectively affect the bottom-line of manufacturers imple-
menting RL. Lastly, RL activities require active participation of both
upstream and downstream partners in the supply chain to be
successfully implemented. The leadership of manufacturers to pro-
mote and diffuse the RL activities in the supply chain is crucial for
achieving the desired outcomes. Supply chain coordination can be a
promising topic for further investigation (Wong et al., 2009; C.W.Y.
Wong et al., 2011; C.Y. Wong et al., 2011).

Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to two anonymous reviewers for their
helpful comments on an earlier version of this manuscript. This
research is partially supported by the Research Grants Council of
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (GRF 5455/11).
Wong is partially supported by The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
(Grant no. A-PL75).

Appendix A. Proﬁle of the respondents.

Respondents
(%)

Company
characteristics

Respondents

(%)

Company
characteris-
tics

Number of

employees

1–10

11–50

14.8

33.6

51–100

35.9

101–500

4500

6.3

2.3

Product type

Tobacco
products
Petroleum
reﬁning and
related
industries
Rubber and
miscellaneous
plastic products
Leather and
leather
products

4.7

1.6

7.0

1.6

25


116

K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 146 (2013) 106–117

Stone, clay,
glass, and
concrete
products
Apparel and
other ﬁnished
products made
from fabrics
and similar
products
Lumber and
wood products

Fabricated and
metal products

Paper and
allied products
Industrial,
commercial,
machinery, and
computer
equipment
Printing,
publishing, and
allied
industries
Electronic and
other electrical
equipment and
components

7.8

2.3

6.3

3.1

1.6

1.6

3.1

Unknown

7.0

Total annual

sales (million
USD)
o$10

4$10–$20

13.3

31.3

4$20–$50

35.2

4$50–$100

10.9

4$100
Unknown

2.3
7.0

References

Amit, R., Schoemaker, P.J., 1993. Managing assets and skills: a key to sustainable

competitive advantage. Strategic Management Journal 31 (1), 91–106.

Armstrong, J.S., Overton, R.S., 1977. Estimating nonresponse bias in mail surveys.

Journal of Marketing Research 14 (4), 396–402.

Autry, C.W., 2005. Formalization of reverse logistics programs: a strategy for
managing liberalized returns. Industrial Marketing Management 34 (7), 749–757.
Barney, J., 1991. Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of

Management, 17(1); p. 99–120.

Beamon, B.M., Fernandes, C., 2004. Supply-chain network conﬁguration for product

recovery. Production Planning & Control 15 (3), 270–281.

Bollen, K.A., Lennox, R., 1991. Conventional wisdom on measurement: a structural

equation perspective. Psychological Bulletin 110 (2), 305–314.

Carter, C.R., Ellram, L.M., 1998. Reverse logistics: a review of the literature and
framework for future investigation. Journal of Business Logistics 19 (1), 85–102.
Carter, C.R., Rogers, D.S., 2008. A framework of sustainable supply chain manage-
ment: moving toward new theory. International Journal of Physical Distribution
& Logistics Management 38 (5), 360.

Chan, F.T.S., Chan, H.K., 2008. A survey on reverse logistics system of mobile phone

industry in Hong Kong. Management Decision 46 (5), 702–708.

Chan, H.K., Yin, S.Z., Chan, F.T.S., 2010. Implementing just-in-time philosophy to
Journal of Production

International

reverse logistics systems: a review.
Research 48 (21), 6293–6313.

Clarke, R.A., 1994. The challenge of going green—comment by Clarke. Harvard

Business Review 72 (4), 37–38.

Corbett, C.J., Klassen, R.D., 2006. Extending the horizons: environmental excellence
as key to improving operations. Manufacturing & Service Operations Manage-
ment 8 (1), 5–22.

Crosby, P.B., 1979. Quality is Free. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.
Das, K., Chowdhury, A.H., 2012. Designing a reverse logistics network for optimal
International

collection, recovery and quality-based product-mix planning.
Journal of Production Economics 135 (1), 209–221.

Daugherty, P.J., Autry, C.W., Ellinger, A.E., 2001. Reverse logistics: the relationship
between resource commitment and program performance. Journal of Business
Logistics 22 (1), 107.

Derwall, J., Guenster, N., Bauer, R., Koedijk, K., 2005. The eco-efﬁciency premium

puzzle. Financial Analysts Journal 61 (2), 51–63.

Donaldson, L., 2001. The Contingency Theory of Organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA;

Sage Publications.

Dowlatshahi, S., 2005. A strategic framework for the design and implementation of
Journal of

remanufacturing oepraitons in reverse logistics.
Production Research 43 (16), 3455–3480.

International

Dowlatshahi, S., 2010. A cost–beneﬁt analysis for the design and implementation of
Journal of

reverse logistics systems: case studies approach.
Production Research 48 (5), 1361–1380.

International

Elkington, J., 1998. Cannibals with Forks: The Triple Bottom Line of the 21th

Century. New Society Publishers, Stoney Creek, CT.

Elkington, J., 2004. Enter the triple bottom line. In: Henriques, A., Richardson,
J. (Eds.), The Triple Bottom Line: Does It All Add Up?. Earthscan, London, pp. 1–16.
J.E., 1995. Product-process development integration in manufacturing.

Ettlie,

Management science 41 (7), 1224–1238.

Flapper, S.D.P., Van Nunen, J.A.E.E., Wassenhove, L.N.V., 2005. Managing Closed-

loop Supply Chains. Springer, New York.

Friedman, M., 1962. Capitalism and Freedom. University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.
Gerbing, D.W., Anderson, J.C., 1988. An updated paradigm for scale development
Journal of Marketing

incorporating unidimensionality and its assessment.
Research 25 (2), 186–192.

Gomez, F., Guzman, J.I., Tilton, J.E., 2007. Copper recycling and scrap availability.

Resources Policy 32 (4), 183–190.

Guide, V.D.R.J., 2000. Production planning and control

for remanufacturing:
Journal of Operations Management

industry practice and research needs.
18 (4), 467–483.

Guide, V.D.R.J., Li, J., 2010. The potential for cannibalization of new products sales by

remanufactured products. Decision Sciences 41 (3), 547–572.

Hart, S.L., 1995. A natural-resource-based view of the ﬁrm. Academy of Manage-

ment Review 20 (4), 986–1014.

Heidrich, O., Harvey, J., Tollin, N., 2009. Stakeholder analysis for industrial waste

management systems. Waste Management 29 (2), 965–973.

Hoffman, A.J., Bazerman, M.H., 2005. Changing Environmental Practices: Under-
standing and Overcoming the Organizational and Psychological Barriers.
Harvard Business School Working Paper.

Huang, X., Kristal, M.M., Schroeder, R., 2010. The impact of organizational structure
on mass customization capability: a contingency view. Production and Opera-
tions Management 19 (5), 515–530.

Jack, E.P., Powers, T.L., Skinner, L., 2010. Reverse logistics capabilities: antecedents
and cost savings. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics
Management 40 (3), 228–246.

Jayaraman, V., Luo, Y., 2007. Creating competitive advantages through new value
creation: a reverse logistics perspective. The Academy of Management
Perspectives 21 (2), 56–73.

Kenne, J.P., Dejax, P., Gharbi, A., 2012. Production planning of a hybrid manufactur-
ing–remanufacturing system under uncertainty within a closed-loop supply
chain. International Journal of Production Economics 135 (1), 81–93.

Klassen, R., McClaughlin, C., 1996. The impact of environmental management on

ﬁrm performance. Management Science 42 (8), 1199–1214.

Klassen, R.D., Whybark, D.C., 1999. Environmental management in operations: the

selection of environmental technologies. Decision Sciences 30 (3), 601–631.

Konar, S., Cohen, M.A., 2001. Does the market value environmental performance?

Review of Economics and Statististics 83 (2), 281–289.

Koufteros, X.A., Cheng, T.C.E., Lai, K.H., 2007. “Black-box” and “gray-box” supplier
integration in product development: antecedents, consequences and the mod-
erating role of ﬁrm size. Journal of Operations Management 25 (4), 847–870.

Krikke, H., le Blanc, I., van de Velde, S., 2004. Product modularity and the design of

closed-loop supply chains. California Management Review 46 (2), 23–39.

Krumwiede, D.W., Sheu, C., 2002. A model for reverse logistics entry by third-party

providers. Omega 30 (5), 325–333.

Kull, T.J., Wacker,

J.G., 2010. Quality management effectiveness in Asia: the

inﬂuence of culture. Journal of Operations Management 28 (3), 223–239.

Lado, N., Martinez-Roz, E., Valenzuela, A., 2004. Identifying successful marketing
strategy by export regional destination. International Marketing Review 21 (6),
573–597.

Lai, K.-H., Wong, C.W.Y., 2012. Green logistics management and performance: some
empirical evidence from Chinese manufacturing exporters. Omega—Interna-
tional Journal of Management Science 40 (3), 267–282.

Lai, K.H., Cheng, T.C.E., 2005. Effects of quality management and marketing on

organizational performance. Journal of Business Research 58 (4), 446–456.
Lai, K.H., Cheng, T.C.E., 2009. Just-in-Time Logistics. Gower Publishing, England.
Lai, K.H., Cheng, T.C.E., Tang, A.K.Y., 2010. Green retailing: factors for success.

California Management Review 52 (2), 6–31.

Lai, K.H., Wong, C.W.Y., Cheng, T.C.E., 2012. Ecological modernisation of Chinese
export manufacturing via green logistics management and its regional implica-
tions. Technological Forecasting and Social Change 79 (4), 766–770.

Larson, A.L., Teisberg, E.O., Johnson, R.R., 2000. Sustainable business: opportunity

and value creation. Interfaces 30 (3), 1–12.

Lau, K.H., Wang, Y., 2009. Reverse logistics in the electronic industry of China:

a case study. Supply Chain Management 14 (6), 447.

March, J.G., 1991. Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning. Organiza-

tion Science, 2(1); p. 71–87.

Marien, E.J., 1998. Reverse logistics as competitive strategy. Supply Chain Manage-

ment Review 14 (1), 43–52.


K.-h. Lai et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 146 (2013) 106–117

117

Martin, P., Guide, V.D.R.J., Craighead, C.W., 2010. Supply chain sourcing in remanu-
facturing operations: an empirical investigation of remake versus buy. Decision
Sciences 41 (2), 301–324.

McGuire, J.B., Sungren, A., Schneeweis, T., 1988. Corporate social responsibility and

ﬁrm performance. Academy of Management Journal 31 (4), 854–872.

Min, H., Ko, H.J., 2008. The dynamic design of a reverse logistics network from the
perspective of third-party logistics service providers. International Journal of
Production Economics 113 (1), 176–192.

Naor, M., Linderman, K., Schroeder, R., 2010. The globalization of operations in
Eastern and Western countries: unpacking the relationship between national
and organizational culture and its impact on manufacturing performance.
Journal of Operations Management 28 (3), 194–205.

Ng, M.K.M., Lun, Y.H.V., Lai, K.H., Cheng, T.C.E., 2013. Research on shipping studies.

International Journal of Shipping and Transport Logistics 5 (1), 1–12.

Park, J., Sarkis, J., Wu, Z.H., 2010. Creating integrated business and environmental
value within the context of China's circular economy and ecological moder-
nization. Journal of Cleaner Production 18 (15), 1494–1501.

Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S.B., Lee, J.-Y., Podsakoff, N.P., 2003. Common method
biases in behavioral research: a critical review of the literature and recom-
mended remedies. Journal of Applied Psychology 88 (5), 879–903.

Pokharel, S., Mutha, A., 2009. Perspectives in reverse logistics: a review. Resources

Conservation and Recycling 53 (4), 175–182.

Porter, M., 1985. Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior

Performance.

Porter, M.E., van der Linde, C., 1995. Green and competitive. Harvard Businss

Review 73 (5), 120–134.

Prahinski, C., Kocabasoglu, C., 2006. Empirical research opportunities in reverse supply

chains. Omega—International Journal of Management Science 34 (6), 519–532.

Presley, A., Meade, L., Sarkis,

J., 2007. A strategic sustainability justiﬁcation
methodology for organizational decisions: a reverse logistics illustration.
International Journal of Production Research 45 (18–19), 4595–4620.

Reinhardt, F.L., 1999. Bringing the environment down to earth. Harvard Business

Review 77 (4), 149–179.

Rogers, D., Tibben-Lembke, R., 2001. An examination of reverse logistics practices.

Journal of Business Logistics 22 (2), 129–148.

Samuelson, P., 1947. Foundations of Economic Analysis. Harvard University Press,

Cambridge, MA.

Sarkis, J., Dijkshoorn, J., 2007. Relationships between solid waste management
performance and environmental practice adoption in Welsh small and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). International Journal of Production Research
45 (21), 4989–5015.

Sasikumar, P., Kannan, G., Haq, A.N., 2010. A multi-echelon reverse logistics
network design for product recovery—a case of truck tire remanufacturing.
International
Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 49 (9–12),
1223–1234.

Schmenner, R.W., Swink, M.L., 1998. On theory in operations management. Journal

of Operations Management 17 (1), 97–113.

Srivastava, S.K., 2007. Green supply chain management: a state-of-the-art literature

review. International Journal of Management Reviews 9 (1), 53–80.

Stock, J.R., 2001. The 7 deadly sins of reverse logistics. Material Handling Manage-

ment 56 (3), 5–11.

Thierry, M., Salomon, M., Vannunen, J., Vanwassenhove, L., 1995. Strategic issues in
product recovery management. California Management Review 37 (2), 114–135.
Thomas, V.M., 2003. Product self-management: evolution in recycling and reuse.

Environmental Science & Technology 37 (23), 5297–5302.

Tibben-Lembke, R., 2002. Life after death: reverse logistics and the product life
cycle. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management
32 (3–4), 223–244.

Toffel, M.W., 2004. Strategic management of product recovery. California Manage-

ment Review 46 (2), 120–141.

Walley, N., Whitehead, B., 1994. It's not easy being green. Harvard Business Review

72 (2), 46–52.

Wang, X., Kockelman, K.M., 2007. Speciﬁcation and estimation of a spatially and
temporally autocorrelated seemingly unrelated regression model: application
to crash rate in China. Transportation 34 (3), 281–300.

Weeks, K., Gao, H.M., Alidaeec, B., Rana, D.S., 2010. An empirical study of impacts of
production mix, product route efﬁciencies on operations performance and
proﬁtability: a reverse logistics approach. International Journal of Production
Research 48 (4), 1087–1104.

Wong, C.W.Y., Lai, K.-H., Cheng, T.C.E., 2009. Complementarities and alignment of
information systems management and supply chain management. Interna-
tional Journal of Shipping and Transport Logistics 1 (2), 156–171.

Wong, C.W.Y., Lai, K.H., Lun, Y.H.V., Cheng, T.C.E., 2012a. A study on the antecedents
of supplier commitment in support of logistics operations. International Journal
of Shipping and Transport Logistics 4 (1), 5–16.

Wong, C.W.Y., Lai, K.H., Shang, G., Lu, C.S., Leung, T.K.P., 2012b. Green operations and
the moderating role of environmental management capability of suppliers on
manufacturing ﬁrm performance. International Journal of Production Economics
140 (1), 283–294.

Wong, C. W. Y., Lai, K. H., Cheng, T. C. E., Lun, V. Y. H., 2011. The roles of stakeholder
support and procedure-oriented management on asset recovery. International
Journal of Production Economics, 135(2), 584–594.

Wong, C.W.Y., Wong, C.Y., Boon-itt, S. Green service practices: performanc eimpli-
cationand the role of environmental management systems. Service Science.
10.1287/serv.1120.0037, in press.

Wong, C.Y., Boon-itt, S., Wong, C.W.Y., 2011. The contingency effects of environ-
mental uncertainty on the relationship between supply chain integration and
operational performance. Journal of Operations Management 29 (6), 604–615.
Wu, H.-J., Dunn, S.C., 1995. Environmentally responsible logistics systems. Interna-

tional Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management 25 (2), 20.

Yang, J.X., Lu, B., Xu, C., 2008. WEEE ﬂow and mitigating measures in China. Waste

Management 28 (9), 1589–1597.

Zellner, A., 1962. An efﬁcient method of estimating seemingly unrelated regression
equations and tests of aggregation bias. Journal of the American Statistical
Association 57, 500–509.

Zhu, Q.H., Geng, Y., Lai, K.H., 2010. Circular economy practices among Chinese
manufacturers varying in environmental-oriented supply chain cooperation
and the performance implications. Journal of Environmental Management 91
(6), 1324–1331.

Zhu, Q.H., Geng, Y., Sarkis,

J., Lai, K.H., 2011. Evaluating green supply chain
management among Chinese manufacturers from the ecological modernization
perspective. Transportation Research Part E—Logistics and Transportation
Review 47 (6), 808–821.

Zhu, Q.H., Sarkis, J., Cordeiro, J.J., Lai, K.H., 2008a. Firm-level correlates of emergent
green supply chain management practices in the Chinese context. Omega—
International Journal of Management Science 36 (4), 577–591.

Zhu, Q.H., Sarkis, J., Lai, K.H., 2008b. Green supply chain management implications
for “closing the loop”. Transportation Research Part E—Logistics and Transpor-
tation Review 44 (1), 1–18.

Zhu, Q.H., Sarkis, J., Lai, K.H., 2012. Green supply chain management innovation
diffusion and its relationship to organizational improvement: an ecological
modernization perspective. Journal of Engineering and Technology Manage-
ment 29 (1), 168–185.

