Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal
Strategic posture, financial performance and environmental disclosure: An empirical
test of legitimacy theory
Vanessa Magness
Article information:
To cite this document:
Vanessa Magness, (2006),"Strategic posture, financial performance and environmental disclosureAn
empirical test of legitimacy theory", Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 19 Iss 4 pp. 540 -
563
Permanent link to this document:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/09513570610679128
Downloaded on: 03 February 2017, At: 08:01 (PT)
References: this document contains references to 76 other documents.
To copy this document: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
The fulltext of this document has been downloaded 6775 times since 2006*
Users who downloaded this article also downloaded:
(2000),"Corporate environmental reporting: A test of legitimacy theory", Accounting, Auditing &amp;
Accountability Journal, Vol. 13 Iss 1 pp. 10-26 http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/09513570010316126
(1995),"Corporate social and environmental reporting: a review of the literature and a longitudinal study
of UK disclosure", Accounting, Auditing &amp; Accountability Journal, Vol. 8 Iss 2 pp. 47-77 http://
dx.doi.org/10.1108/09513579510146996

Access to this document was granted through an Emerald subscription provided by emerald-srm:200821 []
For Authors
If you would like to write for this, or any other Emerald publication, then please use our Emerald for
Authors service information about how to choose which publication to write for and submission guidelines
are available for all. Please visit www.emeraldinsight.com/authors for more information.
About Emerald www.emeraldinsight.com
Emerald is a global publisher linking research and practice to the benefit of society. The company
manages a portfolio of more than 290 journals and over 2,350 books and book series volumes, as well as
providing an extensive range of online products and additional customer resources and services.
Emerald is both COUNTER 4 and TRANSFER compliant. The organization is a partner of the Committee
on Publication Ethics (COPE) and also works with Portico and the LOCKSS initiative for digital archive
preservation.

*Related content and download information correct at time of download.

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/0951-3574.htm

Strategic posture, ﬁnancial

performance and environmental

disclosure

An empirical test of legitimacy theory

Vanessa Magness

Ryerson University, Toronto, Canada

Abstract
Purpose – The objective of this paper is to test Ullmann’s hypothesis that strategy posture, modiﬁed
by ﬁnancial performance, must be considered in light of stakeholder power in order to understand a
company’s social responsibility disclosure policy.
Design/methodology/approach – This study in this paper uses regression analysis to examine
annual report disclosure of environmental information after a major accident in the mining industry. A
multiple-item disclosure score is tailored to the Canadian accounting environment, and used as a
dependent variable.
Findings – This paper ﬁnds that companies that maintain themselves in the public eye through
press release activity disclose more information than other companies. However there is no evidence to
suggest that disclosure content is moderated by ﬁnancial performance. Companies that obtained
external ﬁnancing one year after the accident made more disclosure than other companies. The
signiﬁcance of the external ﬁnancing variable is evident when disclosure is restricted to discretionary
or non-ﬁnancial items, but disappears if the dependent variable represents mandatory ﬁnancial items.
Research limitations/implications – The paper shoes that while Ullmann addressed the matter of
actual social responsibility performance, in addition to disclosure, this paper does not examine
performance. Furthermore, press release activity is only one type of strategic posture. Future work
that employs some other measure may yield additional insight into the decision-making process.
Originality/value – Prior study of Ullmann’s work has not considered the interactive impact of
proﬁt and strategic posture. Furthermore, the actual nature of the disclosure, voluntary versus
mandatory, has not been speciﬁcally examined. This paper addresses both of these issues.

Keywords Social responsibility, Accounting, Mining industry, Financial performance, Disclosure,
Canada

Paper type Research paper

Introduction
Although the users of accounting information were initially considered to be the
ﬁnancial stakeholders, companies now use their annual reports to provide a variety of
information on non-ﬁnancial issues such as relations with employees, customers and
the outside community, as well as information on environmental impacts (Owen, 1990).
Proponents of legitimacy theory have suggested several ways that companies use
discussion of non-ﬁnancial issues to manage stakeholder impressions. For example,
they can use environmental disclosures to try to inﬂuence stakeholder reaction to

The author wishes to thank Professor Deirdre Taylor CGA (Ryerson School of Business
Management) for her assistance with data collection, and Ryerson’s Faculty of Business for
providing ﬁnancial support for this research.

AAAJ
19,4

540

Accounting, Auditing &
Accountability Journal
Vol. 19 No. 4, 2006
pp. 540-563
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
0951-3574
DOI 10.1108/09513570610679128

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
An empirical test
of legitimacy
theory

541

accidents that have industry-wide repercussions (Blacconiere and Patten, 1994). There
is also evidence that managers use non-ﬁnancial and ﬁnancial disclosures in different
ways as part of an impressions management strategy (Walden and Schwartz, 1997).
However, environmental disclosure policy remains difﬁcult to deﬁne, in part because
disclosed information is often unrelated to a company’s actual performance, and
because analyses of
the relationships between environmental and ﬁnancial
performance on the one hand, and between environmental disclosure and ﬁnancial
performance on the other, have revealed numerous inconsistencies. Ullmann (1985)
said that corporate social responsibility is an under-theorized area of academic enquiry.
Furthermore, he suggested that prior studies have omitted a key variable from their
analyses, which accounts for the inconsistent ﬁndings. This paper applies the Ullmann
contingency framework in an attempt to test his ideas, and to lay the groundwork for
the resolution of inconsistencies through future research.

Ullmann suggested that strategic posture and ﬁnancial performance (proﬁt),
considered in light of stakeholder power, provide a basis for the determination of a
cohesive, systematic response to external demands for environmental information. In
Canada, the following inter-related factors suggest that stakeholder power has been
growing for several years:

. The growing public concern for the environmental impacts of business activity.
. The predominance of institutional traders in the North American market.
. The growing interest in ethical investing among institutional investors.

Ethical
investors apply a social responsibility screen as part of the investment
decision-making process. The factors cited above suggest that when institutional
investors consider investing in Canada, they apply such a screen because of this
country’s resource-based economy.

The failure of a tailings dam at the Omai mine in Guyana in 1995 drew attention to
the environmental impacts of the mining industry. This mine is partly owned by
Cambior, a Canadian public company. Given that many mining companies rely on
operations outside their home countries, the potential repercussions of this accident
were likely to trigger a response across the industry. If legitimacy theory is correct, this
response is likely to be reﬂected (at least partly) through companies’ disclosure of
information concerning environmental risk and management, thus providing an
opportunity to explore Ullmann’s ideas of the relationship of disclosure with strategic
posture and ﬁnancial performance.

Conceptual framework
Legitimacy theory has its roots in the idea of a social contract between the corporation
and society. A company’s survival and growth depend on its ability to deliver desirable
ends, to distribute economic, social, or political beneﬁts to the groups from which it
derives its power (Shocker and Sethi, 1974). Early accounting theory identiﬁed the
users of accounting information as creditors and shareholders – the ﬁnancial
stakeholders. Disclosures in annual reports were directed primarily to those groups
alone, and designed to discharge stewardship obligations so as to ensure ongoing
access to ﬁnancial markets (Gray et al., 1995). Over time, the concept of the stakeholder
expanded to include insurers, suppliers, consumer associations,
regulators,
environmental groups, and the media, plus others (Canadian Institute of Chartered

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
AAAJ
19,4

542

Accountants, 1997). The objective of accounting expanded to include the provision of
information to help stakeholders estimate the amount, timing, and uncertainty of
future cash ﬂows (Financial Accounting Standards Board, 1978), as well as to satisfy
social
interests (Gray et al., 1995). This put considerable pressure on company
managers to ﬁnd ways to respond to a diversity of interests. Legitimacy theory was
subsequently integrated into the accounting literature as a means of explaining what,
why, when, and how certain items are addressed by corporate management in their
communication with outside audiences.

Legitimacy theory begins with the assumption that an organization has no inherent
right to exist. This right is conferred upon it by society, but only when the company’s
value system is perceived to be congruent with that of the society in which it operates
(Dowling and Pfeffer, 1975; Lindblom, 1994). Furthermore, this right can be revoked if
the company is thought to have breached any of the terms of its social contract
(Deegan, 2002). This revocation could be accomplished by consumers reducing
demand for the company’s product or service, by suppliers limiting access to labour or
ﬁnancial capital, or by stakeholders lobbying for legislation that would impact the cash
ﬂow of the company (Terreberry, 1968). The social contract itself contains both explicit
terms, spelled out in the form of legal requirements, and implicit terms, which include
the non-legislated societal expectations (Gray et al., 1996). The implicit terms may
eventually be enshrined in clearly deﬁned legislation, but until that occurs managers
can vary in their interpretation of these terms, and in their response.

Since legitimacy theory is based on perception, any response by management must
be accompanied by disclosure, for actions which are not publicized will not be effective
in changing external parties’ views of the organization (Cormier and Gordon, 2001).
While disclosure within the ﬁnancial sections of a company’s annual report are subject
to guidelines established by the accounting profession and other regulators,
management has considerable ﬂexibility with regard to the discussion (if any) in the
other sections. Lindblom (1994) said that in the process of attaining legitimacy, a
company could use corporate social responsibility (CSR) discussion to:

.

correct public misunderstanding of its performance (if a “legitimacy gap” has
arisen through public misconception);

. alter expectations of performance (if management thinks the public has an

.

unrealistic expectation of its responsibilities);
show how the company has improved performance (if the organization is
thought to have failed in one of its perceived roles); and

. deﬂect attention away from performance (if the organization has strengths –
such as a good record of charitable contributions – that it wishes to emphasize,
in order to direct the public’s attention away from other aspects of its
performance – such as a pollution problem).

While corporations can and do use other media for making social responsibility
disclosures (Ze´ghal and Ahmed, 1990), the use of the annual report for legitimation
purposes has been observed in a variety of studies (Salancik and Meindl, 1984;
Amernic, 1992; Dyball, 1998; O’Donovan, 2002).

If legitimacy theory correctly describes the disclosure decision process, then an

effective disclosure policy requires management to:

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
An empirical test
of legitimacy
theory

543

.

. keep track of public interest issues (Guthrie and Parker, 1989; O’Donovan, 2002);
consider the relative importance of different stakeholder groups (Neu et al., 1998);
and
tailor social disclosures accordingly (Patten, 1992).

.

A substantial body of evidence supports the allegation that there is a strategic element to
the disclosure process. Deegan and Gordon (1996) found higher levels of environmental
disclosure when membership in environmental groups is rising. Environmental
disclosures increase when environmental problems and penalties are the focus of media
attention (Neu et al., 1998; Deegan et al., 2000). This latter research also found that other
types of social reporting increased along with environmental disclosure, suggesting that
companies use social responsibility discussion to frame outside users’ overall view of
company performance. In addition to ﬁnding a link between level of disclosure and
public interest, Neu et al. (1998) and Freedman and Jaggi (1988) found that disclosure
rises when net income declines, suggesting that management uses social reporting to
deﬂect attention from poor ﬁnancial performance. There is also evidence that
environmental disclosure provides organizations with methods of managing potentially
discrediting events such as environmental ﬁnes (Warsame et al., 2002). Furthermore,
disclosure decisions were found to differ, depending on whether the objective is to gain,
maintain, or repair legitimacy (O’Donovan, 2002).

Changes in legislation are often triggered by accidents, and these changes can affect
entire industries and extend to other countries. For example, after a train derailment
outside Toronto in 1979 forced the evacuation of 250,000 people, British Rail launched
new directives banning trains from carrying toxic chemicals and ﬂammables together
(Globe and Mail, 1979). Trotman (1979) suggested that companies could use social
disclosure to reduce the chances of a legislative backlash by convincing the public that
they are acting in a socially responsible manner. Empirical evidence to support this
view comes from the chemical and textile industries. Chemical company shares
declined in price after the Union Carbide accident in Bhopal (Blacconiere and Patten,
1994), and again when superfund regulation was amended to expand the reporting
requirements for ﬁrms that release hazardous materials into the environment
(Blacconiere and Northcut, 1997). In the textile industry, share prices declined after
Occupational Safety and Health standards were tightened (Freedman and Stagliano,
1991). In all three of these studies, share response was modiﬁed by the extent or nature
of prior disclosure. These ﬁndings suggest the following:

(1) Shareholders are alert to public perceptions of a company’s social impacts.
(2) A stakeholder backlash can trigger new regulation with prospective cash ﬂow

repercussions.

(3) Management can in some cases moderate this backlash through the disclosure

process.

Walden and Schwartz (1997) suggested that managers use non-ﬁnancial disclosure in
response to demands for CSR discussion, and tend to withhold ﬁnancial information
unless regulation calls for its release. Public interest is faster to change than regulation;
therefore ﬁnancial disclosure is expected to be more constant over time. Analyses of
increase in environmental discussion (both
annual reports showed a substantial
ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial)
in

in 1989 (the year of the Exxon Valdez accident)

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
AAAJ
19,4

544

comparison to earlier years. This increase was observed in the oil industry (Patten,
1992), and by companies in the chemical, forest, and consumer products sectors as well
(Walden and Schwartz, 1997). Walden and Schwartz also found that non-ﬁnancial
environmental disclosure declined in 1990.

While the extent of environmental disclosure appears to respond to stakeholder
concern, efforts to deﬁne a systematic corporate environmental disclosure policy have
been fraught with difﬁculty. This difﬁculty stems from problems with three potential
correlations:

(1) between environmental disclosure and environmental performance;
(2) between environmental performance and ﬁnancial performance; and
(3) between environmental disclosure and ﬁnancial performance.

Much of the prior literature ﬁnds little agreement between companies’ environmental
performance and their discussion (if any) of that performance. If disclosures are
supposed to provide accurate information about actual performance, then disclosure
often fails. In the annual reports of US companies, environmental disclosures are
vague, incomplete, or unreliable (Wiseman, 1982; Rockness, 1985; Freedman and
Wasley, 1990; Gamble et al., 1995). Similar conclusions were drawn in the UK (Harte
and Owen, 1991), across Europe and in Japan (Fekrat et al., 1996), in Australia (Deegan
and Gordon, 1996), and in Canada (Blunn, 1992). These ﬁndings argue that
stakeholders are not provided with the information they need to estimate the amount,
timing, or uncertainty of future cash ﬂows, nor do they receive the information
required to evaluate management’s satisfaction of its stewardship responsibilities with
regard to environmental resources. One might conclude that companies use disclosure
to deliberately mislead their stakeholders. On the other hand, if the key objective of
environmental disclosure is to manage stakeholder expectations, one should not
necessarily expect a correlation with performance at all (Neu et al., 1998).

Assessments of the last two correlations – between environmental performance and
ﬁnancial performance, and between environmental disclosure and ﬁnancial
performance – are inconsistent. For example, Freedman and Jaggi (1992) found no
long-term association of pollution performance with ﬁnancial performance in the pulp
and paper industry. On the other hand, a reduction in emissions was negatively
associated with productivity in the brewing industry (Smith and Sims, 1985), and in the
electrical utilities industry (Gollop and Roberts, 1983). However, Russo and Fouts
(1997) found a positive association of environmental and ﬁnancial performance across
a variety of industries. With regard to environmental disclosure and proﬁtability,
Freedman and Jaggi (1988) and Neu et al. (1998) found that large companies with poor
ﬁnancial performance make more disclosure. On the other hand, large companies, and
those with good ﬁnancial performance, were observed to make more disclosure in
Cormier and Magnan (1999). These inconsistent ﬁndings, coupled with the uncertainty
as to management’s objective, have cast doubt on the legitimacy of environmental
disclosure as an area of accounting research enquiry (Gray et al., 1995).

Research over the past 15 years has identiﬁed additional variables associated with

the extent and/or nature of disclosure, such as:

. Company size (Lang and Lundholm, 1993; Neu et al., 1998; Bewley and Li, 2000).
. The privacy of management information (Bewley and Li, 2000).

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
. Enforcement efforts by regulatory bodies such as the Environmental Protection

Agency (Barth et al., 1997; Neu et al., 1998).

. Dependence on capital markets (Gibbins et al., 1990; Lang and Lundholm, 1993;
Botosan, 1997; Barth et al., 1997; Sengupta, 1998; Cormier and Magnan, 1999).
Industry (Gray et al., 2001) and related factors such as industry growth rate and
degree of concentration (Russo and Fouts, 1997).

.

An empirical test
of legitimacy
theory

545

Some of these studies looked speciﬁcally at environmental disclosures, but none
addressed the problem of the inconsistent correlations discussed above. Ullmann
suggested that such conﬂicting ﬁndings are the result of empiricists working without
an underlying theory that captures the strategic considerations that motivate the
decision-making process. He suggested that strategic posture articulates with two
other factors – ﬁnancial performance, and stakeholder power – to explain disclosure,
and that the omission of strategic posture from these earlier studies may explain their
contradictory results (Ullmann, 1985). This was a descriptive piece of literature
however, and no empirical evidence was offered in its support.

Strategic posture refers to the way an organization’s decision makers respond to
external demands. An active posture involves deliberate efforts to manage the
impressions of important stakeholders. With a passive posture, no attempt is made to
monitor stakeholder concerns, or to deﬁne an optimal stakeholder management
strategy. Both active and passive postures are moderated by ﬁnancial performance, as
the ability and desire to attend to social demands are at least partially tied to ﬁnancial
success. This is because the cost of obtaining certain information, such as the cost of
environmental remediation, may dissuade ﬁnancially unsuccessful companies from
disclosing this sort of information (Lang and Lundholm, 1993; Neu et al., 1998).
Furthermore, the litigation costs of non-disclosure could be higher for successful
companies than for unsuccessful ones (Skinner, 1994).

The third item to consider in this framework is stakeholder power. High stakeholder
power means stakeholders control resources critical to the company. The growth of
socially responsible investing (SRI), considered in light of institutional market power,
suggests that stakeholder power plays a vital role in driving management decisions in
the mining industry in Canada.

Clusters of socially conscious investors operated at the grassroots level in the 1960s
(Papmehl, 2001). In the 1980s, SRI gained the attention of the professional money
managers with the establishment of the ﬁrst ethical fund in the UK, and within four
years there were 14 such funds, with assets totalling £144 million and a growth rate of
about 50 percent (Ethical Investment Research Service (EIRIS), 1989). In the UK, the
Trades Union Congress actively encouraged pension fund trustees to consider the
social ramiﬁcations of their investments, and this concern spread to several trade
unions in the US (Owen, 1990). The SRI movement has inﬂuenced legislation in the UK,
where pension fund trustees are required to disclose their SRI policies if they have
them (Papmehl, 2001). Independent organizations such as the Council on Economic
Priorities in the USA, the UK Ethical Investment Research Service, and Ethicscan and
Jantzi Research Associates Inc. in Canada offer independent research services to social
investors.

The size of the institutional traders relative to the capital market highlights the
power of these stakeholders. In Canada, institutional investments now total over

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
AAAJ
19,4

546

$1.5 trillion (SIO Forum, 2000) (December). This compares to a total investment market
in Canada of $2.0 trillion in November 2002 (TSX, 2002). In Canada, even funds that are
not speciﬁcally identiﬁed as social investments are targeted with calls for ethical
screening. For example, the Ontario Teachers Federation has called for social screening
of one of the largest pension funds in the country, and John McNaughton, CEO of the
investment arm of the Canada Pension Plan, has said there are concerns about the
ethical issues involved in some of their investment decisions (SIO Forum, 2000)
(September). Based on the dominance of the institutional players in the capital market,
and their inclusion of CSR matters in their investment decision framework, it will be
assumed for the purpose of this analysis that stakeholder power has been high in
Canada for several years, and that social responsibility is one of the stakeholders’
guiding investment principles.

Ullmann argued that in periods of high stakeholder power, companies with an
active strategic posture make deliberate and conscious efforts to satisfy stakeholder
demands through both actual performance and disclosure of information about that
performance. The predominance of the mining industry in Canada means the Canadian
capital market provides an opportunity to subject his hypothesized contingency
framework to empirical testing. A modiﬁed version of Ullmann’s framework is
illustrated in Table I. The current paper excludes consideration of actual
environmental performance, so all reference to social performance is excluded from
the table.

In Ullmann’s contingency framework, situation 1 indicates positive correlations

between:

.

.

strategic posture and ﬁnancial performance;
strategic posture and disclosure; and
. ﬁnancial performance and disclosure.

For example, when management employs an active strategic posture, and ﬁnancial
performance is good, a high level of environmental disclosure is expected if stakeholder
power is high. In this situation, management tries to advertise its success across the
entire performance spectrum (Ullmann, 1985). This means going beyond the disclosure
speciﬁed by professional or regulatory authorities to include extensive discussion of
CSR. In light of the company’s good ﬁnancial performance, fear that investors will put

Situation

Stakeholder
power

Strategic
posture

Financial
performance Disclosure strategy

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

High
High
High
High
Low
Low
Low
Low

Active
Active
Passive
Passive
Active
Active
Passive
Passive

Good
Poor
Good
Poor
Good
Poor
Good
Poor

Mandatory and voluntary: high
Mandatory – high voluntary – low
Mandatory – indeterminate voluntary – low
Mandatory – indeterminate voluntary – low
Mandatory – high voluntary – low
Mandatory and voluntary: low
Mandatory and voluntary: low
Mandatory and voluntary: low

Source: Adapted from Ullmann (1985)

Table I.
Ullmann’s contingency
framework

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
An empirical test
of legitimacy
theory

547

a negative premium on social disclosure (such as dollars spent on environmental
protection) is minimal. When stakeholder power is low, however, as in situation 5, this
same company reduces CSR discussion as there is less compelling demand for it. In
situation 2, the company is expected to exhibit high levels of mandatory disclosure.
The unfavorable economic situation leads to a rationalization strategy of using
required disclosures to report the burdensome ﬁnancial impact of social regulation.
Voluntary disclosure, however, is low for fear that investors will react negatively to
excessive social expenditures.

In situations 3 and 4, a passive approach toward stakeholder impressions
management means the company does not attempt to exploit the strategic potential of
disclosure. Managers who use a passive approach are unlikely to monitor stakeholder
power or adapt their disclosures in light of that power. Ullmann suggests that in this
situation the levels of mandatory disclosure are indeterminate, while voluntary
disclosures are expected to be low (situations 5 through 8, where stakeholder power is
low, are not relevant to this study.)

Roberts (1992) presented empirical evidence supporting the hypothesis that high
stakeholder power, an active strategic posture, and good ﬁnancial performance contribute
to good social disclosure. Roberts made no effort, however, to distinguish mandatory from
discretionary disclosure, nor did he explore potential interactions among variables. Both
are important, given Ullmann’s belief that management will exploit the greater ﬂexibility
of voluntary disclosure as a method of shaping stakeholder impressions when ﬁnancial
performance is good. Furthermore, the Roberts paper operationalized stakeholder power
using independent variables that are to some extent controlled by management. For
example, he used the debt-equity ratio, and the proportion of shares owned by
management, as alternative proxies for stakeholder power. Both, however, are subject to
company control. This means the analysis showed management response (disclosure) to
situations contrived by management itself. The current analysis both distinguishes
between the use of discretionary and mandatory disclosure, and focuses on a situation
where stakeholder power is beyond company inﬂuence, while investigating managers’
use of communication to shape stakeholder impressions.

In summary, legitimacy theory argues that managers use disclosure to shape
stakeholder impression of the role and responsibility of the corporation, and the degree
to which the company is satisfying those responsibilities. Ullmann has said that
strategic posture needs to be considered along with ﬁnancial performance and
stakeholder power. Prior efforts to subject his ideas to empirical examination have not
considered the interactive impact of proﬁtability and strategic posture; furthermore,
the measure of stakeholder power used in earlier work was subject to company control,
and the content of disclosure – voluntary versus mandatory – was not speciﬁcally
examined. The current analysis is structured to address all of these concerns.

Hypothesis, model and data collection
The context for this study is 1995, following the failure of a tailings dam at the Omai
gold mine in Guyana in August of that year. Three million cubic meters of wastewater
contaminated with cyanide and copper sludge ﬂooded the countryside and the river
system. A state of environmental emergency was declared. Environmentalists and
scientists compared it to the Exxon Valdez oil spill in terms of potential long-term
environmental and health repercussions (Chatterjee, 1995). The Exxon Valdez accident

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
AAAJ
19,4

548

elevated environmental concerns in the public eye, threatening congressional approval
for the development of Florida’s offshore areas and the Alaska Arctic National Refuge,
in effect turning one company’s accident into an industry-wide problem (Toronto Star,
1989). In the Canadian mining industry, where offshore operations are common, a
mining accident in another country can have a similar impact. A year after the dam
failure in Guyana, the President and CEO of Placer Dome – a Canadian mining
company – commented on how the Omai mine accident had sensitized emerging
countries to the environmental effects of the mining industry (Reuters, 1996).

When the accident occurred, the mine was closed for ﬁve months, and Cambior –
another Canadian gold mining company and one of the owners of the Omai mine –
incurred US$2.2 million in direct costs, plus capital expenditures of $6.8 million to return
the mine to operation: furthermore, the company lost US$2.5 million for each month the
mine was closed (Northern Miner, 1995). A Guyanese Commission of Enquiry
recommended the establishment of environmental protection regulation for the country’s
industries (Northern Miner, 1996). A lobby group – Recherches Internationales Quebec
– ﬁled a class action lawsuit against Cambior, and lobbied ﬁnancial institutions in both
Canada and the USA to discourage them from providing capital to the owners. The
Canadian mining industry formed a task force to design a new policy on tailings pond
construction (The Mining Association of Canada, 1998). It can therefore be concluded
that this accident not only affected gold mining operations in Guyana, but it raised both
management and stakeholder concern for the industry as a whole.

While institutional investors’ interests generally include a variety of social matters,
an accident such as this one would focus them, at least temporarily, on environmental
issues. Furthermore, Mitchell et al. (1997) argued that urgency is a critical factor
necessary for an issue to warrant management attention. Since one of the tenets of
legitimacy theory is that companies use disclosure to convey information as to how
they are dealing with matters of interest to stakeholders, this accident provides the
setting for an examination of
the relationship between strategic posture and
environmental disclosure. The hypothesis to be tested is this:

When there is a demand for information on environmental risk and management, managers’
response – measured by items of disclosure in the annual report – depends upon the
companies’ strategic posture.

In other words, the nature of environmental disclosure is modiﬁed by a company’s
strategic posture.

A sample of gold mining companies was selected for this study, subject to two

criteria:

(1) The company was a publicly traded Canadian company at the time of the

accident.

(2) The company was identiﬁed with a primary Compustat SIC of 1,040 (gold and

silver ores).

Using these criteria, 44 companies were identiﬁed. The model used to explore the
relationship is:

Scorei ¼ B0i þ BliPRi þ B2iSizei þ B3iXFini þ B4iROAi þ 1i

ð1Þ

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
where:

Scorei

PRi

is a multiple item disclosure variable discussed in Table II and below;

is the number of press releases from company i over the 12-month period
ending December 31, 1995, the year of the accident;

An empirical test
of legitimacy
theory

Sizei

is the natural log of the market value of company i, adjusted as discussed in
the discussion of control variables below

549

XFini

is a dummy variable equal to 1 if company i obtained external ﬁnancing in
the ﬁscal year following the year of the accident;

ROAi

is the return on assets of company i in 1995;

B0i

1i

is the intercept; and

is the error term.

Three companies were excluded from part of the analysis due to lack of information for
one or more of the variables.

investors (Hutchin, 1994) as well as individual

The dependent variable: Scorei
For the purpose of measuring environmental disclosure, annual reports were obtained
for the ﬁscal year in which the accident occurred. While CSR disclosure is not limited to
the annual report (Ze´ghal and Ahmed, 1990), this medium is a primary information
source for institutional
investors
(Epstein and Freedman, 1996) and environmental groups (Patten, 1992; Gamble et al.,
1995). Furthermore, despite limits to the accuracy of its contents, as noted earlier, CSR
discussion is considered to have greater credibility when it is included in the annual
report than in other media (Tilt, 1994), possibly because of its proximity to the audited
ﬁnancial statements (Warsame et al., 2002). Finally, Rankin (1996) observed that most
stakeholders seeking environmental information look ﬁrst to the annual report. While
the emergence of the standalone environmental report in the 1990s has led to questions
about the relative importance of the annual report as a disclosure medium, the Gibson
and O’Donovan (2000)
found that annual report disclosure of environmental
information was still on an upward trend in the latter part of the decade. This
ﬁnding suggests that management continued to regard the annual report as a key
medium for disclosure of this nature.

Several earlier papers used volume of disclosure as the dependent variable (Cowen
et al., 1987; Guthrie and Parker, 1989; Patten, 1991; Neu et al., 1998), instead of a scoring
system such as the one used here. These earlier studies tried to identify factors driving
the decision to disclose information about a host of social issues such as human
resource or environmental matters, or company involvement with the community.
While volume of discussion may reﬂect the emphasis management places on a
particular topic,
in impressions

fails to capture the subtle issues inherent

it

Score (range 0-7)

Number of companies

0

8

1

4

2

4

3

13

4

10

5

3

6

1

7

1

Table II.
Distribution of disclosure
scores (n ¼ 44)

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
AAAJ
19,4

550

management strategy (Neu et al., 1998), and for this reason was not suitable for use in
this study. Roberts (1992) used a disclosure scoring system derived from the US
Council on Economic Priorities (CEP) ratings. As was the case with the other volume of
disclosure measures, this rating system: excellent (2), good (1), or poor (0), failed to
distinguish mandatory from discretionary disclosure.

In their analyses of the value relevance of environmental disclosure, Blacconiere and
Patten (1994) and Blacconiere and Northcut (1997) used a multiple item-scoring factor
that addressed speciﬁc types of disclosure content. In these two studies disclosure was
an independent variable. Again, however, the disclosure factor was used to represent
quantity only. The present study uses a similar method to assess disclosure, but
attempts also to capture the distinct nature of disclosure items. This score factor is
used initially to represent breadth of disclosure, and later modiﬁed so as to distinguish
the different types of information content.

Environmental disclosures were measured for each of the 44 companies using a
seven- point-scoring factor – Scorei – detailed in Table II. Each annual report, was
scored independently, by two accounting-professors. Disagreements were resolved
through discussion once the reviews were complete. A score of 0 or 1 was assigned for
each of the items shown below, regardless of where it was included in the report:

. A – statements on the compliance status or compliance efforts of the company

relative to environmental standards.

. B – existence of a board or executive level committee responsible for monitoring

environmental regulations and the environmental impact of operations.

. C – presentation of current year cash ﬂows for environmental control or

remediation.

. D – disclosure of next year’s estimated cash ﬂows for environmental

control/remediation.

. E – disclosure of current period estimate of future environmental liability.
. F – disclosure of estimated total future environmental liability.
. G – statements on current/potential environmental actions/lawsuits against the

company.

Items A, C, D, and G were included in the score factor used by Blacconiere and Patten
(1994). Item B is included as a signal of management commitment to environmental
stewardship[1]. Disclosure items E and F were recommended in s3060 (Capital Assets)
of the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants handbook for the year in question
(the handbook has been modiﬁed since that time.) This part of the handbook was
speciﬁcally designed to provide guidance to companies in the natural resource
industry. Item F referred to the estimated liability associated with land reclamation
activities that would be scheduled for the end of each mine’s useful life. The aggregated
estimate, totalled across all of the company’s sites, corresponds to item F in this
disclosure score. It was industry practice to accrue a portion of this liability annually
using a units-of-production method. The annual accrual corresponds to item E. These
two items will be classiﬁed as mandatory ﬁnancial disclosures for the purpose of the
extended analysis to follow. Li and McConomy (1999) present evidence that item F is
value relevant in the Canadian capital market. It should be noted, however, that
Canadian accounting guidelines grant considerable discretion as to how and what is

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
disclosed. Despite its handbook status, item F was often omitted from annual reports,
and item G, disclosure of current or potential litigation, while also required in s3290
(Contingencies), is also often omitted (Li et al., 1997).

Scorei, ranging from 0 to 7, is designed to include a variety of information categories
such as monetary items (items C through F), as well as qualitative items such as A, B
and G. Items D and F are future-oriented ﬁnancial items, while C and E pertain to the
year just ended. The distribution of scores across the 44 companies, and of the scoring
for each individual item are shown in Table II. Eight companies had a score of nil. Only
one company was disclosed in each of the seven possible categories. The average score
was 2.7 (Table III).

An empirical test
of legitimacy
theory

551

Key independent variable: strategic posture
Managers have the opportunity to devise a company speciﬁc strategy to shape
stakeholder impressions. For example, they may choose from a variety of media
according to their communication objectives (Ze´ghal and Ahmed, 1990). Alternatively
they can utilize a company sponsored philanthropic foundation, or invest heavily in their
own public affairs ofﬁces (Roberts, 1992). Both approaches, however – investment in a
foundation, or in a public relations ofﬁce – are largely dependent on company size. As a
relatively low cost method of investing in stakeholder management strategy, press release
activity is a more readily available alternative, and is the method chosen for this study.
Press releases are not necessarily the most efﬁcient medium for communication, for
they do not focus on a particular target market as effectively as other media such as
brochures or advertising (Ze´ghal and Ahmed, 1990). However, when this accident
occurred, the situation could not be described as normal. In a situation of high
stakeholder power, an accident such as this one calls for an immediate response that

Variable

Mean

St. dev

Minimum

Maximum

Scorei
MV i
PRi
Xfini
ROAi

Correlation matrix
Scorei
Sizei
PRi
XFini
ROAi

2.66

1,054

47.444
0.488
3.821

1.000
0.437
0.332
0.320
– 0.174
Scorei

1.83

2,340

69.480
0.506
20.737

1.000
– 0.002
0.010
– 0.137
Sizei

0
2
0
0

7.000

12,430
294
1

– 19.080

118.64

1.000
0.090
– 0.069
PRi

1.000
0.097

XFini

1.000
ROAi

Notes: Description of variables: Scorei – is a seven-point disclosure rating (Table VII); MV i – is the
market value of the company in millions of Canadian dollars on August 18, 1995, one day before the
accident; PRi – is the number of press releases by company i in the calendar year 1995, the year of the
Omai mine accident; XFini – is a dummy variable equal to 1 if company i obtained new external
ﬁnancing in the ﬁscal year following the year of the accident; and ROAi – is the return on assets of
company i the year the accident occurred. Sizei is MV i (see above) transformed into the natural log of
the market value, regressed against the inter-listing and geographic variables, and PRi as described in
the discussion of control variables. All other variables are as deﬁned in the Table

Table III.
Summary statistics for
untransformed variables
(n ¼ 41)

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
AAAJ
19,4

552

must be directed to a diverse stakeholder group. Furthermore in a situation such as
this, communication that results in a press release could originate with the press itself.
This is more likely to occur, however, if a communication link between the company
and the press has already been established. This suggests that companies that use
press releases on a regular basis are likely to issue more communications after the
accident than companies that do not normally access the press. Given the use of the
annual report as the source of the disclosure variable, a press release period covering
the 12 months leading up to the end of the year in which the accident occurred is
chosen, for disclosure decisions are made at year-end. All but three of the 41 companies
used in the analysis had ﬁscal (reporting) year-ends of December 31. Most of the
company managers would therefore be devising their disclosure strategies shortly
after that date (regression results using press releases counted over a period of time
that precedes the date of the accident are discussed later in this paper.)

Press release activity was measured using Factiva, a database providing access to
several media sources, including over 270 presswires. All press releases were examined
to ensure that only those with information directly from the company were included.
For example:

. Company X announces a new addition to its board of directors.
. Company X announces its quarterly results.

Would each be counted as a press release from Company X? On the other hand, an
announcement from Company Y that it has just purchased shares in Company X would
not. The number of press releases per company over this time period varied from 0 to
294, with a mean of about 47 (Table III).

Press release activity is used in this analysis as a proxy for media presence. Some
companies choose to operate in the public eye, while others operate quietly away from
public view. Frequent media presence means the company is often brought into
stakeholder view. If Ullmann is correct, then given the strength of stakeholder power in
Canada in the mid-1990s, a company with an active strategic posture (strong media
presence) will be a high discloser. For this reason, the press release coefﬁcient (B1i) in
equation 1 is expected to be statistically signiﬁcant and positive.

The control variables: external funding, size, and ﬁnancial performance
The XFini variable is included to indicate whether or not company i accessed the external
market for new ﬁnancing in the ﬁscal year following the year of the accident (of the
companies examined in this study 20 increased their reliance on external capital, largely
through the expansion of long-term bank debt.) Companies use disclosure to provide
information on ﬁnancial position and operating risk. This is particularly important for
companies that access ﬁnancial markets on a regular basis (Gibbins et al., 1990; Lang and
Lundholm, 1993; Frankel et al., 1995). Blacconiere and Patten (1994) suggested that
discretionary disclosures reduce investor uncertainties when the company is dealing with
operations perceived as high risk. The industry-wide repercussions of the Omai mine
accident likely made investors wary of the environmental risk factor. A substantial
portion of the Scorei factor (items A through D) is discretionary, therefore, the coefﬁcient
for the XFini variable is expected to be positive.

The association of size with environmental disclosure is well established in the
accounting literature (Patten, 1992; Neu et al., 1998; Bewley and Li, 2000). In keeping with

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
An empirical test
of legitimacy
theory

553

these earlier ﬁndings, the size coefﬁcient is expected to be positive. Several other control
factors were considered, but were subsequently discarded. For example, preliminary
analyses showed that disclosure is not associated with a company’s listing status (1 if the
company was inter-listed on a major US exchange; 0 otherwise). Nor was disclosure
associated with the major geographic location of company operations: none of the
categorical variables used to distinguish companies with major operations in Central or
South America from those focused on Africa or Asia, or from those with operations
restricted to North America, were statistically signiﬁcant. As might be expected,
however, the geographic and listing variables were all signiﬁcantly associated with size.
Company size, based on market value, was subsequently regressed against these other
variables, and the residuals from that regression were used in equation 1.

Financial performance is measured as return on assets (ROA). Using the broadly
deﬁned disclosure variable in the early part of this analysis, ﬁnancial performance is
included as a control variable with an indeterminate sign. The role of ﬁnancial
performance will be explored in greater detail shortly.

Results and discussion
The results of equation 1 (Tables IV and V) can be summarized as follows:

.

.

.

environmental disclosure increases with company size;
companies with plans to access external ﬁnancial markets disclose more
information on environmental issues; and
companies that pursue an active strategy of stakeholder management through
press releases make more extensive environmental disclosures, even when size is
taken into consideration.

In other words, with the exception of ﬁnancial performance (ROA), all signs on
coefﬁcients conformed to expectation, and all coefﬁcients were statistically signiﬁcant.
The explanatory power of the model exceeds that obtained in some of the prior analyses
that used volume of words as the disclosure factor (Patten, 1991; Neu et al., 1998).

Expected sign

Coefﬁcient

t-value

þ / –
þ
þ
þ
þ / –

5.054 * * *
2.286 * *
3.203 * * *
2.311 * *

1.800
0.008
0.593
1.087
– 0.011

Intercept
PRi
Sizei
XFini
ROAi

B0i
B1i
B2i
B4i
B5i
Notes: Signiﬁcant at: a ¼ 0:01* * * ; a ¼ 0:05* * ; a ¼ 0:10* ; R 2 ¼ 0:33. Data was incomplete for
three of the originally identiﬁed companies. For this reason the remainder of the analysis proceeded
with 41 companies. Scorei ¼ B0i þ B1iPRi þ B2iSizei þ B3iXFini þ B4iROAi þ 1i (1). Where: Scorei is
a seven-point disclosure rating discussed in Table VII; PRi is the number of press releases by company
i in the calendar year 1995, the year of the Omai mine accident; Sizei is the natural log of the market
value, regressed against the inter-listing and geographic variables, and PRi as described in the
discussion of control variables; XFini equals 1 if company i obtained new external ﬁnancing (debt or
equity) in the ﬁscal year following the year of the accident; 0 otherwise (source: Financial Post Survey
– Mines and Energy, 1995); ROAi is the return on assets of company i the year the accident occurred
(source: Financial Post Survey – Mines and Energy); B0i is the intercept; and 1i is the error term

– 0.950

Table IV.
Regression analysis.
Dependent variable:
disclosure rating (A-G)
(n ¼ 41)

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
AAAJ
19,4

554

Table V.
Regression analysis.
Dependent variable:
mandatory disclosures
(E and F) (n ¼ 41)

Expected sign

Coefﬁcient

t-value

þ / –
þ
þ
þ
þ / –

Intercept
PRi
Sizei
XFini
ROAi

B0i
B1i
B2i
B4i
B5i
Notes: Signiﬁcant at: a ¼ 0:01* * * ; a ¼ 0:05* * ; a ¼ 0:10* ; R 2 ¼ 0:24. MDisci ¼ B0i þ B1iPRi
þB2iSizei þ B3iXFini þ B4iROAi þ 1i (2). Where: MDisci is a disclosure score ranging from 0 to 2
as follows: 1 if the company discloses current year estimate of future environmental liability (item E); 0
otherwise, plus; 1 if the company discloses estimated total future environmental liability (item F); 0
otherwise. Other variables as in Table IV

4.743 * * *
1.835 *
3.583 * * *
0.507
0.090

0.704
0.003
0.277
0.100
0.000

Residuals obtained from the ordinary least squares (OLS) application of equation 1
were subjected to diagnostic testing. The runs test results support the assumption that
the residuals were randomly distributed; however, the Jarque-Bera and chi-square test
results both suggested a non-normal distribution. For this reason, further investigation
into the existence of a relationship between Scorei and PRi was conducted using a
Spearman’s Rank test as described below:

. Key variable PRi was regressed against

factors
(Sizei;XFini and ROAi) to obtain residuals labelled PRi-adjusted. The absolute
values of
these residuals were ranked in ascending value, along with
Scorei:Scorei is a whole number ranging from 0 (rank 1) to 7 (rank 8), while
PRi-adjusted consisted of rational numbers. This meant there were eight distinct
ranks for Scorei, but 41 distinct ranks for PRi-adjusted.

the other independent

. Observations were grouped according to the rank of Scorei. The mean and
median value for the corresponding PRi-adjusted values were calculated, and
ranked. For example, eight companies had a score of 0,
(rank 1). The
corresponding PRi-adjusted group mean (14.9) was the second lowest group
mean, so it was assigned rank 2. Four companies had a score of 1 (rank 2) and the
PRi-adjusted group mean (23.8) was the ﬁfth largest group mean, so it was
assigned Rank 5. Four companies had a score of 2 (rank 3) and the corresponding
PRi-adjusted group mean was assigned rank 4.

. The data included one outlier. This company was Pegasus Gold Inc., the only
company to score a full disclosure score of 7. However, this company’s press
release volume (adjusted, as described above) was only 46. (The unadjusted press
release volume for this company was 63, well below the maximum of 294.) This
company was dropped from the analysis, and the Spearman’s Rank test was
applied to the remaining seven groups.

The resulting t-value supports the conclusion that there is a systematic relationship
between Scorei and PRi-adjusted, at a ¼ 0:10. (Results using the PRi-adjusted median
in place of the mean were identical.)

If press release activity is a suitable proxy for strategic posture, the results so far
support Ullmann’s contention that an active strategic posture is linked to greater CSR
disclosure when stakeholder power is high. The lack of explanatory power for ﬁnancial

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
performance in Table IV is not surprising, given the deﬁnition of disclosure. According
to the Ullmann (1985) contingency framework, there is a differential impact of ﬁnancial
performance on mandatory disclosures on the one hand, and on voluntary disclosures
on the other (see Table I). In equation 1, however, the disclosure factor was a
combination of both. The relationship of mandatory versus discretionary disclosure
with both strategic posture and ﬁnancial performance is considered in the following
discussion. This portion of the discussion examines OLS results only (see Table VI).

An empirical test
of legitimacy
theory

555

Separation of score into mandatory and voluntary components
Tables VI and VII show the regression results using reduced score variables, with
MDisci representing mandatory ﬁnancial
including
discretionary or non-ﬁnancial items (A, B, C, D, and G) respectively. When disclosure is
restricted to mandatory ﬁnancial items the external ﬁnancing variable is no longer
statistically signiﬁcant (Table V). On the other hand, when disclosure is restricted to
discretionary or non-ﬁnancial items, the external ﬁnancing factor is signiﬁcant at
a ¼ 0:01 (Table VII). In other words, when companies contemplate accessing the
external market for new ﬁnancing they expand the discretionary environmental
disclosures in advance, but not the mandatory ones. This makes intuitive sense, since

items (E and F), and DDisci

Expected sign

Coefﬁcient

t-value

þ / –
þ
þ
þ
þ / –

1.100
0.005
0.317
0.987
– 0.010

Intercept
PRi
Sizei
XFini
ROAi

B0i
B1i
B2i
B4i
B5i
Notes: Signiﬁcant at: a ¼ 0:01* * * ; a ¼ 0:05* * ; a ¼ 0:10* ; R 2 ¼ 0:28. DDisci ¼ B0i þ B1iPRi þ
B2iSizei þ B3iXFini þ B4iROAi þ 1i (3). Where: DDisci is a disclosure score ranging from 0 to 5 as
follows: 1 if the company discloses compliance status or compliance efforts relative to environmental
standards (item A); 0 otherwise, plus; 1 if the annual report discloses the existence of a board or
executive level environmental committee (item B); 0 otherwise, plus; 1 if the annual report presents
current year cash ﬂows for environmental control or remediation (item C), 0 otherwise, plus; 1 if the
annual report discloses next year’s estimated cash ﬂows for environmental control/remediation (item
D); 0 otherwise, plus; 1 if the annual report includes statements on current/potential environmental
actions/lawsuits (item G). Other variables as in Table IV

3.940 * * *
1.950 *
2.190 * *
2.690 * * *

– 1.270

Table VI.
Regression analysis.
Dependent variable:
discretionary/
non-ﬁnancial disclosures
(n ¼ 41)

Strategic posture
(DPR)

Financial performance ROA
(dummy)

Discretionary disclosure expected to be

High
High
Low
Low

Good (1)
Poor (0)
Good (1)
Poor (0)

High
Low
Low
Low

Notes: The information below is extracted from Table I and amended to include the dummy variable
RM i which equals 1 if the company ROA exceeds the mean (3.8); 0 otherwise. In equation 4 the
interactive variable PRi* RM i is a quantitative variable with a lower bound of zero, and its coefﬁcient
is expected to be positive (see Table VIII)

Table VII.
Analysis of equation 4
interactive term:
PRi* RM i

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
AAAJ
19,4

556

Table VIII.
Regression analysis with
interactive term.
Dependent variable:
discretionary/
non-ﬁnancial disclosures
(n ¼ 41)

one would expect the annual report to contain the mandatory items regardless of
ﬁnancing plans. Also it provides support for the Walden and Schwartz conjecture that
companies will use non-ﬁnancial disclosure (which dominates the dependent variable
used in equation 3 of Table VII) to inﬂuence external opinion of its CSR performance
(Walden and Schwartz, 1997). Finally, building on a suggestion by Gray et al. (1996)
that the implicit terms of the social contract embody societal expectations, greater use
of discretionary items is expected when management wants to shape external opinion.
The explanatory power (R 2) in each of Tables IV-VI varies directly with the breadth
of the disclosure (dependent) variable. For example, Table IV shows regression results
using the full 7-point score, and R 2 is 0.33. When disclosure is a ﬁve-point item score as
in Table VI, the R 2 drops to 0.28. When the disclosure variable takes the narrowest
deﬁnition of disclosure by including only items E and F, R 2 falls to 0.24. This suggests
that the two components of the score factor – DDisci and Mdisci – are deﬁned so as to
measure different types of information.

Introduction of interactive term: strategic posture modiﬁed by ﬁnancial performance
In equation 4 (Table VIII) the variable RM i is created to distinguish companies with
good ﬁnancial performance from those with poor (see Table VII for analysis of RM i).
The summary statistics (Table III) show ROA ranging from 2 19.1 to 118.6 percent
with a mean of 3.8 percent. RM i is a dummy variable with a value of 1 for those
companies with ROA in excess of the mean, signifying good performance; 0 otherwise
(alternative deﬁnitions of RM i are discussed in the Sensitivity Analysis section later in
this paper.) Equation 4 is designed to highlight the interactive impact of ﬁnancial
performance on strategic posture. In a situation of high stakeholder power, companies
with good ﬁnancial performance (RM i ¼ 1) and an active posture (high PRi) are
expected to be high disclosers of discretionary items (see Table VII). Companies with
an active posture and poor ﬁnancial performance (RM i ¼ 0) are expected to be low
disclosers of discretionary items. The sign for the coefﬁcient of the interactive term is
therefore expected to be positive.

Table VIII includes the results of analysis using the interactive RM i term. The
strategic posture, size, and external ﬁnancing variables remain statistically signiﬁcant
at a ¼ 0:05. The interactive term PRi* RM i is not signiﬁcant, nor is the ﬁnancial
performance variable. The coefﬁcient of the interactive term is negative, contrary to
expectation. Using the factors as deﬁned in this paper, the regression results do not

Expected sign

Coefﬁcient

t-value

Intercept
PRi
RM i
PRi* RM i
Sizei
XFini

B0i
B1i
B2i
B3i
2.560 * *
B4i
2.460 * *
B5i
Notes: Signiﬁcant at: a ¼ 0:01* * * ; a ¼ 0:05* * ; a ¼ 0:10* ; R 2 ¼ 0:28. DDisci ¼ B0i þ BiPRi þ B2i
RM i þ B3iPRi* RM i þ B4iSizei þ B5iXFini þ 1i (4). Where: DDisci is a disclosure score ranging from 0
to 5 as in Table VI; RM i equals 1 if the return on investment for company i is above the mean ROA of
3.8; 0 otherwise. Other variables as in Table IV

1.280
0.010
0.270
–0.010
0.350
0.790

4.440 * * *
2.590 * *
0.660
– 1.240

þ / –
þ
þ
þ
þ
þ

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
An empirical test
of legitimacy
theory

557

support Ullmann’s contention that ﬁnancial performance will inﬂuence the disclosure
of discretionary information in the presence of high stakeholder power.

Sensitivity analysis
(i) Alternative measures of ﬁnancial performance
Table VIII shows the analysis using the interactive term PRi* RM i, where RM i is 1 if
the company’s return on assets exceeds the mean ROA of 3.8 percent. The median ROA
for the sample of companies was only 1.63 percent, suggesting that the mean was
affected by one or more extreme values. For this reason, alternative versions of the
dichotomous RM i factor were employed in reiterative applications of model 4. For
example, the regression was run using RM i equal to 1 if the company’s return on assets
exceeded the median value. The only major change was the loss of statistical
signiﬁcance for the size factor at a ¼ 0:05. (The new p-value was 0.078.) In another
iteration, the data were ranked in quartiles according to market value. For each
company, RM i was set equal to 1 if its return on assets exceeded its quartile’s median.
In this iteration, each of the PRi; Sizei, and XF i factors was statistically signiﬁcant at
a ¼ 0:05. Finally, RM i was set equal to 1 if the company’s return on assets was greater
than zero as in Neu et al. (1998). In this application, the external ﬁnancing and size
variables remained signiﬁcant at a ¼ 0:05, but the press release factor was not. (None
of these results are shown in this paper.) In all of these iterations the performance
measure and the interactive term PRi* RM i remained statistically insigniﬁcant.
Possibly RM i needs to be redeﬁned so as to make a sharper distinction between good
and poor performance. For example, if good (or poor) ﬁnancial performance were
deﬁned to be the upper (or lower) quartile of the ﬁnancial performance range, the data
might reﬂect Ullmann’s hypothesized relationship of ﬁnancial performance with
strategic posture and disclosure. An analysis of this sort, however, would best be
performed with a larger sample of companies.

(ii) Exclusion of item G from the disclosure score
Item G (statements on current or potential environmental actions or lawsuits against
the company), while a mandatory disclosure according to Canadian accounting
standards, was initially counted in with DDisc (Discretionary or Non-Financial
disclosure). Disclosure of item G is particularly difﬁcult to score since the absence of a
clear statement could mean one of two things: either there were no such actions, or
there were, but management decided to withhold the information. Given the equivocal
interpretation, all statistical work was repeated with Score2i and DDisc – i redeﬁned to
exclude item G, with no appreciable change in the results.

(iii) Alternative press release period
The accident may have caused some managers to alter the company’s strategic
posture. Volume of press releases in the months before the accident might therefore be
a better indication of management choice of active versus passive posture just before
the accident. For this reason, a twelve-month period leading up to August 18, 1995 –
the day before the accident occurred – was used to reassess the press release factor.
The results of the new OLS regression are shown in Table IX. There is no appreciable
difference between the results here and those obtained when press release activity was
measured over the calendar year. However, the non-parametric Spearman’s Rank test

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
AAAJ
19,4

558

Table IX.
Regression analysis.
Dependent variable:
disclosure rating (A-G)
(n ¼ 41)

failed to support the ﬁnding of a systematic relationship between strategic posture and
disclosure. This suggests that the determination of any such relationship is sensitive to
the measurement period used to evaluate strategic posture. It makes sense, in that
annual report disclosure decisions are made at year-end, which corresponds to the
measurement period used in the original regression (Table IV).

Given the gravity of the accident, and the perceived threat to the industry, it is
possible that press release activity would increase immediately after the accident, at
least for some companies. It is also possible that managers who previously made little
effort to maintain a media presence could alter that strategy after the accident. In other
words, the accident may have prompted a change in strategy. This paper does not test
directly for a change in strategic posture, and this may be an interesting question for
future work.

Summary, conclusion and suggestions for future research
The disclosure scores of a sample of Canadian gold mining companies are regressed
against the number of company press releases, while controlling for size, ﬁnancial
performance, and plans to access the capital markets. The objective is to test Ullmann’s
hypothesis that the power of external stakeholders to control required resources, and a
company’s strategic posture combined with ﬁnancial performance, should be viewed
simultaneously when attempting to predict the company’s social responsibility disclosure
policy (Ullmann, 1985). A broadly deﬁned disclosure score is used to assess environmental
disclosure at the end of 1995, a year in which there was a major environmental accident in
the mining industry. At such a time, stakeholder demands for information on
environmental risk and management are likely to be high for companies in the industry.
Press release activity is used as a measure of strategic posture – active versus passive –
and the measurement period corresponds to calendar 1995. By interacting the ﬁnancial
performance factor with strategic posture, the statistical model used in this paper elicits
insights not considered in earlier explorations of legitimacy theory.

Ullmann argues that when stakeholder power is high, companies with an active
strategic posture make greater social responsibility disclosure (Ullmann, 1985). The
ﬁndings in this paper support this view. Companies that maintain a media presence
through press releases make more disclosures in their annual reports for the year of the
accident than companies that operate quietly out of public view. There is no evidence,
however, to support Ullmann’s claim that good ﬁnancial performance combined with
an active strategic posture promotes the disclosure of discretionary or non-ﬁnancial

Expected sign

Coefﬁcient

t-value

þ / –
þ
þ
þ
þ / –

Intercept
PRi
Sizei
XFini
ROAi

B0i
B1i
B2i
B4i
B5i
Notes: Signiﬁcant at: a ¼ 0:01* * * ; a ¼ 0:05* * ; a ¼ 0:10* ; R 2 ¼ 0:35. Scorei ¼ B0i þ B1iPRi þ
B2iSizei þ B3iXFini þ B4iROAi þ 1i (1). Where: PRi is the number of press releases by company i in
the 12 months leading up to August 18, 1995, the day before the Omai accident occurred; all other
variables are as deﬁned in Table IV

1.433
0.033
0.537
1.040
– 0.010

3.330 * * *
2.449 * *
3.281 * * *
2.227 * *

– 0.870

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
An empirical test
of legitimacy
theory

559

information. More data is needed to fully explore the role of ﬁnancial performance, as
there may have been an insufﬁcient number of observations to effectively distinguish
good from poor performance. One way to expand the data would be to allow companies
that mine for base metals into the sample. Base metal mining companies are equally
affected by a legislative backlash that follows an accident at a gold mine, so by limiting
the sample to gold and silver mining companies, this analysis may have imposed an
unnecessary restriction.

The disclosure score used in this paper includes measures of ﬁnancial versus
qualitative, forward-looking versus historic, and mandatory versus discretionary items.
This type of score provides greater insight into the subtle nature of impressions
management than is permitted by the measure of volume used in several earlier studies.
When score components consisting of mandatory ﬁnancial items on the one hand, and
non-ﬁnancial or discretionary items on the other, were individually regressed against the
independent variables, the ﬁnancing factor was statistically signiﬁcant for the latter
regression only. Given the latitude that managers have over the extent and form of
disclosure outside professional and regulatory requirements, this ﬁnding makes intuitive
sense, and supports the suggestion by Walden and Schwartz (1997) that companies rely
on non-ﬁnancial disclosure when they need to shape stakeholder impressions.

In this paper, the disclosure factor was designed to assess the presence or absence of
different types of information, but not the extensiveness of that information. Many of
the items in the scoring factor used in this paper correspond to speciﬁc CICA disclosure
items. These items were either disclosed, or they were not, suggesting that a
dichotomous scale is appropriate. However one of the non-ﬁnancial items, item A,
relates to compliance with environmental regulation. Disclosure here could consist of a
lengthy, detailed narrative. Alternatively, the discussion could be vague, or altogether
missing. A more reﬁned measuring system that acknowledges the extensiveness of
information disclosure could possibly have produced different results from those
observed in this study.

Future research might use some alternative measure for strategic posture. In this
paper, no effort was made to distinguish companies that use the press to establish their
strategic posture from companies that rely on some other form of media. Furthermore,
the content of the press communication was not taken into consideration. The question
of whether the repercussions of the Omai accident prompted a change in strategic
posture is also an interesting one to explore. However, given that Ullmann’s
contingency framework tried to explain corporate decisions regarding actual social
performance, as well as disclosure about that performance, the next logical step is for
future research to incorporate a measure of environmental performance. The Canadian
economy offers a good platform for this sort of work. Canada’s resource-dependent
economy, along with its ﬂexible accounting disclosure regime, offers considerable
opportunity for further exploration in corporate impressions management strategy.

Note

1. This seven-point rating system was developed and applied in Magness, 2001. In that paper,
item B – existence of a high level environmental committee – was found to modify share
price response in the wake of a similar mining accident in the Philippines in 1996. Klassen
and McLaughlin also present evidence that high-level commitment to environmental
management is value relevant (Klassen and McLaughlin, 1996).

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
AAAJ
19,4

560

References
Amernic, J. (1992), “A case study in corporate ﬁnancial reporting: Massey-Ferguson’s visible

accounting decisions 1970-1987”, Critical Perspectives on Accounting, Vol. 3, pp. 1-43.

Barth, M., McNichols, M. and Wilson, G. (1997), “Factors inﬂuencing ﬁrms’ disclosures about

environmental liabilities”, Review of Accounting Studies, pp. 35-64.

Bewley, K. and Li, Y.

(2000), “Disclosure of environmental

manufacturing companies: a voluntary disclosure perspective”, Advances
Environmental Accounting and Management, Vol. 1, pp. 206-26.

information by Canadian
in

Blacconiere, W. and Northcut, D. (1997), “Environmental information and market reaction to
legislation”, Journal of Accounting, Auditing and Finance, Vol. 12,

environmental
pp. 149-78.

Blacconiere, W. and Patten, D. (1994), “Environmental disclosures, regulatory costs, and changes

in ﬁrm value”, Journal of Accounting and Economics, Vol. 18, pp. 357-77.

Blunn, R. (1992), “Content of reports growing”, Financial Post, Vol. S31, Toronto, October 19.
Botosan, C. (1997), “Disclosure level and the cost of equity capital”, The Accounting Review,

Vol. 72, pp. 323-49.

Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants (CICA) (1997), Full Cost Accounting from an

Environmental Perspective, CICA, Toronto.

Chatterjee, P. (1995), “GUYANA-ENVIRONMENT: cyanide spill could be long-term disaster”,

Interpress Service, August 30.

Cormier, D. and Gordon, I. (2001), “An examination of social and environmental reporting

strategies”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 14, pp. 587-616.

Cormier, D. and Magnan, M.

(1999), “Corporate environmental disclosure strategies:
determinants, costs and beneﬁts”, Journal of Accounting, Auditing and Finance, pp. 429-51.
Cowen, S., Ferreri, L. and Parker, L. (1987), “The impact of corporate characteristics on social
responsibility disclosure: a typology and frequency-based analysis”, Accounting
Organizations and Society, Vol. 12, pp. 111-22.

Deegan, C. (2002), Australian Financial Accounting, McGraw Hill Book Company, Sydney.
Deegan, C. and Gordon, B. (1996), “A study of the environmental disclosure practices of

Australian corporations”, Accounting and Business Research, Vol. 26, pp. 187-99.

Deegan, C., Rankin, M. and Voght, P. (2000), “Firms’ disclosure reactions to major social

incidents: Australian evidence”, Accounting Forum, Vol. 24, pp. 101-30.

Dowling, J. and Pfeffer, J. (1975), “Organisational legitimacy: social values and organisational

behaviour”, Paciﬁc Sociological Review, pp. 122-36.

Dyball, M. (1998), “Corporate annual reports as promotional tools: the case of Australian National

Industries Limited”, Asian Review of Accounting, Vol. 6, pp. 25-53.

Epstein, M. and Freedman, M.

(1996), “Social disclosures and the individual

investor”,

Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal, pp. 94-104.

Ethical Investment Research Service (1989), Choosing an Ethical Fund: The EIRIS Guide, 2nd ed.,

EIRIS, London.

Fekrat, M., Inclan, C. and Petroni, D. (1996), “Corporate environmental disclosures: competitive
disclosure hypothesis using 1991 annual report data”, The International Journal of
Accounting, Vol. 31, pp. 175-95.

Financial Accounting Standards Board (1978), Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 1:

Objectives of Financial Reporting by Business Enterprises, FASB, Norwalk, CT.

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
An empirical test
of legitimacy
theory

561

Financial Post (1995), “Survey – mines and energy”, Financial Post.
Frankel, R., McNichols, M. and Wilson, G.

(1995), “Discretionary disclosure and external

ﬁnancing”, The Accounting Review, Vol. 70, pp. 135-50.

Freedman, M. and Jaggi, B. (1988), “An analysis of the association between pollution disclosures
and economic performance”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 1,
pp. 43-58.

Freedman, M. and Jaggi, B. (1992), “An investigation of the long-run relationship between
pollution performance and economic performance: the case of pulp and paper ﬁrms”,
Critical Perspectives on Accounting, Vol. 3, pp. 315-36.

Freedman, M. and Stagliano, A. (1991), “Differences in social cost disclosures: a market test of

investor reaction”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 4, pp. 68-83.

Freedman, M. and Wasley, C. (1990), “The association between environmental performance and
environmental disclosures in annual reports and 10Ks”, Advances in Public Interest
Accounting, Vol. 3, pp. 183-93.

Gamble, G., Hsu, K., Kite, D. and Radtke, R. (1995), “Environmental disclosures in annual reports

and 10Ks, an examination”, Accounting Horizons, Vol. 9, pp. 34-54.

Gibbins, M., Richardson, A. and Waterhouse, J. (1990), “The management of corporate ﬁnancial
Journal of Accounting

disclosure: opportunism, ritualism, policies and processes”,
Research, Vol. 28, pp. 121-43.

Gibson, K. and O’Donovan, G. (2000), “Environmental disclosures in Australia: a longitudinal
the 6th Interdisciplinary Environmental Association

study”, paper presented at
Conference, Montreal.

Globe and Mail (1979), “British rail changes policy”, Globe and Mail, November 14, p. A5.
Gollop, F. and Roberts, M. (1983), “Environmental regulations and productivity growth: the case
of fossil-fuelled electric power generation”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 91, pp. 645-74.
Gray, R., Kouhy, R. and Lavers, S. (1995), “Corporate social and environmental reporting: a review
of the literature and a longitudinal study of UK disclosure”, Accounting, Auditing &
Accountability Journal, Vol. 8, pp. 47-77.

Gray, R., Owen, D. and Adams, D. (1996), Accounting & Accountability: Changes and Challenges

in Corporate and Social Reporting, Prentice Hall, London.

Gray, R., Javad, M., Power, D. and Sinclair, C. (2001), “Social and environmental disclosure and
corporate characteristics: a research note and extension”, Journal of Business, Finance and
Accounting, Vol. 28, pp. 327-56.

Guthrie, J. and Parker, L. (1989), “Corporate social reporting: a rebuttal of legitimacy theory”,

Accounting and Business Research, Vol. 19, pp. 343-52.

Harte, G. and Owen, D. (1991), “Environmental disclosures in the annual reports of British
companies: a research note”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 4,
pp. 51-61.

Hutchin, H. (1994), “Annual reports. who reads them?”, Communication World, pp. 18-21.
Klassen, R. and McLaughlin, C. (1996), “The impact of environmental management on ﬁrm

performance”, Management Science, Vol. 42, pp. 1199-214.

Lang, M. and Lundholm, R. (1993), “Cross-sectional determinants of analyst ratings of corporate

disclosure”, Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 31, pp. 246-71.

Li, Y. and McConomy, B. (1999), “An empirical examination of factors affecting the timing of
environmental accounting standard adoption and the impact on corporate valuation”,
Journal of Accounting, Auditing and Finance, Vol. 14, pp. 279-313.

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
AAAJ
19,4

562

Li, Y., Richardson, G. and Thornton, D. (1997), “Corporate disclosure of environmental liability
information: theory and evidence”, Contemporary Accounting Research, Vol. 14, pp. 435-74.
legitimacy for corporate social
performance and disclosure”, paper presented at the Critical Perspectives on Accounting
Conference, New York, NY.

(1994), “The implications of organizational

Lindblom, C.K.

Magness, V. (2001), “The value relevance of environmental disclosures – an event study in the

Canadian mining industry”, working paper, Ryerson University, Toronto.

(The) Mining Association of Canada (1998), A Guide to the Management of Tailings Facilities,
Mining Association of Canada Web Site, available at: www.mining.ca (accessed October
13, 2002).

Mitchell, R., Agle, B. and Wood, D. (1997), “Toward a theory of stakeholder indentiﬁcation and
salience: deﬁning the principle of who and what really counts”, The Academy of
Management Review, Vol. 22 No. 4, pp. 853-86.

Neu, D., Warsame, H. and Pedwell, K. (1998), “Managing public impressions: environmental
disclosure in annual reports”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 23, pp. 265-88.

Northern Miner (1995), Vol. 81, December 4.
Northern Miner (1996), No. 81, January 22.
O’Donovan, G.

(2002), “Environmental disclosures in the annual report: extending the
legitimacy theory”, Accounting, Auditing &

applicability and predictive power of
Accountability Journal, Vol. 15, pp. 344-71.

Owen, D.

(1990), “Towards a theory of social

investment: a review essay”, Accounting,

Organizations and Society, Vol. 15, pp. 249-65.

Papmehl, A. (2001), “Do good and prosper”, CMA Management, June, pp. 44-5.
Patten, D. (1991), “Exposure, legitimacy and social disclosurE”, Journal of Accounting and Public

Policy, Vol. 10, pp. 297-308.

Patten, D. (1992), “Intra-industry environmental disclosures in response to the Alaskan oil spill:

a note on legitimacy theory”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 17, pp. 471-5.

Rankin, M. (1996), Corporate Reporting – The Green Gap, Institute of Chartered Accountants in

Australia, Sydney.

Reuters (1996), “Philippine mine leak won’t hit earnings”, March 26.
Roberts, R. (1992), “Determinants of corporate social responsibility disclosure: an application of

stakeholder theory”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 17, pp. 595-612.

Rockness, J. (1985), “An assessment of the relationship between US corporate environmental
performance and disclosure”, Journal of Business Finance and Accounting, Vol. 12,
pp. 339-54.

Russo, M. and Fouts, R. (1997), “A resource based perspective on corporate environmental

performance and proﬁtability”, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 40, pp. 534-59.

Salancik, G. and Meindl, J. (1984), “Corporate attributions as strategic allusions of management

control”, Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 29, pp. 238-54.

Sengupta, P. (1998), “Corporate disclosure quality and the cost of debt”, Accounting Review,

Vol. 73, pp. 459-74.

Shocker, A. and Sethi, S. (1974), “An approach to incorporating social preferences in developing
corporate action strategies”, in Sethi, S. (Ed.), The Unstable Ground: Corporate Social
Policy in a Dynamic Society, Wiley, New York, NY.

SIO Forum (2000), Social Investment Organization Toronto, September.

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
An empirical test
of legitimacy
theory

563

SIO Forum (2000), Social Investment Organization, Toronto, December.
Skinner, D. (1994), “Why ﬁrms voluntarily disclose bad news”, Journal of Accounting Research,

Spring, pp. 38-60.

Smith, H. and Sims, W. (1985), “The impact of pollution charges on productivity growth in

Canadian brewing”, Rand Journal of Economics, Vol. 16, pp. 410-23.

Terreberry, S. (1968), “The evolution of organizational environments”, Administrative Science

Quarterly, Vol. 12, pp. 590-613.

Tilt, C. (1994), “The inﬂuence of external pressure groups on corporate social disclosure”,

Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 7, pp. 47-72.

Toronto Star (1989), “Fallout from disastrous oil spill is long way from over, experts say”,

Toronto Star, June 24, p. C4.

Trotman, K. (1979), “Social responsibility disclosures by australian companies”, Chartered

Accountant in Australia, March, pp. 24-8.

TSX (2002), TSX Monthly Review, Toronto Stock Exchange web site, available at: www.TSX.

com (accessed December 22, 2002).

Ullmann, A. (1985), “Data in Search of a theory: a critical examination of the relationships among
social performance, social disclosure and economic performance of US ﬁrms”, Academy of
Management Review, Vol. 10, pp. 540-57.

Walden, W. and Schwartz, B. (1997), “Environmental disclosures and public policy pressure”,

Journal of Accounting and Public Policy, Vol. 16, pp. 125-54.

Warsame, H., Neu, D. and Simmons, C. (2002), “Responding to ‘discrediting’ events: annual report
disclosure responses to environmental ﬁnes”, Accounting and the Public Interest, available
at: http://aaahq.org/ic/browse.htm (online journal) (accessed April 26, 2002).

Wiseman, J. (1982), “An evaluation of environmental disclosures made in corporate annual

reports”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 7, pp. 53-63.

Ze´ghal, D. and Ahmed, S. (1990), “Comparison of social responsibility information disclosure
media used by Canadian ﬁrms”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 3,
pp. 38-53.

Corresponding author
Vanessa Magness can be contacted at: vmagness@ryerson.ca

To purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: reprints@emeraldinsight.com
Or visit our web site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints

Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
This article has been cited by:1.Jennifer Martínez-Ferrero, Isabel-María García-Sánchez. 2017. Coercive, normative and mimeticisomorphism as determinants of the voluntary assurance of sustainability reports. International BusinessReview 26:1, 102-118. [CrossRef]2.Yu He, Qingliang Tang, Kaitian Wang. 2017. Carbon performance versus financial performance. ChinaJournal of Accounting Studies 1-22. [CrossRef]3.Salvatore Ruggiero, Heikki Lehkonen. 2017. Renewable energy growth and the financial performance ofelectric utilities: A panel data study. Journal of Cleaner Production 142, 3676-3688. [CrossRef]4.Alessandro Mechelli, Riccardo Cimini, Francesca Mazzocchetti. 2017. The usefulness of the businessmodel disclosure for investors’ judgements in financial entities. A European study. Revista de Contabilidad20:1, 1-12. [CrossRef]5.TangQingliang Qingliang Tang q.tang@uws.edu.au LuoLe Le Luo laura.luo@newcastle.edu.au Schoolof Business, Western Sydney University, Sydney, Australia Newcastle Business School, University ofNewcastle, Sydney, Australia . 2016. Corporate ecological transparency: theories and empirical evidence.Asian Review of Accounting 24:4, 498-524. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]6.Hank C. Alewine Timothy C. Miller How Balanced Scorecard Format and Reputation Related toEnvironmental Objectives Influence Performance Evaluations 123-165. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF][PDF]7.Larissa Degenhart, Mara Vogt, Nelson Hein, Fabrícia Silva da Rosa. 2016. Ranking setorial do grau deevidenciação ambiental das empresas brasileiras listadas no IBrX‐100. REGE - Revista de Gestão 23:4,326-337. [CrossRef]8.David Mutua Mathuva, Josephat Mboya Kiweu. 2016. Cooperative social and environmental disclosureand financial performance of savings and credit cooperatives in Kenya. Advances in Accounting . [CrossRef]9.Petra Dilling. 2016. Reporting on Long-Term Value Creation—The Example of Public Canadian Energyand Mining Companies. Sustainability 8:9, 938. [CrossRef]10.Dinithi Dissanayake, Carol Tilt, Maria Xydias-Lobo. 2016. Sustainability reporting by publicly listedcompanies in Sri Lanka. Journal of Cleaner Production 129, 169-182. [CrossRef]11.Jędrzej George Frynas, Camila Yamahaki. 2016. Corporate social responsibility: review and roadmap oftheoretical perspectives. Business Ethics: A European Review 25:3, 258-285. [CrossRef]12.PrasadAcklesh Acklesh Prasad Acklesh Prasad is a Senior Lecturer in Business Information Systemsat Queensland University of Technology. His research interests and expertise are in the area of fit ofinformation technology (IT) to the business processes and ways to measure the value of investmentsin IT, and governance of IT resources in various organisational settings. His research spans both thetheoretical and practical aspects of these issues. He has published widely in these areas in journals asthe Journal of Information Systems, International Journal of Accounting Information Systems and theAustralasian Journal of Information Systems. GreenPeter Peter Green Peter Green is Professor and Headof School in the School of Accountancy at the Queensland University of Technology. Peter has researched,presented and published widely on systems analysis and design, conceptual modelling, information systemsauditing and eCommerce. His publications have appeared in such internationally refereed journals as MISQuarterly, Journal of Information Systems, International Journal of Accounting Information Systems,European Journal of Information Systems, Information Systems, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge &Data Engineering, Journal of Database Management and the Australian Journal of Information Systems.HealesJon Jon Heales Jon Heales is a Senior Lecturer in Business Information Systems in the UQ BusinessDownloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
School at the University of Queensland. His research interests and expertise are in the area of individualand behavioural information systems, IT artefact research and organisational information systems. Hehas published widely in these areas in journals as the Journal of Information Systems, InternationalJournal of Accounting Information Systems and the Australasian Journal of Information Systems. Schoolof Accountancy, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia UQ Business School, TheUniversity of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia . 2016. Do organisations in developing economies legitimisetheir level of profit? Evidence from Fiji. Accounting Research Journal 29:1, 59-80. [Abstract] [Full Text][PDF]13.Alonso Moreno, Macario Cámara. 2016. Stakeholders in annual reports under ownership concentration:a historical case of a Spanish brewery company. Accounting History Review 26:2, 57-81. [CrossRef]14.Odera Odhiambo Odhiambo Odera Odhiambo Odera is based at Masinde Muliro University ofScience and Technology, Kakamega, Kenya. Scott Albert Albert Scott Albert Scott is based at theSchool of Commerce, University of Southern Queensland, Toowoomba, Australia. Gow Jeff Jeff GowJeff Gow is based at the School of Commerce, University of Southern Queensland, Toowoomba,Australia, and Department of Agricultural Economics, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, SouthAfrica. Masinde Muliro University of Science and Technology, Kakamega, Kenya School of Commerce,University of Southern Queensland, Toowoomba, Australia School of Commerce, University of SouthernQueensland, Toowoomba, Australia, and Department of Agricultural Economics, Stellenbosch University,Stellenbosch, South Africa . 2016. An examination of the quality of social and environmental disclosuresby Nigerian oil companies. Corporate Governance: The international journal of business in society 16:2,400-419. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]15.Constancio Zamora-Ramírez, Jose María González-González, Ana María Sabater-Marcos. 2016. CarbonReporting : análisis de la respuesta del mercado español. Spanish Journal of Finance and Accounting / RevistaEspañola de Financiación y Contabilidad 45:2, 231-265. [CrossRef]16.Eugenio D'Amico, Daniela Coluccia, Stefano Fontana, Silvia Solimene. 2016. Factors InfluencingCorporate Environmental Disclosure. Business Strategy and the Environment 25:3, 178-192. [CrossRef]17.Jose Maria Gonzalez-Gonzalez Accounting and Finance, University of Seville, Seville, Spain ConstancioZamora Ramírez Accounting and Finance, University of Seville, Seville, Spain . 2016. Voluntary carbondisclosure by Spanish companies: an empirical analysis. International Journal of Climate Change Strategiesand Management 8:1, 57-79. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]18.Thomas Thijssens, Laury Bollen, Harold Hassink. 2015. Secondary Stakeholder Influence on CSRDisclosure: An Application of Stakeholder Salience Theory. Journal of Business Ethics 132:4, 873-891.[CrossRef]19.Hichem khlif Faculty of Economic and management of Mahdia, University of Monastir, Tunisia KhaledHussainey Accounting & Finance Department, University of Plymouth, Plymouth, UK Imen Achek HighSchool of Commerce of Tunis, University of Manouba, Tunisia . 2015. The effect of national cultureon the association between profitability and corporate social and environmental disclosure. MeditariAccountancy Research 23:3, 296-321. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]20.A.H. Fatima Department of Accounting, Kulliyyah of Economics and Management Science, InternationalIslamic University Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia Norhayati Abdullah Faculty of BusinessManagement and Accounting, University Sultan Zainal Abidin, Kuala Terengganu, Malaysia MaliahSulaiman Department of Accounting, Kulliyyah of Economics and Management Science, InternationalIslamic University Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia . 2015. Environmental disclosure quality: examiningthe impact of the stock exchange of Malaysia’s listing requirements. Social Responsibility Journal 11:4,904-922. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
21.Aliyu Baba Usman Department of Accounting, Othman Yeop Abdullah Graduate School of Business,Universiti Utara Malaysia, Sintok, Malaysia Noor Afza Binti Amran Department of Accounting, OthmanYeop Abdullah Graduate School of Business, Universiti Utara Malaysia, Sintok, Malaysia . 2015. Corporatesocial responsibility practice and corporate financial performance: evidence from Nigeria companies. SocialResponsibility Journal 11:4, 749-763. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]22.Prabanga Thoradeniya Monash Business School, Monash University, Clayton, Australia Janet LeeResearch School of Accounting, The Australian National University, Canberra, Australia, Rebecca TanResearch School of Accounting, The Australian National University, Canberra, Australia, Aldónio FerreiraMonash Business School, Monash University, Clayton, Australia, . 2015. Sustainability reporting and thetheory of planned behaviour. Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal 28:7, 1099-1137. [Abstract][Full Text] [PDF]23.Prof. John Sands ,Prof. Ki-Hoon Lee Michael Dobler Faculty of Business and Economics, TechnischeUniversität Dresden, Dresden, Germany Kaouthar Lajili Telfer School of Management, University ofOttawa, Ottawa, Canada Daniel Zéghal Telfer School of Management, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,Canada . 2015. Corporate environmental sustainability disclosures and environmental risk. Journal ofAccounting & Organizational Change 11:3, 301-332. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]24.Prof Harri Laihonen Stefano Fontana University of Rome Saoienza, Rome, Italy Eugenio D'AmicoDepartment of Political Science, University Rome 3, Rome, Italy Daniela Coluccia Department of Businessand Law, University of Rome Sapienza, Rome, Italy Silvia Solimene Department of Business and Law,University of Rome Sapienza, Rome, Italy . 2015. Does environmental performance affect companies’environmental disclosure?. Measuring Business Excellence 19:3, 42-57. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]25.Martin Samy School of Accounting, Finance And Economics, Leeds Beckett University, Leeds, UK HenryItotenaan Ogiri School of Accounting, Finance And Economics, Leeds Beckett University, Leeds, UKRoberta Bampton School of Accounting, Finance And Economics, Leeds Beckett University, Leeds, UK .2015. Examining the public policy perspective of CSR implementation in Sub-Saharan Africa. SocialResponsibility Journal 11:3, 553-572. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]26.María del Mar Miras-Rodríguez, Amalia Carrasco-Gallego, Bernabé Escobar-Pérez. 2015. Are SociallyResponsible Behaviors Paid Off Equally? A Cross-cultural Analysis. Corporate Social Responsibility andEnvironmental Management 22:4, 237-256. [CrossRef]27.Tzu-Kuan Chiu, Yi-Hsin Wang. 2015. Determinants of Social Disclosure Quality in Taiwan: AnApplication of Stakeholder Theory. Journal of Business Ethics 129:2, 379-398. [CrossRef]28.Alexandra Middleton. 2015. Value relevance of firms’ integral environmental performance: Evidence fromRussia. Journal of Accounting and Public Policy 34:2, 204-211. [CrossRef]29.Ryan J. Casey, Jonathan H. Grenier. 2015. Understanding and Contributing to the Enigma of CorporateSocial Responsibility (CSR) Assurance in the United States. AUDITING: A Journal of Practice & Theory34:1, 97-130. [CrossRef]30.Nikolaos Demertzidis, Thomas A. Tsalis, Glykeria Loupa, Ioannis E. Nikolaou. 2015. A benchmarkingframework to evaluate business climate change risks: A practical tool suitable for investors decision-makingprocess. Climate Risk Management 10, 95-105. [CrossRef]31.Kathleen Herbohn, Julie Walker, Huay Yien Monica Loo. 2014. Corporate Social Responsibility: TheLink Between Sustainability Disclosure and Sustainability Performance. Abacus 50:4, 422-459. [CrossRef]32.X.H. Meng, S.X. Zeng, Jonathan J. Shi, G.Y. Qi, Z.B. Zhang. 2014. The relationship between corporateenvironmental performance and environmental disclosure: An empirical study in China. Journal ofEnvironmental Management 145, 357-367. [CrossRef]Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
33.Isabel Gallego-Álvarez, Isabel M. García-Sánchez, Cléber da Silva Vieira. 2014. Climate Change andFinancial Performance in Times of Crisis. Business Strategy and the Environment 23:6, 361-374. [CrossRef]34.Mohamed A. Omran Department of Accounting & MIS, College of Business, Gulf University of Science& Technology, Meshrif, Kuwait Ahmed M. El-Galfy College of Business, Gulf University of Science &Technology, Meshrif, Kuwait . 2014. Theoretical perspectives on corporate disclosure: a critical evaluationand literature survey. Asian Review of Accounting 22:3, 257-286. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]35.R.J. Hall, G.D. Moura, F.F.R.R. Macêdo, P.R. Cunha. 2014. Compras Públicas Sustentáveis: Um Estudonas Universidades Federais Brasileiras. Amazônia, Organizações e Sustentabilidade 3:1, 27-44. [CrossRef]36.Renfred Wong Accounting, Finance and Economics, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, UK AndrewMillington School of Management, University of Bath, Bath, UK . 2014. Corporate social disclosures:a user perspective on assurance. Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal 27:5, 863-887. [Abstract][Full Text] [PDF]37.Antonis Skouloudis, Nikoleta Jones, Chrisovaladis Malesios, Konstantinos Evangelinos. 2014. Trends anddeterminants of corporate non-financial disclosure in Greece. Journal of Cleaner Production 68, 174-188.[CrossRef]38.Chika Saka School of Business Administration, Kwansei Gakuin University, Nishinomiya, Japan TomokiOshika School of Commerce, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan . 2014. Disclosure effects, carbonemissions and corporate value. Sustainability Accounting, Management and Policy Journal 5:1, 22-45.[Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]39.Mostafa Kamal Hassan. 2014. Risk narrative disclosure strategies to enhance organizational legitimacy:Evidence from UAE financial institutions. International Journal of Disclosure and Governance 11:1, 1-17.[CrossRef]40.Yu He, Qingliang Tang, Kaitian Wang. 2013. Carbon disclosure, carbon performance, and cost of capital.China Journal of Accounting Studies 1:3-4, 190-220. [CrossRef]41.Pamela Kent Bond Business School, Bond University, Gold Coast, Australia Tamara Zunker BondBusiness School, Bond University, Gold Coast, Australia . 2013. Attaining legitimacy by employeeinformation in annual reports. Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal 26:7, 1072-1106. [Abstract][Full Text] [PDF]42.Jason Chen Vicky Arnold Steve G. Sutton Does Web Disclosure of Environmental Information AffectLitigation Awards? 1-22. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF] [PDF]43.X. H. Meng, S. X. Zeng, C. M. Tam. 2013. From Voluntarism to Regulation: A Study on Ownership,Economic Performance and Corporate Environmental Information Disclosure in China. Journal of BusinessEthics 116:1, 217-232. [CrossRef]44.Abdifatah Ahmed HajiScicom (MSC) Berhad, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 2013. Corporate socialresponsibility disclosures over time: evidence from Malaysia. Managerial Auditing Journal 28:7, 647-676.[Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]45.Michael Jones and Jill SolomonBristol University and Henley Business SchoolJaved SiddiquiManchesterBusiness School, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. 2013. Mainstreaming biodiversityaccounting: potential implications for a developing economy. Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal26:5, 779-805. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]46.Stacie Buccina, Douglas Chene, Jeffrey Gramlich. 2013. Accounting for the environmental impacts ofTexaco's operations in Ecuador: Chevron's contingent environmental liability disclosures. AccountingForum 37:2, 110-123. [CrossRef]Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
47.Ans KolkUniversity of Amsterdam Business School, The Netherlands Fabienne FortanierUniversity ofAmsterdam Business School, The Netherlands. 2013. Internationalization and environmental disclosure:the role of home and host institutions. Multinational Business Review 21:1, 87-114. [Abstract] [Full Text][PDF]48.Elizabeth Stanny. 2013. Voluntary Disclosures of Emissions by US Firms. Business Strategy and theEnvironment 22:3, 145-158. [CrossRef]49.Heather R. Dixon-Fowler, Daniel J. Slater, Jonathan L. Johnson, Alan E. Ellstrand, Andrea M. Romi.2013. Beyond “Does it Pay to be Green?” A Meta-Analysis of Moderators of the CEP–CFP Relationship.Journal of Business Ethics 112:2, 353-366. [CrossRef]50.Roman LanisUniversity of Technology, Sydney, Australia Grant RichardsonUniversity of Adelaide,Adelaide, Australia. 2012. Corporate social responsibility and tax aggressiveness: a test of legitimacytheory. Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal 26:1, 75-100. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]51.Azlan Amran, Say Keat Ooi, Mehran Nejati, Abdul Hadi Zulkafli, Boey Ann Lim. 2012. Relationshipof firm attributes, ownership structure and business network on climate change efforts: evidence fromMalaysia. International Journal of Sustainable Development & World Ecology 19:5, 406-414. [CrossRef]52.Ronald P. Guidry, Dennis M. Patten. 2012. Voluntary disclosure theory and financial control variables:An assessment of recent environmental disclosure research. Accounting Forum 36:2, 81-90. [CrossRef]53.Le Luo, Yi-Chen Lan, Qingliang Tang. 2012. Corporate Incentives to Disclose Carbon Information:Evidence from the CDP Global 500 Report. Journal of International Financial Management & Accounting23:2, 93-120. [CrossRef]54.Abdifatah Ahmed Haji, Nazli Anum Mohd Ghazali. 2012. The influence of the financial crisison corporate voluntary disclosure: Some Malaysian evidence. International Journal of Disclosure andGovernance 9:2, 101-125. [CrossRef]55.Indrarini Laksmana, Wendy Tietz, Ya-Wen Yang. 2012. Compensation discussion and analysis (CD&A):Readability and management obfuscation. Journal of Accounting and Public Policy 31:2, 185-203.[CrossRef]56.Nousheen Tariq Bhutta, Muhammed Mohtsham Saeed. 2011. Accounting scandals in the context ofcorporate social reporting. Journal of Database Marketing & Customer Strategy Management 18:3, 171-184.[CrossRef]57.José Antonio Plaza Úbeda, Jerónimo de Burgos Jiménez, Luis Jesús Belmonte Ureña. 2011. Grupos deinterés, gestión ambiental y resultado empresarial: una propuesta integradora. Cuadernos de Economía yDirección de la Empresa 14:3, 151-161. [CrossRef]58.Isabel‐María García SánchezFacultad de Economía y Empresa, Campus Miguel de Unamuno, EdificioFES, Salamanca, Spain Luis Rodríguez DomínguezFacultad de Economía y Empresa, Campus Miguelde Unamuno, Edificio FES, Salamanca, Spain Isabel Gallego ÁlvarezFacultad de Economía y Empresa,Campus Miguel de Unamuno, Edificio FES, Salamanca, Spain. 2011. Corporate governance and strategicinformation on the internet. Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal 24:4, 471-501. [Abstract] [FullText] [PDF]59.Javier Husillos, Carlos Larrinaga González, María José Álvarez Gil. 2011. The emergence of triple bottomline reporting in Spain. Spanish Journal of Finance and Accounting / Revista Española de Financiación yContabilidad 40:150, 195-219. [CrossRef]Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
60.Jennifer C. Chen, Robin W. Roberts. 2010. Toward a More Coherent Understanding of the Organization–Society Relationship: A Theoretical Consideration for Social and Environmental Accounting Research.Journal of Business Ethics 97:4, 651-665. [CrossRef]61.Jesse Dillard and Madeleine E. PullmanHank C. AlewineGatton College of Business and Economics,University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA. 2010. A model for conducting experimentalenvironmental accounting research. Sustainability Accounting, Management and Policy Journal 1:2,256-291. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]62.Roger L. Burritt and Stefan SchalteggerRené OrijLeiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands. 2010.Corporate social disclosures in the context of national cultures and stakeholder theory. Accounting,Auditing & Accountability Journal 23:7, 868-889. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]63.Suresh Cuganesan, James Guthrie, Leanne Ward. 2010. Examining CSR disclosure strategies within theAustralian food and beverage industry. Accounting Forum 34:3-4, 169-183. [CrossRef]64.Charles H. Cho, Robin W. Roberts, Dennis M. Patten. 2010. The language of US corporateenvironmental disclosure. Accounting, Organizations and Society 35:4, 431-443. [CrossRef]65.Shidi Dong, Roger Burritt. 2010. Cross-sectional benchmarking of social and environmental reportingpractice in the australian oil and gas industry. Sustainable Development 18:2, 108-118. [CrossRef]66.Nardia Haigh, Andrew Griffiths. 2009. The natural environment as a primary stakeholder: the case ofclimate change. Business Strategy and the Environment 18:6, 347-359. [CrossRef]67.Niamh O'SullivanUniversity of Amsterdam Business School, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,The Netherlands Brendan O'DwyerUniversity of Amsterdam Business School, University of Amsterdam,Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 2009. Stakeholder perspectives on a financial sector legitimation process.Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal 22:4, 553-587. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]68.Carlos Serrano-Cinca, Mar Rueda-Tomás, Pilar Portillo-Tarragona. 2009. Factors Influencing E-Disclosure in Local Public Administrations. Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy 27:2,355-378. [CrossRef]69.Marie‐Andrée CaronÉcole des Sciences de la Gestion, Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, CanadaMarie‐France B. TurcotteÉcole des Sciences de la Gestion, Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal,Canada. 2009. Path dependence and path creation. Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal 22:2,272-297. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]70.Vanessa Magness Environmental disclosure in the mining industry: A signaling paradox? 55-81. [Abstract][Full Text] [PDF] [PDF]71.Aapo LänsiluotoFaculty of Business Studies, University of Vaasa, Vaasa, Finland Marko JärvenpääSchoolof Business and Economics, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland. 2008. Environmental andperformance management forces. Qualitative Research in Accounting & Management 5:3, 184-206.[Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]72.Isabel Gallego ÁlvarezFacultad de Economía y Empresa, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain IsabelMaría García SánchezFacultad de Economía y Empresa, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain LuisRodríguez DomínguezFacultad de Economía y Empresa, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.2008. Voluntary and compulsory information disclosed online. Online Information Review 32:5, 596-622.[Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]73.Begoña Gutiérrez‐NietoDepartment of Accounting and Finance, University of Zaragoza, Saragossa, SpainYolanda Fuertes‐CallénDepartment of Accounting and Finance, University of Zaragoza, Saragossa, SpainCarlos Serrano‐CincaDepartment of Accounting and Finance, University of Zaragoza, Saragossa, Spain.Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)
2008. Internet reporting in microfinance institutions. Online Information Review 32:3, 415-436. [Abstract][Full Text] [PDF]74.Lee Parker, James Guthrie and Markus MilneDavid OwenInternational Centre for Corporate SocialResponsibility, Nottingham University Business School, Nottingham, UK. 2008. Chronicles of wastedtime?. Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal 21:2, 240-267. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]Downloaded by University of North Carolina at Charlotte At 08:01 03 February 2017 (PT)