ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION AS A LINK BETWEEN CORPORATE 

ENVIRONMENTAL AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE 

 

PETER M. MADSEN 

Marriott School of Management 

Brigham Young University 

Provo UT 84602 

 

INTRODUCTION 

 

For three decades, management scholars, strategists, and economists have debated 

whether or not firms benefit financially from efforts to minimize their impact on the natural 
environment, in other words, whether “it pays to be green” (Folger & Nut, 1975; Freedman & 
Jaggi, 1982; Hart & Ahuja, 1996; Russo & Fouts, 1997).  Empirical tests of the relationship 
between corporate environmental performance (CEP) and corporate financial performance (CFP) 
have been largely inconclusive (e.g. Jaffe et al., 1995; King & Lenox, 2002; Margolis & Walsh, 
2003; McWilliams & Siegel, 2001; Sarkis & Cordeiro, 2001). 

Recent work on the relationship between corporate environmental performance (CEP) 
and CFP moves away from attempting to identify correlations between high-level measures of 
CEP and firm-level profitability.  Rather, it seeks to identify and investigate the causal 
mechanisms that relate CEP to firm performance.  The purpose of the work presented here is to 
empirically test one such mechanism: that strong CEP allows firms to gain competitive 
advantage when governments increase the stringency of environmental regulations.  I examine 
this issue in the context of the global automobile industry between 1968 and 2000, inclusive.   
 

THEORY AND HYPOTHESES 

 

Environmental regulation looms large in the context of corporate environmental activity.  
Industrial pollution abatement expenditures comprise around 2% of GPD in the U.S. and several 
Western European nations, with firms in pollution-intensive industries bearing the bulk of these 
costs (Jaffe, 1995; U.S. Census Bureau, 2002).  Governmental environmental regulation drives 
most corporate interest in environmental issues and the majority of corporate environmental 
initiatives are specifically aimed at allowing firms to comply with current or expected future 
regulations (Bansal & Roth, 2000; Clemons, 2001; Majumdar & Marcus, 2001; Palmer et al., 
1995).   

To the extent that the costs of improved CEP differs between firms, those firms with low-

CEP costs could gain an advantage by increasing their own CEP while lobbying for more 
stringent environmental regulation that would force their competitors to increase CEP as well 
(Hart, 1995; Shrivastava 1995; Vogel, 1997).  Such a strategy is a special case of the general 
strategy of competing by “raising rivals’ costs” (Salop & Scheffman, 1983).   

Empirical work suggests that improved CEP typically comes at the cost of small 

increases in operating costs (Berman & Bui, 2001; Gray & Shadbegian, 2003).  But these costs 
are unlikely to be uniform across firms, for several reasons.  First, operational and administrative 
economies of scale in pollution abatement allow large firms to increase their CEP at a lower 
price (per unit of output) than smaller firms (Brock & Evans, 1986; Dean & Brown, 1995; 
Pashigian, 1984; Pittman, 1981; Scherer & Ross, 1990).  Second, firms with more experience 


operating with high CEP may face lower costs of increasing CEP than firms with less experience 
(Dean & Brown, 1995). 

Empirical work suggests that firms with greater experience operating at high levels of 

CEP are able to more easily meet new, more-stringent environmental regulations than are firms 
with less experience.  For example, Dean and Brown (1995) find that environmental regulation 
constitutes a barrier to entry in a sample of U.S. manufacturing industries, suggesting that 
incumbents face lower costs of compliance than do new entrants.  This work suggests that the 
costs of meeting stringent environmental regulation should fall disproportionately on the low-
CEP firms in an industry.  Such differential costs of compliance with new environmental policies 
may grant high-CEP firms a competitive advantage over their low-CEP rivals.   

 
H1: When a jurisdiction tightens the stringency of its environmental regulation of an 
industry, high-CEP industry participants gain market share relative to low-CEP 
participants in that jurisdiction. 

 
 

 

Sample, Data & Analysis 
 

METHODS 

 

The effects of changes in environmental regulation on competition are examined using a 
sample consisting of all automakers for which country-level sales data were available during the 
33-year period between 1968 and 2000, inclusive.  The unit of analysis in this study is the 
automaker-country-standard change.  In other words, the sample includes one observation for 
each automaker present in a country for each significant change in automobile emission 
standards that occurred in that country during the sampling period.   The sample includes 89 
different automakers and 147 changes in emission standards in 45 countries, resulting in a total 
of 3318 automaker-country-standard change observations.   

The primary sources of information on national emissions standards are various 

publications of the European Oil Companies’ Organization for Environmental Protection and 
Health (CONCAWE).  I obtained data on automaker production and sales by country from 
various editions of World Motor Vehicle Data published by the Motor Vehicle Manufacturers 
Association of the United States (and continuing from 1999 as Ward’s World Motor Vehicle 
Data) and from various years of the World Automotive Market Report published by Auto & 
Truck International. 

Because the data were clustered by automaker, country, and year, I use a fixed effects 

OLS panel model, also known as the Least Squares Dummy Variable (LSDV) model, with fixed 
effects for automaker, country, and year.  The LSDV model specifies a compound error term, 
with automaker, country, and year components as well as a residual error term. 

 

Variables.  
 

The dependent variable of interest in this study is automaker competitive performance 

around the time of a country-level change in automobile emission standards.  Competitive 
performance is operationalized as the change in an automaker’s market share of new car sales in 
a country from the year before an automobile emission standard took effect to the year after it 


took effect.  In other words, if a country changed its automobile emission standards in year t, the 
dependent variable in this study, denoted (cid:1) market share, equals automaker market share in year 
t+1 minus automaker market share in year t-1.   

H1 suggests that high-CEP firms gain an advantage when environmental regulations are 

tightened.  Consequently, the independent variable in this study, denoted automaker CEP, is a 
proxy for automaker CEP.  Automaker CEP indicates the degree to which an automaker has 
developed the ability to meet auto emission standards more stringent than those in force in a 
given country and is operationalized as the fraction of an automaker’s prior-year sales that were 
made in countries with emission standards at least 25% more stringent than those in force in the 
focal country.   

An automaker’s market share in a given country could be impacted by many factors, 

including characteristics of the automaker (and its vehicles), the country, the automaker-country 
combination and the time period.  This study uses two strategies to control for these effects.  
First, it employs automaker, country, and year fixed effects.  Second, it includes a series of 
control variables to account for dynamic factors influencing automaker market share.  In the 
analysis, I include automakers’ share of the worldwide passenger car market, denoted global 
market share, to account for automaker size and the change in an automaker’s worldwide market 
share, (cid:1) global market share, to control for factors influencing automaker competitiveness 
internationally.   

At the country level, I include population, per capita GDP, and per capita automobile 
sales to control for the size and growth of a country’s automobile market and the country’s 4-
firm concentration ratio to control for the effects of market concentration.  I also include the 
automaker’s production share (the fraction of all cars produced in a country accounted for by an 
automaker) to control for the possibility that automakers with production facilities in a country 
gain an advantage in that country’s auto market.  And, finally, I include an indicator variable, 
headquarters, that takes a value of 1 for the country in which an automaker is headquartered and 
0 otherwise.  Headquarters accounts for the possibility that being headquartered in a country 
impacts market share growth in that country.  
 
Results 
 

Table 1 reports results of the regression analyses of automaker market share change in 

response to changes in national automobile emission standards.  Models 1 and 2 report results of 
models estimated without automaker, country, and year fixed effects and models 3 and 4 include 
the fixed effects.  Models 1 and 3 contain only control variables.  The coefficients for global 
market share and (cid:1) global market share are both positive and highly significant in Model 1.  
These findings indicate that large automakers are more likely to increase their market share in 
any given market than are their smaller competitors and that automakers that are growing 
internationally are also likely to increase their market share in a particular country.  The global 
market share coefficient is no longer significant when the fixed effects are added in Model 3.  
This is not surprising because automaker market shares are fairly stable over time and the fixed 
automaker effects should remove the effect of variables that vary little over time.  But the (cid:1) 
global market share coefficient remains highly significant in Model 3, suggesting that global 
market share change is a strong predictor of market share change in any given country. 

___________________ 

Table 1 about here 


___________________ 

 

None of the other control variables appear to significantly impact changes in automaker 

 
market share surrounding changes in emission standards in Model 1.  But in Model 3, the per 
capita automobile sales and 4-firm concentration ratio coefficients become highly significant.  
Because both of these coefficients are positive, these results suggest that on average automakers 
are more likely to gain market share in countries with high rates of new car sales per person and 
in countries with highly concentrated automobile markets.  In these data, the later effect appears 
to be driven by the expansion of foreign automakers into markets that at one time were 
dominated by local producers.   

Models 2 and 4 introduce the independent variable, automaker CEP.  In both cases the 
automaker CEP coefficient is positive and highly significant, indicating that automakers with 
high CEP gain market share relative to low-CEP automakers during periods in which a country 
increases the stringency of its automobile emission standards.  These findings suggest that high-
CEP automakers benefit competitively from the enactment of strict environmental regulations at 
the expense of their low-CEP competitors.  This result provides strong support for H1.  
 

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 

 

These findings may be considered a very conservative test of the effect of CEP on 

automaker competitiveness when emissions standards change, for two reasons.  First, because of 
data availability this paper examines only the time periods in which new auto emission standards 
went into effect, not when they were first announced.  Several years frequently elapse between 
the announcement of a new standard and the enforcement of that standard (for example, the U.S. 
CAAA standards were enacted in 1970, but did not come into effect until the mid 1970’s).  
Consequently, because automakers that could not meet new, stringent standards in a country 
likely began to pull out of that country before the standards come into force, the analysis here 
may be capturing only a portion of the competitive impact of new emission standards.  Second, 
the study included change in automakers’ international market share during the time periods 
examined as a control variable and this variable may mask a portion of the effect of CEP on 
automaker competitiveness.  To the extent that new automobile emission standards came into 
effect in multiple countries in the same years, the true effect to CEP on automaker market share 
in those countries is larger than the effect reported here.  Due to these factors, the results of 
indicate a very strong effect of CEP on automaker competitiveness. 

However, CEP only impacts automaker performance during time periods in which 

environmental regulations are tightened.  I ran a series of models (not reported here) that were 
identical to those reported in Table 1, but covered time periods in which national automobile 
emission standards did not change.  In these models, automaker CEP had no effect on market 
share, indicating that during periods of constant environmental policy, CEP was not related to 
firm performance.  CEP becomes advantageous only under the condition of tightened emissions 
regulation.  This finding offers a partial explanation for the chronic inconclusive results of 
studies of the effect of CEP on CFP.  In this industry, strong CEP enhances firm competitiveness 
under certain conditions, but under other conditions it has a non-significant effect. 
 
environmental strategy.  Because environmental regulations are central to corporate 
environmental activities, political strategies aimed at influencing such regulations may represent 

The analyses presented here portray an important and neglected aspect of corporate 


one of the most significant avenues through which CEP may impact firm performance.  This 
paper constitutes a strong empirical demonstration that changes in environmental standards 
moderate the relationship between CEP and CFP.  During the latter half of the 20th century, high-
CEP gained market share relative to their low-CEP competitors when more stringent automobile 
emission controls went into effect. 
 
 

REFERENCES AVAILABLE FROM THE AUTHOR


 




Copyright of Academy of Management Annual Meeting Proceedings is the property of Academy of
Management and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the
copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for
individual use.

