 
 
Human Resource Bundles and Manufacturing Performance: Organizational Logic and
Flexible Production Systems in the World Auto Industry
Author(s): John Paul Macduffie
Source: ILR Review, Vol. 48, No. 2 (Jan., 1995), pp. 197-221
Published by: Sage Publications, Inc.
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2524483
Accessed: 14-02-2017 01:48 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted

digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about

JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

http://about.jstor.org/terms

Sage Publications, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to ILR Review

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 HUMAN RESOURCE BUNDLES AND MANUFACTURING

 PERFORMANCE: ORGANIZATIONAL LOGIC AND FLEXIBLE

 PRODUCTION SYSTEMS IN THE WORLD AUTO INDUSTRY

 JOHN PAUL MACDUFFIE*

 Using a unique international data set from a 1989-90 survey of 62
 automotive assembly plants, the author tests two hypotheses: that
 innovative HR practices affect performance not individually but as
 interrelated elements in an internally consistent HR "bundle" or system;
 and that these HR bundles contribute most to assembly plant productiv-
 ity and quality when they are integrated with manufacturing policies
 under the "organizational logic" of a flexible production system. Analy-
 sis of the survey data, which tests three indices representing distinct
 bundles of human resource and manufacturing practices, supports both
 hypotheses. Flexible production plants with team-based work systems,
 "high-commitment" HR practices (such as contingent compensation
 and extensive training), and low inventory and repair buffers consis-
 tently outperformed mass production plants. Variables capturing two-
 way and three-way interactions among the bundles of practices are even
 better predictors of performance, supporting the integration hypoth-
 esis.

 D espite claims that innovative human
 resource (HR) practices can boost
 firm-level performance and national com-
 petitiveness, few studies have been able to
 confirm this relationship empirically, and
 still fewer have systematically described the
 conditions under which it will be strongest.

 Although some of the problems in this
 research stream have been empirical (for
 example, unreliable measures and inad-
 equate controls), the more fundamental
 barriers have been conceptual. Innovative
 HR practices are often studied in a vacuum,
 with more attention paid to isolating the
 effect of individual practices than to under-

 *The author, who is Assistant Professor of Man-
 agement at the Wharton School, University of Penn-
 sylvania, thanks Peter Cappelli, Harry Katz, Thomas
 Kochan, Bruce Kogut, Paul Osterman, Frits Pil, Daniel
 Raff, Nikolai Rogovsky, Libby Scott, and Peter Sherer
 for their comments on an earlier draft of this paper,
 and the International MotorVehicle Program at M.I.T.
 for generous support.

 Additional details on the data and methodologies
 from the International Assembly Plant Study are avail-
 able from John Paul MacDuffie at 2017 Steinberg-
 Dietrich Hall, Wharton School, University of Pennsyl-
 vania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6370. Data cannot be
 shared with other researchers due to confidentiality
 agreements with participating companies.

 Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 48, No. 2 January 1995). ? by Cornell University.

 0019-7939/95/4802 $01.00

 197

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 198 INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

 standing how different HR practices inter-
 act to reinforce one another, or how they
 are linked to business functions and strate-
 gies.

 In this paper I test the relationship be-
 tween HR practices and economic perfor-
 mance using a unique international data
 set based on surveys distributed to 62 auto-
 motive assembly plants in 1989-90. I inves-
 tigate the hypothesis that "bundles" of in-
 terrelated and internally consistent HR
 practices, rather than individual practices,
 are the appropriate unit of analysis for
 studying the link to performance, because
 they create the multiple, mutually reinforc-
 ing conditions that support employee mo-
 tivationtand skill acquisition. Furthermore,
 I examine the hypothesis advanced in
 Arthur (1992) and Kochan, Cutcher-
 Gershenfeld, and MacDuffie (1991) that
 an HR bundle or system must be integrated
 with complementary bundles of practices
 from core business functions (and thereby
 with the firm's overall business strategy) to
 be effective.

 I argue here that flexible production
 systems have a distinct "organizational logic"
 that integrates bundles of human resource
 practices with manufacturing practices in
 pursuit of simultaneous improvements in
 productivity and quality. A flexible produc-
 tion plant reduces inventory levels and other
 "buffers," increasing interdependence in
 the production process and highlighting
 production problems. Dealing effectively
 with these problems requires motivated,
 skilled, and adaptable workers. By combin-
 ing the reduction of buffers with the devel-
 opment of these work force characteristics,
 flexible production systems create the con-
 ditions under which innovative HR prac-
 tices are most likely to yield effective eco-
 nomic performance.

 This line of argument is consistent with
 recent work (Cappelli and Singh 1993;
 Kogut and Zander 1992; Pfeffer 1994) as-
 serting that human resources can be a pri-
 mary source of sustainable competitive ad-
 vantage for a firm. Employee knowledge
 about products, processes, and customers
 that is embedded in routines and social
 interaction patterns can create organiza-

 tional capabilities more difficult to imitate
 than readily purchased technological capa-
 bilities.

 Focusing on one specific industry con-
 text, automotive assembly, provides many
 advantages for testing this argument. Em-
 pirical work on this topic has often relied
 on dichotomous measures of HR practices
 at the establishment level and financial
 measures of performance at the corporate
 level. These measures can be quite unreli-
 able, particularly across industries, and are
 at different levels of analysis. The assembly
 plant data set used in this study includes
 more reliable, context-specific measures of
 performance and HR practices at a com-
 mon level of analysis, as well as control
 variables, such as technology and product
 complexity, that could affect manufactur-
 ing performance.

 Previous Research

 This paper builds on an extensive body
 of past research on the auto industry in two
 ways. It explores the role of human re-
 sources in the "organizational logic" of a
 production system more deeply than previ-
 ous descriptive work that contrasts mass
 and flexible production (for example,
 WomackJones, and Roos 1990; MacDuffie
 and Krafcik 1992). Although mass and
 flexible (or "lean") production systems
 implicitly require different approaches to
 managing human resources, Womack et al.
 did not explain how HR practices are inte-
 grated into these different production sys-
 tems, nor did they test the relationship
 between HR practices and performance.
 Indeed, the term "lean production" used
 by Womack et al. appropriately captures
 the minimization of buffers but neglects
 the expansion of work force skill and con-
 ceptual knowledge required for problem-
 solving under this approach. These "en-
 riched" human resource capabilities are
 better described in terms of flexibility.

 This paper also encompasses more of the
 interaction between social and technical
 aspects of the production system than past
 industrial relations research (such as Katz,
 Kochan, and Gobeille 1983; Katz, Kochan,

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 HR BUNDLES AND MANUFACTURING PERFORMANCE 199

 and Weber 1985; Katz, Kochan, and Keefe
 1988). The authors of these earlier papers
 concluded that Quality-of-Work-Life
 (QWL) activities had little impact on per-
 formance because QWL had virtually no
 effect on work organization, process im-
 provement, or skill development. But they
 lacked data about the production system to
 test this hypothesis. The 1988 paper ex-
 tended the inquiry to the value of teams,
 finding that teams were negatively associ-
 ated with performance. However, only
 plants from a single company were studied,
 at which the adoption of teams was not
 linked to broader changes in production
 policies. Also, these authors did not mea-
 sure bundles of practices but assessed indi-
 vidual practices, potentially missing differ-
 ences between overall HR systems.

 The emphasis here on the relationship
 between the social system and technical
 features of production is consistent with
 the tradition of socio-technical systems
 (STS) theory (Trist and Bamforth 1951;
 Emery and Thorsrud 1976; Pasmore 1988).
 My view of this relationship, however, dif-
 fers considerably from that of STS theory.
 STS theory characterizes autonomous work
 teams as an alternative to Taylorist ap-
 proaches to work organization that is supe-
 rior in any technical setting. STS organiza-
 tional designs thus seek to maximize the
 autonomy of work teams from the con-
 straints of the technical system, often by
 adding buffers to the technical system. In
 contrast, this paper explores the integra-
 tion of HR practices that seek to expand
 employee skill and involvement with pro-
 duction practices that minimize buffers.

 For example, at Volvo's celebrated
 Uddevalla plant, the elimination of the
 moving assembly line and the introduction
 of team assembly of an entire vehicle were
 heralded by some as an appealing alterna-
 tive to flexible production (Berggren 1992).
 But as Adler and Cole (1993) have argued,
 although Uddevalla's emphasis on team
 autonomy (and the use of buffers of various
 kinds to protect this autonomy) may have
 facilitated individual and team learning, it
 constrained organizational learning and
 overall system improvement. Although this

 paper cannot resolve this debate (Uddevalla
 was closed in the spring of 1993, in part due
 to concerns about its economic perfor-
 mance), it does test a hypothesis-about
 how buffer reduction coupled with innova-
 tive HR practices is linked to economic
 performance-that is counter to STS pre-
 dictions.

 The "Organizational Logic"

 of Flexible Production:

 Integrating Bundles of Practices'

 Innovative human resource practices are
 likely to contribute to improved economic
 performance only when three conditions
 are met: when employees possess knowl-
 edge and skills that managers lack; when
 employees are motivated to apply this skill
 and knowledge through discretionary ef-
 fort; and when the firm's business or pro-
 duction strategy can only be achieved when
 employees contribute such discretionary
 effort (Levine and Tyson 1990; Bailey 1992).
 I will argue that all three conditions must
 be met for HR practices to contribute to
 performance. Skilled and knowledgeable
 workers who are not motivated are unlikely
 to contribute any discretionary effort.
 Motivated workers who lack skills or knowl-
 edge may contribute discretionary effort
 with little impact on performance. Even if
 innovative HR practices generate skilled
 and motivated workers, the HR system must
 be integrated with the firm's production
 strategy for discretionary effort to be ap-
 propriately channeled toward performance
 improvement.

 The concept of "bundles" of HR prac-
 tices is important in evaluating whether

 "Organizational logic" is a term used by sociolo-
 gists to describe principles or frameworks for action
 that indicate preferred directions without dictating
 particular practices (Useem 1993; Biggart 1991). It
 can be related to literature in organization theory
 and economics that examines systemic interrelation-
 ships 'among organizational practices, using notions
 of congruence, "fit," configurations, and comple-
 mentarities (for example, Miller and Friesen 1984;
 Milgrom and Roberts 1993; Meyer, Tsui, and Hinings
 1993, in an Academy of ManagementJournal special
 issue on "configurational" research).

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 200 INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

 (and how) these conditions can be met.
 Firms generally organize human resource
 practices into systems that are consistent
 with their culture and business strategy
 (Osterman 1987; Block, Kleiner, Roomkin,
 and Salsburg 1987). It is the combination
 of practices in a bundle, rather than indi-
 vidual practices, that shapes the pattern of
 interactions between and among managers
 and employees (Cutcher-Gershenfeld
 1991). Thus, research that focuses on the
 impact of individual HR practices on per-
 formance may produce misleading results,
 with a single practice capturing the effect
 of the entire HR system (Ichniowski, Shaw,
 and Prennushi 1993).

 Furthermore, a bundle of interrelated,
 overlapping HR practices provides several
 ways for workers to acquire skills (for ex-
 ample, off-thejob and on-thejob training,
 job rotation, problem-solving groups) and
 multiple incentives to boost motivation (for
 example, extrinsic rewards such as perfor-
 mance-based pay and intrinsic rewards from
 participating in decision-making and good
 job design). As Hackman (1985) wrote,
 performance may be "an overdetermined
 phenomenon, the product of multiple non-
 independent factors whose influence de-
 pends in part on the fact that they are
 redundant." There is now ample empirical
 support for the bundling or systems view.2
 The "organizational logic" of flexible
 production links together a bundle of manu-

 2For example, Weitzman and Kruse (1990) found
 that most studies of contingent compensation plans
 showed weak but positive effects on performance,
 with the strongest effects occurring when contingent
 pay was combined with some employee participation
 scheme. Similarly, Levine and Tyson (1990) found
 that the performance impact of employee participa-
 tion programs was greatest when participation was
 substantive, involving changes in how work was done,
 rather than consultative. Several recent large-sample,
 cross-industry surveys also have found a positive asso-
 ciation between bundles of innovative HR practices
 and various performance measures, including the
 Columbia Business Unit studies (Ichniowski 1991;
 Mitchell, Lewin, and Lawler 1990); a study by Huselid
 (1993) that addressed criticisms of the Columbia
 studies about response rate, simultaneity, and meth-
 odology for measuring HR practices; and a two-round
 survey of Fortune 1000 companies (Lawler, Mohrman,
 and Ledford 1992).

 facturing practices (related to the minimi-
 zation of buffers) with a bundle of human
 resource practices (related to the expan-
 sion of work force skills and motivation).'
 Each of these bundles is made up of inter-
 related, internally consistent, and even over-
 lapping practices. The two bundles are
 complementary in that they affect separate
 aspects of a plant's operations and yet mu-
 tually reinforce each other. Thus, "organi-
 zational logic" here refers to a systemic
 property that exerts a powerful pull toward
 internal consistency within these bundles
 and a complementary relationship between
 them. (The degree to which internal con-
 sistency within bundles and complementar-
 ities across bundles exists is, of course, a
 matter for empirical investigation.)

 Buffers

 Under mass production, disruptions to
 the production process (sales fluctuations,
 supply interruptions, equipment break-
 downs) prevent the realization of econo-
 mies of scale. Accordingly, buffers such as
 extra inventories or repair space are added
 to the production system. These buffers
 essentially create organizational slack as a
 reserve against unforeseen contingencies.
 But under flexible production, such buff-
 ers are seen as costly for several reasons.
 First, the buffers represent a commitment
 of resources not directly devoted to pro-
 duction. Inventory buffers in particular
 are costly to store and handle, and can
 hinder the move from one product design
 to another. Most important, buffers can
 hide production problems. When inven-
 tory stocks are high, a defective part can
 simply be scrapped and replaced. But when
 inventories are very low, as with a Just-in-

 3The distinctive "logic" of flexible production in
 auto assembly emerged from the experiments ofJapa-
 nese companies in the 1950s and 1960s (Monden
 1983; Cusumano 1985; Ono 1988). Although this
 production system model is grounded in a particular
 historical context, it appears to be diffusing success-
 fully to different social and economic contexts (Helper
 1991; Florida and Kenney 1991) and thus will be
 described in terms of its organizational characteris-
 tics rather than its link toJapan.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 HR BUNDLES AND MANUFACTURING PERFORMANCE 201

 Time inventory system, a bad part draws
 immediate attention, and must be dealt
 with, to prevent the production system from
 grinding to a halt. Buffers of in-process
 inventories are kept low and lot sizes are
 small, so if a problem is discovered by a
 "downstream" process, there are few defec-
 tive parts that must be discarded. Shrink-
 ing the size of the final repair area has a
 similar effect, since a small area will over-
 flow quickly if defect levels rise. The mini-
 mization of buffers serves a cybernetic or
 feedback function, providing valuable in-
 formation about production problems
 (Ono 1988; Schonberger 1982).

 Human Resource Capabilities

 Historically, under mass production,
 workers were hired to perform narrowly
 defined manual tasks requiring little skill,
 and were viewed as interchangeable parts.
 Turnover was high, but jobs were set up so
 any unskilled worker could learn them
 quickly, minimizing the costs of replacing
 workers. Absenteeism was high, but buffers
 of utility workers were established to pro-
 vide coverage. Motivation was low, but
 close monitoring by supervisors and effi-
 ciency wages ensured adequate work effort.
 Workers were not expected to think on the
 job, and were in fact discouraged from
 doing so. The main concern of mass pro-
 duction managers was to prevent any dis-
 ruption to the achievement of production
 quotas, and they developed buffers of vari-
 ous kinds, in part, as a safeguard against
 labor troubles (Shimada and MacDuffie
 1986).

 In contrast, flexible production gives
 workers a much more central role in the
 production system. To identify and resolve
 problems as they appear on the line, work-
 ers must have both a conceptual grasp of
 the production process and the analytical
 skills to identify the root cause of problems.
 Developing an integrated conception of
 the production system requires that work-
 ers directly encounter problems, through
 the decentralization of production respon-
 sibilities such as quality inspection, equip-
 ment maintenance, job specification, and

 statistical process control (SPC) from spe-
 cialized inspectors and engineers to shop-
 floor teams. Developing the skills for this
 problem-solving requires a variety of
 multiskilling practices, including extensive
 off- and on-the-job training, a few broadjob
 classifications, allowing job rotation within
 and across teams, and "off-line" group prob-
 lem-solving activities (for example, em-
 ployee involvement groups or quality
 circles).

 The multiple skills and conceptual knowl-
 edge developed by the work force under
 flexible production are of little use unless
 workers are motivated to contribute men-
 tal as well as physical effort. Workers will
 only contribute their discretionary effort to
 problem-solving if they believe that their
 individual interests are aligned with those
 of the company, and that the company will
 make a reciprocal investment in their well-
 being. Thus, flexible production is charac-
 terized by such "high commitment" human
 resource policies as employment security,
 compensation that is partially contingent
 on performance, and a reduction of status
 barriers between managers and workers.
 The company investment in building worker
 skills also contributes to this "psychological
 contract" of reciprocal commitment (Cole
 1979; Dore 1992).

 The Link Between Buffers
 and Human Resources

 The complementarity of policies on buff-
 ers and human resources is critical to the
 "organizational logic" of mass versus flex-
 ible production.4 Under mass production,
 the use of buffers to create stable condi-
 tions for high-volume production, under
 which all inputs can be optimized for great-

 4This perspective is supported by cross-industry
 research that finds statistically significant links be-
 tween innovative HR practices and manufacturing
 policies such asJust-in-Time inventory systems (JIT)
 and total quality management (Snell and Dean 1992;
 Ebrahimpour and Lee 1988). While these authors
 argue that the integration of these manufacturing
 policies with innovative HR practices leads to im-
 proved performance, they lack performance mea-
 sures to test this claim.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 202 INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

 est efficiency, is complemented by the view
 of production workers as interchangeable
 parts. Workers who were not expected to
 think and whose expected contribution of
 effort could be obtained despite their low
 skill and motivation were a perfect match
 for a technically optimized production sys-
 tem that was not supposed to stop and in
 which modifications were to be kept to a
 minimum.

 For flexible production, the link between
 the minimization of buffers and the devel-
 opment of human capabilities is driven by
 the philosophy of continuous improvement,
 known in Japan as "kaizen." From the
 perspective of kaizen, problems are oppor-
 tunities for improvement (Imai 1986). It is
 this philosophy that sustains the
 organization's willingness to accept the
 vulnerability of "lean" buffers and the pres-
 sure to deal with problems as they become
 visible-even if this means stopping the
 production line, unthinkable under mass
 production. This philosophy also guides
 the development of problem-solving skills
 in the work force. In a sense, flexible
 production transfers the ability to cope
 with contingencies from the technical sys-
 tem, where buffers provide mass produc-
 tion systems with 'just in case" protection,
 into the human resource system, which deals
 with the unexpected by developing a capa-
 bility for learning (MacDuffie 1991; Adler
 1992; Nishiguchi 1993).

 Another critical difference in philoso-
 phy relates to production system outcomes.
 The conventional wisdom of manufactur-
 ing under a mass production "logic" as-
 sumes a necessary tradeoff between the
 goals of productivity and quality. The use
 of buffers is justified on productivity
 grounds, because it protects against disrup-
 tions to high-volume production, and be-
 cause a certain level of quality defects is
 expected. By contrast, under flexible pro-
 duction, productivity (minimization of ef-
 fort) and quality (minimization of defects)
 are regarded as complementary goals.

 This characteristic of flexible produc-
 tion is also linked to the reduction of buff-
 ers and the development of problem-solv-
 ing capabilities. With no buffers present,

 any defect can bring the entire system to a
 standstill, so there is a strong incentive to
 drive quality defects toward zero. Stopping
 the line to deal with a quality problem can
 ultimately boost uptime and productivity if
 the problem can be traced back to its root
 cause and eliminated.

 Problem-solving efforts are not limited
 to quality matters. Under flexible produc-
 tion, workers and engineers also apply their
 problem-solving abilities to the task of im-
 proving equipment performance over
 time-a process identified by Monden
 (1983) as "giving wisdom to the machine."
 As a result, production technology need
 not be automatically subject to decay and
 depreciation but can actually appreciate in
 value over time. The same principle ap-
 plies to all job specifications. Although the
 basic structure of production jobs is deter-
 mined by engineers, teams of production
 workers have responsibility for developing,
 recording, and modifying job specifica-
 tions-a process known as "standardized
 work." These specifications are as detailed
 as any industrial engineering time study,
 but with the crucial difference that work-
 ers, rather than managers or engineers,
 take charge of their revision. (Adler 1993;
 Cole 1992.)

 Thus the problem-solving capabilities
 that arise from linking lean buffers with
 enriched human resources can help boost
 performance by improving the efficiency
 with which the root causes of quality prob-
 lems are identified, by helping technology
 to be used more effectively, and by refining
 job specifications.

 Operationalizing the Organizational

 Logic: Measurement Issues

 The discussion above suggests that
 bundles of practices should be measured to
 capture the "organizational logic" of a pro-
 duction system. This raises four important
 measurement questions: (1) What consti-
 tutes a "bundle"? (2) How should practices
 in a bundle be combined? (3) How can a
 bundle be empirically validated? and (4)
 How should the relationship between dif-
 ferent bundles of practices be specified?

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 HR BUNDLES AND MANUFACTURING PERFORMANCE 203

 Table 1. Innovative Human Resource Practices and Their Link

 to the Conditions for Economic Performance.

 Integration

 of HR

 Skill! Motivation/ with Production
 Innovative HR Practice Knowledge Commitment System, Strategy

 Work Systems Index

 Work Teams X X X

 Problem-Solving Groups (Employee Involvement
 or Quality Circle groups) X X X

 Employee Suggestions Made and Implemented X X X
 Job Rotation X X

 Decentralization of Quality-Related Tasks X X

 HRM Policies Index

 Recruitment and Hiring X X

 Contingent Compensation X X
 Status Differentiation X

 Training of New Employees X X

 Training of Experienced Employees X X

 Choosing a Bundle

 Researchers have developed many
 typologies for innovative HR practices (see
 a summary in Bailey 1992), categorized in
 terms of their impact on, for example,
 motivation or skill development or work
 structures. But given that any single prac-
 tice may play a multifaceted role in the
 overall human resource system, there is no
 clear conceptual basis for separating prac-
 tices affecting motivation from those af-
 fecting skill. For example, work teams rep-
 resent a restructuring of work organization
 that integrates human resources more fully
 into the production system, but they also
 develop worker skills and influence motiva-
 tion and commitment.

 In this study, the choices about the HR
 bundle began with the design of the ques-
 tionnaire. I developed questions based on
 extensive field work that revealed which
 HR policies differentiated mass and flex-
 ible production systems most clearly. Most
 questions were closely tied to shopfloor
 activities at the plant level, and therefore
 excluded many human resource policies at
 the corporate level. Furthermore, I se-
 lected for measurement only practices that

 could potentially be implemented in any
 plant in the international sample, thus ex-
 cluding practices that are exclusively asso-
 ciated with one particular company or coun-
 try. For example, practices such as teams,
 quality circles, and job rotation that are
 commonly found both injapan and in other
 countries are measured, but other prac-
 tices such as the nenko wage system, satei
 evaluation system, enterprise unions, or
 lifetime employment-considered more
 uniquelyJapanese-are not.

 For those practices that were measured,
 I then distinguish between those that affect
 the organization of work and the way work
 tasks are carried out (called Work Systems)
 and those that reflect firm-level human
 resource policies affecting employees at all
 levels (called HRM Policies). Osterman
 (1994) made a similar distinction between
 work organization practices and support-
 ing HRM practices. Table 1 indicates how
 the human resource practices in these two
 categories can be linked to some or all of
 the three conditions identified above as
 essential for economic performance:
 worker skill and knowledge; worker motiva-
 tion; and the integration of human resource
 practices with firm strategy.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 204 INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

 Combining Practices in a Bundle

 Implicit in the notion of a "bundle" is the
 idea that practices within bundles are inter-
 related and internally consistent, and that
 "more is better" with respect to the impact
 on performance, because of the overlap-
 ping and mutually reinforcing effect of
 multiple practices. While the combined
 impact of practices in a bundle could be
 specified in a variety of ways, two simple
 alternatives are an additive approach and a
 multiplicative approach. Choosing between
 these two approaches poses the question of
 whether the bundle as a whole should be
 viewed as equal to or greater than the sum
 of the parts.

 For both statistical and conceptual rea-
 sons, I use the additive approach to com-
 bining practices. Statistically, the additive
 combination of practices has the desirable
 property that the sum of normally distrib-
 uted variable scores is still normally distrib-
 uted, which is not true for the multiplica-
 tive product. Conceptually, a multiplica-
 tive relationship implies that if any single
 organizational practice is not present, the
 "bundle" score (and effect) should be zero.
 This is too rigid a criterion for a bundle,
 given that there is no precise theoretical
 basis for specifying which practices signify
 the "organizational logic." Although prac-
 tices in a bundle are expected to be interre-
 lated, the absence of a particular practice
 will not eradicate the effect of all other
 practices, but will weaken the net effect of
 the bundle. (Osterman [1994] takes this
 approach; see p. 176.)

 Validating a Bundle

 Three statistical procedures-each with
 advantages and disadvantages-can be used
 to validate a conceptually defined "bundle":
 reliability analysis, factor analysis, and clus-
 ter analysis. Reliability analysis can evalu-
 ate the intercorrelations among variables
 grouped together in a bundle-an advan-
 tage if the conceptual basis for categorizing
 practices is strong, and a disadvantage if it
 is not. Factor analysis is best suited to
 identifying the interrelationships among a
 set of items in a scale, all designed to mea-

 sure the same construct. It is less appropri-
 ate for assessing a "bundle," which is not a
 scale but an index (DeVellis 1991) consist-
 ing of a set of interrelated variables, each of
 which represents a different construct.
 Cluster analysis groups observations (in this
 case plants) that lie in close proximity in
 multidimensional space for a given set of
 variables. Since different clustering algo-
 rithms produce different clusters and all
 clustering algorithms will find clusters of
 some kind, it is important to test different
 cluster solutions and choose those that are
 most statistically distinct (Everitt 1980;
 Aldenderfer and Blashfield 1984; Ulrich
 and McKelvey 1990).

 Examining the Interaction
 Between Bundles

 The interaction between bundles can
 also be modeled as either an additive or
 multiplicative relationship. Here, I argue
 that the multiplicative assumption makes
 more sense, because the bundles are con-
 ceptualized as complementary. The "orga-
 nizational logic" argument claims that poli-
 cies to reduce buffers will only be effective
 in the presence of HR policies that develop
 problem-solving skills and motivation in
 the work force, and that either set of poli-
 cies alone will be ineffective. A multiplica-
 tive relationship among the three bundles
 of practices (Use of Buffers, Work Systems,
 and HRM Policies) will be captured in two
 ways here-with an overall Production Or-
 ganization Index (POI) that is the product
 of scores for the three bundles, and with
 two-way and three-way multiplicative inter-
 action terms. In addition, I will compare
 the multiplicative POI with an additive POI
 that averages the three indices to assess the
 assumption about interrelationships among
 bundles.

 Methodology

 Sample

 The International Assembly Plant Study
 was sponsored by the International Motor
 Vehicle Program (IMVP) at M.I.T.5 The

 5The International Motor Vehicle Program (IMVP)
 was a five-year research program, from 1985 to 1990,

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 HR BUNDLES AND MANUFACTURING PERFORMANCE 205

 author and John Krafcik contacted ninety
 assembly plants, representing 24 produc-
 ers in 16 countries, and approximately 60%
 of total assembly plant capacity worldwide.
 Survey responses were received from 70
 plants during 1989 and early 1990. These
 plants were divided into "volume" and
 "luxury" categories (the latter defined as
 plants producing automobiles with a 1989
 U.S. base price of over $23,000), on the
 assumption that the production systems for
 these product types might differ substan-
 tially. This paper includes data from the 62
 volume plants, whose surveys were more
 complete.

 Table 2 lists the distribution of the 62
 volume plants by regional category. The
 proportion of plants in different regions
 corresponds closely to the proportion of
 worldwide production volume associated
 with those regions, with a slight
 underrepresentation ofJapanese plants in
 Japan and overrepresentation of New En-
 trant and Australian plants, whose volume
 is low. Plants were chosen to achieve a
 balanced distribution across regions and
 companies, and to reflect a range of perfor-
 mance within each participating company,
 minimizing the potential for selectivity bias.
 Table 3 lists the dependent, independent,
 and control variables, with descriptive sta-
 tistics.

 Questionnaire Administration
 and Data Collection

 Questionnaires were sent to a contact
 person, often the plant manager, who dis-
 tributed different sections to the appropri-
 ate departmental manager or staff group.
 Plants and companies were guaranteed com-
 plete confidentiality and, in return for their
 participation, received a feedback report
 comparing their responses with mean scores
 for different regions. All 90 plants that
 were contacted were visited by one of the
 researchers between 1987 and 1990. Early
 visits provided the field observations that

 sponsored by virtually every automotive company in
 the world. IMVP continues now as one of the Sloan
 Foundation-funded centers for the study of indus-
 trial competitiveness.

 Table 2. Composition of the

 Volume Assembly Plant Sample.

 Regional Category n

 Japan (J/J) 8

 Japanese-Parent Plants in North America

 (J/NA) 4

 U.S.-Parent Plants in North America

 (US/NA) 14

 Europe (All/E) 19

 New Entrants, Including Korea, Taiwan,

 Mexico, and Brazil (All/NE) 11

 Australia (All/Aus) 6

 TOTAL 62

 Source: International Assembly Plant Study.

 became the foundation of the assembly
 plant questionnaire. Some of these plants
 were used to pilot the questionnaire as well.
 For the 70 plants that returned a question-
 naire, the visit often followed receipt of the
 questionnaire, providing an opportunity to
 fill in missing data, clarify responses that
 were unclear or not internally consistent,
 and carry out interviews to aid the later
 interpretation of data analyses. When the
 visit preceded receipt of a questionnaire,
 this same follow-up process to improve data
 accuracy was carried out via telephone and
 fax.

 Measures-Dependent Variables

 Labor productivity. Labor productivity is
 defined as the hours of actual working ef-
 fort required to build a vehicle at a given
 assembly plant, adjusted for comparability
 across plants by a methodology developed
 by Krafcik (1988) .6 The productivity meth-
 odology focuses on a set of standard activi-
 ties that are common across all plants in the
 survey, to control for differences in vertical

 6Although it can be advantageous to use a broader
 measure of productivity that includes the full range of
 inputs to the production process (capital, labor, ma-
 terials and energy) -Total Factor Productivity (Hayes
 and Clark 1985)-it can be very difficult to get these
 data and to ensure their comparability across coun-
 tries. Labor productivity is both easier to measure
 and the most relevant measure for a study that exam-
 ines how human and technical capabilities are orga-
 nized.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 206 INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

 Table 3. Descriptive Statistics: Dependent and Independent Variables.

 (n = 62 Except for Quality, for Which n = 46)

 Variable Name Mean S.D. Description

 Dependent Variables
 Productivity 33.1 12.4 Labor productivity, defined as hours of
 actual effort required to build a vehicle
 Quality 78.4 31.2 Consumer-perceived quality, defined as

 defects per 100 vehicles, from J.D. Power

 Independent Variables

 Production Organization Index 45.9 20 Index capturing "organizational logic" of
 the production system; simple average of
 the three component indices listed below

 Use of Buffers 56.1 23.9 The degree to which production

 operations are buffered against potential
 disruptions

 Work Systems 31.9 23.3 Work structures and policies that govern

 shop floor production activity

 HRM Policies 47.3 26.0 Organization-wide HR policies that affect

 employee commitment and motivation

 Total Automation 24.0 14.0 Overall automation stock, defined as % of
 direct production steps that are automated

 Production Scale 904.4 639.9 Average number of vehicles built during a

 standard, non-overtime day

 Model Mix Complexity 30.9 21.3 Mix of different platforms and models at a

 plant

 Parts Complexity 56.5 23.5 Variation in the number of wire harnesses,

 exterior colors, engine/transmission
 combinations; number of assembly area
 parts; percentage of common parts across
 vehicles; and number of suppliers of
 assembly area parts

 Product Design Age 4.6 3.2 Weighted average number of years since a

 major model introduction for each product

 Source: International Assembly Plant Study.

 integration. Since a large vehicle requires
 more effort to assemble than a small ve-
 hicle, adjustments are made to standardize
 for vehicle size. Adjustments are also made
 to standardize for the number of welds,
 which differs across designs and therefore
 affects headcount in the body shop.

 Labor hours are also adjusted for absen-
 teeism, for two reasons: (1) the study fo-
 cuses on the labor effort involved in build-
 ing vehicles (not total labor costs) and does
 not include the additional employees hired
 to cover absenteeism; and (2) absenteeism
 rates may be influenced significantly by
 national and social welfare policies that are
 not under the control of plant manage-
 ment. This is a conservative adjustment,
 given that absenteeism is lowest in the coun-

 try with plants having the highest produc-
 tivity (Japan), moderate in the United
 States, where productivity is intermediate,
 and highest in countries whose productiv-
 ity is worst in the sample (various European
 and newly industrialized countries).

 Quality. The quality measure is derived
 from the 1989 survey of new car buyers in
 the United States, carried out byJ. D. Power.
 The variable measures the number of de-
 fects per 100 vehicles, and is adjusted to
 reflect only those defects that an assembly
 plant can affect, that is, omitting defects
 related to the engine or transmission, while
 emphasizing defects related to the fit and
 finish of body panels, paint quality, and the
 integrity of electrical connections (Krafcik
 1988).

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 HR BUNDLES AND MANUFACTURING PERFORMANCE 207

 Measures-Independent Variables

 Production organization measures. To
 operationalize the "organizational logic"
 of flexible and mass production systems, I
 developed three component indices-Use
 of Buffers, Work Systems, HRM Policies-
 and an overall Production Organization
 Index. The variables included in these
 indices reflect both choices about what to
 include in the assembly plant questionnaire
 and statistical tests aimed at boosting the
 internal reliability of each index.

 Each of the three component indices is
 composed of multiple variables, described
 below. All variables are standardized by
 conversion to z-scores before being addi-
 tively combined to form indices. Each vari-
 able in an index receives equal weight,
 because I felt that there was no clear con-
 ceptual basis for assigning differential
 weights. For ease of interpretation, I apply
 a linear transformation to the summed z-
 scores for each component index, such
 that 0 is the plant with the lowest score in
 the sample and 100 is the plant with the
 highest score. The validation of these indi-
 ces is described in the next section.

 (i) Use of Buffers. This index measures
 a set of production practices that are in-
 dicative of overall production philosophy
 with respect to buffers (for example, in-
 coming and work-in-process inventory),
 with a low score signifying a "buffered"
 system and a high score signifying a "lean"
 system. It consists of three items:

 - the space (in square feet) dedicated to
 final assembly repair, as a percentage of
 total assembly area square footage.

 - the average number of vehicles held in
 the work-in-process buffer between the
 paint and assembly areas, as a percentage
 of one shift production.

 - the average level of inventory stocks, in
 days for a sample of eight key parts,
 weighted by the cost of each part.

 (ii) Work Systems. This index captures
 how work is organized, in terms of both
 formal work structures and the allocation
 of work responsibilities, and the participa-
 tion of employees in production-related
 problem-solving activity. A low score for
 this variable indicates a work system with a

 narrow division of labor that is "specializ-
 ing" in orientation, and a high score indi-
 cates a "multiskilling" orientation. It con-
 sists of six items:

 - the percentage of the work force in-

 volved in formal work teams.

 - the percentage of the work force in-
 volved in employee involvement groups.

 - the number of production-related sug-

 gestions received per employee.

 - the percentage of production-related

 suggestions implemented.

 - the extent of job rotation within and
 across teams (O = no job rotation, 1 =
 infrequent rotation within teams, 2 =
 frequent rotation within teams, 3 = fre-
 quent rotation within teams and across
 teams of the same department, 4 = fre-
 quent rotation within teams, across
 teams, and across departments).

 - the degree to which production workers
 carry out quality tasks (O = functional
 specialists responsible for all quality re-
 sponsibilities; 1, 2, 3, 4 = production
 workers responsible for 1, 2, 3, or 4 of
 the following tasks: inspection of in-
 coming parts, work-in-process, finished
 products; gathering Statistical Process
 Control data).

 (iii) HRM Policies. This index measures
 a set of policies that affects the "psychologi-
 cal contract" between the employee and
 the organization, and hence employee
 motivation and commitment. A low score
 for this variable indicates a "low commit-
 ment" set of HRM policies and a high score
 indicates "high commitment" policies. It
 consists of four items:

 - the hiring criteria used to select employ-
 ees in three categories: production
 workers, first line supervisors, and engi-
 neers (the sum of rankings of the impor-
 tance of various hiring criteria for these
 three groups of employees, with low
 scores for criteria that emphasize the fit
 between an applicant's existing skills
 and job requirements ["previous expe-
 rience in a similarjob"] and high scores
 for criteria that emphasize openness to
 learning and interpersonal skills ["a will-
 ingness to learn new skills" and "ability
 to work with others"]).

 - the extent to which the compensation

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 208 INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

 system is contingent on performance (0
 = no contingent compensation; I = com-
 pensation contingent on corporate
 performance; 2= compensation contin-
 gent on plant performance, for manag-
 ers only; 3 = compensation contingent
 on plant performance or skills acquired,
 production employees only; and 4 = com-
 pensation contingent on plant perfor-
 mance, all employees).

 - the extent to which status barriers be-
 tween managers and workers are present
 (0 = no implementation of policies that
 break down status barriers and 1, 2, 3, 4
 = implementation of 1, 2, 3, or 4 of these
 policies: common uniform, common
 cafeteria, common parking, no ties).

 - the level of training provided to newly
 hired production workers, supervisors,
 and engineers in the first six months of
 employment (0 = up to one week of
 training for newly hired production
 workers, first line supervisors, and engi-
 neers; 1 = one to two weeks of training
 for newly hired employees in all three
 groups; 2 = two to four weeks of training
 for newly hired employees in all three
 groups; and 3 = over four weeks of
 training for newly hired employees in
 all three groups).

 - the level of ongoing training provided
 to experienced production workers, su-
 pervisors, and engineers (0 = 0-20 hours
 of training for experienced production
 workers, first line supervisors, and engi-
 neers per year; 1= 21-40 hours of train-
 ing per year for all 3 groups; 2 = 41-80
 hours of training per year; and 3 = over
 80 hours of training per year).

 (iv) Production Organization Index
 (POI). This index is constructed, as de-
 scribed above, in both an additive form, as
 a simple average of the three component
 indices, and a multiplicative form, as the
 product of component indices. For both
 forms, a low POI score indicates a tradi-
 tional mass production system and a high
 POI score indicates a flexible production
 system.

 Measures-Control Variables

 Total automation. The main technology
 variable, the automated percentage of di-
 rect production steps, captures the level of

 both flexible and fixed automation.7 For
 each functional area, a proxy measure for
 direct production activities was developed,
 as described in Table 4. Then a weighted
 average level of automation for the plant
 was calculated, based on the amount of
 direct labor each functional area requires
 in an average unautomated plant. Since
 the index measures the percentage of total
 direct production steps that are automated,
 it is expected to correlate with the produc-
 tivity measure, which includes the labor
 hours required for non-automated direct
 production steps as well as indirect and
 salaried hours.

 Plant scale. This variable is defined as the
 average number of vehicles built during a
 standard, non-overtime day, adjusted for
 capacity utilization. Overtime is not in-
 cluded in either production levels or hours
 worked, which adjusts for overcapacity situ-
 ations. In undercapacity situations, I dis-
 tinguished between short-term and long-
 term undercapacity. When undercapacity
 was short-term, I asked for data from the
 most recent period of full capacity opera-
 tion. When undercapacity was long-term, I
 assumed that plants would have been able
 to adjust labor inputs to that capacity level
 and regarded it as the effective capacity of
 the plant.

 Model mix complexity. This measure is
 based on the mix of different products and
 product variants produced in the plant. It
 includes the number of distinct platforms,
 models, body styles, drive train configura-
 tions (front-wheel versus rear-wheel drive),
 and export variations (right-hand versus

 7Another technology variable, the Robotic Index,
 measures the number of weld, paint, and assembly
 robots (defined as programmable with at least three
 axes of motion) used in the plant, adjusted for plant
 scale. This measure is a better proxy for the quality
 and vintage of the capital equipment in a plant than
 the "total automation" variable, since the robots, by
 definition, are flexible rather than fixed automation
 and most investment in robotics is relatively recent.
 Since both technology variables produced similar
 results when used separately in regression analyses, I
 only report results using "total automation," which is
 the more comprehensive of the two measures.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 HR BUNDLES AND MANUFACTURING PERFORMANCE 209

 Table 4. Measurement of Automated Percentage of Direct Production Steps.

 Functional Area Proxy Measure of Automated Production Steps

 Body Welding Percentage of spot and seam welds applied by automation
 Paint: Joint Sealing Percentage of total length of joint sealer applied by automation
 Paint: Primer/Color Percentage of total square inches of paint applied by automation
 Assembly Number of automated assembly tasks, weighted by labor content

 left-hand steering), weighted according to
 a scheme developed by Krafcik (1988). The
 measure includes a correction factor to
 account for the number of assembly lines
 and body shops in the plant. For instance,
 a plant with two parallel assembly lines
 producing a single model on each is given
 the same model mix score as that of an-
 other plant that builds one model with one
 assembly line. The measure is scaled to
 yield a score from 0 to 100, where 0 repre-
 sents the plant with the least model mix
 complexity and 100 the plant with the most
 model mix complexity.

 Parts complexity. This measure is com-
 piled from two subgroups of variables. The
 first subgroup includes three measures of
 parts or component variation-the num-
 ber of engine/transmission combinations,
 wire harnesses, and exterior paint colors-
 that affect the sequencing of vehicles, the
 variety of required sub-assemblies, and
 material and parts flow through the system.
 The second subgroup includes three mea-
 sures-the number of total parts to the
 assembly area, the percentage of common
 parts across models, and the number of
 suppliers to the assembly area-that affect
 both the logistics of material and parts flow
 and the administrative/coordination re-
 quirements for dealing with suppliers. All
 these variables are scored on a 1-6 scale,
 where 1 is the lowest and 6 the highest
 complexity level. They are additively com-
 bined and the resulting index is rescaled
 from 0 to 100, as above.

 Product design age. This variable is de-
 fined as the weighted average number of
 years since a major model change introduc-
 tion for each of the products currently
 being built at each plant. This measure is a
 partial proxy for manufacturability in the

 assembly area, under the assumption that
 products designed more recently are more
 likely than older products to have been
 conceived with ease of assembly in mind.8

 Model Specification

 For the regression analyses, I chose to
 log all dependent and independent vari-
 ables, conforming to the common practice
 of using a Cobb-Douglas specification for
 the production function. Cobb-Douglas is
 attractive because it generates coefficients
 and test statistics that are easy to interpret
 and its assumption of the substitutability of
 labor and capital (that is, that different
 mixes of labor and capital, but neither fac-
 tor exclusively, can achieve the same out-
 put quantity) is a good fit to the auto assem-
 bly plant context.

 These data do not support the use of the
 precise Cobb-Douglas specification, how-
 ever, primarily because labor hours, the
 usual measure of labor inputs in Cobb-
 Douglas, is an integral part of the left-hand-
 side productivity measure. The productiv-

 8This assumption must be qualified. Newer de-
 signs may capture a time trend toward more
 manufacturable designs across companies, but given
 wide differences in product development capabilities
 (Clark and Fujimoto 1991), two designs of the same
 age across different companies are not likely to be
 equally manufacturable. It is more plausible that a
 company with a rapid product development cycle
 (whose products will be younger, on average) achieves
 better coordination between design and manufactur-
 ing-and thus more manufacturable designs-than
 companies with long development cycles. While older
 designs, by moving down the learning curve, could be
 associated with fewer hours per car, most evidence
 suggests that the benefits of more manufacturable
 designs outweigh learning curve gains (Womack,
 Jones, and Roos 1990).

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 210 INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

 ity measure in most Cobb-Douglas specifi-
 cations is a financial metric-the ratio of
 outputs to inputs where both are expressed
 in dollars-whereas here productivity is the
 physical ratio of inputs to outputs (hours of
 effort and vehicles built). But the central
 assumption of Cobb-Douglas-that the pro-
 duction function is best modeled as a mul-
 tiplicative relationship among interrelated
 inputs-is embodied in this specification.
 There is also precedent for including a
 variable that affects how capital or labor
 inputs are utilized. The constant elasticity
 of substitution (CES) model (of which
 Cobb-Douglas is a specific case) includes
 an "efficiency" parameter that affects both
 inputs. Industrial relations researchers
 commonly include factors that affect labor
 inputs (for example, unionization) but not
 capital (Brown and Medoff 1978; Clark
 1980). The production organization indi-
 ces will play this role here.

 Thus the "base case" regression equa-
 tions, including all control variables but
 not the production organization indices,
 will be:

 (1) Log (Productivity) =

 Log Total Automation + Log Product
 Design Age + Log Scale + Log Model
 Mix Complexity + Log Parts Complexity

 and

 (2) Log (Quality) =

 Log Total Automation + Log Product
 Design Age + Log Scale + Log Model
 Mix Complexity + Log Parts Complexity

 Logged versions of the three component
 indices and the overall Production Organi-
 zation index will be added, one at a time, to
 see what they contribute to explaining per-
 formance beyond the "base case" variables.
 Finally, interaction effects among the three
 component indices will be considered, first
 by adding all two-way interaction terms,
 then by adding the three-way interaction
 term. The "base case" equation for testing
 the interaction terms will consist of the
 control variables plus all the component
 indices. The model produces similar re-
 sults with different functional forms, such
 as all unlogged variables.

 One final data transformation is war-
 ranted. Five plants in the sample have
 missing values for some variables in the
 Work Systems and HRM Policies indices,
 but have complete data for all other vari-
 ables. Preserving degrees of freedom is
 crucial for these analyses, given the high
 number of variables to be entered in the
 regression equation and the relatively small
 sample size. Therefore, following Maddala
 (1977), I substitute the sample mean for
 the two missing indices for these plants
 (8% of the sample) so they are not ex-
 cluded from the regression analyses.

 Empirical Results:

 Validating the Bundling of Practices

 Reliability Tests

 Reliability tests for the three component
 indices reveal a significant intercorrelation
 among the included variables. The
 Cronbach's standardized alpha score is 0.63
 for the Use of Buffers index, 0.70 for the
 HRM Policies index, and 0.81 for the Work
 Systems index. The three component indi-
 ces are also highly intercorrelated-for Use
 of Buffers and Work Systems, r = 0.62; for
 the Use of Buffers and HRM Policies, r =
 0.48; and for Work Systems and HRM Poli-
 cies, r = 0.62. For the Production Organiza-
 tion Index, the Cronbach's standardized
 alpha is 0.80.

 Factor Analysis

 When all variables making up the three
 component indices were factor analyzed,
 strong factors did emerge, but each factor
 combined variables involving Buffers with
 some Work Systems or HRM Policy vari-
 ables in ways that were not readily inter-
 pretable. As a result, these factors were not
 used, since the indices can be more readily
 justified conceptually and are validated by
 the other two methods.

 Cluster Analysis

 The final validation step involved the
 examination of clusters generated from
 values of the three component indices.
 Analyses comparing various clustering

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 HR BUNDLES AND MANUFACTURING PERFORMANCE 211

 Table 5. Means of Production Organization Variables and Indices Across Clusters of Plants.

 Variable (n = 57) (n = 29) (n = 14) (n = 14) F

 Sample MassProd Transition FlexProd

 Repair Area (sq. feet as % of assembly area) 10.4% 13.7% 9.1% 4.8% 15.8***
 Paint-Assembly Buffer (% of 1-shift production) 23.3% 29.7% 18.7% 14.6% 3.9**
 Inventory Level (days' supply for 8 parts) 2.1 2.8 2.1 0.63 18.7***
 % Work Force in Teams 22.4% 5.0% 10.4% 70.2% 38.6***
 % Work Force in EI, QC Groups 32.5% 16.5% 20.9% 77.4% 17.8***
 Suggestions per Employee 9.2 0.24 0.33 36.5 15.3***
 % Suggestions Implemented 36.3% 25.5% 23.8% 72.0% 16.8***
 Job Rotation Index (0 = none; 4 = extensive) 1.8 1.2 1.9 3.0 20.8***
 Quality Control at Shop Floor
 (0 = none; 4 = extensive) 3.1 2.6 2.9 4.5 2.8*
 Hiring Criteria (Low = match past experience
 to job; High = interpersonal skills, willingness
 to learn new skills) 35.1 32.7 35.8 39.4 12.7***
 Training New Hires (0 = Low; 3 = High) 1.6 1.0 1.9 2.4 13.1*
 Training Experienced Employees (0 = Low;
 3 = High) 1.4 0.9 1.6 2.1 7.9***
 Contingent Compensation (0 = none; 4 = based
 on plant performance) 1.6 0.72 2.2 3.0 20.0***
 Status Differentiation (0 = extensive; 4 = little) 1.9 1.1 2.0 3.4 17.7***

 Use of Buffers Index 58.7 44.7 62.7 83.5 28.3***
 Work Systems Index 32.0 18.8 24.3 66.7 59.4***
 HRM Policies Index 47.3 26.5 55.9 81.8 73.4***

 *Statistically significant at the .10 level; **at the .05 level; ***at the .01 level.
 Source: International Assembly Plant Study.

 methods (not reported here) showed that
 the Euclidean measure for distance between
 cluster centroids and the Within Group
 Average method of forming clusters pro-
 duced the most statistically distinct clus-
 ters. These methods were used to derive
 two-, three-, and four-cluster solutions.
 Means from the three-cluster solution are
 presented here, since they can be readily
 interpreted. Clusters 1 and 3, which repre-
 sent the endpoints of the production orga-
 nization continuum, are labeled "MassProd"
 and "FlexProd," respectively, and Cluster 2
 is regarded as an intermediate group, here
 labeled "Transition."

 Table 5 contains means across these three
 clusters for all of the variables making up
 the Production Organization Index and
 then for each component index. These
 means are based on the original,
 unstandardized scale for each variable, for
 easier interpretability. All means differ

 substantially across clusters, for both the
 individual variables and all three compo-
 nent indices, and nearly all the F-tests are
 statistically significant at the .01 level.

 Empirical Results: Production
 Organization and Manufacturing

 Performance

 Correlations

 The simple correlations between the pro-
 duction organization indices and perfor-
 mance are relatively high, and similar. For
 Use of Buffers, Work Systems, and HRM
 Policies, the correlations with productivity
 are, respectively, r = -.49, r =-.50, and r =
 -.50, with p < .01 for all three. The corre-
 sponding correlations with quality are r =
 - .49, r = -.43, and r = -.67, again with p <
 .01. The correlationswith performance are
 negative because of the way outcomes are
 measured lower hours per vehicle and

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 212 INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

 Table 6. Production Organization Indices Regressed on Log Labor Productivity.

 (Standard Errors in Parentheses)

 Variable Eq. I Eq. 2 Eq. 3 Eq. 4 E, q. 5 E q. 6

 Log Total Automation -0.14** -0.15*** -0.15*** -0.14** -0.14** -0.14**

 (.056) (.055) (.054) (.054) (.052) (.052)
 Log Scale -0.18** -0.14* -0.16** -0.18** -0.13* -0.15**
 (.076) (.078) (.074) (.074) (.072) (.072)

 Log Model Mix -0.07 -0.05 -0.07 -0.08 -0.06 -0.05
 Complexity (.053) (.053) (.052) (.052) (.049) (.050)
 Log Parts 0.18** 0.14 0.18** 0.19** 0.16* 0.16*
 Complexity (.091) (.091) (.088) (.088) (.085) (.085)
 Log Product 0.19** 0.15* 0.16** 0.15** 0.10 0.09
 Design Age (.073) (.075) (.072) (.075) (.073) (.077)
 Log Use -0.09*
 of Buffers (.048)
 Log Work -0.09**
 Systems (.043)
 Log HRM -0.08*
 Policies (0.04)
 Log Production
 Organization _ -0.07***
 (multiplicative) (.021)

 Log Production
 Organization 02- 9* **
 (additive) (.096)

 Adjusted R 2 0.483 0.505 0.513 0.506 0.557 0.548
 F for Equation 12.4*** 11.4*** 11.7*** 11.4*** 13.3*** 13.3***
 F for R2 Change
 from "Base Case"
 (Eq. 1) 3.5* 4.6** 3.6* 9.0*** 9.0***

 *Statistically significant at the .10 level; **at the .05 level; ***at the .01 level.

 lower defects per 100 vehicles indicate bet-
 ter productivity and better quality. It is
 important to note that these correlations
 are in all cases higher than the correlations
 between each individual variable in the
 three indices and the two performance
 measures. This result confirms the value of
 combining individual practices into
 bundles.

 Cluster Means

 Means of the clusters defined above show
 statistically significant differences for both
 productivity and quality. Productivity fig-
 ures for the MassProd, Transition, and
 FlexProd clusters are, respectively, 36.6,
 33.4, and 20.9 hours per vehicle. The one-
 way analysis of variance has an F-statistic of

 11.2 and is significant at the 99% confi-
 dence level. When using t-tests to compare
 each pair of cluster means, all but one
 (between the MassProd and Transition
 means) are statistically significant. Quality
 for these same clusters is 94.1, 73.9, and
 49.5 defects per 100 vehicles, respectively.
 The F-statistic of 22.4 is significant at the
 99% confidence level, as are all t-tests for
 cluster means.

 Thus, clusters defined in terms of the
 three component indices do reveal large
 differentials in both productivity and qual-
 ity between the MassProd and FlexProd
 clusters. The Transition cluster has nearly
 the same productivity mean as the MassProd
 cluster but substantially better quality. It
 therefore appears that quality improvement
 may precede productivity improvement for

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 HR BUNDLES AND MANUFACTURING PERFORMANCE 213

 plants making a transition to flexible pro-
 duction.

 Table 7. Production Organization Interaction
 Terms Regressed on Log Labor Productivity.

 (Standard Errors in Parentheses)

 Productivity Regressions

 Variable Eq. 1 Eq. 2 Eq. 3

 Table 6 contains the first hierarchical
 regression analysis. Equation 1 contains
 the "base case" variables regressed on log
 labor productivity. All of the control vari-
 ables are statistically significant except for
 model mix complexity. As expected, scale
 and automation have negative signs, that is,
 the higher the scale of production and
 level of automation, the lower the hours
 per vehicle. Product design age and parts
 complexity have positive signs, signifying
 that an older design and more complexity
 are linked to more hours per vehicle.

 Equations 2, 3, and 4 add the three indi-
 ces of the production organization index,
 one at a time, to the "base case" variables.
 All three indices are statistically significant.
 Furthermore, they all have approximately
 the same effect size, with standardized co-
 efficients (not shown) ranging from -.186
 to -.196. In all three equations, the ad-
 justed R2 is higher than the "base case" and
 the increase is statistically significant. Thus
 each index has the hypothesized relation-
 ship to productivity-"leaner" buffers, more
 multiskilling work systems, and more "high
 commitment" HR policies are each associ-
 ated with fewer hours per vehicle.

 Equation 5 then adds the full Production
 Organization Index (POI), in its multipli-
 cative form, to the base case variables. The
 index is statistically significant at the 99%
 confidence level, with a standardized coef-
 ficient of -.32 (not shown), substantially
 higher than coefficients for the three sepa-
 rate indices. The increase in R2 is also a
 statistically significant change, suggesting
 substantial interaction effects. Results when
 using the additive form of the POI, in equa-
 tion 6, are virtually identical, providing
 little basis for supporting one form over the
 other.

 Interaction effects are tested in Table 7.
 Equation 1 provides the base case, with all
 control variables and all three component
 indices. Equation 2 adds the two-way inter-
 action terms (Buffers x WorkSys; Buffers x

 Log Total -0.15*** -0.11** -0.11**
 Automation (.053) (.051) (.048)
 Log Scale -0.29* -0.17** -0.11 **
 (.173) (.072) (.070)

 Log Model Mix -0.55 -0.07 -0.04
 Complexity (.051) (.049) (.047)
 Log Parts 0.15* 0.22** 0.15*
 Complexity (.088) (.087) (.084)
 Log Product 0.09 0.10 0.10
 Design Age (.076) (.074) (.069)
 Log Use of -0.09* -0.09 -0.03
 Buffers (.047) (.069) (.067)
 Log Work Systems -0.06 -0.02 -0.01

 (.045) (.047) (.044)

 Log HRM Policies -0.08* -0.05 -0.03

 (.045) (.051) (.056)

 LBuffers x LWorkSys - -0.18** -0.02

 (.076) (.089)
 LBuffers x LHRM -0.01 -0.31*
 Policies (.144) (.169)
 LWorkSys x LHRM -0.13* 0.141
 Policies (.076) (.118)
 LBuffers x LWorkSys - -0.64***
 x LHRM Policies (.221)

 Adjusted R2 0.543 0.597 0.649
 F for Equation 10.0*** 9.2*** 10.4***
 F for R2 change from
 base case (Eq. 1) 3.4** 5.0***

 *Statistically significant at the .10 level; **at the

 .05 level; ***at the .01 level.

 HRM; WorkSys x HRM), and equation 3
 adds the three-way interaction term (Buff-
 ers x WorkSys x HRM).

 Multiplicative interaction terms are of-
 ten criticized because they are so highly
 correlated with the component variables,
 creating problems of multicollinearity that
 can inflate standard errors (Blalock 1979).
 This is a particular problem with a small
 sample size and limited degrees of free-
 dom. To deal with this problem, Jaccard,
 Turrisi, and Wan (1990) recommended a
 linear transformation known as "center-
 ing," in which the mean value for a variable
 is subtracted from each score. Centering
 reduces multicollinearity without chang-

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 214 INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

 ing the structural relationship among the
 variables. Regression results, including f-
 tests for the overall equation and for incre-
 mental R-squared changes, are unchanged
 when centering is used. Thus centering
 increases the likelihood that a statistically
 significant interaction effect can be identi-
 fied, because of the reduction in measure-
 ment error, without the risk associated with
 other procedures for reducing multicollin-
 earity that interaction effects will be artifi-
 cially inflated (Cronbach 1987).9

 In equation 2, the Buffers x WorkSys
 interaction term and the WorkSys x HRM
 interaction term are both statistically sig-
 nificant, while the Buffers x HRM term is
 not. One possible explanation for this
 latter result is the high correlation (r = .72)
 with the Use of Buffers index. Coefficients
 for the individual indices are no longer
 statistically significant. All three interac-
 tion terms have the expected negative sign,
 and the adjusted R2 is .597. Finally, there is
 a statistically significant increase in R2 from
 the "base case" of equation 1. Thus the two-
 way interaction terms do explain variance
 in productivity beyond that captured by the
 three individual indices.

 The three-way interaction term is an even
 better predictor of productivity. In equa-
 tion 3, this interaction term (Buffers x
 WorkSys x HRM) is statistically significant
 at the 99% confidence interval, and the
 adjusted R2 increases to .649. None of the
 individual indices have statistically signifi-
 cant coefficients, and of the three two-way
 interaction terms, only Buffers x HRM is
 statistically significant-a striking finding,
 since this interaction term was the only one
 that was not significant in equation 2. 10 The

 9Without centering, nine of the twelve correla-
 tions between the three indices and the four interac-
 tion terms are greater than 0.5, and three correla-
 tions are greater than 0.8. After centering, only one
 of the twelve correlations is greater than 0.5.

 10One possible explanation is that the three-way
 interaction term identifies plants with high scores on
 Use of Buffers and HRM Policies (as well as on Work
 Systems) while the two-way interaction term may iden-
 tify plants with high scores on Use of Buffers (that is,
 plants that have reduced buffers considerably) but
 low scores on HRM Policies. Plants in this latter

 increase in R2 from equation 1 is statisti-
 cally significant, as noted in the table. Fur-
 thermore, the increase from equation 2 is
 also statistically significant, with an F-statis-
 tic of 8.4 (p = .005).

 Quality Regressions

 Tables 8 and 9 show the parallel analyses
 for quality. In Table 8, the base case, in
 equation 1, has a very low adjusted R2 of .06,
 and none of the independent variables (or
 the equation overall) is statistically signifi-
 cant. Particularly noteworthy, in compari-
 son with the productivity base case, is that
 the automation coefficient is very close to
 zero. Equation 2, which adds the Use of
 Buffers index, is little different, since nei-
 ther the index nor the change in R2 is
 statistically significant. This result is sur-
 prising, given the expectation that low
 buffer, Just-in-Time systems are strongly
 associated with high quality levels. In equa-
 tions (3) and (4), however, the two other
 indices related to production organization
 are statistically significant. Equation 3
 contains the Work Systems index, signifi-
 cant at the 95% confidence level, with an
 adjusted R2 of .149, and in equation 4 the
 HRM Policies index is significant at the
 99% confidence level and the adjusted R2
 rises to .24. In both cases, the increase in R2
 over the base case is statistically significant.
 The control variables do not change appre-
 ciably in any of these equations.

 Equation 5 reveals that, as with produc-
 tivity, the overall Production Organization
 Index (in its multiplicative form) is associ-
 ated with a more substantial increase in R2
 over the base case than the individual com-
 ponent indices. The adjusted R2 increases
 to .293, and the standardized coefficient
 for the overall index (not in the table) of
 -.57 is higher than that for Work Systems

 group, which would have moved toward "leaner" buff-
 ers without changing HR practices, possibly do have
 significantly better productivity than plants with low
 scores for both indices. In the equation that only
 includes the two-way interaction terms, the combina-
 tion of these two different statistical relationships
 might have increased the standard error of the coef-
 ficient until it was not significant.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 HR BUNDLES AND MANUFACTURING PERFORMANCE 215

 Table 8. Production Organization Indices Regressed on Log Quality.

 (Standard Errors in Parentheses)

 Variable Eq. 1 Eq. 2 Eq. 3 Eq. 4 Eq. 5 Eq. 6

 Log Total Automation 0.01 -0.02 0.01 0.03 0.01 0.02
 (.095) (.099) (.091) (.086) (.084) (.075)

 Log Scale -0.14 -0.10 -0.11 -0.16 -0.07 -0.06

 (.120) (.126) (.116) (.108) (.106) (.095)

 Log Model Mix Complexity 0.05 0.09 0.06 0.04 0.09 0.11

 (.085) (.089) (.081) (.077) (.074) (.067)

 Log Parts Complexity 0.02 -0.06 0.03 -0.02 -0.08 -0.08

 (.151) (.154) (.144) (.136) (.132) (.119)

 Log Product Design Age 0.18 0.08 0.12 0.06 -0.04 -0.10

 (.130) (.151) (.126) (.122) (.127) (.115)

 Log Use of Buffers -0.11

 (.094)

 Log Work Systems -0.15 * *
 (.065)

 Log HRM Policies -0.20***

 (.062)

 Log Production Organization -0.12***
 (multiplicative) (.032)
 Log Production Organization - -0.65***
 (additive) (.125)

 Adjusted R2 0.064 0.075 0.149 0.241 0.293 0.429
 F for Equation 1.6 1.6 2.3** 3.4*** 4.1*** 6.6***
 F for R2 change from "base case" (Eq. 1) 1.5 5.0** 10.3*** 14.0*** 26.6***

 *Statistically significant at the .10 level; **at the .05 level; ***at the .01 level.

 (-.33) and HRM Policies (-.46). The F-
 statistic for the increase in R2, compared to
 the "base case," is also statistically signifi-
 cant. For quality, however, using the addi-
 tive form of the Production Organization
 Index (in equation 6) results in a much
 larger increase in adjusted R2 (.429) and a
 much larger standardized coefficient (.73).
 This result calls into question the assump-
 tion that the relationship among the com-
 ponent indices is best modeled as multipli-
 cative rather than additive.

 In tests of interaction terms (Table 9),
 the results for quality differ from those for
 productivity. Equation 1 again provides
 the base case with all three indices but no
 interaction terms. In equation 2, which
 includes all the two-way interaction terms,
 Buffers x WorkSys is significant with a nega-
 tive sign, while Buffers x HRM is significant
 with a positive sign; the remaining WorkSys
 x HRM interaction term is not statistically

 significant. Of the individual component
 indices, both Use of Buffers and HRM Poli-
 cies coefficients are statistically significant,
 both with a negative sign. The overall
 adjusted RI is .456, and the increase in RI
 from equation 1 is statistically significant.
 Equation 3 shows very similar results be-
 cause, unlike for productivity, the three-
 way interaction term is not statistically sig-
 nificant, and the coefficients for the other
 variables change relatively little.

 These results suggest that the relation-
 ship of the Use of Buffers index to quality is
 complex. In equations 6 and 7, the index
 alone and the Buffers x WorkSys interac-
 tion term are significant with negative coef-
 ficients, as expected. But the positive coef-
 ficient for the Buffers x HRM interaction
 term is counter to expectations, indicating
 that when all other main effects and inter-
 action effects are held constant, plants with
 a high interaction score for these indices

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 216 INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

 Table 9. Production Organization Interaction

 Terms Regressed on Log Quality.
 (Standard Errors in Parentheses)

 Variable Eq. 1 Eq. 2 Eq. 3

 Log Total -0.11 -0.04 -0.05
 Automation (.087) (.079) (.079)
 Log Scale -0.19 -0.14 -0.17

 (.255) (.099) (.104)

 Log Model Mix 0.81 0.03 0.01
 Complexity (.078) (.069) (.073)
 Log Parts -0.07 0.17 0.20
 Complexity (.135) (.134) (.141)
 Log Product -0.07 -0.22 -0.23
 Design Age (.140) (.132) (.133)

 Log Use of -0.14 -0.48*** -0.51***
 Buffers (.087) (.138) (.141)
 Log Work Systems -0.06 0.07 0.06

 (.065) (.073) (.074)

 Log HRM Policies -0.19* -0.20*** -0.24***

 (.065) (.071) (.084)

 LBuffers x -0.49*** -0.56***
 LWorkSys (.137) (.158)
 LBuffers x LHRM 0.36* 0.49*
 Policies (.197) (.253)
 LWorkSys x LHRM -0.07 -0.18
 Policies (.108) (.174)
 LBuffers x LWorkSys 0.27
 x LHRM Policies (.321)
 Adjusted R2 0.288 0.456 0.452
 F for Equation 3.3*** 4.4*** 4.1***
 F for R2 change from
 "base case" (Eq. 1) 4.8*** 3.8***

 *Statistically significant at the .10 level; **at the

 .05 level; ***at the .01 level.

 have more defects per 100 vehicles.11 The
 combination of these contradictory rela-
 tionships may explain why the Use of Buff-
 ers index, entered alone with the control
 variables in equation 2, has no impact on
 quality.

 A "Japan Effect"?

 To test for a possible 'Japan effect," I
 added dummy variables for Japanese loca-

 l"There is no clear substantive reason why the
 relationship of these two indices should vary from the
 other two-way interactions. If the reduction of buff-
 ers is intended to make problems visible and encour-
 age problem-solving, HRM policies that affect worker
 commitment are certainly as important for problem-

 tion andjapanese management, separately,
 to the regression equations.12 These dummy
 variables were statistically significant in most
 of the productivity regressions. When added
 to equations 2-5 in Table 6, the coefficients
 for the three component indices, as well as
 the overall Production Organization index,
 ceased to be statistically significant. This
 result may be partially due to the high
 correlations-ranging from .36 to .73-
 between these indices and the Japanese
 dummies. But it also suggests that there
 may be some 'Japan effect" with respect to
 productivity. However, for equations 2 and
 3 in Table 7, the statistical significance of
 the interaction effects is unchanged when
 the Japan-related dummies are added. In
 equation 3, for example, the Japan dum-
 mies are statistically significant, but so is
 the three-way interaction term and the
 Buffers x HRM term. Thus, even when
 Japanese plants are controlled for, the in-
 teraction among the three production or-
 ganization bundles is a powerful predictor
 of productivity.

 Also, there is little evidence of any 'Ja-
 pan effect" for quality. The Japanese
 dummy variables are not statistically signifi-
 cant in any of the quality regressions. The
 only change from the original results is that
 the Work Systems index, statistically signifi-

 solving, and hence quality, as work teams. A possible
 explanation is that the positive coefficient for the
 interaction term captures those plants that have high
 scores for Use of Buffers but low scores for HRM
 Policies-plants that had better productivity but worse
 quality. This might also explain why the three-way
 interaction term is not statistically significant for
 quality, since the individual indices and the two-way
 interaction term are already capturing the complex
 relationships between Use of Buffers and HRM Poli-
 cies.

 12The idea behind a 'Japan effect" is that unique
 attributes of Japanese culture orJapanese manage-
 ment style might explain plant performance differ-
 ences. However, the variables in the production
 organization indices all reflect practices implemented
 at plants around the world; practices unique toJapan
 were deliberately not measured. If Japan-located or
 Japanese-managed plants have superior performance
 because they utilize flexible production systems more
 often and more fully than other plants, this is not a
 "Japan effect," as long as other plants that implement
 flexible production to a similar extent show similar
 performance results.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 HR BUNDLES AND MANUFACTURING PERFORMANCE 217

 cant in the original quality regressions,
 ceases to be significant when the Japan
 dummies are added, but the dummy vari-
 ables are also not statistically significant.
 This may be due to multicollinearity be-
 tween the Japan dummies and the Work
 Systems index. As with productivity, the
 coefficients for the interaction terms are
 essentially unchanged when the Japanese
 dummies are added.

 As a final test, I examine whether the
 production organization indices and inter-
 action terms help explain performance dif-
 ferences within the group of 13 Japanese-
 managed plants, using non-parametric
 Spearman correlation coefficients.13 Nearly
 all of the eight variables (three component
 indices, one overall Production Organiza-
 tion index, and four interaction terms)
 have statistically significant correlations
 with productivity and quality. Only HRM
 Policies does not have a significant correla-
 tion with productivity, and only Work Sys-
 tems is not significantly correlated with
 quality.'4 These results strengthen the case
 that the bundles of practices that make up
 flexible production do account for observed
 performance differences.

 Conclusions

 Past research on the relationship between
 innovative human resource practices and
 economic performance has often failed to
 recognize the interrelationships among
 practices in the overall HR system; has used
 aggregate performance measures at a cor-
 porate level of analysis, far removed from

 '3This non-parametric statistic is necessary, given
 the small number of plants in these subsamples. Also,
 a one-tail significance test is used, since the direction
 of the relationship is expected to be negative, that is,
 the higher a plant's score on each variable (closer to
 the "flexible production" endpoint), the lower hours
 per vehicle and defects per vehicle should be.

 "4Applying the same test to the subset of eight
 plants located injapan, the Use of Buffers index and
 the overall Production Organization index both have
 a statistically significant correlation with productiv-
 ity, as does the Buffers x WorkSys interaction term
 and the three-way interaction term. For quality, the
 correlations with the Use of Buffers and HRM Policies
 indices are statistically significant, as is the correla-
 tion with the Buffers x HRM term.

 the settings in which many HR practices are
 implemented; or has lacked adequate data
 about technical aspects of a firm's produc-
 tion system and business strategy to assess
 the relative contribution of the HR system
 to performance. In addition, much of the
 research on the performance of automo-
 tive assembly plants has overemphasized
 either the technical system or the HR sys-
 tem without fully exploring the interaction
 of the two systems and how it can affect
 performance.

 In this paper I have investigated two
 hypotheses left unresolved by this research
 stream: that innovative HR practices affect
 performance not individually but as inter-
 related elements in an internally consistent
 HR "bundle" or system; and that these HR
 bundles contribute most to assembly plant
 productivity and quality when they are inte-
 grated with manufacturing policies under
 the "organizational logic" of a flexible pro-
 duction system. I developed three indices
 (Use of Buffers, Work Systems, and HRM
 Policies) to capture systemic differences in
 organizational logic between mass produc-
 tion and flexible production. I found that
 each of these indices had high internal
 consistency, in terms of intercorrelations
 among the bundled practices. Each was
 also highly correlated with the other two
 indices, suggesting a high degree of inte-
 gration. Finally, cluster analysis distin-
 guished three groups of plants-Mass Pro-
 duction, Transition, and Flexible Produc-
 tion-that differed significantly in mean
 values for these indices and the practices
 bundled within them.

 I explored the contribution of innova-
 tive HR practices to economic performance
 using hierarchical regression analysis, add-
 ing production organization indices suc-
 cessively to a "base case" equation contain-
 ing control variables. The three produc-
 tion organization indices, as well as the
 overall index combining them, were all
 found to be statistically significant pre-
 dictors of productivity and quality, with
 the exception of Use of Buffers, which
 was not significant for quality. Further-
 more, the results strongly support the
 hypothesized two-way and three-way in-

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 218 INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

 teraction effects among the indices.

 The variance explained in the regres-
 sion analyses was much higher for produc-
 tivity than for quality. This difference may
 partly be due to the smaller sample size for
 the quality regressions. But the control
 variables account for 48% of the variance in
 the "base case" productivity equation, and
 only 6% in the "base case" quality equation.
 This difference suggests that the relative
 contribution of the production organiza-
 tion indices is greater for quality than for
 productivity. This interpretation is consis-
 tent with the fact that the Transition cluster
 of plants has better quality than the Mass
 Production cluster of plants, but roughly
 equivalent productivity. However, it also
 raises the possibility that the control vari-
 ables are incorrectly specified in the quality
 regressions.

 Overall, the evidence strongly supports
 the hypothesis that assembly plants using
 flexible production systems, which bundle
 human resource practices into a system
 that is integrated with production/busi-
 ness strategy, outperform plants using more
 traditional mass production systems in both
 productivity and quality. These results
 provide the strongest statistical evidence
 to date of a positive relationship between
 innovative human resource practices and
 economic performance, particularly
 given the comprehensive international
 sample, the presence of strong control
 variables, the high reliability of the con-
 text-specific measures of performance
 and HR practices, and the discovery of
 statistically significant interaction effects
 in a small sample.

 There are several limitations to this study.
 The data are cross-sectional, so causality
 cannot be definitively determined. Find-
 ings from assembly plants, which have both
 capital-intensive and labor-intensive opera-
 tions, may not generalize well to other set-
 tings. The automation measures do not
 capture all capital inputs to the production
 process and are thus imperfect proxies for
 capital. In addition, the data do not in-
 clude all the variables that could affect
 assembly plant performance. This study
 also faces some of the perennial dilemmas

 of how to measure innovative HR practices.
 For example, survey data cannot identify
 the nuances of team functioning. Some
 teams may engage in little job rotation and
 cross-training because of workers' resistance
 to having a "team concept" forced on them.
 Other teams may focus on personnel and
 schedule matters but do little produc-
 tion problem-solving. Thus the growing
 body of assembly plant case studies is an
 essential complement to these survey data
 (for example, Brown and Reich 1989;
 Adler 1992; Huxley, Robertson, and
 Rinehart 1991; Rubenstein, Kochan, and
 Bennett 1993).

 These data also cannot address the de-
 bate about whether flexible production
 represents "management by stress." Critics
 argue that flexible production plants
 achieve much of their productivity advan-
 tage by "sweating" workers through a faster
 work pace, standardized jobs, social con-
 trol via peer pressure, and stress from a
 bufferless production system and "kaizen"
 (continuous improvement) efforts that
 emphasize reductions of labor input (Parker
 and Slaughter 1988; Fucini and Fucini 1990;
 Graham 1993). Because the data analyzed
 here do not measure work pace explicitly, I
 cannot evaluate the claim that flexible
 production leads inevitably to
 "speedup"-or the counterclaim that it
 requires "working smarter" more than
 working harder.

 This study does shed light on the issue of
 "fit" between HR strategy and business strat-
 egy (Arthur 1992). A "fit" hypothesis pre-
 dicts that either mass or flexible produc-
 tion plants with a good fit between their HR
 and production strategies will perform well.
 In contrast, these results suggest that, at
 least for auto assembly plants, the flexible
 production approach consistently leads to
 better performance than the mass produc-
 tion approach. If flexible production does
 constitute a superior strategy for automo-
 tive assembly, then it should diffuse more
 rapidly than other production systems-an
 issue that will be explored as this research
 continues with the collection of longitudi-
 nal data from the same international
 sample.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 HR BUNDLES AND MANUFACTURING PERFORMANCE 219

 REFERENCES

 Adler, Paul S. 1992. "The 'Learning Bureaucracy':
 New United Motor Manufacturing, Inc." In Barry
 M. Staw and Larry L. Cummings, eds., Research in
 Organizational Behavior. Greenwich, Conn.: JAI
 Press.

 _. 1993. "Time-and-Motion Regained." Harvard

 Business Review (Jan.-Feb.), pp. 97-108.

 Adler, Paul S., and Robert E. Cole. 1993. "Designed
 to Learn: A Tale of Two Auto Plants. " Sloan Manage-
 ment Review (Spring), pp. 33-45.

 Aldenderfer, Mark S., and Roger K. Blashfield. 1984.

 Cluster Analysis. Beverly Hills: Sage.

 Arthur,Jeffrey B. 1992. "The Link Between Business
 Strategy and Industrial Relations Systems in Ameri-
 can Steel Minimills." Industrial and Labor Relations
 Review, Vol. 45, No. 3 (April), pp. 488-506.

 Bailey, Thomas. 1992. "Discretionary Effort and the
 Organization of Work: Employee Participation and
 Work Reform Since Hawthorne." Paper written for
 the Sloan Foundation, Columbia University.

 Berggren, Christian. 1992. Alternatives to Lean Produc-
 tion: Work Organization in the Swedish Auto Industry.
 Ithaca, N.Y.: ILR Press.

 Biggart, Nicole Woolsey. 1991. "Explaining Asian
 Economic Organization: Toward a Weberian Insti-
 tutional Perspective." Theory and Society, Vol.20, pp.
 199-232.

 Industry. Berkeley: University of California Press.
 __. 1992. "Issues in Skill Formation and Training
 in Japanese Approaches to Automation." In Paul S.
 Adler, ed., Technology and theFuture of Work, pp. 187-
 209. New York: Oxford University Press.

 Cronbach, Lee. 1987. "Statistical Tests for Modera-
 tor Variables." Psychological Bulletin, Vol. 102, No. 3,
 pp. 414-17.

 Cusumano, Michael. 1985. 7hejapaneseAuto Industry:
 Technology and Management at Toyota and Nissan.
 Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

 Cutcher-Gershenfeld, Joel. 1991. "The Impact on
 Economic Performance of a Transformation in
 Workplace Relations." Industrial and LaborRelations
 Review, Vol. 44, No. 2 (January), pp. 241-60.

 DeVellis, Robert F. 1991. Scale Development: Theory

 and Applications. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage.

 Dore, Ronald P. 1992. 'Japan's Version of Manage-
 rial Capitalism." In Thomas A. Kochan and Michael
 Useem, eds., Transforming Organizations. New York:
 Oxford University Press, pp. 17-27.

 Ebrahimpour, Maling, and Sang Lee. 1988. "Quality
 Management Practices of American and Japanese
 Electronic Firms in the U.S." Production and Inven-
 tory ManagementJournal (4th qtr.), pp. 28-31.

 Emery, Fred, and Einar Thorsrud. 1976. Democracy at

 Work. Leiden, Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff.

 Blalock, H. M. 1979. Social Statistics. New York:

 Everitt, Brian. 1980. Cluster Analysis, 2nd Edition.

 McGraw-Hill.

 London: Heineman.

 Block, Richard, Morris Kleiner, Myron Roomkin, and
 Sidney Salsburg. 1987. "Industrial Relations and
 the Performance of the Firm: An Overview." In
 Morris M. Kleiner et al., eds., Human Resources and
 thePeiformanceoftheFirm. Madison,Wis.: Industrial
 Relations Research Association Series.

 Brown, Charles, and James Medoff. 1978. "Trade
 Unions in the Production Process." Journal of Politi-
 cal Economy, Vol. 86, No. 3 (June), pp. 335-78.

 Brown, Claire, and Michael Reich. 1989. "When
 Does Union-Management Cooperation Work? A
 Look at NUMMI and GM-Van Nuys." California
 Management Review, Vol. 31, No. 4 (Summer),
 pp. 26-44.

 Cappelli, Peter, and Harbir Singh. 1992. "Integrat-
 ing Strategic Human Resources and Strategic Man-
 agement." In Peter Sherer, David Lewin, and Olivia
 Mitchell, eds., Research Frontiers in Industrial Rela-
 tions, pp. 165-92. Madison, Wis.: Industrial Rela-
 tions Research Association series.

 Carper, W. B., and W. E. Snizek. 1980. "The Nature
 and Type of Organizational Typologies: An Over-
 view." Academy of Management Review, Vol. 5, pp. 65-
 75.

 Clark, Kim. 1980. "The Impact of Unionization on
 Productivity: A Case Study." Industrial and Labor
 Relations Review, Vol. 34, No. 4 (July), pp. 466-87.

 Clark, Kim, and Takahiro Fujimoto. 1991. Product
 DevelopmentPerformance. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
 Business School Press.

 Cole, Robert E. 1979. Work, Mobility, and Participa-
 tion: A Comparative Study of Japanese and American

 Florida, Richard, and Martin Kenney. 1991. "Trans-
 planted Organizations: The Transfer of Japanese
 Industrial Organization to the U.S." American Socio-
 logical Review, Vol. 56 (June), pp. 381-98.

 Fucini,J., andJ. Fucini. 1990. WorkingfortheJapanese:
 Inside Mazda's American Auto Plant. New York: Free
 Press.

 Graham, Laurie. 1993. "Inside a Japanese Trans-
 plant: A Critical Perspective. " Work and Occupations,
 Vol. 20, No. 2, pp. 147-73.

 Hackman, J. Richard. 1985. "Doing Research That
 Makes a Difference." In Edward E. Lawler III et al.,
 eds., Doing Research That Is Useful for Theory and
 Practice. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

 Hayes, Robert, and Kim Clark. 1985. "Exploring the
 Sources of Productivity Differences at the Factory
 Level." In Kim Clark et al., eds., The Uneasy Alliance.
 Boston, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press.

 Helper, Susan. 1991. "Strategy and Irreversibility in
 Supplier Relations: The Case of the U.S. Automo-
 bile Industry." Business History Review, Vol. 65,
 pp. 781-824.

 Huselid, Mark. 1993. "Human Resource Manage-
 ment Practices and Firm Performance." Unpub-
 lished paper, Rutgers University.

 Huxley, Christopher, David Robertson, and Jim
 Rinehart. 1991. "Team Concept: A Case Study of
 Japanese Management in a Unionized Canadian
 Auto Plant." Unpublished paper, Canadian Auto
 Workers Research Group.

 Ichniowski, Casey. 1991. "Human Resource Manage-
 ment Systems and the Performance of U.S. Manu-

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 220 INDUSTRIAL AND LABOR RELATIONS REVIEW

 facturing Businesses." NBER Working Paper Series
 #3449. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

 Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn Shaw, and Giovanni
 Prennushi. 1993. "The Effect of Human Resource
 Management Practices on Productivity." Unpub-
 lished paper, Columbia University.

 Imai, Kenichi. 1986. Kaizen. New York: Free Press.
 Jaccard, James, Robert Turrisi, and Choi K. Wan.
 1990. Interaction Effects in Multiple Regression.
 Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage.

 Katz, Harry, and Jeffrey Keefe. 1992. "Collective
 Bargaining and Industrial Relations Outcomes: The
 Causes and Consequences of Diversity." In Peter
 Sherer, David Lewin, and Olivia Mitchell, eds., Re-
 search Frontiers in Industrial Relations, pp. 43-76.
 Madison, Wis.: Industrial Relations Research Asso-
 ciation series.

 Katz, Harry, Thomas A. Kochan, and Kenneth
 Gobeille. 1983. "Industrial Relations Performance,
 Economic Performance, and QWL Programs: An
 Interplant Analysis." Industrial and Labor Relations
 Review, Vol. 37, No. 1 (October), pp. 3-17.

 Katz, Harry, Thomas A. Kochan, and Jeffrey Keefe.
 1988. "Industrial Relations and Productivity in the
 U.S. Automobile Industry. " Brookings Papers on Eco-
 nomic Activity, Vol. 3, pp. 685-715.

 Katz, Harry, Thomas A. Kochan, and Mark Weber.
 1985. "Assessing the Effects of Industrial Relations
 and Quality of Working Life on Organizational Per-
 formance. " Academy of ManagementJournal, Vol. 28,
 No. 3 (September), pp. 509-27.

 Kochan, Thomas A., Joel Cutcher-Gershenfeld, and
 John Paul MacDuffie. 1991. "Employee Participa-
 tion, Work Redesign, and New Technology: Impli-
 cations for Manufacturing and Engineering Prac-
 tice." In Gavriel Salvendy, ed., Handbook ofIndustrial
 Engineering, 2nd Edition. New York: John Wiley,
 pp. 798-814.

 Kogut, Bruce, and Udo Zander. 1992. "Knowledge of
 the Firm, Combinative Capabilities, and the Repli-
 cation of Technology." Organization Science, Vol. 3,
 No. 3 (August), pp. 383-97.

 Krafcik, John F. 1988. "Comparative Analysis of
 Performance Indicators at World Auto Assembly
 Plants." M.S. Thesis, Sloan School of Management,
 M.I.T.

 Lawler, Edward E., III, Susan Mohrman, and Gerald
 E. Ledford,Jr. 1992. Employee Involvement and TQM:
 Practice and Results in Fortune 1000 Companies. San
 Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

 Levine, David, and Laura D'Andrea Tyson. 1990.
 "Participation, Productivity, and the Firm's Envi-
 ronment." In Alan S. Blinder, ed., PayingforProduc-
 tivity. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institute,
 pp. 183-244.

 MacDuffieJohn Paul. 1991. "Beyond Mass Produc-
 tion: Flexible Production Systems and Manufactur-
 ing Performance in the World Auto Industry. " Diss.,
 Sloan School of Management, M.I.T.

 MacDuffie, John Paul, and John F. Krafcik. 1992.
 "Integrating Technology and Human Resources for
 High Performance Manufacturing: Evidence from

 the International Auto Industry." In Thomas A.
 Kochan and Michael Useem, eds., Transforming Or-
 ganizations. New York: Oxford University Press,
 pp. 209-26.

 Maddala, G. S. 1977. Econometrics. New York: McGraw-

 Hill.

 Meyer, Alan D., Anne S. Tsui, and C.R. Hinings. 1993.
 "Configurational Approaches to Organizational
 Analysis." Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 36,
 No. 6 (December), pp. 1175-95.

 Milgrom, Paul, and John Roberts. 1993.
 "Complementarities and Fit: Strategy, Structure,
 and Organizational Change." Unpublished manu-
 script, Stanford University.

 Miller, Danny, and Peter Friesen. 1980. "Momentum
 and Revolution in Organizational Adaptation."
 Academy of ManagementJournal, Vol. 23, pp. 591-614.
 Mitchell, Daniel J.B., David Lewin, and Edward E.
 Lawler III. 1990. "Alternative Pay Systems, Firm
 Performance, and Productivity." In Alan S. Blinder,
 ed., Paying for Productivity. Washington, D.C.:
 Brookings Institution, pp. 15-94.

 Monden, Yasuhiro. 1983. Toyota Production System.

 Norcross, Ga.: Institute of Industrial Engineers.

 Nishiguchi, Toshihiro. 1993. StrategicIndustrial Sourc-
 ing: The Japanese Advantage. New York: Oxford
 University Press.

 Ono, Taiichi. 1988. Workplace Management. Cam-

 bridge, Mass.: Productivity Press.

 Osterman, Paul. 1987. "Choices Among Alternative
 Internal Labor Market Systems." Industrial Rela-
 tions, Vol. 27, No. 1 (February), pp. 46-67.

 __. 1994. "How Common Is Workplace Transfor-
 mation and Who Adopts It?" Industrial and Labor
 Relations Review, Vol. 47, No. 2 (January), pp. 173-
 88.

 Parker, Mike, and Jane Slaughter. 1988. Choosing
 Sides: Unions and the Team Concept. Boston: South
 End Press.

 Pasmore, William. 1988. DesigningEffective Organiza-
 tions: The Socio-Technical Systems Perspective. New
 York: John Wiley.

 Pfeffer, Jeffrey. 1994. Competitive Advantage 7'/irough

 People. Boston, Mass.: Harvard Business School
 Press.

 Rubenstein, Saul, Thomas A. Kochan, and Michael
 Bennett. 1993. "The Saturn Partnership: Co-
 Management and the Reinvention of the Local
 Union." In Bruce Kaufman and Morris Kleiner,
 eds., Employee Representation: Alternatives and Future
 Directions. Madison, Wis.: Industrial Relations Re-
 search Association series.

 Schonberger, Richard. 1982. Japanese Manufacturing

 Techniques. New York: Free Press.

 Shimada, Haruo, and John Paul MacDuffie. 1986.
 "Industrial Relations and 'Humanware': Japanese
 Investments in Automobile Manufacturing in the
 United States." Working Paper, Sloan School of
 Management, M.I.T.

 Snell, Scott A., andJames W. Dean,Jr. 1992. "Inte-
 grated Manufacturing and Human Resource Man-
 agement: A Human Capital Perspective." Academy
 of Management Journal, Vol. 35, No. 3 (August),

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 HR BUNDLES AND MANUFACTURING PERFORMANCE 221

 pp. 467-504.

 Trist, Eric, and Kenneth Bamforth. 1951. "Some
 Social and Psychological Consequences of the
 Longwall Method of Coal-Getting." Human Rela-
 tions, Vol. 4, pp. 6-38.

 Ulrich, Dave, and Bill McKelvey. 1990. "General
 Organizational Classification: An Empirical Test
 Using the United States and Japanese Electronics
 Industries." Organizational Science, Vol. 1, No. 1
 (February), pp. 99-118.

 Useem, Michael. 1993. ExecutiveDefense: Shareholder
 Powerand CorporateReorganization. Cambridge, Mass.:
 Harvard University Press.

 Weitzman, Martin, and Douglas Kruse. 1990. "Profit
 Sharing and Productivity." In Alan S. Blinder, ed.,
 PayingforProductivity. Washington, D.C.: Brookings
 Institute, pp. 95-142.

 WomackJames, DanielJones, and Daniel Roos. 1990.
 The Machine That Changed the World. New York:
 Rawson-MacMillan.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 01:48:43 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

