ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION AND COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE: AN EXPLORATORY

STUDY OF U.S. INDUSTRIAL-GOODS  MANUFACTURERS

Sara A. Morris, Old Dominion  University, Department  of Management  and Marketing, Norfolk,  VA 23529

ABSTRACT

This research  provides a theoretical justification  for the link
between a fimi's environmental  performance  and competitive
advantage,  and tests the  mode! empirically.  Findings for  a
subsample  of  51  large  firms  support  a  strong  negative
relationship between the pollution that a t'lrm releases and the
firm's cost  advantage.

THEORETICAL  FOUNDATIONS  AND

HYPOTHESKS

The effect  of corporate social performance  on firm financial
performance has generated considerable research interest over
the  iast  twenty  years.  However,  empirical  findings  remain
inconclusive  and  a  compelling  theoretical  justitlcation  for
why  the  relationship  should  exist  has  not  been  articulated
(Wotxl & Jones, 1995).  The concept of competitive  advantage
offers  ju.st  such  a  "compelling  theoretical  justification"  for
why a firm's environmental  performance  should be related to
accounting-based  measures of financial pertbrmance.

Competitive Advantage and Firm  Profitabiiity

The theory of competitive advantage as articulated  by Porter
(1980)  is pervasive  in  the  strategic  management  literature.
There  arc two types of competitive  advantages:  cost  advan-
tages  and  differentiation  advantages.  A  firm  with  a  cost
advantage  offers  customers  a  standard  product  at  a  lower
price  than  other  tlrms can  afford  to charge.  A firm with  a
differentiation  advantage offers  the customer a unique  feature
at  a  price  premium,  but, for  the customer,  the  value  of  the
unique feature exceeds the price differential  charged.

Porter (19X0) argued that these competitive advantages  affect
firm  protltability.  The  empirical  evidence  is  sufficiently
strong  that  textbooks  (e.g.,  Hill  &  Jones,  1995:104)  now
defme  competitive  advantages  in  terms  of  profitability.
Variation in profits  is linked to firm  differences  in resources
and  internal  capabilities.  This notion of firm heterogeneity
lies  at  the  heart  of  the  resource-based  view  of  the  firm
(Barney,  1991).

The Resource-Based  View ofthe  Firm

According to the resource-based view ofthe  firm,  the source
of a firm's competitive advantage (and, thereby, its profitabili-
ty) is the bundle of firm-specific resources it controls.  Firm
resources may be tangible or intangible, or may take the form

4U

Academy  of Management Proceedings  '97

of  managerial  capabilities.  A tirm's  resources can  create a
sustained competitive advantage if those resources enable the
firm  to cut  costs or improve  product  features  in  such a way
that rivals cannot  match.  (Bamey,  1991)

A  resource  must  be  valuable  to  customers,  rare,  hard  for
competitors to imitate, and nonsubstitutable  in order to lead
to  a  sustained  competitive  advantage  (Bamey,  1991).  A
resource  is  valuable  to the  extent  that  it  can  contribute  to
lower costs or a differentiated  feature  that  cu.stomers want.  A
valuable  firm  resource must  also be rare  because a resource
that  is possessed by a large number  of firms  cannot  serve to
set  any  single  firm  apan  from  rivals  in  terms  of  product
attributes.  The rareness requirement  implies that  a resource
be  imperfectlv  imiiable  or  else  the  resource  can  become
commonly  available.  Finally,  a  resource  must  be  nonsub-
stitutable;  to  the  extent  that  rivals  can  obtain  a  viable
substitute  for  a valuable, rare,  and  inimitable  resource,  the
competitive advantage diminishes.

the 

affects 

environmental  pxiribrmance 

From  the theory of competitive  advantage, it follows that  if
firm 
firm's
profitability,  it  must  do this  by altering  (I)  the  firm's  cost
position  (i.e,  its  cost  advantage),  and/or  (2)  the  unique
feature(s) associated with the firm's product  (i.e, its  differenti-
ation  advantage).  The change in the competitive  advantage
may be brought  about  by altering one ofthe  firm's  valuable,
rare, imperfealy imitable, and nonsubstitutable  resources that
serve as the source of cost and/or differentiation  advantages.

Environmental  Performance  and Cost Advantage

In  economic  terms,  pollution  is a  classic  side effect  of  the
manufacturing  process.  The conventional  wisdom  assumes
that pollution reduction is accomplished  via pollution  control
equipment operating at the end ofthe  manufacturing  process
(Nehn,  1996).  Therefore,  pollution is positively related to a
cost advantage  because of high end-of-pipe  pollution  control
costs that  would have to be incurred to reduce the pollution.

A more contemporary view holds that  pollution is wasteful  of
inputs  and effort,  given  that  pollution  is usually  associated
with  outdated  product  design,  poor  choice  of  inputs,  or  a
flawed manufacturing proce.ss (Nehn,  1996; Porter & van der
Linde,  1995).  According  to  this  "green  is  efficient"
argument, pollution is negatively related to a cost  advantage
because  it  indicates  an  absence  of  modem  manufacturing
techniques,  which  both  prevent  pollution  and  reduce  other
manufacturing  costs through enhanced  productivity.


These considerations yield contradictory hypotheses about the
relationship hetween pollution and cost advantage.  As this is
an  exploratory  study,  I  decided  to  retain  both  rather  than
choosing oniy one.

the  past  and  past  violations  of  environmental  regulations
would  damage  the  firm's  environmental  reputation,  while
early pollution reduction  would enhance  the firm's  environ-
mental  reputation.

Hypothesis  Ia:  The  amount  of  pollution  released 
positively  related to a cost  advantage.

Hypothesis  Ib:  The  atnount  of  pollution  released 
negatively  related to a cost  advantage.

is

is

(1996) 

A  recent  study  by  Nehrt 
.suggests  a  positive
relationship  between  early  pollution  prevention  and  a  cost
advantage,  consistent  with  the  predictions  of  the  resource
based  view of the firm.  As a resource, pollution  prevention
manufacturing  technologies meet the valuable,  nonsuhstitut-
able,  inimitable,  and  rare  criteria,  yielding  a  competitive
advantage  to  early  adopters.  Nehrt  (1996)  explained  his
results  in  terms  of  first-mover  advantages-early  pollution
reduction  is positively related to firm  profitability  because it
provides cost advantages that rivals eannot  soon match.

Hypothesis  2: 

Early  pollution  reduction  is  positively
related to a subsequent cost  advantage.

Another  potential  cost  of  pollution  flows  from  government
regulations.  Violators of environmental  regulations face legal
fees  and  potential  fines.  The fines  tend  to be quite  modest
compared  to corfX)rate  assets, but a firm's  legal  expenses in
mounting  a  defense  can  he  fairly  substantial.  Therefore,
violations of environmental  regulations would logically hurt
firm  profitability  due to high legal expenses.

Hypothesis 3: 

Violation  of environmental  regulations  is
negatively  related to a cost  advantage.

Knvironmental 
Advantage

Performance 

and  DifTerentiation

Most competitive advantage models of environmental  perfor-
mance posit  that  good environmental  performance  enhances
a  firm's  reputation,  which  contributes  to  a  differentiation
advantage  (Clelland,  Fryxell,  &  Wen,  1996).  As  an
intangible resource, a firm's  reputation  meets the criteria of
rareness,  inimitability,  and  nonsubstitutability  necessary  to
create a competitive advantage  (Rao, 1994).

Because  reputations  are  socially  constructed  and  causally
amhguous (Rao, 1994), they are painstaking to e.stablish  and
slow to change.  Thus, we would expect  a firm's  environmen-
tal performance in the past to affea  its current reputation  and,
in  turn,  its current  differentiation  advantage.  Past  environ-
mental pertbrmance could take at least three  forms-pollution
released  in  the  past,  early  pollution  reduction,  and  past
violations of environmental regulations.  Pollution released in

The following hypotheses were derived from  the firm  reputa-
tion  argument:

Hypothesis 4: 

The  amount  of  pollution  released  in  the
past  is  negatively  related  to  a  current
differentiation  advantage.

Hypothesis 5: 

The  image of early pollution  reduction  is
positively 
to 
current
differentiation  advantage.

related 

a 

Hypothesis  6: 

Violation  of environmental  regulations in
the past  is negatively  related to a current
differentiation  advantage.

Salience of Competitive  Advantages to Buyers

though 

A  cost  advantage  tends  to  be  more  attractive  than  a
(ifferentiation  advantage to buyers of industrial  goods (Porter,
1980). 
The  relatively  low  salience  of  differentiation
advantages  for  buyers  of  indu.strial  goods  means  that  11 rm
reputation  is not equally valuable  to all  types of customers,
even 
and
nonsubstitutable.  This  leads  one  to  question  the  extent  to
which a reputation for  good environmental  performance  will
affect 
the  current  sample
(manufacturers of chemicals, steel, and metal  products).  This
consideration  of  salience  for  buyers  provides  the  final
hypothesis:

the  behavior  of  firms 

inimitable, 

reputation 

rare, 

in 

is 

Hypothesis  7: Models based on the influence of environ-
mental  performance  on a cost  advantage
will  explain  more  of  the  variance  in  the
current  sample  than models  based on the
influence of environmental performance on
a differentiation  advantage.

METHODS

Sample

The  sample  consisted  of  85  firms  from  six  industries:
industrial, inorganic chemicals; plastic materials; industrial,
organic chemicals; agricultural chemicals; blast  furnaces/steel
mills;  and  fabricated  structural  melal  products.  These
industries were selected because they involve dirty production
processes  that  produce  significant  environmental  pollution,
according  to  the  U.S.  Environmental  Protection  Agency
(EPA) Toxics Release Inventory (TRI) database, and because
each  industry  consists of at  least  eight  nondiversified  firms

Academy  of Management  Proceedings  '97

All


with financial data listed on Compaa  Disclosure for each of
fiscal  years  1991-1993.  All  firms  that  met these criteria  in
the six industries were selected.

Measures

Competitive  advantages.  The  most  common  measures of
competitive advantage/financial  performance  in the  strategic
management 
literature  are  accounting  measures,  more
specifically,  profitability  ratios (Barney,  1997; Hill & Jones,
1995).  Because pollution  prevention/control  techniques are
asset  intensive, a cost advantage was measured using return
on assets (ROA) in this study.  Because firm  reputation  affects
sales, a differentiation  advantage was measured using retum
on  sales  (ROS).  Table  1  shows  how  all  variables  were
operationalized.

Independent  variables.  The  amount  of pollution  released
and  past  pollution  released  was determined  from  the SENV
variable-sum  of land,  air, and water releases-in  the EPA's
TRJ  database. 
Early  pollution  reduction  (for  a  cost
advantage) was calculated  from  the firm's toxic releases and
off-site  transfers  (the SRT variable in the TRI  database).  A
drop  in  SRT  indicates  a  drop  in  the  production  of  toxic
substances,  which  should  decrease  costs.  Earlv  pollution
reduction  (for  a  differentiation  advantage)  was  calculated

from  SENV,  ignoring  off-site  transfers.  A  drop  in  SENV
might  indicate  a drop in the production  of toxic substances,
or merely a shift  from  releases to transfers.  Either way, the
firm  could  announce  a  drop  in  toxic  releases  in  hopes  of
improving  its  reputation.  Violation  of  environmental
regulations was based on whether a firm had been  cited  for
any  EPA  violation  during  the  period  1991-1994  (EPA
violations)  or  the  period  1987-1990  (past  EPA  violations).
Violators  were 
the  U.S.  EPA
Enforcement  Docket  Database,  which  lists judicial  actions,
and the Administrative  Database, which lists regulatory/non-
judicial  actions.'

identified  using  both 

Control  variables.  As it is unreasonable to expect environ-
mental pertbrmance to be a major  determinant  of competitive
advantage,  two control  variables were included.  The  firm's
general  operating  efficiency  was  defined  differently
depending  on  the  dependent  variable.  For  ROA,  general
operating  efficiency  was  measured  via  total  asset  turnover
(TATO). 
For  ROS,  general  operating  efficiency  was
measured via gross profit margin (GPM).  Firm  size, the other
control  variable,  was also defined  differently  depending  on
the dependent variable.  For ROA, firm size was measured via
the  firm's  share of its industry's total  assets.  For ROS, firm
size was measured  via market  share.

TABLE 1

Variable  Deflnitions

Competitive  Advantage

Cost  Advantage

Differentiation  Advantage

Dependent  Variables

Z'  average ROA.  1991-93

Z average ROS,  1991-93

Independent  Variables

Pollution  Released

Z total  SENV,  1991-93

Past Pollution  Released

Early Pollution  Reduction

(firm's % of ind. total SRT,  1989) minus
(firm's  % of ind. total  SRT,  1990)

(% of ind. tot. SENV,  1989) minus (% of
ind. SENV,  1990)

Z total SENV,  1987-90

EPA  Violations

YES/NO%io!aSions,  1991-94

Past  EPA  Violations

Controls

YES/NO violations,  1987-90

Operating  Efficiency

Z average TATO,  1991-93

Z average GPM,  1991-93

Firm Size

average share of ind. total  assets,  1991-93

average market  share,  1991-93

'Z" indicates variable was normalized for firm's industry by creating a Z-score

''YES=1,NO=0

413 

Academy  of Management Proceedings  '97


RESULTS  AND DISCUSSION

regression  analysis  was  used  to  test 

the
Hierarchical 
hypotheses,  with  the control  variables entered on step  1 and
the variaHes of interest entered on step 2.  Table 2 reports the
results, which  fail  to suppon  the hypotheses when the entire
sample  is examined.

Resnits of Hierarchical  Regression  Analyses

TABLE 2

advantage  (as  reflected  in  ROA)  would  be  affected  by the
amount  of pollution  released  (HI), early pollution  reduction
efforts  (H2), and EPA violations (H3).  The combined  effect
of  these  variables on ROA was not  significant  (A^" = .055,
n.s.).  One marginally  significant  regression  coefficient  (for
EPA violations, p=.2O, p=.O726) is in the opposite direction
from  that  predicted  by  Hypothesis  3. 
In  this  sample,
violations of EPA regulations were positively as opposed to
negatively related to ROA.

All 85 Firms

51  Firms  Filing
TRI  Reports

Diff
Adv.

ROS

Cost
Adv.

ROA

Dift;
Adv.

ROS

.16

.18t

.12

.141*

*

.06 It

.189**

-.14

-.4!**

-.21

.10

.04

.033

.094

.036

1.63

.20t

.055

.194

.142

3.76*

,24^-

.22T

.190**

.379

.310

• ^ 9 **

.08

.158*

-.47**

.22

-.03

.158*

.316

.240

Cost
Adv.

ROA

.35**

*

Model

I)V

Step I

TATO

GPM

TA  share

.20t

SRT  drop

.13

mkt  share

AR-

Step  2

SENV

past  SENV

SENV  drop

violations

past  viola.

AR'

R'

Adj.  R'

F

df

5.50*»*

4.15**

(5,78

(5,79

(5,45)

(5,45)

)

tp<.10;  *p<.05; **p<.01;  *+*p<.001
The  first  three  hypotheses  predicted  that  the  firm's  cost

that 

three  hypotheses  predicted 

firm's
The  next 
differentiation  advantage  (as  retlected  in  ROS)  would  be
alTeaed by the amount  of pollution  released in the past (H4),
early pollution reduction efforts  (H5), and past EPA  violations
(H6).  The combined etfect  of these variables on ROS was not
significant  (AR~ = .033, n.s.).

the 

After controlling for the effects of general  operating  efficiency
(TATO  or  GPM)  and  firm  size  (share  of  industry's  total
assets, or market share), firm environmental  performance  had
no  effect  on  a  firm's  cost  advantage  or  differentiation
advantage.

A second set of regression models was run on only those  firms
that  filed  reports to the TRI  database  (n=51).  These  firms
tended to be larger than  the 34 non-reporting  firms  in terms
of sales and assets, and to be more profitable  in terms of ROS
and ROA.

Among firms filing TRI reports, environmental  performance
contributed  to a cost advantage  in the ways expected (AR' =
.l90,p = .0069).  Hypotheses  1 band  2 were supported.  The
firm's ROA over the 1991-1993  period was negatively related
to the amount of pollution released during the period  (P=-.41,
/7=.OO56) and  positively  related  to a drop in  the  amount  of
pollution  produced  (and  released  or  transferred  off-site)
t^tween  1989 and  1990 (p=.24,/7=.O541).  Violations of EPA
regulations  during  the  1991-1993  period  had  the  opposite
effect  (p=.22, /J=.O871)  of what  was predicted by Hypothesis
3.  Thus,  there  was  a  marginally  significant  positive
relationship between EPA violations and a cost advantage.

Also  among  firms  filing  TRI  reports,  as  expected  from
Hypothesis 7, there was less support  for the hypotheses about
environmental  pertbrmance  and  a dilTerentiation  advantage
than about environmental  performance  and a cost advantage.
Although  the  combined  effect  of  differentiation-relevant
variables  on  ROS  was  signitlcant  (AR~ == .158,  p=.O231),
hypothe.ses 5 and 6 were not  supported.  Thus, there was no
evidence  that  a drop  in the  amount  of pollution  released  or
that  past  EPA  violations  damage  a  firm's  reputation.
Hypothesis 4 stated that  the amount  of pollution  released in
the  past  is  negatively  related  to  a  current  differentiation
advantage, on the presiimption that past pollution would harm
a firm's  reputation.  The regression  coefficient  supports this

Academy of Management Proceedings  '97

414


ENDNOTES

1. I thank Howard M. Kinlaw, Jr. for obtaining the U.S. EPA
Enforcement  Docket  and  Administrative  databases  that
provided  part  of the data for  this study.  We are grateful,  in
turn, 
to  Merle  Miller,  Enforcement  Docket  Database
Manager,  U.S. Environmental  Protection  Agency  Office  of
Enforcement,  for  invaluable guidance in interpreting data.

REFERENCES

Barney.  J.B.  1991.  Firm  resources  and  sustained  competitive  advantage.
Journal of Management.  17:99-120.

Bamey,J.B.  1997. Cfoining and sustaining compelilive advantage.  Reading,
MA:  Addison-Wesley.

QeUantl. IJ.. Fryxell.G.R. and Wen. T.  1996,  Corporate pollution prevention:
An  empirical  test  of  five  corporate  social  performance  outcome  models.  In
Rehbein.  K.  (Ed.).  International  Association  for  Business  and  Society
Proceedings: 306-311.

Griffin. J.J,  1996.  The Toxics Release Inventory (TRI) database:  Limitations
and implications.  In Rehbein. K. [Ed.). International Association for  Business
and Society Proceedings: 324-329.

Hill, C.W.L.  ,&  Jones. G.R.  t995.  Strategic management:  An integrated
approach  {3Tde<i.).  Boston. MA:  Houghton  Mifflin,

Nehrt. C.  1996.  Timing  and intensity effects  of environmental  investments.
Strategic Management Journal.  17; 535-547.

Porter.M.E.  1980.  Competitive strategy:  Tectini^ues for  analyzing indus-
tries and competitors.  New York: the Free Press.

Porter. M.E.. & van der Linde. ('.  1995.  Green arxl competitive:  Ending the
stalemate.  Harvard Business Review.13{5):  120-134.

Rao. H.  1994.  The social construction of reputation:  Certification  contests,
legitimation,  and  the  survival  of  organizations  in  ihe  American  automobile
industry:  1895-1912.  Strategic  Management  Journal.  l5(SpeciaI  Issue,
Winter): 29-44.

hypothesis (P=-.47, p=.OO32), but strong correlations between
past  and recent  releases (r=.75) and between ROS and ROA
(r=.91) cause one to suspect  that  past  pollution may be more
indicative  of  the  use  of  out-of-date,  wasteful  production
technologies than of bad reputation.

and 

peribrmance 

environmental 

This  has  been  an  exploratory  study  of  the  relationship
between 
financial
perlbrmance  among  U.S.  industrial-goods  manufacturers.
Although 
the  study  offers  competitive  advantage  as  a
rationale for  why environmental  performance  and financial
performance  should be related, the empirical  results are not
significant  for the full sample of 85 firms.  However, 34 of the
chemical, steel, and metal manufacturers  in the sample filed
no  reports  of  toxic  releases  to  the  U.S.  Environmental
Protection  Agency.  Thus, 40^^- ofthe  firms  in  the targeted
industries  claimed  no  pollution  and,  consequently,  no
possibility for a drop in the amount  of pollution  produced.

The findings for 51 firms  which filed TRI reports (generally,
the  larger  and  more  profitable  firms)  indicate  a  negative
relationship between the pollution that  a firm releases and the
firm's  cost  advantage.  This supports the "green is  efficient"
position of Nehn (1996) and Porter and van der Linde (1995).
Thefindingsalsohint  of a positive relationship between EPA
violations  and  firm  profitability,  which  begs  further
investigation,  especially  given 
the  current  study
controlled for firm size.

that 

Although every exploratory study lacks the sophistication that
comes from  experience in the area, some ofthe  measures in
this study are especially crude.  The most  serious limitation
of  the  study  is  probably  the  use  of  the  SENV  and  SRT
variables from  the TRI database, which measure the volume
of  chemicals  released  rather  than  the  toxicity  of  the
chemicals.  More  work  needs  to  be  done  to  examine  the
environmental  impact  (toxicity)  instead  of  just  the  total
quantity (volume) of releases (see Griffin,  1996).

415 

Academy  of ManagemenI Proceedings  '97



