Journal of  Applied  Psychology
2001,  Vol. 86, No. 6,  1294-1299

Copyright 2001  by the  American  Psychological  Association.  Inc.
0021-9010/01/$5.00  DOI:  10.1037//0021-9010.86.6.1294

Turnover  and  Organizational Performance:  A Comparative Analysis  of the

Effects  of Voluntary,  Involuntary,  and Reduction-in-Force  Turnover

James  C. McElroy  and  Paula  C.  Morrow

Iowa State University

Scott  N. Rude

Mellon Financial  Corporation

Data  were  collected  from  31  regional  subunits  of  a  national  financial  services  company  to  examine
differential  effects  of 3 types of turnover (voluntary,  involuntary, and reduction-in-force) on measures of
organizational subunit performance. Although  each form of turnover exhibited adverse effects  on  subunit
performance  when  examined separately, partial correlation results revealed greater and more pervasive
adverse  effects  for  reduction-in-force  turnover  (i.e.,  downsizing)  in  comparison  with  the  effects  of
voluntary  and involuntary  turnover. The results confirm  the negative effects  of downsizing,  suggesting
the  need  to  move  beyond  the  traditional  voluntary-involuntary  classification  scheme  used  in  turnover
research.

The purpose of the present  study was to examine the effects  of
turnover on organizational  subunit performance.  This study  differs
from  the  majority  of  such  research  in  that  it  examines  turnover
from  the organization's point of view rather than from  that of the
individual.  Previous research has attempted to look at the relation-
ship  between  turnover  and job  performance  as  part  of  the  func-
tional  versus dysfunctional  approach  to  turnover  (Hollenbeck  &
Williams,  1986).  However, little research  exists on the  aggregated
effects  of  turnover  on  organizational  performance.  In  addition,
focusing  on organizational  subunit-level  turnover bridges  the gap
between  the  literatures  on  turnover  and  those  on  downsizing.
Downsizing  is,  in  a  sense,  an  organizationally  induced  form  of
turnover. It is not, however, well represented  in theoretical models
of turnover. In documented  taxonomies  of turnover, downsizing is
embedded  within larger taxonomic categories.  For example, down-
sizing  would  be considered  a form of involuntary (from  the indi-
vidual's  perspective)  turnover  (Bluedorn,  1978;  Price,  1977),  a
form of avoidable (from  the organization's point of view) turnover
(Dalton, Krackhardt, & Porter,  1981),  and potentially either  func-
tional  or  dysfunctional depending  on  the  individuals downsized.
Subsuming  downsizing  within  other  categories  of  turnover  is
unfortunate  because  it  can  be  expected  to  have  different  attitu-
dinal  and  behavioral  consequences  for  both  individuals  and
organizations.

In  this  article,  we  separate  downsizing  from  other  forms  of
involuntary, avoidable  turnover such as dismissals.  Dismissals are
a  function  of poor individual  performance  or of insubordination.
Downsizing  is  more  often  a  function of  the  organization's  eco-
nomic  conditions  or  strategic  planning efforts,  such as to focus a

James C. McElroy and Paula C. Morrow, Department of Management,
Iowa  State University;  Scott  N.  Rude,  Department  of Human Resources,
Mellon Financial Corporation, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to James C.
McElroy, Department of Management, Iowa State University, 300 Carver
Hall,  Ames,  Iowa  50011.  Electronic  mail  may  be  sent  to  jmcelroy®
iastate.edu.

1294

firm on its core competencies,  preempt future  slowdowns, change
the corporate  culture, or reduce  the number of levels in the orga-
nizational  structure (Hitt, Keats,  Harback,  & Nixon,  1994).  Ulti-
mately, however, even these latter efforts  are driven by the  desire
to  improve  the  firm's  financial  performance.  Unfortunately,  as
discussed  below,  there  is little empirical  evidence  that the  perva-
sive  practice  of  downsizing  actually  has  this  effect  on  financial
performance.

Turnover  and Organizational  Performance

Although  some  evidence  exists  for  a  curvilinear  relationship
between turnover and performance at the individual level of anal-
ysis  (Jackofsky,  1984;  Trevor,  Gerhart,  &  Boudreau,  1997),  the
weight of the evidence points toward a negative relationship  (Cot-
ton & Turtle, 1986;  Morrow, McElroy, Laczniak, & Fenton,  1999;
Vecchio & Norris,  1996; Williams & Livingstone,  1994). Extrap-
olating  these findings to the organization  or subunit level  is very
difficult  because of the lack of studies that partition out the various
forms  of turnover and their effects  on more  macrolevel  measures
of  performance. Consequently, this  study posits  that the  relation-
ship between  turnover and  organizational  performance  is  a  func-
tion of the nature of the turnover in question—that is, involuntary,
voluntary, or reduction-in-force.

Assessing the  effects  of involuntary turnover on  organizational
performance  is complicated  by the fact  that terminations  normally
entail relatively small proportions  of  an organization's  workforce
and thus terminations have a low base rate  (i.e., are characterized
by restriction in range). Terminations may need to exceed a thresh-
old  level  before  the  benefits  associated  with  eliminating  poor
performers  actually  result  in  changes  in  organizational  perfor-
mance  indicators.  However,  assuming  that  poor  performers  are
replaced  with  better  performers,  organizational  performance
should be enhanced. The removal of poor  performers should  help
to maintain and preserve performance-based norms among remain-
ing employees  (Trevino,  1992). Furthermore, the  attributional  ef-
fect on those employees who remain should be positive (Mowday,
1981),  given the knowledge  that it  was the  leaver's  poor  perfor-


RESEARCH  REPORTS

1295

mance that caused  his or her dismissal,  as opposed  to  attributions
that  the  organization  was  somehow  at  fault.  In  light of  evidence
positively  linking  the  removal  of  poor  performers  with  improve-
ments in the  replacement  and remaining  employees'  work  norms
and attitudes, the loss of poor performers  should be advantageous
to the firm. Consequently,  we hypothesize  the following:

Hypothesis  1: Involuntary  turnover—that is, dismissals—will be  pos-
itively  related to organizational  performance  measures.

People  voluntarily leave organizations  for a variety of reasons.
Some  leave  to  escape  negative  work  environment  factors  and
others  are  pulled  away  from  the  organization  by  more  attractive
opportunities. Although some research  on voluntary turnover, such
as  Ostroff s  (1992)  finding  of  a  negative  relationship  between
intention to quit and school  unit performance,  supports the gener-
alized  negative  relationship  between  turnover  and  performance,
the  complexity  of  issues  surrounding  voluntary turnover  makes
such generalizations  impossible.  For example,  voluntary turnover
is  likely  to  involve  a  greater  number  of  unexpected  departures,
which may have adverse consequences  in that vacancies  and  staff
shortages  can  decrease  productivity and  result  in  the  use  of  less
experienced  personnel.  The  potential  benefits  of  voluntary turn-
over  for  performance  are  many  (e.g.,  infusion  of  new  ideas,
changes  in  policies  and  practices),  but  the  lag  time  for  these
benefits  is  likely  to be  longer  than that  associated  with the  sepa-
ration,  replacement,  and  training  costs  connected  with voluntary
turnover. What differentiates the arguments surrounding voluntary
turnover from those of involuntary turnover (i.e., dismissals) is that
with involuntary turnover it is known that it is the poor performers
who are leaving. The fact that voluntary  turnover  is not limited  to
poor performers leaves numerous attributional explanations among
stayers  regarding  why  people  leave.  Some  of  these explanations
may  enhance  employee  attitudes  and  subsequent  behaviors
whereas  others  may  diminish  them  (Mowday,  1981).  Without
specific  knowledge on the nature of voluntary turnover, its inten-
sity,  and  its  concentration  or  dispersion  within the organization,
it  is  not  possible  to  predict  a  relationship  between  voluntary
turnover  and  organizational  performance.  Thus,  we hypothesize
the following:

Hypothesis  2:  Voluntary  turnover will not be  significantly  related to
organizational  performance.

The  impact  of  downsizing  or  reduction-in-force  turnover  is
hypothesized  to be  fundamentally  different  from  voluntary  turn-
over.  With  downsizing,  because  no  replacement  employees  are
planned and the departing employees  are presumed to have been at
least  minimally competent,  the organization  is taking a calculated
risk that the cost savings associated  with fewer employees will not
detract  from  organizational  performance.  This  may  be  possible
with  technological  innovation  or  divestiture  of  operations,  but
unless  the  organization  is  extensively  overstaffed, there  is  little
reason  to believe that employee  reductions should, by themselves,
improve  performance.

The  limited  research  on  reduction-in-force  turnover  has  pro-
duced  conflicting evidence  regarding its relationship  to  organiza-
tional  performance.  A  closer  look  at  this  research  adds  to  our
skepticism that reductions-in-force  should increase organizational
performance.  For  example,  although  Bruton,  Keels,  and  Shook

(1996)  found  an overall positive relationship between  downsizing
and organizational  performance,  this finding is actually  tempered
by  asset  divestiture  in  addition  to  employee  reductions.  That  is,
Bruton  et  al.  found  that  the  better  performing  downsized  firms
were those that had also reduced  their asset  base during the study
period. Given that the organizational performance measure used in
the  study  was  return  on  assets,  downsizing  of  assets  as  well  as
people  allowed  the  more  successful  downsizers  to  affect  both
the numerator and denominator  of the performance measure. Con-
sequently,  these  results  are  actually  more  in  line  with  Cascio,
Young, and Morris's  (1997) finding that employee  reductions  (as
opposed  to  asset  reductions)  were  detrimental  to  organizational
performance.

The lone  remaining  study demonstrating  support for a positive
relationship between  downsizing  and organizational  performance
is  the  work  of  Wayhan  and  Werner  (2000).  This  study  used
announcements  of,  rather  than  actual,  reductions-in-workforce
and  did  not  differentiate  reduction  efforts  involving  strategic
choices  (e.g.,  asset  reductions,  divestitures,  reductions  aimed  at
refocusing  on core  competencies)  from  general  workforce  reduc-
tions  (i.e.,  reductions  involving  people  as  opposed  to  assets).
Furthermore,  none  of  the  studies  examining  workforce  reduction
have distinguished among  the  various forms of  workforce reduc-
tion (dismissals,  quits, etc.). Given this evidence,  we contend  that
reduction-in-force  turnover is negatively related  to  organizational
performance.

Hypothesis  3:  Reduction-in-force 
relationship  with  organizational performance measures.

turnover  will  exhibit  a  negative

Method

Sample

Data  were  collected  from  31  of  35  geographically  separated  sales  re-
gions  of  a  national  financial  services  company  headquartered  in  a  mid-
western state. Four regions were omitted because they were part of a joint
venture with another company.  Each sales region in the study sold the same
or  similar  products:  home  mortgages  in  a  traditional  one-on-one  sales
setting. The regions (i.e.,  subunits) constituted the unit  of analysis in this
study,  with  the  regions serving  as surrogates for organizations.  Although
using regions rather than  actual  organizations limited the ability  to gener-
alize to other  organizations, it did enable us to control for the influence  of
exogenous  variables.  Furthermore,  unlike  in  many  other  organizations,
regional managers in this organization were not the targets of downsizing
but  rather  the  originators  and  implementers  of  such  reduction-in-force
efforts.

Personnel  in  each  region  consisted  of  commissioned  sales  representa-
tives,  mortgage  processors,  and  management  and  administrative  staff.
Region  staff sizes ranged  from  34 to 315 employees, with the median and
mean  size being  171 and  165,  respectively.  The total  retail population for
this  study  was  approximately  5,200 employees; approximately  half  were
commissioned  sales  representatives,  approximately  30%  were  mortgage
processors, and the remaining  20% were management  and administrative
staff.

Data  on turnover  and organizational performance were collected over a
2-year  period  as  part  of  the  company's  normal  data-collection  process.
Longitudinal  performance  information  was  deemed  necessary  to  address
the  possibility  that  performance  was  more  of  an  antecedent  of  turnover
rather  than  the  reverse.  That  is,  the  initial  turnover  and  performance
indicators  were  both  derived  from  the  first  year,  thus  providing  only
cross-sectional  data.  The  availability  of  data  from  a  second  year  allows


1296

RESEARCH REPORTS

stronger causal  inferences  regarding  the role of each  form of turnover and
also  facilitates  an assessment of the extent to which turnover exhibits lag
effects  on  subsequent  organizational  performance.  Except  for  customer
satisfaction  (see  below),  the  Year  1 and  Year  2  time  frames underlying
turnover and performance  data matched  exactly.

Measures

Control variables.  Three variables  were treated  as control variables in
this study: the existence  of banking  services  in the region,  the  urban-rural
nature  of  the  region,  and  subunit  size.  Although the  financial  services
company that served  as the basis  for the study has offices in all 50 states,
its banking subsidiary operates in only 7 of the 31 regions  included in the
study.  Bank  presence  is  assumed  to  increase  name  recognition,  provide
greater  opportunities  for referral  business  through relationship  marketing,
and allow for potential economies of operation. These advantages could be
expected to result in increased profitability  and perhaps decreased  volun-
tary  turnover  as  a  result  of  increased  individual  sales  related  to  bank
presence.  Consequently,  regional  offices  that  included  banking  services
were coded  1 and those  with no banking  services  were coded  0 to control
for  any  effect  of banking services on  organizational  performance.

Eight of the regions were located in or around large metropolitan  areas.
Muchinsky  and  Morrow  (1980)  posited  that  market conditions influence
voluntary turnover, an argument supported by Williams  and  Livingstone's
(1994)  meta-analysis  showing  that individual performance  and voluntary
turnover are  affected  by  state  unemployment rates. Given that large  met-
ropolitan  areas have greater revenue  potential and  that the  nature of their
location alone may make them more economically  favorable, regions were
coded  1 for metro and 0 for nonmetro as a control for economic conditions.
Finally, studies  have suggested  a negative relationship between  organi-
zational  (subunit) size  and turnover (Anderson  & Meyer,  1993), although
Ryan, Schmidt, and Johnson (1996) found  no such relationship. Given this
and the notion of economies of scale, data were collected on the number of
employees  per region  as of January of the second  year, the  middle of the
data-collection  period.

Turnover.  Three  measures  of  turnover  were  collected  directly  from
company records:  voluntary turnover, involuntary turnover, and reduction-
in-force.  Each  form  of  turnover  was  measured  as  a  rate  on  an  annual,
fiscal-year  (July  1-June 30)  basis.  Voluntary turnover,  as defined by  the
company, is the number of employees  who left a given region on their own
initiative as a percentage  of the average  number of employees  in a given
region. The average turnover rate across all regional offices  included in this
study was 34%, with a range of 10%-61%. Involuntary turnover is defined
by  the  company as the  total number of employees  in a given region  who
were let go because of a failure to meet company standards as a percentage
of the average number of employees  in the region. The average involuntary
turnover  rate  in  the  sample  was  5%,  with  a  range  of  0%-9%.  Finally,
reduction-in-force  turnover is the percentage  of employees  who were laid
off  for economic or redundancy  reasons. The average rate for this form of
turnover  was 7%,  with  a range  of 0%-29%.

Organizational  performance.  Profitability  was  collected  from  com-
pany records  and was measured  by the company using basis points (BPs)
of  profit  per  loan  achieved  per  region.  BPs  is  a  common  method  of
measurement within the mortgage industry, with a basis point being 0.01%
of  the  loan  amount. The  profit  figure  used  in  this  study  combines  all
revenues  accrued  by  a  given  region  less  all  expenses  incurred  by  or
allocated  to  the region  divided  by  the amount of  loans  funded  by a given
region. It is calculated  monthly and annually for each region. For this study
we had access to annual profitability figures for 30 of the 31 regions in the
1 st year and all 31 regions  in the 2nd year. In the  1 st year, six of the regions
reported  negative profitability, with the range of BPs for all regions being
from  -95  to  82, with a mean  of  28.97.  hi the 2nd year, only  two of the
regions  reported  negative  profitability figures. The range of BPs for  1997
was  from  -57  to 92, with an average  of  48.16.

Productivity  was  also  collected  from  company  records.  The  company
calculates  it  by  adding  the  total  amount  of  loans  funded  per  region  per
month  divided  by  the  number  of  sales  employees  in  the  region.  Thus,
productivity represents  the sales volume produced  per month by the aver-
age sales representative  in each region. The data used in this study were the
annualized average per-month  figures  per region for 30 regions in the  1st
year  and  for  31  regions  in  the  2nd  year.  For  the  1st  year,  productivity
figures ranged from $230,620  to $ 1,324,110, with a mean of $574,940. For
the 2nd year,  the range  was  from  $414,160  to  $978,930,  with a  mean  of
$628,410.

Customer  satisfaction  was  derived  from  a  survey  administered  by  the
company to all customers  obtaining loans  from  November of the  1st year
to June of the 2nd year (i.e., approximately a year and a half, cutting across
the 2-year time frame of the study). Customers  rated their satisfaction with
a given region's  loan processing  performance  on a  1-5  scale  (1  =  poor,
5  =  outstanding).  In  company  records,  all  "4"  and  "5"  responses  were
tabulated  as  satisfied  customers.  The  number  of  satisfied  customers  was
then  divided  by  the  number  of  surveys  returned  per  region  to  form  a
percentage  index of customer satisfaction per region. The company  reports
a  38% response  rate  for the  return  of  the  satisfaction  surveys.  The  satis-
faction  index ranged  from  84.58  to 94.85,  with a mean of  91.81.

The  final  organizational  performance  measure  was cost  per  loan.  The
company began measuring this in the 2nd year, so data were available only
for  that  year. Cost  per  loan  is  the  total  expenses  per  region  minus com-
mission  and bonuses  paid  divided  by the number of  loans  per month. An
annualized  average  per  region  for  the  2nd  year  was  used.  This  measure
ranged  from  $802  to $2,338, with an average  cost  per  loan of $1,384.

Results

Descriptive  statistics  and  study  findings  are  presented  in  Ta-
ble  1.  The  zero-order  correlations  among  the  turnover  measures,
shown  below  the  diagonal  in  Table  1, indicated  that  a  positive
interrelationship existed among all three forms of turnover (i.e., rs
ranged  from  .35  to  .41).  In  a  downsizing  situation,  these  data
suggest  that  poorly  performing  employees  are  also  let  go  at  a
higher  rate  (i.e.,  involuntary  turnover  increases)  and  that  other
employees  voluntarily  leave  more  often.  Similarly,  there  were
strong  interrelationships  among  the  performance  measures  both
within  and  across time  frames.

In all cases, correlations between the turnover and  performance
indicators were moderate to large in magnitude, with higher levels
of turnover associated with lower levels of performance  (note that
cost  per  loan  is  an  indicator  to  be  minimized,  and  thus  positive
correlations entailing this indicator reflect  an inverse relationship
between  turnover  and  performance).  In absolute  value  terms,  the
smallest to largest correlations between performance  and turnover
to  —.65  (involuntary turnover),  —.43
measures ranged  from  -.35 
to  .58 (voluntary turnover), and -.31 
(reduction-in-force
turnover). These findings, although counter to Hypotheses 1 and 2,
strongly  supported  Hypothesis  3.  Furthermore,  they  suggest  that
the negative relationship between turnover and performance  found
in  prior research at the  individual  level of  analysis may  extend  to
subunit performance  as  well.

to  -.80 

Because the subunit was the unit of analysis in this study, it was
necessary to control for subunit characteristics that might influence
turnover. Therefore,  partial correlation  analysis  was used  to eval-
uate the  hypotheses  after  controlling for bank  status, metro status,
and subunit size. Although the sample size is small, it is  sufficient
to allow for the inclusion of three control variables while detecting
medium effect  sizes at a power level of .8 (Cohen & Cohen, 1975).


RESEARCH  REPORTS

1297

Table 1
Descriptive  Statistics,  Correlations, and Partial Correlations

Measure

M

SD

1

10

11 

12

1.  Bank  status*
2. Metro status5
3. Subunit  size0
4. Year  1 involuntary  turnover
5. Year  1 voluntary  turnover
6. Year  1 RIF turnover
7.  Year  1 profitability
8. Year  1 productivity  (in  1,000s)
9. Years  1-2 customer  satisfaction
10. Year 2  profitability
11.  Year 2 productivity  (in  1,000s)
12. Year 2 cost per  loan

.23
.26
165.06
4.57
34.40
6.69
28.97
574.94
91.81
48.16
628.41
1,383.77

.43
.44
65.02
2.58
13.80
6.81
42.16
217.86
2.48
28.60
155.20
382.68

.03
.33
.00
-.15
-.06
.14
.47
.07
.18
.33
-.28

-.25
.16
-.19
.21
-.22
.16
-.13
.13
.20
.26

-.46
-.41
-.41
.52
.56
.55
.41
.44
-.48

—
.38
.41
-.47
-.35
-.65
-.36
-.42
.52

—
.35
-.47
-.43
-.46
-.49
-.56
.58

—
-.73
-.31
-.75
-.80
-.45
.71

-.29
-.39
-.66
—
.54
.69
.75
.65
-.67

-.24
-.20
-.21

—
.39
.49
.88
-.48

-.53
-.31
-.71

—
.59
.52
-.72

-.21
-.33
-.81

-.36
-.42
-.42

.43
.56
.65

—
.65
-.57

—-.60

—

Note.  Zero-order correlations <  ±.36 are statistically  significant  at p  <  .05 (two-tailed). Correlations  >  ±.45 are statistically  significant  at p  < .01
(two-tailed). Partial correlations are in bold above the diagonal and were controlled for bank status, metro status, and size. Partial correlations <  ±.38 are
statistically  significant  at p  <  .05 (two-tailed). Correlations >  ±.47 are statistically  significant  at p  <  .01 (two-tailed). RIF  =  reduction-in-force.
a No bank state  =  0, bank  state = 1.  b Nonmetro status  =  0, metro status  = 1.  c Number of employees.

The  relevant  partial correlations  are shown above  the diagonal  in
Table  1.

Hypothesis  1, postulating that involuntary turnover  (dismissals)
would  be  positively  related  to  organizational  performance  mea-
sures, was not supported. Partial correlations between performance
and involuntary turnover measures in absolute  value terms ranged
from  —.21  to  —.53,  with  only  two  statistically  significant  corre-
lations.  Specifically,  involuntary  turnover  adversely  affects cus-
tomer  satisfaction  (r  =  —.53)  and cost  per loan  (r  =  .43),  even
after  controlling  for  bank  status,  metro  status, and  size.

Hypothesis  2  stipulated  that  voluntary turnover  would  not  be
significantly  related  to  organizational  performance.  Partial  corre-
lations in absolute value terms ranged from  —.20 to .56. Half of the
partial correlations were statistically significant,  and half were  not,
with  the  three  significant  findings  suggesting  that voluntary turn-
over  has  undesirable  consequences  for  subunit  profitability  in
Year 1 (r =  —.39), productivity in Year 2 (r =  —.42), and cost per
loan  (r  = .56).

Hypothesis 3 posited a negative relationship between  reduction-
in-force  turnover  and  performance.  This  hypothesis  received
strong  support,  with partial  correlations  in  absolute  value  terms
ranging from  —.21 to  —.81. Five of six partial correlations  entail-
ing  reduction-in-force  turnover  were  significant.  Reduction-in-
force  turnover  had  an  adverse  association  with  all  performance
measures  except  Year  1 productivity.

Two interesting patterns emerge  when one views these  correla-
tional  data.  First,  whether  viewing  zero-order  or  partial  correla-
tions,  the  negative  relationship  between  reduction-in-force  turn-
over and subunit performance  indicators  is much stronger than that
for  involuntary or voluntary forms of turnover. Second, these data
show  that  reduction-in-force  turnover in Year  1 has  adverse  con-
sequences  that extend into  Year 2. For example,  the partial corre-
lation  for  reduction-in-force  turnover and  subunit  Year  1  profit-
ability (r =  -.66), although substantial, is even greater  for Year 2
profitability  (r =  -.81). Moreover,  the partial correlation  between
reduction-in-force  turnover and subunit  productivity  changes from
a  statistically  insignificant  —.21  for  Year  1 to  —.42  in  Year  2.
These  findings  suggest  the  effect  of  downsizing  may  even  be
exacerbated  over  a  1-year lag time.

Discussion

The  results of  this  study  clearly  suggest  that  turnover has  un-
desirable  consequences  for organizational  performance.  Although
the  results  support  only  one  of  the  three  hypotheses,  they  do
provide substantial support for treating reduction-in-force  turnover
as distinct from involuntary  or voluntary  forms  of turnover.  Even
though  several  individual  findings  raise  interesting  questions  for
future  research  (e.g.,  why is involuntary turnover associated  more
with  declines  in  customer  satisfaction  than  with voluntary turn-
over?),  the emphasis  here  is  on  the  advantages  of  separating  the
three  forms of turnover.

The  results  of  the  zero-order  correlations  support  the  general
finding  from  the  psychological  literature  of  an  overall  negative
relationship  between  turnover and  performance,  regardless  of the
type of  turnover. The partial  correlation  analysis,  however,  dem-
onstrates  the  difficulty  of  making  such  a  generalization.  Only  5
of  12 correlations  involving  involuntary  and  voluntary turnover
remained  significant  after  controlling  for  subunit  characteristics.
Reduction-in-force turnover, on the other hand, demonstrated  large
and  pervasive  adverse  associations  with all  measures  of  subunit
performance  except  Year  1 productivity. The  lack  of  association
between  reduction-in-force  turnover and  Year  1 productivity is a
significant  finding  in  its  own  right,  given  that  productivity  was
measured in terms of efficiency—that  is, amount of loans  divided
by  the  average  number of  sales  employees.  Lack  of  a significant
correlation  between this and reduction-in-force  turnover  indicates
that  as  the  denominator  got  smaller  (due to  downsizing)  the  nu-
merator  also  got  smaller.  The detrimental  effects  of  reduction-in-
force  turnover  are  apparently less  immediate  in  the  case  of  pro-
ductivity, relative  to other  Time  1 outcomes.  However,  it is  also
interesting  to  note 
that  this  negative  relationship  between
reduction-in-force  turnover and  productivity efficiency was  even
greater  (and more  statistically significant) in  Year  2.

Given  the cross-sectional  nature of  the  Year  1 data,  the signif-
icant,  negative  effect  of  reduction-in-force  turnover  on  Year  1
profitability  may  be  a  function  of  the  decision  to  downsize  as  a
result of poor profitability. That  is, when faced  with poor prior or
anticipated  profitability figures, management  may  have made  the


1298

RESEARCH REPORTS

decision  to  downsize  in  an  effort  to  reduce  costs  in  hopes  of
improving  Year  1  end-of-year  profitability  (i.e.,  a  preemptive-
move  strategy).  Indeed, discussions  with company  officials  indi-
cate this to be the case.  However, the stronger correlations  evident
with  respect  to  Year  2 outcomes  support  the  asserted  causal  link
between reduction-in-force  turnover and declines in organizational
performance.

The results here must be viewed in light of this study's statistical
and  sample  limitations.  Regarding  statistical  issues,  readers  are
cautioned  that  strong  estimates  of  association  observed  may  be
partially  a  function  of  the  use  of  aggregated  data  (Hulin,
Roznowski, & Hachiya,  1985; Steel & Griffeth,  1989). The sample
organization  selected  also poses some limitations. Analyzing turn-
over effects  within subunits of one company, although allowing us
to control  for exogenous  variable effects, limits the generalizability
of  the  results.  The  findings  may  also be  more  applicable  to  the
nature of this organization's business—that is, a service  organiza-
tion heavily engaged in customer  contact  work. Moreover,  all data
were gathered  from company records, so the level of sophistication
of  some  measures,  such as customer  satisfaction,  was limited  and
some slippage may exist among the three types of turnover used in
this study. Because record  data were used, it is possible  that  some
employees  left  voluntarily  instead  of  either  waiting  to  be  termi-
nated  involuntarily  (e.g.,  in  the  case  of  a  poor  performer)  or
downsized.  If this were a pervasive problem,  however, one would
expect  to  find  few  significant  differences  in  turnover  effects.
Furthermore,  had we been  able to use more conventional measures
of  financial  performance,  such  as return on  assets,  a more  direct
comparison  to previous research  results,  such  as the Cascio  et al.
(1997) study, would have been  possible.  Finally, the collection  of
additional data over even longer  time periods would have allowed
for  further  examination  of the effects  of various forms of turnover
over  the  long  term.  A  merger  involving  the  financial  services
company  in  question  following this  data  collection  effort,  how-
ever,  negated  this opportunity.

In  conclusion, this study points to a need  for partialing out the
effects  of voluntary and various forms of involuntary turnover (i.e.,
dismissals  and reductions-in-force) in studies at the organizational
or  subunit  level  of  analysis.  The  failure  to  separate  these  three
types of turnover may  mask  or even exacerbate  the effects  of any
single  form  of  turnover on  organizational  performance.  The  fact
that  this  study  found  even  isolated  effects  of  involuntary  and
voluntary  turnover  on  organizational  performance  supports  the
retention  of  separate  forms  of  turnover  in  future  organizational
level  studies of turnover. These  findings  also point to the need to
move  beyond  the  traditional  voluntary-involuntary  classification
of  turnover, even in  studies  of  turnover  at  the  individual level of
analysis.  Regarding  reduction-in-force  turnover  differently  from
other  forms  of  involuntary  turnover  is  likely  to  increase  under-
standing  and  prediction  of  quit  behavior  by  identifying  other
motives  for  voluntary turnover  (e.g., perceptions  of procedural  or
distributive  injustice linked  to  the  downsizing  process,  personal
fear  of  being  downsized in the  future).

Finally,  separating  reduction-in-force  from  other  forms  of  in-
voluntary  turnover may  also  add to  the growing  literature on the
psychology  of  downsizing,  particularly  among those  who remain
(e.g., Krackhardt & Porter,  1985; Mowday,  1981).  One promising
framework  for assessing  these  effects  would be to position down-
sizing as a psychological  contract  violation. Turnley and Feldman

(2000), for example,  found that such violations  were significantly
related to employees'  efforts to find other jobs, intentional  neglect
of job  duties,  and decreased  organizational  citizenship  behavior,
all  of  which  might  help  explain  the  negative  correlations  found
in  this  study  between  reduction-in-force  turnover  and  subunit
performance.

In  summary,  downsizing,  an  organizationally  based  form  of
involuntary  turnover,  was  a  potent  predictor  of  organizational
performance  in  this  study.  If  substantiated  in  future  studies,  the
inclusion  of downsizing  to  turnover models  may  enhance under-
standing of  all turnover phenomena.

References

Anderson, P. M., & Meyer, B. D. (1993). The extent and consequences of
turnover.  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic  Activity:  Microeconomics,
177-248.

Bluedorn, A. C. (1978). A taxonomy of turnover. Academy  of  Management

Review, 3, 647-651.

Bruton, G. G., Keels, J. K., & Shook, C. L. (1996). Downsizing the  firm:
Answering  the  strategic  questions.  Academy  of  Management  Execu-
tive, 10, 38-45.

Cascio,  W.  F.,  Young,  C.  E.,  &  Morris,  J.  R.  (1997).  Financial  conse-
quences  of  employment-change decisions in  major  U.S. corporations.
Academy  of  Management  Journal,  40,  1175-1189.

Cohen,  J.,  &  Cohen,  P.  (1975).  Applied  multiple  regression/correlation

analysis for  the  behavioral  sciences.  Hillsdale, NJ:  Erlbaum.

Cotton,  J.,  & Tuttle,  J.  (1986).  Employee  turnover:  A  meta-analysis and
review  with  implications  for  research. Academy  of  Management  Re-
view,  11,  55-70.

Dalton,  D.  R.,  Krackhardt,  D.  M.,  &  Porter,  L.  W.  (1981).  Functional
turnover: An empirical assessment. Journal  of Applied  Psychology,  66,
716-721.

Hitt,  M.  A.,  Keats,  B.,  Harback,  H.,  &  Nixon,  R.  (1994).  Rightsizing:
Building  and  maintaining  strategic  leadership  and  long-term  competi-
tiveness.  Organizational  Dynamics,  23,  18-32.

Hollenbeck, J. R., & Williams, C. R. (1986). Turnover functionality  versus
turnover frequency:  A note on  work attitudes and organizational  effec-
tiveness. Journal  of Applied  Psychology,  71, 606-611.

Hulin, C. L., Roznowski, M., & Hachiya, D. (1985). Alternative opportu-
nities and withdrawal decisions: Empirical and dieoretical discrepancies
and  an integration. Psychological  Bulletin, 97,  233-250.

Jackofsky,  E.  (1984).  Turnover  and  performance:  An  integrated process

model. Academy  of Management  Review, 9, 74-83.

Krackhardt,  D., & Porter, L. W. (1985). When friends  leave: A structural
analysis  of  the  relationship  between  turnover  and  stayers'  attitudes.
Administrative  Science  Quarterly,  30,  242-261.

Morrow,  P. C., McElroy, J. C., Laczniak,  K. S., & Fenton, J.  B. (1999).
Using absenteeism and performance to predict employee turnover: Early
detection through company records. Journal  of Vocational Behavior, 55,
358-374.

Mowday,  R. T.  (1981).  Viewing  turnover  from  the  perspective of  those
who remain: The relationship of job attitudes to attributions of the cause
of turnover. Journal  of Applied  Psychology,  66,  120-123.

Muchinsky, P. M., & Morrow, P. C. (1980). A multidisciplinary model of
voluntary employee turnover. Journal of  Vocational  Behavior, 17,  263-
290.

Ostroff,  C.  (1992).  The  relationship  between  satisfaction,  attitudes,  and
performance:  An organizational level analysis. Journal  of Applied  Psy-
chology,  77, 963-974.

Price,  J.  L.  (1977).  The  study  of  turnover.  Ames:  Iowa  State  University

Press.

Ryan, A. M., Schmidt, M. J., & Johnson, R. (1996).  Attitudes and  effec-


RESEARCH  REPORTS

1299

tiveness: Examining relations at an organizational  level. Personnel Psy-
chology,  49, 853-882.

Steel,  R. P.,  &  Griffeth,  R. W.  (1989).  The  elusive relationship  between
perceived  employment  opportunity  and  turnover  behavior:  A  method-
ological  or  conceptual  artifact.  Journal  of  Applied  Psychology,  74,
846-854.

Trevino.L. K. (1992). The social effects of punishment in organizations: A

justice  perspective. Academy  of  Management  Review,  17, 647-676.

Trevor,  C., Gerhart, B., & Boudreau, J. (1997). Voluntary turnover and job
performance:  Curvilinearity  and  the  moderating  influences  of  salary
growth and  promotions.  Journal  of Applied  Psychology, 82, 44-61.

Turnley,  W.  H.,  &  Feldman,  D.  C.  (2000).  Re-examining  the  effects of
psychological  contract  violations:  Unmet expectations  and job  dissatis-
faction  as mediators.  Journal  of  Organizational Behavior, 21, 25-42.

Vecchio,  R.,  &  Morris,  W.  (1996).  Predicting  employee  turnover  from
performance,  satisfaction,  and  leader-member  exchange.  Journal  of
Business and Psychology, 11,  113-125.

Wayhan, V. B., & Werner,  S. (2000). The impact of workforce reductions
on financial performance:  A  longitudinal perspective.  Journal of Man-
agement,  26, 341-363.

Williams, C. R., & Livingstone, L. P. (1994). Another look at the relation-
ship between performance and voluntary turnover. Academy of  Manage-
ment Journal, 37, 269-298.

Received  July  3,  2000
Revision received January 26,  2001
Accepted  February 5,  2001

Wanted: Your Old Issues!

As  APA continues  its efforts  to digitize journal  issues for  the PsycARTICLES
database, we are finding  that older issues are increasingly unavailable in our inventory.
We are turning to our long-time subscribers for assistance. If you would like to donate
any  back  issues  toward  this  effort  (preceding  1982),  please  get  in  touch  with  us  at
journals@apa.org  and specify  the journal titles, volumes, and issue numbers that you
would like us to take off your hands. (Your donation is of course tax deductible.)

The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.
The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.

