Journal of Information Technology (1999) 14, 375± 386
Loyalty of on-line bank customers
LEIF  B.  MET HLIE  and HERBJé RN  NY SVEEN
Department of Strategy and Management, Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration,
Breiviksveien 40, 5045 Bergen, Norway

Electronic commerce changes  the relationships between sellers and buyers dramatically. The new properties
of  electronic markets offer customers added values. New customer value propositions  have to be established
in most markets and new marketing strategies must be formulated. One of  the business sectors most heavily
affected  is  banking.  How  can  banks  retain  loyal  customers when  moving  into  electronic banking?  Research
in  marketing  has  unveiled  several  determinants  of  customer  loyalty.  However,  this  knowledge  is  based  on
research on customers in traditional markets. In this paper we focus on customers’ loyalty in on-line banking.
The  ® ndings  indicate that  determinants of  loyalty  in  on-line  banking  environments  are  similar  to  those  in
the  physical  market-place.  However,  customer  satisfaction  is  found  to  have  the  most  signi® cant  impact,
followed  by  brand  reputation,  while  switching  costs  and  search  costs,  although  signi® cant,  have  minor
explanatory  power.  The  implications  of  these  ® ndings  on  banks’   marketing  strategies  are  discussed.

Introduction

On average, US companies lose 50% of their customers
in  5  years  (Seybold,  1998).  How  many  leads  are
required to recruit a new customer? Surveys show that
it  is  up  to  six  times  as  expensive  to  recruit  new  cus-
tomers as it is to retain existing customers (Rosenberg
and  Czepiel,  1983).  Furthermore,  loyal  customers 
are  assumed to  be  less  price sensitive (Krishnamurthi
and  Raj,  1991)  and  the  presence  of  loyal  customers
provides  the  ® rm  with  valuable  time  to  respond  to
competitive  actions  (Aaker,  1991).  Seybold  (1998)
described  the  economics  of  customer  loyalty  based 
on  a  pro® tability  model  developed  by  Reichheld
(1996).  The elements to achieving higher revenues via
customer retention are  (1)  base  revenue ±   the  longer
you  retain them, the  more money you  make,  (2)  cost
savings ±  they cost you less to serve, (3) price premium
±   they  pay  more  for  your  products,  (4)  acquisition
costs  ±   they  cross-sell and  up-sell themselves and  (5)
they  generate  referrals.

On  these  grounds it  is  not  surprising that  so  many
banks have embarked on customer loyalty programmes,
usually targeted at speci® c market segments. Here they
seek to establish durable relationships by adding value
to  services and  offering  favourable  prices. Banks  have
traditionally established strong brands and experienced
low  turnover  of  their  customer base.  Bank  customers
have generally been loyal to their main bank. Will on-
line banking in electronic markets change this situation?
`Electronic  commerce  is  transforming  the  market-
place  by  changing  ® rms’  business models, by  shaping
relations among market actors, and by contributing to

changes  in  market  structure’  (OECD,  1998,  p.  18).
Thus,  on-line  banking  in  electronic  markets  requires
new business models for banks. What are the new value
propositions  of  banks  needed  to  meet  customers’
buying  behaviour  in  electronic  markets  and  how  are
the  customer  values  created?  Rayport  and  Sviokla
(1994)  claimed that customer values are created in the
content  ±   the  functionality  of  the  product  or  service
provided  and  in  the  infrastructure  ±   the  channel  of
delivery  and  the  context  ±   the  way  the  product  or
service is presented to the customer. The World Wide
Web  on  the  Internet,  the  dominant  technological
platform  of  electronic  commerce  today,  has  unique
properties  that  enable  new  customer  values  to  be
created in content, infrastructure and context (Methlie,
1998).

The  Internet  and  electronic  markets  have  imposed
a fundamental shift in business economics. Evans and
Wurster (1997)  called  it  the  new  economics of  infor-
mation.  It  will  change  the  way  we  do  banking  in  all
core  areas:  production,  distribution,  trading  and
payment (Llewellyn, 1997).  It lowers transaction costs
(Bakos,  1991)  and  increases  the  economy  of  scale,
scope and speed in processing banking services to the
market.  As  a  result,  fundamental restructuring of  the
value  chains  in  banking  is  to  be  expected.  Llewellyn
(1997)  advocated  a  contract  model  of  banking  based
on  vertical  disintegration and  outsourcing; Evans  and
Wurster  (1997)  described  it  as  `deconstruction  of 
the  value  chain’   (p.  74)  and  Hagel  et  al.,  (1997, 
p.  43)  called it  `changing  the  entire value  proposition
of  retail  banks’.  Disintegration of  vertically  integrated
value chains in banking offers cost ef® ciency and added

0268± 3962   1999 The Association for Information Technology Trust


376

¯ exibility. `In this new world distribution will be done
by  the  phone  company,  statements  by 
® nancial
management  software,  facilitation  by  different  kinds 
of  agent  software,  and  origination  by  any  number  of
different  kinds  of  product  specialists’  (Evans  and
Wurster,  1997,  p.  77).

If  customer  loyalty  is  a  key  factor  in  achieving
pro® tability  in  banking,  as  can  be  inferred  from  the
many  loyalty  programmes  found  in  this  sector  and
electronic markets  are  changing  the  banking  environ-
ment  and  customer  relationships,  then  a  study  of 
what  determines  customer  loyalty  in  on-line  banking
should  be  of  great  interest.  Therefore,  in  this  paper
we  focus on  factors  that  keep  on-line customers loyal
to  banks  on  the  Internet.

Loyalty and the determinants of loyalty

Many de® nitions of loyalty have been presented in the
literature. Jacoby and Chestnut (1978) gave a summary
of  many  of  them.  Their  conclusion  was  that  the 
only way to reveal real loyalty is to measure customers’
attitudes  and  intentions  towards  the  brand  in  ques-
tion. Based  on  this,  Oliver  (1997)  de® ned customers’
loyalty as `a deeply held commitment to rebuy or repat-
ronize  a  preferred  product  or  service  consistently  in
the future, despite situational in¯ uences and marketing
efforts having the potential to cause switching behavior’
(p.  392).  This  means  that  customers  must  perceive 
the bank as better than competitors and that customers
must  like  the  bank  better  than  competitors  (affective
loyalty).  Rebuying  or  repatronizing  means  that  cus-
tomers  must  have  an  intention  to  keep  on  using  the
bank  in  the  future (conative  loyalty).  In other  words,
affective  loyalty  is  related  to  customers’  attitudes
towards  the  bank  while  conative  loyalty  is  related  to
customers’ behavioural intentions towards the bank in
the  future.  Based  on  this,  we  see  that  loyalty  is  not
only rebuying ±   or what  Dick  and Basu (1994)  called
spurious  loyalty  ±   but  that  loyalty  towards  a  brand 
also  implies  a  positive  attitude  towards  the  brand  in
addition to  intention  to  rebuy  the  brand.

In  this  paper,  we  address  the  question  of  what
determines  the  loyalty  of  on-line  banking  customers.
As  noted  above,  loyalty  is  a  complex,  aggregated
concept  that  cannot  be  de® ned  nor  measured  by 
any  single variable.  From marketing literature, several
antecedents of  loyalty  have  been revealed. Among the
determinants  of  loyalty  towards  a  brand  are  cus-
tomers’  satisfaction  with  the  brand  (Selnes,  1993;
Samuelsen  et  al.,  1997),  brand  reputation  (Selnes,
1993;  Samuelsen  et  al.,  1997),  switching  costs  (Dick
and  Basu,  1994),  salesperson  trust  (Macintosh  and
Lockshin, 1997),  salesperson commitment (Macintosh

Methlie and Nysveen

and Lockshin, 1997) and affective antecedents such as
emotion,  feeling  and  mood  (Dick  and  Basu,  1994).
Furthermore,  social  norms  and  situational  in¯ uences
are  assumed to  affect  loyalty  (Dick  and  Basu,  1994).
In  this  article,  we  focus  on  loyalty  among  bank
customers  on  the  Internet.  They  do  not  meet  sales-
persons.  Salesperson  trust  and  salesperson  commit-
ment  are  therefore  excluded  from  our  analysis.
Furthermore, we  have  excluded  affective  antecedents
such  as  emotion,  feeling  and  mood,  assuming  that
customer  relationships  are  primarily  based  on  cogni-
tive  evaluations  of  the  bank  due  to  the  nature  of  the
services  bought.  Search  costs  are  assumed  to  be
reduced  when  moving  from  the  traditional  market-
place to electronic markets (Bakos, 1991). Search costs
are also treated as a part of the switching cost construct
(Fornell,  1992).  Since  search  costs  are  regarded  as 
an  important  part  of  the  economics  of  electronic
markets,  we  chose  to  treat  search  costs  as  an  explicit
determinant of  loyalty  here.

From the  arguments above,  we  embark on a  model
of customer loyalty including the following four deter-
minants:  (1)  satisfaction  with  the  brand,  (2)  brand
reputation, (3)  switching  costs  and  (4)  search  costs.

they  buy.  This  reduces  the 

Moving  from  the  market-place  to  an  electronic
market changes  customer relationships. It  is  therefore
assumed that  some of  the  determinants of  loyalty  will
be  affected.  A  reduction 
in  search  costs  has 
been predicted (Bakos, 1991, 1997; Strader and Shaw,
1997). This reduction is assumed to reduce loyalty and
it  may  also  be  argued  that  it  will  change  the  effect  of
search  costs  on loyalty  relative  to  other  determinants.
Brand  reputation  is  often  used  as  a  heuristic  for  the
evaluation  of  a  brand. If  a  brand has  a  positive  repu-
tation, customers are supposed to be loyal to the brand.
Furthermore,  better  opportunities  in  searching  for
information about a brand in electronic markets make
it  easier  for  customers  to  evaluate  brand  attributes
before 
importance 
of  brand  reputation  as  a  heuristic  for  brand  quality. 
A  consequence  of  this  could  be  that  the  relative
importance of  brand reputation on loyalty  is  reduced.
Electronic  markets  also  enable  a  wide  range  of  new
seller  and  customer  relationships  to  be  set  up,  for
instance  increased  and  customized  product  informa-
tion,  customer  participation  in  product  development
and reduction in order ful®
lment time (Methlie, 1998).
All  this  may  improve  customer  satisfaction  (Strader
and Shaw, 1997).  By increasing customer satisfaction,
this  variable  may  increase  its  importance  as  a  deter-
minant  of  loyalty.  Based  on  these  possible  changes, 
a  fair  proposition  is  that  the  values  of  the  deter-
minants  of  loyalty  will  change  when  moving  bank
services from the physical market-place to an electronic
market.


Loyalty of on-line bank customers

377

From  research 

in  marketing  we  have 

some
knowledge  about  the  determinants  of  loyalty  in  the
physical  market-place.  Taking  this  knowledge  as  our
basis  we  want  to  investigate  whether  determinants of
loyalty  in the  market-place  hold in  electronic markets
as  well.  We  shall  look  at  the  following  determinants
of  loyalty:  customer  satisfaction  with  a  brand,  brand
reputation,  switching  costs  and  search  costs.

Satisfaction

Customer  satisfaction  is  a  post-choice  evaluation  of 
a  speci® c  transaction  (Selnes,  1993).  Early  studies
conceptualized  customer  satisfaction  as  customer
perception  of  product  performance  (Cardozo,  1965;
Anderson, 1973).  Later  studies showed that  customer
satisfaction is a function of customer perception of pro-
duct performance compared to a set of standards (e.g.
expectations,  values  and  norms)  ±   the  con® rmation/
discon® rmation  paradigm  (Yi,  1990).  Besides  the
direct  effect  of  con® rmation/discon® rmation,  both
expectation (the comparison standard) and perception
of  brand performance are found to  have  direct effects
on  customer satisfaction  with  a  brand  (Churchill  and
Surprenant, 1982;  Yi,  1990).

Satisfaction  is  considered  to  act  as  an  antecedent 
of  loyalty,  arising  out of  direct prior experience (Dick
and  Basu,  1994).  Several  studies  have  found  support
for  the  positive  relationship  between  customer  satis-
faction  with  a  brand  and  their  loyalty  towards  that
brand  (Fornell,  1992;  Sandvik  and  Duhan,  1996;
Samuelsen  et  al.,  1997).  `Loyal  customers  are  not
necessarily satis® ed customers, but satis® ed customers
tend  to  be  loyal  customers’  (Fornell,  1992,  p.  7).  A
satis® ed customer has few incentives to change supplier
or  brand.  Therefore,  `Customer  satisfaction  makes  it
costly  for  a  competitor  to  take  away  another  ® rm’s
customer’ (Fornell, 1992,  p. 10).  Satisfying customers
should therefore be of  great  importance to  vendors in
keeping  their  customers loyal.

Customers  who  are  satis® ed  with  their  bank  prob-
ably  develop a  positive  attitude  towards  the  bank.  As
a  result,  their  intention  to  stay  with  the  bank  in  the
future  is  likely  to  be  high.  Based  on  this  argument 
we  propose  the  following  hypotheses.

: Increasing customer satisfaction leads to higher

H
affective  loyalty.

1a

: Increasing customer satisfaction leads to higher

H
conative  loyalty.

1b

Brand reputation

A  brand  is  a  name,  term,  symbol,  sign  or  design  to
identify  the  goods  or  services  of  one  seller  and  to

differentiate  them  from  those  of  competitors  (Keller,
1998). Brand reputation has been de® ned as a percep-
tion  of  quality  associated  with  the  brand’s  name
(Selnes, 1993).  A  strong  brand is  a  brand with  `a  set
of assets linked to a brand’s name or symbol that adds
to  the  value  provided by  a  product  or  service  to  that
® rm’s  customers’  (Aaker,  1996,  pp.  7± 8).  A  strong
brand  is  a  signal  of  quality;  it  is  a  risk  reducer  for
customers and  it  reduces search  costs  (Keller,  1998).
A  brand  name  ±   or  a  brand’s  reputation  ±   is  often
used  as  a  heuristic  for  choice  when  intrinsic  cues  or
attributes are dif® cult or impossible to employ (Selnes,
1993). Brand reputation and satisfaction may look like
the  same  construct. In  the  literature,  however,  brand
reputation  is  seen  more  as  a  long-term  and  overall
evaluation  of  the  product  than  customer  satisfaction
(Selnes, 1993).

A  positive  relationship  is  expected  between  brand
reputation and customer loyalty to the brand (Sandvik
and Duhan, 1996). The reason for this is that a brand’s
reputation  might  function  as  a  social  norm  and  that
customers  often  rely  on  the  beliefs  of  their  reference
groups  to  a  great  extent.  Another  reason  why  brand
reputation  is  important  for  loyalty  is  that  it  may  be
dif® cult to evaluate satisfaction with a product directly
in  some  situations.  In  such  situations  the  brand
reputation  is  used  as  a  heuristic  for  evaluating  the
product. However,  an  important point  to  note  is  that
customer satisfaction with a brand is a determinant of
brand reputation in  some situations. In  the  insurance
industry,  for  instance,  customer  satisfaction  with  a
brand  is  found  to  have  a  positive  relation  to  brand
reputation  (Selnes,  1993).  This  underscores both  the
direct  and  indirect effects  of  customer satisfaction  on
customers’  loyalty.  However,  in  this  paper  we  are
focusing  on  the  direct  effect  of  customer  satisfaction
on  loyalty.  The  expected  effects  of  brand  reputation
on  affective  and  conative  loyalty  are  presented as  the
following  hypotheses.

:  Increasing  brand  reputation  leads  to  higher

H
affective  loyalty.

2a

:  Increasing  brand  reputation  leads  to  higher

H
conative  loyalty.

2b

Switching costs

Porter  (1980)  de® ned  switching  costs  as  the  costs 
of  switching  from  one  supplier’s  product  to  another
supplier’s  product.  Fornell  (1992)  included  search
costs,  transaction  costs,  learning  costs,  customers’
habits,  emotional  costs  and  cognitive  effort  in  the
switching  costs  construct.  As  can  be  seen,  switching
costs include both economic and psychological values.
Switching  costs  is  a  common  strategy  to  increase


378

loyalty  (Dick  and  Basu,  1994).  Currently  banks  are
eager  to  launch  loyalty  programmes where  customers
obtain  substantial  bene® ts  by  holding  most  of  their
banking  business within  one bank  (positive  lock-in).

`Switching  barriers  make  it  costly  for  the  customer
to  switch  to  another  supplier’  (Fornell,  1992,  p.  10).
The  implication  of  this  proposition  is  a  positive
relationship  between  switching  costs  and  customer 
loyalty.  High  switching  costs  retain  customers  from
changing banking relationships. Therefore, an increase
in  switching  costs  will  lead  to  an  increase  in  loyalty.
Since  this  is  a  kind  of  `lock-in’  strategy,  it  probably
has  a  positive  effect,  mainly  on  the  intention to  keep
on  as  a  customer  (conative  loyalty)  rather  than  on
customers’  affective  commitment  towards  the  bank
(affective  loyalty).  Customers  will  probably  perceive
high  switching  costs  as  something  negative  which
reduces their  ¯ exibility  to  switch  supplier or  product.
Therefore, we  predict a  negative  relationship between
switching  costs  and  affective  loyalty  and  argue  the
following  hypotheses.

: Increased switching costs lead to lower affective

H
loyalty.

3a

: Increased  switching  costs 

H
conative  loyalty.

3b

lead  to  higher

Methlie and Nysveen

:  Increased search  costs  lead  to  lower  affective

H
loyalty.

4a

:  Increased search  costs  lead  to  higher  conative

H
loyalty.

4b

Affective and conative loyalty

Affective loyalty is a component of loyalty that focuses
on how much a  customer likes the  bank  or how posi-
tive their attitude is towards the bank. Conative loyalty
focuses on  the  customer’s  intention  to  keep  on  using
the  bank  in  the  future.  Fishbein  and  Ajzen  (1975)
argued  that  attitude  towards  a  product  predicts  atti-
tude  towards  buying  the  product.  Attitude  towards
buying the  product is assumed to  predict intention to
buy  the  product.  In  marketing  literature,  attitude
towards  a  product is  often  used  as  a  direct  predictor
of intention to buy the product (Homer, 1990; Brown
and Stayman, 1992).  Based on this, it seems plausible
to  predict  a  positive  effect  of  affective  loyalty  on 
conative  loyalty.  Therefore, we  propose  the  following
hypothesis.

: Increased  affective 

H
conative  loyalty.

5

loyalty 

leads  to  higher

Search costs

Fornell  (1992) 
included  search  costs  as  part  of 
the  switching  costs  construct.  In  this  paper,  search
costs  are  treated  as  a  construct  of  their  own  since
search costs are an important aspect of the economics
of  electronic  markets  and  a  key  concept  in  studying
buyers’  behaviour.  A  standard  de® nition  of  buyers’
search  costs  in  the  economic  literature  is  `the  cost
incurred by  the  buyer  to  locate  an  appropriate  seller
and  purchase  a  product’  (Bakos,  1997,  p.  1677).  A
major  impact  of  electronic  markets  is  that  they 
reduce  the  costs  customers  must  pay  to  search  for
information  about  products  in  the  market  (Bakos,
1991).

High search costs are assumed to make it expensive
for  customers  to  shop  around  for  the  best  offer  in 
the  market.  The  implication of  this  is  that  it  is  costly
for  customers  to  ® nd  alternative  brands  or  suppliers.
Therefore,  they  keep  on  using  the  same  brand  or 
the  same supplier. This implies that  high  search costs
lead  to  high  conative  loyalty.  However,  customers 
are  probably  not  satis® ed  with  a  situation  where  it  is
dif® cult  to  ® nd  alternatives  and,  thus,  having  limited
¯ exibility  being  imposed  on  them.  Therefore,  it  is
assumed that the relationship between search costs and
affective  loyalty  is  negative  ±   as  for  switching  costs.

The model

So  far  we  have  presented  four  determinants  of
signi® cant importance for loyalty, both affective loyalty
and  conative  loyalty  in  traditional  markets.  In  this
paper,  we  want  to  study  the  effects  of  these  determi-
nants  in  the  context  of  on-line  banking.  Figure  1
depicts the  model of  our study.  Positive  and  negative
postulated  relations  are  represented  by  +  and  ± ,
respectively.

Figure  1 The  proposed  model  for  the  study.


Loyalty of on-line bank customers

The analysis will show whether the drivers for loyalty
are valid for both affective loyalty and conative loyalty.
The  hypotheses  are  summarized in  Figure  1.

The study

To  test  the  hypotheses,  we  collected  data  from
customers  of  three  banks  delivering  services  on  the
Internet. The  study  was  carried  out  in  January  1998.
As for  most banks  on  the  Internet today,  the  services
currently available are primarily account-based services
(bill  payment,  money  transfers  between  accounts and
account 
information).  Data  were  collected  by  a
questionnaire accessible on  the  home page  of  each  of
the  three  banks  for  10  days.  The  respondents  ®
lled
out  the  questionnaire on  their  computer  screens  and
returned the  data  by  the  Internet. The  data  collected
were  organized  in  an  Access  database  and  copied  to
LISREL  for  statistical  analysis.  Respondents  could 
win prizes by  answering the  questionnaire. Therefore,
we  controlled  for  multiple  responses  from  identical
persons  by  checking  their  Internet  addresses.  A  total
of 1463  respondents answered the  questionnaire. The
respondents were between 18  and 71  years old with a
mean  age  of  36  years  compared  to  the  mean  age  of
the  population  of  37  years.  Of  the  respondents,  6%
were  women,  compared to  18%  of  the  population  of
Internet  bank  customers  at  the  time  of  the  study.
Therefore,  women  were  under-represented  in  the
sample. However, after splitting the two groups ±  men
and  women  ±   we  found  no  signi® cant  difference
between  them  with  respect  to  the  effect  on  the  two
loyalty  constructs discussed in this  paper. Only 9%  of
the  sample  had  not  ® nished high  school.  As  many  as
73%  of  the  respondents  had  been  to  college  for  3 
or  more  years,  of  which  nearly  60%  had  a  degree  in
engineering or  business. From more general  data,  we
know  that  well-educated  people  are  the  strongest 
users  of  the  Internet.  Overall,  our  sample  was  fairly
representative  of  the  population  except  for  the  over-
representation of  men  in  the  sample  which,  however,
as  mentioned  above,  did  not  represent  a  problem  in
our analysis.

Measures, reliability and validity

In the  study  we  looked at  search  costs  as  a  construct
separated from other switching costs. Search costs were
measured  by  two  items:  (1)  `I  used  a  lot  of  time
searching  for  information about  other  banks’  services
before I selected the bank’  and (2) `I used several infor-
mation sources to collect information before I selected
the  bank’ .  Switching  costs  were  measured  by  (1)  `I
think  I  will  lose  money  by  quitting  my  relationship

379

with  my  bank’   and  (2)  `I  think  it  will  cost  a  lot  of
money  to  change  bank’ .  For  satisfaction  we  used  (1)
`So  far,  my  bank  has  satis® ed  my  expectations’  and
(2)  `I feel that  my bank manage my loan and deposits
in  a  good  way’ .  Three  items  were  used  to  measure
brand reputation: (1) `My bank has a good reputation
among  my  friends’,  (2)  `My  bank  has  a  good  reputa-
tion  compared  to  other  banks’  and  (3)  `My  bank 
gets  a  lot  of  new  customers  because  it  has  a  good
reputation’. In discussing loyalty above, we argued that
loyalty 
includes  both  a  deeply  held  commitment
towards  the  bank  (affective  loyalty)  and  an  intention
to keep on using the bank (conative loyalty).  Affective
loyalty  was  measured  by  (1)  `My  bank  has  personal
meaning  to  me’  and  (2)  `I  feel  that  I  belong  to  my
bank’ .  Conative loyalty  was  measured as  (1)  `I  intend
to keep on as a customer at my bank’  and (2) `I gladly
recommend my bank to other people that I know’. All
items were measured on a seven-point scale from very
negative  (1)  to  very  positive  (7).  Reliability  was
assessed  by  inspecting  the  item  reliability  and  mean
variance extracted. As shown in Table 1, the values of
item  reliability  are  between  0.55  and  1.0  indicating
reliable  measures.  The  values  of  the  mean  variance
extracted varied from  0.84  to  0.70,  all  well above  the
0.5 
level  suggested  by  Bagozzi  and  Yi  (1988).
Consequently, we  argue  that  reliability  is  assured (cf.
Table  1).

According to Anderson and Gerbing (1988), conver-
gent  validity  can  be  assessed  by  determining whether
each  indicator’s  estimated  pattern  coef® cient  on  its
underlying  construct  is  signi® cant.  This  is  done  by
checking  the  t-values  for  the  indicators  of  the  factor
loadings  (see  Table  2).  The  results  show  that  all  of
the pattern coef® cients were signi® cant. Consequently,
convergent  validity  is  assured.

Discriminant  validity  is  assessed  by  determining
whether  the  con® dence  interval  (± 2 SE)  around  the
correlation  estimate  between  two  constructs  includes
1.0  (absolute value). The results presented in Table 3
show that none of the con® dence intervals included 1.0
(absolute value), thus indicating discriminating validity.
Although  all  constructs  passed  the  Anderson  and
Gerbing (1988)  test for both convergent and discrimi-
nant  validity,  this  test  is  admittedly  a  weak  test  of
discriminant  validity,  particularly  with  such  a  large
sample.  Consequently,  discriminant  validity  was  also
assessed  by  the  procedure  suggested  by  Fornell  and
Larcker  (1981).  They  argued  that  the  mean  variance
extracted  should  be  higher  for  each  latent  construct
than  the  squared  correlation  between  the  constructs.
From Tables 2 and 3, we see that none of the squared
correlations  between  the  constructs  were  higher  than
the mean variance extracted for each of the constructs.
Consequently, discriminant validity  is  assured.


380

Table 1 Reliability

Construct

Item

Methlie and Nysveen

Mean 

Item 
reliability variance 
extracted

Search  costs

I  used  a  lot  of  time  searching  for  information  about  other  banks’  

Switching  costs

Customer  satisfaction

Brand reputation

Affective  loyalty

Conative  loyalty

services  before  I  selected the  bank

I  used  several  information  sources  to  collect information  before  I 

selected the  bank

I  think  that  I  will  lose  money  by  quitting  my  relationship  with  my  bank
I  think  that  it  will  cost  a  lot  of  money  to  change  bank
So  far,  my  bank  has  satis® ed  my  expectations
I  feel  that  my  bank  manages  my  loan  and  deposits  in  a  good  way
My  bank  has  a  good  reputation among  my  friends
My  bank  has  a  good  reputation compared  to  other  banks
My  bank  gets  a  lot  of  new  customers  because it  has  a  good  reputation
My  bank  has  personal  meaning  to  me
I  feel  that  I  belong  to  my  bank
I  intend  to  keep  on  as  a  customer  at  my  bank
I  gladly  recommend my  bank  to  other  people  that  I  know

0.93

0.70
1.00
0.55
0.73
0.66
0.71
0.79
0.60
0.76
0.91
0.72
0.81

0.82

0.78

0.70

0.70

0.84

0.77

Search 
costs

0.96 
(17.87)
0.84 
(17.21)

Table 2 Measuring model

I  used  a  lot  of  time  searching  for  information  about 

other  banks’   services  before  I  selected the  bank

I  used  several  information  sources  to  collect 

information  before  I  selected the  bank

I  think  that  I  will  lose  money  by  quitting  my 

relationship  to  my  bank

I  think  that  it  will  cost  a  lot  of  money  to 

change  bank

So  far,  my  bank  has  satis® ed  my  expectations

I  feel  that  my  bank  manages  my  loan  and 

deposits  in  a  good  way

My  bank  has  a  good  reputation  among  my  friends

My  bank  has  a  good  reputation  compared  to 

other  banks

My  bank  gets  a  lot  of  new  customers  because  it 

has  a  good  reputation

My  bank  has  personal  meaning  to  me

I  feel  that  I  belong  to  my  bank

I  intend  to  keep  on  as  a  customer at  my  bank

I  gladly  recommend my  bank  to  other  people 

that  I  know

Values  are  standardized  estimates  with  t-values  in  parentheses.

Switch 
costs

SatisfactionReputation

Affective  Conative 
loyalty

loyalty

1.00 
(27.94)
0.74 
(23.27)

0.85 
(37.46)
0.81 
(38.08)

0.84 
(38.08)
0.89 
(41.33)
0.78 
(33.85)

0.87 
(39.15)
0.95 
(44.21)

0.85 
(38.64)
0.90 
(42.24)

±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±

Loyalty of on-line bank customers

Table 3 Estimated correlation coef® cients between latent constructs

Search  costs

Switch  costs

Satisfaction

Reputation

381

Affective 
loyalty

Conative 
loyalty

Search  costs
Switching  costs

Satisfaction

Reputation

Affective  loyalty

Conative  loyalty

1.00
0.06a
0.03b
2.34c
0.05
0.03
1.67
0.06
0.03
2.26
± 0.10
0.03
± 3.49
0.02
0.03
0.74

1.00

0.34
0.03
12.08
0.28
0.03
10.38
0.30
0.03
11.27
0.30
0.03
11.04

a Estimated  correlation coef® cients.
b Standard  deviation.
c t-values.

Results

The  results of  the  analysis  are  presented in  Figure  2.
As  can  be  seen,  we  analysed  the  effects  of  the
antecedents on both affective and conative loyalty. Due
to the x 2’ s well-known dependency on sample size, the

Figure 2 The  results  of  the  study

1.00

0.64
0.02
31.70
0.54
0.02
23.46
0.82
0.01
56.50

1.00

0.50
0.02
22.41
0.67
0.02
36.28

1.00

0.67
0.02
37.13

1.00

model  ® t  was  deemed to  be  satisfactory  even  though
the x 2 p-value was signi® cant. The sample size of 1463
was considered to be large and, consequently, we based
the  ® t  assessment  on  other  indices.  The  root  mean
square  error  of  approximation  (RMSEA)  was  0.047,
which  is  below  the  recommended 0.05  level  (Browne
and  Cudeck,  1992).  Both  the  goodness  of  ® t  index
(GFI  = 0.98)  and  the  comparative  ® t  index  (CFI
= 0.99)  were  satisfactory.

Figure  2  illustrates  the  relationships  between  the
antecedents and  affective  loyalty  and  conative loyalty,
respectively.  From  the  squared  multiple  correlations
we infer that the model predicts the two kinds of loyalty
fairly  well,  with  76%  of  the  variance  explained  for
conative  loyalty  and  36%  of  the  variance  explained 
for  affective  loyalty.

The  results  show  that  customer  satisfaction  and
brand  reputation  are  the  two  most  important  deter-
minants for both affective loyalty  and conative loyalty.
For conative loyalty, customer satisfaction (0.57) is the
main antecedent but brand reputation also has a signi-
® cant  effect  (0.16).  The  effects  of  switching  costs
(± 0.02) and search costs (0.01) on conative loyalty are
not signi® cant. The effect of affective loyalty on cona-
tive  loyalty  is  positive  and  signi® cant.

For  affective  loyalty,  the  results  support  three  of 
the  four hypotheses presented in Figure  1.  The  effect
of  customer  satisfaction  (0.33),  brand  reputation
(0.27)  and  search costs (± 0.14)  are all  signi® cant  and
in  the  predicted  direction.  The  relationship  between
switching  costs  and  affective  loyalty,  however,  is
positive and signi® cant  (0.12),  rather than  negative  as

±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±

382

hypothesized. The implication of this is that an increase
in  switching  costs  leads  to  an  increase  in  affective
loyalty.

1a

2a

1b

,  H

,  H

and  H

Based  on  these  results,  we  conclude  with  support
for  the  satisfaction  hypotheses  and  the  brand  reputa-
tion hypotheses for both affective  and conative loyalty
(H
).  The  predicted  effect  of 
search  costs  on  affective  loyalty  is  supported  (H
),
while  the  postulated  effect  of  search  cost  on  conative
loyalty  is  not  signi® cant.  None  of  the  switching  costs
hypotheses were supported. The results show  support
for the predicted effect of affective loyalty  on conative
loyalty  (H

).

2b

4a

5

Implications of the results

The  ® ndings  of  this  study  support  the  hypothesized
effects  of  customer  satisfaction  and  brand  reputation
on  affective  and  conative  loyalty.  The  results indicate
stronger  support  for  satisfaction  and  reputation  than
for  switching  costs  and  search  costs  as  determinants
of  loyalty.  This  applies  to  both  affective  and  conative
loyalty.  Since customer satisfaction and brand reputa-
tion  are  the  main  determinants  of  loyalty,  banks  on
the  Internet should struggle  to  satisfy  their  customers
and  build strong  brands.

Satisfaction

Customer  satisfaction  is  associated  with  an  overall
performance of the banking relationship that customers
experience  through  repeated  transactions  with  the
bank.  As  described  above,  customer  satisfaction  is
determined by  two  indicators:  expectations  (compari-
son standards) and  peformance perception. As shown
in Figure 2, customer satisfaction explains more of the
variation  in  conative  loyalty  than  in  affective  loyalty.
The effect of customer satisfaction on loyalty con® rms
previous  ® ndings  that  satis® ed  customers  tend  to  be
loyal  (Fornell,  1992;  Sandvik  and  Duhan,  1996;
Samuelsen et  al.,  1997).

In order to achieve loyal customers banks must know
how  to  satisfy  their  customers.  Thus,  focus  on  the
customers  must  be  given  highest  priority  in  on-line
banking.  However,  a  critical  issue  follows:  how  can
banks  remain  in  control  of  customers’  access  to  the
distribution  channels?  In  the  physical  market-place
banks have dedicated links to their customers through
their  branch  network.  In  electronic  markets,  services
are  mediated  through  a  distribution  channel  with
several intermediaries participating in the value chain:
context  providers,  network  operators,  Internet  access
providers, business service providers (portals)  and,  to
an  increasing  extent,  brokers  and  (software)  agents.

Methlie and Nysveen

From  having  a  dedicated  link  to  their  customers
through  branches,  banks,  as  the  ultimate  product
providers,  are  pushed  backwards  in  the  value  chain
with  the  danger of  losing  control  of  customer access.
Disintermediation and  loss  of  customer control mean
reduced opportunities for  fostering  customer satisfac-
tion  and  building  strong  brands.  To  achieve  this
control,  we  predict  that  cooperation  with  new  actors
in  the  value  chain  will  be  needed.  This  may  also  be
supplemented by focused acquisitions and licensing of
software  products (Gordon, 1996).

To satisfy customers, it is important to listen to their
needs  and  desires  (Sterne,  1998).  Therefore,  it  is  of
vital  importance to  give  customers the  opportunity to
respond to  offers.  Responding  can  include questions,
comments on  services, suggestions for  improvements,
demands, etc. and can be mediated through the e-mail
system. Another way  to satisfy customers is to person-
alize  services.  Loyal  customers  can  be  obtained  by
providing  them  with  personal  attention  (Allen  et  al.,
1998).  Personalized  bank  services  may  be  offered  by
customized information about savings, funds and credit
offers. `Frequently asked  questions’  (FAQ), organized
discussion groups  and  the  use  of  push  technology  to
move  personalized  messages  to  customers  are  other
means by which added value for the customers can be
created. Furthermore, value can be added by providing
support tools such as personal ® nancial systems (PFS)
to  help  customers  manage  their  family  economy  and
® nancial matters. Value-added services are assumed to
make  customers more satis® ed.

Brand reputation

Branding  and  brand  reputation  have  been  discussed 
in  the  marketing  literature  over  the  last  10  years.
Reputation  seems  to  be  an  important  determinant of
loyalty  when  products  are  dif® cult 
to  evaluate
(Samuelsen  et  al.,  1997).  In  markets  with  many
suppliers,  complex  services  and  unclear  values  and
preferences,  rational  choices  are  dif® cult  to  make.
Mechanisms to  simplify  buying  decisions are  needed.
Brand  reputation  is  one  such  mechanism  where
information  gathering  and  processing  are  reduced  by
substituting  attribute  evaluation  with  heuristics  ±   the
brand. Our study  indicates that  brand reputation is  a
signi® cant  determinant  of  loyalty,  although  not  as
strong  as    customer satisfaction.

To explain  why customer satisfaction seems to be a
stronger determinant of  loyalty  than  brand reputation
we  have  to  look  at  the  bank  services  currently  avail-
able  from  most  of  the  Internet  banks.  Brand  reputa-
tion  is  thought  of  as  being  a  strong  determinant  of
loyalty in markets with complex products where simpli-
fying  buying  decisions  is  needed.  The  bank  services


Loyalty of on-line bank customers

available  to  the  customers  in  our  study  may  be
perceived as standardized services, although with rather
complex cost structures (fees, interest rates, etc.). This
may  explain  why  satisfaction  seems  to  be  a  more 
signi® cant  determinant of  loyalty  ±   conative  loyalty  in
particular ±  than brand reputation. However, we antici-
pate  that  the  importance  of  brand  reputation  will
increase as  new  services  such  as  purchases of  stocks,
mutual  funds,  loans,  etc.,  become  more  common  on
the  Internet.

The results indicate that a strong brand is an impor-
tant  determinant  of  loyalty.  `Building  brand  equity
requires  creating  a  brand  that  consumers  are  aware 
of  and  with  which  consumers have  strong,  favorable
and  unique brand associations’  (Keller,  1998,  p.  68).
To  build  brand  equity,  banks  should  choose  brand
elements (brand, slogans and/or logo) that identify and
differentiate  the  brand.  Furthermore,  marketing  pro-
grammes that  include price strategy,  product strategy,
communication  strategy  and  channel  strategy  should
be implemented to build strong, favourable and unique
associations.  In  this  process,  alternative  communica-
tion  options  such  as  media  advertising  (television,
radio, newspapers, magazines and the Internet), direct
response advertising, outdoor advertising,  sponsorship
and  event  marketing  should be  used.

Switching costs

According to our results, switching costs have a positive
effect  on  affective  loyalty,  in  contrast  to  the  negative
relationship  postulated  in  the  hypothesis.  A  possible
explanation  is  that  customers  may  feel  that  they 
are  saving  money  by  being  loyal  to  one  bank  instead
of  focusing  on  the  negative  effects  of  being  `locked 
in’.  By  keeping  one  primary  banking  relationship 
customers  save  themselves  from  switching  costs.
Customers appreciate  this  and  two  lines  of  reasoning
may explain this. Either customers focus on the added
value  of  a  one-stop banking relationship or customers
regard  the  investment  in  a  banking  relationship  as  a
sunk  cost,  thus  disregarding  the  negative  effects  of
being  locked in.  An appreciation  of  added  value  may
be associated with intangible assets related to personal
services,  better  ® nancial  control  of  the  account,  etc.
On the  other  hand, the  positive  relationship may  also
be  explained  by  a  rather  unre¯ ected  attitude:  either
the  switching  costs  are  regarded  as  insigni® cant  or
customers do  not  have  the  feeling  of  being  exploited
by  the  bank.  It  might  also  imply  that  customers look
at  switching barriers as a necessity ±  something that  is
inherent in the  services (Andreassen, 1998).  This can
be  explained  by  the  nature  of  the  banking  services
commonly available on-line today ±  primarily account-
based  services.

383

Although switching barriers can be built on negative
elements such as  lock-in factors it  seems more appro-
priate  to  build  switching  barriers  on  elements  that
provide  customers  with  added  value.  Many  of  the
loyalty  programmes  offered  today  are  based  on  such
values,  for  example  reduced  interest  rates,  reduced
fees, etc. In this way, being locked in to one bank can
be  perceived  as  a  positive  relationship  strengthening
loyalty  to  the  bank.  Figure  2  shows  that  switching
barriers  have  a  signi® cant  effect  on  affective  loyalty 
but not on conative loyalty.  The reason for this  could
be that changing banking relationships on the Internet
today  is  perceived as  easy.

Search costs

The search costs in this  study focus on the  time used
to  establish  an  Internet  relationship  with  a  bank.  As
postulated in the hypotheses, the effect of search costs
on  affective  loyalty  is  found  to  be  negative  implying
that  reduced  search  costs  lead  to  increased  affective
loyalty.  This  may  indicate  that  the  customers  value
their  time  highly  and  that  the  alternative  costs  are 
high.  This  can  be  explained by  demography. Internet
bank  customers  are  well-educated  and  have  salaries
above  average.  The  time  they  spend  on  searching 
for product information reduces the  time available for
other  activities  such  as  working  or  leisure.  They  are
not  willing  to  spend  their  valuable  time  searching  for
and  evaluating  alternative  offers.  Thus,  the  effect 
of  search  costs  on  affective  loyalty  is  negative  and  a
reduction  in  search  costs  leads  to  increased  affective
loyalty  (Andreassen, 1998).

An  implication  of  this  ® nding  is  that  banks  should
struggle  to  reduce  search  costs  to  increase  affective
loyalty.  Internet  customers  have  the  opportunity  of
achieving  reduced  search  costs  (Bakos,  1991,  1997).
By  taking  advantage  of  technology  such  as  search
engines  and  intelligent  agents,  search  costs  may  be
reduced. For banks, however, such agents and engines
may  imply  a  competitive  risk.  Sophisticated  search
agents  and  engines  give  the  customers  a  unique
opportunity  of  comparing  offers  of  similar  products
from  several  suppliers.  If  customers  take  advantage 
of  this  opportunity,  it  will  lead  to  pressure on  prices
and  pro® t  margins.  Theoretically,  this  should  lead 
to  a  reduction in  conative  loyalty.  However, the  ® nd-
ings  of  this  study  indicate  no  effect  of  search  costs 
on  conative  loyalty.  Studies  show  that  the  services 
offered  by  banks  on  the  Internet  are  very  similar
(Nettavisen,  1998).  Since  searching  for  alternative
services does not lead to signi® cantly better offers, this
may  explain  why  search  costs  are  not  an  important
determinant  of  conative  loyalty  to  banks  on  the
Internet.


384

Affective loyalty

The  positive  effect  of  affective  loyalty  on  conative
loyalty  found  in  this  study  underlines the  importance
of  building  personal  relations  with  customers  to
increase their intention to keep on as customers in the
bank.  As  discussed  earlier,  this  may  be  done  by  the
use  of  several  communication  techniques  offered  on
the  Internet,  for  example  e-mail.  Personal  attention
and  personalized  services  will  probably  be  of  great
importance for  customers’  attitudes  towards  the  bank
and,  through  this,  also  of  great  importance for  cona-
tive  loyalty.

Limitations of the study

In  this  study  we  have  argued  for  causal  relationships
between  the  antecedents  of  loyalty  and  affective  and
conative  loyalty.  Demonstration  of  causality  involves
three  distinct  operations:  demonstrating  co-variation,
eliminating  spurious  relations  and  establishing  the 
time  order  of  the  occurrences  (Frankfort-Nachmias
and  Nachmias,  1992).  A  cross-sectional  study,  a
correlational design, was  used in  this  survey. We can,
therefore,  demonstrate  co-variance  between  the  vari-
ables.  Elimination  of  spurious  relations  includes  the
use  of  a  homogenous  sample  and  a  set  of  control
variables.  In  this  study  the  sample  is  homogeneous
with  respect  to  the  banking  relationship ±   all  respon-
dents were  users of  Internet banks. However,  the  age
of  the  respondents  varied  from  18  to  71  years,  94%
were  men  and  6%  were  women  and  they  differed  in
education. Other control variables were not measured
and  could therefore  not  be  used  as  co-variates.  Time
order  is  not  possible  to  establish  by  the  use  of  a 
cross-sectional study. Therefore, loyalty may have been
established  prior  to  the  measurements  of  the  ante-
cedent  variables  and  not  the  other  way  around  as
argued  above  (cf.  Figure  1).  However,  the  assumed
relations  are  based  on  theory  and  logic  that  indicate
that the antecedent variables are established before the
criteria  variables.

The questionnaire was available for all customers of
the  three  banks  using  the  Internet  as  a  channel  for
bank  services.  The  customers  themselves  chose
whether  they  wanted  to  ®
ll  out  the  questionnaire  or
not. This procedure leads to self-selection, which may
cause  a  biased  sample.  However,  the  demography  of
the respondents ±  compared to the demography of the
population of Internet users of the three banks ±  indi-
cates that the sample is fairly representative except for
the  over-representation  of  men  in  the  sample.  We
analysed  the  model  for  women  and  men  separately.
The  results  show  that  there  are  no  signi® cant  differ-

Methlie and Nysveen

ences between the  two  groups for any  of  the  relation-
ships.  This  indicates  that  the  over-representation  of
men in  the  sample does not  bias  the  results.

Concluding Remarks

`Gauging  ±   and communicating ±   what  your products
and  services  are  worth  to  customers  has  never  been
more important’  (Anderson and  Narus, 1998,  p.  53).
This  proposition  is  even  truer  when  it  comes  to
commerce in electronic markets. In this paper we have
described the results of some empirical ® ndings of what
determines loyalty when bank services are moved from
the  market-place to  on-line banking. In this study, we 
have  tested  the  determinants  known  from  marketing
literature to hold in traditional markets to see whether 
these  determinants  also  hold  in  the  new  markets  of
electronic  banking.  The  ® ndings  indicate  that  this  is
true  to  some  extent.  Customer  satisfaction,  however,
is found to have the greatest impact, followed by brand
reputation, while switching costs and search costs have
less  explanatory  power  of  loyalty.

At  the  core  of  all  successful  business  relationships
are satisfaction and trust. Trust can be built by brands.
Satisfaction  and  trust  can  be  expressed  in  customer
values.  There  is  a  growing  interest  in  being  able  to
express customer values in electronic commerce. Banks
need to reassess their customer value proposition when
moving  into  electronic  markets.  In  addition,  there  is
an  increasing  focus  on  loyalty  programmes  in  retail
banking  today.  The  ® ndings  of  this  study  should  be
of  particular  interest  in  forming  marketing  strategies
for banks in general and for these loyalty  programmes
in  particular.

We  have  outlined  above  some  limitations  of  this
study. However, despite these limitations we claim that
the  results  found  are  valid  and  relevant.  We  should,
however, be aware that the ® ndings are associated with
the banking services available at the three banks in our
study.  These  services  are  the  most  common  banking
services  on  the  Internet  today  and,  as  stated  above,
are  primarily  account-based  services.  With  banking
services of  the  more  `shopping  types’ ,  such  as  buying
consumer loans,  mortgages,  stocks,  etc.,  the  situation
may  change.  Therefore, it  will  be  interesting  to  do  a
similar  empirical study  in  2± 3  years  time.

Acknowledgements

This study is part  of  a  research programme on  multi-
media  banking  at  the  Foundation  for  Research  in
Economics  and  Business  Administration 
funded 
jointly  by  the  Norwegian Research Council and  three


Loyalty of on-line bank customers

business partners: Telenor, Schibsted and Sparebanken
Hedmark.  The  authors  wish  to  thank  Einar  Breivik,
associate  professor  of  the  Norwegian  School  of  Eco-
nomics  and  Business  Administration,  for  support  in
the  statistical  analysis  of  the  data  using LISREL.

References

Aaker, D.A. (1991) Managing Brand Equity (The Free Press,

New  York).

Aaker,  D.A.  (1996) Building  Strong  Brands (The Free Press,

New  York).

Allen,  C.,  Kania,  D. and Yaeckel, B. (1998) Internet  World.
Guide to One-to-one  Web Marketing (John Wiley & Sons,
Inc.,  New York).

Anderson,  J.C.  and  Narus,  J.A.  (1998) Business  marketing:
understand  what  customers  value.  Harvard  Business
Review November± December  76(6), 53± 65.

Anderson, J.C.  and Gerbing,  D.W. (1988) Structural equa-
tion  modelling in  practice:  a  review  and  recommended
two-step approach. Psychological Bulletin 103(3), 411± 23.
Anderson,  R.E.  (1973) Consumer  dissatisfaction:  the  effect
of  discon® rmed  expectancy  on  perceived  product 
performance.  Journal  of Marketing Research February X,
38± 44.

Andreassen,  M.  (1998)  Loyalty  and  bank  services  on
Internet. Thesis,  The  Norwegian  School  of  Economics
and  Business  Administration,  Bergen,  Norway.

Bagozzi, R.P.  and Yi, Y.  (1988) On the evaluation of  struc-
tural  equation  models.  Journal  of  the  Academy  of
Marketing  Science 16(1), 74± 94.

Bakos,  J.Y.  (1991) A  strategic analysis  of electronic market-
places.  MIS  Quarterly September  15(3),  1676± 92,
295± 310.

Bakos, J.Y. (1997) Reducing buyer search costs: implications
for  electronic marketplaces.  Management  Science 43(12)
1676± 92.

Brown,  S.P.  and  Stayman,  D.M.  (1992)  Antecedents  and
consequences of attitude toward the ad. A meta-analysis.
Journal  of  Consumer  Research 19,  34± 51.

Browne,  M.W.  and  Cudeck,  R.  (1992) Alternative  ways  of
assessing ® t. Sociological Methods and Research 21, 230± 58.
Cardozo,  R.N.  (1965)  An  experimental  study  of  customer
effort, expectation, and satisfaction. Journal of Marketing
Research II,  244± 9.

Churchill  Jr.,  G.A.  and  Surprenant,  C.  (1982) An  investi-
gation  into  the  determinants  of  customer  satisfaction.
Journal  of  Marketing  Research XIX,  491± 504.

Dick,  A.S.  and  Basu,  K.  (1994)  Customer  loyalty:  toward
an  integrated  conceptual  framework.  Journal  of  the
Academy  of  Marketing  Science 22(2), 99± 113.

Evans,  P.B. and Wurster, T.S. (1997) Strategy and the new
economics  of  information.  Harvard  Business  Review,
September± October  75(5), 71± 82.

Fishbein,  M.  and  Ajzen, I.  (1975) Belief,  Attitude,  Intention,

and  Behavior (Addison-Wesley,  Reading,  MA).

Fornell, C.  (1992) A  national  customer  satisfaction  barom-
eter:  the  Swedish  experience.  Journal  of  Marketing 56,
6± 21.

385

Fornell,  C.  and  Larcker,  D.F.  (1981) Evaluating  structural
equation models  with  unobservable  variables  and  mea-
surement error. Journal of Marketing Research 18, 39± 50.
Frankfort-Nachmias,  C.  and  Nachmias,  D.  (1992) Research
Methods in the Social Sciences (Edward Arnold, London).
Gordon, N. (1996) Homes for orphans.  The Banker January

146(839), 68± 9.

Hagel, J., Hewlin, T. and Hutchings, T. (1997) Retail bank-

ing: caught in a web? The McKinsey Quarterly 2, 42± 55.

Homer, P. M. (1990) The mediating role of attitude toward
the ad:  some  additional evidences. Journal  of  Marketing
Research XXVII, 76± 86.

Howcroft,  B. (1987) Retail banking  in the UK:  a  change in

organisational form. Journal of Retail B anking 9(3).

Jacoby,  J.  and  Chestnut,  R.W.  (1978)  B rand  Loyalty

Measurement and Management (Wiley, New York).

Keller, K.L. (1998) Building, Measuring, and Managing Brand

Equity (Prentice Hall, Englewood, New Jersey).

Krishnamurthi, L. and Raj, S.P. (1991) An empirical analysis
of  the relationship between brand loyalty and consumer
price elasticity. Marketing Science 10(2), 172± 83.

Llewellyn, D.T. (1997) Banking in the 21st century: the trans-
formation of an industry. Bulletin Economique et Financier
11(49) 5± 27.

Macintosh, G. and Lockshin, L.S. (1997) Retail relationship
and store loyalty: A multi-level perspective. International
Journal of Research in Marketing 14, 487± 97.

Methlie, L.B. (1998) A Business Model for Electronic Commerce
(Norwegian  School  of  Economics  and  Business
Administration, Bergen, Norway).

Nettavisen,  Z. 

(1998)  Dù dt 

lù p  mellom  bankene,

http://www.nettavisen.no, 13 August.

OECD  (1998) The  Economic  and  Social  Impacts  of  Electronic

Commerce (OECD Paris).

Oliver, R.N. (1997) Satisfaction. A Behavioral Perspective on the

Consumer (McGraw-Hill Inc., New York).

Porter,  M.E.  (1980)  Competitive  Strategy (The  Free  Press,

New York).

Rayport,  J.F. and Sviokla, J.J. (1994) Managing in the mar-
ketspace. Harvard Business Review November±  December
72(6), 141± 50.

Reichheld, F.F. (1996) The Loyalty  Effect (Harvard Business

School Press, Boston, MA).

Rosenberg,  L.J.  and  Czepiel,  J.A.  (1983)  A  marketing
approach  to  customer  retention.  Journal  of  Consumer
Marketing 2, 45± 51.

Samuelsen,  B.M.,  Grù nseth,  B.O.  and  Sandvik,  K.  (1997)
Customer  loyalty:  effects  of  customer  satisfaction  and
brand reputation BETA (1), 36± 46.

Sandvik, K. and Duhan, D. (1996) The effects of performance
on brand reputation, satisfaction and loyalty, in The 25th
EMAC Conference, Budapest 14th± 17th May, pp. 983± 99.
Selnes, F. (1993) An examination of the effect of product per-
formance  on  brand  reputation,  satisfaction  and  loyalty.
European Journal of Marketing 27(9), 19± 35.

Seybold,  P.V.  (1998)  Customer.com (Times  Books,  New

York).

Sterne, J.  (1998) World  Wide  Web Marketing.  Integrating  the
Web  into  Your  Marketing  Strategy (John  Wiley  &  Sons,
Inc., New York).


386

Strader, T.J. and Shaw, M.J. (1997) Characteristics of  elec-

tronic markets.  Decision  Support  Systems 21,  185± 98.

Yi,  Y.  (1990) A  critical  review  of  customer  satisfaction,  in
Review  of  Marketing,  Zeithaml,  V.A.  (ed.)  (American
Marketing  Association,  Chicago),  68± 123.

Biographical notes

from 

Leif  B. Methlie is a  professor of  information manage-
ment in the Department of Strategy and Management,
Norwegian  School  of  Economics  and  Business
Administration,  Bergen,  Norway.  He  holds  a  BSc  in
mechanical  engineering 
the  University  of
Strathclyde,  UK  (1962)  and  a  degree  in  business
administration  from  Stockholm  University,  Sweden
(1967).  Since  1974  he  has  conducted  research  on
information  systems  to  support  management  and
decision  makers  based  on  management,  cognitive 
and  systems  theory.  Since  1996  electronic commerce
has  been  his  major  research  area  and  he  is  currently
managing  several  research  projects  concerning  elec-
tronic  banking  and  tourism.  He  teaches  graduate

Methlie and Nysveen

courses  on  electronic  commerce,  IT-support  for
management  and  knowledge  management.  He  is  a
former  president  of  the  Norwegian  School  of  Eco-
nomics and  Business Administration (1990± 1995).

Herbjù rn  Nysveen  is  a  research  scholar  at  the
Norwegian  School  of  Economics  and  Business
Administration, Department of  Strategy  and Manage-
ment, Bergen, Norway.  He is a  PhD  student working
on  his  dissertation  on  the  Internet  and  marketing
communication.  He  is  currently  engaged  in  several
research  projects  in  electronic  commerce  concerning
electronic banking and tourism. He teaches a graduate
course on  marketing  and  interactive  multimedia.

Address  for  correspondence:  Leif  B.  Methlie,
Norwegian  School  of  Economics  and  Business
Administration,  Department 
and
Management,  Breiviksveien  40,  N-5045  Bergen,
Norway.

Strategy 

of 

