Leadership
8(4) 377–395
! The Author(s) 2012
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1742715012444055
lea.sagepub.com

Article

Transformational leadership
and the work outcomes of
Chinese migrant workers:
The mediating effects of
identification with leader

Qing Miao
Zhejiang University, China

Alexander Newman and Peter Lamb
Nottingham University Business School, China

Abstract
This study examines the mediating influence of identification with leader on the relationship
between follower perceptions of transformational leadership behavior and their work outcomes,
using data obtained from migrant workers and their supervisors in a large manufacturing company
located in south-eastern China. Hierarchical regression analysis revealed that transformational
leadership was positively related to the affective commitment and job performance of followers,
and negatively related to their turnover intentions. In contrast, no significant influence was found
of transformational
followers. Subsequent analysis
revealed that identification with leader mediated the relationship between transformational lead-
ership and follower attitudes, but did not mediate the relationship between transformational
leadership and follower job performance. These findings highlight the importance of cultural
and wider contextual
influences on the processes by which leadership impacts on the work
outcomes of migrant workers in the Chinese manufacturing industry. The managerial implications
of these findings are discussed and suggestions for future research provided.

leadership on the innovative behavior of

Keywords
identification, innovative behavior, job performance, organizational commitment, transformational
leadership, turnover intentions

Corresponding author:
Alexander Newman, Nottingham University Business School, The University of Nottingham, Ningbo China, 199 East
Taikang Road, Ningbo, 315100, China
Email: alex.newman@nottingham.edu.cn


378

Introduction

Leadership 8(4)

transformational

two decades the impact of

Over the past
leadership behavior on
employee attitudes and behavior has received signiﬁcant attention from researchers
(Avolio et al., 2004). Meta-analytic reviews of the literature have found a positive association
between transformational leadership and work outcomes of interest to organizations, such
as job performance and organizational commitment (Lowe et al., 1996; Judge and Piccolo,
2004). However, most of the existing research has been conducted in Western organizational
settings. There has been limited examination of the mediating mechanisms which may inﬂu-
ence the relationship between transformational leadership and follower work outcomes in
Asian organizational contexts (Liu et al., 2010).

Transformational

leadership has been shown to work comparatively well

in Asian
cultures such as China, which are collectivistic and relationship-based, given the focus of
transformational leaders on developing the collective identity of followers and stressing the
achievement of group goals (Jung and Avolio, 1999; Walumbwa and Lawler, 2003;
Walumbwa et al., 2005). Despite this, there has been limited examination of how the
follower’s identiﬁcation with their leader impacts on their attitudinal and behavioral
responses towards his or her leadership behavior (Liu et al., 2010).

In order to address this gap in the literature, the present study focuses on identiﬁcation
with leader as a mechanism by which transformational leadership translates into positive
work outcomes. Identiﬁcation with leader has been shown to be a mechanism by which a
leader engenders commitment to their goals (Shamir et al., 1993; Kark et al., 2003;
Van Knippenberg et al., 2004), and is especially important in the Chinese organizational
context given high levels of interpersonal relationalism and respect for seniority (Farh et al.,
1998; Hwang, 2000). Although identiﬁcation with leader has been shown to be closely
associated with transformational leadership (Liu et al., 2010), there has been limited empir-
ical investigation of the extent to which it mediates the inﬂuence of transformational lead-
ership on the work outcomes of followers, especially their in-role behavior and attitudes.
This study utilizes social identity theory as a tool to examine the mediating role played by
identiﬁcation with leader on the relationship between transformational leadership and fol-
lower work outcomes, speciﬁcally their job performance, innovative behavior, organiza-
tional commitment and turnover intentions. Social
identity theory proposes that the
identity of an individual derives directly from the relationship they have with social entities
such as their direct supervisor, with whom they interact on a frequent basis. It proposes that
individuals change or develop their self-concept when they identify with such entities, so that
their values and goals become similar to that of the entity (Pratt, 1998). By focusing on
identiﬁcation with leader as an intervening mechanism, we hope to provide a more nuanced
understanding of the processes by which transformational leadership inﬂuences the attitudes
and behavior of followers in the Chinese organizational context.

This study also makes an important contribution by highlighting the importance of
industrial and organizational level factors in inﬂuencing the processes by which transform-
ational leadership translates into positive work outcomes. Although prior studies suggest
that transformational leadership may lead to positive work outcomes in modern service
sector organizations operating in the main economic centers of Shanghai, Beijing and
Guangdong (Walumbwa and Lawler, 2003; Walumbwa et al., 2007; Liu et al., 2010), limited
work has been conducted in more traditional manufacturing organizations located outside
of the major cities, which are staﬀed primarily by migrant workers. Investigating the impact


Miao et al.

379

of leadership behavior on this group of workers is extremely important, given they make
up the vast majority of the total urban workforce in the labor-intensive manufacturing
sector, and have relatively low job tenure and technical skills compared to other groups of
workers (Jiang et al., 2009; Zhang, 2010). It is also important given the fact that the
Chinese manufacturing sector has been hit by signiﬁcant levels of employee turnover in
recent years. In some industrial sectors, which employ large numbers of migrant workers,
turnover rates have reached as high as 120% in recent years (Morris et al., 2009).
Therefore, it is of vital importance to understand whether transformational leadership
can be utilized as a tool to enhance their work outcomes, speciﬁcally their organizational
commitment and their in-role behavior, as well as reducing their turnover intentions. To
this end we use a sample of 322 supervisor–subordinate dyads from a large garment
manufacturer located in the south-east of China. The ﬁndings should enable us to provide
guidance to managers as to how transformational leadership may be utilized to the beneﬁt
of organizations in the garment manufacturing industries and similar industries across
Asia which employ large numbers of migrant workers.

Literature review
Transformational leadership

Transformational leadership theory, developed by Burns (1978) and popularized by Bass
(1985), refers to the ability of leaders to change the organizational status quo through the
development of shared follower values, needs and aspirations, with the aim of generating
awareness and acceptance of group goals (Bass, 1990). Transformational leaders generate a
vision of the future, communicate that vision to followers and foster commitment to that
vision (Avolio, 1999). In this study we adopt Bass and his associates’ conceptualization of
transformational leadership into four main components: idealized inﬂuence, inspirational
motivation,
intellectual stimulation and individualized consideration (Bass and Avolio,
1994). Although other authors have developed alternative conceptualizations of transform-
ational leadership (Kouzes and Posner, 1993), Bass’s four-component model was adopted as
it has been the most widely used and exhibited good construct validity when tested in a host
of cultural and industrial settings such as China, India, Kenya and the USA (Walumbwa and
Lawler, 2003; Walumbwa et al., 2005).

Idealized inﬂuence is concerned with the leader’s ability to exert emotional inﬂuence over
and gain respect from his/her followers (Bass, 1998). Leaders provide idealized inﬂuence
when they act as role models through the exhibition of exemplary ethical behavior. They set
goals which are not self-centered and demonstrate a willingness to pursue these goals even
when personal costs result. Such behavior generates respect for, and trust in, the leader and
makes followers more proud of their organization and keener to work harder to promote its
goals (Bass and Avolio, 1994).

Inspirational motivation is concerned with the ability of the leader to provide fol-
lowers with a sense of purpose and energy to foster the attainment of organization goals
(Bass, 1985). This is done through the creation of a new vision, developing clear and plaus-
ible strategies for attaining the vision and mobilizing commitment to that vision through
communicating the vision to followers in a clear and plausible way (Avolio, 1999;
Walumbwa and Lawler, 2003).

Intellectual stimulation refers to the ability of leaders to get their subordinates to ques-
tion their own values and beliefs, as well as those of the leader and the organization.


380

Leadership 8(4)

This should encourage followers to develop creative and imaginative approaches to solving
problems and performing their jobs (Bass and Avolio, 1994).

Individualized consideration is deﬁned as the ability of the leader to provide individual
support to their subordinates by acting as a coach or mentor (Bass, 1985). Such leaders show
the ability to motivate and develop the self-conﬁdence of their followers by providing special
attention to their individual needs, aspirations and strengths (Bass, 1998; Avolio, 1999).

Hypotheses development
Transformational leadership and work outcomes

The inﬂuence of transformational leadership on the promotion of favorable attitudinal and
behavioral responses in employees, such as organizational commitment and performance,
has been extensively researched in Western countries (Lowe et al., 1996; Judge and Piccolo,
2004). However, limited work has been conducted on the eﬀects of transformational lead-
ership on Chinese employees. Traditionally, researchers questioned the extent to which
Western theories of leadership that stress employee involvement and participation are appro-
priate in China given the fact that it is predominantly a collectivistic and relationship-based
society (Tsui et al., 2004). However, in recent years, a small but growing number of studies
have established that transformational leadership can elicit the same positive emotional and
behavioral responses in Chinese employees as it does in Western employees (Walumbwa and
Lawler, 2003; Walumbwa et al., 2007; Liu et al., 2010; Yang et al., 2010). Some studies even
suggest that Asian employees might respond even more positively to transformational lead-
ership than employees in the West given its focus on developing the collective identity of
followers and stressing the achievement of group goals (Jung and Avolio, 1999). For exam-
ple, using an experimental approach Jung and Avolio (1999) found that Asian subjects
respond more positively to transformational leadership than US subjects.

Only in recent years have researchers begun to examine the impact of transformational
leadership on employee behavior in China and other Asian societies. Transformational lead-
ership should have positive eﬀects on employee behavior for a number of reasons. First, the
provision of individualized consideration should enhance the innovative behavior of employ-
ees through promoting their conﬁdence to challenge the status quo and develop new ideas. It
should also lead to the greater transfer of knowledge from the leader to their follower as to
how perform better in their job. Second, intellectual stimulation on the part of leaders should
also assist in encouraging followers to develop creative solutions to problems and perform
better in their job through getting them to challenge accepted practices (Bass and Avolio,
1994). Finally, when leaders are charismatic and inspirational, they serve as role models to
their followers, encouraging them to work hard to achieve their goals and objectives (Shamir
et al., 1993). This should force them to focus on the task at hand rather than towards external
issues, enhancing their job performance and creativity (Shin and Zhou, 2003).

Findings from empirical studies in Asia suggest that transformational leadership beneﬁts
organizations in terms of enhancing employee performance and creativity (Shin and Zhou,
2003; Gong et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2010; Yang et al., 2010). For example, Gong et al. (2009)
demonstrated a positive relationship between transformational leadership and creativity,
moderated by employee creative self-eﬃcacy, using a sample of workers in Taiwan.
Likewise, Yang et al. (2010) also found that the transformational leadership of middle
managers impacted signiﬁcantly on the job performance of frontline employees in three
large Chinese organizations. Liu et al. (2010) demonstrated that transformational leadership


Miao et al.

381

facilitated the voice behavior of Chinese of managerial-level employees in two major Chinese
cities, Shanghai and Guangzhou. The positive eﬀect of transformational leadership on
employee behavior in these studies may be ascribed to the fact that Asian employees, who
generally display high levels of conservation, respond better to a leader who provides them
with individualized consideration, as highlighted by previous work on Korean employees
(Shin and Zhou, 2003). Conservation refers to respect for tradition, harmony, security and
conformity. In the present organizational context, we expect similar results to previous
studies which have been conducted in Asia. This leads us to the following hypotheses:

H1a: Transformational leadership is positively related to the job performance of followers
H1b: Transformational leadership is positively related to the innovative behavior of followers

Recent work has begun to examine the impact of transformational

leadership on
employee attitudes in China,
including their organizational commitment and turnover
intentions (Walumbwa and Lawler, 2003; Huang et al., 2006; Walumbwa et al., 2007).
Organizational commitment has been deﬁned as the relative strength of an employee’s
identiﬁcation and involvement with a particular organization (Steers, 1977), whereas turn-
over intentions refers to the extent to which an employee believes they will leave their
present organization in the near future (Chen and Francesco, 2000). Transformational
leadership might be expected to induce a positive emotional response of employees
towards the organization for two main reasons. First, transformational leaders inﬂuence
their followers to sacriﬁce their own self-interest for the good of the organization (Shamir
et al., 1993). This should lead to greater organizational commitment and lower intention to
turnover, as employees work together towards the common good of the organization.
Second, transformational leaders encourage followers to think more critically and seek
new ways in which to approach their work (Bass, 1985). This should increase the motiv-
ation of followers and encourage them to be more involved in their job, which should lead
to higher levels of job satisfaction and organizational commitment. As regards the ﬁndings
of empirical work, Walumbwa and his associates found that transformational leadership
was positively related to the organizational commitment, and negatively related to the job
withdrawal, of employees working in ﬁnancial organizations
located in Shanghai
(Walumbwa and Lawler, 2003; Walumbwa et al., 2007). Huang et al. (2006) found that
leadership styles that stress employee participation were strongly linked to organizational
commitment for short but not long-tenure employees in two large state-owned enterprises.
In line with these studies we might expect transformational leadership to positively inﬂu-
ence the attitudes of migrant workers in the manufacturing sector, given low levels of
employee commitment and high turnover compared to other industries. This leads us to
the following hypotheses:

H1c: Transformational leadership is positively related to the aﬀective organizational commit-
ment of followers
H1d: Transformational leadership is negatively related to the turnover intentions of followers

Transformational leadership and identification with supervisor

Over the last decade there has been growing research on how identiﬁcation with groups and
individuals inﬂuences employee attitudes and behavior in the workplace (Van Knippenberg
et al., 2004). Identiﬁcation refers to the part of an individual’s identity that derives directly


382

Leadership 8(4)

from their relationship with an entity such as a group,
individual or organization.
An individual’s recognition that they share similar values or goals with the entity may
aﬀect their self-concept, or they might change and develop their self-concept, so that their
values and goals become similar to that of the entity (Pratt, 1998). Although a great deal of
work has focused on an individual’s identiﬁcation with a group or organization they belong
to, recent studies have broadened the categorization of identity to encompass the personal
relationships an individual has with other organizational members (Kark et al., 2003;
Van Knippenberg et al., 2004; Sluss and Ashforth, 2007).

leaders provide individualized attention,

One such relationship that has been shown to inﬂuence an individual’s self-identity in
the workplace is a follower’s relationship with their leader. Researchers have suggested
that transformational leadership may exert a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the follower’s self-
identity when their beliefs about a leader become self-referential or self-deﬁning (Pratt,
1998). Because transformational
intellectual
inspirational motivation and idealized inﬂuence to followers, the follower
stimulation,
might be motivated to adjust their self-concept to become more like that of the leader,
in terms of sharing similar beliefs and values (Liu et al., 2010). In other words, a trans-
formational
leader becomes a role model who the follower personally identiﬁes with
(Shamir et al., 1993). Empirical work indicates a strong relationship between transform-
ational leadership and the follower’s personal identiﬁcation with the leader (Kark et al.,
2003; Liu et al., 2010). Supervisor/subordinate relationships have been shown to be even
more important to organizational eﬀectiveness in China given the hierarchical nature of
Chinese society which stresses respect for seniority (Chen et al., 2002).

Despite such developments in the literature, there has been limited empirical research
examining how follower identiﬁcation with leader might impact on the relationship between
transformational leadership and work outcomes. In recent years researchers have attempted
to address this gap in the literature by examining the mediating eﬀects of identiﬁcation with
leader on employee responses to transformational leadership (Liu et al., 2010). For example,
Liu et al. (2010) found that identiﬁcation with leader fully mediated the relationship between
transformational leadership and followers’ extra-role behavior (i.e. behavior that is not
explicitly required by one’s job but has a positive inﬂuence on organizational eﬀectiveness),
as well as partially mediating their voice behavior (i.e. their willingness to speak up towards
their supervisor).

Social identity theory has been used to explain why identiﬁcation with leader might
mediate the relationship between transformational leadership and the in-role behavior of
followers, in other words their job performance (Walumbwa et al., 2008). Follower identi-
ﬁcation with leader should cause the follower to experience the leader’s interests as their own
(Van Knippenberg, 2000). This should result in them exerting greater eﬀort to work towards
the goals set by the leader in an attempt to enhance their own self-concept, resulting in higher
levels of job performance and creativity (Van Knippenberg et al., 2004). This leads us to the
following hypotheses:

H2a: Identiﬁcation with leader will mediate the relationship between transformational leadership
and the job performance of followers
H2b: Identiﬁcation with leader will mediate the relationship between transformational leader-
ship and the innovative behavior of followers

As the supervisor is one of the main representatives of the organization, stronger identi-
ﬁcation with leader should also elicit positive attitudinal responses in the follower towards


Miao et al.

383

their employing organization, such as higher organizational commitment and lower turnover
intentions. Identiﬁcation with leader also provides followers with a frame of reference with
which to interpret and adapt their behavior in the context of their organizational environ-
ment (Ashforth and Mael, 1989). This should enhance the self-esteem of the follower
through providing them with a consistent view of
from others
(Dukerich et al., 2002). In turn, enhanced self-esteem should lead to greater commitment
on the part of the individual. This leads us to the following hypotheses:

themselves, distinct

H2c: Identiﬁcation with leader will mediate the relationship between transformational leadership
and the aﬀective organizational commitment of followers
H2d: Identiﬁcation with leader will mediate the relationship between transformational leader-
ship and the turnover intentions of followers

Method
Sample and data collection

The empirical study, which was conducted in October 2010, consisted of collecting infor-
mation via survey questionnaires from 322 supervisor–subordinate dyads in a large garment
manufacturing ﬁrm in China. The ﬁrm was located in Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, in the
south-east of China. Conducting the survey in a single organization enabled us to mitigate
the eﬀects of diﬀerences between organizations, and allowed us to observe the impact of
leadership behavior more accurately than would be the case if we had surveyed dyads from a
variety of organizations.

Respondents were all employed on a full-time basis and belonged to 22 production work-
groups involved in textile manufacturing. Each group consisted of 1 supervisor and between
15 and 25 subordinates. Administrative employees were not included in the sample. Each
workgroup was involved in working one production line. Due to the fact that they worked
sequentially on the line, each specializing in a particular task, a great deal of coordination
between team members was required. The main roles of the supervisor were to monitor their
work process, provide guidance to them as how best to perform their jobs and motivate them
to work more eﬃciently.

Two sets of questionnaires were used in the study: one for subordinates and another for
their immediate supervisor. As most of the scales in our questionnaire were originally in
English, they were translated into English and back-translated into Chinese by two members
of the research team to check their reliability prior to distribution (Brislin, 1993). Following
this, the survey was piloted on a small number of supervisor–subordinate dyads from the
same organization. Minor changes were made to the wording and order of some items to
enhance clarity.

The questionnaires were administered separately to subordinate and supervisor groups.
The subordinate questionnaire was administered in three waves over a period of three weeks
to reduce the possibility of common response bias. In the ﬁrst wave subordinates provided
their demographics and rankings of transformational leadership behavior of their immediate
supervisor. In the second wave data was collected ranking their identiﬁcation with super-
visor. In the third wave ratings relating to their commitment and turnover intentions were
obtained. Supervisor ratings on their subordinates’ performance and innovative behavior
were collected during the third week in one wave.


384

Leadership 8(4)

Before the questionnaires were distributed, one of the research team visited all of the
participants personally and highlighted the purpose of the research. He guaranteed them
anonymity, and informed them that their employer would only be provided with the
aggregate ﬁndings of the research. Each participant was then provided with a cover
letter informing them how to complete the questionnaire. The questionnaires were
coded with a number that allowed the research team to match the subordinate responses
their supervisor. Out of a total of 1000 questionnaires distributed to
to those of
subordinates and their immediate supervisors (half
to each group), 644 completed
questionnaires were returned (accounting for 322 supervisor–subordinate dyads). This
amounted to a response rate of 64.4%. A number of questionnaires were excluded due
to incomplete responses.

The 322 subordinates who fully responded to all parts of the questionnaire were super-
vised by 22 immediate supervisors. Of the subordinates, 56.1% were female, 30.2% were
younger than 20 years and only 6.1% were educated to high school level or above. On
average the subordinates had been working at the organization for slightly less than 11
months. Of the 22 supervisors, half were female, around 64% were younger than 30 years
and none had a high school education. They had been working in a supervisory capacity for
an average of 16 months and 10 days.

Measures

All the survey items, except for the control variables, were measured on ﬁve-point Likert
scales.

Independent variable

Transformational leadership. Subordinates were asked to report the transformational leadership
behavior of their direct supervisor using 30 items adapted from the Multifactor Leadership
Questionnaire (MLQ) form 5X (Bass and Avolio, 1995). As our focus was on transform-
ational leadership behavior, only those items measuring transformational leadership were
included in our survey, consistent with previous research (Shin and Zhou, 2003; Avolio et al.,
2004). For each item respondents were required to rate using a ﬁve-point Likert scale
(1¼ Not at all and 5¼ Very frequently, if not always).

As our hypotheses did not distinguish between the four main components of transform-
ational leadership (idealized inﬂuence, inspirational motivation, intellectual stimulation and
individualized consideration), they were combined into one higher-order factor (Cronbach
Alpha¼ 0.872). This is consistent with recent empirical work on transformational leadership
theory (Kark et al., 2003; Shin and Zhou, 2003; Liu et al., 2010).

Mediating variable

Identification with leader. Shamir et al.’s (1998) seven-item scale was used to measure
identiﬁcation with leader. This scale has been used and validated in a Chinese organizational
setting (Liu et al., 2010). Subordinates were required to rank the extent to which they identiﬁed
with their direct supervisor on ﬁve-point Likert scales (from 1 ¼ strongly disagree to


Miao et al.

385

5¼ strongly agree). Sample items included ‘she/he is a model for me to follow’ and ‘my values
are similar to his/her values’. The Cronbach’s Alpha for this scale was 0.815.

Dependent variables

Affective commitment. Meyer et al.’s (1993) six-item scale was used to measure aﬀective organ-
izational commitment. This scale has been widely used and validated in a Chinese organ-
izational setting (Chen and Francesco, 2003). Subordinates were required to rank their
(from 1¼ strongly disagree to
aﬀective commitment using ﬁve-point Likert
5¼ strongly agree). Sample items included ‘I do not feel a strong sense of belonging to
my organization’ and ‘I would be happy to spend the rest of my career with this organiza-
tion’. The Cronbach’s Alpha for this scale was 0.754.

scales

Turnover Intentions. Farh et al.’s (1998) four-item indigenous Chinese scale was used to meas-
ure turnover intentions. Subordinates were required to rank their turnover intentions using
ﬁve-point Likert scales (from 1¼ strongly disagree to 5¼ strongly agree). Sample items
included ‘I may leave this company and work for another company in the next year’ and
‘I plan to stay in this company to develop my career for a long time’. The Cronbach’s Alpha
for this scale was relatively weak at 0.629, which fell below the generally accepted standards
of reliability. However, it was left in the analysis as it was found to be a distinctive construct
in subsequent conﬁrmatory factor analysis of the dataset, and has been validated in previous
empirical work in China (Chen and Francesco, 2000).

Job performance. Job performance was measured by three items taken from Heilman et al.
(1992). Previous research has validated this scale in the Chinese setting (Lam et al., 2002).
Five-point Likert scales (from 1 ¼ strongly disagree to 5¼ strongly agree) were used to
measure these items. Ratings were provided by supervisors for each of their subordinates.
The items were ‘this employee is very competent’, ‘this employee gets his/her work done very
eﬀectively’ and ‘this employee has performed his/her job well’. The Cronbach’s Alpha for
this scale was 0.891.

Innovative behavior. Innovative behavior was measured using ﬁve items taken from Scott and
Bruce (1994). This scale has been used and validated in a Chinese setting (Chen and Aryee,
2007). Five-point Likert scales (from 1¼ strongly disagree to 5¼ strongly agree) were used to
measure these items. Ratings were provided by supervisors for each of their subordinates.
Sample items included ‘this team member searches out new ideas’ and ‘this team member
generates creative ideas’. The Cronbach’s Alpha for this scale was 0.925.

Control variables

A number of control variables were included in line with previous research (Chen and
Francesco, 2000). Dummy variables were used to measure gender (0¼ female, 1¼ male)
and educational level (0¼ junior high school education or below, 1¼ high school education
or above). As the workforce was made up predominantly of young workers in their teens and
twenties, a dummy variable was used to separate workers into two main age groups (those
younger than 20 were coded 1 and those older than 20 were coded 0). Tenure was measured
as a continuous variable as time in months since joining the ﬁrm.


386

Leadership 8(4)

Analysis and results

Two steps were used in the process of data analysis. In the ﬁrst step conﬁrmatory factor
analysis (CFA) was conducted using LISREL 8.8 to test the discriminant validity of the
study variables. In the second step, regression analysis was used to test the direct and
mediated eﬀects of transformational leadership on work outcomes, in line with Baron and
Kenny’s (1986) recommendations.

Table 1 presents the results of CFA. The proposed six-factor model was compared to that
of series of alternative models. As can be seen, the ﬁt indexes reveal that the six-factor model
ﬁts the data better than alternative models, providing support for the distinctiveness of the
constructs used in the study.

In Table 2 the means, standard deviations and reliability coeﬃcients of each continuous
variable used in the study, and the correlations between all variables are presented.
The results of regression analysis are shown in Table 3.
As shown in Table 3 (Model 1), transformational leadership was positively related to
identiﬁcation with leader when demographic variables were controlled for (b¼ .652
p < 0.01). Furthermore, as evident in Table 3 (Model 2) transformational leadership was
positively related to the job performance of employees (b¼ .157 p < 0.01) and aﬀective
organizational commitment (b¼ .299 p < 0.01), and negatively related to their turnover
intentions (b¼ .247 p < 0.01), in line with hypotheses 1a, 1c and 1d. Contrary to hypothesis
1b, transformational leadership did not inﬂuence the innovative behavior of employees.

Regarding the mediated hypotheses, when identiﬁcation with leader was included in the
regression with transformational leadership it was still signiﬁcantly related to two of the
work outcomes: aﬀective organizational commitment and turnover intentions. The previous
signiﬁcant relationship between transformational leadership and aﬀective commitment was
no longer signiﬁcant in the presence of identiﬁcation with leader, signifying that it fully
mediated the relationship in line with hypothesis 2c. Partial support was also provided for
hypothesis 2d, suggesting both direct and mediated eﬀects via identiﬁcation with leader, of
transformational leadership on turnover intentions. No support was provided for hypoth-
eses 2a and 2b, demonstrating no mediated eﬀects of identiﬁcation with leader on the rela-
tionship between transformational leadership and both the job performance and innovative
behavior of employees.

Discussion

This study was designed to examine whether transformational leadership inﬂuences the
attitudes and behavior of migrant workers from the Chinese manufacturing industry, as
well as investigating whether identiﬁcation with leader mediates the relationship between
transformational leadership and work outcomes.

The study uncovered two main ﬁndings. First, although transformational leadership had
a positive inﬂuence on employee attitudes and job performance, it had no inﬂuence on their
innovative behavior. Several explanations might be provided for this ﬁnding. One explan-
ation might be the fact that the speciﬁc organizational context in which this research was
undertaken may not provide employees with the opportunity to be creative in the workplace.
Indeed, recent work by Wang and Rode (2010) indicates that the relationship between
transformational leadership and creativity is extremely complex, and is inﬂuenced by a
whole host of
individual and organizational values. They speciﬁcally found that


Miao et al.

Table 1. Confirmatory factor analysis.

Model

Six-factor model
Five-factor model: affective commitment and

turnover intentions combined

X2

645.82
764.55

Five-factor model: job performance and

1170.44

innovative behavior combined

One-factor model

3485.47

df

362
367

367

377

IFI

0.98
0.97

0.93

0.58

CFI

0.98
0.97

0.93

0.58

IFI: incremental fit index; CFI: the comparative fit index; RMSEA: root-mean-square error of approximation.

387

RMSEA

0.037
0.048

0.070

0.170

Table 2. Descriptive statistics, reliability coefficients and correlations amongst study variables.

Variable

Mean S.D.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

1. Tenure
2. Transformational leadership
3. Identification with leader
4. Affective commitment
5. Turnover intentions
6. Job performance
7. Innovative behavior

10.84 12.96

3.39
3.35
3.44
2.96
3.35
2.29

0.62  .018 (0.872)
.657**
0.68
.281**
0.69
0.82
0.97
1.00

.045
.077
(0.754)
.097  .246**  .212**  .347**
.099
.072
.083
.011

(0.815)
.404**

.149**
.011

.130*
.016

(0.629)

.029 (0.891)
.493**
.012

(0.925)

*, ** indicate significance at the 5% and 1% levels respectively. Numbers in parentheses are the Cronbach’s alphas.

transformational leadership only inﬂuenced creativity when the innovative climate of the
organization was high and employees identiﬁed with their immediate supervisor. The demo-
graphics of the sample may have also inﬂuenced the ﬁndings. Recent work by Shin and Zhou
(2003) suggests that low conservation of employees might neutralize the relationship between
transformational leadership and innovative behavior. Given that our sample consists of
relatively young employees, who are less traditional and more open to change (low in con-
servation), the presence of a non-relationship might not be so unusual. The low levels of
average tenure of employees within this particular organizational and industrial context
might also impact on their ability to be creative in their job, namely employees who are
relatively new to the job would tend to focus on targets set to them by their supervisor rather
than try to develop new ways of doing things. Previous work suggests that employees only
begin to develop a capacity to generate innovative ideas once they have had some time to
understand what is required in their job, and have had time to harness new knowledge for
the development of creative solutions in their work (Weisberg, 1999; Gong et al., 2009). This
may explain why previous laboratory studies have found a limited impact of transform-
ational leadership on innovative behavior (Redmond et al., 1993; Jaussi and Dionne, 2003).
A third possible explanation might arise from the possibility that supervisors in the textile
industry have limited time to provide individualized consideration, the element of trans-
formational leadership which has been found to be most closely linked to creativity (Moss
and Ritossa, 2007). Closer examination of respondent data from this particular study
demonstrated that they ranked individualized consideration of their immediate supervisor
much lower than the other three elements.


388

Leadership 8(4)

Table 3. Regression analysis (n¼ 322).

Model 1

Model 2a

Dependent variables

Identification
with Leader

Job
Performance

Innovative
Behavior

Affective
Organizational
Commitment

Turnover
Intentions

Controls

Gender
Education
Age
Tenure
R2

Direct effects

 .066
 .010
.058
.075*
.020

Transformational leadership
R2
R2

.652***
.415
.435

Mediation effects

Transformational leadership
Identification with leader
R2
R2

 .060
 .023
 .145**
.060
.034

.157***
.024
.058

.124*
.049
.026
.060

.078
.020
 .156***
.059
.040

.008
.000
.040
 .012
.031
.001
.041

 .072
.034
 .029
.102*
.024

.299***
.087
.111

.104
.299***
.138
.162

.093*
.061
.035
.111**
.028
 .247***
.060
.088
 .151**
 .147**
.072
.100

*, **, *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.
aIn Model 2 when testing for direct effects, the control variables and transformational leadership were entered in two
separate steps. In testing for mediation effects, the control variables were entered in the first step and transformational
leadership and mediators in the second step.

Second, although identiﬁcation with leader mediated the relationship between transform-
ational leadership and employee attitudes, it was not found to inﬂuence the relationship
between transformational leadership and two variables measuring employee behavior: job
performance and innovative behavior. This was a surprising result given the ﬁndings of
previous empirical work that indicate the positive eﬀects of identiﬁcation with leader on
follower behavior in China (Liu et al., 2010). A number of factors might explain this unex-
pected result. One possible explanation might be that although transformational leaders
should engender greater identiﬁcation to leader, this may not fully translate into employee
performance, as employee performance within this particular industry may result from a
whole host of contextual factors which are not under direct control of the immediate super-
visor. These may include factors such as employee participation in training. This resonates
with Dirks and Ferrin’s (2002) assertions that attitudinal values may be decoupled from
behavioral outcomes, due to a wide range of contextual factors. Indeed, previous research
suggests that identiﬁcation with leader may only inﬂuence employee behavior when variables
measuring the organizational climate are controlled for (Siegel and Kaemmerer, 1978; Wang
and Rode, 2010). As our study was conducted within a single organization it was impossible
for us to do this. Another contextual factor that may explain why employee identiﬁcation
does not translate into employee performance results from the limited working experience of
migrant employees in this particular industrial context. The average tenure of respondents in
this study was less than one year, and for many it was their ﬁrst job away from their
hometowns. Although the receipt of encouragement and inspiration from their supervisor
may quickly lead to a positive attitudinal response amongst employees, it should take much
more time to inﬂuence their productive capabilities. For many employees the impact of


Miao et al.

389

transformational leadership on performance, and to a greater extent innovation, has not
been fully realized due to their short tenure within their organization. Indeed, initial posthoc
analysis suggests the relationship between identiﬁcation with leader and job performance is
stronger for those with longer tenure. A further explanation for our ﬁndings could arise from
the fact that personal identiﬁcation might lead to overdependence on the leader (Kark and
Chen, 2003). This may not be eﬀective in enhancing performance given the limited attention
the supervisor can pay to each member of his/her team in this particular organizational
context, resulting from the high number of subordinates per supervisor. Another speciﬁc
contextual factor of potential signiﬁcance could be the widespread use of performance-
related pay in the Chinese textile manufacturing industry. This may result in workers
being motivated to achieve high levels of performance whether or not they identify with
their immediate supervisor. As a result, identiﬁcation with leader may only aﬀect their atti-
tudes rather than behavior, as the contingent reward basis of performance-related pay sub-
stitutes for the impact of leadership (Kerr and Jermier, 1978). As our study did not measure
transactional leadership it is diﬃcult to verify whether this is the case or not. Future research
should address this by including transactional items from the MLQ to see whether transac-
tional leadership is a better predictor of employee behavior in this organizational context,
and leads to greater identiﬁcation with the leader than transformational leadership.

A number of managerial implications can be derived from the ﬁndings of the pre-
sent study. First, our ﬁndings indicate that transformational leadership is an increasingly
important tool in the kit of managers looking to enhance employee commitment in an
increasingly competitive Chinese labor market. This is beneﬁcial given that high levels of
organizational commitment have been shown to lead to lower levels of voluntary turnover
(Maertz et al., 2003). Chan’s (2010) proﬁle of an apparent paradox in China’s labor market
with both scarcity of migrant labor and an abundance of rural labor, means that those ﬁrms
that can employ eﬀective transformational leadership mechanisms will be better positioned
to retain and attract labor than those who do not or cannot utilize transformational lead-
ership. Second, although transformational leadership was also found to be positively linked
to job performance it did not inﬂuence their innovative behavior. This resonates with Wang
and Rode’s points about supporting mechanisms for transformational leadership being
beyond the remit of frontline managers, and suggests limited opportunities are being pro-
vided to employees to develop new ways of doing things in their work. In order to enhance
their competitive position ﬁrms should consider providing more opportunity for involving
all members of the organization in the generation of new ideas.

issues that have practical

Our study also raises some theoretical

implications for
organizations attempting to integrate transformational leadership in contexts where perfor-
mance-related pay mechanisms are utilized. This arises because transformational leadership
tends to be portrayed as a course of action by which leaders wield a hierarchical inﬂuence
over the activities of others, while simultaneously asserting that their organizations possess a
commonality of goals and intentions and encourage their subordinates to work towards the
collective interest. However, the theoretical underpinning of strategies such as performance-
related pay resides in agency theory, in which the emphasis is on appeals to individual
instrumentalism (Jensen and Meckling, 1976). This apparent theoretical asymmetry may
have considerable implications for the deployment of practices founded upon the collective
conceptions of transformational leadership and atomistic motivations that underlie perfor-
mance-based pay systems (Tourish et al., 2010). This could result in confounding messages
to employees and may result in the intended eﬀects of such organizational policies


390

Leadership 8(4)

being diluted. Our proposition is that these theoretical diﬀerences have bearing on the likely
success of organizational practices within this organizational context, and thus managers at
a senior level should facilitate an audit to identify which of their organizational elements are
congruent and which are incompatible, in order to foster better alignment of practice.
Certainly, it would be appropriate to consider team or group-based performance incentives
that may oﬀer a better ﬁt with the inherent collectivism of transformational leadership.

Limitations and suggestions for future research

Several limitations compromise the utility of our ﬁndings. The ﬁrst regards the cross-sectional
nature of the study, which means we are not fully able to conﬁrm the causality between
variables in our study. For example, better performing or more committed employees
might rank their supervisor’s transformational leadership behavior more highly. Future
research should address this by use of a longitudinal study design.

Second, only one possible mechanism which mediates the relationship between transform-
ational leadership and its work outcomes was examined in this study. Future research may
investigate other mechanisms which have been shown to mediate the eﬀects of transform-
ational leadership such as trust in leader (Jung and Avolio, 2000).

The fact that the present study was conducted in a single organization may also have
inﬂuenced its ﬁndings. Future work should be conducted in a larger number of organiza-
tional and industrial contexts to determine whether the ﬁndings are generalizable within and
outside of China. Speciﬁcally, the role played by organizational-level variables in enhancing
employee responses to transformational leadership needs greater examination. In line with
previous studies, the ﬁndings of the present study suggest that the innovative climate of a
particular ﬁrm may combine with employee level characteristics to inﬂuence how followers
respond to a transformational leader (Wang and Rode, 2010).

We might expect similar results if this study was replicated in manufacturing organizations
staﬀed primarily by migrant workers in other Asian societies such as India and Indonesia,
given that they are typically characterized by high turnover rates and low levels of job tenure
as in the present study. As with China, we might expect performance-related pay to be the
main driver behind employee performance, and identiﬁcation with supervisor to only mediate
the eﬀects of transformational leadership onto performance outcomes when subordinates had
a long-term relationship with their supervisor, given the fact that Asian cultures stress the
importance of building long-term relationships (Hofstede, 2007). The low levels of employ-
ment tenure associated with migrant labor in this industrial context perhaps limits the poten-
tial for the development of interpersonal relationships between supervisors and subordinates
commonly known in China as guanxi. In other words, we sense that scarcity of time in the
economic context subordinates the cultural element.

The nature of labor scarcity in the textile and other labor-intensive industries in China is
providing a momentum for change with regards to the management and control of labor.
Recent tragedies at Foxconn and other manufacturing companies in China, resulting from
the poor treatment and management of migrant labor, have provided further moral impetus
for a movement towards a more humanistic approach to the management of labor resources
in China (Chan, 2010). Our study considers whether transformational leadership can be
utilized to elicit greater commitment and aid in the retention of workers within this industrial
setting characterized by dynamic change. As more participative management styles such as
transformational leadership are likely to become a consistent feature of the human relations


Miao et al.

391

context within the Chinese economy, research of a more longitudinal nature would be well
placed to capture how transformational leadership is deployed and to capture its resultant
eﬀects in this dynamic setting. We would speculate that over time, wider organizational
support for transformational leadership would become more institutionalized, and conse-
quently the eﬀects of organizational variables on outcomes such as innovative behavior will
be lessened.

Conclusions

This study represents an important ﬁrst step to understanding the inﬂuence of transform-
ational leadership on the work outcomes of migrant workers in the Chinese manufacturing
industry. In addition to this empirical contribution, a theoretical contribution is made by
examining the mediating eﬀects of identiﬁcation with leader on the relationship between
transformational leadership and work outcomes. Our study took place during a period of
ongoing change within the textile industry and wider labor changes within China.
The dynamism of this context, and therefore of our study, stands in contrast with much
of the previous work in the area of transformational leadership which has been conducted in
static rather than dynamic contexts.

Our ﬁndings demonstrate that Bass’s four-component model of transformational leader-
ship, exhibits high construct validity in the Chinese context, providing further support for its
generalizability to contexts outside of the West in which it was developed. As we did not seek
to develop and test an indigenous measure of transformational leadership in a Chinese
context, we cannot be certain as to whether or not the model might be extended to pick
up additional dimensions unique to China. This could be addressed by future research.
However, by focusing on identiﬁcation with supervisor, a construct which has been validated
by previous empirical research in China, as a mediating mechanism we examine the cultural
processes by which transformational leadership inﬂuences the attitudinal and behavioral
responses of followers, given that China is a culture in which deference to authority and
respect for seniority is commonplace.

Our study shows that context is clearly important in terms of how leadership is exer-
cised, given that the present study was undertaken in a turbulent and uncertain phase of
Chinese economic and social development. However, we are cautious of expectations that
cultural asymmetry will necessarily generate diﬀerent outcomes within this ﬁeld. Our study
suggests that Western theories of leadership are applicable in Asia, and what is needed is
to develop an understanding of the processes by which leadership inﬂuences follower
attitudes and behavior. It may be that some forms of leadership develop organically
within the Chinese or wider Asian context and display strong associations to Western
theories of leadership, without ever having being directly or indirectly exposed to them.
We appreciate that Western theories of leadership are inherently imbued with cultural
origin but this does not necessarily mean that they are so particularistic that they are
inappropriate in asymmetrical contexts.

In essence, we suggest that the main focus of research into Asian leadership should be on
examining how the mix of cultural and wider contextual inﬂuences, such as particular socio-
economic and industrial contexts, along with particular industrial work dynamics, impact on
follower responses to transformational leadership. Research should also concentrate on
investigating the processes by which transformational leadership inﬂuences work outcomes,
not by seeking to identify forms of leadership as being associated with culturally bound


392

Leadership 8(4)

identities and preferences. In the present study we do this by distinguishing between cultural
inﬂuences in terms of identiﬁcation with supervisor and the nature of the rather dynamic
industrial context, on follower responses to the exercise of leadership. Future research could
be undertaken to better understand the distinct roles of cultural and wider contextual inﬂu-
ences on the processes by which leadership inﬂuences the work outcomes of followers.

References

Ashforth BE and Mael F (1989) Social identity theory and the organization. Academy of Management

Review 14(1): 20–39.

Avolio BJ (1999) Full Leadership Development: Building the Vital Forces in Organizations. Thousand

Oaks, CA: Sage.

Avolio BJ, Zhu W, Koh W and Puja B (2004) Transformational leadership and organizational com-
mitment: Mediating role of psychological empowerment and moderating role of structural distance.
Journal of Organizational Behavior 25(8): 951–968.

Baron RM and Kenny DA (1986) The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psychological
research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 51(6): 1173–1182.

Bass BM (1985) Leadership and Performance beyond Expectations. New York: Free Press.
Bass BM (1990) Bass and Stogdill’s Handbook of Leadership: Theory, Research and Managerial

Applications. New York: Free Press.

Bass BM (1998) Transformational Leadership: Industry, Military, and Educational Impact. Hillsdale,

NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Bass BM and Avolio BJ (1994) Improving Organizational Eﬀectiveness through Transformational

Leadership. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Bass BM and Avolio BJ (1995) Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire: Manual Leader Form, Rater, and

Scoring Key for MLQ (Form 5x-Short). Redwood City, CA: Mind Garden.

Brislin R (1993) Understanding Culture’s Inﬂuence on Behavior. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace

College Publishers.

Burns JM (1978) Leadership. New York: Harper & Row.
Chan KW (2010) A China paradox: Migrant labor shortage amidst rural labor supply abundance.

Eurasian Geography and Economics 51(4): 513–530.

Chen ZX and Aryee S (2007) Delegation and employee work outcomes: An examination of the cultural

context of mediating processes in China. Academy of Management Journal 50(1): 226–238.

Chen ZX and Francesco AM (2000) Employee demography, organizational commitment, and turn-

over intentions in China: Do cultural diﬀerences matter? Human Relations 53(6): 869–887.

Chen ZX and Francesco AM (2003) The relationship between the three components of commitment

and employee performance in China. Journal of Vocational Behavior 62(3): 490–510.

Chen ZX, Tsui AS and Farh JL (2002) Loyalty to supervisor vs. organizational commitment:
Relationships to employee performance in China. Journal of Occupational and Organizational
Psychology 75(3): 339–356.

Dirks KT and Ferrin DL (2002) Trust in leadership: Meta-analytic ﬁndings and implications for

research and practice. Journal of Applied Psychology 87(4): 611–628.

Dukerich JM, Golden BR and Shortell SM (2002) Beauty is in the eye of the beholder: The impact of
identity, and image on the cooperative behaviors of physicians.

identiﬁcation,

organizational
Administrative Science Quarterly 47(3): 507–533.

Farh JL, Leung F and Law K (1998) On the cross-cultural validity of Holland’s model of vocational

choices in Hong Kong. Journal of Vocational Behavior 52(3): 425–440.

Gong Y, Huang JC and Farh L (2009) Employee learning orientation, transformational leadership and
employee creativity: The mediating role of employee creative self-eﬃcacy. Academy of Management
Journal 52(4): 765–778.


Miao et al.

393

Heilman ME, Block CJ and Lucas JA (1992) Presumed incompetent? Stigmatization and aﬃrmative

action eﬀorts. Journal of Applied Psychology 77(4): 536–544.

Hofstede G (2007) Asian management in the 21st century. Asia-Paciﬁc Journal of Management 24(4):

411–420.

Huang X, Shi K, Zhang Z and Cheung YL (2006) The impact of participative leadership behavior on
psychological empowerment and organizational commitment in Chinese state-owned enterprises:
The moderating role of organizational tenure. Asia-Paciﬁc Journal of Management 23(3): 345–367.
Hwang KK (2000) Chinese relationalism: Theoretical construction and methodological considerations.

Journal for the Theory of Social Behavior 30(2): 155–178.

Jaussi KS and Dionne SD (2003) Leading for creativity: The role of unconventional leader behavior.

Leadership Quarterly 14(4–5): 475–498.

Jensen M and Meckling W (1976) Theory of the ﬁrm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and ownership

structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3(4): 305–360.

Jiang B, Baker RC and Frazier GV (2009) An analysis of job dissatisfaction and turnover to reduce
global supply chain risk: Evidence from China. Journal of Operations Management 27(2): 169–184.
Judge TA and Piccolo RF (2004) Transformational and transactional leadership: A meta-analytic test

of their relative validity. Journal of Applied Psychology 89(5): 755–768.

Jung DI and Avolio BJ (1999) Eﬀects of leadership style and followers’ cultural orientation on perform-

ance in group versus individual task conditions. Academy of Management Journal 42(2): 208–218.

Jung DI and Avolio BJ (2000) Opening the black box: An experimental investigation of the mediating
eﬀects of trust and value congruence on transformational and transactional leadership. Journal of
Organizational Behavior 21(8): 949–964.

Kark R, Shamir B and Chen G (2003) The two faces of transformational leadership: Empowerment

and dependence. Journal of Applied Psychology 88(2): 246–255.

Kerr S and Jermier JM (1978) Substitutes for leadership: Their meaning and measurement.

Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 22(3): 375–403.

Kouzes JM and Posner BZ (1993) Psychometric properties of the leadership practices inventory

updated. Educational and Psychological Measurement 53: 191–199.

Lam SK, Chen XP and Schaubroeck J (2002) Participative decision making and employee performance
in diﬀerent cultures: The moderating eﬀects of allocentrism/idiocentrism and eﬃcacy. Academy of
Management Journal 45(5): 905–914.

Liu W, Zhu R and Yang Y (2010) I warn you because I like you: Voice behavior, employee identiﬁ-

cations, and transformational leadership. Leadership Quarterly 21(1): 189–202.

Lowe KB, Kroeck N and Sivasubramaniam N (1996) Eﬀectiveness correlates of transformational and
transactional leadership: A meta-analytic review of the MLQ literature. Leadership Quarterly 7(3):
385–425.

Maertz CP, Stevens MJ and Campion MA (2003) A turnover model for the Mexican maquiladoras.

Journal of Vocational Behavior 63: 111–135.

Meyer JP, Allen NJ and Smith CA (1993) Commitment to organizations and occupations: Extension

and test of a three-component conception. Journal of Applied Psychology 78(4): 538–551.

Morris J, Wilkinson B and Gamble J (2009) Strategic international human resource management or
the ‘bottom line’? The cases of electronics and garments commodity chains in China. International
Journal of Human Resource Management 20(2): 348–337.

Moss SA and Ritossa DA (2007) The impact of goal orientation on the association between leadership

style and follower performance, creativity and work attitudes. Leadership 3(4): 433–456.

Pratt MG (1998) To be or not to be: Central questions in organizational identiﬁcation. In: Godfrey P
(ed.) Identity in Organizations: Developing Theory through Conversations. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage, 171–207.

Redmond MR, Mumford MD and Teach R (1993) Putting creativity in work: Eﬀects of leader
behavior on subordinate creativity. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 55(1):
120–151.


394

Leadership 8(4)

Scott SG and Bruce RA (1994) Determinants of innovative behavior: A path model of individual

innovation in the workplace. Academy of Management Journal 37(3): 580–607.

Shamir B, House RJ and Arthur MB (1993) The motivational eﬀects of charismatic leadership: A self-

concept based theory. Organizational Science 4(4): 577–594.

Shamir B, Zakay E, Breinin E and Popper M (1998) Correlates of charismatic leader behavior in
military units: Subordinates’ attitudes, unit characteristics, and superior’s appraisals of leader per-
formance. Academy of Management Journal 41(4): 387–409.

Shin SJ and Zhou J (2003) Transformational leadership conservation, and creativity: Evidence from

Korea. Academy of Management Journal 46(6): 703–714.

Siegel SM and Kaemmerer WF (1978) Measuring the perceived support for innovation in organiza-

tions. Journal of Applied Psychology 63(5): 553–562.

Sluss DM and Ashforth BE (2007) Relational identity and identiﬁcation: Deﬁning ourselves through

work relationships. Academy of Management Review 32(1): 9–32.

Steers R (1977) Antecedents and outcomes of organizational commitment. Administrative Science

Quarterly 22(1): 46–56.

Tourish D, Craig R and Amernic J (2010) Transformational leadership education and agency perspec-
tives in business school pedagogy: A marriage of inconvenience? British Journal of Management
21(1): S40–S59.

Tsui AS, Schoonhoven CB, Meyer MW, Lau CM and Milkovich GT (2004) Organization and man-
agement in the midst of societal transformation: The People’s Republic of China. Organization
Science 15(2): 133–144.

van Knippenberg D (2000) Work motivation and performance: A social identity perspective. Applied

Psychology: An International Review 49(3): 357–371.

van Knippenberg D, Van Knippenberg B, Cremer DD and Hogg MA (2004) Leadership, self, and

identity: A review and research agenda. Leadership Quarterly 15(6): 825–856.

Walumbwa FO and Lawler JJ (2003) Building eﬀective organizations: Transformational leadership,
collectivist orientation, work-related attitudes, and withdrawal behaviors in three emerging econo-
mies. International Journal of Human Resource Management 14(7): 1083–1101.

Walumbwa FO, Avolio BJ and Zhu W (2008) How transformational leadership weaves its inﬂuence on
individual job performance: The role of identiﬁcation and eﬃcacy beliefs. Personnel Psychology
61(4): 793–825.

Walumbwa FO, Lawler JJ and Avolio BJ (2007) Leadership, individual diﬀerences, and work-related
attitudes: A cross-culture investigation. Applied Psychology: An International Review 56(2): 212–230.
Walumbwa FO, Lawler JJ, Avolio BJ, Wang P and Shi K (2005) Transformational leadership and
work-related attitudes: The moderating eﬀects of collective and self-eﬃcacy across cultures. Journal
of Leadership and Organizational Studies 11(3): 2–16.

Wang P and Rode JC (2010) Transformational leadership and follower creativity: The moderating
eﬀects of identiﬁcation with leader and organizational climate. Human Relations 63(8): 1105–1128.
Weisberg RW (1999) Creativity and knowledge: A challenge to theories. In: Sterngerg RJ (ed.)

Handbook of Creativity. New York: Cambridge University Press, 226–250.

Yang J, Zhang ZX and Tsui A (2010) Middle manager leadership and frontline employee performance:

Bypass, cascading, and moderating eﬀects. Journal of Management Studies 47(4): 654–678.

Zhang H (2010) The Hukou system’s constraints on migrant workers’ job mobility in Chinese cities.

China Economic Review 21(1): 51–64.

Qing Miao is Associate Professor of Management at Zhejiang University, China. He holds a
PhD from Zhejiang University and was a postdoctoral fellow at Ljubljana University. His
current research interests are in the areas of leadership and entrepreneurship, with an
emphasis on leadership theory in the Chinese context and the leading role of the founder
in entrepreneurship.


Miao et al.

395

Alexander Newman is Associate Professor of International Business at the University of
Nottingham, Ningbo China. His research interests are in the areas of leadership, organiza-
tional behaviour and entrepreneurship. He has published in such outlets as the International
Journal of Human Resource Management, International Small Business Journal, Personnel
Review and Journal of Managerial Psychology.

Peter Lamb is Assistant Professor of Organizational Behaviour at the University of
Nottingham, Ningbo China. His research interests include leadership, management and
organisational learning, and the transfer and translation of management ideas across time
and space.


