     Original Article
     The impact of the corporate identity 
mix on corporate reputation 

 Received (in revised form): 5 th  June 2010    

  Kevin       Money         
 (PhD) is an associate professor at Henley Business School and Director of the John Madejski Centre for Reputation. 
He teaches on the MBA programme and is a mentor and tutor on Henley ’ s Advanced Management Programme. He also 
supervises DBA and PhD Research Associates. Money is a Fellow of the Sunningdale Institute, which is a think-tank and 
development centre managed by the National School of Government. He is a chartered psychologist, a member of the 
British Society of Clinical Hypnosis and a licensed NLP practitioner. He is also a trustee of the Safer South Africa Trust 
(UK) and an academic member of the board of EABIS. He has acted as a consultant to major companies and voluntary 
organizations in the United Kingdom, USA and South Africa.   

  Susan       Rose           
 (DBA) is an associate professor in Marketing Management at Henley Business School where she is involved in both 
teaching and researching in the ﬁ elds of strategic marketing, branding and consumer behaviour. She is also the Associate 
Head of the School of Management at Henley responsible for Post Graduate Professional Programmes including 
the Henley MBA. She is a researcher within the John Madejski Centre for Reputation focusing on customer-brand 
relationships and the link to reputation. Her extensive business experience is within the ﬁ elds of marketing and brand 
management, communications and marketing research across a wide range of industry sectors. Rose is a consultant in 
the areas of branding and consumer behaviour where she has acquired experience in brand investigation and strategy 
formulation.   

  Carola       Hillenbrand         
 (PhD) holds the position of Lead Researcher in the John Madejski Centre for Reputation at Henley Business School 
overseeing a variety of international and large-scale research projects in the proﬁ t and not-for-proﬁ t sector. She 
holds a PhD in Applied Organizational Psychology from Brunel University. Her key areas of professional expertise 
are in reputation, corporate responsibility, the psychological foundations of successful organizational relationships and 
multivariate statistics. Hillenbrand is also the Subject Area Leader for the subject of Reputation and Relationships on the 
Henley MBA programme and has been responsible for the development of materials and teaching of the subject on MBA 
and corporate programmes. In addition, she teaches statistics and multivariate data analysis on both the MBA and the 
doctoral programme. She is a certiﬁ ed coach, a licensed NLP practitioner and a chartered psychologist with the British 
Psychological Society.           

   The concepts of corporate identity (CI) and corporate reputation (CR) 
  ABSTRACT  
receive  extensive  investigation  within  their  separate  domains.  Recent  strategic 
marketing literature calls for these two ﬁ elds of study to be brought closer together. 
This article answers this call by developing a ﬁ ve-construct research model with four 
hypotheses.  The  model  proposes  that  the  corporate  identity  mix  (CIM)  plays  a 
distinct and independent role in driving CR alongside daily experiences of business 
operations (BO). Furthermore, the model proposes that the impact of CIM on CR 
is mediated through corporate brand beliefs. The study is based on the professional 
service  sector  and  assesses  the  model  and  hypotheses  using  data  collected  from  a 
questionnaire completed by 126 customers. Partial least squares structural equation 
modelling  technique  is  used  to  analyse  the  data.  Results  indicate  that  customer 

  Correspondence:     Susan Rose  
    Henley Business School at the 
University of Reading, 
Greenlands, Henley on Thames, 
RG9 3AU, Oxon, UK.  
 E-mail:  susan.rose@henley
.reading.ac.uk        

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX  Brand Management  Vol. 18, 3, 197–211

www.palgrave-journals.com/bm/


 Money  et al  

experiences  of  the  CIM  and  daily  BO  of  the  organization  have  independent  and 
signiﬁ cant impacts upon the development of CR. As a further contribution, the study 
operationalizes, and provides new measure of, the CIM.  
   Journal of Brand Management  (2010)  18,  197 – 211.  doi: 10.1057/bm.2010.31; 
published online 15 October 2010    

   Keywords:  
   structural equation modelling   ;    partial least squares       

    corporate reputation   ;    corporate identity mix   ;    corporate brand beliefs   ; 

 INTRODUCTION 
 Corporate reputation (CR) is a key factor 
in  the  success  of  organizations  ( Fombrun 
and van Riel, 2004 ). Antecedents of a good 
reputation  include  stakeholders ’   positive 
experiences  of  organizational  behaviour 
( MacMillan   et  al ,  2005a ).  A  number  of 
beneﬁ cial outcomes in terms of stakeholder 
behaviour  result  from  a  good  reputation 
( Ardend, 2009 ). 

 Theorists  such  as   Balmer  and  Greyser 
(2006)   argue  that  the  development  of  a 
positive  CR  will  depend  upon  the  align-
ment  of  brand  management  activities 
such  as  the  development  of  the  corporate 
identity  mix  (CIM),  along  with  customer 
experiences  of  daily  business  operations 
(BO)  such  as  customer  service  delivery. 
Despite  the  plausibility  of  these  proposi-
tions,  they  remain  empirically  untested 
( Melewar and Karaosmanoglu, 2006 ). This 
study aims to test the proposition that CIM 
is an antecedent of CR and therefore pos-
itively  inﬂ uences  stakeholder  behaviours 
via the development of a strong CR. 

 There are two key objectives of this study. 
The ﬁ rst is to develop a model of how aspects 
of  CIM  affect  CR.  CIM  is  established  to 
impact CR through the creation of corporate 
brand beliefs (CBB). The second objective is 
to  provide  an  operationalization  and  meas-
urement  of  the  CIM  framework  proposed 
by  Melewar and Jenkins (2002) .   

 THEORETICAL DEVELOPMENT 
 The investigation of the relationship between 
aspects of a corporate brand management, 

such as the CIM and CR, has been inhib-
ited by the different ways concepts relating 
to corporate brand and CR are operation-
alized      ( Pitt  and  Papania,  2007 ).   Brown 
 et al  (2006)  identify two levels at which the 
corporate brand and CR are studied. The 
study of the corporate brand is often con-
ducted  at  the  organizational  level,  that  is, 
what  organizations  do  to  enhance  their 
corporate brands ( Aaker, 2004 ). The study 
of CR, on the other hand, is typically con-
ducted at the individual level  –  what indi-
viduals  think  and  feel  about  organizations 
( Fombrun and van Riel, 2004 ;  Walsh  et al , 
2009 ;  Money  et al , 2010 )    . Linking the indi-
vidual and organizational levels together in 
a  single  model  creates  a  methodological 
challenge. This challenge makes it difﬁ cult 
to establish the impact of CIM upon CR. 
Recently, scholars have achieved success in 
bringing together some marketing and rep-
utation  concepts  through  operationalizing 
them  at  the  individual  level  ( Walsh   et  al , 
2009 ).  Brown  et al  (2006)  also propose that 
the individual level is a useful way to oper-
ationalize  such  a  link,  and  we  therefore 
develop measures for CR, CIM and CBB 
at the individual level. 

 Confusion  surrounds  the  use  of  terms 
such  as  CR,  corporate  identity  (CI),  cor-
porate image and corporate brand. Practi-
tioners  and  researchers  use  these  terms 
inconsistently  ( Pitt,  2007 ).   Brown   et  al  
(2006)  ease this ambiguity by providing an 
interdisciplinary  framework  of  how  these 
concepts relate to an organization ’ s strategic 
objectives. This framework, however, remains 

198

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX  Brand Management  Vol. 18, 3, 197–211


 Impact of the corporate identity mix on corporate reputation 

untested, and cross-disciplinary research to 
enhance understanding of such concepts is 
called  for.  To  address  this  gap,  we  bring 
together  understanding  from  the  domains 
of  both  CIM  and  CR.  We  provide  an 
integrated  model  of  the  development  of 
reputation  and  operationalize  and  test  the 
distinctions  in  the   Brown   et  al   (2006)  
framework, speciﬁ cally that of CI.  

 Corporate reputation 
 CR is often conceptualized as the perceptions, 
attitudes  and  esteem  with  which  stake-
holders  hold  an  organization  ( Bromley, 
2002 ). For example,  Fombrun (1996, p. 72)  
gives the following deﬁ nition:  ‘ A corporate 
reputation is a perceptual representation of 
a  company ’ s  past  actions  and  future  pros-
pects that describes the ﬁ rm ’ s overall appeal 
to all of its key constituents when compared 
with  other  leading  rivals ’ .  Thus  CR  is  a 
comparative  construct.  Perceptions  of  the 
past and the future derive from an inﬁ nite 
list  of  stakeholder  experiences  and  future 
scenarios.  However,  this  is  problematic 
because they do not necessarily lend them-
selves  easily  to  comparison.  On  the  other 
hand, the overall appeal of an organization, 
which comprises both positive stakeholder 
trust and emotion towards the organization, 
is comparable across different organizations 
and is increasingly seen to encapsulate the 
essence  of  an  organization ’ s  reputation 
( Fombrun and van Riel, 2004 ). In line with 
this view, we adopt a conceptualization of 
CR in terms of trust and positive emotions. 
Organizations  do  not  own  the  trust  and 
positive  emotions  that  stakeholders  hold 
towards them but can, however, over time 
engage  in  activities  that  will  help  build 
these aspects of their reputation.   

 Experiences of daily BO 
 Stakeholder  experiences  of  daily  BO  are 
key  antecedents  of  CR  ( MacMillan   et  al , 
2005b ). BO includes how an organization 
deals  with  stakeholders  such  as  suppliers, 

customers and employees in terms of daily 
activities such as product or service delivery. 
Deliberate  marketing  activities  such  as 
advertising  or  branding  differ  from  these 
daily  BO  activities  because  the  latter  are 
carried out in order to deliver value to the 
stakeholders.  Marketing  activities  are  used 
to inﬂ uence stakeholders and to raise aware-
ness of BO activities. From a strategic per-
spective, this distinction is useful because it 
allows  for  an  exploration  of  the  relative 
importance of customer experience of BO 
and the deliberate branding activities in the 
development of CR.   

 Consequences of CR 
 A  positive  CR  leads  to  a  number  of 
supportive behaviours by stakeholders ( Post 
 et  al ,  2002 ),  these  are  often  key  to  the 
generation  of  cash  ﬂ ow  and  positive  per-
formance. This leads to the creation of tan-
gible market assets for the ﬁ rm, and acts as 
a buffer against the effects of crisis situations 
or  mistakes  by  the  organization  ( Roberts 
and Dowling, 2002 ).  Money and Hillenbrand 
(2006)  present a causal model that integrates 
the development and consequences of CR 
and which represents current understanding 
of CR in the literature. The organizational 
and  individual  levels  proposed  by   Brown 
 et al  (2006)  are incorporated into the model 
shown in  Figure 1 .   

 CIM and CBB as antecedents of CR 
 Extending  the   Money  and  Hillenbrand 
(2006)  model, the following sections review 
aspects of corporate brand literature in terms 
of how CIM and CBB can act as anteced-
ents of CR. Such literature has developed 
in relative isolation from the CR literature 
but draws upon similar underlying theories 
from sociology, anthropology and psycho-
logy ( Aaker, 2004 ;  Keller, 2008 ). CIM is a 
tool  used  by  management  to  present  the 
corporate brand to its external audiences in 
such  a  way  as  to  create  distinctive  mental 
associations that drive positive organizational 

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX  Brand Management  Vol. 18, 3, 197–211

199


 Money  et al  

Antecedents ⇒

Corporate Reputation

⇒ Consequences

Organizational level

Asset generating activities

Intangible assets

Market asset/performance

Experiences of 

Business Operations
Experiences with the 
day-to-day operating

practices of an
organization 

Individual level

Corporate
Reputation

Positive beliefs, positive
emotions and feelings of

trust toward the 

organization

Consequences of

Corporate 
Reputation

Supportive behaviours
towards the organization

Observations and Experiences

Beliefs  

        Attitudes

Intentions 

         Behaviours

  Figure 1 :             
  Source : Adapted from  Money and Hillenbrand (2006)  and  Brown  et al  (2006) .  

  Placing corporate reputation in a causal model.  

assessment  by  stakeholders  ( Aaker,  2004 ). 
Theorists such as  Keller (2008)  propose that 
CIM should result in distinctive CBB; these 
beliefs, in turn, are seen to directly impact 
on  CR.  Therefore,  the  impact  that  CIM 
has on CR is seen to be mediated through 
CBB.   

 The CIM 
 CI is a mechanism by which an organiza-
tion  expresses  itself  to  the  external  world 
and  a  means  by  which  stakeholders  come 
to  know  an  organization.  The  analogy  to 
human  identity  is  often  drawn  ( Balmer, 
2001 ), as CI similarly serves to communi-
cate  the  many  facets  an  external  audience 
would  want  to  know  about  an  organiza-
tion,  such  as  who  they  are,  what  they  do 
and what they stand for. For this study, we 
adopt  the  deﬁ nition  of  CI  provided  by 
 Melewar (2003, p. 197) :  ‘ the set of mean-
ings  by  which  a  company  allows  itself  to 
be  known  and  through  which  it  allows 
people to describe, remember and relate to 
it ’ .  Sub-components  of  the  CI  concept 
have  been 
identiﬁ ed  and  articulated 
( Melewar and Karaosmanoglu, 2006 ), and 
include 
are  directly 
under  the  control  of  management  such  as 

activities 

that 

corporate  communications  and  corporate 
design.  Melewar and Jenkins (2002)  point 
to the highly contentious nature of the CI 
concept and the resulting difﬁ culty associ-
ated with researching it. The CIM is a way 
in which the organization can present itself 
via a series of external cues. The CIM is a 
sub-set of such deliberate and often tactical 
activities,  and  involves  tangible  decisions 
regarding  elements  such  as  brand  name, 
logo, physical appearance, advertising styles 
and  product  features  that  clearly  differen-
tiate  organizations  from  other  corporate 
brands ( Aaker, 2004 ). The CIM is therefore 
posited  to  act  as  an  antecedent  of  CBB. 
While  Melewar and Jenkins (2002)  articu-
late the CIM, they fall short of suggesting 
empirical measures for it, which this study 
sets out to provide.   

 Corporate brand beliefs 
 CBB  are  beliefs  about  the  brand  held  in 
the minds of customers, which result from 
the deliberate branding activities of organ-
izations  ( Keller,  2008 ).   Brown  and  Dacin 
(1997)  refer to corporate associations as the 
information  and  beliefs  that  a  stakeholder 
holds  about  an  organization.  This  study 
adopts  the  deﬁ nition  of  CBB  as  a  unique 

200

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX  Brand Management  Vol. 18, 3, 197–211


 Impact of the corporate identity mix on corporate reputation 

set  of  characteristics  associated  with  an 
organization ( Davies and Chun, 2002 ), such 
as  the  belief  that  an  organization  is  at  the 
forefront of innovation in technology. The 
equity  of  the  corporate  brand  resides  in 
beliefs  that  are  distinctive  and  favourable 
towards  the  organization  ( Aaker,  2004 ). 
CBB can be distinguished from CR in that 
it provides an indication of distinctiveness. 
CR,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  comparative 
construct  and  provides  an  indication  of 
relative favourability. 

 Beliefs precede notions of favourability 
and behaviour ( Fishbein and Ajzen, 1975 ). 
Therefore,  CBB  are  a  crucial  component 
in understanding the relationship between 
aspects  of  CIM  and  CR.  Formation  of  a 
distinctive set of brand beliefs is an impor-
tant strategic objective that involves organ-
izations reﬂ ecting upon their own values, 
the  intended  image  of  the  organization, 
stakeholder  expectations  and  the  posi-
tioning of competitors. CBB should align 
with  the  organizational  strategy,  which  is 
delivered  via  a  range  of  tactical  activities 
( Keller,  2008 ).  In  recent  years,  increasing 
attention  has  been  given  to  the  role  that 
the  CIM  plays  in  developing  positive 
beliefs  about  a  corporate  brand,  which  is 
widely associated with positive brand per-
formance  ( Melewar  and  Karaosmanoglu, 
2006 ).   

 An integrated framework of CIM 
and CR 
 In   Figure  2   we  present  an  integrated 
research model. In line with the literature 
reviewed  above,  CIM  is  proposed  to 
directly  inﬂ uence  CBB,  which  in  turn 
affects CR. Experiences of the CIM include 
visual  identity,  corporate  messages,  and 
physical or virtual presence. It is important 
to note that changes to visual identity, cor-
porate  messages,  and  physical  or  virtual 
presence  can  be  driven  relatively  quickly 
by an organization. The organization plans, 
manages  and  controls  the  CIM,  whereas 

BO  evolves  out  of  an  individual ’ s  daily 
experiences of the operations of the organ-
ization. Any changes to how BO are expe-
rienced by customers will take considerable 
effort  by  an  organization  and  can  only  be 
experienced  over  a  longer  period  of  time     
( Fombrun and van Riel, 2004 ). While we 
do  not  explicitly  measure  the  impact  of 
time in this study, the context of the study 
is one of a long-standing relationship with 
customers,  in  which  aspects  of  BO  are 
already seen as being of critical importance. 
If  the  study  ﬁ nds  an  independent  and 
signiﬁ cant  role  in  terms  of  the  impact  of 
CIM and CBB on CR, this would suggest 
that CIM and CBB play an even larger role 
in situations in which customers have lesser 
experiences of daily BO. 

 Researchers  can  distinguish  between 
the  more  tactical  and  deliberate  activities 
related  to  the  CIM  that  inﬂ uence  CBB, 
from the more relational elements that are, 
in  this  study,  conceptualized  as  BO.  A 
framework  proposed  initially  by   Balmer 
and  Soenen  (1998)   and  developed  by 
 Melewar and Jenkins (2002)  is used to iso-
late  and  measure  CIM.  This  framework 
categorizes  CIM  in  relation  to  how  it 
builds  different  facets  of  the  corporate 
brand, namely: the dimensions of  body  (the 
physical  representation  of  the  brand  in 
terms  aspects  of  logo,  colours  and  visual 
identity);   voice   (an  organization ’ s  verbal 
presence  in  advertising,  the  media  and 
desirable social circles);  soul  (the kinaesthetic 
or feeling-based representation of the brand) 
and  the   mind   (what  the  brand  stands  for 
in terms of its intellectual or thought lead-
ership  proposition).   Figure  2   presents  the 
extended   Money  and  Hillenbrand  (2006)  
model  incorporating  CIM  and  CBB  into 
a single ﬁ ve-concept model. 

 A key contribution of this study is that 
it  incorporates  the  CIM  and  CBB  into  a 
model explaining CR and its consequences. 
This  is  achieved  by  developing  a  new 
measure of the CIM, operationalized at the 

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX  Brand Management  Vol. 18, 3, 197–211

201


 Money  et al  

Antecedents ⇒

Corporate Reputation

⇒ Consequences

Organizational level

Asset generating activities

CIM

(Experiences of the
Corporate Identity 

Mix)

H1

BO

H3

(Experiences of

Business Operations)

Intangible assets

Market asset/performance

CBB

(Corporate 

Brand
Beliefs)

H2

CR

(Corporate
Reputation)

H4

Consequences
of corporate 

reputation

Individual level

Observations and Experiences

Beliefs                     Attitudes

Intentions           Behaviours

   Figure 2 :             

  Summary of the theoretical model including the CIM and CBB.  

individual  level  and  measured  in  terms  of 
customer experiences of branding activities 
rather  than  in  terms  of  an  organization ’ s 
view of its activities. Customer experiences 
related  to  the  CIM  are  operationalized  as 
antecedents  of  CBB.   Fishbein  and  Ajzen 
(1975)   provide  the  theoretical  support  for 
the causal link between all constructs in the 
model. CBB mediates the impact of expe-
riences of the CIM on CR. The inclusion 
of a mediator informs understanding of the 
building of CR as a sequential process. The 
model incorporates four hypotheses:  

 Hypothesis  1:        Positive  experiences  of 

CIM contribute to positive CBB.   

 Hypothesis  2:        Positive CBB contributes 

to positive perceptions of CR.   

 Hypothesis 3:        Positive experiences of BO 
contribute  to  positive  perceptions  of 
CR.   

 Hypothesis 4:        Positive perceptions of CR 
contribute  to  positive  consequences 
of CR.     

 METHOD  

 Research context and sampling 
strategy 
 The  model  was  tested  with  customers  of 
a  post-experience,  post-graduate  business 
school 
in  the  United  Kingdom  that 
recently  altered  its  corporate  brand.  This 
sample  was  selected  because  a  business 
school represents an important professional 
services  context.  While  a  service  can  be 
considered  a   ‘ product  offer ’   ( Kotler  and 
Keller, 2006 ), there are distinctive features 
regarding  the  branding  of  services  com-
pared  to  tangible  products.  Professional 
services  are  characterized  by  the  need 
for close interpersonal interactions, which 
mostly  take  place  between  the  customer 

202

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX  Brand Management  Vol. 18, 3, 197–211


 Impact of the corporate identity mix on corporate reputation 

and  the  people  within  the  organization 
( Berry,  1983 ;   Iacobucci  and  Ostrom, 
1996 ). Services are most often branded at 
the  corporate  level  with  the  organization 
and  the  service  offer  being  virtually  one 
and  the  same.  Furthermore,   Cretu  and 
Brodie  (2007)   suggest  that  CR   ‘ becomes 
more  important  when  there  are  higher 
levels  of  service ’ .  For  these  reasons,  the 
research sample was derived from the cus-
tomers  of  a  business  school,  thus  repre-
senting  CIM  in  a  service  con text  and 
thereby facilitating the investigation of the 
key constructs of CIM and CR. Further-
more,  the  selected  business  school  was 
undergoing  a  change  in  management,  at 
which time the role of the CIM and CR 
becomes crucial. 

 A questionnaire was distributed face-to-
face  and  online  to  500  customers  of  the 
business  school.  The  proﬁ le  of  the  cus-
tomers  consisted  of  managers  in  full-time 
employment in middle to senior positions. 
The  average  age  of  customers  is  35  and 
the  average  salary  is  in  excess  of  USD 
100.000.  A  total  of  126  useable  responses 
were  obtained,  providing  an  acceptable 
response 
 Baruch 
(1999) . This sample size was used in order 
to meet the sample requirements of the data 
analysis  technique  ( Wixom  and  Watson, 
2001 ).   

according 

rate 

to 

 Questionnaire development and 
measures 
 A series of multi-item scales were used in 
the construction of the research instrument 
in  line  with  the  guidelines  of   Churchill 
(1979)  and  Rossiter (2002) . The question-
naire was broadly structured into ﬁ ve parts: 
(i)  operational  measures  of  the  CIM  con-
struct; (ii) operational measures of the BO 
construct; (iii) operational measures of the 
CBB  construct;  (iv)  operational  measures 
of  the  CR  construct;  and  (v)  operational 
measures  of  the  construct  for  the  Conse-
quences of CR. 

 On the basis of the framework proposed 
by  Melewar and Jenkins (2002) , which uses 
the  analogy  of  the  mind,  soul,  body  and 
voice  to  identify  the  different  ways  in 
which  a  CI  presents  itself,  interviews  and 
focus  groups  were  used  to  develop  new 
measures of experiences of the CIM. Inter-
views  with  10  key  managers,  involved  in 
the strategic change process and the devel-
opment of the CIM of the business school, 
were  undertaken  to  identify  both  the 
desired  CBB  and  the  activities  relating  to 
the  CIM  of  the  organization.  Two  focus 
group  discussions  with  customers  were 
also undertaken. Nine statements, three on 
body,  and  two  each  on  voice,  soul  and 
mind, were developed to capture customers ’  
experiences  of  these  four  aspects  of  the 
CIM. The items to measure CBB are also 
newly  developed  in  this  process.  The 
resulting scale comprises 13 items, seven on 
brand positioning and six on organizational 
characteristics.  Items  for  CR  assume  that 
trust and positive emotion are components 
of  CR  (as  stated  in  the  literature  review) 
and  were  adapted  from   Fombrun  and 
van Riel (2004) . Items for consequences of 
CR  are  adapted  from   MacMillan   et  al  
(2005a) . Finally, items for the BO construct 
were  adapted  from   Morgan  and  Hunt 
(1994)   and   MacMillan   et  al   (2005b)   to 
ensure  appropriateness  for  the  business 
school.  All  measures  can  be  viewed  in 
Appendix,  including  key  item  and  scale 
information.   

are 

reﬂ ective 

 The  ﬁ ve  constructs  of  the  research 
model  were  measured  via  multi-item 
scales,  using  a  7-point  Likert  scale.  Three 
constructs 
in  nature, 
namely  CBB,  CR  and  consequences  of 
CR, and two are formative, namely CIM 
and  BO.  For  a  reﬂ ective  construct,  the 
observed  indicators  identify  the  causal 
implications  of  the  construct.  For  a  for-
mative  construct,  the  observed  indicators 
cause  or  form  the  construct  ( Hair   et  al , 
2006 ).   

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX  Brand Management  Vol. 18, 3, 197–211

203


 Money  et al  

 Controlling for common method 
variance 
  Podsakoff   et  al   (2003)   suggest  that  for 
studies making use of formative indicators, 
procedural  controls  are  likely  to  be  the 
most  effective  way  to  control  common 
method bias. We followed their suggestions 
relating  to  item  characteristic  effects,  item 
context  effects  and  measurement  context 
effects  for  formative  and  reﬂ ective  indica-
tors (see  Podsakoff  et al , 2003, p. 898 ). The 
impact  of  common  methods  bias  on  the 
reﬂ ective elements of the questionnaire was 
also  assessed  using  statistical  techniques  as 
reported in the ﬁ ndings.   

 Data analysis techniques 
 The  research  model  and  hypotheses  were 
analysed using the structural equation model-
ling  approach  of  partial  least  squares  (PLS). 
PLS is appropriate because the research model 
includes  both  formative  and  reﬂ ective  con-
structs. The sample size exceeds requirements 
for  PLS  application  ( Wixom  and  Watson, 
2001 ). The PLS analyses involve two separate 
but sequentially related stages ( Hulland, 1999 ). 
First,  validity  and  reliability  analyses  test  the 
measurement model. Second, estimating the 
paths between the variables tests the structural 
model by determining their signiﬁ cance and 
the predictive ability of the model.    

 FINDINGS  

 The measurement model: Reliability 
and validity of the measures 
 The standardized loadings of the individual 
items  on  their  constructs  evaluate  the 
adequacy of the measures of the formative 
constructs.  All  loadings  are  adequate  using 
the  guidelines  given  by   Hair   et  al   (2006) . 
For  the  reﬂ ective  constructs,  Cronbach ’ s 
  ♡   coefﬁ cients, as well as composite reliability 
for each of the constructs, indicate reliability 
of all measures (see  Table 1 ) ( Chin, 1998a ). 
The Cronbach ’ s   ♡   coefﬁ cients range between 
0.71 and 0.88 and the composite reliabilities 
range between 0.88 and 0.96, which indi-
cate excellent reliability. 

 In addition, measures used for the reﬂ ective 
constructs are assessed for convergent and dis-
criminant validity by using the average vari-
ance  extracted  (AVE)  for  each  construct,  as 
well as the correlations between the constructs 
(see  Table 1 ). All AVEs are greater than 0.5 
and therefore demonstrate satisfactory conver-
gent validity ( Chin, 1998a ). The square roots 
of the AVEs are greater than the correlations 
between  the  constructs,  therefore  demon-
strating discriminant validity ( Chin, 1998a ). 
 With regard to the formative constructs, 
 Hulland (1999)  states that indicators of the 
same construct can have positive, negative 

   Table 1 :       Inter-construct correlations (consistency and reliability tests for multi-item constructs) 

    

    

    Cronbach’s  ♡   

    Composite 
reliability  

   CIM (1) 
   BO (2) 
   CBB (3) 
   CR (4) 
   Cons. of CR  c   (5) 

 NA  a   
 NA  a   
 0.88 
 0.71 
 0.86 

 NA  a   
 NA  a   
 0.93 
 0.88 
 0.96 

    Average 
variance 
extracted  

 NA  a   
 NA  a   
 0.52 
 0.52 
 0.71 

  Construct correlation matrix  

  CIM  (1) 

  BO  (2) 

  CBB  (3) 

  CR  (4) 

  Cons. of CR   c   

  NA   a   
 0.54 
 0.53 
 0.49 
 0.38 

   — 
 NA  a   
 0.42 
 0.75 
 0.46 

   — 
   — 
 0.72  b   
 0.45 
 0.39 

   — 
   — 
 —   
 0.72  b   
 0.43 

(5) 

   — 
   — 
   — 
 —   
 0.84  b   

   a    Cronbach’s   ♡  s, composite reliabilities and average variances extracted are not reported for CIM and BO because 
these scales consist of formative indicators ( Chin, 1998b, pp. 320 – 321 ).   
   b    Square root of AVE is on the diagonal of the construct correlation matrix.   
   c    Consequences of Corporate Reputation    .   
      NA = Not applicable   .   

204

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX  Brand Management  Vol. 18, 3, 197–211


 Impact of the corporate identity mix on corporate reputation 

or  no  correlation  with  one  another. 
Formative  indicators  need  not  be  corre-
lated  nor  have  high  internal  consistency. 
Composite  reliability  and  measures  of 
AVEs  are  only  applicable  for  reﬂ ective 
measures (see  Chin, 1998b, pp. 320 – 321 ). 
Content  validity  needs  to  be  ensured 
through strong theory and the use of mul-
tiple measures ( Cohen  et al , 1990 ).  Bollen 
and  Lennox  (1991)   suggest  that  all  meas-
ures forming the underlying constructs are 
included.  In  order  to  assess  the  relations 
between  formative  measures  and  latent 
constructs,  Chin (1998a)  proposes that item 
weights  are  analysed.  A  full  list  of  the 
weights is presented in Appendix. It should 
be  noted  that  not  all  of  the  weights  are 
signiﬁ cant. They are kept in the analysis of 
the  ﬁ nal  path  model  in  line  with  recom-
mendations with regard to formative indi-
cators ( Cohen  et al , 1990 ).   

 The structural model: Path 
coefﬁ cients and predictive ability 
 The  key  outputs  from  this  analysis  are  as 
follows. First,  R -squared values (see  Figure 3 ) 
provide  an  indication  of  the  predictive 
ability of the independent variables. CBB, 
CR and consequences of CR with  R -squared 

values  of  0.28,  0.59  and  0.19,  respectively, 
produce  adequate  evidence  of  the  predic-
tive  ability  of  the  model  ( Cohen  and 
Cohen,  1975 ).  Second,   Figure  3   reports 
the path coefﬁ cients and their statistical sig-
niﬁ cance.  Three  hundred  bootstrapping 
exercises  with  varying  sample  and  case 
numbers  yielded  robust  estimates  ( Chin 
1998a,   b ). The results reported in  Figure 3  
are based on 300 samples drawn randomly 
from  the  126  cases  following  standard 
bootstrapping procedures ( Mathieson  et al , 
2001 ),  revealing  that  all  the  links  in  the 
model are signiﬁ cant at the 0.01 level.   

 Assessment of common method 
biases 
 Harman ’   single  factor  test  is  performed, 
revealing the presence of six distinct factors 
in  the  initial  un-rotated  solution.  These 
results  do  not  preclude  the  possibility  of 
common method variance. However, they 
suggest  that  it  is  not  a  likely  explanation 
for  the  reported  ﬁ ndings  ( Andersson  and 
Bateman, 1997 ).    

 DISCUSSION 
 The  results  support  the  research  model. 
The  measurement  of  these  constructs  is 

CIM

(Experiences of the
Corporate Identity 

Mix)

+0.53***
(t=8.92)

+0.69***
(t=12.40)

BO

(Experiences of

Business Operations)

CBB

(R2=0.28)

+0.16***
(t=2.87)

+0.43***
(t=4.84)

CR (R2=0.59)

Consequences

of corporate
reputation
(R2=0.19)

  The ﬁ tted model.  

    Figure 3 :             
  Notes : The ﬁ tted model based on the results.  *  indicates signiﬁ cance at the  P     <    0.1 level;  *   *  indicates signiﬁ cance at the  P     <    0.05 level; 
 *   *   *  indicates signiﬁ cance at the  P     <    0.01 level.  Cohen and Cohen (1975, p. 151)  provide guidelines for the interpretation of  R -squared. 
These are:  R -squared of 0.01 is a small effect size,  R -squared of 0.09 is a medium effect size and  R -squared of 0.25 is a large effect size.  

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX  Brand Management  Vol. 18, 3, 197–211

205


 Money  et al  

both reliable and valid. What is distinctive 
about  this  study  is  that  testing  is  achieved 
at the individual level (what an individual 
experiences, thinks and feels about the cor-
porate branding), rather than the organiza-
tional  level  (what  activities  organizations 
can  engage  in  to  enhance  their  corporate 
brands).  It  therefore  provides  one  solu -
tion  to  a  long-standing  methodological 
challenge  in  bringing  together  branding 
and  reputation-related  research  ( Pitt  and 
Papania, 2007 ). 

 In doing so, the CIM, CBB and BO are 
found to have a positive and distinct impact 
upon CR. Of the antecedents, it seems that 
BO has the largest direct impact on reputa-
tion.  This  is  not  surprising  given  that  the 
sample  represents  customers  in  a  long-
standing  professional  service  relationship. 
What is interesting is that deliberate CIM 
activities have an independent and signiﬁ -
cant  impact  on  reputation,  even  when 
there  is  an  on-going  relationship.  Impor-
tantly, the mediating role of CBB in linking 
the CIM and CR is conﬁ rmed (Hypotheses 
1  and  2).  This  suggests  that  beliefs  about 
the  corporate  brand  may  act  as  a  buffer 
between the experience customers have of 
the  deliberate  branding  activities  of  an 
organization  and  the  consequent  feelings 
they have about its reputation. Investments 
made in the CIM mix can thus be justiﬁ ed 
in terms of the impact that these have on 
CBB, and the consequent impact CBB has 
on  CR  and  positive  customer  behaviour. 
Furthermore, BO have a signiﬁ cant impact 
on CR (Hypothesis 3). CR, in turn, has a 
signiﬁ cant  impact  on  the  consequences  of 
CR (Hypothesis 4).  

 The impact of CIM and CBB on CR 
(Hypotheses 1 and 2) 
 The study demonstrates CIM having a sig-
niﬁ cant  impact  upon  CBB.  The  variance 
explained,   R -squared  is  28  per  cent.  This 
result is achieved, for the ﬁ rst time, through 
empirically operationalizing the dimensions 

suggested  of   Melewar  and  Jenkins  (2002)  
of  body,  voice,  soul  and  mind,  and  show 
that these aspects of CIM have a signiﬁ cant 
impact on positive beliefs about the corpo-
rate brand. 

 Furthermore,  the  effect  of  CBB  on 
CR  is  signiﬁ cant.  This  ﬁ nding  provides 
evidence for the impact of the development 
of effective brand beliefs upon reputation. 
While this path coefﬁ cient is signiﬁ cant, the 
beliefs  about  the  corporate  brand  have  a 
lesser impact on CR than BO. This is not 
surprising,  as  BO  activities  are  more  sub-
stantial  in  terms  of  their  contact  with  the 
customer and have a long-established record 
of  affecting  reputation  ( MacMillan   et  al , 
2005a ).  The  results  suggest  that  beliefs 
about the corporate brand play a signiﬁ cant 
and  distinct  role  in  building  CR.  This  is 
important  for  a  number  of  reasons.  First, 
organizations often set out to directly inﬂ u-
ence  certain  beliefs  about  the  corporate 
brand. Second, such activities can be justi-
ﬁ ed as important in bringing about positive 
CR  and  associated  consequences.  Beliefs 
about  the  corporate  brand  may  act  as  a 
buffer  against  negative  customer  experi-
ences, because the results suggest that beliefs 
about  the  corporate  brand  mediate  the 
impact of the CIM on CR.   

 The impact of BO on CR (Hypothesis 3) 
 The effect of BO on CR is signiﬁ cant. This 
ﬁ nding is consistent with previous reputa-
tion research ( MacMillan  et al  2005a ;  Walsh 
and  Beatty,  2007 ),  but  is  of  particular 
importance  here  because  BO  is  found  to 
have  a  signiﬁ cant  impact  on  CR  in  the 
presence of CIM. This ﬁ nding suggests that 
both  CIM  and  BO  simultaneously  affect 
CR. This ﬁ nding reinforces the view that 
organizations  should  spend  considerable 
effort managing daily operations associated 
with  BO  in  a  consistent  manner  with 
branding  activities,  and  look  for  ways  to 
work  collaboratively  across  the  marketing 
and operational functions.   

206

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX  Brand Management  Vol. 18, 3, 197–211


 Impact of the corporate identity mix on corporate reputation 

 CR and its consequences 
(Hypothesis 4) 
 Supportive stakeholder behaviours represent 
the consequence of CR. The effect of CR 
on  these  behavioural  consequences  is  sig-
niﬁ cant. Support for Hypothesis 4 is con-
sistent  with  previous  studies  in  different 
contexts ( MacMillan  et al  2005b ;  Walsh and 
Beatty, 2007 ). The ﬁ nding that CR explains 
19  per  cent  of  the  behavioural  intentions 
in  this  study  is  important.  It  is  consistent 
with previous studies that have shown that 
a positive reputation affects positive behav-
iours  (such  as  recommending  the  business 
school  to  other  potential  customers,  con-
sidering the business school as the provider 
of  further  services  and  co-operating  with 
the business school by providing informa-
tion  to  improve  the  service).  Given  the 
new  dimension  in  the model of  the  CIM 
mix,  the  replication  of  this  relationship 
provides  validity  to  the  newly  conﬁ gured 
model. The conﬁ rmation of this link there-
fore  provides  a  useful  validation  of  the 
research and the model presented.    

 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE 
RESEARCH 
 The ﬁ rst limitation relates to the selection 
of the sample. A further study with poten-
tial customers, as well as existing customers, 
is  called  for,  as  potential  customers  are 
likely to have less direct experience of the 
daily operations of the organization. In this 
slightly  different  context,  the  impact  of 
CIM on CR may differ and this may pro-
duce  evidence  of  the  greater  relevance  of 
CI  at  differing  levels  of  brand  knowledge 
and  maturity  of  the  customer-brand  rela-
tionship. Furthermore, a replication of this 
study in other contexts, such as with other 
business  schools  and / or  other  organiza-
tions, both within and outside the profes-
sional  service  sector,  is  called  for  in  order 
to  demonstrate  the  generalizability  of  the 
model.  Given  the  relevance  of  time  and 
the differences that are recognized between 

the short-term development of CBB versus 
the longer-term development of CR, future 
research  should  look  at  replicating  the 
model across different customer life cycles. 
This  could  be  achieved  by  undertaking 
research  among  customers  with  varying 
length of brand usage, which would repre-
sent different levels of maturity and loyalty 
to  the  brand.  This  would  enable  the 
investigation of the impact of time on the 
development of CBB and CR. 

 Finally,  the  study  has  a  particular  focus 
on  CIM,  CBB  and  CR.  Future  research 
could incorporate other elements of corpo-
rate  brand  management  such  as  the  con-
cepts of brand personality, brand equity or 
brand loyalty, which may result in a more 
comprehensive understanding on the sub-
ject  of  how  the  corporate  brand  impacts 
CR.   

 CONCLUSIONS 
 This article represents a ﬁ rst step in bringing 
together aspects of the CIM and CR in a 
single model that is empirically tested. Four 
contributions  are  provided  by  the  study. 
First,  the  outcomes  of  this  study  demon-
strate that it is possible to model simultane-
ously the impact of aspects of CIM and BO 
on  CR.  This  outcome  provides  evidence 
for  the  value  of  both  activities  in  devel-
oping  CR  and  its  consequences.  Second, 
the results provide evidence of the relative 
importance of these activities. In the con-
text  of  existing  customers  of  a  business 
school, the ﬁ ndings indicate that BO has a 
bigger  impact  on  CR  than  the  CIM  and 
CBB. The result may be different for rela-
tionships at different stages of development 
or different levels of maturity. In practical 
terms, researchers and practitioners can use 
the  model  and  method  in  this  study  to 
establish  the  relative  importance  of  these 
different  activities  in  different  situations. 
That is, how, when and under what condi-
tions are factors such as the CIM, CBB and 
BO  most  salient  in  building  CR.  Third, 

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX  Brand Management  Vol. 18, 3, 197–211

207


 Money  et al  

the  study  provides  an  operationalization 
and  measure  of  the  CIM  framework 
provided  by   Melewar  and  Jenkins  (2002) . 
This operationlization makes it possible to 
empirically  test  the  impact  of  aspects  of 
CBB  on  CR.  The  measures  of  CIM  and 
methods by which they are derived may be 
of use to future researchers seeking to fur-
ther  bridge  the  gap  between  the  study  of 
CBB and CR. Finally, the wider contribu-
tion of the research study is the operation-
alization  of  what   Brown   et  al   (2006)   call 
the individual-level concepts. The creation 
and  application  of  individual-level  con-
structs  provides  a  potential  method  for 
researchers and practitioners to connect the 
CIM and CR.              

   REFERENCES  
         Aaker  ,    D . A .       (  2004  )    Leveraging  the  corporate  brand  . 

  California Management Review     46    (3)  :   6   –   18  .  

     Andersson  ,    L . M .      and     Bateman  ,    T . S .       (  1997  )    Cynicism 
in the workplace: Some causes and effects  .   Journal of 
Organizational Behavior September     18    (5)  :   449   –   469  .  

     Ardend  ,   R . J .      (  2009  )   Reputation for cooperation: Con-
tingent beneﬁ ts in alliance activity  .   Strategic Manage-
ment Journal     30    (4)  :   371   –   385  .  

     Balmer  ,    J . M . T .       (  2001  )    Corporate  identity,  corporate 
branding and corporate marketing  –  Seeing through the 
fog  .   European Journal of Marketing     35    (3/4)  :   248   –   291  .  

     Balmer  ,    J . M . T .      and     Greyser  ,    S . A .       (  2006  )    Integrating 
corporate  identity,  corporate  branding,  corporate 
communications,  corporate  image  and  corporate 
reputation  .    European  Journal  of  Marketing      40    (7/8)  : 
  730   –   741  .  

     Balmer  ,    J . M . T .      and     Soenen  ,    G .       (  1998  )    A  New 
Approach  to  Corporate  Identity  Management  . 
  International Centre for Corporate Identity Studies. 
Working Paper, 1998/5  .  

     Baruch  ,    Y .       (  1999  )    Response  rate  in  academic  studies   –  
A  comparative  analysis  .    Human  Relations      52    (4)  : 
  421   –   438  .  

     Berry  ,    L . L .       (  1983  )    Relationship  marketing  .    In:  L.L. 
Berry, G.L. Shostack and G. Upah (eds.)     Emerging 
Perspectives on Services Marketing  .   Chicago, IL: American 
Marketing Association  ,   pp.     25   –   28  .  

     Bollen  ,    K .      and     Lennox  ,    R .       (  1991  )    Conventional 
wisdom  on  measurement:  A  structural  equation 
perspective  .   Psychological Bulletin     110    (2)  :   305   –   405  .  
     Bromley  ,   D .      (  2002  )   Comparing corporate reputations: 
League  tables,  quotients,  benchmarks  or  case 
studies?     Corporate Reputation Review     5    (1)  :   35   –   50  .  

     Brown  ,   T . J .     and    Dacin  ,   P . A .      (  1997  )   The company and 
the product: Corporate associations and consumer 
product responses  .   Journal of Marketing     61  :   68   –   84  .  

           Brown  ,    T . J .    ,     Dacin  ,    P . A .    ,     Pratt  ,    M . G .      and     Whetten  , 
  D . A .       (  2006  )    Identity,  intended  image,  construed 
image, and reputation: An interdisciplinary frame-
work  and  suggested  terminology  .    Journal  of  the 
Academy of Marketing Science     34    (2)  :   99   –   106  .  

        Chin  ,   W . W .      (  1998a  )   Issues and opinions on structural 
equation  modelling  .    MIS  Quarterly      22    (March)  : 
  7   –   16  .  

      Chin  ,    W . W .       (  1998b  )    The  partial  least  squares  approach 
for structural equation modeling      .   In: G.A. Marcoulides 
(series ed.)  Modern Methods For Business Research      New 
Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates  .  

     Churchill  ,    G . A .       (  1979  )    A  paradigm  for  developing 
better  measures  of  marketing  constructs  .    Journal  of 
Marketing Research     151    (Feb)  :   64   –   73  .  

      Cohen  ,   J .     and    Cohen  ,   P .      (  1975  )   Applied Multiple Regres-
sion/Correlation  Analysis  for  the  Behavioral  Science  . 
  New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates  .  

      Cohen  ,   P .    ,    Cohen  ,   J .    ,    Teresi  ,   J .    ,    Marchi  ,   M .     and    Velez  , 
  C . N .      (  1990  )   Problems in the measurement of latent 
variables  in  structural  equations  causal  models  . 
  Applied Psychological Measurement     14    (2)  :   183   –   196  .  

     Cretu  ,   A . E .     and    Brodie  ,   R . J .      (  2007  )   The inﬂ uence of brand 
image  and  company  reputation  where  manufacturers 
market to small ﬁ rms: A customer value perspective  . 
  Industrial Marketing Management     36  :   230   –   240  .  

     Davies  ,    G .      and     Chun  ,    R .       (  2002  )    Gaps  between  the 
internal  and  external  perceptions  of  the  corporate 
brand  .   Corporate Reputation Review     5    (2/3)  :   144   –   158  .  
      Fishbein  ,   M .     and    Ajzen  ,   I .      (  1975  )   Belief, Attitude, Inten-
tion  and  Behavior:  An  Introduction  to  Theory  and 
Research  .   Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley  .  

     Fombrun  ,   C . J .      (  1996  )   Reputation: Realizing Value from 
the Corporate Image  .   Boston, MA: Harvard Business 
School Press  .  

         Fombrun  ,   C . J .     and    van Riel  ,   C . B . M .      (  2004  )   Fame and 
Fortune:  How  Successful  Companies  Build  Winning 
Reputations  .   New Jersey: Prentice Hall  .  

      Hair  ,    J . F .    ,     Black  ,    W . C .    ,     Babin  ,    B . J .    ,     Anderson  ,    R . E .     
and    Tatham  ,   R . L .      (  2006  )   Multivariate Data Analysis  . 
  New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall  .  

      Hulland  ,   J .      (  1999  )   Use of partial least squares in strategic 
management  research:  A  review  of  four  recent 
studies  .   Strategic Management Journal     20  :   195   –   204  .  

     Iacobucci  ,   D .     and    Ostrom  ,   A .      (  1996  )   Commercial and 
interpersonal  relationships:  Using  the  structure  of 
interpersonal relationships to understand individual-
to-individual,  individual-to-ﬁ rm  and  ﬁ rm-to-ﬁ rm 
relationships  in  commerce  .    International  Journal  of 
Research in Marketing     13  :   53   –   72  .  

        Keller  ,   K . L .      (  2008  )   Strategic Brand Management  ,   3rd edn.   

  New Jersey: Prentice Hall, Pearson Education  .  

     Kotler  ,    P .      and     Keller  ,    K . L .       (  2006  )    Marketing  Manage-

ment  .   USA: Pearson Prentice Hall  .  

       MacMillan  ,   K .    ,    Money  ,   K .    ,    Downing  ,   S .     and    Hillenbrand  , 
  C .       (  2005a  )    Reputation  in  relationships:  Measuring 
experiences, emotions and behaviours  .   Corporate Rep-
utation Review     8    (3)  :   214   –   232  .  

        MacMillan  ,   K .    ,    Money  ,   K .    ,    Money  ,   A .     and    Downing  , 
  S .      (  2005b  )   Relationship marketing in the not-for-
proﬁ t sector: An extension and application of the 

208

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX  Brand Management  Vol. 18, 3, 197–211


 Impact of the corporate identity mix on corporate reputation 

commitment-trust 
Research     58    (6)  :   806   –   818  .  

theory  . 

  Journal  of  Business 

     Mathieson  ,    K .    ,     Peacock  ,    E .      and     Chin  ,    W . W .       (  2001  ) 
  Extending  the  technology  acceptance  model:  The 
inﬂ uence  of  perceived  user  resources  .    Database  for 
Advances in Information Systems     32  :   86   –   112  .  

     Melewar  ,    T . C .       (  2003  )    Determinants  of  the  corporate 
identity construct: A review of the literature  .   Journal 
of Marketing Communications     9  :   195   –   220  .  

           Melewar  ,    T . C .      and     Jenkins  ,    E .       (  2002  )    Deﬁ ning  the 
corporate  identity  construct  .    Corporate  Reputation 
Review     5    (1)  :   76   –   90  .  

       Melewar  ,    T . C .      and     Karaosmanoglu  ,    E .       (  2006  )    Seven 
dimensions  of  corporate  identity.  A  categorisation 
from the practitioners ’  perspectives  .   European Journal 
of Marketing     40    (7/8)  :   846   –   869  .  

        Money  ,   K .     and    Hillenbrand  ,   C .      (  2006  )   Using reputa-
tion measurement to create value: An analysis and 
integration  of  existing  measures  .    Journal  of  General 
Management     32    (1)  :   1   –   12  .  

     Money  ,   K .    ,    Hillenbrand  ,   C .    ,    Day  ,   M .     and    Magnan  ,   G .      
(  forthcoming  )    Exploring  the  reputation  of  b2b 
partnerships:  Extending  the  study  of  reputation 
from the perception of single ﬁ rms to the percep-
tion  of  interﬁ rm  partnerships  .    Industrial  Marketing 
Management     39  (2010)  :   761   –   768  .  

     Morgan  ,    R . M .      and     Hunt  ,    S . D .       (  1994  )    The  commit-
ment-trust theory of relationship marketing  .   Journal 
of Marketing     58    (3)  :   20   –   39  .  

     Pitt  ,    L .       (  2007  )    A  qualitative  framework  for  under-
standing  brand  and  identity  .    Journal  of  General 
Management     36    (2)  :   1   –   16  .  

      Pitt  ,    L . F .      and     Papania  ,    L .       (  2007  )    In  the  words: 
Managerial  approaches  to  exploring  corporate 
intended image through content analysis  .   Journal of 
General Management     32    (4)  :   1   –   16  .  

      Podsakoff  ,    P . M .    ,     MacKenzie  ,    S . B .    ,     Lee  ,    J .- Y .      and    
Podsakoff  ,   N . P .      (  2003  )   Common method biases in 
behavioral research: A critical review of the litera-
ture and recommended remedies  .   Journal of Applied 
Psychology     88    (5)  :   879   –   903  .  

     Post  ,   J . E .    ,    Preston  ,   L . E .     and    Sachs  ,   S .      (  2002  )   Mana-
ging  the  extended  enterprise:  The  new  stake-
holder view  .   California Management Review     45    (1)  : 
  6   –   28  .  

     Roberts  ,   P . W .     and    Dowling  ,   G . R .      (  2002  )   Corporate 
reputation  and  sustained  superior  ﬁ nancial  per-
formance  .    Strategic  Management  Journal      23    (12)  : 
  1077   –   1094  .  

     Rossiter  ,    J . R .       (  2002  )    The  C-OAR-SE  procedure  for 
scale development in marketing  .   International Journal 
of Research in Marketing     19  :   305   –   335  .  

      Walsh  ,   G .     and    Beatty  ,   S .      (  2007  )   Customer-based cor-
porate reputation of a service ﬁ rm: Scale develop-
ment  and  validation  .    Journal  of  the  Academy  of 
Marketing Science     35    (1)  :   127   –   143  .  

      Walsh  ,   G .    ,    Mitchell  ,   V .- W .    ,    Jackson  ,   P . R .     and    Beatty  , 
  S . E .      (  2009  )   Examining the antecedents and con-
sequences  of  corporate  reputation:  A  customer 
perspective  .    British  Journal  of  Management      20    (2)  : 
  187   –   203  .  

      Wixom  ,   B . H .     and    Watson  ,   H . J .      (  2001  )   An empirical 
investigation  of  the  factors  affecting  data  ware-
housing success  .   MIS Quarterly     25    (1)  :   17   –   41  .     

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX  Brand Management  Vol. 18, 3, 197–211

209


 Money  et al  

 APPENDIX   

 Full list of items and measurement information 

 See  Tables A1 and A2 .                

 Table A1 :       Formative indicators 

    

    CIM: experiences of the corporate identity mix  
     

its appearance. 

 (Body) I have seen that the Business School logo has changed in terms of 
 
 (Body) The Business School’s on-site accommodation is of a high standard. 
 (Body) The lecture and syndicate rooms are supportive for my learning. 
 (Voice) I have noticed that the Business School updated its advertising. 
 (Voice) I have noticed that the Business School has more of a voice in 
  practitioner and academic circles. 
 (Soul) The Business School has the feel of an organization that is more and 
  more focused on my learning needs. 
 (Soul) The Business School has the feel of a place that would support my 
  personal growth. 
 (Mind) I now have more opportunities to access the Business School’s 
 
 (Mind) I have noticed that the composition of faculty at the Business 
  School is becoming more international in mix. 

thinking. 

    
    BO: experiences of business operations  
     

information about life in / around the Business School). 

 (Beneﬁ ts) The staff at the Business School are always responsive to my 
  needs. 
 (Beneﬁ ts) The pre-course administrative side of the Business School 
  works effectively (eg, sending out joining instructions, providing 
 
 (Beneﬁ ts) The information technology capability at the Business School is 
  of a high standard. 
 (Beneﬁ ts) Spending time at the Business School’s site is an enjoyable 
  experience. 
 (Beneﬁ ts) The Business School helps me to become a better manager. 
 (Beneﬁ ts) My Business School experience will help me to progress in my 
  career. 
 (Beneﬁ ts) The Business School helps me in my personal development. 
 (Communication) The Business School provides me with useful 
 
 (Communication) On a day-to-day basis, the Business School really listens 
 
 (Keeping commitments) There are times when the Business School has 
 
 (Keeping commitments) The Business School gains more from me than 
 
 (Keeping commitments) As far as I know, the Business School treats all its 
  students equally and fairly. 

I gain from them (eg, the fees I pay, the experience I bring).  a   

tried to evade commitments to me.  a   

information that is relevant to me. 

to what I tell them. 

     
     
     
     

     

     

     

     

     

     

     

     
     

     
     

     

     

     

     

  Mean

  

  Standard 
deviation  

  Standard 
weight  

 5.9 

 4.7 
 5.3 
 4.0 
 3.6 

 4.3 

 5.1 

 3.7 

 3.7 

  

 5.5 

 4.9 

 3.9 

 6.0 

 5.7 
 5.9 

 5.6 
 5.2 

 3.9 

 2.7 

 3.8 

 5.5 

 1.89 

 1.42 
 1.22 
 1.73 
 1.30 

 1.51 

 1.46 

 1.53 

 1.41 

 0.23* 

 0.17* 
 0.32** 

     −    0.18 
 0.21 

 0.25 

 0.64*** 

     −    0.48*** 

 0.02 

  

  

 1.31 

 1.50 

 1.70 

 1.12 

 1.12 
 0.99 

 1.24 
 1.04 

 1.40 

 1.64 

 1.52 

 1.32 

 0.14* 

 0.18* 

 0.29*** 

 0.13* 

 0.29** 
 0.07 

 0.09 
 0.11 

 0.03 

 0.27*** 

 0.14* 

 0.39*** 

   a    Reverse coded.   

     * indicates signiﬁ cance at the  P     <    0.1 level; ** indicates signiﬁ cance at the  P     <    0.05 level; *** indicates signiﬁ cance at the 
 P     <    0.01 level.   

210

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX  Brand Management  Vol. 18, 3, 197–211


 Impact of the corporate identity mix on corporate reputation 

 Table A2 :       Reﬂ ective indicators 

    

  Mean

  

  Standard 
Deviation  

  Loading

  

    CBB: corporate brand beliefs  

     
     
     
     
     
     
     

 Composite reliability=0.93; AVE=0.52  
 I believe that the Business School is a thought leader in business. 
 I believe that the Business School is an international business school. 
 I believe that the Business School is a leading edge research institution. 
 I believe that the Business School is for practicing managers. 
 I believe that the Business School is made up of cutting-edge faculty. 
 I believe that the Business School is experienced in management education. 
 I believe that the Business School is a business school that has a longstanding 
  history in business education. 
 I believe that the Business School is friendly. 
 I believe that the Business School is warm. 
 I believe that the Business School is bold. 
 I believe that the Business School is competent. 
 I believe that the Business School is conscientious. 
 I believe that the Business School is prestigious. 

     
     
     
     
     
     
    
    CR: corporate reputation  

     
     

     

     

     

     

     

 Composite reliability=0.88; AVE=0.52  
 (Trust) In my opinion, the Business School will be reliable in the future. 
 (Trust) I am conﬁ dent that the Business School will be thoroughly dependable, e
  specially when it comes to things that are important to me. 
 (Trust) In terms of the foreseeable future, if the Business School made me a 
  promise, I would be sure that it would be kept. 
 (Trust) I would feel secure facing an unforeseen situation in my relationship 
  with the Business School, because I know it wouldn ’ t let me down. 
 (Trust) The Business School is very unpredictable. I never know how it is going 
 
 (Positive emotion) When I think about the Business School and where I see it 
  going, I feel happy. 
 (Positive emotion) When I think about the Business School and where I see it 
  going, I feel sad.  a   

to act from one day to the next.  a   

     

     

     

     

     

the foreseeable future. 

those that I already do (eg, short courses, research). 

future (eg, sharing information about my future development needs). 

    
    Consequences of corporate reputation  
 Composite reliability=0.96; AVE=0.71  
 (Loyalty) I am likely to cease my relationship with the Business School as soon 
  as I can.  a   
 (Retention) I would consider using the Business School for services beyond 
 
 (Retention) I am likely to agree to requests from the Business School in the 
 
 (Loyalty) I am likely to continue my relationship with the Business School for 
 
 (Investment of time) In the future I will treat disagreements between the 
  Business School and myself as working together to ﬁ nd solutions to 
  problems, rather than a real conﬂ ict. 
 (Advocacy) I would recommend the Business School to anyone who is looking 
 
 (Support) I would defend the Business School if it was criticized (eg, in the 
  media or by other business schools). 
 (Investment in time) In the future, I will treat differences of opinion between 
 
  which will probably result in beneﬁ ts for both of us. 
 (Advocacy) I speak highly of the Business School, if the conversation makes the 
  Business School relevant. 
 (Investment in time) In the future, I will work with the Business School to ﬁ nd 
 

the Business School and myself as  ‘ just part of our working relationship ’ , 

the best way to meet both of our needs. 

for management education. 

     

     

     

     

     

 4.7 
 5.5 
 4.3 
 5.7 
 4.5 
 6.0 
 6.3 

 6.0 
 5.8 
 4.3 
 5.7 
 5.5 
 5.4 
  

 5.7 
 5.3 

 5.5 

 5.4 

 2.3 

 5.3 

 2.6 

  

 2.0 

 5.2 

 5.7 

 5.8 

 5.4 

 5.7 

 5.6 

 5.1 

 5.8 

 5.6 

 1.35 
 1.32 
 1.53 
 1.03 
 1.45 
 0.94 
 0.86 

 0.92 
 1.03 
 1.37 
 0.94 
 0.98 
 1.39 

  

 1.12 
 1.16 

 1.18 

 1.26 

 1.23 

 1.29 

 1.63 

  

 1.39 

 1.54 

 1.25 

 1.16 

 1.18 

 1.46 

 1.34 

 1.26 

 1.22 

 1.19 

 0.67*** 
 0.71*** 
 0.62*** 
 0.72*** 
 0.70*** 
 0.76*** 
 0.70*** 

 0.71*** 
 0.71*** 
 0.57*** 
 0.79*** 
 0.73*** 
 0.73*** 

  

 0.80*** 
 0.79*** 

 0.88*** 

 0.80*** 

 0.60*** 

 0.58*** 

 0.47*** 

  

 0.71*** 

 0.84*** 

 0.83*** 

 0.85*** 

 0.77*** 

 0.86*** 

 0.86*** 

 0.84*** 

 0.87*** 

 0.91*** 

   a    Reverse coded.   
     * indicates signiﬁ cance at the  P     <    0.1 level; ** indicates signiﬁ cance at the  P     <    0.05 level; *** indicates signiﬁ cance at the 
 P     <    0.01 level    .   

© 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1350-23IX  Brand Management  Vol. 18, 3, 197–211

211


Copyright of Journal of Brand Management is the property of Palgrave Macmillan Ltd. and its content may not
be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written
permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

