Journal of Operations Management 27 (2009) 324–338

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Operations Management

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / j o m

In union lies strength: Collaborative competence in new product
development and its performance effects

Anant A. Mishra 1, Rachna Shah *

Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota, 321 Nineteenth Avenue South, Minneapolis, MN 55455-0438, United States

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Article history:
Received 23 January 2007
Received in revised form 7 October 2008
Accepted 9 October 2008
Available online 22 October 2008

Keywords:
Collaborative competence
Product development
Resource based view
Complementarity theory
Structural equations modeling

It is widely recognized that new product development (NPD) is a highly interdependent
process, yet efforts to empirically model the interdependence and examine its effect on
ﬁrm performance are scarce. Our study addresses this research gap. We model ﬁrms’
abilities to collectively collaborate with suppliers, customers, and internal employee
teams in NPD as collaborative competence and examine its impact on project and market
performance. Using responses collected from 189 NPD managers, we ﬁnd empirical
evidence for collaborative competence and its differential impact on project and market
performance. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd that collaborative competence has a direct impact on
project performance, but its impact on market performance is indirect, mediated through
project performance. The results have signiﬁcant managerial implications; achieving
superior market performance from inter- and intra-organizational
involvement is
contingent on achieving superior project performance, and companies that fail to achieve
desired project performance outcomes will also fail in achieving market performance
goals.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

1. Introduction

New product development (NPD) is a key source of
competitive advantage for individual ﬁrms (Verona, 1999).
Successful NPD requires ﬁrms to develop routines and
practices to collaborate with suppliers, customers, and
internal cross-functional employee teams. While some
ﬁrms are able to involve key suppliers in their NPD
endeavors, others are more effective in collaborating with
customers. Still others develop expertise in leveraging
advantages garnered from involving their own employees
in product development teams. Few ﬁrms, however,
develop the competence to engage suppliers, customers,
and internal employees simultaneously in their NPD

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 612 624 4432; fax: +1 612 624 8804.

E-mail addresses: mish0049@umn.edu (A.A. Mishra),

shahx024@umn.edu (R. Shah).

1 Tel.: +1 612 626 9761; fax: +1 612 624 8804.

0272-6963/$ – see front matter . Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.jom.2008.10.001

projects. We believe that the ability to simultaneously
collaborate with suppliers, customers, and cross-func-
tional teams in NPD is a valuable – yet rare – ﬁrm level
capability. We label it collaborative competence in this
study.

The notion that focal ﬁrms need to integrate externally
with their suppliers and customers and internally across
different functions to achieve NPD success is not a new
idea; it has a rich history in the organizational strategy
(Bajaj et al., 2004; Grant, 1996; Bensaou and Venkatraman,
1995; Kogut and Zander, 1992) and supply chain literature
(Frohlich and Westbrook, 2001; Hammel and Kopczak,
1993). Frohlich and Westbrook (2001) demonstrate
empirically that ﬁrms with the widest arc of integration
(i.e., ﬁrms that integrate both suppliers and customers into
the activities of
the focal ﬁrm) have the strongest
association with performance improvement as compared
to ﬁrms that integrate only suppliers or only customers.
The practitioner literature also highlights the superior
performance beneﬁts of simultaneously involving multiple


A.A. Mishra, R. Shah / Journal of Operations Management 27 (2009) 324–338

325

stakeholders in the NPD process (e.g., Carlile, 2004;
Orlikowski, 2002). Despite the increased attention to
collaboration in academic and practitioner literature, there
is relatively little rigorous empirical research identifying
the managerial actions and mechanisms that underlie
collaborative competence.

In this study, we deﬁne collaborative competence as the
ability to simultaneously involve key stakeholders in the
NPD process and examine its effect on performance. We
begin by developing a conceptual foundation for the
underlying dimensional structure of collaborative compe-
tence by identifying three sets of collaborative practices
related to suppliers, customers, and internal cross-func-
tional employee teams. Following this, we empirically
examine whether the three sets of collaborative practices
indeed constitute collaborative competence in an NPD
context. To quantify the performance beneﬁts associated
with collaborative competence, we operationalize perfor-
mance as project performance and market performance. We
investigate direct effects of collaborative competence on
project and market performance and also test for the
mediating role of project performance between collabora-
tive competence and market performance. Complemen-
tarity theory and resource-based view (RBV) provide the
theoretical grounding for our investigation.

We use project level data collected from 189 manu-
facturing plants in three industries and six countries to test
our conceptual framework linking collaborative compe-
tence with project and market performance. Our results
make three contributions to the literature. First, by
empirically modeling the interdependencies among col-
laborative practices, we accurately replicate the highly
interdependent nature of
the product development
process. Our second contribution lies in demonstrating
that collaborative competence has a different impact on
project and market performance measures; our results
indicate that collaborative competence has a strong direct
effect on project performance and an indirect effect on
market performance, mediated by project performance. A
third contribution of our research is related to the
generalizability of empirical results obtained from using
a multi-industry, multi-country sample. As a set, our
results extend our understanding of the role of collabora-
tion in NPD process and its speciﬁc links with performance.
The rest of the paper is organized in the following
manner. In Sections 2 and 3, we review the existing NPD
literature related to collaborative practices and present
three research hypotheses. In Section 4, we describe the
research design and measures. Section 5 outlines the
empirical methods we use to evaluate the hypotheses and
results followed by Section 6, in which we discuss our
ﬁndings and their implications for research and practice.
Finally, limitations and future research ideas are outlined
in Section 7.

2. Collaboration in NPD

The literature on collaboration in NPD has a rich history
with the information processing theory (IPT) (Galbraith,
1977; Tushman and Nadler, 1978; Daft and Lengel, 1986)
serving as the primary theoretical lens through which

collaboration between a ﬁrm and its internal and external
partners in NPD has been studied. According to this
perspective, an organizational design that is efﬁcient in
both acquiring and processing rich information is best
suited for uncertain, equivocal tasks. Uncertainty arises
from ‘‘the difference between the amount of information
required to perform the task and the amount of informa-
tion already possessed by the organization’’ (Galbraith,
1977). Equivocality, on the other hand, arises from the
existence of multiple conﬂicting interpretations about
organizational situations (Weick, 1979).

As NPD environments are typically characterized by
high levels of both uncertainty and equivocality, an
‘‘integrated problem solving’’ approach that requires the
early involvement of key stakeholders in the product
development process and permits sharing of critical
information upstream and downstream in the product
development supply chain as necessary for executing NPD
work (Wheelwright and Clark, 1992). Swink (2006, p. 1)
states that an organization’s ability to collaborate is key to
its innovative success. It also suggests that collaborative
NPD integrates many sources of design ideas and data.
Building on Swink’s conceptualization, we study colla-
boration in NPD across three interfaces: collaboration
between the core design team and the suppliers, custo-
mers, and cross-functional teams.

To do so, we conducted an extensive review of
organization theory, strategy, and operations management
literatures and found that, while the term ‘‘collaboration’’ is
widely used in the NPD context, it is frequently used
interchangeably with integration and coordination and, to a
lesser extent, with cooperation and communication (Gulati
et al., 2005; Barki and Pinsoneeault, 2005; Frohlich and
Westbrook, 2001; Van de Ven et al., 1976). Upon reviewing
the long and rich evolutionary history associated with this
body of literature, we came to the conclusion that it is very
difﬁcult, if not impossible, to resolve the differences among
these different terms. Moreover, resolving these differences
is not central to our research objectives. Rather, given that
collaboration across each of the three interfaces has received
widespread attention in existing literature, we summarize
ﬁndings from key studies in Table 1.

With regard to supplier

involvement, Clark and
Fujimoto (1991), Eisenhardt and Tabrizi (1995), Smith
and Reinertsen (1998), Gupta and Souder (1998), all ﬁnd
that involving suppliers in the NPD process is critical to
accelerating the pace of product development. Suppliers
are more likely to identify potential problems such as
contradictory speciﬁcations or unrealistic designs, early in
the design process. Involving suppliers in the NPD process
also opens up outsourcing and external acquisition
possibilities, thereby reducing the internal complexity of
projects and providing extra personnel to shorten the
critical path for NPD projects. Besides shortening devel-
opment cycles, supplier involvement has been shown to
have a positive effect on other measures of performance
such as lower development costs (e.g., Kessler, 2000,
McGinnis and Vallopra, 1999),
improved design-for-
manufacturability (e.g., Wasti and Liker, 1997, Swink,
1999) and enhanced product quality (e.g., McGinnis and
Vallopra, 1999).


326

A.A. Mishra, R. Shah / Journal of Operations Management 27 (2009) 324–338

Table 1
Overview of selected literature on collaborative practicesa.

SI CI CFI

Independent variable (s)

Dependent variable(s)

Ancona and

Caldwell (1992)

Eisenhardt and

Tabrizi (1995)

X

Ettlie (1995)

X

X

X

An entropy-based diversity index
to calculate functional diversity.

No. of stages in which suppliers
participated; total no. of functions
in every stage of product development.
Personnel integration that captures
the extent of job rotation between
design and manufacturing engineering.

Hartley et al. (1997)

X

Length of supplier involvement.

Ittner and

Larcker (1997)

X X

X

Moffat (1998)

X

Swink (1999)

X

X

Extent of supplier involvement,
customer involvement, cross-
functional teams in product design.

Customer input index capturing
whether (a) customers were on the
team, (b) marketing function was
present in the team, (c) customer
input was used, and (d) QFD
techniques were used.
Extent of supplier inﬂuence (single
item); extent of manufacturing
involvement (three item scale).

Ragatz et al. (2002)

X

Extent of supplier involvement
in decision making.

Bajaj et al. (2004)

X

Koufteros et al. (2005) X X

Langerak and

Hultink (2005)

X X

X

Degree of customer interaction
measured as the ratio of number
of customer signoffs in the design
phase to total design budget.
Extent of customer integration in
NPD efforts, supplier integration in
product engineering, and supplier
integration in development process.
Extent of (a) supplier involvement,
(b) lead user involvement, and (c)
stimulating inter-functional
cooperation in NPD efforts.

Petersen et al. (2005)

X

Supplier effort in (a) technical
assessment and (b) business
assessment.

Composite measures of performance
that captures efﬁciency, quality,
technical innovation, adherence to
schedules, adherence to budget, and
work excellence.
Development time adjusted by
industry.

Organizational performance
measured as sales/employee;
development cycle time adjusted
by product life cycle.
Perceived contribution to
new product design.
Organizational performance—
composite measure of ROA, sales
growth, return on sales, and
perceived overall performance.
Project task performance—a
composite measure of (a) timeliness
of delivery, (b) product quality, (c)
design iteration/engineering change
order reduction, and (d) internal
external customer satisfaction.
New product manufacturability—
composite measure of product
cost, product quality,
manufacturability, etc.
Project outcomes—composite
measure of overall satisfaction
and degree of goal achievement.
Extent of savings in design time
and design cost with respect
to budgeted goals.

Product innovation performance;
product quality performance

New product (a) development
speed—a composite measure of
two items that captures the ability
to minimize the time in developing
new products; (b) proﬁtability—a
composite measure of two item that
captures the extent to which new
product met the proﬁt and margin goals.
Project team effectiveness—a composite
measure that captures the extent to
which the project team functions
smoothly, achieves consensus, and
makes faster decisions.

a SI: supplier involvement, CI: customer involvement, and CFI: cross-functional involvement.
b +ve: positive, -ve: negative.

Resultb

+ve support

+ve support only in
computer industry
sample
+ve support

Supported

+ve support only for
cross-functional teams

Not supported

+ve support

+ve support

+ve support when
specialization and
oversight is high

+ve support only for
effects of customer
integration

+ve support for the effect
of supplier involvement
on development speed
and lead user involvement
on both metrics

+ve support for supplier
effort in technical
assessment on project
team effectiveness

Similarly, with regard to customer

involvement,
evidence from case studies indicates that an incomplete
and inaccurate assessment of customers’ needs can result
in extremely high costs at the design stage (von Hippel,
1998; Walker and Tersini, 1992). Involving the customer in
the product development process keeps the design team
members updated on changing customer tastes and
requirements and reduces the high degree of uncertainty
accompanying new applications in the industry (MacCor-
mack et al., 2001; Grifﬁn and Hauser, 1993). At the same
time, frequent and regular communication with customers
prevents what Thomke and Nimgade (2000) refer to as

‘‘creeping elegance’’, or the designers’ quest for perfection,
which could lead to cost and time overruns. Customer
involvement is clearly a critical aspect of the NPD process.
Finally, involving cross-functional teams (i.e., teams
comprised of members from engineering, manufacturing,
marketing, etc.)
in the NPD process is considered
beneﬁcial. Increasing functional diversity in cross-func-
tional
teams increases the amount and variety of
information available to design products, reducing much
of the uncertainty and equivocality in the NPD process on
one hand and helping project team members understand
the design process more quickly and fully from a variety of


A.A. Mishra, R. Shah / Journal of Operations Management 27 (2009) 324–338

327

perspectives on the other (Henke et al., 1993). It also helps
identify possible downstream problems such as manu-
facturing difﬁculties or potential mismatches with custo-
mer requirements (Ancona and Caldwell, 1992; Eisenhardt
and Tabrizi, 1995).

In addition to these advantages, researchers have listed
potential problems with collaborative initiatives. Hansen
and Nohria (2004, p. 11),
for instance, theorize that
collaboration can be overdone easily and state that employ-
ees, in response to collaborative initiatives, may begin to
participate in extraneous meetings in which nothing of
substance is accomplished. This suggests that collaborating
within and across ﬁrm boundaries is time-consuming and
resource intensive. A focal ﬁrm has to commit substantial
resources to overcome dissimilar management styles of
collaborating partners for collaboration to succeed. Other
problems include infringement of intellectual property
rights for participating ﬁrms once the collaboration period is
over and behavioral misjudgments that can occur during
team interactions. Despite these disadvantages, the beneﬁts
from collaboration far outweigh its potential costs.

The overarching consensus gleaned from the NPD
literature is that collaboration with each of the three
interfaces provides both operational and ﬁnancial/market
performance beneﬁts. Our review also supports Gerwin
and Barrowman’s (2002) assertion that while researchers
recognize the importance of these sets of practices and
their interdependencies, they examine them in isolation.
Such isolated study leads to potentially incorrect conclu-
sions. Gerwin and Barrowman state that most empirical
studies tend to disregard the ‘‘interpretive aspect of
coordination’’
(p. 940), which involves the need to
reconcile the differing meanings across the three interfaces
for fairly well-agreed upon goals and tasks. We attempt to
ﬁll this gap by examining them together in one study and
seek to extend this literature stream by examining the
performance implications arising from simultaneously
pursuing collaborative NPD practices across the three
interfaces.

3. Hypothesis development

We use RBV and complementarity theory to develop
our conceptual framework. Researchers invoking an RBV
perspective argue that, for a resource to confer competitive
advantage to a ﬁrm, it must not be possessed by all
competing ﬁrms, it must be difﬁcult to imitate or duplicate
through other means, and it must contribute positively to
performance (Barney, 1991). Additionally, RBV researchers
distinguish between resources that can be acquired in
factor markets and those that are developed inside a ﬁrm.
Resources and their performance effects have been
conceptualized very broadly in previous research (Hoopes
et al., 2003). For example, Tanriverdi and Venkatraman
(2005) conceptualized various sources of knowledge as a
ﬁrm-speciﬁc resource. Rigby and Zook (2002) show that
the ability to combine internal and external information is
a critical source of competitive advantage in their sample
of innovative companies.

While individual routines used to collaborate with
suppliers, customers, and internal work-teams contribute

positively to ﬁrm performance, they are not idiosyncratic
and cannot be considered a valuable resource in the RBV
sense. In contrast, bundles of routines are more difﬁcult to
copy and less likely to be imitated by competitors or
purchased in factor markets; they can be considered a
valuable resource (Shah and Ward, 2003). The economic
theory of complementarities informs us about the super-
additive value of resource combinations (Cassiman and
Veugelers, 2006). A set of
resources is deﬁned as
complementary when using more of any one of the
resources increases the returns from using others (Mil-
grom and Roberts, 1995). Conceptually, complementarity
exists when a resource is more valuable in the presence of
another resource than if
it is considered alone (see
Milgrom and Roberts, 1995 for a detailed mathematical
treatment). In the context of this study, we argue that the
joint involvement of suppliers, customers, and cross-
functional internal employee teams in developing a new
product
leads to the development of super-additive
synergies and is more valuable than the involvement of
each individually. We refer
to these super-additive
synergies as ‘‘collaborative competence’’ and examine its
conceptualization with the following proposition:

Proposition. Collaborative competence is a multidimen-
sional, higher order construct comprised of supplier involve-
ment, customer involvement, and cross-functional
team
involvement.

3.1. Impact on project performance

With increasing pressure on project managers and R&D
personnel to develop products better and faster, the need
to collaborate effectively and simultaneously with key
stakeholders in the product development process has
gained signiﬁcant importance. Sutton and Hargaddon
(1996) emphasize that, as a group engages in spanning
the functional and organizational boundaries, more
divergent thinking and combinatorial possibilities are
likely and lead to higher group innovativeness. More
recently, Wong (2004) shows that in creating an innovative
solution, group members that seek external knowledge
from across group boundaries also need to look inward,
actively engaging in mutual discussions and brain storm-
ing internally to consider how external knowledge can be
combined with their internal resources and capabilities to
create innovative solutions.

Bringing the three distinct ‘‘thought worlds’’ (Dough-
erty, 1992) of suppliers, customers, and cross-functional
teams together onto the same organizational platform
forces each of them to understand and appreciate each
other’s concerns and work toward a mutually agreed-upon
solution. Collective involvement of these diverse groups
helps in developing a common language and a shared
syntax for representing differences and understanding the
critical interdependencies at boundaries (Carlile, 2004). It
also facilitates a process of transforming and synchroniz-
ing localized capabilities and strengths into jointly
produced knowledge that
interests,
thereby enabling early resolution of problems during the
development process. For example, involving a focal ﬁrm’s

transcends local


328

A.A. Mishra, R. Shah / Journal of Operations Management 27 (2009) 324–338

suppliers and customers together in the development
process is beneﬁcial because it allows the suppliers to
integrate speciﬁc customer requirements into a compo-
nent design at earlier design stages. At the same time,
manufacturing involvement in the development process is
also necessary in order for manufacturing function to
initiate changes in manufacturing process technology and
align its technological abilities and constraints within the
product speciﬁcations. This also ensures that the unique
capabilities of manufacturing process technology are taken
into consideration by suppliers and the design team when
decisions are made regarding the complexity and variety of
components within product families. As a result, project
performance goals are likely to be met, because wasteful
expenditures in both materials and time can be minimized,
delays in the development process can be prevented, and
the product’s time to market can be reduced. These
arguments lead us to propose the following hypothesis.

Hypothesis 1. Collaborative competence is positively asso-
ciated with project performance.

3.2. Impact on market performance

Research on collaboration across business units of
multi-business ﬁrms has shown that sharing product
designs, subsystems, components, and manufacturing
processes creates ‘‘asset amortization beneﬁts’’
from
economies of scope for a ﬁrm (Tanriverdi and Venkatra-
man, 2005; Markides and Williamson, 1994). As business
units share and reuse existing product knowledge, they
tend to reduce development, tooling, and manufacturing
costs, speeding up NPD activities and allowing the ﬁrm to
rapidly address new market opportunities (Meyer and
Lehnerd, 1997). We believe that these arguments are
applicable in the context of an NPD project. Competitors
may be able to achieve similarities in product designs in
competing products, acquire similar marketing and
advertising skills, and, to a lesser extent,
implement
similar managerial policies governing the development
process. Their ability to recognize and imitate comple-
mentarities originating from inter- and intra-organiza-
tional
collaboration routines within another ﬁrm,
however, is signiﬁcantly limited. Successfully recognizing
and imitating complementarities require systemic changes
across multiple organizational dimensions. Additionally,
implementing a single dimension without implementing
others is not likely to produce the intended performance
improvements (Porter, 1996); rather, it may even produce
negative performance effects (Milgrom and Roberts, 1995).
Thus, in an NPD project, collaborative competence is a
source of competitive advantage that leads to higher
market performance of the product.

The development of the Boeing 787 Dreamliner is an
example of how collaborative competence can be a unique
source of competitive advantage and lead to market success.
According to a recent news release from The Boeing
Company (2007), the 787 Dreamliner is currently the
fastest selling commercial airplane in aviation history.
Boeing leveraged the technical capabilities of more than 50
partners spread over 130 locations and working together

over a span of 4 years to develop the 787 Dreamliner. While
similar technical capabilities were undoubtedly available to
its competitors, Boeing’s ability to integrate its partners into
a network facilitated rapid technical knowledge exchange
(MacCormack and Forbath, 2008). Such complementarity
among the various dimensions of collaborative practices
acts as a source of sustainable competitive advantage, which
should lead to superior market performance. Therefore, we
propose the following hypothesis.

Hypothesis 2. Collaborative competence is positively asso-
ciated with market performance.

3.3. Relationship between project performance and market
performance

The relationship between project and market perfor-
mance has long been recognized as an important, yet
unresolved, question in NPD research (Krishnan and
Ulrich, 2001). A ﬁrm is more likely to develop successful
products that have a higher customer value when its
developmental activities are well-executed (Brown and
Eisenhardt, 1995). Past research provides some evidence
linking escalating product costs to market failure of a new
product (Schmidt and Calantone, 1998; Boulding et al.,
1997). A product pricing strategy and its unit cost may
determine both its short- and long-term proﬁtability
(Tatikonda and Montoya-Weiss, 2001; Mallick and Schroe-
der, 2005). Similarly, the technical performance of the
product may be an important determinant of its market
performance. Cooper and Kleinschmidt (1987) have shown
that superior technical performance of a product in terms
of its features and innovativeness is a key factor in
differentiating new product winners from losers. Time to
market has also been an important determinant of market
outcomes (Shankar, 1999; Bowman and Gatignon, 1996).
Our review of literature suggests that, while individual
measures at the operational level have been correlated
with market performance measures, few prior studies
(with the exception of Tatikonda and Montoya-Weiss,
2001) have systematically examined the overall impact of
a holistic project performance measure on market
performance. We address this issue in our study and
examine the following hypothesis.

Hypothesis 3. Project performance is positively associated
with market performance.

4. Methods

We use conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) and struc-
tural equation modeling (SEM) to measure and test our
conceptual framework using survey data. All descriptive
analyses are conducted using SPSS (12.1), and CFA and SEM
are conducted using AMOS (4.0).

4.1. Sample

The data used for empirical analysis was collected as
part of
the High Performance
Manufacturing (HPM) project in 2005–2006. The HPM

the third round of


A.A. Mishra, R. Shah / Journal of Operations Management 27 (2009) 324–338

329

was a large-scale, multi-country, multi-industry research
project conducted by a team of international researchers
and designed to comprehensively assess a manufacturing
plant’s operation. For Round 3, six countries were selected
for study: Finland, Sweden, Germany, Japan, Korea, and the
United States. These countries were chosen to obtain a
broad representation of
In
keeping with the ﬁrst and second rounds, automotive
suppliers, electronics, and machinery were selected as the
three industries, using a stratiﬁed sample consisting of
traditional and high performance manufacturing plants
(for comprehensive details on data collection during
Rounds 1 and 2, please see Flynn et al., 1995; Sakakibara
et al., 1997).

the industrialized world.

Because participation in the study necessitated exten-
sive effort on part of the plant, an assigned team member
solicited plant participation by calling the plant manager of
each prospective plant to describe the study objective,
explain the participation mechanism, and relay the
beneﬁts of participation. Plants that agreed to participate
appointed a survey coordinator to serve as the liaison with
the research team; in many cases this liaison was the plant
manager. A packet containing 21 surveys was then mailed
to the coordinator who distributed the questionnaires to
the appropriate respondents, collected the completed
questionnaires, and mailed the responses back to the
research team (for details on protocol
followed in
collecting data during Round 3, please refer to Peng
et al., 2007).

The NPD survey instrument was new to Round 3 and
was speciﬁcally developed to better understand the
product development process. NPD researchers assisted
in developing the survey instrument based on an extensive
review of relevant literature. The instrument was pre-
tested with academic and industry experts and at several
manufacturing plants. During administration, each plant
coordinator selected a product development manager as
the key respondent for the NPD survey. To get accurate
responses, the product development manager was asked to
refer to a ‘‘recent major product development project’’ in
which he/she participated, thus making a product devel-
opment project the unit of analysis in this study. Our
current study uses responses from the product develop-
ment manager only. The ﬁnal data set consists of 189
responses from product development managers relating
one project to one plant. The response rate amounts to
approximately 65 percent. Even so, we assessed non-
response bias, comparing the plant size and annual
revenue of the responding and non-responding plants.
We did not ﬁnd any evidence of a systematic non-response
bias. Table 2 shows the proﬁle of the sample across the
different industries and countries.

4.2. Measures

4.2.1. Collaborative practices

We used 14 items on a 7-point Likert-type scale
(1 = strong disagreement, 7 = strong agreement) to mea-
sure supplier involvement, customer involvement, and
cross-functional
involvement in the NPD process (see
Appendix A). The scale items measure both the extent and

Table 2
Proﬁle of sample across different industries and countries.

Number of plants

Industry

Country

Finland
Germany
Japan
South Korea
Sweden
United States

Total

Electronics

Machinery

Automotive

Total

14
9
10
10
7
9

59

6
13
11
10
10
11

61

10
19
13
11
7
9

69

30
41
34
31
24
29

189

the timing of the involvement of each group and are
developed using the existing literature on collaboration
(Brown and Eisenhardt, 1995; Ittner and Larcker, 1997;
Hartley et al., 1997; Swink, 1999; Gerwin and Barrowman,
2002). For instance, the measurement items SUPINV2 (We
partnered with suppliers for the design of this product),
CUSTINV3 (Customers were an integral part of the design
effort for this project), and CRFINV1 (New product design
teams have frequent interaction with the manufacturing
function) are each a measure of the extent to which the
focal ﬁrm collaborates with suppliers, customers, and
cross-functional
teams in the product development
process. Similarly, SUPINV1 (Suppliers were involved early
in the design efforts in this project), CUSTINV1 (We consulted
customers early in the design efforts in this product), and
CRFINV2 (Manufacturing is involved in the early stages of
new product development) are each a measure of the timing
of involvement with suppliers, customers, and cross-
functional teams.

4.2.2. Collaborative competence

A key tenet of complementarity theory is that the
returns obtained from jointly using collaborative prac-
tices are greater than the sum of returns obtained from
using individual practices in isolation (Milgrom and
Roberts, 1995, p. 181). However, there are many different
ways to model the joint adoption including a mathema-
tical speciﬁcation as illustrated by Milgrom and Roberts
(1995) and statistical speciﬁcation using interaction and
latent model approaches. We model collaborative com-
petence as a reﬂective second order construct to capture
complementarities arising from the ﬁrst order con-
structs. This second order, collaborative competence
construct accounts for multi-lateral
interactions and
covariances among the ﬁrst order constructs and is a
superior statistical speciﬁcation compared to pair-wise
and higher order interactions. The use of second order
construct to represent complementarities among ﬁrst
order constructs has been well documented in existing
studies (Shah and Ward, 2007; Ettlie and Pavlou, 2006;
Tanriverdi and Venkatraman, 2005; Sivadas and Dwyer,
2000). Using the second order construct also allows us to
sidestep the statistical confounding that results from
highly signiﬁcant correlations among the ﬁrst order
constructs, which are consistent with the theory of
complementarities (Whittington et al., 1999; Milgrom
and Roberts, 1995).


330

A.A. Mishra, R. Shah / Journal of Operations Management 27 (2009) 324–338

4.2.3. NPD performance measures

Project performance is assessed using four commonly
used items reﬂecting time-to-market, technical perfor-
mance, unit manufacturing cost, and R&D budget as
measured relative to goals (see Appendix A). These
measures have been widely recognized as central objec-
tives in measuring internal performance of an NPD process
(Hauptman and Hirji, 1996; Wheelwright and Clark, 1992).
Typically, these objectives are set at the start of project
execution, and performance is assessed by comparing the
objectives to the degree of achievement upon project
completion. Thus, we asked NPD project managers to rate
the success of the product development project relative to
the set goals and objectives on the four measures. Market
performance is measured using items for market share,
overall proﬁtability, return on investment, and overall
commercial success (see Appendix A). These market
performance measures have been frequently used in
previous product development literature (Atuahene-Gima
and Li, 2004; Brown and Eisenhardt, 1995). All responses
concerning questions on project performance and market
performance were measured on a 7-point Likert-type
scale.

4.2.4. Control variables

Plant size is frequently associated with resource
availability and bureaucratic structures. Larger plants
have more resources to carry out product development
tasks, but are also more likely to have longer development
periods because of complex, formal structures (Ettlie,
1995). We measure plant size with the total number of
hourly and salaried employees and use the logarithm of
plant size to control its effects on project and market
performance.

Another source of variation among product develop-
ment projects comes from project team member char-
acteristics, because team characteristics such as average
experience of the team members play an important role in
determining project outcomes (Ettlie, 1995). Teams with a
concentration of specialists or members with relevant
experience have a higher probability of achieving their
project performance goals. We control for the effect of
team characteristics on project performance and measure
it using average team experience of the project team in
years. Previous researchers have also noted the deleterious
effects of large size on ﬁrm performance (Chandler, 1962;
Child, 1972) because more employees are typically
associated with increased bureaucracy and structural

Table 3
Means, standard deviations, and correlations of all variablesa.

inertial
forces (Hannan and Freeman, 1984) which
negatively affect ﬁrm performance. Similar negative
associations are also found in the context of team size
and project performance. Thus, we include team size as a
control variable on project performance.

Additionally, we control for the effects of product size
(measured as the number of components in a complete
product) on project performance. Products with a higher
number of components are likely to have a higher degree of
task interdependence than products with smaller numbers
of components; this, in turn, may impact project perfor-
mance outcomes.

Finally, previous NPD research has noted the impact of
industry membership and country location on a ﬁrm’s
approach to product development (Ettlie, 1995; Hoskisson
and Hitt, 1990). Therefore, in order to control for any
heterogeneity among projects in the sample due to
differences in their industry membership or their country
location, we standardize the data across the six countries
and three industries in our sample.

5. Results

We followed a two-stage procedure recommended by
Anderson and Gerbing (1988) in testing our conceptual
framework. During the ﬁrst stage, we used CFA to develop
and test
the measurement models associated with
collaborative practices and performance measures. This
was done to purify and validate the constructs and to
ensure that any misﬁt in the overall structural model
representing our conceptual framework could be attrib-
uted to structural relationships. During the second stage,
we use SEM to examine the hypothesized structural
relationships. The model ﬁt was assessed with goodness-
of-ﬁt index (GFI), incremental ﬁt index (IFI), comparative
ﬁt index (CFI), Tucker Lewis index (TLI), and normed chi-
square. We also report root mean square error of
approximation (RMSEA) and its 90% conﬁdence interval,
root mean squared residual
(RMSR), and Parsimony
normed ﬁt index (PNFI). Descriptive statistics and correla-
tions among the variables are summarized in Table 3. The
process details are described below.

5.1. Measurement model results

5.1.1. Collaborative practices

We analyzed four measurement models to establish the
dimensional structure of collaborative practices using CFA.

Variables

Mean

S.D.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Supplier involvement
Customer involvement
Cross-functional involvement
Project performance
Market performance
Average team experience
Team size
Product size
Plant size

4.63
4.92
5.23
4.47
4.76
11.14
60.42
1721.70
1045.26

1.14
1.14
0.88
0.81
0.94
11.18
229.46
4514.40
3145.52

1.00
0.42
0.23
0.21
0.19
0.08
0.12
 0.08
 0.09

1.00
0.19
0.12
0.12
0.00
0.05
 0.04
 0.15

1.00
0.19
0.12
0.13
0.10
 0.03
 0.16

1.00
0.59
0.04
 0.04
0.08
 0.01

1.00
0.00
 0.03
0.17
 0.18

1.00
 0.02
0.01
 0.02

1.00
0.03
0.10

1.00
0.02

1.00

a n = 189 observations; p-value < 0.05 for correlation values greater than 0.14; p-value < 0.01 for correlation values greater than 0.19.


A.A. Mishra, R. Shah / Journal of Operations Management 27 (2009) 324–338

331

Table 4a
Measurement models.

Models

Collaborative practices
Model 1 (one-factor model)
Model 2 (3 uncorrelated factors)
Model 3 (3 correlated factors)
Model 4 (one second order factor)

Performance measures
Model 5 (one-factor model)
Model 6 (two-factor model)

x2 (df)

Normed x2

GFI

IFI

TLI

CFI

RMSEA (90% CI)

SRMR

415.73 (54)
157.50 (54)
114.95 (51)
114.95 (51)

56.57 (14)
14.87 (13)

7.70
2.92
2.25
2.25

4.04
1.14

0.70
0.89
0.91
0.91

0.91
0.98

0.55
0.87
0.92
0.92

0.90
0.99

0.45
0.84
0.90
0.90

0.84
0.99

0.55
0.87
0.92
0.92

0.90
0.99

0.19 (0.17, 0.21)
0.10 (0.08, 0.12)
0.08 (0.06, 0.10)
0.08 (0.06, 0.10)

0.13 (0.09, 0.16)
0.03 (0.00, 0.08)

0.14
0.16
0.06
0.06

0.08
0.03

For more information on commonly recommended cutoff criterion for ﬁt statistics, please refer to Shah and Goldstein (2006). Model 1: CFA involving all
items representing the various collaborative practices loaded on one factor; Model 2: CFA involving the three uncorrelated ﬁrst order factors; Model 3: CFA
involving the three correlated ﬁrst order factors; Model 4: CFA involving second order collaborative competence factor; Model 5: CFA involving all
performance items on one factor; Model 6: CFA involving two correlated performance factors.

The ﬁt statistics for these four models are shown in
Table 4a. Model 1 conceptualizes that all 14 items
representing the various collaborative practices are
denoted by a unidimensional factor—i.e., the variance
among all 14 items is accounted for by a single
representative construct (also known as Harman’s one-
factor test). Not surprisingly, Model 1 has a very poor ﬁt. In
Model 2, we conceptualize that
the 14 items are
represented by three distinct and un-correlated ﬁrst order
factors corresponding to supplier involvement, customer
involvement, and cross-functional involvement. The ﬁt
measures for Model 2 are signiﬁcantly better than Model
1, indicating that a multi-dimensional model composed
of three un-correlated ﬁrst order factors is justiﬁed
and is superior to a unidimensional ﬁrst order factor
model. Further evidence in support of Model 2 is
obtained by examining the signiﬁcance of the chi-square
difference across the two models with respect to their
degrees of freedom difference. The chi-square difference

(Dx2 = 261.00) is signiﬁcant (p-value < 0.01). Two items
(SUPINV5 and CUSINV3) in Model 2 had high inter-item
correlations with other items and did not seem to add
any incremental information to the measurement model.
We dropped these two items from all further analysis
(see Appendix A).

Model 3 conceptualizes that the three ﬁrst order factors
are free to correlate with each other (Fig. 1). The ﬁt indices
for Model 3 exceed the critical cutoff levels commonly used
in empirical research (Shah and Goldstein, 2006). The
superior ﬁt is also reﬂected in the positive and signiﬁcant
correlations among the ﬁrst order factors that represent
collaborative practices. A comparison between Models 2
and 3 indicates that Model 3 represents the data
considerably better than Model 2; the chi-square differ-
ence between the two models
is also signiﬁcant
(Dx2 = 43.55, Ddf = 3, p-value < 0.01). Finally, in Model
4, we test the effectiveness of using a reﬂective second
order construct to represent complementarities among the

Fig. 1. Measurement models corresponding to Models 3 and 4 in Table 4a.


332

A.A. Mishra, R. Shah / Journal of Operations Management 27 (2009) 324–338

three ﬁrst order factors (Fig. 1). When two nested models
have exactly the same chi-square and ﬁt measures (as do
Models 3 and 4), the superiority of one model is established
by examining the signiﬁcance of the second order factor
loadings in the measurement model on one hand and
signiﬁcance of the structural links in the second order
factors model compared to the structural links in the ﬁrst
order factors model on the other (Venkatraman, 1989). All
the second order factor loadings in Model 4 are signiﬁcant
(p-value < 0.05). Further, the structural model using the
second order factor structure for collaborative competence
ﬁts the data better relative to the structural model with ﬁrst
order factors (discussed in Section 5.2). Both results strongly
support the notion of complementarity and indicate that the
second order factor structure is a better statistical speciﬁca-
tion for modeling collaborative competence.

Given the results, we used Model 4 to assess validity
and reliability. We assessed convergent validity using
standardized parameter loadings of the measurement
items on their respective constructs. The standardized
parameter loadings range from 0.51 to 0.83 and are
signiﬁcant at p-value < 0.01, providing a strong support of
convergent validity. Discriminant validity is examined by
calculating conﬁdence intervals around the estimates of
inter-factor correlation (F) (Anderson and Gerbing, 1988).
Because none of the conﬁdence intervals for the inter-
construct correlations contain 1.0, we conclude that the
constructs are distinct from each other. We assessed
composite reliability using the procedures outlined by
Fornell and Larcker (1981); the composite reliability values
for each of the factors exceeds 0.70 (see Appendix A). As a
set, the results indicate the dimensionality, validity, and
reliability of collaborative competence as a second order
factor and provide support to our proposition.

5.1.2. Performance measures

The dimensional structure for performance measures
was assessed in a manner similar to measures for
collaborative practices. We used CFA to analyze two
measurement models. Model 5 consists of nine measures
forming a unidimensional factor, whereas Model 6 consists
of two distinct yet correlated factors representing project
performance and market performance. Table 4a presents
the ﬁt statistics for these two models. We retain Model 6
because of its superior overall ﬁt to the data; its ﬁt indices
dominate the ﬁt statistics associated with Model 5 and
exceed critical cutoff values. We also computed the chi-
square difference across the two models and found it to be
signiﬁcant with respect to the corresponding change in the
degrees of freedom (Dx2 = 38.47, Ddf = 1, p-value < 0.01).
We dropped two items because they showed signiﬁcant
cross-loadings with other items.

Standardized parameter loading for all performance
items on their respective constructs were signiﬁcant and

Table 4b
Structural models.

Models

x2 (df)

Normed x2

Model 7 (Complementarity model)
Model 8 (Direct effects model)

349.63 (223)
386.23 (222)

1.57
1.74

ranged from 0.58 to 0.84, indicating evidence of con-
vergent validity. The conﬁdence interval around the
estimate of inter-factor correlation did not contain 1.0,
indicating that project and market performance constructs
are distinct from each other. The composite reliability for
project performance and market performance were 0.66
and 0.80, respectively.

5.2. Structural model

The complete structural model representing our con-
ceptual framework along with the parameter estimates is
shown in Fig. 2. It includes the second order collaborative
competence construct, and the three structural
links
representing our three hypotheses. We label this the
complementarity model (Model 7). We also evaluate an
alternate model shown in Fig. 3, where collaborative
competence as the second order factor is removed; instead
it includes the direct relationships between the three sets
of collaborative practices and the two performance
measures, along with the link from project to market
performance. We label this the direct effects model (Model
8). Speciﬁcally, the complementarity model, with its
second order factor,
is more parsimonious because it
requires fewer parameters to be estimated, compared to
the direct effects model, and accounts for the covariance
among the ﬁrst order factors. We discuss the model
statistics and their implications below.

In comparing the complementarity model with the
direct effects model, we ﬁnd that the ﬁt statistics for the
complementarity model are marginally better than those
of the direct effects model (Table 4b). More importantly,
only two of the six direct structural links from cross-
functional involvement, customer involvement, and sup-
plier involvement to project and market performance are
signiﬁcant (at p-value < 0.05) in the direct effects model,
indicating poor model speciﬁcation. The insigniﬁcant
structural links are inconsistent with the existing literature
and provide additional indirect support to the comple-
mentarity model. We also compare the variance explained
by the complementarity and direct effects models. Because
the link between project performance and market perfor-
mance is similar in algebraic sign, magnitude, and
signiﬁcance in the two models, we assess the variation
(R2) explained in the project performance by the two
models;
the complementarity model explains 34%
(R2 = 0.34) variation compared to the 26% (R2 = 0.26) of
the variation explained by the direct effects model. This
clearly demonstrates the superiority of the complemen-
tarity model over the direct effects model in explaining the
variation in project performance.

Consequently, we use the complementarity model to
evaluate Hypotheses 1, 2, and 3. We use the signiﬁcance of
the structural links represented by standardized parameter

GFI

0.87
0.86

IFI

0.90
0.87

TLI

0.88
0.85

CFI

0.90
0.87

RMSEA (90% CI)

SRMR

0.05 (0.04, 0.07)
0.06 (0.05, 0.07)

0.07
0.10

PNFI

0.67
0.65


A.A. Mishra, R. Shah / Journal of Operations Management 27 (2009) 324–338

333

Fig. 2. Complete structural model representing the complementarity model (Model 7).

(structural

estimates associated with the structural paths in evaluating
the hypotheses. As indicated in Fig. 2, the link from
collaborative competence to project performance is positive
and signiﬁcant
link = 0.48, p-value < 0.01),
providing strong support for Hypothesis 1. In contrast, the
path from collaborative competence to market performance
is not signiﬁcant (at p-value < 0.05); therefore, we do not
ﬁnd support for Hypothesis 2. Hypothesis 3 proposed a
positive impact of project performance on market perfor-
mance; our results provide signiﬁcant support for that
relationship (structural link = 0.81, p-value < 0.01).

As expected, among the control variables in the
complementarity model, project team size has a signiﬁcant
negative effect on project performance, indicating that
larger teams are associated with lower project perfor-
mance. In contrast, the effect of product size on project
performance is signiﬁcant and positive, suggesting that a
product with a larger number of components is associated
with higher level of project performance. This result is
counter-intuitive and in contradiction with previous
research. Perhaps the relationship between product size
and project performance is contingent on the number of
new components designed exclusively for the product or
on component commonality among different product
conﬁgurations, so the larger product size does not
necessarily imply greater task interdependence or com-
plexity of product development efforts. Future research
should examine both the direct relationship between
product size and project performance and the contingency

effects of other variables impacting their direct relation-
ship.

6. Discussion and conclusion

The goal of this study was to investigate the perfor-
mance beneﬁts of simultaneously involving suppliers,
customers, and cross-functional teams in the NPD process.
We use the resource-based view and the complementarity
theory to conceptualize synergies that arise from involving
suppliers, customers, and cross-functional internal teams
in the NPD process as a second order factor and label it
‘‘collaborative competence.’’ Using multi-country, multi-
industry, project level data from 189 manufacturing plants,
we empirically validate the second order factor structure.
We then assess the performance effects of collaborative
competence on project and market-based performance.
We discuss theoretical, empirical, and managerial con-
tributions below.
Theoretically,

study overcomes weaknesses
observed in prior NPD research. Most previous NPD
studies focus on limited aspects of
involvement and
examine sources of synergy obtained from these domains
in an isolated manner. Such fragmented conceptualization
does not represent the product development process in
practice because it
ignores the ‘‘interdependencies’’
(Krishnan and Ulrich, 2001) and the ‘‘shared product
concept’’ (Leonard-Barton, 1995) that exist among suppli-
ers, customers, and cross-functional teams. To better

this


334

A.A. Mishra, R. Shah / Journal of Operations Management 27 (2009) 324–338

Fig. 3. Complete structural model representing the direct effects model (Model 8).

represent these interdependencies, our study conceptua-
lized collaborative competence as the synergy resulting
from simultaneous involvement of the three key groups
associated with the NPD process. Further, while the
resource-based view recognizes that the separate involve-
ment of supplier, customer, or cross-functional teams are
each valuable and create supplier involvement synergies,
customer involvement synergies, and cross-functional
involvement synergies respectively, it does not recognize
the super-additive synergies arising from involving all
three groups (suppliers, customers, and cross-functional
teams) in the product development process. Our use of the
complementarity theory in this study is an effort toward
presenting a more nuanced and realistic picture of
collaborative product development.

With its second order, multi-dimensional conceptua-
lization of collaborative competence, this study captures
both the synergies arising from the independent involve-
ment of supplier, customer, and cross-functional teams
and the super-additive value of synergies arising from the
complementarity of different types of involvement. As the
rich literature stream on the relationship between inter-
and intra-organizational
involvement and ﬁrm perfor-
mance indicates, conceptualizing individual dimensions of
a multi-dimensional construct as independent and exam-
ining their performance effects separately may lead to
inconsistent and ambiguous results.

We make three empirical contributions to the existing
literature. First, we establish that the collective pursuit of

collaborative practices such as supplier involvement,
customer involvement, and cross-functional involvement
underlies the higher order collaborative competence.
Although the usefulness of each of the three collaborative
practices has been cited in previous literature (Gerwin and
Barrowman, 2002; Krishnan and Ulrich, 2001), they have
not been modeled together. The superiority of the second
order factor model (Model 4) compared to the three
correlated factors model (Model 3) conﬁrms that multiple
manifestations of involvement are all driven by a cohesive,
yet unobservable, underlying competence. Further, our
analysis shows that the complementarity model (Model 7),
compared to the direct effects model (Model 8), yields
statistically stronger and practically valid results. Speci-
ﬁcally, the extent of variation in project performance
explained by the second order latent construct is higher
than that produced by separately analyzing the three sets
of collaborative practices. Overall, our efforts to present a
parsimonious representation of interdependencies among
collaborative practices using a second order latent con-
struct is both conceptually and methodologically a step
toward providing a nuanced perspective on the integrated
nature of the product development process.

Our second contribution consists in demonstrating that
collaborative competence impacts project and market
performance differently. While collaborative competence
has a positive and signiﬁcant impact on project perfor-
mance, its impact on market performance is insigniﬁcant.
We also ﬁnd a signiﬁcant positive link between project and


A.A. Mishra, R. Shah / Journal of Operations Management 27 (2009) 324–338

335

competence

market performance. As a set, the results associated with
H2 and H3 suggest that the link between collaborative
competence and market performance is indirect, mediated
through project performance. We use the Sobel test to
examine the signiﬁcance of the mediation effect, an
approach advocated by Baron and Kenny (1986). The
Sobel test statistic equals 2.83 and is signiﬁcant (p-
value < 0.01). The analyses show that the link between
collaborative
and market performance
becomes insigniﬁcant when project performance is added
to the model, suggesting a complete mediation relation-
ship between collaborative competence and market
performance (Venkatraman, 1989). An insigniﬁcant direct
link between collaborative competence and market
performance is surprising given that customer involve-
ment in NPD projects forms a key component of this
competence. The primary objective that drives ﬁrms to
involve customers in their product development efforts is
to understand customer requirements and market trends
so that superior market performance can be achieved.

What, then, explains our ﬁnding? We believe that there
are two potential explanations for the insigniﬁcant direct
link between collaborative competence and market
performance. One is that project execution holds the key
to market success and that achieving superior market
performance from inter- and intra-organizational involve-
ment necessitates excellence on project performance
metrics. Speciﬁcally, companies that fail to achieve their
desired project performance outcomes will also fail in
achieving market performance goals. This interpretation
puts signiﬁcant pressure on ﬁrms to excel on operational
level metrics as a precondition to excelling in the market.
In general, this pattern of results, where an operational
level variable is found to have an impact on operational
level performance but not on market or ﬁnancial measures
of performance, is similar to that observed in supply chain
and information technology literature. For
instance,
Vickery et al. (2003, p. 535) found that coordination of
value-added activities has a direct impact on competitive
performance, but not on the ﬁnancial performance of the
ﬁrm. Similarly, information technology researchers have
called the general failure of studies to show a direct
positive relationship between information technology
investment and measures of overall ﬁnancial performance
proﬁtability a paradox (Dedrick et al., 2003, p. 23). Barua
et al. (1995) argue that the impact of operational variables
on overall ﬁrm performance should be easier to detect
through intermediate measures of operational perfor-
mance. A second explanation for the insigniﬁcant effects of
collaborative competence on market performance could be
that perhaps the collaboration items used in our study
(particularly, the customer involvement scale) lack sufﬁ-
cient variation to capture the true impact of collaborative
competence on market performance. This is plausible,
given that the collaboration scales used in our study have
been derived primarily from existing studies, where they
have gradually evolved and been optimized toward
measuring operational performance beneﬁts rather than
market or ﬁnancial performance metrics.

Our third contribution derives from the increased
generalizability of our ﬁndings due to the broad scope of

the sample. Our multi-industry, multi-country sample
stands in sharp contrast to many empirical studies in the
NPD literature wherein the sample of companies used is
simply either a set of
Japanese companies or U.S.
companies based in the electronics or the computer
industry (Balachandra and Friar, 1997). As such, the
generalizability of previous empirical ﬁndings is primarily
restricted to high performing ﬁrms in a single highly
competitive industry and does not portray the true state of
affairs across the whole landscape of product development
efforts in various industries and countries.

Although the conceptual

framework in our study
examines the performance impact of simultaneously
involving suppliers, customer, and cross-functional teams
in the NPD process, its implications are not restricted only
to projects requiring both inter- and intra-organizational
collaboration. For example, NPD projects that are com-
pletely internal to a ﬁrm may involve multiple stake-
holders
IT projects which involve
coordination between the internal software team and
multiple departments). In these cases, harnessing the
knowledge complementarities across multiple stake-
holders by jointly involving them in the project is likely
to lead to enhanced performance outcomes.

in-house

(e.g.,

Our study also has important managerial implications.
While managers must continue to involve a diverse group
of stakeholders in their product development process to
achieve superior performance, the real operational bene-
ﬁts of collaboration are derived when efforts are made to
synchronize localized capabilities and strengths into
jointly produced knowledge that transcends local interests
and enables early resolution of problems during the NPD
process. Further, achieving superior market performance
impact from competence in involving these diverse groups
is contingent on how the competence affects intermediate
operational level performance. Thus, product development
managers must continue to focus on ensuring that
efﬁciency at the operational level is achieved, because it
constitutes the ﬁrst step toward improvement in overall
ﬁrm performance.

These managerial implications can also be extended
beyond the NPD process and into any context that involves
alliances or ﬁrms engaging in an outsourcing/offshoring
relationship with a vendor ﬁrm. While potential savings
from economies of scope or labor arbitrage are certainly a
key reason for ﬁrms to engage in such relationships, it is
unlikely that such beneﬁts will accrue unless operational
performance ﬁrst improves. As a recent AT Kearney (2007)
study on offshoring indicates, that the best performing
companies in their survey ‘‘focus less on saving money and
more on improving operational performance, and in doing
so they save more money’’ (p. 11). That is, the surveyed
companies that focused on improving operational metrics
achieved the largest cost savings.

7. Future research and limitations

While our study highlights the advantages of collabor-
ating simultaneously with suppliers, customers, and cross-
functional teams in the NPD process, ﬁrms may not use the
three sets of collaborative practices to an equal extent.


336

A.A. Mishra, R. Shah / Journal of Operations Management 27 (2009) 324–338

Speciﬁcally, a focal ﬁrm’s choice of collaborating with
suppliers or customers may depend on contextual and
situational conditions on one hand and the supply chain
structure on the other. Future research efforts directed at
studying the collaboration process in NPD would greatly
beneﬁt by examining the conditions under which an
unbalanced collaborative approach may result in superior
outcomes compared to a more balanced collaborative
approach.

Another potential area for future research would be
to examine the variation in the costs of collaboration
across the three interfaces. At a macro level, collabora-
tive practices with suppliers, customers, and cross-
functional teams are similar in that they involve the
sharing of technical and business knowledge. However,
collaboration costs across each of the three interfaces
could vary signiﬁcantly due to the differences in their
level of ‘‘shared context’’ (Hinds and Mortensen, 2005)—
arising from commonality in information, tools, work
processes, and work cultures across the three inter-
faces—with the core design team. Because cross-func-
tional teams are a part of the same focal ﬁrm as the core
design team, their levels of shared context with the core
design team are likely to be higher compared to that of
suppliers and customers. Consequently, there are fewer
barriers for information ﬂow between the cross-func-
tional teams and the core design team, and the potential
for conﬂict is low.

Additionally our study is conducted from the point of
view of the focal ﬁrm; focusing on a focal ﬁrm inherently
misses the supplier–customer aspect embodied by the
supply chain perspective. Suppliers and customers are
each likely to have an independent and different
interpretation of the term ‘collaboration’, and evaluate
the extent of its collaboration efforts with the focal
ﬁrm differently. A more nuanced understanding of
collaboration and the effectiveness of collaborative
competence on performance outcomes require focusing
on a triad (Supplier-Focal Firm-Customer) as the unit of
analysis. We call upon future researchers to extend
examining collaboration from a dyadic to a triadic
perspective.

Future research might also beneﬁt from developing
measurement items that capture aspects of involvement
other than the extent and timing of involvement. While
our measures demonstrate interesting results, more
ﬁnely grained measurement items will help capture
greater variation across the three sets of collaborative
practices. New measurement items may enable research-
ers to use other research methods in examining the
performance impact of collaborative competence. For
instance, using categorical variables to measure colla-
boration allows researchers to use Milgrom and Roberts’
(1995) approach. Speciﬁcally, one can compare the
project performance of ﬁrms that use all three sets of
collaborative practices to the project performance of
ﬁrms that use any two sets or even only one set.
Cassiman and Veugelers (2006) provide an excellent
example of this approach. Combining analytical and
empirical methods such as agent-based simulation using
NK model seems a promising approach for testing

complementarity; Porter and Siggelkow (2008) provide
a detailed description of this approach.

As with any study, our

results must also be
considered in light of the nature of the research sample
and data. We collected data from a single key
respondent; while this is currently the standard method
in empirical research,
it is associated with common
method bias. To assess common method bias, we looked
for a general methods factor during CFA, but did not ﬁnd
one. We also attempted to minimize its impact through
careful selection of the respondents—for this study we
used responses only from NPD managers. Although the
relationships we examined are derived from theory,
any interpretation of causality between constructs
should be treated with caution. Another limitation of
our study is the absence of control variables related to
the suppliers’ and customers’ involvement. Subsequent
research could replicate the results obtained from this
study by including control variables such as number of
suppliers/customers, previous experience in working
with the suppliers/customers, duration and terms of
the relationship with suppliers/customers, etc. Despite
these limitations, our multi-country, multi-industry
study provides researchers and managers with clear
guidance for achieving superior project and market
performance.

Appendix A. Measures

Responses to supplier involvement, customer involvement
and internal involvement measures are given on 7-point
Likert-type scale (1 = strong disagreement, 7 = strong agree-
ment).

Supplier involvement (r = 0.84)
SUPINV1

Suppliers were involved early in the design efforts, in this
project.

SUPINV2 We partnered with suppliers for the design of this product.
SUPINV3

Suppliers were frequently consulted about the design of
this product.
Suppliers were an integral part of the design effort.
Suppliers were selected after the design for this product
was completeda,b.

SUPINV4
SUPINV5

Customer involvement (r = 0.80)
CUSTINV1 We consulted customers early in the design efforts for this

product.

CUSTINV2 We partnered with customers for the design of this

product.

CUSTINV3 Customers were frequently consulted about the design of

this producta.

CUSTINV4 Customers became involved in this project only after the

design was completedb.

CUSTINV5 Customers were an integral part of the design effort for

this project.

Cross-functional involvement (r = 0.75)
CRFINV1

New product design teams have frequent interaction with
the manufacturing function.

CRFINV2 Manufacturing is involved in the early stages of new

CRFINV3

CRFINV4

product development.
The manufacturing function is involved in the creation of
new product concepts.
New product concepts are developed as a result of the
involvement of various functions.

a Deleted items.
b Reverse coded items.


A.A. Mishra, R. Shah / Journal of Operations Management 27 (2009) 324–338

337

Appendix A (Continued )

Please rate the success of this product development project,
relative to its goals (1 = signiﬁcantly worse, 2 = worse,
3 = somewhat worse, 4 = about same, 5 = somewhat better,
6 = better, 7 = signiﬁcantly better).

Market performance (r = 0.80)
MKTPER1
MKTPER2
MKTPER3
MKTPER4

Market share.
Overall proﬁtability.
Return on investment.
Overall commercial successa.

Project performance (r = 0.66)
PRJPER1
PRJPER2
PRJPER3
PRJPER4

Technical performance relative to speciﬁcations.
Time to market.
Unit manufacturing cost.
R&D budget.

Approximate average years of experience of team
members.
How many parts are required to make one unit?
The total number of individuals involved in the
project.
Number of hourly personnel + number of salaried
personnel.

Control variables
Average team
experience
Product size
Team size

Plant size

References

Ancona, D.G., Caldwell, D.F., 1992. Demography and design: predictors of
new product team performance. Organization Science 3 (3), 321–341.
Anderson, J.C., Gerbing, D.W., 1988. Structural equation modeling in
practice: a review and recommended two-step approach. Psycholo-
gical Bulletin 103 (3), 411–423.

Atuahene-Gima, K., Li, H., 2004. Strategic decision comprehensiveness
and new product development outcomes in new technology ven-
tures. Academy of Management Journal 47 (4), 583–597.

Bajaj, A., Kekre, S., Srinivasan, K., 2004. Managing NPD: cost and schedule
performance in design and manufacturing. Management Science 50
(4), 527–536.

Balachandra, R., Friar, J.H., 1997. Factors for success in R&D projects and
new product innovation: a contextual framework. IEEE Transactions
on Engineering Management 44 (3), 276–287.

Barki, H., Pinsoneeault, A., 2005. A model of organizational integration,
implementation effort, and performance. Organization Science 16 (2),
165–179.

Barney, J.B., 1991. Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage.

Journal of Management 17 (1), 99–120.

Baron, R.M., Kenny, D.A., 1986. The moderator-mediator variable distinc-
tion in social psychological research: conceptual, strategic, and sta-
tistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
51 (6), 1173–1182.

Barua, A., Kriebel, C.H., Mukhopadhyay, T., 1995. Information technolo-
gies and business value: an analytic and empirical investigation.
Information Systems Research 6 (1), 3–23.

Bensaou, M., Venkatraman, N., 1995. Conﬁgurations of interorganiza-
tional relationships: a comparison between US and Japanese auto-
makers. Management Science 41 (9), 1471–1492.

Boeing, 2007. <http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2007/q2/070521c

_nr.html>.

Boulding, W., Morgan, R., Staelin, R., 1997. Pulling the plug to stop the new

product drain. Journal of Marketing Research 34 (1), 164–176.

Bowman, D., Gatignon, H., 1996. Order of entry as a moderator of the
effect of the marketing mix on market share. Marketing Science 15
(3), 222–242.

Brown, S.L., Eisenhardt, K.M., 1995. Product development: past research,
present ﬁndings, and future directions. Academy of Management
Review 20 (2), 343–378.

Carlile, P.R., 2004. Transferring, translating, and transforming: an inte-
grative framework for managing knowledge across boundaries. Orga-
nization Science 15 (5), 555–568.

Cassiman, B., Veugelers, R., 2006. In search of complementarity in inno-
vation strategy: internal R&D and external knowledge acquisition.
Management Science 52 (1), 68–82.

Chandler, A.D., 1962. Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the History of

Industrial Enterprise. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Child, J., 1972. Organizational structure, environment and performance:

the role of strategic choice. Sociology 6 (1), 1–22.

Clark, K.B., Fujimoto, T., 1991. Product Development Performance: Strat-
egy, Organization and Management in the World Auto Industry.
Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.

Cooper, R.G., Kleinschmidt, E.J., 1987. New products: what separates
winners from losers? Journal of Product Innovation Management
4 (3), 169–184.

Daft, R.L., Lengel, R.H., 1986. Organizational information requirements,
media richness and structural design. Management Science 32 (5),
554–571.

Dedrick, J., Gurbaxani, V., Kraemer, K.L., 2003. Information technology and
economic performance: a critical review of the empirical evidence.
ACM Computing Surveys 35 (1), 1–28.

Dougherty, D., 1992. Interpretive barriers to successful product innova-

tion in large ﬁrms. Organization Science 3 (2), 179–202.

Eisenhardt, K.M., Tabrizi, B.N., 1995. Accelerating adaptive processes:
product innovation in the global computer industry. Administrative
Science Quarterly 40 (1), 84–110.

Ettlie, J.E., 1995. Product-process development integration in manufac-

turing. Management Science 41 (7), 1224–1237.

Ettlie, J.E., Pavlou, P.A., 2006. Technology-based new product develop-

ment partnerships. Decision Sciences 37 (2), 117–147.

Flynn, B.B., Sakakibara, S., Schroeder, R.G., 1995. Relationship between JIT
and TQM: practices and performance. Academy of Management
Journal 38 (5), 1325–1360.

Fornell, C., Larcker, D., 1981. Structural equation models with unobser-
Journal of Marketing

vable variables and measurement error.
Research 18 (1), 39–50.

Frohlich, M.T., Westbrook, R., 2001. Arcs of integration: an international
study of supply chain strategies. Journal of Operations Management
19 (2), 185–200.

Galbraith, J.R., 1977. Organization Design. Addison-Wesley, Cambridge,

MA.

Gerwin, D., Barrowman, N.J., 2002. An evaluation of research on
integrated product development. Management Science 48 (7), 938–
953.

Grant, R.M., 1996. Toward a knowledge-based theory of the ﬁrm. Strategic

Management Journal 17, 109–122.

Grifﬁn, A., Hauser, J.R., 1993. The voice of the customer. Marketing Science

12 (1), 1–27.

Gulati, R., Lawrence, P.R., Puranam, P., 2005. Adaptation in vertical
relationships: beyond incentive conﬂict. Strategic Management Jour-
nal 26 (5), 415–440.

Gupta, A.K., Souder, W.E., 1998. Key drivers of reduced cycle time.

Research Technology Management 41 (4), 38–43.

Hammel, T.R., Kopczak, L.R., 1993. Tightening the supply chain. Produc-

tion and Inventory Management 34 (2), 63–70.

Hannan, M.T., Freeman, J., 1984. Structural inertia and organizational

change. American Sociological Review 49 (2), 149–164.

Hansen, M.T., Nohria, N., 2004. How to build collaborative advantage. MIT

Sloan Management Review 46 (1), 22–30.

Hartley, J.L., Zirger, B.J., Kamath, R.R., 1997. Managing the buyer–supplier
interface for on-time performance in product development. Journal of
Operations Management 15 (1), 57–70.

Hauptman, O., Hirji, K.K., 1996. The inﬂuence of process concurrency on
project outcomes in product development: an empirical study of
cross-functional teams. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Manage-
ment 43 (2), 153–164.

Henke, J.W., Krachenberg, A.R., Lyons, T.F., 1993. Cross-functional teams:
good concept, poor implementation! Journal of Product Innovation
Management 10 (3), 216–229.

Hinds, P.J., Mortensen, M., 2005. Understanding conﬂict in geographically
distributed teams: the moderating effects of shared identity, shared
context, and spontaneous communication. Organization Science 16
(3), 290–307.

Hoopes, D.G., Madsen, T.L., Walker, G., 2003. Guest editors’ introduction to
the special issue: why is there a resource-based view? Toward a
theory of competitive heterogeneity. Strategic Management Journal
24 (10), 889–902.

Hoskisson, R.E., Hitt, M.A., 1990. Antecedents and performance outcomes
of diversiﬁcation: a review and critique of theoretical perspectives.
Journal of Management 16 (2), 461–509.

Ittner, C.D., Larcker, D.F., 1997. Product development cycle time and
organizational performance. Journal of Marketing Research 34 (1),
13–23.

Kearney, A.T., 2007. Execution is everything: the keys to offshoring

success. <http://www.atkearney.com/main.taf?p=5,3,1,157>.


338

A.A. Mishra, R. Shah / Journal of Operations Management 27 (2009) 324–338

Kessler, E.H., 2000. Tightening the belt: methods for reducing develop-
ment costs associated with new product innovation. Journal of Engi-
neering and Technology Management 17 (1), 59–92.

Kogut, B., Zander, U., 1992. Knowledge of the ﬁrm, combinative capabil-
ities, and the replication of technology. Organization Science 3 (3),
383–397.

Koufteros, X., Vonderembse, M., Jayaram, J., 2005. Internal and external
integration for product development: the contingency effects of
uncertainty, equivocality, and platform strategy. Decision Science
36 (1), 97–133.

Krishnan, V., Ulrich, K.T., 2001. Product development decisions: a review

of the literature. Management Science 47 (1), 1–21.

Langerak, F., Hultink, E.J., 2005. The impact of new product development
acceleration approaches on speed and proﬁtability: lessons for pio-
neers and fast followers. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Manage-
ment 52 (1), 30–42.

Leonard-Barton, D., 1995. Wellsprings of Knowledge. Harvard Business

School Press, Boston, MA.

MacCormack, A., Verganti, R., Iansiti, M., 2001. Developing products on
‘‘Internet Time’’: the anatomy of a ﬂexible development process.
Management Science 47 (1), 133–150.

MacCormack, A., Forbath, T., 2008. Learning the ﬁne art of global colla-

boration. Harvard Business Review 86 (1), 24–26.

Mallick, D.N., Schroeder, R.G., 2005. An integrated framework for mea-
suring product development performance in high technology indus-
tries. Production & Operations Management 14 (2), 142–158.

Markides, C.C., Williamson, P.J., 1994. Related diversiﬁcation, core com-
petences and corporate performance. Strategic Management Journal
15 (5), 149–165.

McGinnis, M.A., Vallopra, R.M., 1999. Purchasing and supplier involve-
ment: issues and insights regarding new product success. Journal of
Supply Chain Management 35 (3), 4–15.

Shah, R., Goldstein, S.M., 2006. Use of structural equation modeling in
operations management research: looking back and forward. Journal
of Operations Management 24 (1), 148–169.

Shah, R., Ward, P.T., 2007. Deﬁning and developing measures of lean

production. Journal of Operations Management 25 (4), 785–805.

Shah, R., Ward, P.T., 2003. Lean manufacturing: context, practice bundles,
and performance. Journal of Operations Management 21 (2), 129–
149.

Shankar, V., 1999. New product introduction and incumbent response
strategies: their interrelationship and the role of multimarket con-
tact. Journal of Marketing Research 36 (3), 327–344.

Sivadas, E., Dwyer, R.F., 2000. An examination of organizational factors
inﬂuencing new product success in internal and alliance-based pro-
cesses. Journal of Marketing 64 (1), 31–49.

Smith, P.G., Reinertsen, D.G., 1998. Developing Products in Half the Time.

Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.

Sutton, R.I., Hargadon, A., 1996. Brainstorming groups in context: effec-
tiveness in a product design ﬁrm. Administrative Science Quarterly 41
(4), 685–718.

Swink, M.L., 1999. Threats to new product manufacturability and the
effects of development team integration processes. Journal of Opera-
tions Management 17 (6), 691–709.

Swink, M.L., 2006. Building collaborative innovation capability. Research-

Technology Management 49 (2), 37–47.

Tanriverdi, H., Venkatraman, N., 2005. Knowledge relatedness and the
performance of multibusiness ﬁrms. Strategic Management Journal
26 (2), 97–119.

Tatikonda, M.V., Montoya-Weiss, M.M., 2001. Integrating operations and
marketing perspectives of product innovation: the inﬂuence of orga-
nizational process factors and capabilities on development perfor-
mance. Management Science 47 (1), 151–172.

Thomke, S., Nimgade, A., 2000. Bush Boake Allen. Harvard Business School

Meyer, M.H., Lehnerd, A.P., 1997. The Power of Product Platforms. The

Cases 1–24.

Free Press, New York.

Milgrom, P., Roberts, J., 1995. Complementarities and ﬁt: strategy, struc-
ture, and organizational change in manufacturing. Journal of Account-
ing & Economics 19 (2/3), 179–208.

Moffat, L.K., 1998. Tools and teams: competing models of integrated
product development project performance. Journal of Engineering
and Technology Management 15 (1), 55–85.

Orlikowski, W.J., 2002. Knowing in practice: enacting a collective
capability in distributed organizing. Organization Science 13 (3),
249–273.

Peng, D.X., et al., 2007. Linking routines to operational capabilities: a
new perspective. Journal of Operations Management 26 (6), 730–
748.

Petersen, K.J., Handﬁeld, R.B., Ragatz, G.L., 2005. Supplier integration
into new product development: coordinating product, process and
supply chain design. Journal of Operations Management 23 (3/4),
371–388.

Porter, M.E., 1996. What is strategy? Harvard Business Review 74 (6),

61–78.

Porter, M.E., Siggelkow, N., 2008. Contextual interactions within activity
systems and sustainability of competitive advantage. Academy of
Management Perspectives 22 (2), 34–56.

Ragatz, G.L., Handﬁeld, R.B., Petersen, K.J., 2002. Beneﬁts associated
with supplier integration into new product development under
conditions of technology uncertainty. Journal of Business Research
55 (5), 389–400.

Tushman, M.L., Nadler, D.A., 1978. Information processing as an integrat-
ing concept in organizational design. Academy of Management
Review 3 (3), 613–624.

Van de Ven, A.H., Delbecq, A.L., Koenig Jr., R., 1976. Determinants of
coordination modes within organizations. American Sociological
Review 41 (3), 322–338.

Venkatraman, N., 1989. The concept of ﬁt in strategy research: toward
verbal and statistical correspondence. Academy of Management
Review 14 (1), 423–444.

Verona, G., 1999. A resource-based view of product development. Acad-

emy of Management Review 24 (1), 132–142.

Vickery, S.K., Jayaram, J., Droge, C., Calantone, R., 2003. The effects of an
integrative supply chain strategy on customer service and ﬁnancial
performance: an analysis of direct versus indirect relationships.
Journal of Operations Management 21 (5), 523–539.

von Hippel, E., 1998. Economics of product development by users: the
impact of ‘‘sticky’’ local information. Management Science 44 (5),
629–644.

Walker, R., Tersini, N., 1992. Silicon Destiny: The Story of Application
Speciﬁc Integrated Circuits and LSI Logic Corporation. C.M.C. Publica-
tions, Milpitas, CA.

Wasti, S.N., Liker, J.K., 1997. Risky business or competitive power? Sup-
plier involvement in Japanese product design. Journal of Production
and Innovation Management 14 (5), 337–355.

Weick, K.E., 1979. The Social Psychology of Organizing. Addison-Wesley,

Reading, MA.

Rigby, D., Zook, C., 2002. Open-market innovation. Harvard Business

Wheelwright, S.C., Clark, K.B., 1992. Creating project plans to focus

Review 80 (10), 80–89.

Sakakibara, S., Flynn, B.B., Schroeder, R.G., Morris, W.T., 1997. The impact
of just-in-time manufacturing and its infrastructure on manufactur-
ing performance. Management Science 43 (9), 1246–1257.

Schmidt, J.B., Calantone, R.J., 1998. Are really new product development
projects harder to shut down? Journal of Product Innovation Manage-
ment 15 (2), 111–123.

product development. Harvard Business Review 70 (2), 67–82.

Whittington, R., Pettigrew, A., Peck, S., Fenton, E., Conyon, M., 1999.
Change and complementarities in the new competitive landscape:
a European panel study 1992–1996. Organization Science 10 (5),
583–600.

Wong, S., 2004. Distal and local group learning: performance trade-offs

and tensions. Organization Science 15 (6), 645–656.

