Unions and Productivity:
Evidence from  Academe

MARK  MEADOR  and  STEPHEN  J.  K.  WALTERS
Loyola  College  in Maryland,  Baltimore,  MD  21210

In order to test competing hypotheses about the effect of unions on labor productivity,
we  examine  research performance  in  a  sample  of  889  Ph.D.-granting  departments
(175  unionized)  in public  universities.  We find no  support for  the  hypothesis  that
unions enhance productivity  in academe. If we compare union and nonunion depart-
ments endowed with (sample) mean amounts of labor and capital, we find that union-
ization is associated with a 17 percent  reduction in output of published articles and a
9 percent  reduction in peers'  survey evaluations of a department's  level of scholarly
achievement.

Introduction

I. 
Theory  has spawned  conflicting  predictions  about unionism's  effect  on  productivity.
The traditional view was that unions damaged productivity  via restrictive work rules,
featherbedding,  and  disruptive  strikes  or  other  adversarial  tactics.  More  recently,
however,  Freeman  (1976)  and Freeman  and Medoff  (1984)  advanced  the  hypothesis
that unions may enhance productivity. In their formulation,  unions constitute a desir-
able  "voice/response"  mechanism  which  can  improve  worker  morale  and  coopera-
tion,  reduce  labor  turnover,  negotiate  improvements  in  the  organization  of  the
workplace, or otherwise reduce X-inefficiency  in affected  firms.

In recent years, many investigators have tried to determine whether favorable  or
unfavorable  union  productivity  effects  predominate.  At  present,  it  appears  that
studies concluding that unions enhance productivity outnumber those concluding that
unions  reduce  (or  have  no  effect  on)  productivity.  One  oft-cited  study  is  by  Brown
and Medoff  (1978), who applied a production function  framework  to 1972 cross-state
data on 20 two-digit  SIC industries and concluded that unionization  increased  output
per worker by about 22 percent (approximately  the same percentage, incidentally, by
which  unions  raised  wages  in  their  sample).  Subsequent  researchers  have  applied
the  Brown-Medoff  methodology  to particular  industries. For  example,  Clark  (1980)
analyzed  establishment  data  for  the U.S. cement  industry  and concluded  that  union-
ization  raised productivity  six to eight percent; Allen  (1984)  analyzed  data from  the
1972 Census of  Construction  Industries  and concluded  that  unions raised  productiv-
ity  (measured  by  valued  added  per  employee,  adjusted  for  interarea  construction
price  differences)  by  17 to  22  percent.'  On  the  other  hand,  Clark  (1984)  analyzed

JOURNAL OF LABOR  RESEARCH
Volume XV,  Number 4  Fall  1994


374 

JOURNAL OF LABOR RESEARCH

data on over 900 product-line businesses and found  no favorable  productivity  effects,
and Hirsch and Link (1984) reached a similar conclusion for a sample of  19 two-digit
SIC  manufacturing  industries.  Finally,  Warren  (1985)  analyzed  time  series  data  for
U.S.  manufacturing  over  1948-1973  and  found  that  union  membership  significantly
decreased average labor productivity.

We might conclude that these results  simply  confirm  the commonsensical  view
that  unions can have different  productivity  effects  in different  contexts. Before  clos-
ing  the  case,  however,  we  should  note  that  the  methodology  and  data  underlying
most  of  these  studies  contain  some  important  limitations.  Studies  based  on  the
Brown-Medoff  approach  may, for example, be picking up favorable  union  productiv-
ity  effects  that  are  primarily  a result  of  union/nonunion  wage  differentials.  And  the
data used in all prior studies are afflicted  by what may be termed "survivorship bias,"
i.e.,  because  they  are  burdened  by  above-competitive  union  wage  rates,  unionized
firms must be more efficient  if they are to survive in the long run. In sum, the empiri-
cal literature on the productivity effects  of unions is not as substantial as it appears.

We think, then, that the investigation must continue, and that a study of academic
research  productivity  may  —  because  union  wage  effects  and  survivorship  bias  are
comparatively  unimportant  in  academe —  provide  some  uniquely  valuable  insights.
Section  II outlines the limitations of prior research  in a bit more detail. In section  III
we describe  our  model, data, and  methodology.  Later  sections present  our  empirical
results and summary remarks.

II.  Critiques of the Prior Evidence
A  good  deal  of  the  empirical  literature  on  unions'  productivity  effects  relies  on  the
methodology  originated  by Brown  and Medoff  (1978), which  began  with  a  modified
Cobb-Douglas production  function

Q = AK"{L„ + cLJ^-^, 

(1)

where  Q = output,  K = capital, L^ = nonunion  labor, L^  -  union  labor, a = elasticity
of output with respect to capital (0 < a < 1), and i4 is a technical efficiency  parameter.
The  parameter  c converts  union  labor  units  into  nonunion  labor  units  and  "reflects
differences  in the productivity  of  union  and nonunion  labor. If  c is  greater  than  1.0,
union  labor is more productive than  nonunion  labor; if c is less than  1.0,  union  labor
is more productive than nonunion labor" (Brown and Medoff,  1978, p. 360).

But,  as  Reynolds  (1986)  has  pointed  out,  in  this  specification  c  is  simply  the

ratio of the marginal product of union labor to that of nonunion  labor:

= [0(1 -  ä)Q]l[L^ + cLJ,  and 

,so 

(2)

(3)

(4)


MARK MEADOR and STEPHEN J, K, WALTERS 

375

Reynolds  further  observes  that,  if  all  firms  maximize  profits,  the  marginal  product
per  dollar  spent  on  union  labor  will  equal  the  marginal  product  per  dollar  spent  on
nonunion labor, or, alternatively:

[dQ/dLJ/[dQ/dLJ  = wJw^, 

(5)

where wjw^  is the ratio of union to nonunion wage rates. Thus, c =  wjw^.

Reynolds argues, therefore,  that estimated  versions of equation (1) above convey

no useful  information  about unions' real productivity  effects:

[T]he alleged pro-productivity effects  of unionizatioti , , , must shift marginal pro-
ductivity  schedules  rightward,  ceteris  paribus, making  a given  total  amount of
unionized  labor  more  productive  than  a demographically  identical  amount of
nonunionized  labor working with the same capital. Such a situation  would induce
each unionized firm to employ  more labor than otherwise at a given union price
premium, but the firm would still move along downward-sloping marginal produc-
tivity schedules to establish an equality between value marginal products and input
prices. Conversely, a c greater than  1,0  is consistent with  leftward  shifts  in  firms
marginal labor productivity schedules , , , because firms reestablish the  first-order
conditions [for profit maximization] in response to any monopoly price differential.
Estimates of c are of no consequence  in discovering  the independent  impact of
unionization  on productivity  hecause there is no way to statistically  separate ob-
served marginal  productivity  differentials  from  union/nonunion  price  differentials
(Reynolds, 1986, pp, 445-46),

In the view of Addison and Hirsch (1989), Reynolds's critique does not invalidate
all the studies that use the Brown-Medoff  methodology. They observe that movements
along  a  stationary  labor  demand  schedule  imply  a changing  ratio  of  labor  to  other
inputs; since the production function  studies control for capital inputs and labor qual-
ity, they  argue  that  the  studies  measure  vertical  shifts  in  the  labor  demand  schedule
resulting  from  union  productivity  effects,  Addison  and  Hirsch  agree,  however,  that
these studies are afflicted  by what might be called "survivorship bias," In their words:

[U]nion firms facing higher wage rates must be more productive if they are to sur-
vive in the long run. Hence the union productivity  effect  is not being measured
across a representative sample of firms. Rather, only those firms that have survived
by increasing productivity  (a shift  in the [labor] demand  schedule) sufficiently  to
offset  higher union wages are observed. Measurement of union productivity  differ-
entials from  among a sample of surviving firms thus overstates  the productivity
effect of unions on a representative firm (Addison and Hirsch, 1989, p, 75),

Lovell, Sickles, and Warren  (1988) note that the productivity  estimates  reported
by  Brown  and Medoff  (and  their followers)  are upwardly  biased  for  another  reason.
To  derive  a  linear  estimating  equation,  Brown-Medoff  applied  a  first-order  Taylor
series  approximation  to the  intrinsically  nonlinear  explanatory  variable  representing
union  membership. The resulting measured  union  productivity  effect  was, according
to Lovell, Sickles, and Warren, about  15 percent higher than that derived from  a more
accurate nonlinear model.


376 

JOURNAL OF LABOR RESEARCH

Unfortunately,  then,  it  appears  there  is  very  little  reliable  evidence  about  the
productivity  effects  of  unions.^ In  the  words  of  Addison  and  Hirsch:  "We  conclude
that there is no compelling  evidence that, in general, the net effect  of unions on pro-
ductivity is positive or negative. . ..  Estimated  union-nonunion  productivity  differen-
tials may result from  an entangling of union productivity, price, and wage effects.  Or
we may be observing the outcome of  a competitive process in which  less  productive
unionized  enterprises  have  been  selected  out  of  the  system"  (Addison  and  Hirsch,
1989, p. 83).

Clearly, more empirical research on this topic is needed. In this paper, we exam-
ine research productivity  in 889 Ph.D.-level  academic departments (175 of which are
unionized)  in  public  universities.  This  sample  of  data  has  some  unique  attributes
which  should enable us to avoid  some of the pitfalls  of earlier  studies of the produc-
tivity effects  of unions.

First,  it  is unlikely  that  survivorship  bias  is an  important  source  of  variation  in
productivity  in  this  industry. While  it is true  that  academic  programs  are  terminated
on occasion, such terminations are quite rare and commonly limited to nontraditional
academic  disciplines  (which  are  not  among  the  fields  included  in  our  data  sample).
And  failure  of  an entire  institution  (especially  a public  one)  is virtually  unknown  in
this segment of the higher education  industry.

Second,  the  union  wage  effect  is quite  small  in  academe.  Barbezat  (1989),  for
example, has measured the proportional  salary  advantage of unionized faculty  mem-
bers  at  1.3  to  1.6  percent  (after  controlling  for  numerous  professional  characteris-
tics).-' This  suggests that  any perceptible  productivity  effect  of unions  in academe is
not  merely  a  movement  along  a  stable  marginal  product  curve  but  is,  in  fact,  the
result of a shift  in such a curve.

In  sum,  then,  our  data  set  permits  a  relatively  pure  test  of  the  traditional  vs.
"voice/response"  theories  of  unionism.  In  addition,  our  methodology  allows  for  the
possibility  that  unionization  affects  the  slope  parameters  of  the  production  function
as  well  as  the  efficiency  parameter  in  the  intercept  term.  In  contrast  to  Brown  and
Medoff  (who had data on the percentage of unionized  laborers in each  subject  indus-
try), we have data on individual academic departments (i.e., "firms"), which are orga-
nized  as either union  or nonunion  entities. Thus, following  the suggestion  of Warren
(1985), we employ  appropriate  interaction  terms in our estimated  equations  in  order
to observe  not just  unions'  effects  on the efficiency  of  labor inputs, but  their  effects
on the efficiency  of capital inputs as well.

III.  Model, Data, and Methodology
Institutions  of  higher  education  are  multiproduct  firms,  and  research  output  is just
one portion  of  any  academic  department's  total  output  (see, e.g.,  Cohn  et al.,  1989).
That is, in academe

Q=f(R,T,S), 

(6)


MARK MEADOR and STEPHEN J. K. WALTERS 

377

where  Q is the total output of a department's  faculty  members; R is research  output;
T  is  teaching  output;  and  S  is  institutional  or  community  service  output.  Note  also
(see, e.g.. Graves et al., 1982) that

R^g{K,L,A^,AT.,As,W^,Wj,Ws), 

(7)

where ÍT is a vector of  capital  inputs  available to a department's  faculty  members; L
is  a  vector  of  labor  inputs; A^,  Aj,  and  A^  are  department  members'  abilities  in
research,  teaching,  and  service,  respectively;  and  W¡^, Wj,  and  M^  are  the  depart-
ment's relative remunerations to output of research, teaching, and service.

In order to simplify  equation  (7) for purposes of empirical testing, however, we
make the following  assumptions. First,  we assume that teaching  and service  outputs
exhibit  little  variation  across  departments;  therefore,  the  relative  remunerations  to
these outputs exhibits  little variation  as well. This would be hopelessly  unrealistic  if
our data  encompassed  all  academic  institutions,  but  we thiiik  it is tolerably  realistic
for  our  sample  of  Ph.D.-granting  departments  in  public  institutions.  Such  depart-
ments cannot impose unusually heavy teaching and service requirements if they hope
to  attract  and  retain  faculty  capable  of  performing  the  type  of  research  typically
required  to attract doctoral  students and sustain  a program. Further, by confining  our
study  to public  institutions,  we reduce  the amount  of  variation  in output  that  results
entirely from  variation in institutional  mission. It is possible that the mission (as well
as  the  resource  base)  of  a representative  private  institution  is  significantly  different
from  that  of  a public one — e.g.,  public  universities  may expect  more (or  different)
teaching  or  service  than  better-endowed  private  schools.'* We submit,  however,  that
since our sample includes only departments in public institutions, this source of vari-
ation in output is greatly reduced.^

Second,  since valid  measures  of  the relative abilities  of department  members  at
research,  teaching,  and  service  are  simply  not  available,  we  assume  them  to  be
uniformly  — or at least randomly — distributed across departments. Again, we think
that  the  nature  of  our  data  sample  makes  this  a  reasonable  assumption.  All  Ph.D.-
level  departments  presumably  attempt  to  attract  and  retain  high-quality,  research-
oriented,  terminally-qualified  faculty.  Among  these  departments,  then,  significant
variation  in  any  "objective"  measure  of  raw  ability  (e.g., possession  of  the Ph.D.)  is
unlikely. Any such variation would be further  reduced by our focus on public  institu-
tions. It  may be  argued  that private  schools  (with  their richer  endowments  and,  per-
haps,  lighter  teaching  and  service  burdens)  might  hire  the  most  able  faculty,  but,
again, this  potential  source of  interdepartmental  variation  in  productivity  is  reduced
in our data sample.

We use data compiled by the Conference  Board of Associated Research Councils
(1982), which  gathered  data  on  departments  with doctoral  programs  in  32  academic
disciplines  so that the relative quality  of  these programs  could  be assessed. In  22 of
these disciplines, the data include two alternative  measures of departmental  research
output useful  for estimating a version of equation (7).


378 

JOURNAL OF LABOR RESEARCH

One measure,  which  we denote  as  /í¡,  is simply  a raw  count of journal  articles
published by a department. In the social sciences, articles that appeared during  1978-
1980 in journals covered by the Social Science  Citation Index were counted. In engi-
neering  and the mathematical, physical, or biological  sciences, articles that  appeared
during  1978-1979 in journals covered by the Science  Citation Index were counted. A
second  measure  of  research  output,  which  we  denote  as  /?2,  is  the  Conference
Board's  survey  of  the  mean  rating  of  the  "scholarly  competence  and  achievements"
of a department's  faculty.^

Clearly, neither output  measure is perfect.  Not all articles are of equal  length or
have  equal  significance.  We  might  prefer,  therefore,  a  count  of  standardized  pages
published,  or  a  citations-weighted  article  count,  to  our  Ry  But  even  a  length-  or
impact-adjusted  count  may  inaccurately  measure  research  productivity  in  certain
cases.  Some  disciplines,  for  example,  place  far  greater  emphasis  on  publication  of
books or monographs  than  articles; in other fields, the best measure  of research  out-
put may be patents awarded. Another problem  is that the Conference  Board  counted
articles  over  a  relatively  brief  period.  Academic  research  often  involves  a  lengthy
gestation  period  culminating  in  a  surge  of  publication  activity,  and  there  are  many
fields for  which  the normal publication  "cycle" exceeds the limited  time over  which
the Conference  Board gathered  its data. Table  1 shows the variation  in average  num-
ber  of  articles  per  faculty  member  per  year  across  disciplines.  In  civil  engineering,
for  example, the  average faculty  member  publishes  0.30  articles  per  year —  or  one
every 3.33 years — far greater than the two-year counting period used by the Confer-
ence  Board.  If  a department's  observed  level  of  productivity  is  the  sum  of  "perma-
nent" and "transitory" components, shortening  the counting  period  may increase  the
likelihood  that  a "transitory"  phenomenon  will  lead  to under-  or  overestimates  of  a
department's true productivity.

Our /?2, on the other hand, has many of the virtues and vices of standard  surveys
of program quality. It is true that /îj  is simply a "consensus opinion" about the schol-
arly  achievements  of  a department's  faculty,  and evaluators'  opinions  may  be  based
on  out-of-date  information  or may  be influenced  by factors  unrelated  to their  peers'
research. On the other hand, surveys give evaluators an opportunity  to weigh the sig-
nificance  of published  research — of  all types — in forming  their opinions. What  is
more,  survey  respondents  can  weigh  a lifetime  of  contributions  to a discipline,  and
are not forced  to consider only what a particular faculty  member has done lately. We
cannot  say with certainty  that /?2  is necessarily  superior to R^ as a measure of  long-
term research output, but we think it is clear that it has some attributes that Ä,  lacks.
(And, as Table  1 shows, the two measures  are positively  and significantly  correlated
for  all  22 disciplines  in  this  study). In consequence,  we estimate  a version  of  equa-
tion (7) using both measures of research output.

The  Conference  Board  study  also  contains  department-level  data  on  four  key

inputs — two types of labor input and two types of capital input:

Lj  =  the number of full-time  faculty  in a department as of December,  1980;


MARK MEADOR and STEPHEN J. K. WALTERS 

379

Table  1

Variation in Individual Publication Performance for  22 Disciplines;
Correlation between Total Publications in a Department (R^) and

Survey Ratings on Scholarly Achievements of a Department's Faculty

(R2), for  889 Departments in Public Universities

Field

Anthropology
Biochemistry
Botany
Cell Biology
Chemical  Engineering
Chemistry
Civil  Engineering
Computer Science
Economics
Electrical  Engineering
Geography
Geosciences
Mathematics
Mechanical  Engineering
Microbiology
Physics
Physiology
Political  Science
Psychology
Sociology
Statistics
Zoology

*Pearson correlation  coefficient

Articles per faculty
member per year

Correlation*

between /?, and R2

0.60
2.45
1.05
3.00
0.45
1.84
0.30
0.98
0.68
0.49
0.45
1.27
0.56
0.30
1.27
1.60
0.52
0.64
1.02
0.81
0.60
0.45

0.72
0.84
0.37
0.63
0.65
0.76
0.67
0.74
0.67
0.81
0.79
0.72
0.79
0.77
0.62
0.86
0.68
0.73
0.72
0.81
0.57
0.60


380 

JOURNAL OF LABOR RESEARCH

¿2 =  the  number  of  enrolled  full-  or  part-time  doctoral  students  in  a  depart-

ment as of December,  1980;

Kj =  a composite index  (values ranging  from  -3  to -f-3) describing  the  size of

the library^ in the university in which the department is located; and

^2 =  the fraction  of a department's members holding research  grants from  the
Alcohol,  Drug  Abuse,  and  Mental  Health  Administration,  the  National
Institutes of Health, or the National Science Foundation  at any time dur-
ing  1978-1980,

Given the preceding  assumptions,  simplifications,  and  data, we  would  estimate

the following  equation:

(8)
where  all  variables  are  as  previously  defined  and  M  is  a randomly  distributed  error
term.

+ äK^+eK2  + u, 

R-a-irbL^-i-cL2 

In order to determine if unionization  is significantly  related to academic research
productivity, however, we apply the familiar  specification  for  the Chow  test to equa-
tion  (8), We include  a union  dummy  variable  (U = 1, if  unionized)  and  the  dummy
times each of the explanatory  variables in the regressions to allow for the  estimation
of separate union/nonunion  intercepts and slope coefficients.  Thus, we have:

^^ 

2 

^ 

(9)

In  this  formulation,  a  is  the  intercept  coefficient  for  nonunion  departments  and  the
slope coefficients  b, c,  d,  and  e represent  the  marginal  effects  on research  output  of
our measures of labor and capital in nonunion departments,^ As such, we expect that
b,  c,  d,  and  e  all  will  be  significantly  positive.  The  value  of  a'  is  the  incremental
effect  of  unionization  on  the  intercept  coefficient;  the  incremental  effects  of  union-
ization on the productivity of Lj, L2, íTj, and K2 are represented by b',  c', d',  and  e',
respectively. If unionization  has no overall effect  on research  productivity, a',b',  c',
d',  and e'  all should equal zero,

IV,  Empirical  Results
Table  2  contains  OLS  estimates  of  equation  (9)  for  both  available  measures  of
research  output, K[  and ^2- Each regression  is estimated  with pooled  cross-sectional
data  from  22 academic  disciplines.  Because  there  are  significant  differences  among
discipline  means  for  most  of  the  variables  in  the  model,  we  include  discipline
dummy  variables  in the pooled  regressions. Thus, our estimates  are based  on  devia-
tions  from  discipline  means  rather  than  overall  sample  means. The  dummies  allow
for  separate  discipline  intercepts  and  are  designed  to  pick  up  discipline-specific
effects  on either /?[ or /?2 that are not explained by the basic model.^

The  results  reported  in  Table  2  indicate  that  there  is  a  significant  relationship
between  unionization  and  both  our  measures  of research  output.  In  both  the R^  and


MARK MEADOR and STEPHEN J. K. WALTERS

OLS Estimates of Equation (9) for  Two Measures of Research Output,

(n=889)

Table 2

381

and R2

Coefficient,
Independent
Variable

a'U

b'L^U

cL,

dK,

d' i

e' K^U

Adjusted/? 2
F-statistic

Dependent
Variable: R,

Dependent
Variable; R j

5.45
(1.32)
0.572 ***
(8.00)
-0.0331
(0.214)
0.156***
(7.36)
-0.0844 **
(2.08)
4.39 ***
(5.14)
-3.38
(1.43)
0.Í98***
(4.51)
-0.123*
(1.66)
0.631
3.30 ***

-0.213 **
(2.16)
0.0197  ***

(11.6)

0.00560
(1.52)
0.00432  ***
(8'.58)
-0.001825 *
(1.89)
0.230 ***

(11.3)
-0.156***
(2.77)
0.0162  ***

(15.5)

0.000161
(0.910)
0.723
4.68 ***

•  (*•,  ***) Significant  at  10% (5%, 1%)  level
Notes: Regressions  are  estimated  with  discipline  dummies,  which  are  not  reported.  Absolute  values  of  (-statistics  are
reported  in parentheses below the estimated coefficients.  The repotted  F-statistic  is for the null hypothesis that  a',
b'. c', d'.  and e' are jointly equal to 0.

^2  regressions,  the  null  hypothesis  that  unionization  has  no overall  effect,  i.e.,  that
a'  = b'  = c'  = d'  = e'  = 0, is rejected  at a one percent significance  level. Note  further
that seven of the ten unionization coefficients  are negative; none of the three positive
coefficients  are significant  at a ten percent  level. In the R^ regression,  b',  c\  d',  and
e'  all carry  a negative sign, with c'  and e'  significant  at the five percent  and ten per-
cent  levels. In  the R2 regression,  a\  c',  and  d'  are significantly  negative  at  the five,
ten,  and  one  percent  levels.  In  sum,  we  find  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  unions
improve  efficiency  in  academe  —  via  a  "voice/response"  mechanism  or  any  other.
Indeed, our data support the traditional view that unions do not enhance productivity
but reduce it, diminishing the marginal productivity of both labor and capital.


382 

JOURNAL OF LABOR RESEARCH

To get a rough idea as to unions' net contribution to research output, we can use
our estimates  of a',  b',  c',  d',  and  e'  to calculate  the incremental  effect  of  unioniza-
tion on each output measure at the overall sample means of L,, Lj' ^l» ^nd Xj. Based
on our /?j regression, we find that a unionized department with mean input character-
istics  will  produce  4.45  fewer  publications  per  year  than  a comparable  nonunion
department.  Relative  to  the  overall  sample  mean  of  25.2  publications  per  year,  this
represents a 17.4 percent reduction. Based on our R^ regression, unionization  is asso-
ciated  with  a 0.254  reduction  in  the  index  of  scholarly  achievement.  Relative  to  the
overall sample mean index value of 2.83, this represents a reduction of 8.98 percent.

V.  Summary and Conclusions
Previous  empirical  tests  of  unions'  effects  on  productivity  are  afflicted  with  several
important  problems.  While  many  such  studies  have  concluded  that  unions  increase
labor  productivity  —  perhaps  because  unions  constitute  an  efficiency-enhancing
"voice/response" mechanism — it is possible that these estimates are (a) the result of
unions'  effects  on wages or (b) the outcome of a dynamic process in which less pro-
ductive  unionized  firms  are  "selected  out," and  thus  are  under-represented  in cross-
sectional data.

We think that a study of unionism in academe is relatively free of such problems.
Note  first  that  several  studies  document  that  the  union  wage  premiun\  is  small  in
academe  —  as  little  as  1.3  to  1.6  percent,  according  to  Barbezat  (1989).  Absent  a
union wage effect,  then, we can have greater confidence  that any observed union pro-
ductivity  effect  in  our  sample  is  not  merely  a  movement  along  a  stable  marginal
product  curve but rather a result of a shift  in such a curve. Note also that  we restrict
our  analysis  to  Ph.D.-level  departments  residing  in  public  institutions;  since  the
"failure"  of  such  programs  is  an  extraordinarily  rare  event,  it  is  unlikely  that  our
results  are  affected  by  the  problem  of  "survivorship  bias"  that  afflicts  other  cross-
sectional studies.

We  examine  research  productivity  using  two  alternative  measures  of  faculty
research  output  (a count  of published  articles, and a peer evaluation  of the  scholarly
achievements of faculty); our methodology allows for the possibility that unionization
affects  the slope parameters of the production functions  as well as the intercept terms.
We find no support in our data for  the hypothesis that unions enhance productivity  in
academe. Seven of the ten unionization parameters in our equations are negative; five
of  these  parameters  are  significant  at generally  accepted  confidence  levels. None of
the three positive unionization parameters are significant. If we compare departments
with amounts of labor and capital equal to the mean values for our sample, we calcu-
late  that  unionization  reduces  output  of  published  articles  by  about  17 percent,  and
reduces a more subjective measure of scholarly achievement by about 9 percent.

One  explanation  for  these results  is that  unions, though  they  do not raise  aver-
age  academic  salaries  by  very  much,  may  alter the distribution  of  returns  to  faculty
members.  Indeed,  Barbezat  (1989)  found  that  unionization  increases  the  retum  to


MARK MEADOR and STEPHEN J. K. WALTERS 

383

seniority  and  decreases  the  retum  to  several  measures  of  merit,  including  an  indi-
vidual's output of published books and articles. Clearly, when the pecuniary retum to
research  falls  relative to other  activities,  we should  expect  less research  and  more of
the other activities.

The key question is what these other activities might be. If unions simply substi-
tute the passage of time (i.e., seniority)  for  research  output as a criterion  in compen-
sation  decisions,  then  we  might  conclude  that  unions'  negative  effect  on  research
productivity  is  inefficient,  leading  to  the  substitution  of,  say,  leisure  for  academic
output. It is possible, however, that unionization  produces  an alteration  in the output
mix  of  faculty.  We  are  aware  of  one  case  (though  not  at  a  Ph.D.-level  institution)
where  a  newly-unionized  faculty  voted  to  require  all  full-time  professors  to  hold  a
minimum of nine office  hours per week. To the extent that this work rule was a bind-
ing  constraint,  it  may  have  reduced  research  output  but  increased  the  quantity  or
quality of teaching output.

Future  research  should  be  aimed  at  determining  whether  such  output  substitu-
tion is a significant  feature  of academic  unions and, if it is, whether this  substantially
alters the conclusion  that faculty  unions reduce  efficiency.  One promising  avenue of
inquiry  is  the  nonparametric  production  frontier  approach  pioneered  by  Fare  et  al.
(1985), and used by Bymes et al. (1985) to assess the impact of unions on productivity
in surface  coal  mining. The nonparametric  approach  is readily  applicable  to a multi-
product  setting,  and  also  may  allow  us  to  identify  the  composition  of  any  union/
nonunion  productivity  differential  (e.g.,  technical  efficiency  vs.  scale  efficiency)  as
well  as  its  magnitude  and  direction.  Such  inquiry  is, however,  beyond  the  scope  of
the present paper.


384 

JOURNAL OF LABOR  RESEARCH

NOTES

'Additional  studies  that  applied  the Brown-Medoff  methodology  and found  positive  union  productivity
effects  include Frantz (1976). Connerton et al. (1983), Allen (1986.  1987), and Register (1988).

^Studies  which  eschew  the Brown-Medoff  methodology  are rare. One such, by Ehrenberg  et al. (1983),
could detect no significant  union productivity  effect  in a sample of cross-sectional  data on 260 municipal
libraries. Byrnes et al. (1988) applied a novel mathematical programming  technique to two samples of data
on  U.S. surface  coal  mines; they  found  a large and significant  positive  union  productivity  effect  in both.
Only the former  study, however, is prospectively free of survivorship bias.

•'This  is broadly  consistent  with  earlier  studies  of the faculty  union  wage  effect.  For example.  Hu  and
Leslie (1982) concluded that positive wage effects  disappear after  adjusting  for differences  in cost of living,
and  Freeman  (1978)  found  that the union  salary  premium  was a mere  four  percent  by 1976-1977. though
he estimated it had been about ten percent in 1970-1971.

••Cohn et al. (1989) found  significant  differences  between the cost structures of public and private universi-
ties, though de Groot et al. (1991) found no significant  effects  of ownership on production  efficiency.

'Note  also that even if there is significant  remaining  variation  in nature of mission  and input quality,  this
will only affect  our results if these factors are correlated  with  unionization.

*The Conference Board asked survey respondents lo "check the box next to the term that most closely cor-
responds to your judgment of the quality of faculty" in specific  departments, considering  "only the schol-
arly  competence  and achievements  of the faculty."  The descriptive  terms  were  "distinguished."  "strong."
"good."  "adequate,"  "marginal." "not sufficient  for doctoral  education."  and "don't  know  well  enough to
evaluate." The survey was conducted  with great care. The population of evaluators equaled or exceeded 20
percent of the faculty  population  in the programs  under evaluation.  Each evaluator  was asked to consider
no more than 50 programs in her or his discipline (and none was asked to consider his or her own institu-
tion).  All but ten percent of the evaluators  were  provided  all names  of faculty  members  associated  with
each program under review.

^The index scores are actually a weighted  average of ten measures which the Conference  Board found (by
means of principle  component  analysis)  to be most  closely  related  to library  size. The ten measures are:
volumes  added and held,  microforms  held, current  serials received,  expenditures for library  materials, for
binding, and for salaries, other operating expenditures, professional  staff, and nonprofessional  staff.

^Typically, production  functions  are assumed  to be multiplicative,  and estimable  linear  functional  forms
are  obtained  by taking  logarithms  of all variables.  In this  case,  however,  several  of our series  include
observations that are less than or equal to zero. Rather than impose arbitrary transformations  to remove the
negative and zero values, we estimate the models using data without any logarithmic  transformations.

^Although the separate discipline intercepts are not reported  in Table 2, the discipline intercepts differ sig-
nificantly  in both  the /?, and i?2 regressions. Based on the t\uU hypothesis that each discipline shares the
same intercept, relevant F-statistics  are 19.7 for the R^ regression  and 18.7 for the Äj regression; both are
significant  at the one percent level.

REFERENCES

Addison, John T. and Barry T. Hirsch. "Union  Effects  on Productivity. Profits, and Growth: Has the Long

Run Arrived?" Joumai  of Labor Economics 7 (January  1989): 72-Í05.

Allen, Steven G. "Unionized Construction  Workers Are More Productive." Quarterly Journal of Economics

99 (May 1984): 251-74.

.  "The Effect  of Unionism  on Productivity  in Privately  and Publicly  Owned  Hospitals and

Nursing Homes''  Journal of Labor Research 7 (Winter  1986): 59-68.


MARK MEADOR and STEPHEN J, K, WALTERS 

385

_,  "Can  Union  Labor  Ever  Cost  Less?"  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics  102  (May  1987):

347-73,

Barbezat,  Debra A, "The Effect  of Collective  Bargaining on Salaries in Higher Education," Industrial and

Labor Relations Review 42 (April  1989): 443-55,

Brown,  CharJes  and  James  L,  Medoff,  "Trade  Unions  in  the  Production  Process," Journal  of  Political

Economy 86 (June  1978): 355-78,

Bymes, Patricia, Rolf Fare, Shawna Grosskopf,  and C, A, Knox Lovell, "The Effect  of Unions on Produc-

tivity: U,S, Surface Mining of Coal," Management Science 34 (September  1988): 1037-53,

Carnegie  Foundation  for  the  Advancement  of  Teaching,  The Control of  the  Campus.  Lawrenceville,  NJ:

Princeton University Press, 1982,

Clark, Kim B, "The Impact of Unionization  on Productivity: A Case Study," Industrial and Labor Relations

Review 34 (July  1980): 466-84,

_,  "Unionization  and  Firm  Performance:  The  Impact  on  Profits,  Growth,  and  Productivity,"

American  Economic Review 74 (December  1984): 893-919,

Cohn,  Elchanan,  Sherrie  L, W, Rhine,  and  Maria  C,  Santos,  "Institutions  of  Higher  Education  as  Multi-
Product  Firms: Economies  of  Scale and Scope," Review of Economics and Statistics 71 (May  1989):
284-90,

Conference  Board  of  Associated  Research  Councils,  Committee  on  an  Assessment  of  Quality-Related
Characteristics  of Research-Doctorate  Programs  in the United  States, Jones, L,V,, G,  Lindzey, and P,
E, Coggeshall  (eds,). An Assessment of Research-Doctorate Programs in the United States, Vols,  1-5,
Washington, D,C,: National Academy Press, 1982,

Connerton, Marguerite, Richard B, Freeman, and James L, Medoff,  "Industrial  Relations and  Productivity:

A Study of the U,S, Bituminous Coal Industry," Mimeo, Harvard University, 1983,

Dayal,  Sahab,  "Collective  Bargaining  Among  Academic  Professionals:  An  Analysis  of  Issues  and  Out-

comes," Joumal  of Collective Negotiations in the Public Sector  18 (1989): 207-16,

de  Groot,  Hans,  Walter  W,  McMahon,  and  J,  Fredericks  Volkwein,  "The  Cost  Structure  of  American

Research Universities," Review of Economics and Statistics 13 (August  1991): 424-31,

Ehrenberg, Ronald G,, Daniel R, Sherman, and Joshua L, Schwarz, "Unions and Productivity  in the Public
Sector:  A Study  of  Municipal  Libraries," Industrial and Labor  Relations Review 36  (January  1983):
199-213,

Fare,  Rolf,  Shawna  Grosskopf,  and  C,  A,  Knox  Lovell,  The Measurement  of  Efficiency  of  Production.

Hingham, Mass,: Kluwer-Nijhoff,  1985,

Frantz, John,  "The  Impact  of  Trade  Unions  on  Productivity  in  the  Wood  Household  Furniture  Industry,"

Honors thesis. Harvard University, 1976,

Freeman,  Richard  B,  "Individual  Mobility  and  Union  Voice  in  the  Labor  Market," American  Economic

Review 66 (May  1976): 361-68,

,  "Should  We  Organize?  The  Effects  of  Faculty  Unionism  on  Academic  Compensation,"

Working Paper No, 301, National Bureau of Economic Research, November  1978,

and James Medoff,  What Do Unions Do? New York: Basic Books, 1984,

Graves,  Philip  E,,  James  R,  Marchand,  and  Randall  Thompson,  "Economics  Departmental  Rankings:
Research  Incentives, Constraints, and  Efficiency,"  American  Economic  Review 11  (December  1982):
1131-41,

Hirsch,  Barry  T,  and  Albert N, Link, "Unions, Productivity, and  Productivity  Growth," Journal of  Labor

Research 5 (Winter  1984): 29-37,


386 

JOURNAL OF LABOR RESEARCH

Hu, Teh Wei, and Larry  L. Leslie. "The Effects  of Collective  Bargaining on College Faculty  Salaries  and

Compensaûon"  Applied Economics  14 (June  1982): 269-77.

Jordan, John M., Mark Meador, and  Stephen J. K. Walters. "Effects  of Department  Size and  Organization
on  the  Research  Productivity  of  Academic  Economists." Economics  of  Education  Review  1  (1988):
252-55.

_.  "Academic  Research  Productivity,  Department  Size  and  Organization:  Further  Results."

Economics of Education Review 8 (1989): 345-52.

Laband,  David N. "An Evaluation  of 50  'Ranked'  Economics Departments — by Quantity and Quality of
Faculty  Publication  and Graduate  Student Productivity." Southem  Economic Joumal  52 (July  1985):
216-40.

Lovell, C. A.  Knox,  Robin  C.  Sickles, and  Ronald  S.  Warren, Jr.  "The  Effects  of  Unionization  on  Labor

Productivity: Some Additional Evidence." Joumal  of Labor Research 9 (Winter  1988): 55-63.

Ormsby, Joseph G.,  and  L.arry  R. Watts. "The  Effect  of  Umonization  on Organiiational  Commitmenv. A
Longitudinal  Study  of a University  Faculty." Joumal  of  Collective Negotiations  in the Public  Sector
18 (1989): 327-36.

Register, Charles A. "Wages, Productivity, and Costs in Union and Nonunion Hospitals." Joumal  of Labor

Research 9 (Fall  1988): 325-45.

Reynolds, Morgan O. Power and Privilege: Labor  Unions in America. New York: Universe,  1984.

'Trade  Unions  in  the  Production  Process  Reconsidered."  Joumal  of  Political Economy  94

(April  1986): 443-47.

Warren,  Ronald  S.  "The  Effect  of  Unionization  on  Labor  Productivity:  Some  Time-Series  Evidence."

Joumal  of Labor Research 6 (Spring  1985): 199-207.

Wessels,  Walter  J.  "The  Effects  of  Unions  on  Employment  and  Productivity:  An  Unresolved  Conflict."

Joumal  of Labor Economics 3 (January  1985): 101-108.


Copyright of Journal of Labor Research is the property of Springer Science & Business Media
B.V. and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv
without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print,
download, or email articles for individual use.

The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.
The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.

