ARTICLE IN PRESS

Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec

Managing Editor:
G. WILLIAM SCHWERT

Founding Editor:
MICHAEL C. JENSEN

Advisory Editors:
EUGENE F. FAMA
KENNETH FRENCH
WAYNE MIKKELSON
JAY SHANKEN
ANDREI SHLEIFER
CLIFFORD W. SMITH, JR.
RENÉ M. STULZ

Associate Editors:
HENDRIK BESSEMBINDER
JOHN CAMPBELL
HARRY DeANGELO
DARRELL DUFFIE
BENJAMIN ESTY
RICHARD GREEN
JARRAD HARFORD
PAUL HEALY
CHRISTOPHER JAMES
SIMON JOHNSON
STEVEN KAPLAN
TIM LOUGHRAN
MICHELLE LOWRY
KEVIN MURPHY
MICAH OFFICER
LUBOS PASTOR
NEIL PEARSON
JAY RITTER
RICHARD GREEN
RICHARD SLOAN
JEREMY C. STEIN
JERRY WARNER
MICHAEL WEISBACH
KAREN WRUCK

Volume 88, Issue 1, April 2008
ISSN 0304-405X

JOURNAL OF
Financial
ECONOMICS

Published by ELSEVIER
in collaboration with the
WILLIAM E. SIMON GRADUATE SCHOOL 
OF BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION, 
UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Venture capital reputation and investment performance$

Rajarishi Nahata

Baruch College, City University of New York, New York, NY 10010, USA

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 5 July 2007
Received in revised form
23 October 2007
Accepted 26 November 2007
Available online 13 September 2008

JEL classiﬁcation:
G24

Keywords:
Venture capital
Reputation
Certiﬁcation
Initial public offerings
Mergers and acquisitions (M&A)

I propose a new measure of venture capital (VC) ﬁrm reputation and analyze its
performance implications on private companies. Controlling for portfolio company
quality and other VC-speciﬁc factors including experience, connectedness, syndication,
industry competition, exit conditions, and investment environment, I ﬁnd companies
backed by more reputable VCs by initial public offering (IPO) capitalization share (based
on cumulative market capitalization of IPOs backed by the VC), are more likely to exit
successfully, access public markets faster, and have higher asset productivity at IPOs.
Further tests suggest VCs’
IPO Capitalization share effectively captures both VC
screening and monitoring expertise. My ﬁndings have ﬁnancial implications for limited
partners and entrepreneurs regarding their VC-sorting activities.

& 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1.

Introduction

Reputation of ﬁnancial services providers and the cost-
beneﬁt analyses of association with reputed actors are
important considerations for companies interested in
raising capital. Absent credible and adequate information
about the companies, external investors tend to rely on
the reputation of the companies’ associates as certiﬁers of
the companies’ own quality. For example, a substantial
body of
research exists in the realms of auditing,
investment banking, and venture capital
that
examines the performance implications of reputation of
ﬁnancial services providers on public ﬁrms, both in the

(VC)

$ I thank an anonymous referee for very valuable comments. Linda
Allen, Wolfgang Bessler, Nick Bollen, Paul Chaney, Shulamith Gross, Matt
Johnson, Julia Kwok, Craig Lewis, Ron Masulis, Hans Stoll, and seminar
participants at Baruch College, FMA Annual Meetings, FMA European
Meetings, and Vanderbilt University provided helpful comments and
suggestions. I gratefully acknowledge the ﬁnancial support from the
Baruch College Fund, PSC-CUNY, and the Financial Markets Research
Center at Vanderbilt.

E-mail address: raj_nahata@baruch.cuny.edu

0304-405X/$ - see front matter & 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2007.11.008

short-term (for instance, IPO underpricing) and long-run.1
However, academic work documenting the impact of
reputation of ﬁnancial intermediaries on performance of
private ﬁrms is limited.2 Given the information-opacity

1 See, among others, Beatty (1989), Feltham, Hughes, and Simunic
(1991), Hogan (1997), Menon and Williams (1991), and Michaely and
Shaw (1995) for studies on auditor reputation, Beatty and Ritter (1986),
Carter and Manaster (1990), Carter, Dark, and Singh (1998), and Titman
and Trueman (1986) on investment bank reputation and IPO under-
pricing, McLaughlin, Saﬁeddine, and Vasudevan (2000) on impact of
investment bank reputation on long-run performance of seasoned equity
issuers, and Lerner (1994a), Gompers (1996), and Krishnan, Masulis, and
Singh (2006) on inﬂuence of venture capital reputation on initial public
offerings and their long-run performance. Also see Megginson and Weiss
(1991), Lee and Wahal (2004), and Li and Masulis (2006) for the impact
of VC certiﬁcation in initial public offerings.

2 As expected the VC literature provides most of the evidence in this
area. Lerner (1994a) concludes that seasoned venture capitalists appear
to be particularly proﬁcient at taking companies public near market
peaks. Gompers (1996) conﬁrms that younger VC ﬁrms strive for quick
formation of reputation in the VC industry by taking their portfolio
companies public sooner. Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu (2007) analyze
the positive impact of VC ﬁrms’ network centrality on the likelihood of
successful exits of their portfolio companies. Sorensen (2007) measures


128

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

ARTICLE IN PRESS

of private ﬁrms, the certiﬁcation-based approach relying
on ﬁnancial intermediaries’ reputation capital assumes
extreme importance for the performance of such ﬁrms
that lack a publicly known track record. Venture capital
offers a fertile area to study the performance implications
of reputation on private ﬁrms and that is the main subject
of this study.

Although contextual use of measures of VC reputation
exists in VC literature as mentioned earlier (footnote #2),
there is little research on formulating a consistent
measure of VC reputation or evaluating the impact of
diverse measures suggested by the literature on VC
investment outcomes, in a rigorous econometric frame-
work. This is surprising considering both the importance
of reputation in the VC industry and the preponderance of
studies in other areas, notably the auditing and invest-
ment banking literatures that highlight the performance
implications of reputation of ﬁnancial intermediaries on
public ﬁrms. This study has two primary objectives. First,
it provides a comparable evaluation of different VC
reputation measures that can be easily constructed from
publicly available data, and relates them to multiple
yardsticks of company performance, the likelihood of a
successful exit being one of them. In so doing, I propose a
new measure of VC reputation that consistently predicts
future performance of private ﬁrms. Second, the study
directly controls for connections and networks that
reputable VC ﬁrms are more likely to be tied into, and
documents the performance consequences of VC connec-
tions as distinct from those arising out of VC reputation
that
is largely based on the VC’s ability and past
performance.

Measures of VC experience such as age, cumulative
aggregate investment, and number of investment rounds
have been used in previous studies such as Lerner (1994a),
Gompers (1996), Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu (2007), and
Sorensen (2007). In addition, Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu
(2007)’s measures of VC network centrality are also likely
to be correlated with VC reputation. After accounting for
these measures of VC experience, connectedness, and
network
additional
VC-speciﬁc factors that are likely to impact performance
such as syndication,
investment
environment, and exit conditions, I show that one of my
measures of VC reputation emerges as the only consis-
tently robust predictor of VC and portfolio company
performance.3

industry competition,

and controlling

centrality,

for

(footnote continued)
the differential impact of VC screening and value-addition services on
IPO success and ﬁnds companies funded by more experienced VCs are
more likely to go public primarily due to their ability to source better
investments. By way of contrast, Hsu (2004) analyzes the costs borne by
the entrepreneurs for afﬁliating with more reputable VCs.

3 In this study, my intention is not to separate VC reputation from VC
experience or ability or to show their individual impact on VC ﬁrm or
portfolio company performance. Rather, I am interested in formulating a
measure of VC reputation that consistently predicts VC investment
outcomes. Moreover, reputation is diligently built upon experience,
ability, and past performance, and is expected to broadly incorporate
facets of each. In that sense, VC reputation, at least in the context of this
study, should be viewed as an inclusive measure of VC experience,
ability, and past performance. Nonetheless, I use alternate measures of

While as a certiﬁcation agent, VC reputation is
important for the portfolio companies, the VCs themselves
are also concerned about their reputation if they seek to
be active long-term players in the ﬁnancial markets. Given
the highly networked nature of
the venture capital
industry and the repeated need for funds, maintaining
and enhancing reputation is critical
for the venture
capitalists. A good reputation attracts potential investors
and helps in developing useful working relationships with
entrepreneurs, lawyers, investment bankers, auditors, and
others who provide useful services to portfolio companies
(Sahlman, 1990). Reputable VCs can also beneﬁt from less
costly and larger fund raising for future partnerships. As
well, reputation affects VC compensation, which in
established funds is signiﬁcantly more sensitive to
performance, as shown by Gompers and Lerner (1999a).
Consequently to preserve and enhance reputation, repu-
table VC ﬁrms, to a certain extent, are more likely to invest
in companies that have a greater potential to succeed.

The resulting selection bias is important to control for
to rule out concerns that the performance of VC ﬁrms and
their portfolio companies may be due to the quality of the
companies themselves rather than VCs’ reputation and
their capabilities. In other words, do reputable VCs truly
add incremental value to their portfolio companies, or do
they simply have access to a more promising investment
opportunity set? To address concerns regarding selection
I develop a proxy for capturing the portfolio
bias,
company’s quality, and explicitly control
for the co-
investment networks and syndication relationships of
the VCs. Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu (2007) argue that
VCs that actively syndicate with other industry partici-
pants and are better connected have superior access to
deal ﬂow, investment opportunity sets, and information.
In addition,
I use a variation of Heckman’s (1979)
endogeneity correction procedure, and ﬁnd the results to
be robust.4

In the Heckman correction procedure, I ﬁrst model a
reputable VC’s likelihood of
investing in a portfolio
company in a probit framework. The empirical speciﬁca-
tion of the selection equation reﬂects characteristics of the
portfolio company and the VC ﬁrm, location of the VC
ﬁrm, and industry conditions at the time of initial VC
funding. In the second-step regressions, I add the inverse
Mills ratio received from the ﬁrst-step probit regression as
an additional regressor for estimating each measure of

(footnote continued)
VC experience, previously used in the literature, as additional control
variables to show the robustness of my results.

4 Sorensen (2007) employs a structural model to separate the effects
of sorting from value-addition to study their individual inﬂuences on the
IPO rates. However, estimation of the structural model is numerically
intensive and only parsimonious speciﬁcations are numerically tractable.
In contrast, I employ a richer speciﬁcation to include all variables that
have been previously shown to or that can possibly inﬂuence the
performance of portfolio companies. Furthermore, Sorensen’s focus is on
measuring the differential impact of VC screening and value-addition on
IPO success. In contrast my focus is on proposing a new measure of VC
reputation that is robust across several measures of performance and
should ideally reﬂect both VC monitoring and screening expertise. In
addition, when I control for Sorensen’s measure of VC experience in my
analyses, I ﬁnd my results to be robust.


ARTICLE IN PRESS

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

129

company performance. My ensuing analyses provide
evidence consistent with Sorensen (2007) that more
reputable VC ﬁrms select superior VC investments as well
as add incremental value to their portfolio companies.

I use two VC reputation measures to relate to the
outcome of VC investments. The ﬁrst is based on the
cumulative market capitalization of IPOs backed by the VC
ﬁrm in the IPO market. As Gompers and Lerner (1999b)
point out, IPOs are the most successful of all venture exits
and fetch the highest returns to the venture investors. In
guiding a portfolio company from a private start-up to an
IPO, the VC ﬁrm adds to its reputation of being a
successful venture investor. Furthermore, an IPO exit
creates a ‘buzz’ and enhances VC visibility in the industry.
For each VC ﬁrm, I cumulate the dollar market value of all
companies taken public by the VC ﬁrm until a given
calendar year and normalize it by the aggregate market
value of all VC-backed companies that went public until
the same calendar year. Kaplan and Schoar (2005) report a
fair degree of return persistence in the private equity
industry, and Megginson and Weiss (1991) and Krishnan,
Masulis, and Singh (2006) argue that VCs enjoying
continuing success create a greater visibility for them-
selves. The cumulative nature of the measure of VC
reputation captures this effect.

My second measure of VC reputation is based on the
VC’s share of aggregate investment in the VC industry.
This measure is motivated by two observations. First, a
higher share of aggregate investment denotes a higher
share of fund commitments by limited partners (LPs) who
select and invest in VC funds largely based on their
reputation.5 Second, Hsu (2004) shows that start-ups are
often willing to turn down higher valuation offers in favor
of more reputable VCs even if valuation offers are lower.
This implies reputable VCs have a larger investment
opportunity set and are likely to have a higher share of
aggregate VC investment as well. To create the second
measure, for each VC ﬁrm, I cumulate its dollar investment
until a given calendar year and normalize it by the overall
aggregate investment in the VC industry until the same
calendar year.

The empirical analysis relates measures of VC reputa-
tion to the performance of portfolio companies whose VC
funding occurred between 1991 and 2001. I ﬁrst examine
whether the portfolio company achieved a successful
exit—IPO or acquisition—by the beginning of 2006 in a
logit framework. Controlling for a variety of factors known
to affect VC ﬁrm performance, I ﬁnd reputable VC ﬁrms
are more likely to lead their companies to successful exits.
This evidence holds when I analyze the performance of
individual VC investments as well as the performance of
the lead VC ﬁrm at the portfolio company level.

Second, I investigate whether or not reputable VC ﬁrms
are more likely to speed up a portfolio company’s exit. To
analyze this, I use the time to exit Cox hazard models,
which also account for the right-censoring since compa-
nies in existence beyond December 2005 may yet exit

5 The correlation of aggregate VC investment and LPs’

funds

commitment, measured between 1980 and 2005 exceeds 0.98.

successfully. I ﬁnd that reputable VCs are more likely to
exit successfully with a lower expected duration. This is
valid for both individual VC investments as well as the
lead VC ﬁrm at the portfolio company level.

Third, when I restrict the sample to successful exits,
I ﬁnd IPOs are associated with more reputable VCs, even
relative to acquisitions. Thus, a monotonic pattern
emerges in which top brand VCs are more likely to be
associated with IPOs, followed by medium brand VCs with
acquisitions, and the least reputable VCs with unsuccess-
ful exits. Since IPOs, on average, fetch the highest returns
to the venture investors followed by acquisitions, this
pattern is anticipated as the best VCs are expected to both
select and nurture their portfolio companies toward the
most successful exit. My VC reputation measure ade-
quately captures this pattern, which is a testament to its
robustness.

Finally, I examine the asset productivity of companies,
speciﬁcally analyzing the ratio of revenues to total book
assets when the portfolio companies go public.6 Asset
productivity is a means to determine the efﬁciency by
which a company converts its investment in assets into
sales. I ﬁnd that companies backed by more reputable VCs
have higher asset productivity at the time of their IPOs.
Reputable VCs are more likely to provide better value-
added services that
translate into higher operating
efﬁciency for their portfolio companies.

I apply the VC reputation measures to my analysis in a
manner so that reverse causality (better performance
leads to a better reputation) is unlikely to explain the
observed performance patterns. Speciﬁcally, I measure the
reputation of a given VC ﬁrm at the end of the year prior to
the year of its ﬁrst investment in the portfolio company.
Since a substantial time gap is likely to exist between the
ﬁrst investment by the VC ﬁrm and its exit, I relate a VC
ﬁrm’s past reputation to its future performance. Thus, by
construction, the reputation measures are free of look-
ahead bias. I ﬁnd my ﬁrst VC reputation measure, based
on the cumulative dollar capitalization of IPOs backed by
the VC, to be a consistently better predictor of VC
investment and portfolio company performance. Addi-
tional tests suggest VC’s dollar capitalization share of IPOs
effectively captures both VC screening and monitoring
expertise. The Appendix provides a ranking of the top 30
VC ﬁrms, by VC’s dollar capitalization share in the IPO
market. The second reputation measure, based on VC’s
aggregate investment in the venture capital industry, is
not as consistent
in predicting portfolio companies’
performance.

This study differs from the existing literature on VC
reputation and experience primarily in three ways. First,
I test and propose a new measure of VC reputation that is

6 I do not analyze M&A exits on this dimension due to non-
availability of target-speciﬁc ﬁnancial information in a wide majority of
cases. Most acquisitions are reported to the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) as 8K ﬁlings. SEC rules do not require target ﬁnancials
to be reported unless the acquisition is at least 10% of an acquirer’s value.
Private targets are likely to be much smaller in size relative to their
acquirers and therefore, ﬁnancial and accounting information on targets
is seldom available.


130

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

ARTICLE IN PRESS

intuitive, is publicly available, and is the only measure
that consistently predicts VC investment and portfolio
company performance. This is after accounting for VC
connectedness (Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu, 2007) and
other measures of VC experience such as VC age (Lerner,
1994a; Gompers, 1996; Gompers and Lerner, 1999a),
cumulative number of investment rounds made by the
VC ﬁrm (Sorensen, 2007), and VC’s aggregate investment
in the venture capital industry (Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and
Lu, 2007). Second, in addition to analyzing the likelihood
of a successful VC exit using the logit and hazard models,
I dig deeper into successful exits and study two additional
performance measures: ﬁrst, whether the most reputable
VCs are able to take their companies public more often
rather than sell them to potential acquirers, and second,
whether the asset productivity of portfolio companies
backed by reputable VCs is higher. Third, I analyze the
performance implications of VC reputation on private
ﬁrms, unlike Krishnan, Masulis, and Singh (2006) who
study the impact of VC reputation on the long-run
performance of IPOs.

Finally, whether VCs display capability in sorting
companies or in providing value-added services to their
portfolio companies, their reputation is enhanced on
account of proﬁtable fulﬁllment of either activity.
A consistently performing measure of VC reputation,
which incorporates into itself both the VC’s screening
and value-addition abilities, can be of good use to limited
partners and entrepreneurs in their VC-sorting activities.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses
the data, methodology, and construction of variables.
Section 3 presents the effect of VC reputation on the
performance of VC investments. Section 4 analyzes the
impact of reputation on portfolio company performance.
Section 5 investigates robustness of the results. Finally,
Section 6 concludes.

2. Data, variables, and methodology

I source the data from the Securities Data Corporation’s
VentureXpert database provided by Thomson Financial.
I focus on investments made by U.S. based VC ﬁrms in
private companies headquartered in the U.S. The primary
sample includes all VC investments made between 1991
and 2001, in companies that received their ﬁrst round of
VC funding beginning in 1991. The private equity invest-
ments in buy-outs of relatively mature companies do not
form a part of the study. Since, I track the performance of
portfolio companies until the beginning of 2006, the
methodology provides for a minimum of 4 years for a
successful exit, consistent with the analysis in Gompers
and Lerner (2000a) and Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu
(2007). Companies that do not exit successfully by the
beginning of 2006 are classiﬁed as unsuccessful exits. The
information on successful exits—IPOs and acquisitions—is
available in the VentureXpert database, and I cross-verify
it with the New Issues database (for IPOs) and M&A
database (for acquisitions), also provided by Thomson
Financial. The data consist of 33,539 identiﬁable VC
investments in 12,124 portfolio companies, for which

Table 1
Year-wise distribution of VC investments

The table presents year-wise distribution of VC investments between
1991 and 2001, in companies that received their ﬁrst round of VC
funding beginning in 1991, and for which relevant data are available.
Companies that went public or were acquired between 1991 and 2005,
inclusive, are classiﬁed as ‘Successful’ exits, otherwise denoted ‘Un-
successful’ exits.

Funding year

VC investments at beginning of 2006

%Successful

Successful

Unsuccessful

1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
Total

178
399
399
500
751
1066
1306
1374
2008
2290
972

11243

196
328
331
406
799
1168
1673
2189
4207
7715
3284
22296

47.59
54.88
54.66
55.19
48.45
47.72
43.84
38.56
32.31
22.89
22.84
33.52

relevant company and VC ﬁrm data are available. In the
analyses of 33,539 VC investments, each VC-portfolio
company pair is unique, even though the VC may have
participated in multiple rounds of ﬁnancing.

Table 1 presents the year-wise distribution of VC
investments made between 1991 and 2001, and their
status at the beginning of 2006. As observed, the VC
investment activity gathered momentum in the mid-
1990s, peaked in the late-1990s, and slowed considerably
following the ‘‘bubble burst’’ of the dot-com era. The
proportion of successful VC investments has decreased
since the mid-1990s, coinciding with the growth in the
venture capital industry; however the investments under-
taken particularly in the late-1990s have also had a
shorter timeframe to exit (relative to those made in the
early- or mid-1990s) since the sample period is right-
censored at the beginning of year 2006. Since these
investments may eventually exit successfully, the Cox
hazard model employed explicitly accounts for the right-
censoring involved.

2.1. Measure of success

The portfolio companies are treated as successful if
they go public or are acquired. Gompers and Lerner
(2000a), Brander, Amit, and Antweiler (2002), Hochberg,
Ljungqvist, and Lu (2007), Sorensen (2007), and Zarutskie
(2007) use similar measures to evaluate success of
portfolio companies. Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu
(2007) also show that this measure is a reasonable proxy
for VC fund returns. It is well known that VC ﬁrms reap
most of
their
investments that exit either through IPOs or acquisitions
(Cumming and MacIntosh, 2003; Cochrane, 2005). In my
sample, roughly 25% of the portfolio companies exited
successfully by the beginning of 2006, which is compar-
able to the 26% reported by Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu
(2007). In terms of VC investments, about 34% succeeded,

their proﬁts from the sub-sample of


ARTICLE IN PRESS

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

131

the success percentage being slightly lower than the 41.8%
reported by Cochrane (2005) during the 1987–2000
timeframe using a different data set collected by
VentureOne.

2.2. VC reputation

I construct two measures of VC reputation to analyze
the likelihood of successful exits. The ﬁrst is based on the
cumulative market capitalization of IPOs backed by the VC
ﬁrm in the IPO market. For each VC ﬁrm, I cumulate the
dollar market value of all companies taken public by the
VC ﬁrm from the beginning of calendar year 1987 up until
a given calendar year and normalize it by the aggregate
market value of all VC-backed companies that went public
from the beginning of 1987 up until the same calendar
year (I hereafter refer to this measure as ‘IPO Capitaliza-
tion share’). The market value of portfolio companies is
based on the initial day closing price and shares out-
standing on that date, both of which are sourced from
Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) records.
Since the lead VC reputation is measured at the time of
the portfolio company’s initial funding round, the con-
structed measure based on the market value of companies
taken public incorporates at least 4 years of VC perfor-
mance in the case of companies initially funded in 1991,
since the lead VC reputation is based on companies taken
public between 1987 and 1990. For companies initially
funded in 1997, this VC reputation measure incorporates
10 years of VC performance from 1987 until 1996.

The second measure of reputation is based on the VC’s
share of aggregate investment in the VC industry. A higher
share of aggregate investment denotes a bigger share of
fund commitments by limited partners who select and
invest in VC funds largely based on their reputation. For
each VC ﬁrm, I cumulate the dollar investment from the
beginning of year 1980 up until a given calendar year and
normalize it by the overall aggregate investment in the VC
industry in those years (I hereafter refer to this measure as
‘VC investment share’).7 Thus for example, in the case of
companies initially funded in 1991, lead VC reputation is
based on aggregate investments made by the VC between
1980 and 1990. The data for constructing this measure
come from VentureXpert. In both cases, a larger number
or share denotes more reputable VCs.

I analyze both the outcome of VC investments as well
as the fate of portfolio companies. At the investments
level, the reputation is measured for each VC investor at
the time of its ﬁrst investment in the portfolio company. At
the portfolio company level, I take the reputation of the
lead VC as the primary explanatory variable. Usually, the
lead VC originates the deal and is among the ﬁrst venture
investors in the start-up.
It is often the most active
investor and extensively helps in monitoring, professio-
nalizing the company, and locating follow-on VCs for

7 Unlike my ﬁrst measure of VC reputation based on the market
value of companies taken public, to construct this measure, I start from
before 1987 in order to capture the pattern of VC investments that may
have then culminated in successful or unsuccessful outcomes in later
years including 1987.

syndicated investments. I determine the lead VC as the
ﬁrm that participated in the ﬁrst round and made the
largest total investment in the company across all rounds
of funding. Absent the identity of investors in the ﬁrst
round, I apply the same logic to determine the lead VC
ﬁrm based on identities of the second round investors.
This classiﬁcation, based on the identities of the ﬁrst or
second round investors,
is preferred to the one that
determines the lead VC ﬁrm based on the total VC
investment across all rounds of ﬁnancing irrespective of
when the VC started its association with the portfolio
company. For instance, later funding rounds involve larger
amounts based on higher company valuations and a VC
ﬁrm that participated only in the last round of funding but
invested the largest amount would be classiﬁed as the
lead VC, which would not be a meaningful classiﬁcation.
Table 2, Panel A shows the average IPO Capitalization
share of
lead VC ﬁrms that led their companies to
successful exits is 1.66%. This differs signiﬁcantly from
the average IPO Capitalization share of 1.00% for lead VCs
who back unsuccessful companies. A similar pattern is
observed on analyzing the share of aggregate investment
in the VC industry. The average VC investment share is
0.29% (0.18%) for the lead VCs who back successful
(unsuccessful) portfolio companies, the difference being
statistically signiﬁcant.
In Table 2, Panel B, a similar
pattern emerges for both the reputation measures
pertaining to individual VC ﬁrms that invest in these
portfolio companies.

2.3. Other VC characteristics: experience and connectedness

I use the age of the VC ﬁrm to measure its VC industry
experience. The average age of the lead VCs whose
portfolio companies exit successfully (unsuccessfully) is
13.46 (12.12) years, the difference being statistically
signiﬁcant. The pattern in Panel B of Table 2 is likewise
with experienced VCs more likely to be associated with
successful exits.

As mentioned earlier, the measures of VC reputation
developed are likely to be correlated both with VC
experience in general, and with VC ﬁrm’s age in particular.
In my sample, for the lead VCs, the correlations of VC age
with IPO Capitalization share and VC investment share are
0.40 and 0.32 respectively. I include VC age to maintain
consistency with prior literature and also as an additional
control variable. For robustness, I also use the cumulative
number of investment rounds as an alternative proxy for
VC experience (Sorensen, 2007); the results are qualita-
tively similar.

I measure the VC connectedness or how networked the
VC is in the spirit of Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu (2007).
I measure the number of relationships each VC has had in
5 years on a rolling basis. Speciﬁcally, I count the number
of unique VCs each VC has syndicated with in 5 years on a
rolling basis and normalize it by the number of relation-
ships possible during those 5 years. VCs that actively
syndicate with other industry participants and are better
connected have arguably better access to deal ﬂow,
investment opportunity sets, and access to information


132

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

ARTICLE IN PRESS

Table 2
Descriptive statistics for VC-backed companies funded between 1991 and 2001 that ‘exited’ by beginning of 2006

IPOs/Acquisitions are classiﬁed as ‘Successful’ exits; companies that did not exit successfully are denoted ‘Unsuccessful’ exits. Panel A presents statistics
on VC-backed portfolio companies that were initially funded between 1991 and 2001, and for which relevant data are available. The reputation of the
venture capitalist backing the portfolio company is proxied for by two variables. The ﬁrst is based on the VC ﬁrm’s dollar capitalization share in the IPO
market, determined by the cumulative market capitalization of the companies taken public by the VC ﬁrm, relative to other VC ﬁrms. The second
measures the VC’s share of aggregate investment in the VC industry. In both cases, the higher the number, the higher the VC’s reputation. Other
characteristics of the VC are the VC’s connectedness measured by the normalized number of unique VCs the VC has syndicated with in previous 5 years,
and age of the VC ﬁrm. VC reputation, VC connectedness, and VC age are measured prior to VC’s ﬁrst investment in the portfolio company. VC syndication
is characterized by the size of the VC syndicate in the portfolio company, percentage of companies involving a corporate investor as one of the VCs, and
percentage of companies involving an arm of an investment bank as one of the VCs. The portfolio company characteristics include the total VC funding to
the portfolio company across all ﬁnancing rounds, and percent of companies that were funded at the early/seed stage of development. VC industry
competition at the time of VC’s initial funding of the portfolio company is captured by the aggregate funds inﬂow into the VC industry in the year prior.
The investment opportunities available to VCs at the time of their initial investment in the portfolio company are captured by the median market to book
ratio in the high-tech industry (deﬁned in footnote 11), in that year. The exit market conditions are proxied by the lagged quarterly number of IPO and
M&A transactions prior to exit (in the case of unsuccessful exits, average of the lagged number of transactions since the company’s initial VC funding).
Panel B presents statistics on all VC (including the lead) investments made between 1991 and 2001, in companies that received their ﬁrst round of VC
funding beginning in 1991, and for which relevant data are available. p-Values pertaining to a t-test for equality of means and Wilcoxon test for equality of
medians are reported.

Panel A: VC-backed portfolio companies
Lead VC reputation measures

IPO Capitalization share %
VC investment share %

Lead VC characteristics
VC connectedness %
Age (years)

VC syndication

Successful exits

Unsuccessful exits

Tests of equality

(p-values)

Number

Mean

Median

Number

Mean

Median Mean Median

3008
3008

1.66
0.29

0.59
0.10

9116
9116

1.00
0.18

0.13
0.04

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

3008
2978

6.86
13.46

4.34
11.72

9116
8972

4.19
12.12

1.82
9.75

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

VC syndicate size
% Of companies backed by a corporate VC
% Of companies having an investment bank as a VC

3008
3008
3008

5.32
35.26
23.10

4.00

9116
9116
9116

3.71
24.20
15.86

3.00

Portfolio company characteristics

Total VC funding across all rounds ($M)
% Of companies funded at the seed or early stage

2947
3008

31.42
66.97

18.96

8545
9116

21.57
62.65

9.78

0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00

0.00

VC industry competition

Aggregate VC fund inﬂows in the year prior to the lead VC’s

3008

36.86

17.75

9116

56.64

45.49

0.00

0.00

ﬁrst investment in the portfolio company ($billion)

VC investment environment

Median M/B ratio in the high-tech industry in the year of lead

3008

2.29

2.19

9116

2.30

2.11

0.40

0.00

VC’s ﬁrst investment in the portfolio company

IPO and M&A market conditions

Lagged quarterly number of IPOs prior to VC exit
Lagged quarterly number of M&A deals prior to VC exit

3008
3008

101.69
2719.69

86

2580

9116
9116

69.37

2461.57

64

2413

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

Panel B: VC investments
VC reputation measures

IPO Capitalization share %
VC investment share %

VC characteristics

VC connectedness %
Age (years)

VC syndication

11243
11243

1.44
0.21

0.40
0.06

22296
22296

1.04
0.16

0.15
0.03

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

11243
10896

6.14
12.66

3.56
10.67

22296
21699

4.35
11.72

2.10
8.56

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

% Of VC investments made by traditional VCs
% Of VC investments made by corporate VCs
% Of VC investments made by investment banks

11243
11243
11243

62.36
12.64
7.76

22296
22296
22296

62.55
10.80
7.52

0.73
0.00
0.44


ARTICLE IN PRESS

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

133

Table 2 (continued )

Successful exits

Unsuccessful exits

Tests of equality

(p-values)

Number

Mean

Median

Number

Mean

Median Mean Median

VC investment characteristics

% Of VC investments made at the seed or early stage
% Of traditional VC investments at the seed or early stage
% Of corporate VC investments at the seed or early stage

11243
11243
11243

41.02
48.08
24.92

22296
22296
22296

48.25
54.29
35.46

0.00
0.00
0.00

VC industry competition

Aggregate VC fund inﬂows in the year prior to VC’s ﬁrst

11243

46.71

30.75

22296

65.07

45.49

0.00

0.00

investment in the portfolio company ($billion)

VC investment environment

Median M/B ratio in the high-tech industry in the year of

11243

2.34

2.11

22296

2.29

1.95

0.00

0.00

VC’s ﬁrst investment in the portfolio company

(Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu, 2007). Controlling for VC
connectedness and the likelihood of a better deal ﬂow is
one of the ways I try to address the selection bias arising
from VC access to more promising investment opportu-
nities.

Table 2, Panel A shows that the average normalized
connectedness (hereafter referred to as VC connectedness)
of a lead VC is 6.86% (4.19%) when it backs successful
(unsuccessful) portfolio companies. These statistics are
comparable to the average VC connectedness of 4.24%
reported by Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu (2007). The
difference in VC connectedness for successful and un-
successful companies is signiﬁcant at the 1% level. In Panel B
of Table 2, I present the average VC connectedness for all
individual VCs that invested in the portfolio companies.
The average normalized connectedness of VCs that led
their portfolio companies to successful (unsuccessful) exits
is 6.14% (4.35%), the difference being signiﬁcant at the 1%
level. The average connectedness of lead VCs at 4.85% is
slightly lower than that of all VCs since it is measured at
the time of ﬁrst round of investment in the portfolio
company. VC investors in later rounds seem to have
improved their connectedness because of a ﬂurry of
investments and syndications from the mid- to late-1990s.

2.4. VC syndication

Brander, Amit, and Antweiler (2002) provide evidence
that syndicated VC deals have higher returns. I control for
the performance implications of syndication by measur-
ing the size of the VC syndicate in each portfolio company.
The median VC syndicate comprises of four (three) VCs for
successful (unsuccessful) portfolio companies. The med-
ian syndicate comprising three VCs across all U.S. based
portfolio companies is similar to the ﬁndings in Lerner
(1994b) but higher than the median VC syndicate size
comprising of a single VC reported by Brander, Amit, and
Antweiler (2002) on their data set of Canadian venture
investments.

In addition, I create an indicator variable denoting
presence of corporate venture capitalists in the VC

syndicate. Gompers and Lerner (2000a) provide evi-
dence that corporate backing is beneﬁcial to the perfor-
mance of VC-backed companies. Of
the portfolio
companies that exited successfully (unsuccessfully), 35%
(24%) involved a corporate investor in the VC syndi-
cate (Table 2, Panel A). On the whole, 27% of the
companies had a corporate investor as one of the VC
syndicate members. Also, in Table 2, Panel B, I show that
12.6% (10.8%) of all VC investments that translated into
success (failure) were made by corporations. On the
whole, corporate investors represent 11.4% of the VC
investments, the percentage being much higher than the
6% reported by Gompers and Lerner (2000a) during the
1983–1994 period, suggesting a dramatic increase in
venture capital activity by corporations in the latter part
of the 1990s.

It is also well known that VCs provide more than
ﬁnancial capital to develop their portfolio companies.8
They help attract other investors including banks, exten-
sively develop the human capital in the portfolio com-
pany, professionalize the company, bring in potential
customers and suppliers using their extended network,
help forge strategic alliances, and also draw in lawyers,
investment bankers, auditors, and other service providers
who are capable of providing useful services to portfolio
companies.
It takes time to develop proﬁciency and
expertise in the VC industry to nurture and guide portfolio
companies toward proﬁtable exits. The last decade has
witnessed a lot of activity in the VC industry, one being an
appreciable entry of investment banks. To determine the
performance of investment banks in the VC industry,
I create an indicator variable denoting presence of invest-
ment banks in the VC syndicate. As observed in Table 2,
Panel A, of the portfolio companies that exit successfully
(unsuccessfully), 23.10% (15.86%) involve an investment
bank in the VC syndicate, the numbers being signiﬁcantly

8 For evidence on positive inﬂuence of venture capitalists on their
portfolio companies, see Barry, Muscarella, Peavy, and Vetsuypens
(1990), Brav and Gompers (1997), Gompers (1995), Gompers and Lerner
(1999b), Hellmann and Puri (2000, 2002), Hochberg (2005), Lerner
(1994a, 1995), Lindsey (2008), and Megginson and Weiss (1991).


134

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

ARTICLE IN PRESS

different from each other. However, at the investments
level, 7.76% (7.52%) of all VC investments that translate into
success (failure) are made by investment banks, the
percentages being not signiﬁcantly different from each
other.

2.5. Portfolio company characteristics

The performance of portfolio companies is likely to
depend on their quality. As well, better quality companies
are more likely to afﬁliate with more reputed VC investors.
As discussed earlier, I control for VC connectedness, which
is one way of addressing the selection bias on account of
VC access to more promising deal ﬂow. A second way to
mitigate the resulting selection bias is to explicitly create
a variable that is a proxy for company quality. I create a
variable that measures the total VC investment in the
portfolio company across all ﬁnancing rounds. The greater
the total VC investment, the better the likelihood of a
successful exit. VCs engage in extensive monitoring of
their companies and continually evaluate their ventures’
promise, need for additional capital, use of capital, and
whether to liquidate their equity investments. As Gom-
pers (1995) illustrates, a follow-on funding occurs only if
companies continue to do well. Furthermore, VC funds are
organized largely as self-liquidating partnerships and the
need to terminate the fund at the end of 10–12 years
imposes a healthy discipline on fund managers. It forces
the venture capitalists to refuse additional rounds of
capital for weak ventures. Thus, all else equal, greater VC
funding reﬂects a better quality portfolio company. As
observed in Table 2, Panel A, successful (unsuccessful)
companies received on average, an aggregate VC invest-
ment of $31.4 ($21.6) million. This difference is signiﬁcant
at the 1% level.
Admittedly,

this measure of company quality is
imperfect and involves look-ahead bias since the cumu-
lative funding to the portfolio company (before the exit)
is unknown at the time of
initial or even later VC
funding. However, data limitations prevent me from
capturing a more adequate measure of portfolio company
quality. The VentureXpert database provides very
little information on portfolio companies other than
funding rounds, amounts invested, venture investors,
and eventual exits. As a robustness check, upon excluding
the variable capturing company quality—cumulative VC
funding to the portfolio company—all results remain
qualitatively similar. Apart
from VC connectedness
and cumulative VC funding, I also try to account for
portfolio company quality using the Heckman (1979)
selection framework that models the likelihood of more
reputable VCs associating with better quality companies
(Section 5).

I also create an indicator variable denoting whether the
ﬁrst investment by a VC in the portfolio company occurred
at the ‘seed’ or ‘early’ stage of development. Companies in
early stages of development are likely to be riskier and
this may impact their performance. I observe that 46% of
the VC investments occurred when the companies were in
their seed/early developmental stages, which is higher

than the 39% reported in Gompers (1995).9 As observed in
Panel B of Table 2, among successful (unsuccessful) exits,
41.02% (48.25%) of all VC investments were made at the
seed/early stage, the difference being statistically signiﬁ-
cant. Similar patterns emerge when I study the perfor-
mance of
and corporate VC investors
separately. For both types of investors, a larger proportion
of their investments were unsuccessful when the initial
funding was at the seed/early stage.

traditional

It is notable that the percentage of seed/early stage
investments made by traditional VCs far exceeds those
made by corporate VCs (CVCs). This is likely for multiple
reasons. Early-stage companies are arguably riskier which
makes them unattractive investments for the relatively
more risk-averse corporations. CVCs in general are less
experienced in venture investing than traditional VCs;
furthermore, CVC managers often have weaker perfor-
mance incentives compared to the general partners in the
traditional VC ﬁrms.10 These factors are likely to make the
CVC managers unwilling to take additional risks asso-
ciated with investing in early-stage start-ups. Moreover,
business relations between the start-ups and corporations
such as customer–supplier
relations, marketing and
advertising support, strategic alliances, or joint ventures
are more likely at a relatively later stage of the start-up’s
lifecycle. Such business relations are often accompanied
by equity investments from CVCs’ parent corporations.
Allen and Phillips (2000) provide evidence on block
ownership by corporations and the resultant beneﬁts in
product market relationships.

2.6. VC industry competition

Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu (2007) present evidence
that competition among VCs for deal ﬂow adversely
affects the subsequent performance of their portfolio
companies, which is consistent with the ‘money chasing
deals’ scenario ﬁrst shown by Gompers and Lerner
(2000b) in the VC context.
I control for VC industry
competition in my models by using the aggregate fund
inﬂows in the VC industry in the year prior to the VC’s ﬁrst
investment in a portfolio company. Table 2, Panel A shows
that the median fund inﬂows in the VC industry at the
time of the lead VC’s initial investment in a successful
(unsuccessful) portfolio company was $17.75 ($45.49)

9 For proper comparison, I group the following developmental stages
reported in Table V in Gompers (1995) into seed/early stage: Seed,
Startup, Early, First, and Other Early. However, the 39% reported in
Gompers (1995) likely understates the true percentage since the same
venture capitalist may have participated in both early and expansion/
later stages of a company’s development and would be counted multiple
times. Recall that in my analysis, each VC-portfolio company pair is
unique even though the VC may have participated in multiple rounds of
ﬁnancing.

10 For example, General Partners in traditional VC ﬁrms are primarily
compensated through ‘carried interest’ which is typically 20–30% of the
proﬁts realized by the VC fund. In contrast, CVC managers seldom receive
similar compensation because corporations are typically reluctant to
make large payments to their venture managers, payments that can
substantially exceed those paid to other employees of the parent
corporations. See Gompers and Lerner (2000a), Hellmann (2002), and
Masulis and Nahata (2008) for issues about CVC investing.


ARTICLE IN PRESS

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

135

billion, the difference being statistically signiﬁcant. The
average VC fund inﬂow is higher than that reported in
Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu (2007) because as noted
earlier, a signiﬁcant
fraction of VC investments is
concentrated in the late 1990s, a period of boisterous VC
activity. The pattern in Table 2, Panel B is similar with
signiﬁcantly higher VC industry inﬂows at the time of the
VC’s initial investment being associated with unsuccessful
exits.

2.7. VC investment environment

I control

In the spirit of Gompers and Lerner (2000b), Gompers,
Kovner, Lerner, and Scharfstein (2008), and Hochberg,
Ljungqvist, and Lu (2007),
for investment
environment available to VCs using the market to book
ratios of all public ﬁrms that belong to the high-tech
industries.11 It is plausible the investment opportunities
available to investors affect their investment decisions
and their performance. On one hand, high market to book
ratios in an industry can be an indication of favorable
growth prospects. On the other, high market to book ratios
may point toward excessive optimism and over-valuation
in an industry, which may lead to inefﬁcient investment
decisions and poor performance (Baker and Wurgler,
2002).

As a proxy for the VC investment environment, I use
the median market to book ratio for the high-tech
industries in the year of the ﬁrst VC investment in a
portfolio company. Table 2, Panel A shows the median
market to book ratio of 2.19 at the time of lead VC’s ﬁrst
investment
in the portfolio company is signiﬁcantly
higher for successful exits, indicating VCs appear to select
more promising companies in an upbeat investment
climate. A similar pattern emerges when analyzing
individual VC investments in Table 2, Panel B, which is
consistent with the evidence in Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and
Lu (2007). However, given the insigniﬁcant impact of VC
investment environment on success probability as
reported in Gompers, Kovner, Lerner, and Scharfstein
(2008), the incremental impact of VC investment environ-
ment on VC ﬁrm and company performance can only be
measured in a multivariate setup.

2.8.

IPO and M&A market conditions

Starting with Lerner (1994a), several studies have
shown VCs timing their exits, particularly the IPOs, with
‘better’ market conditions. Since VC exits from their
portfolio companies, through IPOs or acquisitions, are at
least in part likely to be a function of conditions in the IPO

11 The public ﬁrms are drawn from the Compustat universe and their
industry is classiﬁed by their primary three-digit Standard Industry
Classiﬁcation (SIC) codes. High-tech industries are classiﬁed as belonging
to SIC codes 283 (biological products, genetics, and pharmaceuticals),
481 (high-tech communications), 365–369 (electronic equipment),
482–489 (communication services), 357 (computers), and 737 (software
services). The market to book ratio is measured as the market value of
equity plus the book value of assets minus the book value of equity
divided by the book value of assets.

and M&A markets, I speciﬁcally control for the exit market
environment using two variables, each measuring the
state of the respective markets. First,
I measure the
quarterly number of IPOs—number of IPOs over a period
of 3 months—prior to the portfolio company’s exit. This
measure is lagged by a quarter so as to allow a typical
company and its investors up to 3 months to prepare for
an impending exit by way of an IPO or an acquisition.
Second, I likewise measure the quarterly number of M&A
deals prior to the portfolio company’s exit. The higher the
number of IPO/M&A transactions, the more conducive the
environment is for VCs trying to exit successfully during
that period.

In Table 2, Panel A,

I report the lagged quarterly
number of IPO and M&A transactions, prior to company
exits. For unsuccessful exits, I measure the average of the
lagged quarterly number of IPO/M&A transactions over
the entire time period, starting from the portfolio
companies’ initial date of VC funding. Though imprecise,
this is necessary to compare the exit market conditions
across successful and unsuccessful exits, at least in the
univariate setting, since it is not obvious when to measure
exit market conditions for unsuccessful portfolio company
exits. In the Cox hazard framework, I allow for time-
varying exit market conditions, which alleviates this
concern, as detailed in the next sub-section. I ﬁnd that
in the case of successful exits, the previous quarter
witnessed on average, 102 IPO and 2,720 M&A transac-
tions, the numbers being signiﬁcantly higher than those
during average exit market conditions. This is consistent
with the evidence reported in Lerner
(1994a) and
Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu (2007).

2.9. Methodology

furthermore,

To measure the likelihood of a successful exit I use both
the logit and hazard models. The hazard model allows for
analyzing the timing of events;
it also
accounts for the right-censored feature of the data, since
companies that have not exited successfully by the
beginning of 2006 are treated as liquidations, though
they may still exit successfully. I measure most of the
explanatory variables including the VC reputation mea-
sures at the time of the ﬁrst VC investment in the portfolio
company. Speciﬁcally, I measure the reputation of a given
VC ﬁrm just prior to the year of its ﬁrst investment in the
portfolio company. I do likewise for VC experience and its
network connectedness. The variable proxying for com-
petition in the VC industry, aggregate VC fund inﬂows into
the industry, is also measured as of the year prior to
the VC’s ﬁrst investment in the portfolio company. The
variable proxying for VC investment environment, the
market
is
measured as of the year of the VC’s ﬁrst investment in
the portfolio company. Since a substantial time gap is
likely to exist between the ﬁrst investment by the VC ﬁrm
and its exit, I relate a VC ﬁrm’s past reputation to its future
performance. This is important to rule out concerns
regarding reverse causality that better performance can
lead to better reputation.

to book ratio in the high-tech industry,


136

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

ARTICLE IN PRESS

I allow for time-varying exit market conditions in the
hazard framework to enable the portfolio companies and
their investors to follow trends in exit markets and reach
their exit decisions. The hazard framework has the added
advantage of capturing exit market conditions on a
periodic (in this case, quarterly) basis, to determine their
impact on the incidence of successful exits, which a
simple logit model cannot. However, upon using the
average quarterly number of IPO/M&A transactions mea-
sured over the entire VC-funded timeframe of unsuccess-
ful companies, and the lagged quarterly number of IPO/
M&A transactions for successful companies,
I obtain
similar qualitative results in the logit framework.

3. Performance of VC investments

I ﬁrst estimate the impact of VC reputation on
performance of
individual venture investments. The
dependent variable in Table 3 equals one if the VC
investment is successful and zero otherwise. I estimate
the determinants of success/failure of VC investment in a
logit framework.
I relate the likelihood of company
success to the following variables: VC’s reputation, VC’s
connectedness, VC’s experience, portfolio company’s qual-
ity, VC syndicate size, VC industry competition as
measured by aggregate fund inﬂows in the year prior to
the VC’s ﬁrst investment in the company, VC investment
environment as measured by the market to book ratio in
the high-tech industry in the year of VC’s ﬁrst investment
in the company, exit market conditions, and indicator
variables denoting (i) investment by a traditional VC ﬁrm,
(ii) investment by a corporate investor, (iii) investment by
an arm of an investment bank, (iv) investment at the seed
or early stage of company’s development, (v) investment
by a traditional VC ﬁrm at the seed or early stage in
the company’s lifecycle, and (vi) investment by a corpo-
rate investor at the seed or early stage of company’s
development.

Though not reported, I include industry indicators for
each portfolio company, using the VentureXpert industry
deﬁnitions. Broadly,
the data cover and specify the
following 10 industries: biotechnology, communications/
media, computer hardware, computer software/services,
consumer related,
internet speciﬁc,
medical/health, semiconductors/other electronics, and
other products.12 By including industry indicators, I also
partially account for differences in technological and
industrial characteristics of
the portfolio companies.
I also include year ﬁxed effects, based on the initial VC
funding in the portfolio company, as additional control
variables.

industrial/energy,

In models 1 through 3, I separately include the two VC
reputation measures and the VC connectedness variable.
All three are found to have an appreciable positive impact

12 VentureXpert database does not report the conventional SIC codes
for a large fraction of companies. As a further check, my results
are robust to inclusion of the broader six-industry classiﬁcation of
VentureXpert, which includes the following industries: biotechnology,
communications/media, computer related, medical/health/life science,
non-high-technology, and semiconductors/other electronics.

on VC investment performance. In model 4, I introduce
the IPO Capitalization share and VC connectedness
variables together. Both continue to positively affect the
likelihood of VC success. However, the impact of IPO
Capitalization share is reduced. In economic terms, one
standard deviation increase in the IPO Capitalization share
increases the odds of a successful exit by more than 12%.
In model 5, I include both VC investment share and VC
connectedness variables. As before, VC connectedness is
found to positively impact VC performance whereas VC
investment share is rendered ineffective in predicting the
success probability. The insigniﬁcant coefﬁcient on VC
investment share can be attributed to multicollinearity
problems because of the simultaneous introduction of the
two variables; the correlation between VC investment
share and VC connectedness is a signiﬁcant 0.62.

Several other factors affect VC performance. As ex-
pected, the quality of the portfolio company denoted by
the total VC funding to the portfolio company, positively
affects performance of VC investments. Consistent with
the evidence in Brander, Amit, and Antweiler (2002), VC
syndication also results in improved performance. As well,
investments by corporate venture investors are more
likely to succeed which is consistent with the evidence
reported in Gompers and Lerner (2000a). VCs that make
investments at the seed or early stage in a company’s
lifecycle are more likely to fail, perhaps a reﬂection of the
riskier nature of early stage investments. The age of the VC
ﬁrm, a measure of VC experience, is insigniﬁcant after
controlling for VC reputation and connectedness.

Both aggregate VC fund inﬂow—a proxy for competi-
tion in the VC industry, and the market to book ratio in the
high-tech industry—a proxy for VC investment environ-
ment, have signiﬁcant negative coefﬁcients suggesting
that their higher values reduce the probability of success
of individual VC investments in the multivariate frame-
work. On the other hand, consistent with the evidence in
Lerner (1994a) and Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu (2007),
the incidence of successful VC exits rises when exit
market conditions are more conducive for IPO and M&A
transactions.

I next turn to analyzing the likelihood of a successful
exit using the Cox hazard model where the logarithm of
time to exit is the dependent variable. The time to exit is
measured from the date of each VC’s ﬁrst investment in
the portfolio company. The Cox model
is a semi-
parametric model in which the hazard function is not
dependent on a speciﬁc distribution of the survival time.
The time to exit is censored for unsuccessful VC invest-
ments that have not exited by the beginning of 2006.

The results are reported in Table 4. In the Cox hazard
framework, a positive (negative) coefﬁcient on the vari-
able implies a higher (lower) hazard for that variable and
hence a lower (higher) expected duration. The uncondi-
tional time to exit of an average VC investment is ﬁve and
one-half years. I ﬁnd most results mirror the evidence
IPO Capitalization share, one of the
reported earlier.
measures of VC reputation,
in
explaining performance of VC investments. In terms of
economic signiﬁcance, based on the estimates in model 4,
one standard deviation increase in VC’s IPO Capitalization

is highly signiﬁcant


ARTICLE IN PRESS

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

137

Table 3
Logit regression analysis of the status of VC investments in the beginning of year 2006

The sample in the regressions consists of VC investments between 1991 and 2001, in companies that received their ﬁrst round of VC funding beginning
in 1991, and for which relevant data are available. The dependent variable in all models takes the value of one if the portfolio company backed by VC
investment, has gone public or been acquired and zero if it is still private by the beginning of year 2006. The reputation of the venture capitalist backing
the portfolio company is proxied for by two variables. The ﬁrst is based on the VC ﬁrm’s dollar capitalization share in the IPO market, determined by the
cumulative market capitalization of the companies taken public by the VC ﬁrm, relative to other VC ﬁrms. The second measures the VC’s share of
aggregate investment in the VC industry. In both cases, the higher the number, the higher the VC’s reputation. Other control variables are as follows: VC’s
connectedness measured by the normalized number of unique VCs each VC has syndicated with in previous 5 years, size of the VC syndicate, total VC
funding to the portfolio company across all ﬁnancing rounds, market to book ratio in the high-tech industry (deﬁned in footnote #11) proxying for VC
investment environment, aggregate VC industry funds inﬂow proxying for industry competition, exit market conditions proxied by lagged quarterly
number of IPO and M&A transactions prior to exit (in the case of unsuccessful exits, average of the lagged number of transactions since each VC’s initial
funding), age of the VC ﬁrm, and indicator variables denoting whether the VC is a traditional ﬁrm, a corporate investor, or an arm of an investment bank.
Other indicator variables denote whether the VC investment occurred when the portfolio company was at an early/seed stage of development, whether
the traditional VC invested at an early/seed stage, and whether the corporate investor invested at an early/seed stage. Industry and initial funding year
ﬁxed effects are included in all regressions but their coefﬁcients are suppressed for brevity.
Intercepts are not reported. Robust p-values,
heteroskedasticity-adjusted, are in brackets next to the parameter estimates. ** And * denote signiﬁcance at 1% and 5% levels respectively.

VC reputation

IPO Capitalization share
VC investment share

VC connectedness
VC syndicate size
Total VC funding across all rounds
Median market to book ratio in high-tech industry in the year
of VC’s ﬁrst investment in the portfolio company
Log of aggregate fund inﬂows in the VC industry in the year
prior to the VC’s ﬁrst investment in the portfolio company
IPO and M&A market conditions
Log of lagged number of IPOs
Log of lagged number of M&A deals

Indicator ¼ 1 if VC is a traditional VC ﬁrm
Indicator ¼ 1 if VC is a corporate investor
Indicator ¼ 1 if VC is an arm of an investment bank
Indicator ¼ 1 if VC investment is at an early/seed stage
Indicator ¼ 1 if traditional VC invested at early/seed stage
Indicator ¼ 1 if corporate VC invested at early/seed stage
Log of VC’s age
Industry and year ﬁxed effects
 Log likelihood
Number of observations

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

0.088 [0.00]**

0.058

[0.00]**

0.327 [0.00]**

0.118
[0.06]
0.025 [0.00]**
[0.00]**
0.071
0.070
[0.00]**
0.004 [0.00]** 0.004 [0.00]**
0.004 [0.00]**
 0.482 [0.00]**  0.498 [0.00]**  0.459 [0.00]**  0.469 [0.00]**  0.464 [0.00]**

0.030
[0.00]**
0.069 [0.00]**
0.004 [0.00]**

[0.02]*
0.014
[0.00]**
0.070
0.004 [0.00]**

[0.00]**

0.073

 0.483 [0.00]**  0.486 [0.00]**  0.447 [0.00]**  0.464 [0.00]**  0.449 [0.00]**

1.257

1.260

1.263

[0.00]**

[0.00]**

[0.00]**

[0.00]**

[0.36]
[0.00]**
[0.24]

1.258
1.260
[0.00]**
8.587 [0.00]** 8.596 [0.00]** 8.586 [0.00]** 8.585 [0.00]** 8.590
[0.00]**
0.062
0.057
[0.32]
0.314
0.313
[0.00]**
0.098
0.080
[0.33]
 0.536 [0.00]**  0.531 [0.00]**  0.537 [0.00]**  0.537 [0.00]**  0.534 [0.00]**
[0.33]
0.106
[0.61]
0.074
0.008
[0.96]

0.063
[0.31]
0.306 [0.00]**
0.084
[0.31]

[0.34]
0.097
[0.60]
0.076
[0.97]  0.002

[0.29]
0.089
[0.59]
0.074
[0.93]  0.001

[0.54]
[0.00]**
[0.55]

[0.31]
[0.00]**
[0.23]

[0.22]
[0.67]
[0.05]*

[0.25]
[0.60]
[0.61]

0.112
0.062
0.033

0.038
0.318
0.050

0.063
0.312
0.100

0.088
0.076
0.001

Present
17388
31898

Present
17401
31898

Present
17392
31898

Present
17385
31898

Present
17383
31898

share is associated with a 7% increase in the hazard of a
VC’s successful exit.

As for VC’s network centrality, the higher the value of
VC connectedness, the shorter the expected duration,
which is consistent with the evidence in Hochberg,
Ljungqvist, and Lu (2007). In other words, more reputable
and better-connected VCs are more likely to lead their
portfolio companies to successful exits. However, when
introduced simultaneously with IPO Capitalization share,
VC connectedness is rendered statistically insigniﬁcant in
explaining success of VC investments. The other VC
reputation measure, VC investment share, is insigniﬁcant
in explaining the likelihood of VC success when it is
included along with VC connectedness. By itself, however,
it is signiﬁcant in predicting success of VC investments.

As before, portfolio company quality, beneﬁcial effects
of VC syndication, and presence of a corporate VC
positively affect VC performance and result in shorter
expected times to proﬁtable exits. Furthermore, portfolio
companies that witnessed investments at the seed or
early stage in their lifecycles are more likely to result in

failures. One signiﬁcant difference from the earlier results
is VC investments that occur when the median market to
book ratio in the high-tech industry is higher, have a
higher probability to succeed. Finally, when exit market
conditions are more favorable, VC investments are more
likely to exit successfully.

4. Portfolio company performance

I next estimate the impact of lead VC’s reputation on
portfolio company performance where the unit of analysis
is each portfolio company. I determine the lead VC as the
ﬁrm that participated in the ﬁrst round and made the
largest total investment in the company across all rounds
of funding.
If information on ﬁrst round investors is
unavailable, I follow the same logic to identify the lead VC
from among the second round investors. As mentioned
earlier, this classiﬁcation of lead VCs is more meaningful
compared to the one that classiﬁes
lead VCs as
the investors who have made the largest cumulative


138

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

ARTICLE IN PRESS

Table 4
Hazard analysis of VC investments in the beginning of year 2006

The sample in the regressions consists of VC investments between 1991 and 2001, in companies that received their ﬁrst round of VC funding beginning
in 1991, and for which relevant data are available. The Cox Hazard Model is estimated with log of time to exit being the dependent variable. The time to
exit of a successful VC (that backed a portfolio company that either went public or was acquired) is the calendar time taken to exit from the date of VC’s
ﬁrst investment in that portfolio company. Time to exit of VCs yet to exit successfully by beginning of 2006 is right censored at the end of calendar year
2005. Positive (negative) coefﬁcient indicates that the covariate increases the hazard and shortens (lengthens) the expected duration. The reputation of
the venture capitalist backing the portfolio company is proxied for by two variables. The ﬁrst is based on the VC ﬁrm’s dollar capitalization share in the
IPO market, determined by the cumulative market capitalization of the companies taken public by the VC ﬁrm, relative to other VC ﬁrms. The second
measures the VC’s share of aggregate investment in the VC industry. In both cases, the higher the number, the higher the VC’s reputation. Other control
variables are as follows: VC’s connectedness measured by the normalized number of unique VCs each VC has syndicated with in previous 5 years, size of
the VC syndicate, total VC funding to the portfolio company across all ﬁnancing rounds, market to book ratio in the high-tech industry (deﬁned in footnote
#11) proxying for VC investment environment, aggregate VC industry funds inﬂow proxying for industry competition, time-varying exit market
conditions proxied by lagged quarterly number of IPO and M&A transactions, age of the VC ﬁrm, and indicator variables denoting whether the VC is a
traditional ﬁrm, a corporate investor, or an arm of an investment bank. Other indicator variables denote whether the VC investment occurred when the
portfolio company was at an early/seed stage of development, whether the traditional VC invested at an early/seed stage, and whether the corporate
investor invested at an early/seed stage. Industry and initial funding year ﬁxed effects are included in all regressions but their coefﬁcients are suppressed
for brevity. Robust p-values, cluster-adjusted on VC ﬁrm, are in brackets next to the parameter estimates. ** And * denote signiﬁcance at 1% and 5% levels
respectively.

VC reputation

IPO Capitalization share
VC investment share

VC connectedness
VC syndicate size
Total VC funding across all rounds
Median market to book ratio in high-tech industry in the year
of VC’s ﬁrst investment in the portfolio company
Log of aggregate fund inﬂows in the VC industry in the year
prior to the VC’s ﬁrst investment in the portfolio company
IPO and M&A market conditions

Log of number of IPOs in the previous quarter
Log of number of M&A deals in the previous quarter

Indicator ¼ 1 if VC is a traditional VC ﬁrm
Indicator ¼ 1 if VC is a corporate investor
Indicator ¼ 1 if VC is an arm of an investment bank
Indicator ¼ 1 if VC investment is at an early/seed stage
Indicator ¼ 1 if traditional VC invested at early/seed stage
Indicator ¼ 1 if corporate VC invested at early/seed stage
Log of VC’s age
Industry and year ﬁxed effects
 2Log likelihood
Number of observations

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

0.041

[0.00]**

0.034 [0.00]**

0.132

[0.01]**

0.032
0.001
0.074

[0.00]**
[0.00]**
[0.00]**

0.033 [0.00]**
[0.00]**
0.001
0.066
[0.02]*

[0.00]**
0.012
[0.00]**
0.031
0.001
[0.00]**
0.082 [0.00]**

0.003
[0.34]
0.032 [0.00]**
[0.00]**
0.001
0.077
[0.00]**

[0.08]
0.063
[0.00]**
0.010
[0.00]**
0.031
0.001
[0.00]**
0.079 [0.00]**

 0.056 [0.03]*  0.060 [0.02]*  0.044

[0.08]  0.052 [0.04]*  0.045

[0.07]

0.416
3.475
0.002
0.260
0.066

[0.00]**
[0.00]**
[0.95]
[0.00]**
[0.14]

[0.00]**
0.408
[0.00]**
0.408 [0.00]**
[0.00]**
3.474
[0.00]** 3.468 [0.00]**
3.471
0.016
[0.71]
0.013
0.017
[0.69]
[0.75]
0.266 [0.00]**
0.266 [0.00]**
0.263 [0.00]**
0.092
[0.05]*
[0.06]
0.082
[0.04]*
0.093
 0.395 [0.00]**  0.395 [0.00]**  0.397 [0.00]**  0.395 [0.00]**  0.395 [0.00]**
[0.38]
0.050
 0.035
[0.68]
0.004
[0.89]

0.409 [0.00]**
[0.00]**
3.472
0.013
[0.75]
0.258 [0.00]**
[0.05]*
0.084

[0.33]
0.057
[0.66]  0.040
0.017
[0.72]

[0.38]
0.047
[0.70]  0.033
0.001
[0.81]

[0.35]
0.045
[0.68]  0.032
0.002
[0.92]

[0.26]
0.044
[0.62]  0.030
0.003
[0.12]

0.411

Present
207621
31666

Present
207605
31666

Present
207638
31666

Present
207620
31666

Present
207580
31666

investment across all
funding rounds. Moreover, the
evidence from the previous section indicates reputable
VCs, based on IPO Capitalization share, are signiﬁ-
cantly more likely to be associated with successful
exits, irrespective of their classiﬁcation into lead or non-
lead VCs.

4.1. Likelihood of a successful exit

As earlier, I ﬁt the logit and hazard models to study the
likelihood of a successful exit.
I relate the company
success to the same variables used earlier to model VC
investment performance: lead VC’s reputation, lead VC’s
connectedness, lead VC’s experience, portfolio company’s
quality, VC syndicate size, VC industry competition as
measured by aggregate fund inﬂows in the year prior to
the ﬁrst round of funding, VC investment environment as
measured by the market to book ratio in the high-tech
industry in the year of ﬁrst round of funding, exit market

conditions as measured by the lagged number of IPO and
M&A transactions, industry and year ﬁxed effects, and
indicator variables denoting (i) presence of a corporate
investor in the VC syndicate, (ii) presence of an invest-
ment bank in the VC syndicate, and (iii) initiation of VC
funding at the seed or early stage in the company’s
lifecycle.

In Table 5,

I report the determinants of success
(or failure) of portfolio companies using the logit frame-
work. In models 1 through 3, when separately including
the two VC reputation measures and the VC connected-
ness variable, all three are found to positively affect the
portfolio company performance. In model 4, I introduce
the IPO Capitalization share and VC connectedness
variables together. The impact of VC connectedness is
substantially reduced and rendered insigniﬁcant. How-
ever, IPO Capitalization share continues to strongly predict
portfolio company performance. Finally,
in model 5,
I include both VC investment share and VC connected-
ness variables. Both the VC investment share and VC


ARTICLE IN PRESS

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

139

Table 5
Logit regression analysis of the status of VC-backed portfolio companies in the beginning of year 2006

The sample in the regressions consists of VC-backed companies initially funded between 1991 and 2001, and for which relevant data are available. The
dependent variable in all models takes the value of one if the portfolio company has gone public or been acquired and zero if it is still private by the
beginning of year 2006. The reputation of the lead venture capitalist backing the portfolio company is proxied for by two variables. The ﬁrst is based on
the lead VC ﬁrm’s dollar capitalization share in the IPO market, determined by the cumulative market capitalization of the companies taken public by the
VC ﬁrm, relative to other VC ﬁrms. The second measures the lead VC’s share of aggregate investment in the VC industry. In both cases, the higher the
number, the higher the lead VC’s reputation. Other control variables are as follows: lead VC’s connectedness measured by the normalized number of
unique VCs each VC has syndicated with in previous 5 years, size of the VC syndicate, total VC funding to the portfolio company across all ﬁnancing
rounds, market to book ratio in the high-tech industry (deﬁned in footnote #11) proxying for VC investment climate, aggregate VC industry funds inﬂow
proxying for industry competition, exit market conditions proxied by lagged quarterly number of IPO and M&A transactions prior to exit (in the case of
unsuccessful exits, average of the lagged number of transactions since company’s initial VC funding), age of the lead VC ﬁrm, and indicator variables
denoting involvement of a corporate investor in the VC syndicate, presence of an investment bank as one of the VC syndicate members, and whether the
VC investment occurred when the portfolio company was at an early/seed stage of development. Industry and initial funding year ﬁxed effects are
included in all regressions but their coefﬁcients are suppressed for brevity. Intercepts are not reported. Robust p-values, heteroskedasticity-adjusted, are
in brackets next to the parameter estimates. ** denotes signiﬁcance at 1% level.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

0.119

[0.00]**

0.126

[0.00]**

0.370

[0.00]**

[0.00]**
0.275
[0.00]**
0.020
0.076
0.082 [0.00]**
0.076
[0.00]**
0.004 [0.00]** 0.004 [0.00]**
0.004 [0.00]**
 0.302 [0.00]**  0.318 [0.00]**  0.293 [0.00]**  0.301 [0.00]**  0.296 [0.00]**

[0.00]**  0.003
[0.73]
0.077
[0.00]**
0.004 [0.00]**

0.030
0.069 [0.00]**
0.005 [0.00]**

[0.00]**

 0.728 [0.00]**  0.733 [0.00]**  0.694 [0.00]**  0.740 [0.00]**  0.701 [0.00]**

Lead VC reputation

IPO Capitalization share
VC investment share
Lead VC connectedness
VC syndicate size
Total VC funding across all rounds
Median market to book ratio in high-tech industry in the year
of ﬁrst VC investment in the portfolio company
Log of aggregate fund inﬂows in the VC industry in the year
prior to ﬁrst VC investment in the portfolio company
IPO and M&A market conditions
Log of lagged number of IPOs
Log of lagged number of M&A deals

0.661 [0.00]**
4.980
Indicator ¼ 1 if VC syndicate involves a corporate investor
0.317
Indicator ¼ 1 if VC syndicate includes an investment bank
0.055
Indicator ¼ 1 if lead VC investment is at an early/seed stage  0.053
Log of lead VC’s age
0.013
Industry and year ﬁxed effects
 Log likelihood
Number of observations

5628
11327

Present

0.667 [0.00]**

0.672
[0.00]** 4.968 [0.00]** 4.980
[0.00]**
0.320
[0.00]**
0.315
[0.48]
0.058
[0.55]
0.063
[0.47]  0.034
[0.65]  0.071
0.037
[0.08]
0.052
[0.68]

0.662 [0.00]**

0.662 [0.00]**
[0.00]**
[0.00]** 4.988 [0.00]** 4.982 [0.00]**
[0.00]**
0.322 [0.00]**
[0.00]**
0.321
[0.47]
[0.52]
0.066
[0.52]
0.059
[0.51]  0.053
[0.34]  0.048
[0.47]
0.022
[0.55]
0.019
[0.25]
[0.49]

Present

5637
11327

Present

5627
11327

Present

5614
11327

Present

5619
11327

connectedness are signiﬁcantly effective in predicting
portfolio companies’ success probability.

The other factors that signiﬁcantly affect portfolio
company performance in a positive way include portfolio
company quality (proxied by the total VC funding to the
portfolio company), VC syndication, presence of a corpo-
rate investor, and better exit market conditions. On the
other hand, portfolio companies funded in a buoyant
investment environment, or funded in times of increased
VC competition, are more likely to fail. These results are
consistent with the earlier reported ﬁndings on individual
VC investments. I next employ the Cox hazard model to
analyze the portfolio company performance.

In Table 6, the logarithm of time to exit (time between
exit and initial VC funding) is the dependent variable and
is censored for portfolio companies that were neither
acquired nor went public by the beginning of 2006. In
models 1 through 3, I separately include the two VC
reputation measures and the VC connectedness variable.
As before, more reputable and better-connected VCs have
a higher likelihood of achieving successful exits with a
lower expected duration.

In model 4, I introduce the IPO Capitalization share and
VC connectedness variables together. This speciﬁcation

renders VC connectedness insigniﬁcant at the conven-
tional levels. IPO Capitalization share continues to be
signiﬁcantly effective in predicting the likelihood of
successful outcomes. It has a large effect economically
as well. One standard deviation increase in lead VC’s IPO
Capitalization share is associated with a 16% increase in
the hazard of a portfolio company’s successful exit. Finally,
in model 5, I include both VC investment share and VC
connectedness variables. However, only VC investment
share is found to positively impact VC performance and
the positive coefﬁcient indicates that better reputation
increases the likelihood of a successful exit.

Taking the right-censored nature of the data into
account, I continue to ﬁnd that the presence of a corporate
VC in the VC syndicate has a signiﬁcant effect on the
success probability. Also, better exit market conditions in
the IPO and M&A markets are more likely to be associated
with successful exits. As before, portfolio company quality
and VC syndication have a positive impact on the
likelihood of a successful exit. On the other hand, higher
aggregate VC fund inﬂow—a proxy for competition in the
VC industry—signiﬁcantly reduces the likelihood of
success of portfolio companies. This is consistent with
VCs making poorer investment decisions when capital is


140

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

ARTICLE IN PRESS

Table 6
Hazard analysis of VC-backed portfolio companies in the beginning of year 2006

The sample in the regressions consists of VC-backed companies initially funded between 1991 and 2001, and for which relevant data are available. The
Cox Hazard Model is estimated with log of time to exit being the dependent variable. The time to exit of a successful portfolio company that has either
gone public or been acquired is the calendar time taken to exit from the date of its initial VC funding. Time to exit of portfolio companies yet to exit
successfully by beginning of 2006 is right censored at the end of calendar year 2005. Positive (negative) coefﬁcient indicates that the covariate increases
the hazard and shortens (lengthens) the expected duration. The reputation of the lead venture capitalist backing the portfolio company is proxied for by
two variables. The ﬁrst is based on the lead VC ﬁrm’s dollar capitalization share in the IPO market, determined by the cumulative market capitalization of
the companies taken public by the VC ﬁrm, relative to other VC ﬁrms. The second measures the lead VC’s share of aggregate investment in the VC industry.
In both cases, the higher the number, the higher the lead VC’s reputation. Other control variables are as follows: lead VC’s connectedness measured by the
normalized number of unique VCs each VC has syndicated with in previous 5 years, size of the VC syndicate, total VC funding to the portfolio company
across all ﬁnancing rounds, market to book ratio in the high-tech industry (deﬁned in footnote #11) proxying for VC investment climate, aggregate VC
industry funds inﬂow proxying for industry competition, time-varying exit market conditions proxied by lagged quarterly number of IPO and M&A
transactions, age of the lead VC ﬁrm, and indicator variables denoting involvement of a corporate investor in the VC syndicate, presence of an investment
bank as one of the VC syndicate members, and whether the VC investment occurred when the portfolio company was at an early/seed stage of
development. Industry and initial funding year ﬁxed effects are included in all regressions but their coefﬁcients are suppressed for brevity. Robust
p-values, cluster-adjusted on lead VC ﬁrm, are in brackets next to the parameter estimates. ** And * denote signiﬁcance at 1% and 5% levels respectively.

Lead VC reputation

IPO Capitalization share
VC investment share
Lead VC connectedness
VC syndicate size
Total VC funding across all rounds
Median market to book ratio in high-tech industry in the year
of ﬁrst VC investment in the portfolio company
Log of aggregate fund inﬂows in the VC industry in the year
prior to ﬁrst VC investment in the portfolio company
IPO and M&A Market conditions

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

0.058

[0.00]**

0.074

[0.00]**

0.176

[0.00]**

[0.02]*
0.015
0.002 [0.00]**
0.002

[0.95]  0.006

[0.01]**
0.018
0.002 [0.00]**
[0.88]

[0.00]**  0.007
[0.26]
0.011
[0.01]**
0.016
[0.05]*
0.012
0.002 [0.00]**
0.003 [0.00]**
0.006
[0.87]
0.001
[0.97]

[0.00]**
0.154
[0.12]
0.006
[0.01]**
0.016
0.002 [0.00]**
0.003
[0.94]

 0.210 [0.00]**  0.214 [0.00]**  0.200 [0.00]**  0.226 [0.00]**  0.204 [0.00]**

Log of number of IPOs in the previous quarter
Log of number of M&A deals in the previous quarter

1.043
1.280
Indicator ¼ 1 if VC syndicate involves a corporate investor
0.180
Indicator ¼ 1 if VC syndicate includes an investment bank
0.051
Indicator ¼ 1 if lead VC investment is at an early/seed stage  0.010
0.022
Log of lead VC’s age
Industry and year ﬁxed effects
 2Log likelihood
Number of observations

Present
49678
11260

[0.00]**
[0.01]**
[0.00]**
[0.31]
[0.85]
[0.27]

1.061
1.245
0.175
0.056
0.002
0.042

[0.00]**
1.055
[0.02]*
1.303
[0.00]**
0.177
[0.26]
0.052
[0.97]  0.020
0.041
[0.03]*

[0.00]**
1.043
[0.01]**
1.308
[0.00]**
0.182
[0.29]
0.052
[0.68]  0.001
0.030
[0.05]*

[0.00]**
1.052
[0.01]**
1.282
[0.00]**
0.178
[0.29]
0.056
[0.97]  0.005
0.030
[0.15]

[0.00]**
[0.01]**
[0.00]**
[0.25]
[0.92]
[0.13]

Present
49689
11260

Present
49596
11260

Present
49551
11260

Present
49562
11260

plentiful. The ‘money chasing deals’ phenomenon, ﬁrst
shown by Gompers and Lerner (2000b) in the context of
VC industry, drives VCs into making inferior investments.
Finally, consistent with the evidence reported in Gompers,
Kovner, Lerner, and Scharfstein (2008), the VC investment
environment at the time of initial funding, proxied by the
median market to book ratio in the high-tech industries, is
insigniﬁcant in explaining the likelihood of company
success.

An interesting issue is the differential impact of my VC
reputation measures on the success of portfolio compa-
nies that received funding in their early stages versus
those that were funded relatively later in their lifecycle.
VCs spend considerable time and effort in screening as
well as monitoring their portfolio companies (see among
others, Lerner, 1995; Kaplan and Stromberg, 2001, 2003)
and their reputation should ideally reﬂect both of these
important characteristics. Arguably, VCs are likely to
expend more effort on monitoring, relative to screening,
on the early-stage portfolio companies. At the later stages
of development, when companies are relatively closer to
exits, the VC screening expertise assumes relatively more
importance. One way to test whether VC reputation
measured by IPO Capitalization share effectively incorpo-

rates both VCs’ selection as well as monitoring abilities,
and predicts success of portfolio companies irrespective of
their lifecycle position, is by dividing the sample by the
developmental stage of portfolio companies when they
were initially funded.
I divide my sample based on
companies’ being in seed/early or later/expansion stages
at the time of their initial funding, and replicate the
analyses of Table 6.
IPO
Capitalization share signiﬁcantly predicts the success of
portfolio companies in terms of an increased likelihood of
a successful exit, suggesting that it effectively captures
VCs’ screening as well as monitoring expertise. I do not
report the results in order to conserve space; however,
details are available upon request.

In both the sub-samples,

4.2.

IPOs versus acquisitions

In hazard analyses, I ﬁnd that more reputable VCs are
able to exit successfully with a lower expected duration. In
this sub-section I focus on the sub-sample of successful
companies (VC backed IPOs and acquisitions) and analyze
whether VCs backing the IPO ﬁrms are more reputable
relative to those backing the target ﬁrms. There are two


ARTICLE IN PRESS

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

141

primary reasons I analyze this issue. First,
IPOs and
acquisitions are the two primary methods through which
privately held ﬁrms move to dispersed public ownership.
Although the ‘going public’ decision has been extensively
studied both theoretically and empirically,
limited
research exists on the acquisitions of private ﬁrms,
particularly those that are VC-backed. Recent studies by
Brau, Francis, and Kohers (2003), and Poulsen and
Stegemoller (2008) show factors that determine the ﬁrm’s
choice of an IPO or an acquisition, for a broad sample of
privately held ﬁrms. In a VC-speciﬁc narrower context,
Bayar and Chemmanur (2006) theoretically model the
choice of exit strategy by entrepreneurs and venture
capitalists focusing again on the two most proﬁtable exit
routes. By empirically analyzing the choice between IPOs
and acquisitions for VC-backed ﬁrms, I am able to shed
light on the determinants of the exit choice for an
important subset of ﬁrms desiring to move to public
status after being privately held.

The second reason is I am able to provide additional
robustness about the proposed measure of VC reputation,
by analyzing its impact on the likelihood of exits via IPOs
or acquisitions. If a monotonic pattern emerges in which
top brand VCs are more likely to be associated with IPOs,
followed by medium brand VCs with acquisitions, and the
least reputable VCs with unsuccessful exits,
it would
indicate the VC reputation measure performs well.

In the logit framework, I ﬁrst relate the company’s
choice of exit via an IPO or an acquisition to my measures
of VC reputation. The dependent variable is one if the
company goes public and zero if it is acquired. As earlier,
I estimate models adding sequentially the two variables
that proxy for VC reputation. Models 1 and 2 in Table 7
show that the most reputable VCs are associated with
IPOs more often, even relative to acquisitions. As the VC’s
share of cumulative IPO capitalization and investment
rises, the probability of an IPO exit over an acquisition exit
rises as well.

Other observations are as follows. Among the sub-
sample of successful exits, companies with higher VC
funding, indicating better quality companies, are more
likely to exit via IPOs. This is consistent with Bayar and
Chemmanur (2006) who hypothesize that better quality
companies have an increased probability of success in the
product markets as standalone ﬁrms and are more likely
to go public. I ﬁnd companies that are VC funded when the
market to book ratios in the high-tech industries are
higher, are less likely to go public. Also, companies that
receive their ﬁrst funding when the investment capital is
plentiful are less likely to exit through IPOs. This indicates
that the best quality companies receive funding when the
available capital in the industry is not as plentiful, which
is consistent with earlier results. Furthermore, I ﬁnd that
IPOs are more likely during better IPO market conditions,
which echoes the ﬁndings in Brau, Francis, and Kohers
(2003) in the IPO versus acquisition context. Finally,
companies that received their VC funding when they were
in early stages of development are more likely to be
acquired, which is consistent with the evidence in Poulsen
and Stegemoller (2008). Later-stage companies can better
withstand product market competition, and are more

likely to survive as standalone ﬁrms, relative to early-
stage companies, and this guides their exit choice as well.
As a further robustness check, I next examine the
likelihood of a portfolio company exit via the three major
routes—IPOs, acquisitions, and liquidations—in a multi-
nomial setting. The exit likelihood is regressed on my
measures of VC reputation along with the other indepen-
dent variables used in earlier analyses. The results are
presented in Table 7, models 3 and 4 that are estimated in
a multinomial
In model 3, the VC
reputation is measured by the IPO Capitalization share,
which continues to be robust in predicting the likelihood
of successful exits. In summary, I ﬁnd top brand VCs are
more likely to be associated with IPOs,
followed by
medium brand VCs with acquisitions, and the least
reputable VCs with unsuccessful exits. This monotonic
pattern successfully captured by IPO Capitalization share
is a further testament to its robustness. In contrast, as
presented in model 4, the other measure of VC reputation,
VC investment share, is not able to capture this monotonic
pattern in a signiﬁcant way.

logit framework.

4.3. Asset productivity of VC-backed IPOs

turnover

Jain and Kini

Finally, I analyze the asset productivity (asset turnover)
of VC-backed portfolio companies when they go public.
Asset productivity is a means to determine the efﬁciency
by which a company converts its investment in assets into
(1994), and Purnanandam and
sales.
Swaminathan (2004) analyze asset
in the
context of long-run IPO performance. In the VC context,
recent research by Puri and Zarutskie (2007) suggests that
the scale of investment and production is an important
criterion for company ﬁnancing by VCs. They also report
that subsequent to receipt of venture funding, VC-backed
companies exhibit larger levels of investment in assets
relative to non-VC-backed ﬁrms but do not exhibit larger
levels of sales. However, they do not differentiate among
VCs and treat all VCs as a single class of investors, when
comparing VC-backed and non-VC-backed companies.

Since some VCs are more reputable than others, it is
worthwhile to examine the impact of VC reputation on
asset productivity of their portfolio companies. VCs play
an extensive role in professionalizing start-up ﬁrms
through human resource policies, executive compensation
design, and stafﬁng of adequate personnel, particularly in
sales and marketing (Hellmann and Puri, 2002). Since
reputable VCs are more likely to provide better value-
added services in professionalizing their portfolio compa-
nies,
I hypothesize that companies backed by more
reputable VCs have higher asset productivity at IPOs.

As earlier, the sample includes all companies that
received initial VC funding between 1991 and 2001 and
went public by the beginning of 2006. Recall
that
VC-backed IPOs are the most successful of all portfolio
companies and as such are likely to be backed by the
most reputable and active venture investors. To analyze
asset productivity for each company,
I measure the
ratio of annual sales to total book assets prior to the IPO
year. I obtain similar, but stronger qualitative results,


142

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

ARTICLE IN PRESS

Table 7
Logit analysis of IPO and M&A exits during 1991–2005

The sample in models 1 and 2 consists of VC-backed companies initially funded between 1991 and 2001 that exited via an IPO or an acquisition
between 1991 and 2005, and for which relevant data are available. Models 1 and 2 are estimated in a logit framework with the choice of IPO being the
dependent variable. The dependent variable is coded 1 for IPOs and 0 for acquisitions. The sample in models 3 and 4 consists of all venture-backed
companies funded between 1991 and 2001, and for which relevant data are available. Models 3 and 4 are estimated in a multinomial logit framework
determining the likelihood of IPOs and acquisitions. The dependent variable in models 3 and 4 takes three discrete values constituting IPOs, acquisitions,
and unsuccessful exits. The reputation of the lead venture capitalist backing the portfolio company is proxied for by two variables. The ﬁrst is based on the
lead VC ﬁrm’s dollar capitalization share in the IPO market, determined by the cumulative market capitalization of the companies taken public by the VC
ﬁrm, relative to other VC ﬁrms. The second measures the lead VC’s share of aggregate investment in the VC industry. In both cases, the higher the number,
the higher the lead VC’s reputation. Other control variables are as follows: lead VC’s connectedness measured by the normalized number of unique VCs
each VC has syndicated with in previous 5 years, size of the VC syndicate, total VC funding to the portfolio company across all ﬁnancing rounds, market to
book ratio in the high-tech industry (deﬁned in footnote #11) proxying for VC investment climate, aggregate VC industry funds inﬂow proxying for
industry competition, time-varying exit market conditions proxied by lagged quarterly number of IPO and M&A transactions, age of the lead VC ﬁrm, and
indicator variables denoting involvement of a corporate investor in the VC syndicate, presence of an investment bank as one of the VC syndicate members,
and whether the VC investment occurred when the portfolio company was at an early/seed stage of development. Industry and initial funding year ﬁxed
effects are included in all regressions but their coefﬁcients are suppressed for brevity. Intercepts are not reported. Robust p-values are in brackets next to
the parameter estimates. ** And * denote signiﬁcance at 1% and 5% levels respectively.

Lead VC reputation

IPO Capitalization share
VC investment share
Lead VC connectedness
VC syndicate size
Total VC funding across all rounds
Median market to book ratio in high-tech industry
in the year of ﬁrst VC investment in the portfolio
company
Log of aggregate fund inﬂows in the VC industry in
the year prior to ﬁrst VC investment in the portfolio
company
IPO and M&A market conditions

Log of number of IPOs in the previous quarter
Log of number of M&A deals in the previous

quarter
Indicator ¼ 1 if VC syndicate involves a corporate
investor
Indicator ¼ 1 if VC syndicate includes an
investment bank
Indicator ¼ 1 if lead VC investment is at an early/
seed stage
Log of lead VC’s age
Industry and year ﬁxed effects
 Log likelihood
Number of observations

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

IPO vs. M&A

IPO vs. M&A

IPO

M&A

IPO

M&A

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

0.152 [0.00]**

0.159 [0.00]** 0.047 [0.03]*

0.399 [0.00]**

0.292 [0.00]** 0.047
[0.52]
 0.024 [0.10]  0.002 [0.84]  0.013 [0.17]
0.014 [0.03]* 0.016 [0.00]**
0.007
0.057 [0.00]** 0.058 [0.00]** 0.055 [0.00]** 0.056 [0.00]**
0.029 [0.00]** 0.029 [0.00]** 0.013 [0.00]** 0.003 [0.01]** 0.013 [0.00]** 0.003 [0.02]*
 0.513 [0.00]**  0.514 [0.00]**  0.406 [0.00]**  0.071 [0.17]  0.405 [0.00]**  0.068 [0.19]

[0.46]

[0.81]

[0.80]

0.006

0.006

 0.926 [0.00]**  0.881 [0.00]**  0.478 [0.00]**  0.450 [0.00]**  0.422 [0.00]**  0.435 [0.00]**

1.720 [0.00]** 1.737 [0.00]** 2.361 [0.00]**  1.307 [0.00]** 2.386 [0.00]**  1.308 [0.00]**
3.148 [0.00]** 3.648 [0.00]** 3.105 [0.00]** 3.644 [0.00]**
0.632

[0.15]

[0.13]

0.601

 0.019 [0.91]  0.018 [0.91]

0.263 [0.01]** 0.232 [0.00]** 0.263 [0.01]** 0.232 [0.00]**

0.111

[0.52]

0.126

[0.46]

0.188

[0.08]

0.026

[0.72]

0.200

[0.06]

0.026

[0.72]

 0.461 [0.00]**  0.474 [0.00]**  0.223 [0.01]** 0.041

[0.50]  0.236 [0.01]** 0.036

[0.55]

 0.116 [0.10]  0.113 [0.11]  0.020 [0.64]

0.039

[0.13]  0.011 [0.79]

0.042

[0.10]

Present

1386
2917

Present

1387
2917

Present
13510
11327

Present
13525
11327

when I analyze asset productivity using sales and assets
reported in the year of the IPO. I procure the data from
Compustat and ﬁll in any missing observations using the
IPO prospectuses. In the multivariate analysis I relate a
company’s sales-to-book assets ratio to my measures of
VC reputation. The dependent variable is logarithm of one
plus the sales-to-book and the models are estimated using
the Tobit framework. Most of the other independent
variables are the same used in earlier analyses: VC
connectedness, VC syndicate size, portfolio company’s
quality,
lead VC’s age, VC industry competition as
measured by aggregate fund inﬂows in the year prior to
the ﬁrst round of VC funding, VC investment environment
as measured by the market to book ratio in the high-tech
industry in the year of ﬁrst round of VC funding, IPO and
M&A market conditions prior to the IPO, and indicator
variables denoting (i) presence of a corporate investor in

the VC syndicate, (ii) presence of an investment bank in
the VC syndicate, and (iii) initiation of VC funding at the
seed or early stage in the company’s lifecycle. In addition,
I include the: (i) median market to book ratio in IPO ﬁrm’s
industry in the year of exit, (ii) a measure of the lead
underwriter’s reputation, (iii) company’s equity market
capitalization at the IPO, (iv) median sales-to-book assets
ratio in IPO ﬁrm’s industry in the year of exit, and (v)
industry and exit year indicators. The industries are
classiﬁed into 30 categories based on the SIC codes, which
are available for all companies, since the sample compa-
nies are publicly held. I source the industry deﬁnitions
from Ken French’s Web site (http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.
edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html).

The industry market

to book ratio captures the
industry conditions in the year of exit, while the under-
writer reputation measures the quality of underwriting


ARTICLE IN PRESS

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

143

Table 8
Tobit analyses of asset productivity (sales to assets) of VC-backed IPOs

The sample in the regressions consists of VC-backed companies that were initially funded between 1991 and 2001 and went public between 1991 and
2005, inclusive. The dependent variable is the logarithm of one plus the sales-to-book assets ratio of the VC-backed portfolio company at the IPO. IPO
company’s sales and book assets are the last reported annual revenues and total book assets of the company prior to the IPO. The reputation of the lead
venture capitalist backing the portfolio company is proxied for by two variables. The ﬁrst is based on the lead VC ﬁrm’s dollar capitalization share in the
IPO market, determined by the cumulative market capitalization of the companies taken public by the VC ﬁrm, relative to other VC ﬁrms. The second
measures the lead VC’s share of aggregate investment in the VC industry. In both cases, the higher the number, the higher the lead VC’s reputation. Other
control variables are as follows: lead VC’s connectedness measured by the normalized number of unique VCs each VC has syndicated with in previous
5 years, size of the VC syndicate, total VC funding to the portfolio company across all ﬁnancing rounds, market to book ratio in the high-tech industry
(deﬁned in footnote #11) proxying for VC investment environment, aggregate VC industry funds inﬂow proxying for industry competition, exit market
conditions proxied by lagged quarterly number of IPO and M&A transactions, age of the lead VC ﬁrm, and indicator variables denoting involvement of a
corporate investor in the VC syndicate, presence of an investment bank as one of the VC syndicate members, and whether or not the VC investment
occurred when the portfolio company was at an early/seed stage of development. I add reputation of the lead underwriter, median market to book ratio in
IPO ﬁrm’s industry in the year of exit, company’s equity market capitalization at the IPO, and the median sales to assets ratio in IPO ﬁrm’s industry in the
exit year as additional controls. Industry and exit year ﬁxed effects are included in all regressions, but their coefﬁcients are suppressed for brevity.
Intercepts are not reported. Robust p-values, heteroskedasticity-adjusted, are in brackets next to the parameter estimates. ***, **, And * denote signiﬁcance
at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively.

Log(1+sales-to-

book assets)

(1)

Log(1+sales-to-

book assets)

(2)

Log(1+sales-to-

book assets)

(3)

Log(1+sales-to-

book assets)

(4)

Lead VC reputation

IPO Capitalization share

VC investment share

Lead VC connectedness

VC syndicate size

Total VC funding across all rounds

Median market to book ratio in high-tech industry in the
year of ﬁrst VC investment in the portfolio company
Log of aggregate fund inﬂows in the VC industry in the
year prior to ﬁrst VC investment in the portfolio company
IPO and M&A market conditions

Number of IPOs in the previous quarter

Number of M&A deals in the previous quarter

Indicator ¼ 1 if VC syndicate has a corporate investor

Indicator ¼ 1 if VC syndicate has an investment bank as a
VC
Indicator ¼ 1 if ﬁrst VC investment is at an early/seed
stage
Log of lead VC’s age

Indicator ¼ 1 if lead underwriter is in top quartile by rank

Median market to book ratio in IPO ﬁrm’s industry in the
year of exit
Log of IPO company’s equity market capitalization

Median sales to book assets ratio in IPO ﬁrm’s industry in
the year of exit
Industry and year ﬁxed effects
Number of observations
 Log likelihood

0.013***

[0.01]

 0.017***

[0.00]

 0.002***

[0.00]
0.069**
[0.03]
 0.048**
[0.02]

 0.075*
[0.07]
 0.255
[0.28]

 0.110***

[0.00]
 0.045
[0.11]

 0.139***

[0.00]
 0.001
[0.96]
 0.048*
[0.07]
 0.033
[0.19]
 0.007
[0.32]

0.296***

[0.00]
Present

974

355.46

0.013
[0.44]

 0.017***

[0.00]

 0.001***

[0.00]
0.068**
[0.03]
 0.048**
[0.02]

 0.072*
[0.09]
 0.257
[0.27]
 0.111***
[0.00]
 0.045
[0.11]

 0.139***

[0.00]
0.009
[0.43]
 0.045*
[0.09]
 0.036
[0.15]
 0.007
[0.30]

0.303***

[0.00]
Present

974

358.31

0.003
[0.12]

 0.019***

[0.00]

 0.001***

[0.00]
0.074**
[0.02]
 0.048**
[0.02]

 0.072*
[0.09]
 0.273
[0.24]

 0.109***

[0.00]
 0.045*
[0.10]

 0.141***

[0.00]
0.005
[0.68]
 0.050*
[0.06]
 0.034
[0.16]
 0.007
[0.32]

0.347***

[0.00]
Present

974

353.16

0.014**
[0.04]

 0.001
[0.79]

 0.018***

[0.00]

 0.001***

[0.00]
0.074**
[0.02]

 0.051***

[0.01]

 0.073*
[0.08]
 0.272
[0.24]

 0.109***

[0.00]
 0.043
[0.12]

 0.136***

[0.00]
0.001
[0.95]
 0.050**
[0.05]
 0.030
[0.22]
 0.007
[0.29]

0.342***

[0.00]
Present

974

351.18

services provided to the company at the IPO. The under-
writer reputation measures are downloaded from Jay
Ritter’s Web site (http://bear.cba.uﬂ.edu/ritter/ipodata.
htm). In particular, I create an indicator variable denoting
whether or not the lead underwriter is in the top quartile
of the underwriter ﬁrms at the time of the IPO. Since the
dependent variable is based on revenues, I control for
company size and the median sales-to-book assets ratio in

the IPO ﬁrm’s industry. Finally, the industry and year
indicators capture the heterogeneity across industries and
time periods.

The results are presented in Table 8. In models 1
through 3, I introduce the measures of VC reputation and
connectedness sequentially, the dependent variable being
the natural logarithm of one plus the asset turnover ratio
at the IPO. I observe a signiﬁcantly positive coefﬁcient on


144

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

ARTICLE IN PRESS

IPO Capitalization share indicating that companies backed
by reputable VCs have greater asset productivity at
their IPOs. As well, in a univariate regression, the IPO
Capitalization share is statistically signiﬁcant at the 2%
level in explaining asset productivity of companies at their
initial public offerings. The coefﬁcients on VC investment
share and VC connectedness are, however, insigniﬁcant.
When I
introduce IPO Capitalization share and VC
connectedness simultaneously in model 4, the VC reputa-
tion measure continues to be statistically signiﬁcant in
explaining asset turnover. This is consistent with the
evidence reported in Hellmann and Puri (2002) on value-
added services provided by the VCs in terms of professio-
nalizing the ﬁrms. Based on the estimates of model 4, in
terms of economic signiﬁcance, one standard deviation
increase in the IPO Capitalization share is associated with
a nearly 4% increase in asset productivity for VC-backed
companies going public.

Successful

companies whose

Several signiﬁcant predictors of asset productivity
emerge from the analyses. Companies that are backed by
larger VC syndicates and receive larger VC funding have
lower asset turnover ratios. A possible explanation is
since these companies receive greater VC funding, their
turnover
asset base is larger, depressing the asset
ratio.
initial
funding
occurred when the market to book ratios of the high-tech
industries were higher, have higher asset turnover ratios
at IPO suggesting that formation and able nurturing of
some better quality companies does depend on invest-
ment environment. On the other hand, IPO companies
that were funded when capital availability in the VC
industry was plentiful have lower asset turnover ratios.
Companies also have lower asset turnover ratios when
they exit amidst better IPO market conditions, suggesting
that companies with lower asset productivity are able to
go public,
taking advantage of better capital-raising
conditions.

Furthermore,

I ﬁnd companies that are backed by
corporate venture investors, or have an investment bank
as one of the VC syndicate members, or are associated
with more reputable underwriters at their initial public
offerings, have lower asset productivity. This suggests that
association with certain prominent actors beneﬁts the
portfolio companies in their endeavor to go public despite
their lower asset turnover ratios. Also, companies that
received their initial VC funding in their later stages of
development have higher asset turnover ratios. Finally,
I observe a signiﬁcantly positive coefﬁcient on the median
asset productivity in the IPO ﬁrm’s industry in the year
of exit.

5. Robustness tests

From previous analyses, the IPO Capitalization share
has emerged as a consistent predictor of company and VC
ﬁrm performance, and also distinguishes among reputable
VCs backing IPOs and acquisitions. In this section, I discuss
additional sensitivity tests to analyze the robustness of
my earlier results and in particular my measure of VC
reputation, the IPO Capitalization share.

5.1. Correction for selection bias using Heckman’s procedure

The parameter estimates in previous tables could be
biased because of the selection bias arising out of likely
matching of better portfolio companies with more
reputable VCs. As a result, the performance of VC ﬁrms
and their portfolio companies may be due to the quality of
the companies themselves rather than VCs’ reputation. In
previous analyses, I try to capture the quality of portfolio
companies using two proxies—total VC funding and VC
connectedness. As an additional check, to address con-
cerns on account of endogeneity, I use Heckman’s (1979)
correction procedure. I model a reputable VC’s likelihood
of investing in a portfolio company using the probit
model. This ﬁrst-step model estimates the likelihood of
reputable VCs making venture investments in these
privately held ﬁrms.
In the second-step regressions,
I add l, the inverse Mills ratio, received from the ﬁrst-
step probit model as an additional regressor to estimate
each measure of company performance: likelihood of a
successful exit, probability of an IPO versus acquisition,
and asset productivity at IPOs. Formally, I have:

First step (selection equation):
Pr ðReputable VC ¼ 1Þ

ðProbitÞ :

¼ a0 þ a1 Control variables þ 

Second step:
ðCox HazardÞ :

Time to Exit ¼ b0 þ b1 Reputable VC
þ b2 Control variables
þ b3 l þ Z

(1)

ðLogitÞ :

Pr ðIPO or AcquisitionÞ

¼ b0 þ b1 Reputable VC þ b2 Control variables
(2)

þ b3l þ Z

ðTobitÞ : Asset productivity ¼ b0 þ b1 Reputable VC
þ b2 Control variables
þ b3l þ Z

(3)

The empirical speciﬁcation of the selection equation
reﬂects characteristics of the portfolio company and the
VC ﬁrm, location of the VC ﬁrm, and industry conditions at
the time of initial VC funding. The dependent variable in
the selection equation is an indicator variable denoting
whether the lead VC backing the portfolio company
belongs to the top quartile of VCs based on IPO
Capitalization share at the time of initial VC funding.
I relate the likelihood that the portfolio company is backed
by a reputable VC to the following variables: VC
connectedness, VC age, number of companies the VC has
invested in since inception, portfolio company quality as
measured by total VC funding, an indicator variable
denoting initiation of VC funding at company’s seed/early
stage, VC industry competition measured by aggregate
fund inﬂows in the year prior to the ﬁrst round of
company’s funding, VC investment environment mea-
sured by the market to book ratio in the high-tech
industry in the year of ﬁrst round of company’s funding,
and indicator variables denoting whether the VC ﬁrm is


ARTICLE IN PRESS

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

145

the selection equation as well. Also,

based in the states of California, Massachusetts, New York,
Texas, or Virginia, states where most VC ﬁrms are located.
The logic for inclusion of explanatory variables in the
selection equation is as follows. Reputable VCs are likely
to have better connections in the industry, which
motivates inclusion of VC connectedness. Since reputation
is at least partially based on experience, I allow the VC age
to enter
the
cumulative number of IPOs and the market capitalizations
of portfolio companies at IPO, on which the measure of VC
reputation is based, are likely a function of the number
of portfolio companies funded by the VC. Therefore,
I construct the number of companies funded by a VC
since its inception as an additional regressor in the
selection equation predicting a more reputable VC.
Sorensen (2007) shows reputable VCs are more likely to
match with better quality companies, which calls for
inclusion of a proxy for company quality. Reputable VCs
by virtue of their experience are less likely to invest in
times of increased VC competition because of higher
expected valuations since a number of VCs are vying for
the same deals.
investment
environment, as proxied by the industry market to book
ratio, VC competition is likely to increase, again predicting
a lower likelihood of investment by reputable VCs. Finally,
more reputable VCs are likely to have access to a larger set
of investment opportunities relative to less reputable VCs
who may have to invest in relatively more risky early/seed
stage deals in order to generate returns and establish
reputation in the industry.

In times of an upbeat

All but one of these explanatory variables use VC-,
company-, and market characteristics known at the time
of a VC’s initial investment. In the absence of a suitable
proxy that measures the quality of portfolio companies at
the initiation of VC funding, the measure I use is the total
VC funding which of course is not known at the inception
of VC funding. The results, however, remain qualitatively
unaltered upon exclusion of this variable. As a further
robustness check, I also include indicators denoting the
portfolio company’s industry in the selection equation.
While all the primary results remain qualitatively similar,
none of the indicators emerge statistically signiﬁcant in
predicting the likelihood of a reputable VC.

Table 9, model 1, reports the results of estimating
Eq. (1) along with the selection equation. Eq. (1) pertains
to the fourth model estimated in Table 6. The model
includes VC reputation based on the VC’s IPO Capitaliza-
tion share along with other control variables including VC
connectedness. However, along with the earlier variables,
I also add the inverse Mills ratio to control for the
selection bias. The results from the selection equation
estimation indicate that an investment by a reputable VC
is more likely if the VC is better connected (indication of
better access to deal ﬂow and a wider choice of deals), if
the VC is more experienced (aged), if the VC possesses
more investment experience by virtue of the number of
companies it has invested in, and if the portfolio company
is of a better quality. Also, reputable VCs are less likely to
invest during periods of higher fund inﬂows in the VC
industry and in an investing environment characterized
by higher market to book ratios in high-tech industries.

Furthermore, whether or not the portfolio company is in
its seed/early stage of developmental lifecycle also has a
signiﬁcant impact on the investment behavior of repu-
table VCs. Finally, VCs based in California are more likely
to be reputable relative to those based in other states that
include Massachusetts and Texas, states well-known for
concentration of VC investments. The speciﬁcation of the
selection equation is notable since most of the explana-
tory variables in the predictive model of reputable VC
backing are statistically signiﬁcant.

I

In the ﬁrst model,

I estimate the likelihood of a
successful exit in the Cox hazard framework. Based on
the results of earlier analyses,
focus on the IPO
Capitalization share of the VC ﬁrm as the measure of VC
reputation, while controlling for other variables including
the inverse Mills ratio. I ﬁnd that the IPO Capitalization
share continues to be a signiﬁcantly positive determinant
of portfolio company performance. The inverse Mills ratio
derived from the ﬁrst-step estimation is signiﬁcant
suggesting it is important to control for the selection bias
associated with VCs’ choice of their portfolio companies
(Sorensen, 2007).

reputable VCs,

I turn next to analyzing the likelihood of an IPO versus
acquisition in the case of successful portfolio companies
after adjusting for potential selection bias. Among suc-
cessful exits, companies that exited via IPOs are likely to
be backed by the most
relative to
acquisitions. I estimate model 2 in Table 9 to replicate
the results of the ﬁrst model in Table 7. When contrasting
IPOs and acquisitions,
I continue to ﬁnd the most
reputable VCs based on the IPO Capitalization share are
able to lead their portfolio companies to IPOs. The inverse
Mills ratio derived from the ﬁrst-step estimation is,
however,
I estimate the asset
productivity of VC-backed IPOs by estimating the model 3.
The results observed qualitatively mirror those reported in
the fourth model of Table 8. Companies backed by
reputable VCs have higher asset productivity, as proxied
by asset turnover ratios, at their IPOs. However, the
inverse Mills ratio derived from the ﬁrst-step estimation is
not signiﬁcant in this speciﬁcation. As a robustness check,
the analysis of asset productivity of VC-backed IPOs in the
Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) framework yields qualita-
tively similar results.
In summary, all my results are
robust to the correction of selection bias possibly induced
by VCs’ choice of portfolio companies.

insigniﬁcant. Finally,

5.2. VC reputation and IPOs

IPOs, and in particular their underpricing, have been a
fascinating topic of research in academic ﬁnance. One of
the questions that arises in the context of this study is
whether VC reputation (and the measures proposed) has
an impact on IPO underpricing, say by reducing the
underpricing of shares at IPOs through their certiﬁcation,
and thereby fetching higher prices for the companies
relative to their market prices (Megginson and Weiss,
1991). On the other hand, if reputable VCs bring better
quality companies to the IPO market as evidenced earlier,
theoretical work by Allen and Faulhaber (1989) and Welch


1
4
6

R

.

N
a
h
a
t
a

/

J
o
u
r
n
a
l

o
f

F
i
n
a
n
c
i
a
l

E
c
o
n
o
m
i
c
s

9
0

(
2
0
0
8
)

1
2
7
–
1
5
1

A
R
T
C
L
E

I

I

N

P
R
E
S
S

Table 9
Analyses of VC-backed portfolio companies’ performance controlling for endogeneity arising from receipt of reputable VC funding

The sample in the ﬁrst model consists of venture-backed companies initially funded between 1991 and 2001. The Cox Hazard Model is estimated with log of time to exit being the dependent variable. The time
to exit of a successful portfolio company that has either gone public or been acquired is the calendar time taken to exit from the date of its initial VC funding. Time to exit of portfolio companies yet to exit
successfully by beginning of 2006 is right censored at the end of calendar year 2005. Positive (negative) coefﬁcient indicates that the covariate increases the hazard and shortens (lengthens) the expected
duration. The sample in the second model consists of venture-backed companies initially funded between 1991 and 2001 that subsequently went public or were acquired by the beginning of 2006. The model is
estimated in a logit framework with the choice of IPO being the dependent variable. The dependent variable is coded 1 for IPOs and 0 for acquisitions. The sample in the third model consists of venture-backed
companies that were initially funded between 1991 and 2001 and went public between 1991 and 2005, inclusive. The dependent variable in the model is the logarithm of one plus the sales-to-book assets ratio
(S/B) of the VC-backed portfolio company at the IPO. IPO company’s sales and assets are the last reported annual revenues and total book assets of the company prior to the IPO.

The reputation of the lead venture capitalist backing the portfolio company is proxied by the VC ﬁrm’s dollar capitalization share in the IPO market, determined by the cumulative market capitalization of
the companies taken public by the VC ﬁrm, relative to other VC ﬁrms. The higher the number, the higher the lead VC’s reputation. Other control variables are as follows: VC’s connectedness measured by the
normalized number of unique VCs each VC has syndicated with in previous 5 years, size of the VC syndicate, total VC funding to the portfolio company across all ﬁnancing rounds, market to book ratio in the
high-tech industry (deﬁned in footnote #11) proxying for VC investment environment, aggregate VC industry funds inﬂow proxying for industry competition, exit market conditions proxied by lagged quarterly
number of IPO and M&A transactions (time-varying in the case of hazard model), age of the lead VC ﬁrm, and indicator variables denoting involvement of a corporate investor in the VC syndicate, presence of an
investment bank as one of the VC syndicate members, and whether the VC investment occurred when the portfolio company was at an early/seed stage of development. The inverse Mills ratio derived from the
ﬁrst stage probit estimation is added to account for selection bias, if any, on account of likelihood of more reputable VCs selecting better portfolio companies on average. In addition, reputation of the lead
underwriter, the median market to book ratio in IPO ﬁrm’s industry in the year of exit, company size measured by log of equity market capitalization at the IPO, and median sales to book assets ratio (S/B) in IPO
ﬁrm’s industry in the year of exit are included as additional controls in estimation of the third model. Industry and year ﬁxed effects are included in all regressions, but their coefﬁcients are suppressed for
brevity. Intercepts are not reported. Robust p-values are in brackets next to the parameter estimates. ***, **, And * denote signiﬁcance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively.

Additional explanatory variables used in the estimation of selection equation (probit model) predicting reputable VC investments (lead VCs that reside in the top quartile based on their IPO capitalization
share) are VC connectedness, portfolio company quality measured by total VC funding to the portfolio company across all ﬁnancing rounds, market to book ratio in the high-tech industry proxying for VC
investment environment, aggregate VC industry fund inﬂow proxying for industry competition, an indicator denoting whether the VC investment occurred at the seed/early stage of company’s development, VC
age, number of companies VC has invested in until the year of its ﬁrst investment in the portfolio company, and indicators for whether the VC ﬁrm is based in California, Massachusetts, New York, Texas, or
Virginia.

Pr (Reputable VC ¼ 1)

Cox Hazard

Pr (Reputable VC ¼ 1)

IPO vs. M&A Logit

Pr (Reputable VC ¼ 1)

Log (1+S/B) Tobit

(1)

(2)

(3)

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

Coeff.

p-Val

0.254

[0.00]***

0.003
 0.058

 0.104

[0.00]***
[0.06]*

[0.00]***

0.079
 0.017
0.016
0.002
0.004

 0.237

[0.00]***
[0.05]**
[0.01]***
[0.00]***

[0.92]

[0.00]***

0.180

[0.00]***

0.003
 0.048

 0.139

[0.03]**
[0.50]

[0.00]***

0.152
 0.022
0.007
0.029
 0.513

 0.919

[0.00]***

[0.18]
[0.78]

[0.00]***
[0.00]***

[0.00]***

0.116

[0.00]***

0.003
0.065

 0.085

[0.05]**
[0.67]

[0.26]

0.013
 0.002
 0.018
 0.001
0.074

 0.053

[0.05]**
[0.44]

[0.00]***
[0.00]***
[0.02]**

[0.01]***

Lead VC reputation

IPO Capitalization share

Lead VC connectedness
VC syndicate size
Total VC funding across all rounds
Median market to book ratio in high-tech industry in the
year of ﬁrst VC investment in the portfolio company
Log of aggregate fund inﬂows in the VC industry in the
year prior to ﬁrst VC investment in portfolio company
IPO and M&A Market conditions


Log of number of IPOs in the previous quarter
Log of number of M&A deals in the previous quarter

Indicator ¼ 1 if VC syndicate involves a corporate investor
Indicator ¼ 1 if VC syndicate includes an investment bank
Indicator ¼ 1 if VC investment is at an early/seed stage
Log of lead VC’s age
Number of companies lead VC has invested in
Indicator ¼ 1 if VC ﬁrm is based in California
Indicator ¼ 1 if VC ﬁrm is based in Massachusetts
Indicator ¼ 1 if VC ﬁrm is based in Texas
Indicator ¼ 1 if VC ﬁrm is based in Virginia
Indicator ¼ 1 if VC ﬁrm is based in New York
Inverse Mills Ratio
Indicator ¼ 1 if lead underwriter is in the top quartile
Median M/B ratio in IPO ﬁrm’s industry in exit year
Log of IPO company’s equity market capitalization
Median S/B ratio in IPO ﬁrm’s industry in exit year
Industry and year ﬁxed effects
 2Log likelihood
Number of observations

 0.141
0.220
0.029
0.250
0.023
 0.086
 0.705
0.124

[0.00]***
[0.00]***
[0.00]***
[0.00]***

[0.77]
[0.46]

[0.00]***
[0.05]**

1.050
1.274
0.187
0.055
0.005
 0.034

[0.00]***
[0.01]***
[0.00]***

[0.25]
[0.91]
[0.22]

 0.163

[0.01]***

 0.299
0.194
0.038
0.161
 0.142
 0.426
0.133
0.164

[0.00]***
[0.00]***
[0.00]***

[0.15]
[0.39]
[0.19]
[0.83]
[0.23]

1.729
0.619
 0.020
0.113
 0.465
 0.096

[0.00]***

[0.13]
[0.91]
[0.51]

[0.00]***

[0.30]

0.050

[0.75]

 0.252
0.095
0.021
 0.111
0.112
0.010
0.086
 0.213

[0.04]**
[0.14]

[0.00]***

[0.45]
[0.56]
[0.98]
[0.88]
[0.31]

6024
11327

Present
49515
11260

1402
2917

Present

2770
2917

584
982

 0.073
 0.279
 0.106
 0.042
 0.129
 0.009

[0.08]*
[0.23]

[0.00]***

[0.13]

[0.00]***

[0.54]

 0.042
 0.049
 0.030
 0.008
0.341

[0.27]
[0.06]*
[0.22]
[0.24]

[0.00]***

Present

701
974

A
R
T
C
L
E

I

I

N

P
R
E
S
S

R

.

N
a
h
a
t
a

/

J
o
u
r
n
a
l

o
f

F
i
n
a
n
c
i
a
l

E
c
o
n
o
m
i
c
s

9
0

(
2
0
0
8
)

1
2
7
–
1
5
1

1
4
7


148

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

ARTICLE IN PRESS

that

(1989) suggest
these companies may be more
underpriced than lower quality companies.13 I acknowl-
edge these are not the only explanations for low or high
IPO underpricing in the context of this study; Ritter and
Welch (2002) present a comprehensive review of IPO
activity, pricing, and allocations. They merely illustrate
the tenuous relation between VC reputation,
issuer
quality, and IPO underpricing, which can only be mea-
sured in an empirical setup.

To analyze the impact of VC reputation on IPO under-
pricing, I construct a measure of IPO underpricing, deﬁned
as the difference between the market price on the ﬁrst
day’s close and the IPO offer price, normalized by the IPO
offer price. In my analysis however, I do not observe a
signiﬁcant relation between IPO underpricing and VC
reputation in the multivariate framework, suggesting that
neither prediction dominates the other. Even though the
coefﬁcient on VC reputation is negative suggesting
reduced underpricing for reputable VC-backed IPOs, the
evidence about the insigniﬁcant impact of VC reputation
on IPO underpricing is also somewhat consistent with the
ﬁndings in Lee and Wahal (2004) who report that IPOs
backed by VCs are more underpriced, relative to non-
VC-backed ones. Lee and Wahal (2004) also report that
the subsequent inﬂow of funds into the VC ﬁrms is more
pronounced following the market ‘buzz’ observed when
the companies are more underpriced. The initial return
(or underpricing), also referred to as the ‘‘ﬁrst day pop,’’
generates a lot of publicity in the press and among the
capital market constituents including institutional and
retail investors. As a result, the incentive to attract large
inﬂows of funds that enhance reputation but also serve as
an incentive to underprice more to generate the ‘‘pop’’
may have a confounding effect on VC motivation to certify
their portfolio companies, which is predicted to reduce
underpricing. This may also lead to the insigniﬁcant
relation observed between VC reputation and IPO under-
pricing. On the other hand, consistent with recent studies
(Beatty and Welch, 1996; Hansen, 2001; Banerjee et al.,
2006), I ﬁnd the reputation of the lead underwriter has a
signiﬁcant positive impact on the extent of underpricing.14

13 The common feature in these models is higher-quality issuers
purposely underprice their shares at IPOs to deter lower-quality issuers
from imitating; however, they are able to recover the resultant shortfall
at IPO through future stock issues at higher prices or favorable market
responses to future dividend announcements. See, also, Chemmanur
(1993) who models better quality ﬁrms trying to induce outsiders to
engage in costly information production. The deliberate underpricing at
IPO compensates outsiders for producing information which is subse-
quently reﬂected in higher secondary market prices for better quality
ﬁrms.

14 In additional tests on other company-speciﬁc variables at IPO, I do
not ﬁnd the propensity to bring proﬁt- or loss-making companies to the
market to be signiﬁcantly related to my measures of VC reputation,
suggesting reputable VCs do not seem to be associated with lower
quality exits. A ﬁnal IPO-speciﬁc variable analyzed is the IPO Float
deﬁned as the fraction of shares sold in the IPO relative to the total
outstanding shares of the company post-IPO. However, I fail to ﬁnd a
signiﬁcant relation between the IPO Float and VC reputation. The ability
of a company to sell a higher fraction of shares depending purely on VC
reputation (or certiﬁcation) is likely confounded by the company’s
funding needs at the time, which also affects the number of shares
offered and thus, the IPO Float.

When companies go public, issuer insiders including
the venture capitalists are often under lock-up periods in
which they may not be allowed to cash out of their
shareholdings. It may therefore be helpful to analyze the
impact of VC reputation on long-run performance of
the issuers to gauge whether companies and VCs realize
ﬁnancial beneﬁts, particularly after lock-up expirations. In
a complementary study, Krishnan, Masulis, and Singh
(2006) report that the VC’s dollar market share of the IPO
market is signiﬁcantly positively associated with long-run
IPO issuer performance measured by industry-adjusted
return on assets (ROA), market to book ratio, and listing
survival.15 Thus, reputable VCs are associated with a
higher value creation for their portfolio companies when
their prote´ ge´ s go public, and do not seem to be associated
with lower quality exits.

5.3. Alternative deﬁnitions of VC reputation, VC experience,
and VC connectedness

I construct another measure of VC reputation, a short-
run measure, based on the cumulative dollar capitaliza-
tion of IPOs backed by the VC ﬁrm. For each VC ﬁrm,
I cumulate the dollar market value of all companies taken
public by the VC ﬁrm in the previous ﬁve years on a rolling
basis, and normalize it by the aggregate market value of
all VC-backed companies that went public during those
ﬁve years. As before, the VC reputation is measured at the
time of VC’s ﬁrst investment in the portfolio company
resulting in a substantial time gap between the measure-
ment of VC reputation and portfolio company exit.
Although the earlier results relating reputation to VC ﬁrm
and portfolio company performance are robust to the
adoption of this measure based on VC’s more recent
performance, the originally constructed long-run cumu-
lative measure, based on IPO capitalization, has more
explanatory power, both statistically and economically.
This is further evidence of the efﬁcacy of
long-run
cumulative IPO capitalization as a measure of VC reputa-
tion since reputation is expected to incorporate the long-
term track record of the VC ﬁrm, a property the measure
appears to capture effectively.

Sorensen (2007) argues that the cumulative number of
investment rounds made by each VC is a better measure of
VC experience relative to VC’s age, since age cannot
properly distinguish between active and inactive inves-
tors. I re-estimate all my results using VC’s cumulative
number of investment rounds as a proxy for VC experi-
ence. As earlier, VC experience is measured at the time of
the VC’s ﬁrst
in the portfolio company.
However, all the earlier results relating VC reputation by

investment

15 A slight difference between the VC reputation based on cumula-
tive IPO capitalization and Krishnan, Masulis, and Singh (2006)’s
measure of VC reputation—IPO Market share—is their measure is based
on IPO gross proceeds rather than the IPO ﬁrm’s market capitalization.
IPO gross proceeds is a less attractive measure of VC reputation since it
reﬂects the company’s need for funds at the time of IPO rather than the
VC ﬁrm’s involvement in providing expertise and value-added services
which are more adequately captured by IPO ﬁrm’s market capitalization.


ARTICLE IN PRESS

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

149

IPO Capitalization share, to VC ﬁrm and portfolio company
performance remain qualitatively robust.

The measure of VC connectedness utilized so far
captures the number of unique relationships each VC
has had with other VCs in ﬁve years on a rolling basis.
However, this measure does not differentiate VCs who
lead VC syndicates from those that are invited to be
syndicate members by other lead VCs. In the spirit of
Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu (2007),
I construct two
directed measures of VC connectedness. The ﬁrst measures
the number of relationships a VC ﬁrm has with other lead
VCs when it is invited to co-invest in other VCs’ deals. The
second counts the number of other VCs a VC ﬁrm has
invited into its own syndicates. Clearly, the directed
measures of VC connectedness have one additional thread
of information—number of relationships forged when VCs
led (or did not lead) their syndicates—that motivates their
usage. As before, I normalize both the directed measures
by the number of relationships possible during those
5 years. Next, I re-estimate all the results by using these
alternative deﬁnitions of VC connectedness. I continue to
ﬁnd that VC reputation based on the cumulative IPO
capitalization remains a consistent predictor of portfolio
company and VC ﬁrm performance.

5.4.

Including VC fund size as an explanatory variable

Kaplan and Schoar (2005) show that VC fund size is
positively related with fund performance. As a further
robustness check, I also include the VC fund size as an
additional explanatory variable in all previous tests
analyzing VC ﬁrm and portfolio company performance.
However, this does not qualitatively affect the results and
the IPO Capitalization share as a measure of VC reputation
continues to be a signiﬁcant predictor of performance. I do
not report the results both for reasons of brevity and the
reduced sample size due to unavailable information on
fund size for a number of VC funds.

6. Conclusion

Like all ﬁnancial intermediaries, it is important for
venture capitalists to maintain a favorable reputation if
they seek to be active long-term players in the ﬁnancial
markets. Moreover, better reputation confers ﬁnancial
beneﬁts, which provide VCs the incentives to invest in
acquiring reputation in the ﬁrst place. For example, Hsu
(2004) provides evidence that offers made by reputable
VCs are more likely to be accepted, and more reputable
VCs acquire start-up equity at a signiﬁcant discount,
compared to less reputable VCs. Thus, while reputation is
primarily based on ability and past performance, the
actors are also concerned about preserving and enhancing
their reputation through better future performance. In
this study, I analyze whether association with reputable
venture capitalists confers performance beneﬁts to their
portfolio companies and if so, in what form? In so doing,
I propose a measure of VC reputation that consistently
predicts VC and portfolio company performance.

Controlling for the portfolio company’s quality, exit
market conditions, and a number of VC speciﬁc factors
that impact performance including experience, connect-
edness, syndication, industry competition, and investment
environment, I ﬁnd that companies led by more reputable
VCs based on the cumulative market capitalization of IPOs
backed by the VC ﬁrm, are more likely to exit successfully,
access public markets faster, and have higher asset
productivity at
results being economically
meaningful. On the other hand, the other likely measures
of VC reputation such as age, cumulative aggregate
investment, cumulative number of investment rounds,
or VC connectedness do not emerge as consistent
predictors of private company performance.

IPOs—all

In exploring whether the positive relation between VC
reputation and portfolio company performance is robust
to adjusting for superior VC investment selectivity, I ﬁnd
evidence that even though more reputable VC ﬁrms are
found to select superior VC investments, they also add
incremental value to their portfolio companies resulting
in better performance. Whether VCs display capability in
sorting companies or in providing value-added services to
their portfolio companies, their reputation is enhanced on
account of proﬁtable fulﬁllment of either activity. A
consistently performing measure of VC reputation—as
suggested in this study—which incorporates into itself
both the VC’s screening and value-addition abilities, can
be of good use to limited partners in their VC-sorting
activity. In a similar vein, entrepreneurs can also choose to
associate with brand name VCs for a higher likelihood of
better future performance.

Appendix. Ranking of the top 30 venture capital ﬁrms

VC ﬁrm rankings are based on the dollar capitalization
share of a VC ﬁrm in the IPO market, cumulated until the
end of year 2005. As a comparison, the 1998 rankings
based on the dollar capitalization share of the VC ﬁrm in
the IPO market until the end of that year are also
presented. * Indicates the VC ﬁrm was outside the top
100 bracket.

2005
Rank

1

2

3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

11

12
13
14

Venture capital ﬁrm

IPO Capitalization

J.P. Morgan Chase Capital
Partners
Kleiner Perkins Cauﬁeld &
Byers
Integral Capital Partners
Goldman, Sachs & Co.
New Enterprise Associates
Sequoia Capital
Cisco Systems, Inc.
Intel Capital
Accel Partners
Amerindo Investment
Advisors, Inc.
Worldview Technology
Partners
Benchmark Capital
Vulcan Capital
Institutional Venture
Partners

share (%)

13.36

12.55

9.24
8.13
8.03
7.98
7.37
6.99
6.16
5.91

5.55

5.48
5.42
4.94

1998
Rank

2

1

3
11
7
5
*
*
13
*

*

*
*
26


ARTICLE IN PRESS

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

150

15
16
17
18
19

20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

Bowman Capital
Crosspoint Venture Partners
Meritech Capital Partners
Matrix Partners
Technology Crossover
Ventures
Oak Investment Partners
GE
Comdisco Ventures
Mayﬁeld Fund
Microsoft Corporation
Sprout Group
Greylock
U.S. Venture Partners
Norwest Venture Partners
Kinetic Ventures LLC
Bessemer Venture Partners

4.92
4.80
4.73
4.66
4.61

4.54
4.47
4.45
4.42
4.06
4.01
3.94
3.72
3.72
3.64
3.54

*
60
*
41
25

15
*
*
16
*
24
20
10
17
72
19

References

Allen, F., Faulhaber, G., 1989. Signaling by underpricing in the IPO market.

Journal of Financial Economics 23, 303–323.

Allen,

J., Phillips, G., 2000. Corporate equity ownership, strategic
alliances, and product market relationships. Journal of Finance 55,
2791–2815.

Baker, M., Wurgler, J., 2002. Market timing and capital structure. Journal

of Finance 57, 1–32.

Banerjee, S., Hansen, R., Hrnjic, E., 2006. IPO underpricing to buy holding.

Unpublished working paper, Tulane University.

Barry, C., Muscarella, C., Peavy, J., Vetsuypens, M., 1990. The role of
venture capital in the creation of public companies: evidence from
the going-public process.
Journal of Financial Economics 27,
447–472.

Bayar, O., Chemmanur, T., 2006. IPOs or acquisitions?: a theory of the
choice of exit strategy by entrepreneurs and venture capitalists.
Unpublished working paper, Boston College.

Beatty, R.P., 1989. Auditor reputation and the pricing of initial public

offerings. The Accounting Review 64, 693–709.

Beatty, R.P., Ritter, J.R., 1986. Investment banking, reputation, and the
underpricing of initial public offerings. Journal of Financial Econom-
ics 15, 213–232.

Beatty, R., Welch, I., 1996. Issuer expenses and legal liability in initial

public offerings. Journal of Law and Economics 39, 545–602.

Brander, J., Amit, R., Antweiler, W., 2002. Venture capital syndication:
improved venture selection versus the value-added hypothesis.
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 11, 423–452.

Brau, J., Francis, F., Kohers, N., 2003. The choice of IPO versus takeover:

empirical evidence. Journal of Business 76, 583–612.

Brav, A., Gompers, P., 1997. Myth or reality? The long-run under-
performance of initial public offerings: evidence from venture and
non-venture capital-backed companies.
Journal of Finance 52,
1791–1821.

Carter, R.B., Dark, F.H., Singh, A.K., 1998. Underwriter reputation, initial
returns, and the long run performance of IPO stocks. Journal of
Finance 53, 285–311.

Carter, R.B., Manaster, S., 1990. Initial public offerings and underwriter

reputation. Journal of Finance 45, 1045–1068.

Chemmanur, T., 1993. The pricing of initial public offerings: a dynamic
Journal of Finance 48,

model with information production.
285–304.

Cochrane, J., 2005. The risk and return of venture capital. Journal of

Financial Economics 75, 3–52.

Cumming, D.J., MacIntosh, J.G., 2003. A cross-country comparison of full
and partial venture capital exits. Journal of Banking and Finance 27,
511–548.

Feltham, G.A., Hughes, J.S., Simunic, D.A., 1991. Empirical assessment of
the impact of auditor quality on the valuation of new issues. Journal
of Accounting and Economics 14, 375–399.

Gompers, P.A., 1995. Optimal investment, monitoring, and the staging of

venture capital. Journal of Finance 50, 1461–1489.

Gompers, P.A., 1996. Grandstanding in the venture capital industry.

Journal of Financial Economics 43, 133–156.

Gompers, P.A., Lerner, J., 1999a. An analysis of compensation in the US
venture capital partnerships. Journal of Financial Economics 51,
3–44.

Gompers, P.A., Lerner, J., 1999b. The Venture Capital Cycle. The MIT Press.
Gompers, P.A., Lerner, J., 2000a. The determinants of corporate venture
capital successes: organizational structure, incentives and comple-
mentarities. In: Morck, R. (Ed.), Concentrated Corporate Ownership.
University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic
Research, pp. 17–50.

Gompers, P.A., Lerner, J., 2000b. Money chasing deals? The impact of
Journal of Financial

fund inﬂows on private equity valuations.
Economics 55, 281–325.

Gompers, P.A., Kovner, A., Lerner, J., Scharfstein, D., 2008. Venture capital
investment cycles: the impact of public markets. Journal of Financial
Economics 87, 1–23.

Hansen, R.S., 2001. Do investment banks compete in IPOs?: the advent of
the ‘‘7% plus contract’’. Journal of Financial Economics 59, 313–346.
J., 1979. Sample selection bias as a speciﬁcation error.

Heckman,

Econometrica 47, 153–161.

Hellmann, T., 2002. A theory of strategic venture investing. Journal of

Financial Economics 64, 285–314.

Hellmann, T., Puri, M., 2000. The interaction between product market
and ﬁnancing strategy: the role of venture capital. Review of
Financial Studies 13, 959–984.

Hellmann, T., Puri, M., 2002. Venture capital and the professionalization
of start-up ﬁrms: empirical evidence. Journal of Finance 57, 169–197.
Hochberg, Y., 2005. Venture capital and corporate governance in the
newly public ﬁrm. Unpublished working paper, Northwestern
University.

Hochberg, Y., Ljungqvist, A., Lu, Y., 2007. Venture capital networks and

investment performance. Journal of Finance 62, 251–301.

Hogan, C.E., 1997. Costs and beneﬁts of audit quality in the IPO market: a

self-selection analysis. The Accounting Review 72, 67–86.

Hsu, D., 2004. What do entrepreneurs pay for venture capital afﬁliation?

Journal of Finance 59, 1805–1844.

Jain, B., Kini, O., 1994. The post-issue operating performance of IPO ﬁrms.

Journal of Finance 49, 1699–1726.

Kaplan, S.N., Schoar, A., 2005. Private equity returns: persistence and

capital ﬂows. Journal of Finance 60, 1791–1823.

Kaplan, S.N., Stromberg, P., 2001. Venture capitalists as principals:
contracting, screening, and monitoring. American Economic Review
91, 426–430.

Kaplan, S.N., Stromberg, P., 2003. Financial contracting theory meets the
real world: an empirical analysis of venture capital contracts. Review
of Economic Studies 70, 281–315.

Krishnan, C.N.V., Masulis, R.W., Singh, A., 2006. Does venture capital
reputation affect subsequent IPO performance? Unpublished work-
ing paper, Case Western Reserve University.

Lee, P.M., Wahal, S., 2004. Grandstanding, certiﬁcation, and the under-
Journal of Financial

pricing of venture capital backed IPOs.
Economics 73, 375–407.

Lerner, J., 1994a. Venture capitalists and the decision to go public. Journal

of Financial Economics 35, 293–316.

Lerner,

J., 1994b. The syndication of venture capital

investments.

Financial Management 23, 16–27.

Lerner, J., 1995. Venture capitalists and the oversight of private ﬁrms.

Journal of Finance 50, 301–318.

Li, X., Masulis, R.W., 2006. Venture capital investments by IPO under-
interest, or moral hazard?

writers: certiﬁcation, alignment of
Unpublished working paper, Vanderbilt University.

Lindsey, L., 2008. Blurring ﬁrm boundaries: the role of venture capital in

strategic alliances. Journal of Finance 63, 1137–1168.

Masulis, R.W., Nahata, R., 2008. Financial contracting with strategic
investors: evidence from corporate venture capital. Unpublished
working paper, Baruch College and Vanderbilt University.

McLaughlin, R., Saﬁeddine, A., Vasudevan, G.K., 2000. Investment banker
reputation and the performance of seasoned equity issuers. Financial
Management 29, 96–110.

Megginson, W.L., Weiss, K.A., 1991. Venture capitalist certiﬁcation in

initial public offerings. Journal of Finance 46, 879–903.

Menon, K., Williams, D.D., 1991. Auditor credibility and initial public

offerings. The Accounting Review 66, 313–332.

Michaely, R., Shaw, W.H., 1995. Does the choice of auditor convey quality

in an initial public offering? Financial Management 24, 15–30.

Poulsen, A., Stegemoller, M., 2008. Moving from private to public
ownership: selling out to public ﬁrms vs. initial public offerings.
Financial Management 37, 81–101.

Puri, M., Zarutskie, R., 2007. On the lifecycle dynamics of venture-capital-
and non-venture-capital-ﬁnanced ﬁrms. Unpublished working paper,
Duke University.

Purnanandam, A., Swaminathan, B., 2004. Are IPOs really underpriced?

17, 811–848.


ARTICLE IN PRESS

R. Nahata / Journal of Financial Economics 90 (2008) 127–151

151

Ritter, J., Welch, I., 2002. A review of IPO activity, pricing, and allocations.

Titman, S., Trueman, B., 1986. Information quality and the valuation of

Journal of Finance 57, 1795–1828.

new issues. Journal of Accounting and Economics 8, 159–621.

Sahlman, W.A., 1990. The structure and governance of venture capital

Welch, I., 1989. Seasoned offerings, imitation costs, and the underpricing

organizations. Journal of Financial Economics 27, 473–521.

of initial public offerings. Journal of Finance 44, 421–450.

Sorensen, M., 2007. How smart

matching model of venture capital.
2725–2762.

is smart money? A two-sided
Journal of Finance 62,

Zarutskie, R., 2007. Do venture capitalists affect investment perfor-
mance? Evidence from ﬁrst-time funds. Unpublished working paper,
Duke University.

