The Interactive Effects of Psychological 
Capital and Organizational Identity on 
Employee Organizational Citizenship  
and Deviance Behaviors

Journal of Leadership & 
Organizational Studies
17(4) 380 –391
© Baker College 2010
Reprints and permission: http://www. 
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1548051809353764
http://jlos.sagepub.com

Steven M. Norman1, James B. Avey2, James L. Nimnicht2, 
and Nancy Graber Pigeon2

Abstract
We studied 199 working adults from a cross section of organizations in the United States to examine the relationship between 
positive  psychological  capital  and  organizational  identity  on  employee  deviance  and  organizational  citizenship  behaviors. 
Organizational identity was found to moderate the relationship between psychological capital (PsyCap) and both employee 
deviance and organizational citizenship behaviors such that employees highest in PsyCap and most strongly identified with the 
organization were most likely to engage in organizational citizenship behaviors and least likely to engage in deviance behaviors. 
We discuss implications for research and practice in the areas of PsyCap and employee identification with the organization.

Keywords
psychological capital, organizational identity, organizational citizenship behavior, employee deviance, moderation

Recent research has highlighted the important role of accen-
tuating  the  positive  in  organizations.  The  accumulating 
conceptual and empirical research has emphasized the rela-
tionship between various previously underemphasized psy-
chological constructs such as virtuousness (e.g., Cameron, 
Bright,  &  Caza,  2004);  compassion  (e.g.,  Lilius  et  al., 
2008); well-being (e.g., Wright & Cropanzano, 2007); and 
efficacy,  hope,  optimism,  and  resilience  (e.g.,  Avey, 
Luthans,  &  Youssef,  2010;  Peterson  &  Byron,  2008; 
Youssef & Luthans, 2007) and employee outcomes in the 
workplace. However, as noted in important critiques of this 
line  of  research  (e.g.,  Fineman,  2006;  Hackman,  2009), 
most  studies  to  date  have  examined  linear  relationships 
between predictor and criterion with limited accounting for 
context  and  especially  moderating  variables.  Important 
questions, such as when does positivity matter more or less, 
have not yet been addressed. Thus, the purpose of this study 
is  to  add  to  a  growing  line  of  research  on  what  has  been 
termed positive psychological capital (PsyCap) by consid-
ering the moderating role of organizational identity on the 
relationship between PsyCap and employee organizational 
citizenship behaviors (OCBs) and deviance behaviors (also 
referred to as counterproductive work behaviors, or CWBs).
As a variable of interest in this study that is relatively 
new in the management literature, PsyCap has been defined 
as follows:

(1) having confidence (efficacy) to take on and put in 
the necessary effort to succeed at challenging tasks; 
(2)  making  a  positive  expectation  (optimism)  about 
succeeding  now  and  in  the  future;  (3)  persevering 
toward goals and, when necessary, redirecting paths 
to  goals  (hope)  in  order  to  succeed;  and  (4)  when 
beset  by  problems  and  adversity,  sustaining  and 
bouncing back and even beyond (resilience) to attain 
success. (Luthans, Youssef, & Avolio, 2007, p. 3)

Researchers of PsyCap have consistently argued conceptu-
ally  (Luthans  & Youssef,  2007;  Luthans, Youssef,  et  al., 
2007)  and  demonstrated  empirically  (Avey,  Luthans,  & 
Youssef, 2010; Avey, Wernsing, & Luthans, 2008; Luthans, 
Avolio, Avey, & Norman, 2007; Luthans, Norman, Avolio, 
& Avey,  2008)  that  PsyCap  is  a  core  construct,  or  what 
Law, Wong, and Mobley (1998) refer to as a multidimen-
sional construct, and is comprised of hope, optimism, effi-
cacy, and resilience. While research on this core construct 

1Hasan School of Business, Colorado State University–Pueblo
2College of Business, Central Washington University, Ellensburg

Corresponding Author:
Steven M. Norman, Hasan School of Business, Colorado State University, 
2200 Bonforte Blvd., Pueblo, CO 81001-4901
Email: Steve.norman@colostate-pueblo.edu


Norman et al. 

381

has  yielded  support  for  relations  with  workplace  perfor-
mance  (e.g.,  Luthans,  Avey,  Clapp-Smith,  &  Li,  2008; 
Luthans,  Avolio,  et  al.,  2007),  there  have  been  limited 
studies  on  other  important  employee  outcomes.  Further, 
no  studies  to  date  have  considered  to  what  extent  the 
important role of individual orientation toward the organi-
zation may matter in understanding the role of PsyCap at 
work. Thus, organizational identification is examined here 
as a moderator in our hypotheses. The discussion begins 
with  a  brief  introduction  of  the  evolution  of  PsyCap,  
followed by a brief discussion of each dimension. Next, 
we discuss links between PsyCap and the criterion vari-
ables  OCBs  and  deviance,  including  the  moderating  
role of organizational identification. The Method section 
describes the test of hypotheses and is followed by a dis-
cussion,  including  results  and  implications  for  research 
and practice.

Theory and Hypotheses
Given  that  previous  research  on  positive  organizational 
behavior (POB; e.g., Luthans, Avolio, et al., 2007; Luthans 
&  Youssef,  2007;  Wright,  2003;  Wright  &  Cropanzano, 
2007;  Wright,  Cropanzano,  &  Bonett,  2007)  has  exten-
sively described the evolution of thought in this area, this 
discussion will be brief, yet it is necessary because a center-
piece  variable  in  this  study,  PsyCap,  emerged  from  the 
study of POB. Grounded in the seminal research of positive 
psychology (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2000), Luthans 
brought positive psychology to the workplace through the 
study of POB (Luthans, 2002a,b). POB necessarily includes 
an  examination  of  positive-oriented  psychological  con-
structs  and  how  they  manifest  in  the  workplace.  Specifi-
cally,  the  constructs  of  hope,  resilience,  optimism,  and 
self-efficacy have been considered components of POB.

As a variable of study in POB, research in hope primar-
ily leverages Snyder, Irving, and Anderson’s (1991) defini-
tion of hope as “positive motivational state that is based on 
an interactively derived sense of successful (a) agency (goal 
directed energy) and (b) pathways (planning to meet goals)” 
(p. 287). Thus, hope includes both the motivation (will) and 
a plan (pathways) to succeed at a given goal. In other words, 
hope  is  comprised  of  a  motivational  propensity  Snyder 
refers  to  as  willpower,  as  well  as  the  uncanny  cognitive 
ability  to  generate  multiple  paths  to  the  same  goal  (“way 
power”). The latter can be understood as the ability to con-
tinually think of a new method to accomplish a goal. If one 
path to a goal is stopped (e.g., funding is cut for a project), 
rather than giving up and feeling hopeless, a person high in 
hope can generate additional paths or ways to accomplish 
the goal, thus increasing chances of goal accomplishment. 
This way power enhances the motivational component by 
generating beliefs that effort applied on a specific path will 

lead to success. Prior research has generally supported the 
relationship between one’s hope level and his or her athletic 
and academic achievement, as well as psychological well-
being  (Snyder,  2000;  Snyder  &  Lopez,  2002).  Further, 
Luthans and colleagues brought hope research to the work 
environment (Luthans & Jensen, 2002; Peterson & Byron, 
2008; Peterson & Luthans, 2003).

Resilience is based on the research initiated by Masten 
and colleagues (Masten, 2001; Masten & Reed, 2002) and 
is viewed generally as a positive reaction or adaptation in 
the face of risk or adversity. Luthans directed this definition 
to the workplace as the “positive psychological capacity to 
rebound, to ‘bounce back’ from adversity, uncertainty, con-
flict, failure, or even positive change, progress and increased 
responsibility”  (Luthans,  2002a,  p.  702).  Workers’  resil-
ience has been positively related to their level of job satis-
faction,  commitment,  and  happiness  (Larson  &  Luthans, 
2006; Youssef & Luthans, 2007).

Optimism  is  based  in  attribution  theory  and  is  most 
closely  associated  with  Seligman  (1998),  who  describes 
optimism  toward  internal,  relatively  stable,  and  general 
attributions  regarding  positive  events  and  external,  rela-
tively  unstable,  and  specific  excuses  regarding  negative 
events. However, viewing optimism in this manner does not 
account for what is realistic given a person’s resources (or 
lack thereof). Therefore, it would seem to follow that disap-
pointment would follow eventually and perhaps frequently, 
given that some tasks are clearly outside the person’s capa-
bilities. Conversely, optimism as described by Luthans and 
colleagues  (Luthans,  2002a,  b;  Luthans  Avolio,  Avey,  & 
Norman, 2007; Luthans, Youssef, & Avolio, 2007) relative 
to  the  organizational  context  aligns  with  Seligman’s 
research  on  realistic  optimism  and  is  grounded  in  reality. 
This realistic optimism (Peterson, 2000) factors in the capa-
bilities of the perceiver and is therefore grounded in nature. 
Seligman  (1998)  has  found  that  optimism  specific  to  the 
workplace had a significant and positive relationship with 
performance levels of insurance sales agents. Additionally, 
optimism has been shown to have a significant relationship 
with one’s rated performance (Luthans, Avolio, Walumbwa, 
&  Li,  2005;  Youssef  &  Luthans,  2007),  as  well  as  one’s 
work happiness and job satisfaction.

Self-efficacy is based in large part on Bandura’s (1997, 
1998, 2000) research, but as applied to the workplace. Spe-
cifically, Stajkovic and Luthans (1998b, p. 66) define effi-
cacy as “the employee’s conviction or confidence about his 
or  her  abilities  to  mobilize  the  motivation,  cognitive 
resources or courses of action needed to successfully execute 
a specific task within a given context.” Thus, self-efficacy 
as  viewed  here  is  directed  specifically  to  a  given  context 
and has been supported via meta-analysis to have a signifi-
cant positive relationship with work-specific performance 
(Stajkovic & Luthans, 1998a).


382   

Positive PsyCap

Current  research  in  POB  has  now  been  directed  toward 
what is being called positive PsyCap (Luthans, Avolio, et al., 
2007; Luthans & Youssef, 2007; Luthans, Youssef, & Avolio, 
2007). While initial POB research viewed each of the four 
included  constructs  (hope,  optimism,  resilience,  and  self-
efficacy)  moreso  in  isolation  from  each  other,  PsyCap 
research views these constructs in relation to each other and 
the commonalities among the variables. This core PsyCap 
construct has been defined as follows:

an individual’s positive psychological state of devel-
opment  that  is  characterized  by:  (1)  having  confi-
dence  (self-efficacy)  to  take  on  and  put  in  the 
necessary effort to succeed at challenging tasks; (2) 
making  a  positive  reference  (optimism)  about  suc-
ceeding now and in the future; (3) persevering toward 
goals and, when necessary, redirecting paths to goals 
(hope)  in  order  to  succeed;  and  (4)  when  beset  by 
problems  and  adversity,  sustaining  and  bouncing 
back and even beyond (resilience) to attain success. 
(Luthans, Youssef, & Avolio, 2007, p. 3)

The four components have been psychometrically sup-
ported  to  be  indicators  of  one  underlying  construct 
(PsyCap), which accounts for higher positive effects than 
does each component individually. Further, PsyCap is mea-
surable and discriminant from related concepts such as core 
self-evaluations (Luthans, Avolio, et al., 2007). Conceptu-
ally,  Luthans,  Avolio,  et  al.  (2007)  have  noted  that  the 
underlying threads that link the four capacities into a higher 
order core construct reside in a combination of the follow-
ing:  (a)  the  positive  perceptions,  attributions,  interpreta-
tions, and appraisals of one’s experiences; (b) the availability 
of physical and psychological resources; and (c) the resul-
tant  actual  and  perceived  probability  of  success  based  on 
personal choices, vested effort, and perseverance.

Higher order factors (often referred to as second-order 
factors) are similar to what Law, Wong, and Mobely (1998) 
refer to as multidimensional constructs. When a first-order 
factor (e.g., job satisfaction) is modeled as a latent factor, 
the  variable  is  operationalized  as  the  shared  variance 
between the items used to measure it. In a second-order fac-
tor, there is more than one single-order factor (hope, opti-
mism, resilience, and self efficacy, in this case). As such, 
when modeled, the variable can be thought of as the shared 
variance between the first-order factors (which is the shared 
variance between the items of each first-order factor). Hob-
foll (2002) argued that second-order factors are quite useful 
in social sciences as researchers often split hairs between 
very similar constructs (e.g., hope and optimism) that may 
have significant differences but not necessarily meaningful 

Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies 17(4)

differences. Today, second-order factors are commonplace 
in management literature such as that on transformational 
leadership,  core  self-evaluation  traits,  and  empowerment, 
which all have four first-order factors.

Empirical support for PsyCap as a core construct comes 
from  research  using  a  competing  measurement  models 
analysis that found PsyCap was best measured as a second-
order factor. Specifically, the results indicated that each of 
the  four  dimensions  load  onto  one  core  factor,  which  we 
term  PsyCap  (Luthans,  Avolio  et  al.,  2007).  PsyCap 
research continues to grow and has been found related to 
job satisfaction, organizational commitment, trust, and per-
formance (Luthans, Avolio, et al., 2007; Luthans, Norman 
et al., 2008; Norman, Avolio, & Luthans, in press).

OCBs
Research in OCBs has become more popular since the work 
of  Organ  (1988),  who  originally  conceptualized  OCBs  as 
the  discretionary  behaviors  that  are  exhibited  by  an  indi-
vidual  and  not  formally  recognized  by  the  organizational 
system, yet that generally facilitate the effective and effi-
cient functioning of the organization to which the individ-
ual  belongs.  Organ  later  defined  OCBs  more  in  terms  of 
behavior that facilitates “the maintenance and enhancement 
of the social and psychological context that supports task 
performance” (Organ, 1997, p. 91). Both general conceptu-
alizations  include  the  idea  of  extrarole  behaviors  that  are 
aimed at benefiting the organization to which the individual 
belongs.

OCBs were originally categorized as falling into one of 
two categories: altruistic behaviors or generalized compli-
ance  behaviors  (Smith,  Organ,  &  Near,  1983).  Altruistic 
behaviors  are  intended  to  help  another  individual.  Such 
behavior would include helping a coworker with an assign-
ment, covering for a coworker while the coworker is away 
from the office, and similar behaviors aimed at helping a 
coworker that are not formally a part of the helper’s recog-
nized  duties.  Generalized  compliance  behaviors  include 
those behaviors that comply with or support organizational 
policies,  norms,  and  procedures.  These  behaviors  may 
include such things as being on time to work or supporting 
organizational policies.

OCBs were later classified into four components (Organ, 
1988) that included a similar but narrower view of altruism 
than Smith et al.’s (1983) view: conscientiousness, which 
can be considered a narrow view of Smith et al.’s general-
ized  compliance;  courtesy,  or  considering  others  who 
would  be  affected  before  taking  action  that  might  affect 
them; civic virtue, or being sensitive and committed to an 
organization’s best interests; and sportsmanship, or gener-
ally having a positive attitude and not complaining about 
adversity.  There  have  been  subsequent  views  of  OCBs, 


Norman et al. 

383

some  that  were  similar  to  Organ’s  (1988)  typology,  with 
significant construct overlap (Morrison, 1994; Van Scotter 
& Motowidlo, 1996), and others that categorized OCBs as 
either  organizationally  focused  (OCBO)  or  individually 
focused (Lee & Allen, 2002; Williams & Anderson, 1991). 
Organizationally  focused  behaviors  are  those  that  are 
directed  toward  benefiting  the  organization.  An  example 
would be staying late to finish a project in order to help the 
organization.  Individually  focused  behaviors  are  those 
directed toward helping a specific individual. An example 
would be filling in for a coworker while he or she was away 
from the office. In this study, given the focus on the organi-
zational referent, citizenship behaviors at the organizational 
referent  (OCBO)  was  selected  as  an  outcome  variable  of 
interest.

Positive PsyCap and OCBs
Earlier research (Van Dyne & LePine, 1998) devoted care-
ful attention to the antecedents of OCBs by attempting to 
uncover specific predictors of OCBs. Following the origi-
nal definition of OCBs put forth by Smith et al. (1983) and 
later supplemented by Lee and Allen (2002), in which some 
OCBs are classified as being positively oriented toward the 
organization, it is reasonable to consider positive PsyCap as 
a precursor to OCBs.

PsyCap, viewed here as a potentially more valuable con-
tributor as a composite variable derived from the combina-
tion  of  hope,  optimism,  self-efficacy,  and  resilience,  is 
expected to be related to desirable work behaviors that sup-
port the organization through nonprescribed job behaviors. 
Hence, there is a likelihood that positive PsyCap may lead 
to desirable work behaviors, not considered as part of the 
employee  job  description,  that  are  offered  voluntarily  by 
the  individual  employee  in  support  of  the  organization 
itself.

The current research proposes that an employee’s level 
of  positive  PsyCap  is  related  to  the  likelihood  that  the 
employee will engage in OCBOs for the following reasons. 
First, as a positive individual construct, PsyCap is generally 
oriented toward goal success through one’s ability to find 
various (path)ways (i.e., hope) to success, some of which 
might be creative and thus not part of the formal task role, 
such as being resilient when necessary in order to persist 
toward  goal  attainment,  confident  in  one’s  abilities  and 
therefore  not  afraid  to  try  novel  methods,  and  optimistic 
about the future in order to maintain a positive orientation. 
There is a logical and practical association between each of 
these qualities, as well as in combination with each other, 
and extrarole behaviors to help achieve that success, both 
individually  and  organizationally.  In  fact,  earlier  research 
(Avey,  Luthans,  &  Youssef,  2010)  suggests  that  the  
composite  variable  of  PsyCap  may  have  higher  positive 

Identity with the

Organization

+

Psychological

Capital

–

+

Employee
Deviance

Organizational

Citizenship
Behaviors

Figure 1. Theoretical model on the interaction between 
psychological capital and organizational identity

effects  than  the  individual  variables  of  hope,  resilience, 
self-efficacy,  and  optimism  when  related  to  desirable 
employee behaviors.

In addition, related positive psychological research sup-
ports  the  relationship  between  positivity  and  broader 
thought–action repertoires (Fredrickson, 2001), which can 
provide  additional  support  for  the  proposed  relationship. 
Fredrickson’s (1998, 2001) broaden-and-build theory sug-
gests that positive emotions and orientations broaden peo-
ple’s  attention  and  focus,  their  patterns  of  thinking,  and 
their  behavior  as  well,  which  has  been  empirically  sup-
ported by Kahn and Isen (1993). These broader behaviors 
can be expressed as OCBOs. In other words, it is possible 
that the positive emotions discussed by Fredrickson, which 
are related to PsyCap, lead to broader actions manifested as 
OCBOs.  More  specifically,  Fredrickson  (2003)  considers 
the contribution of positive emotions by employees through 
voluntary  behaviors,  such  as  sharing  with  or  assisting 
coworkers  or  helping  improve  the  organization  through 
ideas and suggestions that would not normally be consid-
ered part of the job description. As shown in Figure 1, the 
preceding discussion leads us to our first hypothesis: 

Hypothesis 1a: PsyCap is positively related to OCB 

directed toward the organization (i.e., OCBO).

Organizational Identity
Organizational  identity  as  examined  here  will  be  viewed 
through the lens of social identity theory, or SIT (Ashforth 
& Mael, 1989). SIT attempts to understand why individuals 
classify themselves into some groups, but not others. It has 
been proposed that perhaps the process of social identifica-
tion is both comparative and relational by nature (Ashforth 
& Mael, 1989; Tajfel & Turner, 1985). There are said to be 
two separate purposes of social identification: to segment 
and  order  the  social  environment  through  one’s  cognitive 
processes  and  to  enable  individuals  each  to  visualize  and 


384   

Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies 17(4)

define  themselves  within  a  social  context.  The  second  of 
these functions is of most interest to SIT because it suggests 
that individuals classify themselves and others within each 
social context in which they are embedded at the time by 
engaging  different  categorization  schemas  (Ashforth  & 
Mael, 1989).

Given the cognitive processes that individuals engage in 
to  classify  themselves  within  social  categories  (including 
organizational membership), people are each going through 
the sense-making process that allows them to posture them-
selves  within  the  associated  social  class,  which  subse-
quently influences their self-concept (Chatman & Spataro, 
2005; Tajfel, 1982; Tsui, Egan, & O’Reilly, 1992; Turner, 
1982).

According to SIT, the self-concept is influenced by vari-
ous recognizable qualities and the similarities that the indi-
vidual has to referent others relative to these qualities. Such 
qualities that one will compare relative to the referent others 
include one’s abilities, attributes, and psychological quali-
ties. The degree of similarity between the individual and the 
organization’s  leadership  and  management  can  directly 
influence the degree of identification that person has with 
the organization. This identification might make the organi-
zation more attractive to the employee, which might lead to 
actual behavior in the form of OCBs (Rousseau, 1998).

Organizational Identity,  
PsyCap, and OCBOs
Organizational identity has been said to define, at least in 
part,  the  employee’s  view  of  himself  or  herself.  In  other 
words, at least a part of an employee’s self-image is said to 
result from the organizations that person chooses to identify 
with. If the organization is said to have such a strong impact 
on how an employee feels about himself or herself, then it 
would seem to follow that the employee will therefore do 
everything he or she can to make the organization success-
ful, thereby enhancing the image of his or her own identity. 
After all, it may be human nature to want to be part of a 
winning  team,  consistent  with  the  need  to  maintain  or 
enhance one’s self-esteem. This being said, organizational 
identity is believed to influence the degree to which an indi-
vidual will exhibit OCBOs.

As  supported  above,  it  is  believed  that  organizational 
identity will affect an employee’s exhibited level of OCBOs. 
However,  it  is  of  particular  interest  to  examine  whether 
organizational identity will affect (moderate) the relation-
ship between PsyCap and an employee’s displayed OCBOs. 
In other words, will employees who are high in both PsyCap 
and  organizational  identity  be  more  inclined  to  exhibit 
OCBOs than employees who are not high in one of these 
factors? Given the relationship supported for each of these 
constructs, it is likely that there is an interaction between 

these variables that will differentially affect the relationship 
previously  hypothesized.  This  leads  us  to  our  next 
hypothesis:

Hypothesis 1b: Identity with the organization moder-
ates the relationship between PsyCap and OCBOs 
such that those higher in PsyCap and who highly 
identify  with  their  organizations  will  engage  in 
the most OCBOs.

Deviance
Research in POB and PsyCap has historically been aimed at 
examining the relationship between POB and PsyCap with 
positively oriented organizational outcomes such as job sat-
isfaction,  organizational  commitment,  and  performance 
(Luthans,  Avolio,  et  al.,  2007;  Luthans,  Norman,  et  al., 
2008). However, it has been proposed that POB and PsyCap 
should  also  be  examined  with  less  desirable  outcomes 
(Luthans & Youssef, 2007) such as workplace cynicism and 
CWBs  (Bennett  &  Robinson,  2000),  also  referred  to  as 
deviance (Fox & Spector, 1999).

CWBs are defined as “voluntary behavior of organiza-
tional  members  that  violates  significant  organizational 
norms, and in doing so, threatens the well-being of the orga-
nization and/or its members” (Bennett & Robinson, 2000, 
p. 356). CWBs can work to the detriment of the organiza-
tion  by  their  definition  and  nature  and  can  include  such 
active behaviors as spreading negative rumors, working to 
the job (or slowdown behaviors), harassing coworkers, sab-
otaging the work of other employees or key projects, or pur-
posely  failing  to  follow  instructions.  The  more  passive 
workplace behaviors include actions such as failing to help 
a coworker, neglecting to pass on key information, or other-
wise withholding something that can help the organization 
and its members achieve relevant goals, with the intent of 
restricting the accomplishment of organizational goals.

Traditionally, CWBs have been considered separately as 
either organizationally or individually oriented, much like 
OCBs. Hence, the CWB would be aimed uniquely at either 
a  coworker  or  the  organization  itself.  Recently,  however, 
Berry, Ones, and Sackett (2007) have found organizational 
and interpersonal deviance to be strongly correlated. Hence, 
a specific instantaneous negative behavior or form of devi-
ance is seen as being positively associated with CWBs.

PsyCap and Workplace Deviance
Recently, in addition to the easily identified conceptual dif-
ferentiation between OCBs and CWBs, empirical evidence 
has shown that it is preferable to consider CWBs, viewed 
here  as  a  form  of  deviance  within  the  organization,  and 
OCBs  as  independent  constructs  with  their  own  specific 


Norman et al. 

385

relationships and outcomes rather than as opposite ends of 
a  single  continuum  (Sackett,  Berry,  Wiemann,  &  Laczo, 
2006). Following this finding and for the purposes of this 
study,  we  consider  OCBs  and  CWBs  as  independent 
outcomes.

The  question  of  what  causes  organizationally  deviant 
behavior, or CWBs, must also be considered. According to 
Fox and Spector (1999), individual stressors brought about 
through  behavioral  constraints  within  the  workplace  may 
be a cause of CWBs as the individual responds to or rebels 
against the constraint. For example, a line employee faced 
with  ever-increasing  pressure  for  additional  output  might 
purposely  sabotage  the  assembly  line  to  slow  it  down, 
thereby allowing the employee to catch up. It is interesting 
that it may be that those employees higher in PsyCap are 
more  able  to  rebound  (resilience)  from  the  pressure  for 
additional output by recognizing (hope) that they are able 
(self-efficacy) to withstand the pressure as it is only momen-
tary and will soon be reduced (optimism).

Positive PsyCap is proposed to be negatively related to 
workplace deviance in the following ways. First, by nature 
PsyCap is positively oriented since each component aims to 
achieve and succeed. Therefore, negatively oriented behav-
iors  are  inherently  counterproductive  to  goal  attainment. 
This would encourage the individual toward behaviors that 
are  more  directed  toward  helping  that  person  succeed, 
rather than hindering success.

Next, the individual components of PsyCap can specifi-
cally be contrasted with deviance or CWBs. Snyder (2000, 
2002) suggests that hope is driven toward the twin positive 
outcomes  of  goal  accomplishment  and  finding  ways  to 
accomplish individual and organizational goals. By nature, 
then, CWBs are contrary to these goals and therefore not 
behaviors that are normally exhibited by those high in hope. 
Resilience is directed toward positive adaptation in the face 
of adversity. Therefore, those high in resilience are looking 
for  positive  reactions  and  adaptations,  not  negative  emo-
tions and cynicism. Hence, CWBs are clearly not in the cat-
egory of positive adaptations and therefore are not likely by 
those high in resilience.

Self-efficacy  is  directed  toward  gathering  the  needed 
motivation  and  confidence  toward  succeeding  at  a  given 
task.  In  opposition,  CWBs  are  clearly  behaviors  that  are 
aimed more toward demotivation of an individual relative to 
organizational goals. Therefore, these behaviors are clearly 
not behaviors displayed by individuals who are looking to 
succeed  at  a  given  task.  Last,  optimists  have  a  generally 
positive orientation toward the future. Given that CWBs by 
nature are geared toward a negative result, they are clearly 
not  behaviors  normally  displayed  by  people  high  in  opti-
mism. Given the above, we submit our next hypothesis:

Hypothesis  2a:  PsyCap  is  negatively  related  to 

employee deviance.

Organizational Identity, PsyCap, and 
Workplace Deviance

Organizational  identity,  as  discussed  earlier,  is  associated 
with an individual’s viewing himself or herself as part of 
the organization in a long-term sense and is rooted in SIT 
(Ashforth  &  Mael,  1989).  Thus,  an  individual  would  be 
more  likely  to  engage  in  behaviors  that  would  make  the 
organization more successful (i.e., OCBOs), enhancing that 
individual’s  own  identity,  and  less  likely  to  engage  in 
behaviors  that  would  negatively  affect  the  organization, 
which  would  denigrate  that  individual’s  identity.  Further, 
given  the  negative  relationship  that  was  proposed  before 
between PsyCap and CWBs, we would expect not only that 
those  lower  in  PsyCap  would  engage  in  more  deviant 
behaviors, but that those lower in PsyCap and who do not 
identify with their organizations would engage in the most 
deviance behaviors. Overall, individuals detached and neg-
atively oriented while at work are those most likely to be 
deviant. Conversely, those highly identified with the orga-
nization and hopeful, optimistic, efficacious, and resilient 
are least likely to be deviant. Given this, we submit the final 
hypothesis:

Hypothesis 2b: Identity with organization moderates 
the  relationship  between  PsyCap  and  deviance 
such that those higher in PsyCap and highly iden-
tified will have the lowest amount of deviance.

Method
Sample

The  directional  hypotheses  can  be  seen  in  Figure  1.  The 
sample for this study was comprised of 199 working adults. 
To enhance external validity of the results, the sample was 
drawn  from  multiple  industries  and  organizations.  This 
included 94 women, 104 men, and 1 participant who did not 
indicate  gender.  Approximately  12%  of  participants 
reported an annual salary of $80,000 or higher. Participant 
age  ranged  from  18  to  81  years,  with  an  average  of  31.5 
years and a standard deviation of 13.35 years. Participant 
tenure  with  the  organizations  ranged  from  1  year  to  20 
years, with an average tenure of 6.45 years (standard devia-
tion of 6.95 years). Individuals worked in general services, 
education,  finance,  manufacturing,  marketing,  and  social 
work.

Measures
PsyCap was measured with the 12-item instrument reduced 
from  the  24-item  instrument  developed  and  validated  by 
Luthans  and  colleagues  (Luthans,  Avolio,  et  al.,  2007). 
Like the full scale, the shorter, 12-item instrument (Avey, 


386   

Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies 17(4)

Luthans, & Mhatre, 2008; Norman, Avolio, et al., in press) 
included a 6-point Likert-type scale ranging from strongly 
agree to strongly disagree. Example items are “I feel con-
fident  analyzing  a  long-term  problem  to  find  a  solution” 
(efficacy),  “There  are  lots  of  ways  around  any  problem” 
(hope), “I usually take stressful things at work in stride” 
(resilience), and “I always look on the bright side of things 
regarding  my  job”  (optimism).  The  full  instrument  has 
been  validated  across  multiple  samples  and  consistently 
demonstrated  strong  psychometric  fit  to  the  data  when 
modeled as a second-order factor in which each item is fit 
to its latent construct (e.g., efficacy items fit to an efficacy 
latent)  and  each  of  the  four  latent  constructs  (hope,  effi-
cacy, resilience, and optimism) was fit to an overall PsyCap 
construct.  Across  multiple  samples  and  industries,  the 
24-item  PsyCap  questionnaire  has  consistently  demon-
strated  strong  psychometric  performance  (e.g.,  Avey, 
Luthans, & Jensen, 2009; Avey, Luthans, & Youssef, 2010; 
Avey, Wernsing, et al., 2008; Luthans, Avey, Clapp-Smith, 
& Lee, 2008; Luthans, Avolio, et al., 2007). The shorter, 
12-item instrument used here was previously used by Nor-
man et al. (in press) and demonstrated an internal reliabil-
ity of α = .92, with each item significantly loading on its 
respective latent factor.

Identity  with  the  organization  was  measured  with  the 
three-item instrument used in Avey, Avolio, Crossley, and 
Luthans (2008). Items were “I feel this organization’s suc-
cess is my success,” “I feel being a member in this organi-
zation helps define who I am,” and “I feel the need to defend 
my  organization  when  it  is  criticized.”  Internal  reliability 
for this instrument was α = .86.

OCBOs  were  measured  with  Lee  and  Allen’s  (2002) 
OCB  instrument,  which  uses  eight  items  for  individual 
OCBs  and  eight  items  for  organizational  OCBs.  In  this 
study specifically, we selected eight items consistent with 
the organizational referent and therefore examined relation-
ships specifically with OCBOs. An example item is “I offer 
ideas to improve the functioning of the organization.” This 
eight-item OCBO instrument demonstrated adequate inter-
nal reliability (α = .90.).

CWBs were measured with 10 items from Fox and Spec-
tor’s (1999) CWBs scale (α = .81), which has demonstrated 
strong  psychometric  properties.  Example  items  asked  the 
extent to which respondents have “purposely ignored your 
boss” and “purposely wasted company materials/supplies.” 
Ratings were on a 6-point Likert-type scale ranging from 
hardly, if ever to frequently, if not always. To reduce scale 
length, 10 items were chosen from this instrument. These 
items have been used in previous research (Avey, Luthans, 
& Youssef,  2010)  and  were  selected  on  the  basis  of  face 
validity for the broad sample and high reported frequency 
in Fox and Spector’s (1999) work.

Procedure

Participants  were  contacts  of  faculty  and  students  from  a 
large  midwestern  university.  All  participants  were  from 
U.S.  organizations  and,  after  volunteering  to  participate, 
were sent a uniform resource locator (“link”) to an online 
survey. Data collection was set up in two temporally sepa-
rated waves to minimize affects of common method vari-
ance  (Podsakoff,  MacKenzie,  Lee,  &  Podsakoff,  2003). 
Survey  1  included  demographic  information,  the  PsyCap 
questionnaire,  and  the  organizational  identification  mea-
sure. The response rate for Time 1 was 86%. After comple-
tion of Time 1 and a 2-week separation period, participants 
were sent a link to Survey 2, which included the OCB and 
counterproductive workplace behaviors scale. The response 
rate for Time 2 was 74%, which resulted in usable data from 
199 participants. Participant data were matched with a ran-
domly generated 7-digit code for logging in Survey 2.

Analyses and Results 
Means, standard deviations, and bivariate correlations can 
be seen in Table 1. As can be seen, PsyCap and organiza-
tional identification were both related to OCBOs with r = 
.60, p < .01, and r = .56, p < .01, respectively. Further, both 
predictors were also related to employee deviance, with r = 
−.45,  p  <  .01,  and  r  =  −.33,  p  <  .01,  respectively.  These 
results suggest support for the main effect hypotheses in our 
study. However, to provide further tests of our hypotheses 
beyond  simple  bivariate  correlations,  we  used  regression 
analyses to test both main and interactive effects of PsyCap 
and organizational identity on both OCBOs and employee 
deviance. Specifically, the regression model included three 
steps.  First,  covariates  of  age,  gender,  and  tenure  were 
entered into Step 1 in order to better isolate the variance in 
the  criterion  of  our  predictor  variables.  In  Step  2,  both 
PsyCap  and  organizational  identity  were  added  to  the 
 models as predictors. Finally, in Step 3 the interaction term 
was added to the model. This interaction term was a mean-
centered product between PsyCap and organizational iden-
tity. Results of the regression model can be seen in Table 2.
Hypothesis  1a  predicted  that  PsyCap  would  be  posi-
tively related to OCBOs. As seen in Table 2, PsyCap was a 
significant predictor of OCBOs after controlling for demo-
graphic variables (β = .39, p < .01), providing support for 
Hypothesis 1a. Hypothesis 1b, which predicted that organi-
zational identity would moderate the relationship between 
PsyCap  and  OCBOs  such  that  the  relationship  would  
be  stronger  when  identification  was  high,  was  also  sup-
ported.  Specifically,  the  interactive  effect  of  PsyCap  and 
organizational identity predicted small but significant vari-
ance  above  and  beyond  the  main  effect  of  PsyCap  and  


Norman et al. 

387

Table 1. Intercorrelations Among Study Variables

Variable

1. Age
2. Tenure
3. Gender (DC)
4. Psychological capital
5. Organizational identity
6. OCBO
7. Deviance

N = 199.
*p < .01.

M

31.54
6.45
1.47
4.61
3.92
4.92
2.18

SD

13.35
6.95
.50
.82
1.23
1.20
.97

1

2

3

4

5

6

.64*
.14
.20*
.34*
.34*
−.22*

.05
.16
.20*
.18*
−.11

.19*
.20*
.28*
−.12

.57*
.60*
−.45*

.56*
−.33*

−.26*

Table 2. Regression Analyses With Psychological Capital, Outcomes, and Covariates

Variable

Age
Tenure
Gender
Psychological capital
Organizational identification
Interaction term (psychological capital and  

organizational identification)

Total R2
Δ in R2

N = 199.
*p < .01.

Organizational Citizenship  
Behaviors—Organization

    Workplace Deviance

Step 1

.33*
−.06
.29*

.20*

Step 2

Step 3

.24*
−.11
.15*
.39*
.24*

.47*
.27*

.23*
−.12
.16*
.30*
.04
.31*

.50*
.03*

Step 1

−.21*
.03
−.11

.04*

Step 2

     Step 3

−.18
.08
−.02
−.34*
−.06

.16*
.12*

−.21*
.05
−.01
−.58*
−.53*
.74*

.29*
.13*

organizational identity (ΔR2 = .03, β = .31, p < .01). Thus, 
overall there was support for both Hypotheses 1a and 1b.

The hypotheses regarding the effects of the predictors 
on deviance behaviors were parallel in content but oppo-
site  in  direction.  Hypothesis  2a  predicted  that  PsyCap 
would be negatively related to employee deviance. Again 
evident in Table 2, the main effect of PsyCap on employee 
deviance  was  significant  above  the  influence  of  demo-
graphic covariates (β = −.34, p < .01), suggesting support 
for  Hypothesis  2a.  Further,  Hypothesis  2b  predicted  that 
organizational identity would moderate the negative rela-
tionship between PsyCap and deviance such that the rela-
tionship would be stronger when identification was high. 
In other words, those high in PsyCap and highly identified 
with the organization would engage in the lowest levels of 
deviance. We also found full support for this hypothesis as 
the  interaction  term  was  both  significant  and  arguably 
quite meaningful in terms of predicting variance in devi-
ance  above  and  beyond  the  main  effects  of  PsyCap  and 
organizational identification (ΔR2 = .13, β = .74, p < .01). 
Thus, similar to the first set of hypotheses, we found full 
support for Hypotheses 2a and 2b.

Discussion

This study represents the first empirical analyses integrat-
ing research on identity with advances in research on posi-
tive PsyCap. More specifically, we investigated the extent 
to  which  an  individual  identified  with  the  organization 
“mattered” in terms of how employee PsyCap manifests in 
the workplace. In short, results suggest that identification 
with the organization does matter somewhat (small yet sig-
nificant) relative to OCBs in general and OCBOs in particu-
lar and even more meaningfully (negatively) with respect to 
employee deviance. Specifically, in this study participants 
who  were  higher  in  PsyCap  reported  engaging  in  more 
OCBOs. Further, those who were both high in PsyCap and 
identified highly with their organization reported engaging 
in the highest frequency of OCBOs as compared with those 
who did not identify with their organizations. A similar pat-
tern of results was evident when we considered employee 
deviance  as  a  criterion.  As  hypothesized,  participants 
reporting  higher  levels  of  PsyCap  within  the  domain  of 
their  job  reported  engaging  in  fewer  deviance  behaviors. 
This relationship was moderated by organizational identity 


388   

Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies 17(4)

such that those who were high in PsyCap and who identi-
fied highly with the organization would engage in the low-
est levels of deviance.

These  results  add  to  the  growing  body  of  research  on 
PsyCap in several ways. First, PsyCap research has tended to 
consider the main effects of PsyCap on a given individual-
level  and  organizationally  related  criterion  and  has  rarely 
considered  individual-level  moderators  of  these  relation-
ships. Given that relations between employee attitudes and 
outcomes  do  not  occur  in  a  vacuum  but  in  a  context  of 
related phenomena at multiple levels, this study represents 
a first step in beginning to consider moderators of observed 
relationships.  Next,  this  study  provides  replication  and 
extension  of  previous  work  linking  PsyCap  and  both 
OCBOs  and  deviance  (e.g.,  Avey,  Luthans,  &  Youssef, 
2010) by showing in a separate sample that the relationship 
between  these  constructs  can  be  replicated  and  that  this 
relationship depends on individual-level cognitions. Addi-
tionally, this research adds to research on workplace devi-
ance  and  OCBOs  by  linking  the  research  domains  of 
positive  psychology  and  these  organizationally  oriented 
individual-level behaviors.

Next, the current research answers a call from organiza-
tional identity researchers to examine the extent as well as 
the mechanisms of workers’ identification with their orga-
nizations (Rousseau, 1998). Having examined the concept 
of identification and underlying mechanisms, we can now 
perhaps better consider the role that organizational identifi-
cation plays in organizational change. By examining one’s 
level of identity with the organization as a moderator of the 
relationship between that person’s PsyCap and the amount 
of OCBOs demonstrated by that person, we can better help 
uncover such mechanisms.

Further,  by  merging  research  in  PsyCap  (Luthans, 
Youssef,  & Avolio,  2007)  and  research  in  OCBs  (Organ, 
1988, 1997), we extend the theoretical leverage points of 
each area and support related research (Avey, Luthans, & 
Youssef,  2010).  By  extending  past  relationships  between 
PsyCap and OCBOs (Avey, Luthans, & Youssef, 2010) in a 
different setting, we add external validity to this past asso-
ciation.  Further,  by  adding  the  variable  of  organizational 
identity as a moderator of the relationship found previously, 
we begin to understand more about the mechanisms of this 
relationship.

Implications for Managers
These  results  also  suggest  implications  for  managers  of 
organizations,  contributing  to  an  evidence-based  manage-
ment approach (see Rousseau, 2006; Rousseau & McCarthy, 
2007).  First,  in  a  context  of  higher  unemployment  and  a 
struggling economy, organizations must realize the potential 
of  their  human  capital  to  garner  a  competitive  advantage. 

This study suggests that managers may invest in developing 
employees’ PsyCap (e.g., see Luthans, Avey, & Patera, 2008, 
for a review of interventions that have successfully increased 
one’s level of state-like PsyCap), and as a result, possibly 
achieve an increase in OCBs. These resulting nonprescribed 
helpful  behaviors  may  enhance  team  and  organizational 
functioning (Organ, 1997).

Similarly,  a  second  practical  implication  is  the  invest-
ment in PsyCap for a decrease in employee deviance. Dur-
ing  challenging  economic  times,  employees  and  potential 
employees may engage in more deviance to gain an advan-
tage over internal competitors for organizational resources 
(jobs, promotions, assignments; see O’Connell, 2009). Since 
those higher in PsyCap reported lower levels of employee 
deviance,  this  study  suggests  that  the  enhancement  of 
PsyCap may have a suppressing effect on deviance.

A final practical implication is related to the effects of 
identity.  Despite  layoffs,  mismanagement,  and  forms  of 
breach in the psychological contract, results from this study 
provide support that employees still identify with organiza-
tions (Rousseau, 1998). Given that organizational identity 
was associated with higher levels of OCBs and lower levels 
of employee deviance, this suggests that managers ought to 
increase  employee  identification  with  the  organization. 
This increase in employees’ feeling like an extension of the 
organization, along with increases in PsyCap, may be asso-
ciated with lower deviance and more citizenship behaviors 
toward the organization, which was supported in our find-
ings relative to OCBOs.

Future Research and Conclusion
Looking  forward,  future  research  in  the  area  of  PsyCap 
would  benefit  from  considering  PsyCap  in  multiple 
accepted  organizationally  related  theoretical  frameworks. 
Here we have focused on one theory-driven method of inte-
grating  PsyCap,  organizational  identification  processes, 
and OCBs. While this is a logical first step, untangling the 
web of nomological networks and relations between PsyCap 
and other well-accepted theories will be critical to generat-
ing  a  better  understanding  of  how  advances  in  the  sister 
field of positive psychology may affect our understanding 
of organizational phenomena. For example, what role might 
affectivity play in the current investigation? It is possible 
that positive affectivity is related to both PsyCap and OCBs 
whereas negative affect might be related to deviance behav-
iors such as CWBs, as viewed here. Future research might 
be  aimed  at  exploring  these  relationships  in  attempt  to 
untangle  both  similarities  and  differences.  Further,  while 
this  research  extends  understanding  of  moderators  on  the 
relationship  between  PsyCap  and  employee  outcomes  at 
work,  future  research  should  continue  to  explore  both 
 moderators  and  mediators  at  multiple  levels  within  and 


Norman et al. 

389

between organizations and cultures to fully grasp how and 
why  this  emerging  construct  PsyCap  matters  in  today’s 
organizations.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no conflicts of interest with respect to the 
authorship and/or publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research and/
or authorship of this article.

References
Ashforth, B. E., & Mael, F. (1989). Social identity theory and the 
organization. Academy of Management Review, 14(1), 20-39.
Avey, J. B., Avolio, B. J., Crossley, C. R., & Luthans, F. (2008). 
Psychological  ownership:  Theoretical  extensions  and  analy-
sis of a multi-dimensional theory-based measure. Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, 30, 173-191.

Avey, J. B., Luthans, F., & Jensen, S. (2009). Psychological capi-
tal:  A  positive  resource  for  combating  stress  and  turnover. 
Human Resource Management.

Avey, J. B., Luthans, F., & Mhatre, K. H. (2008) A call for longitu-
dinal designs in POB and PsyCap research. Journal of Orga-
nizational Behavior, 29, 1-7.

Avey,  J.  B.,  Luthans,  F.,  & Youssef,  C.  M.  (2010) The  additive 
value  of  psychologicalcapital  in  predicting  workplace  atti-
tudes and behaviors. Journal of Management.

Avey, J. B., Wernsing, T. S., & Luthans, F. (2008). Can positive 
employees  help  positive  organizational  change?  Journal  of 
Applied Behavioral Science, 44, 48-70.

Bandura, A.  (1997).  Self-efficacy:  The  exercise  of  control.  New 

York: Freeman.

Bandura,  A.  (1998).  Personal  and  collective  efficacy  in  human 
adaptation and change. In J. G. Adair, D. Belanger, & K. L. 
Dion (Eds.), Advances in psychological science: Vol. 1. Per-
sonal, social and cultural aspects (pp. 51-71). Hove, UK: Psy-
chology Press.

Bandura, A. (2000). Cultivate self-efficacy for personal and orga-
nizational effectiveness. In E. A. Locke (Ed.), The Blackwell 
handbook of principles of organizational behavior (pp. 120-
136). Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell.

Bennett, R. J., & Robinson, S. L. (2000). Development of a mea-
sure of workplace deviance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 
85, 349-360.

Berry, C. M., Ones, D. S., & Sackett, P. R. (2007). Interpersonal 
deviance,  organizational  deviance,  and  their  common  corre-
lates:  A  review  and  meta-analysis.  Journal  of  Applied  Psy-
chology, 92, 410-424.

Cameron,  K.  S.,  Bright,  D.,  &  Caza,  A.  (2004).  Exploring 
the  relationships  between  organizational  virtuousness  
and  performance.  American  Behavioral  Scientist,  47(6), 
766-790.

Chatman, J. A., & Spataro, S. E. (2005). Using self categorization 
theory to understand relational demography-based variations 
in people’s responsiveness to organizational culture. Academy 
of Management Journal, 48(2), 321-331.

Fineman,  S.  (2006).  On  being  positive:  Concerns  and  counter-

points. Academy of Management Review, 31(2), 270-291.

Fox,  S.,  &  Spector,  P.  E.  (1999). A  model  of  work  frustration-
aggression. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 20, 915-931.
Fredrickson,  B.  L.  (1998).  What  good  are  positive  emotions? 

Review of General Psychology, 2, 300-319.

Fredrickson, B. L. (2001). The role of positive emotions in posi-
tive  psychology:  The  broaden-and-build  theory  of  positive 
emotions. American Psychologist, 56, 218-226.

Fredrickson, B. L. (2003). The value of positive emotions. Ameri-

can Scientist, 91, 330-335.

Hackman, J. R. (2009). The perils of positivity. Journal of Orga-

nizational Behavior, 3(2), 309-319.

Hobfoll, S. (2002). Social and psychological resources and adap-

tation. Review of General Psychology, 6, 307-324.

Larson,  M.  D.,  &  Luthans,  F.  (2006).  Potential  added  value  of 
psychological capital in predicting work attitudes. Journal of 
Leadership and Organizational Studies, 13(2), 75-92.

Law,  K.  S., Wong,  C.,  &  Mobley, W.  H.  (1998). Toward  a  tax-
onomy of multidimensional constructs. Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 23, 741-755.

Lee, K., & Allen, N. J. (2002). Organizational citizenship behav-
ior and workplace deviance: The role of affect and cognitions. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 131-142.

Lilius, J. M., Worline, M. C., Maitlis, S., Kanov, J., Dutton, J. E., 
& Frost, P. (2008). The contours and consequences of com-
passion at work. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 29(2), 
193-218.

Luthans, F. (2002a). The need for and meaning of positive orga-
nizational behavior. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 23, 
695-706.

Luthans, F. (2002b). Positive organizational behavior: Developing 
and managing psychological strengths. Academy of Manage-
ment Executive, 16(1), 57-72.

Luthans, F., Avey, J. B., Clapp-Smith, R., & Li, W. (2008). More 
evidence  on  the  value  of  Chinese  workers’  psychological 
capital: A  potentially  unlimited  competitive  resource?  Inter-
national  Journal  of  Human  Resource  Management,  19(5), 
818-827.

Luthans,  F.,  Avey,  J.  B.,  &  Patera,  J.  L.  (2008).  Experimental 
analysis  of  a  web-based  micro-intervention  on  the  learning 
and development of positive psychological states. Academy of 
Management Learning and Education, 7, 209-221.

Luthans, F., Avolio, B. J., Avey, J. B., & Norman, S. M. (2007). 
Positive psychological capital: Measurement and relationship 
with performance and satisfaction. Personnel Psychology, 60, 
541-572.

Luthans,  F., Avolio,  B.  J.,  Walumbwa,  F.  O.,  &  Li,  W.  (2005).  
The psychological capital of Chinese workers: Exploring the 


390   

Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies 17(4)

relationship  with  performance.  Management  and  Organiza-
tion Review, 1(2), 249-271.

relations between the two domains. Human Performance, 19, 
441-464.

Luthans, F., & Jensen, S. M. (2002). Hope: A new positive strength 
for human resource development. Human Resource Develop-
ment Review, 1, 304-322.

Luthans, F., Norman, S. M., Avolio, B. J., & Avey, J. B. (2008). 
The mediating role of psychological capital in the supportive 
organizational  climate–employee  performance  relationship. 
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 29(2), 219-238.

Seligman, M. E. P. (1998). Learned optimism. New York: Pocket 

Books.

Seligman, M. E. P., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000). Positive psy-

chology. American Psychologist, 55, 5-14.

Smith, C. A., Organ, D. W., & Near, J. P. (1983). Organizational 
citizenship  behavior:  Its  nature  and  antecedents.  Journal  of 
Applied Psychology, 68, 653-663.

Luthans, F., & Youssef, C. M. (2007). Emerging positive organiza-

Snyder, C. R. (2000). Handbook of hope. San Diego, CA: Aca-

tional behavior. Journal of Management, 33, 321-349.

demic Press.

Luthans, F., Youssef, C. M., & Avolio, B. J. (2007). Psychological 

Snyder, C. R. (2002). Hope theory: Rainbows in the mind. Psy-

capital. New York: Oxford University Press.

chological Inquiry, 13(4), 249-276.

Masten,  A.  S.  (2001).  Ordinary  magic:  Resilience  processes  in 

development. American Psychologist, 56, 227-239.

Masten, A. S., & Reed, M. G. J. (2002). Resilience in develop-
ment. In C. R. Snyder, & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), Handbook of posi-
tive psychology (pp. 74-88). Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press.

Morrison, E. W. (1994). Role definitions and organizational citi-
zenship behavior: The importance of the employee’s perspec-
tive. Academy of Management Journal, 37, 1543-1567.

Norman, S. M., Avolio, B. J., & Luthans, F. (in press). The impact 
of positivity and transparency on trust in leaders and their per-
ceived effectiveness. Leadership Quarterly.

O’Connell, P. (2009). Don’t let top talent get away. Business Week 
Online, 2/2/2009, 15-15. Retrieved on January 30, 2009 from 
http://www.businessweek.com/managing/content/jan2009/
ca20090130_941108.htm

Organ,  D.  W.  (1988).  Organizational  citizenship  behavior:  The 

good soldier syndrome. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.

Organ,  D.  W.  (1997).  Organizational  citizenship  behavior:  It’s 

construct clean-up time. Human Performance, 10(2), 85-97.

Peterson, C. (2000). The future of optimism. American Psycholo-

gist, 55, 44-55.

Peterson, S. J., & Byron, K. (2008). Exploring the role of hope in 
job performance: Results from four studies. Journal of Orga-
nizational Behavior, 29(6), 785-803.

Peterson, S., & Luthans, F. (2003). The positive impact of devel-
opment  of  hopeful  leaders.  Leadership  and  Organization 
Development Journal, 24, 26-31.

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. C., Lee, J., & Podsakoff, N. P. 
(2003).  Common  method  biases  in  behavioral  research:  A 
critical  review  of  the  literature  and  recommended  remedies. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 88, 879-903.

Rousseau, D. M. (1998). Why workers still identify with organiza-

tions. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 19, 217-233.

Rousseau, D. M. (2006). Is there such a thing as “evidence-based 
management”? Academy of Management Review, 31, 256-269.
Rousseau,  D.  M.,  &  McCarthy,  S.  (2007).  Educating  managers 
from an evidence-based perspective. Academy of Management 
Learning and Education, 6, 84-101.

Sackett,  P.  R.,  Berry,  C.  M.,  Wiemann,  S.  A.,  &  Laczo,  R.  M. 
(2006). Citizenship and counterproductive behavior: Clarifying 

Snyder, C. R., Irving, L., & Anderson, J. (1991). Hope and health: 
Measuring  the  will  and  the  ways.  In  C.  R.  Snyder  &  D.  R. 
Forsyth  (Eds.),  Handbook  of  social  and  clinical  psychology 
(pp. 285-305). Elmsford, NY: Pergamon.

Snyder, C. R., & Lopez, S. (2002). Handbook of positive psychol-

ogy. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Stajkovic, A. D., & Luthans, F. (1998a). Self-efficacy and work-
related performance: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 
124(2), 240-261.

Stajkovic, A. D., & Luthans, F. (1998b). Social cognitive theory and 
self-efficacy: Going beyond traditional motivational and behav-
ioral approaches. Organizational Dynamics, 26(4), 62-74.

Tajfel, H. (1982). Social identity and intergroup relations. Cam-

bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Tajfel,  H.,  & Turner,  J.  C.  (1985). The  social  identity  theory  of 
intergroup  behavior.  In  S.  Worchel  &  W.  G.  Austin  (Eds.), 
Psychology of intergroup relations (pp. 7-24). Chicago: Nel-
son-Hall.

Tsui, A. S., Egan, T. D., & O’Reilly, C. A. (1992). Being differ-
ent:  Relational  demography  and  organizational  attachment. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 37, 549-579.

Turner, J. C. (1982). Toward a cognitive redefinition of the social 
group. In H. Tajfel (Ed.), Social identity and intergroup rela-
tions  (pp.  15-40).  Cambridge,  UK:  Cambridge  University 
Press.

Van Dyne, L., & LePine, J. A. (1998). Helping and voice extra-
role behavior: Evidence of construct and predictive validity. 
Academy of Management Journal, 41, 108-119.

Van Scotter, J. R., & Motowidlo, S. J. (1996). Interpersonal facili-
tation and job dedication as separate facets of contextual per-
formance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81, 525-531.

Williams, L. J., & Anderson, S. E. (1991). Job satisfaction and orga-
nizational  commitment  as  predictors  of  organizational  citizen-
ship and in-role behaviors. Journal of Management, 17, 601-617.
Wright,  T. A.  (2003).  Positive  organizational  behavior: An  idea 
whose time has truly come. Journal of Organizational Behav-
ior, 24, 437-442.

Wright,  T. A.,  &  Cropanzano,  R.  (2007).  The  happy/productive 
worker  thesis  revisited.  In  J.  Martocchio  (Ed.),  Research  in 
personnel  and  human  resources  management  (Vol.  26,  pp. 
269-313). Amsterdam: Elsevier.


Norman et al. 

391

Wright, T. A., Cropanzano, R., & Bonett, D. G. (2007). The mod-
erating  role  of  employee  positive  well-being  on  the  relation 
between  job  satisfaction  and  job  performance.  Journal  of 
Occupational Health Psychology, 12(2), 93-104.

Youssef,  C.  M.,  &  Luthans,  F.  (2007).  Positive  organizational 
behavior in the workplace: The impact of hope, optimism, and 
resilience. Journal of Management, 33, 774-800.

Bios
Steve  Norman  holds  a  Ph.D.  in  Leadership  and  Organizational 
Behavior  from  the  University  of  Nebraska-Lincoln  and  is  an 
Assistant Professor of Management in the Hasan School of Business 
at  Colorado  State  University-Pueblo.    His  research  and  consulting 
interests include positive psychological capital, leadership (including 
authentic leadership and electronic forms of leadership), and trust.

James B. Avey holds a Ph.D. in Leadership and Organizational 
Behavior  from  the  University  of  Nebraska-Lincoln.  He  is  an 

assistant  professor  of  management  at  Central  Washington 
University  and  Director  of 
the  Northwest  Center  for 
Organizational  Research.  His  main  research  interests  include 
positive  psychological  capital,  ethical  leadership  and  psycho-
logical ownership.

James L. Nimnicht is Distinguished Professor of the University 
Teaching  at  Central Washington  University.    He  earned  a  Ph.D. 
from the University of Nebraska in Organizational Behavior and 
has research interests that include psychological capital, turnover 
and training.

Nancy Graber Pigeon is an Assistant Professor of MGT/Law 
at  Central  Washington  University.  She  has  a  Juris  Doctorate 
and  a  Masters  Degree  in  Labor  and  Industrial  Relations.  She 
practices employment law and actively works as a consultant 
in  the  fields  of  employment  law  and  human  resource 
management.

