 
 
Occupational embeddedness and job performance
Author(s): THOMAS W. H. NG and  DANIEL C. FELDMAN
Source: Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 30, No. 7 (OCTOBER 2009), pp. 863-891
Published by: Wiley
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/41683872
Accessed: 03-08-2017 01:12 UTC
 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/41683872?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms

Wiley is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of
Organizational Behavior

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Journal of Organizational Behavior
 J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)
 Published online 8 January 2009 in Wiley InterScience
 (www.interscience.wiley.com) DOI: 10.1002/job.580

 Occupational embeddedness and job
 performance

 THOMAS W. H. NG1* AND DANIEL C. FELDMAN2
 1 School of Business and Economics, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
 2 University of Georgia, Terry College of Business, Athens, Georgia

 Summary While researchers have recently focused their attention on organizational embeddedness,
 occupational embeddedness has received little theoretical and empirical attention. Using
 multisource data on 162 employees in multiple jobs and organizations, we found that
 occupational embeddedness is positively related to both task performance and creativity
 and is negatively related to counterproductive work behavior, even after controlling for the
 effects of organizational embeddedness. In addition, we found that trait affect moderated the
 relationships of occupational embeddedness to job performance. Occupational embeddedness
 was more strongly related to counterproductive work behavior when trait negative affect was
 high, while occupational embeddedness was more strongly related to both citizenship behavior
 and creativity when trait positive affect was high. Results also indicated that the various
 components of occupational embeddedness had different effects on job outcomes. Fit had a
 strong positive effect on core task performance, links had a positive effect on creativity, and
 sacrifice had a small positive effect on citizenship behavior. The article concludes with a
 discussion of implications for future research and management practice. Copyright © 2009
 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Introduction

 Over the last decade, organizational researchers have paid considerable attention to the construct of job
 embeddedness (Mitchell, Holtom, Lee, Sablynski, & Erez, 2001). This research has examined how
 perceptions of person-job fit, links with colleagues and work activities, and potential sacrifices
 associated with changes in employment can affect employee turnover. Empirical studies consistently
 find that individuals with high job embeddedness are less likely to leave their employers voluntarily
 (Crossley, Bennett, Jex, & Burnfield, 2007).

 However, much less work has been done on the influence of embeddedness on employee

 performance. Because perceptions of strong fit, expansion of social links, and accumulation of sunk
 costs may promote employees' motivation to perform well at work, the level of embeddedness is likely

 * Correspondence to: Thomas W. H. Ng, School of Business and Economics, The University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong
 Kong. E-mail: tng@business.hku.hk

 Received 17 November 2007
 Revised 1 7 November 2008
 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Accepted 24 November 2008

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 864 T. W. H. NG AND D. C. FELDMAN

 to affect task performance, too (Lee, Mitchell, Sablynski, Burton, & Holtom, 2004). There are at least
 two ways to further our understanding of the embeddedness - performance relationship.

 First, researchers can differentiate among multiple foci of embeddedness. Specifically, while
 empirical research on job embeddedness has been growing, to date there has been very little empirical
 research on occupational embeddedness (Feldman & Ng, 2007; King, Burke, & Pemberton, 2005). Just
 as employees can become embedded in their jobs, individuals can become enmeshed in their
 occupations. When employees perceive a strong fit with their occupations, develop extensive links with
 professional colleagues and activities, and accumulate numerous side-bets (e.g., professional
 reputations and social status), they might also have particularly strong incentives to perform well in
 their occupations.

 A second possible way to strengthen our knowledge about the embeddedness - performance
 relationship is to examine multiple forms of job performance. The conceptualization of job
 performance has been expanded in recent years to include three key components: core task behaviors ,
 citizenship behaviors , and counterproductive behaviors. Rotundo and Sackett (2002) compared the
 relative importance of these three groups of performance behaviors in managerial ratings of
 subordinates' overall job performance. They found that each of these three categories of performance
 behaviors contributed to overall performance ratings, with core task performance given the highest
 weight, followed by counterproductive performance, and citizenship performance. An additional
 indicator of job performance that has been studied in recent years is creativity. In many organizations,
 in fact, creativity is used as a separate criterion in performance appraisals because employee creativity
 contributes to organizations' ability to adapt to rapidly changing business environments (De Jonge &
 De Ruyter, 2004; Johnson, 2001; Welbourne, Johnson, & Erez, 1998).

 The first goal of the current study, then, is to examine the relationships of occupational
 embeddedness with several indicators of job performance (including core task performance,
 organizational citizenship behavior, counterproductive work behavior, and creativity). Little research
 has been done to examine whether occupational embeddedness will operate similarly to job
 embeddedness in promoting job performance - and whether occupational embeddedness will predict
 job performance after controlling for job embeddedness.

 Certainly, the primary focus of embeddedness research has been on the antecedents of job mobility
 and stability. Beyond those relationships, though, it is equally important to take a closer look at the
 consequences of embeddedness, particularly in terms of job performance. Is lack of inter-occupational
 mobility associated with poorer performance because there are no incentives to excel in the outside
 labor market? Or, is lack of inter-occupational mobility associated with greater performance because
 individuals do not want to risk losing their only true employment option? In this study, we consider the
 theories underlying the relationship between occupational embeddedness and job performance and
 empirically examine whether occupational embeddedness has additional predictive power above and
 beyond job embeddedness.

 The second goal of the paper is to examine the ways in which trait positive and trait negative affect

 might moderate the relationships between occupational embeddedness and job performance. The few
 existing studies of the job embeddedness - task performance relationship have assumed a rather
 straightforward relationship between these two constructs without considering the influence of
 employees' personality traits (e.g., Lee et al., 2004; Wijayanto & Kismono, 2004). However, a great
 deal of research has shown that people's affect can significantly influence how individuals construe
 work situations (e.g., Forgas & George, 2001) and there is growing evidence to support an interactionist
 perspective on this phenomenon (Tett & Burnett, 2003). Therefore, in the present study, we also
 examine how the relationships between occupational embeddedness and dimensions of job
 performance might be moderated by both trait positive affect and trait negative affect.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 OCCUPATIONAL EMBEDDEDNESS 865

 The Construct of Embeddedness

 Organizational embeddedness

 To explain why people do not change organizations even when opportunities exist, Mitchell et al.
 (2001) proposed a construct called job embeddedness, which they define as the combination of three
 organizational forces (fit, links, and sacrifice) that keep people in their current jobs. Fit is the extent to
 which an individual's abilities match organizational requirements and an individual's interests match
 organizational rewards. Links refer to the extent of ties individuals have with other people and activities
 at work (e.g., friendship ties or task interdependence). Sacrifice is defined as what people would have to
 give up if they left their organizations (e.g., pensions or insurance benefits).

 Mitchell et al. (2001) emphasize that research on embeddedness moves beyond reliance on current
 job attitudes and perceptions of the labor market in examining job mobility (e.g., Farrell & Rusbult,
 1981; Rusbult & Farrell, 1983). Instead, embeddedness researchers have focused on the fact that, in
 many cases, individuals stay in their jobs even though they may dislike them and have better
 alternatives elsewhere. Thus, the three forces (fit, links, and sacrifice) that comprise the embeddedness
 construct represent three key factors that are relatively independent of job (dis)satisf action and from
 conditions in the open labor market.

 The embeddedness perspective on job mobility is also distinct from the sociological-structural

 perspective, which argues that job mobility is primarily driven by vacancies in the labor market
 (DiPrete, De Graaf, Luijkx, Tahlin, & Blossfeld, 1997; Fujiwara-Greve & Greve, 2000; Rosenfeld,
 1992). In contrast, the embeddedness perspective proposes that individuals may have little mobility in
 their careers if the fit, links, and sacrifice components of embeddedness are high, even when there are
 plentiful vacancies available in the labor market.

 Two additional points are noteworthy about the definition of job embeddedness. First, Mitchell et al.
 (2001) suggest that job embeddedness might also emerge from fit, links, and sacrifices associated with
 living in their present communities, which make job changes less likely. Second, because
 embeddedness in a particular job essentially embeds an individual within his/her current organization,
 they suggest that job embeddedness implies organizational embeddedness. Thus, like other researchers
 (e.g., Crossley et al., 2007), we treat embeddedness in the job as virtually synonymous with
 embeddedness in the organization.

 Occupational embeddedness

 As Rosenfeld (1992:48) has commented, "[differences among types of firms, industries, and
 occupations in their job rewards, career ladders, and employment relationships should affect the job
 shifts underlying careers." We also suggest that the job embeddedness perspective proposed by
 Mitchell et al. (2001) might be fruitfully applied to understanding occupational embeddedness as well.
 Specifically, we propose that occupational embeddedness is comprised of three forces (fit, links, and

 sacrifice) that keep people in their current occupations. Fit is the extent to which an individual's
 abilities match occupational requirements and an individual's interests match occupational rewards.
 Links refer to the extent to which individuals have ties to other people and activities in the occupation
 (e.g., friendships with professional colleagues or involvement in professional associations). Sacrifice
 refers to what people would have to give up if they left their occupations (e.g., high compensation or
 high social status ascribed to the profession).

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 866 T. W. H. NG AND D. C. FELDMAN

 Like organizational embeddedness, occupational embeddedness is a direct formative construct

 (Edwards & Bagozzi, 2000); that is, occupational fit, links, and sacrifice contribute to occupational
 embeddedness, but occupational embeddedness does not cause fit, links, and sacrifice. The greater the
 perceived fit, links, and sacrifice, the stronger occupational embeddedness will be.

 Comparison with other constructs

 Table 1 provides a comparison between occupational embeddedness and other theoretically similar
 constructs. For instance, occupational embeddedness is different from organizational embeddedness.
 Embeddedness in a particular organization typically requires individuals to stay within the same
 occupation, but embeddedness in an occupation does not preclude organizational changes within the
 same occupation (Neal, 1999; Tolbert, 1996). Indeed, lawyers, physicians, engineers, professors,
 electricians, and carpenters frequently change employers without changing occupations.

 Occupational embeddedness is also conceptually distinct from community embeddedness (that is,
 entrenchment in the city or town in which one lives). Many occupations, ranging across the spectrum of
 educational requirements, can be readily pursued in numerous communities in a country; changing
 occupations does not necessarily mean individuals would have to move to another community. To be
 sure, there are some location- specific occupations (e.g., shipbuilding is largely done along lake or
 ocean coasts). By and large, though, being embedded in an occupation is not the same as being
 embedded in a community.

 Occupational embeddedness is also conceptually distinct from the construct of career entrenchment
 (Carson, Carson, & Bedeian, 1995). Career entrenchment consists of three dimensions: high
 occupational investment, high emotional costs associated with leaving an occupation, and low number
 of occupational alternatives. Blau (2001), though, has criticized the career entrenchment construct as
 simply being a measure of continuance commitment because it emphasizes the costs of leaving
 (occupational investment, emotional costs) and availability of alternatives. Occupational embedded-
 ness is a much broader construct that encompasses fit and links in addition to the costs of leaving.

 Following the arguments of Mitchell et al. (2001), we also propose that the three components of

 embeddedness differ from the three dimensions of commitment (Allen & Meyer, 1990). Relating to
 occupational embeddedness specifically, affective occupational commitment reflects one's emotional
 attachment to one's vocation. Perceptions of fit, on the other hand, are not necessarily affective in
 nature. Moreover, social links are not the same as normative occupational commitment because some
 social links, like the number of professional memberships employees have, are not part of the
 normative commitment construct. Finally, perceptions of sacrifice are also distinct from continuance
 occupational commitment because the sacrifice scale taps specific rewards or assets that individuals
 would have to give up if they left their occupations. In contrast, continuance occupational commitment
 taps general and global perceptions of accumulated side-bets. Thus, while we would expect a positive
 relationship between embeddedness and commitment, there are major parts of the embeddedness
 construct that are theoretically different from commitment and/or are measured in different ways.

 Hypotheses

 Figure 1 depicts the specific proposed relationships among organizational and occupational
 embeddedness, trait positive and negative affect, and various dimensions of job performance. Below,
 we discuss each of these proposed relationships in more detail.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 OCCUPATIONAL EMBEDDEDNESS 867

 Table 1. Comparisons between occupational embeddedness and theoretically similar constructs

 Construct Definition Differences from occupational embeddedness

 Occupational The three key forces, including
 embeddedness fit, links, and sacrifice, that keep

 people in their current occupations

 Organizational The three key forces, including Occupational embeddedness focuses strictly
 embeddedness fit, links, and sacrifice, that keep on occupational factors rather than

 people in their current organizations organizational factors

 Community The three key forces, including fit, Occupational embeddedness focuses strictly
 embeddedness links, and sacrifice, that keep people on occupational factors rather than community

 in their current community factors

 Affective An affective attachment to the Occupational embeddedness is not always
 occupational occupation affective in nature and is not limited to
 commitment attachment based on identification with the

 Normative An obligation to remain in the Occupational embeddedness does not
 occupational occupation necessarily relate to how right or wrong it is
 commitment to be so attached
 Continuance Perceived cost associated with Occupational embeddedness includes both
 occupational leaving the occupation affective and cognitive based evaluations and
 commitment is not limited to attachment based solely on

 occupation

 Career Extent of career investments, Occupational embeddedness (a) is broader in
 entrenchment emotional costs, and limits of scope since it includes three different forces,

 career alternatives (b) focuses strictly on within-occupational

 lack of options or cost of leaving

 factors and does not include perceptions of
 career alternatives, (c) has three distinctive
 dimensions whereas career entrenchment
 does not (Blau, 2001)

 Affective An affective attachment to the Occupational embeddedness focuses strictly
 organizational organization on occupational factors rather than
 commitment organizational factors (e.g., identification with

 Normative An obligation to remain in the Occupational embeddedness focuses strictly
 organizational organization on occupational factors rather than
 commitment organizational factors (e.g., provision of

 the organization) as bases of attachment

 Continuance Perceived cost associated with Occupational embeddedness focuses strictly
 organizational leaving the organization on occupational factors rather than
 commitment organizational factors (e.g., pension funds)

 as bases of attachment

 training) as bases of attachment

 Occupational The extent to which individuals Occupational embeddedness is not always
 satisfaction like or dislike their affective in nature

 occupations

 Intention to leave Individuals' own estimated Occupational embeddedness (a) does not
 the organization probability of the likelihood preclude organizational turnover within the

 of leaving the organization industry, and (b) does not indicate any

 behavioral intent

 Intention to leave Individuals' own estimated Occupational embeddedness describes a
 the occupation probability of the likelihood present career reality and does not explicitly

 of leaving the occupation address any behavioral intent to leave

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 868 T. W. H. NG AND D. C. FELDMAN

 Figure 1. The proposed model

 Occupational embeddedness and performance

 As noted before, the conceptualization of job performance has been expanded in recent years to include
 multiple groups of performance behaviors (Rotundo & Sackett, 2002). Core task performance refers to
 the basic required duties of a particular job. Citizenship performance refers to those extra behaviors
 engaged in by employees, over and above their core task requirements, that actively promote and
 strengthen the organization's effectiveness (e.g., helping coworkers) (Organ, 1988; Hunt, 1996).
 Counterproductive performance refers to voluntary behaviors that harm the well-being of the
 organization (e.g., theft) (Bennett & Robinson, 2000). Creativity is the extent to which employees
 generate new and useful ideas for improving organizational productivity (Anderson, De Dreu, &
 Nijstad, 2004).

 In one of the few empirical studies linking organizational embeddedness to dimensions of job

 performance, Lee et al. (2004) found that organizational embeddedness was positively related to both
 core task performance and citizenship behavior. The authors suggested that "because high on-the-job
 embeddedness reflects (1) many links, (2) a good fit, and/or (3) consequential things that an employee
 gives up by quitting, the motivation to perform should be high" (p. 714).

 Based on Lee et al.'s (2004) study, we expect that occupational embeddedness will also be positively

 related to performance effectiveness. Because high occupational embeddedness indicates (1) perceived
 fit with the occupation, (2) strong social links within an occupation, and (3) high costs of leaving the
 occupation, the motivation to perform well within the occupation should be high, too. For instance, the
 person-occupation fit research suggests that individuals whose skills match occupational requirements
 or whose personalities and values match occupational environments are more likely to perform better
 than those without good fit (Dawis, 2005).

 Furthermore, research on social identity suggests that, when a group membership becomes salient,

 the person will be more motivated to dedicate effort to protect and reinforce that group identity (Stryker
 & Burke, 2000; Stryker & Serpe, 1982). Therefore, to bolster their sense of occupational identity,
 individuals who are occupationally embedded may be more likely to go the extra mile to make sure that
 both in-role duties and extra-role work activities are done thoroughly (London, 1984). In addition, the
 attraction-selection-attrition paradigm suggests that individuals are more likely to achieve success in

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 OCCUPATIONAL EMBEDDEDNESS 869

 occupations in which they think they can excel (Kristof-Brown, Zimmerman, & Johnson, 2005).
 Conversely, employees who do not consistently perform up to occupational standards are more likely to
 self-select out of the occupation or be terminated (Schneider, Goldstein, & Smith, 1995). Hence, we
 hypothesize that, even controlling for organizational embeddedness, occupational embeddedness will
 be positively related to task performance, citizenship behaviors, and creativity.

 Occupational embeddedness is also likely to predict counterproductive work behaviors. Marcus and

 Schüler (2004) found that counterproductive work behaviors largely result from lack of self-control,
 which Gottfredson and Hirschi (1990) define as the tendency to avoid acts whose long-term costs
 exceed momentary advantage. When an individual is highly embedded in an occupation, the person
 will be highly cognizant of his/her desire (or need) to remain in that occupation for a long period of
 time. As such, highly-embedded workers should have a stronger aversion to engaging in
 counterproductive work behaviors which might have long-term negative consequences (e.g., poor
 professional reputation) for their careers (Ng & Feldman, 2007). Conversely, less embedded workers
 may have fewer reasons to refrain from counterproductive work behavior because they realize that they
 are unlikely to stay in their occupations much longer anyway.

 Hypothesis 1: Controlling for the effect of organizational embeddedness, occupational
 embeddedness is positively related to core task performance (Hla), citizenship behavior (Hlb),
 and creativity (Hlc), and negatively related to counterproductive work behavior (Hid).

 Moderating role of positive and negative affect

 Most researchers agree that trait positive affect and trait negative affect are independent dimensions
 (Diener & Emmons, 1985; Eagly & Chaiken, 1993; Thoresen, Kaplan, Barsky, Warren, & de
 Chermont, 2003). Drawing from research on cognitive processing, we suggest here that both trait
 positive and trait negative affect are likely to be significant moderators of the relationship between
 occupational embeddedness and dimensions of job performance.

 Trait positive affect versus trait negative affect
 Trait positive affect reflects one's level of pleasurable engagement with the environment (Watson,
 1988, 2000). People high in trait positive affect appear energetic, joyful, sociable, and lively. In
 contrast, individuals who have low trait positive affect appear to be sluggish and drowsy.

 Trait negative affect, on the other hand, reflects the level of aversive emotional states like distress,

 anger, anxiety, nervousness, and guilt (Watson & Clark, 1984). Individuals who are high on trait
 negative affect appear to be dismissive and withdrawn. In contrast, individuals who are low in trait
 negative affect appear to be calm and relaxed.

 Moderating role of trait positive affect
 We predict here that trait positive affect will strengthen the positive relationships of occupational
 embeddedness with task performance, citizenship behaviors, and creativity. In addition, trait positive
 affect will strengthen the negative relationship between occupational embeddedness and counter-
 productive work behavior.

 There are several reasons for this prediction. First, trait positive affect predisposes people to be
 naturally positive at work in the absence of any obvious triggering device or situational contingency
 (Watson, 2000). Second, trait positive affect predisposes individuals to look for environmental cues that
 are positive (e.g., pleasant coworkers) (Larsen, 1992; Levin & Stokes, 1989; Necowitz & Roznowski,

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 870 T. W. H. NG AND D. C. FELDMAN

 1994). Third, trait positive affect influences how people interpret the information they do receive. High-
 positive-affect individuals process information in the environment in a more positive way (Rusting,
 1999) and try to maintain consistency between their own enduring (positive) predispositions and the
 situations in which they find themselves (Judge & Larsen, 2001; Levin & Stokes, 1989; Watson &
 Clark, 1984).

 Because of their tendency to be excited and optimistic and to process information in positive ways,
 individuals high on trait positive affect will react more strongly to perceptions of good fit, establishment
 of broad social links in the occupation, and accumulation of desired rewards. In general, they are more
 likely to see fit, links, and sacrifice as evidence that they have "made it" and that their careers have been
 successful (e.g., Cable & Judge, 1996; Seibert, Kraimer, & Liden, 2001). As a result, the positive
 relationships between occupational embeddedness and constructive job behaviors (task performance,
 citizenship behavior, and creativity) discussed earlier will be even stronger for high trait positive affect
 workers. At the same time, because individuals who have strong trait positive affect are particularly
 excited about staying in their occupations over the long haul, they will be even more careful not to
 engage in counterproductive work behaviors that might hurt those long-term career plans. Thus, we
 predict:

 Hypothesis 2: The positive relationships of occupational embeddedness with task performance
 (H2a), citizenship behavior (H2b), and creativity (H2c) will be stronger for individuals high in trait
 positive affect (vs. individuals low in trait positive affect). The negative relationship between
 occupational embeddedness and counterproductive work behaviors (H2d) will be stronger for
 individuals high in trait positive affect (vs. individuals low in trait positive affect).

 Moderating role of trait negative affect
 We also predict here that trait negative affect will weaken the positive relationships of occupational
 embeddedness with task performance, citizenship behaviors, and creativity. In addition, trait negative
 affect will weaken the negative relationship between occupational embeddedness and counter-
 productive work behavior.

 Specifically, trait negative affect influences how people interpret the information they receive ať
 work and their levels of work motivation. For instance, individuals with high trait negative affect are
 more pessimistic that their efforts will result in tangible organizational rewards (Watson & Clark,
 1984). Further, high trait negative affect may color how individuals view problems on the job. High trait
 negative affect may influence workers to see thé problems they face on the job to be more severe and
 irreversible than they really are. As a result, workers with high negative affect may over-react or be
 overly passive when faced with relatively minor challenges at work (Watson & Slack, 1993).

 Therefore, we predict that trait negative affect will moderate the relationships between occupational

 embeddedness and dimensions of job performance. Even though we generally expect that individuals
 will react positively (in core task performance, organizational citizenship behavior, and creativity)
 when they perceive strong fit, broad links, and high accumulated rewards, those with high trait negative
 affect may perceive their occupational embeddedness with less enthusiasm. For instance, embedded
 individuals with high negative affect may be worried about "becoming stuck" in the current
 occupations and about their likelihood of achieving new careers or obtaining other desired career
 rewards (Feldman, 1988). This worry may limit the positive effect of occupational embeddedness on
 task performance, citizenship behavior, and creativity.

 In addition, we predict that trait negative affect may weaken the relationship between occupational

 embeddedness and counterproductive work behaviors. As noted before, highly-embedded workers

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 OCCUPATIONAL EMBEDDEDNESS 871

 should have a strong aversion to engaging in counterproductive work behaviors which might have long-
 term negative consequences for their careers. However, individuals high on trait negative affect
 generally have greater trouble regulating their emotions and impulsiveness (Iverson & Deery, 2001;
 Watson & Clark, 1984). As such, compared to highly embedded workers with low negative affect, those
 highly embedded workers who have high negative trait affect may see less reason or have less
 willingness to withhold their counterproductive work behaviors.

 Hypothesis 3: The positive relationships of occupational embeddedness with task performance
 (H3a), citizenship behavior (H3b), and creativity (H3c) will be weaker for individuals high in trait
 negative affect (vs. individuals low in trait negative affect). The negative relationship between
 occupational embeddedness and counterproductive work behaviors (H3d) will be weaker for
 individuals high in trait negative affect (vs. individuals low in trait negative affect).

 Method

 Procedure

 To insure variance in terms of occupational embeddedness, we endeavored to collect data from
 employees working in a wide range of occupations. To that end, we adopted a participant recruitment
 strategy used by other researchers such as Hubbell and Chory- Assad (2005) and Tepper, Uhl-Bien,
 Kohut, Rogelberg, Lockhart, and Ensley (2006). Specifically, a campus advertisement was used to
 invite students to participate in a research project. Each participant was instructed to invite one close
 friend, relative, or significant other who was organizationally-employed at the time to participate in the
 current research study. In return, small monetary rewards (equivalent to approximately $US 8) were
 offered to both the students and the actual employees who completed the surveys.

 A total of 175 employees were recruited through these referrals and were consequently sent surveys.
 In addition, each employee respondent was also instructed to invite one coworker with whom she/he
 worked closely on a daily basis to respond to a shorter survey about the focal employee's job
 performance. These coworkers were provided with stamped envelopes with which they sent their
 evaluations directly back to the researchers. The entire data collection was completed within a two-
 month time frame. The final data set had 162 completed and matched surveys (for an effective response
 rate of 92.5%).

 Instead of relying on supervisors, we asked coworkers to evaluate employees' job performance for

 three major reasons. First, one of the major dependent variables of interest in this study was
 counterproductive interpersonal behavior. Arguably, coworkers are the ones who have the most
 opportunities to observe instances of such behavior on the job. Second, because the survey questions
 were related to employment relationships and job changes, we hoped respondents would feel more
 comfortable participating when direct supervisors were not involved. Third, while self-reported and
 supervisor-reported behavioral outcomes have been examined in the embeddedness literature before,
 we are unaware of any studies in this area that have used peer reports. As noted by Van Dyne and
 LePine (1998), peer-ratings of performance might reveal new and different findings compared to other
 sources of ratings.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz . Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 872 T. W. H. NG AND D. C. FELDMAN

 The students whom we initially contacted to get the employee sample were business school students

 at a university in Hong Kong. English survey items were translated into Chinese and then back-
 translated into English (see Brislin, 1980; Hui, Lee, & Rousseau, 2004). The back-translated version
 was very close to the original English items. For the few items that were not close to the original
 version, translators discussed and reached an agreement on the wording of those items.

 Sample

 The average age of employee respondents was 34 years old and the sample was almost evenly split by
 gender (48% female, 52% male). Average organizational tenure was 5.0 years and average job tenure
 was 4.9 years. Eighty-four per cent (84%) of the sample had at least some college education, while 25%
 of the sample held managerial positions. These demographic characteristics are consistent with those
 observed in other empirical studies conducted with Hong Kong nationals (e.g., Aryee, Wyatt, & Stone,
 1996).

 Participants were asked to provide the industry or profession in which they worked. A wide range of
 occupations was represented in the final sample. Participants were customer service representatives and
 sales personnel, bankers, consultants, financial analysts, traders, engineers and IT professionals,
 doctors, nurses and healthcare professionals, technicians, educators, general administrative personnel,
 civil service workers, social workers and counselors, manufacturing employees, construction and
 landscaping workers, media and communication specialists, and others.

 Measures collected from employees

 Organizational embeddedness
 The items for the organizational embeddedness measure are adapted from Mitchell et al. (2001) and
 appear in Table 2. We worded the items in terms of organizational embeddedness rather than in terms of
 job embeddedness so that respondents could more easily see the differences between the two
 embeddedness constructs (i.e., organizational vs. occupational embeddedness). As noted earlier,
 previous theoretical and empirical research suggests that job embeddedness implies organizational
 embeddedness in any event (Crossley et al., 2007; Mitchell et al., 2001).

 To reduce the possibility of respondent fatigue, we used only subsets of items from Mitchell et al.'s
 (2001) scales because the original scales were quite long (9 items for the fit dimension, 7 items for the
 links dimension, and 10 items for the sacrifice dimensions). We retained four to five items from each
 scale that (a) have strong factor loadings reported in Mitchell et al. (2001), (b) are readily modified to an
 occupational context so that the new measure of occupational embeddedness (discussed below) would
 largely mirror the organizational embeddedness items, and (c) would be applicable to the wide range of
 industries we sampled.

 We pre-tested this shortened organizational embeddedness measure on a group of employees in
 Hong Kong before collecting data for the main part of the study. Specifically, we collected responses
 from 196 employees in Hong Kong; these subjects were participating in a different on-going research
 project on social networks. In this pretest sample, we observed that the shortened scale of
 "organizational fit" was correlated with Mitchell et al.'s (2001) full fit scale at .95. The shortened
 "organizational links" scale was correlated with Mitchell et al.'s full links scale at .99. Finally, the
 shortened "organizational sacrifice" scale was correlated with Mitchell et al.'s full sacrifice scale at .94.
 These high correlations indicate that our shortened scales closely resemble the content domains of the
 original measures.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. /. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 OCCUPATIONAL EMBEDDEDNESS 873

 a g £ I
 "ss e 8 S I a -s I g ?l £ I
 23 CZ2 e S Oh 'S & O *B
 5 ft »C Ui CS- Oh O C <D
 CXi_ë ft S »C <D Ui o CS- o .0 O 0 c«T3 <D
 ^ Ì * -i <D I o o !» S 0 3 11 c«T3

 'S § -I ^ <5 § .'S) i 3 | § £ « g. .g
 ^ '«i 'S 1 •§ .S g s w o gi| i ^ 'S
 lg- 'S 1 •§ JS .S s- g g g & .3 ê 's <g £ s
 lg- S § ja g §•§ g z & g ê 's Sis s 8 S g>
 3 8 ja H Oed g §^o O '& z g .9 3 O £ ° I C g1 Ö i 2
 |s ä .S^ â S I gï í a ¿I O
 3«-2 ¿3 S § 1 5 ^s§-s w> 8 i Si 1 e I il "
 3«-2 ¿3 S §fi g w> 8 .2 g e g, .s "
 f| Sis §fi ïl g i .2 i I g 15 I 3 g, .s il

 Oed o O '& O ° C Ö O 2á

 1 S d T3 S*§1.^ .2 Is-a-S- P 13 cd *T3 ^ tn ^3 'Ö s "á ° |ji "§ O
 C d T3 .2 P 13 cd *T3 tn ^3 'Ö "á "§ O
 t3 C d ü T3 O ti s, cj ^ C Sg cd C *T3 « O £ 'Ö Ö'Sufe O ^
 <D íj O S ř s, d C _0 s O ti CU ed O _ X> ^
 T3 í: #* 3 -m ñ "Ö Cd3«5 fly - o % C u ^ <u o
 2 T3 <D b O 3 S g o C g*S _0 S)^- s 'S3 O fly - •§ CU £< o C ed % ° O .9 _ SS <u
 T3 I í: #* 3 I -m ñ "Ö |a^ IN Cd3«5 i fly i il o C <2 u Ů ^ 1-2 <u o
 I § s|,!|'S S I § II! 6< S§^ i I« i J¡ il cÖ«,? «al Ü 1-2
 ^3 © S « 'S «a o a KA SfiePtS cÖ«,? §H°
 ^3 ¡ Ig|á«|Sgig'|^lsi 'S «a KA 3 s I S 3 •§ t1? ,a 31
 I ¡§^1^1Ü-2S|S-§S g ! s g i » •§ s, ! a ,a S » 31 I
 H I --3 ^^hhh^ÍhKK |>á<al |>| ill |1 vnffi^K 8-1 uh o<H oh wh -1
 H ^^hhh^ÍhKK vnffi^K uh o<H oh wh «
 oS 3 M ëS 'g 'g
 f §
 £ 3
 c £
 1 ^
 ä s
 2 -S
 § -1
 'i si
 •S c <_, Ti a
 •S Il c <_, S I 8"

 C pû 13 Ö (u o
 oft o d x> •£-) o
 >> *ö ° o X a s § S
 C CÖ W ü ^ ü 4) S
 6 .a a <u ü x> «>
 I* 8 » i a S <u § -8.« x>
 OS =1- _ .C bû.S a a 23
 ° 1! o "§ S <d o § «3 .o

 I ta® -s 1 &eï: 1 3> SS I i G ¡ I § 1 S^l li

 uè" ta® &eï: 3> SS o o ° e G § S^l ~
 » & ta® gS ■§! &eï: 2 3> f SS o ° o • e - i £ G to § ® | S^l ~ £
 SS c o gS i-| § '3ft tic 5 -ë>> S § í3 ií g i ^ ® S ?S Za
 c o § tic •£ -ë>> _H ií ^ .2 ^ Za
 Již ° hhöjq <D o •£ CD § _H .2 ^ -a ^ a -
 2.S2 hhöjq >, g u u o ts 8, S « t 'S a £ -s. -
 •s « 3 u u S n «g ^^s-g
 §g u ufi S J i si «g ï Í S -8
 I5ÜI a<2 s 11 g1 g| ^

 2 u o ^ Â p.. ^ d o)c3

 1 I5ÜI ii< tí "Il s ^ g1 g| ^ l| 11
 ! 2 1 !lti| u o ^ Â HI "Il d o)c3 ì î 15 ^cd l I i) lì ö
 ^ 3 S t S o o ^ § a "2 oc ^eS
 -g .s u «>§«£> S ^ a §§ p.. ^ -y d -tí ^ a 'S
 i C g|5lli O ^ c/3 Jll ŠSwf.wn I £Í» »JÍ II O . »C I I ri I! S®
 C O ^ c/3 ŠSwf.wn £Í» O
 ■2 S is3'!5! s es«0 gï ^ I g Sjž al
 ■2 C gaë1 § 9 9i0|
 •a S ifîsêt lu I Hl« gï £e I "S S 11
 •a I láá Ž I ááSS Ě Ě -al*
 <5 e 3 â? F I .a

 C/3
 (/3
 0)
 -§

 I

 §
 "S
 a

 o

 8
 T3
 §
 13
 c
 0

 "cd
 N

 1
 I?
 «^-1
 0
 <Z3

 S
 4)

 >>
 <L>

 00

 (N
 <D

 1

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 874 T. W. H. NG AND D. C. FELDMAN

 The fit and sacrifice items were measured using 5-point Likert-format scales. Response scales ranged

 from 1 (Strongly Disagree) to 5 (Strongly Agree). Links was measured with open-ended questions.

 More specifically, the dimension of fit was measured with five items. A sample item is: "I feel like I

 am a good match for this company." The a coefficient is .8 1 . The dimension of links was measured with
 five open-ended items. An example is: "How many coworkers are highly dependent on you?" The item
 scores were summed; a higher score indicates a higher number of links. Finally, the dimension of
 sacrifice was measured with five items (a = .80). A sample item is: "I am well compensated for my
 level of performance in this organization."

 Next, following Mitchell et al. (2001), the dimensions of fit, links, and sacrifice were combined by

 averaging the composite scores of the three dimensions. In this way, all three dimensions contributed
 equally to the composite organizational embeddedness score.

 Occupational embeddedness
 Because there were no existing measures of occupational embeddedness, we operationalized the
 construct by modifying items that we used to measure organizational embeddedness (as discussed
 above). The new scale also appears in Table 2.

 Specifically, the dimension of fit was measured with five Likert items. A sample item is: "I feel like I
 am a good match for this occupation." The dimension of links was measured with four open-ended
 questions. An example here is: "How many professional associations are you a member of?" These
 item scores were then summed; a higher score indicates a higher number of links. Finally, the
 dimension of sacrifice was measured with five items. A sample item is: "I am well compensated for my
 level of performance in this occupation."

 In addition, we examined the psychometric properties of this new occupational embeddedness measure

 on the pre-test sample we mentioned earlier. We found that the fit and sacrifice scales had internal
 consistency estimates of .86 and 88, respectively. (The link score is a summed index and therefore has no
 internal consistency estimate.) Furthermore, an exploratory factor analysis showed that these three scales
 emerged as distinct factors, accounting for 68% of the total variance. Thus, it appears that the three scales
 are psychometrically acceptable as a measure of occupational embeddedness.

 In this study's main sample, we found that the a coefficient for the fit dimension was .87 and the a

 coefficient for the sacrifice dimension was .84. As with the organizational embeddedness score,
 occupational embeddedness was then calculated by averaging the composite scores of fit, links, and
 sacrifice. (In our subsequent analyses, we also present the results of analyses based on individual
 dimensions of embeddedness as a way to assess the appropriateness of aggregating the three
 dimensions into a composite construct.)

 Trait positive and negative affect
 We measured trait positive and negative affect with the PANAS 20-item scales (Watson, Clark, &
 Teilegen, 1988). The positive affect scale (a = .87) measures the extent to which individuals have felt
 alert, excited, interested, inspired, strong, determined, attentive, active, enthusiastic, and proud in the
 past month. The negative affect scale (a = .92) measures the extent to which individuals have felt
 irritable, distressed, ashamed, upset, nervous, guilty, scared, hostile, jittery, and afraid in the past
 month. Employees used 5-point Likert-format scales to record responses, ranging from 1 (Strongly
 Disagree) to 5 (Strongly Agree).

 Performance measures collected from coworkers

 The four dimensions of job performance were evaluated by coworkers. These, too, were measured with
 5-point Likert scales. The means, standard deviations, and correlations of all the variables in the study
 are provided in Table 3.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J . Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 OCCUPATIONAL EMBEDDEDNESS 875

 s 1^3 , i- I O i- I O

 , in m

 _ . en e-*
 o _ . o (S oo
 1 ' en Ö

 . C<i H 00 H
 as ho t >n
 1 * r-; O

 , "nenmenm
 00 O H r-H r-H I>
 f r o

 ^ I in -h m (N m 8
 ^ ^ I | <N r-n O ' O ' <N t- gj
 ' ' ' ' en o ,g

 <u

 * * ^
 I K S S * o * S ' S !n öb

 f * * ' en ö g

 <?3

 Oh

 * * * * ^
 I * ^tV^t^boOrH(S * * * <8
 ^ I I ^o^incxsooom ' ' ' ' " ^
 ' ' f ' ' " en © ^

 II

 £
 * ^
 , inMenoo^innoMn -c
 ^ , I OO-h-HOOO00^D ' £
 r r ' r r r ^ 0 ^
 * * * s
 _ I Vn'ûÎHa00Vl00^^ bX)
 m _ I I MHOMHH(SOW<n ' ' ' ' 0) bX)
 Í ' ' ' í i ' Í«® «

 10

 Jh
 * * * ®
 * * * * M
 I ooohcnOHOoM^Hh «j
 I I (NtNO-HrHfN^rHOrH^ * * ||
 r r * * r r r r ^ ^ *■

 <u
 0Û
 <L>
 * * * * £h
 * * * * * * * o
 I OO^DON^O^tCNOO^^CNOO o
 ^ I in(SHOH(S(NHHOenoo ' ' ' ' 0
 ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' * ^ g Cfl

 II
 j-i m

 •ç «J ¿*
 £ lî
 íj I lì o
 ■§1 -o ^ f "ä If

 cd -h o
 t« S o -û

 -o ^ "ä
 -O ^ ^ .S II ^ -o
 <u^o°2 ^ -o
 x> £ u & <u "> 9 - ^ >:
 S u le "5 o « .^¡ ja o § - .-r. -a
 u 13 * « * "5 y g £> -s I 8 ÎS
 "a co.rt'öScL 13 1 > s « * i ^ •§ y is '-•o g '* -g -s > -log- I <5 ^ S
 co.rt'öScL > s o '-•o -g > © <5 ^ S
 is! a^&i, §& •« v Tí -a 8
 is! 1-18.8 a^&i, 8.11 fil §& I •§ ,^23 v Tí -a 8
 3 'S OOP^uuuüwÄÄ^ .. PSS®
 3 'S 8 &1 1 "i :l § g 8 1 * S "ã PSS® ¡ ?

 •g
 ^ HMfn^i^^ihoooNOH
 ^ t-H r-H < *"« X> O

 CN
 vo
 il

 (/3
 <L>

 1

 c?
 O

 on
 ö
 0

 1
 ë O
 is

 0

 c/T
 a
 #o

 .23
 ž

 T3

 C/Î

 < Ä

 1

 en

 <D

 Î

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 876 T. W. H. NG AND D. C. FELDMAN

 Task performance
 Core task performance was measured with the 7-item scale developed by Williams and Anderson
 (1991). Sample items are: "This employee adequately completes assigned duties" and "This employee
 meets formal performance requirements of the job" (a = .90).

 Citizenship behaviors
 Citizenship behaviors were also measured using scales developed by Williams and Anderson (1991).
 We followed Williams and Anderson (1991) in differentiating between citizenship behaviors directed
 at the organization and those directed at coworkers. Seven items were used to measure citizenship
 behaviors directed at the organization. Sample items are: "This employee's attendance at work is above
 the norm" and "This employee gives advance notice when unable to come to work" (a = .86). Seven
 items were also used to measure citizenship behaviors directed at others. Examples here are: "This
 employee goes out of his/her way to help new employees" and "This employee takes time to listen to
 co-workers' problems and worries" (a = .93).

 While our initial intention had been to treat these two scales separately, the high correlation between
 them (r = .75) led us to aggregate the two measures to form a composite scale of citizenship behavior.
 The overall citizenship behavior scale had an a coefficient of .93.

 Creativity
 Creativity was measured with a 4-item scale adapted from Baer and Oldham (2006). The four items are:
 "The employee suggests many creative ideas that might improve working conditions at the
 organization"; "The employee often comes up with creative solutions to problems at work"; "The
 employee suggests new ways of performing work tasks"; and "The employee is a good source of
 creative ideas." The coefficient a is .93.

 Counterproductive interpersonal behavior
 Counterproductive interpersonal behavior was measured using Bennett and Robinson's (2000) 7-item
 counterproductive interpersonal behavior scale. Sample items are: "This employee made fun of
 someone at work" and "This employee played a mean prank on someone at work." The coefficient a is
 .94.

 Control variables

 In the present study we controlled for gender, educational level, and job complexity . The measurement
 of gender and educational level was straightforward. As noted earlier, a wide variety of occupations
 were included in the present sample. To parsimoniously control for the effect of these occupational
 differences without using too many dummy variables, we categorized respondents' jobs as high or low
 job complexity.

 Two researchers (the first author and a research assistant) were responsible for coding jobs. The

 process was guided by previous studies that have also coded job complexity (e.g., Avolio & Waldman,
 1990; Salgado et al., 2003; Wood, Mento, & Locke, 1987). Specifically, the two raters classified each
 job into high and low job complexity by assessing the levels of general intelligence, verbal ability, and
 numerical ability required to perform the job successfully (Avolio & Waldman, 1990). Inter-rater
 agreement was 94%. In situations where there was disagreement, discussion was used to reach
 consensus. Examples of "high complexity" jobs are doctors and engineers. Examples of "low
 complexity" jobs are clerks and restaurant workers.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 OCCUPATIONAL EMBEDDEDNESS 877

 Finally, it should be noted that we did not include some traditional control variables (age, job tenure,
 organizational tenure, and job level) because they overlap with the content domains of fit, links, and
 sacrifice. For example, we did not control for age because it is closely related to perceptions of sacrifice
 (Rhodes, 1983); older workers tend to see changes as creating greater sacrifices. Similarly, we did not
 control for job and organizational tenure because they are core indicators of links. Job level was also not
 controlled for because one of the items measuring links is the number of other workers that were
 dependent on the focal employees (Mitchell et al., 2001), and employees who occupy higher job levels
 typically have many more links.

 Confirmatory factor analyses

 Occupational and organizational embeddedness
 Because the measurement items for occupational embeddedness were newly developed for this study,
 we examined their discriminant validity. Specifically, we modeled the three core dimensions of
 occupational embeddedness (fit, links, sacrifice) and the three core dimensions of organizational
 embeddedness in a confirmatory factor analysis (see Figure 2). These six dimensions were allowed to
 freely correlate with one another. It should be noted that the two links measures (for both embeddedness
 constructs) were modeled as single-item constructs because they are operationalized as count variables
 rather than as scales.

 The fit of the model was evaluated by three fit indices: the root mean squared error of approximation

 (RMSEA) (Steiger, 1990), the non-norm fit index (NNFI) (Tucker & Lewis, 1973), and the comparative
 fit index (CFI) (Bentler, 1990). The updated criteria proposed by Hu and Bentler (1999) suggest that, to
 conclude a model fits the data well, RMSEA should be close to .06 and both NNFI and CFI should be
 close to .95.

 The confirmatory factor analysis indicated that the measurement model demonstrated marginally
 acceptable fit. Specifically, the x2 value was 490.52 ( df= 196), the CFI was .94, the NNFI was .93, and
 the RMSEA was .09. Thus, these six measurement scales appeared to have largely acceptable
 psychometric properties, even though RMSEA fell short of the updated criterion.

 We further examined the discriminant validity of occupational and organizational embeddedness by
 testing a 3-construct model, in which the items from both fit variables were forced into one factor, both
 links variables were forced into one factor, and items from both sacrifice variables were forced into one
 factor. If occupational embeddedness and organizational embeddedness are truly distinct constructs,
 then grouping both sets of fit measures, both sets of links measures, and both sets of sacrifice measures
 into three constructs would worsen the model fit. Indeed, the results here supported that reasoning. The
 three-construct model had a x2 value of 666.18 (df= 206), CFI was .91, NNFI was .90, and RMSEA
 was .11. The increase in x2 value relative to the change in degree of freedom (175.66/10) was
 statistically significant (p< .01), suggesting that the fit of the 3-dimension model was significantly
 worse than the original 6-dimension model.

 As expected, high corrected (disattenuated) correlations were observed among the respective
 elements of organizational embeddedness and occupational embeddedness: .58 between organizational
 fit and occupational fit, .60 between organizational links and occupational links, and .87 between the
 two dimensions of sacrifice, x2 difference tests indicated that, when we constrained each of these pair-
 wise correlations to a value of 1.0, the fit of the model was significantly worsened. Specifically, the Ax/
 Mf ranged from 15.19/1 (p<. 05) to 144.44/1 (/?<.05). These results suggest that corresponding
 dimensions of occupational and organizational embeddedness, although they are strongly correlated
 with each other, are empirically distinct from each other.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 878 T. W. H. NG AND D. C. FELDMAN

 Figure 2. Organizational embeddedness and occupational embeddedness

 We also investigated whether the measures of occupational embeddedness and occupational
 commitment might overlap. In the pre-test sample we used for validating the occupational embed-
 dedness scale, we also measured occupational commitment with Meyer, Allen, and Smith's (1993)
 scale. The a coefficients for the affective, normative, and continuance dimensions of occupational
 commitment were .91, .90, and .86, respectively. By and large, the results suggested that occupational
 embeddedness was empirically distinct from the three dimensions of occupational commitment. The
 baseline model containing the six variables (i.e., the fit, links, and sacrifice dimensions of occupational
 embeddedness and the affective, normative, and continuance dimensions of occupational commitment)
 had a x2 value of 647.17 'df= 363); CFI was .97, NNFI was .97, and RMSEA was .06.

 We also examined factor correlations among embeddedness dimensions and commitment

 dimensions. The factor correlations of the fit dimension of occupational embeddedness were .79
 with affective occupational commitment, .24 with normative commitment, and .26 with continuance
 commitment. The factor correlations of the links dimension of occupational embeddedness were .05

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 OCCUPATIONAL EMBEDDEDNESS 879

 with affective occupational commitment, .10 with normative commitment, and .15 with continuance
 commitment. The factor correlations of the sacrifice dimension of occupational embeddedness were
 .70 with affective occupational commitment, .20 with normative commitment, and .25 with
 continuance commitment, x2 difference tests indicated that, when we constrained each of these pair-
 wise correlations to a value of 1.0, the fit of the model was significantly worsened in each case (the A//
 Adf ranged from 139.70/1 to 677.14/1, p < .01).

 Finally, in this pretest sample, we also measured respondents' turnover 5 months after the initial

 survey. Twenty (20) individuals out of 196 respondents (10%) had changed organizations during the 5-
 month span. We examined whether occupational embeddedness would predict employee turnover
 above and beyond the effects of occupational commitment (the total amount of variance explained by
 the three dimensions of occupational commitment was 20%). We found that, after controlling for the
 three dimensions of occupational commitment, the composite of occupational embeddedness is
 significantly and negatively related to turnover behaviors (ß= - .13, p < .05, AR2 = 2%). Affective
 commitment (ß = - .16, p<.05) and continuance commitment (ß = -30, p<. 01) were also
 significant negative predictors, while normative commitment was unrelated to turnover. Taken
 together, these results suggest that occupational embeddedness has additional predictive power above
 and beyond the three dimensions of occupational commitment.

 Dimensions of job performance
 In a similar way, we modeled the four dimensions of performance rated by coworkers (task
 performance, citizenship behavior, creativity, and counterproductive interpersonal behavior) in a
 confirmatory factor analysis. These results suggest that the various performance dimensions are
 empirically distinct.

 The X2 value was 1 191.76 (« df= 399), CFI = .96, NNFI = .96, and RMSEA = .08. Task performance
 was correlated .65 with citizenship behavior, .43 with creativity, and -.54 with counterproductive
 behavior. Citizenship behavior was correlated .54 with creativity and -.42 with counterproductive
 behavior, while creativity was correlated -.27 with counterproductive behavior, x2 difference tests
 indicated that, when we constrained each of these pair- wise correlations to a value of 1.0, the fit of the
 model significantly worsened in each case (the Ax/ Arranged from 22.96/1 to 530.85/1, p < .01).

 Results

 Hypothesis 1 predicts that, controlling for the effect of organizational embeddedness, occupational
 embeddedness is positively related to core task performance (Hla), citizenship behavior (Hlb), and
 creativity (Hlc), and is negatively related to counterproductive work behavior (Hid). We ran four
 separate regression models, each corresponding to one of the four dependent variables of interest. The
 results are presented in Table 4.

 Regarding core task performance, we found that occupational embeddedness had a marginally

 significant positive effect (ß = .14, p < .10, A R2 = .01) above and beyond the effect of organizational
 embeddedness. We also found that occupational embeddedness was positively related to creativity after
 controlling for organizational embeddedness ( ß = .2S , p<. 01, AR2 = .05). Similarly, as expected,
 occupational embeddedness was negatively related to counterproductive interpersonal behavior above
 and beyond the effect of organizational embeddedness (ß = -.16, p < .05, A R2 = .02). However, we
 found that occupational embeddedness was not related to citizenship performance (ß = .05, ns). Thus,
 Hypotheses la, lc, and Id received support whereas Hypothesis lb did not.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 880 T. W. H. NG AND D. C. FELDMAN

 Table 4. Interaction effects of occupational embeddedness and trait affect on dimensions of job performance

 DV = task DV = citizenship DV = interpersonal
 performance behavior creativity behavior

 DV = counterproductive

 Control variables

 Gendera .04 .06 -.10 .03
 Educational levelb .19* .05 .08 -.16*
 Job complexity0 .07 .04 .02 -.16*
 Organizational embeddedness -.04 .15* .09 -.23**
 C R ) (.05)* (.03) (.02) (.10)**

 Main effects

 Occupational embeddedness .14* .05 .28** -.16*
 (AR2) (.01) * (.00) (.05)** (.02)*
 Positive affect .14* .02 .14* -.07
 Negative affect .09 .02 -.08 .11*
 (AR2) (.02)* (.00) (.02)* (.02)*

 Interaction effects

 PA X occupational embeddedness .08 .41** .46** -.08
 NA X occupational embeddedness .04 .20* .17* .20**
 (AR2) (.00) (.08)** (.10)** (.04)**
 Total R2 .08 .11 .19 .18

 Note :
 *p < .05; **p < .01; *p < .10; PA = positive affect; NA = negative affect.
 al = male, 2 = female.
 bl = some high school, 2 = high school graduate, 3 = some college, 4 = associate degree, 5 = bachelors degree 6 = postgraduate
 degree.
 C1 = low job complexity, 2 = high job complexity.

 Hypotheses 2 and 3 addressed the moderating effects of trait positive and trait negative affect. The

 statistical results appear in Table 4, while the graphical plots of interaction effects appear in Figures 3-5.

 Hypothesis 2 predicts that trait positive affect moderates the relationships of occupational

 embeddedness with core task performance (H2a), citizenship behavior (H2b), creativity (H2c), and
 counterproductive work behaviors (H2d). In this moderator analysis, we put occupational
 embeddedness, the moderator variable (trait positive affect), and their interaction term into the
 same regression model as independent variables and used the various performance dimensions as
 dependent variables. Variables were centered before the interaction term was created in order to reduce
 nonessential multicollinearity. Again, we controlled for the effects of gender, education level, job
 complexity, and organizational embeddedness here.

 Hypotheses 2b and 2c were supported, while Hypotheses 2a and 2d were not (cf. Table 4).
 Specifically, the interaction effects between occupational embeddedness and trait positive affect on
 citizenship behavior (ß = .41,/? < .01) and creativity (ß = .46,/? < .01) were statistically significant. To
 determine the direction of the significant interaction effects, first we examined the simple slope of
 citizenship behavior regressed on occupational embeddedness at different levels of trait positive affect
 (1 SD above/below the mean). Next, we examined the simple slope of creativity regressed on
 occupational embeddedness at different levels of trait positive affect (1 SD above/below the mean).

 As shown in Figure 3 (upper panel), the relationship between occupational embeddedness and
 citizenship behavior was positive when trait positive affect was high. On the other hand, the
 relationship was negative when trait positive affect was low, though the slope is not statistically

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 OCCUPATIONAL EMBEDDEDNESS 881

 PA = Trait Positive Affect; NA = Trait Negative Affect

 Figure 3. Graphical plot of the two-way interaction effect between occupational embeddedness and trait affect on

 employees' citizenship behavior

 significant. This result indicates that occupational embeddedness is positively related to citizenship
 behavior only when individuals have high trait positive affect (H2b). We found a similar pattern of
 results for creativity. That is, the relationship between occupational embeddedness and creativity is
 positive when trait positive affect is high (H2c). The relationship is negative when trait positive affect is
 low, although the slope is only marginally significant at p = .08 (see Figure 4, upper panel).

 Hypothesis 3 predicts that trait negative affect moderates the relationships of occupational

 embeddedness with core task performance (H3a), citizenship behavior (H3b), creativity (H3c), and
 counterproductive work behaviors (H3d). As can be seen in Table 4, the interaction between
 occupational embeddedness and trait negative affect had significant effects on citizenship behavior
 ( ß = .20, p < .05) and counterproductive interpersonal behavior (ß = .20, p < .01) and a marginally
 significant effect on creativity (ß = .ll9 p< .10).

 Figure 3 (lower panel) shows that the relationship between occupational embeddedness and

 citizenship behavior was positive when trait negative affect was low. In contrast, the relationship was

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 882 T. W. H. NG AND D. C. FELDMAN

 PA = Trait Positive Affect; NA = Trait Negative Affect

 Figure 4. Graphical plot of the two-way interaction effect between occupational embeddedness and trait affect on

 employees' creativity

 negative when trait negative affect was high, although the slope is not statistically significant. Thus,
 H3b was supported. Figure 4 (lower panel) shows that the relationship between occupational
 embeddedness and creativity was positive when trait negative affect was low. In contrast, the
 relationship was not statistically significant when trait negative affect was high. Thus, H3c was also
 supported.

 Figure 5 shows that the nature of the relationship between occupational embeddedness and
 counterproductive behavior depends on the levels of trait negative affect. The relationship is negative
 for those who are low in trait negative affect, while the relationship is positive for those high in trait
 negative affect, although the slope is not statistically significant. Hypothesis 3d, then, is fully
 supported. These results provide support for our premise that, when individuals are high in trait
 negative affect, they respond less favorably to occupational embeddedness.

 Finally, we re-ran all the regression analyses using individual dimensions of occupational
 embeddedness (fit, links, and sacrifice) rather than overall composite scores. The rationale for

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 OCCUPATIONAL EMBEDDEDNESS 883

 NA = Trait Negative Affect

 Figure 5. Graphical plot of the two-way interaction effect between occupational embeddedness and trait negative

 affect on employees' counterproductive behavior

 performing such analyses was to examine whether the results observed above were driven by any one
 dimension of embeddedness in particular. These results appear in Table 5.

 The fit dimension had positive main effects on task performance, citizenship behaviors, and
 creativity. On the other hand, links had a positive main effect on creativity and a negative main effect on
 counterproductive interpersonal behavior. Sacrifice had a weak positive effect on citizenship behaviors.
 Thus, it appears that all three dimensions are important components of occupational embeddedness.
 The individual components predicted different kinds of job performance and with different levels of
 significance.

 Next, we examined interaction effects. Again, we found that the significant interaction effects
 reported earlier were driven by different dimensions of occupational embeddedness. For example, the
 two-way interaction effect of occupational embeddedness and trait positive affect on citizenship
 behavior reported earlier seems to be driven primarily by the links dimension. In general, then, we
 recommend the continued use of the composite score of embeddedness because it is better aligned to
 the theoretical construct it measures. At the same time, separate component scores are helpful in
 understanding the various reasons why embeddedness impacts job performance dimensions in the ways
 that it does.

 Discussion

 The goals of the present study were to discuss the distinctive nature of occupational embeddedness,
 demonstrate its relationships to various dimensions of job performance, and to illustrate the ways in
 which trait affect moderates those relationships. We found that occupational embeddedness contributes
 to greater core performance, greater creativity, and fewer counterproductive work behaviors even after
 controlling for the effects of organizational embeddedness. Further, different components of the
 embeddedness construct (fit, links, and sacrifice) drove the relationships between occupational

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 884 T. W. H. NG AND D. C. FELDMAN

 Table 5. Interaction effects of fit, links, and sacrifice with trait affect on dimensions of job performance

 DV = task DV = citizenship DV= interpersonal
 performance behavior creativity behavior

 DV = counterproductive

 Control variables

 Main effects

 Gender3 .04 .06 -.10 .03
 Educational levelb .19* .05 .07 -.16*
 Job complexity0 .07 .04 .02 --16*^
 Organizational embeddedness -.04 .15 .09 -.23**
 C é ) (.05)* (.03) (.02) (.10)**
 Occupational fit .28** .17* .16* -.10
 Occupational links .05 -.05 .23** -.14*
 Occupational sacrifice .06 .16* .02 .04
 (A/?2) (.09)** (.07)** (.06)** (.02)
 PA .07 -.07 .11 -.07
 NA .07 -.02 -.08 .11*
 (A/?2) (.01) (.00) (.02) (.02)

 Interaction effects

 Occupational fit X PA .01 .11 .24* -.10
 Occupational links x PA .03 .26* .32** -.03
 Occupational sacrifice X PA .16 .01 .13 -.32**
 Occupational fit x NA -.11 -.17 -.00 -.02
 Occupational links x NA .40 .08 .23* .16*
 Occupational sacrifice x NA .27* .15 .07 -.18*
 (A/?2) (.03) (.07)* (.14)** (.12)**

 Total R2

 Note'
 *p < .05; **p < .01; V < .10; PA = positive affect; NA = negative affect.
 al = male, 2 = female.
 bl = some high school, 2 = high school graduate, 3 = some college, 4 = associate degree, 5 = bachelors degree 6 = postgraduate
 degree.
 C1 = low job complexity, 2 = high job complexity.

 embeddedness and various components of job performance. In addition, we found that both trait
 positive affect and trait negative affect moderated the relationships between occupational
 embeddedness and some dimensions of job performance.

 Directions for future theory development

 While much of the work on turnover suggests that job dissatisfaction leads to turnover (Griffeth, Horn,
 & Gaertner, 2000), the research on job embeddedness provides an explanation for why individuals who
 are dissatisfied with their jobs continue to stay in those jobs nonetheless. There have also been mixed
 findings regarding the relationship between performance and turnover. One camp has argued that the
 strongest performers are more mobile because they have more job alternatives and because they
 recognize they can get larger salaries or faster promotions if they switch employers (Trevor, Gerhart, &
 Boudreau, 1997). Another group of researchers has argued that it is the weakest performers who will be

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 OCCUPATIONAL EMBEDDEDNESS 885

 more mobile because they are more likely to select themselves out of jobs on which they perform
 poorly or are more likely to be terminated for poor performance (Keller, 1984; Schneider et al., 1995).

 One direction for future research highlighted by this study, then, is investigating the inter-
 relationships among embeddedness, performance, and turnover more carefully. The results here
 suggest that the relationship between job performance and turnover may be partially reconciled by
 considering one's level of embeddedness. Individuals who have high performance and have a high level
 of embeddedness may be more likely to stay with their employers, while individuals who have high
 performance but a low level of embeddedness may be more likely to leave. In the former case, high
 embeddedness serves to cement the relationship between high-performing employees and their
 employers; in the latter case, lack of embeddedness serves to make high performing employees even
 more mobile in the external labor market. Thus, embeddedness might be an important moderating
 variable between job performance and turnover behavior. In the present study, we did not have
 longitudinal data on mobility behavior (except for the pre-test sample), but clearly the relationships
 among multiple forms of embeddedness, multiple types of job performance, and multiple forms of
 turnover (e.g., voluntary vs. involuntary) should be studied in much more detail.

 Another direction highlighted by this study is fuller consideration of personality in the nomological
 network of embeddedness. We found support for our premise that, while occupational embeddedness
 increases constructive job behaviors and decreases counterproductive work behavior in general,
 individuals high in positive affect (or low in negative affect) are more likely to react favorably to high
 occupational embeddedness and perform accordingly. While certainly some personality traits have
 direct effects on dimensions of job performance (for example, high trait positive affect is frequently
 correlated with creativity), the moderating effects of personality on the relationships among
 embeddedness and job performance dimensions warrant further attention, too.

 In addition, while the present study focuses on how trait affect moderates the relationships between

 embeddedness and performance, these individual differences may also be major factors in predicting
 how employees get embedded in the first place. For example, individuals who are low on openness to
 experience may be more likely to become embedded, while individuals who are high on neuroticism
 may be less likely to become embedded. By emphasizing a person-situation interactionist perspective,
 we hope that researchers will consider why employees with certain personality profiles are likely to
 react more or less positively to occupational embeddedness.

 Several unexpected findings are also worthy of further research as well. First, occupational

 embeddedness was unrelated to citizenship behavior and only weakly related to in-role behavior,
 whereas it was more strongly related to creativity and counterproductive work behavior. One possible
 reason is that the distinction between in-role behavior and extra-role behavior is ambiguous and is
 likely to vary across persons, contexts, and time (Tepper, Lockhart, & Hoobler, 2001; Zellers, Tepper,
 & Duffy, 2002). In addition, there are likely to be ample spillover effects of these two sets of behaviors
 on each other, since it may be hard to excel in one without being at least competent in the other. In
 contrast, the constructs of creativity and counterproductive behavior are likely to be much more distinct
 and straightforward in the minds of raters and therefore easier to evaluate independently.

 In addition, we found that neither positive nor negative trait affect moderated the relationship

 between occupational embeddedness and core task performance. This result might be due to the fact
 that strong norms promoting excellent performance in core task activities exist in most organizations.
 All employees, highly embedded or not, are expected to perform their core task activities at acceptable
 levels, and therefore trait positive and negative affect may have little impact on this relationship. Even a
 high negative trait affect person with low occupational embeddedness would be reluctant to ignore in-
 role tasks because such behavior would jeopardize the employee's job security.

 Finally, in our moderation tests, we found that only at high levels of trait positive affect or at low

 levels of trait negative affect was occupational embeddedness related to citizenship behavior, creativity,

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 886 T. W. H. NG AND D. C. FELDMAN

 and counterproductive work behavior. One possible explanation for this set of findings comes from the
 literature on people's needs to strive for consistent emotional experiences (Judge & Larsen, 2001;
 Larsen, 1992). This literature suggests that people are generally attracted to those others or situations
 that have an affective tone consistent with their own. As we have argued before, occupational
 embeddedness largely represents a positive career situation. As such, this career phenomenon is likely
 to be a stronger stimulus to evoke powerful behavior changes in those employees with a generally
 positive outlook (high positive affect, low negative affect) than in those with a negative outlook. Our
 findings, then, suggest that in addressing the relationship between embeddedness and performance in
 the future, it is important to consider the intensity with which employees' emotional experiences of
 organizational and occupational embeddedness are activated and how those emotions may strengthen
 or weaken the productivity of employees with different emotional profiles.

 Implications for research methodology

 To fully explain the effects of occupational embeddedness on employees, it would be fruitful to
 examine the dimension scores of occupational embeddedness in addition to the overall composite
 score. Both methods of analyses (composite score vs. dimensional analysis) should be used in
 researchers' statistical analyses because they offer different insights into the dynamics of occupational
 embeddedness. As Mitchell et al. (2001) have argued, fit, links, and sacrifice together contribute to
 perceptions of embeddedness. As such, the construct only makes theoretical sense when all three
 dimensions are measured. The empirical evidence in this study suggests that, in general, the composite
 score is a valid predictor of performance outcomes.

 Nonetheless, once the effects of occupational embeddedness (measured as the composite score) have
 been identified, further analyses may provide useful insights into what drives specific relationships
 between components of embeddedness and dimensions of job performance. For instance, here we
 observed that the links dimension (but not the fit and sacrifice dimensions) contributed to the interaction
 effect of occupational embeddedness and trait positive affect on citizenship behavior. Thus, additional
 analyses of the components of embeddedness and their separate effects on different dimensions of job
 performance would be helpful in understanding the general relationship between these two constructs.

 The current study also takes some initial steps toward operationalizing occupational embeddedness

 and understanding its role in career development. Without doubt, there is overlap between
 organizational embeddedness and occupational embeddedness. While they are conceptually distinct,
 they frequently co-occur in practice. At this point, though, the effects of occupational embeddedness
 have received much less attention than those associated with organizational embeddedness. Indeed, we
 are aware of no empirical research that has been done on occupational embeddedness to date, even
 though some theoretical work has been advanced (Feldman & Ng, 2007). Given that occupational
 embeddedness was shown to be related to various dimensions of job performance here, we hope that
 researchers will pay attention to this level of embeddedness in future research and refine the
 operationalizations we presented here.

 In particular, special attention should be given to the sacrifice dimension of embeddedness. We

 found that the disattenuated relationship between organizational sacrifice and occupational sacrifice
 was very high (.87). This high bivariate correlation may have occurred because "sacrifice" may be a
 broader or fuzzier construct concept relative to the "fit" and "links." For example, individuals may
 find it relatively easy to conceptualize the differences between occupational fit and organizational fit; as
 we noted earlier, people frequently leave employers but stay in the same occupation. Much the same
 situation occurs with links, since employees can readily distinguish between colleagues they currently
 work with and those they know in other organizations. In contrast, when individuals think about

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 OCCUPATIONAL EMBEDDEDNESS 887

 "sacrifice," the losses associated with the current job and the losses associated with the current
 occupation may be more inextricable. Indeed, the losses associated with leaving the organization will
 be evident immediately, while the scope of the losses associated with leaving the occupation may not
 become evident for some time to come. More work is needed, then, to identify the conditions under
 which perceptions of sacrifice associated with leaving an organization overlap with the perceptions of
 sacrifice associated with leaving an occupation.

 It is important to highlight three methodological limitations of our findings here and how they might
 affect the interpretation of our results. The first limitation of this study is the cross-sectional nature of
 the data. While we were able to get multi-source data, we were not able to get longitudinal data as well.
 Therefore, causality cannot be inferred. Second, our subject recruitment strategy has some elements of
 convenience sampling. We utilized it to get a diverse set of employees in different occupations and to
 maximize variance on our key variables of interest, i.e., occupational embeddedness. The resulting
 samples of employees and coworkers, though, are not random. Finally, some of our effect sizes are
 small and thus we have relied on the less conventional a level (.10) in a few cases. Therefore,
 alternative sampling strategies and alternative research designs will be needed before firm conclusions
 from these results can be drawn.

 Implications for practice

 The results here suggest that occupational embeddedness promotes stronger performance. However,
 occupational embeddedness might also be more difficult to change than organizational embeddedness
 because managers have little control over the occupational environment. What managers can do,
 though, is reinforce employees more for making "cosmopolitan" investments in their careers.

 For instance, managers can encourage employees to be active in professional, occupational, and

 industry associations to build and expand their networks with colleagues in other firms. Similarly,
 organizations can encourage and reward employees for pursuing further training on existing skills and
 to develop new competencies. These kinds of activities strengthen embeddedness at the occupational
 level, but in so doing, help employees perform more effectively "locally," too.

 It is important to keep in mind, though, that occupational embeddedness is not necessarily a desirable
 goal in and of itself. Even though we observed that occupational embeddedness is positively related to
 employee creativity at the individual level, too much embeddedness can reduce a firm's capacity to
 innovate, diffuse long-standing conflicts, and open up promotional opportunities (Staw, 1980).
 Particularly when organizations are striving to adapt quickly in volatile industries or to compete on the
 basis of technological innovation, it is important for managers to remember that the "embeddedness"
 human resource strategy (Mitchell et al., 2001) may not always be appropriate. In addition, increasing
 occupational embeddedness for all employees may be dysfunctional for yet another reason. If
 managers seek to increase occupational embeddedness for individuals with high trait negative affect,
 for instance, they may actually risk increasing the level of counterproductive work behavior in their
 units.

 Conclusion

 The present study draws researchers' attention to the positive role that occupational embeddedness can
 play in affecting multiple dimensions of job performance. We hope that the current study will heighten

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 888 T. W. H. NG AND D. C. FELDMAN

 researchers' interest in incorporating multiple levels of embeddedness into their work, particularly in
 terms of focusing on the interplay of occupational and organizational embeddedness on different forms
 of job performance. We also hope that other theoretical perspectives, such as personality theory, will be
 incorporated into future exploration of this important career phenomenon.

 Author biographies

 Thomas W. H. Ng received his Ph.D. from the University of Georgia and is currently an Assistant
 Professor at the University of Hong Kong. His research interests include career development, job
 mobility, organizational and occupational commitment, turnover, aging, work hours, and personality at
 work.
 Daniel C. Feldman (Ph.D., Yale University) is the Synovus Chair of Servant Leadership and Associate
 Dean for Research at the University of Georgia Terry College of Business. His research interests
 include career indecision, career embeddedness, underemployment, and early retirement incentives.

 References

 Allen, N. J., & Meyer, J. P. (1990). The measurement and antecedents of affective, continuance, and normative

 commitment to the organization. Journal of Occupational Psychology , 63, 1-18.

 Anderson, N., De Dreu, C. K., & Nijstad, B. A. (2004). The routinization of innovation research: A constructively

 critical review of the state-of-the-science. Journal of Organizational Behavior , 25, 147-173.

 Aryee, S., Wyatt, T., & Stone, R. (1996). Early career outcomes of graduate employees: The effect of mentoring

 and ingratiation. Journal of Management Studies , 33, 95-118.

 Avolio, B. J., & Waldman, D. A. (1990). An examination of age and cognitive test performance across job

 complexity and occupational types. Journal of Applied Psychology , 75, 43-50.

 Baer, M., & Oldham, G. R. (2006). The curvilinear relation between experienced creative time pressure and
 creativity: Moderating effects of openness to experience and support for creativity. Journal of Applied
 Psychology , 91 , 963-970.

 Bennett, R. J., & Robinson, S. L. (2000). Development of a measure of workplace deviance. Journal of Applied

 Psychology , 85 , 349-360.

 Bentler, P. M. (1990). Comparative fit indexes in structural models. Psychological Bulletin , 107 , 238-246.
 Blau, G. (2001). Testing the discriminant validity of occupational entrenchment. Journal of Occupational and

 Organizational Psychology, 74 , 85-93.

 Brislin, R. W. (1980). Translation and content analysis of oral and written material. Handbooks of Cross-Cultural

 Psychology , 2, 339-444.

 Cable, D. M., & Judge, T. A. (1996). Person-organization fit, job choice decisions, and organizational entry.

 Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 67 , 294-311.

 Carson, K., Carson, P., & Bedeian, A. (1995). Development and construct validation of a career entrenchment

 measure. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology , 68, 301-320.

 Crossley, C. D., Bennett, R. J., Jex, S. M., & Burnfield, J. L. (2007). Development of a global measure of job
 embeddedness and integration into a traditional model of voluntary turnover. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92,
 1031-1042.

 Da wis, R. V. (2005). The Minnesota theory of work adjustment. In S. D. Brown, & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Career
 development and counseling : Putting theory and research to work (pp. 3-23). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
 De Jonge, A., & De Ruyter, K. (2004). Adaptive versus proactive behavior in service recovery: The role of self-

 managing teams. Decision Sciences, 35, 457-491.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 OCCUPATIONAL EMBEDDEDNESS 889

 Diener, E., & Emmons, R. A. (1985). The independence of positive and negative affect. Journal of Personality and

 Social Psychology , 47 , 1105-1117.

 DiPrete, T. A., De Graaf, P. M., Luijkx, R., Tahlin, M., & Blossfeld, H. (1997). Collectivist versus individualist

 mobility regimes? Structure change and job mobility in four countries. American Journal of Sociology, 103 ,
 318-358.

 Eagly, A. H., & Chaiken, S. (1993). The psychology of attitudes. Fort Worth: Harcourt Brace.
 Edwards, J. R., & Bagozzi, R. P. (2000). On the nature and direction of relationships between constructs and

 measures. Psychological Methods , 5, 155-174.

 Farrell, D., & Rusbult, C. E. (1981). Exchange variables as predictors of job satisfaction, job commitment, and
 turnover: The impact of rewards, costs, alternatives, and investments. Organizational Behavior and Human
 Performance , 27, 78-95.

 Feldman, D. C. (1988). Managing careers in organizations. Glencoe, IL: Scott Foresman.
 Feldman, D. C., & Ng, T. W. H. (2007). Career mobility, career embeddedness, and career success. Journal of

 Management , 33 , 350-377.

 Forgas, J. P., & George, J. M. (2001). Affective influences on judgments and behaviors in organizations: An

 information processing perspective. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 86 , 3-34.

 Fujiwara-Greve, T., & Greve, H. R. (2000). Organizational ecology and job mobility. Social Forces , 79, 547-585.
 Gottfredson, M. R., & Hirschi, T. (1990). A general theory of crime. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
 Griffeth, R. W., Horn, P. W., & Gaertner, S. (2000). A meta-analysis of antecedents and correlates of employee

 turnover. Journal of Management, 26 , 463-488.

 Hu, L., & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criterion for fit indexes in covariance structure analysis: Conventional

 criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling , 6, 1-55.

 Hubbell, A. P., & Chory-Assad, R. M. (2005). Motivating factors: Perceptions of justice and their relations with

 managerial trust and organizational trust. Communication Studies , 56 , 47-70.

 Hui, C., Lee, C., & Rousseau, D. M. (2004). Psychological contract and organizational citizenship behavior in

 China: Investigating generalizability and instrumentality. Journal of Applied Psychology , 89 , 311-321.

 Hunt, S. T. (1996). Generic work behavior: An investigation into the dimensions of entry-level, hourly job

 performance. Personnel Psychology , 49 , 51-83.

 Iverson, R. D., & Deery, S. J. (2001). Understanding the "personological" basis of employee withdrawal: The
 influence of affective disposition on employee tardiness, early departure, and absenteeism. Journal of Applied
 Psychology , 86 , 856-866.

 Johnson, J. W. (2001). The relative importance of task and contextual performance dimensions to supervisor

 judgments of overall performance. Journal of Applied Psychology , 86 , 984-996.

 Judge, T. A., & Larsen, R. J. (2001). Dispositional affect and job satisfaction: A review and theoretical extension.

 Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 86, 67-98.

 Keller, R. T. (1984). The role of performance and absenteeism in the prediction of turnover. Academy of

 Management Journal , 27, 176-183.

 King, Z., Burke, S., & Pemberton, J. (2005). The "bounded" career: An empirical study of human capital, career

 mobility and employment outcomes in a mediated labour market. Human Relations , 58 , 981-1007.

 Kristof-Brown, A. L., Zimmerman, R. D., & Johnson, E. C. (2005). Consequences of individuals fit at work: A
 meta-analysis of person-job, person-organization, person-group, and person-supervisor fit. Personnel Psychol-
 ogy, , 58 , 281-342.

 Larsen, R. J. (1992). Neuroticism and selective encoding and recall of symptoms: Evidence from a combined

 concurrent-retrospective study. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 62 , 480-488.

 Lee, T. W., Mitchell, T. R., Sablynski, C. J., Burton, J. P., & Holtom, B. C. (2004). The effects of job embeddedness
 on organizational citizenship, job performance, volitional absences, and voluntary turnover. Academy of
 Management Journals , 47 , 711-722.

 Levin, I., & Stokes, J. P. (1989). Dispositional approach to job satisfaction: Role of negative affectivity. Journal of

 Applied Psychology , 74, 752-758.

 London, M. (1984). Toward a theory of career motivation. Academy of Management Review , 8 , 620-630.
 Marcus, B., & Schuler, H. (2004). Antecedents of counterproductive behavior at work: A general perspective.

 Journal of Applied Psychology , 89 , 647-660.

 Meyer, J. P., Allen, N. J., & Smith, C. A. (1993). Commitment to organizations and occupations: Extension and test

 of a three-component conceptualization. Journal of Applied Psychology , 78 , 538-551.

 Mitchell, T. R., Holtom, B. C., Lee, T. W., Sablynski, C. J., & Erez, M. (2001). Why people stay: Using

 organizational embeddedness to predict voluntary turnover. Academy of Management Journal , 44 , 1 102-1 121.
 Neal, D. (1999). The complexity of job mobility among young men. Journal of Labor Economics , i 7, 237-261.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 890 T. W. H. NG AND D. C. FELDMAN

 Necowitz, L. B., & Roznowski, M. (1994). Negative affectivity and job satisfaction: Cognitive processes

 underlying the relationship and effects on employee behaviors. Journal of Vocational Behavior , 45, 270-294.
 Ng, T. W. H., & Feldman, D. C. (2007). Organizational embeddedness and career embeddedness across career

 stages. Journal of Vocational Behavior , 70, 336-351.

 Organ, D. W. (1988). A restatement of the satisfaction-performance hypothesis. Journal of Management, 14 , 547-

 557.

 Rhodes, S. R. (1983). Age-related differences in work attitudes and behavior: A review and conceptual analysis.

 Psychological Bulletin , 93, 328-367.

 Rosenfeld, R. A. (1992). Job mobility and career processes. Annual Review of Sociology, 18, 39-61.
 Rotundo, M., & Sackett, R R. (2002). The relative importance of task, citizenship, and counterproductive
 performance to global ratings of job performance: A policy-capturing approach. Journal of Applied Psychology,
 87, 66-80.

 Rusbult, C. E., & Farrell, D. (1983). A longitudinal test of the investment model: The impact on job satisfaction, job

 commitment, and turnover of variations in rewards, costs, alternatives, and investments. Journal of Applied
 Psychology, 68, 429-438.

 Rusting, C. L. (1999). Interactive effects of personality and mood on emotion-congruent memory and judgment.

 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 1073-1086.

 Salgado, J. F., Anderson, N., Moscoso, S., Bertua, C., de Fruyt, F., & Rolland, J. R (2003). A meta-analytic study of
 general mental ability validity for different occupations in the European community. Journal of Applied
 Psychology, 88, 1068-1081.

 Schneider, B., Goldstein, W. H., & Smith, D. B. (1995). The ASA framework: An update. Personnel Psychology,

 48, 141-113.

 Seibert, S. E., Kraimer, M. L., & Liden, R. C. (2001). A social capital theory of career success. Academy of

 Management Journal, 44, 219-237.

 Staw, B. M. (1980). The consequences of turnover. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 1, 253-273.
 Steiger, J. H. (1990). Structural model evaluation and modification: An internal estimation approach. Multivariate

 Behavioral Research, 25, 173-180.

 Stryker, S., & Burke, R J. (2000). The past, present, and future of an identity theory. Social Psychology Quarterly,

 63, 284-297.

 Stryker, S., & Serpe, R. T. (1982). Commitment, identity salience, and role behavior: A theory and research
 example. In W. Ickes, & E. C. Knowles (Eds.), Personality , roles, and social behavior (pp. 199-218). New York:
 Springer- Verlag.

 Tepper, B. J., Lockhart, D., & Hoobler, J. (2001). Justice, citizenship behavior, and role definition effects. Journal

 of Applied Psychology, 86, 789-796.

 Tepper, B. J., Uhl-Bien, M., Kohut, G. F., Rogelberg, S. G., Lockhart, D. E., & Ensley, M. D. (2006). Subordinates

 resistance and managers' evaluation of subordinates' performance. Journal of Management, 32, 185-209.

 Tett, R. R, & Burnett, D. D. (2003). A personality trait-based interactionist model of job performance. Journal of

 Applied Psychology, 88, 500-517.

 Thoresen, C. J., Kaplan, S. A., Barsky, A., Warren, C. R., & de Chermont, K. (2003). The affective underpinnings
 of job perceptions and attitudes: A meta-analytical review and integration. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 914-
 945.

 Tolbert, R S. (1996). Occupations, organizations, and boundary less careers. In M. B. Arthur, & D. M. Rousseau

 (Eds.), The boundaryless career: A new employment principle for a new organizational era (pp. 331-349). New
 York: Oxford University Press.

 Trevor, C. O., Gerhart, B., & Boudreau, J. W. (1997). Voluntary turnover and job performance: Curvilineanty and

 the moderating influences of salary growth and promotions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82, 44-61.

 Tucker, L., & Lewis, C. (1973). A reliability coefficient for maximum likelihood factor analyses. Psychometrika,

 38, 1-10.

 Van Dyne, L., & LePine, J. A. (1998). Helping and voice extra-role behaviors: Evidence of construct and predictive

 validity. Academy of Management Journal, 41, 108-119.

 Watson, D. (1988). Intraindividual and interindividual analyses of positive and negative affect: Their relation to

 health complaints, perceived stress, and daily activities. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 1020-
 1030.

 Watson, D. (2000). Mood and temperament. NY: The Guildford Press.
 Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1984). Negative affectivity: The disposition to experience aversive emotional states.

 Psychological Bulletin, 96, 465-490.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 OCCUPATIONAL EMBEDDEDNESS 891

 Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Teilegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of positive and

 negative affect: The PANAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 54, 1063-1070.

 Watson, D., & Slack, A. K. (1993). General factors of affective temperament and their relation to job satisfaction

 over time. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Process , 54 , 181-202.

 Welbourne, T. M., Johnson, D. E., & Erez, A. (1998). The role-based performance scale: Validity analysis of a

 theory-based measure. Academy of Management Journal , 41 , 540-555.

 Wijayanto, B. R., & Kismono, G. (2004). The effect of job embeddedness on organizational citizenship behavior:

 The mediating role of sense of responsibility. Gadjah Mada International Journal of Business, 6 , 335-354.

 Williams, L. J., & Anderson, S. E. (1991). Job satisfaction and organizational commitment as predictors of

 organizational citizenship and in-role behaviors. Journal of Management, 17 , 601-617.

 Wood, R. E., Mento, A. J., & Locke, E. A. (1987). Task complexity as a moderator of goal effects: A meta-analysis.

 Journal of Applied Psychology , 72, 416-425.

 Zellers, K. L., Tepper, B. J., & Duffy, M. K. (2002). Abusive supervision and subordinates' organizational

 citizenship behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology , 87, 1068-1076.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 30, 863-891 (2009)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:12:36 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

