Cornell University ILR School
DigitalCommons@ILR
Center for Advanced Human Resource Studies
(CAHRS)

CAHRS Working Paper Series

2-1-2008

Employee Attributions of the “Why” of HR
Practices: Their Effects on Employee Attitudes and
Behaviors, and Customer Satisfaction
Lisa Hisae Nishii
Cornell University, lhn5@cornell.edu

David P. Lepak
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey

Benjamin Schneider
University of Maryland

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/cahrswp

Part of the Human Resources Management Commons

Thank you for downloading an article from DigitalCommons@ILR.
Support this valuable resource today!

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Center for Advanced Human Resource Studies (CAHRS) at DigitalCommons@ILR. It
has been accepted for inclusion in CAHRS Working Paper Series by an authorized administrator of DigitalCommons@ILR. For more information,
please contact hlmdigital@cornell.edu.


Employee Attributions of the “Why” of HR Practices: Their Effects on
Employee Attitudes and Behaviors, and Customer Satisfaction

Abstract
The construct of Human Resource (HR) Attributions is introduced. We argue that the attributions that
employees make about the reasons why management adopts the HR practices that it does have consequences
for their attitudes and behaviors, and ultimately, unit performance. Drawing on the strategic HR literature, we
propose a typology of five HR-Attribution dimensions. Utilizing data collected from a service firm, we show
that employees make varying attributions for the same HR practices, and that these attributions are
differentially associated with commitment and satisfaction. In turn, we show that these attitudes become
shared within units and that they are related to unit-level organizational citizenship behaviors and customer
satisfaction. Findings and implications are discussed.

Keywords
Human Resource Attributions, attitudes, behaviors, HR practices, organizations, employees

Disciplines
Human Resources Management

Comments
Suggested Citation
Nishii, L. H., Lepak, D. P. & Schneider, B. (2008). Employee attributions of the “why” of HR practices: Their
effects on employee attitudes and behaviors, and customer satisfaction (CAHRS Working Paper #08-03). Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University, School of Industrial and Labor Relations, Center for Advanced Human Resource
Studies.
http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/cahrswp/481

This article is available at DigitalCommons@ILR: http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/cahrswp/481


 
 
 

CAHRS at Cornell University 
615B Ives Hall 
Ithaca, NY  14853-3901  USA 
Tel.  607 255-9358 
www.ilr.cornell.edu/CAHRS 

 
W O R K I N G   P A P E R   S E R I E S    
 
Employee Attributions of the “Why” of HR 
Practices:  Their Effects on Employee 
Attitudes and Behaviors, and Customer 
Satisfaction 
 
Lisa H. Nishii 
David P. Lepak 
Benjamin Schneider 
 
Working Paper 08 – 03 
      
  

 
 

 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

Employee Attributions of the “Why” of HR 

Practices: Their Effects on Employee Attitudes 

and Behaviors, and Customer Satisfaction 

 

Lisa H. Nishii 

Department of Human Resource Studies 
School of Industrial and Labor Relations 

Cornell University 

393F Ives Hall 

Ithaca, NY 14853 
Tel: (607) 255-4431 
Fax: (607) 255-1836 

Email: LHN5@cornell.edu  

David P. Lepak 

Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey 
School of Management and Labor Relations 
Department of Human Resource Management 

Piscataway, NJ  08854 

Tel: (732) 445-5824 
Fax: (732) 445-2830 

E-mail: lepak@smlr.rutgers.edu

Benjamin Schneider 

Valtera and the University of Maryland 

1363 Caminito Floreo, Suite G 

La Jolla, CA  92037 

Tel and fax: (858) 488-7594 

E-mail:  bschneider@valtera.com  

February 2008 

 
 
 

http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/cahrs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

This paper has not undergone formal review or approval of the faculty of the ILR School.  It is 
intended to make results of Center research available to others interested in preliminary form to 

encourage discussion and suggestions. 

Most (if not all) of the CAHRS Working Papers are available for reading at the Catherwood 

Library.  For information on what’s available link to the Cornell Library Catalog: 

http://catalog.library.cornell.edu if you wish. 

 

Page 2 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

ABSTRACT 

The construct of Human Resource (HR) Attributions is introduced.  We argue that the 

attributions that employees make about the reasons why management adopts the HR practices 

that it does have consequences for their attitudes and behaviors, and ultimately, unit 

performance.  Drawing on the strategic HR literature, we propose a typology of five HR-

Attribution dimensions.  Utilizing data collected from a service firm, we show that employees 

make varying attributions for the same HR practices, and that these attributions are differentially 

associated with commitment and satisfaction.  In turn, we show that these attitudes become 

shared within units and that they are related to unit-level organizational citizenship behaviors 

and customer satisfaction.  Findings and implications are discussed.   

 

 

 

 

 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. 

We would like to thank Michele Gelfand, Paul Tesluk, Paul Hanges, and John Hausknecht for 
their invaluable feedback on earlier drafts of this paper.  This research was funded by a grant 

from the National Science Foundation.

Page 3 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

Employee Attributions of the “Why” of HR Practices: Their Effects on 

Employee Attitudes and Behaviors, and Customer Satisfaction 

Introduction 

Strategic human resources management (SHRM) researchers have sought to 

understand the ways in which a firm’s human resource (HR) practices are associated with its 

performance, and they have amassed impressive research on the topic over the last two 

decades.  Research has generally supported the notion that when appropriately designed, HR 

practices can help organizations enhance their performance.  However, as Wright and Nishii (in 

press) note, this research has contributed little to our theoretical understanding of how HR 

practices and performance relate; much more research that examines variables that might be 

involved in the proverbial “black box” between HR systems and organizational performance is 

needed (Bowen & Ostroff, 2004; Nishii & Wright, in press; Ostroff & Bowen, 2000).  Although 

scholars have converged in their belief that HR practices are associated with organizational 

outcomes through their influence on employee attitudes and behaviors (e.g., Huselid, 1995; 

Wright, McCormick, Sherman, & McMahan, 1999; Wright, McMahan, & McWilliams, 1994), 

Bowen and Ostroff (2004), and Nishii and Wright (in press; Wright & Nishii, in press) have 

recently suggested that the causal chain may be more complex than previously thought.  They 

suggest that employees’ perceptions of HR practices are likely to precede the employee 

attitudes and behavior links in the causal chain.  That is, in order for HR practices to exert their 

desired effect on employee attitudes and behaviors, they first have to be perceived and 

interpreted subjectively by employees in ways that will engender such attitudinal and behavioral 

reactions.  But if, as we know from psychological research, people perceive reality differently 

(Ichheiser, 1949; Fiske & Taylor, 1992), then we can expect that not all employees will interpret 

HR systems similarly.  This suggests that the effect of HR practices is not likely to be automatic 

and always as expected; instead, their effect will reside in the meanings that employees attach 

to those practices.   

Despite the intuitive appeal of such arguments, however, the oft-used study designs, in 

which managerial reports of HR practices are linked to measures of organizational performance, 

 

Page 4 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

have not allowed for an examination of the ways in which individuals may experience and 

respond differentially to HR systems within organizations (cf. Gerhart, Wright, & McMahan, 

2001).  Thus, empirical research which begins to explore the role of employees’ perceptions of 

HR practices in the causal chain is sorely needed (Wright & Nishii, in press).   

In one of the most comprehensive theoretical models on the topic to date, Bowen and 

Ostroff (2004) argue that in order for a HR system to link to performance in desired ways, it 

must elicit unambiguous and shared perceptions of climate, or the behaviors that management 

expects, supports, and rewards.  Their work is groundbreaking in their acknowledgement of the 

role employee perceptions play in translating HR practices into desired organizational 

outcomes.  We build on their theory by also proposing that employees’ perceptions of HR 

practices are important.  However, our focus diverges from theirs on climate because we focus 

not on employees’ perceptions about what HR practices connote with regard to the behaviors 

that are expected, supported, and rewarded by management, but rather on employees’ 

attributions for why the HR practices exist.  It is possible for employees to share climate 

perceptions based on the HR practices they experience – for example that safety-focused 

behaviors are expected and rewarded (i.e., climate for safety, Zohar, 1980) – but to disagree 

about why those HR practices were put into place to create that climate.  It could be that some 

employees perceive that the creation of a safety climate is motivated by management’s concern 

for employee well-being, while others perceive it to be motivated by a desire to cut costs 

associated with accidents on the job, or by external requirements imposed by regulatory bodies. 

The core idea in our research is that employees respond attitudinally and behaviorally to 

HR practices based on the attributions they make about management’s purpose in 

implementing the actual HR practices.  While some research attention has been paid to the 

desired attitudinal and behavioral reactions to HR practices (e.g., commitment, satisfaction, 

discretionary behaviors, productivity, absenteeism), little attention has been paid to employees’ 

attributions about the why of specific HR practices, the attributions upon which the attitudinal 

and behavioral reactions are likely based (see Koys, 1988, 1991 for exceptions).  According to 

 

Page 5 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

social attribution theory, people can attach different meanings to social stimuli (Fiske & Taylor, 

1991), and based on the way that they process these stimuli, their attitudinal and behavioral 

responses to that information may differ.  When this logic is applied to the study of HR practices, 

it follows that the relationship between HR practices and employee attitudes and behaviors, and 

ultimately organizational performance, may depend on the attributions employees make about 

the motives underlying the HR practices they experience.  As we describe below, we 

differentiate between two internal HR attributions that are expected to relate positively to 

employee attitudes (i.e., the attributions that HR practices are designed due to management’s 

intent to enhance service quality and employee well-being), and two that are expected to relate 

negatively to employee attitudes (i.e., the attributions that HR practices are designed due to 

management’s interest in cost reduction and exploiting employees), as well as between these 

internal HR attributions and an external attribution that HR practices are designed in response 

to situational pressures that are external to management (i.e., the attribution that HR practices 

are designed to comply with union requirements).   

Given previous attention to satisfaction, commitment, and organizational citizenship 

behaviors (OCBs) as representing desired employee responses to HR practices (e.g., Arthur, 

1992, 1994; Huselid, 1995; Jackson & Schuler, 1995; Tsui, Pearce, Porter, & Tripoli, 1997), we 

focus in this study on the relationships between HR Attributions and satisfaction and 

commitment at the individual-level of analysis.  Consistent with past research, we further 

propose that while satisfaction and commitment are attitudes that originate at the individual-level 

of analysis, they become shared among unit members through a number of social processes 

(Ostroff, 1992).  These emergent unit-level attitudes in turn influence unit-level OCBs and 

valued performance outcomes; in the current study, we focus on customer satisfaction.  There 

are two possible ways to test the proposed conceptual links involving HR Attributions.  The first 

is to examine the relationship between HR practices, HR Attributions and outcome variables 

across firms.  The second is to examine the effect of HR Attributions on firm performance 

across units within an organization—as long as equivalent performance measures are available 

 

Page 6 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

across all units.  We chose the latter approach for the current study because it allows us to hold 

HR practices, executive leadership, and other important organizational context factors relatively 

constant across units of analysis, thereby making HR Attributions the focus of the study.  The 

organization that participated in our research was chosen precisely because it is structured 

around departments as the unit of analysis, has enough departments to enable meaningful 

within-organization tests of the proposed relationships, and consistent customer satisfaction 

data across departments were available. 

Theoretical Background and Hypotheses 

Research on causal attributions has a long history, dating back to early work by Heider 

(1958), Jones and Davis (1965), and Kelley (1967), and voluminous subsequent work 

conducted by psychologists and by scholars from other disciplines who applied attribution 

theory to their specific areas of inquiry.  Attribution theory is primarily concerned with the generic 

causal principles that people use to explain people’s behavior or events, whereas attributional 

theories are concerned with specific attributions that people make in a particular life domain.  

The distinction is important because though attributional theories draw inspiration from 

attribution theory, attribution theory as originally developed describes generic, content-free 

processes that rarely apply to the attributional processes that actually unfold in specific content 

domains wherein people utilize domain-specific knowledge structures to guide the attribution 

process rather than content-free attributional principles (Hilton & Slugoski, 1986).  Thus, while 

some of the basic building blocks of attribution theory may be useful for thinking about 

attributions of HR practices, others are not.  This is particularly true because attribution theory 

focuses on causal explanations for one’s own behavior, others’ behavior, or episodic events, 

whereas our construct of HR attributions refers to employees’ causal explanations for HR 

practices to which they are exposed on an ongoing basis.  Thus, many of the principles which 

help explain the way people arrive at causal explanations for behavior or episodic events do not 

generalize to the case of HR attributions. Indeed, Lord and Smith (1983) cautioned researchers 

from over-generalizing attribution theories to organizational research, and urge scholars to build 

 

Page 7 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

context-specific attributional models instead.  Nevertheless, we first describe some of the main 

principles of generic attribution theory before turning to the more specific case of our 

attributional theory of HR practices. 

Causal Attributions 

Early theorists in this area proposed that people have a basic need to predict and control 

the environment, and that understanding the causes of behaviors and/or events helps people to 

do so (Heider, 1958).  Furthermore, they argued that understanding attributions is critical 

because people’s interpretations of the causes of behavior and events determine their 

subsequent attitudes and behaviors (Kelley & Michela, 1980).  According to Heider (1958), one 

of the fundamental considerations for explaining why someone behaved as he or she did is 

whether the locus of causality is internal or external to the person (i.e., dispositional or 

environmental).  When the behavior is thought to have been caused by dispositional factors, the 

behavior is more informative, and is believed by perceivers to be a more reliable predictor of 

future behavior (Jones & Davis, 1965).  Therefore, internal attributions tend to be more strongly 

associated with other cognitions, feelings, and behavior (Jones, et al., 1972; Weiner et al., 

1972) than external attributions, which, according to the discounting rule, reveal less about the 

underlying motivation of the behavior (Kelly & Michela, 1980).  Other factors are also thought to 

influence the impact of attributions on associated attitudes and behaviors.  For example, 

observed behavior is thought to be more informative as it decreases in social desirability, 

because when observed behaviors are socially desirable, there is a greater chance that the 

behavior represents the constraints of the situation (i.e., influence of norms or social 

expectations) rather than some aspect of the actor’s choice or disposition (Jones, Davis, & 

Gergen, 1961; Jones & McGillis, 1976).  Also, the more stable one perceives the cause of a 

behavior or event to be (i.e., whether it is likely to change in the future), the more pronounced 

the effect of that behavior/event, and the more an observer perceives the actor as having 

control over the behavior/event, the stronger the resulting effect (Weiner, 1979).    

 

Page 8 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

A model of HR Attributions 

CAHRS WP08-03 

We define HR Attributions as causal explanations that employees make regarding 

management’s motivations for using particular HR practices, and argue that employees’ HR 

attributions have important consequences for their commitment and satisfaction.  Consistent 

with existing attribution theories (e.g., (Hdier, 1958; Jones & Davis, 1965), we first distinguish 

between internal and external HR attributions, since external attributions have been found to be 

less influential for observer attitudes and behaviors than internal attributions.  In some earlier 

work, Koys (1988, 1991) also differentiated between internal and external causal explanations 

for HR practices.  He suggested that HRM activities that are done “out of a spirit of justice” or “to 

attract and retain employees” at their companies represented internal attributions, while 

perceptions that HRM activities were done to “encourage individual or organizational 

performance” or “to comply with government relations” were examples of external causal 

explanations.  Although it is unclear why Koys chose this particular set of causal explanations to 

study, and why “to encourage individual or organizational performance” represents an external 

attribution, his empirical results largely confirmed the hypothesis that internal causal 

explanations are positively related to commitment while external causal explanations are 

unrelated to commitment.   

We build on Koys’ (1988, 1991) work by also making a distinction between internal and 

external HR attributions, but beyond this distinction, we argue that internal attributions are likely 

to be multi-dimensional.  In order to develop a typology of internal HR attributions, we turned to 

the SHRM literature to identify the often discussed causes for why management adopts the HR 

practices that it does.  Two main themes, which differ from those proposed by Koys (1988, 

1991), emerged as being particularly relevant.  The first involves the strategic or business-

related goals that underlie HR practices.  The SHRM literature is replete with discussions 

concerning the distinction between “quality enhancement” and “cost reduction” strategies (e.g., 

Arthur, 1992, 1994; Porter, 1980; Schuler & Jackson, 1987), with the assumption being that 

employers adopt HR practices that are most likely to channel employee attitudes and behaviors 

 

Page 9 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

to be aligned with the business strategy (Jackson & Schuler, 1995).  Therefore, we include HR 

attributions reflecting the “service quality enhancement” and “cost reduction” strategic foci in our 

typology.  Second, SHRM researchers have also differentiated HR systems based on the 

underlying employee-oriented philosophy held by management (e.g., Lepak, Taylor, Tekleab, & 

Marrone, 2002; Osterman, 1994).  A philosophy aimed at maximizing employee well-being has 

been differentiated from a philosophy aimed at maximizing employee efficiency.  Thus, we 

include HR attributions related to each of these philosophies in our typology, depicted in Table 

1.  It is important to note that while managerial reports of both the strategic goals and employee-

oriented philosophies underlying HR practices have been examined, research has yet to focus 

on employees’ perceptions of the extent to which these factors motivate HR practices, and thus 

our focus on employees’ HR attributions related to these themes represents a novel contribution 

to existing SHRM research. 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Commitment- 
Focused 
Control-Focused 

 

Typology of HR Attributions 

Table 1 

 

Internal Attributions 

Employee-oriented 

 Business/strategic 
goal underlying HR 

Service quality 

Cost Reduction 

Philosophy 
Employee 
Well- Being 
Exploiting 
Employees 

External 
Attribution 

Union Compliance 

As shown in the columns of Table 1, both the HR Attributions regarding the business 

goals and employee-oriented philosophies underlying HR practices are internal attributions, 

which refer to the perception that actions are due to factors for which the actor (management) is 

responsible, or over which the actor has control.  In contrast, an external attribution would be 

one in which management is perceived as a passive recipient of external, environmental, forces 

(i.e., the perception that HR practices are adopted not as a function of management’s voluntary 

intentions but because management has to adopt certain HR practices due to external 

constraints).  Constraints mandated by union contracts may be the most common and salient for 

 

Page 10 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

unionized employees, although other possibilities include EEO laws and institutional norms (i.e., 

the pressure to conform to HR practices being offered by competing organizations).  

Turning to the rows in Table 1, we expect internal attributions to be differentiable based 

on whether they connote positive or negative implications for employees, with the expectation 

that the underlying valence of these attributions will dictate their relationship with employees’ 

attitudinal responses.  Indeed, early attribution theory suggests that the “hedonic relevance” of a 

behavior (i.e., HR practice) for an observer (i.e., employee) influences the attributions that are 

made, such that behaviors that are perceived to benefit the perceiver result in favorable 

attributions, whereas behaviors that have adverse effects for the perceiver lead to unfavorable 

attributions (Jones & Davis, 1965).  In line with social exchange principles, we expect that 

commitment-focused (e.g., Arthur, 1992; 1994) HR Attributions that connote positive 

consequences for employees (i.e., Service Quality and Employee well-being HR attributions) 

are likely to engender a felt obligation to reciprocate in positive and beneficial ways (cf. Ostroff & 

Bowen, 2000; Schmit & Allscheid, 1995; Whitener, 2001).  However, when employees perceive 

that the intended goals of HR practices connote lower levels of concern for employees and a 

more cost-driven control-focus (i.e., Cost Reduction and Exploiting Employees HR attributions), 

lower levels of satisfaction and commitment are likely to ensue.   

HR Attributions Regarding HR Strategy 

As mentioned previously, there has been significant attention paid to the distinction 

between “quality enhancement” strategies and “cost reduction” strategies within the SHRM 

literature (e.g., Arthur, 1992, 1994; Porter, 1996: Schuler & Jackson, 1987).  Consistent with the 

resource-based view of the firm, scholars have argued that when a firm adopts a quality 

enhancement HR strategy in which employees are perceived as assets required to produce 

high quality goods/services, large investments tend to be made in the long-term development of 

employee skills, management focuses on motivating employees to work hard toward quality-

oriented goals, and management places the importance of employee welfare above revenues 

and profits (Schuler & Jackson, 1987).  In contrast, when the strategic focus is on competing on 

 

Page 11 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

the basis of low costs, management perceives employees as costs to control, focuses on 

enforcing employee compliance with rules and procedures, and monitors the quantity of 

employee output (Bamberger & Meshoulam, 2000).  Under the latter circumstances, employees 

are seen as replaceable workers who are part of a cost equation function and the associated 

HR strategy tends to focus on reducing costs associated with each employee by, for example, 

offering low base salaries with few perks and engaging in narrow and short-term training 

(Schuler & Jackson, 1987). 

However, past work on these HR strategies has focused on the employer’s perspective.  

We build on this work by focusing on employees’ attributions regarding the HR strategy that 

they perceive as motivating specific HR practices.  We expect that any HR practice can be 

viewed differently by employees in a single firm such that some employees perceive an HR 

practice as connoting an underlying quality HR strategy and others attribute the practice to a 

cost reduction HR strategy, regardless of the actual HR strategy pursued by management.  For 

example, to some employees, a pay for performance system might communicate an underlying 

motivation of management to empower employees and encourage them to produce high quality 

products or services, and a willingness to reward employees according to their worth (Spreitzer, 

1995).  Such employees might make the attribution that their firm’s pay practices are motivated 

by a quality enhancement HR strategy.  To other employees in the firm, however, the same pay 

for performance practice might be perceived as a means of controlling costs by getting the most 

employee productivity per dollar spent on labor costs (Deckop, Mangel, & Cirka, 1999).  They 

might perceive that it is a means for management to closely monitor performance, and that 

compared to pay structures in which all employees of a given tenure and rank receive roughly 

the same pay regardless of performance, pay for performance ensures little waste for the 

organization.  Such employees would likely make the attribution, then, that their firm’s pay 

practices are motivated by a cost reduction HR strategy.  This example illustrates how the same 

HR practices may be viewed differently by employees, even within the same firm.   

 

Page 12 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

Thus, from an employee perspective, we draw a parallel to the commitment/control 

distinction within the strategic HR literature and anticipate that employees will interpret the 

extent to which they perceive HR practices as signaling an underlying Quality HR strategy in 

which employees are viewed as an asset, versus a Cost Reduction HR strategy in which 

employees are viewed as a cost to be controlled.  We expect the extent to which employees 

attribute these different HR strategic priorities to their company to logically be associated with 

their attitudes on the job.  The more employees perceive that they are viewed as assets by their 

employers, the more they are likely to be willing, in turn, to give back to their employers in the 

form of commitment to the organization (Eisenberger, Fasolo, & Davis-LaMastro, 1990).   

Hypothesis 1:  Attributions that HR practices reflect a Quality HR Strategy will be 

positively related to employee commitment and satisfaction. 

However, we expect that when employees perceive that HR practices reflect an underlying Cost 

Reduction HR strategy in which the organization views employees as a cost to be minimized, 

corresponding levels of commitment and satisfaction will be negative (Appelbaum, Lavigne-

Schmidt, Peytchev, & Shapiro, 1999).   

Hypothesis 2:  Attributions that HR practices reflect a Cost Reduction HR Strategy will 

be negatively related to employee commitment and satisfaction.   

HR Attributions Regarding Management’s Employee-Oriented Philosophy 

In addition to focusing on HR strategies, SHRM scholars have begun to differentiate HR 

systems based on the underlying HR philosophy held by management (Lepak, Taylor, Tekleab, 

Marrone, & Cohen, 2002; Osterman, 1994).  According to strategic choice theory (Child, 1972; 

1997), managers’ decisions are influenced not only by their company’s strategy and 

environmental pressures, but also by their ideology and philosophical values regarding how 

employees should be managed.  For example, Osterman (1994) found that establishments that 

believe that they have a responsibility for enhancing employee welfare were more likely to adopt 

innovative work practices targeted at enhancing employee skills, commitment and motivation 

rather than at reducing financial costs.   Similarly, Lepak and colleagues (2002) argued and 

 

Page 13 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

found that while business strategy is a likely determinant of the adoption of high performance 

work practices, a firm’s employee-oriented philosophy—specifically whether employees are 

viewed as an asset or as costs to be controlled—is a more proximal determinant of HR 

decisions.   

Again, however, HR philosophies have to date been examined only from the employer’s 

perspective, and we focus instead on the employees’ perspective.  It is reasonable to expect 

that employees perceive and evaluate management’s HR philosophies, and that their 

attributions regarding management philosophy influence the nature of the employer-employee 

relationship.  Specifically, we expect that when employees perceive that specific HR practices 

are motivated by an underlying managerial philosophy of caring for employee well-being, then 

those employees will feel more satisfied and committed than if they perceive that management 

cares less about their well-being (cf. Eisenberger, et al., 1990; shore & Wayne, 1993).  Thus, we 

expect:  

Hypothesis 3:  Employee attributions that HR practices reflect a managerial philosophy 

that is focused on Employee Well-being will be positively related to employee 

commitment and satisfaction. 

In contrast to the expected positive effects of HR Attributions regarding employee well-

being, the attribution that HR practices are motivated primarily by a managerial philosophy 

focused on exploiting, or getting the most out of employees, is likely to have negative effects on 

employee attitudes.  Implicit in this attribution is the notion that by virtue of being focused on 

getting the most out of employees, management may not always have the interests of 

employees at heart.  Employees who hold this view are likely to believe that unless investments 

in employees are associated with cost or efficiency savings, management will be reluctant to 

adopt them.  Such a view is indicative of a perceived lack of intrinsic management commitment 

to employee development and welfare, and thus will likely be reciprocated with correspondingly 

lower levels of employee commitment and satisfaction.  Accordingly, we expect: 

 

Page 14 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

Hypothesis 4:  Employee attributions that HR practices reflect a managerial philosophy 

that is focused on Exploiting Employees will be negatively related to employee 

commitment and satisfaction.   

External Attribution: Union Compliance 

 

As mentioned previously, the external attribution of interest in our study is the attribution 

that HR practices are designed in response to legal requirements, specifically in response to 

union requirements.  We expect that external attributions, such as the perception that the design 

of HR practices is a function of union requirements, will exhibit a non-significant relationship with 

employee attitudes for a number of reasons.  First, as argued by early attribution theorists (e.g., 

Jones & Davis, 1965), external/situational explanations are less helpful for predicting future 

behavior or events than internal explanations because they are more easily subject to change 

than enduring internal dispositions.  In addition, because compliance with union requirements is 

socially desirable, it provides little information about the underlying dispositional traits or values 

of management (Jones & McGillis, 1976) and therefore is unlikely to be related to other 

cognitions or behaviors on the part of employees.  Furthermore, as Weiner (1979) might argue, 

because compliance with union requirements may be perceived as an unstable and to some 

extent uncontrollable cause of behavior – because union contracts are subject to change and 

are subject to influence from parties other than management – the attribution that concern for 

union compliance drives the design of HR practices should not have a pronounced effect on 

associated employee attitudes.  Taken together, past research findings suggest that the 

external HR attribution that HR practices are motivated by management’s concern to comply 

with union requirements should be unrelated to employee satisfaction and commitment.  

Even if employees were to attribute meaningful dispositional explanations to 

management’s efforts to comply with union requirements, both positive and negative causal 

explanations are possible, and thus we expect the net effect across employees to be non-

significant.  In some cases, employees may view management’s concern for union compliance 

as a signal that management values employee rights; as a result, those employees may 

 

Page 15 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

respect, appreciate, and value management, thereby making their Union Compliance HR 

attribution positively related to employee attitudes.  In other cases, employees may perceive 

that management’s efforts to comply with union requirements suggests that management cares 

only about doing the bare minimum to avoid legal liability, but nothing more. In other words, it is 

possible for employees to have either an optimistic or cynical view of management’s 

commitment to union compliance.  In much the same way that empowerment and participation 

practices in the automotive industry have been simultaneously viewed as “empowerment” or 

“exploitation” (whereby more is demanded of workers without concomitant increases in 

resources) by employees within a single organization (Babson, 1995), we too believe that the 

same HR attribution regarding union compliance can take on differential meanings within a 

single organization.  It is for this reason that we expect an overall null relationship between this 

attribution and employee attitudes (because the positive and cynical perceptions cancel each 

other out).  This is consistent with research which has found that there is no consistent effect of 

union membership on employee satisfaction (Gordon & Denisi, 1995).  Therefore, 

Hypothesis 5:  Employee attributions that HR practices reflect a concern for Union 

Compliance will be unrelated to employee commitment and satisfaction.   

Satisfaction, Commitment, and OCBs 

A goal of HR is to impact individual attitudes and behaviors so that in the aggregate, unit 

and organizational performance are also enhanced; here, we focus on the effects of aggregate 

satisfaction and commitment on unit level customer satisfaction.  Although the overwhelming 

majority of research on employee satisfaction and commitment has occurred at the individual-

level of analysis, scholars have more recently begun to recognize that even employee attitudes 

such as satisfaction and commitment, which originate within individuals and therefore were 

assumed to be idiosyncratic, become shared by employees in work units (Harter, Schmidt, & 

Hayes, 2002; Currall, Towlwer, Judge, & Khon, 2005; Ostroff, 1992; Schneider, Hanges, Smith, 

& Salvaggio, 2003).  We expect these attitudes to become shared among members of the same 

work unit for a number of reasons.  First, unit members are likely to be exposed to a variety of 

 

Page 16 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

unit goals, rules and procedures, strategies, technologies, work environments, task demands, 

and leadership that lead to shared experiences and attitudes, which are differentiable from 

those of unit members in other groups.  Thus, employees’ attitudes are likely to be influenced, at 

least in part, by factors that are shared across unit members, and which therefore account for a 

significant portion of shared attitudes.  Second, through what Moregeson and Hoffman (1999) 

term the process of “double interact,” unit members come to share their attitudes and views of 

the organization.  In essence, when an employee shares some sentiment with a colleague, who 

responds, the first employee responds back, and this reciprocal interaction creates collective 

perceptions.  Third, once a unit has established a distinct character, attraction-selection-attrition 

dynamics (Schneider, 1987) may further accentuate similarity in attitudes across employees.   

Further, we expect unit-level commitment and satisfaction will be positively associated 

with OCBs.  Given that committed employees feel emotional attachment to the organization, it 

follows that they will have a greater motivation or desire to contribute behaviorally to the 

organization than would employees with negative affective commitment (Meyer & Allen, 1997).  

Similarly, satisfaction is an important predictor of OCBs, as theory suggests that whether 

employees give their efforts wholeheartedly to the organization and produce up to their potential 

depends in large part on the way they feel about their jobs and work environment (Judge, 

Thoresen, Bono, & Patton, 2001; Ostroff, 1992).  In support of these relationships, recent meta-

analyses on OCBs revealed that overall job satisfaction and organizational commitment 

consistently predict OCBs, and that they are among the strongest attitudinal predictors of OCBs 

(with correlations in the .30 range; Organ, Podsakoff & MacKenzie, 2005).  Although these 

meta-analyses focused on individual-level relationships, it is reasonable to expect that similar 

relationships would hold at the group level of analysis (Ostroff, 1992; Ehrhart & Naumann, 

2004).     

Hypothesis 6: Unit-level satisfaction and commitment will be positively related to OCBs 

across units.   

 

Page 17 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

Performance Outcomes 

CAHRS WP08-03 

 

Clearly, an ultimate goal for organizations is to enhance performance in the marketplace, 

often measured in terms of productivity, profits, or customer satisfaction.  For service 

companies, one of the keys to making profits is satisfying one’s customers (Anderson, Fornell, & 

Lehman, 1994; Rust & Zahorik, 1993).  This has been substantiated by studies showing a clear 

relationship between service quality, customer satisfaction, and financial returns (e.g., Hallowell, 

1996; Nelson, Rust, Zahorik, Rose, Batalden, & Siemanski, 1992; Schneider, Ehrhart, Mayer, 

Saltz & Niles-Jolly, 2005).  An impressive research stream has shown that customers’ 

experiences of service quality are influenced by employees’ experiences, specifically by their 

attitudes and behaviors (e.g, Schneider & Bowen, 1995; Schneider, Wheeler, & Cox, 1992).  As 

stated by Rucci and his colleagues (Rucci, Kirn, & Quinn, 1997), “any person with even a little 

experience in retailing understands intuitively that there is a chain of cause and effect running 

from employee behavior to customer behavior to profits, and it’s not hard to see that behavior 

depends primarily on attitude (Rucci, et al., 1998; p.84).  Thus, it is reasonable to expect that 

employees’ attitudes, and in turn OCBs, will be associated with customer satisfaction.   

Researchers have focused on OCBs as being important in influencing performance 

because spontaneous, cooperative behaviors on the part of employees that may go beyond 

their formal work requirements are necessary for the accomplishment of organizational goals 

(Katz & Kahn, 1966).  Consistent with Katz and Kahn’s (1966) claim, researchers have 

proposed that the difference between outstanding and mediocre service companies is that in the 

former, employees exert more discretionary effort and engage in organizational citizenship 

behaviors that favorably influence customers’ perceptions of service quality (Berry, 1999; 

Bowen, Schneider, & Kim, 2000; Morrison, 1997).  OCBs are particularly important for customer 

satisfaction because the often unpredictable nature of services makes it difficult to specify 

beforehand the behaviors that are necessary for producing high quality service (Morrison, 

1996); thus, many employee behaviors that are necessary for producing high quality service fall 

outside the formal job requirements of employees and are instead discretionary OCBs.  Further, 

 

Page 18 of 53 


ployee Attributions of the Why 

Em
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

Podsakoff and his colleagues (2000) suggest that OCBs enhance customer satisfaction at the 

unit level when employees help each other with work-related problems, thereby freeing the 

manager to spend more time on other productive tasks.  Support for the expected relationship 

between OCBs and customer satisfaction has been empirically examined in a handful of 

studies.  In a study of a restaurant chain, Koys (2001) found that OCBs at the unit level 

correlated .36 with service quality for that unit, and Schneider and his colleagues (2005) found a 

.28 relationship between OCBs and unit customer satisfaction in chain of supermarkets.  A 

meta-analysis of OCBs by Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Paine, and Bachrach (2000) suggests an 

even stronger relationship, with OCBs accounting for roughly 38% of the variance in customer 

satisfaction indicators. Thus, accordingly, we expect:  

Hypothesis 7:  Unit-level OCBs will be positively associated with unit performance. 

The relationships proposed in hypotheses 1-7 can be seen graphically in Figure 1.  As 

shown, the individual level HR Attributions are expected to be correlated with individual attitudes 

and commitment.  In the aggregate, unit level satisfaction and commitment are expected to be 

positively associated with OCBs, which will be positively related to customer satisfaction.    

 

Page 19 of 53 


Unit Outcome 

Customer 
Satisfaction 
with People 

 

 

 

+

H7 

Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

 

Figure 1:  

The hypothesized model 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Individual
 
- level of 
analysis 
 

 

 

 

 

Unit-level 

of 

analysis 

HR Attributions 

 
Attributions regarding 
business goal underlying 
HR 
Service Quality (H1) 
Cost Reduction (H2) 
 
Attributions regarding 
HR philosophy 
Employee well-being (H3) 
Exploiting Employees 
(H4) 
 
External Attribution 
Compliance with union 
contract (H5) 

 

+
-

+
-

weakest

CAHRS WP08-03 

 

Unit Behaviors  

Organizational 

Citizenship 
Behaviors 
 (Helping & 

Conscientiousness) 

 

 

 

 

 

+

H6

 
 
 
 

Attitudes 

Affective 

Commitment 

& 

Satisfaction 

Page 20 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

Participants and Procedure 

METHODOLOGY 

The criteria according to which we selected an organization to participate in this 

research was that the organization be structured around meaningful units and units with 

common indices of performance in order to enable tests of the hypotheses at the unit level.  An 

additional criterion was that data from multiple sources would be available in order to reduce 

single source bias.  Our aim was to collect HR Attributions, commitment, and satisfaction data 

from employees within departments, OCB data from the manager of each department, and 

customer satisfaction data from the customers of each department.   

The organization that matched these criteria was a supermarket chain with stores that 

each contains approximately 18 departments.  For each of these departments, customer 

satisfaction data were available and used as the performance measure. The uniformity of HR 

practices across the organization, and in particular across the 18 different types of departments, 

was confirmed through discussions with the head of HR for the company.  A single document 

detailing the organization’s HR policies and practices is considered to be applicable to all 

employees, and the presence of a union in the supermarket chain further enhances the 

likelihood that common rules and guidelines are familiar to all across the units.     

After study measures were finalized with focus groups to ensure understandability and 

relevance with regard to language, participants voluntarily completed the surveys during work 

hours.  In order to assure respondents of the confidentiality of their responses, all completed 

surveys were sent directly to the researchers rather than to corporate headquarters.  

Respondents indicated the department within the store in which they worked.  Data were 

collected from 4,500 employees and 1,100 department managers.  Of the employees, 37% 

were male, 81% were Caucasian, 38% were above the age of 40, and 65% had been at the 

company for fewer than 5 years.  Of the department managers, 48% were male, 94% were 

Caucasian, and 60% had been at the company for fewer than 5 years.  Over 90% of the 

respondents were from unionized stores, thereby making comparisons based on unionization 

 

Page 21 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

impossible; therefore, only unionized stores were included in the analyses.  The final sample 

included 4208 employees and 1010 department managers, nested within 362 departments 

across 95 stores1.   

Measures 

HR Attributions.  As a first step toward developing a measure of HR Attributions, we 

first informally surveyed 25 organizational scholars asking them to brainstorm on the different 

possible attributions that employees might make for HR practices.  We asked that they base 

their responses on their own experiences and the experiences of others, as well as on what 

they know of the research literature.  There was considerable overlap across respondents, and 

the responses that we received could be categorized into themes that were closely aligned with 

the typology of 5 HR Attributions that we developed based on the literature.  Thus, we felt 

confident about proceeding to test our typology of HR attributions.  In order to do so, we 

developed measures of the five proposed HR attributions, as there are no existing measures of 

HR Attributions.  An item representing each of the five proposed HR Attributions of theoretical 

interest was included for each of 5 main HR practice areas: staffing, training, benefits, pay, and 

performance appraisals.  That is, for each HR practice respondents were asked to indicate the 

degree to which the HR practice was designed in order to 1) enhance (service) quality; 2) keep 

costs down; 3) promote employee well-being; 4) get the most work out of employees; and 5) 

comply with union requirements.  We also included an item each for the two HR attribution 

categories that emerged from our informal poll of organizational scholars but which we had not 

originally included in our typology: the extent to which each HR practice was designed in order 

to 6) keep up with what other companies are doing, and 7) to produce a positive image in the 

marketplace and earn the company a reputation for being a leader in the industry.   

In a first round of 5 focus groups in which we piloted our measure, employees and 

department managers were asked to provide feedback on the content and wording of the HR 

Attribution items. Specifically, they were asked to comment on items that were unclear or that 

were not directly relevant to the organization, and were also asked to indicate whether there 

 

Page 22 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

might be other HR attributions worth including in our survey.  Their feedback centered around 3 

main issues.  First, with regard to the content of the HR attributions, they did not identify other 

HR attributions that they thought we should include in our survey.  However, the majority of 

focus group participants told us that they do not know what other companies (particularly not 

competing supermarket chains) are doing with respect to the HR practices about which we 

inquired, and thus they suggested that it would be less confusing to survey participants if we 

excluded the attributions relating to institutional pressures (HR attribution 6, above) and public 

reputation (attribution 7, above), both which require some understanding of HR trends in the 

marketplace.  Second, focus group participants struggled with the wording of the item we had 

written to represent the Exploiting Employees HR Attribution.  Consistent with 

conceptualizations of employee-oriented philosophies (Lepak, et al., 2002), we originally asked 

employees about the extent to which HR practices were designed to control, monitor, and/or 

direct employee behavior.  However, based on their input, the item was reworded to ask about 

the extent to which employees perceived that HR practices were designed to “get the most work 

out of employees.”  Finally, in regard to the HR practices about which we inquired, focus group 

participants explained that due to the heavy union presence, employees do not undergo formal 

performance appraisals, and thus explained that this was not an appropriate HR practices on 

which to focus.  Instead, employees described scheduling (i.e., number of hours per employee, 

number of employees per shift) as being an important HR practice with consequences for 

employee attitudes and behavior.  Therefore, scheduling was included in place of performance 

appraisals as one of the 5 HR practices. 

In a second round of 5 focus groups, we piloted our revised measure of HR attributions.  

We presented an item representing each of the 5 HR Attributions we originally proposed, and 

asked respondents to evaluate each of 5 HR practices—staffing, training, benefits, pay, and 

scheduling—with regard to the extent to which they perceived each of the 5 HR Attributions as 

being relevant.  Thus, respondents answered a total of 25 questions: 5 HR attribution questions 

for each of 5 HR practices.  As can be seen in Appendix 1, the HR Attribution items were 

 

Page 23 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

organized by HR practice and not by HR Attribution (i.e., 5 attributions were listed for each of 5 

HR practices.  We did not receive any comments to suggest that further revisions to our 

measures were necessary, thus we collected data using these 25 items.  Each of the items was 

rated on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1=not at all, to 5=to a great extent, indicating the 

extent to which the respondents perceived each of the HR Attributions to be relevant for the HR 

practices.   

We conducted a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) to examine how well the data fit the 

proposed 5 factor structure of HR Attributions.  Specifically, the 5 items (1 for each HR practice) 

referencing the service quality attribution were loaded onto a single factor, the 5 items 

referencing the cost reduction attribution were loaded onto a single factor, and so on.  Results 

indicated relatively poor fit (χ2

(233)=6394.17; CFI=.82; RSMEA=.09; SRMR=.07), and the 

modification indices suggested that a primary reason for poor fit was that the Service Quality 

and Employee Well-being factors were highly correlated, and thus we ran a subsequent model 

in which the HR Attribution items were loaded onto 4 factors: a combined Service Quality and 

Employee Well-being factor, and the proposed Cost Reduction, Exploiting Employees, and 

Union Compliance factors.  The fit for this model was acceptable (χ2

(213)=3708.27; CFI=.90; 

RSMEA=.07; SRMR=.06), and was significantly better (χ2

(1)=2685.9; p<.01) than for the 5-factor 

model. 

Although Service Quality and Employee Well-being were hypothesized to comprise 

separate factors, it is not altogether surprising that the results of the CFA suggested that they 

should be combined, for service researchers maintain that in order for service employees to 

deliver quality service, they must feel that they are treated well by their companies (Morrision, 

1997; Schneider & Bowen, 1995).  Thus, HR practices that signal the importance of service 

quality should also signal the importance of employee well-being in order to be maximally 

effective; from the employees’ perspective, then, if they perceive that the underlying managerial 

goals of HR practices is to “help employees deliver quality service,” then they apparently also 

perceive that HR practices are designed with the goal of maximizing employee well-being.  

 

Page 24 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

Moreover, it is likely that these two sets of items factored together because of their shared 

concern for people: a concern for employees and for customers.  Indeed, we had grouped these 

two HR attributions together conceptually in Table 1 based on their shared “commitment-

enhancing” focus.  Thus, we labeled this combined HR attribution “Quality and employee 

enhancement HR Attribution.”  Cronbach’s alpha for this factor was α = .91.   

In order to recognize the possibility that the Cost Reduction and Exploiting Employees 

HR attributions might also similarly be combined to reflect their shared “control” focus, we also 

tested a 3 factor attributions model containing a concern for people factor (Service quality and 

employee well-being HR attributions combined), control-focused factor (Cost reduction and 

Exploiting Employees HR attributions combined), and neutral, external attribution factor (Union 

compliance HR attribution).  We found that the fit was good (χ2

(194)=2439.03; CFI=.91; 

RMSEA=.06; SRMR=.06), and was significantly better (χ2Δ (17)=404.63) than the 4 factor model 

just reported.  In recognition of these results, we combined the Cost Reduction and Exploiting 

Employees HR attributions into a single factor named “Cost and employee exploitation HR 

Attribution.”  Cronbach’s alpha for this factor was α =.82, and for the Union Compliance scale it 

was α =.79.  

Affective commitment and satisfaction.  At the individual level of analysis, Affective 

commitment was measured using 4 items adapted from the well-established scale by Meyer, 

Allen, and Smith (1993).  An example item is, “I feel a strong sense of ‘belonging’ to [company 

name].”  Cronbach’s alpha was α =.92.  As for employee satisfaction, of interest in this study 

was employees’ satisfaction with their overall position as an employee of a company.  Some 

authors have argued in favor of global measures over sums of facet satisfaction measures (e.g., 

Ironson, Smith, Brannick, Gibson, & Paul, 1989), and therefore we measured satisfaction using 

an adapted version of the gender-neutral single-item Faces Scale (Dunham & Herman, 1975).  

Contrary to popular thought in our field, that single-item measures are undesirable due to poor 

reliability, Wanous, Reichers, and Hudy (1997) conducted a meta-analysis in which they utilized 

 

Page 25 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

the correction for attenuation formula to conclude that, at a minimum, the estimated reliability for 

single-item measures of satisfaction is close to .70.   

Preliminary analyses suggested that commitment and satisfaction were highly correlated 

(r = .50; p<.01), and thus we conducted a CFA at the individual-level of analysis to see whether 

a model in which the two attitude variables were combined was superior to one in which they 

were not.  Assuming a 3 factor solution for the HR attribution items, as described above, we 

compared a 4 factor model (in which satisfaction and commitment are combined) to a 5 factor 

model (in which satisfaction and commitment are kept separate) and found the more 

parsimonious 4 factor solution (χ2

(316)=2930.26; CFI=.92; RMSEA=.05; SRMR=.06) was a 

significantly better fitting model (χ2Δ (1)=793.94)  than the 5 factor model (χ2

(317)=3724.20; 

CFI=.90; RMSEA=.06; SRMR=.08).  An exploratory factor analysis confirmed this result, as a 

single employee attitudes factor representing the 4 affective commitment items and 1 global 

satisfaction item emerged and explained 71% of the variance.  Thus, for simplicity’s sake, we 

proceeded to test study hypotheses using this combined Employee Attitudes factor rather than 

treating commitment and satisfaction separately.  The reliability for this combined scale was α = 

.90. 

Group-level employee attitudes were expected to follow the fuzzy composition 

(Kozlowski & Klein, 2000) or referent-shift (Chan, 1998) model of composition/aggregation, 

according to which the group-level construct is expected to differ in subtle ways from the 

individual-level construct due to the influence of higher-level contextual influences that are not 

captured by the lower-level construct (e.g. shared contextual features, group tasks, group 

leadership, etc.; Bliese, 2000).  In order to justify the aggregation of the employee attitudes 

scale (combined employee commitment and satisfaction) to the unit-level of analysis, we 

calculated ICC-(1) and ICC-(2) values (Bartko, 1976; James, 1982) as well as the rwg statistic 

using a uniform distribution as the null distribution (James, Demaree, & Wolf, 1984).  The ICC-

(1) was .06, the ICC-(2) was .36, and the mean rwg was .772.  The ICC-(1) and rwg values were 

within the recommended range of .05-.20 (Bliese, 2000) and above .60 (James, 1982), 

 

Page 26 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

respectively.  The ICC-(2) value, which assesses the reliability of the group means, was lower 

than the recommended .60 cutoff (Glick, 1985).  However, the F test for employee attitudes was 

significant (F(361, 2873) = 1.55; p<.01), and we used this as another index for justifying the 

appropriateness of aggregation (Bliese, 2000). 

 Although the ICC-(2) statistic was lower than the recommended cutoff, it is important to 

put this into perspective.  In particular, the attitudes were assessed with the individual, and not 

the group, as the referent, since the constructs originate in the psychological processes of 

individuals.  Thus these aggregation statistics relate to sharedness of personal attitudes, not 

about perceptions about an external group-level construct, the latter which is the usual focus for 

aggregation statistics.  Thus, recall the examples of satisfaction and commitment items noted 

earlier.  Each of those has the individual respondent as the frame of reference rather than the 

department so we are, indeed, aggregating personal internal reflections and not observations of 

the shared external world.   

It is worth noting that we attempted to reduce the possibility of common method bias 

involving employee attitude data (i.e., HR attributions, satisfaction, and commitment) using 

recommended proximal and methodological separation techniques (Podsakoff et al., 2003). 

First, the measurement of HR attributions and employee attitudes appeared in separate 

sections of our survey, and were separated by different sets of instructions and by the 

measurement of a construct not included in this study.  In addition, we separated HR attributions 

and employee attitudes methodologically by assessing employee satisfaction using a different 

scale format than that used for HR attributions and commitment.  Whereas the HR attribution 

and commitment items utilized a 5 point Likert-type scale, satisfaction was assessed using a 

faces scale.   

Organizational citizenship behaviors.  Group-level constructs that are observable and 

are clearly group-level phenomena are good candidates to be measured with the group as the 

referent.  Therefore we measured a two-dimensional categorization of OCBs consistent with 

Organ’s (1997) recommendation, which includes the helping and conscientiousness 

 

Page 27 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

dimensions.  We did so using Podsakoff and colleagues’ items (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, 

Moorman, & Fetter, 1990) re-worded with the department as the referent.  The Helping 

dimension involves giving assistance to fellow co-workers.  An example item is, “In my 

department, employees are always ready to lend a helping hand to other employees around 

them.”  Cronbach’s alpha was α = .89.  The Conscientiousness dimension includes behaviors 

such as attendance and following rules.  An example item is, “In my department, employees 

obey rules and regulations even when no one is watching.”  Cronbach’s alpha was α = .85.  

Because the two OCB dimensions were assessed at the unit level by a single rater (department 

managers), aggregation to the unit level was not necessary, and therefore neither are 

aggregation statistics. 

Customer satisfaction.  To assess customer satisfaction, we utilized the 11 items used 

by the participating organization.  Department employees were rated by customers, for 

example, on friendliness and knowledge, and products were rated on freshness and availability. 

When the items were submitted to an exploratory factor analysis, four dimensions emerged: 

Satisfaction with people (α = .93), product (α = .95), place (α = .88), and price (measured by a 

single item).  The facet of customer satisfaction that is most relevant in the current study—and 

was therefore used in all analyses—is Customer Satisfaction with People, as employee 

attitudes and behaviors are not likely to influence the satisfaction that customers experience 

with price, product or place.  As these data were provided to us already aggregated to the 

department level of analysis we do not have aggregation statistics available for them. 

Analyses 

In order to test the hypotheses, we conducted two latent variable structural equation 

models, one at the individual-level of analysis to test hypotheses 1-5, and another at the 

department level to test hypotheses 6 and 7.   In the individual-level structural equation model 

used to examine the relationships between the HR Attribution scales and employee commitment 

and satisfaction, the non-independence of observations due to cluster sampling (within 

departments) was taken into account when computing standard errors and chi-square tests of 

 

Page 28 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

model fit3. By doing so, we were able to avoid violating non-independence statistical 

assumptions, as is often the case when nested organizational data is examined without taking 

non-independence of observations into account (Hoffman, 2000).  In both the individual-level 

and unit-level models, the indicators of the continuous latent variables were included in the 

model, and the MPlus software was used to analyze the data.  Analyses were conducted only 

on departments with at least 4 respondents, in order to minimize instability in the data.   

In addition, because it is not possible to collect employee attitude data from multiple 

sources, we attempted to address common method bias in the employee attitude data by 

conducting the Harman’s one-factor test, which is the most commonly used technique for 

addressing common method variance (Podsakoff, et al., 2003).  We compared the one-factor 

Harman’s CFA solution to a four-factor solution for employee attitudes (3 factors for HR 

attributions and a combined attitudes factor) and found that the single-factor solution does not fit 

the data (χ2

(323)= 7179.51; CFI=.80; RMSEA=.09 SRMR=.12), and is indeed significantly worse 

(χ2Δ (7)=4249.25) than the four-factor solution (χ2

(316)=2930.26; CFI=.92; RMSEA=.06; 

SRMR=.06).  Thus, we conclude that there is at least some evidence that a single method-

driven factor does not adequately represent our data.   

RESULTS 

Descriptive Statistics 

Means and standard deviations for the individual-level variables are displayed in Table 

2, as well as correlations among the variables.  Because the responses from employees within 

a department are likely to share some variance (or be characterized by “non-independence”) as 

a function of shared experiences, we present partial correlations that control for department.  In 

Table 3, we present the means and standard deviations for the department-level variables, as 

well as the correlations among them.  The correlations were conducted on data from 

departments with at least 4 respondents, which yielded a total of 362 departments, although 

department manager and customer satisfaction data were not available for all of those 

departments, thereby further reducing the sample size in some analyses.   

 

Page 29 of 53 


Table 2 

 
Mean 
3.01 

3.27 
3.37 
2.79 
3.45 
2.93 

 

 

Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

 

Partial correlations among individual-level variables, controlling for department 

Scale 
1.  Quality & employee enhancement 

2.  Cost & employee exploitation  HR 

HR Attribution  

Attribution 

3.  Union Compliance HR Attribution 
4.  Affective Commitment 
5.  Satisfaction 
6.  Combined Employee Attitudes 
 
**  p < .01  
N = 3188-3242 individuals, depending on the number of missing values for each correlation.     

S.D. 
.89 

.77 
.87 
1.14 
1.03 
1.03 

1 
 

.38** 
.17** 
.61** 
.44** 
.63** 

2 
 

 

.56** 
.25** 
.08** 
.24** 

3 
 

 
 

.09** 
.01 
.08** 

4 
 

 
 
 

.50** 

-- 

 

Correlations among unit-level variables 

Table 3 

Scale 
1.  Employee Attitudes 

(commitment & satisfaction 
combined) 

2.  OCB—Helping dimension 

3.  OCB—Conscientiousness 

4.  Customer satisfaction with 

dimension 

people 
p < .05 
*  
p < .01  
**  
† 
p , .10 

Mean 

2.93 

3.89 

4.03 

3.51 

S.D. 

.47 

.80 

.71 

.24 

1 

 

. 13† 
(n=185) 

.16* 

(n=185) 

.09 

(n=109) 

2 

 

 

.66** 
(n=185) 
.28** 
(n=109) 

3 

 

 

 

.11 

(n=109) 

Test of study hypotheses 

 

Due to the fact that the Service Quality (hypothesis 1) and Employee Well-being 

(hypothesis 3) HR Attributions were combined to create a single Enhancing quality and 

employee HR Attribution, and the Cost Reduction (hypothesis 2) and Exploiting Employees 

(hypothesis 4) HR Attributions were combined into a single Exploiting costs and employees HR 

Attribution, tests of hypotheses 1 and 3, and hypotheses 2 and 4, respectively, were combined.  

An individual-level structural equation model designed to test these hypotheses exhibited good 

fit (χ2

(313)=2866.61; CFI=.93; RMSEA=.05; SRMR=.06), and provided support for our 

 

Page 30 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

hypotheses.  Consistent with the directionality of hypotheses 1 and 3, the Enhancing quality and 

employee HR Attribution was positively associated with employee attitudes (β = .70; p ≤.01), 

and the Exploiting costs and employees HR Attribution was negatively associated with attitudes 

(β = -.06; p ≤.05). Union Compliance HR Attribution was unrelated to attitudes (β = -.04; p ≥.05). 

Significant paths are depicted with solid arrows, while non-significant ones appear as dashed 

arrows in Figure 2.     

 

Figure 2: 

Hypotheses 1-5 at the individual-level of analysis 
(χ2
(313)=2866.61; CFI=.93; RMSEA=.05; SRMR=.06) 

HR Attributions 

Hypotheses 1 & 3: 
Quality & employee 

enhancement  

.70** 

Hypotheses 2 & 4: 
Cost & employee 

exploitation  

-.06* 

Employee 
Attitudes 

NS 

Hypothesis 5: 

Union Compliance  

 

Page 31 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

Figure 3: 

Hypotheses 6-7 at the unit-level of analysis 
(94)=85.54; CFI=1.00; RMSEA=.00; SRMR=.05) 

(χ2

OCB-Helping 

.54** 

.74** 

NS 

OCB-

Conscientiousness 

Employee 
Attitudes 

.23* 

.25* 

 

 

 

Customer 

Satisfaction with 

People 

Prior to running analyses to test the department-level model, the variables were 

standardized by department type in order to rule out the possibility that observed results may be 

a function of between-department differences in the salience of the HR practices to the 

departments, to satisfaction or commitment, and so forth.  Thus, all reported results are based 

on z-scores.  The model shown in Figure 3 fit the data extremely well (χ2

(94)=85.54; CFI=1.00; 

RMSEA=.00; SRMR=.05).  The path coefficients shown in Figure 3 support hypothesis 6, 

indicating that employee attitudes are positively associated with unit-level OCBs.  Employee 

attitudes was significantly associated with both OCB-Helping (β = .23; p ≤.05) as well as OCB-

Conscientiousness (β = .25; p ≤.05).  In partial support of hypothesis 7, we found that OCB-

Helping was significantly associated with customer satisfaction (β = .54; p ≤.01) but OCB-

Conscientiousness was not (β = -.28   ; p ≥.05). 

 

Page 32 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

DISCUSSION 

Overall, our results supported the notion that employees make attributions about the 

purpose(s) for the HR practices in their organization, and that these HR Attributions are 

differentially associated with attitudes.  As expected, the attribution that HR practices are 

motivated by the organization’s concern for enhancing service quality and employee well-being 

was positively related to employee attitudes, the attribution focused on reducing costs and 

exploiting employees was negatively associated with attitudes, and the external attribution 

involving union compliance was not significantly associated with attitudes.  In turn, unit-level 

attitudes were significantly associated with the two dimensions of OCBs, and OCB-Helping was 

significantly related to customer satisfaction.  We believe that these findings have important 

theoretical, methodological, and practical implications.  

 

These results support the idea that there are likely cross-level and emergent processes 

in organizations through which HR practices are associated with individual-level responses to 

those HR practices, which in turn emerge in conceptually meaningful ways at higher levels of 

analysis to be linked with group level performance.  Most importantly, the results suggest that 

the same set of HR practices may not even exhibit similar effects within a single organization.  

The implication is that it’s not just the HR practices themselves, but rather also employees’ 

perceptions of those HR practices that are important for achieving desired organizational 

outcomes.   

Theoretical Implications and Directions for Future Research 

  Our findings contribute to SHRM research and theory in a number of important ways.  

First, although a number of scholars have suggested that employees’ interpretations or 

attributions of HR practices are likely to play an important role in influencing the ultimate effect 

of HR practices, our study is among the first to provide evidence that this is the case.  Our 

research confirms the argument made by Nishii and Wright (in press; Wright & Nishii, in press) 

that meaningful variability exists within organizations – in terms of employees’ perceptions of 

and reactions to HR practices – and that implicitly ignoring this variability by focusing on single 

 

Page 33 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

organizational respondents’ reports of HR practices in their organizations may be hurting our 

ability to understand the process through which HR practices become linked to performance.  

Our research suggest the utility of focusing more future SHRM research on the way that HR 

practices are enacted in organizations, as revealed in human perception and behavior, in 

addition to a focus on HR content and policy development (Purcell, 2005).     

 

A second, related point is that researchers should take caution in relying on managers’ 

reports of HR practices.  As Wright and Nishii (in press) suggested, there is likely to be a 

disconnect between intended HR practices as reported by managers and the effect of actual HR 

practices that is at least partially explained by differential meanings imposed on those practices 

by employees.  Because managerial and employee reports of HR practices may differ in 

important ways, future researchers should explicitly recognize this distinction and acknowledge 

whether their focus is on intended versus actual and perceived HR practices, and the 

implications for SHRM theory therein.   

Third, we believe that our findings may be informative for trying to disentangle some of 

the inconsistent findings to date regarding external fit.  Specifically, equivocal findings about the 

benefits of aligning HR practices to business strategy may be explained in part by the commonly 

adopted methodology in which single respondents are asked to report on a firm’s HRM system 

and strategies.  Such a methodology does not permit the researcher to examine employees’ 

attributions regarding the strategic goals underlying HR practices; yet, the degree to which 

employees understand the strategic goals underlying HR practices may impact the 

effectiveness of those HR practices (cf. Wright & Boswell, 2002).  For example, when 

comparing two organizations with the same business strategy and set of HR practices, the 

relationship between HR practices and performance could be stronger in the organization in 

which employees’ attributions regarding the strategic goals underlying the HR practices are 

more closely aligned with the organization’s intended strategy.     

Fourth, the construct of HR Attributions may also be useful when thinking about internal 

fit or alignment among HR practices.  Given that a primary objective of internally aligning HR 

 

Page 34 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

practices is to send consistent messages to employees regarding the firm’s goals and 

expectations for employee behavior, it may be more appropriate to explore notions of internal fit 

from the employees’ perspective rather than rely on HR representatives’ assumptions or 

researchers’ calculations of internal fit.  Indeed, it is reasonable to expect that in some cases, 

even if a firm’s HR practices appear to be internally consistent on paper, they may not be 

experienced as such by employees.  From the employees’ perspective, alignment HR practices 

would be evidenced by coherence or consistency in the HRM-related messages that employees 

receive from the HR practices to which they are subject, as well as agreement across 

employees.  More specifically, in an organization in which HR practices are internally aligned, 

one might expect employees’ attributions about HR practices to be rather uniform across the 

specific HR practices about which employees are asked to respond (e.g., training, staffing, pay, 

benefits, and scheduling, among others).  In addition, there should be relatively little variability 

across employees and units regarding the attributions that are made for the firm’s HR practices.  

This was not the case for employees in the organization participating in our research.  Future 

research that explores the potential moderating role of consistency in HR Attribution perceptions 

– both within individuals across HR practices, and across individuals within organizations – on 

the relationship between HR practices and performance would help to she light on some of 

these issues.   

Our research findings are suggestive of several additional avenues for future research.  

First, our data show that people’s attributions for the same HR practices differ, and that these 

differential attributions have implications for valued outcomes, and thus future research that 

examines the antecedents of people’s attributions is necessary.  Given that the way that objects 

are perceived by individuals depends on attributes of the object itself, the context within which it 

is perceived, and the characteristics of the perceiver (Brunswik, 1956), research should focus 

on identifying the attributes of HR practices that are particularly salient or informative as far as 

attributions are concerned (e.g., is it the design of HR practices, the message that they tell 

relative to other communications from management, or the fairness with which they are 

 

Page 35 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

implemented within the organization?), other contextual cues that are particularly influential in 

the attribution process (Bruner, 1957; Kelley & Michela, 1980), and the individual difference 

factors that contribute to variability in people’s HR attributions (Golding & Rorer, 1972).  Indeed, 

it is possible that people’s HR attributions are influenced as much by individual difference 

factors (e.g., personality, values, goals, needs, social roles, past experiences, competencies, 

expectancies) as by organizational practice, as people’s attributions will be based on how they 

selectively attend to information regarding HR practices as well as how they process that 

information; specifically, differences in the criteria according to which HR practices are judged 

(Mischel & Shoda, 1995).  Although we interpreted the factor structure of internal HR attributions 

to represent a “quality and employee enhancement HR attribution” and a “cost and employee 

exploitation HR attribution,” we cannot rule out the possibility that the positive and negative HR 

attribution factors, respectively, may be driven by positive and negative affectivity on the part of 

respondents4.  Thus, future research that teases apart the relative contributions of individual and 

organizational factors that influence employees’ HR attributions would be valuable. 

As our discussion of the individual-level antecedents of HR attributions suggest, we 

conceptualized HR attributions as an individual-level phenomenon in this study.  Indeed, 

aggregation statistics confirmed that HR attributions were not sufficiently shared among 

department members so as to represent a meaningful unit-level construct.  However, it is 

entirely possible for HR Attributions to emerge as a group-level construct in other organizational 

contexts.  The extent to which group members come to share their HR attributions is likely a 

function of the quantity and quality of social interaction patterns within the group that affect the 

extent of group sensemaking that takes place (Weick, 1995).  These social interaction patterns 

may be influenced by the level of task interdependence, interpersonal liking, and group diversity 

within a group, as well as the degree of shared context, leadership, roles, norms, or task goals 

(James, Joyce & Slocum, 1998; Kozlowski & Hattrup, 1992).  When group members engage in 

extensive social interactions and collectively make sense of their organizational environments, 

they are likely to share organizational assumptions and mutually influence the way that they 

 

Page 36 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

perceive HR practices.  Thus, while we theorize HR attributions as originating in the 

psychological processes of individuals, group conditions may lead some groups to coalesce 

more than other groups in their perceptions of HR Attributions.  Future research that further 

explores the emergence of HR attributions as a group-level construct would be informative. 

Bowen and Ostroff (2004)’s model of the features of HR systems that influence 

employees’ perceptions of HR practices is untested, and thus future research is needed to 

examine whether their model may be useful for understanding the antecedents of employees’ 

attributions regarding the why of HR practices.  We expect some aspects of their model to be 

informative for understanding the antecedents of HR attributions.  For example, we expect that 

variability across employees’ HR attributions should be reduced when communication regarding 

HR is unambiguous.  As might be expected based on social psychological theories of attitude 

formation and change (Eagly & Chaiken, 1993), we expect HR attributions to be shaped by the 

volume, presentation, and timing of discrepant information regarding HR practices, such that HR 

attributions should be most widely shared when thorough and unambiguous information is 

presented to employees early in their tenure at an organization when they are especially 

motivated to attend to information about organizational practices.  Furthermore, we expect that 

such HR information will be more influential in the formation of employees’ HR attributions when 

the source of that information is credible (e.g., when the HR function is seen as a legitimate 

authority, Bowen & Ostroff, 2004).  When organizational communicators are not seen as 

credible, then employees may be more likely to rely on their own subjective perceptions as well 

as those of their coworkers when interpreting HR practices.  Although early attribution theory 

assumed that the social perceiver engaged in attributional processes alone, later theorists 

recognized the likelihood that social perceivers turn to others for explanations when trying to 

determine the cause of a behavior or event (e.g., Antaki, 1985).  When employees engage in 

collective sensemaking they will come to share their HR attributions.  Future research, 

preferably utilizing data collected from multiple organizations to take advantage of between-

 

Page 37 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

organization variability, should explore the processes through which employees share HR 

attributions, and the effects associated with weakly versus strongly shared attributions.   

It is also reasonable to expect that when faced with attributional uncertainty, employees 

might turn to their more knowledgeable managers for explanations about the HR practices.  

Thus, future research that examines the influence of managers’ HR attributions on the 

attributions of their employees, as well as the interaction of the two, would be valuable.  An 

interesting possibility is that due to the actor-observer effect, which is the tendency to attribute 

others’ behavior to dispositional factors but one’s own behavior to situational ones (Jones & 

Nisbett, 1972), managers and employees may be predisposed to make differing attributions 

regarding HR practices.  This of course assumes that employees perceive managers as 

implementers of HR practices, which some research suggests they do (Zohar, 2000; Zohar & 

Luria, 2004).  When managers are perceived as the actor, or as the implementer of HR 

practices, then employees are likely to attribute dispositional factors as underlying the design 

and implementation of HR practices (e.g., manager is fair, caring, etc.) and may be unable to 

see other possible explanations for HR practices.  However, other, situational explanations may 

exist for HR practices, explanations which are perceptible to managers and HR professionals.  

Such divergence in attributions between managers and their subordinates may be problematic, 

as discrepant attributions have been associated with greater subordinate dissatisfaction 

(Wexley, Alexander, Greenawalt, & Couch, 1980) and may also be related to greater conflict 

between managers and subordinates (Martinko & Gardner, 1987).  Thus, future research would 

benefit from examining whether such actor-observer differences in HR attributions exist, and if 

they do, examine how they interact in affecting employee attitudes and behavior.  Such 

differences may partially account for varying reports of HR practices as perceived by HR 

professionals, managers, and employees.  Nevertheless, because individuals act based on their 

own perceptions, assessing employees’ HR attributions is critical.   

It would also be valuable to examine the conditions under which employees are 

motivated to seek information about the underlying goals of management that drive HR 

 

Page 38 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

practices.  Bowen and Ostroff (2004) suggest that this is most likely when employees perceive 

that they are dependent on HR practices for attaining their personal goals.  We expect 

employees to always perceive HR practices as being relevant for them, but it may be that 

employees’ greater ongoing dependency on some practices (e.g. pay, benefits, scheduling) 

than others (e.g., selection) may make them more likely to attend to information surrounding 

those HR practices than others when making their HR attributions.  In addition, it is possible that 

people may be cognitively predisposed to make internal HR attributions much more often than 

external HR attributions.  This tendency, referred to as the fundamental attribution error (Ross, 

1977), is well documented.  One explanation for this bias is that dispositional attributions occur 

rather spontaneously, while collecting situational information that might provide alternative 

explanations for behavior/events is often more cognitively taxing (Gilbert, Pelham, & Krull, 

1988).  This is consistent with what we learned in our focus groups, in which employees told us 

that they would have a hard time considering the attribution that HR practices were designed in 

response to institutional pressures (i.e., management adopts the HR practices that it does to be 

consistent with peer companies), since they know little about the HR practices employed by 

peer companies.  Thus, when important situational factors are at play, extra communication 

efforts may be required to make them salient to employees.  It is, however, possible that in other 

organizations – such as those that are known for their HR practices or which are dominated by 

knowledge workers – employees may be more familiar with institutional norms surrounding HR 

practices, and that therefore external attributions related to institutional pressures would be 

more prevalent.  Research aimed at understanding these nuances, and their implications for 

organizational communication efforts, would be beneficial.  

Finally, future research should consider cross-cultural extensions of our theory.  For 

example, research (e.g., Fletcher & Ward, 1988) has shown that the fundamental attribution 

error is much less common in collectivistic cultures such as Japan, perhaps suggesting that 

external HR attributions may be more common in those cultures.  If this were the case, it may 

be that HR attributions may play a smaller role in impacting employee attitudes and behaviors in 

 

Page 39 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

collectivistic than individualistic cultures.  Or, it could also be the case that in collectivistic 

cultures, in which responding to situational demands is paramount, external attributions that 

reflect such pressures will be more influential for employee attitudes and behaviors.  This, as 

well as other cross-cultural extensions of our theory, would be worthwhile to explore.  

Practical Implications 

The goal of HRM is to design and implement HR practices in a way that leads to desired 

employee attitudes and performance.  The question that should be of interest to HR 

practitioners, therefore, is whether a firm’s HR practices are successfully accomplishing these 

goals as intended, and if not, to identify the factors that might be responsible.  By testing a 

cross-level model that linked employees’ subjective attributions of HR practices to their attitudes 

and behaviors, and ultimately to customer satisfaction, we showed that employees’ HR 

attributions may at least partially account for the varied success with which HR practices 

ultimately impact organizational performance.  For HR practitioners, this suggests that 

assessing HR attributions can provide valuable information about why HR practices have or 

have not accomplished organizational goals as intended.  Rather than focusing solely on 

managerial assessments of fit among HR practices, our results suggest the benefits of shifting 

attention to employee assessments of fit.  Doing so may help illuminate problematic areas that 

are not viewed as problematic by managers but are perceived as so by employees.  By closely 

examining employees’ HR attributions practitioners can get a sense for whether some HR 

practices, but not others, may be to blame.  In doing so, it would be important to examine not 

only the mean HR attributions made, but also the variance in those attributions.  For a particular 

HR attribution desired by management, it may be that there is great variability across HR 

practices in the extent to which employees perceive that attribution to be relevant, or it could be 

that there is great variability across employees in the extent to which they perceive the 

attribution to be a driver of HR practices.   

The former case might be indicative of a lack of alignment across HR practices in the 

messages that they send, suggesting that it would be best to revise either the “problematic” HR 

 

Page 40 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

practices themselves or the communication surrounding those HR practices.  In the latter case, 

however, it would be important for management to understand the correlates of those 

differences in employees’ HR attributions.  For example, do employees in different locations 

have different sets of attributions, and with what can those differences be correlated?  

Employee attributions might diverge due to differences in the way that the HR practices are 

being implemented across units by managers, for example (Zohar, 2000).  In such cases, 

identifying the particular units in which employee attributions are problematic, and assessing the 

contextual and managerial factors that may be to blame would be helpful. Depending on the 

correlates, the interventions likely to be effective will vary.  The insights afforded by examining 

employees’ HR attributions, as we just highlighted, suggest that organizations might benefit 

from expanding the way they view employee attitude surveys.  Rather than focusing solely on 

employees’ attitudes (i.e., “engagement”), expanding employee surveys to also focus on 

employees’ perceptions of HR practices would provide more actionable items on which to 

leverage organizational change efforts. 

 

More generally, based on research which indicates that an effect is attributed to the 

cause that is most salient to perceivers (McArthur & Post, 1977; Taylor & Riske, 1975), it seems 

it would behoove organizations to communicate the intentions of HR practices to employees in 

an unambiguous and salient manner, both through formal organizational communications and 

also more indirectly through line managers.  Open communication between managers and their 

employees should help to not only communicate management’s intentions to employees 

thereby facilitating desired attributions, but also expose the alternative perspectives and 

attributions that are held by employees so that they can subsequently be addressed by 

management.  An added benefit of increased dialogue between managers and their employees 

is that it should help align managers’ and employees’ attributions (Martinko & Gardner, 1987), 

thereby reducing the negative outcomes associated with divergent attributions mentioned 

previously (i.e., reduced satisfaction and increased conflict).   

 

Page 41 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

In addition, given research which suggests there is a primacy bias in the causes to which 

people attribute events (Jones, et al., 1968; Ross et al., 1975), organizations should pay special 

attention to the role of recruitment experiences and new employee orientation programs in 

shaping employees’ HR attributions.  Generally speaking, when faced with potentially 

ambiguous stimuli, perceivers scan and interpret available information until an attribution can be 

made, after which information tends to be disregarded or assimilated into previously made 

attributions.  Thus, employees should be most motivated to seek explanations for HR practices 

when they first join a company.  Differences in the ways that individuals experience entry into 

the organization may give rise to differential attributions, which, once formed, may be resistant 

to change in much the same way as other causal schemas (Ross & Lepper, 1980).   

In addition, theories of cognitive homeostasis suggest that experiences with 

disequilibrium stimulate cognitive reevaluation; thus, organizational change events that alter the 

organizational landscape are likely to stimulate attributional processes on the part of employees.  

Indeed, scholars have argued that successful organizational change requires cognitive 

reframing, or the break-down of old schemas in order to build new schemas that cognitively 

accommodate the ongoing changes in the external organizational environment (Labianca, Gray, 

& Brass, 2000; Sottolano, 2001).  This suggests the importance of framing change efforts in 

ways that stimulate desirable employee attributions regarding the reasons for organizational 

change (Rousseau & Tijoriwala, 1999), for these change-related attributions are likely to be 

closely aligned with employees’ re-assessments of their HR attributions.    

Limitations 

 

As with any study, the results of this study must be viewed in light of its limitations.  First, 

it is possible that some of the reported results are inflated by single-source response bias.  

Nevertheless, there are several reason why we believe that response bias may not be a big 

concern in the current study.  First, we used department manager reports of OCBs rather than 

employee reports of OCBs in order to control for response bias, and thus only the paths 

involving the HR Attributions and attitudes may be in question.  Second, the construct of HR 

 

Page 42 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

Attributions is conceptually distinct from employee commitment and satisfaction, and thus there 

is less concern about response bias than there would be if the two constructs being related 

were highly similar (e.g. positive affect and satisfaction).  This was supported by the results of 

the Harman’s one-factor test, which we reported previously.  Third, recent literature suggests 

that common method variance is not as prevalent as researchers once assumed (e.g., 

Crampton & Wagner, 1994; Lindell & Whitney, 2001; Spector, 1987; 1994), and is very seldom 

a severe enough issue to invalidate research findings (e.g., Doty & Glick, 1998).  Spector 

(2006), for example, argues that the seemingly automatic criticism of cross-sectional self-report 

data as being inflated is simply unfounded, as there are few scientific data to unequivocally 

support the notion that common method alone is sufficient to produce biases, and there is 

ample data to refute this notion.  According to Spector’s (2006) reasoning, if common method 

variance were as serious a problem as some argue, then we should expect to see all variables 

measured with the same self-report survey to exhibit systematically inflated correlations.  In our 

individual-level data, however, this was not the case.5   

Another limitation is that because of the cross-sectional nature of the data, questions 

regarding causality remain unanswered.  Thus, for example, it was not possible to test for the 

possibility that employee attitudes might influence their HR Attributions.  It could be, for 

example, that when people feel dissatisfied with their job and lack organizational identification, 

they perceive that the organization must not care about them and therefore they make negative 

attributions about their firm’s HR practices.  In other words, employees’ positive or negative 

attitudes may provide a lens through which they perceive and attach meaning to organizational 

activities such as HR practices.  Also possible is for customer satisfaction to influence 

employees’ HR Attributions such that high customer satisfaction ratings lead to the attribution 

that HR practices must be designed with the goal of Service Quality in mind.  Future research 

that incorporates longitudinal data is necessary to test these various alternatives, with perhaps 

the most likely outcome being that these are reciprocating systems issues (Schneider et al., 

1998).   

 

Page 43 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

Indeed, similar criticisms have been made of attribution theories more generally, as most 

research has treated attributions as being associated with attitudinal consequences in a linear 

fashion, with attributions influencing attitudes as we have depicted in our model.  Some 

scholars, however, have recognized that the relationship between attributions and their 

consequences is likely much more cyclical and ongoing, such that properties of an attribution 

elicit certain attitudes and behaviors that in turn influence subsequent information antecedents 

of future attributions, often in self-confirming ways (e.g., Kelley & Michela, 1980).  Thus, for 

example, an employee who is highly committed to an organization and performs many OCBs in 

response to the attribution that HR practices are motivated by management’s concern for quality 

and employee enhancement may be more likely to elicit attitudes and behaviors on the part of 

his/her manager that confirm the attribution that management cares for employees.  If this were 

the case, it suggests once more the importance of attending to the HR attributions that are 

formed during newcomer orientation, as attributions may be difficult to alter once formed.  

Nevertheless, future research designed to examine the evolving nature of HR attributions over 

time would be extremely beneficial, both in relation to this specific theory and to attribution 

theory more generally. 

 

Third, because we chose to test our model within a single organization, we were unable 

to test the relationship between actual HR practices and HR Attributions.  Future research that 

examines whether HR Attributions play a mediating or moderating role in the relationship 

between HR practices and organizational performance would be valuable.  It may be that 

certain “high performance work practices” that are internally aligned always lead to certain HR 

Attributions, in which case HR Attributions would play a mediating role.  However, because HR 

practices are interpreted within the context of a vast array of other organizational information 

and HR Attributions are influenced by employees’ individual cognitions, it is more likely that 

employees will vary in the attributions that they make for HR practices.  This might suggest that 

the relationship between HR practices and performance is moderated by HR Attributions such 

 

Page 44 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

that only when HR practices are attributed in certain ways do the HR practices lead to 

organizational performance in desired and expected ways.       

Fourth, we were unable to test all of our study hypotheses simultaneously in a single 

model.  Because our independent variables are at the individual-level of analysis and our 

outcome variables at the department-level, the only viable approach for doing so would have 

been to test our entire model at the department-level of analysis (Hofmann, Griffin, & Gavin, 

2000).  Unfortunately, however, aggregation statistics for the HR attributions did not provide 

sufficient support for aggregating the attributions to the department level of analysis6.  We were 

thus constrained to test our hypotheses using one individual-level and one department-level 

model. 

Finally, the HR practices about which respondents were asked to report in the current 

study were chosen for their appropriateness in the participating organization.  The HR 

Attribution items may have to be modified for use in other organizations in order to cover the 

range of HR practices that would be appropriate in those samples.  For example, other HR 

practices of interest might include policies regarding work/family balance or flexible work 

schedules, performance appraisals, promotion policies, employee assistance programs, and 

diversity policies.  Because we drew from existing SHRM research and piloted our HR 

attributions with multiple samples, we expect that the construct of HR attributions will be 

generalizable to other organizations and industries, and that the specific HR attributions that we 

examined in this study will provide a good foundation for future research.  Nevertheless, 

because people are thought to rely on domain-specific knowledge structures to define likely 

causes for particular events (Hilton & Slugoski, 1986), we recognize the possibility that there 

may be causal explanations, or HR attributions, that are relevant in other organizations and 

industries that were not for employees in the current organization.   

Conclusion 

 

Despite these limitations, we believe that the results of this study provide important 

insights into the underlying process by which HR practices become reflected in employee 

 

Page 45 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

attitudes and behaviors, as well as customer satisfaction.  As expected based on psychological 

theories concerning individual differences in cognition, affect, and motivation, employees did not 

respond uniformly to the same set of HR practices.  And while additional research that builds on 

this study and further explores the notion of HR Attributions is certainly needed, this study 

provides a useful starting point for future efforts in a similar vein to explore the impact of HR 

practices on employees and organizations.  

 

Page 46 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

Footnotes 

 

1.  Focus groups with executive managers confirmed the appropriateness of the department, 

rather than the store, as the unit level of analysis.  Many of the organization’s structures and 
activities (e.g., accounting, employee attitude surveys, customer satisfaction measures) are 
centered on the department rather than the store level of analysis, and employees tend to 
interact mainly with other employees within their department rather than with members of 
other departments within their stores.  Moreover, a comparison of aggregation statistic 
indicated that for almost all of the individual level data, ICC(1) and rwg statistics are 
considerably higher when aggregating to the department rather than store level of analysis.  
ICC(2) values, however, which increase with group size (Bliese, 2000) tended to be similar 
for the department and store levels of analysis.   

2.  A look at the aggregation statistics for commitment and satisfaction separately suggests that 
the low ICC-(2) value may be driven in large part by the low ICC-(2) value for the satisfaction 
item.  While the aggregation statistics for affective commitment were all within or close to 
recommended ranges (the ICC-(1) was .07, the ICC-(2) was .58, and the mean rwg was .53), 
the values for the single-item measure of satisfaction were lower (the ICC-(1) value was .03, 
and the ICC-(2) value was 0.33, while the mean rwg value across departments was .60).  The 
F test for both commitment (F(361, 2872) = 1.53; p<.01) and satisfaction (F(361, 2828) = 1.31; p<.01) 
were significant.  

3.  Non-independence was taken into accout by using the TYPE=COMPLEX analysis command 
in MPlus, which estimates parameters by maximizing a weighted log likelihood function, and 
computes standard errors using a sandwich estimator. 

4.  Past research suggests that the possibility that positive/negative affectivity or cynicism is a 

universal source of common method variance in self-report data is quite low (Spector, 2006), 
and that even though negative affectivity may be related to organizational variables, it has 
little impact on the relations among organizational variables (Chan, 2001; Williams & 
Anderson, 1994). 

5.  If common method bias were this severe a problem, then in our data, we would expect to see 

all of the 25 HR attribution items, 4 affective commitment items, and the employee 
satisfaction item to be correlated by virtue of their shared measurement method (i.e., same 
self-report survey).  However, this was not the case; despite very strong power to detect 
significant differences (N= 3154-3218 depending on the analyses), there were 19 
correlations among these variables that were not significant, and furthermore, of the 
correlations that were significant, 42% of them were smaller than .20, further suggesting that 
common method variance is not a universal inflator of correlations (Spector, 2006). 

 
6.  For the Quality & employee enhancement HR attribution, ICC(1)=.07, ICC(2)=.53 and 

rwg=.74; for the Cost & employee exploitation HR attribution, ICC(1)=.02, ICC(2)=.19, and 
rwg=.58; and for the Union compliance HR attribution, ICC(1)=.02, ICC(2)=.15, and rwg=.40.  
Not surprisingly, a structural equation model testing all hypotheses simultaneously at the 
department-level of analysis exhibited poor fit (χ2
SRMR=.11)   

(761)=1265.87; CFI=.81; RMSEA=.09; 

 

Page 47 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

References 

 

Antaki, C. (1985).  Ordinary explanation in conversation: Causal structures and their defense.  

European Journal of Social Psychology, 15, 213-230. 

Arthur, J.B. (1992).  The link between business strategy and industrial relations systems in 
American steel minimills.  Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 45(3), 488-506.  

Arthur, J.B. (1994).  Effects of human resource systems on manufacturing performance and 

turnover.  Academy of Management Journal, 37, 670-687.   

Batt, R. (2002).  Managing customer services: Human resource practices, quit rates, and sales 

growth.  Academy of Management Journal, 45(3), 587-597. 

Bamberger, P., & Meshoulam, I. (2000).  Human resource strategy: formulation, implementation, 

and impact.  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 

Bartko, J.J. (1976).  On various intraclass correlation reliability coefficients.  Psychological 

Bulletin, 83, 762-765. 

Becker, B.E. & Gerhart, B. (1996).  The impact of human resource management on 

organizational performance: Progress and prospects.  Academy of Management Journal, 
39(4), 779-801.  

Becker, B.E. & Huselid, M.A. (1998).  High performance work systems and firm performance: A 

synthesis of research and managerial implications.  In G.R. Ferris (Ed.),  Research in 
Personnel and Human Resources Management (p.53-101).  Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.  
Bentler, P.M., & Chou, C.P. (1988).  Practical issues in structural modeling.  In J.S. Long (Ed.), 

Common Problems/proper solutions: Avoiding error in survey research (pp.161-192).  
Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 

Bliese, P.D. (2000).  Within-group agreement, non-independence, and reliability: Implications for 
data aggregation and analysis.  In K.J. Klein & S.W.J. Kozlowski (Eds.), Multilevel theory, 
research, and methods in organizations: Foundations, extensions, and new directions 
(pp.349-381).  San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 

Bowen, D.E., & Ostroff, C. (2004). Understanding HRM-firm performance linkages: The role of 

the “strength” of the HRM system. Academy of Management Review, 29(2), 203-221. 
Bruner, J.S. (1957).  Going beyond the information given.  In H. Gruber, K. Hammond, & R. 
Jesser (eds.), Contemporary approaches to cognition (pp.41-69).  Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 

Chan, D. (1998).  Functional relations among constructs in the same content domain at different 
levels of analysis: A typology of compsotion models.  Journal of  Applied Psychology, 83, 
234-246. 

Chan, D. (2001).  Method effects of positive affectivity, negative affectivity, and impression 

management in self-reports of work attitudes.  Human Performance, 14, 77-96. 

Child, J. (1972).  Organizational structure, environment and performance: The role of strategic 

choice.  Sociology, 6, 1-22. 

Child, J. (1997).  Strategic choice in the analysis of action, structure, organizations and 

environment:  Retrospect and prospect.  Organization Studies, 18, 43-76. 

Crampton, S.M., & Wagner, J.A., III. (1994).  Percept-percept inflation in microorganizational 

research: An investigation of prevalence and effect.  Journal of Applied Psychology, 79, 
67-76. 

Currall, S.C., Towler, A.J., Judge, T.A., & Khon, L. (2005).  Pay satisfaction and organizational 

outcomes.  Personnel Psychology, 58, 613-640. 

Deckop, J.R., Mangel, R. & Cirka, C.C. (1999).  Getting more than you pay for: Organizational 

citizenshihp behavior and pay-for-performance plans.  Academy of Management Journal, 
42(4), 420-428. 

 

Page 48 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 
Delery, J.E. & Doty (1996).  Modes of theorizing in strategic human resource management: Tests 

CAHRS WP08-03 

 

of universalistic, contingency, and configurational performance predictions.  Academy of 
Management Journal, 39, 802-835.   

Delery, J.E. (1998).  Issues of fit in strategic human resource management: Implications for 

research.  Human Resource Management Review, 8, 289-310.  

Doty, D.H., & Glick, W.H. (1998).  Common method bias: Does common methods variance really 

bias results?  Organizational Research Methods, 1, 374-406. 

Dunham, R.B. & Herman, J.B. (1975).  Development of a female faces scale for measuring job 

satisfaction.  Journal of Applied Psychology, 60, 629-631. 

Eagly, A., & Chaiken, S. (1993).  Psychology of attitudes.  NY: Harcourt, Brace Jovanovich. 
Ehrhart, M.G. & Naumann, S.E. (2004). Organizational citizenship behavior in work groups: A 

group norms approach.  Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(6), 960-974. 

Eisenberger, R., Fasolo, P., & Davis-LaMastro, V. (1990).  Perceived organizational support and 
employee diligence, commitment, and innovation.  Journal of Applied Psychology, 75(1), 
51-59. 

Frese, M. (1985).  Stress at work and psychosomatic complaints: A causal interpretation.  Journal 

Golding, S.L. & Rorer, L.G. (1972).  Illusory correlation and subjective judgment.  Journal of 

of Applied Psychology, 70, 314-328. 

Abnormal Psychology, 80, 249-260. 

Graen, G.B. & Uhl-Bien, M. (1995).  Development of LMX theory of leadership over 25 years: 

Applying a multi-level multi-domain perspective.  Leadership Quarterly, 6, 210-247. 

Gutek, B.A., & Winter, S.J. (1992).  Consistency of job satisfaction across situations: Fact or 

framing artifact?  Journal of Vocational Behavior, 41, 61-78. 

Hamilton, V.L. (1980).  Intuitive psychologist or intuitive lawyer?  Alternative models of the 

attribution process.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 767-772. 

Harter, J.K., Schmidt, F.L., & Hayes, T.L. (2002).  Business-unit-level relationship between 

employee satisfaction, employee engagement, and business outcomes: A meta-analysis.  
Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(2), 268-279. 

Heskett, J.L., Sasser, W.E., & Schlesinger, L.A. (1997).  The service profit chain: How leading 
companies link profit and growth to loyalty, satisfaction, and value. New York, NY: The 
Free Press. 

Heider, F. (1958).  The psychology of interpersonal relation. New York: Wiley. 
Hilton, D.J., & Slugoski, B.R. (1986).  Knowledge-based causal attribution: The abnormal 

conditions focus model.  Psychological Review, 93, 75-88. 

Huselid, M.A. (1995).  The impact of human resource management practices on turnover, 

productivity, and corporate financial performance.  Academy of Management Journal, 
38(3), 635-672.  

Ichheiser, G. (1949).  Misunderstandings in human relations: A study in false social perception.  

American Journal of Sociology, 55. 

Ironson, G.H., Smith, P.C., Brannick, M.T., Gibson, W.M., & Paul, K.B. (1989).  Construction of a 
job in general scale: A comparison of global, composite, and specific measures.  Journal 
of Applied Psychology, 74, 193-200. 

Jackson, S.E., & Schuler, R.S. (1995).  Understanding human resource management in the 

context of organizations and their environments.  Annual Review of Psychology, 46, 237-
264.  

James, L.R. (1982).  Aggregation bias in estimates of perceptual agreement.  Journal of Applied 

Psychology, 67, 219-229. 

James, L.R., Demaree, R.G., & Wolf, G. (1984).  Estimating within-group interrater reliability with 

and without response bias.  Journal of Applied Psychology, 69, 85-98. 

James, L.R., Joyce, W.F., & Slocum, J.W. (1988).  Organizations do not cognize.  Academy of 

Management Review, 13(1), 129-132. 

 

Page 49 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 
Jones, E.E., & Davis, K.E. (1965).  From acts to dispositions: The attribution process in person 

CAHRS WP08-03 

 

perception.  In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology, Vol. 2 
(pp.219-266). New York: Academic Press. 

Jones, E.E., Kanouse, D.E., Kelley, H.H., Nisbett, R.E., Valins, S., & Weinder, B. (Eds.) (1972).  
Attribution: Perceiving the causes of behavior.  Morristown, NJ: General Learning Press. 

Jones, E.E., & McGillis, D. (1976).  Correspondent inferences and the attribution cube: A 

comparative reappraisal. In J.H. Harvey, W.J. Ickes, & R.F. Kidd (Eds.), New directions in 
attribution research (Vol. 1, pp. 189-420).  Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Jones, E.E., & Nisbett, R.E. (1972).  The actor and the observer: Divergent perceptions of the 

causes of behavior.  In E.E. Jones, D.E. Kanouse, H.H. Kelley, R.E. Nisbett, S.Valins, & 
B. Weiner (Eds.), Attributions: Perceiving the causes of behavior (pp.79-94).  Morristown, 
NJ: General Learning Press. 

Jones, E.E., Rock, L., Shaver, K.G., Goethals, G.R., & Ward, L.M> (1968).  Pattern of 

performance and ability attribution: An unexpected primacy effect.  Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 10, 317-340. 

Judge, T.A., Thoresen, C.J., Bono, J.E., & Patton, G.K. (2001).  The job satisfaction-job 

performance relationship: A qualitative and quantitative review.  Psychological Bulletin, 
127(3), 376-407. 

Kelley, H.H. (1967).  Attribution theory in social psychology.  In D.Levine (Ed.), Nebraska 

Symposium on Motivation (Vol. 15, pp.192-240).  Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 

Kelley, H.H. (1973).  The process of causal attribution.  American Psychologist, 28, 107-128. 
Kelley, H.H. & Michela, J.L. (1980).  Attribution theory and research.  Annual Review of 

Psychology, 31, 457-501. 

Kozlowski, S.W.J. & Hattrup, K. (1992).  A disagreement about within-group agreement: 

Disentagling issues of consistency versus consensus.  Journal of Applied Psychology, 77, 
161-167. 

Kozlowski, S.W.J & Klein, K.J. (2000).  A multilevel approach to theory and research in 

organizations: Contextual, temporal, and emergent processes.  In K.J. Klein & S.W.J. 
Kozlowski (Eds.), Multilevel theory, research, and methods in organizations: Foundations, 
extensions, and new directions (pp.3-90).  San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, Inc. 

Koys, D.J. (1988).  Human resource management and a culture of respect: Effects of employees’ 

organizational commitment.  Employee Rights and Responsibilities Journal, 1, 57-68. 

Koys, D.J. (1991).  Fairness, legal compliance, and organizational commitment.  Employee 

Rights and Responsibilities Journal, 4(4), 283-291. 

Lepak, D.P., Taylor, M.S., Tekleab, A., & Marrone, J. (2002).  Firms’ use of high investment HR 

systems to manage employees for competitive advantage: Differential use and 
implications for performance.  Presented at the annual conference for the Academy of 
Management, Denver, CO. 

Lindell, M.K., & Whitney, D.J. (2001).  Accounting for common method variance in cross-sectional 

research designs.  Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 114-121. 

Lord, R.G. & Smith, J.E. (1983).  Theoretical, information processing, and situational factors 

affecting attribution theory models of organizational behavior. Academy of Management 
Review, 8(1), 50-60. 

Martinko, M.J., & Gardner, W.L. (1987).  The leader-member attribution process.  Academy of 

Management Review, 12(2), 235-249. 

McArthur, L.Z., & Post, D.L. (1977).  Figural emphasis and person perception.  Journal of 

Experimental Social Psychology, 13, 520-535. 

Meyer, J.P., & Allen, M.J. (1997).  Commitment in the workplace: Theory, research and 

application.  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 

 

Page 50 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 
Meyer, J.P, Allen, M.J., & Smith, C.A. (1993).  Commitment to organizations and occupations: 

CAHRS WP08-03 

 

Extension and test of a three-component conceptualization.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 78, 538-551. 

Mischel, W., & Shoda, Y. (1995).  A cognitive-affective system theory of personality: 

Reconceptualizing situations, dispositions, dynamics, and invariance in personality 
structure.  Psychological Review, 102(2), 246-268. 

Moregson, F.P., & Hoffman, D.A. (1999).  The structure and function of collective constructs: 

 

Implications for multilevel research and theory development.  Academy of Management 
Review, 24, 249-265. 
Morrison, E.W. (1997).  Service quality: An organizational citizenship behavior framework.  
Advances in the Management of Organizational Quality, 2, 211-249. 

Nishii, L.H., & Wright, P. (In press). Variability at multiple levels of analysis: Implications for 

strategic human resource management.  In D.B. Smith (Ed.), The people make the place.  
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

Organ, D.W. (1997).  Organizational citizenship behavior: It’s construct clean-up time.  Human 

Performance, 10(2), 85-97. 

Organ, D.W., Podsakoff, P.M. & MacKenzie, S.B. (2005).  Organizational citizenship behavior: Its 

nature, antecedents, and consequences.  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 

Osterman, P. (1994).  How common is workplace transformation and how adopts it?  Industrial 

and Labor Relations Review, 47, 173-188.  

Ostroff, C. (1992).  The relationship between satisfaction, attitudes, and performance: An 

organizational level analysis.  Journal of Applied Psychology, 77, 963-974. 

Ostroff, C. & Bowen, D.E. (2000).  Moving HR to a higher level: Hr practices and organizational 
effectiveness.  In K.J. Klein & S.W.J. Kozlowski (Eds.), Multilevel theory, research, and 
methods in organizations: Foundations, extensions, and new directions (pp.211-266).  
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, Inc. 

Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S.B., Moorman, R.H., & Fetter, R. (1990).  Transformational leader 

behaviors and their effects on followers’ trust in leader, satisfaction, and organizational 
citizenship behaviors.  The Leadership Quarterly, 1(2), 1048-9843. 

Porter, M. E. (1996).  What is strategy?  Harvard Business Review, November-December, 61-78. 
Rentsch, J.R. (1990).  Climate and culture: Interaction and qualitative differences in 

organizational meanings.  Journal of Applied Psychology, 75(6), 668-681. 

Ross, M. & Fletcher, G.J.O. (1985). Attribution and social perception. In G. Lindzey & E. Aronson 

(Eds.), The handbook of Social Psychology, Vol. 2.  New York: Random House.  
Ross, L., & Lepper, M.R. (1980).  The perseverance of beliefs: Empirical and normative 

considerations.  In R.A. Shweder & D. Fiske (Eds.), New directions for methodology of 
behavioral science: Fallible judgment in behavioral research (pp.17-36).  San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass. 

Schmit, M.J., & Allscheid, S.P. (1995).  Employee attitudes and customer satisfaction: Making 

theoretical and empirical connection.  Personnel Psychology, 48, 521-536. 

Schneider, B. (1987).  The people make the place.  Personnel Psychology, 40, 437-454. 
Schneider, B., & Bowen, D.E. (1995).  Winning the service game.  Boston, MA: Harvard Business 

School Press. Burke & C. Cooper (Eds.).  Reinventing Human Resources.  London: 
Routledge. 

Schneider, B., Ehrhart, M.G., Mayer, D.M., Saltz, J.L., & Niles-Jolly, K. (2005).  Understanding 

organization-customer links in service settings.  Academy of Management Journal, 48(6), 
1017-1032.   

Schneider, B., Salvaggio, A.N., & Subirats (2002).  Climate strength: A new direction for climate 

research.  Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(2), 220-229. 

 

Page 51 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 
Schneider, B., Hanges, P.J., Smith, S.B., & Salvaggio, A.N. (2003).  Which comes first: Employee 

CAHRS WP08-03 

 

attitudes or organizational financial and market performance?  Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 88(5), 836-851. 

Schneider, B., & White, S.S. (2004).  Service quality: Research perspectives.  Thousand Oaks, 

CA: Sage Publications.   

Schuler, R.S., &  Jackson, S.E. (1987).  Linking competitive strategies with human resource 

management practices.  Academy of Management Executive, 1(3), 207-219. 

Shore, L.M., & Wayne, S.J. (1993).  Commitment and employee behavior: Comparison of 

affective commitment and continuance commitment with perceived organizational support.  
Journal of Applied Psychology, 78, 774-780. 

Sorensen, J.B. (2002).  The strength of corporate culture and reliability of firm performance.  

Administrative Science Quarterly, 47, 70-91. 

Spector, P.E. (1987).  Method variance as an artifact in self-reported affect and perceptions at 

work: Myth or significant problem?  Journal of Applied Psychology, 72, 438-443. 

Spector, P.E. (1994).  Using self-report questionnaires in OB research: A comment on the use of 

controversial method.  Journal of Organizational Behavior, 15, 385-392. 

Spector, P.E. (2006).  Method variance in organizational research: Truth or urban legend?  

Organizational Research Methods, 9(2), 221-232. 

Spreitzer, G.M. (1995).  Psychological empowerment in the workplace: dimensions, 

measurement, and validation.  Academy of Management Journal, 38(5), 1442-1465. 
Tsui, A.S., Pearce, J.L., Porter, L.W., & Hite, J.P. (1995).  Choice of employee-organization 

relationship: Influence of external and internal organizational factors.  In G.R. Ferris (Ed.),  
Research in Personnel and Human Resources Management (pp.117-151). Greenwich, 
CT: JAI Press. 

Tsui, Pearce, Porter, & Tripoli (1997).  Alternative approaches to the employee-organization 

relationship: Does investment in employees pay off?  Academy of Management Journal, 
40(5), 1089-1121.  

Wanous, J.P., Reichers, A.E., & Hudy, M.J. (1997).  Overall job satisfaction: How good are 

single-item measures?  Journal of Applied Psychology, 82(2). 

Weick, K.E. (1985).  The significance of corporate culture. 
Weick, K.E. (1995).  Sensemaking in organizations.  Thousand Oaks: CA: Sage Publications. 
Weiner, B., Frieze, I., Kukla, A., Reed, L., Rest, S., & Rosenbaum, R.M. (1972).  Perceiving the 

causes of success and failure.  New York: General Learning Press. 

Wexley, K.N., Alexander, R.A., Greenawalt, J.Pl, & couch, M.A. (1980).  Attitudinal congruence 

and similarity as related to interpersonal evaluations in manager-subordinate dyads.  
Academy of Management Journal, 23, 320-330. 

Whitener, E.M. (2001).  Do “high commitment” human resource practices affect employee 
commitment? A cross-level analysis using hierarchical linear modeling.  Journal of 
Management, 27, 515-535. 

Williams, L.J., & Anderson, S.E. (1994).  An alternative approach to method effects using latent-

variable models: Applications in organizational behavior research.  Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 79, 323-331. 

Wright, P.M., & Boswell, W.R. (2002).  Desegregating HRM: A review and synthesis of micro and 
macro human resource management research.  Journal of Management, 28(3), 247-276. 

Wright, P.M., & Nishii, L.H. (in press). Strategic HRM and organizational behavior: Integrating 

multiple levels of analysis.  In D. Guest (Ed.), Innovations in HR.. Oxford: Blackwell 
Publishing. 

Zwick, W.R., & Velicer, W.F. (1982).  Factors influencing four rules for determining the number of 

components to retain.  Multivariate Behavioral Research, 17, 253-269. 

 

 

Page 52 of 53 


Employee Attributions of the Why 
 

 

CAHRS WP08-03 

Appendix 1 

HR Attribution scale items 

 

Directions:  In this section, we would like to know your opinions about why your company has the 
personnel policies and practices it has.  Please tell us the extent to which you agree with each of 
the statements below.   
 
 [Company name] provides employees the training that it does: 

1.  in order to help employees deliver quality service to customers. 
2.  so that employees will feel valued and respected—to promote employee well-being. 
3.  to try to keep costs down. 
4.  because they are required to by the union contract. 
5.  in order to get the most work out of employees. 

[Company name] provides employees the benefits that it does (e.g., health care, retirement 
plans): 

1.  in order to help employees deliver quality service to customers. 
2.  so that employees will feel valued and respected—to promote employee well-being. 
3.  to try to keep costs down. 
4.  because they are required to by the union contract. 
5.  in order to get the most work out of employees. 

[Company name] makes the hiring choices that it does (i.e., the number and quality of 
people hired): 

1.  in order to help employees deliver quality service to customers. 
2.  so that employees will feel valued and respected—to promote employee well-being. 
3.  to try to keep costs down. 
4.  because they are required to by the union contract. 
5.  in order to get the most work out of employees. 
[Company name] pays its employees what it does:  

1.  in order to help employees deliver quality service to customers. 
2.  so that employees will feel valued and respected—to promote employee well-being. 
3.  to try to keep costs down. 
4.  because they are required to by the union contract. 
5.  in order to get the most work out of employees. 

[Company name] schedules employees the way it does (hours, flexibility, leave policies): 

1.  in order to help employees deliver quality service to customers. 
2.  so that employees will feel valued and respected—to promote employee well-being. 
3.  to try to keep costs down. 
4.  because they are required to by the union contract. 
5.  in order to get the most work out of employees. 
 

  

 

 
 

Page 53 of 53 

