 
 
Employee Creativity: Personal and Contextual Factors at Work
Author(s): Greg R. Oldham and  Anne Cummings
Source: The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 39, No. 3 (Jun., 1996), pp. 607-634
Published by: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/256657
Accessed: 03-08-2017 01:13 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms

Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access
to The Academy of Management Journal

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 ? Academy of Management Journal
 1996, Vol. 39, No. 3, 607-634.

 EMPLOYEE CREATIVITY: PERSONAL AND

 CONTEXTUAL FACTORS AT WORK

 GREG R. OLDHAM
 ANNE CUMMINGS

 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

 This study examined the independent and joint contributions of employ-
 ees' creativity-relevant personal characteristics and three characteris-
 tics of the organizational context-job complexity, supportive supervi-
 sion, and controlling supervision-to three indicators of employees'
 creative performance: patent disclosures written, contributions to an
 organization suggestion program, and supervisory ratings of creativity.
 Participants (171 employees from two manufacturing facilities) pro-
 duced the most creative work when they had appropriate creativity-
 relevant characteristics, worked on complex, challenging jobs, and were
 supervised in a supportive, noncontrolling fashion.

 Numerous commentators have argued that enhancing the creative perfor-
 mance of employees is a necessary step if organizations are to achieve com-
 petitive advantage (Amabile, 1988; Devanna & Tichy, 1990; Kanter, 1983;
 Shalley, 1995). When employees perform creatively, they suggest novel and
 useful products, ideas, or procedures that provide an organization with im-
 portant raw material for subsequent development and possible implementa-
 tion (Amabile, 1988; Staw, 1990; Woodman, Sawyer, & Griffin, 1993). The
 initiation and implementation of these products enhance an organization's
 ability to respond to opportunities and, thereby, to adapt, grow, and compete
 (Kanter, 1983, 1988; March & Simon, 1958; Van de Ven, 1986; Van de Ven &
 Angle, 1989).

 Unfortunately, little is known about the conditions that promote the
 creative performance of individual employees in organizations. Although
 numerous studies have attempted to identify the personal characteristics of
 individuals that predict creative accomplishment (Barron & Harrington,
 1981), little of this research has focused on creative achievements in work
 settings. Moreover, little empirical work has systematically examined the
 possibility that characteristics of organizational contexts contribute signifi-
 cantly to employees' creative performance at work (Amabile, 1988; Shalley,
 1991; Staw, 1990). Finally, although several theorists have called for research

 We thank Carol Kulik, Keith Murnighan, and Christina Shalley for their helpful comments
 on earlier drafts of this article. This research was supported by the Center for Human Resources
 Management at the University of Illinois.

 607

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 608

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 that addresses the joint or combined effects of personal and contextual factors
 on employee creativity (cf. Amabile, 1987; Staw, 1984; Woodman et al.,
 1993), very few empirical studies of this type have actually been conducted.

 The purpose of the reported investigation was to address these issues.
 Specifically, we examined the independent and joint contributions of charac-
 teristics of individual employees and of their organizational contexts (i.e.,
 job complexity and supervisory style) to three indicators of creativity in
 an organizational setting-patent disclosures written, contributions to an
 organization suggestion program, and supervisory ratings of creativity.

 BACKGROUND

 The study of creativity has generated a wide-ranging variety of defini-

 tions of the concept, some of which define it as a characteristic of a person and
 others as a process (Amabile, 1988). However, most contemporary researchers
 and theorists have adopted a definition that focuses on the product or out-
 come of a product development process (Amabile, 1983, 1988; Shalley, 1991;
 Woodman et al., 1993; Zaltman, Duncan, & Holbek, 1973). Following this
 earlier work, in the current study we defined creative performance as prod-
 ucts, ideas, or procedures that satisfy two conditions: (1) they are novel or
 original and (2) they are potentially relevant for, or useful to, an organization.
 Further, we consider a product, idea, or procedure novel if it involves either
 a significant recombination of existing materials or an introduction of com-
 pletely new materials.

 Following the conceptualizations of Amabile (1988) and Staw (1990),
 in our definition we recognize the distinction between creative performance
 and organizational innovation. That is, creative performance refers to prod-
 ucts, ideas, and so forth produced at the individual level, whereas innovation
 refers to the successful implementation of these products at the organizational
 level. In the current study, our focus was on the generation of creative out-
 comes by individual employees, not on the implementation of these out-
 comes.

 Personal Characteristics and Creativity

 As noted earlier, a large body of literature has focused on determining

 a set of personal characteristics and attributes associated with creative
 achievement (Barron & Harrington, 1981; Davis, 1989; Martindale, 1989).
 This research has examined personal characteristics ranging from biographi-
 cal factors to measures of cognitive styles and intelligence (Amabile, 1983;
 Barron & Harrington, 1981; Davis, 1989; Hocevar & Bachelor, 1989; Wood-
 man & Schoenfeldt, 1989). In general, these studies have demonstrated that
 a stable set of core personal characteristics, including broad interests, attract-
 ion to complexity, intuition, aesthetic sensitivity, toleration of ambiguity,
 and self-confidence, relate positively and consistently to measures of creative
 performance across a variety of domains (Barron & Harrington, 1981; Gough,
 1979; Martindale, 1989).

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Oldham and Cummings

 609

 A number of questionnaire measures have been developed that attempt
 to reliably assess these personal characteristics. One of the most widely used
 and respected of these measures is Gough's Creative Personality Scale (CPS;
 Gough, 1979; Hocevar & Bachelor, 1989; Kaduson & Schaefer, 1991; McCrae,
 1987). The CPS includes 30 items empirically derived from the 300-item
 Adjective Check List (ACL; Gough & Heilbrun, 1965). In general, the items
 included are consistent with the core personal characteristics described
 above as correlates of creativity. For example, high CPS scorers endorse
 adjectives such as "self-confident," "interests wide," and "reflective" as self-
 descriptors; low scorers endorse words like "conventional" and "interests
 narrow."

 In Gough's (1979) analysis of the CPS, ratings of creativity from expert
 judges, faculty members, assessment staff, and interviewers were examined
 for 12 groups of individuals from a variety of domains (e.g., mathematicians,
 architects, and research scientists) who had completed the ACL. Correlations
 of individual ACL items with the creativity ratings were used to select the
 30 CPS items. The derived CPS correlated significantly with the creativity
 ratings in 10 of the 12 groups examined. Moreover, in two cross-validation
 samples, Gough reported that the CPS correlated significantly with ratings
 of creative performance. Subsequent research has also supported the validity
 of the CPS (Kaduson & Schaefer, 1991).

 In the present investigation, we used the Creative Personality Scale to
 assess employees' creativity-relevant personal characteristics and examined
 the contribution of the CPS to employee creativity. On the basis of the evi-
 dence reviewed above, we predicted the following:

 Hypothesis 1: An employee's score on the CPS will relate
 positively to employee creative performance.

 Organizational Context and Creativity

 Although the search for personal characteristics predictive of creative

 performance dominated creativity research for several decades, recent re-
 search has begun to examine the effects of such contextual factors as goals,
 deadlines, and expected evaluations on individuals' creative performance
 (Amabile, 1979, 1982; Amabile, Goldfarb, & Brackfield, 1990; Amabile &
 Gryskiewicz, 1989; Amabile, Hennessey, & Grossman, 1986; Carson & Carson,
 1993; Koestner, Ryan, Bernieri, & Holt, 1984; Kruglanski, Friedman, & Zeevi,
 1971; Shalley, 1991, 1995). Most of this research has been conducted in
 behavioral laboratories and has followed an "intrinsic motivation" perspec-
 tive. According to this perspective, the context in which an individual per-
 forms a task influences his or her intrinsic motivation, which in turn affects
 creative achievement (Amabile, 1988). Individuals are expected to be most
 creative when they experience a high level of intrinsic motivation-that is,
 when they are excited about a work activity and interested in engaging in it
 for the sake of the activity itself (Amabile, 1983, 1987; Shalley, 1991). Under
 these conditions, individuals are free of extraneous concerns and are likely
 to take risks, to explore new cognitive pathways, and to be playful with ideas

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 610

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 and materials (Amabile et al., 1990). They are also likely to stay focused on
 the internal nature of the task and to work longer on an idea or a problem.
 Situations that encourage this exploration and persistence should increase
 the likelihood of creative performance.

 Previous research provides some direct support for the importance of
 intrinsic motivation for understanding creative responses. For example, stud-
 ies by Amabile (1979) and Koestner and colleagues (1984) showed positive
 associations between measures of intrinsic motivation and individuals' cre-
 ative performance on artistic tasks. Intrinsic motivation has been linked to
 creativity in work organizations as well. In an interview study, 120 scien-
 tists engaged in R&D mentioned intrinsic motivation as an important determi-
 nant of creative performance more frequently than any other characteristic
 (Amabile & Gryskiewicz, 1987).

 We therefore expected characteristics of an organizational context that

 promote or support intrinsic motivation to enhance creative achievement.
 In contrast, characteristics of the context that restrict or constrain an indi-
 vidual's excitement in his or her work activities should reduce creativity
 (Amabile, 1983; Deci & Ryan, 1985; Koestner et al., 1984). In the current
 study, we focused on two contextual characteristics suggested by previous
 research and theory as important determinants of intrinsic motivation and
 creative performance at work: job complexity and supervisory style. Each of
 these contextual conditions is reviewed separately below.

 Job complexity. The design of jobs has long been considered an important
 contributor to employees' intrinsic motivation and creative performance at
 work (Amabile, 1988; Hackman & Oldham, 1980; Kanter, 1988; West & Farr,
 1989). Specifically, complex, challenging jobs (i.e., those characterized by
 high levels of autonomy, skill variety, identity, significance, and feedback)
 are expected to support and encourage higher levels of motivation and cre-
 ativity than are relatively simple, routine jobs (Deci, Connell, & Ryan, 1989;
 Hackman & Oldham, 1980). When jobs are complex and challenging, individ-
 uals are likely to be excited about their work activities and interested in
 completing these activities in the absence of external controls or constraints.
 The level of interest and excitement produced by a job's design is then
 expected to foster creative achievements at work. In addition, complex jobs
 may actually demand creative outcomes by encouraging employees to focus
 simultaneously on multiple dimensions of their work, whereas highly simple
 or routine jobs may inhibit such a focus.

 Previous research suggests that complex jobs can have a positive and
 substantial impact on a variety of work-related outcomes (Cotton, 1993;
 Fried & Ferris, 1987; Kopelman, 1985). For example, numerous field studies
 have relied on measures of the five job characteristics identified in the previ-
 ous paragraph and have demonstrated that an overall index of these character-
 istics, the Motivating Potential Score (MPS; Hackman & Oldham, 1980),
 explains substantial amounts of variance in measures of internal motivation
 (the extent to which employees experience positive feelings when they per-
 form well and negative feelings when they perform poorly), job satisfaction,

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Oldham and Cummings

 611

 and overall performance (Fried & Ferris, 1987). In addition, a few studies
 have provided some support for the link between the complexity of employ-
 ees' jobs and their creative responses at work. Hatcher, Ross, and Collins
 (1989) created a job complexity index by averaging employee reports of three
 job characteristics: autonomy, variety, and feedback. Their results showed
 positive, significant relations between this index and the number of new
 ideas employees submitted to an organization suggestion program. And a
 study by Amabile and Gryskiewicz (1989) demonstrated significant relations
 between employee self-reports of creativity and of "freedom" and "challeng-
 ing work."

 The current study used the MPS index to assess job complexity and

 examined the contribution of this index to employee creative achievement.
 On the basis of the aforementioned arguments, we predicted

 Hypothesis 2: A job's score on the MPS index will relate
 positively to employee creative performance.

 Supervisory style. A second salient characteristic of the organizational

 context that is often considered a potent determinant of employee creativity
 at work is style of supervision (Amabile & Gryskiewicz, 1987, 1989; Deci &
 Ryan, 1987; West & Farr, 1989). In particular, supervision that is supportive
 of employees is expected to enhance creative achievement; supervision that
 is controlling or limiting is expected to diminish creative performance (Deci
 et al., 1989; Deci & Ryan, 1985, 1987). When supervisors are supportive, they
 show concern for employees' feelings and needs, encourage them to voice
 their own concerns, provide positive, chiefly informational feedback, and
 facilitate employee skill development (Deci & Ryan, 1987). These actions on
 the part of a supervisor are expected to promote employees' feelings of self-
 determination and personal initiative at work, which should then boost levels
 of interest in work activities and enhance creative achievement.

 In contrast, when supervisors are controlling, they closely monitor em-
 ployee behavior, make decisions without employee involvement, provide
 feedback in a controlling manner, and generally pressure employees to think,
 feel, or behave in certain ways (Deci et al., 1989). Supervision that is experi-
 enced as controlling undermines intrinsic motivation and shifts an employ-
 ee's focus of attention away from work activities and toward external con-
 cerns (Deci et al., 1989; Deci & Ryan, 1987). This reduction in intrinsic
 motivation is then expected to lower creative performance.

 A few studies provide some support for the proposed effects of support-

 ive behavior on intrinsic motivation (e.g., Deci, Schwarz, Sheinman, & Ryan,
 1981; Ryan & Grolnick, 1986; Zuckerman, Porac, Lathin, Smith, & Deci, 1978).
 For example, Zuckerman and colleagues (1978) found that when individuals
 were given choices about which tasks to complete and how much time
 to allot to each, they were significantly more intrinsically motivated than
 individuals who were not offered choices. In addition, Harackiewicz (1979)
 demonstrated that individuals who were given positive informational feed-
 back about their task performance (i.e., "you performed better on these puz-

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 612

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 zles than the average participant") exhibited higher levels of intrinsic motiva-
 tion than individuals who were given no feedback.1

 Previous research also supports the proposed association between sup-
 portive supervision and employee creativity. For example, Stahl and Koser
 (1978) demonstrated that R&D scientists' creative output was significantly
 related to the extent to which supervisors were empathic and attempted to
 understand employees' feelings. West (1989) demonstrated that health care
 professionals were most creative when their supervisors provided high levels
 of social support. Carson and Carson (1993) showed that individuals who
 were given informational feedback about their creativity on the first trial of
 a task exhibited higher creativity on subsequent trials than individuals who
 were given no feedback. Andrews and Farris (1967) showed that teams of
 scientists produced the most creative outcomes when their supervisors pro-
 vided substantial freedom at work and many opportunities to influence im-
 portant decisions. Amabile and Gryskiewicz (1989) found significant rela-
 tions between employee ratings of supervisory encouragement and of
 creativity. Lastly, Scott and Bruce (1994) demonstrated that professional
 employees who reported high-quality relationships with their supervisors
 (relationships characterized by support, trust, and autonomy) were described
 by those supervisors as more likely to generate creative ideas.

 Previous research also provides some support for the association be-
 tween controlling supervision and lowered intrinsic motivation and creativ-
 ity. Several studies (e.g., Pittman, Davey, Alafat, Wetherill, & Kramer, 1980;
 Ryan, 1982; Ryan, Mims, & Koestner, 1983) showed that when performance
 feedback was offered in a controlling fashion (e.g., "You performed well, just
 as you should"), participants' intrinsic motivation was adversely affected.
 Similarly, Lepper and Greene (1975) found that children placed under sur-
 veillance exhibited lower intrinsic motivation than those who were not moni-
 tored. Regarding creative outcomes, a field experiment by Koestner and his
 associates (1984) examined the effects of "controlling-limits" on the creativ-
 ity of children's artwork. The experimenter set limits about being neat while
 painting a picture. Results demonstrated that children in the controlling-
 limits condition exhibited significantly lower levels of creativity than chil-
 dren in a no-limits condition. Finally, Stahl and Koser (1978) showed nega-
 tive relations between employee reports of supervisory control and objective
 indicators of creative output.

 The current study specifically examined associations between the sup-

 portive and controlling aspects of supervision and several indicators of em-
 ployee creative performance. On the basis of the intrinsic motivation perspec-
 tive and the evidence reviewed above, we predicted the following:

 1 In general, this body of theory and literature focuses on comparisons between no feedback
 and positive informational feedback. It is also possible that negative informational feedback
 (feedback that focuses on specific problems with work while providing guidance for future
 employee behavior) might enhance individuals' intrinsic motivation and subsequent creativity.

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Oldham and Cummings

 613

 Hypothesis 3: Supportive supervision will relate positively
 to employee creative performance.
 Hypothesis 4: Controlling supervision will relate nega-
 tively to employee creative performance.

 Joint Contributions of Personal and Contextual Characteristics

 To this point we have discussed the possible independent contributions

 of employees' creativity-relevant personal characteristics, job complexity,
 and supervisory style to creative performance. In addition to examining
 these independent contributions, we also examined the possibility that these
 personal and contextual factors combine and interact with one another to
 influence employee creativity at work.

 As noted earlier, commentators have long suggested that personal and
 contextual factors interact to affect creativity (i.e., Amabile, 1983, 1987;
 Woodman et al., 1993). Although very few empirical studies have directly
 examined the joint effects of personal and contextual factors on employee
 creative performance, previous research has shown that personal, job, and
 supervisory variables do combine to influence other employee work re-
 sponses. In particular, studies have established that measures of employees'
 personal, job, and supervisory characteristics are generally independent of
 one another (cf. Abdel-Halim, 1981, 1983; Ferris, 1983; Griffin, 1980) and
 that they often interact to affect such outcomes as satisfaction and work
 performance (Abdel-Halim, 1981, 1983; Greene, 1979; Griffin, 1980; Johns,
 1978). For example, Abdel-Halim (1981) demonstrated that employees expe-
 rienced high levels of job satisfaction when they worked on complex jobs
 and were supervised in a considerate, supportive fashion. Other studies
 have found interactions among supervisory style and employees' personal
 characteristics (cf. Abdel-Halim, 1981; Keller, 1989; Weed, Mitchell, & Mof-
 fitt, 1976). For example, Weed and colleagues (1976) showed that employees
 low in dogmatism exhibited the highest levels of performance when supervi-
 sors were supportive. Finally, a few studies have demonstrated that measures
 of job complexity, supervision, and employees' personal characteristics
 jointly combined to affect employees' work responses (cf. Abdel-Halim, 1983;
 Griffin, 1980; Zierden, 1980). For example, Griffin (1980) found significant
 relations between employee job satisfaction and a measure of supervisory
 participative behavior for employees who strongly desired growth and devel-
 opment at work and worked on complex jobs.

 In the present investigation, we built upon this earlier literature and
 posited a multiplicative model of creative performance involving employees'
 creativity-relevant personal characteristics, job complexity, and supervisory
 style. In essence, this model suggests that employee creativity is maximized
 when high levels of all the aforementioned conditions (Creative Personality
 Scale, Motivating Potential Score, and supportive and noncontrolling super-
 vision) are present, because a high level of any one condition enhances an
 employee's ability to respond positively to the other conditions. For example,
 an employee with a high score on the CPS should exhibit higher creativity

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 614

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 in response to a complex job than an employee with a low CPS score, and
 this response should be further enhanced when levels of supportive and
 noncontrolling supervision are also high.

 On the basis of the aforementioned arguments, we predicted the follow-

 ing four-way interaction:

 Hypothesis 5: Creativity-relevant personal characteristics
 and contextual conditions will interact in such a way that
 creative performance will be highest when employees
 score high on the CPS index, work on high-MPS jobs, and
 are supervised in both a supportive and noncontrolling
 fashion.

 Finally, in addition to examining the associations between employees'

 personal and contextual characteristics and creative performance, this
 study also explored the contributions of these characteristics to two
 traditional outcomes: overall work performance and intentions to quit
 (turnover intentions). Since little research has examined employee creativity
 in the context of more traditionally studied outcomes, the possible effects
 of combinations of creativity-relevant personal and contextual factors on
 outcomes such as work performance and intentions to quit remain un-
 known. This is a potentially significant issue if certain personal and
 contextual conditions combine to enhance creative achievement while
 contributing to lowered effectiveness on more traditional dimensions. For
 example, employees with high scores on the CPS index (high-CPS employ-
 ees) may respond to noncontrolling supervision by producing more creative
 work but in the process may also lower their overall work performance.
 By focusing their energy and attention to produce creative outcomes, high-
 CPS employees may devote less effort to more traditional dimensions of
 work, and overall effectiveness may suffer. The current study addresses
 this possibility by simultaneously exploring the contributions of creativity-
 relevant personal characteristics, job complexity, and supervisory style to
 employees' overall work performance and intentions to quit as well as to
 indicators of creative achievement.

 Research Setting and Participants

 METHODS

 The research was conducted in two manufacturing facilities that pro-

 duced component parts for technical equipment. Each employee in the two
 facilities held 1 of 18 different jobs (e.g., design engineer, manufacturing
 engineer, design drafter, toolmaker, and technician).

 Human resources managers from each of the facilities were contacted
 by the authors and asked to identify individual work units within the facili-
 ties for possible participation in the research. Managers were told that the
 research involved the possible effects of individual and contextual conditions
 on employees' work-related responses and were asked to identify units that
 were representative of the organization as a whole. At no time did we express

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Oldham and Cummings

 615

 a particular interest in work units where high creative performance was
 present or expected.

 All employees in the identified units were then contacted and asked to

 participate. We told employees that the study was designed to assess their
 responses to their work environments; we did not indicate that creative
 performance was the focus of the research. A total of 171 employees (118
 from facility A; 53 from facility B) agreed to participate in the study. This
 number reflects a response rate of 87 percent of those originally contacted
 in facility A and of 75 percent of those in facility B, an overall participation
 rate of 83 percent. Thirty-seven percent of the participants were women. The
 mean age was 41 years, and the mean organizational tenure level was 12.75
 years. The modal education level was "business college or technical school
 degree." Interviews with human resources managers indicated that the demo-
 graphic and job profiles of the respondents were typical of the general popula-
 tion in the participating work units.
 Procedures

 Three types of data were collected on site. First, employees completed

 questionnaires at their desks or in a conference room. These questionnaires
 included items that measured personal characteristics, job complexity, super-
 visory style, and intentions to quit. Before they completed the questionnaires,
 employees were told that it was desirable to have their names on the question-
 naires for research purposes and were assured that all provided information
 would be kept completely confidential.

 After employee questionnaires were administered, the direct supervisors
 of the participating employees completed questionnaires that included items
 measuring each employee's creative and overall performance. Finally, human
 resource managers provided data on two additional measures of creative
 performance: patent disclosures written and contributions to an organization
 suggestion program.
 Measures

 Creativity-relevant personal characteristics. The 30-item Creative Per-
 sonality Scale (CPS; Gough, 1979) of the ACL (Gough & Heilbrun, 1965)
 was used to assess employees' creativity-relevant personal characteristics.
 Employees were asked to "place a check mark next to each adjective that
 you think describes you." Of the 30 adjectives, 18 describe highly creative
 people: capable, clever, confident, egotistical, humorous, informal, individu-
 alistic, insightful, intelligent, interests wide, inventive, original, reflective,
 resourceful, self-confident, sexy, snobbish, and unconventional. Each of
 these checked adjectives was given a value of + 1. The remaining 12 adjectives
 describe less creative people: cautious, commonplace, conservative, conven-
 tional, dissatisfied, honest, interests narrow, mannerly, sincere, submissive,
 suspicious, and phony.2 Each of these checked adjectives was assigned a
 value of -1. The values were then summed to form a CPS index.

 2 After pretests, we selected "phony" to replace the original item, "affected."

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 616

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 Reliability of the CPS index was calculated via a weighted composite

 technique (Lord & Novick, 1968). We generated a positive subscale including
 the 18 adjectives that describe highly creative people and a negative subscale
 including the 12 adjectives associated with less creative individuals. A sepa-
 rate Cronbach's reliability coefficient was calculated for each of these sub-
 scales (alpha+ and alpha-). We then calculated the reliability of the total
 CPS index using a linear combination weighted for the number of items on
 each subscale and the correlation between the subscales.3 The reliability of
 the CPS index was .70.

 Job complexity. Fifteen items from the Job Diagnostic Survey (Hack-
 man & Oldham, 1980) were used to assess the challenge and complexity of
 employees' jobs. Three items for each of five job characteristics (autonomy,
 skill variety, task identity, task feedback, and task significance) were averaged
 to form a summary index for that characteristic. We then combined these
 indexes to form a Motivating Potential Score (MPS) for each job using the
 formula suggested by Hackman and Oldham (1980): MPS = (variety + iden-
 tity + significance)/3 x autonomy x feedback.4

 Internal consistency was assessed for each of the five job characteristics

 as well as for other measures in this study (supervisory style, creative perfor-
 mance, overall performance, and intentions to quit) in terms of Cronbach's
 reliability coefficient (alpha). The median alpha of the job characteristics
 measures was .68. Table 1 reports reliabilities for all measures.

 Supervisory style. To measure supervisory support and control, we used
 12 items. Some of these items were adapted from the Michigan Organizational
 Assessment Package (1975) and others were written specifically for this
 study. Items were rated on a seven-point Likert-type scale that ranged from
 "strongly disagree" (1) to "strongly agree" (7). All items appear in the Ap-
 pendix.

 Independence among the 12 supervision items was assessed with explor-
 atory factor analysis using principal components analysis with varimax rota-

 3 The formula used to calculate the reliability of the CPS index was as follows:

 Total alpha- [(n+/n)(alpha+) + (n-In)(alpha-) + 2r(n+/n)(n-/n)]

 (n+ln) + (n-ln) + 2r(n+/n)(n-/n)

 where n = the total number of scale items, n+ = the number of positive subscale items, n- =
 number of negative subscale items, and r = the correlation between positive and negative sub-
 scales.

 4 To supplement this measure, we assigned each of the 18 job classifications a substantive
 complexity score based on those Roos and Treiman (1980) derived from the Dictionary of
 Occupational Titles (U.S. Department of Labor, 1977). This measure has been used in recent
 studies (e.g., Arvey, Bouchard, Segal, & Abraham, 1989; Gerhart, 1987; Oldham, Kulik, & Stepina,
 1991) as a non-self-report index of overall job complexity. When we conducted analyses using
 this measure in place of the MPS score, virtually identical results were obtained. These results
 are available from the authors on request.

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Variables

 Mean s.d. Reliability 1

 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

 Means, Standard Deviations, and Correlationsa

 TABLE 1

 1. Creativity-relevant personal characteristics
 2. Job complexity
 3. Noncontrolling supervision
 4. Supportive supervision
 5. Rated creativity
 6. Patents
 7. Suggestions
 8. Rated performance
 9. Intentions to quit

 .70
 .68b .22*
 .67 .12 .50*
 .86 .08 .37* .38*
 .90 .12 .24* .28* .14

 4.26 3.55
 143.82 65.39
 4.91 1.09
 4.68 1.11
 4.60 1.29
 0.28 0.87
 0.31 0.47
 5.19 1.09
 2.52 1.37

 .85 .05 .35* .31* .29* .75* .05 -.02
 .75 .00 -.33* -.08 -.25* .03 .12 .01 -.08

 .27* .16 .07 -.14 .23*
 .00 -.05 -.20 -.19 .01 .18

 aN= 171.
 b This value represents the median reliability of the five measures of job characteristics.
 *p < .05, two-tailed test

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 618

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 tion. Two factors emerged from this analysis accounting for 52.9 percent of
 the variance. The first factor (eigenvalue = 4.57) was composed of the eight
 items with factor loadings ranging from .52 through .79 and reflected "sup-
 portive supervision." The second factor (eigenvalue = 1.78) was composed
 of the remaining four items (loadings .57-.78) and reflected "controlling
 supervision." We averaged item scores for both factors to form indexes.
 Certain items on each index were reverse-coded so that high scores on the
 indexes reflect supportive and noncontrolling supervision.

 Creative performance ratings. Supervisors rated the extent to which

 each employee produced work that was novel and useful to the organization.
 Three items developed for this study were used to assess creativity and are
 reported in the Appendix. Ratings were made on seven-point Likert-type
 scales and were averaged to form a rated creativity index.

 Patent disclosures written. When employees developed product or pro-

 cess ideas that were deemed by their supervisors to be very original and
 relevant to the organization or the industry in general, they were invited to
 write a patent disclosure. Patents and patent applications are commonly
 used measures of creative output (cf. Keller & Holland, 1983; Pelz & Andrews,
 1966), and the patent disclosure measure used here reflects the first step in
 the patent application process. This measure specifically assesses the number
 of internal patent disclosures written by an employee over a two-year period.
 Ratings on this measure ranged from 0 through 2.

 Contributions to a suggestion program. Employees were also invited to
 submit recommendations to a formal organization suggestion program. The
 suggestion program, which was separate from the patent disclosure process,
 usually involved ideas about procedural or process changes in work methods
 (e.g., changes in quality inspections or waste disposal techniques). A multi-
 functional committee regularly reviewed all submitted recommendations
 and accepted only those that were considered novel and appropriate for
 organizational implementation. This measure assesses whether an employ-
 ee's recommendations were accepted (i.e., judged creative) by the review
 committee over the same two-year period. When an employee's suggestions
 were accepted, this measure was coded 1; when not accepted, the suggestions
 measure was coded 0.

 Overall performance ratings. Using three items suggested by Hackman

 and Oldham (1976), supervisors of each employee rated his or her perfor-
 mance on three dimensions: work quantity, work quality, and amount of
 effort. Ratings were made on seven-point Likert-type scales and averaged to
 form a rated performance index.

 Intentions to quit. We averaged three items suggested by Colarelli (1984)

 to form an index of intentions to quit. Items were measured on a seven-point
 Likert-type scale that ranged from "strongly disagree" (1) to "strongly agree"
 (7). Numerous studies have demonstrated that similar measures relate sig-
 nificantly to subsequent employee turnover (Hom, Griffith, & Sellaro, 1984;
 Rosse & Hulin, 1985).

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Oldham and Cummings

 619

 Relations among the Measures

 RESULTS

 Table 1 presents correlations and descriptive statistics for all measures

 included in the research.5 The measure of creativity-relevant personal charac-
 teristics (CPS) is positively and significantly related to the measure of job
 complexity (MPS). However, CPS does not relate significantly to the measures
 of supervision. The job and supervision measures are all positively and
 significantly related to one another.

 The three measures of creativity are all positively related to one another,

 but only the relation between patents and rated creativity is statistically
 significant. Rated creativity also correlates positively and significantly with
 rated performance, demonstrating that individuals rated high on the tradi-
 tional performance measure are also rated as highly creative. The last out-
 come measure, intentions to quit, does not correlate significantly with the
 other outcomes.

 Correlations between CPS and the three creativity indicators are shown

 in Table 1 and provide only partial support for Hypothesis 1. Specifically,
 CPS correlates positively and significantly with one of the creativity indica-
 tors (patents) but not with the remaining two indicators (rated creativity and
 suggestions). In addition, the relations between CPS and the supplementary
 outcomes, performance and intentions to quit, are nonsignificant.

 Results shown in Table 1 also provide partial support for Hypothesis 2.
 Job complexity (MPS) correlates positively and significantly with only one
 of the three creativity indicators: rated creativity. In addition, MPS relates
 positively and significantly to rated performance and negatively and signifi-
 cantly to intentions to quit.

 The results shown in Table 1 provide no support for Hypothesis 3. There
 are no significant associations between supportive supervision (SS) and the
 creativity indicators. However, supportive supervision does relate signifi-
 cantly to both rated performance and intentions to quit. Finally, noncontrol-
 ling supervision (NS) correlates positively and significantly with one measure
 of creative performance (rated creativity), providing partial support for Hy-
 pothesis 4. Noncontrolling supervision also relates positively and signifi-
 cantly to rated performance.
 Hierarchical Regression Analyses

 To examine the joint contributions of the CPS and the context measures

 to the explanation of the creativity and supplementary outcomes, we con-

 5 The low means of the patent and suggestion measures shown in Table 1 reflect the some-

 what positively skewed distributions of these variables, which is not uncommon in field research
 on creativity and innovation (cf. Keller & Holland, 1983; Owens, 1969; Pelz & Andrews, 1966).
 Using both square root and logarithmic transformations of these two variables, we repeated all
 correlational and regression analyses reported below and obtained results virtually identical to
 those obtained using the original measures. Given these findings, and noting that regression
 analyses are generally robust even in the presence of departures from assumptions of normality
 (Pedhazur, 1982: 34), we report results using the original patent and suggestion measures.

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 620

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 ducted hierarchical regression analyses. Since our primary interest was the
 contribution of the four-way interaction involving CPS, MPS, and noncon-
 trolling and supportive supervision (Hypothesis 5), it was necessary to con-
 trol for the independent effects of these variables and the lower-order interac-
 tions among them (Aiken, West, & Reno, 1991; Cohen & Cohen, 1983; Peters,
 O'Connor, & Wise, 1984). Thus, we entered main effects into the equations
 first, followed by the 6 two-way interactions, the 4 three-way interactions
 and, finally, the 1 four-way interaction.6 We emphasize interpretation of the
 increased squared multiple correlation (R2) that results from including a
 particular predictor in a regression equation as an indication of its impor-
 tance, because the multicollinearity present when both main effects and
 interaction terms are included in equations results in unstable and thus
 uninterpretable regression coefficients (Hom et al., 1984; Miller, Katerberg, &
 Hulin, 1979; Pedhazur, 1982). Table 2 summarizes results.

 Results indicate that the independent effects of the CPS and organiza-
 tional context measures together explained significant amounts of variance
 in two of the three creativity indicators: rated creativity and patents. Specifi-
 cally, the main effects alone accounted for 10 percent of the variance in rated
 creativity and 12 percent of the variance in patents. The main effects also
 explained a significant amount of variance (16%) in the two supplementary
 outcomes: rated performance and intentions to quit.

 The contributions of the interaction terms, however, differ substantially

 between the creative performance and the supplementary outcomes. As Table
 2 shows, none of the two-, three-, or four-way interaction terms contribute
 significantly to the performance and intentions to quit measures. Indeed, the
 entire set of interaction terms explains only 4-6 percent of the variance in
 these supplementary outcomes. On the other hand, several of the interaction
 terms contribute significantly to the creativity measures, and the set of inter-
 action terms explains 14-22 percent of the variance in these three indicators.7

 6 We introduced the two- and three-way interaction terms into the equations in all possible

 orders, obtaining results virtually identical to those reported in Table 2.

 7 It is possible that the types of jobs employees hold may influence the contextual factors

 they experience and the creative outcomes they produce. For example, employees in professional
 or engineering jobs may receive more supportive supervision or have more opportunities to
 produce patents than employees in nonprofessional or technical jobs. To examine this possibil-
 ity, we created a dummy variable representing this job type distinction. Employees holding
 professional/engineering jobs (e.g., design engineer and manufacturing engineer) were coded
 1; those holding nonprofessional but technical jobs (e.g., toolmaker and quality control techni-
 cian) were coded 0. Correlations between this dummy variable and all measures included in
 the research showed no significant associations (all p's > .05). Next, we repeated the regression
 analyses appearing in Table 2, after controlling for job type. In these analyses, the job-type
 variable was introduced first into the equations, followed by the steps as described above (i.e.,
 CPS, MPS, etc.). Results showed that job type did not make significant contribution to any of
 the outcomes. Moreover, all of the significant main and interaction effects shown in Table 2
 remained statistically significant (p < .05) after the introduction of the job-type variable. In
 total, these results suggest that job type does not affect the relations examined in this study.
 Details of these results are available on request.

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Summary of Results of Hierarchical Regression Analyses

 TABLE 2

 Variables R2 AR2 R2 AR2 R A 2 ARR2 R 2 R2 AR2

 Rated Rated Intentions to

 Creativity Patents Suggestions Performance Quit

 Creativity-relevant personal
 .07* .07*
 .08* .01
 .08* .00
 .12* .04*
 .12* .00
 .13* .01
 .14* .01
 .20* .06*
 .21* .01
 .22* .01
 .24* .02
 .24* .00
 .25* .01
 .30* .05*
 .34* .04*

 characteristics (CPS)
 Job complexity (MPS)
 Noncontrolling supervision (NS)
 Supportive supervision (SS)
 CPS x MPS
 CPS x NS
 CPS x SS
 MPS x NS
 MPS x SS
 NS x SS
 CPS X MPS x NS
 CPS x MPS x SS
 CPS x NS x SS
 MPS x NS x SS
 CPS x MPS x NS x SS

 .01 .01
 .06* .05*
 .09* .03*
 .10* .01
 .17* .07*
 .18* .01
 .18* .00
 .18* .00
 .18* .00
 .18* .00
 .19* .01
 .19* .00
 .19* .00
 .19* .00
 .24* .05*

 .03 .03
 .04 .01
 .06 .02
 .09 .03
 .17* .08*
 .21* .04*
 .21* .00
 .21* .00
 .22* .01
 .25* .03
 .27* .02
 .27* .00
 .28* .01
 .28* .00
 .28* .00

 *p < .05

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 622

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 The contributions of the various interaction terms vary somewhat across
 the three creativity indicators. Specifically, results in Table 2 show a signifi-
 cant CPS-by-MPS interaction and a significant four-way interaction for rated
 creativity. Results for patents also show a significant four-way interaction,
 a significant three-way interaction of MPS, noncontrolling supervision, and
 supportive supervision, and a significant MPS-by-noncontrolling supervision
 interaction. Results for the third measure of creativity, suggestions, are
 slightly different. Here, the four-way interaction is not significant, but 2 two-
 way interactions make statistically significant contributions: CPS x MPS and
 CPS x NS.

 To interpret the interactions, we used procedures suggested by Peters
 and colleagues (1984) and conducted separate regression analyses for sub-
 groups of the sample. For example, for the significant CPS-by-MPS interac-
 tions, we split the CPS measure at the median to form high and low CPS
 subgroups. We then regressed suggestions and rated creativity on MPS (job
 complexity) for each subgroup and plotted the within-subgroup regression
 equations using unstandardized regression coefficients. Figure 1 shows re-
 sults for the suggestions measure. Results for the rated creativity measure,
 which are basically identical to those shown, are available on request from
 the authors.

 Figure 1 shows that relations between MPS and the suggestions outcome
 vary as a function of employees' creativity-relevant personal characteristics.
 For employees with high CPS scores, the more complex their jobs, the more
 they produced novel and useful suggestions. But for employees with rela-
 tively low CPS scores, the more complex their jobs, the less they produced
 creative suggestions.

 The same procedure was used to illustrate the significant interactive
 effect of CPS and noncontrolling supervision (NS) on suggestions and the
 effect of the MPS-by-NS interaction on patents. Both interactions are very
 similar in form to that shown in Figure 1 and are not displayed here. Specifi-
 cally, the CPS-by-NS interaction shows that for employees with high CPS
 scores, noncontrolling supervision has a strong, positive association to the
 production of novel suggestions. However, for employees in the low CPS
 group, noncontrolling supervision is very weakly associated with the sugges-
 tions measure. Similarly, the significant MPS-by-NS interaction for patents
 shows that individuals who perform highly complex jobs respond more
 positively to noncontrolling supervision than employees working on rela-
 tively simple jobs. Figures illustrating these interactions are available on
 request from the authors.

 Table 2 also shows a significant effect of the interaction of MPS, noncon-
 trolling supervision, and supportive supervision on patents. To interpret this
 interaction, we split each of the supervision measures at the median to form
 subgroups and regressed patents on MPS for each combination of these
 subgroups (e.g., high NS and low SS, and low NS and low SS). Results
 were generally consistent with the argument that when all three contextual
 conditions support intrinsic motivation, creativity is higher than when any

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Oldham and Cummings

 623

 FIGURE 1

 Interaction of Creativity-Relevant Personal Characteristics

 and Job Complexity for Suggestions

 High -

 Suggestions

 --0- High CPS

 ...... ..... Low CPS

 Low

 0

 I I

 100

 ' I

 300

 ' I

 400

 200

 MPS

 one condition is low. Specifically, results showed that the job complexity
 measure was more strongly associated with patents when supervision was
 both supportive and noncontrolling than when one or both of these supervi-
 sion measures were low. Therefore, to illustrate the interaction, we regressed
 the patents measure on MPS for the high NS-high SS subgroup and for a
 new category consisting of employees in the remaining three subgroups: low
 NS-low SS, low NS-high SS, and high NS-low SS. Figure 2 shows results.
 As suggested above, the figure shows a positive relation between MPS
 and patents when supervisors are both supportive and noncontrolling. How-
 ever, when supervisors are controlling, nonsupportive, or both, the challenge
 and complexity of employees' jobs has little relation to number of patent
 disclosures written.

 Interpretation of the two significant four-way interactions (see Table 2)
 allows us to address Hypothesis 5. This hypothesis predicts that the highest
 levels of creative performance occur when employees score high on all four

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 624

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 FIGURE 2

 Interaction of Job Complexity, Noncontrolling Supervision,

 and Supportive Supervision for Patents

 High -

 Patents

 - High Noncontrolling Supervision

 and High Supportive Supervision

 ............ -All Other Subgroups

 Low

 0

 ' I

 100

 ' I

 200

 MPS

 ' I

 300

 I

 400

 predictors: the CPS index, the MPS index, supportive supervision (SS), and
 noncontrolling supervision (NS). To examine this interaction, we again split
 each of the context measures (i.e., MPS, NS, SS) at the median to form
 subgroups. We then regressed the creativity outcomes (rated creativity and
 patents) on CPS for each of the eight combinations of these subgroups. As
 predicted, results showed that the more contextual conditions were high,
 the stronger the association between CPS and creativity.

 Given this pattern of results and Hypothesis 5, we again contrasted

 regression results for two groups: the high MPS-high NS-high SS and a
 combination of the seven remaining subgroups (e.g., low MPS-low NS-high
 SS, high MPS-low NS-high SS, etc.). Figure 3 shows results for rated creativ-
 ity. Results for patents were virtually identical to those shown in the figure
 and are available from the authors on request.

 The results shown in Figure 3 provide support for Hypothesis 5: creative
 performance was highest when employees had appropriate creativity-

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Oldham and Cummings

 625

 FIGURE 3

 Interaction of Creativity-Relevant Personal Characteristics,

 Job Complexity, Noncontrolling Supervision, and

 Supportive Supervision for Rated Creativity

 High

 Rated
 Creativity

 Or- --

 --[- High MPS-High NS-High SS
 - - - All Other Subgroups

 Low

 -20

 I I I I
 -10 0

 I

 10

 20 20

 CPS

 relevant personal characteristics and worked under conditions expected to
 foster intrinsic motivation. Specifically, when jobs were complex and super-
 visors supportive and noncontrolling, CPS was strongly and positively associ-
 ated with rated creativity. However, when scores were low on one or more
 of the contextual conditions, CPS had little relation to creative achievement.

 DISCUSSION

 This study examined the independent and joint contributions of a mea-

 sure of creativity-relevant personal characteristics (the CPS) and three mea-
 sures of the organizational context-job complexity, supportive supervision,
 and noncontrolling supervision-to the explanation of three indicators of
 employee creativity: patents, contributions to a suggestion program, and

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 626

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 rated creativity. In addition, we examined the contributions of the personal
 and context measures to two traditional outcomes, overall work performance
 and intentions to quit (turnover intentions).

 In general, results indicated that the contextual characteristics alone
 contributed independently to the performance and intentions to quit out-
 comes. Employees exhibited higher performance and lower intentions to quit
 when their jobs were complex and when their supervisors were described
 as supportive and noncontrolling.

 But a completely different pattern of results emerged for the three creativ-
 ity outcomes. In addition to the fact that two of the context measures (job
 complexity and noncontrolling supervision) and the CPS made independent
 contributions to one creativity indicator, interactive combinations of the CPS
 and the context measures contributed significantly to each of the creativity
 outcomes. Specifically, the interaction of the CPS and job complexity and
 that of the CPS and noncontrolling supervision contributed significantly to
 the suggestions outcome, and the four-way interaction term involving CPS,
 job complexity, noncontrolling supervision, and supportive supervision con-
 tributed significantly to the patents and rated creativity outcomes.

 The direction of the results for patents and rated creativity was as hypoth-
 esized: employees produced the most creative work when they had appro-
 priate creativity-relevant personal characteristics (high CPS), worked on com-
 plex, challenging jobs (high MPS), and were supervised in a supportive,
 noncontrolling fashion. The absence of any of these conditions adversely
 affected creative performance. For the suggestion outcome, results were
 nearly as expected. Production of novel and useful recommendations to a
 formal suggestion program was higher when individuals had high CPS scores,
 complex jobs, and noncontrolling managers. However, supervisory support
 had little role in predicting this particular indicator of creativity.

 These results are generally consistent with earlier "interactionist" ap-
 proaches to understanding creativity (Amabile, 1987; Woodman & Schoen-
 feldt, 1989) and suggest that managements should consider both personal
 and contextual factors to increase creativity in work organizations. Specifi-
 cally, our results suggest that if creativity at work is to be enhanced, an
 individualized or selective approach to management may be warranted. For
 example, individuals with high levels of creativity-relevant personal charac-
 teristics might be identified through use of assessment instruments such
 as the CPS and the normative baselines that accompany these instruments
 (Gough, 1979). Individuals demonstrating high creative potential relative to
 these norms might then be surrounded with contextual conditions that sup-
 port intrinsic motivation. That is, high-CPS employees might be placed in
 complex, enriched jobs and managed in a supportive, noncontrolling fashion.
 However, the same contextual conditions should be implemented cautiously,
 if at all, for individuals with few creativity-relevant personal characteristics.
 Our results suggest that for low-CPS employees, enriching jobs and managing
 in a supportive manner may have few beneficial effects or may actually have
 adverse effects on creative achievement (see Figures 1 and 3). Low-CPS

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Oldham and Cummings

 627

 employees may be overstretched or irritated by certain contextual conditions
 (e.g., complex, challenging jobs), and respond by lowering their creative
 output.

 In addition, although designing the context in the individualized manner

 described above appears to be an appropriate strategy if one is interested in
 maximizing creative achievement at work, our results also suggest that this
 strategy may complicate efforts to simultaneously maximize general perfor-
 mance effectiveness or to minimize turnover in a work unit. Results indicated
 that the context measures independently made strong positive contributions
 to these traditional outcomes, suggesting that performance might be enhanced
 and intentions to quit lowered if all employees were placed in highly complex
 jobs and managed in a supportive, noncontrolling manner. Thus, if the con-
 text is not designed in this fashion for some employees (e.g., if those with
 few creativity-relevant characteristics are placed on less complex jobs), their
 general performance and organizational longevity may suffer. This implies
 that managers may face a dilemma regarding some employees, a conflict
 between enhancing creative achievement and maximizing traditional out-
 comes. It also suggests that managers should consider which outcomes they
 value most before implementing an individualized or more general manage-
 ment strategy.

 Although we have discussed several implications of our results for the

 management of creativity, the research reported here is not without its limita-
 tions. First, like the results of other field studies that include multiple mea-
 sures of creative performance (cf. Pelz & Andrews, 1966), our results indicate
 relatively low convergence among creativity measures (i.e., ratings, patents,
 and suggestions; see Table 1). Although rated creativity and patents were
 positively and significantly correlated with one another, the suggestions
 measure was not significantly correlated with either other measure of creativ-
 ity. In addition, as described above, the multiplicative effects of personal
 and contextual characteristics were similar for rated creativity and patents,
 but different for suggestions.

 One explanation for the lack of convergence between the suggestions
 measures and the remaining creativity indicators involves the nature of the
 suggestions measure itself. As mentioned earlier, suggestions was a dichoto-
 mous measure. The resulting restricted range may have contributed to the
 relatively weak associations between this measure and the other indicators
 of creativity. Future research should examine suggestion measures with a
 wider range, such as the total number of suggestions accepted by a review
 committee.

 The low convergence between suggestions and patents could also be

 explained by conceptual and empirical distinctions in the innovation litera-
 ture. In particular, routine, incremental, or minor innovations have been
 distinguished from radical or major innovations (Dewar & Dutton, 1986;
 Ettlie, Bridges, & O'Keefe, 1984; Knight, 1967; Zaltman et al., 1973). Routine
 innovations represent relatively small changes in an organization's products,
 procedures, or services. They are new to the organization but reflect an

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 628

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 adaptation or simple adjustment of existing practices, and their implementa-
 tion rarely requires major changes in organizational structures or processes
 (Dewar & Dutton, 1986; Knight, 1967). Radical innovations, in contrast, repre-
 sent larger changes in organizational products, procedures, or services. They
 reflect broader shifts in perspective and reorientation of existing practices
 and often require major changes in organizational structures or processes to
 implement. This distinction is also consistent with the characterization of
 individuals' creativity styles as ranging from adaptive to innovative (Kirton,
 1976, 1989). Employees with adaptive styles work within existing structures
 to make incremental changes and "do things better." In contrast, employees
 with innovative styles treat current structures as part of the problem and
 make more radical changes by "doing things differently" (Kirton, 1976: 622).
 Thus, another possible explanation for the weak association involving
 the suggestions and patents measures is that they reflect different kinds
 of creative performance: suggestions reflects a routine or adaptive kind of
 creativity outcome, whereas patents represents a radical or innovative type
 of creative performance. Submissions to the formal suggestion program were
 usually detailed, specific suggestions that involved daily work practices.
 They were more often minor adjustments to existing practices than sources
 of major changes in product or procedures. Patent disclosures, on the other
 hand, represented ideas that could make a major change in a product or
 procedure-ideas the organization wanted to protect its rights in. They were
 characterized by distinctly different, not simply better, ways of going about
 the work.

 Our results also indicated that supervisors' ratings of creativity are more
 closely aligned with patents than with suggestions. One possible explanation
 for this finding is that supervisors' ratings were influenced in one of two
 ways by their awareness of employees' patent and suggestion contributions.
 First, supervisors may have given stronger consideration in their ratings to
 the number of patents generated than to employee suggestions because
 patents were more highly visible organizational contributions. Second, super-
 visors may have considered suggestions and patents equally but judged pa-
 tents as more creative than suggestions. Future research using ratings of
 creativity should systematically examine these possibilities by asking raters
 to describe the basis for their creativity ratings.

 Future work is also needed to develop a refined and comprehensive set
 of objective creativity indicators that range from the routine or adaptive to
 the highly radical or innovative. In addition, work is needed that examines
 the contributions of personal and contextual characteristics to this set of
 creativity outcomes. For example, future research might examine the effects
 of other personal characteristics (e.g., technical skills and cognitive styles)
 and contextual conditions (e.g., goal-setting programs, financial incentive
 systems, and interpersonal competition) on various types of creative perfor-
 mance. In addition, research should continue to address the interactive ef-
 fects of these personal and contextual characteristics on employee creativity.

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Oldham and Cummings

 629

 A second limitation of this study involves the rather low internal consis-
 tency reliabilities for some of the measures included in the research. For
 example, the low reliabilities for job complexity and noncontrolling supervi-
 sion (.68 and .67) may have reduced the effectiveness of these measures in
 explaining the creativity outcomes. Work is now needed to develop more
 reliable measures of these constructs and to investigate their relation to a
 variety of creativity indicators.

 Finally, the results of this research have been discussed as though

 creativity-relevant personal and organizational characteristics caused
 employees' creative accomplishments. The current study was, however,
 cross-sectional, and these assumptions of causality are not technically justi-
 fied. It is possible, for example, that highly creative performers were placed
 in more complex jobs and supervised in a more supportive manner in the
 work units investigated. Moreover, employees' recent creative accomplish-
 ments might have affected their responses to the CPS measure.

 Longitudinal field studies and controlled field experiments that address
 the issue of causal direction are now needed. Specifically, longitudinal stud-
 ies should follow individuals with different CPS scores and from different
 contexts for a period of time, assessing their creative performance at regular
 intervals. Field experiments might examine the effects on creative perfor-
 mance of (1) assigning employees with different scores on the CPS index
 to different positions within an organization and (2) manipulating specific
 characteristics of the organizational context.

 In addition, research is needed that examines the effects of context

 manipulations on employees' creativity-relevant personal characteristics. Al-
 though we treated personal and contextual characteristics as independent
 constructs and our measures of these constructs made independent contribu-
 tions to the three creativity indicators (Tables 1-2), our measures of personal
 characteristics (CPS) and job complexity (MPS) related significantly to one
 another (Table 1). It may be that employees who scored high on the CPS
 self-selected into complex jobs or were assigned to such jobs by supervisors.
 Alternatively, it may be that individuals' scores on the CPS were shaped by
 their job experiences. Early research by Kohn and Schooler (1978) demon-
 strated that certain job conditions could substantially influence personal
 characteristics such as intellectual flexibility. Studies are now needed to
 investigate whether characteristics of a job and an organizational context
 affect employees' creativity-relevant personal characteristics.

 In conclusion, despite the limitations described in the paragraphs above,

 this study contributes to a growing literature on individual creativity in
 organizations and provides support for an interactionist approach. Future
 practice and research need to further unravel the complex relations among
 personal characteristics, contextual factors, and a variety of creative out-
 comes. As this unraveling occurs, organizations may be better able to appreci-
 ate their employees' creative potential and to benefit from the implementation
 of their novel and useful contributions.

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 630

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 REFERENCES

 Abdel-Halim, A. A. 1981. Personality and task moderators of subordinate responses to perceived

 leader behavior. Human Relations, 34: 73-88.

 Abdel-Halim, A. A. 1983. Effects of task and personality characteristics on subordinate responses

 to participative decision making. Academy of Management Journal, 26: 477-484.

 Aiken, L. S., West, S. G., & Reno, R. R. 1991. Multiple regression: Testing and interpreting

 interactions. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

 Amabile, T. M. 1979. Effects of external evaluation on artistic creativity. Journal of Personality

 and Social Psychology, 37: 221-233.

 Amabile, T. M. 1982. Children's artistic creativity: Detrimental effects of competition in a field

 setting. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 8: 573-578.

 Amabile, T. M. 1983. The social psychology of creativity. New York: Springer-Verlag.
 Amabile, T. M. 1987. The motivation to be creative. In S. Isaksen (Ed.), Frontiers in creativity:

 Beyond the basics: 223-254. Buffalo, NY: Bearly Limited.

 Amabile, T. M. 1988. A model of creativity and innovation in organizations. In B. M. Staw &
 L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, vol. 10: 123-167. Greenwich,
 CT: JAI Press.

 Amabile, T. M., Goldfarb, P., & Brackfield, S. C. 1990. Social influences on creativity: Evaluation,

 coaction, and surveillance. Creativity Research Journal, 3: 6-21.

 Amabile, T. M., & Gryskiewicz, N. D. 1989. The creative environment scales: Work environment

 inventory. Creativity Research Journal, 2: 231-253.

 Amabile, T. M., & Gryskiewicz, S. S. 1987. Creativity in the R & D laboratory (Technical Report

 No. 30). Greensboro, NC: Center for Creative Leadership.

 Amabile, T. M., Hennessey, B. A., & Grossman, B. S. 1986. Social influences on creativity: The

 effects of contracted-for reward. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50: 14-23.

 Andrews, F. M., & Farris, G. F. 1967. Supervisory practices and innovation in scientific teams.

 Personnel Psychology, 20: 497-515.

 Arvey, R. D., Bouchard, T. J., Segal, N. L., & Abraham, L. M. 1989. Job satisfaction: Environmental

 and genetic components. Journal of Applied Psychology, 74: 187-192.

 Barron, F. B., & Harrington, D. M. 1981. Creativity, intelligence, and personality. AnnualReview

 of Psychology, 32: 439-476.

 Carson, P. P., & Carson, K. D. 1993. Managing creativity enhancement through goal-setting and

 feedback. Journal of Creative Behavior, 27: 36-45.

 Cohen, J., & Cohen, P. 1983. Applied multiple regression/correlation analysis for the behav-

 ioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

 Colarelli, S. M. 1984. Methods of communication and mediating processes in realistic job pre-

 views. Journal of Applied Psychology, 69: 633-642.

 Cotton, J. L. 1993. Employee involvement: Methods for improving performance and work

 attitudes. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

 Davis, G. A. 1989. Testing for creative potential. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 14:

 257-274.

 Deci, E. L., Connell, J. P., & Ryan, R. M. 1989. Self-determination in a work organization. Journal

 of Applied Psychology, 74: 580-590.

 Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. 1985. Intrinsicmotivation andself-determination in human behavior.

 New York: Plenum Press.

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Oldham and Cummings

 631

 Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. 1987. The support of autonomy and the control of behavior. Journal

 of Personality and Social Psychology, 53: 1024-1037.

 Deci, E. L., Schwarz, A. J., Sheinman, L., & Ryan, R. M. 1981. An instrument to assess adults'
 orientations toward control versus autonomy with children: Reflections on intrinsic motiva-
 tion and perceived competence. Journal of Educational Psychology, 73: 642-650.

 Devanna, M. A., & Tichy, N. 1990. Creating the competitive organization of the 21st century:

 The boundaryless corporation. Human Resource Management, 29: 445-471.

 Dewar, R. D., & Dutton, J. E. 1986. The adoption of radical and incremental innovations: An

 empirical analysis. Management Science, 32: 1422-1433.

 Ettlie, J. E., Bridges, W. P., & O'Keefe, R. D. 1984. Organization strategy and structural differences

 for radical versus incremental innovation. Management Science, 30: 682-695.

 Ferris, G. R. 1983. The influence of leadership on perceptions of job autonomy. Journal of

 Psychology, 114: 253-258.

 Fried, Y., & Ferris, G. R. 1987. The validity of the Job Characteristics Model: A review and meta-

 analysis. Personnel Psychology, 40: 287-322.

 Gerhart, B. 1987. How important are dispositional factors as determinants of job satisfaction?

 Implications for job design and other personnel programs. Journal of Applied Psychology,
 72: 366-373.

 Gough, H. G. 1979. A creative personality scale for the Adjective Check List. Journal of Personal-

 ity and Social Psychology, 37: 1398-1405.

 Gough, H. G., & Heilbrun, A. B. 1965. The Adjective Check List manual. Palo Alto, CA: Consult-

 ing Psychologists Press.

 Greene, C. N. 1979. Questions of causation in the path-goal theory of leadership. Academy of

 Management Journal, 22: 22-41.

 Griffin, R. W. 1980. Relationships among individual, task design, and leader behavior variables.

 Academy of Management Journal, 23: 665-683.

 Hackman, J. R., & Oldham, G. R. 1976. Motivation through the design of work: Test of a theory.

 Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 16: 250-279.

 Hackman, J. R., & Oldham, G. R. 1980. Work redesign. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
 Harackiewicz, J. M. 1979. The effects of reward contingency and performance feedback on
 intrinsic motivation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37: 1352-1363.

 Hatcher, L., Ross, T. L., & Collins, D. 1989. Prosocial behavior, job complexity, and suggestion

 contribution under gainsharing plans. Journal of AppliedBehavioral Science, 25: 231-248.

 Hocevar, D., & Bachelor, P. 1989. In J. A. Glover, R. R. Ronning, & C. R. Reynolds (Eds.), Hand-

 book of creativity: 53-75. New York: Plenum Press.

 Hom, P. W., Griffith, R. D., & Sellaro, C. L. 1984. The validity of Mobley's (1977) model of

 employee turnover. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 34: 141-174.

 Johns, G. 1978. Task moderators of the relationship between leadership style and subordinate

 responses. Academy of Management Journal, 21: 319-325.

 Kaduson, H. G., & Schaefer, C. E. 1991. Concurrent validity of the creative personality scale of

 the Adjective Check List. Psychological Reports, 69: 601-602.

 Kanter, R. M. 1983. The change masters. New York: Simon & Schuster.
 Kanter, R. M. 1988. When a thousand flowers bloom: Structural, collective, and social conditions

 for innovation in organizations. In B. M. Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organi-
 zational behavior, vol. 10: 169-211. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

 Keller, R. T. 1989. A test of the path-goal theory of leadership with need for clarity as a moderator

 in research and development organizations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 74: 208-212.

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 632

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 Keller, R. T., & Holland, W. E. 1983. Communicators and innovators in research and development

 organizations. Academy of Management Journal, 26: 742-749.

 Kirton, M. 1976. Adaptors and innovators: A description and measure. Journal of Applied

 Psychology, 61: 622-629.

 Kirton, M. 1989. Adaptors and innovators: Styles of creativity and problem-solving. New

 York: Routledge.

 Knight, K. E. 1967. A descriptive model of the intra-firm innovation process. Journal of Business,

 40: 478-496.

 Koestner, R., Ryan, R. M., Bernieri, F., & Holt, K. 1984. Setting limits on children's behavior:

 The differential effects of controlling vs. informational styles on intrinsic motivation and
 creativity. Journal of Personality, 52: 233-248.

 Kohn, M. L., & Schooler, C. 1978. The reciprocal effects of the substantive complexity of work

 and intellectual flexibility: A longitudinal assessment. American Journal of Sociology,
 84: 24-52.

 Kopelman, R. E. 1985. Job redesign and productivity: A review of the evidence. NationalProduc-

 tivity Review, 4: 237-255.

 Kruglanski, A. W., Friedman, I., & Zeevi, G. 1971. The effects of extrinsic incentive on some

 qualitative aspects of task performance. Journal of Personality, 39: 606-617.

 Lepper, M., & Greene, D. 1975. Turning play into work: Effects of adult surveillance and extrinsic

 rewards on children's intrinsic motivation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
 31: 479-486.

 Lord, F. M., & Novick, M. R. 1968. Statistical theories of mental test scores. Reading, MA:

 Addison-Wesley.

 March, J. G., & Simon, H. A. 1958. Organizations. New York: Wiley.

 Martindale, C. 1989. Personality, situation, and creativity. In J. A. Glover, R. R. Ronning, & C. R.

 Reynolds (Eds.), Handbook of creativity: 211-232. New York: Plenum.

 McCrae, R. R. 1987. Creativity, divergent thinking, and openness to experience. Journal of

 Personality and Social Psychology, 52: 1258-1265.

 Michigan Organizational Assessment Package. 1975. Ann Arbor: Institute for Social Research,

 University of Michigan.

 Miller, H. E., Katerberg, R., & Hulin, C. L. 1979. Evaluation of the Mobley, Horner, and Hollings-

 worth model of employee turnover. Journal of Applied Psychology, 64: 509-517.

 Oldham, G. R., Kulik, C. T., & Stepina, L. P. 1991. Physical environments and employee reac-
 tions: Effects of stimulus-screening skills and job complexity. Academy of Management
 Journal, 34: 929-938.

 Owens, W. A. 1969. Cognitive, noncognitive, and environmental correlates of mechanical inge-

 nuity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 53: 199-208.

 Pedhazur, E. J. 1982. Multiple regression in behavioral research. New York: Holt, Rine-

 hart & Winston.

 Pelz, D. C., & Andrews, F. M. 1966. Scientists in organizations: Productive climates for re-

 search and development. New York: Wiley.

 Peters, L. H., O'Connor, E., & Wise, S. L. 1984. The specification and testing of useful moderator
 variable hypotheses. In T. S. Bateman & G. R. Ferris (Eds.), Method and analysis in organi-
 zational research: 128-139. Reston, VA: Reston.

 Pittman, R. S., Davey, M. E., Alafat, K. A., Wetherill, K. V., & Kramer, N. A. 1980. Informational

 versus controlling verbal rewards. Personality and Social PsychologyBulletin, 6: 228-233.

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1996

 Oldham and Cummings

 633

 Roos, P. A., & Treiman, D. J. 1980. Worker functions and worker traits for the 1970 U.S. census
 classification. In A. R. Miller, D. J. Treiman, P. S. Cain, & P. A. Roos (Eds.), Work, jobs,
 and occupations: A critical analysis of the Dictionary of Occupational Titles: 336-389.
 Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

 Rosse, J. G., & Hulin, C. L. 1985. Adaptation to work: An analysis of employee health, withdrawal,

 and change. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 36: 324-347.

 Ryan, R. M. 1982. Control and information in the interpersonal sphere: An extension of cognitive

 evaluation theory. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 43: 450-461.

 Ryan, R. M., & Grolnick, W. S. 1986. Origins and pawns in the classroom: Self-report and
 projective assessments of individual differences in children's perceptions. Journal of Per-
 sonality and Social Psychology, 50: 550-558.

 Ryan, R. M., Mims, V., & Koestner, R. 1983. Relation of reward contingency and interpersonal
 context on intrinsic motivation: A review and test using cognitive evaluation theory. Journal
 of Personality and Social Psychology, 45: 736-750.

 Scott, S. G., & Bruce, R. A. 1994. Determinants of innovative behavior: A path model of individual

 innovation in the workplace. Academy of Management Journal, 37: 580-607.

 Shalley, C. E. 1991. Effects of productivity goals, creativity goals, and personal discretion on

 individual creativity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 76: 179-185.

 Shalley, C. E. 1995. Effects of coaction, expected evaluation, and goal setting on creativity and

 productivity. Academy of Management Journal, 38: 483-503.

 Stahl, M. J., & Koser, M. C. 1978. Weighted productivity in R & D: Some associated individual and

 organizational variables. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, EM-25: 20-24.

 Staw, B. M. 1984. Organizational behavior: A review and reformulation of the field's outcome

 variables. In M. R. Rosenzweig & L. W. Porter (Eds.), Annual review of psychology, vol.
 35: 627-666. Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews.

 Staw, B. M. 1990. An evolutionary approach to creativity and innovation. In M. A. West & J. L.

 Farr (Eds.), Innovation and creativity at work: 287-308. Chichester, UK: Wiley.

 U.S. Department of Labor. 1977. Dictionary of occupational titles (4th ed.). Washington, DC:

 U.S. Government Printing Office.

 Van de Ven, A. H. 1986. Central problems in the management of innovation. Management

 Science, 32: 590-607.

 Van de Ven, A. H., & Angle, H. L. 1989. An introduction to the Minnesota innovation research
 program. In A. H. Van de Ven, H. L. Angle, & M. S. Poole (Eds.), Research on the manage-
 ment of innovation: The Minnesota studies: 3-30. New York: Harper & Row.

 Weed, S. E., Mitchell, T. R., & Moffitt, W. 1976. Leadership style, subordinate personality, and

 task type as predictors of performance and satisfaction with supervision. Journal of Applied
 Psychology, 61: 58-66.

 West, M. A. 1989. Innovation amongst health care professionals. SocialBehaviour, 4: 173-184.

 West, M. A., & Farr, J. L. 1989. Innovation at work: Psychological perspectives. SocialBehaviour,

 4: 15-30.

 Woodman, R. W., & Schoenfeldt, L. F. 1989. Individual differences in creativity: An interaction-
 ist perspective. In J. A. Glover, R. R. Ronning, & C. R. Reynolds (Eds.), Handbook of creativ-
 ity: 77-92. New York: Plenum.

 Woodman, R. W., Sawyer, J. E., & Griffin, R. W. 1993. Toward a theory of organizational creativ-

 ity. Academy of Management Review, 18: 293-321.

 Zaltman, G., Duncan, R., & Holbek, J. 1973. Innovations and organizations. London: Wiley.
 Zierden, W. E. 1980. Congruence in the work situation: Effects of growth needs, management

 style, and job structure on job-related satisfactions. Journal of Occupational Behaviour,
 1: 297-310.

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 634

 Academy of Management Journal

 June

 Zuckerman, M., Porac, J., Lathin, D., Smith, R., & Deci, E. L. 1978. On the importance of
 self-determination of intrinsically motivated behavior. Personality and Social Psychology
 Bulletin, 4: 443-446.

 APPENDIX

 The items measuring supportive supervision included (1) My supervisor helps me solve

 work-related problems, (2) My supervisor encourages me to develop new skills, (3) My supervisor
 keeps informed about how employees think and feel about things, (4) My supervisor encourages
 employees to participate in important decisions, (5) My supervisor praises good work, (6) My
 supervisor encourages employees to speak up when they disagree with a decision, (7) My
 supervisor refuses to explain his or her actions (reversed-coded), and (8) My supervisor rewards
 me for good performance.

 The items measuring noncontrolling supervision included (1) My supervisor always seems
 to be around checking on my work (reverse-coded), (2) My supervisor tells me what shall be
 done and how it shall be done (reverse-coded), (3) My supervisor never gives me a chance to
 make important decisions on my own (reverse-coded), and (4) My supervisor leaves it up to
 me to decide how to go about doing my job.

 The items measuring creative performance included (1) How ORIGINAL and PRACTICAL

 is this person's work? Original and practical work refers to developing ideas, methods, or
 products that are both totally unique and especially useful to the organization; (2) How ADAP-
 TIVE and PRACTICAL is this person's work? Adaptive and practical work refers to using
 existing information or materials to develop ideas, methods, or products that are useful to the
 organization; and (3) How CREATIVE is this person's work? Creativity refers to the extent to
 which the employee develops ideas, methods, or products that are both original and useful to
 the organization.

 Greg R. Oldham is the C. Clinton Spivey Professor of Business Administration and
 a professor of labor and industrial relations at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
 Champaign. He received his Ph.D. degree from Yale University. His current research
 interests include the design of work and work environments.
 Anne Cummings is a doctoral candidate in the Department of Business Administration
 at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Beginning in fall 1996, she will be
 an assistant professor of management at the Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.
 Her current research interests include employee creativity and the social structure of
 organizational groups.

This content downloaded from 131.193.20.83 on Thu, 03 Aug 2017 01:13:07 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

